 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA12407A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1386-1393


Abasi
Abudulimu
*,

Rafael
Sandoval-Torrientes
,

Iwan
Zimmermann
,

José
Santos
*,

Mohammad Khaja
Nazeeruddin
* and 

Nazario
Martín
*

IMDEA Nanociencia, Madrid, 28049, Spain. E-mail: abasi@imdea.org

EPFL VALAIS, Sion, 1951, Switzerland

Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, 28040, Spain

Received
11th November 2019
, Accepted 18th December 2019
First published on 19th December 2019
The synthesis and characterization of three novel HTMs with different highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy levels and their performances in MAPbI3-based devices in comparison with Spiro-OMeTAD is reported. Without systematic optimization, the HTMs performed well. The devices delivered fill factors comparable to the one with Spiro-OMeTAD but suffered from short-circuit current (JSC). Interestingly, despite the significant differences in HOMO energy levels, all three HTMs generated the same open-circuit voltage (VOC). We explored the performance limiting factors of the HTMs by simple transient photovoltage/photocurrent (TPV/TPC) measurements along with drift-diffusion simulations. We found no correlation between HOMO energy levels of the HTMs and VOC of the devices. Performances of the devices are limited by high trap density as well as low carrier mobility of the HTMs, and by the shunts present in the devices. Furthermore, the high trap density and low carrier mobility of the HTM are found to induce ion migration effect in the device causing slow decaying components in TPV/TPC. Nevertheless, it is confirmed that JSC and VOC, measured at steady state, are not influenced by the ion migration effect. These HTMs can be improved further by optimizing their conductivity, trap density, morphology, and can be used as alternatives to Spiro-OMeTAD or other expensive, synthetically challenging HTMs. The simple and inexpensive approach presented in this work can also be applied for effectively evaluating charge transporting materials for perovskite solar cells.

Hybrid inorganic–organic perovskites have become a hot research topic in the field of photovoltaics due to their broad optical absorption profile, high free charge carrier generation yield, and fast charge carrier mobility. The theoretical maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) for single-junction perovskite solar cells (PSC) is calculated to be 31%, and over 20% has already been achieved in less than a decade, with the record performing cell reaching 25.2%. The hole transporting material (HTM) is accredited to be an essential component in achieving such high PCE, as it facilitates carrier extraction and reduces carrier recombination. Spiro-OMeTAD, considered as the benchmark, is the most commonly found HTM in top-performing PSCs. However, several drawbacks still have to be overcome in order to commercialize Spiro-OMeTAD for high-performance PSCs to a large extent. The synthesis of Spiro-OMeTAD is a rather expensive process, and it also needs to be doped with hygroscopic dopants as it does not possess intrinsic high carrier mobility, which in turn decreases the stability of the devices. Thus, developing easy-to-produce, process, scalable, environmentally friendly new HTM is an attractive milestone to achieve.

Moreover, there are various reports about the effect of energy levels of both electron and hole transporting materials (ETM and HTM) on the device performance. Those include: (a) certain energy level offsets between perovskite and charge transporting materials (ETM and HTM) are necessary to achieve best device performance; (b) while both ETM and HTM help improve fill factor (FF), mainly HTM is responsible for the high open-circuit voltage (VOC); (c) influence of the HOMO energy level of HTM on the device performance depends on the perovskite applied in the device; (d) VOC is mainly determined by the quasi-Fermi level splitting within the perovskite rather than the energy levels of ETM and HTM. Hence, besides finding new suitable HTMs, understanding their role in device physics is also crucial for improving the device performance as well as for advancing the design of PSCs towards commercialization.
Here we report on the synthesis and characterization of three novel HTMs, namely HTM1, HTM2, and HTM3 (shown in Fig. 1) obtained in two synthetic steps from cheap precursor materials (3,6-dibromofluorenone and 2,6-dibromo-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophen-4-one). We thoroughly studied their performances in the MAPbI3-based PSCs, in comparison with Spiro-OMeTAD. Through current–voltage (J–V) measurements we found that these new HTMs perform quite well, producing FF comparable or even exceeding that of the Spiro-OMeTAD. However, they produce less short-circuit current (JSC) than the Spiro-OMeTAD. Moreover, despite the large differences in HOMO levels, we observed that these HTMs resulted in the same VOC. Since any effect of an HTM on the device performance mainly arises either from the desired carrier extraction or undesired carrier recombination, a better understanding of these processes can help to improve designing the HTMs as well as the devices. Therefore, we conducted simple transient photocurrent (TPC) and transient photovoltage (TPV) measurements on the devices under various background light intensities to gain a deeper insight on the effect of HTMs on both carrier extraction and recombination dynamics. To confirm the experimental findings, we have also performed drift-diffusion simulations.

The chemical core structure of our HTMs (Fig. 1A) varies regarding Spiro-OMeTAD in just a single bond (one less), giving rise to hemi-spiro derivatives in the case of HTM1 and HTM2. In addition, we explore the influence of substituting two phenyl rings of the fluorene moiety by two thiophene rings (HTM3) on the overall performance, expecting a better interface coupling with the perovskite layer. All these new HTMs are decorated with pendant aryl amine moieties mimicking the benchmark Spiro-OMeTAD (full synthetic details of the HTMs is disclosed on ESI).

Based on literature, one may promptly predict from comparison of the HOMO energy levels of the HTMs (shown in Fig. 1B) that HTM3, with the highest HOMO value, would perform worse as higher interfacial carrier recombination but the same carrier transfer rates are expected when HOMO energy level of the HTM is higher than the valence band of the perovskite. In contrast, HTM3 actually outperformed the other new HTMs generating the highest JSC, FF, and PCE (compare the electrical parameters and J–V curves in Fig. 1). This result suggests that the models for predicting the charge extraction efficiency, and thus, the device performance, should consider not only the relative HOMO energy levels of perovskite and HTM but also their interface coupling. The new HTMs though produced noticeably less JSC and slightly lower VOC than Spiro-OMeTAD. Interestingly, all the new HTMs produced almost identical VOC, despite the large differences in their HOMO energy levels, suggesting no direct connection between HOMO levels of HTMs and VOC of the devices. The simulation results delivered the same conclusion (ESI). Our findings support the reports which propose quasi-Fermi level splitting and carrier recombination inside the perovskite to be responsible for the VOC rather than the energetic levels of the HTMs and ETMs.
In order to better understand the performance limiting factors of the HTMs, the charge extraction and recombination dynamics of the devices must be studied in detail, and we performed TPV/TPC measurements for that purpose. It is a simple technique to study devices under operational conditions. Just need to change the load resistance in the measurement system to switch between TPV and TPC, and information such as charge density dependence of carrier recombination and extraction as well as device ideality factor nid, just to mention a few, can easily be obtained by recording the measurement under various background light (BGL) intensity. In addition, light intensity dependence of VOC and JSC, the most common methods to show the recombination mechanism in the device using eqn (1) and (2), are already available in the TPV/TPC data, see Fig. 2.
JSC ∝ (BGL)a
(1)
(2)
where
e is the elementary charge, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature. The power a, in eqn (1), decreases from 1 if bimolecular recombination is significant at short circuit. Though, this method is insensitive to trap-assisted recombination, as both generation G and trap-assisted recombination rates Rtr scale linearly with BGL intensity,

JSC = ed(G − Rtr) = ed(G − ktrntrn)
(3)
where
d is the active layer thickness, ntr (n) is the trapped (free) charge density, and ktr is the recombination coefficient. Eqn (2) results in 1 ≤ nid ≤ 2 depending on the charge carrier recombination mechanism in the devices (nid = 1 if bimolecular recombination dominates and nid = 2 if trap-assisted recombination dominates).

BGL intensity dependence of JSC with a = 1 in Fig. 3A, extracted from TPC data, shows that the devices are free from noticeable bimolecular recombination at short circuit. BGL intensity dependence of VOC in Fig. 3B, extracted from TPV data, on the other hand, implies that charge recombination in all these devices at open-circuit is governed by mid-gap or deep traps (nid = 2.02, 2.54, 2.22, 1.81 for the devices employing Spiro-OMeTAD, HTM1, HTM2, and HTM3, respectively). Note, the devices with all the new HTMs are affected by shunts resulting in higher slopes in the low light intensity range. Thus, to avoid the influence of shunts on assessing nid, only the last three or four measurement points are fitted in Fig. 3B. We have also looked at the differential nid (see ESI) as well as the nid values derived from TPV transients and come to the same conclusion. The fact that nid > 2 for the devices with HTM1 and HTM2 may imply presence of ion migration effect or/and of the shunt effects also at higher BGL intensity. Besides the higher slopes at lower BGL intensity range in Fig. 3B, our simulation results (ESI) also explained that the low shunt resistance is mainly responsible for the lower VOC in the devices fabricated with the new HTMs at one sun compared to the one with Spiro-OMeTAD. It might be related to diffusion of Au into the HTMs as the new HTM layers are about 2.3 times thinner than the Spiro-OMeTAD.
TPC results in Fig. 4 show that, at low BGL intensity, charge dynamics of the device with HTM3 at short circuit replicates that of the device with Spiro-OMeTAD. Similarly, charge dynamics of the device with HTM1 follows that of the device with HTM2, revealing the fact that HOMO of the HTM governs the TPC. The differences among them arise as the BGL intensity increases, featuring a slow tail, requiring at least a double-exponential decay function for the fit (see ESI). The lifetime of the fast component (τTPC) found to be 3 μs for the devices employing HTM3 and Spiro-OMeTAD, whereas τTPC = 6 μs is found for the devices with HTM1 and HTM2. The longer TPC lifetimes in the devices with HTM1 and HTM2 are attributed mainly to the lower carrier extraction efficiency of these HTMs arising from their lower carrier mobility compared to Spiro-OMeTAD and HTM3. We can neglect the influence of recombination on the TPC of the devices with HTM1 and HTM2 as the TPC lifetimes are almost constant over the range of BGL intensity applied in this report (Fig. 4C), and at low BGL intensity the charge recombination is at least 10 times slower than the extraction (compare TPC and TPV at low BGL intensity in Fig. 4 and 5). That being said, the carrier mobility is about 5 times slower in HTM3, and 10 times in HTM1,2, compared to Spiro-OMeTAD, according to μ = d2/(2τTPCVbi) and dHTM1,2,3 = 0.43dspiro (where Vbi is the built-in potential) when only the HTMs are considered. Consideration of the active layers resulted in mobility values of 5.5, 1.5, 1.6 and 2.8 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 for Spiro-OMeTAD, HTM1, HTM2, and HTM3, respectively. Anyhow, TPC of the devices with HTM3 and Spiro-OMeTAD are slightly affected by carrier recombination at higher BGL intensities (see Fig. 4C and 5C).
TPC and its integral  should not vary with the BGL intensity if neither the number of charges generated in the perovskite by the weak pulsed light nor the number of charges collected at the electrodes is affected by the BGL intensity. Yet, TPC of all these devices converts from single-exponential decay at low BGL intensity to double-exponential decay at higher BGL intensities. Considering the constant TPC amplitude at all BGL intensity in each device (see ESI) and the fact that charge generation takes place mainly at the ETL side of the perovskite (see ESI) within picoseconds with a minor influence of HTM, we can discard the influence of HTMs on the charge generation. Drift-diffusion simulation results illustrated that the slow TPC component could be referred as low carrier mobility or high trap density induced slow charge extraction in the devices (see ESI). However, when the parameters which guarantee the experimentally observed TPV/TPC characteristics are applied in the simulation, the BGL intensity-dependent TPC features are not well reproduced (see ESI). It is worth mentioning that the fast TPC components do not react much to the BGL intensity, but the slow components do, resulting in Q that fluctuates with BGL intensity as well as with the integration time (see ESI). We tend to attribute that to the consequence of an ion migration effect, as it is known to act at a time scale longer than the charge extraction time with large contribution from charge traps and charge accumulation at the interfaces. It explains the more pronounced slow TPC component observed in the devices with HTM1 and HTM2. Charge extraction in these HTMs is slow (Fig. 4C), and they possess higher trap density.
TPV data of all the devices exhibit double-exponential decay form at low BGL intensity with around one order of magnitude difference in lifetimes, which are much shorter in the devices with HTM3 and Spiro-OMeTAD (see Fig. 5 and also the fit results in ESI). The two decay lifetimes have frequently been reported in perovskite solar cells, while their origin is still under debate. Some attribute the faster component to the recombination at the perovskite/charge-transporting-material (ETM and HTM) interfaces and the slower component to the recombination within the bulk, while others suggest the exact opposite.Fig. 5 demonstrates that TPV lifetimes and amplitudes are quite different for devices with different HTMs. This finding may conflict with the claim above, since otherwise, we would have seen at least one of the TPV lifetimes to be the same for all the devices, considering the fact that the devices differ from each other just in the HTM. TPV lifetimes of the slow component also decrease with the increase of BGL intensity, and around one sun the slow component disappears in the devices with Spiro-OMeTAD and HTM3 while it still takes up to 20% of the total signal in the devices with HTM1 and HTM2. The increase of BGL intensity increases the stationary charge density in the device and consequently reduces the free trap density by filling them up with free charges and can raise the recombination rate. Simulation results demonstrated that both high trap density and slow charge carrier mobility of HTM could extend the TPV lifetime and even can induce a slow decay component (see ESI). However, the BGL intensity-dependent TPV features are not well reproduced (see ESI). It is noticed, though, that a moderate trap-density, together with low shunt resistance, is also able to generate the slow TPV component. Nevertheless, it still could not reproduce well the BGL intensity-dependent TPV characteristics observed in the experiment (see ESI). The slow TPV component can also be an effect of ion migration as both traps and charge accumulation are known to trigger the ion migration effect in the perovskite solar cells, and at high BGL intensity its effect can be reduced since traps will be filled, and the free charge density in the device will be largely vanished by recombination. Therefore, diminishing of the slow components at lower BGL intensity in the devices with Spiro-OMeTAD and HTM3, compared to those with HTM1 and HTM2, denotes the presence of higher trap densities in the HTM1 and HTM2 than in the Spiro-OMeTAD and HTM3.
Faster TPV and TPC decays are generally referred as to faster charge recombination and faster charge extraction (if recombination in TPC can be neglected), respectively. However, to relate the charge dynamics observed in TPC/TPV to the measured stationary VOC and JSC, one first must confirm whether the TPC/TPV data, at all, represent the charge dynamics that lead to the stationary device performance. For that, we have calculated the recombination current Jrec and VcalOCviaeqn (4) and (5), respectively, using parameters determined solely from TPC/TPV measurements.
(4)
(5)
(6)
where
τ is the lifetime of the total charge density n, τTPV is the TPV lifetime, λ is a constant obtained from τTPVversus n log–log plot (slope), ΔVOC is the amplitude of the TPV. The ideality factors are calculated as nid = e/[kBTγ(λ + 1)].

We found that the calculated recombination current Jrec and open-circuit voltage VcalOC match well with the measured JSC and VOC (Fig. 6) when the lifetimes of the fast TPV component and the integral of TPC only up to 3 μs (for the devices with HTM3 and Spiro-OMeTAD) and 6 μs (for the devices with HTM1 and HTM2) are used in the calculation. The slow TPC component, being not relevant to the stationary JSC, has also been reported recently. Knowing that the charge dynamics represented by the fast TPC/TPV components mainly account for the device performance at steady state, we can now assign the under performances of the devices with the new HTMs, compared to Spiro-OMeTAD, to the higher trap density, slow charge extraction, minor fast carrier recombination (HTM3), and to the high shunts present in the devices employing the HTMs. Additionally, an energy barrier (ΔE = 140 meV) between HTM3 and Au electrode created by their energy levels mismatch cost partial JSC. The JSC increased to 21.0 mA cm−2 when the Au electrode was replaced by a Cu one (see ESI).

In summary, we have synthesized three novel HTMs with different HOMO energy levels and tested their charge extraction performances in MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells in comparison with Spiro-OMeTAD. These HTMs produced FF comparable to Spiro-OMeTAD but resulted in noticeably less JSC and slightly lower VOC compared to Spiro-OMeTAD. Interestingly, despite the large differences in the HOMO energy levels, they resulted in the same VOC. By performing TPC/TPV measurements and drift-diffusion simulations, we found that the higher trap density and lower carrier mobility of the HTMs along with the shunts cost the overall performance losses. Higher interfacial carrier recombination and an energy barrier between the HTM and Au electrode partly contributed the performance loss in the device with higher HOMO HTM3. Besides, the devices employing HTMs with high trap density and slow carrier mobility showed significant ion migration effect. However, the recombination current Jrec and VOC derived from TPV/TPC data confirmed that JSC and VOC measured at steady state are not influenced by the ion migration effect. These HTM have not been systematically optimized yet and can be used as alternatives for some of the expensive and synthetically challenging HTMs by tuning their trap density, conductivity, and morphology, etc. The presented simple approach can efficiently be applied to evaluate HTMs for the photovoltaic devices.


The synthesis of all HTMs is depicted in Scheme 1. Condensation of 3,6-dibromofluorenone (1) with 4-methoxy-N-(4-methoxyphenyl)-N-phenylaniline (2) employing Eaton's reagent (7.7% w/w P2O5 in MeSO3H) yields fluorene derivative 3 in moderate yield. Subsequent palladium cross-coupling with the appropriate arylamine provides HTM1 and HTM2. The synthesis of HTM3 is undertaken from 2,6-dibromocyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophen-4-one (6), which was previously obtained following the procedure described by Wang, by Corey–Fuchs reaction with PPh3 and CBr4 to yield compound 7 in moderate yield. The final step is a fourfold Suzuki reaction to couple triarylamine 5. Detailed synthetic procedures and characterization may be found in the ESI.


FTO coated glass (NSG10) was sequentially cleaned by sonication in a 2% Hellmanex solution and isopropanol for 15 min, respectively. A 20 nm to 50 nm titania blocking layer was applied on the substrates by spraying a solution of titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) in ethanol at 450 °C. For the 200–300 nm mesoporous TiO2 layer, 30 NR-D titania paste from Dyesol diluted in ethanol (150 mg ml−1) was applied by spin-coating at 4000 rpm for 10 s followed by a sintering step at 500 °C for 30 min. The MAPbI3 perovskite precursor solution was prepared by mixing 461 mg PbI2 and 159 mg methylammonium iodide in 800 μl of DMSO. The perovskite layers were fabricated by a single step spin-coating procedure reported by Seok et al. The perovskite solution was spun at 1000 rpm for 10 s followed by 5000 rpm for 30 s using a ramp of 3000 rpm s−1. 15 s prior to the end of the spin-coating sequence 100 μl of chlorobenzene were poured onto the spinning substrate. Afterwards, the substrates were transferred onto a heating plate and annealed at 100 °C for 45 min. Spiro-OMeTAD (2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenyl-amine)9,9′-spirobifluorene), HTM1, HTM2 and HTM3 were used as hole transporting materials and applied from a solution in chlorobenzene. Optimized concentrations were found to be 70 mM for Spiro-OMeTAD and 30 mM for the new HTMs. tert-Butylpyridine (Tbp), tris(2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tert-butylpyridine)cobalt(III) (FK209) and tris(bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide) (Li-TFSI) were added as additives: 330 mol% Tbp, 50 mol% Li-TFSI from a 1.8 M stock solution in acetonitrile and 3 mol% FK209 from a 0.25 M stock solution in acetonitrile. The HTM solution was spin-coated dynamically onto the perovskite layers at 4000 rpm for 20 s. The gold electrodes were deposited by thermal evaporation of 80 nm gold using a shadow mask under high vacuum conditions.


The photovoltaic device performance was analysed using a VeraSol LED solar simulator (Newport) producing one sun AM 1.5 (100 mW cm−2) sunlight. Current–voltage curves were measured in air with a potentiostat (Keithley). The light intensity was calibrated with an NREL certified KG5 filtered Si reference diode. The solar cells were masked with a metal aperture of 0.16 cm2 to define the active area. The current–voltage curves were recorded scanning at 20 mV s−1.


The device is connected to a high impedance (1 MΩ) input channel of an Oscilloscope to provide the open-circuit condition. A white LED is used to illuminate the device continuously in the background (BGL) to generate steady-state charge carrier density creating VOC. A weak 532 nm pulsed laser is applied on top of the BGL to create a small number of additional charge carriers (causing an increase in open-circuit voltage, ΔVOC), which decays in time after the light pulse switches off. The rate of the green laser pulse is set to 6 Hz. TPC is the same as TPV, and the only difference is that the device is connected to the oscilloscope's 50 Ω input channel instead of 1 MΩ. Both BGL and pulsed light intensities are controlled by neutral density filters. TPV/TPC signals are recorded with a Picoscope 6424 controlled by a custom-built Python program. The simulation of the TPC/TPV is done by GPVDM software developed by R. C. I. MacKenzie, which models the device parameters by solving the drift-diffusion, carrier continuity, and Poisson's equations. First, the parameters of the model are optimized to reproduce the J–V characteristics of our reference devices with Spiro-OMeTAD. Then, the TPV/TPC are modeled using the same parameters, and only the targeted parameter is allowed to vary when a certain parameter is needed to be swept for a range. The parameters and related results can be found in the ESI.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We thank the European Research Council (ERC-320441-Chirallcarbon), the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness MINECO (projects CTQ2014-52045-R, CTQ2014-58801, CTQ2015-71154-P, CTQ2016-81911-REDT, CTQ2017-83531-R, Centro de Excelencia Severo Ochoa SEV-2016-0686 and Unidad de Excelencia María de Maeztu MDM-2015-0538), the CAM (FOTOCARBON project S2013/MIT-2841). We also acknowledge SNSF for financial support of the project “Tailored Design and in-depth understanding of perovskite solar materials using in-house developed 3D/4D nanoscale ion beam analysis, project number: 200020L_1729/1.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details of synthesis, compound's spectroscopic and electrochemical characterization, device's electrical characterization, and simulation. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta12407a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020