 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA03967C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18727-18734


Xuliang
Hou
,

Qiuxiang
Li
,

Tai
Cheng
,

Lu
Yu
,

Fuzhi
Wang
*,

Jun
Lin
*,

Songyuan
Dai
,

Yongfang
Li
 and 

Zhan'ao
Tan
*

Beijing Key Laboratory of Novel Thin Film Solar Cells, School of Renewable Energy, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, China. E-mail: tanzhanao@ncepu.edu.cn; jun.lin@ncepu.edu.cn; wfz501@ncepu.edu.cn

CAS Key Laboratory of Organic Solids, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China

Received
1st June 2015
, Accepted 30th July 2015
First published on 4th August 2015
PEDOT-PSS is a widely used hole extraction layer in polymer solar cells (PSCs). However, its acidic and hygroscopic nature usually affects the long-term stability of photovoltaic devices. Herein, we report an effective method to enhance the conductivity and stability of the PEDOT-PSS film by doping with an amphiphilic perfluorosulfonic copolymer, Nafion. The highly hydrophobic fluorocarbon backbone of Nafion preferentially interacts with the hydrophobic PEDOT of PEDOT-PSS, while the highly hydrophilic –SO3H groups preferentially interact with hydrophilic PSS chains, inducing the PEDOT chains to separate from the PSS chains by Nafion. The conductivity and surface morphology of the Nafion-doped PEDOT-PSS layer were investigated by using a four-point probe and an atomic force microscope, respectively. The optical properties of the Nafion doped PEDOT-PSS film and the photoactive layer spin-coated on it were studied by transmittance and reflection spectra. With the Nafion doped PEDOT-PSS hole extraction layer (HEL), the power conversion efficiency of the PSCs based on poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) reaches 4.63%, increased by 14.3% in comparison with that of the control devices. Furthermore, the lifetime of the devices with Nafion doped PEDOT-PSS HEL is greatly enhanced.

In bulk heterojunction polymer solar cells (PSCs), the interfacial barriers at the electrode–semiconductor contacts are dominated by several key factors such as the energy level alignment between the work function (WF) of the electrode and the molecular orbit energy of the semiconductor, the polarization of the semiconductor adjacent to the electrode surface, and the interfacial chemistry and structure. Therefore, interface engineering between the electrode and the photoactive layer is critical for the enhancement of the device power conversion efficiency (PCE) and long term stability in PSCs.

It is well-established that the interfacial barrier at the indium tin oxide (ITO)/photoactive layer interface limits the performance of PSCs, since the WF of ITO is about 4.7 eV, which does not match the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of most used conjugated polymers (below −5.0 eV). Consequently the use of hole extraction layers (HELs) at the anode is required for efficient charge extraction. Commercially available poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT-PSS) is the most used HEL in the fabrication of PSCs, which can modify the work function of ITO, planarize the substrate, and contact-dope the interface. However, PEDOT-PSS has its own intrinsic problems, such as acidity and hygroscopicity, which could compromise the stability of the devices. Several methods have been proposed to modify the intrinsic nature of PEDOT-PSS, including the addition of organic/inorganic compounds, such as salt, zwitterion, ionic liquid, dimethyl sulfate, anionic surfactant, ethylene glycol, sorbitol, ethanol/isopropyl alcohol, or dimethyl sulfoxide into PEDOT-PSS aqueous solution and the treatment of PEDOT-PSS films with a polar organic compound, organic or inorganic acid, or cosolvent. Molecular or ionic doping of PEDOT-PSS near contacts enables charge tunneling through contact barriers, inducing enhanced charge extraction. However, small molecule dopants can easily diffuse and migrate due to their soft nature, which limits effective interfacial doping and degrades the performance of the devices.
Nafion is a perfluorinated polymer containing the fluorocarbon backbone and perfluorovinyl ether branch with sulfonic acid end groups, as shown in Fig. 1(b). With excellent proton conductivity and exceptional chemical stability, Nafion has been widely used as the proton exchange membrane of choice in fuel cell applications. Recently, Nafion was reported to be used as a dopant for the hole injection layer in polymer light-emitting diodes to tune the work-function of ITO and enhance the efficiency and stability of the devices. In PSCs, Nafion has also been applied as a dopant in poly(thienothiophene) to change the surface energy, as a recombination layer in tandem or triple-junction structures, and as a hole extraction layer in inverted structures.
Herein, we demonstrate that by doping Nafion into PEDOT-PSS to be used as the HEL, we can achieve high performance PSCs with enhanced PCE and stability, since the large-sized polymeric dopant resists diffusion or migration at the electrode–semiconductor interface. With the Nafion doped PEDOT-PSS HEL, the PCE of PSCs based on poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) reaches 4.63%, increased by 14.3% in comparison with that of the control devices with the un-doped PEDOT-PSS HEL.

PEDOT-PSS (Clevios P VP AI 4083) was acquired from H. C. Stark Company. Nafion D-520 (5 wt%) dispersion in a mixture of water and alcohol (4.5:5.5 in volume) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. P3HT was supplied by Rieke Metals. PCBM was acquired from Nano-C. Indium tin oxide (ITO) coated glass (10 Ω sq−1) was obtained from CSG Holding Co., Ltd (China).

Devices with the structure of ITO/Nafion:PEDOT-PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca/Al were fabricated as shown in Fig. 1(a). The ITO glass was ultrasonically cleaned with detergent, deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol in sequence. The cleaned ITO substrate was further ultraviolet ozone (UVO) treated for 15 min. The Nafion dispersion was mixed with PEDOT-PSS aqueous solution in a desired volume ratio. The mixture solution was dropped onto the ITO substrate for spin coating, and the ITO/Nafion:PEDOT-PSS substrate was dried at 150 °C for 15 min in air. The thickness of the Nafion:PEDOT-PSS film is 35, 50, 60, 65, and 75 nm for the blend film with a volume ratio of 0:1, 1:10, 1:5, 1:2, and 1:1, respectively. P3HT:PCBM photoactive layers were made by spin coating a 1,2-dichlorobenzene solution of P3HT:PCBM (1:1 w/w, polymer concentration of 20 mg mL−1) on the ITO/Nafion:PEDOT-PSS substrate, and then solvent-annealed in glass Petri dishes for about three hours. After that, the films were thermally annealed at 150 °C for 10 min under a nitrogen atmosphere. The thickness of the photoactive layers was approximately 220 nm by adjusting the speed of spin-coating. Finally, calcium of 20 nm and aluminum of 100 nm were successively vacuum thermal evaporated on the top of the active layer. The control devices with only PEDOT-PSS HEL were also fabricated following the same recipe. The active area of the device is about 4 mm2.
The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristic of the device was measured by using a computer controlled Keithley 2400 Source Measure Unit under the 100 mW cm−2 standard AM 1.5G spectrum using a XES-70S1 (San-Ei Electric Co., Ltd) solar simulator (AAA grade, 70 mm × 70 mm photo beam size). External quantum efficiency (EQE) of the device was measured using a solar cell spectral response measurement system QE-R3011 (Enli Technology Co., Ltd). The surface morphologies of the photoactive layer and the anode HEL were measured by using an AC Mode III Module atomic force microscope (Agilent Technologies) using tapping mode. The thickness of the films involved in the device was measured by using a Dektak XT surface profilometer (Bruker). The conductivity of the HEL film was measured by using Four-Point Probes (RTS-8, 4 Probes Tech.). Transmittance and reflection spectra of the device were measured by using a UV-vis spectrophotometer (Shimadzu).

The conductivity of the Nafion-doped PEDOT-PSS film was examined by the four-point probe method. Table 1 lists the conductivities of PEDOT-PSS films before and after being doped with different amounts of Nafion. The un-doped PEDOT-PSS film has a conductivity of 6.38 × 10−4 S cm−1, which is in good agreement with previous reports of PEDOT-PSS (Clevios P VP AI 4083). After the Nafion doping, the conductivity of PEDOT-PSS films increases significantly. Higher Nafion concentration corresponds to higher conductivity, with the highest value of 2.15 × 10−3 S cm−1 attained for the film doped with Nafion at a volume ratio of 1:2 (Nafion:PEDOT-PSS). Such conductivity enhancement could be related to the structural change of PEDOT-PSS which resulted from the interaction between Nafion and PEDOT-PSS. Firstly, Nafion is a stronger acid than PSSH and thus could donate protons to PSS, reducing the coulombic interaction between PSS and PEDOT. Secondly, both Nafion and PSS contain sulfonate groups that could strongly interact with each other, resulting in the segregation of PSS chains from PEDOT-PSS. Lastly, Nafion tends to be more compatible with hydrophobic PEDOT than PSS due to its highly hydrophobic fluorocarbon backbone. All these factors could contribute to the chain separation between PEDOT and PSS, which causes the PEDOT chains to be less coiled or more linear. Therefore, the inter-chain charge transport is facilitated and the conductivity of Nafion doped PEDOT-PSS films is enhanced. The higher conductivity will certainly be beneficial to hole extraction and transport when Nafion doped PEDOT-PSS is used as the HEL in PSCs. Since the conductivity increases in the order of magnitude with Nafion doping, the increase in film thickness did not bring any negative impact on the performance of the PSCs. However, with further increasing the amount of Nafion in PEDOT-PSS (1:1 Nafion:PEDOT-PSS), the conductivity of the film cannot be further improved, because the π–π stacking of conductive PEDOT chains would be distorted by too large amount of Nafion.

Nafion:PEDOT-PSS

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)
rms (nm)
Conductivity (S cm−1)
Ratio
Thickness (nm)
Best
Average
Buffer layer
P3HT:PCBM

a The parameters of PCEs were averaged over 15 devices.

0:1
35
0.63
9.38
68.6
4.05
3.82 ± 0.14
3.28
1.78
15.8
6.38 × 10−4
1:10
50
0.62
9.99
68.1
4.26
3.99 ± 0.14
3.16
4.68
8.2
7.01 × 10−4
1:5
60
0.62
10.21
69.6
4.38
4.07 ± 0.15
2.81
5.24
8.9
9.34 × 10−4
1:2
65
0.62
10.48
71.6
4.63
4.30 ± 0.23
2.67
12.0
10.3
2.15 × 10−3
1:1
75
0.62
10.51
69.4
4.49
4.18 ± 0.18
2.68
12.5
9.5
2.05 × 10−3
The impact of the Nafion-doping ratio on the surface morphology of the PEDOT-PSS layer was investigated by atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements. Fig. 2 shows the AFM height images and phase images of the PEDOT-PSS layer before and after Nafion-doping in different volume ratios. The un-doped PEDOT-PSS layer is quite smooth with a root mean square (rms) roughness of only 1.78 nm, as shown in Fig. 2(a). In comparison, the rms roughness increases dramatically after doping of Nafion into PEDOT-PSS, from 4.68 nm for the 1:10 (Nafion:PEDOT-PSS) doped layer to 12.5 nm for the 1:1 doped layer, as shown in Fig. 2(b)–(f). The detailed rms results are listed in Table 1. In addition, after Nafion doping, larger phase separation between hydrophobic (bright regions) and hydrophilic (dark regions) domains was also observed from the AFM phase images shown in Fig. 2(b’)–(f’). The improvement in phase separation is mainly due to the amphiphilic nature of doped Nafion, which contains both the hydrophobic fluorocarbon backbone preferentially interacting with hydrophobic PEDOT and hydrophilic sulfonic acid groups preferentially interacting with hydrophilic PSS. Therefore, the AFM results are consistent with the previous analysis for the conductivity enhancement by Nafion doping.
The increased roughness of the HEL could potentially enhance the effective contact area between the anode buffer layer and the active layer, which will be advantageous for hole collection. Furthermore, rougher surfaces may decrease the reflection on the contact interface and enhance the spectral absorption of the active layer, thus helping the light-harvesting of the photoactive layer. In addition, due to the excellent thermal and mechanical stability of Nafion, the decohesion of the PEDOT-PSS film can be greatly restrained with Nafion acting as the firm skeleton. Therefore, the lifetime of the PSCs would be greatly enhanced when Nafion doped PEDOT-PSS is adopted as the HEL.
The morphology of the photoactive layer was also characterized to investigate the influence of the buffer layer on the P3HT:PCBM blend layer. The height image of the surface of the blend layers is illustrated in Fig. S1. Interestingly, the active layer deposited on the most smooth buffer layer of un-doped PEDOT-PSS shows the roughest topography with an rms roughness of 15.8 nm. Although the roughness of Nafion-doped PEDOT-PSS increases dramatically in comparison with that of un-doped PEDOT-PSS, the roughness of P3HT:PCBM blend layer deposited on the Nafion-doped PEDOT-PSS film decreases instead. The values of the rms roughness are also listed in Table 1.
In order to explore the reasons for the decrease in roughness of the active layer, the surface contact angle of water on un-doped PEDOT-PSS and Nafion doped PEDOT-PSS films was tested to characterize the polarity variation of the films, as shown in Fig. 3, which reflects the change in polarity of the PEDOT-PSS film after Nafion doping. The contact angle of water on the un-doped PEDOT-PSS film is 32° (Fig. 3(a)), while it gradually increases with a higher Nafion-doping ratio. This value reaches ∼110° when the volume ratio Nafion:PEDOT-PSS is 1:1 (Fig. 3(e)), which indicates that the surface of PEDOT-PSS changes from hydrophilic to hydrophobic after Nafion doping. The hydrophobic property of the Nafion:PEDOT-PSS film is beneficial to the contact of the buffer layer and photoactive layer derived from an organic solution, leading to formation of a high-quality upper photoactive layer. In addition, the hydrophobic surface will also improve the film resistance to water vapor erosion, which is conducive to the stability of the device.
The penetrability of light through the Nafion-doped PEDOT-PSS layer was investigated by checking the transmittance of the thin film spin-coated on the pre-cleaned ITO substrate as shown in Fig. 4(a). Interestingly, with the PEDOT-PSS or Nafion doped PEDOT-PSS layer, the ITO substrate shows enhanced transmittance in a wavelength from 380 to 520 nm. Such an anti-reflection effect should be attributed to the optical interference between the organic layer (un-doped PEDOT-PSS or Nafion doped PEDOT-PSS) and inorganic ITO layer due to their large refractive index (n) difference. The Nafion doped PEDOT-PSS layers show reduced transmittance in comparison with the un-doped PEDOT-PSS layer, and the transmittance decreases with increasing Nafion content from 1:10 to 1:1 (Nafion:PEDOT-PSS). This phenomenon may be ascribed to the increased phase separation in the blended film doped with Nafion, which was illustrated previously in Fig. 2. The aggregated domains could potentially scatter the incident light, thus reducing the transmitted light as shown in the inset of Fig. 4(a). Fortunately, such a light-trapping effect is actually helpful for the light harvesting in real PSCs as confirmed by the reflection results shown in Fig. 4(b). After the incident light passes through the photoactive layer and then is reflected by the back metal contact, the reflected light would be scattered by the aggregated domains in Nafion doped PEDOT-PSS, thus increasing the light harvesting in the photoactive layer as shown in the inset of Fig. 4(b). Therefore, more photo-induced excitons and higher photo-current could be generated by the enhanced light harvesting.
The photovoltaic performance of PSCs with a device structure of ITO/Nafion doped PEDOT-PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca/Al as shown in Fig. 1(a) was investigated as a function of Nafion doping ratio in PEDOT-PSS. Fig. 5(a) shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the devices under the illumination of AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2, and the device performance parameters are summarized in Table 1, where the average values were calculated based upon 15 devices and the error values are the standard deviation used as an appropriate level of precision. For the control device with an un-doped PEDOT-PSS buffer layer, there shows a PCE of 4.05% (with an average value of 3.82 ± 0.14%) with a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 9.38 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.63 V and a fill factor (FF) of 68.6%. In comparison, all the devices with a Nafion doped PEDOT-PSS layer exhibit superior performance, which mainly results from the improved Jsc and FF since the Voc of the devices remains almost unchanged regardless of the Nafion doping ratio. Among them, when the doping ratio of Nafion to PEDOT-PSS was 1:2, the devices with Nafion:PEDOT-PSS layers achieved the highest PCE of 4.63% (with an average value of 4.30 ± 0.23%), among the highest values reported for P3HT:PCBM based PSCs. This is 14.3% higher than that of the control devices with un-doped PEDOT-PSS buffer layers, due to 11.7% and 4.45% improvement in Jsc (10.48 mA cm−2) and FF (71.6%), respectively.
The enhanced FF should be ascribed to the decreased series resistance of the contact and the increased conductivity of the HEL as listed in Table 1. The increased Jsc was further confirmed by the external quantum efficiency (EQE) test as shown in Fig. 5(b). Obviously, the devices with Nafion doped PEDOT-PSS buffer layers demonstrate the increased photon-to-electron sensitivity in the wavelength range of 350–550 nm, which is consistent with the decreased reflection over the same wavelength range as shown in Fig. 4(b). Therefore, the increased Jsc should be mainly attributed to the enhanced light harvesting by decreased reflection and increased light-scattering. Besides, the improved conductivity of Nafion doped PEDOT-PSS and decreased contact resistance at the HEL/P3HT interface could also contribute to the enhanced Jsc.
The long term stability (as shown in Fig. 6) of encapsulated PSCs with the un-doped PEDOT-PSS and Nafion doped PEDOT-PSS interfacial layer was investigated according to the International Summit on OPV Stability (ISOS-D-1 shelf). The encapsulated devices were stored in the dark at ambient temperature and humidity. The photovoltaic parameters (Voc, Jsc, FF and PCE) were recorded daily with a solar simulator (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). After 1008 hours (42 days), the PCE of the un-doped PEDOT-PSS modified devices drops to 83% of the initial value. The decrease of the PCE is mainly attributed to the deterioration of both Voc and FF, since the Jsc remains almost unchanged. Our observation is in good agreement with recent reports on the degradation of PSCs based on PEDOT-PSS. In contrast, the devices with the Nafion doped PEDOT-PSS interfacial layer demonstrate dramatically improved stability. After 42 days, the FF drops only 4%, while the Voc and Jsc remain almost unchanged, resulting in the overall PCE retaining 95% of the initial value. Such significant improvement is mainly related to the enhanced resistance to the moisture and impurities by the Nafion component in the HEL. Because the fluorocarbon chains of Nafion are more hydrophobic than those of PSS, Nafion tends to preferentially settle on the top surface of the HEL. As a result, the impurities from PEDOT-PSS and the ITO substrate, such as metal and sulfate, could be effectively blocked by Nafion to enter the photoactive layer. Furthermore, compared to the un-doped PEDOT-PSS, the Nafion doped PEDOT-PSS becomes less sensitive to moisture because the Nafion component has stronger hydrophobicity (as shown in Fig. 3) and better chemical stability which is less sensitive to moisture relative to conventional PEDOT-PSS.
To further study the effect of Nafion dopant on the air stability of the PEDOT-PSS film, we compared the degradation process of PEDOT-PSS and Nafion doped PEDOT-PSS films stored in air at ambient temperature and humidity. The optical micrographs of PEDOT-PSS and Nafion doped PEDOT-PSS (1:2) films are shown in Fig. 7. The morphology of the as-prepared PEDOT-PSS film is much smoother than that of Nafion doped PEDOT-PSS, and a few defects within the film can be observed. The sizes of these defects gradually grow with time, and more and more new defects are produced over time. When the PEDOT-PSS film was stored in air for 11 days, defects with different sizes can be observed within the film, and the size of the defect can reach 2–3 μm, which suggests that the presence of moisture in the air seriously affect the stability of the PEDOT-PSS film. For the Nafion doped PEDOT-PSS (1:2), the defect growth rate is much lower than that of PEDOT-PSS film. Only a small number of defects can be observed after the film was placed in the air for 8–11 days, suggesting that the Nafion dopant in the PEDOT-PSS film can effectively improve the resistance of the film to water vapor erosion, which is beneficial to improve the air stability of the PSCs.

In conclusion, we demonstrated an efficient approach to improve the power conversion efficiency and long-term stability of polymer solar cells by incorporation of amphiphilic Nafion doped PEDOT-PSS as a hole extraction layer. Because the hydrophobic fluorocarbon backbone of Nafion tends to preferentially interact with the hydrophobic PEDOT and the hydrophilic –SO3H groups of Nafion tend to preferentially interact with hydrophilic PSS, the PEDOT chains are separated from the PSS chains by Nafion in Nafion doped PEDOT-PSS. Consequently, the conductivity of the doped film was greatly enhanced and the surface roughness was greatly increased, inducing the decreased contact resistance and reduced optical reflection, and resulting in significant improvement in PCE. Furthermore, due to the excellent thermal and mechanical stability of Nafion, the decohesion of the PEDOT-PSS film can be substantially restrained by the stable Nafion skeleton, inducing great enhancement of the lifetime of PSCs with the Nafion doped PEDOT-PSS layer. Our work opens a new venue for the selection of hole extraction materials for designing more stable PSCs with higher efficiency.


This work was supported by the NSFC (No. 51173040, 51303052), the SRFDP (No. 20130036110007), the National Key Basic Research Program of China (973 project, No. 2015CB932201), the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University (NCET-12-0848), the Beijing Higher Education Young Elite Program (YETP0713), the State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces (Xiamen University, 201404) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, China (13ZD11, 2014ZD11, 2014MS35, 2014ZZD07).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta03967c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015