 DOI: 10.1039/C8CC06952B
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 11459-11462


Lin-Feng
Gao
,

Wen-Jun
Luo
,

Ying-Fang
Yao
* and 

Zhi-Gang
Zou
*

Eco-materials and Renewable Energy Research Center (ERERC), Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, College of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Nanjing University, No. 22 Hankou Road, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210093, P. R. China. E-mail: yaoyingfang@nju.edu.cn; zgzou@nju.edu.cn

Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Nano Technology, National Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures, Department of Physics, Nanjing University, No. 22 Hankou Road, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210093, P. R. China

Macau Institute of Systems Engineering, Macau University of Science and Technology, Macau 999078, P. R. China

Received
27th August 2018
, Accepted 18th September 2018
First published on 19th September 2018
Lead halide perovskites (LHPs) have been investigated for photoelectrochemical hydrogen generation from water splitting. However, the harsh requirements in preparing the environment, i.e. isolating water and oxygen, hinder the wide applications of lead halide perovskites. Herein, an all-inorganic perovskite, i.e. a CsPbBr3-based photocathode, has been prepared to generate hydrogen. It is notable that as a valuable trial for a potential large-scale production, the whole preparation process was completed in an open-air environment. The LHP photocathode achieved the highest photocurrent of about 1.2 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE. And the photocurrent remains around 94% after continuous illumination for 1 h with the Faradaic efficiency of 90%, illustrating a good photoelectrochemical stability. The all-inorganic LHP photocathodes are facile to prepare with a relatively good performance, and can be improved via band engineering and structure optimization, of which large-scale applications can be expected.

Effectively harvesting power from the infinite solar energy is a promising strategy to meet the increasing energy demands of human society. Photovoltaic devices, represented by silicon, GaAs, CdTe and lead halide perovskite (LHP) solar cells, transform solar energy into electricity, and achieve high power conversion efficiencies over 20%. However, because of the fluctuant sun illuminating time influenced by daytime, weather, and latitude, the electricity supply of photovoltaic devices is usually too unstable to be integrated into a power grid. To avoid undesirable intermittency of sun light, converting solar to chemical energy such as hydrogen generation via photoelectrolysis of water is a promising solar energy storage method.

Very recently, LHPs have started to attract increasing research interest as photoelectrodes in photoelectrochemical reactions, due to their high absorption coefficient, large diffusion length, and high charge mobility. Zheng's group for the first time applied CH3NH3PbI3 as a photoanode to achieve Na2S oxidation, which opened a new avenue for preparing high-efficiency LHP photoelectrodes. To date, the photochemical conversion efficiency of LHP photoelectrodes has reached 7.63%. Despite the enormous progress of LHP photoelectrodes, the fabrication environment still requires strict control, because of the vulnerability of CH3NH3PbI3 to moisture, oxygen, and heat. During the preparation, water and oxygen need rigorous isolation, and the operational temperature needs austere restriction. The high environmental requirements highly increase the cost of LHP photoelectrode fabrication, and hence the industrialization potential of LHP photoelectrodes calls for a new type of LHP material and fabrication method to resist the environment caused corrosion.
Adopting novel LHPs with high stability would resolve the limitation of preparation environments. We noted that all-inorganic perovskites represent one of the most attractive materials in the cutting-edge solar cell field for their high stability to moisture. And among this type of LHPs, CsPbBr3 is one of the most promising materials. Although cesium lead iodide/bromide (CsPbI3−xBrx, 0 ≤ x < 3) has a more appropriate bandgap for solar conversion, substantial unstable phenomena occur upon phase transitions, usually between an orthorhombic phase and a cubic phase under the atmospheric environment. On the basis of the above thoughts, we herein fabricated a type of CsPbBr3-based photocathode to split water for hydrogen generation. The photocathode achieved a photocurrent of about 1.2 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE. After continuous illumination for 1 h, the photocurrent remained around 94% with the Faradaic efficiency of 90%. Strikingly, the whole photocathode fabricating process was completed in an open-air environment without any ambient temperature control. This moderate fabricating process thus allows the production of a wide range of LHP-based photoelectrochemical cells for hydrogen energy conversion and storage.
Even as a prominent photoelectric material, CsPbBr3 exhibits undesired photoluminescence properties. This indicates that the radiative recombination of electrons and holes dominates the charge transfer during light irradiation. As a result, it is difficult for CsPbBr3 to serve as a photocathode directly. Therefore, analogous to the inverted-structure solar cells, we adopted NiO and ZnO as the hole and electron transport materials respectively for the charge extraction. The energy levels of each layer are shown in Fig. 1a. The Fermi level of FTO at −4.4 eV is higher than the valence band maximum of NiO at −5.4 eV, and that of CsPbBr3 at −5.6 eV, leading to a favorable hole transfer from CsPbBr3, through NiO, to the FTO layer. Similarly, due to the higher conduction band minimum of CsPbBr3 at −3.3 eV than that of ZnO at −4.4 eV, and the Fermi level of Ag at −4.3 eV, electrons can be extracted from CsPbBr3, through ZnO, and transferred to the Ag layer effectively. We believed that this structure can effectively reduce the charge recombination and realize the application of photogenerated electrons. We used steady-state fluorescence quenching to ensure the effective electron and hole extraction through ZnO and NiO (Fig. 1b). The emission intensity of CsPbBr3 was obviously weakened with contact to either ZnO or NiO. The quenching was even dramatic with the addition of both ZnO and NiO, indicating a probable preference of electron–hole separation with a tandem structure shown in Fig. 1a.
Although CsPbBr3 is relatively stable in moisture and oxygen environments, directly inserting the CsPbBr3 photocathode into water remains a challenge since cesium is highly soluble in water to incur irreversible crystal structure collapse. Hence, finding out an effective way to protect CsPbBr3 from water erosion is essential to assemble an LHP photocathode for H2 generation. There are two strategies to achieve the waterproof effect: (i) compact material- and (ii) bulk material-based encapsulation. In the former strategy, a dense film of Ni should be prepared by magnetron sputtering or using a thermal evaporator to seal off the LHPs. However, because of the voids between the metal particles, aqueous electrolytes can easily penetrate through the Ni layer and quickly break down the LHPs. By contrast, the bulk material-based encapsulation method employs a centimeter size metallic cover to protect the perovskite from water, such as fusible alloys and titanium foil. The bulk metal can perfectly isolate the perovskite from water and efficiently transfer electrons to the active sites. In our work, a fusible InBiSn alloy was adopted to encapsulate the CsPbBr3 photocathode, which has a very low melting point of 65 °C and was able to conveniently cover the photocathode without the destruction of the LHP and charge transport materials. In order to enhance the electrical conductivity between the ZnO electron transporting layer and the InBiSn alloy, we used a layer of silver paste to connect each other electrically. Pt particles were then deposited onto the fusible alloy as electrocatalysts for hydrogen generation. The schematic configuration of the CsPbBr3-based photocathode is shown in Fig. 1c. With this appropriate design of band structure and encapsulation strategy, once the photocathode is irradiated, photo-generated electron–hole pairs in CsPbBr3 are separated immediately. The holes are transferred to the valence band of NiO and are collected by the FTO layer. Meanwhile, the electrons are extracted by ZnO and reach the Pt electrocatalysts to achieve water reduction to hydrogen. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the cross-sectional structure of the CsPbBr3-based photocathode in Fig. 1d (without fusible alloy and Pt particles) confirms this configuration. From the bottom to the top, we observed an FTO layer with a thickness of about 380 nm, a layer of NiO/CsPbBr3/ZnO with a thickness of 740 nm, and a layer of silver paste with a thickness of 8 μm, which are marked with different colors, respectively.
Current fabrication of CsPbBr3 films via one-step solution processes faced enormous challenges and a sufficiently thick film has rarely been attained. Because of a huge difference in the solubility of CsBr and PbBr2, it is likely that they form Cs4PbBr6 or CsPb2Br5 impurities in aprotic solvents, e.g., dimethylformamide (DMF) and dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO). Herein a sequential deposition method was employed to prepare a CsPbBr3 film. Firstly, a high-concentration PbBr2 precursor solution was spin-coated on the FTO glass substrates and a PbBr2 film was formed through an annealing process. Then a deposition process in CsBr solution was performed to achieve CsPbBr3 growth. It should be noted that the whole photocathode fabricating process was completed in an open-air environment without any ambient temperature control. Fig. 2a shows the top-view SEM image with the inset showing the cross-sectional view of the CsPbBr3 film. The particle sizes of CsPbBr3 are up to a micron scale, and few grain boundaries could be observed through the film (inset of Fig. 2a), guaranteeing an effective charge transition through the LHP film. Voids were seldom observed on this film, indicative of the formation of a dense CsPbBr3 film that prevents an interior short circuit between the NiO and ZnO layers. Undoubtedly, the as-prepared dense film is beneficial for the CsPbBr3-based photocathodes to achieve high solar to hydrogen efficiency. The XRD patterns of CsPbBr3 are shown in Fig. 2b, with the peaks at 15.1°, 21.4°, and 30.6° attributed to the lattice space of (110), (020) and (220), respectively. The peaks at 26.3°, 37.7°, and 51.4° should be assigned to FTO. And the small peak at 11.5° was attributed to the CsPb2Br5 phase. The as-prepared CsPbBr3 film exhibited absorption from the ultraviolet to the visible region with one absorption peak at 517 nm, which should be ascribed to the CsPbBr3 formation. (Fig. 2c). By employing a Tauc plot to analyze the CsPbBr3 film, a band gap of 2.35 eV is determined with the direct transition model (Fig. 2d).
In order to modulate the CsPbBr3 material structure and thus achieve the optimal photoelectrochemical properties, investigations on the CsBr deposition were then carried out. The whole deposition process was monitored via XRD patterns and UV-vis spectra. The intensity of the signature peaks of CsPbBr3 at 15.1° and 21.4° increased, coincident with the fading of peaks of PbBr2 at 18.6° and 21.6° with increasing CsBr deposition time (Fig. 3a), indicating the phase transition from PbBr2 to CsPbBr3 crystals. The UV-vis spectra (Fig. 3b) also verified the CsPbBr3 phase formation during CsBr deposition. The absorption peak at 517 nm emerged after PbBr2 was dipped into the CsBr solution, and became stronger with the increase in deposition time to 14 min. Both the intensity of XRD signature peaks of CsPbBr3 (Fig. 3a) and the UV-vis absorption peak for CsPbBr3 (Fig. 3b) remained steady from 14 to 18 min, indicating that the CsPbBr3 phase was fully formed till the deposition time of 14 min. It was also notable that with the increase in CsBr deposition time, the impure phases varied dramatically. The peaks of CsPb2Br5 at 11.6° decayed rapidly, concomitant with the rise of Cs4PbBr6 at 22.4° (Fig. 3c), indicating that the continuous addition of CsBr led to the composition increase of Cs+ and Br− in the CsPbBr3 crystals. The counterbalance of impure phases led to the optimized photoelectrochemical properties. Fig. 3d exhibits the photocurrent curves of CsPbBr3 with different deposition times. The one with 14 min deposition time showed the highest photocurrent, and as a result, represented the photocathodes in the subsequent experiment.
The photoelectrochemical performance of the as-prepared photocathode was further investigated; a three-electrode system was used for photoelectrochemical hydrogen evolution measurements. As shown in Fig. 4a, the CsPbBr3-based photocathode showed a high onset potential at about 1.16 VRHE, and a current density of 1.2 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE under AM 1.5G simulated sunlight conditions (100 mW cm−2). Furthermore, the half-cell solar to hydrogen efficiency (HC-STH, Fig. S1, ESI) of the CsPbBr3-based photocathode was calculated from the current density–potential curve in Fig. 4a. This presents a peak at 0.74 VRHE with the maximum HC-STH up to 0.64%. To verify the above photocurrent under AM 1.5G simulated sunlight conditions, the incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) was measured under monochromatic light irradiation. Fig. 4b displays the IPCE of the CsPbBr3-based photocathode and the curve reaches about 20% in the region from 380 to 510 nm. A photocurrent density of 1.4 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE was calculated through the integration of the AM 1.5G solar spectrum with the IPCE curve, which corroborated the measured photocurrent value in Fig. 4a. The CsPbBr3-based photocathode exhibited a superior stability and the photocurrent only decreased by 6% after 1 h of continuous illumination (Fig. 4c). The amount of evolved gaseous H2 during the photoelectrochemical reaction was monitored using gas chromatography. The Faradaic efficiency for H2 generation was up to 90% (Fig. 4d), suggesting a negligible photo-induced corrosion process, and the H2 production was the major contribution of the photocurrent. In order to prove the eligibility of the fabrication technique and preparation process, a CsPbBr3-based solar cell was also assembled, and the short circuit current (JSC), open circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE) were tested, as shown in Fig. S2 (ESI).
In this study, we for the first time developed an all-inorganic LHP photocathode to split water for hydrogen production. The photocathode achieved a photocurrent of about 1.2 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE. And the all-inorganic LHP photocathode retained 94% activity after 1 h of continuous irradiation, exhibiting a high photoelectrochemical stability. The HC-STH efficiency of the all-inorganic photocathode is possibly further improved by means of partially substituting Br− with I− to reduce the bandgap of the LHPs, and a further structural optimization. It should be noted that the whole photocathode fabricating process was completed in an open-air environment without any ambient temperature control, which is often difficult for organic–inorganic hybrid LHP preparation. Preparing a LHP photocathode out of a completely sealed environment, e.g. a glove box, is a valuable try of decreasing the environmental and expense requirements that directly orients to large-scale production. It is believed that this study pushes forward the potential applications of LHPs in the photoelectrolysis of water.
This work was supported primarily by the National Scientific Instrument Development Major Project of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51627810).

There are no conflicts to declare.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cc06952b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018