 DOI: 10.1039/C8EE02958J
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1265-1273


Hsin-Hsiang
Huang
,

Yen-Chen
Shih
,

Leeyih
Wang
* and 

King-Fu
Lin
*

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan. E-mail: kflin@ntu.edu.tw

Center for Condensed Matter Sciences, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan. E-mail: leewang@ntu.edu.tw

Received
8th October 2018
, Accepted 28th November 2018
First published on 28th November 2018
The power conversion efficiency of the perovskite solar cell is high enough to be commercially viable. However, long-term stability is the inevitable issue that obstructs its commercialization. Here, we demonstrate that the half-year (∼4680 h) stable unencapsulated inverted solar cell has almost zero loss in performance, measured under controlled environmental condition, when using montmorillonite (MMT)/CH3NH3PbI3 nanocomposite as photoactive layer. It yields up to 17.29% in power conversion efficiency, owing to the formation of an outstandingly dense gas permeation barrier of exfoliated MMT shell that effectively retards the moisture from penetrating into the perovskite. It is believed that this extensively modified device and low-cost architecture will compellingly lead to the timely commercialization of perovskite solar cells.

The perovskite solar cells (PSCs) with organic ammonium lead iodide as photoactive material have been highly regarded to have potential for commercialization because of their high power conversion efficiency (PCE) and low processing cost. However, long-term stability still needs to be addressed. Montmorillonite (MMT) is a natural smectic clay of multiple stacked nanoplatelets with ∼1 nm thickness and ∼300 nm lateral length. Once MMT is exfoliated to fabricate the polymer composite film, the exfoliated MMTs (exMMTs) function like a barrier blocking the moisture from penetrating into the films. Moreover, exMMTs are anionic in nature and can interact with organic ammonium iodide through cation exchange. In this study, we found they formed as a shell on the surface of perovskite crystalline grains when incorporated into the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite precursor solution prior to spin-coating into a film. The as-fabricated unencapsulated PSCs are extremely stable, with the PCE of 17.29% barely changed after half a year of storage in the controlled ambient environment. Notably, exMMTs can be easily fabricated by sonicating the MMT in aqueous solution after swelling in water, the process of which is manifestly supported by DLVO theory and is also low cost.


Photovoltaic cells that use perovskite as photo absorber and carrier transporter is a focus of emerging cutting-edge research enthusiasm. The perovskite-based solar cells not only have high power conversion efficiency (PCE), beyond 22%, but are also fabricated with simple solution process and cheap materials. However, to compete with other photovoltaic technologies, the long-term stability of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) remains a critical hurdle for commercialization. Inevitably, moisture is a main issue for the instability of the perovskite film. Decomposition of CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) to HI, CH3NH2 and PbI2 in a humid environment is the most recognized degradation pathway for the perovskite materials.

To date, various approaches have been employed to alleviate the instability of PSCs, such as compositional manipulation of the perovskite by insertion of ions to achieve a more stable crystal structure, adding graphene oxide or polymer to the precursor solution to form the hybrid composites, enhancing the stability by controlling the grain size at larger than 1 μm to reduce the grain boundaries of perovskite film, introducing a passivation layer between perovskite and the hole or electron transporting layer, and even substitution of titanium dioxide (TiO2) or Spiro-OMeTAD by other more hydrophobic materials to prevent moisture penetration. Besides, numerous approaches have been employed to encapsulate the PSCs preventing direct exposure to moisture. It should be noted that a one-year stable device has recently been achieved by engineering an ultra-stable 2D/3D (HOOC(CH2)4NH3)2PbI4/CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite. Although successful, the reported PCE is rather low.
Here, we develop an innovative method to slow the water permeability of the perovskite by blending the MAPbI3 solution with exfoliated montmorillonite (exMMT), which eventually forms a protective shell of exMMT on perovskite crystals to enhance the long-term stability of the inverted (p–i–n) solar cell, usually showing negligible hysteresis when fullerene is used as the top electron-transporting layer. We find that the perovskite film incorporating exMMT is surprisingly protected against aging from moisture, heat and light, achieving highly stable perovskite-based photovoltaic cells.
Tens of thousands of documents on nanocomposites have been published in the past three decades, from which the polymer-silicate nanocomposites have been developed with ultimately practical applications. The most common layered silicates used for application nowadays is montmorillonite (MMT), which is a natural smectic clay of multiple stacked nanoplatelets (the thickness of the layer is approximately 1nm, and the lateral dimensions of these layers vary from 300 angstromsto several microns) composed of two tetrahedral silica layers fused into an edge-shared octahedral layer of alumina or magnesia. Polymer nanocomposite film incorporating exMMT not only has many improved properties, such as capability to block gas or vapor passage through the film, but also is benign to the environment. Because exMMT nanoplatelets are anionic in nature, they would disperse in water to form a homogeneous suspension. By following the approach in the literature, we used the Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek (DLVO) theory to calculate the interaction energy between two adjacent nanoplatelets in MMT as a function of their width of gallery, as shown in Fig. S2 (ESI), suggesting that the nanoplatelets inside MMT are in repulsive state against their adjacent nanoplatelets when MMT swells in water. Consequently, exMMT nanoplatelets were successfully fabricated by swelling MMT to overcome the van der Waals force, then sonicating the suspension for seven days at room temperature. The morphology of such fabricated exMMT nanoplatelets with a dimension of ∼300 nm was observed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Fig. S3, ESI). X-ray diffraction of the dried suspension also revealed that the characterization peak of MMT at 2θ = 7.1° has been significantly diminished (Fig. S4, ESI), indicating that a large amount of the MMTs have been exfoliated. Moreover, the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) of MMT after exfoliation to exMMT also shows that the Si 2p bonding energy peak at 102.1 eV shifted to 101.3 eV, Al 2p peak at 74.6 eV to 73.8 eV, and Mg 2p peak at 49.3 eV to 49.1 eV (Fig. S5, ESI). On the contrary, the bonding energy of O 1s peak at 531.3 eV shifted to 531.6 eV. The exfoliation of MMT is also supported by the Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) result that the absorption peak at 623 cm−1 and 1044 cm−1, represented by the coupled Al–O and Si–O out-of-plane vibration and Si–O out-of-plane stretching mode, became broader as the MMT was exfoliated (Fig. S6, ESI).

The perovskite films were then fabricated from the MAPbI3 precursor solutions mixed with different amounts of exMMTs. XRD patterns of all the exMMT/MAPbI3 thin films show only the tetragonal characteristic peaks occurring at 2θ from 10 to 40° (Fig. S7, ESI), suggesting the formation of the MAPbI3 phase. Besides, suitable amount of the exMMTs as an additive increased the crystal size, as estimated by Scherrer's equation (Table S3, ESI). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the exMMT/MAPbI3 films shown in Fig. S8 (ESI) reveal that the grain size of the perovskite crystals increases with the amount of exMMTs, implying that exMMT additives have slowed down the crystallization rate to form larger crystalline grains. Notably, the grain size observed by SEM is much larger than the crystal size, indicating that the perovskite grains are in polycrystalline form. Nevertheless, when the content of exMMT was increased to over 0.01 wt%, the grain size did not further increase, probably due to the aggregation of exMMTs, which can be observed by optical microscopy (OM, Fig. S9, ESI).

To examine the environmental stability of materials, MAPbI3 and exMMT/MAPbI3 thin films containing different amounts of exMMTs were kept at relative humidity (RH) of ∼70% and room temperature for 1 h and 1 day (Fig. S10 and S11, ESI). The phase transition of the MAPbI3 film was observed by the color change from black to yellow (Fig. 1a). The ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) spectra of MAPbI3 films in Fig. 1b shows that the absorption above 450 nm dropped significantly, probably due to the material decomposition to form PbI2. In contrast, the UV-vis spectra of exMMT (0.01 wt%)/MAPbI3 showed no obvious change during the same storage period (Fig. 1c). XRD patterns were taken to examine the degraded films, with the diffraction peak at 2θ = 12.5° and 14.1° corresponding to PbI2 phase and perovskite (110), respectively (Fig. 1d and e). For 1 h storage, the decomposition of MAPbI3 into PbI2 was still in progress, showing the coexistent peaks from MAPbI3 and PbI2. After storage for 1 day, the (110) peak from the perovskite film was completely extinguished, leaving only the peak of PbI2. In contrast, the diffraction pattern of exMMT (0.01 wt%)/MAPbI3 film was almost unchanged after the same storage time, consistent with the observed unchanged film color and UV-vis spectra. Thus, the exMMT is indeed able to stabilize the perovskite phase of MAPbI3. Nonetheless, the poor moisture stability of the film with exMMT content beyond 0.01 wt% is probably due to the aggregation of exMMTs to form inhomogeneous coverage (Fig. S9 and S10, ESI).

Next, we investigated whether this exMMT (0.01 wt%)/MAPbI3 nanocomposite can enhance device stability. Perovskite solar cells with and without incorporating 0.01 wt% exMMT were fabricated, and their photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves under simulated one-sun illumination were compared in Fig. 2a. Notably, both cells were hysteresis-free when scanned in forward and backward directions.

Table S4 (ESI) summarizes the corresponding photovoltaic parameters, including short-circuit current density (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), PCE and resistances (series (RS) and shunt (Rsh)). The performance of device containing 0.01 wt% exMMT was slightly better, with the PCE increased from 16.65 ± 0.16% to 17.29 ± 0.15%, probably due to the larger grain size of perovskite, which reduces the charge recombination associated with the defect-assisted recombination. In the beginning, the stability of phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM)/MAPbI3 and PCBM/[exMMT (0.01 wt%)/MAPbI3] films coated on top of the hole transporting material (HTM)/ITO glass, fabricated under the same conditions as cell fabrication but without application of Ag electrode, against water immersion was examined as shown in Movie S1 (ESI). It can be observed that the pristine MAPbI3 film completely decomposed in 30 s after immersion in water, while the PCBM/[exMMT (0.01 wt%)/MAPbI3] film is much more stable and remains dark brown after 1 min.
Thereafter, according to the phase-stability testing results as discussed above, we further compare the stability of the devices with and without incorporating 0.01 wt% exMMT (without encapsulation) stored in ambient environment under controlled RH of 25% for 30 days, which was then raised to 50% for the rest of the test. The J–V curves of the devices with MAPbI3 and exMMT (0.01 wt%)/MAPbI3, measured up to 195 days of storage, are plotted in Fig. 2b and c, respectively. For comparison, the change of PCE is plotted in Fig. 2d, and all other photovoltaic parameters extracted from these J–V curves are shown in Fig. S12 (ESI). As can be seen, severe degradation of the pristine MAPbI3 perovskite cell was observed. The cell degrades to about 80% of the initial PCE after 30 days of storage at RH 25% and then degrades swiftly to nil within ∼60 days, apparently due to the decomposition of perovskite phase to PbI2. In contrast to the behavior of the pristine MAPbI3 device, the performance of exMMT (0.01 wt%)/MAPbI3 solar cell exhibits negligible degradation after 195 days (∼4680 h), with all the photovoltaic parameters almost unchanged. The SEM images of the aged MAPbI3 films with and without incorporating 0.01 wt% exMMT are also shown in Fig. S13 (ESI), which indicates that the crystalline structure of perovskite barely changed in the presence of exMMT but was completely damaged without the protection of exMMT.

To further explore the reason behind the protection of MAPbI3 films against environmental aging by incorporating exMMT, we measured the depth composition profiles of the MAPbI3 and exMMT (0.01 wt%)/MAPbI3 films by using XPS (Fig. 3). The films were deposited on the HTM/ITO substrate following the same process as solar cell fabrication. In measurements, Ar+ ions were used to etch the sample layer by layer, and the surface composition information was recorded prior to each etching step. The bonding energy of the constituent elements was obtained and distinguishable. The results show that the concentrations of Pb and I atoms barely changed throughout the depth of the pristine MAPbI3 layer (Fig. 3a). As to the exMMT (0.01 wt%)/MAPbI3 film, the concentration of exMMT on the surface was almost twice that of MAPbI3, but gradually decreased to nil, along with increasing concentration of MAPbI3 as the etching depth reached to 50 nm. Apparently, the exMMTs have been repelled to the surface as MAPbI3 crystallized on the HTM/ITO substrate. It is well known that for hydrophobic modification of MMT with aliphatic ammonium compounds, exMMTs in MMT are prone to attracting the ammonium groups of aliphatic ammonium compounds for cationic exchange. Therefore, as exMMTs were mixed with MAI and PbI2 in dimethyl sulfoxide/N,N-dimethyformamide (DMSO/DMF) mixed solvent to prepare the exMMT/MAPbI3 precursor solutions, they would have a tendency to attract the MAI. Once the precursor solution was spin-coated on the HTM/ITO substrate and the exMMTs were repelled to the surface, the exMMTs would strongly bond to the perovskite crystalline grains through cationic exchange with MAI, thus forming a shell on the surface of grains. To directly detect the interaction between exMMT and MAI in the exMMT/MAPbI3 perovskite, we applied the pristine MAPbI3 and exMMT/MAPbI3 precursor solutions (the content of exMMT has been increased to 1 wt% to enhance the result) on top of the potassium bromide substrate, which was then subject to FTIR spectra measurement after drying. The results shown in Fig. S14 (ESI) indicate that the stretching and bending vibration peaks of N–H bond in pristine MAPbI3, which appear at 3478 cm−1 and 1645 cm−1, shift to 3506 cm−1 and 1665 cm−1 upon interaction with exMMT, evidencing that the exMMTs have strongly bonded to the perovskite crystalline grains through cationic exchange with MAI.

We also performed energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) elemental mapping to confirm that exMMT has uniformly dispersed throughout the surface of exMMT (0.01 wt%)/MAPbI3 film (Fig. S15, ESI). Therefore, it is conceivable that the exMMT formed as a protective shell in the perovskite/PCBM interface, inhibiting moisture from penetrating into the perovskite layer during the aging test of PSCs. Notably, we also employed spin coating to apply an exMMT layer on the surface of the perovskite, but it did not form a homogenous film and the photovoltaic performance of resulting PSCs was rather poor (Fig. S16, ESI).

Thermal stability of the perovskite film is also a major issue for the long-term stability of the cell because the heat induced by light inside the perovskite film does not spread out quickly. Literature has shown that MAPbI3 has very low thermal conductivity. The structure of MAPbI3 tends to decompose into CH3NH2 and HI vapor with the accumulation of heat, leaving PbI2 in the film. Here, damp-heat tests of the devices using pristine MAPbI3 and exMMT (0.01 wt%)/MAPbI3 were conducted in the environment of RH 50% at 50, 55, and 60 °C, respectively, with the decayed photovoltaic performance shown in Fig. S17 and Table S5 (ESI). The device with pristine MAPbI3 degraded severely when the PCE dropped to 12.18 ± 0.26% at a timescale of 25 h at 50 °C (Fig. 4a and Fig. S17a, ESI), in which the decay is mainly attributed to the decrease of FF; JSC and VOC remain fairly stable. The subsequent decrease of VOC and then JSC leads to the catastrophic drop of PCE to 0.85 ± 0.17% after 175 h. Again in striking contrast, the devices with 0.01 wt% exMMT have a PCE of 17.29 ± 0.15%, which only decreases to 16.40 ± 0.17% after 175 h at 50 °C. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is currently no consensus on how to estimate the lifetime of perovskite solar cells with respect to the environmental temperature. Nevertheless, the lifetime prediction of organic solar cells often requires the extrapolation of accelerated aging data, with failure time or degradation rates determined at elevated temperatures and used to predict the material performance at ambient condition. The most important methodology for such extrapolations used for decades is based on the Arrhenius relationship. Arrhenius extrapolations assume that a chemical degradation process is controlled by a degradation rate kd, which is proportional to exp(−Ea/kBT), where Ea is the activation energy of a failure condition, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature in Kelvin. Because the lifetime to reach a certain degree of degradation (t%,T) at temperature T is theoretically proportional to the reciprocal of degradation rate, the Arrhenius relationship can be rearranged to the following form:

(1)
where
C is the constant. Accordingly, we intended to employ eqn (1) to estimate the storage lifetime of PSCs with exMMT (0.01 wt%)/MAPbI3 at ambient condition. The normalized PCEs of PSCs with exMMT (0.01 wt%)/MAPbI3versus storage time in the environmental conditions of RH 50% at 50, 55, and 60 °C are plotted in Fig. S17c (ESI) and summarized in the Table S5 (ESI). If 20% degradation can be tolerated, the t80 lifetimes (defined as the time at which PCE reaches 80% of the initial value) of the PSCs with exMMT (0.01 wt%)/MAPbI3 at 50, 55 and 60 °C were estimated to be 276, 149 and 88 h, respectively (Fig. S17c, ESI). With a simple calculation using eqn (1), the activation energy of the PSCs with exMMT (0.01 wt%)/MAPbI3 to reach 20% degradation (or 80% of the initial PCE) is 1.058 eV. Consequently, the lifetime of PSCs with exMMT (0.01 wt%)/MAPbI3 at room temperature (298 K) can be estimated to be 6709 h, or approximately 280 days, as shown in Fig. 4b, which is plausible as compared to the observed negligible degradation after 4680 h of storage, shown in Fig. 2d.


To complete this study, the light soaking tests of PSCs are inevitable. Fig. 5 shows the light-soaking testing results of the unencapsulated MAPbI3 and exMMT (0.01 wt%)/MAPbI3 devices under constant illumination (1 sun) at 25 °C and RH ∼50%. J–V curves were taken periodically to extract the observed device parameters. As shown in Fig. S18a and b (ESI), the device with pristine MAPbI3 lost the majority of its initial performance by 54 h. In striking contrast, the exMMT (0.01 wt%)/MAPbI3 devices demonstrated much better stability and maintained 88% of the initial PCE after 200 h of light-soaking aging. Notably, further study on the cells with perovskite containing more stable amines such as formamidinium iodide to combine with exMMTs is ongoing. The ensuing more stable unencapsulated devices with exMMTs at high temperature are expected and give us confidence that stability would not be a problem for commercialization when they are properly encapsulated.


In summary, we have demonstrated that exMMT nanoplatelets tended to be repelled to the surface of exMMT (0.01 wt%)/MAPbI3 film during crystallization of MAPbI3, functioning as a protective shell that inhibits the moisture from penetrating into the perovskite during environmental aging. This innovative method can effectively improve the lifetime of solar cells based on organometal halide perovskites. Because this device modification is facile and low cost, it deserves further exploration for large-scale fabrication.


Hydroiodic acid (30 mL, 0.227 mol, 57 wt% in water, Acros) and methylamine (27.8 mL, 0.273 mol, 40% in methanol, TCI) were stirred in an ice bath for 2 h. Then, the precipitates were recovered by evaporation at 50 °C for 1 h. The products were dissolved in ethanol, recrystallized from diethyl ether, and finally dried at 60 °C in a vacuum oven for 24 h.


The “BEN-GEL A” MMT, with a general chemical formula of (Na,Ca)0,33(Al,Mg)2Si4O10(OH)2·n(H2O), used for this study was from Hojun Yoko Co., Ltd (Tokyo, Japan) with the cation exchange capacity (CEC) of 94 meq/100 g. For swelling MMT in water, 8.3 mg of MMT was added to 10 mL DI water in a beaker and stirred vigorously for 3 days to form a suspension. Then, the solution was subjected to sonication (40 KHz, 300 W, DC300H, Delta Ultrasonic Co., Ltd) at the allocated duration time intervals of 1 h, 1 day, 3 days and 7 days, respectively. Afterward, ∼10 mL of DMF (extra dry, 99.8%, Acros) was added to each beaker for the solvent exchange. The solutions were vigorously stirred for 1 h and then concentrated to ∼5 mL of exMMT solution by evaporation. In order to further remove water from the exMMT solutions, ∼10 ml of DMF was again added to the solution, stirred for 1 h, and then concentrated to ∼5 mL. By repeating the same process at least 5 times, exMMTs in DMF with different degrees of exfoliation were fabricated.


15.92 mg MMT was added to a Spectra/Pro regenerated cellulose membrane tube with the molecular weight cut-off of 3500. After measuring the weight of the membrane tube containing MMT, it was immersed in a beaker containing 5 L of water; the water can pass through the membrane freely but MMT cannot. During the swelling experiment, the membrane tube was removed after immersion for different designated time intervals, and the surface was dried with tissue paper before the weight was measured. After weight measurement, testing of the membrane tube was resumed in the beaker until the weight was barely changed. An empty membrane tube was used for the blank test, and its weight change per day was taken as the reference. The weight gain and the corresponding enlarged width of the gallery between two adjacent nanoplatelets in MMT (estimated from the weight gain) versus swelling time are shown in Fig. S1 (ESI).


According to the DLVO theory, the interaction energy between two charged platelets in aqueous solution with ions, where the van der Waals attractive energy is counteracted by the Coulombic repulsive energy, can be expressed as follows:

(2)
where
κ is the Debye–Huckel parameter, given by

(3)

ϒ0 is the potential parameter, represented by

(4)

n0 is the ion concentration, k is Boltzmann's constant, T is the absolute temperature, d is the distance between two charged platelets, zi is the valence number of i ion, which is either a positive or negative integer, ψ is the potential of charged platelets, and A is the Hamaker constant associated with the van der Waals attraction between two platelets, estimated by

(5)
where
ε is the dielectric constant (εMMT = 210, εwater = 80),n is refractive index (nMMT = 1.5, nwater = 1.33), h is the Planck constant, and νe is the frequency of visible light. By following the literature, for MMT swelling in water, the total interaction energy between two adjacent nanoplatelets can be calculated by eqn (2) with the parameters shown in Table S1 (ESI). Based on the data shown in Table S1 (ESI), the interaction energy versus the width of gallery between two adjacent nanoplatelets of MMT swelling in water is plotted in Fig. S2 (ESI). Accordingly, the nanoplatelets inside MMT are clearly in repulsive state against their adjacent nanoplatelets immediately after swelling in water.


Indium tin oxide (ITO, 7 Ω square−1, Solaronix)-coated glass substrates were cleaned with ultrasonic baths of detergent, deionized water, isopropanol and acetone for 20 min sequentially, then treated with O2 plasma (600 mTorr, 18 W) for 10 min. Poly[3-(6-carboxyhexyl)thiophene-2,5-diyl], as HTM, was spin-coated on top of the cleaned ITO substrate at 4000 rpm for 45 s, which was then heated at 140 °C for 10 min.

MAPbI3 and exMMT/MAPbI3 perovskite films were prepared in a nitrogen gas-filled glovebox by using solvent-assisted casting method, as reported elsewhere. In the beginning, one-step process was employed to prepare the MAPbI3 and exMMT/MAPbI3 precursor solutions. For preparation of the pristine MAPbI3 precursor solution, 461 mg of PbI2 (ultra-dry, 99.999%, Alfa Aesar), 159 mg of MAI and 213 μL of DMSO (extra dry, 99.7%, Acros) were dissolved in 750 μL of DMF at room temperature. For preparation of the exMMT/MAPbI3 precursor solutions, 461 mg of PbI2, 159 mg of MAI and 213 μL of DMSO were dissolved in 750 μL of DMF containing different weight ratios of exMMT ranging from 0.1 to 0.0001 wt% (based on the weight of MAPbI3). The exMMT was prepared by sonication for 7 days (see the preparation of exMMT section for detail). The precursor solutions were spin-coated onto the HTM/ITO at 4000 rpm for 25 s, and 5 mL of diethyl ether was slowly dripped on the spinning substrate over 10 s. The transparent film was heated at 65 °C for 4 min and then 100 °C for 1 h to obtain a dense, glossy CH3NH3PbI3 film in dark brown color.
PCBM (99%, Solenne) in chlorobenzene (CB, anhydrous, 99.8%, Aldrich) (25 mg mL−1) was deposited on top of MAPbI3 or exMMT/MAPbI3 film as electron-transporting layer by spin-coating at 2000 rpm for 30 s. Polyethylenimine (PEI, average Mw ∼ 25000, branched, Aldrich) in methanol (0.1 wt%) was spin-coated on top of PCBM at 4000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, a 100 nm thick layer of silver as the counter electrode for PSCs was thermally evaporated under high vacuum.

TEM was carried out on a Hitachi H-7100 TEM at 75 kV. Carbon-film-coated copper grids used for TEM were dipped into the diluted exMMT solutions, withdrawn carefully, and dried in desiccators. XPS was performed in a Theta Probe Angle-Resolved X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer using Al-Kα X-ray photons (hν = 1486.6 eV). SEM images and EDX elemental mapping were taken with a Hitachi S-4800 SEM microscope at 10 kV. OM was carried out in a SONY Exwave HAD Microscope with color video camera and light source F0-150H. The crystalline phases were investigated by X-ray diffractometer on a Bruker D8 equipped with Cu-Kα radiation. Infrared spectra were recorded on a JASCO PLUS 480 ATR-FTIR spectrometer, and UV-vis absorption spectra were recorded on a JASCO V-670 spectrometer (Jasco Company, Hachioji, Tokyo, Japan). For the environmental storage test, the PSCs with MAPbI3 and exMMT/MAPbI3 (without encapsulation) and their films were placed in an environmental chamber (TEN-H40, temperature: 0–100 °C ± 1 °C, humidity: 25–95% ± 3%, Tender Scientific Co., Ltd) at the pre-set relative humidity and temperature. Photovoltaic performance measurements were conducted under full sunlight (100 mW cm−2) using a xenon-lamp-based solar simulator (AM 1.5G, Enli Tech). The light intensity of the solar simulator was calibrated by a monocrystalline silicon solar cell (SRC2020, Enli Tech). J–V characteristics were recorded by a Keithley 2400 source meter, scanning the backward (from 1.1 to −0.1 V) and then forward (from −0.1 to 1.1 V) direction with a delay time of 10 ms for each voltage step (0.01 V). The active area of the devices was defined by a metal mask with an aperture of 0.09 cm2. For the light-soaking test; the unencapsulated devices were placed under constant illumination of full sunlight (100 mW cm−2) using a xenon-lamp-based solar simulator (AM 1.5G, Enli Tech) in the ambient condition controlled at 25 °C and RH ∼50%. Their J–V curves were periodically monitored by a Keithley 2400 source meter.


K. F. L. and L. W. conceived this study and planned the experiments. H. H. H. fabricated all samples and performed the experiments. Y. C. S. helped to carry out the device stability tests. K. F. L., L. W. and H. H. H. jointly wrote the manuscript. All authors discussed the results and contributed to the final manuscript.


The authors declare no competing financial interests.


This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of the Republic of China through grant MOST103-2221-E-002-280-MY3. L. W. acknowledges the funding supported by Institute of Atomic and Molecular Sciences, Academia Sinica and Ministry of Science and Technology of the Republic of China through grants AS-iMATE-107-34 and MOST105-2119-M-002-030-MY3.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ee02958j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019