 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA09546H
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6809-6814


Mutalifu
Abulikemu
,

Silvano
Del Gobbo
,

Dalaver H.
Anjum
,

Mohammad Azad
Malik
* and 

Osman M.
Bakr
*

Division of Physical Sciences and Engineering, Solar and Photovoltaic Engineering Research Center (SPERC), King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), 23955-6900 Thuwal, Saudi Arabia. E-mail: osman.bakr@kaust.edu.sa

Imaging and Characterization Lab, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), 4700 KAUST, Thuwal, 23955-6900 Saudi Arabia

School of Materials, The University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PL, UK. E-mail: azad.malik@manchester.ac.uk

Received
24th November 2015
, Accepted 26th December 2015
First published on 29th December 2015
Inorganic nanocrystals composed of earth-abundant and non-toxic elements are crucial to fabricate sustainable photovoltaic devices on a large scale. In this study, various shapes and different phases of antimony sulfide nanocrystals, which are composed of non-scarce and non-toxic elements, are synthesized using a colloidal hot-injection method. The effect of various synthetic parameters on the final morphology is explored. Also, foreign ion (chlorine) effects on the morphology of Sb2S3 nanocrystals have been observed. Structural, optical and morphological properties of the nanocrystals were investigated, and Sb2S3 nanocrystal-based solid-state semiconductor-sensitized solar cells were fabricated using the as-prepared nanocrystals. We achieved a promising power conversion efficiency of 1.48%.

Binary chalcogenide semiconductors have exhibited great potential for solar energy conversion due to their solution processability, bandgap tunability, large light absorption coefficient, and compositional tailorability. All high-performance photovoltaic materials contain either toxic or scarce elements, such as Pb, Cd, In, Ga and Te; thus, the production of solution-processable nanocrystals from earth-abundant and non-toxic elements using environmentally benign synthetic methods has become a major challenge for the inorganic semiconductor-based solar energy field. Antimony sulfide is one of the potential materials for use in low-cost solar cells because of its relatively high abundance, low toxicity and large light absorption coefficient.

Sb2S3 is known to exist in two distinct phases, amorphous and crystalline; amorphous Sb2S3 is a direct bandgap semiconductor with a gap of 2.15 eV having a bright orange color. Crystalline Sb2S3 known as stibnite (gray black) has a bandgap of 1.73 eV and was demonstrated to be suitable for potential applications in solar cells, optical data storage, lithium batteries and supercapacitors. Sb2S3 has already been used in high-performance semiconductor-sensitized solar cells as a light harvester due to its high absorption coefficient. Sb2S3 can form stable complexes with bifunctional hole-transporting materials in semiconductor sensitized solar cells (SSSCs), a key feature for high-efficiency semiconductor-sensitized inorganic–organic hetero-junction solar cells. Early work on Sb2S3-based solar cells dates back to 1992, when Savadogo et al. made photoelectrochemical cells with 0.8% and 2.0% efficiencies under 40 mW cm−2 illumination for amorphous and crystalline Sb2S3, respectively. Recently, 7.5% efficiency was obtained, where Sb2S3 is deposited on TiO2 using a chemical bath deposition (CBD) method. More recently, 0.98% device efficiency was achieved using single molecule precursor antimony ethyl xanthate. However, to the best our knowledge, there are no reports on Sb2S3 NC-based solar cells. Besides Sb2S3, narrower band gap Sb2Se3 was also utilized as a light absorber for thin film solar cells obtaining remarkable values of efficiency.
Various shapes of Sb2S3 NCs have been synthesized using hydrothermal, solvothermal, polyol, and chemical vapor transport reactions, Aerosol-Assisted Chemical Vapour Deposition (AACVD) and chemical bath deposition. Oxygen contamination was a problem in most of the cases. A report on the synthesis of Sb2S3 nanowires using the hot injection method is already present in the literature, but no systematic studies of the synthesis of amorphous (orange) and crystalline (gray-black) Sb2S3 NCs using colloidal hot injection methods have ever been reported. Herein we report a systematic study on hot-injection colloidal synthesis of Sb2S3 NCs and an investigation into the effect of precursors, temperature and time on the formation of Sb2S3 NCs. We also report the fabrication of Sb2S3 NC-based solar cells and the characterization of their photovoltaic performance.
The synthesis of Sb2S3 NCs was carried out under inert conditions. In a typical synthesis of Sb2S3 NCs (please refer to the detailed experimental section in the ESI), 1 mmol of antimony(III) chloride, 6 ml oleic acid and 8 ml 1-octadecene (ODE) were loaded into a 3-neck round-bottom flask and heated (150 °C) under vacuum for 1 h, and then purged and kept under nitrogen while maintaining the temperature at 180 °C. A total of 1.5 mmol bis(trimethylsilyl) sulfide (TMS) in 5 ml ODE was then injected into the reaction flask which changed the color of the solution from clear yellow to orange. The reaction temperature was gradually decreased to 100 °C after injection. After approximately 30 minutes, the orange color of the solution started to change into a gray-black color, and the reaction was stopped after 90 minutes. In order to observe the growth of NCs soon after the injection, a 5 ml aliquot was collected after 90 s of injection, and quenched by injecting it into cold anhydrous toluene. Then, the final product and the aliquot in toluene were washed by centrifugation with a mixture of chloroform and ethanol, and eventually re-dispersed in toluene.
The aliquot taken after 90 s of the injection was an orange solution which was analyzed by powder X-ray diffraction (p-XRD). The broad p-XRD pattern corresponds to the stibnite (Sb2S3; ICDD # 00-006-0474) phase of antimony sulfide (Fig. 1a). The broadness of the pattern indicates a poorly crystalline Sb2S3 sample. The color of the reaction mixture turned gray-black after the completion of the reaction, and the p-XRD pattern in Fig. 1b shows that the as-prepared NCs are highly crystalline with no indication of secondary phases.
In order to characterize the optical properties of the as-synthesized orange and gray-black Sb2S3 NCs and to determine their band gap, a NC film was deposited on a clean glass substrate. Fig. 2 shows the Tauc plot of crystalline gray-black and orange semi-amorphous Sb2S3 NPs deposited on glass substrates. From the onset of the curves it was possible to estimate the bandgaps of the two films to be 1.73 eV for gray-black Sb2S3 NCs – close to the band gap of bulk crystalline Sb2S3 and 2.15 eV for the orange Sb2S3 NCs. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis of the samples was carried out by a FEI Titan G2 80-300CT microscope equipped with an X-ray energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) detector. Conventional TEM, high-resolution TEM (HRTEM), and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) measurements were carried out to determine the shape, size, and crystallinity of the as-synthesized NCs. TEM micrographs (Fig. 3a and b) show that the particles constituting the orange powder obtained from the 90 s aliquot have a spherical shape and are connected in a chain-like structure. The average size of the NCs is approximately 30 nm. The SAED pattern (Fig. 3b) indicates that the NCs are weakly crystalline since the Debye–Scherrer rings are rather fuzzy. Based on the color of the NCs and the results from both p-XRD and SAED techniques, the as-synthesized NCs are poorly crystalline Sb2S3 NCs. EDX analysis was carried out to determine the stoichiometry of NCs by measuring the atomic percentage ratio of Sb to S. The ratio was found to be 42:58, as shown in Fig. S1, indicating that the Sb2S3 NCs are slightly antimony rich.
Other TEM micrographs (Fig. 3c and d) show that the NCs obtained after the completion of the reaction have an urchin-like nanostructure composed of nanorods (NRs). HRTEM micrographs (Fig. 3d) indicate that the Sb2S3 NCs are highly crystalline, with a diameter of approximately 15 nm. The high crystallinity of these NCs is further affirmed by SAED (Fig. 3d). The corresponding EDX spectrum (Fig. S2) of crystalline NCs confirmed that the crystalline phase is also stoichiometric, with an atomic ratio of Sb to S of 40:60. These results show that the shape, size and stoichiometry of Sb2S3 NCs can be controlled by the reaction time.
Other sulfur sources were used instead of TMS to observe their effect on the morphology of Sb2S3. In one case elemental sulfur was dissolved in degassed oleylamine (1 mmol elemental S in 3 ml oleylamine) and stored in a glovebox as a stock solution. A total of 1.5 mmol sulfur stock solution was injected instead of the TMS solution, and all other conditions remained unchanged. Similar to the previous experiment, one aliquot was taken at 90 s, and the same cleaning process was used. The corresponding TEM micrographs of NCs synthesized for 90 s are shown in Fig. S3a and b; they have a spherical shape and are connected in a chain-like structure. Their average size is approximately 20 nm, smaller than NCs synthesized using TMS solution in Fig. 3b. The color of the as-synthesized NCs is orange suggesting that they are weakly crystalline. After approximately 40 minutes, the orange color of the solution in the flask started turning black. The reaction was stopped after 90 minutes following the injection. Fig. S3c and d show that the morphology is that of highly crystalline nanorods. However, evidence from TEM and EDS (Fig. S4) indicates that some antimony NCs formed on the surface of the Sb2S3 NCs, suggesting that part of the SbCl3 was reduced to Sb by the oleylamine. Another experiment with a second injection of the sulfur source was performed to obtain pure Sb2S3 nanorods (NRs) free from Sb NPs. During the experiment, a 0.75 mmol sulfur stock solution was injected once the orange color of solution started changing into black after the initial injection of the 1.5 mmol sulfur stock solution. TEM images (Fig. S3e and f) indicate that there are no Sb NCs on the surface of the NRs. The reactivity of the elemental S in oleylamine is lower than that of the one in TMS, which may lead to a slower and anisotropic growth of Sb2S3 NCs.
As another sulfur source, elemental S was used in ODE. This sulfur solution has the advantage to be stable in air. The stock solution was prepared by dissolving 1 mmol S in 6 ml ODE under nitrogen at 200 °C for 1 h. Two rounds of experiments were carried out: one in which the reaction temperature was decreased to 100 °C after the injection of the 1.5 mmol sulfur source and the other in which the reaction temperature was maintained at 180 °C following the injection. In both cases, there was no formation of NCs. Another experiment was carried out at 220 °C, with the solution maintained for 90 minutes at that temperature. We only obtained black NCs, and could not obtain orange NCs by this method. This outcome may be due to the lower reactivity of elemental sulfur in ODE that requires higher temperatures. A similar observation was reported by Guo et al. for the formation of CdS NCs when diphenyl disulfide was used as a sulfur source. The TEM analysis combined with EDS measurements shown in Fig. S4 indicates that the as-synthesized NCs are composed of crystalline Sb2S3 with a nanorod-like morphology. Even in this case Sb NCs were observed on the surface of the Sb2S3 NCs.
The injection and NC growth temperature can affect the size, shape, monodispersity, and phase of NCs. Several experiments were carried out to explore the effect of temperature on the size and morphology of Sb2S3 NCs as well as on the reaction kinetics of the formation of Sb2S3 NCs. TMS solution was injected at 140 °C, and all other conditions were the same. An orange aliquot was taken 90 s after the injection, and a second one was taken after 90 minutes, resulting in a mixture of orange and black colors. We took a third aliquot after 2 h, which had a completely black color. The TEM micrograph (Fig. S5a) of the first aliquot indicates that it is composed of spherical amorphous Sb2S3 NCs, and TEM and HRTEM images (Fig. S5b and c) of the second aliquot show that the as-synthesized NCs are a mixture of amorphous and crystalline Sb2S3. TEM, HRTEM and SAED (Fig. S5d–f) confirmed that the third aliquot was made up of pure crystalline Sb2S3 NCs. The diameter of the NRs was smaller than that of the crystalline Sb2S3 NCs obtained when the injection temperature was 180 °C. Thus, the lower injection temperature affected, as expected, the diameter of the NRs and the kinetics of formation of the crystalline Sb2S3 NCs.
To further quantify the effect of a high injection temperature, TMS solution was injected at 220 °C. The TEM and SAED micrographs (Fig. S6) of an aliquot of the as-synthesized NCs, taken 90 s after the injection, indicate that the NCs consist of amorphous and crystalline Sb2S3. After the TMS injection, the solution color immediately changed to orange and subsequently started turning black. The shape of the crystalline Sb2S3 NCs was irregular, resembling a nanobelt structure. This finding further demonstrates how injection temperature affects the morphology and kinetics of formation of Sb2S3 NCs.
In another trial, TMS solution was injected at 100 °C, and this temperature was maintained throughout the reaction. It took more than 2.5 h to form completely black NCs. Thus, it takes a longer time to form crystalline Sb2S3 NCs if the TMS solution is injected at a lower temperature. However, the diameter of the crystalline NCs (Fig. 5b) is larger than that of the NCs obtained with injection at 140 °C or 180 °C.
We also designed another experiment to grow Sb2S3 NCs at a higher growth temperature. In this experiment, TMS solution was injected at 140 °C, and the reaction temperature was maintained at 140 °C. Highly crystalline Sb2S3 NCs were obtained, as shown in Fig. S7a–c. Compared to NCs grown at the lower temperature (100 °C, Fig. S7d–f), the diameter of the NRs was larger.
Based on these experiments that were carried out at different nucleation (injection) and growth temperatures (Fig. 4 and S5–7), it can be concluded that lower nucleation (injection) temperatures lead to lower monomer concentrations that can yield larger-sized nuclei. On the other hand, larger particles can be obtained by higher growth temperatures as the rate of the monomer addition to existing particles is increased. Moreover, there is a higher chance of Ostwald ripening at higher temperatures. Very high temperatures (T > 180 °C) cause an even higher monomer concentration as well as a faster kinetics that give rise to larger NPs in a shorter time lapse.
Sb2S3 NCs were also synthesized using antimony(III) acetate and oxide as Sb precursors. The corresponding TEM and SAED micrographs are shown in Fig. 6a and b. The color of both solutions was orange, indicating that they were both composed of weakly crystalline Sb2S3 NCs. The as-synthesized NCs were well separated with a spherical shape and an average size of approximately 125 nm. The size of the NCs did not change significantly after 90 minutes of reaction time. Similarly, Sb2S3 NCs were synthesized using Sb2O3 instead of Sb(OAc)3, and the TEM micrographs (Fig. 6c and d) show that the as-synthesized NCs are spherical in shape, with an average size of approximately 100 nm, smaller than for NCs synthesized using Sb(OAc)3. SAED (Fig. 6d inset) confirmed that the NCs synthesized for 90 minutes were weakly crystalline. In both cases, the experiments were continued overnight, but the orange color did not change. It is thus straightforward that the counter ion of the precursor plays an important role in the morphology and crystallinity; in fact it is known that crystalline chain-like NRs are formed when SbCl3 is used as an antimony precursor.
To see the effect of a higher temperature on the morphology of NCs, the temperature was maintained at 180 °C. After 1.5 h of reaction time, the orange color of the NCs started changing to black, and the reaction was stopped after 2 h. TEM, HRTEM and SAED micrographs (Fig. S8) indicate that the as-prepared NCs were highly crystalline and composed of large NRs with a diameter of larger than 200 nm.
Foreign ion effects on the morphology of metal and semiconductor NCs have been also observed. As can be noted above we could not obtain highly crystalline black Sb2S3 NCs when antimony acetate or oxide was used as an antimony source under the same reaction conditions. We suspected that this effect may be due to the role of chlorine ions. To study this effect, different amounts of 3 and 6 mmol NaCl in 0.5 ml H2O were added to a mixture of Sb(OAC)3, oleic acid and ODE, with the other conditions and details of the procedure the same as before. The reaction was carried out at different time lengths, but all of the as-synthesized NCs were orange Sb2S3 NCs. TEM and SAED micrographs (Fig. S9) indicate that there is weak crystallinity in the product, with some spherical NCs of both large and small sizes. The reason that NaCl did not induce a morphology change is that chlorine ions may not participate in the metal–organic complex in this reaction due to water's miscibility with oleic acid and ODE.
For a follow-up trial, tetrabutylammonium chloride (NBu4Cl) was chosen as a chlorine source soluble in ODE, and 3 mmol NBu4CI were added to the mixture of Sb(OAC)3, oleic acid and ODE. The orange color started to change to black half an hour after the TMS injection, and the second aliquot was taken after 90 minutes of reaction time. TEM, HRTEM and SAED micrographs (Fig. 6) reveal that weakly crystalline and crystalline Sb2S3 NCs were obtained. The shape of the amorphous NCs is chain-like spherical, whereas the shape of the crystalline NCs is chain-like NRs with a diameter of approximately 20 nm. We were therefore able to control the morphology of Sb2S3 NCs by adding an appropriate chlorine source, i.e., NBu4Cl. It is necessary to remark that NBu4Cl has a good solubility in the mixture of oleic acid and ODE at an elevated temperature.
The photovoltaic properties of Sb2S3 NCs were investigated by fabricating a device with the quite common solid state sensitized solar cell (SSSC) architecture HTM/Absorber/ETM/FTO. Orange Sb2S3 NCs are used as starting materials for Sb2S3-based SSSCs because of their higher dispersibility, and then annealed at 300 °C for 30 minutes to form a crystalline Sb2S3 NP film. In a typical device fabrication process, Sb2S3 NCs were deposited on mesoporous TiO2-coated FTO using the dip coating technique, and then annealed under inert conditions. After that, a 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) solution was spin-coated as a HTM, and gold was thermally evaporated as a top electrode. The detailed device fabrication process is described in the ESI. Optical absorption measurements on the annealed films demonstrate that the band gap of Sb2S3 is nearly identical to that of the crystalline gray-black Sb2S3 NCs (Fig. S10), and SEM images indicated that the individual NCs were merged to form larger structures after annealing (Fig. S11). In order to improve surface passivation of absorber layers for reducing charge recombination at the interface, a thin layer of ZnS is coated on the surface of the Sb2S3 NC film. PL spectra (Fig. S12) showed that the PL intensity is significantly enhanced after the ZnS surface treatment indicating that the surface defects are decreased by passivation. From the J–V curve under illumination of the as-fabricated device (Fig. 4 and 7) 1.48% power conversion efficiency was obtained, with short circuit current Jsc = 7.15 mA cm−2, open circuit voltage VOC = 421 mV and fill factor FF = 49.27%. The average efficiency of the cell coated with ZnS is higher than that of the cell without ZnS-coating of 36%. The band gap of Sb2S3 can be lowered by doping with selenium to boost the short-circuit current density.
In conclusion, a synthesis protocol was established for novel, nanostructured, Sb2S3 NC photovoltaic materials, and their structural, morphological, optical, and photovoltaic properties were characterized. The main achievement of this work is the development of a colloidal, hot-injection synthetic protocol that enables the production of various shapes of Sb2S3 NCs for inks for use in the fabrication of low-cost, environmentally friendly PV cells. Moreover, different antimony and sulfur sources and the effects of foreign ions on the shape and crystallinity of Sb2S3 NCs were also examined. Finally, for the first time, Sb2S3 NC-based SSSCs were fabricated via dip coating, exhibiting promising power conversion efficiencies to warrant further investigation.
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta09546h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016