 DOI: 10.1039/C5EE01757B
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2650-2656


Gumin
Kang
,

Kyuyoung
Bae
,

Minwoo
Nam
,

Doo-Hyun
Ko
,

Kyoungsik
Kim
* and 

Willie J.
Padilla


School of Mechanical Engineering, Yonsei University, 50 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-749, Republic of Korea. E-mail: kks@yonsei.ac.kr

Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Hwarangno 14-gil, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 136-791, Republic of Korea

Department of Applied Chemistry, Kyung Hee University, Yongin, Gyeonggi 130-701, Republic of Korea

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 27708, USA

Received
5th June 2015
, Accepted 29th July 2015
First published on 30th July 2015
Optical haze is one of the most important factors to be considered in the development of efficient photonic and optoelectronic devices by manipulating the light behavior. In this work, we fabricated a high optical haze film composed of self-aggregated alumina nanowire arrays and applied this novel structure to improve the energy conversion efficiency of organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices. We controlled the optical properties of films, such as total/diffuse transmittance and haze value, by changing the packing density of nanowires during the wet etching process. By optimizing the etching conditions, the nanowire bundle arrays enabled us to obtain an ultrahigh optical haze value up to ∼98% or high transmittance up to ∼96%. By simply attaching the haze film onto the front glass surface of the OPV device, we significantly elongated the optical path length in the active layer, thereby achieving an overall efficiency of 9.01% out of the bare device of 8.17%, resulting in 10.28% enhancement.

The demand for low-cost and high-performance photovoltaic devices has continuously increased over the past few decades in energy and environmental science. In order to meet this demand, many previous studies have extensively investigated numerous dielectric nanostructures owing to their superior light management ability to confine, guide, and scatter photons inside the absorber layer of the device. However, more simple and scalable designs as well as cost-effective fabrication methods are required to apply the nanostructures for practical uses in the photovoltaic device industry. Here, we report a novel fabrication process of dielectric nanostructure consisting of self-aggregated alumina nanowires which shows ultrahigh optical haze and transparency for use in light trapping enhancement film of organic photovoltaic devices. By attaching three different types of haze films onto the front surface of an OPV device, we achieved a 5–10% relative improvement in the energy conversion efficiency. The technique utilized to fabricate our haze film is based on electrochemical anodization of aluminum which has the advantage of low-cost, a simple processing step, and suitability for large-scale fabrication. According to simplicity and universal applicability of our approach, we expect that this approach will be widely used for developing high-performance optoelectronic devices in the future.


Light management strategies are crucial for controlling the optical or thermal properties of windows (or displays), designing the efficient lighting system, and improving the performance of optoelectronic devices.

The metallic nanostructures, such as nanoparticles and nano-gratings, have been extensively studied for managing the light in optoelectronic devices because of their ability to confine, guide, and scatter the light into or out of the devices by excitation of surface plasmon resonances. However, the parasitic absorption losses in the metallic nanostructures limit the overall enhancements in device performance.
On the other hand, integration of transparent dielectric nanostructures with devices has come into the spotlight as one of the promising light management strategies because the lossless dielectric structures inherently have no parasitic absorption nor do they deteriorate the electrical properties of the devices. Numerous light management strategies using them such as gradient-index anti-reflection, scattering-induced light trapping enhancement, and resonance mode induced light extraction/trapping enhancement have been proposed.
Optical haze, which is defined as the ratio of diffusely transmitted light to total transmitted light, is one of the most crucial parameters to be taken account for controlling the light behavior in the diverse optical and optoelectronic systems. Recently, transparent nanostructured films with high optical haze have been used as a light management layer of the devices to enhance the absorption efficiency of thin film solar cells, the extraction efficiency of LEDs, and the mechanical flexibility of thin film transistors.
In this study, we demonstrate self-aggregated alumina nanowire arrays with high optical haze and applied this novel structure onto the front surface of organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices to improve the energy conversion efficiency. We employed a haze film composed of self-aggregated alumina nanowire arrays to elongate the optical path length in the active layer of the cell through multiple reflections and refractions at the air/glass interface. We controlled the optical properties of the haze film by adjusting the packing density of nanowires via wet etching. With optimized etching conditions, the aggregated nanowire arrays exhibited an ultrahigh optical haze value up to ∼98% or high transmittance up to ∼96%. We simply attached this film onto the front surface of the OPV device and achieved an overall efficiency enhancement of 10.28% in comparison with the bare device.
We developed a novel method to fabricate a haze film composed of self-aggregated alumina nanowires with controlled morphologies and optical properties by employing a capillary force-induced self-aggregation process. The aggregated nanowire arrays were fabricated by two-step anodization of aluminum combined with an optimized pore widening process. At first, one side of bulk aluminum sheets was electro-polished in a mixture of perchloric acid and ethanol (HClO4:C2H5OH = 1:4 in volume ratio) to obtain a smooth aluminum surface. Then, first step anodization was carried out in oxalic acid (H2C2O4, 0.3 M) at 40 V for 15 hours with a platinum grid as a counter electrode. The first anodized aluminum oxide (AAO), which has disordered pore arrays, was completely removed using a mixture of phosphoric and chromic acids (6 wt% H3PO4 and 1.8 wt% CrO3). Next, second step anodization was accomplished under the same experimental conditions as employed in the first step anodization. Through the two-step anodization processes, well-aligned two-dimensional alumina nanopore arrays (AAO) were obtained as shown in Fig. 1a. Then, we performed a modified pore widening process to fabricate self-aggregated alumina nanowire arrays. Fig. 1b shows a schematic illustration of fabrication procedures of self-aggregated alumina nanowire arrays made from an as-prepared AAO template. The modified pore widening was carried out by wet-chemical etching of AAO in a phosphoric acid (H3PO4, 5 wt%) solution. At the beginning of the etching process, the pore diameter increased gradually until the thinnest part of the alumina pore wall was etched completely (see ESI, Fig. S1). After a certain etching time (43 min), the alumina walls were broken and the structure was eventually separated into several pieces of vertical nanowires with nearly triangular cross-section. During the etchant rinsing and subsequent drying process, the lateral capillary force acting between the nanowires was induced by the surface tension of water. If the capillary force exceeds the flexural rigidity of nanowires, the nanowires bend towards each other and aggregate to form a bundle-like structure (Fig. 1b). The SEM image in Fig. 1c shows self-aggregated alumina nanowire arrays. The bright white region in the image represents the densely aggregated tips of nanowires which resemble a ridge of a mountain.
The etching times of 43 min, 44 min, 45 min, and 46 min produce nanowire arrays that have different thickness and aggregation morphology as shown in the SEM images (Fig. 1d(i) to (iv)). Shorter etching time (43 min) produced thicker nanowires which have stronger tensile strength. As a consequence, they make a partially aggregated nanowire structure with lower packing density, and smaller cluster size. In addition, many nano-ridges and nano-voids were formed between the nanowire bundles, as shown in the SEM image (Fig. 1d(i)). The bright white and black regions in the SEM image represent the nano-ridges and nano-voids, respectively. In contrast, longer etching time (46 min) created thinner nanowires which have a larger aspect ratio and mechanical flexibility. This enlarged mechanical flexibility causes nanowires to be densely aggregated. As a result, thinner nanowires formed a highly entangled nanowire structure with higher packing density, larger cluster size, fewer number of nano-ridges, and nano-voids in comparison with thicker nanowires (Fig. 1d(iv)). These morphological differences significantly affected the optical properties of the film. This effect will be discussed later in detail.
To characterize the optical properties and implement the film onto the front surface of OPV devices, we detached the self-aggregated alumina nanowire structures from the aluminum substrate using scotch tape. Fig. 2a and b show the schematic illustration and photographs of the haze film, detached from a 43 min-etched AAO template, when the film is located between the printed image and the digital camera. When the film is placed right on top of the image, we observed the clear image which confirmed the high optical transparency of the film (Fig. 2b(i)). When the film was lifted off of the image, the image appeared cloudy since the transmitted light through the film became highly scattered (Fig. 2b(ii) and (iii)). To visualize the scattering of light, we took a picture of green laser (λ = 532 nm) beam irradiated onto the white screen after passing through a haze film (Fig. 2c). The laser beam is highly scattered and spread out behind the haze film as observed in Fig. 2d.
To quantitatively assess the transparency and optical haze of the films, total and diffuse transmittance spectra were measured using a UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer equipped with an integrating sphere. The haze films produced from 43 min, 44 min, 45 min, and 46 min etched nanowires, were named as “Haze A”, “Haze B”, “Haze C”, and “Haze D”, respectively. Each haze film had quite different morphology which was dominantly affected by the degree of nanowire aggregation. And we found that the degree of nanowire aggregation is an important parameter for determining the geometries and optical properties of our haze films. The haze film composed of partially aggregated nanowires has many nano-voids and nano-ridges. In contrast, the haze film with densely aggregated nanowires has a small number of nano-voids and nano-ridges. When the light passed through the haze film, these nano-voids and ridges act as light scattering centers because they made boundaries of refractive index-mismatch between alumina and air. Since the partially aggregated nanowire film has more light scattering centers, it exhibited a higher diffuse transmittance as well as a higher optical haze in comparison with the densely aggregated nanowire film. The optical haze at 450 nm was 63% for Haze D, and the haze increased up to 98% for Haze A Fig. 3b. In contrast, densely aggregated nanowire films showed higher total transmittance. For instance, the total transmittance at 450 nm was 85% for Haze A, and this value increased up to 96% for Haze D (Fig. 3a).
To utilize the transparency and strong scattering ability of the haze film, we integrated the film with PTB7:PC70BM-based OPV devices. We performed optical and electrical characterizations to systematically investigate the performance improvement achieved by the haze films. Fig. 4a shows a schematic representation of an organic solar cell with a haze film that is attached on the front side of solar cells.
We measured the absorption spectra of bare organic solar cells and cells with three types of haze film using a spectrometer equipped with an integrating sphere. The solid lines in Fig. 4b represent the absorption spectra of solar cells with and without haze films. The oscillations in the absorption spectra of bare solar cells (black solid line) are originated from the Fabry–Perot interference in the planar thin active layer. By attaching the haze films on the front surface of the OPV device, these oscillations are notably reduced and the absorptions at valley positions increased as shown in the spectra (green, blue and red solid line). The haze film improved light absorption in the device over a broadband wavelength range as confirmed from the estimated enhancement factors (dotted line in Fig. 4b). This absorption enhancement is mainly attributed to the improved light trapping ability of the device by attaching the haze films. Because there are numerous nano-voids and nano-ridges in the film, the incident light passing through the haze film undergoes strong scattering. This scattering changes the propagation direction of light from normal to oblique incidence in the device. As a result, the optical path length of light is elongated and hence the light absorption in the active layer is also enhanced by the haze film. Since the partially aggregated nanowire film has more scattering centers, it exhibited higher diffuse transmittance as well as higher optical haze, in comparison with the densely aggregated nanowire film. Indeed, the film with higher optical haze tends to boost the light absorption of the OPV device more efficiently, as expected (Fig. 4b). Because all the geometry and material properties of the device were almost the same except the haze value of the film, we can conclude that the haze film with a lower degree of aggregation (higher haze) can extend the optical path length longer.
The photovoltaic performances of the haze film based organic solar cells were investigated against that of a bare cell (without haze films) using a solar simulator under AM 1.5 G conditions (100 mW cm−2). The J–V and external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves are presented in Fig. 4c and d. The performances of the device are summarized in Table 1. The Jsc can be theoretically calculated by integrating the product of the incident photon flux density F(λ) and EQE(λ) of the device over the wavelength (λ) of the incident light,
where
q is the electron charge. Therefore, we could compare Jsc values of the OPVs from the spectral EQE data. The mismatch factor between Jsc (EQE) and Jsc (J–V) was around 0.942, which is within measurement error possibly occurring under ambient conditions. Based on the calculation, the Jsc of the OPV was increased from 15.23 mA cm−2 for the bare OPV to 16.87 mA cm−2 for the OPV integrated with the haze film, corresponding to 10.74% enhancement. The EQE is determined by the efficiencies of five successive steps: photon absorption, photo-generated exciton diffusion, exciton dissociation, charge carrier transport, and charge collection at the electrodes. Because the only difference between the devices is in the optical film with no distinct features in the OPV part, the higher EQE values for the OPV with the optical film indicates enhanced harvesting of the incident solar light due to the presence of the haze film.

Device

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
PCE ↑ (%)

a PCE ↑ represents the percentage increase of PCE compared to the PCE of a bare cell.

Bare
0.74
16.19
67.50
8.17
Haze A
0.75
18.10
66.48
9.01
10.28
Haze B
0.74
17.69
67.31
8.86
8.45
Haze C
0.74
16.98
67.34
8.54
4.53
To quantitatively investigate the propagation direction of transmitted light in the glass substrate and active layer of the OPV device, we measured the angular distribution of the transmitted laser beam through the haze film (Fig. 5a). We attached the haze film on the bottom of a hemi-cylindrical prism using index matching fluid and measured the diffusely transmitted light intensity as a function of scattering angle. By comparing the scattering angles of transmitted light through the prism with and without the haze film, we confirmed that the haze film significantly diffuses the incident light (Fig. 5b). In other words, the haze film can obliquely couple with the incident light into the active layer of the photovoltaic device and greatly extend the optical path length.
We performed FDTD simulations to confirm the measured enhancement of light absorptions in the device with the haze film. To simulate the reflectance of the bare reference device, one single incident ray was launched in the normal direction. As for the reflectance of the haze film-attached device, scattered rays with several oblique angles were launched (inset of Fig. 5d). In the simulation, we assumed that the normally incident ray is scattered or diffused into several rays with oblique angles after it passes through the haze film. The portions of each ray were estimated from measured scattering angles (Fig. 5a and b). The reflectance for the each diffused ray was calculated over a visible range and each spectrum was multiplied by the estimated portion. By summing all the spectra, the predicted reflectance of the haze film attached device was obtained. Because direct sunlight and light sources used in our experiments were unpolarized, we calculated and averaged two reflectance spectra for TE and TM polarized light (see Fig. S2, ESI). Further simulation details are provided in the ESI. The simulated reflectance spectra (Fig. 5d) are highly consistent with that of the measured one as shown in Fig. 5c. We confirmed that the enhancement is originated from the increased optical path length caused by oblique rays that have passed through the haze film.
The open circuit voltage (Voc), short circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the organic solar cells with and without the haze films are summarized in Table 1. The bare cell yielded a PCE of 8.17% while the cell with haze films yielded a PCE from 8.54% to 9.01% depending on the types of haze films. The cell with haze film A exhibited the maximum PCE enhancement of 10.28% compared to that of the bare cell.

In conclusion, we have fabricated a transparent thin haze film composed of self-aggregated alumina nanowires from an anodized aluminum oxide (AAO) template using a modified wet etching process. The transparency and optical haze of the films have been optimized by tuning the packing density of nanowires. With the appropriate wet-chemical etching conditions, the transmission haze of the film was as high as 98% while maintaining high transmittance. The organic photovoltaic device with the film showed the maximum power conversion efficiency of 9.01% which makes 10.28% enhancement in comparison with that of the bare device. The enhancement is mainly attributed to the elongated optical path length in the active layer of the device because of the significantly scattered light, which has passed through the haze film. In addition to the proposed film's excellent optical properties, simple, scalable, and cost-effective fabrication methods make the structure a promising and practical candidate for realizing high-performance optoelectronic devices.


High purity-aluminum foils were purchased from Alfa Aesar (0.5 mm, 99.999%). Poly[(9,9-bis(30-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] (PFN, 1-Material), poly({4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl}{3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl}) (PTB7, 1-Material), [6,6]-phenyl C71 butyric acid methyl ester (PC70BM, Nano-C) were purchased and then used as received without any purification.


The PFN interlayer material dissolved in methanol with a concentration of 0.5 mg mL−1 in the presence of a small amount of acetic acid (2 μl mL−1) was spin-coated onto a pre-patterned ITO-glass substrate, followed by drying under vacuum for 1 h. The PTB7:PC70BM blend (1:1.5 by weight) dissolved in the mixed solvent of chlorobenzene/diiodooctane (97:3 vol/vol) with a total concentration of 25 mg mL−1 was spin-coated on top of the PFN interlayer to form a 90 nm-thick photoactive layer. The solvent was completely dried in a vacuum chamber overnight. A top MoO3 (8 nm)/Ag (100 nm) electrode was thermally evaporated through a shadow mask under high vacuum conditions with a pressure of ∼3 × 10−6 Torr. Therefore, the complete OPV consists of an inverted structure of ITO-coated glass/PFN (5 nm)/PTB7:PC70BM (90 nm)/MoO3 (8 nm)/Ag (100 nm). An active area of 0.116 cm2 was defined as the overlap between the top and bottom electrodes. The OPVs were fabricated and then encapsulated in a glove box filled with nitrogen before being transferred to ambient conditions for their performance measurement.



J–V characteristics of the developed OPVs were determined using a Source Meter (Keithley 2400) under an Air Mass 1.5 Global (AM 1.5 G) illumination with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The light was provided by a solar simulator (XES 301s, SAN-EI ELECTRIC) with a 300 W Xe lamp. The solar spectrum was modulated using an AM 1.5 G filter without an additional filter. The light source was adjusted by using a silicon reference cell calibrated by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). EQE spectra were obtained using a 300 W Xe light source and a monochromator provided by a K3100 IPCE Measurement System (McScience). The photovoltaic performance measurements were carried out under ambient conditions. The morphology of the haze films was characterized using FE-SEM (S-4800, Hitachi).


The total/diffuse transmittance spectra of the haze films and absorption spectra of the organic solar cells were measured using a UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer (UV3600, Shimadzu) with an integrating sphere (60 mm inner diameter).


This research was supported by Basic Science Research Program and the Pioneer Research Center Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning (NRF-2015R1A2A2A11001112, NRF-2013M3C1A3065045) and the Low Observable Technology Research Center program of the Defense Acquisition Program Administration and Agency for Defense Development, and the Yonsei University Research Fund of 2014.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ee01757b
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015