 DOI: 10.1039/D2NJ02576K
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2022, 46, 14703-14710


Xinyu
Wang
,

Qingxiao
Zhang
,

Wen
Wang
,

Hui
Zhang
,

Jie
Wang
,

Qun
Yang
,

Xueqin
Zuo
,

Guang
Li
* and 

Shaowei
Jin
*

School of Materials Science and Engineering, School of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Institute of Physical Science and Information Technology, Anhui Key Laboratory of Information Materials and Devices, Anhui University, No. 111, Jiulong Road, Shushan District, Hefei 230601, China. E-mail: jinsw@mail.ustc.edu.cn; liguang1971@ahu.edu.cn

Received
24th May 2022
, Accepted 6th July 2022
First published on 7th July 2022
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) with cheap, simple, and fast preparation methods have attracted great interest from researchers as outstanding representatives of third-generation solar cells. To improve the applicability of dye-sensitized solar cells, the development of materials with high efficiency and low production cost is the top priority. In this work, the MoO2/MoP heterostructure was obtained by a hydrothermal method combined with phosphate annealing, and their electrochemical properties were further investigated. Compared with MoO2, the heterogeneous MoO2/MoP possessed superior electrical conductivity and catalytic activity. The DSSC fabricated with MoO2/MoP achieved an excellent conversion efficiency (PCE) of 8.64%, which was better than that of MoO2 (7.63%), and platinum (7.68%). The results verified that the novel structural engineering and good synergy between MoO2 and MoP make it have excellent electrocatalytic behavior. Meanwhile, in the MoO2/MoP heterostructure, a large number of nanosheets are distributed on the porous MoO2. The porous structure enhances the ion penetration, and the abundant nanosheets expand the contact surface with the electrolyte, providing a substantial active reaction surface and sufficient catalytically active sites for the catalytic reduction of I3−. Therefore, the MoO2/MoP nanocomposites with high efficiency, simple preparation, and low cost provide a possibility for the study of electrode materials.

Fossil energy, as an essential driving force of industrial development, has led to increasing resource shortage and environmental pollution due to over-consumption, so it is particularly important to find alternative and renewable sources. Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are photovoltaic devices that can directly utilize renewable energy (solar energy) to realize photoelectric conversion. With abundant raw materials and low-cost and relatively simple process technology, dye-sensitized solar cells have great advantages in large-scale industrial production. DSSCs are usually divided into three parts, consisting of a dye-sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2 photoanode, a redox electrolyte, and a counter electrode as a reduction catalyst. The role of the counter electrode is to reduce the I3− in the electrolyte to obtain two electrons to I−; in addition, the oxidized dye molecules are reduced to the ground state under the action of I− in the electrolyte. The electrons in the external circuit are generated by the dye after being irradiated by light. The counter electrode exhibits its excellent performance. In traditional DSSCs, the noble metal Platinum (Pt) is the predominant counter electrode material (CE). However, Pt is expensive, scarce, and easily corrosive in liquid electrolytes, which may cause serious defects in large-scale production. Therefore, the search for substitute CEs based on plentiful and low-priced components is a top priority in realizing the large-scale production and commercialization of DSSCs.

At present, the research on alternative CE materials is also in full bloom. There have been many signs of progress in carbonaceous materials, conductive polymers, composite materials, and metal sulfides. The unique electrical conductivity and limited carrier conduction path of metal oxides also make them suitable candidates for sensitive materials for optoelectronic devices. Through in-depth knowledge of the metallic elements, Mo may be an electroactive element owing to the multiple valence states of +2, +3, +4, +5, and +6. The research on Mo element has also gradually deepened, among which, MoS2 has become the focus of research due to its high activity, excellent morphology and good optical properties. As an important member of transition metal oxides, MoO2 has low-cost, low toxicity, high-density unsaturated atomic surface and tortilla rutile structure, which also makes it have a place in the field of electrocatalysis. However, the intrinsic electrochemical activity of pure MoO2 did not meet expectations. As we know, methods such as metal hybridization, interfacial engineering, morphological modifications, and the construction of internal porous structures are very effective in improving the electrocatalytic performance of transition metal oxides. Nowadays, the interface engineering of this heterogeneous structure has become a hot spot in the field of electrochemical applications because of its comprehensive advantages and synergistic effects. The heterojunction formed by the double parent phase can form a built-in electric field at the interface, reduce the possibility of electron–hole pair recombination, and regulate the carrier transport in optoelectronic devices. In addition, heterogeneous interfaces often form more catalytically active centers on the catalyst surface, thus overcoming the shortcomings of single-component materials. For example, Zhang et al. reported MoO2/MoS2 composites with flower-like microsphere structures as supercapacitor negative electrode materials with high specific capacitance and good cycling stability. Han G H et al. prepared micro-nano porous MoO2@CoMo heterostructures with high catalytic performance, exhibiting a low overpotential of 76 mV for hydrogen evolution at −50 mA cm−2. H. C. Fu et al. prepared a few layered Ti3C2Tx Mxene contact Si solar cells, and the maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) reached 11.5%. Moreover, Transition metal phosphides have a special crystal structure of triangular prism shape, abundant surface coordination of unsaturated atoms, acid and alkali resistance, and high stability and strong electrical conductivity. Metal phosphides such as MoP, and Co2P both shown high catalytic activity in OER (oxygen evolution reaction), but there are rarely studied in DSSC. Therefore, the effective coupling of MoO2 to MoP would be a promising strategy for significantly facilitating I3− reduction in DSSCs.
Herein, the MoO2/MoP heterostructure with high crystallinity was synthesized by high-temperature annealing using MoO3 as the precursor. The prepared MoO2/MoP nanomaterials form a network engineering structure, which has a larger contact area and is more conducive to the reaction with the electrolyte. We determined the heterogeneous structure by X-ray diffraction (XRD), and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM). Further electrochemical tests showed that the synthesized MoO2/MoP nanocomposites have better electrocatalytic performance than MoO2 nanocomposites, and the PCE of DSSC assembled by the sandwich method is as high as 8.64%, which has obvious advantages compared with 7.68% of Pt.

Ammonium molybdate tetrahydrate ((NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O), nitric acid (HNO3), red phosphorus, absolute ethanol, deionized water, and polyethylene glycol a were purchased from Tianjin Guangfu Fine Chemical Research Hospital. The 10.0 × 10.0 cm2 FTO glass substrate was equally divided into 1.0 × 2.0 cm2, washed three times with ethanol and deionized water by ultrasonic machine, and then stored in absolute ethanol for later use.


(NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O (0.5564 g) was stirred vigorously at room temperature until it was completely dissolved in 30 mL of deionized water. Afterward, 10 mL of 2.2 M nitric acid was carefully added dropwise at room temperature with vigorous stirring to make an acidic environment. Then, a 50 mL Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave was selected, in which the solution obtained above was transferred and heated at 180 °C for 21 hours. After the reaction process, the autoclave was naturally cooled to room temperature. The reaction pellet was washed 3 times by centrifugation with absolute ethanol and deionized water until the pH was neutral. Finally, moisture was removed from the samples in an oven at 60 °C until completely dry after 24 h.


First, 0.5 g of molybdenum oxide (MoO3) and 0.4 g of red phosphorus (P) were placed in a porcelain boat, respectively, and the red phosphorus was placed upstream of the gas flow, sealed in a tube furnace, and heat-treated at 850 °C for 5 h. Finally, the pure substance was obtained by pickling with hydrochloric acid in an oven. The roadmap for the synthesis of the MoO2/MoP nanocomposite is illustrated in Schematic S1 (see ESI). MoO2 was synthesized in the same way, 0.5 g molybdenum oxide (MoO3), without red phosphorus, was directly annealed at 850 °C for 3 h in a sealed tube furnace. MoP was synthesized by dissolving 4 g of ammonium molybdate tetrahydrate and 3 g of ammonium hydrogen phosphate in 15 mL of deionized water, evaporated the water to obtain a white solid, fully ground, and calcined at 500 °C in the air for 5 h; then at 650 °C in H2 flow After reduction, MoP was obtained. During the whole process, the appearance of the sample ranged from white to dark blue and finally became a black product.


CE was fabricated by the knife-scraping method, and the prepared samples were used as the material to fabricate the counter electrode. This sandwich DSSC device usually consists of photoanode TiO2, fabricated CE, and fluid electrolyte. For specific methods, see ESI.



Fig. 1(a)–(c) and Fig. S1c–f (ESI) shows the scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of the MoO2 and MoO2/MoP nanocomposites. The SEM of the MoO3 has been shown in Fig. S1a and b (ESI), it is uniformly dispersed and is in the shape of thin strips; after annealing, the synthesized MoO2 forms uniform stripes on the surface; after phosphating, the etching traces on the surface of MoO2/MoP composite nanofibers increase and form size. The pore size is 100–200 nm, and spikes with a length of 150–200 nm grow on the surface, which increases the specific surface area, and because the nanofibers are stacked together to form a network structure, the electron flow rate increases and the electrocatalytic efficiency is improved. Two different crystalline phases are present in the MoO2/MoP nanocomposites as seen in the high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images in Fig. 1(d) and (e). The crystalline spacing of 1.38 nm corresponds to the (102) crystalline plane of MoP and the interplane distance of 2.18 nm corresponds to the (210) plane of MoO2. The EDX elemental mapping images of the MoO2/MoP nanocomposite are shown in Fig. 1(f)–(i), indicating that the P, Mo, and O elements are uniformly distributed.

The corresponding XRD patterns of MoO2/MoP and MoO2 synthesized by different holding times at 850 °C by the two-step sintering method, and MoP phosphating under H2 are shown in Fig. 2. It can see that the characteristic peaks at 27.9°, 43.1°, 57.5°, and 74.3°correspond to the (001), (101), (110), and (201) crystal planes of MoP (PDF#24-0771) respectively, effectively indicates the existence of MoP. Meanwhile, the characteristic peaks at 26.0°, 31.8°, 37.0°, 53.6°, 60.6° and 66.7°are consistent with the (−111), (101), (−211), (013) and (−222) crystal planes of MoO2 (PDF#32-0671) respectively. The diffraction pattern contains peaks for both MoP and MoO2, indicating the coexistence of MoP and MoO2 in the heterostructure.
In addition, the MoO2/MoP nanocomposites were analyzed by XPS to study the change in element composition and valence state after phosphating. The total XPS energy spectrum of MoO2/MoP in Fig. 3(a) confirms the presence of elements Mo, P, and O, which corroborates the detection results of XRD and EDX. As shown in Fig. 3(b), Mo 3d3/2 of MoO2 can be manifested in characteristic peaks at 235.97 eV and 233.21 eV, while the two characteristic peaks at 232.58 eV and 229.28 eV correspond to the Mo 3d5/2 spin–orbital components. The peaks found at 228.00 eV and 230.85 eV can be associated with MoP, ascribed to P 2p3/2 and P 2p1/2, respectively. Comparing the Mo element in MoO2 and MoP, the introduction of P can also be proved (Fig. S2, ESI). In the P 2p spectrum (Fig. 3(c)), the peaks at 129.37 eV and 133.67 eV further indicate the presence of MoP bonds, and the characteristic peak at 134.38 eV is due to the presence of P–O bonds due to surface oxidation. The O 1s spectrum in Fig. 3(d) can be distributed into three characteristic peaks, the peak at 530.66 eV represents Mo–O–Mo, and the peaks at 531.38 eV and 532.37 eV represent C–O–Mo, CO, respectively.

To assess the effect of MoO2, MoO2/MoP, and MoP nanocomposites as counter electrodes in DSSCs on the catalytic performance, a three-electrode system was used for CV testing with a scan rate of 25 mV s−1. Two pairs of distinct redox peaks with intact peak shapes can be observed in Fig. 4(a). The left side is attributed to the redox reaction eqn (1), and the right side is related to the oxidation and reduction of I2/I3−. For the detection of electrocatalytic activity, the redox peaks on the left are usually compared.

I3− + 2e− → 3I−
(1)
3I2 + 2e− → 2I3−
(2)
The peak position difference (Epp) between the oxidation peak and the reduction peak on the abscissa on the low potential side of the CV curve and the cathodic reduction peak current density (Jpc) are the key parameters for evaluating the catalytic materials. Both higher Jpc and lower Epp values can reflect higher catalytic activity, faster redox reaction rate, and excellent reversibility. It can be seen from Fig. 4(a) that the order of Epp values of all CEs is Pt (318 mV) > MoP (267 mV) > MoO2 (258 mV) > MoO2/MoP (238 mV). Jpc values for Pt > MoO2/MoP > MoP > MoO2, indicating that the addition of phosphorus improves the electrocatalytic properties of MoO2. The significant enhancement of the MoO2/MoP composites is mainly due to the introduction of phosphorus which changes the morphology of MoO2, thus providing more catalytic reaction sites, as well as increased electrical conductivity and accelerated charge transfer. To verify the stability of the sample in the electrolyte, continuous CV tests were carried out. The continuous CV curves of all CE and the corresponding specific changes of Epp are compared in Fig. S3 (ESI). After many cycles, MoO2 and MoP showed a significant increase in Epp (115 mV and 53 mV, respectively). For CE of MoO2/MoP electrode, the CV Curve hardly changes, indicating that MoO2/MoP has better corrosion resistance in electrolytes. Due to the synergistic effect of strong interface interaction in heterostructures, the CE of MoO2/MoP can maintain relatively excellent cycle stability under the long-term test of DSSCs devices.
Two identical CEs were assembled into a sandwich structure to study the electron transport within each group of counter electrode materials in the EIS test, the electron transport in the photo anode layer, the photo anode/electrolyte/dye interface, the counter electrode/electrolyte interface, and the electrolyte diffusion. The Nyquist plots and the equivalent circuit diagram were given in Fig. 4(b). The ohmic series resistance (Rs) is determined by the intercept of the start point of the leftmost semicircle and the x-axis and represents the contact resistance between the FTO conductive substrate and the counter electrode material. Meanwhile, Rs have a significant effect on the fill factor (FF) and photovoltaic performance of DSSCs. From Fig. 4(b), the order of the Rs Values is MoO2/MoP < Pt < MoP < MoO2, the larger the value of Rs, the greater the resistance of electronic recombination, and the less the electronic recombination, the better the battery performance. Meanwhile, Rs is related to the resistivity and electron transport properties of conductive glass. In the high-frequency region of the Nyquist diagram, the first semicircle represents the impedance Rct for charge transport at the electrode/electrolyte interface, which can reflect the catalytic activity of various CEs for I3− reduction. In the low-frequency region, the second semicircle represents the Nernst diffusion impedance of iodine ions in the electrolyte, which is closely related to the nanostructure and porosity of the electrode. From the perspective of contribution to the total battery impedance, the transmission impedance (Rct) in the electronic film are the main aspects that affect the total battery impedance, followed by the Nernst diffusion impedance in the electrolyte. It can be seen in Table 1 that the Rct values of MoO2/MoP, Pt, MoO2 and MoP CEs are 0.16, 0.86, 0.46 and 0.49 Ω cm2, respectively. The smallest Rct of MoO2/MoP as the counter electrode material means that its catalytic activity for I3− ions is better. This result indicates that the introduction of phosphorus increases the bonding between the nanosheets, forming a network structure. At the same time, more active sites are provided, thereby improving the electrical conductivity of DSSCs and transferring electrons efficiently from the external circuit, the principle is shown in Fig. 4(d).
CEs

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
ct (Ω cm2)

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

η (%)
MoO2/MoP
4.66 ± 0.01
0.16 ± 0.01
0.76
17.31
0.66
8.64
MoP
6.32 ± 0.01
0.49 ± 0.01
0.77
14.47
0.68
7.63
MoO2
6.74 ± 0.01
0.46 ± 0.01
0.77
12.97
0.70
7.00
Pt
5.80 ± 0.01
0.86 ± 0.01
0.77
14.40
0.70
7.68
Tafel curve can be obtained by EIS test of an asymmetric virtual battery composed of two identical counter electrodes. To study the catalytic performance of three CE materials as counter electrodes, the interfacial charge transfer characteristics of three counter electrode materials were compared by the Tafel curve. In the Tafel polarization curve, the Tafel region in the middle can compare the electrocatalytic activity of each pair of electrode materials. As shown in Fig. 4(c), the intersection of the tangent of the cathode or anodic branch and the zero-voltage zero point is usually referred to as the exchange current density (J0). Furthermore, J0 satisfies eqn (3), where R is the standard gas constant, T is the thermodynamic temperature, n is the number of electrons transferred per chemical reaction at the interface between the electrolyte solution and the counter electrode material, and F is the Faraday constant, and Rct is the EIS test. From this formula, it can be seen that J0 is negatively correlated with Rct, which is consistent with the EIS result. The larger the J0 value, the better the catalytic performance of the material. Among the three counter electrode materials, MoO2/MoP possesses the best catalytic performance, matching the above CV and electrochemical impedance results.
J0 = RT/nFRct
(3)
Jlim = 2neDCNA/l.
(4)
The limiting diffusion current density (Jlim) is commonly used to evaluate the catalytic material's ability to reduce I3− and is the intersection of the cathode branch and the y-axis. From eqn (4), Jlim is positively related to the diffusion coefficient (DN) of I3−/I− in the electrolyte, where l is the spacer thickness and C is the I3−/I− concentration. As shown in Fig. 4(c), the Jlim values of MoO2/MoP, Pt, and MoO2 progressively decrease, indicating the rapid reaction kinetics of MoO2/MoP.
The photovoltaic performance test (J–V), which most intuitively reflects cell performance, is determined by measuring at 100 mW cm−2 light intensity. Photovoltaic parameters of DSSC include Voc (open-circuit voltage), FF (fill factor), Jsc (short-circuit current density), and PCE. As shown in Fig. 5(a), the photovoltaic performance of DSSCs based on MoO2/MoP is better than that of Pt and MoO2, the DSSCs fabricated with MoO2/MoP achieve a champion PCE of 8.64%, Voc of 0.76, Jsc of 17.31 mA cm−2, and FF of 66%. Comparing the current work and the reported work (see Table S1, ESI), it can be seen that MoO2/MoP has unique advantages as a dye-sensitized solar cell. This phenomenon can increase the etching marks on the surface of MoO2 composite nanofibers through the introduction of phosphorus, and even penetrate the nanosheets to form a porous structure, which increases the contact area with the electrolyte, thereby improving its photovoltaic performance.

In conclusion, we have successfully synthesized MoO2/MoP nanocomposite by direct phosphate calcination treatment with the as-prepared MoO3 as the precursor. Through phosphating treatment, more nanosheets were grown on the surface of MoO2, and porous structures were formed at the same time. Finally, the MoO2/MoP heterostructure exhibited a high PCE of 8.64%, FF of 66%, Voc of 0.76, and Jsc of 17.31 mA cm−2, which were better than those of the DSSCs with Pt, MoP, and MoO2. This demonstrates that phosphating can effectively enhance the electrocatalytic activity and optical properties of MoO2. The improved performance is mainly due to the introduction of MoP which enhances the interfacial coupling with MoO2, resulting in increased synergy between MoP and MoO2, while the rich pores in the MoO2/MoP heterostructure enhance ion penetration and the abundant nano-sheet layer on the MoO2 surface increases the contact area with the electrolyte, providing more active surface area. MoO2/MoP has the best photovoltaic performance, which provides a practical basis for the development of counter electrodes and the improvement of the efficiency of DSSCs.


The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.


This work was financially supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2017YFA0403503), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (11674001), the Key Natural Science Research Program of Anhui Educational Committee (KJ2018ZD001).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2nj02576k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022