 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA06009E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20500-20507


Zuosheng
Peng
,

Yangdong
Zhang
,

Yuxin
Xia
,

Kang
Xiong
,

Chaosheng
Cai
,

Lianpeng
Xia
,

Zhanhao
Hu
,

Kai
Zhang
,

Fei
Huang
* and 

Lintao
Hou
*

Siyun Laboratory, Department of Physics, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, PR China. E-mail: thlt@jnu.edu.cn

Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China. E-mail: msfhuang@scut.edu.cn

Biomolecular and Organic Electronics, IFM, Center of Organic Electronics, Linköping University, SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden

Received
2nd August 2015
, Accepted 2nd September 2015
First published on 3rd September 2015
We report a facile technique of blending a conjugated polymer thieno[3,4-b]thiophene/benzodithiophene (PTB7):[6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM[70]) active materials with a conjugated interfacial modification polymer poly[(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] (PFN) to simplify the coating process and improve the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) polymer solar cell (PSC) performance. The reason for and result of PFN self-organization via a spontaneous vertical delamination onto the ITO surface were investigated by charge transfer state, optical modelling based on transfer matrix formalism, surface energy measurement, scanning Kelvin probe force microscopy and impedance spectroscopy analysis in conjunction with atomic force microscopy and scanning electron microscopy. The relaxed charge transfer state demonstrates that PFN doping has a negligible impact on the donor:acceptor heterojunction interface. The optical simulation of device structures indicates that doping PFN into a BHJ has nearly no influence on the photon absorption profile of the active layer. Very encouraging device performance was achieved in the one-step coating PFN:BHJ PSC with ITO as the cathode, which is comparable to that of the two-step coating PSC. Moreover, for ITO-free inverted PSCs with PEDOT:PSS as the incident light top-electrode, decent device performance can also be obtained, demonstrating the remarkable universality through this facile strategy.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs), which have advantages of flexibility, light weight, portability, solution processing and low cost, are considered one of the promising solar energy conversion technologies in the future renewable energy systems. In recent years, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has exceeded 10% within the laboratory, which nearly meets the requirements of commercialization. The significant progress in PCE improvements is mainly attributed to designing and synthesizing new photoactive materials, creating novel architectures, controlling photoactive layer morphology and utilizing interface modification. For high-performance devices, it was confirmed that the insertion of the nonconjugated or conjugated interfacial modification layer (IML) between the photoactive layer and the cathode is highly necessary, which facilitates charge collection and extraction by means of work function modification and interfacial charge redistribution. For example, nonconjugated polymers such as PEO, PEI, and PEIE, and conjugated polymers such as PFPA-1, FTBTF-N, and poly[(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] (PFN), were used as IMLs to help collect and extract the negative charge carriers. In 2015, Wu et al. proposed a highly efficient conjugated polymer PFN as the IML and achieved a certified PCE as high as 10.61%, which is mainly attributed to the effect of an increased device built-in potential coming from the existence of interface dipole and an enhanced charge carrier mobility due to the reduced recombination loss. The device lifetime can be greatly enhanced due to the better stability of interfacial materials to the water and oxygen in the air compared with the common low work function interfacial metals.

Although nonconjugated or conjugated polymers as IMLs can obviously improve the device performance, the addition of IMLs by solution coating certainly increases the fabrication complexity in the large area roll-to-roll processing due to the requirements of rigorous alignment of multiple layers, accurate thicknesses, limited mutual solubility, and so on. For solving these problems, an easy spontaneous vertical phase separation technique was introduced in several studies. Wang et al. reported that doping a certain ratio of the nonconjugated polymer poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP) into the poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT):[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) bulk photoactive layer can lead to an enhancement of PCE by about 13% due to the spontaneous vertical migration of PVP molecules to the surface of the P3HT:PCBM active layer during the spin-coating process. Other nonconjugated polymers, such as PEG, PDMS-b-PMMA, fullerene end-capped PEG and PEI, were also mixed into the photoactive layer to form the interfacial buffer layer via self-assembly. In addition, Zhang et al. reported a self-assembled BenMeIm-Cl ionic liquid as the cathode interfacial material. However, it was reported that the stability of ionic-type materials in devices was worse than that of their neutral parts in devices. Although nonconjugated polymers such as IMLs via self-organization have been reported by several groups mentioned above, conjugated interfacial polymers via a spontaneous vertical separation in nanocomposites have not yet been systematically investigated.
Conjugated interfacial polymers have many advantages compared to nonconjugated interfacial polymers. Firstly, the higher electrical conductivity of conjugated interfacial polymers, e.g. PFN, compared with insulating nonconjugated interfacial polymers, allows them to be used as robust IMLs via self-assembly for high performance PSCs, especially when the interlayer thickness is more than 20 nm. It can be predicted that the doping concentration sensitivity to PCEs will be decreased for conjugated polymers due to the favorable conductive property. Secondly, it was reported that devices based on conjugated interfacial polymers exhibited larger open circuit voltage than devices based on nonconjugated interlayer polymers, e.g., PEO and PEI, indicating that conjugated interfacial polymers can form lower energetic barriers for electrons. Thus, conjugated interfacial polymers exhibited much better device performance both in organic light-emitting diodes and PSCs compared to nonconjugated interfacial polymers. Last but not the least, besides the highly polar side-chain groups, conjugated interfacial polymers with the unsaturated backbone chain structure can show a wide range of adaptability of different work-function cathodes, which work well for the very high work-function electrodes, e.g. Au, while nonconjugated interfacial polymers only work well for the relatively low work-function electrodes, e.g. Al, due to the saturated backbone chain structure.
Recently, Lei et al. synthesized an amine-based fullerene derivative PCBDAN, which can play vital roles of an electron acceptor and IML simultaneously. For clarifying the effect of the PCBDAN amino-functionalized fullerene derivative on the hole carrier extraction, Cai et al. proposed a hole trapping mechanism based on poly[N-9′-heptadecanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)] and P3HT donors by using femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy measurements. They found that the hole trapping behavior depends on the relative energetic position of the hole transport states mostly determined by the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of donors and the trapping states induced by the amine end groups, which provides important guidance for this strategy.
Based on the above reports, we incorporate a small amount of the versatile conjugated polymer PFN with terminal amino electron-donating groups into the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) mixture of a conjugated polymer thieno[3,4-b]thiophene/benzodithiophene (PTB7):[6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM[70]) in chlorobenzene (CB):1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) solution to reduce the work function of the ITO (or Al/TiOx) and simplify the solar cell fabrication complexity. The HOMO level of PTB7 is ∼−5.15 eV, which is much higher than the ionization state of the PFN amino group of ∼−5.40 eV, indicating that the hole trapping by the PFN amino group should be negligible. We demonstrate that PFN molecules can migrate vertically to the bottom of the PTB7:PCBM[70] layer and form an IML between ITO and the photoactive layer based on the measurements of contact angle, surface energy, built-in potential, optical field distribution, morphology and charge transfer state. The one-step coating device can achieve comparable device performance to that of the conventional two-step coating cell. The strategy is also suitable for the attractive roll-to-roll compatible ITO-free inverted solar cells with Al/TiOx as the cathode and PEDOT:PSS as the top anode. This work provides not only a useful method for optimizing device structure but also new insights into the nature of the conjugated polymer as IML.

The chemical structures of PTB7, PFN and PCBM[70] and the processing steps of two types of devices are shown in Fig. 1. For the two-step coating device with an inverted structure of ITO/PFN/PTB7:PCBM[70](BHJ)/MoO3/Al (Type I), a conjugated polymer PFN interlayer was spin coated on top of the ITO layer and then the PTB7:PCBM[70] active layer was spin coated on top of the PFN interlayer. For the alternative one-step coating device with an inverted structure of ITO/PFN:PTB7:PCBM[70](PFN:BHJ)/MoO3/Al (Type II), organic PFN:BHJ nanocomposite solution was directly spin coated on top of the ITO substrate with PFN layer formation via vertical self-assembly after drying.

The current density versus voltage (J–V) curves of Type I and Type II devices with variable PFN weight ratios (0, 1, 3, 5 and 7 wt%) are shown in Fig. 2a. The conventional Type I device shows an average PCE of 7.50%, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.77 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 16.12 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 0.61. For comparison, the best Type II device performance is obtained with the optimum weight ratio of PFN to BHJ of 3 wt%, showing an average PCE of 7.07%, a Voc of 0.76 V, a Jsc of 15.74 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.59, which are comparable to those of the conventional Type I device. The detailed device parameters are shown in Table 1. With the increase of the weight ratio of PFN, the PCEs of the Type II devices increase dramatically from 1.39% to 7.07% with the weight ratio of PFN doping into the BHJ from 0 to 3 wt%, and then decrease from 6.21% to 4.90% with the weight ratio of PFN to BHJ from 5 wt% to 7 wt%. The dark J–V curves of the device are presented in Fig. 2b. It can be seen that the dark currents of Type II devices with weight ratios (0, 1, 5 and 7 wt%) are higher than those of the conventional Type I device, which can cause an increase in series resistance and a decrease in shunt resistance. However, the Type II device with the PFN doping weight ratio of 3 wt% shows very low dark current and is comparable to that of the conventional Type I device. Considering the similar light and dark J–V characteristics of Type I and Type II (3 wt%) devices, we can speculate that the reason for the Type II device performance improvement originates in the spontaneous PFN vertical stratification via self-assembly from the BHJ. The new PFN interlayer can be formed on top of the ITO surface to facilitate the electron extraction and collection. The lower PCE of Type II device (3 wt%) than that of Type I device (7.07% vs. 7.50%) may be due to the incomplete PFN-rich buried interlayer after drying, as seen from the corresponding difference in Voc (0.76 V vs. 0.77 V). For the 5% and 7% PFN:BHJ films, a slightly thick and porous PFN sub-layer would be formed between the BHJ and ITO, leading to the lower device performance. The lower Voc is mainly attributed to the higher dark current for the 5 wt% and 7 wt% Type II devices.
Type
Doping weight ratio of PFN (wt%)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCEave [PCEmax] (%)

a PCEmax: maximum power conversion efficiency; PCEave: average power conversion efficiency.

Type I
—
16.12
0.77
0.61
7.50 [7.62]
Type II
0
12.47
0.36
0.31
1.39 [1.65]
Type II
1
15.12
0.75
0.56
6.37 [6.48]
Type II
3
15.74
0.76
0.59
7.07 [7.14]
Type II
5
15.19
0.73
0.56
6.21 [6.30]
Type II
7
14.85
0.72
0.46
4.90 [5.12]
We also examined the universality of this approach by fabricating roll-to-roll compatible ITO-free inverted devices. As shown in Fig. 2c and Table 2, the device with an inverted structure of Al/TiOx/BHJ/PEDOT:PSS achieves a poor PCE of 4.12%, while the device with an inverted structure of Al/TiOx/PFN/BHJ/PEDOT:PSS achieves an improved PCE of 6.60% due to the insertion of PFN IML. Furthermore, when the optimal 3 wt% PFN is doped into the BHJ with an inverted device structure of Al/TiOx/PFN (3 wt%):BHJ/PEDOT:PSS, an average PCE of 6.21% is obtained, proving the adaptability of the PFN doping BHJ method for other device structure systems. The lower PCE of ITO-free devices than that of ITO-based devices (6.21% vs. 7.07%) in the optimum weight ratio of PFN to BHJ of 3:97 should be mainly ascribed to the lower conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS layer than ITO, as the transmittance spectra of the ITO and PEDOT:PSS films are similar in a wide wavelength range (Fig. S1). The accuracy of the Jsc is confirmed by the corresponding external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurement, as shown in Fig. S2. The calculated Jsc values obtained from EQE curves of both ITO-based and ITO-free inverted devices are in good agreement with the values of Jsc measured by J–V characteristics studies.
Device structure

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCEave [PCEmax] (%)

a PCEmax: maximum power conversion efficiency; PCEave: average power conversion efficiency.

Al/TiOx/BHJ/PEDOT:PSS
12.27
0.76
0.44
4.12 [4.32]
Al/TiOx/PFN/BHJ/PEDOT:PSS
15.46
0.77
0.56
6.60 [6.78]
Al/TiOx/3 wt% PFN:BHJ/PEDOT:PSS
15.01
0.77
0.54
6.21 [6.41]
The surface and bottom molecular distributions of the pristine BHJ and PFN:BHJ films were analysed by measuring their physicochemical properties. As seen in Fig. 3a, the water droplet has the smallest contact angle of 79° on the spin-coated PFN film surface, whereas it shows 85°, 97° and 95° on the spin-coated hydrophobic PCBM[70], PTB7 and BHJ film surfaces, respectively. The similar water contact angles of PTB7 and BHJ films indicate that the BHJ film surface is richer in PTB7. When 3 wt% PFN was doped into the BHJ, the water droplet contact angle nearly remained unchanged (95°), showing that a small amount of PFN molecules have little effect on the BHJ molecular surface distribution and PFN with polar functional groups may sink to the interior or bottom of the BHJ film during the spin coating process. It was believed that the vertical self-assembly is formed by differing surface energies in organic blends on the basis of the minimization of the total system energy. For exploring the vertical self-organization of PFN, surface energies of PFN, PCBM[70], PTB7, BHJ and PFN (3 wt%):BHJ solid films prepared by spin coating were measured using water and formamide as the probe liquids based on Owens equation γl(1 + cosθ) = 2(γsDγlD)1/2 + 2(γsPγlP)1/2, where γs and γl are the surface energies of the sample and the probe liquid, and D and P refer to the dispersion and polar components of the surface energy, respectively (see details in the ESI). As displayed in Fig. 3b, the high-surface energies of PFN (49.8 mN m−1) and ITO (55 mN m−1) indicate that PFN molecules in PFN:BHJ solutions can migrate vertically towards the high-surface energy ITO to achieve a bulk free energy minimization and thus an ultrathin PFN layer can be formed thermodynamically between ITO and the BHJ layer during the spin-coating process. In other words, because the surface energy of PFN is substantially higher than that of BHJ, the buried ITO interface would be almost exclusively composed of PFN by means of interaction free energies of the film constituents after drying. It is important to note that the BHJ (19.1 mN m−1) film has a similar low surface energy to that of the PFN:BHJ (19.0 mN m−1) nanocomposite film, confirming that there is nearly no hydrophilic PFN molecule existing on the surface of the PFN:BHJ nanocomposite film. Also the surface energy of the pure PTB7 (18.7 mN m−1) film is similar to that of the BHJ or the PFN:BHJ film, revealing that a PTB7-rich interface decorates the exposed surface of two kinds of active films, which is also consistent with the contact angle results. The above mentioned surface energy analysis also applies to ITO-free inverted devices, where the PFN molecules can migrate vertically towards high-surface energy Al/TiOx (44.2 mN m−1) via self-assembly in the drying process.
The observation is further corroborated by scanning Kelvin probe force microscopy (SKPFM) measurements, while the work function modifications from 4.64 eV (ITO) to 4.06 eV (ITO/PFN), 4.42 eV (ITO/PFN:BHJ) or 4.39 eV (ITO/PFN/BHJ) are obtained, confirming that the surface of the PFN:BHJ nanocomposite film lacks adequate PFN for attaining a thermodynamically air stable surface. However, due to the very weak signal intensity of nitrogen, we failed to map the PFN depth profile inside the active layer by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). The PFN distribution in bulk using the charge transfer state probing method and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) will be discussed in the next part.
The built-in potential of solar cells is accessible by means of the capacitive method. Fig. 4 depicts the impedance spectroscopy analysis of the capacitance–voltage (C−2–V) characteristics at 10 kHz in the dark. The built-in potential can be deduced from the C−2–V characteristic curve fitting with the Mott–Schottky relationship C−2 = 2(Vbi − V)/(Aeεε0NA), where Vbi is the built-in potential, V is the applied voltage, A is the device effective area (14 mm2), e corresponds to elementary charge, ε is the relative dielectric constant (assuming ε of 3.5), ε0 is the permittivity of vacuum and NA accounts for the concentration of acceptor impurities. We can deduce the values of Vbi according to the voltage which is located at the maximal capacitance (the flat-band condition). In the case of Type II device without the PFN layer, a Vbi of 0.31 ± 0.02 V is obtained, which is in agreement with its low Voc, implying the significant effect of PFN on the improvement of the built-in electric field. When the PFN layer was inserted between the ITO and the BHJ layer, Vbi increased to 0.66 ± 0.02 V for Type I device, while a Vbi of 0.66 ± 0.02 V was obtained for Type II device (3 wt%), which is quite the same as that of the conventional Type I device. Obviously, doping PFN into BHJ blends can have the same effect on improving the built-in electric field as that of the PFN/BHJ bilayer structure. In other words, the spontaneous PFN molecule sinking via self-assembly on the surface of ITO in the drying process is evidenced by the quite equal values of Vbi of Type I and Type II (3 wt%) devices.
Although PFN molecules can migrate into the ITO surface from the PFN:BHJ nanocomposite solution during the spin-coating process, it is not clear whether a few residual PFN molecules were distributed in the donor:acceptor interface. For a better understanding of PFN influence on the active layer properties, the charge transfer (CT) state of BHJ and PFN:BHJ nanocomposite films was investigated by detecting the electroluminescence (EL) emission and highly sensitive Fourier-transform photocurrent spectroscopy (FTPS) absorption spectra. It is believed that the EL peak corresponds to the CT emission state of the donor:acceptor interface. As the EL emission of pure PTB7 has a reported light-emitting peak around 820 nm and pure PCBM[70] has an emission at 720 nm, it can be seen that 3 wt% PFN doping into the active layer does not change the CT emission of the BHJ with a peak at ∼1010 nm for both BHJ and PFN:BHJ nanocomposite films, as shown in Fig. 5a, indicating that there is no PFN molecule existing at the donor:acceptor interface. On the other hand, the theoretical CT absorption energy state (ECT) can be deduced from the external quantum efficiencies of the charge transfer states (EQECT).
where
T is the temperature, λ is the reorganization energy associated with charge transfer absorption, f is the prefactor and k is the Boltzmann constant. In Fig. 5b, the BHJ film shows an ECT value of 1.36 eV, which is exactly the same as 1.36 eV of the PFN (3 wt%):BHJ nanocomposite film. The CT absorption results are consistent with the corresponding CT emission spectra, which are also in accordance with the same built-in potentials of Type I and Type II (3 wt%) devices. However, when the higher 7 wt% PFN dopes into the BHJ, the ECT shifts about 10 meV to 1.37 eV, implying that excessive PFN molecules can involve in the donor:acceptor interface or the bulk interpenetrating network. This leads to the decrease of the device performance (Table 1). The energy shift (∼10 meV) does not correspond to the difference in Voc (∼−40 mV) between 3 wt% and 7 wt% PFN-doping Type II devices, indicating that the large leakage current is the unintended loss of the open-circuit voltage (Fig. 2b). We emphasize that the EL spectra of 3 wt% and 7 wt% devices have little difference due to the weak detector signal intensity in the 1000–1100 nm wavelength range. In summary, the EL and FTPS results of Type I and Type II (3 wt%) devices demonstrate that the addition of a tiny amount of PFN into the BHJ does not influence the pristine donor:acceptor interface of the bulk active layer because of the spontaneous PFN vertical self-assembly.

To investigate the effect of the device configuration changes on the optical absorption profile, a transfer matrix method is employed to model optical calculations. The spectral radiation of AM 1.5G (300–1000 nm) and the experimentally measured refractive indices (n) and extinction coefficients (k) of the BHJ and PFN (3 wt%):BHJ absorber materials used in the simulations are presented in Fig. 6a. The photon absorption rate profiles can be derived based on the above data, as shown in Fig. 6b and c. The absorbed photon flux density curves of the two types of devices are very similar except for the slightly higher power dissipation in the PFN interlayer for Type I device. The maximal photon flux density is 1.56 × 1028 m−3 s−1 and 1.52 × 1028 m−3 s−1 at 230 nm thickness relative to the substrate for Type I and Type II (3 wt%) devices, respectively, indicating that doping 3 wt% PFN into BHJ has a negligible influence on the photon absorption of the active layer. The absorption spectra of the PFN (3 wt%):BHJ and BHJ films are shown in Fig. S3. The similar absorption spectra imply that the PFN material almost makes no contribution to the harvesting of photons with vibronic features similar to the BHJ film. However, it should be noted that a slightly better interference effect exists in Type I device compared to Type II device when we plot the optimal maximum photocurrent as a function of the active layer thickness by neglecting any electrical losses and assuming that every photon absorbed in the active layer gives rise to an electron in the outer circuit, as shown in Fig. 6d, indicating that PFN mixing into BHJ blends is more suitable for roll-to-roll processing due to the photocurrent insensitivity to the variation of the active layer thickness.
As the large leakage current is related to the film morphology, the BHJ and PFN:BHJ film topographies were investigated by atomic force microscopy (AFM), as shown in Fig. 7. The root-mean-square (RMS) roughness values of BHJ, PFN (3 wt%):BHJ and PFN (7 wt%):BHJ films are 3.97 nm, 4.04 nm and 8.41 nm, respectively. The comparable RMS values of the BHJ and PFN (3 wt%):BHJ films indicate that adding a tiny amount (3 wt%) of PFN into BHJ almost has no impact on the film roughness. However, a honeycomb array of holes distributed in the PFN (3 wt%):BHJ film implies that PFN molecules might sink to the bottom of the BHJ layer during the spin-coating process and the vacant holes were produced after drying. This honeycomb structure has little effect on the film compactness, which can be seen from the good dark current curve in Fig. 2b. However, when a relatively large amount of PFN (7 wt%) was added into the BHJ, the size of honeycombs becomes bigger and the RMS value increases sharply. The uneven and non-compact film morphology is the key reason for the poor PFN (7 wt%):BHJ device dark current (Fig. 2b). This would be an interesting topic for further study.
The effect of PFN vertical migration to the ITO surface via self-assembly can be confirmed by SEM, as shown in Fig. 8. It is clear that the cross-sectional SEM image of Type II device (ITO/PFN:BHJ/MoO3/Al) is quite similar to that of the Type I device (ITO/PFN/BHJ/MoO3/Al), confirming that PFN molecules are successfully migrated and stratified via self-assembly after drying. We emphasize that this SEM result has never been reported in the previous studies.

In this work, efficient PSCs were successfully fabricated and simplified by doping the conjugated polymer PFN into the PTB7:PCBM[70] photoactive mixture. Vertical self-assembly stratification of conjugated PFN molecules can be achieved after drying due to the strong interaction between PFN and ITO or PFN and TiOx with very high surface energies. Compared with those of the complicated two-step coating device, the built-in potential, optical field distribution and charge transfer state of the one-step coating device can still remain unaltered. Also the SEM images confirm the stratified structure of the PFN:BHJ nanocomposite after drying. The PCE and Jsc values as high as 7.07% and 15.74 mA cm−2 are obtained at the optimum 3 wt% PFN doping ratio, representing the highest device performance for interfacial conjugated polymer doping BHJ solar cells achieved to date. Moreover, for ITO-free inverted PSCs with a PEDOT:PSS layer as the top anode electrode, a decent PCE of 6.21% is achieved, providing a new effective approach for the roll-to-roll compatible PSC fabrication process through this strategy.


PTB7 and PCBM[70] were purchased from 1-Material Inc. and Solenne Inc., respectively. PEDOT:PSS (Clevios PH1000) solution was mixed with 5% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (Alfa Aesar 99.9%) and 0.5% surfactant (FS-30) for higher conductivity and better surface wettability. The PFN material was synthesized in our laboratory. PFN was dissolved in methanol (with a few drops of acetic acid to ionize PFN) with a concentration of 1 mg mL−1 for spin-coating on top of the ITO substrate, while PFN was dissolved in CB:DIO (97:3 by volume) solution with a concentration of 25 mg mL−1 for mixing with PTB7:PCBM[70] active solution. For PTB7:PCBM[70] BHJ active solution, the blending ratio of PTB7:PCBM[70] was 1:1.5 with a concentration of 25 mg mL−1 in a binary solvent system CB:DIO (97:3 v/v). For PFN:PTB7:PCBM[70] nanocomposite solution (i.e., the PTB7:PCBM[70] BHJ mixture with a small amount of PFN), different weight ratios (0, 1, 3, 5 and 7 wt%) of PFN from CB:DIO solution with a concentration of 25 mg mL−1 were doped into the PTB7:PCBM[70] active solution, respectively.


The ITO-coated glass substrates were cleaned with acetone, alkaline lotion, deionized water and isopropanol in that order. For the reference two-step coating device with the inverted structure of ITO/PFN/BHJ/MoO3/Al, a 10 nm thick PFN layer was first spin coated from methanol at 2000 rpm on top of the clean ITO substrate and then a 95 nm thick PTB7:PCBM[70] active layer was spin coated on top of the PFN layer. For one-step coating devices with the inverted structure of ITO/PFN:BHJ/MoO3/Al, different weight ratios (0, 1, 3, 5 and 7 wt%) of PFN doping into the PTB7:PCBM[70] BHJ active solution were spin coated directly on top of the clean ITO respectively. Finally, 10 nm MoO3 and 100 nm Al were deposited onto the active layers via thermal evaporation under a pressure of 3 × 10−4 Pa. The effective area was 14 mm2 determined by using a patterned metal mask. For verifying the effect of the conjugated polymer PFN IML on ITO-free devices, PSCs with the inverted structures of Al/TiOx/PFN/BHJ/PEDOT:PSS and Al/TiOx/PFN:BHJ/PEDOT:PSS were also fabricated. 100 nm Al and 4 nm Ti were thermally evaporated onto the glass substrates, respectively, and exposed to air for 12 hours to form the Al/TiOx cathode. The PFN/BHJ bilayer and PFN:BHJ single layer were deposited onto the Al/TiOx cathode by spin coating. Finally modified PEDOT:PSS (100 nm) was spin-coated on top of the active layer.


The current J–V characteristics were measured using a Keithley 2400 source meter under illumination of an AM 1.5G solar simulator with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (Sun 2000 Solar Simulator, Abet Technologies, Inc.). The film thickness was measured by using a surface profiler (XP-2). The surface work functions were obtained by SKPFM (SKP 5050, KP Technology). UV-vis absorption spectra were recorded by using a Shimadzu UV-2550 UV-vis spectrophotometer. The impedance spectroscopy analysis of capacitance–voltage was performed by employing a CHI 660D electrochemical workstation. Contact angles using water and formamide as the testing liquids were determined on top of the solid active films using a drop shape analyzer DSA100 instrument. The EQE data were recorded with a QE-R test system from Enli Technology Company (Taiwan). The film topography was investigated using AFM (Bioscope Catalyst Nanoscope-V). The cross-sectional image was measured by SEM (ULTRA55, Zeiss). Highly sensitive EL emission spectra were measured with a Shamrock SR-303i spectrograph from Andor Tech. coupled to a Newton EM-CCD Si array detector. Highly sensitive FTPS spectra were obtained by using a Vertex 70 from Bruker Optics. Refractive indices of BHJ and PFN:BHJ films were determined by using a J.A. Woollam V-VASE spectroscopic ellipsometer in a wavelength range of 300–1000 nm.


The authors are grateful to the NSFC Project (#11204106 & #61274062), the Open Fund of the State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices (South China University of Technology #2012-skllmd-10) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities for financial support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta06009e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015