 DOI: 10.1039/D2EE01727J
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 4157-4166


Ke
Hu
,

Can
Zhu
,

Kan
Ding
,

Shucheng
Qin
,

Wenbin
Lai
,

Jiaqi
Du
,

Jianqi
Zhang
,

Zhixiang
Wei
,

Xiaojun
Li
,

Zhanjun
Zhang
*,

Lei
Meng
*,

Harald
Ade
* and 

Yongfang
Li
*

School of Chemical Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China. E-mail: zhangzj@ucas.ac.cn

Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, CAS Key Laboratory of Organic Solids, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: menglei@iccas.ac.cn; liyf@iccas.ac.cn

Department of Physics and Organic and Carbon Electronics Laboratories (ORaCEL), North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA. E-mail: hwade@ncsu.edu

CAS Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication, CAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, 100190 Beijing, China

Laboratory of Advanced Optoelectronic Materials, Suzhou Key Laboratory of Novel Semiconductor-Optoelectronics Materials and Devices, College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, China

Received
30th May 2022
, Accepted 10th August 2022
First published on 12th August 2022
All-polymer solar cells (all-PSCs) have attracted considerable interest owing to their superior device stability and mechanical robustness. Recently, all-PSCs have achieved high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 17% benefitting from the development of polymerized small molecular acceptors. However, most all-PSCs are processed using halogenated solvents that are hazardous to the environment. Herein, non-halogenated solvent toluene is utilized with a large amount of volatilizable DTT (dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]thiophene) solid additive, for eco-friendly and highly efficient all-PSCs. The DTT solid-additive treatment can fine-tune the aggregation of the polymer donor and polymer acceptors, and the resulting active layer possesses appropriate domain size and high domain purity with bi-continuous-interpenetrating networks. Consequently, the treatment of DTT additive enables the high-performance non-halogenated solvent processed all-PSCs based on PBQ6:PYF-T-o with PCE up to 17.06% (certified PCE of 16.6%), which is among the highest efficiencies in non-halogenated-solvent-processed all-PSCs to date. Importantly, the toluene-processed active layer of all-PSCs can be successfully fabricated under ambient conditions with the help of the DTT additive, and the device fabricated under ambient conditions showed a higher PCE of 15.74%. This study highlights the importance of a solid-additive strategy in controlling the active layer morphology for practical applications of high-performance and environment-friendly all-PSCs.

All-polymer solar cells (all-PSCs) have attracted great interest owing to their superior device stability and excellent mechanical robustness. Recently, all-PSCs have achieved high power conversion efficiency (PCE) over 17% benefitting from the development of polymerized small molecular acceptors (PSMAs). However, most all-PSCs are fabricated by processing with halogenated solvents that are hazardous for environment. Herein, non-halogenated solvent of toluene is utilized with large amount of volatilizable DTT solid additive for all-PSCs with PBQ6 as polymer donor and PYF-T-o as polymer acceptor. It was found that the toluene solvent processing with DTT solid additive treatment can fine-tune the crystallinity and aggregation of the polymer donor and polymer acceptor, and the resulted active layer possesses appropriate domain size and high domain purity with bi-continuous interpenetrating networks. Consequently, the PCE of all-PSCs based on PBQ6:PYF-T-o reached 17.06%, which is among the highest efficiency in the non-halogenated-solvent-processed all-PSCs to date. More importantly, the toluene-processed active layer of all-PSCs can be fabricated in ambient conditions with the help of DTT additive, and the fabricated device showed a high PCE of 15.74%. The results indicate that the solid additive strategy is promising for the practical application of high-performance and environment-friendly all-PSCs.


All-polymer solar cells (all-PSCs), comprising a blend active layer of a p-type conjugated polymer donor and an n-type conjugated polymer acceptor, have attracted great interest due to their superior device stability and excellent mechanical robustness. However, for a long time all-PSCs showed a much lower power conversion efficiency (PCE) compared to PSCs based on polymeric donors and small molecular acceptors due to lack of high-performance polymer acceptors. In 2017, the “polymerized small molecule acceptor” (PSMA) strategy was proposed by Zhang et al. and a novel narrow-bandgap polymer acceptor PZ1 was synthesized, which changed this situation. The PSMAs preserve the advantages of small-molecule acceptors (SMAs) (such as narrow bandgap, strong absorption coefficient, and suitable electronic energy levels) and the advantages of polymers (such as higher stability and better flexibility), simultaneously. Recently, all-PSCs have achieved a high power conversion efficiency (PCE) exceeding 17% mainly via the optimization of PSMA structures.

Although all-PSCs have made significant progress, due to the large molecular sizes of polymers, most of them are processed with halogenated solvents, such as chloroform and chlorobenzene. Due to the good solubility of the polymer semiconductors in the halogenated solvents, optimal morphology with a nano-scale interpenetrating network can be formed, which is beneficial to the charge separation and transport in the devices. However, as such halogenated solvents are inevitably hazardous to humans and the environment, they are not applicable to large-area production in the future. Hence, it is crucial and imperative to develop an eco-friendly process based on non-halogenated solvents for high-performance all-PSCs. Therefore, attempts have been made to explore green solvents for fabricating active layers with favorable morphology in all PSCs. Zou et al. used HFQx-T and HFAQx-T as polymer donors and an n-type conjugated polymer N2200 as the polymer acceptor to fabricate all-PSCs using a non-halogenated THF solvent. With THF as the processing solvent, the active layer showed a higher absorption coefficient, better phase separation, exciton dissociation, and charge carrier mobilities compared to that processed with CHCl3. The optimized device based on HFAQx-T:N2200 processed using THF, delivered a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 7.45%. Guo et al. selected three green solvents, CS2, 1,2,4-TMB, and o-XY with different boiling points, as the host solvents to control the film drying kinetics. The PCEs of the all-PSCs based on PM6:L14 were enhanced from 13.0% (in CS2) to 15.6% (in o-XY). Nevertheless, the performance of most of the all-PSCs processed with non-halogenated solvents is still lower than that of the devices processed with halogenated solvents.
Polymer/polymer blends inherently tend to phase-separate and form large domains because of the reduced entropy and the thermodynamically unfavorable mixing caused by the long polymer chains, resulting in inefficient exciton dissociation and charge collection. Therefore, developing morphology control methods to manipulate the morphology of the blend film toward advantageous phase separation is critical for fabricating all-PSCs. In most cases of highly efficient solution-processed PSCs, the organization of optimal bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) morphology of their active layer has extensively relied on the assistance of additional treatments, such as thermal annealing (TA), solvent vapor annealing, and solvent additives. The addition of trace amounts of appropriate solvent additives to the host solvent has been regarded as the most effective way of tuning the morphology of the active layers of the PSCs. Solvent additives can selectively dissolve certain photovoltaic materials, which is crucial for optimizing the morphology of the blended films. Common solvent additives such as 1-chloronaphthalene (CN) and 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) can make the phase separation of the donor and acceptor more refined, change the molecular orientation and make the molecular packing more orderly, thereby optimizing the morphology of the active layer of PSCs. However, some of the additives are toxic halogenated compounds, which prevent the realization of truly eco-friendly processing. Alternatively, the solid additive is another promising candidate for BHJ morphology control. Solid additives not only inherit the advantages of solvent additives, such as the improved molecular packing), but also further enhance device performance due to their excellent volatilization characteristics. It has been reported that molecular crystalline ordering can be manipulated through intermolecular interactions between the solid additive and the donor/acceptor materials, thereby improving the performance of the device. Recently, Hou and coworkers designed several new volatile solid additives, and successfully used them to improve the PCE of PSCs. These additives not only improved intermolecular π–π stacking of the SMAs but they could also be removed with heating. Cui and coworkers achieved PCE of 16.97% for a PM6:Y6-based device and 18.89% for the PSC based on PTQ10:m-BTP-PhC6:PC71BM using the solid additive DTT. They found that the active layer treated by the DTT solid additive formed appropriate phase separation and donor/acceptor bi-continuous-interpenetrating networks for efficient charge separation and transport, which benefits the improvement of the photovoltaic performance. Peng et al. promoted the PCE of the ternary PSC-based on PTQ10:BTP-FTh:IDIC (1:0.9:0.1, w/w/w) to 19.07% by the treatment of the DTT solid additive. Solid additives have achieved great success in polymer donor/small-molecule acceptor blend-based devices, but are rarely used in all-PSCs. Therefore, it is necessary to explore the effect of solid additives on the photovoltaic performance of all-PSCs.
Taking into account the importance of the non-halogenated solvent and the advantages of the DTT solid additives in improving the active layer morphology of the PSCs, herein, we used the non-halogenated toluene as the solvent with DTT solid additive for the fabrication of the all-PSCs with PBQ6 as the polymer donor and PSMA PYF-T-o as the polymer acceptor, for realizing highly-efficient and eco-friendly all-PSCs. We found that DTT can fine-tune the crystallinity and aggregation of the donor and acceptor with appropriate domain size and high domain purity. During the kinetic process of DTT removal in the PBQ6:PYF-T-o blend film under thermal annealing, donor and acceptor can intercalate into the matrix left by the DTT removal, to form an appropriate phase separation and donor/acceptor bi-continuous-interpenetrating networks for efficient charge separation and transport. Consequently, the treatment of toluene solvent and DTT additive enabled the PBQ6:PYF-T-o-based all-PSC devices with a PCE of up to 17.06% (certified value of 16.6%), with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.886 V, an excellent short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 25.12 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 76.64%. The PCE of 17.06% is among the highest values for the non-halogenated-processed all-PSCs to date, and it is much higher than that for the device with CN as an additive (PCE = 15.35%). In addition, we demonstrated the feasibility of non-halogenated solvent processing in fabricating active layers of the PBQ6:PYF-T-o-based all-PSCs under ambient conditions, which achieved a higher PCE of 15.74%. This work highlights that adding a solid additive during the preparation of the photoactive layer is a promising strategy for precise morphology optimization and thus further boosting the efficiency of all-PSCs.

The molecular structures of PBQ6, PYF-T-o, and the volatile solid additive DTT are shown in Fig. 1a. The number average molecular weights (Mn) of PBQ6 and PYF-T-o were measured to be 28.7 kDa with a polydispersity index (PDI) of 1.44 and 23.7 kDa with a PDI of 1.39, respectively, by the high-temperature gel-permeation chromatography (GPC) (Fig. S1 in (ESI)). The absorption spectrum of the pristine PBQ6 film displayed a distinct absorption band centered in the range of 500–700 nm, complementing that of the pure PYF-T-o film having strong absorption bands between 700 and 900 nm (Fig. 1b). As is well known, the optical properties of organic semiconductor films have a strong connection with the aggregation behavior in a solid film. Fig. S2 (ESI) shows the UV-vis absorption spectra of neat PBQ6 and PYF-T-o films with different additive treatments, such as CN and DTT. Compared with the absorption spectrum of the PBQ6 film with CN solvent additive treatment, the higher ratio of the 0–0 peak to 0–1 peak for the PBQ6 film with DTT solid-additive treatment indicates the stronger aggregation tendency of PBQ6 after the DTT treatment. In addition, the 0–0 peak position of PBQ6 and PYF-T-o films with DTT treatment is redshifted by ca. 6 nm and 4 nm, respectively, compared with those of the PBQ6 and PYF-T-o films with CN treatment. In addition, the maximum absorption coefficients of the PBQ6:PYF-T-o film with DTT were measured to be 3.84 × 104 cm−1 at 646 nm and 5.97 × 104 cm−1 at 826 nm, respectively, higher than those of the PBQ6:PYF-T-o film with CN. These results suggest that DTT treatment may increase the intermolecular packing of both PBQ6 and PYF-T-o, which will be discussed in the grazing incident wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) section. These results show that the DTT solid-additive treatment improves the optical properties of the individual materials and their blends.

The highest occupied molecular orbital energy level (EHOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital energy level (ELUMO) of PBQ6 and PYF-T-o were measured by electrochemical cyclic voltammetry (CV), and the EHOMO/LUMO values were determined to be −5.61/−3.14 eV and −5.69/−3.76 eV for PBQ6 and PYF-T-o, respectively (Fig. 1c and Fig. S3, ESI).
To examine the effect of CN and DTT additives on the photovoltaic performance of all-PSCs, all-PSCs based on PBQ6:PYF-T-o were fabricated using the conventional device architecture of indium tin oxide (ITO)/poly (3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly (styrene-sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)/active layer/aliphatic amine-functionalized perylene-diimide (PDINN)/Ag (Fig. 1a). Detailed experimental procedures are described in ESI. We chose toluene (a nonhalogenated solvent) as the active layer processing solvent. To optimize the photovoltaic performance, various device fabrication conditions were carefully screened, including types of additives, types of solvents, the weight ratio of the donor and acceptor, the amount of the additives, and the experimental results are summarized in Tables S1–S4 in the ESI. The optimized device fabrication conditions are as follows, a D/A weight ratio of 1:1, a solution concentration of 16 mg mL−1 with 275% DTT (weight ratio relative to PYF-T-o) as the additive in toluene, and thermal annealing at 90 °C for 10 min. It is worth noting that because the processing solvent, toluene, has a higher boiling point of 110.6 °C, a warm spin-coating technique at 50 °C was applied to accelerate the solvent evaporation and thereby prevent excessive phase-separations within the BHJ blend film.

Fig. 2a presents the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of all-PSCs under simulated AM 1.5G irradiation at 100 mW cm−2, the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. The device using the additive of 1% CN yielded a power conversion efficiency of 15.35%, along with Voc of 0.890 V, Jsc of 23.62 mA cm−2, and FF of 73.01%. Then, different weight ratios (relative to PYF-T-o) of the DTT were used to optimize the morphology of the PBQ6:PYF-T-o active layer for improving the photovoltaic performance of all-PSCs. As shown in Table S4 (ESI), increasing the weight ratios of DTT from 200% to 275% led to higher FF and Jsc. As a result, a maximum PCE of as high as 17.06% was achieved in the device processed with 275% DTT and with TA treatment at 90 °C for 10 min, with Voc of 0.886 V, Jsc of 25.12 mA cm−2, and a notable FF of 76.64% (Table 1), which is the best PCE reported for the all-PSCs treated using a non-halogenated solvent (Fig. 2d and Table S7, ESI). The efficiency of 17.06% is one of the highest PCEs even compared to all-PSCs using chlorinated solvents (Fig. 2c and Table S6, ESI). The PCE was also certified as 16.6% by the NIM (National Institute of Metrology) of China (test report attached in Fig. S4 in ESI). By further increasing the DTT content from 275% to 500%, the Jsc value decreased to 23.65 mA cm−2 and the FF value remained almost unchanged, resulting in a lower PCE of 15.83%. It should be noted that all the devices processed with a weight ratio of DTT ranged from 200% to 500% realizing a higher PCE of over 15% (Fig. S5, ESI), demonstrating the promising effect of DTT as an additive in improving the photovoltaic performance. In addition, Table S5 (ESI) lists PCEs of the all-PSCs based on the PBQ6 polymer donors with different molecular weights. As can be seen, all-PSCs exhibited decent PCEs for different batches of donors with molecular weights ranging from 8 to 38 kDa, while the PBQ6 polymer donor with Mn of 28.7 kDa realized the highest PCE of 17.06%.
Active layer

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

J
cal (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a The average PCEs in parenthesis were calculated from 12 devices.
b The certified results from the National Institute of Metrology, China.

PBQ6:PYF-T-o/CN
0.890 (0.885 ± 0.005)
23.62 (23.33 ± 0.31)
23.20 (22.85 ± 0.26)
73.01 (72.24 ± 0.85)
15.35 (15.07 ± 0.26)
PBQ6:PYF-T-o/DTT
0.886 (0.883 ± 0.004)
25.12 (24.75 ± 0.36)
24.70 (24.45 ± 0.32)
76.64 (76.05 ± 0.79)
17.06 (16.81 ± 0.22)
PBQ6:PYF-T-o/DTT
0.869
25.2
75.8
16.6

Fig. 2b displays the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the devices processed by the different additives. All the devices exhibited high and broad EQE responses in the wavelength range of 300–900 nm. The additive treatment of DTT for the PSCs based on PBQ6:PYF-T-o led to higher EQE values than the CN additive treatment, which could be ascribed to the enhanced absorbance of the blend film (Fig. S2c, ESI). The devices processed with DTT had an integrated current density of 24.70 mA cm−2, while 23.20 mA cm−2 was found for the device with CN, matching well with the Jsc values of the devices from the J–V measurements. In addition, we also measured the EQE spectra of the devices after the additive treatment with different amounts of DTT solid, as shown in Fig. S6 in ESI, for understanding the effect of the amount of the DTT solid during the additive treatment on the Jsc values of the devices.
Thermal stability is one of the major advantages of all-PSCs. We examined the thermal stability of the active layer films based on PBQ6:PYF-T-o with CN and DTT. The active layers were annealed at 150 °C at different times before fabricating into all-PSC devices. After 600 min of thermal annealing stress, the photovoltaic performance of the all-PSCs based on PBQ6:PYF-T-o with CN and DTT did not show significant degradation (as shown in Fig. S7, ESI). The results prove that the blend films based on PBQ6:PYF-T-o with CN and DTT have good thermal stability under harsh test conditions.
The improvements in PCEs for the PBQ6:PYF-T-o-based devices through the DTT additive treatment are mainly due to the significantly-enhanced Jsc and FF parameters, which are generally determined by charge transport properties in PSCs. Thus, the vertical charge transport properties of the BHJ blend film were investigated by the space charge limited current (SCLC) method (detailed experimental procedures are provided in the SI). The hole-only and electron-only device structures are composed of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active-layer/MoO3/Ag and ITO/ZnO/active-layer/PDINN/Ag, respectively. As shown in Fig. S8 and Table S8 in ESI, the average hole/electron mobilities of the devices based on PBQ6:PYF-T-o with DTT were estimated to be 6.19 × 10−4/8.41 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, with an μh/μe ratio of 0.736. For the device based on PBQ6:PYF-T-o with the CN blend film, the μh and μe were calculated as 4.44 × 10−4 and 7.33 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, with the μh/μe ratio of 0.607. The much improved and balanced μh and μe are conducive to the optimized charge carrier transport in the all-PSCs, which would contributed to the high FF values of the all-PSCs based on PBQ6:PYF-T-o with DTT.
To gain an insight into the charge generation and exciton dissociation in the devices treated using the CN or DTT additive, the dependence of the photocurrent density (Jph) on the effective voltage (Veff) was measured and the results are shown in Fig. 3a. Herein, Jph = JL − JD, where JL and JD are the current densities under illumination and dark conditions, respectively. Veff is defined as Veff = V0 − V, wherein V0 is the voltage when Jph equals 0 and V is the applied voltage. Generally, when Jph reaches saturation at a high Veff greater than 2 eV, all the excitons in PSC devices are dissociated into free charges and collected by the electrodes without recombination. The probability of exciton dissociation P(E, T) could be calculated by Jph/Jsat, which were determined to be 95.84%, and 97.58% for the all-PSC devices based on the PBQ6:PYF-T-o with CN and DTT, respectively. The higher value of P(E, T) for the devices based on PBQ6:PYF-T-o with DTT demonstrates higher exciton dissociation at the D/A interface, which is in good agreement with the higher Jsc and FF values. The dependence of Jsc on the illumination light intensity (Plight) was investigated to provide insight into the mechanism of charge carrier recombination. Generally speaking, the dependence of Jsc on P follows the equation Jsc ∝ Pαlight, where α is the power law exponent. The α value closer to 1 represents the less bimolecular recombination of the charge carriers in the material. As shown in the plots of logJscvs. log(Plight) shown in Fig. 3b, fitted power-law exponent (α) values of 0.975 and 0.989 were obtained for all-PSCs devices based on PBQ6:PYF-T-o with CN and DTT, respectively, which indicates the most suppressed bimolecular recombination in the devices based on PBQ6:PYF-T-o with DTT.
Transient photocurrent (TPC) characterization of PSCs based on PBQ6:PYF-T-o with CN or DTT was also conducted to further study the trap-involving space–charge carrier dynamics, as shown in Fig. S9 in ESI. The device with DTT shows a faster turn-off dynamic than the device with CN, implying that the charge extraction is very rapid and less charge is trapped in the device with DTT. The charge recombination characteristics were further analyzed by studying the photocarrier lifetime, which can be evaluated via transient photovoltage (TPV) measurements. Fig. 3c illustrates the carrier lifetime curves under different light intensities obtained from TPV measurements, the charge carrier lifetime in the device with DTT is greater than that of the device with CN under various light intensities. Under the illumination of 100 mW cm−2, the carrier lifetime of the device with DTT was estimated to be 0.79 μs, and the value of the device with CN was only 0.57 μs under the same light illumination conditions. The prolonged photocarrier lifetime further confirmed the effectively suppressed charge recombination in the device with DTT. The longer charge carrier lifetime of the device with DTT should benefit from the improved morphology of the active layer with the DTT solid additive treatment, which will be discussed below.
We also studied the impact of additives on the charge carrier mobility (μ) using the photogenerated charge extraction by a linearly increasing voltage (photo-CELIV) technique (Fig. 3d). In fact, photo-CELIV could more accurately reveal the information inside the working OSCs than the single-carrier measurements. The rise speed of the current under illumination is determined by the overall conductivity of the film, and the time to reach the extraction current maximum could be used to estimate the drift mobility of the photogenerated charge carriers. The charge carrier mobility (μ) of the devices can be estimated based on the equation of μ = 2d2/(3Atmax2(1 + 0.36Δj/j0)), where d is the active layer thickness, A is the ramp rate, tmax is the time when the extracted current reaches its maximum value, j0 represents the dark capacitive current, and Δj is the transient current peak height. The calculated μ values are 2.82 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 3.30 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the device with CN and DTT, respectively. Combining the above-mentioned analysis, the DTT-based device possesses more efficient exciton dissociation, less charge carrier recombination, and higher charge carrier mobility, which guarantees more efficient charge transport and collection, and is beneficial for obtaining higher FF, Jsc, and PCE in the all-PSCs. In addition, we also measured the photo-CELIV for the devices with different amounts of the DTT solid-additive treatment, as shown in Fig. S10 in ESI. The calculated μ values are 3.01 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, 3.30 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 3.10 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the device with 200%, 275% and 500% DTT, respectively. The higher μ value of the device with 275% DTT is beneficial for the increase in the Jsc of the corresponding device.
The morphology of the films was studied by a combination of techniques including transmission electron microscopy (TEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), and grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS). As shown in Fig. S11a and b (ESI), TEM images of the blend films treated with DTT and CN exhibited different phase separation sizes. The bright and dark regions represent donor-rich and acceptor-rich domains, respectively. Relative to the PBQ6:PYF-T-o blend film treated with the CN additive, better nanoscale phase separation with more favorable aggregation was realized in the films processed with DTT to realize a well-developed nanoscale bi-continuous interpenetrating network with a fibrous structure, which is in favor of the exciton dissociation and charge transport. We then carried out AFM measurements to characterize the surface morphologies of the PBQ6 and PYF-T-o and PBQ6:PYF-T-o blend films with different additives. As presented in Fig. S11c and d (ESI), all the blend films processed with CN or DTT showed smooth and uniform surface morphology. The BHJ blend using the CN additive showed a root mean square (RMS) value of 1.08 nm and the blend film processed with DTT exhibited a comparatively larger fibril width and the phase separation with a higher RMS of 1.50 nm, which is consistent with the AFM of PBQ6 and PYF-T-o films (Fig. S12, ESI).
Grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) experiments were conducted to investigate the morphology features in the pristine and blend films. The 2D GIWAXS diffraction patterns and the corresponding line-cut profiles of the neat films of PBQ6 and PYF-T-o are shown in Fig. S13 and S14 (ESI). For the PBQ6 films, the major lamellar diffraction peaks at q = 0.27 Å−1, and a strong π–π diffraction peak at q = 1.68 Å−1 were observed in the out-of-plane (OOP) direction. The crystalline coherence length (CCL) of the (010) π–π diffraction peak in the OOP direction was calculated as 23.6 Å (Table S9, ESI). These results indicate that PBQ6 shows a clear face-on molecular orientation. Compared with the PBQ6 film without the additive treatment, the PBQ6 film processed with the CN solvent additive showed a diffraction peak at q = 1.70 Å−1 in the OOP direction with an increased CCL value of 24.4 Å, indicating that the crystalline packing of PBQ6 is improved by the CN treatment. Regarding the PBQ6 film treated with DTT, the scattering intensity of the π–π stacking in the OOP direction was further intensified with a higher CCL value of 27.1 Å when compared with the PBQ6 films without the additive and with the CN additive treatment. These results suggest that PBQ6 adopts a preferential face-on orientation and improves crystallinity with the treatment of DTT. The (010) peaks of the PYF-T-o, PYF-T-o/CN, and PYF-T-o/DTT films appeared at q =1.60, 1.59, and 1.60 Å−1, demonstrating the π–π stacking distances (dπ–π) of 3.94, 3.96 and 3.93 Å, respectively. PYF-T-o/DTT shows a longer (010) CCL of 19.9 Å than those of PYF-T-o (18.6 Å) and PYF-T-o/CN (19.7 Å), that is indicative of a slightly good inter-chain packing of PYF-T-o/DTT. The microstructure and molecular orientation of the blend film profoundly affect exciton dissociation and charge transport, thus, GIWAXS was also used to investigate the morphological features of the PBQ6:PYF-T-o/CN and PBQ6:PYF-T-o/DTT blend films, as shown in Fig. 4a and b and Fig. S15 (ESI). The blend films with CN and DTT adopted a predominantly face-on orientation, evidenced by the strong lamellar-stacking peak (100) in the IP direction and the obvious π–π stacking peak (010) in the OOP direction. In addition, the DTT-treated blends in the in-plane (IP) orientation with a stronger (100) diffraction peak was located at 0.277 Å−1 compared with the CN-treated blends located at 0.274 Å−1, along with the corresponding CCL of the DTT- and CN-treated films of 94.8 and 86.2 Å, respectively. In detail, the DTT-treated blends improved the crystallinity packing with the larger CCLs (26.8 Å) than that (25.3 Å) of the CN-treated blends in the OOP direction, which is beneficial for the exciton dissociation and charge transport for improving photovoltaic performance. GIWAXS results show that DTT can better improve the crystallinity of PBQ6 and PYF-T-o. The results observed in the GIWAXS measurements agree with the above UV-vis absorption spectra.
Resonant soft X-ray scattering (R-SoXS) revealed the domain size and relative phase purity of the blend films.Fig. 4c and Table S10 (ESI) show the carbon-edge Lorentz corrected R-SoXS profiles at 284.7 eV of PBQ6:PYF-T-o blends with additives CN or DTT. Two log-normal peaks can be resolved from each data set. For the blend treated with CN, the two peaks are located at 0.058 nm−1 and 0.164 nm−1, corresponding to long periods of 108 nm and 38 nm, respectively. For the blend treated with DTT, the two peaks shift to 0.085 nm−1 and 0.183 nm−1, corresponding to smaller long periods of 74 nm and 34 nm, respectively. This indicates that the domain sizes in the blend treated with DTT are smaller, which facilitates exciton dissociation and may be the cause of the higher Jsc. Furthermore, the integrated scattering intensity (ISI) of the blend treated with DTT is 56% higher than that of the blend treated with CN, suggesting a higher phase purity. This may contribute to lower bimolecular charge recombination and thereby an elevated FF of 76.64%. Overall, an appropriate crystallinity, smaller domain sizes, and high average domain purity were obtained for the blend film of PBQ6:PYF-T-o treated with DTT, which is more favorable for higher exciton dissociation, longer charge carrier lifetime, and better charge transport properties, that result in an excellent PCE of 17.06%.
To understand the working mechanism of DTT as an additive in tuning the morphology of PBQ6:PYF-T-o blends, we measured the miscibility between polymers and DTT, the contact angles of water, and methylene iodide on PBQ6, PYF-T-o, and DTT films were measured (Fig. S16 in ESI). The surface tension (γ) values of PBQ6, PYF-T-o, and DTT were calculated by following Wu's model and the γ values were 37.68, 35.83, and 47.76 mN m−1, respectively. The degree of molecular miscibility could be reflected by Flory–Huggins interaction parameter χ, which was calculated by using the equation of . The interaction coefficient (χ) between PBQ6 and DTT is 0.597, and between PYF-T-o and DTT is 0.856, which suggested that DTT might have poor miscibility with both the donor and acceptor materials. The limited miscibility between DTT and the polymers was expected to force the phase separation when used as an additive. It should be mentioned that the DTT treatment may increase the molecule packing of both PBQ6 and PYF-T-o, which can be derived from the UV-vis absorption spectra and GIWAXS tests mentioned above. The increased molecular packing of the polymer donor and polymer acceptor could result in the improvement of the photovoltaic performance of the all-PSCs.
The complete removal of DTT from the PBQ6:PYF-T-o blend after the TA treatment was confirmed using Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) measurement. As shown in Fig. S17 (ESI), the as-cast PBQ6:PYF-T-o/DTT film showed the characteristic FT-IR absorption peaks of DTT at 597.8, 697.7, 797.5, and 898.3 cm−1. After the thermal annealing treatment at 90 °C for 10 minutes, the four characteristic absorption peaks of DTT disappeared in the FT-IR absorption spectrum, which proved that DTT as a solid additive in the blend film was completely volatilized under the TA treatment. In addition, the ascast PBQ6/DTT and PYF-T-o/DTT films exhibit significantly rough surfaces with large RMS of 6.22 nm and 6.42 nm due to the large crystals of DTT, as shown in Fig. S18a and c (ESI), respectively. When the blend films were treated under thermal annealing at 90 °C for 10 min, the large crystals of DTT in the two films were completely removed, which resulted in a smaller RMS of 1.49 nm for the PBQ6 film and 1.55 nm for the PYF-T-o film, as shown in Fig. S18b and d (ESI), respectively. During the film-casting process, DTT could fine-tune the crystallinity and aggregation of the active layer. During the kinetic process of the DTT removal under the TA treatment, PBQ6 and PYF-T-o could intercalate into the matrix to form the nanoscale phase separation with bi-continuous-interpenetrating networks, resulting in the appropriate morphology properties and improved photovoltaic performance. A related schematic is shown in Fig. 5.
Compared to the SMA-based solar cells, all-PSCs generally exhibited excellent moisture and oxygen stability, which prompted us to examine the performance of non-halogenated solvent-treated devices with active layers prepared under ambient conditions. Hence, we prepared the active layers using the same optimal device conditions but in air at room temperature. As shown in Fig. 6, the devices with CN could attain a maximum PCE of 13.28%, which recorded a decrease of 13.5% compared with the devices prepared in the nitrogen atmosphere. The DTT-processed devices achieved a significantly higher PCE of 15.74%, which recorded a decrease of 7.74% compared with the devices prepared in the nitrogen atmosphere, demonstrating the great potential of DTT.

In summary, we report an effective nonhalogenated-solvent-processed approach for all-PSCs system to substitute the harmful CF solvent to achieve highly efficient and eco-friendly all-PSCs. In addition, we applied volatilizable DTT as the solid additive to control the morphology to improve the photovoltaic performance of the all-PSCs. DTT can fine-tune the crystallinity and aggregation of the donor and acceptor and an appropriate domain size and high domain purity could be obtained for the blend film. In addition, relative to the treatment of the CN additive for the PBQ6:PYF-T-o blend, the addition of DTT to the BHJ blend resulted in enhanced and balanced charge carrier mobilities, more effective exciton dissociation, and longer carrier lifetime. As a result, the PBQ6:PYF-T-o devices treated with DTT yielded a high efficiency of 17.06%, which is much higher than those for the devices processed with CN (15.35%). It should be noted that all the devices processed with a weight ratio of DTT ranging from 200% to 500% realized a higher PCE of over 15%. These results demonstrate that applying DTT as an additive is a promising method to optimize the BHJ morphology for improving the photovoltaic performance of all-PSCs.


K. H. performed the fabrication, measurement, and analysis of the devices. C. Z. helped to supply the donor material and study the device data. W. L. helped test the GPC of polymers. S. Q., J. D., and X. L. carried out morphology analysis. J. Z. and Z. W. conducted the GIWAXS measurements and data analysis. K. D. and H. A. measured and analyzed the R-SoXS results. K. H. prepared the manuscript. All authors discussed and commented on the manuscript. Y. L., L. M., and Z. Z. supervised the project.


The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


This work was supported by National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2019YFA0705900) funded by MOST, the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51820105003, 21734008, 61904181 and 52173188), the Key Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (No. XDPB13) and the Basic and Applied Basic Research Major Program of Guangdong Province (No. 2019B030302007). R-SoXS data acquisition and manuscript input by NCSU authors supported by ONR grant N000142012155. X-ray data were acquired at the Advanced Light Source, which was supported by the Director, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract DE-AC02-05CH11231.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee01727j
‡ K. Hu and C. Zhu contribute equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022