 DOI: 10.1039/C3CS60088B
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8134-8156

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms

Lei Wang
,
Haiqing Liu
,
Robert M. Konik
,
James A. Misewich
 and 
Stanislaus S. Wong
*

Department of Chemistry, State University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794-3400, USA. E-mail: stanislaus.wong@stonybrook.edu; sswong@bnl.gov

Condensed Matter Physics and Materials Sciences Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Building 480, Upton, NY 11973, USA

Received
3rd March 2013

First published on 10th July 2013
One means of combining the unique physical and chemical properties of both carbon nanotubes and complementary material motifs (such as metal sulfide quantum dots (QDs), metal oxide nanostructures, and polymers) can be achieved by generating carbon nanotube (CNT)-based heterostructures. These materials can be subsequently utilized as novel and interesting constituent building blocks for the assembly of functional light energy harvesting devices and because of their architectural and functional flexibility, can potentially open up novel means of using and taking advantage of existing renewable energy sources. In this review, we present the reliable and reproducible synthesis of several unique model CNT-based heterostructured systems as well as include an accompanying discussion about the charge transfer and energy flow properties of these materials for their potential incorporation into a range of practical solar energy conversion devices.
Lei Wang
Lei Wang received her BS degree in chemistry in 2011 from Shandong University, Jinan, China. She is currently a PhD student of Chemistry at the State University of New York at Stony Brook, under the direction of Prof. Stanislaus S. Wong. Her research interests involve the controlled synthesis and structural characterization of carbon nanotube-based heterostructures for solar cell and battery applications.
Haiqing Liu
Haiqing Liu earned his BS degree in Chemistry in 2010 from the Beijing University of Chemical Technology. He came to the United States in 2011 in pursuit of his Master's degree and is currently studying for his PhD in Chemistry at the State University of New York at Stony Brook, under the direction of Prof. Stanislaus S. Wong. His research interests include the synthesis and characterization of nanomaterials for solar energy and fuel cell applications.
Robert M. Konik
Robert M. Konik earned his PhD in Theoretical Physics from Cornell University in 1997. He completed successive postdoctoral assignments in the Physics Departments at the University of California Santa Barbara and the University of Virginia prior to joining Brookhaven National Laboratory as a Research Scientist in 2003. He has been a Physicist in the Condensed Matter Physics and Materials Sciences Department since 2009.
James A. Misewich
James A. Misewich earned his PhD from Cornell University in 1984 in physical chemistry, with a focus on surface science. He then joined the laser physics group at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center in Yorktown Heights, NY. In 2002, he came to Brookhaven as Chair of the Materials Science Department and later became Chair of the Condensed Matter Physics and Materials Science Department. In June 2007, he became Interim Associate Laboratory Director, a position he held until his current appointment as Associate Laboratory Director for Basic Energy Sciences. He is a Fellow of the American Physical Society and the Optical Society of America, having made significant contributions in several fields, including optics, nanomaterials, ultrafast studies, and surface science.
Stanislaus S. Wong
Stanislaus S. Wong earned his PhD from Harvard University in 1999 under the tutelage of Professor Charles M. Lieber. After completing a postdoctoral fellowship at Columbia University with Professor Louis E. Brus, he is currently a full Professor of Chemistry at SUNY Stony Brook with a joint appointment at Brookhaven National Laboratory. Professor Wong is a member of the Editorial Advisory Boards of Chemistry of Materials and of ACS Applied Materials and Interfaces, and is the section editor of the ‘Materials: synthesis and self-assembly’ section of Nanotechnology. Professor Wong was recently elected as an American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) Fellow for work on the covalent surface chemistry of carbon nanotubes as well as on the synthesis, characterization, and applications of non-carbonaceous nanostructures. He and his group are especially interested in developing nanomaterials for energy applications.

Over the years, with the rapid increase in global population and accompanying economic growth and consumption, there has been an increasing strain on existing fossil fuel resources, which has led to a corresponding hike in oil and gas prices. Moreover, the potentially deleterious environmental impacts, associated with energy production based on fossil fuels, have become a matter of serious concern. For instance, the release of greenhouse gases through the burning of fossil fuels has been implicated in global climate change, which has evolved into a focal point of significant socio-political attention. Hence, with the likelihood of increasing demands upon both existing energy sources and the environment in the near future, it is evident that we will be forced to seek alternative clean energy resources.

The most obvious choice for a plentiful, essentially inexhaustible, and inexpensive alternative energy resource is sunlight, which can be used for heating, lighting, and electricity generation. For instance, when properly concentrated in usable form, it can be used to provide steam in order to run turbines. In fact, when the sun is directly overhead and the sky is clear, radiation impinging on a horizontal surface is ∼1000 W m−2. Significantly, in the United States, for example, the total amount of solar energy striking the surface of the continental 48 states is ∼4.67 × 104 quads per year (wherein a quad, derived from ‘quadrillion’, is 1.05 × 1018 J or 2.9 × 1011 kW h), a value which is well in excess of the 98.6 quads that the nation consumes annually, on average. It has been estimated that by the year 2050, a minimum of 20 terawatts of carbon-free energy (i.e., 1.5 times the total amount of all forms of energy consumed today globally), in the form of electricity and fuels, will be needed to simply meet the increasing demands of an economically and sustainably viable world.
One way to convert the sunlight directly into electrical energy is through the mediation of photovoltaic cells. According to Umeyama and Imahori, there are three major processes associated with converting sunlight into electrical power: (i) absorption of sunlight photons in a photoactive layer to form locally confined excitons, (ii) migration of the excitons to the interface of a donor–acceptor heterojunction and subsequent dissociation to form free electrons and holes, and (iii) movement of the charges towards the respective electrodes so as to eventually yield a photocurrent in an external circuit. Currently about 0.08 quads of energy is produced each year in the United States from solar thermal energy and solar photovoltaic device sources, which are able to convert sunlight directly into electrical energy. There are currently three generations of photovoltaic devices of keen interest: (i) the first generation consists of single-crystalline silicon-based photovoltaic devices, which are commercially available for installation, can deliver power with a 15% efficiency, but suffer from the high cost of manufacturing and installation, and (ii) the second generation is composed of cheaper CuInGaSe2 (CIGS) polycrystalline semiconductor thin films, which can address cost considerations but unfortunately possess poor overall efficiency.
At this time, a lot of active research work has been aimed at fabricating so-called (iii) third-generation devices, which are expected to deliver high efficiency at an acceptable economic cost by utilizing and focusing upon nanoscale systems such as semiconductor quantum dots as the fundamental building blocks. In effect, the efficiency of solar photon conversion possesses an intrinsic limit that complicates matters. That is, sunlight consists of photons possessing a wide range of energies from 0.5 to 3.5 eV, though only ∼1/3 of the total energy can be utilized in current solar cell configurations. Indeed, photons possessing a lower energy than the optical bandgap are frequently not absorbed, while for photons maintaining a higher energy than the bandgap, the excess kinetic energy of the photogenerated electrons and holes created above the bandgap (termed ‘hot’ carriers) is often lost as heat through processes such as electron–phonon scattering. This unavoidable reality results in an upper bound to the thermodynamic efficiency of single-bandgap cells.
Indeed, Shockley and Queisser (SQ) predicted a limiting power efficiency of 30% under simulated black body irradiation conditions, which has been re-calculated as 33% under AM 1.5 solar irradiance, and this limit applies to both photovoltaic and solar fuel devices. The point is that by using third-generation devices, energy losses associated with the cooling of hot carriers can be potentially reduced. At the same time, these devices render the absorption of sub-bandgap photons possible. That is, through multi-exciton generation involving the production of two or more excitons from hot excitons created by the absorption of high-energy photons, third-generation devices can be created to realistically increase the measured conversion efficiency by as much as a factor of 4/3.
In fact, the advantages of third-generation devices can be maximized using nanomaterials. According to Kamat's work, there are three major ways in which this is possible, i.e. in which one can utilize nanostructures for the design of efficient solar energy conversion devices: (i) mimicking photosynthesis with donor–acceptor molecular assemblies or clusters, (ii) designing semiconductor-assisted photocatalysts to produce fuels, such as H, and (iii) creating nanostructured semiconductor-based solar cells.
In this review, we will mainly focus on solar cell architectures rationally constructed from nanoscale building blocks. Improving efficiency is central to the search for new materials for solar energy conversion. In a simple model of solar electric conversion, there are several contributions to the overall efficiency in converting a photon into a current:
ηoverall = ηphotonabsηexcdiffusionηexcbreakηchargecollection
where
ηphotonabs is the efficiency to create an exciton upon absorption of a photon, ηexcdiffusion represents the efficiency with which the exciton diffuses to a place where it can be separated, ηexcbreak denotes the efficiency of breaking the exciton, and ηchargecollection is associated with the efficiency of charge collection. The U.S. Department of Energy's Basic Research Needs for Solar Energy Utilization workshop report discusses several intriguing aspects of using low-dimensional or nanostructured materials for solar applications that suggest the potential for improving efficiency in low-dimensional systems.

Key examples include semiconducting nanoparticles or QDs, based on CdSe, CdTe, and PbS, which exhibit size-dependent properties such as size-quantization effects, as well as metal nanoparticles, which display quantized charging effects. All of these interesting morphology-dependent properties can serve as the basis for developing practical functional devices and systems. Moreover, CNTs possess unique electrical and optoelectronic properties, a wide electrochemical stability window, and a high surface area, all of which render these materials as promising components of energy conversion devices. For example, when subjected to appropriate bandgap excitation, semiconducting CNTs can undergo measurable charge separation. It is worth noting that when the diameter of the CNTs approaches 1 nm, excitons with huge binding energies tend to be generated due to quantum confinement effects, which are a result of their anisotropic one-dimensional (1D) structures. Transient absorption and emission measurements have been used to probe a variety of exciton annihilation and charge separation processes in these systems. Moreover, nanotubes are capable of transporting charge ballistically over relatively large distances at room temperature.
Hence, by ‘merging’ CNTs with other nanostructures, unique heterostructures with surprising and potentially unexpected opto-electronic properties can be generated. Basically, the idea is to merge the favorable properties of individual nanoscale components into an integrated whole, whose specific properties are different from and potentially better than the sum of their separate, constituent parts. Hence, through a judicious choice of complementary nanoscale moieties, the synthetic potential here is the ability to produce truly astonishing nanostructures with distinctive and unforeseeable properties and functionalities. For example, charge carriers are susceptible for recombination loss at the boundaries of semiconducting particles. Chemically attaching CNTs to these systems represents a convenient and practical method of not only capturing photogenerated charges but also transporting them to the electrode surface.
Recently, many review papers have focused on studying CNT-based heterostructures, generated by either covalent or noncovalent attachment for photovoltaic cell applications. Specifically, extensive research has centered on the development of CNT-based organic solar cells, e.g. carbon nanotube-conducting polymer systems, such as (a) polyaniline (PANI) nanocomposites to replace transparent conductive oxide (TCO) layers in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), as well as (b) SWNT/pyrene+/ZnP8 and SWNT-sodium poly(styrene-4-sulfonate) (PSSn−)/ZnP8+ to substitute for semitransparent indium tin oxide (ITO) in photovoltaic cells. Reviews have also depicted CNT-based heterostructures as components of semiconducting-based solar cells, including both CNT–silicon heterojunction solar cell architectures, demonstrating power conversion efficiencies of up to ∼14%, as well as CNT–metal oxide hybrid materials, in which a near doubling of the photoconversion efficiency was achieved, when CNTs were used as the support medium for the subsequent deposition of TiO2 nanoparticles. In this current review, instead of focusing exclusively on either organic or inorganic solar cells, we embark on a more holistic and broader approach in describing families of CNT-based heterostructures, including composite materials composed of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) bound with chemical moieties including but not limited to quantum dots, metal oxide nanostructures, and conjugated polymers. In this particular review, we have placed a special emphasis on ‘chemistry’, i.e. synthesis, and on how rational chemical manipulation can fundamentally impact upon and control the resulting light energy conversion efficiency observed in these systems. That is, how structure correlates with and dictates the function in these nanoscale solar heterostructures is the focus of our interest herein. Nevertheless, before exploring these nanoscale systems in detail and understanding their comparative importance, it is worth providing a suitable context and an underlying rationale to our discussion by reviewing the evolution and state of conventional, existing solar cell configurations.

As one of the most important scientific and technological challenges of this current century, the efficient and cost-effective direct conversion of solar photons into solar electricity has drawn forth an enormous amount of research interest. By taking advantage of the photovoltaic effect in the context of assembling various architectures of functional materials, one can potentially develop novel solar cell configurations. Over the years, relevant meaningful research in this area has focused on creating useful and novel architectural paradigms including but not limited to solid state solar cells, dye-sensitized solar cells, and organic solar cells.


As the earliest solar cell ever commercialized, bulk crystalline silicon (c-Si)-based solar cells display a relatively high efficiency of around 20% in converting solar energy into electricity. Yet its high cost as compared with traditional power sources has hindered it from large-scale implementation. Significant effort has been made to reduce its production expense, while maintaining reasonable efficiency.

One solution has been to use amorphous silicon (a-Si), such as hydrogenated amorphous silicon, namely, a-Si: H. The advantage of using such a material lies in its inexpensive synthesis protocol as well as its higher energy-absorbing capacity as compared with c-Si. Studies in terms of alloying a-Si: H with other elements such as Ge have shown that a wider range of bandgaps from 1.25 eV to 1.72 eV can be achieved, which potentially allows for the absorption of lower energy photons. Moreover, novel methods, such as utilizing nucleated silver particles to enhance broadband absorption, have been proposed in order to realize a more industrially-friendly production approach.
A different attempt to accomplish a reduction in the price of Si-based solar cells has been through the use of Si nanowires (NW). Early studies involved single Si NW radial p–n junction solar cells which utilize vapor–liquid–solid NW growth to produce smooth silicon NWs, which exhibited an efficiency of <3.4%. Additional efforts centered on NW arrays. One of these methods involved aqueous electroless chemical etching of single crystalline Si wafers to bring about the formation of highly parallel Si NWs, with diameters on the order of a few tens of nanometers and up to a few hundred nanometers, possessing measured efficiencies approaching 10%, a value limited to some extent by the Staebler–Wronski effect associated with a-Si itself.
Aside from Si, cadmium telluride (CdTe), copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS), and gallium arsenide (GaAs) have all been used as promising alternative materials in constructing thin-film solid state solar cells, though each has drawbacks. With CdTe, while possessing a favorable bandgap, unsolved difficulties remain with both tellurium supply and cadmium toxicity. With CIGS, the main issue is associated with the synthesis technique itself, namely co-evaporation, which tends to be complicated, costly, and non-uniform in its results. Whereas a GaAs-based multi-junction solar cell has exhibited the highest efficiency on record to date, i.e. at 43.5%, maintaining adequate supplies of gallium as well as dealing with harmful arsenic toxicity both hinder its widespread production and acceptance.

One of the most widely investigated alternatives to inorganic solid-state junction solar cells has been the dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC), which is based on a mixture of nanocrystalline and conducting polymer film constituent components. It is an especially attractive design, as it involves merely a simple fabrication process at reasonably low production cost, and can provide for relatively decent efficiency levels.

DSSCs function on the basis of an injection of electrons from photo-excited dye molecules into the conduction band of n-type semiconducting substrates with the original oxidation state of the dye subsequently restored by electron donation from the electrolyte itself, which usually consists of an organic solvent-containing redox system, such as an iodide/triiodide couple. The dyes in these systems need to fulfill a number of requirements including (a) absorbing light at wavelengths shorter than 920 nm, (b) adhering to the surfaces of semiconductors, (c) possessing appropriate excitation energies so as to minimize energy losses in the electron transfer process, (d) maintaining a high redox potential for regeneration by either an electrolyte or a hole conductor, and (e) evincing long-term chemical stability. In this regard, N3 and also many other ruthenium-based dyes have been thoroughly investigated in the past few decades with conversion efficiencies of ∼10% or so. The use of these dyes has tended to mitigate for severe temperature-dependent efficiency decreases, which has been an issue with conventional solid-state solar cells.
In recent years, the size-dependent properties of QDs have rendered them as promising replacements for conventional dyes as light sensitizers in DSSCs. In fact, quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) represent a highly exciting third-generation solar cell architecture. Specifically, the unusual morphology-dependent optoelectronic properties of QDs provide an unconventional means of potentially exceeding the traditional Shockley–Queisser limit of 32% for Si-based solar cells, because by contrast with dyes, multiple charge carriers can be potentially generated by QDs upon absorption of one photon. Moreover, in early studies, it was shown that charge separation can be enhanced by coupling two different types of semiconductors as long as their bandgaps satisfy certain criteria. Hence, the essence of using QDs instead of traditional dyes lies in the mechanism, wherein electrons can be injected from semiconductors, such as CdSe, directly into wider bandgap materials, such as TiO2, thereby resulting in charge rectification. Finding a means of efficiently capturing these photo-induced electrons at the interface has been a particular challenge.
One solution has been through the use of fullerenes and/or CNTs as either electron acceptors or charge transporters. In terms of efficiency, 5.2% can be achieved with a planar PbS quantum dot/C60 device, whereas 1.46% has been measured for CdSe structures deposited onto ZnO nanorod-coated vertically aligned CNTs. So far, the efficiencies of QDSSCs are rather low. Nonetheless, there is precedence for using CNTs to minimize charge recombination in QDSSCs.

Due to the rapid development of interest in semiconducting polymers, organic solar cells have been studied much more thoroughly in recent years. Specifically, the sp2-hybridization of carbon atoms and more accurately, the high electronic polarizability, caused by delocalized pi-electrons, are responsible for semiconducting organic materials possessing photovoltaic behavior in the UV-visible spectral range. Despite the fact that most organic semiconductors display higher bandgaps than the photons in the solar spectrum (normally around 2 eV), their chemical flexibility as well as their low cost have been driving the design and optimization of associated solar cells.

Early studies of organic solar cells mainly focused on the bilayer donor–acceptor type with Frenkel excitons as the source of charge separation. The two opposite types of charge carriers moved towards their respective contact electrodes where they could be extracted. Hence, the concept of the bulk heterojunction was introduced, which basically was associated with the idea that the donor–acceptor interface should possess as large of an area as possible yet still maintain unrestricted conduction pathways of charge carriers to their respective electrodes. Several types of structures incorporating nanoscale fullerenes exhibited power conversion efficiencies of up to 3.1% with an optimized BTT-DPP/PC70BM composition ratio, and of up to 3.62% with the presence of molecular doping of F4-TCNQ in PCPDTBT:PCBM solar cells. The use of QDs has increased carrier mobilities so as to improve conversion efficiencies with observed enhancements of more than 3.5%.
It is uncertain as to what extent the low efficiencies of organic solar cells are extrinsic by design. It has been previously argued that solar cells where excitons are excited (as compared with continuum particle–hole excitations in inorganic cells) possess maximal efficiencies below the Shockley–Queisser limit. Reduced efficiencies in part arise because the exciton, once excited, needs to dissociate in order to produce a usable photocurrent. This dissociation process requires heat/entropy (i.e. in the form of an absorption of an appropriate phonon). A requirement for heat production then implies less available free energy for the production of useful work. As pointed out by Giebink et al., the need to generate heat/entropy in the course of operating the solar cell can place additional and practical fundamental limits, based on the second law of thermodynamics, upon the efficiency of the cell. This issue can be particularly acute in solar cells with large excitonic binding energies. It is likely that only a small fraction of the heat produced in the course of a photovoltaic operation can be used for the dissociation of excitons. In effect, if the binding energy of the exciton is large (>1 eV), the maximal efficiency of such a cell then can experience significant reductions.
To counter this tendency, organic solar cells employ, as discussed above, a heterojunction architecture. In such a cell, excitons initially form away from the junction. After diffusing to the region of the junction, excitons can undergo charge separation to form a bound polaron pair, which is possible because of the available free energy at the junction. The resulting bound polaron pair possesses a considerably smaller binding energy as compared with the exciton and is therefore much easier (i.e. requires less heat) to dissociate.
While solar cells where exciton generation takes place in optically engineered quantum dots offer a means to exceed the Shockley–Queisser limit through multiple exciton generation, it is unclear at this point what limitations the associated required entropy production will exert upon the operation of the cells. In theory, multiple exciton generation in QDs should allow for the effective conversion of a photon into more than one electron–hole pair, thereby allowing for more efficient use of solar energy and a potential for quantum efficiencies greater than 100%. The multiple exciton generation process has been explained as a consequence of the low dimensional nature of the quantum dot via modification of selection rules and also by the confinement of excitations in a small volume. Nonetheless, multiple excitons require additional heat to dissociate, thereby potentially limiting in part the useful work capable of being extracted via a photocurrent. Such considerations will at least render the practical engineering of quantum dot-based solar cells to be a far more demanding problem.

As far as massive scale applications are concerned, the input expenses of manufacturing solar cells, including the supply and processability of material as well as the energy used for their fabrication, have to be comparable with the prevailing retail price of conventional electricity in order for these cells to be commercially competitive and relevant. Given conventional techniques for constructing bulk Si-layer solar cells, it is likely that there is an inherent limit of $1/Wp (i.e. Watt-peak, a measure of the nominal power of a photovoltaic solar energy device under laboratory illumination conditions) at the modular level. On the other hand, with low-cost substrates and thin layers of semiconductors, thin-film solar cells appear to possess a better chance of further lowering the overall cost. Indeed, production costs below $1/Wp were achieved with CdTe-based thin-film solar cells at the end of 2008. Nevertheless, as mentioned previously, the scarce natural abundance of Te still prevents large-scale commercialization of that material, thereby necessitating a constant search for either developing alternative semiconducting materials or constructing novel architectures of photovoltaic devices.

In this regard, pyrite (Fe2S) and chalcopyrite (CuFeS2) have proven to be promising candidates as light absorbers in solar cells both in terms of their energy gap (i.e. 0.93 eV for CuFeS2 and 0.95 eV for Fe2S, respectively) as well as their availability in terms of being produced from relatively abundant and non-toxic materials. Furthermore, a great number of semiconductors, including Cu2S, CuO, and PbS, exhibit large sunlight absorption coefficients, yet preserve reasonable extraction costs. Unfortunately, such materials also tend to possess low diffusion lengths (Ldiff) for photo-generated charge carriers, so that significantly decreased thicknesses of local absorber layers along with optimized defect passivation techniques are often required to minimize recombination losses and maximize the long-term stability of these systems. In theory, the effective thickness of the layer (deff) can be tailored to match up with the optical absorption length (α−1) of sunlight, thereby rendering practical usage of a larger fraction of the solar energy spectrum. The idea of constructing solar cells with ultra-thin nanocomposite absorbers, such as dyes, was thus a logical consequence of this strategy. A schematic of such a structure is shown in Fig. 1.
Variations on this structural theme have included (a) the use of ordered arrays of Si NWs, wherein an increase in the path length of incident solar radiation could reach up to a factor of 73, thereby exceeding the theoretical light-trapping limit for randomized scattering; (b) a tailored Si nanohole solar cell consisting of 3-D radial p–n junctions with a superb power conversion efficiency of 9.51%; and (c) deposition of CdSe/ZnS nanoparticles onto a Si porous layer, providing for an efficiency enhancement of approximately two-fold under white light illumination.
Another advantage of using nanocomposites involves their potentially seamless incorporation into existing manufacturing processes. For instance, suspensions of absorbing nanoparticles can be printed onto substrates. On one hand, the debate of whether pyrite can be applied as a genuine “solar paint” is still unsettled and, unfortunately, according to recent research, it appears that due to the presence of highly conductive surface-related defects, the possibility of routinely creating pyrite-nanocrystal-based photovoltaics (PVs) is quite slim. On the other hand, a facile synthesis method has been demonstrated to prepare simple solar cells based upon a solution of chalcopyrite CuInSe2 nanocrystals, which could achieve an efficiency value of 3.2% after appropriate optimization. By overcoming relatively high costs and complicated fabrication issues, this nanocrystal-based ink procedure could potentially lead to the development of copper indium diselenide (CIS)-based solar cells, with high efficiencies.
Moreover, CNTs continue to be utilized for the optimization of solar cell systems. Specifically, the high conductivity along the tube axis of CNTs allows for these materials to spatially direct the flow of photogenerated electrons and to assist in both charge injection and extraction. As an example, heterojunctions have been constructed, based on single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) and n-Si, in which the SWNTs behaved as an active photosensing material, involving not only charge separation, transport, and collection but also light absorption.

In organic photovoltaic devices (OPVs), summarized in Fig. 2, the thickness of the light absorber layers can be reduced to either submicron or nanometer levels. Differentiable on the basis of their architectures, there are four types of OPVs: single layer, bilayer, heterojunction, and graded heterojunction (or diffuse bilayer heterojunction). Typically, a single-layer OPV, i.e. the simplest OPV, consists of three parts: organic electronic materials in the middle, a layer of indium tin oxide (ITO) with a high work function, and a layer of metal with a low work function. Bilayer organic solar cells differ from single layer ones in that the middle organic layer splits into two sublayers which contain materials possessing radically different electron affinities, such that the electrostatic forces between them induce the formation of photo-generated excitons, while preventing their recombination.

These two types of organic solar cells possess limitations though. First, in the single-layer module, the carrier mobility of semiconducting organics is 6 orders of magnitude smaller than in single crystalline Si, which lengthens the time required for the photo-generated electrons to be collected by the electrodes, thereby increasing the chances of charge recombination in the device. Second, for both of these two modules, the nature of the interfaces, whether the one between the semiconducting organics and the cathode in the single-layer device or the one between the acceptor and donor in the bilayer device, is not necessarily optimal for properly dissociating excitons, which, however, is a critical necessity for generating free electrons and holes as efficient charge carriers.
Bulk heterojunction (BHJ) cell devices are similar to bilayer devices with respect to the donor–acceptor concept of the two sublayers, but exhibit a largely increased interfacial area where charge separation can be expected to occur. The efficiency of exciton separation of BHJ configurations is significant, as compared with either single or double-layer OPVs, because all excitons can be theoretically dissociated. Moreover, while charges are separated within the different layers, recombination is reduced to a large extent and the resulting photocurrent trend often follows the light intensity either linearly or slightly sub-linearly. We should note that Hiramoto et al. first fabricated a three-layered organic solar cell with a photoactive interlayer composed of codeposited pigments of an n-type perylene tetracarboxylic derivative (Me-PTC) with p-type metal-free phthalocyanine (H2Pc) sandwiched in between the respective pigment layers by using a co-sublimation method; this architecture yielded a power conversion efficiency of 0.7% and a two times larger photocurrent than its corresponding double-layered counterpart under identical illuminating conditions. This device became the precursor of the current BHJ system. As a matter of fact, several other research groups have been studying “interpenetrating polymer networks”, which basically are identical to the bulk heterojunction structures, described in the early 1990s.
Specifically, the first experimentally demonstrated photovoltaic device that was regarded as incorporating a promising “bulk donor–acceptor heterojunction material” was tested in 1995. It was composed of poly[2-methoxy-5-(2′-ethyl-hexyloxy)-l,4-phenylene vinylene], i.e. MEH-PPV, as the donor and cyano-PPV, i.e. CN-PPV, as the acceptor. Diodes constructed with such composites yielded a favorable photovoltaic conversion potential with a carrier collection efficiency of ∼5% and an energy conversion efficiency of ∼0.9%, which is ∼15–25 times larger than in diodes constructed with pure MEH-PPV and ∼100 times larger than in diodes fabricated with CN-PPV, thereby proving that photosensitivity was indeed significantly enhanced.
Recently, it has been shown that composites of π-conjugated polymers and C60 possess a lot of promise for applications in photovoltaic devices, owing to the possibility of efficient electron transfer from the conjugated polymer to C60 under visible light illumination. Moreover, the [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) (first synthesized by Hummelen et al.) was used as an alternative to C60 as the acceptor, since its higher solubility would necessarily benefit from solution-based assembly processes. However, the costs of fullerenes and their derivatives remain high. Under such conditions, the dominant incentive for integrating CNTs into a BHJ is to substitute for more expensive, less conductive, and less air-stable fullerenes and to introduce internal polymer–nanotube junctions within the polymer matrix, so as to combine the physico-chemical properties of conductive polymers with the unique charge transport characteristics of CNTs. As an example, Kymakis et al. have demonstrated that a high open circuit voltage of ∼0.75 V can be observed for a solar energy device, containing a blend of SWNTs and soluble polythiophenes (P3OT). The TEM image of such a device is shown in Fig. 3. In addition, Fig. 4 highlights the schematic of a representative bulk heterojunction solar cell, based on CNTs.

Other groups have optimized the architecture of solar energy systems by adjusting for the thickness of each layer and/or adding in other functional layers. For example, CNT–polymer blends have been spin-coated onto a transparent conductive electrode made of glass, covered with indium tin oxide (ITO) with thicknesses varying from 60 to 120 nm. In addition, a sublayer of polymers, such as poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) and poly(styrenesulfonate) (PSS), was added to help smooth over the ITO surface, thereby decreasing the density of pinholes and stifling current leakage that occurs along shunting paths. Finally, through either thermal evaporation or sputter coating, a 20 to 70 nm thick layer of Al and sometimes an intermediate exciton-blocking layer (e.g. bathocuproine) have been applied onto the photoactive material.
Regarding the ratio of nanotubes to polymers, a CNT concentration of ∼3 wt% was found to be optimal for constructing solar devices consisting of a P3HT/s-SWNT active layer that possessed a nano-filament morphology, thereby inducing a high degree of order in the P3HT phase and preventing SWNT aggregation. In addition, as conventional BHJs tend to exhibit a lack of percolative charge pathways, CNTs have also been used in photoactive films as pipelines in order to support carrier migration at the electrodes, thereby improving charge extraction. For example, CNTs have been functionalized with C60 (ref. 107) and C70 (ref. 108) fullerenes and/or incorporated into P3HT:PCBM devices (Fig. 5) so as to mitigate for shortcomings, such as but not limited to the low carrier mobility of fullerenes and the Coulombic recombination of electron–hole pairs after exciton dissociation. Specifically, with modified CNTs in the active layer, the measured device performances along with corresponding lifetimes were significantly improved for P3HT:PCBM solar cells.
In recent years, a concept of a carbon-only active layer was proposed. In this regard, a solar device, composed of only a blend of reduced graphene oxide (rGO), PC70BM, and s-SWNTs with a diameter of 1.2–1.7 nm range and collectively functioning as an active layer, was found to exhibit a power conversion efficiency of 1.3%. Moreover, Rahman et al. obtained among the best EQE (9.9%) values measured for a device, essentially constructed of poly[(vinylbenzyl)-trimethylammonium chloride] (PVBTAn+) wrapped SWNTs and Zn-based porphyrins.
Another recent, posited structural design consists of the so-called graded heterojunction or diffuse bilayer heterojunction. The architecture associated with this idea aims at combining the small electron distance of the bulk heterojunction (which can inherently decrease interference with the solar cell material) with the charge gradient of bilayer technology (which is responsible for decreasing the backflow of electrons). Dissanayake and Zhong have shown that their experimental model system of such a concept yields surprisingly good external quantum efficiencies, exceeding 90%. First, aligned arrays of SWNTs (either metallic (m) and/or semiconducting (s) ones) are deposited onto a quartz substrate horizontally and directly contacted at the extremes by metal electrodes (e.g. Al or Pd). Then P3HT is deposited onto the nanotubes and top-contacted by an ITO layer, as detailed in Fig. 6. Significantly, the group demonstrated that both m- and s-SWNTs can act as efficient donor components, thereby leading to an overall fast carrier extraction process.
When creating CNT-polymer blends, the use of chemical functionalization, tube individualization, length-shortening, and CNT concentration optimization are often necessary processing manipulation steps. During such protocols, especially with an acid treatment, tubes are made hydrophilic and, as such, are rendered incompatible for blending with photoactive polymers. As a byproduct, such a treatment also creates many defects on the CNT sidewalls, thereby degrading their favorable optoelectronic properties. Hence, a monolayer of CNTs sandwiched in between other layers represents an alternative and feasible method of incorporating such materials into these devices. In prior work, SWNT spider-web networks at various locations in the P3HT/PCBM BHJ PV devices were studied along with their optoelectronic ramifications, including device performance and steady-state/dynamic photophysical behavior. It was demonstrated that SWNTs on the hole-collection side of the active layer gave rise to an increase in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the photovoltaic devices, ranging from 4 to 4.9%, as indicated in Fig. 7.

Similarly, solid, reliable improvements in the short-circuit current density, fill factor, and power conversion efficiency from 8.82 to 9.03 mA cm−2, 0.43 to 0.474, and 2.12% to 2.39% (i.e., by about 13%), respectively, were observed for a system in which MWNTs were added into a hole-extraction layer of PEDOT:PSS (Fig. 8). As was proposed, the high electrical conductivity properties of the composite films (that contained CNTs) might contribute to facilitate the hole-extraction and hole-transport abilities of PEDOT:PSS, thereby leading to a reduction in the series resistance of the devices.

As we have seen in our prior discussion of DSSCs (Fig. 9), ∼10% solar conversion efficiency can be realized using nanostructured TiO2 films (including TiO2 nanoparticles) as well as other morphologies including rod-like TiO2 film electrodes, mesoporous TiO2, and TiO2 nanotube arrays. Nonetheless, the effort to reproducibly achieve game-changing order-of-magnitude improvements in their performance has thus far been frustrating. Specifically, the transport of electrons across the particle network has been a key impediment towards attaining higher photoconversion efficiencies in nanostructured electrodes, as the probability of electron recombination with the oxidized sensitizer is increased due to (i) the random pathways that these electrons experience and (ii) the huge number of grain boundaries that these electrons encounter during the transit process.

To deal with this problem, a popular concept has been to utilize CNT networks as supports in order to anchor light-harvesting semiconducting particles, thereby providing for a convenient means of capturing photogenerated charges and transporting them back to the electrode surface. As previously discussed, early studies have focused on using and chemically attaching either CdS and CdSe QDs or ZnO nanoparticles directly onto SWNT templates (e.g. Fig. 10) in order to optimize the practical efficiency of generating photocurrent in these systems under visible light illumination.
Transient absorption experiments have confirmed the quick deactivation of excited CdS on the SWNT surface, as the transient bleaching activity recovers in about 200 ps. The ability of the CdS–SWNT nanocomposite system to undergo photoinduced charge separation was verified by examining the incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) of the OTE/SWNT/CdS electrode, employed in a photoelectrochemical cell, containing acetonitrile solution with 0.1% triethanolamine as a sacrificial electron donor. In fact, the anodic current observed with SWNT/CdS films (Fig. 11) established the direction of the electron flow as occurring from CdS to the collecting electrode, in a process mediated by the SWNT network.
Normally, such QD–CNT composites have employed oxidized, oxygenated CNTs, generated by the treatment of CNTs with strong acids, so as to form carboxylic acid functionalities (as well as keto, aldehyde, and alcoholic groups) on the nanotube surface. As discussed in the earlier OPV section, such a chemical treatment necessarily also increases the possibility of localized defects, thereby disrupting the π-bonding symmetry of the sp2-hybridized orbitals and potentially resulting in undesirable alterations in conductivity as well as other electrical and mechanical properties.
To mitigate this issue, Olek et al. reported a polymer wrapping technique that has been used to covalently attach QDs onto the surfaces of MWNTs without introducing defects; this mild functionalization method is a promising means of preserving the high conductivity of CNTs in the subsequent QDSSCs. Moreover, a hybrid architecture in which polymer, CNTs, and QDs are collectively utilized in one discrete functional configuration has drawn significant attention, recently. Specifically, a P3HT:PbS QD–MWNT nanohybrid-based solar cell has been reported to efficiently harvest the “often-lost” but important near-IR photons from the solar spectrum. It has been proposed that this effect can be attributed to the involvement of NIR harvesters of PbS QDs as well as to the enhanced separation and transport of photo-excited charge carriers along the MWNT and polymer networks towards the electrodes themselves.
In addition to these systems, MWNTs coated with TiO2 nanoparticles (which represented a promising functionalization protocol of MWNTs in terms of engendering favorable optoelectronic performance in the resulting heterostructures, considering the hydrophobic surface and poor dispersive stability of pristine MWNTs alone) have also been tried as potentially viable electrodes. In effect, the enhanced interconnectivity between these TiO2 particles and the MWNTs in the porous TiO2 film was assumed to be the underlying reason for the observed improvement in the short circuit current density. Furthermore, the addition of the TiO2-CNT heterostructures to the standard TiO2 film provided for a more efficient electron transfer through the film in the resulting DSSCs.

With this background of promising architectural possibilities, not surprisingly, the synthesis of carbon nanotube-based heterostructures has attracted tremendous interest in recent years. We have summarized a number of detailed and complementary synthesis strategies in a previously published review article. To recapitulate, there are usually two approaches for generating CNT-based heterostructures: (i) one strategy is to take pre-formed nanomaterials, such as QDs, and to subsequently attach these structures onto the functionalized CNTs via either chemical linkers or non-covalent interactions; and (ii) the other protocol is to utilize either in situ growth, direct reduction, or electrodeposition processes to directly attach nanoparticles onto the surfaces of CNTs. In this part of the review, we mainly focus on a discussion of the expected improvements in optical and electrical properties in the generation of solar cells, constructed from different CNT-based heterostructures.

Various mechanisms for improving photochemical cells' efficiency have been attempted over the years. As discussed, one well known system included the use of QDSSCs. In effect, QDs with semiconducting properties possess a narrow, finite band gap between the conduction band and the valence band. Hence, combining the unique optoelectronic properties of CNTs with QDs represents significant positive potential for generating high-performing electronic devices.

A solution-processed MWNT–PbS heterostructure can be synthesized by simply mixing pre-formed PbS QDs and oleylamine (OLA) pre-functionalized MWCNTs. The coverage of QDs onto the surfaces of MWCNTs can be readily tuned by adjusting the ratio of PbS QDs to MWNTs, as shown in Fig. 12. Furthermore, this group also combined their nanocomposite with a conducting polymer, namely poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), so as to create a P3HT-QD–MWNT nanohybrid. Fig. 13 denotes a schematic graph of how such a device might function. PbS possesses a narrow intrinsic band gap (i.e. 0.41 eV for bulk PbS) and a large excitonic Bohr radius (≈18 nm for PbS), such that it can serve as a light harvesting system for absorbing radiation over a wide wavelength range of the entire solar spectrum, i.e. up to the near infrared (NIR ≈1430 nm) domain. MWNT and P3HT have been used as acceptors of photoexcited electrons and holes to the cathode and anode, respectively. Overall, this device exhibits a largely enhanced conversion efficiency of 3.03% as compared with 2.57% for the standard bulk heterojunction photovoltaic (PV) cell constructed from P3HT and [6,6]-Phenyl-C61-Butyric Acid Methyl Ester (PCBM) mixtures.

The Weaver group reported on a MWNT–CdSe heterostructure, mediated using a thiol derivative perylene compound (ETPTCDI), as a linker. In fact, the concentration of QDs on CNTs could be increased >20 times after ETPTCDI functionalization of the CNTs. The incorporation of ETPTCDI presumably significantly increased the adhesion between the QDs and the CNTs as a result of bonding between the QDs and the thiol groups on ETPTCDI; enhanced π–π interactions between ETPTCDI and the CNTs also helped to stabilize this construct. In any event, both CdSe QDs and ETPTCDI could serve as donors of charges to CNTs, which would increase the overall photoharvesting efficiency.
By studying PL quenching, it was noted that both QDs and ETPTCDI could act as charge donors for the CNT acceptors. In effect, the light-harvesting photoconductive capabilities of the nanocomposite were analyzed using a setup, shown in Fig. 14A, in order to probe the photocurrent generated by the heterostructure. To summarize, the QD–ETPTCDI–MWNT nanocomposite was deposited between two gold electrodes and irradiated using solar-simulated light. It was noted that the current increased ∼10-fold as compared with the dark state (light is “off”). The adsorption of both ETPTCDI and QDs on CNTs made a difference with respect to the magnitude of the photocurrent (Fig. 14B). Specifically, the addition of ETPTCDI to CNTs was significant and the photocurrent more than doubled upon the subsequent introduction of QDs to the ETPTCDI-CNTs in the identical device. Similarly, the photocurrent for QD-CNTs was inherently much smaller, but increased ∼3 times upon the insertion of ETPTCDI to the device (Fig. 14C). It was noted that the photocurrent response of the nanocomposite consisting of QDs added to ETPTCDI–CNTs was significantly larger than what had been observed with the nanocomposite initially constructed from QD–CNT heterostructures with the later addition of ETPTCDI (Fig. 14C and D). All of these results suggested that ETPTCDI and QDs act cooperatively and synergistically to create the observed enhancement of the photoconductivity response of the QD–ETPTCDI–CNT nanocomposite.
Fig. 15A and B depict a possible schematic representation of the proposed flow of electrons and holes as well as an accompanying energy diagram underlying device performance. Specifically, a fraction of CNTs transports electrons from either QDs, ETPTCDI, or both to one of the electrodes. Another fraction of CNTs transports holes to the other electrode, thereby resulting in measurable current.
In analogous experiments, the Schulz-Drost group reported on the formation of SWNT–CdTe heterostructures using pyrene derivatives as linkers through the covalent attachment of pyrene to CdTe QDs followed by binding onto SWNT surfaces through π–π stacking interactions between pyrene and the SWNT in order to yield QD–pyrene/SWNT nanoscale heterostructures, as shown in Fig. 16 (top). The complementary use of both luminescence and transient absorption measurements has shed light on the formation of so-called “hot” excited states, vibrational relaxation (i.e. 0.6 ps), the formation of strongly correlated excitonic electron–hole pairs (i.e. 150 fs), the presence of trapping (i.e. 9.3 and 53.3 ps), and radiative recombination of excitonic electron–hole pairs (i.e. 35 ns). Fig. 16 (bottom) summarizes all of these processes mentioned above. It is worth stating that in the QD–pyrene/SWNT nanohybrid, a competitive, alternative pathway of charge transfer (i.e. 62 ps) can transform the excitonic state of QD into a charge-transfer state with a lifetime of several nanoseconds, which suggested a high possibility of utilizing this nanohybrid as an integral component of photovoltaic cells. Indeed, after spraying SWNT thin films and QD–pyrene monolayers onto ITO glass as a photoelectrode, the group collected I–V properties under AM 1.5 conditions, and measured a short circuit current of 0.22 mA, an open circuit voltage of −0.1 V, a fill factor of 20.4%, and an efficiency of 0.0044%.
Instead of using only one core QD, several groups have expended great effort with respect to attaching core–shell QDs directly onto CNTs. For instance, Chandan Biswas et al. selectively attached negatively charged CdSe/ZnS QDs onto the positively charged CNT template using Coulombic interactions. This approach represents a simple and straightforward method to immobilize the QDs directly onto individual SWNTs.

Why the emphasis on core–shell morphologies? The shell increases the quantum yield by passivating the surface trap states. In addition, the shell provides for protection against environmental changes and photo-oxidative degradation, and yields another route for multifunctionality through controlled modularity. Specifically, core–shell semiconducting nanocrystal properties are based on the relative conduction and valence band edge alignment of both the core and the shell. In type I semiconductor heterostructures, the electrons and holes tend to localize within the core. In type II heterostructures, one carrier is confined within the shell, while the other is spatially restricted to the core. In a type I system, the core bandgap is smaller than that of the shell. Both the conduction and valence band edges of the core lie within the bandgap of the shell, which confines both electrons and holes in the core, such as with CdSe–CdS and CdSe–ZnS. In the type II configuration, the core valence and conduction band edge are both either lower or higher than the corresponding band edges of the shell. An example of a type II system is ZnTe (e.g. bandgap of 2.26 eV)/CdSe (e.g. bandgap of 1.74 eV). The lowest energy separation of the electron and the hole will occur when the hole is confined to the ZnTe core valence band and the electron is limited to the CdSe shell conduction band. Interestingly, the Li Group fabricated a photovoltaic cell by utilizing core–shell CdSe–ZnSe QD–MWNT heterostructures, as shown in Fig. 17.
PL results depicted in Fig. 18 indicated that such conjugation of CdSe–ZnSe QDs to MWNTs led to a red PL emission (resulting from interband emission from the CdSe core nanocrystals) quenching ratio of about 84%. By contrast, the PL quenching ratio for the blue emission (resulting from the band-edge emission emanating from the ZnSe shell) intensity reached 94% after the conjugation process. In effect, the PL quenching behavior could be attributed to efficient nonradiative charge transfer from the CdSe–ZnSe QDs to the MWNTs through direct chemical connection. Since the QDs are closely attached onto the surfaces of MWNTs in the QD–MWNT conjugated nanocomposites, through distances smaller than 100 Å, a Förster resonance energy-transfer (FRET) process likely accounted for the observed charge transfer from the QDs to the MWNTs.
By forming Al/(CdSe–ZnSe) QD–MWNT hybrid conjugate/PEDOT:PSS/ITO photovoltaic cells, I–V characteristics were measured in the dark under illumination using an ultraviolet (UV) lamp with a power of 6 W at a wavelength of 365 nm. The open-circuit voltage attained 0.7 V with a short-circuit current density of 46 μA cm−2 and a 0.41 fill factor. When the incident optical power density of the UV lamp was 3.9 mW cm−2, the power conversion efficiency was estimated to be 0.34%. The low efficiency observed could be ascribed to the very large energy barrier between CdSe–ZnSe QDs and PEDOT:PSS. By optimizing this structure (i.e. introducing a hole-transporting polymer to reduce the energy barrier), the performance of the PV cell could likely be enhanced.
In terms of a qualitative picture for the charge transfer mechanism for the hybrid nanocomposites, the authors proposed that the two competing processes existed in parallel: i.e. charge transfer from the ZnSe shell to the MWNT (process 1) and charge transfer from the ZnSe shell to the CdSe core crystal (process 2). Illumination with UV light resulted in the formation of excitons in the ZnSe shells. Most excitons (70%) relaxed through a nonradiative FRET process from the ZnSe shell to the MWNTs, due to the inherently high conductivity of the MWNTs along their lengths. The enhanced charge separation likely led to the observed presence of a photocurrent in an outer circuit.
As another example, Yuan et al. utilized single-molecule spectroscopy (SMS) combined with time-correlated single-photon counting to compare the electron transfer (ET) rates amongst type-II ZnSe–CdS dot-in-rod nanostructures, type-I spherical CdSe–ZnS core–shell quantum dots, and CdSe–CdS dot-in-rod structures, respectively. Their time-resolved fluorescence measurements on single nanocrystals of various types indicated that electron transfer to nearby CNTs is most effective for dot-in-rod heterostructures with a type II band alignment. Indeed, the electron transfer dynamics of ZnSe–CdS QD/nanorod nanostructures prevailed over both Auger and radiative recombination processes, thereby rendering these materials as promising candidates for photovoltaic applications.
Instead of utilizing CdSe QDs, Zhang et al. reported on a novel hybrid system consisting of a vertical array of CdSe NWs uniformly wound around a core Ti wire and covered with a carbon nanotube (CNT) film as the porous transparent electrode. These CdSe–CNT fiber solar cells exhibited power conversion efficiencies of 1–2% under AM 1.5 illumination, after the nanowires were infiltrated with redox electrolyte. Such hybrid CdSe NW–CNT photoelectrochemical fiber solar cells demonstrated excellent structural flexibility and stable performance upon rotation and mechanical bending to large angles.

To fabricate these devices, CdSe NW arrays were initially grown by a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process onto an underlying Ti wire framework; a piece of purified CNT film was then uniformly wrapped onto the CdSe. A droplet of ethanol ensured uniform coverage of the CNTs and proper contact with the CdSe NW arrays. Polysulfide electrolyte was subsequently infiltrated into the pores of the CNT film, and in effect, CdSe NW arrays were used as the redox mediator in order to create the resulting photoelectrochemical solar cell. We should note that one end of the Ti wire was exposed as the primary electrode by removing as-prepared CdSe NWs covering its surface, as shown in Fig. 19.
The charge mechanism accounting for the cell performance was described as follows. Specifically, electrons excited in the CdSe NWs during light absorption were extracted by the core Ti wire, and subsequently, as-generated holes were carried by the electrolyte to the CNT film through redox reactions (e.g. S2− to S22− ions). The group measured the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of these Ti–CdSe–CNT fiber solar cells under AM 1.5 illumination at an intensity of 70 mW cm−2. Upon infiltration of the liquid electrolyte, the open-circuit voltage (Voc) achieved a value of 0.48 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 12.7 mA cm−2, and a cell efficiency (η) of 1.42%. This efficiency was comparable to that previously reported for planar CdSe nanoparticle-based photoelectrochemical solar cells (2.6%) but higher than that of CdSe nanorod array-based solar cells (0.52%).
By analogy with CdSe NWs, nanobelt-like CdSe structures could also be utilized as components of solar cells. For instance, Shi et al. have reported on a novel solar cell configuration, incorporating either individual single-walled or double-walled CNTs as well as CdSe nanobelts arranged in simple cross-junction configurations with power conversion efficiencies of up to 1.87% (under standard illumination consisting of AM 1.5 conditions at 75–100 mW cm−2); stable performance in air was demonstrated over long periods. Both semiconducting and metallic CNT–CdSe nanobelt heterostructures yielded similar open-circuit voltages but different short-circuit current densities. Hence, by integrating multiple CNTs in parallel with a single nanobelt in order to construct an array of cross-junction solar cells with scaled current output, these authors proved the possibility and potential of not only parallel device connections but also large-scale production.
In terms of synthesis, both mm-long CdSe nanobelts and cm-long horizontal CNTs (with either single, double, or triple walls) were fabricated by CVD. These as-grown individual CNTs were patterned onto the Si substrate (with 300 nm oxide) in a straight line, after which long CdSe nanobelts measuring 100 nm in thickness were transferred directly onto the CNT layer in a perpendicular direction so as to create junctions, shown in Fig. 20a. The heterojunction area was actually significantly larger than the point contacts associated with either randomized CNT–CNT or nanowire–nanowire junctions. The increased junction area also promoted an enhanced charge separation with CdSe as the light absorption material and the CNT as the hole acceptor. By adding in more CNTs onto the substrate, essentially more parallel cross-junction areas could be generated simultaneously, as shown in Fig. 20b.

Because rapid photoinduced electron transport in DSSC electrodes is necessary to ensure the efficient separation of charge carriers in order to compete with charge recombination processes, light-harvesting metal oxide semiconductors, such as TiO2, have often been used in solar cells. Nonetheless, as the photogenerated electrons are injected onto the TiO2 particles, they may encounter many grain boundaries, which will inevitably increase the likelihood of recombination either with oxidizing species or with tri-iodide ions in the electrolyte, a process which will inhibit the photoconversion efficiency. To mitigate this issue, CNTs can be introduced into the system with the potential for dramatically enhancing the electronic conductivity of the electrode and, therefore, the photoconversion efficiency. Specifically, previous research has suggested that using CNTs in DSSCs should facilitate a beneficial decrease in both overall crystalline grain and particle size, which in turn will not only increase the overall surface area but also provide for more well-defined contact points amongst the particles, CNTs, and the underlying substrate.

Yen et al. developed a modified acid-catalyzed sol–gel procedure for synthesizing CNT–TiO2 heterostructures. XRD results on these materials indicated that only the anatase phase and a small amount of the brookite phase of TiO2 could be identified in the nanocomposite. Introducing MWNTs resulted in a perceptible increase in the loading quantities of dyes and consequently, better solar cell performance. Nevertheless, a higher loading of MWNTs led to competition with TiO2 for light-harvesting, which had the net effect of minimizing the light adsorption of the dye-sensitizer, thereby reducing the overall cell efficiency. In any event, cell performances of DSSCs based on the MWNT–TiO2 nanocomposite electrodes were measured under AM 1.5 simulated sunlight illumination.

When the MWNT content was increased from 0 to 0.5 wt%, the short-circuit photocurrent density (Jsc) initially rose in parallel from 5.97 to 8.82 mA cm−2 (from 0 to 0.3 wt%), but then subsequently decreased to 7.91 mA cm−2 at the higher MWNT content (0.5 wt%). Interestingly, the open-circuit photovoltage (Voc) increased from 0.65 to 0.74 V, and the fill factor (FF) fluctuated around ∼72%. Overall, with an initially increasing MWNT content to 0.3 wt%, the energy conversion efficiency of the cells correspondingly augmented from 2.87 to 4.62% (representing a ∼61% increase), and then decreased to 4.22% at a 0.5 wt% MWNT content. Upon photoelectrical characterization, the authors concluded that the optimum MWNT loading in the electrode was 0.3 wt%.
Taking into account the idea that TiO2 semiconductor electrodes can be photosensitized by absorbed QDs, CNT-based CdS QD/TiO2-sensitized solar cells have been created. Specifically, (i) SWNTs on indium-doped tin oxide (ITO) were formed using a spray-coating method, (ii) the TiO2 film attached onto the SWNT/ITO was prepared using a doctor-blade technique, and (iii) CdS QDs adsorbed onto the TiO2 films were assembled by using a successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction method, which has previously been used for the in situ synthesis of QDs within a mesoporous TiO2 substrate. By forming a sandwich-type cell, composed of CdS–TiO2–SWNT–ITO and Pt-sputtered ITO glass, the photoelectrochemical characteristics of this cell were measured. That is, after irradiation by 100 mW cm−2 white light with air masses (AM) of 0 and 1.5 filters, the power conversion efficiency achieved a value of 1.86% with a short-circuit current density of Jsc = 5.8 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage Voc of 0.6 V, and a fill factor (ff) of 0.55. On the other hand, in the absence of CNTs, the resulting CdS–TiO2–ITO composite electrode exhibited a corresponding efficiency of 1.24% with a Jsc of 3.84 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.6 V, and a fill factor (ff) of 0.54.
The same group also constructed a CNT-based PbS QD/TiO2-sensitized solar cell, essentially using the identical synthesis method for CdS–TiO2–CNTs. Specifically, the SWNTs used were aggregated into bundles with a diameter of about 80–120 nm and a thickness of ∼100–150 nm. The porous TiO2 layers possessed a diameter of 200–300 nm and a thickness of 4 μm. The band gap and size of PbS QDs on TiO2 was ∼0.88 eV and ∼10 nm, respectively. As for the actual measurements, the PbS–TiO2–SWNT–ITO composite evinced a power conversion efficiency of 0.80% with a Jsc of 3.02 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.48 V, and a fill factor (ff) of 0.44. By contrast, the PbS–TiO2–ITO composite in the absence of CNTs only exhibited a corresponding power conversion efficiency of 0.59% with a Jsc of 2.62 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.44 V, and a fill factor (ff) of 0.41. Moreover, by adding in SWNT layers, the electron lifetime was improved, and the photocurrent of PbS–TiO2 on ITO increased by 15.3%, while the corresponding efficiency improved by 35.6%. In the presence of SWNT layers, the PbS/TiO2 photovoltaic cell evinced high photoconversion efficiency as compared with the corresponding one without these nanotubes, presumably due to an improved charge-collecting efficiency and a reduced recombination process for the former.
By analogy, ZnO nanocrystal–CNT heterostructures have also been well studied by a number of different groups. Li et al. reported on the in situ growth of ZnO QDs on the surface of MWNTs via a mild solution-based process. As suggested by photoluminescent measurements, the charge transfer efficiency measured was significantly increased by more than 90% due to the conjugation of ZnO QDs, possessing a hexagonal würtzite crystal structure, onto the MWNTs. Specifically, the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectrum for the ZnO QD reference sample gave rise to a similar pattern but at a much higher intensity than for the ZnO QD–MWNT hybrid sample. Upon calculation, it was concluded that the conjugation of ZnO QDs to the MWNTs had yielded a PL quenching of about 90 ± 5%, as an immediate consequence of charge separation associated with direct electron transfer from ZnO QDs to the MWNTs through the chemical bond. J–V characteristics were tested by forming the analogous Al/ZnO QD–MWNT hybrid conjugate/PEDOT:PSS/ITO device and illuminating it with an ultraviolet lamp operating at a power of 6 W at a wavelength of 365 nm and a power density of 3.9 mW cm−2.
Under such illumination, the ZnO QDs likely produced photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Hence, the direct connection between the ZnO and MWNT likely facilitated the transfer of conduction-band electrons from the ZnO to the MWNTs. This charge separation can happen on an ultrafast time scale, and represents a process which can compete with charge recombination. That is, the highly conductive MWNTs provided for an efficient pathway to transport electrons to the Al electrode. On the other hand, PEDOT:PSS served as a hole acceptor, thereby helping to replenish the ground states of the ZnO QD by delivering the holes back to the ITO electrode. The maximum open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current density, and fill factor were found to be 0.7 V, 54 μA cm−2, and 0.22, respectively. The corresponding power conversion efficiency was estimated to be 0.21%, a relatively small value due in part to the very large energy barrier present between the ZnO QDs and the PEDOT:PSS.
As is well known, 1D semiconductors, such as TiO2 nanotubes and ZnO nanowires, employed as direct electron pathways, can provide for an effective charge transport mechanism, which can be utilized in DSSCs. Moreover, CNTs, due to their large surface area, high electron mobility, and chemical stability, act as conducting scaffolds to capture and transport electrons from either QDs or other 1D metal oxide structures to the electrode surface in DSSCs. In addition, CNTs can be used as a counter electrode in order to reduce the charge transfer resistance along the counter electrode and the electrolyte interface in order to ensure long-term stability in QDSSCs.

Not surprisingly, groups have explored the potential use of CNT films as transparent conductive electrodes for wire-shaped DSSC architectures by wrapping a CNT film around a core Ti wire in the form of ordered TiO2 tube arrays, possessing optimal tube length. As compared with a conventional planar solar cell, this fiber-shaped cell maintained advantages of light weight and device flexibility, and furthermore, can be integrated into textiles of various forms. In effect, the CNT film wrapping around the primary electrode ensured the possibility of maximal surface area for active site coverage, minimized the distance associated with triiodide ion diffusion, and moreover, served as a transparent electrode that could allow for light irradiation from arbitrary directions. This fiber-shaped DSSC consisted of three parts with complementary functions, including an exposed Ti core wire (acting as an anode), a short-distance bare TiO2 tube array area (preventing device short-circuiting), and a CNT-wrapped TiO2 tube array active device region (measuring 1.5 cm in length), wherein the last end of the CNT film was connected as the cathode, as depicted in Fig. 21.
By fixing DSSC wires onto a glass substrate, they were able to measure the J–V characteristics of the resulting cells. Typical data yielded an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.5 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 8.67 mA cm−2, and a power conversion efficiency (η) of 1.65% under standard illumination conditions (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2). To enhance long-distance charge transport, conventional metal electrodes (such as Ag and Cu) were incorporated into their DSSCs. Starting from a single wire placed onto a glass substrate, a metal wire was placed onto the side edge of CNT film in parallel as an additional electrode (Fig. 22). By using Ag and Cu in the device, the cell efficiencies were improved to 2.6% and 2.45%, respectively. Considering the relatively high sheet resistance of the CNT film, parallel connection to a low-resistance metal wire was found to assist in the hole transport process much more efficiently.
In another complementary but more sophisticated example, QDSSC structures were created, based upon ZnO nanorod-coated vertically aligned carbon nanotubes (VACNTs). These VACNT arrays were synthesized using a commercially available PE-CVD system. Subsequently, ZnO nanorods were simultaneously synthesized and deposited onto the surfaces of VACNTs using a hydrothermal method. Pre-synthesized thioglycolic acid capped-CdSe QDs, possessing diameters of ∼4.5 nm, were later loaded onto a ZnO nanorod surface. As shown in Fig. 23, the left image highlights the cross-sectional SEM image of a VACNT array, coated with ZnO nanorods, prior to sensitization with CdSe QDs. It is obvious that the CNTs, which function as the templates for the ZnO nucleation, are normal to the substrate with lengths of up to 5 μm. The right image in Fig. 23 denotes an SEM image of VACNT arrays coated with ZnO nanorods, after sensitization with CdSe QDs. It is evident that the surface of the VACNT/ZnO nanorods noticeably roughens, following QD dispersion and attachment.

Recently, organic (polymer) solar cells have received increasing attention, due to their many practical advantages, such as their inexpensive and relatively facile fabrication techniques, involving either spin coating, dip coating, or roll-to-roll processes. Furthermore, the electronic properties of those polymers could be improved by adding in functional groups, such as dye-sensitizing molecules. The working principle behind polymer-based solar cell consists of three separate but nevertheless key steps, including light absorption, charge carrier generation, and the transport of the opposite charges to the electrodes in order to create the photocurrent. In polymeric materials, efficient charge carrier generation is achieved when the relative energies of the HOMO and LUMO levels allow for an energy offset that is larger than the exciton binding energy. These photo-generated charges must then attain the donor–acceptor interface within their lifetime, and in doing so, traverse a distance to reach the electrode, which is hopefully shorter than their diffusion length (∼10–20 nm). Not surprisingly, as we have suggested throughout this review, CNTs are being seriously considered for photovoltaic applications, since in addition to the high interfacial area between the CNTs and the conjugated polymers, CNTs can invariably improve electrical transport and increase overall efficiency by trapping as-produced photo-generated charges, prior to their recombination.

In this regard, SWNTs have been functionalized with both 2-aminothiophene and carboxylic acid groups to form amide bonds (SWNT–CONHTh), and consequently, have been used as dopants in polymer–fullerene photovoltaic cells. The chemical functionalization strategy was aimed at improving the dispersion of the CNTs in the polythiophene matrix, thereby enhancing the interaction between the polymer and nanotube phases. The resulting power conversion efficiency of such polymer–fullerene cells, derivatized with the SWNT-CONHTh, attained 1.78%, a value superior to both pristine cells without nanotubes (e.g. 1.00%) as well as cells possessing unmodified SWNTs (e.g. 1.41%).

The optoelectronic properties of these ITO/PEDOT:PSS/Blend/Al photo-voltaic cells were subsequently measured upon illumination with a 100 mW cm−2 power intensity of white light using an AM 1.5 filter through the glass/ITO substrate. According to the test results, the optimal concentration of SWNTs was 0.5 wt%. The use of any concentration of SWNTs higher than 1 wt% led to a short circuit. Devices incorporating three blends, containing P3HT:PCBM, P3HT:PCBM-SWNTs, and P3HT:PCBM-SWNT-CONHTh, respectively, were measured. The P3HT–PCBM-based cell possessed a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 3.77 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.55 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 48%. Cells fabricated using P3HT:PCBM:SWCNTs exhibited a Jsc of 4.95 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.55 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 52%. Finally, the cell constructed using P3HT:PCBM:SWCNT-CONHTh maintained a Jsc of 5.6 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.55 V, and an FF of 58%. Hence, the introduction of modified SWNTs noticeably increased the cell performance, likely due to an improved dispersion of the SWNTs and a corresponding increase in the active surface area associated with not only the polymer–nanotube boundary but also the nanotube–fullerene interface.
Patyk et al. also reported on the fabrication of a photovoltaic cell using modified SWNTs. As-produced devices involved stacking, on top of fluorine-doped tin-oxide, the following: (i) an electrochemically-deposited polybithiophene layer, (ii) a layer of SWNTs blended with poly(3-octylthiophene) (POT), and (iii) an evaporated top metal contact, e.g. either Ca/Al or Al. SWNTs were functionalized using both carboxylic acid and 2-(2-thienyl)ethanol groups, thereby resulting in the formation of derivatized SWNT-TIOPH structures, as shown in Fig. 24. The corresponding Ca/Al-top-electrode devices achieved with these chemically modified CNTs were able to attain open-circuit voltages of 1.81 V and average power conversion efficiencies of 1.48% under solar irradiation conditions of 15.5 W m−2 upon AM 1.5 illumination.
Three-dimensional bulk heterojunctions for polymer photovoltaics have been created by using a metallic CNT–polythiophene (PT) core–shell nanowire network coupled with phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl esters (PCBM) infiltrated into the opening of the core–shell nano-networks as electron acceptors. Unlike the case of the bilayer heterojunction configuration, wherein CNTs effectively acted as hole transport paths, transparent electrodes, light absorbers, and electron acceptors, herein the metallic CNTs assumed the following roles: (1) as conductive center electrodes for the electrochemical growth of coaxial CNT–PT core–shell nanowires and (2) as a 3-D interconnected conducting network with which to not only collect holes from dissociated excitons at the PT (donor)–PCBM (acceptor) interface but also transport holes towards the anode.

The material structure, device operation mechanism, and corresponding energy band diagram are shown in Fig. 25. The PT served as the electron donor, as the thickness of the PT polymer was sufficiently close in scale to the exciton diffusion length, such that most of the photo-generated excitons could end up at the PT/PCBM interface and thereby dissociate into free electrons and holes. In effect, the holes only needed to travel across the thin PT shell to arrive at the metallic CNT core.
A representative device was tested under AM 1.5 irradiation conditions of 100 mW cm−2, and yielded a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 8.24 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.71 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 47.1%. These values corresponded to a power conversion efficiency of 2.76%, thereby highlighting a considerable and noticeable improvement over bi-layer heterojunction control devices, constructed primarily of PT polymer grown using identical conditions but on planar gold (5 nm) electrodes.

Arranz-Andrés et al. have studied device performances using different carbon nanotube types in poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) photovoltaic devices. It turns out that there is no obvious correlation with either the number of walls or the diameter of the nanotubes. Moreover, even though most of work has primarily focused on both single-walled and multiwalled nanotubes, double-walled nanotubes have seldom been used in these solar cell configurations. Nevertheless, a critical concentration value of 5 wt% of CNT has been found to achieve the highest open-circuit voltage measured, and hence, the best performance noted for the vast majority of the CNTs studied.

In fact, the highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) of polymer-based solar cells has been accomplished using bulk heterojunction (BHJ) devices, with a published efficiency of over 7% and a record efficiency of over 8%. In complementary experiments, the solar cell performances incorporating both metallic and semiconducting SWNT–P3HT composite systems have been probed. The maximum power conversion efficiency of the SWNT–polymer composite has been reported to be only ∼0.5%, which may result from effects associated with short-circuiting and shunting, due to the high SWNT aspect ratios and the presence of metallic SWNTs within the composites.
It should be noted that distributions of bulk SWNTs typically consist of one-third metallic and two-thirds semiconducting nanotubes. Hence, as metallic SWNTs lack a true band gap, they can act either as charge carriers or as exciton recombination centers, thereby lowering the power conversion efficiency. Moreover, due to the existence of a potential well for holes on the metallic SWNTs and electrons on the polymer formed during the interaction between the P3HT and the SWNTs, the charge separation efficiency can therefore be severely diminished. Hence, it has been suggested that by using semiconducting SWNTs in a polymer-based solar cell, more long-lived carriers ought to be produced, thereby resulting in a measurably higher cell performance. Nevertheless, contradictory to conventional wisdom, Dissanayake and Zhong have found that both semiconducting and metallic SWNTs can function as efficient hole acceptors. In effect, a relatively high efficiency was observed for a SWNT–poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) hybrid photovoltaic cell, suggesting that incorporating metallic SWNTs into polymer-based solar cells was a viable alternative.
Moreover, apart from CNTs, the use of different types of polymers can also substantively affect the performance. For example, polythiophene (PT) is intrinsically inferior in terms of conjugation length and hole conductance, as compared with its 3-alkane-polythiophene analogue, e.g. P3HT, due to the possible electronic mis-communication in the linkage via the 3 and 4 sites on the thiophene ring. Furthermore, PT is sensitive to water, which may lead to unwanted oxidation effects and hence a correspondingly significant diminution of both its electrical and optical properties, as a result of the degradation of its molecular chains. Indeed, if the solar cell device is not assembled in an airtight glove box configuration, the presence of water will almost certainly and deleteriously affect the cell performance of PT-based devices.
Qu et al. studied the influence of linker length, solvent polarity, pH, ionic strength, as well as the nature of the central metal coordinated to the porphyrin macrocycles on the SWNT–porphyrin hybrid systems. Fluorescence and UV-visible spectral techniques have been used to study electron transfer between the amine-modified SWNTs and the porphyrin. Results have suggested that short alkyl chain lengths possessing a terminal diamine group, a high solvent polarity, a low solution pH value, and a low solution ionic strength have tended to give rise to a high electron transfer efficiency. It was noted that the center metal coordinated to the porphyrin macrocycle was not necessarily essential for electron transfer to take place.

To summarize, a number of different types of carbon nanotube-based heterostructures have been widely studied and utilized in the solar cell arena. The power conversion efficiency parameters under standard illumination conditions (AM 1.5) of several of these heterostructures discussed herein have been summarized in Table 1. In this review, we have intensively discussed the use of architectures, associated with CNT-based solar cells, and summarized the formation of several model heterostructures, focusing on optimizing charge separation and electron transfer properties. From what we have discussed above, there has been a growing and strengthening trend to combine CNTs with functionally complementary moieties, such as either QDs, metal oxides, and/or polymers together, to form unique and novel composite heterostructures, thereby synergistically combining the favorable optoelectronic properties of each individual component in order to improve the overall efficiency of the resulting solar cell configurations. Moreover, although large improvements continue to be made in this specific area, we should also note that, as compared with conventional silicon-based solar cells, the efficiencies of CNT-based solar cells still remain relatively low. Nonetheless, recent research has focused on finding more effective solar cell geometry alternatives, such as TiO2 nanoparticle-based solar paint, yielding a conversion efficiency of 3.6% on either FTO/glass substrates or graphene-based heterostructures, which is a positive development that ought to assist in continuing to enhance the performance of these devices at the nanoscale.

Heterostructure types
Morphology
Examples and corresponding power
conversion efficiency measured
CNT–chalcogenide semiconductors
Bare core QDs
e.g. PbS–MWNT–P3HT: 3.03%;
CdTe–SWNT–pyrene: 0.0044%
Core–shell QDs
e.g. CdSe–ZnSe–MWNT: 0.34%
1D
e.g. CdSe NWs–CNT fiber: 1–2%;
CdSe nanobelt–CNT: 1.87%
CNT–metal oxide semiconductors
0D
e.g. MWNT-TiO2 2.87–4.62% with 0–0.5% wt of MWNTs;
CdSe/TiO2/SWNT: 1.86%;
PbS/TiO2/SWNT: 0.80%;
ZnO-CNT: 0.21%;
1D
e.g. TiO2-CNT fiber: 1.65%;
VACNT/ZnO nanorod: 1.46%
CNT–polymer
2D bilayer
e.g. SWNT–CONHTh–polythiophene: 1.78%;
SWNT–TIOPH–poly(3-octylthiophene): 1.48%
3D
e.g. CNT–PT–PCBM: 2.76%
Even though a number of years have passed since our last review on carbon nanotube–nanocrystal heterostructures, it is still worth reiterating the challenges that continue to hinder progress in the field and render reliable structure–property correlations difficult at best. First, it remains a problem to reliably control the rate, density, and spatial localization of moieties (such as but not including nanocrystals) functionalized onto nanotube templates; the corresponding morphological correlations with optoelectronic behavior are hence unclear. Second, the role (and adequate detection) of defects in these systems is not well understood. Third, the precise growth mechanisms involved with many of the synthetic methods used for creating heterostructures are often a matter of speculation. Fourth, the sustainable large-scale production of many of these nanomaterial heterostructures remains very much an issue, but addressing this need should promote their widespread applicability. Fifth and likely most importantly, health, toxicity, and environmental issues associated with the various synthetic protocols of these different and distinctive nanotube-based heterostructures will need to be systematically and properly studied, if the general public is to be accepting the idea of incorporating these novel nanomaterials into practical, everyday solar cell configurations.

Financial support for completion of this Review article was provided by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division at Brookhaven National Laboratory, which is supported by the DOE under Contract No. DE-AC02-98CH10886.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013