 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA13719J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 7808-7818


Longkai
Yangi
,

Yiwen
Li
,

Yaxi
Pei
,

Jiaqin
Wang
,

Hong
Lin
 and 

Xin
Li
*

Pen-Tung Sah Institute of Micro-Nano Science and Technology, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China. E-mail: lixin01@xmu.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory of New Ceramics & Fine Processing, School of Material Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China

Received
15th December 2019
, Accepted 24th March 2020
First published on 25th March 2020
Two-dimensional (2D) perovskites are promising passivating materials to improve the photovoltaic performance and stability of lead halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs). In this work, we report a novel mixed 2D perovskite based on phenylformamidinium (PFA) cations and formamidinium (FA) cations as surface “patches” to stabilize an FA-based perovskite, whose formula is Cs0.05Rb0.05(FA0.83MA0.17)Pb(I0.95Br0.05)3. The mixed-cation 2D perovskite “patches” can be obtained by dropping a PFA iodide (PFAI) solution (≥6 mg mL−1) dynamically on the FA-based perovskite film surface. The mixed-cation 2D perovskite can effectively reduce perovskite surface defects and suppress the recombination at the interface between the perovskite layer and the hole transport layer, which results in improved device performance and thermal stability. Our champion flexible PSC presents a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 19.89%, which is one of the highest reported values for single-junction flexible PSCs to date. The unencapsulated flexible device with the “patches” retains 70.4% of its initial efficiency after 1000 h at 85 °C in a N2 environment. Our new strategy demonstrates a highly promising way to passivate the FA-based perovskite surface for highly efficient PSCs, particularly flexible PSCs.

Flexible lead halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted great attention in recent years, owing to their low weight, mechanical durability, compatibility with different curved surfaces, and cost-effective fabrication. Usually, flexible PSCs are fabricated on polymer-based substrates, such as ethylene terephthalate (PET)/indium tin oxide (ITO), polyethylene 2,6-naphthalate (PEN)/ITO, or a combination of PET/metal-grid/conducting polymers. Hence, the fabrication of high-quality functional layers, which include the electron transport layer (ETL), the perovskite layer, and the hole transport layer (HTL) at low-temperature processing (<150 °C) is quite a challenge. In recent years, inorganic ETLs, such as ZnO, TiO2, and SnO2, have been successfully developed to realize high-performance rigid PSCs and flexible PSCs. Furthermore, the recipe of a perovskite absorber for flexible PSCs has also been explored, such as the use of a methylammonium cation (MA+), binary cations of MA+ and formamidinium (FA+), and quintuple cations. Among them, FA-based perovskites have shown great potential owing to their narrow band gaps and excellent stability. There has been great progress in attaining high-efficiency flexible PSCs.

Although state-of-the-art flexible PSCs based on FA-cations can achieve a champion efficiency over 19%, rigid PSCs based on conductive glasses are still the most favorable PSCs, of which the certificated champion efficiency has surpassed 25.2% so far. The lower transmittance and the higher sheet-resistance of flexible substrates, in comparison with rigid substrates, are responsible for the performance lag of flexible PSCs. More importantly, the quality of the perovskite absorber, which determines the photovoltaic performance of PSCs, is also severely restricted by a flexible substrate. A previous study employed the same protocol to prepare perovskite films on flexible substrates and rigid substrates. The results revealed that the perovskite film grown on the flexible substrates exhibited a terrible morphology with many pinholes, which was quite in contrast from that on the rigid substrates.
Though precursor compositions and deposition protocols have been improved to obtain high-quality perovskite films on flexible substrates, the growth of the perovskite layer is still sensitive to the wrinkling of flexible substrates, which results in many more bulk defects and surface defects. Actually, bulk defects and surface defects are also inevitably observed in rigid PSCs. Therefore, it is of great importance to passivate those bulk defects and surface defects as much as possible to improve the photovoltaic performance, which has already been proven to be effective in silicon-based solar cells. Various additives have been added to passivate the bulk defects within the perovskite absorber for rigid PSCs and flexible PSCs. Additionally, surface passivation of the perovskite-absorber layers by forming 2D perovskite protective layers, has also been intensively studied to improve the PSC performance.
Generally, several iodides with large organic cations having different rigidities, such as alkane-based cations and aromatics-based ammonium cations, are applied. Although the defect passivation effect by the application of any variations of the iodides is expected to be identical, it is believed that the differences, including the different dipole moments, different structural stiffness, and different electron densities, would result in a different enhancement of the power conversion efficiency (PCE). For example, Seok et al. reported an enhanced PCE of 22.9% by using alkane-based iodides, butylammonium iodide (BAI) and octylammonium iodide (OAI) for surface passivation, whereas You et al. demonstrated a certified PCE as high as 23.32% by using an aromatic-based ammonium iodide, phenyl-ammonium iodide (PEAI), for surface passivation. It may seem as though the use of aromatic-based iodides will result in a better photovoltaic performance. However, the PEAI layer would be turned into a 2D perovskite layer, PEA2PbI4, after thermal annealing, which would deteriorate the device's thermal stability. Very recently, a novel mixed 2D perovskite material based on the phenyltrimethylammonium cation and MA+ was developed and shown to greatly improve the photovoltaic performance and thermal stability of rigid MA-based PSCs, which indicates that a molecularly tuned aromatic-based ammonium cation is beneficial for highly efficient and thermally stable FA-based flexible PSCs.
In this study, we propose the use of a novel two-dimensional (2D) perovskite material based on a large size phenylformamidinium iodide (PFAI), to act as surface “patches” to fabricate highly efficient flexible PSCs. The ethylammonium group in a PEAI salt was replaced by a formamidinium group to form a PFAI salt. The novel 2D perovskite was formed when a proper concentration of PFAI solution was dropped onto the FA-based perovskite absorber surface. Owing to the increased number of N atoms within the PFAI salt compared with other organic iodides, the interaction between the PFAI molecules and surface PbI2 was enhanced and resulted in the rapid formation of 2D perovskites even without thermal annealing which is required for most organic-iodide treatment cases. Meanwhile, the FA+ from the perovskite absorber grain boundaries and the surface also takes part in the formation of the 2D perovskites as an A-site cation. Compared with other popular surface-treating organic iodides, PFAI can enhance the photovoltaic performance and thermal stability of the flexible PSCs simultaneously. By optimizing the concentration of the PFAI solution, we obtained a champion efficiency of 19.89% on flexible PSCs, which is one of the highest reported values for single-junction flexible PSCs. Moreover, the flexible devices with the “patches” exhibit an attractive thermal stability as well. Our findings present a novel type of surface passivation by a 2D perovskite material for FA-based perovskite films, which can easily be extended to stabilize FA-based perovskite films for various optoelectronic applications.

A SnO2 colloidal dispersion (15% in water) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. FAI and methylammonium bromide (MABr) were synthesized according to a previous report. Lead(II) iodide (99.99%) was purchased from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology (China). Spiro-OMeTAD was purchased from Derthon Optoelectronic Materials Science Technology (Shenzhen, China). Cesium iodide (99.9%), rubidium iodide (99.9%), and all organic solvents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (America) and used without further purification. PEN/ITO substrates and glass/fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates were obtained from Peccell (Yokohama, Japan) and Asahi Glass (Tokyo, Japan), respectively.

PFAI was synthesized by reacting benzamidine hydrochloride ethanol solution (5 g in 40 mL) with a hydroiodic acid solution (6.66 mL) in a 100 mL flask for 2 h, which was kept in an ice bath. The resulting reaction solution was concentrated by rotary evaporation at 50 °C and crude solids were obtained. The solids were recrystallized three times with anhydrous ethanol and anhydrous diethyl ether. Finally, the purified solids were dried at 60 °C for 24 h in a vacuum oven.

The rigid substrates were cleaned with ultrapure water, acetone, and isopropanol for 15 min successively, and then they were dried by using a N2 gas gun. For the flexible substrates, acetone was replaced by ethanol. The dried substrates were then exposed to an ultra-violet and O3 environment for 30 min. A diluted SnO2 colloidal solution was prepared by mixing the commercial SnO2 solution with ultrapure water (1:3, by volume), which was sonicated for 15 min before its deposition. The diluted SnO2 colloidal dispersion was spin-coated on the cleaned substrates at 3000 rpm for 30 s and then annealed at 120 °C for 30 min in air.

The perovskite precursor was prepared by dissolving 167.03 mg of FAI, 22.28 mg of MABr, 599.31 mg of PbI2, 47.8 μL of a CsI solution (1.5 M in DMSO) and 46.9 μL of a RbI solution (1.5 M in DMSO) in a mixed solution with 743 μL of DMF and 186 μL of DMSO, which resulted in the target perovskite film with a formula of Cs0.05Rb0.05(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Pb(I0.95Br0.05)3. Note, the precursor contained an excess of 6.5% PbI2 according to the recipe. The perovskite precursor was spin-coated at 800 rpm for 10 s and 6000 rpm for 25 s successively. 200 μL of chlorobenzene was dropped on the substrates 3 s before the end of the process. Then the substrates were annealed at 120 °C for 30 min in a nitrogen glove box.
For PFAI treatment, the synthesized PFAI was dissolved in iso-propyl alcohol (IPA) with varied concentrations, such as 2 mg mL−1, 6 mg mL−1, 10 mg mL−1, and 14 mg mL−1. The PFAI solutions were spin-coated onto the perovskite film surface dynamically at a spinning rate of 5000 rpm. Then, the as-prepared substrates were annealed at different temperatures for 5 min. The treatments of BAI, OAI and PEAI were implemented according to previous reports.
The HTL solution was prepared by dissolving 72.3 mg of 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis (N,N-dip-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) in 1 mL of chlorobenzene with the addition of 17.5 μL of Li-TFSI (520 mg mL−1, in acetonitrile), 28.8 μL of 4-tertbutylpyridine and 8 μL of FK209 (180 mg mL−1, in acetonitrile). After the substrates with or without PFAI treatment were cooled to room temperature, the spiro-OMeTAD solution was spin-coated at 2000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, 100 nm of a silver electrode was deposited on the substrates by thermal evaporation.

The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the different films were obtained using an X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku Ultima-IV, Japan). The morphologies of the different perovskite films were observed using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (Zeiss Sigma, Germany). The photoluminescence (PL) spectra were recorded using a fluorescence spectrophotometer (FLS980, U.K.). The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were implemented on an electrochemical station (Chenhua, CHI 660D, China) at different bias voltages. The current density–voltage (J–V) measurements were conducted using a solar simulator (Newport Oriel, USA) with a digital source meter (Keithley 2420, USA). Before the measurements, the light source was calibrated by using a standard silicon solar cell (Newport Oriel, USA). The external quantum efficiency was measured using a solar cell quantum efficiency measurement system (QE-R-3010, Enlitech, Taiwan). An anti-reflecting UV cut-off film (YC-AR 130, Japan) was attached to the front side of each device for the J–V measurements and the external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements.


To inspect the effectiveness of PFAI treatment, we fabricated PSC devices with the planar n–i–p architecture as FTO/SnO2/FA-based perovskite/PFAI-induced layer/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag, as shown in Fig. S1. For convenience, rigid glass substrates were used here. The thicknesses of the SnO2 layer, the perovskite absorber layer, and the spiro-OMeTAD layer were approximately 35 nm, 450 nm, and 250 nm, respectively. The perovskite absorber of the devices was mainly based on FA+ cations (with a molar ratio of FA+/MA+ as 83:17), while the halide ions were I− and Br− (with a molar ration of 95:5). Cs+ and Rb+ were also added to improve the perovskite absorber film quality. The concentrations of the PFAI solutions were varied as 2 mg mL−1, 6 mg mL−1, 10 mg mL−1, and 14 mg mL−1. The corresponding perovskite films are denoted as 2-PFA, 6-PFA, 10-PFA, and 14-PFA, respectively. We checked the effect of the PFAI treatment without post-annealing first. Fig. 1a–d present the dependence of the photovoltaic parameters of the devices on the concentration of the PFAI solution. As can be seen, the average PCE increases with the increased concentration of the PFAI solution, owing to the significantly improved open-circuit voltage (VOC) and slightly enhanced fill factor (FF). The average PCE reaches the highest value when the concentration of the PFAI solution is 10 mg mL−1, and then the PCE declines with the further increased PFAI concentration of 14 mg mL−1. The detailed photovoltaic parameters are given in Table S1. The PSCs based on the 10-PFA films show the best PCEs. We obtained a champion efficiency of 21.38% with a VOC as high as 1.098 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 24.11 mA cm−2 and an FF of 0.808, as shown in Fig. 1e. To further inspect the continuous output of the best cell, the stabilized photocurrent and PCE were recorded at a bias voltage of 0.935 V under AM 1.5G illumination. As shown in the inset of Fig. 1e, a stabilized current density of 22.72 mA cm−2 and stabilized PCE of 21.24% are obtained after 200 s continuous illumination. As shown in Fig. 1f, the integrated JSC acquired from the EQE results is calculated to be 24.05 mA cm−2, which matched the J–V measurement result well. Fig. S2 compares the J–V curves of the champion device under different scan directions, which indicates a small hysteresis. The results prove that the PFAI treatment without any further processing is quite beneficial for improving the PSC performance.

Next, we studied the effect of a post-annealing treatment on the PFAI-treated perovskite films and then on the PSC performance. The PFAI-treated perovskite films were post-annealed at 85 °C for 5 min before the deposition of spiro-OMeTAD, which are denoted as 2-PFA-H, 6-PFA-H, 10-PFA-H, and 14-PFA-H. The dependence of the photovoltaic parameters of those devices on the PFAI concentration is shown in Fig. 1a–d. Table S2 provides the detailed photovoltaic parameters. Interestingly, the changing tendency of the photovoltaic parameters is similar to that of the devices based on the PFAI treatment only. The concentration of 10 mg mL−1 is shown to be the best condition again. A champion efficiency of 21.20%, with a VOC as high as 1.131 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 24.17 mA cm−2 and an FF of 0.776, was achieved. The hysteresis of the cell is reduced, as shown in Fig. S2. Fig. S3 shows the corresponding EQE curve. Compared with the champion device based on the PFA-10 film, the PFA-10-H based device shows a higher VOC but a reduced FF. Normally, an increased VOC arises from a suppressed recombination while a reduced FF can be ascribed to less internal interface contact. This means that post-annealing might change the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD interface. Nevertheless, the overall PCEs of both devices are almost identical. We also investigated the effect of the post-annealing time, from 5 min to 60 min, on device performance, as shown in Fig. S4. It can be seen that the post-annealing time has a negligible effect on device performance. Moreover, the post-annealing temperature was also varied to evaluate its effect from room temperature to 100 °C, as shown in Fig. S5. Strikingly, the devices show robust PCEs against a rising post-annealing temperature. Such results indicate the outstanding performance of PFAI passivation against thermal annealing in our study. Table S3 shows a comparison of the photovoltaic performance between the PFAI treated device and the popular organic-iodide (PEAI, BAI, and OAI) treated devices. It can be seen that both significant PCE enhancement and good thermal stability are obtained from the PFAI treated devices.
To understand how PFAI treatment with or without post-annealing affects FA-based PSCs, we first investigated their effect on the surface morphology of the perovskite layers, as shown in Fig. 2. Fig. 2a presents the SEM image of the control perovskite film, which has a dense polycrystalline grain texture. There are some small and bright platelets at the perovskite grain boundaries, which belong to the excessive PbI2 species. In the case of the 2-PFA film, the grain surface becomes smoother because of the etching effect of the polar IPA solvent. Though small PbI2 platelets are still observed, some areas near the grain boundaries become indistinct. Meanwhile, tiny amorphous species are observed, which might be the product from the reaction between the PFAI salt and the surface residual PbI2. With an increased PFAI concentration, the grain surface becomes smoother, as shown in Fig. 2c and d. At the same time, a new and unknown species like “patches” begins to cover the perovskite film surface, especially the regions near grain boundaries, which is accompanied by the disappearance of the PbI2 phase. With the further increase of the PFAI concentration, the new “patch” material fully covers the perovskite surface, as shown in Fig. 2e. Hence, it can be concluded that the “patch” material emerges with a high concentration of PFAI solution, which might arise from the chemical reaction between the dissolved surface groups, PFAI, and other species at the grain boundaries, such as PbI2. This proposal needs to be further verified. Nevertheless, the formed “patch” material can effectively improve the device performance, as shown in Fig. 1 and Table S1.
Next, we inspected the evolution of the surface morphology of the PFAI-treated perovskite films with post-annealing, as shown in Fig. 2f–j. The surface morphology of the control perovskite film shows no variation after post-annealing treatment. Meanwhile, in the case of the 2-PFA film, the PbI2 phase disappears and the surface looks cleaner, as shown in Fig. 2b and g. Additionally, several darker areas are observed at the perovskite grain boundaries, indicating the formation of a new “patch” material (denoted as “patch 1”). Therefore, it can be deduced that post-annealing might convert the amorphous species into a well-crystallized “patch 1”. By comparing Fig. 2c with 2h and Fig. 2d with 2i, we observed that the already-existing “patch” material became darker and shrinks. To distinguish the already-existing “patch” material from “patch 1”, we named the former as “patch 2” hereinafter. The darker contrast might arise from the greatly improved crystallization of “patch 2” by post-annealing, which can be seen in Fig. S1. When comparing Fig. S1d with S1i and Fig. S1e with S1j, the interface between the perovskite and “patch 2” layer is much clearer after post-annealing. The most important question is whether “patch 1” is the same as “patch 2”.
Subsequently, XRD characterization experiments were performed to determine whether the two “patch” materials are identical. Fig. 3a presents the XRD patterns of the control perovskite film and the perovskite films treated with different concentrations of PFAI solutions. The control perovskite film exhibits a typical alpha-phase perovskite XRD pattern and a featural peak at 12.7° belonging to the PbI2 phase is observed. With the PFAI treatment (2 mg mL−1), the PbI2 peak is reduced, which may have arisen from the formation of the new species, as shown in Fig. 2b. However, no additional peak can be observed from the pattern. This may be ascribed to two reasons: (1) the amount of the newly formed species is insufficient; and (2) the newly formed species is amorphous. A similar change is observed in the XRD pattern of the 6-PFA perovskite film. By further increasing the PFAI concentration to 10 mg mL−1 and 14 mg mL−1, a distinct peak not belonging to the perovskite phase appears at 8.7°, which should belong to “patch 2” as discussed above. Fig. 3b shows the XRD patterns of the control perovskite film with post-annealing at 85 °C and the perovskite films with PFAI treatment followed by post-annealing at 85 °C. A new peak located at 8.2° is observed in the 2-PFA-H film pattern, while a newly rising peak located at 8.7° can be observed from the 6-PFA-H film pattern. Moreover, the peak located at 8.7° in the patterns of the 10-PFA-H film and the 14-PFA-H film becomes higher. Hence, it can be concluded that “patch 1” exists in the 2-PFA-H film and “patch 2” exists in the other modified perovskite films. The peaks arise from the two patches, depending on the concentration of PFAI treated.
To further explore the compositions of the two different “patch” materials, we carried out additional XRD characterization experiments. Fig. 3c presents the XRD patterns of the pure PFAI film and the (PFA)2PbI4 2D perovskite film on FTO substrates. The (PFA)2PbI4 2D perovskite shows a dominant peak located at 8.2°. Hence, it is clear that the obtained “patch 1” in the 2-PFA-H film belongs to the (PFA)2PbI4 2D perovskite. No peak is observed at the location of 8.7° in the (PFA)2PbI4 pattern, which confirms that “patch 2” is different from “patch 1”. To determine the nature of “patch 2”, we added some FAI salts into the (PFA)2PbI4 perovskite precursor solution. The XRD pattern of the resulting 2D perovskite film, (PFA1−xFAx)2PbI4, is presented in Fig. 3c. Interestingly, a new peak located at 8.7° is observed. By varying the content of the FA cation in the (PFA1−xFAx)2PbI4 perovskite film, the peak is always observed, as shown in Fig. S6a. Hence, the featural peaks located at 8.7° in the 10-PFA pattern and the 10-PFA-H pattern indicate that “patch 2” likely belongs to the (PFA1−xFAx)2PbI4 2D perovskite film. However, a decreased ratio of PFA cations to Pb ions results in the shift of the peak location from 8.7 to 8.2°, as shown in Fig. S6a. The result indicates that a high concentration of PFA cations is an essential prerequisite for the formation of (PFA1−xFAx)2PbI4 (patch 2) whereas a low concentration will only result in the formation of PFA2PbI4 (patch 1). This agrees with what we have observed for the samples from 2-PFA to 14-PFA, as shown in Fig. 3a and b.
To rule out the possibility of other ions and groups forming other mixed-cation perovskites having a featural peak at 8.7°, we added MA+, Br−, Cs+, and Rb+ to the (PFA)2PbI4 precursor solution, respectively. Fig. S6b shows the XRD patterns of the corresponding perovskite films, and indicates that the addition of MA+, Br−, Cs+, and Rb+ cations is unable to form the perovskite film exhibiting a diffraction peak at 8.7°. Hence, we can conclude that “patch 2” belongs to the (PFA1−xFAx)2PbI4 2D perovskite. Now, it can be briefly summarized that there are two kinds of 2D perovskite “patches” in Fig. 2g–j, which are (PFA)2PbI4 and (PFA1−xFAx)2PbI4. The concentration of the PFAI solution would directly determine the exact category of the two “patches”.
By combining the SEM results and the XRD results, we can infer the formation mechanism of the two 2D perovskite “patches”, which is different from previous reports.Fig. 4a illustrates the suggested formation of “patch 1”. When the PFAI solution with a low concentration (2 mg mL−1) is spin-coated onto the perovskite film, the residual PbI2 will react with the PFAI salts. However, the resulting product is amorphous owing to the low environmental temperature. Meanwhile, some groups on the perovskite surface will be dissolved owing to the polar IPA solvent. When a PFA-treated film (2-PFA) is annealed at 85 °C, the amorphous product will be converted into crystalline (PFA)2PbI4.

Fig. 4b shows the formation model of “patch 2”. When the PFAI solution with a relatively high concentration (>6 mg mL−1) is spin-coated onto the perovskite film, more PFAI will intercalate into the perovskite surface accompanied by the release of the FA cations from the surface and grain boundaries. Then, a reaction will occur between PFAI cations, FA cations, and PbI2, which will result in a mixed-ion 2D perovskite, that is, (PFA1−xFAx)2PbI4. Note that the detailed ratio of the PFA cation to the FA cation is hard to determine owing to the complicated and dynamic surface reactions. When thermal annealing is applied to the PFA-treated films (>6 mg mL−1), better-crystalized (PFA1−xFAx)2PbI4 would be obtained. Basically, such evolution would not impair the defect passivation effect and the photovoltaic performance because no new species is formed, as proven in Fig. 1, which is unlike the previous report on the PEAI case. However, the enhanced crystallization is accompanied by the slightly shrunken sizes, as shown in Fig. 2. That is to say, the distribution of the mixed-ion 2D perovskite on the perovskite surface would be altered. Conductive-atomic force microscopy (c-AFM) measurements were employed to unravel such a change, as shown in Fig. S7. It can be seen that the PFAI-treated perovskite surfaces (for 10-PFA and 14-PFA cases) becomes rougher with the post-annealing treatment and the conductivities are enhanced, owing to the enhanced crystallization. However, the rougher surface would impair perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD interface contact, resulting in a declined FF and thus a decreased PCE, as shown in Fig. 1 and Tables S1 and S2. It must also be noted that an over-passivated surface might reduce the thickness of the perovskite absorber, and result in less light absorption, as shown in Fig. S8.
The devices with (PFA1−xFAx)2PbI4 passivation showed better performance; therefore, we focused our attention on gaining further insight into (PFA1−xFAx)2PbI4 passivation at the perovskite surface. The photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the control perovskite film, the 10-PFA film and the 10-PFA-H film on glass substrates were compared, as shown in Fig. 5a. The PL intensity can directly reflect the recombination occurring at the bulk defects and surface defects. In our case, passivation is applied on the surface only, so the difference between the three samples arises from the different number of surface defects. The results in Fig. 5a indicate that the (PFA1−xFAx)2PbI4 layer can significantly suppress the recombination at or near to the perovskite surface. Time-resolved PL (TRPL) measurement results support the PL results, as shown in Fig. 5b. The two curves belonging to the two PFAI treated films show a slower decay tendency, indicating the prohibited recombination on their surfaces. We also applied a biexponential equation to fit the TRPL curves and to estimate the average recombination time (τavg). The τavg of the control perovskite on glass was estimated to be 523.0 ns, while it increases to 709.4 and 642.0 ns for the 10-PFA film and the 10-PFA-H film, respectively. The results validate the effectiveness of (PFA1−xFAx)2PbI4 passivation again.
To further evaluate the passivation effect of the (PFA1−xFAx)2PbI4 layer, we applied the space-charge limited current (SCLC) method to estimate the carrier trap state densities (Nt) of the improved perovskite films. Two classes of devices, electron-only devices and hole-only devices, were prepared and measured in the dark. Fig. 6a and b show the corresponding current–voltage (C–V) curves. In such a typical C–V curve, the first linear stage and the second linear phase belong to an ohm response and a trap-filling limit (TFL) region, respectively, as shown in Fig. 6a. The onset voltage of the TFL region, VTFL, is linearly proportional to Nt. In Fig. 6a, the PFAI-treated perovskite films within the electron-only devices show a much lower VTFL, indicating the significantly reduced Nt. According to a previously reported formula, we calculated the electron Nt of the 10-PFA film and the 10-PFA-H film as 1.89 × 1015 and 2.62 × 1015 cm−3, respectively, which are much lower than that of the control film as 4.25 × 1015 cm−3. Similarly, a lower VTFL is observed in the hole-only devices with PFA-treated perovskite films, as shown in Fig. 6b. The hole Nt of the 10-PFA film and the 10-PFA-H film are calculated to be 1.18 × 1016 cm−3 and 1.17 × 1016 cm−3, respectively, which are much lower than the 1.56 × 1016 cm−3 of the control perovskite film. Considering that the modified perovskite surface is in contact with the hole-transport layer, the reduced hole Nt is more important than the reduced electron Nt in the n–i–p structured devices. Hence, the PFA treatment can improve the PCE of the devices greatly. However, the results indicate that post-annealing of the PFAI-treated perovskite films is more beneficial for passivation, resulting in an improved VOC, as shown in Fig. 1e.
Furthermore, we investigated the passivation performance of the (PFA1−xFAx)2PbI4 layer in a complete device using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Fig. 6c shows the Nyquist plots of the PSCs based on the control perovskite film, the PFA-10 film, and the PFA-10-H film measured at 0.75 V in the dark. The arc in the high-frequency region represents the charge transfer resistance at the interfaces of the perovskite/charge-selective contacts, while the arc at the low-frequency region is assigned to the recombination resistance in bulk or between the perovskite layer and the charge-selective contacts. Comparing the three plots of the devices with and without the (PFA1−xFAx)2PbI4 layers, it can be seen that both arcs have been significantly changed. The SnO2/perovskite interface is identical for all devices, therefore, the reduced arc radius of both PFAI-treated devices in the high frequency region indicates a more efficient charge transfer. Meanwhile, the increased arc radius of both PFAI-treated devices in the low frequency region proves an increased recombination resistance.
Moreover, the recombination resistances of all the three devices at different bias voltages were fitted using an equivalent circuit, as shown in the inset of Fig. 6c and as shown in Fig. 6d. By increasing the bias voltage, all the recombination resistances decrease exponentially, which indicates a trap-limited recombination process. As expected, the (PFA1−xFAx)2PbI4 layer with or without post-annealing always shows a higher recombination resistance, which demonstrates its excellent passivation effect. The post-annealing of the PFAI-treated perovskite film can strengthen the passivation effect, as shown in Fig. 6d. The EIS results are in good agreement with those of the TRPL measurements and SCLC measurements shown above. Fig. S9 also presents the Nyquist plots of the devices treated with different concentrations of PFAI solutions. It can be seen that not only the (PFA1−xFAx)2PbI4 layer but also the (PFA)2PbI4 “patch” can passivate the perovskite surface and increase the recombination resistance. Overall, the PFAI-treatment demonstrates its outstanding performance for improving the PSC PCE by reducing surface trap state densities and then suppressing the interfacial recombination.
Finally, we applied our best PFAI-treatment conditions for the fabrication of high-performance flexible devices. Fig. S10a shows the SEM image of the 10-PFA film surface on a flexible substrate, which hints that the recipes of our perovskite film and the PFAI treatment are suitable for the preparation of high-quality perovskite films on a flexible substrate. The cross-section morphology of a completed flexible PSC based on the PFA-10 film is also given in Fig. S10b. The champion PCE of the flexible PSCs based on the 10-PFA film was achieved to be 19.89%, with a VOC of 1.10 V, a JSC of 23.17 mA cm−2, and an FF of 0.780 (Fig. 7a) under the backward scan condition. Fig. S11a shows the corresponding J–V curve under the forward scan condition, indicating negligible hysteresis. The best PSC based on the 10-PFA-H film delivers a similar PCE, as shown in Fig. 7a and S11b. Moreover, the PCE distribution histogram of the flexible PSCs based on the 10-PFA film is given in Fig. S11c, which indicates a high reproducibility. Fig. 7b displays the EQE curve of the champion flexible device based on the 10-PFA film, where the integrated JSC can be calculated to be 23.12 mA cm−2. The EQE result is in good agreement with the value obtained from the J–V measurement. Meanwhile, the difference between the EQE curves of the flexible device and the rigid device in the short-wave range should be ascribed to the different light-absorption abilities of the flexible (PEN) and rigid substrates (glass), which resulted in the lower JSC for the flexible devices compared with those of the rigid devices. Moreover, according to the differential of the EQE curve, the absorption threshold is estimated to be 794 nm (corresponding to a band gap of 1.562 eV), which is consistent with the results of the UV-vis absorption and UV-vis diffuse absorbance spectroscopy measurements, as shown in Fig. S12.Fig. 7c presents the stabilized photocurrent of the flexible device, measured under AM 1.5G illumination at a bias voltage of 0.935 V. A stabilized efficiency of 19.31% can be achieved after 200 s continuous irradiation, demonstrating the good stability of the flexible device.
The thermal stability of the 10-PFA based flexible device without encapsulation was also investigated at 85 °C under N2 conditions. As presented in Fig. 7d, the flexible device based on the 10-PFA film can maintain 70.4% of its initial PCE after 1000 h, while the control flexible device retains 39.5% of its initial PCE after 1000 h. Such declines for both devices are likely due to the deterioration of the hole transport layer. However, the (PFA1−xFAx)2PbI4 layer still demonstrates its superiority for significantly improving the thermal stability of the flexible device. Mechanical stability is also important for the future application of flexible PSCs. We carried out a bending test with a bending curvature radius of 10 mm on a home-made machine. As shown in Fig. S13, the flexible device base on the 10-PFA film can maintain 91.9% of its initial PCE.

In summary, we proposed a novel strategy of PFAI treatment to passivate the FA-based perovskite absorber surface for highly efficient flexible PSCs. The dropping of the PFAI solution onto the FA-based perovskite surface led to an in situ surface chemical reaction, which resulted in the formation of a 2D perovskite acting as surface “patches”. XRD analysis revealed that two possible 2D perovskites could be formed, that is (PFA)2PbI4 and (PFA1−xFAx)2PbI4, depending on the concentration of the PFAI solution. Of the two 2D perovskite passivation materials, (PFA1−xFAx)2PbI4 was much more effective in improving the PSC performance. PL, TRPL and electrochemical measurement results suggested that the surface (PFA1−xFAx)2PbI4 was able to reduce the carrier trap-state densities and thus suppress the interfacial recombination. As a result, the champion rigid PSC and flexible PSC were developed, which delivered PCEs of 21.38% and 19.89%, respectively. Moreover, excellent thermal stability and mechanic stability were obtained on the flexible PSCs with the (PFA1−xFAx)2PbI4 passivating “patches”. Our approach provides an attractive method to fabricate high-efficiency FA-based PSCs, especially flexible PSCs.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


We warmly thank Prof. Peng Gao and Qiu Xiong from the Chinese Academy of Sciences for their help in measuring the EQE curves, and thank Mingpo Li, Yibo Zeng, and Lusheng Liang for their help in measuring the conductivity of perovskite films. This research was funded by the funding from Qinghai Province of China (2017-ZJ-750) and the China Scholarship Council funding support (No. 201906315029).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta13719j
‡ These two authors contributed to this work equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020