 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA12254G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7151-7158


Ranbir
Singh
,

Anupam
Giri
,

Monalisa
Pal
,

Kaliannan
Thiyagarajan
,

Junghyeok
Kwak
,

Jae-Joon
Lee
,

Unyong
Jeong
* and 

Kilwon
Cho
*

Department of Chemical Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang, 790-784, Korea. E-mail: kwcho@postech.ac.kr

Department of Energy Materials and Engineering, Dongguk University, Seoul, Republic of Korea 04620

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology, 77 Cheongam-Ro, Nam-Gu, Pohang 790-784, Korea. E-mail: ujeong@postech.ac.kr

Received
19th December 2018
, Accepted 15th February 2019
First published on 22nd February 2019
There is an ongoing drive to search for low-temperature processed, stable and efficient electron transport layers (ETLs) for perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Herein, we report, for the first time, the use of a MoS2 thin layer as the ETL for PSCs. MoS2 transparent thin films are directly synthesized on the glass/fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate by using microwave irradiation. The electrical characteristics of the MoS2 thin film are measured and compared with state-of-the-art efficient electron transporting materials like TiO2 and SnO2. The perovskite solar cells fabricated with the device structure, glass/FTO/MoS2/perovskite/po-spiro-OMeTAD/Au, exhibit a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 13.1%, which is close to the PCEs obtained from compact TiO2 and SnO2 ETL based PSCs. Good transparency in the visible region (400–900 nm), high electrical conductivity and better charge transfer properties as well as low-temperature synthesis make the MoS2 thin film useful for energy harvesting and other optoelectronic device applications.

In recent years, several electron transport layers (ETLs) have been reported, including metal oxides and metal oxide composites, to achieve high power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of hybrid organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Most of the ETL research studies have focused mainly on transition metal oxides such as titanium dioxide (TiO2), zinc oxide (ZnO), zinc sulfate (ZnSO4), tungsten trioxide (WO3) and tin dioxide (SnO2). Among all the ETLs, TiO2 has been commonly used in planar PSCs and they exhibit PCEs over 17%. Although the electron transfer rate from the photoactive perovskite layer to TiO2 is fast, the TiO2 ETL has drawbacks such as poor device stability and high density of trap states causing recombination of charges at the TiO2/perovskite interface. Another drawback of the TiO2 ETL is that it requires a process of high-temperature sintering (400–500 °C) to generate the electrically conducting anatase phase, thus limiting its application in flexible electronics. Several reports have shown that a low-temperature (180–200 °C) processed SnO2 (ref. 14 and 15) and spin-coated ZnO with low-temperature annealing (∼120–150 °C) have been utilized as the ETL in PSCs, and PCEs of 12–15% have been achieved. Perovskite films deposited on ZnO suffer from severe decomposition due to the presence of hydroxyl groups or acetate ligands on the metal oxide surface. Although, SnO2 shows better environmental stability, the main concerns of the application of SnO2 as the ETL are that it suffers from degradation in high temperature processes and that its much lower conduction band compared to perovskites may result in a voltage loss of PSCs. Another type of low temperature processed (≤100 °C) organic composite material ETLs like PCBM:C60:PFN and PEI:PCBM were employed and they showed a high PCE between 17 and 19%. However, the solubility of the bottom organic ETL layers remains an issue, when perovskite precursor solutions were applied to fabricate solution processed PSC devices. Hence, there has been an ongoing drive to search for a low-temperature processed, stable and efficient ETL for PSCs.

Very recently, transition metal dichalcogenide (TMDC) thin films, especially MoS2, have been used as the hole transport layer (HTL) for PSCs. MoS2 has several advantages as the transport layer. A thin MoS2 film is highly flexible and enables fast transport of the charges in the vertical direction. In addition, it is chemically inert with high electron mobility and fewer traps (as it has no dangling bonds on the layer surface). So far, MoS2 has been utilized only as the HTL for PSCs, not as the ETL. The work function of MoS2 can be tuned in a wide range from 3.5 to 4.8 eV by adjusting the number of layers, chemical composition, elemental doping, surface functionalization, and surface states depending on the synthetic approach. Therefore, MoS2 can also be a promising ETL candidate if its work function is low enough comparable to those of TiO2 or SnO2.
For practical use of MoS2 in PSCs, the synthesis and fabrication process should be improved. Current fabrication of the MoS2 transport layer has been achieved by using MoS2 inks or transferring a CVD-grown MoS2 film on to the PSC electrode. However, those processes lose the genuine advantages of the MoS2 transport layer. The printed layers are thick and vertical transport is slow. The transfer process on to the PSC electrode is not robust and inapplicable to large area solar cells. Both approaches have the issue of weak adhesion to the PSC electrode. To solve these fabrication challenges, synthesis of the MoS2 thin film should be achieved over a large area at low temperature or without requesting any high-temperature thermal annealing. In addition, the synthesis should be carried out directly on the PSC electrode to remove the transfer process.
In this work, for the first time, we used a MoS2 thin film as the ETL for PSCs. We have produced a thin uniform MoS2 film directly on the glass/fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate by using the microwave-assisted low-temperature synthesis in the solution phase. The MoS2 ETL formed a thermally stable interface with the perovskite without requesting any thermal annealing. The MoS2 thin film was highly transparent and electrically conductive in the vertical direction. The PSC fabricated with MoS2 as an ETL had a high current density (21.7 mA cm−2) and a photo conversion efficiency (PCE) of 13.1%. Its solar cell performance was comparable to that of the PSCs fabricated using TiO2 and SnO2 as the ETL. The mechanisms of charge transfer and recombination were compared for the three ETLs.
A typical synthesis process for MoS2 thin film deposition is schematically shown in Fig. 1a. In this method, microwave stimulation activates the reaction between MoCl5 and thiourea in the presence of a high dielectric solvent that is sandwiched between two conducting substrates. We used a conducting p++ Si wafer (σ ≈ 1000 S m−1) as the bottom substrate and FTO coated glass as the top substrate. Thiourea serves as a mild reducing agent and also as a sulphur source in the MoS2 formation. The solvent [Bmim]+[BF4]− acts as a microwave susceptor. The solvent is heated under microwave irradiation by the ionic conduction mechanism. A solvent with high microwave absorption such as the electrolyte used in this study facilitates uniform distribution of thermal energy and subsequent homogeneous nucleation and growth of the thin film. The p++ Si wafer is rapidly heated under microwave irradiation, which is critical to the synthesis. The heat capacity of the p++ Si substrate is directly proportional to its size. Theoretically, the temperature of the p++ silicon wafer substrate increases at a rate of 7.8 °C s−1 under 700 W microwave irradiation. Careful optimization of the irradiation time and microwave power is necessary to obtain uniform thin films. The surface temperature of the glass/FTO substrate increased to 240 °C in 40 s as measured with an IR thermometer.
The camera image in Fig. 1b presents a transparent, continuous and uniform MoS2 film over the whole FTO surface. A FE-SEM image in Fig. 1c shows that the MoS2 nanosheets grew overall along the surface direction, but some of them on the surface were vertically oriented. In general, a diluted precursor solution resulted in a thinner and uniform film. We used thin film XRD to confirm the formation of the MoS2 thin films on the FTO substrate. To obtain the XRD signal, we have transferred the MoS2 thin film onto a glass substrate. As shown in Fig. S1, the XRD peak is consistent with the standard MoS2 data (JCPDS file no. 73-1508), confirming the formation of MoS2 thin films directly on the FTO substrate. Raman spectroscopy was used to confirm the formation of layer structured MoS2. From the Raman spectrum in Fig. 1d, the thin film exhibits two distinct peaks at ∼378 cm−1 and ∼404 cm−1, which correspond to the in-plane Mo–S phonon mode (E12g) and the out-of-plane Mo–S phonon mode (A1g) of the typical MoS2-layered structure, respectively.
The atomic force microscopy (AFM) image of the MoS2 thin film exhibited a continuous film (Fig. 2a), and the topological height profile revealed that the thickness was ∼63 nm. The morphological features and elemental mapping of the synthesized MoS2 thin films were characterized by high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) and EDS elemental mapping analysis. STEM-EDS analysis (Fig. 2b, S2 and Table S1) confirmed the formation of MoS2 with Mo and S as the principal elements in a stoichiometric composition (Mo:S = 1:2) with uniform spatial distribution of Mo and S over the entire detection range of the thin film.

Fig. 3a–d present FE-SEM images of the glass/FTO (a) and their corresponding substrates coated with ETLs of MoS2 (b), SnO2 (c), and TiO2 (d). Thickness of the ETLs was controlled between 50 and 70 nm by adjusting the precursor concentrations and measured with a thickness profilometer for the best performance in photovoltaic properties. All the ETLs have shown good coverage and a continuous film on the large area substrates. The particle domains in the MoS2 layer were bigger than those in the SnO2 and TiO2 layers. Topographical features of the films determined with AFM are shown in the ESI (Fig. S3). Root mean square (RMS) roughness of the bare FTO glass, MoS2, SnO2, and TiO2-coated FTO glass was 25.3 nm, 27.6 nm, 24.6 nm, and 19.4 nm, respectively. The MoS2 and SnO2 coating maintained the roughness of the FTO glass, while TiO2 coating reduced the surface roughness by 5.9 nm. Fig. 3e shows optical transmission spectra of the glass/FTO, glass/FTO/MoS2, glass/FTO/SnO2, and glass/FTO/TiO2 substrates. All the ETL films showed excellent transmittance in the visible region (400–900 nm). The electrical conductivity is a critical parameter for the ETLs, we have fabricated a 50 μm channel device with the structure, glass/FTO/ETLs/Au as shown in the inset of Fig. 3f, and measured the current–voltage (I–V) characteristic for all ETLs (Fig. 3f). Additionally, vertical conductivity of the ETLs was measured by sandwiching ETLs between FTO and Au electrodes (Fig. S4). It is observed that both lateral and vertical electrical conductivity of the MoS2 thin films were significantly higher as compared to the TiO2 and SnO2 thin films.
Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was used to measure the work function (Φ) of the ETLs (Fig. 4a). The work functions were in the order of FTO (−4.7 eV), MoS2 (−4.42 eV), SnO2 (−4.38 eV), and TiO2 (−4.01 eV). Based on the UPS results, we have drawn an energy level diagram for the materials used in PSC fabrication (Fig. 4b), where all the PSCs were fabricated with a device configuration of FTO/ETL/perovskite layer/po-spiro-MeOTAD/Au. The cross-sectional FE-SEM images of the glass/FTO/MoS2 substrate and the glass/FTO/MoS2/perovskite/po-spiro-OMeTAD/Au solar cell device are shown in Fig. S5.
The MAPbI3 perovskite films were prepared on the glass/FTO and glass/FTO/ETL substrates by the two-step spin-coating process as described in experimental section (ESI). The UV-visible absorption spectra of the perovskite film deposited on the glass/FTO, glass/FTO/MoS2, glass/FTO/SnO2 and glass/FTO/TiO2 films are shown in Fig. 4c. The glass/FTO/perovskite film had lower absorbance in the 400–500 nm region than that of other glass/FTO/ETL/perovskite films. The glass/FTO/MoS2/perovskite film exhibited slightly higher absorbance in the 420–600 nm region, which is attributed to the improved light diffusion and enhanced light absorption because of the large surface roughness that scatters the light randomly. The J–V characteristics are exhibited in Fig. 5a. The incident photon to electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) with spectral responses from 300 nm to 850 nm is shown in Fig. 5b. The photovoltaic properties for the optimized devices are summarized in Table 1.
ETL

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
PCEmax

a Averages were taken over eight devices.

FTO
0.71 ± 0.005
17.4 ± 0.18
46.2 ± 1.52
5.78 ± 0.33
6.11%
MoS2
0.89 ± 0.003
21.7 ± 0.35
63.8 ± 1.06
12.68 ± 0.46
13.14%
SnO2
1.04 ± 0.003
22.4 ± 0.31
66.7 ± 0.78
15.58 ± 0.22
15.80%
TiO2
1.06 ± 0.005
22.9 ± 0.19
69.6 ± 0.96
16.89 ± 0.26
17.15%
The solar cells prepared with the MoS2 ETL had an average open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.89 ± 0.003 V, short-circuit current density (JSC) of 21.7 ± 0.35 mA cm−2, fill factor (FF) of 63.8 ± 1.06%, and PCE of 12.68% ± 0.46. Their performance was comparable to those containing the TiO2 ETL and the SnO2 ETL. The VOC of the devices was in the increasing order of 0.71 V (FTO), 0.89 V (MoS2), 1.04 V (SnO2), and 1.06 V (TiO2). The order of VOC values is well matched with the increasing order of the ETL work functions; however, differences in work function values do not follow the differences in the VOC values. In earlier studies, it has been reported that VOC in PSC devices is governed by the splitting of quasi-Fermi levels and recombination inside the photoactive perovskite layer, rather than internal electric field established by the difference in the electrode work functions. Another interesting observation of the MoS2 ETL is that it has higher JSC values over FTO based PSC. This increase in JSC might occur due to the better electrical conductivity or surface roughness of the vertically grown MoS2 crystals which results in more surface area in contact with the photoactive perovskite layer for charge carrier extraction. The corresponding IPCE spectrum for the MoS2 ETL based solar cell device has shown 5–18% increase in IPCE values in comparison to that for the FTO based solar cell device.
In order to understand the underlying reasons behind the device performance, all the perovskite films and solar cells were investigated thoroughly for the charge transfer and recombination loss mechanism at the ETL/perovskite interface. We carried out the time resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements. The PL emission peak was found at λ = 770 nm (Fig. 6a), so the TRPL spectra were obtained at this wavelength. Fig. 6b shows the TRPL results of the glass/FTO/perovskite, glass/FTO/MoS2/perovskite, glass/FTO/SnO2/perovskite, and glass/FTO/TiO2/perovskite substrates. The TRPL decay curves were fitted with the bi-exponential decay equation. The lifetimes associated with charge carrier transfer from perovskite to ETLs were calculated from the decay functions. The extracted decay lifetimes were in the order of FTO (2.69 ns) > FTO/SnO2 (0.47 ns)> FTO/TiO2 (0.39 ns) > FTO/MoS2 (0.35 ns). This result supports the order of the PL intensity of the samples. The shortest charge carrier lifetime for MoS2 indicates an efficient charge transfer from the perovskite to the MoS2 ETL layer before recombination. This efficient charge extraction suppresses the recombination loss in the MoS2 ETL.
Further, the charge carrier recombination in solar cells was studied by measuring the light intensity dependent JSC values at different sun intensities (10–100 mW cm−2). The intensity (I) versus JSC was plotted in a logarithmic scale as shown in Fig. 6c. The experimental data were fitted to a power law (JSC ∝ Iα) as a linear fit on the logarithmic scale. The linear fits provided the value of exponents (α) 0.84, 0.94, 0.96 and 0.98 for the FTO, FTO/MoS2, FTO/SnO2 and FTO/TiO2, respectively. A bigger deviation in the α value for the glass/FTO electrode indicates that this device has dominated non-geminated recombination when compared to the ETL deposited PSCs. For different ETLs, the α value is higher for TiO2 followed by SnO2 and MoS2 showing the order of bimolecular recombination losses in PSC devices. Next, to investigate the trap-assisted non-geminated recombination at the FTO/perovskite interface and the FTO/ETL/perovskite interface, we have studied dependence of VOC on I (Fig. 6d). The VOC shows a linear relationship with I in a semi-logarithmic scale when fitted with the equation VOC ∝ (kBT/e)ln(I). A trap-free relationship should have a slope of kBT/e. The slope of 2.1kBT/e implies significant Shockley–Read–Hall recombination prevalent in the glass/FTO. The slope decreased to 1.79kBT/e in glass/FTO/MoS2, 1.25kBT/e in the glass/FTO/SnO2, and 1.17kBT/e in the glass/FTO/TiO2. The MoS2 ETL has shown the highest slope in all ETLs, which suggests a higher order of trap-assisted recombination at the MoS2/perovskite interface. The charge carrier traps in these devices mainly arise from the interfacial defects at the ETL/perovskite interface, partially supporting the lower VOC of the MoS2 ETL-based devices.
The use of MoS2 as the ETL layer has not been studied so far. The ETL layer must have a high concentration of free electrons and its conduction band level must be lower than that of the perovskite to extract the electrons from the perovskite interface. According to our results, our MoS2 thin film has better conductivity and charge transfer performance at the perovskite/MoS2 interface. Fig. 7 compares the valence band maximum (VBM) of the FTO/MoS2, FTO/SnO2 and FTO/TiO2 thin films measured using the UPS. The FTO/MoS2 layer has the lowest VBM (about 1.8 eV) which is 0.65 eV lower than that of the perovskite, thus the MoS2 layer can be used as an ETL. From the UPS results, the VBM of the MoS2 was estimated to be about −5.95 eV, which is higher than that of the TiO2 ETL. MoS2 is inherently an n-type material unless it is doped or chemically modified. In the previous literature where MoS2 was used as the HTL, MoS2 nanosheets were prepared by the liquid phase exfoliation method. The chemical doping during the exfoliation process is attributed to the p-type behavior of the exfoliated samples and its use as only the HTL.
In conclusion, we have synthesized a MoS2 thin film directly on the FTO coated glass substrate in a quick microwave-assisted process and utilized the as-synthesized thin films as an ETL for thin film solar cell application. A wide transmission in the visible region, favorable work function and good electrical conductivity of the MoS2 thin film makes it useful for solar cell and other optoelectronic applications. The perovskite solar cell fabricated with the MoS2 thin film as an ETL exhibits a high photogenerated current density of 21.8 mA cm−2 and better charge transfer at MoS2/perovskite interfaces. We believe that fast, easy and scalable synthesis of MoS2 proposed by this methodology can be useful for other thin film device applications.

The authors declare no competing financial interest.


We are grateful for the financial support from the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT (MSIT) Project No: NRF-2015R1A2A1A10054164 and NRF-2017R1A4A1015811. This research was also supported by the Korea Electrotechnology Research Institute (KERI) Primary Research Program through the National Research Council of Science and Technology (NST), as funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT (Project No. 18-12-N0101-17).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details of the sample preparation, synthesis of an MoS2 thin film, thin film deposition of SnO2 and TiO2, solar cell fabrication process, EDS spectrum of the MoS2 thin film, AFM height images of the different ETL films, I–V characteristics of the glass/FTO/ETLs/Au devices, and STEM-EDS elemental analysis of the MoS2 thin film. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta12254g
‡ These authors have contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019