 DOI: 10.1039/C5TC01220A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 9859-9868


Yanxia
Cui
*,

Haoyang
Zhao
,

Fan
Yang
,

Peiqian
Tong
,

Yuying
Hao
*,

Qinjun
Sun
,

Fang
Shi
,

Qiuqiang
Zhan
,

Hua
Wang
 and 

Furong
Zhu
*

Key Laboratory of Advanced Transducers and Intelligent Control System (Ministry of Education), Taiyuan University of Technology, Taiyuan 030024, China. E-mail: yanxiacui@gmail.com; haoyuyinghyy@sina.com; frzhu@hkbu.edu.hk

Department of Physics and Institute of Advanced Materials, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China

Centre for Optical and Electromagnetic Research, South China Academy of Advanced Optoelectronics, South China Normal University, Guangzhou 510006, China

Key Laboratory of Interface Science and Engineering in Advanced Materials, Taiyuan University of Technology, Taiyuan 030024, China

Received
1st May 2015
, Accepted 25th August 2015
First published on 26th August 2015
The performance of organic solar cells (OSCs) can be greatly improved by incorporating silica-coated gold nanorods (Au@SiO2 NRs) at the interface between the hole transporting layer and the active layer due to the plasmonic effect. The silica shell impedes the aggregation effect of the Au NRs in ethanol solution which otherwise would lead to a serious reduction in the open circuit voltage when incorporating the Au NRs at the buffer/active interface. As a result, while a high open circuit voltage is demonstrated, the optimized plasmonic OSCs possess an increased short circuit current, and correspondingly an elevated power conversion efficiency with an enhancement factor of ∼11%. The origin of performance improvement in OSCs with the Au@SiO2 NRs was analyzed systematically using morphological, electrical and optical characterization methods along with theoretical simulation. It is found that the broadband enhancement in absorption, which yields a broadband enhancement in exciton generation in the active layer, is the major factor contributing to the increase in the short circuit current density. Simulation results suggest that the excitation of the transverse and longitudinal surface plasmon resonances of individual NRs as well as their mutual coupling can generate a strong electric field near the vicinity of the NRs, thereby leading to an improved exciton generation profile in the active layer. The incorporation of Au@SiO2 NRs at the buffer/active interface also improves hole extraction in the OSCs, resulting in an increase in the open circuit voltage along with a decrease in the series resistance.

Organic solar cells (OSCs) are promising candidates in the field of photovoltaic technology owing to their material advantage as well as compatibility with roll-to-roll fabrication and industry. Recent progress of OSCs has demonstrated that the power conversion efficiency (PCE) has been improved to around 12%, and industrial investment in high throughput manufacturing of OSCs at low cost has already emerged. The potential applications of OSCs include solar plants, energy supplies for portable electric devices, semi-transparent solar cell windows, building or public facility applications, etc.

Due to the relatively short exciton diffusion length and low carrier mobility of organic semiconductors, the featured thickness of the active layer in OSCs is limited (∼100 nm). This reduces the absorption efficiency, thereby leading to a significant loss in photon-to-exciton generation, a limitation all types of thin-film solar cells face. In OSCs, a viable scheme is to boost light absorption in the active layer to the best extent possible. To date, different light trapping methods have been reported for improving absorption in solar cells, including the use of anti-reflection coatings, photonic crystals, and plasmonic nanostructures. Among them, using plasmonic nanostructures is a superior approach in improving light absorption in solar cells due to the near-field enhancement caused by localized surface plasmon (SP) resonances. Plasmonic elements used for light management can be categorized into two groups: nanogratings and nanoparticles (NPs). Plasmonic nanogratings are generally in well-organized patterns, which require complicated nanofabrication techniques, bringing challenges to cost management. Plasmonic NPs, which can be synthesized by low-cost solution processes, are compatible with the fabrication of OSCs and offer a better choice of light trapping components in OSCs.
Plasmonic NPs are usually made of noble metals such as gold (Au) and silver (Ag), having dimensions much smaller than the wavelength of visible light. There are a plethora of different particles in this realm featuring diverse compositions, shapes, and sizes. The selection and the distribution of NPs within OSCs play very important roles in determining the enhancement of PCEs. So far the attributed positive effects for improving PCEs include light scattering, local field enhancement, charge transport improvement,etc. There have been many existing endeavors to dope NPs into the buffer layer (hole transport or electron transport layer) or at the electrode/buffer interface, but the large distance between the plasmonic elements and the active material alleviates the enhancement effect in photon-to-exciton generation. Aiming at exploiting the plasmonic effect, NPs should be introduced into the active layer or at least at the buffer/active interface. At an early stage, there was a debate about whether bare plasmonic NPs in contact with the active materials would deteriorate the cell performance or improve it. A systematical study carried out by Salvador et al. using photoinduced absorption spectroscopy showed that there is indeed charge recombination induced near the vicinity of the metal surface, but such a negative effect can be successfully inhibited by coating a thin insulating film surrounding the NPs. A series of core–shell plasmonic NPs, like silica-coated Ag (Ag@SiO2) nanospheres, silica-coated Au (Au@SiO2) nanospheres or nanorods (NRs),etc., were introduced in the active layer of OSCs, all of which displayed a significant enhancement in PCEs.
In this work, within a conventional OSC device, core–shell configured plasmonic elements were introduced, specifically Au@SiO2 NRs, as they possess dual localized SP resonances, which greatly exceed nanospheres in enhancing the local field. Different from literature reports, we incorporate the coated Au NRs at the buffer/active interface. A previous report indicated that by introducing bare Au NRs at the buffer/active interface, the open circuit voltage (Voc) dropped obviously, thereby limiting the improvement in PCE. Here, we show that by coating the Au NRs with a thin silica film, the reduction in Voc can be avoided. By optimizing the concentration of Au@SiO2 NRs, we demonstrate that the plasmonic OSC outperforms the control device by 11.6% in the short circuit current (Jsc) with its external quantum efficiency (EQE) being significantly enhanced over a very broad spectral range. The fill factor (FF) of the optimized plasmonic OSC is roughly the same as that of the control cell, and thus overall we achieve an 11.4% improvement in PCE. Electromagnetic simulations clearly display that the field intensity surrounding the Au@SiO2 NRs is greatly enhanced due to the excitation of SP resonances, which should benefit the exciton generation in the active layer. In addition, we observe a strong peak in the EQE enhancement spectrum at the band edge of the active material, and simulations reflect that this may come from the coupled SP resonance between neighboring NPs as the spin-coating process automatically forms clustered Au@SiO2 NRs on top of the PEDOT:PSS surface. Other electrical and optical characterization methods further confirm that there is SP boosted exciton generation in the plasmonic OSC. Our work contributes to the development of low-cost thin-film solar cells.

Au NRs were synthesized by the seed-mediated growth method. Hydrogen tetrachloroaurate(III) hydrate (HAuCl4, ≥49.0% Au basis), cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CH3(CH2)15N(Br)(CH3)3, CTAB, 99%), sodium borohydride (NaBH4, 98%), and ascorbic acid were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Silver nitrate (AgNO3, 99.8%) was purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent CO. Ltd. The seed solution was synthesized first. Briefly, CTAB solution (5 mL, 0.2 M) was mixed with 0.1 mL of HAuCl4 (25 mM). Then, 0.6 mL of ice-cold NaBH4 (0.01 M) was quickly added to the mixed solution under vigorous stirring. The seed solution turned brownish-yellow in color 2 min later. And after 15 min of stirring, it was stored at 29 °C for use. For the growth of Au NRs, 4 mL of HAuCl4 (25 mM) and 0.3 mL of AgNO3 (16 mM) were separately added into a 100 mL aqueous solution, and then 100 mL of CTAB solution (0.2 M) was added. 1.5 mL of ascorbic acid (80 mM) was added to reduce Au3+ and Au+. Then, the clear growth solution turned colorless. Sequentially, 240 μL of seed solution was added into the prepared growth solution to start the growth of Au NRs. Finally, the Au NRs were well formed after 24 h at 30 °C. The as-prepared Au NRs were centrifuged once at a speed of 9600 rpm to remove excess CTAB, and then redispersed in deionized water. By changing the amount of AgNO3 solution from 0.26 mL to 1 mL, the length to diameter ratio of Au NRs can be tuned with the longitudinal SP peak shifting from 620 nm to 790 nm.


The preparation of silica coated Au NRs with a silica shell was carried out according to a previously published procedure. Tetraethoxysilane (TEOS), anhydrous ethanol (99.7%), and ammonia aqueous (25%) were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent CO. Ltd. The pH value of 50 mL of the as-prepared Au NR solution was tuned to approximately 9 by adding ammonia aqueous solution, and then 9.5 mL of TEOS ethanol solution (10 mM) was added into the Au NR solution to start the silica coating. Then, the obtained solution was agitated vigorously for 24 h using a magnetic stirrer. Au@SiO2 NRs were collected by centrifugation at 6500 rpm for 15 min and washed twice with deionized water and three times with ethanol. The purified Au@SiO2 NRs were redispersed into 20 mL of ethanol.


The control OSC has a configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7:PC70BM/LiF/Al, named the control cell hereafter. The donor PTB7 (poly[4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-bA′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl) carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]-thiophenediyl]) and the acceptor PC70BM ([6,6]-phenyl-C70-butyric-acid-methyl-ester) were purchased from 1 Material. Chlorobenzene (CB, 99%) was purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent CO. Ltd. PEDOT:PSS was purchased from Heraeus. 1,8-Diiodooctane (DIO, 95%) was purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industry CO. Ltd. All chemicals were of analytical grade and used without further purification. PTB7 and PC70BM were dissolved in CB with 3% DIO at concentrations of 10 mg mL−1 and 15 mg mL−1, respectively. PTB7 and PC70BM were completely dissolved after the solution mixture was stirred vigorously at 60 °C for 12 h. And the stirring needs to be maintained until use. Prior to beginning the fabrication process, the ITO-coated glasses were cleaned successively with deionized water, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol for 10 min in each round, and then they were treated with ultraviolet (UV) ozone for 15 min. The PEDOT:PSS hole transporting layer was spin-coated onto the ITO-coated glass at 3000 rpm for 50 s in air. It took 10 min on a hotplate of 120 °C for the solvent to be evaporated and the remaining PEDOT:PSS film is ∼30 nm thick. Next, a PTB7:PC70BM bulk heterojunction (BHJ) active layer of ∼100 nm thick was spin-coated on top of the PEDOT:PSS layer at 1000 rpm for 50 s in the glove box. To dry the active layer quickly, the samples were placed in a small vacuum chamber for 20 min. Finally, the samples were transferred into a connected thermal evaporation system (with a base pressure of <5.0 × 10−4 Pa) for the deposition of a bilayer LiF/Al(1 nm/100 nm) top electrode. During the fabrication of the hole-only devices, MoO3 was also deposited in the thermal evaporation system. The multilayer films for PL measurements were made using the same methods as in OSC fabrication except for the PTB7 film, for which the solution was prepared by dissolving 10 mg mL−1 PTB7 in CB.

The cross-sectional views of OSCs with Au NRs and Au@SiO2 NRs interposed at the PEDOT:PSS/BHJ interface are shown in Fig. 1. The plasmonic interlayers were obtained by spin-coating the bare Au NR or Au@SiO2 NR solutions at different concentrations (by the dilution method) on top of PEDOT:PSS at 1000 rpm for 40 s. In order to study the effect of Au@SiO2 NRs with higher density on the performance of OSCs, the plasmonic interlayers were also made by the multiple coating approach using the as-prepared Au@SiO2 NR formulation (at a concentration of 3 pM). As such, we obtained OSCs with Au@SiO2 NRs of higher nominal concentrations, e.g., 9 pM and 15 pM, by repeating the spin-coating 3 and 5 times, respectively.

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of Au NRs and Au@SiO2 NRs were taken using a transmission electron microscope at an accelerating voltage of 100 kV (JEOL JEM2100). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the surface of PEDOT:PSS incorporated with Au@SiO2 NRs were recorded using a thermally assisted field emission SEM system (LEO 1530). Extinction spectra of Au NRs and Au@SiO2 NRs in deionized water or ethanol solution were recorded using a UV-visible spectrophotometer (Hitachi U-3900), and absorption spectra of multilayer films were also recorded using a Hitachi U-3900. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of OSCs under AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2 and in the dark were measured using a programmable Source Meter (Keithley 2400). The illumination provided by a Sun 3000 Solar Simulator from ABET Technologies was calibrated using a standard silicon cell. The J–V characteristics of hole-only devices were measured using a Keithley 2400 as well. The EQE of the OSCs as a function of wavelength was recorded using a ZOLIX CSC1011 equipped with a short arc xenon lamp source (Ushio UXL-553). The steady state PL spectra of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7 films with or without the presence of the Au@SiO2 NRs at the PEDOT:PSS/BHJ interface were recorded using a fluorescence spectrophotometer (Tianjin Gangdong Sci.&Tech., F280).


The photos, TEM images, and extinction spectra of different plasmonic NP solutions are given in Fig. 2, in which S1–S4 represent the Au NRs in deionized water, the Au NRs in ethanol, the Au@SiO2 NRs in deionized water, and the Au@SiO2 NRs in ethanol, respectively. Based on the seed-mediated growth method, the synthesized bare Au NRs are capped with a CTAB bilayer, making them positively charged and stabilized in aqueous solution. Here, the obtained Au NRs in deionized water have a clear blue grey color as shown by S1 in Fig. 2(a). The Au NRs have an average length of about 48 nm and a diameter of 24 nm [measured from Fig. 2(b)], exciting a mild transverse localized SP resonance at 519 nm and a strong longitudinal localized SP resonance at 628 nm in deionized water as shown by its extinction spectrum [thin curve, Fig. 2(f)]. The bare Au NRs are dissolved in ethanol, aiming for not deteriorating the previously coated PEDOT:PSS film when the NRs are introduced at the buffer/active interface, but the solution quickly turns dark grey in color [Fig. 2(a), S2]. The extinction spectrum of S2 [thin curve, Fig. 2(g)] clearly shows that the original SP resonances disappear, while a very flat extinction spectrum identified with no apparent peaks is produced. The TEM image of S2 [Fig. 2(c)] shows that obvious aggregation of Au NRs occurs in ethanol solution, resulting in a dark color solution and an abnormal extinction spectrum. This can be explained as follows. The CTAB molecules at the surface of the Au NRs allow the selective adsorption of ethanol molecules and then cause a decrease in the surface charge of the Au NRs. As a result, the Au NRs no longer strongly repel each other but get aggregated as observed. The behavior of Au NR aggregation in ethanol solution was not described in ref. 52, although a similar Au NR synthesis method was used compared to the formulation discussed in the present work.

Based on our results, it is found that the undesirable aggregation of Au NRs can be prevented by coating the NRs with a thin silica shell, i.e., forming Au@SiO2 NRs. Fig. 2(a) reveals that Au@SiO2 NRs in deionized water (S3) and in ethanol (S4) appear as a clear liquid with their color similar to that of S1. TEM images of S3 [Fig. 2(d)] and S4 [Fig. 2(e)] verify that the silica-coated Au NRs can be fully dispersed in both solutions without aggregation. An interesting feature is that the silica-coated Au NRs tend to form clusters instead of appearing individually. From the TEM images, the thickness of the silica shell is ∼8 nm. The extinction spectrum of Au@SiO2 NRs in deionized water (S3) [thick, Fig. 2(f)] indicates that the two SP resonances are red-shifted to 522 nm and 638 nm, respectively, as a result of an increase in the refractive index of the medium surrounding the Au NRs due to the formation of the silica shell. The extinction spectrum of Au@SiO2 NRs in ethanol does not show an obvious change [thick curve, Fig. 2(g)].
The SEM images measured for the PEDOT:PSS surfaces with plasmonic interlayers at different densities of the Au@SiO2 NRs are shown in Fig. 3(a)–(c). It is found that most of the rods are lying parallel to the PEDOT:PSS surface and the NRs are more likely to form clusters instead of appearing individually, similar to the distribution of the NPs observed in Fig. 2(d) and (e). An increase in the concentration yields a higher possibility of the formation of big clusters. An enlarged SEM image, as shown in Fig. 3(d), clearly reveals the clustering effect as well as the core–shell structured Au NRs. From the SEM images shown in Fig. 3(a)–(c), the area densities of the Au@SiO2 NRs on PEDOT:PSS surfaces are estimated to be ∼6, ∼18, and ∼30 NRs per unit area of 1 μm2, respectively, linearly correlated with the nominal concentrations of Au@SiO2 NRs (3 pM, 9 pM, and 15 pM) in ethanol.

Fig. 4(a) shows the J–V characteristics measured for OSCs incorporated with bare Au NRs under illumination of 100 mW cm−2 as well as those of the control cell. It reveals that the OSCs with bare Au NRs perform much worse compared with the control cell, which is mainly attributed to the reduced Voc and FF. The increase in the concentration of bare Au NRs from 0 to 9.0 pM does not lead to an obvious change in Jsc but results in a dramatic drop in Voc. When the OSC is incorporated with the aggregated Au NRs at a relatively high concentration, e.g., 3.0 pM or 9.0 pM, conducting channels are formed between the front and back electrodes, resulting in a device which performs more like a resistor instead of a photodiode. When the OSC is incorporated with aggregated Au NRs at a low concentration (e.g., 0.8 pM), the situation is a bit better as the OSC device still works. But in this case because the buffer/active interface becomes extensively defected, the hole extraction process could be seriously affected, leading to the degradation in Voc along with the increase in series resistance (Rs). In addition, the shunt resistance (Rsh) of the OSC at 0.8 pM also decreases owing to the enhanced leaky current due to the incorporation of the bare Au NRs. All these results reflect that the modification of the PEDOT:PSS surface with a plasmonic interlayer made of bare Au NRs has limitations for application in OSCs.
Instead, after coating the Au NRs with a thin silica shell, the corresponding plasmonic OSCs can considerably outperform the control cell. The average characteristic parameters (with error bars) of OSCs incorporated with Au@SiO2 NRs at different concentrations are calculated based on 10 devices used in the experiments; see Fig. 5 and Table 1. Besides, the characteristic parameters of the best device of each kind are also given in Table 1 and the corresponding J–V curves under the illumination of 100 mW cm−2 are plotted in Fig. 4(b). It is known that the best cells are made with Au@SiO2 NRs at 9.0 pM concentration with an average PCE of 7.45%, which outperform that of the control cell (6.69%) by ∼11.4%. It is also found that the standard deviation of the PCEs of the plasmonic OSCs with relatively low concentration (e.g., 3.0 pM and 9.0 pM) is very much the same as that of the control cell. But when the concentration of Au@SiO2 NRs reaches 15 pM, the fabricated OSCs have pronounced fluctuations in PCE with a standard deviation four times larger than that of the control cell, which might be caused by the possible stacking of NRs formed during multiple spin-coating processes.
Device

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
sh (Ω cm2)
Control
Average
0.746 ± 0.002
13.06 ± 0.077
68.61 ± 0.87
6.69 ± 0.118
6.46 ± 0.85
766.8 ± 38.0
Best
0.751
13.01
70.30
6.87
5.55
827.3
w/3.0 pM Au@SiO2 NRS
Average
0.753 ± 0.005
13.82 ± 0.201
70.14 ± 1.20
7.31 ± 0.087
4.85 ± 0.34
576.0 ± 24.4
Best
0.757
13.80
71.30
7.44
4.46
603.8
w/9.0 pM Au@SiO2 NRS
Average
0.751 ± 0.003
14.70 ± 0.211
67.31 ± 1.10
7.45 ± 0.093
5.05 ± 0.29
358.6 ± 39.2
Best
0.758
14.52
68.23
7.64
4.68
450.0
w/15.0 pM Au@SiO2 NRS
Average
0.739 ± 0.012
13.87 ± 0.327
60.84 ± 4.74
6.24 ± 0.486
6.13 ± 0.90
198.1 ± 51.3
Best
0.756
14.12
62.80
6.71
5.00
284.0

Table 1 indicates that for all of the demonstrated plasmonic OSCs with Au@SiO2 NRs, the degradation in Voc, which takes place for the OSCs with bare Au NRs as shown in Fig. 4(a), does not occur. It is found that the average Voc of the plasmonic OSCs at 3.0 pM or 9.0 pM is even a bit higher than that of the control cell. It is also clear that the plasmonic OSCs with Au@SiO2 NRs possess a higher Jsc compared to that of the control cell, mainly responsible for the enhanced PCE. The highest Jsc of 14.52 mA cm−2 was obtained for the OSC incorporating 9.0 pM Au@SiO2 NRs, displaying an 11.6% increase over that of the control cell. From Table 1, it is found that when the concentration of Au@SiO2 NRs is low (e.g., 3.0 pM), the corresponding OSC has a slight reduction in both Rs and Rsh, resulting in the FF being even a bit higher than that of the control cell. However, when the concentration of Au@SiO2 NRs is 15 pM, Rsh decreases significantly, leading to an ∼10% drop in FF with respect to the control cell. For our best cell, there is a small decrease in Rs and an obvious decrease in Rsh compared to the control cell, overall leading to a small reduction in FF (1.2%). But the enhancement of Jsc overwhelms the reduction of FF so that our best plasmonic cell can outperform the control cell by ∼11% in PCE.
The leading cause of good Voc is due to the elimination of the aggregation of NPs. After the well-dispersed Au@SiO2 NRs are spin-coated on top of the PEDOT:PSS surface, only a small part of the PEDOT:PSS surface is occupied by the clustered Au@SiO2 NRs as depicted in the SEM images [Fig. 3(a) and (b)]. It is deduced that at 3.0 pM or 9.0 pM, the buffer/active interface in the plasmonic OSC with Au@SiO2 NRs did not show a dramatic change from that in the control cell, explaining why Voc does not degrade. The small increase in Voc has also been reported in some published reports which similarly introduced plasmonic NPs at the buffer/active interface, but little attention has been focused on it. Here, we explain this phenomenon as follows. It is reported that for BHJ solar cells, when the HOMO of the hole transport layer (HTL) is higher than that of the donor material, Voc could be strongly influenced by the injection barrier for holes at the HTL/donor interface. It is the case with our cell as the HOMO of the HTL (i.e., PEDOT:PSS) and the donor (i.e., PTB7) is −5.0 eV and −5.15 eV, respectively. It is reasonable to infer that the surface modification by Au@SiO2 NRs could introduce so-called dopant levels within the band gap of PEDOT:PSS, resulting in a decrease in the energy barrier at the PEDOT:PSS/BHJ interface, thereby improving hole extraction. To prove this inference, we fabricated a series of hole-only devices with a configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS(100 nm)/MoO3(5 nm)/Ag, with or without the Au@SiO2 NRs presented on top of the PEDOT:PSS surface for comparison. The corresponding J–V characteristics are shown in Fig. 6(a). It can be clearly observed that the slopes of the J–V curves of all plasmonic hole-only devices are larger (corresponding to higher hole conductivity) than that of the device without any NPs. It means that holes can be extracted more easily in the proposed plasmonic OSCs than in the control cell. This is also consistent with the decrease in series resistance of OSCs with Au@SiO2 NRs, as listed in Table 1. According to ref. 23, efficient hole extraction could decrease the possibility of electron/hole recombination, yielding the observed increase in Voc.

Fig. 6(b) plots the J–V characteristics for the OSCs with and without Au@SiO2 NRs in the dark. It is seen that the current rectification ratio (forward to reverse bias current at ±1 V) decreases gradually and the leakage current increases gradually with the increase of the concentration of Au@SiO2 NRs, consistent with the gradual reduction in the shunt resistance as indicated in Table 1. This must be associated with the interface defects introduced after incorporating Au@SiO2 NRs on top of PEDOT:PSS. From the SEM images shown in Fig. 3(a)–(c), it is known that the particle density at the PEDOT:PSS/BHJ interface increases with the Au@SiO2 NR concentration. The larger the number of nanoparticles introduced into the OSC, the higher the density of the defects at the interface, increasing the charge recombination and therefore the leakage current.
In the following, we focus on comparing the performances of the best plasmonic OSC (with 9.0 pM Au@SiO2 NRs) and the control cell, aiming at better understanding the plasmonic induced increase in Jsc as well as addressing the corresponding reason. First, the EQE versus the wavelength of both cells was measured and is displayed in Fig. 7(a). For the device with Au@SiO2 NRs (9 pM), the EQE is higher than that of the control cell over a broadband wavelength range, covering almost the whole absorption band of PTB7:PC70BM. The increase in EQE (indicated by Δ), defined as the difference between the EQE of the plasmonic and control cells divided by that of the control cell, is plotted in the inset of Fig. 7(a). It is observed that there is an average 10% increase in the EQE of the cell with Au@SiO2 NRs (9.0 pM). The Jsc calibrated by the EQE for the best plasmonic OSC is 13.72 mA cm−2, having a 10.4% increase over that of the control cell (12.42 mA cm−2) consistent with the results from the J–V characteristic measurements.
Next, the enhancement of the EQE can be explained by resorting to electromagnetic calculations based on the three-dimensional finite element method (FEM) utilizing the commercial software of COSMOL Multiphysics. First, a strong enhancement in EQE within the wavelength range from 500 nm to 700 nm where the SP resonances of Au@SiO2 NRs are located is observed. By calculation, we find that the peaks of the localized SP resonances of the Au@SiO2 NRs are red-shifted to 560 nm and 680 nm after introducing the NRs into the present OSC system. Electric field distributions at the two wavelengths around the Au@SiO2 NRs with the displayed plane parallel to the PEDOT:PSS surface are plotted in Fig. 7(b) and (c), respectively. The polarizations of the incident electric field at 560 nm and 680 nm are along the short-axis and the long-axis of the NR, respectively, aimed at exciting the corresponding SP resonance. In both figures, a strong enhancement in the electric field localized near the vicinity of the NRs is clearly observed. We deduce that the enhanced electric field must be responsible for the improved exciton generation in the active layer. It is observed that the enhancement in the EQE spectrum over the wavelength range from 500 nm to 700 nm shows some deviation from the extinction spectrum of Au@SiO2 NRs, which might be due to the clustering effect of Au@SiO2 NRs and/or the change in electrical properties, e.g., charge recombination, charge transport, etc., discussed above. At wavelengths longer than 700 nm, there is a strong peak in the EQE enhancement spectrum (Δ), as shown in the inset of Fig. 7(a). Being aware that the Au@SiO2 NRs tend to form clusters on top of the PEDOT:PSS surface, we then study a simple example with two particles linked end to end with a 5 nm separation in simulation. Under illumination at the polarization directed along the long-axis, the longitudinal SP resonances between the neighboring NRs couple with each other at a wavelength of 720 nm, as shown in Fig. 7(d), in agreement with the experimental results. It is seen in Fig. 7(d) that the intensity of the electric field near the vicinity of the NR pairs significantly exceeds that for a single NR [Fig. 7(c)]. For the minor peak in the EQE enhancement spectrum (Δ) at wavelengths shorter than 500 nm, also reported in ref. 63–65, so far we do not have a clear explanation for it. But from the extinction spectrum of the Au@SiO2 NRs [Fig. 2(a)], it is seen that the extinction of light is also quite strong in this wavelength region due to transitions between the electronic bands in the bulk Au. It is proposed that the inter-band transition in Au, accompanied by the generation of heat may affect the exciton generation rate around the NPs, thereby being responsible for the observed enhancement in EQE in the short wavelength range.

Fig. 8(a) shows a double logarithmic plot of photocurrent density (Jph) as a function of the effective voltage (Veff). Here, Jph = JL − JD, where JL and JD are the current densities under illumination and in the dark, respectively; Veff = V0 − Va, where V0 is the built-in voltage measured at Jph = 0, and Va is the applied bias. When the effective voltage is lower than 0.1 V, the photocurrent for both cells increases linearly as the effective voltage increases, and then tends to saturate. Here, we see that the photocurrent generated at low Veff for the plasmonic OSC is lower than that for the control cell due to the relatively high charge recombination induced by the surface defects formed during the incorporation of Au@SiO2 NRs. The photocurrent further increases with the effective voltage at higher reverse voltage (Veff > 1 V). From the tendency of the Jph–Veff curves shown in Fig. 8(a), it is deduced that the saturated photocurrent (i.e., the photocurrent at sufficiently high effective voltage) for the plasmonic OSC is predicted to be much higher than that of the control cell. Under the assumption that all of the photo-generated excitons are dissociated at a sufficiently high electric field, the saturated photocurrent through the external circuit then depends linearly on the maximum exciton generation rate, which is a measure of the maximum number of photons absorbed. Therefore, the elevated saturated photocurrent suggests that enhanced light absorption takes place in the active layer of the plasmonic OSC compared to the control cell.
In the following, different multilayer films were fabricated with their absorption spectra being characterized. The two curves with solid symbols in Fig. 8(b) show the absorption spectra of two multilayer films in the configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7:PC70BM with or without the Au@SiO2 NRs (9 pM) at the PEDOT:PSS/BHJ interface. It is found that a considerable enhancement in absorption over a broad wavelength range, covering almost the whole absorption band of PTB7:PC70BM, is identified with the presence of NRs, similar to the occurrence in EQE measurements. But it is hard to identify whether the enhanced absorption is from PTB7:PC70BM or not, because the NPs also contribute to the total absorption but they turn light into heat instead of photocurrent. Here, the absorption spectra of another two multilayer films in the configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS with or without the Au@SiO2 NRs (9 pM) on top of the PEDOT:PSS surface [open symbols, Fig. 8(b)] were recorded to clarify the origin of the enhanced absorption. It is found that surface modification with Au@SiO2 NRs also improves the absorption of the ITO/PEDOT:PSS film over a broadband wavelength range, but the absolute intensity of absorption enhancement (from the plasmonic NPs and PEDOT:PSS) is very minor. However, as seen, the absorption enhancement that occurs in ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7:PC70BM films with or without Au@SiO2 NRs is much larger than that occurring in ITO/PEDOT:PSS films. Such a huge increase in absorption should not mainly come from the plasmonic components but should be attributed to the active layer. Therefore, it is confirmed that the incorporation of Au@SiO2 NRs can improve the light absorption in the active layer, thereby increasing the exciton generation in OSCs.
To further identify that the incorporation of Au@SiO2 NRs can lead to the enhancement in the photon-to-exciton process in the active layer, steady state PL spectra of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7 films with or without Au@SiO2 NRs (9 pM) at the PEDOT:PSS/PTB7 interface were recorded. Here, the PC70BM acceptor is excluded in the PL measurement aiming at eliminating the process of non-radiative transition of excitons. As a result, the fluorescence intensity is mainly dependent on the density of photo-generated excitons in PTB7. The measured results at the excited wavelength of 680 nm are shown as an example [Fig. 8(c)], indicating that PTB7 with adjacent Au@SiO2 NRs has a much higher PL intensity than that of the pure PTB7 film. The PL measurements confirm that the plasmonic NPs indeed enhance the absorption in PTB7 by exciting the localized SP resonances, thereby increasing the exciton generation rate in PTB7.

The results of this work demonstrated that the decrease in the open circuit voltage of OSCs with bare Au NRs at the PEDOT:PSS/BHJ interface is caused by the aggregation of bare Au NRs in ethanol solution. Such aggregation of Au NRs can be prevented by adopting Au@SiO2 core–shell structured NRs. The use of Au@SiO2 NRs at the PEDOT:PSS/BHJ interface enables an ∼11% increase in Jsc and PCE in PTB7:PC70BM-based OSCs. It also reflects that with the presence of Au@SiO2 NRs, both Rsh and Rs are reduced; overall, the fill factor of the optimized plasmonic OSC only has a negligible reduction compared to that of the control cell. Moreover, a small increase in Voc is observed in the plasmonic OSC. The increase in Jsc corresponds to a considerable enhancement in EQE over a broad wavelength range, covering the whole absorption band of PTB7:PC70BM. Electromagnetic simulations reveal that the excitation of transverse and longitudinal SP resonances yields a strong electric field near the vicinity of the coated NRs, responsible for the increase in exciton generation in the active layer over the wavelength range from 500 nm to 700 nm. Moreover, the automatically formed Au@SiO2 NR clusters can generate an even stronger electric field at a wavelength of ∼720 nm than the bare NRs, due to the mutual coupling of longitudinal SP resonances produced by the closely packed NPs, resulting in a strong enhancement peak in the EQE at the corresponding wavelength. The subtly designed electrical and optical measurements confirm that the addition of plasmonic NPs indeed benefits the absorption in the active layer, thereby improving the exciton generation in OSCs. The study of hole-only devices reflects that in the plasmonic OSCs, hole extraction is improved with the presence of Au@SiO2 NRs at the PEDOT:PSS surface, responsible for the observed increase in Voc and the decrease in Rs. This work contributes to a comprehensive understanding of the mechanism of plasmonic improved OSCs along with the development of thin film photovoltaics.


This research work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (11204205, 61475109, 61274056, 61275037, and 61405062), Outstanding Young Scholars of Shanxi Province, Hong Kong Scholar Program (XJ2013002), the Doctoral Program of Higher Education Research Fund (20121402120017), and China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2014M550152, 2013M530368, and 2014T70818). We acknowledge Qingyi Yang and Weixia Lan for SEM characterization, and Prof. Ping Huang for the use of PL measurement equipment. Cui also acknowledges Dr Qingkun Liu and Dr Bo Wu for helpful discussions and Yang Hao for some data processing.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015