 DOI: 10.1039/D2TC03039J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 16781-16788


Lei
Zhang
,

Jiaxin
Gao
,

Zuhao
You
,

Qi
Li
,

Ming
Liu
,

Zaifei
Ma
 and 

Yao
Liu
*

State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing, 100029, China. E-mail: liuyao@mail.buct.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials, Center for Advanced Low-dimension Materials, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University, Shanghai, 201620, China

Received
19th July 2022
, Accepted 18th October 2022
First published on 18th October 2022
Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites have attracted a lot of research attention because of their superior optoelectrical properties and great promise for commercialization. Yet, a large number of defects and trap states in perovskites resulted in high device energy loss and hindered their performance as active layers in optoelectronic devices, including solar cells. Here, we designed and synthesized a typical polymer zwitterion (PMPC) with side chains of phosphorylcholine (PC) through reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT) polymerization. This synthesis provides a platform to combine various functional groups (e.g., zwitterions, Lewis bases and carboxylic acid) in one polymer chain, affording a multifunctional polymer passivator, which shows the ability to suppress the non-radiative recombination in perovskites, to the benefit of decreasing the voltage loss (Vloss) and enhancing the build-in potential (Vbi) of the solar cell devices. The integration of PMPC into perovskite precursors improves the crystallization and passivates the defects of perovskite films, to alleviate the space charge limit and suppress the trap-assisted recombination process in solar cell devices. Finally, PMPC passivation improved the solar cell efficiency from 18.77% to 20.16% along with better device stability. This notable optimization of perovskite devices using the phosphorylcholine-based polymer zwitterion provides a straightforward molecular design strategy to achieve multifunctional materials for perovskite passivation.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites have been the focus of numerous studies in the last two decades due to their superior optoelectrical properties, such as high absorption coefficient, low exciton binding energy and long carrier-diffusion length. Particularly, inverted (p–i–n) planar perovskite solar cells (PSCs) with the advantages of low-temperature solution processing and less current–voltage scan hysteresis are promising for the fabrication of flexible or tandem devices. Recent breakthroughs in inverted (p–i–n) planar PSCs have proved that such device design can generate comparable solar cell performance to its mesoscopic or conventional (n–i–p) planar counterparts, showing the potential of such simple device fabrication to achieve higher efficiency through more comprehensive device optimization. Although the nature of the organic–inorganic hybrid in perovskites endows these materials with excellent characteristics of tunable electronic structures, this, on the other hand, makes it easy to introduce more defects in the perovskites during preparation and post-treatment. The composition of this organic–inorganic hybrid makes it highly susceptible to various physical fields, such as light, electric, stress and thermal fields, etc. As a result, defects such as vacancies, interstitials, anti-site substitutions, and dangling bonds generally exist on the polycrystalline film surface or grain boundaries of perovskites. These defects tend to induce charge carrier recombination, suppress the separation of electron–hole pairs, result in charge losses at the interface of the perovskite/charge transport layer, cause higher energy loss and degrade the long-term stability of the devices. Hence, it is essential to develop efficient strategies to passivate the defects in perovskites for higher solar cell efficiency and stability.

A variety of small molecules and polymers were found to have a passivation effect on the defects of perovskites. For example, organic materials containing S, N, O and P atoms can work as Lewis bases to passivate the positively charged defects, such as under-coordinated Pb2+ in perovskites. Some highly polarized small molecules or polymers with carboxylic acid groups are also proved to be efficient passivators to modify the bulk or surface of perovskite thin films. Zwitterionic materials are a class of unique electrolytes, where both cationic and anionic moieties are covalently tethered on the same chain. Compared with common electrolytes, zwitterions lack mobile counterions that negatively impact device operation, which are theoretically proved to passivate two typical deep trap states, such as anionic Pb–I antisites and cationic Pb clusters, and widely used to optimize perovskite thin films. For example, sulfobetaine-based small molecular additives can promote the crystallization of perovskites and improve the quality of perovskite films for large area device fabrication. Huang and co-workers performed a good work utilizing phosphorylcholine-based small molecule zwitterions (L-α-phosphatidylcholine) as functional passivation layers on perovskites to achieve high performance solar cells. Phosphorylcholine-based small molecular surfactants are also common zwitterions, showing unique passivation effects with the PO bonds in PO43− selectively anchoring onto the perovskite surface through the coordination between O atoms and halide deficient sites. Yet, polymer zwitterions based on phosphorylcholine have not been investigated as passivators in perovskite optimization. It has been reported that perovskite films with better morphology and crystallinity can be obtained by introducing suitable polymers into perovskite precursors. The long polymer chains form a network among the perovskite crystalline grains, which can improve the film morphology and device stability. Since polymers have the advantage of easy integration of small molecular monomers into a single molecular chain through polymerization, it is attractive to combine various functional groups (e.g., zwitterions, Lewis bases and carboxylic acid) in one polymer chain to achieve more efficient passivators for perovskites.
Herein, we synthesized a typical polymer zwitterion (PMPC) with side chains of phosphorylcholine (PC) through reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT) polymerization. This synthesis proved efficient to integrate different chemical structures with a passivation effect on perovskites into one polymer chain, affording a multifunctional polymer passivator with controllable molecular weight (Mn: 17.2 kDa, Mw: 21.2 kDa) and batch-to-batch reproductivity. PMPC can efficiently reduce the non-radiative recombination of perovskites due to the passivation effect of the functional groups in the polymer, which is beneficial for decreasing the energy loss (Eloss) and enhancing the build-in potential (Vbi) of the solar cell devices. Moreover, the use of PMPC promoted crystallization of perovskites and reduced the trap densities in or between perovskite grain boundaries, to the benefit of alleviating the space charge limit and suppressing the trap-assisted recombination process in solar cell devices. As a result, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the PSCs is improved from 18.77% to 20.16%, along with a lower energy loss of 0.48 eV and better device stability, after the passivation of perovskites with the phosphorylcholine-based polymer zwitterion.

PMPC and PDI-NOH were synthesized according to the literature.N,N-Dimethylformamide (DMF, anhydrous, 99.8%), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, anhydrous, 99.8%), ethyl acetate (EA, anhydrous, 99.8%), trifluoroethanol (TFE, 99.0%) and chlorobenzene (CB, anhydrous, 99.8%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Methylammonium iodide (MAI), [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM), and poly[bis(4-phenyl) (2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA, Mn = 10000, Mw = 18000, 99.999%) were purchased from Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Corp. Lead iodide (PbI2) was obtained from TCI. All chemicals were used without any further purification.


All chemicals were used without any further purification. The inverted PSC device structure is indium tin oxide (ITO)/PMPC@PTAA/perovskite or perovskite:PMPC/PC61BM/PDI-NOH/Ag. ITO-coated glass substrates (15 Ω sq−1) were cleaned through ultrasonic treatment in detergent, deionized water, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol for 10 min, sequentially. Then the ITO substrates were dried at 60 °C in an oven for 4 h. The cleaned ITO substrates were treated with UV-ozone for 15 min and then transferred into a glovebox. Then, PTAA (2 mg mL−1 in toluene) was spin-coated onto the substrate at 5000 rpm for 30 s, followed by spin-coating the PMPC solution (0.2 mg mL−1 in TFE) at 4000 rpm for 30 s, then the substrates were annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. The perovskite precursor solution was prepared by dissolving PbI2 (1.42 M) and MAI (1.4 M) in a mixed solvent of DMF:DMSO = 9:1 (volume ratio). The precursor solution was stirred at 60 °C overnight. The prepared 1.4 M CH3NH3PbI3 precursor solution was spin-coated at 1000 rpm (acceleration rate: 500 rpm s−1) for 10 s and 5500 rpm (acceleration rate: 2000 rpm s−1) for 15 s. 180 μL antisolvent EA was dropped onto the rotating substrate at 10 s prior to the end. For the fabrication of perovskite:PMPC-based active layers, 0.02 mg mL−1 PMPC solution (mixed solvent of DMF:DMSO = 9:1 (volume ratio)) was used to dissolve perovskite precursors. Next, the as-cast films were annealed at 100 °C for 10 min in a glove box filled with N2. After cooling the samples to room temperature, PC61BM (20 mg mL−1 in CB) and PDI-NOH (3 mg mL−1 in TFE) were spin-coated onto the perovskite layers at 2000 and 4000 rpm for 40 s, sequentially. Finally, 100 nm Ag electrodes were evaporated under high vacuum (1 × 10−6 mbar) to finish the device fabrication.


We fabricated fullerene/MAPbI3 perovskite planar heterojunction solar cells, shown in Fig. 1a, on ITO substrates. The widely used high-performance organic hole transport layer (HTL) PTAA was coated onto ITO substrates for hole extraction. However, due to the non-wetting surface of the PTAA layer towards the perovskite precursor solution, it is challenging to prepare high quality perovskite films on PTAA-coated ITO substrates. The phosphorylcholine-based polymer zwitterion (PMPC) is more hydrophilic than PTAA (Fig. S1 a and b, ESI), which is potentially more compatible with the perovskite precursor solutions. We thus first modified the PTAA surface by coating a dilute PMPC solution on top of it. The 1 H NMR spectrum and GPC of PMPC are shown in Fig. S2 and S3 (ESI). Then, as we expected the solvent (DMF/DMSO) used for dissolving perovskite precursors shows much reduced contact angles on the PTAA/ITO surface after the modifications (Fig. S1 c and d, ESI). We next spin-coated the perovskite precursor solution (PbI2 and MAI in DMF/DMSO with or without PMPC) onto the modified PTAA/ITO substrates, followed by flushing with the anti-solvent and thermal annealing at 100 °C for 10 min to form the photoactive layer. Due to the better wetting of precursor solutions on modified PTAA layers, we can obtain uniform, fully covered and pinhole-free perovskite films on the hydrophobic HTL (i.e., PTAA). The precursor (PbI2 and MAI in DMF/DMSO) containing PMPC can generate perovskite films with larger crystals as shown in the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images (Fig. 2). The grain size distribution (insets in the SEM images) shows the perovskites without PMPC passivation having an average grain size of about 190 nm. When adding PMPC, the average grain size of the perovskite films increased to 325 nm with a narrower distribution (Fig. 2b). Fig. S4a and b (ESI) show the atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of the pristine and perovskite:PMPC films, which show a smoother surface by PMPC passivation. The cross-sectional SEM images of the pristine and perovskite:PMPC films are shown in Fig. S4c and d (ESI). Also, as shown in the cross-sectional SEM image in Fig. 1b, in the perovskite films with PMPC passivation, there are uniform perovskite crystals (∼500 nm) forming a condensed pack with a film thickness of ∼650 nm. PC61BM was coated onto the perovskite layers to serve as the electron transport layer (ETL), followed by depositing a thin interfacial modification layer of PDI-NOH. The 1H and 13C NMR spectra of PDI-NOH are shown in Fig. S5 and S6 (ESI). Finally, silver (Ag) electrodes were deposited by thermal evaporation on top of the interlayer to collect electrons. PDI-NOH can reduce the work function (WF) of the Ag electrode to align energy levels at the device interface for efficient electron extraction.


Fig. 3a shows the representative current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the solar cell devices fabricated using perovskite precursors with or without the PMPC passivator. Devices without PMPC passivation gave average/maximum PCE values of 18.01/18.77%, while adding PMPC into the perovskites improved the average/maximum PCE values to 19.45/20.16%. This notable improvement in device performance resulting from PMPC passivation is due to the synergistic increase in the key device parameters of open-circuit voltage (VOC) (1.09 to 1.12 V), fill factor (FF) (76.11 to 78.44%), and short circuit current density (JSC) (21.69 to 22.16 mA cm−2) (Table 1). As polymers have been reported to prevent the formation of voids in perovskite films, the addition of a polymer would change the viscosity of the solution during deposition and result in the formation of thicker films. These effects could explain the increase in photogenerated currents observed in perovskite:PMPC films. The optimal device performance as shown in Fig. 3b shows a negligible hysteresis in the J–V forward and reverse scans, indicating a high quality of the perovskite devices. The corresponding external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum of the optimal device is shown in Fig. 3c, affording an integrated current density of 21.72 mA cm−2, in agreement with the value measured from the J–V curve within a 5% error. The steady-state output PCE of the optimal perovskite device (with PMPC passivation) is measured under a constant bias voltage of 0.94 V, giving a stabilized efficiency of 19.48% (Fig. 3d), which is consistent with the J–V measurement and higher compared to devices without PMPC passivation. The PCE histograms of the control and the optimized devices (Fig. 3e) and the statistic distribution of the photovoltaic parameters (Fig. S7, ESI) exhibit good reproducibility of the devices and further verify the average PCE enhancement. We next compared the storage stability of the control and the optimized devices. As shown in Fig. 3f, after 500 h storage, the devices with PMPC passivation still maintain over 90% of the initial PCEs, while the control devices show a rapid degradation under the same conditions. As a result, the designed polymer zwitterion (i.e., PMPC) is an efficient and multifunctional passivator that not only improves the solar cell efficiency, but also makes the perovskite devices more stable.
Cells

V
OC (V)
PCE (%)
FF (%)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
Perovskite
1.10
18.77
77.85
21.94
1.09 ± 0.01
18.01 ± 0.42
76.11 ± 0.84
21.69 ± 0.44
Perovskite:PMPC
1.12
20.16
79.06
22.75
1.12 ± 0.01
19.45 ± 0.41
78.44 ± 0.96
22.16 ± 0.34
We compared the Vloss of the solar cell devices to explain the VOC increase of the devices after PMPC modifications. In solar cells, the Vloss is usually used to assess the energy loss in the photoelectron conversion process, including the radiative recombination loss and non-radiative recombination loss. Theoretically, the Vloss in solar cells consists of three loss terms, as given in the following equation:
where
Eg is the bandgap, which is calculated using the Tauc plot from the ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra of the perovskite films (Fig. S8, ESI). ΔV1 and ΔV2 represent the radiative voltage loss above the energy bandgap and below the energy bandgap, respectively. ΔV3 is the non-radiative voltage loss. VSQOC is the maximum VOC derived from the Shockley–Queisser (SQ) limit. VradOC is the radiative recombination limit of the VOC, which can be calculated using the radiative recombination limit from the dark saturation current density (Jrad0), as follows:
where
q is the elementary charge, k is the Boltzmann constant, and Jph is the photocurrent density of the device under open-circuit conditions (assumed to be equivalent to the JSC). E is the energy of the photons and ϕBB is the blackbody photon flux at 300 K. As shown in Fig. S9 (ESI), we obtained the EQEPV plot (sEQE spectrum) by attaching the EQE spectrum with the measured electroluminescence (EL) spectrum converted using the reciprocity relation: EL(E) = EQE(E) × ϕBB(E).

The corresponding Vloss values of the devices with or without PMPC passivation are summarized in Table 2. After PMPC passivation, the radiative recombination loss of the device has no change, while the non-radiative coincidence loss of the device has obviously decreased, which makes the Vloss of the device decrease by 50 mV. Compared to other reported passivators, PMPC demonstrates a great potential to reduce the voltage loss of PSCs based on MAPbI3 perovskites (Table S1, ESI). This shows that PMPC passivation is an effective method to reduce the energy loss of PSCs. Mott–Schottky analysis (Fig. S10, ESI) also confirmed the increase of the built-in potential (Vbi) (70 mV) of the PSCs after PMPC passivation, which further supported the improvement of the VOC of the devices. We next performed space charge limited current (SCLC) characterizations to analyze the influence of PMPC passivation on the density of states (Nd) of the perovskites (Fig. 4a). In the hole-only perovskite devices, the current density increases linearly with the voltage in the Ohmic region, then undergoes nonlinear growth in the trap-filled limited region, with an inflection point between the two regions giving the trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL), and finally exhibits quadratic voltage dependence in Child's region. The VTFL derived from the SCLC measurements is 0.160 V and 0.115 V for the control device and the PMPC-passivated device. Thus, PMPC passivation decreased the Nd of the perovskites from 2.36 × 1015 cm−3 to 1.7 × 1015 cm−3, which is an efficient process to fill trap defects to the benefit of increasing the VOC of PSCs. Moreover, the mobility (μh) is extrapolated from the J–V curves by using the space charge limited current (SCLC) method (Fig. 4a) with the calibrated Mott–Gurney equation: J = 9ε0εrμhV2/8d3. After the calculation, the hole mobility of the perovskite films increased from 0.11 to 0.16 cm2 V−1 s−1 by PMPC passivation, which further proved that the introduction of PMPC reduced the recombination in the perovskite films. The presence of dipole moments in PMPC may alter the energy levels between PTAA and the perovskite. This may lead to enhanced interfacial charge extraction.
Cells

V
oc (V)

E
g (eV)

V
loss (V)

V
SQOC (V)

V
radOC (V)
ΔV1 (V)
ΔV2 (V)
ΔV3 (V)
Perovskite
1.06
1.59
0.53
1.31
1.26
0.28
0.05
0.20
Perovskite:PMPC
1.11
1.59
0.48
1.31
1.26
0.28
0.05
0.15
To evaluate the effect of defects on device performance, we further studied the trap density of states (tDOS) of the perovskite devices with or without PMPC passivation through the thermal admittance spectroscopy (TAS) analysis. TAS is an effective technique to characterize both shallow and deep defects in thin film solar cell devices. As shown in Fig. 4b, the device with PMPC passivation has a lower tDOS over the whole trap depth region than the control device. Specifically, both shallow trap states (0.33–0.40 eV) and deep trap states (0.40–0.58 eV) are suppressed by PMPC, indicating an efficient restraint of energy loss in perovskite devices containing PMPC.
We further evaluated the charge carrier recombination behavior of PSCs by studying the dependence of JSC and VOC on various light intensities (Plight). The relationship between JSC and Plight can be described using the equation: JSC ∝ Palight. As shown in Fig. 4c, the fitted exponential factors α of PSCs with and without PMPC passivation are 0.99 and 0.97, respectively, indicating that PMPC is beneficial for alleviating the space charge limit in perovskite devices. The trap-assisted (Shockley–Read–Hall) recombination can be evaluated using the formula: VOC ∝ (nkT/q) ln(Plight), where q is the elementary charge (1.6 × 10−19 C), k is the Boltzmann constant (1.38 × 10−23 J K−1), and T is the Kelvin temperature. This correlation between VOC and Plight can be used to assess trap-assisted recombination of the devices according to previous reports. As shown in Fig. 4d, devices with PMPC passivation exhibit a smaller slope (1.59kT/q) than the control devices (1.73kT/q). Thus, the trap-assisted recombination process in PSCs was effectively suppressed by the passivation of PMPC. The dark saturation current density of the solar cell devices was also used to assess the impact of PMPC passivation on the charge recombination process. Generally, the lower dark currents lead to lower charge recombination and longer carrier lifetimes, thus delivering a better solar cell performance. Dark J–V curves (Fig. S11, ESI) show that the PSCs with PMPC passivation have a dark current that is 2 or 3 orders of magnitude lower than that of the reference, indicating that the introduction of PMPC significantly reduced the recombination in the active layer and improved the poor interfacial contact near the active layer.
To understand the effect of PMPC on the charge separation and recombination of perovskite films, we tested the steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence (SSPL, Fig. 5a, and TRPL, Fig. 5b) of the perovskite samples with or without PMPC. The enhanced PL intensity provides evidence that PMPC can suppress nonradiative recombination by reducing the defect sites. The TRPL shows a bi-exponential decay with a fast and a slow decay process. The average PL lifetime (τaverage) of the perovskite films increased from 61.98 to 96.45 ns by PMPC passivation (Table S2, ESI). Generally, the fast decay process (τ1) is due to bimolecular recombination of photo-generated free charges, and the slow decay process (τ2) is attributed mainly to trap-assisted recombination. The passivation of PMPC mainly impacts the slow decay process. For the trap-assisted recombination, the PL lifetime of the perovskite films increased from 68.55 to 102.56 ns after PMPC passivation. Moreover, the confocal photoluminescence (PL) mapping (Fig. 5c) is used to identify the optoelectronic properties of the perovskite film surface. The pristine perovskite film shows a larger dark area, indicating that more non-radiative recombination appears in the perovskite cluster boundary, while the PMPC passivated perovskite film (Fig. 5d) shows a uniform PL distribution due to the suppression of non-radiative recombination on the perovskite surface. Thus, PMPC can effectively reduce trap states and extend the charge lifetime in perovskites.
We performed X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) measurements to investigate the interaction between PMPC and perovskites. The XPS survey spectra of the pristine perovskite and perovskite:PMPC-based films are shown in Fig. S12 (ESI). For the Pb 4f peak (Fig. 6a) of the pristine perovskite, the peaks at 138.5 eV and 143.4 eV are assigned to Pb 4f7/2 and Pb 4f5/2, which have shifted to lower binding energies after PMPC passivation. Such a notable binding energy shift of Pb 4f is ascribed to the decline of the cationic charge of under-coordinated Pb2+ within the perovskites, which is most likely due to the donation of lone pair electrons within the phosphate groups (PO43−) in PMPC through the coordinate interaction. Similarly, the binding energy shift of I 3d (Fig. 6b) also confirmed the interaction between PMPC and perovskites. The stoichiometry of I:Pb in perovskite films decreased from 3.62 to 3.34 after PMPC passivation as estimated from the XPS data, an indication of the reduced I-rich region in PMPC modified perovskite films. The binding energy of S 2p shifts toward the lower energy region from 161.4 to 160.6 eV after PMPC modification, indicating that the S element in PMPC serves as an electron donor to coordinate with lead, which alleviates the reduced electron localization around lead atoms caused by iodine vacancy defects (Fig. S13d, ESI). Also, as shown in Fig. S13e (ESI), the P peak has a 0.24 eV shift toward higher binding energies in the PMPC:perovskite sample, indicating the passivation effect of PO43− on perovskites. In the FTIR spectra (Fig. 6c), the peak located at 1252 cm−1 represents the stretching vibration absorption of PO in pristine PMPC, which slightly shifted to lower wavenumbers of 1242 cm−1 when adding PMPC into perovskites, while the stretching vibration absorption of P–O at 1087 cm−1 has no obvious shift in perovskite:PMPC films. The result shows that the coordination with Pb2+ in PO43− is mainly provided by PO. Meanwhile, the peak located at 923 cm−1 represents the stretching vibration of PO43− in PMPC, which also shifts to 909 cm−1 when interacting with perovskites. Additionally, the wavenumbers of 1728 and 1649 cm−1 are assigned to the stretching vibration absorption of CO in pristine PMPC, which shift to lower wavenumbers of 1719 and 1631 cm−1 when blending PMPC with perovskites, confirming the synergistic passivation of PMPC. Moreover, the quaternary ammonium can passivate A-site cation vacancies, compensate the MA+ vacancies, promote perovskite crystallization, and restrain the formation of nonradiative recombination centers. Thus, the phosphorylcholine-based polymer zwitterion (i.e., PMPC) can function as a multifunctional passivator containing various chemical groups coordinating with under-coordinated Pb2+. We finally studied the impact of PMPC on the crystallization of perovskites through X-ray diffraction (XRD) characterization (Fig. 6d). Both the perovskite samples with and without PMPC show strong characteristic diffraction peaks at 14.24°, 28.54°, and 31.98°, assigned to the (110), (220), and (310) diffraction planes of perovskite crystals, respectively. The similar diffraction patterns of both perovskite samples reveal that PMPC is not integrated into the perovskite crystal lattice to induce a phase transition. Yet, the diffraction peaks of PMPC modified perovskite films become stronger and sharper than the control sample, indicating that PMPC promotes perovskite crystallization.

A typical polymer zwitterion (PMPC) containing phosphorylcholine (PC) as side chains was designed and synthesized by RAFT polymerization. This simple approach affords a platform combining various functional groups, such as zwitterions, Lewis bases, and carboxylic acid, in one molecule to achieve a multifunctional polymer passivator for reducing the nonradiative recombination and voltage losses in PSCs. Furthermore, PMPC can improve perovskite crystallization and passivate the trap states in perovskite films, to the benefit of alleviating the space charge limitation and suppressing the trap-assisted recombination in PSCs. Thus, we finally optimized the PCEs of the perovskite devices from 18.77% to 20.16%, along with better device stability and reduced energy loss, upon the use of PMPC in device fabrication. This notable improvement of the phosphorylcholine-based polymer zwitterion on perovskites and devices indicates the great advantages of synthetic polymers for perovskite passivation.


There are no conflicts to declare.


Z. L. and Y. L. acknowledge the support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (21875018).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2tc03039j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022