 DOI: 10.1039/C4TA02137A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12397-12402


Yunlong
Zou
,

James
Holst
,

Yong
Zhang
 and 

Russell J.
Holmes
*

Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. E-mail: rholmes@umn.edu

New Products R&D, Sigma-Aldrich Corporation, 6000 N. Teutonia Ave, Milwaukee, WI 53209, USA

Received
29th April 2014
, Accepted 2nd June 2014
First published on 26th June 2014
Efficient organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs) based on vapor-deposited small molecule materials frequently utilize a planar-mixed heterojunction (PMHJ) architecture, in which a mixed layer of electron donating and accepting materials is sandwiched between neat, planar layers of the donor and acceptor. The neat layers contribute to photocurrent, help minimize the dark current and maximize the device open-circuit voltage. The use of organic semiconductors as the planar layers is not however without complication, as the low charge carrier mobility in these materials can hinder efficient charge collection. In this work, we examine OPVs where the neat donor layer between the anode and the mixture is replaced with a layer of MoOx. An average device power conversion efficiency of (7.7 ± 0.3)% is realized under AM1.5G (100 mW cm−2) solar simulated illumination in a uniformly mixed heterojunction OPV based on the donor–acceptor pairing of 2-{[7-(4-N,N-ditolylaminophenylen-1-yl)-2,1,3-benzothiadiazol-4-yl]methylene}malononitrile (DTDCPB)–C70 without any adjacent donor or acceptor layers. Correcting for spectral mismatch, an average device power conversion efficiency of (7.9 ± 0.3)% is obtained, with a champion device efficiency of 8.2%. The use of MoOxversus a neat donor layer is found to reduce the series resistance and facilitate charge collection from the mixed layer, leading to an increased fill factor and short-circuit current. To our knowledge, this result is among the highest single-cell efficiencies reported for vapor-deposited small molecule OPVs. We further find that mixed OPVs based on DTDCPB–C70 exhibit a promising shelf lifetime, showing no degradation in efficiency after more than seven months. Thus, the removal of the neat planar organic layer can favorably affect device efficiency without potentially adversely impacting stability.

Organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs) continue to attract significant attention as a renewable energy technology due to their advantages in long term sustainability and compatibility with lightweight substrates and high-throughput, large-area processing techniques. Optical excitation in an organic semiconductor leads to the formation of a tightly bound exciton, frustrating immediate charge separation and photocurrent generation. Thus, while photoconversion in organic semiconductors has been a topic of study for more than 50 years, it was not until pioneering work by Tang on thin film, planar heterostructure OPVs that efficient photoconversion became possible. A planar heterostructure OPV consists of a bilayer between electron donating and accepting materials, where an energy-level offset at the donor–acceptor (D–A) interface provides the driving force for exciton dissociation by charge transfer. In such a structure, performance is limited by the ability of the exciton to migrate to the dissociating D–A interface. Consequently, large improvements in device performance were realized with the advent of bulk heterojunction (BHJ) OPVs, where the D–A materials are blended to increase the area of the dissociating interface. Often, some degree of D–A phase separation or demixing is used to balance the need for large interface area with the need for continuous charge collection pathways.

A challenge sometimes encountered in BHJ OPVs is increased charge carrier leakage due to either donor or acceptor phase continuity between the anode and cathode. Solution processed OPVs typically utilize solvent additives to promote vertical phase separation, thus making the electrode selective for holes or electrons. Another approach developed to address this challenge and also offer the potential for increased photocurrent is the incorporation of neat donor and acceptor layers on either side of the mixed D–A layer. This is especially common in small molecule OPVs where vapor-processing permits the facile formation of interfaces between the neat and mixed layers. These devices are often termed planar-mixed heterojunction (PMHJ) OPVs. This architecture was first demonstrated by Hiramoto et al., and has since been used by many groups to realize high efficiency. More recently, the PMHJ approach has been used with the D–A pairing of 2-{[7-(4-N,N-ditolylaminophenylen-1-yl)-2,1,3-benzothiadiazol-4-yl]methylene}malononitrile (DTDCPB) and C70 to demonstrate a very high single-cell power conversion efficiency of 6.8%. In this and many other demonstrations, the PMHJ is chosen for its potential to improve rectification and enhance photocurrent, as excitons generated in the neat layers may diffuse into the mixture and be dissociated (Fig. 1a). By examining the performance of DTDCPB–C70 as a function of device architecture, we show that in cases where the donor is resistive to hole transport, the neat layers in the PMHJ may actually hurt overall device efficiency. For the DTDCPB–C70 system, we demonstrate how modifications in device architecture can lead to power conversion efficiencies exceeding 8% in champion devices. This result is among a handful of vapor-deposited small molecule OPVs with such high efficiency.

Organic photovoltaic cells were fabricated on indium-tin-oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates having a sheet resistance of ∼8–12 Ω □−1. Substrates were cleaned in tergitol solution and organic solvents and treated in UV-ozone ambient for 10 minutes prior to thin film deposition. All layers were deposited by high vacuum thermal evaporation at a pressure of <8 × 10−7 Torr. In all devices, a 10 nm-thick layer of MoOx was deposited at 0.05 nm s−1 on the ITO anode as a buffer layer. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy showed that the MoOx film consists of mostly Mo6+ (see the ESI). X-ray diffraction measurements showed no obvious signature of crystallinity, consistent with previous reports on films obtained using the same methods. When included, neat layers of DTDCPB and C70 were deposited at room temperature at a rate of 0.2 nm s−1. Mixed active layers consisting of a D–A mixture of DTDCPB–C70 were prepared via co-deposition from two sources at a total rate of 0.2 nm s−1. The overall film composition was varied by separately adjusting the donor and acceptor deposition rates. All devices are capped with a 10 nm-thick exciton blocking layer (EBL) of bathocuproine (BCP) and a 100 nm-thick Al cathode. The active area of the resulting device is 0.785 mm2, defined by the area of the cathode. Pre-patterned ITO substrates were used to fabricate devices for lifetime testing. In this case, device active area is defined by the overlap between the cathode and the anode to be 9 mm2. These devices were encapsulated using a microscope cover glass and OG142-112 UV curable epoxy obtained from Epoxy Technology Inc., followed by UV curing (100 mW cm−2) for 3 minutes. In this study, DTDCPB (∼97% purity) was synthesized by Sigma-Aldrich using literature procedures. MoOx (∼99.5%), and BCP (∼95%) were obtained from Alfa Aesar. C70 (∼99%) was obtained from MER Corporation. All materials were used without further purification. All current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured with an Agilent 4155C parameter analyzer under simulated AM1.5G illumination using a 150 W Oriel Xe lamp. External quantum efficiency was determined by measuring the photocurrent under monochromatic light illumination using a 300 W Oriel Xe lamp, a monochromator, an optical chopper wheel and a SR810 lock-in amplifier. A spectral mismatch factor of 0.98 was calculated using previously described methods. Data presented in the figures is not corrected for spectral mismatch. For measurements of the charge collection efficiency, a second batch of ITO with different morphology was used for device fabrication. Devices constructed using this ITO showed higher fill factor (FF), lower short-circuit current density (JSC) and lower VOC, but an overall similar power conversion efficiency. Details on the morphology and electrical characteristics of the two batches of ITO used in this work are provided in the ESI. Optical constants for DTDCPB and C70 were measured via spectroscopic ellipsometry. Photoluminescence quenching experiments were carried out using a Photon Technology International Quantum Master 4 Fluorometer.


In a BHJ with no electrode buffer layer, the poor rectification of the homogeneous active layer can lead to increased dark current and reduced VOC. The planar layers in the PMHJ exist to overcome this problem. For example, the relatively shallow lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy level of the neat donor layer compared to that of the acceptor material can prevent electron leakage to the anode, thus reducing the dark current. In this way, the anode now becomes selective for holes, pinning its Fermi level to the quasi-Fermi level of holes in the mixed layer. A similar argument can be made for charge carriers at the cathode when a neat acceptor layer is included. In the PMHJ architecture, the Fermi levels of the anode and the cathode are pinned to the quasi-Fermi level of holes and electrons in the mixed layer respectively, and the VOC will be the difference between these two Fermi levels. The planar layers are also beneficial as they can contribute to the overall photocurrent.

The use of planar layers is not however without complication due to the often low charge carrier mobility in organic semiconductor materials. The additional planar layer may adversely impact charge collection and increase the non-geminate recombination of electrons and holes. This will cause a reduction in FF and adversely impact efficiency. The remaining question is whether the benefit of generating more excitons in the planar layers outweighs the disadvantage of reduced charge collection efficiency. Of course, while many inorganic materials with high carrier mobility can be used to replace the organic planar layer, they usually have very weak absorption across the solar spectrum and thus do not contribute to photocurrent. Among them, MoOx is a highly efficient hole transport material that has been widely used in both organic light-emitting devices and OPVs. Recent research has also shown that the MoOx buffer layer can form a Schottky junction with materials that have a deep highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy level to prevent electron leakage current to the anode. Aside from not contributing to photocurrent, MoOx is a good candidate to replace organic planar layers in a PMHJ.
Prior to investigating the performance of DTDCPB in a PMHJ, the performance of planar heterojunction (PHJ) OPVs consisting of a 15 nm-thick layer of DTDCPB and a 40 nm-thick layer of C70 was examined. As shown in Fig. 2a, the PHJ device shows low JSC and FF. The current density–voltage characteristics show a severe kink in the fourth quadrant indicating the existence of an imbalance in mobility between electrons and holes and possibly a hole extraction barrier at the anode–DTDCPB interface. The external quantum efficiency spectrum (EQE) in Fig. 2b shows very low response from both DTDCPB and C70. Both thickness dependent and spectrally resolved photoluminescence quenching experiments were carried out on neat films of DTDCPB suggesting a reasonable exciton diffusion length of ∼5 nm. Thus, the low EQE may suggest that the neat DTDCPB layer is not efficient in transporting photogenerated carriers away from the D–A interface. This will lead to a buildup of holes at the D–A interface and increase the rate of recombination, reducing the JSC and FF.
The poor hole transporting behavior of the neat DTDCPB layer is also an obstacle to high efficiency in PMHJ devices. In order to focus on the role of the resistive neat donor layer, the neat C70 layer was omitted from the PMHJ architecture. Fig. 3a shows an overlay of current density–voltage characteristics for OPVs as a function of the neat DTDCPB layer thickness under simulated AM1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). Fig. 3b shows the associated device operating parameters as a function of the neat DTDCPB layer thickness. The FF shows a monotonic decrease of ∼20% as the thickness of the neat DTDCPB layer is increased. The JSC increases slightly with a thin DTDCPB layer but is quickly reduced when the DTDCPB thickness reaches 6 nm. Similar devices constructed without a buffer layer of MoOx show a lower VOC and FF.
In order to estimate the charge collection efficiency (ηCC) for the devices in Fig. 3 as a function of neat DTDCPB layer thickness, device photocurrent was measured under monochromatic illumination as a function of applied bias (+0.8 V to −5 V). Light having a wavelength of λ = 462 nm was chosen to excite only C70 in the mixture, so that no excitons are generated in the neat DTDCPB layer and their diffusion into the mixture need not be considered. For all devices, the measured photocurrent was found to plateau to the same value under large reverse bias, and at this point, the charge collection efficiency was taken to be 100%. Using this normalization, the charge collection efficiency is plotted as a function of applied bias in Fig. 4a. The dependence of ηCC on bias is very similar for all devices from −5 V to −3 V, where the reverse bias is capable of extracting charge carriers efficiently. In the range of −1 V to 1 V, devices with a neat DTDCPB layer show a reduction in the collection efficiency even at a DTDCPB thickness of 3 nm. The reduction in charge collection efficiency in the low bias regime may reflect increased geminate and non-geminate recombination in the mixed layer with the insertion of the resistive neat DTDCPB layer.
The dark current–voltage characteristics for the devices in Fig. 3a were fit using a generalized Shockley equation and the associated values of the series resistance were extracted and plotted in Fig. 4b. An ideality factor of ∼2 is observed for all devices. The increase in series resistance trends with the reduction in FF as the thickness of the neat DTDCPB layer is increased. As a conclusion, the neat DTDCPB layer is not capable of efficiently extracting photogenerated holes from the mixed layer. Efficient charge carrier extraction is critical for high efficiency, and the resistive neat donor layer may not always lead to optimum performance.
In light of this result, a composition and thickness optimization of the mixed layer was carried out. Fig. 5a–d show the performance of a BHJ with a 60 nm-thick active layer as a function of composition. Both JSC and FF peak at a D–A ratio of 1:2, suggesting the possible existence of an optimal microstructure at this composition. Previous work on DTDCPB–C70 reported an apparent phase separation at a D–A ratio of 1:1.6, very close to the optimal composition observed here. The device performance (DTDCPB–C70 = 1:2) is plotted versus active layer thickness in Fig. 5e–h. The JSC increases with active layer thickness up to 70 nm, with the FF showing only a minimal reduction. An average power conversion efficiency of (7.7 ± 0.3%) is obtained for devices with a 70 nm-thick active layer at a D–A ratio of 1:2, with the efficiency of champion devices reaching 8%. A representative plot of the EQE spectrum for the optimized BHJ device architecture is shown in Fig. 5i.
In order to more accurately assess the efficiency of the devices shown in Fig. 5, the spectral mismatch factor was calculated based on the device EQE spectrum and the measured spectrum of the lamp. After applying the spectral mismatch factor, the average corrected JSC and power conversion efficiency for the optimized device architecture are (14.3 ± 0.5) mA cm−2 and (7.9 ± 0.3)%, respectively. The champion device exhibits a mismatch-corrected JSC of 14.8 mA cm−2, a FF of 0.62, a VOC of 0.89 V and a power conversion efficiency of 8.2%. The fact that FF remains almost constant with increasing active layer thickness is rarely observed for BHJs constructed by vapor processing.
In order to characterize the stability of BHJs constructed from DTDCPB–C70, device shelf lifetime was tested. Devices with an area of 9 mm2 were hermetically packaged, stored in ambient, and tested periodically under simulated AM1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). They show similar performance to devices with an active area of 0.785 mm2. Details are provided in the ESI.Fig. 6 shows the resulting device operating parameters normalized to their initial value. Over more than seven months, the VOC remains almost unchanged, while JSC shows a minor reduction and the FF increases slightly. The BHJ device thus shows not only superb performance but good shelf lifetime as well.

The PMHJ architecture is near ubiquitous in the field of vapor-deposited small molecule OPVs. Here however, we demonstrate that the organic planar layers in the PMHJ may not always favorably impact device efficiency. The significance of this result is not limited to the D–A pairing of DTDCPB–C70 as most small molecule donor materials have low charge carrier mobilities and tend to limit the overall charge collection efficiency. We have successfully achieved high efficiency in a simple BHJ device based on the D–A pairing of DTDCPB–C70. Unlike many BHJ OPVs based on vapor-deposited small molecules, this efficiency does not come at the expense of the FF. In fact, the high FF observed in the optimized DTDCPB–C70 device rivals those often observed in the most efficient solution processed BHJ OPVs. An average power conversion efficiency of (7.9 ± 0.3)% is achieved under AM1.5G solar simulated illumination (mismatch-corrected), demonstrating that this simple device architecture can outperform the more commonly applied PMHJ structure.


This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) MRSEC Program under Award number DMR-0819885 and through the NSF PREM Program under Award number DMR-0934157. Support was also received from the University of Minnesota Initiative for Renewable Energy and the Environment. RJH also acknowledges a donation from Sigma-Aldrich Corporation.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta02137a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014