 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA05752C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20366-20374


Nianqing
Fu
,

Yan
Liu
,

Yanchun
Liu
*,

Wei
Lu
,

Limin
Zhou
,

Feng
Peng
 and 

Haitao
Huang
*

School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China

The Key Laboratory of Energy-Efficient Functional Ceramics and Applied Technology of Guangdong Province, Guangzhou Redsun Gas Applications Co. LTD, Guangzhou, 510435, China. E-mail: lyc21@163.com; Fax: +86-20-22855228; Tel: +86-20-36372332

Department of Applied Physics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China. E-mail: aphhuang@polyu.edu.hk; Fax: +852-2333-7629; Tel: +852-2766-5694

Department of Mechanical Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China

Received
27th July 2015
, Accepted 25th August 2015
First published on 26th August 2015
In the present work, we developed a facile post-treatment approach, namely one-step hot-water soaking, to the fabrication of double-layer and hierarchical TiO2 nanotube arrays (H-TNTAs) comprising a nanoparticle/nanotube hybrid layer and a TiO2 nanowire cap layer for highly efficient dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). The nanoparticle/nanotube hybrid structure of the H-TNTA provides enormous specific surface area for sufficient dye attachment and the TiO2 nanowire cap layer serves as a light-scattering layer with increased dye-absorption for superior light harvesting efficiency. This engineered integration makes it possible to control the dye-anchoring, charge transport, charge collection, and light scattering within a photoanode simultaneously. The DSSC based on the well tailored architecture yields an exciting power conversion efficiency of 8.21% under 100 mW cm−2, corresponding to 51% improvement as compared with the cell built on the pristine TNTA (P-TNTA, 5.43%). The efficiency can be further improved to 8.82% when the H-TNTA photoanodes are subjected to an additional TiCl4 treatment.

Among the various photovoltaic devices, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have attracted much interest due to their simple fabrication process, low cost and high power conversion efficiency. As one of the most important components of DSSCs, the photoanode, with a sensitized semiconductor thin film, plays a key role in dye loading, electron injection, charge transport and charge collection. In a conventional DSSC, an ∼10 μm thin film comprising of randomly dispersed nanoparticles, which have high specific surface area for efficient dye loading, is typically employed as the photoanode. However, the disordered network in the film also creates numerous grain boundaries, surface defects and trap states, which slow down the electron transport and increase the charge recombination, limiting the further improvement in charge collection efficiency and device performance. Hence, improving the charge transport is highly demanding and deemed effective in improving the cell efficiency. Several one-dimensional (1D) nanostructures, such as nanorods, nanowires, and nanotubes, have been exploited as photoanodes to overcome the shortcoming of charge transport in DSSCs, owing to their vectorial pathway for fast electron transport along the axial direction. In particular, extensive attention has been paid to TiO2 nanotube arrays (TNTAs) because of their high self-organization, simple fabrication process, controllable geometry, and good light-trapping properties. However, the pristine TNTA (P-TNTA) with smooth walls usually possesses a low specific surface area that is only 1/2 or 1/3 that of the nanoparticle-based TiO2 films. The low specific surface area of P-TNTA is one of the major factors responsible for the low device efficiency, due to the low dye-loading capacity and the resulting inadequate light harvesting.

In the past few years, considerable efforts have been made to increase the surface area of the anodized P-TNTA for enhanced DSSC efficiency, which include (a) tuning of the TNTA morphology by adjusting the anodization parameters and (b) decorating the TNTA wall with nanoparticles via a post-treatment to form a hierarchical structure. By changing the anodization parameters, TNTAs with tunable tube diameter, varying wall thicknesses and shapes, and photonic crystal geometry have been fabricated and applied in DSSCs with enhanced performance. However, these techniques do not significantly increase the surface area and the DSSC efficiency is still not encouraging enough. By filling small nanoparticles into the nanotubes, Pan et al. doubled the efficiency of the TNTA based DSSCs. The soaking of amorphous TNTA in DI water or NH4F aqueous solution leads to a coarse nanotube surface, which improves the cell efficiency to a certain degree. Among the various techniques, TiCl4 treatment demonstrates itself as the most effective technique to increase the surface area and suppress electron recombination, which can promote the device efficiency remarkably. Recently, Park et al. reported a record efficiency up to 11.3% by employing a TiCl4 treated TNTA photoanode.
Even though the TNTA has an intrinsic light scattering effect, its ordered nano-porous structure still leads to a loss of incident light at a wavelength of ∼600–800 nm. Meanwhile, the commonly used dye (such as N719 and N3) also exhibits a low molar extinction coefficient in this long wavelength range. Therefore, increasing the light travelling path in the 1D structured film by using a light-scattering layer is another approach to enhance the cell efficiency, apart from increasing the surface area. Microspheres, nanotubes and nanofibers are commonly used in the scattering layer which is normally deposited on the TiO2 nanoparticle absorption layer by using a layer-by-layer technique to form the photoanodes of DSSCs. However, the multilayer structure derived from this stamping technique also increases the charge transport resistance, especially at the interface between different layers.In situ growth of the scattering layer directly on the TiO2 absorption layer seems to be a promising solution to this problem.
Herein, we report a facile post-treatment to fabricate in situ a TiO2 fiber-nanoparticle/nanotube hierarchically structured photoanode for high efficiency DSSCs. In this one-step treatment, the nanoparticle/nanotube hierarchical structure together with a TiO2 nanowire light-scattering cap layer can be achieved simultaneously. This well-designed structure provides the photoanode with a high specific surface area for sufficient dye loading and a superior scattering effect for adequate light harvesting. Meanwhile, it also retains the excellent 1D electron-transport feature in the film for fast charge collection. The DSSC employing this well-tailored photoanode achieved a high efficiency up to 8.21%, which can be further improved to 8.82% when the photoanode was subjected to an additional TiCl4 treatment.

Highly ordered P-TNTAs were prepared by using a two-step electrochemical anodization technique, using a two-electrode electrochemical cell with Ti foil as the anode and Pt foil as the cathode. Prior to anodization, the Ti foil (0.125 mm thick, 99.7% purity, Strem Chemicals) was cleaned in detergent, acetone, ethanol and distilled water (DI water) successively. The Ti foil was then anodized at 60 V in ethylene glycol (EG) electrolyte containing 0.5 wt% NH4F and 3% (in volume) DI water for 1.5 h. The formed anodic TiO2 layer was peeled off by ultrasonication in a water bath. The treated Ti foil with a fresh surface was subjected to a second anodization under the same conditions for 2 h. Then as-prepared TNTA was dipped into ethanol to remove the electrolyte and annealed at 450 °C for 2 h. A free-standing TNTA membrane was obtained by subjecting the annealed Ti foil to a third-anodization for around 2 h. A highly crystallized anatase pristine TNTA (P-TNTA) was obtained by annealing the free-standing membrane at 500 °C for 2 h.


To fabricate hierarchical TNTA (H-TNTA) membranes, the as-anodized electrodes after the second anodization were soaked in ethanol first and then immersed in hot DI water at 60 °C for 24 h. The hot DI water-soaking post-treatment process was conducted in a fume hood. After cooling down, the electrodes were dipped into H2O2 for 10 s and then rinsed with ethanol and DI water alternatively. By slightly bending the electrodes, the H-TNTA membranes self-detached from the Ti foils during the drying process. The obtained H-TNTA membranes were sintered at 500 °C for 2 h.


The free-standing P-TNTA and H-TNTA membranes were attached to the well-cleaned fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrates to form the photoanodes, using a ∼2 μm thick TiO2 nanoparticle (hydrothermally prepared, ∼14 nm in diameter) layer as the adhesive layer. They were annealed at 500 °C for 2 h and then sensitized in an N719 ethanol solution (0.3 mM, Solaronix, Switzerland) at room temperature for 36 h. Platinized counter electrodes were prepared by thermal decomposition of 5 mM H2PtCl6/isopropanol solution on FTO glass at 390 °C for 15 min. The sensitized photoanodes and counter electrodes were sandwiched to form DSSCs, using 25 μm Surlyn 1702 films as the spacer. The liquid electrolyte composed of 0.5 M LiI, 0.05 M I2, 0.3 M 1-methyl-3-hexylimidazolium iodide (HMII), 0.3 M N-methylbenzimidazole (NMB), and 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine in 3-methoxypropionitrile was filled between the two electrodes. The active area of the DSSCs is 0.16 cm2.


The structure and morphology of the TNTA were observed by using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, FEI Sirion 200) and a transmission electron microscope (TEM, JEOL JEM-2100F). X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku 9 kW SmartLab, Japan) patterns were recorded for crystal phase identification. The optical properties of the TNTA photoanodes and the dye-loading amounts were measured by using an UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Model UV-2550, Shimadzu, Japan). The surface area was evaluated using a Quantachrome NOVA 2000e analyzer. The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) and Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) methods were used to estimate the specific surface area (SSA). I–V characteristics were tested using a Keithley 2420 source meter under AM 1.5 G illumination (100 mW cm−2) supplied by a 300 W solar simulator (Model 69911, Newport-Oriel Instruments, USA). The input illumination was calibrated using a silicon reference cell (NIST) equipped with a power meter. The IPCE measurements were conducted on a Newport 2931-C power meter combined with a Newport 74125 monochromator. The light source was provided by a Newport 66902 solar simulator. The electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were collected under 100 mW cm−2 illumination, using a CHI instrument (CHI 660C, CH Instruments, USA) at the open circuit voltage with an ac perturbation signal of amplitude 10 mV in a frequency range from 105 to 10−2 Hz. The intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) and intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS) measurements were performed on the same sandwiched cells, using a high power green light emitting diode (LED, peak wavelength 520 nm). The LED provides both dc and ac components of the illumination. The light intensity was modulated (±8%) by modulating the voltage applied to the LED. The light intensity on the tested cells was calibrated by using a Si cell.



Fig. 1 schematically illustrates the simple procedure to fabricate the hierarchical H-TNTA architecture with the merits of (a) a vectorial pathway for fast oriented electron transport, (b) a coarse surface for large dye absorbing capacity, (c) an excellent light-scattering effect favoring efficient light harvesting. Two key steps involved in the fabrication process are the preparation of amorphous TNTA by electrochemical anodization and the post-treatment of the TNTA in hot water of 60 °C.


Fig. 2(a) and (b) show the typical morphologies of the P-TNTA obtained after the second anodization process, with a smooth tube wall and a thin top layer left by the first anodization. It is reported that the as-prepared TNTAs are amorphous with a double walled structure, outer and inner walls. The comparable thicker inner wall usually contains a large amount of impurities, such as [TiF6]2− compounds. The amorphous TiO2 is inclined to be dissolved into various solvents, such as DI water. In this study, it was assumed that, during the hot water soaking treatment, the amorphous TiO2, especially the inner wall of nanotubes containing the [TiF6]2− compound, will be dissolved into the hot water according to eqn (1) and (2). In this process, the dissolved F− anions in the solution may also accelerate the dissolution of the amorphous TiO2, according to eqn (2) and (3). Meanwhile, the Ti4+ cations in the solution may also react with H2O (eqn (4)) and redeposit on the wall surface to form TiO2/Ti(OH)4 nanoparticles. During the following annealing process, these titanium compounds will be crystallized into TiO2 nanoparticles and attached tightly onto the tube wall surface to form a TiO2 nanoparticle/nanotube array hybrid structure, as shown in Fig. 2(c), (f) and (g). Since the whole post-treatment process was conducted in a fume hood, the air agitation accelerated the evaporation of the hot water (∼3/5 of the water was evaporated within 24 h). The loss of a large proportion of water increased the Ti4+ concentration in the remaining solution and accelerated the deposition of TiO2 (eqn (4)) on the top surface of the TNTA. As a result, a cap layer (∼2 μm in thickness) composing of TiO2 nanowires (∼100 nm in diameter and several microns in length) is formed on the top of the TNTA which forms an ideal hierarchical H-TNTA structure, as shown in Fig. 2(c)–(e).
TiO2 + 2H2O → Ti4+ + 4OH−
(1)
(2)
(3)
Ti4+ + 2H2O → TiO2 + 4H+
(4)
As displayed in the TEM images of Fig. 3(a) and (b), the P-TNTA demonstrates a smooth tube wall with a wall thickness around 29 nm. This smooth 1D structure often possesses an insufficient surface area for dye attachment. Moreover, some impurity phases can be observed clearly in the TEM images, as marked in Fig. 3a. These impurities may be TiFx or TiCx compounds and will act as trap-sites for electron recombination in a DSSC, decreasing the device performance. In contrast, as revealed in Fig. 3(c) and (d), coarse tube walls were formed in the H-TNTA after the hot water treatment of the P-TNTA for 24 h, with lots of small particles decorated on both the inner and outer surfaces of the tube wall. It is worth noting that the tube walls were composed of columnar crystals connecting to each other, oriented along the tube axial direction. A comparison of Fig. 3(b) and (d) demonstrates that the wall thickness of the H-TNTA was shrunk from 29 nm (for the P-TNTA) to 20 nm because part of the amorphous tube wall was dissolved and converted into TiO2 nanoparticles to form the H-TNTA hybrid structure. Noticeably, the impurities observed in the P-TNTA disappeared in the H-TNTA sample, after the post-treatment. The nanoparticle/nanotube hybrid structure in the H-TNTA is in favor of (i) large dye loading amount due to its rough wall surface decorated with the TiO2 nanoparticles and (ii) fast electron transport and efficient charge collection due to the oriented packing of the columnar nanocrystals. Fig. 3(e) and (f) clearly demonstrate that the TiO2 nanowires in the cap layer of the H-TNTA are aggregates of small nanoparticles (∼15–40 nm in size). This cap layer can act not only as a scattering layer but also as a dye-anchoring layer, both in favor of light harvesting. Anatase TiO2 was confirmed in both the P-TNTA and H-TNTA, as judged from a d(101)-spacing of 0.352 nm (Fig. 3(b), (d) and (f)).
XRD measurements revealed that all the TiO2 samples were crystallized after the annealing at 500 °C in air for 2 h. As shown in Fig. 4, the emergence of (101), (004), (200), and (105) peaks centering at 25.24°, 37.75°, 47.98°, and 53.78°, respectively, suggests the formation of anatase TiO2. No impurity phase can be detected from the XRD pattern for both samples, since the small amount of impurities observed in the P-TNTA by TEM (Fig. 3b) is below the detection limit of XRD. A detailed comparison of the XRD patterns of the P-TNTA and H-TNTA samples shows that the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of almost all the diffraction peaks of the H-TNTA is broadened (inset of Fig. 4), indicating a reduced grain size. The average grain size was calculated to be 28.3 and 19.4 nm for the P-TNTA and H-TNTA, respectively. The decreased grain size of the H-TNTA can be attributed to the dissolution of TiO2 during hot water treatment (eqn (1) and (3)), leading to a significantly increased specific surface area for considerable improvement in dye loading. The N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms reveal that the BET surface area of the H-TNTA membrane is increased remarkably to 46.8 m2 g−1 which almost doubles that of the P-TNTA film (Table 1).
Device
Thickness [μm]
BET surface area [m2 g−1]
Dye-loading [×10−7 mol cm−2]
IPCE [%]

J
sc [mA cm−2]

V
oc [V]
FF

η [%]

a Data listed here are the average values over five devices.
b Values at 550 nm.

P-TNTA
22.8
24.6
1.02
58.8
10.97
0.751
0.659
5.43
H-TNTA
24.1
46.8
2.19
81.4
16.73
0.746
0.662
8.21
To determine the amount of dye loading, the sensitized electrodes (with an active area of 1.5 cm2) were immersed in 0.1 M NaOH aqueous solution and the desorbed dye solutions were measured by UV-Vis spectroscopy. The dye loading amount was calculated to be 2.19 × 10−7 mol cm−2 for the H-TNTA, about twice that of the P-TNTA electrode (1.02 × 10−7 mol cm−2), as evidenced from the absorbance spectra of the detached dye solutions (Fig. 5a). Both the increased dye loading and the scattering cap layer of the H-TNTA sample will contribute to the light harvesting and hence the device performance.
It is well known that many organic dyes, such as N3 and N719, commonly used in DSSCs exhibit a wavelength dependent light absorption, with quite a high molar extinction coefficient within a wavelength of 450–550 nm, which quickly decreases in a range larger than 600 nm. Usually, the incident light (1 Sun) at 540 nm can be absorbed completely by a N719 sensitized film with a thickness of a few micrometers, whereas an absorption distance up to tens of millimeters is required to fully utilize the input light at 700 nm. In this regard, prolonging the optical path length in the photoanode, which can be realized by photon trapping or scattering, is another route to improve the light harvesting efficiency and upgrade the performance of DSSCs. As shown in Fig. 5b and its inset, the P-TNTA sample is semitransparent with a transmittance around 18% in the wavelength range of 400–600 nm. However, the transmittance rises remarkably when the wavelength is larger than 600 nm, owing to the easy transmission of the long wavelength light through ordered nanopores of the TNTA. The N719-sensitized P-TNTA electrode retains a similar transmittance curve shape, with a considerable light loss in the long wavelength region. In contrast, the H-TNTA electrode is opaque (inset of Fig. 5b) with an almost constant transmittance around 9% in the whole wavelength range of 400–800 nm. Most importantly, the transmittance increment of the H-TNTA in the long wavelength region is not as pronounced as that of the P-TNTA, due to the light scattering effect of the nanowire cap layer. As a result of scattering, the transmittance of the N719-sensitized H-TNTA is decreased more significantly in the long wavelength region (>600 nm) than that in the region of 400–600 nm, as compared with the sensitized P-TNTA.
The photovoltaic performances of DSSCs employing the P-TNTA and H-TNTA photoanodes under AM 1.5 front illumination (100 mW cm−2) are displayed in Fig. 6a, with the detailed parameters summarized in Table 1. Before comparing the performance of the P-TNTA and H-TNTA based devices, the photovoltaic contribution of the thin adhesive layer (∼2 μm) was investigated. The thin TiO2 particle layer contributes a power conversion efficiency of 2.23%, with a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 3.42 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 820 mV and a fill factor (FF) of 0.79. The Jsc, Voc and FF are 10.97 mA cm−2, 751 mV and 0.659 for the P-TNTA cell, respectively, leading to a power conversion efficiency of 5.43%. As a result of doubled dye loading and strong light scattering, the Jsc of the H-TNTA device increases from 10.97 to 16.73 mA cm−2, with the Voc and FF almost unchanged, leading to a high efficiency up to 8.21%, ∼51% higher than that of its counterpart, the P-TNTA based device.
The incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were recorded to investigate the Jsc and efficiency enhancement of the H-TNTA based DSSCs. As shown in Fig. 6b, the IPCE of the H-TNTA device exhibits a prominent increase in the whole wavelength range of 400–800 nm, which results from the increased dye loading and the enhanced light scattering in the hybrid structure of the H-TNTA. It is worth noting that the relative increase in IPCE is more pronounced in the long wavelength region (600–800 nm) than that in the 450–600 nm range. For example, the IPCE of the H-TNTA is increased by 37% at 550 nm (81.4% vs. 58.8%), whereas it is 97% at 650 nm (52.1% vs. 26.4%), compared with that of the P-TNTA. This is mainly attributed to the light scattering from the nanowire cap layer of the H-TNTA electrode, since the increased optical path length due to light-scattering is more effective for light harvesting enhancement in a wavelength range where the N719 dye has a poor absorption. While in the short wavelength range where the N719 has a very strong absorption, the scattering effect becomes less effective. According to the equation of Jsc = qηlhηinjηccI0, the remarkable increase of Jsc can be mainly attributed to the increase of the light-harvesting efficiency, ηlh, since the charge collection efficiency is similar for P-TNTA and H-TNTA electrodes (will be proved by EIS and IMPS/VS later) and the difference of charge-injection efficiency in these two kinds of devices can be ignored. The integrated Jsc (Jsc,INT) from the IPCE results is 14.62 and 9.38 mA cm−2 for the H-TNTA and P-TNTA based devices, respectively. The deviation of the Jsc,INT from the measured Jsc (by the IV test) is believed to be resulted from the ionic transport limitation of the electrolyte inside the thick TNTA based photoanodes (∼24 μm in thickness in the present study). However, the Jsc,INT-H-TNTA/Jsc,INT-P-TNTA ratio (1.56) is similar to the measured Jsc-H-TNTA/Jsc-P-TNTA ratio (1.53). It can be concluded that the increase in ηlh for the H-TNTA is due to increased dye attachment and enhanced light scattering in the designed hierarchical electrode.
The electrochemical properties of the DSSCs with various photoanodes were investigated by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) carried out under 1 Sun (100 mW cm−2) illumination. The parameters (Table 2) related to the electron transport and transfer were extracted from the EIS results by fitting the Nyquist plots (Fig. 7) according to the equivalent circuit based on a transmission line model (Fig. 7a). Interestingly, the electron transport resistance, Rw, of the H-TNTA is 2.2 Ω which is even smaller than that (2.95 Ω) of the P-TNTA cell, though the H-TNTA tube-wall is thinner and full of nanoparticles. It is believed that the decreased Rw is due to the improved conductivity of the dye-sensitized TiO2 film under illumination, since the H-TNTA which exhibits a much better light-harvesting efficiency will inject more electrons into the conduction band and hence increase the steady state electron density and the conductivity of the TiO2. As summarized in Table 2, the electron diffusion coefficient, Deff, is 8.09 × 10−4 and 12.4 × 10−4 cm2 s−1 while the electron transport time, τd, is 6.43 and 4.70 ms for the P-TNTA and H-TNTA, respectively, indicating faster electron transport in the H-TNTA. The charge transfer resistance (Rk) at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface is 29.1 Ω for the P-TNTA and 23.6 Ω for the H-TNTA, indicating that the electron recombination at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface of the H-TNTA is slightly faster than that of the P-TNTA. The electron life time (τe) is 50.4 and 63.4 ms for the H-TNTA and P-TNTA, respectively, calculated according to the Bode phase plot (inset of Fig. 7b) and τe = 1/2πfmax, where the fmax is the peak frequency corresponding to the second arc in the Nyquist plot. The smaller Rk and τe of the H-TNTA arises from its larger specific surface area which offers more trap states for electron recombination, in agreement with the slightly decreased Voc, when compared with the P-TNTA cells. According to ηcc = 1 − Rw/Rk, the H-TNTA and P-TNTA devices exhibit similar high charge collection efficiencies of 90.7% and 89.9%, respectively.
Device

R
w [Ω]

R
k [Ω]

τ
d [ms]

τ
e [ms]

D
eff [cm2 s−1]

η
cc [%]
P-TNTA
2.95
29.1
6.43
63.4
8.09 × 10−4
89.9
H-TNTA
2.2
23.6
4.70
50.4
12.4 × 10−4
90.7
Intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy and photovoltage spectroscopy (IMPS and IMVS) were performed to further investigate the electron transport and recombination behaviors in the DSSCs based on the two photoanodes. The electron transport time (τd) and electron life time (τe) which represent the time constant of the injected electrons transporting across the semiconductor film and recombining with I3− in the electrolyte, respectively, can be derived from the obtained IMPS and IMVS results according to τ = 1/2πfmin, where fmin is the characteristic minimum frequency of the IMPS/IMVS imaginary component. Fig. 8a displays the τe and τd of the H-TNTA and P-TNTA devices as a function of the incident photon fluxes. The τe of the H-TNTA is only slightly smaller than that of the P-TNTA, due to the improved surface area of the nanowire–nanoparticle/nanotube architecture. The τd of the H-TNTA is shorter than that of the P-TNTA, especially under high light intensity, indicating the faster electron transport in dye-sensitized H-TNTA hierarchical architecture under irradiation. The ηcc can be estimated according to ηcc = 1 − (τd/τe). Both the H-TNTA and P-TNTA based DSSCs demonstrate a high ηcc around 95%, as shown in Fig. 8b. The results derived from the IMPS/IMVS measurements are in agreement with those obtained from the EIS and I–V tests.
The TiCl4 treatment of the photoanodes is deemed to play a crucial role in improving the specific surface area and the electron transport properties, which will remarkably influence the photovoltaic performance. To this end, the H-TNTA electrodes were subjected to an additional TiCl4 treatment, and the obtained electrodes were employed as photoanodes of DSSCs. As displayed in Fig. 9, both the Jsc and Voc of the device were improved after the TiCl4 treatment. An impressive power conversion efficiency as high as 8.82% is achieved with a Jsc of 17.68% mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.754 V, FF of 0.658 and an IPCE of 86.4% at 550 nm.

In summary, we have successfully proposed a green, simple but effective hot water post-treatment technique to fabricate hierarchical TNTA architecture for efficient DSSCs. The produced impurity free TiO2 nanowire–nanoparticle/nanotube structure demonstrates complementary and synergistic properties, in which the 1D TNTA scaffold provides a vectorial pathway for fast electron transport along the long tube axial direction toward the FTO collection electrode; the small TiO2 nanoparticles decorated on the wall surface provide the photoanode with a large specific surface area for dye attachment; the TiO2 nanowire cap layer offers prominent light-scattering as well as dye-loading. When this well-tailored film was exploited as the photoanode of a DSSC, a high efficiency up to 8.21% was yielded, 51% higher than that of the DSSC based on pristine TNTA. The efficiency can be further improved to 8.82% by adopting a subsequent TiCl4 treatment. It is believed that the technique proposed here is also promising for QDSSCs and other photoelectrochemical applications.


This work was supported by the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2014M562167). It was also financially supported by the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China (Project No. PolyU5163/12E, PolyU5159/13E and PolyU152057/14E).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015