 DOI: 10.1039/C6RA19476A
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 90248-90254

Yue Yu,
Dewei Zhao*,
Corey R. Grice,
Weiwei Meng,
Changlei Wang,
Weiqiang Liao,
Alexander J. Cimaroli,
Hongmei Zhang,
Kai Zhu and 
Yanfa Yan*

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Wright Center for Photovoltaics Innovation and Commercialization, The University of Toledo, Toledo, OH 43606, USA. E-mail: dewei_zhao@hotmail.com; yanfa.yan@utoledo.edu

Institute of Advanced Materials, Key Laboratory for Organic Electronics & Information Displays, Nanjing University of Posts & Telecommunications, Nanjing 210023, P. R. China

Chemistry and Nanoscience Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 15013 Denver West Parkway, Golden, CO 80401, USA

Received
1st August 2016
, Accepted 16th September 2016
First published on 16th September 2016
We report on the synthesis of methylammonium tin triiodide (MASnI3) thin films at room temperature by a hybrid thermal evaporation method and their application in fabricating lead (Pb)-free perovskite solar cells. The as-deposited MASnI3 thin films exhibit smooth surfaces, uniform coverage across the entire substrate, and strong crystallographic preferred orientation along the 〈100〉 direction. By incorporating this film with an inverted planar device architecture, our Pb-free perovskite solar cells are able to achieve an open-circuit voltage (Voc) up to 494 mV. The relatively high Voc is mainly ascribed to the excellent surface coverage, the compact morphology, the good stoichiometry control of the MASnI3 thin films, and the effective passivation of the electron-blocking and hole-blocking layers. Our results demonstrate the potential capability of the hybrid evaporation method to prepare high-quality Pb-free MASnI3 perovskite thin films which can be used to fabricate efficient Pb-free perovskite solar cells.

Organic–inorganic lead (Pb) halide perovskite solar cells have progressed dramatically over the past few years, with a record efficiency of 22.1% being reported recently. This incredible progress is largely ascribed to the superior photovoltaic properties of the Pb-based perovskite absorbers, including high absorption coefficients, long carrier diffusion length, suitable band gaps, and low non-radiative recombination rates. Despite this rapid increase in efficiency, the Pb-based perovskite solar cells continue to face challenges such as their instability against heat and moisture and the toxicity of their most significant component element, Pb. As reported, the Pb-based perovskites decompose upon contacting with some polar solvents, such as water, leading to the resultant lead iodide (PbI2) and environmental concerns. This combined environmental and public health issue raises serious concerns of the viability of Pb-based perovskites, which might hinder large-scale adoption of solar cells and similar devices based on these materials. Therefore, the development of efficient and Pb-free perovskite devices is of great interest and extensive efforts have been recently made towards Pb-free perovskites.

A straightforward approach for developing Pb-free perovskites is to replace the Pb2+ ion with isovalent tin (Sn2+), thus forming Sn-based perovskites such as ASnX3 (with A = cesium (Cs) or organic cations such as methylammonium (MA) and formamidinium (FA), and X = halogen atoms such as chlorine (Cl), bromine (Br), or iodine (I)). Pb-free perovskite solar cells using CsSnI3, MASnI3, FASnI3, CsSnI3−xBrx, and MASnBr3 as absorbers have already been reported. In contrast to Pb-based perovskite solar cells, there are two major obstacles hindering the fabrication of efficient Sn-based perovskite solar cells. Firstly, the most commonly used deposition method, i.e. spin-coating, cannot easily produce smooth Sn perovskite thin films with uniform coverage. Secondly, due to the ease of oxidation of Sn(II), the synthesized Sn perovskite thin films usually exhibit high hole concentration, which is undesirable for efficient solar cell fabrication. To prevent the formation of such large hole densities, tin(II) fluoride (SnF2) is typically used as an additive in the spin-coating process. Compared to the spin-coating process, the thermal evaporation technique usually produces films with smoother surfaces, full surface coverage and high uniformity. Thermal evaporation has been used successfully to fabricate efficient MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells in our and other groups. Recently, smooth MASnBr3 thin films have been synthesized by vapor deposition. However, so far, there is no report on successful synthesis of MASnI3 thin films by vacuum deposition, which has a more suitable band gap for more efficient single-junction solar cells than MASnBr3.
Here we report on the first thermal evaporation of high-quality MASnI3 thin films at room temperature. Without post-deposition annealing, the as-deposited MASnI3 thin films exhibited high crystallinity, smooth surface, full coverage, and strong preferred crystallographic orientation along the 〈100〉 direction as revealed by various characterizations. Additionally, the as-deposited MASnI3 thin films showed hole densities suitable for solar cell applications even without the use of any SnF2 additives, due to the ability of accurate film stoichiometry control via the hybrid thermal evaporation method. The band gap of our MASnI3 thin film is about 1.3 eV. Sn-based perovskite solar cells were fabricated with the inverted device architecture of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/Poly-TPD/MASnI3/C60/BCP/Ag, where PEDOT:PSS, Poly-TPD, C60, and BCP stands for poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate, poly[N,N′-bis(4-butylphenyl)-N,N′-bis(phenyl)benzidine], fullerene, and 2,9-dimethyl-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline, respectively. The PEDOT:PSS layer acts as both the anode buffer layer and hole transporting layer and while the Poly-TPD acts as another hole transporting layer and an electron blocking layer. C60 is the passivation layer and electron transporting layer, while BCP is a hole blocking layer. The thickness of the MASnI3 absorber layer is typically about 200 nm. Our MASnI3 perovskite solar cells have achieved open-circuit voltages (Voc's) as high as 494 mV. The champion cell showed a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1.7% with a Voc of 377 mV, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 12.1 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 36.6%. Further solar cell efficiency improvements could be expected upon the optimization of the MASnI3 thickness and the interface engineering between the perovskite and the electron and/or hole blocking layers. Our results suggest that hybrid thermal evaporation is suitable for fabricating efficient MASnI3 perovskite solar cells.
Our deposition process is a hybrid thermal evaporation. As depicted in Fig. S1, two ceramic crucibles containing tin iodide (SnI2) and methylammonium iodide (MAI) are used as the inorganic and organic precursor sources, respectively, and are heated to maintain at their respective temperature set points before the deposition is allowed to begin. The entire vacuum chamber is thus filled with MAI vapor before the beginning of the actual MASnI3 deposition due to the high vapor pressure of MAI and lack of confinement of the MAI vapor within the crucible beyond the blocking shutter. The existence of the MAI vapor is confirmed by the increased pressure from ∼10−7 to ∼10−5 Torr in the vacuum chamber. The readouts from the quartz crystal microbalances (QCMs) placed above the SnI2 and MAI crucibles before and after opening their individual shutter for SnI2 and MAI confirm the thermal co-evaporation of SnI2 and MAI in the presence of MAI vapor, which we refer as to hybrid thermal evaporation. Due to the complexity of the MAI deposition, instead of monitoring the deposition rate via the QCMs, the vapor pressure is monitored as mentioned in our earlier work. The deposition rate of the SnI2 source is simply monitored by a QCM placed above the SnI2 crucible. The stoichiometry of MASnI3 thin films is controlled by the evaporation rate of SnI2, while the MAI vapor pressure remains constant.

The MASnI3 thin films were co-evaporated by a dual-source evaporation system (Kurt J. Lesker Mini Spectros) equipped in a nitrogen-filled glove box. Two different substrates were used for the depositions: soda-lime glass (SLG) substrates for the material characterization and pre-patterned indium tin oxide (ITO) coated SLG substrates for the device fabrication and characterization. Prior to their utilization, the substrates were sequentially ultrasonicated in diluted Micro-90 detergent, deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol for 15 min respectively, and then dried with flowing nitrogen gas. Two ceramic crucibles containing tin iodide (SnI2) and methylammonium iodide (MAI) were used as the inorganic and organic precursor sources respectively and were heated to their respective temperature set points before the deposition was started. The deposition rate of the SnI2 source was monitored by a quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) placed close to the substrate, while the vapor phase pressure of MAI was monitored instead of the deposition rates, since directly monitoring the deposition rate of MAI was relatively difficult as mentioned earlier in our work. The co-evaporation parameter used was 1.0 Å s−1 for SnI2 and 8 × 10−5 Torr for MAI, roughly corresponding to a 1:1 molar ratio between the two precursor sources. During the entire deposition, the substrate was rotated at a constant speed of 10 rpm and was not heated intentionally. The as-deposited CH3NH3SnI3 thin films could be stored in a nitrogen-filled glove box in the dark for up to two months and no obvious degradation was observed.


The CH3NH3SnI3 thin films were fabricated into solar cells with an inverted planar structure. Before any depositions, the ITO substrates were cleaned with the aforementioned process followed by a UV/O3 treatment for 10 min to improve the wetting ability of the substrates. A layer of PEDOT:PSS with or without Poly-TPD was used as the hole transporting layer. The PEDOT:PSS layer was deposited by spin coating at 4000 rpm from an aqueous solution. The PEDOT:PSS solution was filtered before use. The Poly-TPD layer was deposited by spin-coating at 4000 rpm from a 10 mg mL−1 chlorobenzene solution. Both layers were baked on a hot plate for 30 min to remove the residual solvent. The substrate was then loaded into the co-evaporation system and the CH3NH3SnI3 layer was deposited by co-evaporation. A combination of C60 and BCP was used as the electron transporting and hole blocking layer. The C60 and the BCP layers were deposited by thermal evaporation at a rate of 0.1–0.2 Å s−1 followed by a layer of Ag thermal evaporated through a mask to produce 0.04 cm2 cells. Except for the PEDOT:PSS, all other layers were deposited in a nitrogen-filled glove box and afterwards the substrates were not exposed to the ambient until shortly before the device characterization. All materials used in this work were commercially available and were used as received.


The morphological, topological, structural, optical, and electrical properties of the MASnI3 thin films were evaluated by different characterization methods. The morphology and topology was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and atomic force microscopy (AFM) respectively. The SEM images were taken with a Hitachi S-4800 High Resolution SEM. The AFM image and surface roughness analysis was performed with a Veeco Nanoscope V instrument. The structural properties were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD). The XRD pattern was acquired with a Rigaku Ultima III high resolution X-ray diffractometer, with the Cu-Kα line (λ = 0.154 nm) at 44 kV and 40 mA source excitation. The optical properties were characterized by UV-vis spectroscopy. The transmittance spectrum was obtained with a UV-vis spectrophotometer (PerkinElmer Lambda 1050) and transferred into the absorption coefficient spectrum using the equation α = −log(T)/d, where α, T, and d is the absorption coefficient, transmittance, and the film thickness, respectively. The electrical properties were characterized by 4-point probe and Hall effect measurements. The Hall measurements were performed at room temperature in a four-probe configuration by a commercialized Hall effect measurement system (MMR Technologies), which is equipped with a designed software to calculate the carrier type and the carrier concentration.


The performance of the CH3NH3SnI3 perovskite solar cells was evaluated by current density–voltage (J–V) and external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements. The J–V curves were measured using a Keithley 2400 sourcemeter under AM1.5G (100 W cm−2) solar illumination (PV Measurements Inc.) by sweeping between −0.5 V and 1.5 V with a voltage scan rate of 157 mV s−1. The EQE spectra were measured using a commercialized QE system (PV Measurements Inc.), the monochromatic light intensity of which was calibrated with a standard silicon diode at each wavelength. All device characterizations were performed in the ambient with the device unencapsulated.


The as-deposited MASnI3 thin films show highly reflective surfaces, a representative photo of which is shown in Fig. S2. The top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of our Sn-based perovskite thin film show densely packed grains over large areas, as seen in Fig. 1(a) and S3. No apparent pin-holes are observed in the thin films. The grain size distribution is obtained by using the software Image J. The results are shown in Fig. 1(b). The average grain size is about 110 nm, which is slightly smaller than the thickness of the films (typically about 200 nm). The grain size distribution is found to be comparable with that obtained in the atomic-force microscopy (AFM) image, shown in Fig. 1(c). Fig. 1(d) shows the 3D AFM image of the surface morphology, with an RMS roughness of 10.7 nm from the AFM measurements. It is also worth noting that the choice of substrates, e.g., bare soda lime glass (SLG), indium doped tin oxide (ITO) coated SLG, PEDOT:PSS- or Poly-TPD-coated substrates, does not affect the smoothness and the morphology of the MASnI3 thin films deposited by this hybrid thermal evaporation method. This feature allows us to conduct UV-vis spectroscopy measurements using MASnI3 thin films grown on SLG substrates to calculate the band gap.

The hybrid evaporated MASnI3 thin films deposited at room temperature without any post-deposition annealing exhibit strong crystallinity. Fig. 2(a) shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the MASnI3 thin film. The observed characteristic peaks correspond to the (100), (200), (220), (221), and (400) reflections at 2θ = 14.1°, 28.5°, 40.8°, 43.4°, and 59.1°, respectively. All of these peaks belong to the cubic structure of MASnI3 perovskite and the calculated XRD pattern is shown in Fig. 2(a). Compared with our calculated XRD pattern or the measured XRD patterns reported in literature, including solution-processed or vapor-assisted solution-processed MASnI3, our hybrid thermally evaporated MASnI3 films show a strong preferred orientation along the 〈100〉 direction. The mechanism of the preferred orientation is still under investigation.
The optical properties of our MASnI3 thin films grown by the hybrid thermal evaporation are examined by UV-vis spectroscopy. Fig. 2(b) shows the absorption spectrum of the MASnI3 film. The band gap derived from the Tauc plot, shown in the inset of Fig. 2(b), is about 1.3 eV. This value is in good agreement with the previously reported band gap of the MASnI3 from both experiment and theoretical calculations.
Electrical properties of our MASnI3 thin films are characterized by Hall effect measurement. Our MASnI3 thin films show hole densities in the range of 1017–1018 cm−3. It has been proposed that due to the ease of oxidation of Sn(II), Sn vacancies can easily form during film deposition, leading to excessively large hole densities and low shunt resistances and therefore poor solar cell performance. The hole density of our as-deposited MASnI3 thin films is suitable for solar cell applications, although they are not optimal yet.
The above characterization results indicate that our as-deposited MASnI3 thin films fabricate by hybrid thermal evaporation exhibit structural and optoelectronic properties suitable for solar cell fabrication: excellent surface morphology with full area coverage, high crystallinity, a suitable band gap, and a reasonable carrier density. Therefore, solar cells are fabricated by using these MASnI3 thin films as the light absorbers. An inverted device architecture of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/Poly-TPD/MASnI3/C60/BCP/Ag is explored in this work, which enables successful fabrication of MASnI3 perovskite solar cells.
Fig. 3(a) shows the cross-sectional SEM image of our MASnI3 perovskite solar cell with artificial color added to highlight the layer structure. The thickness of the MASnI3 layer is confirmed to be about 200 nm. Even though the MASnI3 film with such a low thickness might not be sufficient to fully absorb the photons with energy larger than the band gap of MASnI3, this thickness was chosen to reduce the total MASnI3 deposition time and to evaluate the suitability of the hybrid thermal evaporation of MASnI3 thin films for solar cell application. Fig. 3(b) shows the schematic energy band diagram of our MASnI3 solar cells with the inverted architecture. The energy levels of the conduction and valence band edges of MASnI3, electron and hole blocking layers, and the work functions of electrodes are taken from literature. The Poly-TPD layer can efficiently block the electrons from the MASnI3 perovskite and transfer holes to the PEDOT:PSS-coated ITO electrode. In a similar manner, the C60 and BCP layers work together to block holes. Since electrons need to tunnel through the BCP layer to reach the Ag electrode, the BCP layer is thinner (6 nm) than the C60 (20–30 nm), Poly-TPD (20 nm), and PEDOT:PSS (40 nm) layers. The selective nature of these interlayers is the working mechanism of our solar cells.
During the solar cell fabrication, we've found that the use of PEDOT:PSS/Poly-TPD hole selective bi-layers results in significantly improved device performance compared with only PEDOT:PSS. Fig. 4(a) shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the MASnI3 perovskite solar cells under both reverse and forward voltage scans by using PEDOT:PSS or PEDOT:PSS/Poly-TPD as the hole selective layers. Except for the hole selective layers, all other layers in our work, i.e. MASnI3, C60, BCP, and Ag, are taken in the same deposition. Therefore, different device performance could be ascribed to the effect of different hole selective layers. It is seen that the MASnI3 perovskite solar cell using PEDOT:PSS/Poly-TPD hole selective bi-layers shows much higher Jsc (5.1 mA cm−2) and Voc (494 mV) than the cell using PEDOT:PSS-only hole selective layer (Jsc = 3.5 mA cm−2 and Voc = 470 mV). We have fabricated at least 30 MASnI3 perovskite solar cells using each hole selective layer and the device performance improvement by PEDOT:PSS/Poly-TPD hole selective bi-layers has been statistically confirmed. The efficiency histogram of Sn-based perovskite solar cells with PEDOT:PSS-only and PEDOT:PSS/Poly-TPD hole selective layer is shown in Fig. S4. It is worth noting that all the MASnI3 perovskite solar cells with the inverted architecture present very little J–V hysteresis.
The Jsc difference is further understood from the measured external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the MASnI3 perovskite solar cells with PEDOT:PSS-only and PEDOT:PSS/Poly-TPD hole selective bi-layers, shown in Fig. 4(b). Both EQE spectra reflect spectral response in the range from 350 to 950 nm. The EQE spectral response onset is 950 nm, which indicated a band gap value of 1.3 eV. This result is consistent with the optical band gap of 1.3 eV measured by UV-vis spectroscopy, mentioned earlier in our discussion. The integrated photocurrents from these EQE spectra using the AM1.5G solar photon flux spectrum are 3.2 mA cm−2 for the cell using PEDOT:PSS-only and 5.4 mA cm−2 for the cell using PEDOT:PSS/Poly-TPD, which are in good agreement with the Jsc's measured from the J–V curves. It is obvious that by adding the Poly-TPD layer on PEDOT:PSS, the EQE value is enhanced in the entire wavelength range, suggesting a reduced charge recombination due to the introduction of Poly-TPD layer. A unique feature of these EQE spectra is that the spectral response is stronger in the longer wavelength region than in the shorter wavelength region, which is different from most spectral response of MASnI3 perovskite solar cells reported. This feature may be ascribed to the use of C60 electron selective layer, which is known to facilitate electron transfer from Pb-based perovskites to the conductive electrodes. Therefore, the recombination rate at the MASnI3/C60 interface is expected to be lower than that at the PEDOT:PSS/MASnI3 or PEDOT:PSS/Poly-TPD/MASnI3 interfaces.
The performance of MASnI3 perovskite solar cells is further improved by optimizing the thickness of the C60 electron selective layer. We found a tradeoff between Voc and Jsc by varying the C60 thickness. The highest Voc of 494 mV is achieved with a 30 nm thick C60. However, the Jsc (5.4 mA cm−2) of this cell is lower than that of the other cells with a thinner C60 layer. The solar cell with a 20 nm-thick C60 layer achieved the best efficiency of 1.7%, with a Voc of 377 mV, a Jsc of 12.1 mA cm−2, and an FF of 36.6%. The J–V curves under reverse and forward voltage scans and the EQE spectrum of this best-performing MASnI3 device are shown in Fig. 5. It is worth highlighting that the best cell shows no obvious J–V hysteresis, which should be owed to the inverted device architecture. Its corresponding EQE spectrum has a similar shape shown in Fig. 4(b), but it has much higher values in the entire wavelength range. This indicates that improvement of the Jsc can be expected in the future by optimizing all the interlayers. The efficiency histogram of Sn-based perovskite solar cells with a 20 nm C60 layer is shown in Fig. S5. It is also noted that all MASnI3 perovskite solar cells suffer from low FFs, which could be due to the low shunt resistance (Rsh) and high series resistance (Rs). For the best-performing device, the Rsh and Rs are estimated to be 151.1 Ω cm2 and 396.9 Ω cm2, respectively. The low Rsh could result from the high hole density in MASnI3, which could be caused by the easy formation of Sn4+ from the oxidation of Sn2+. The high Rs could be ascribed to the charge recombination. These issues will be addressed in our future studies.
To understand the limiting characteristics of our MASnI3 perovskite solar cells, we have conducted J–V measurement with varying light intensity. Fig. 6 shows the dependence of the Jsc and Voc on the light intensity ranging from 0.8 to 100 mW cm−2. The power law dependence of the Jsc on the light intensity is J ∝ Iα. Generally, a space charge limited solar cell has α ∼ 0.75. Here, our hybrid thermally evaporated MASnI3 perovskite solar cell exhibits an α value of about 0.83, shown in Fig. 6(a). This could be ascribed to the charge carrier imbalance resulting from the interfacial barriers formed due to the non-optimal thickness of the electron/hole transporting layers or the energy level alignment between these interlayers and the perovskite. In Fig. 6(b), the Voc of our MASnI3 perovskite solar cell shows a linear relationship with the light intensity (natural logarithmic scale). A trap-free relationship should have a slope of δVoc = kT/q. The slope of δVoc = 1.97 kT/q in our devices implies significant Shockley–Read–Hall recombination prevalent in our MASnI3 perovskite solar cells.
It is known that the facile oxidation of Sn2+ could cause instability for MASnI3 perovskites, which could be avoided by encapsulation. For this work, our MASnI3 perovskite solar cells were not encapsulated and the cells were measured in ambient air. We observed gradual degradation if the cells were kept in the ambient, similar to other works on Sn halide perovskite solar cells. Parallel degradation mechanisms such as the oxidation of the Ag electrode and/or the oxygen doping of the fullerene layer have also been proposed. However, the hybrid evaporated MASnI3 perovskite thin films could survive for more than two months without obvious degradation if stored in a nitrogen-filled glove box, as shown in Fig. S6. There is no obvious performance degradation of the solar cells fabricated with these aged MASnI3 perovskite thin films as shown in Fig. S6.

In summary, high-quality MASnI3 thin films have been successfully fabricated by the hybrid thermal evaporation method. The as-deposited films have very smooth surface, densely packed grains, excellent surface coverage, and preferred crystallographic orientation along the 〈100〉 direction. The carrier density of holes could be controlled by varying the stoichiometry of the films, allowing for favorable electronic properties for use in solar cells. Our as-deposited MASnI3 thin films exhibited hole densities of 1017–1018 cm−3, which are suitable for solar cell application. The inverted planar MASnI3 perovskite solar cells have achieved a Voc as high as 494 mV. Our best-performing cell has a PCE of 1.7%, with a Voc of 377 mV, a Jsc of 12.1 mA cm−2, and an FF of 36.6%. Further performance enhancement could be expected by optimizing the MASnI3 perovskite and interfacial engineering between the perovskite and the electron/hole selective layers. Our results demonstrate that hybrid thermal evaporation is a viable technique to prepare high-quality MASnI3 thin films, beneficial for efficient Sn halide perovskite solar cells.


This work is financially supported by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) SunShot Initiative under the Next Generation Photovoltaics 3 program (DE-FOA-0000990), National Science Foundation under contract no. CHE–1230246 and DMR–1534686, and the Ohio Research Scholar Program. The work at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory is supported by the U.S. Department of Energy SunShot Initiative under the Next Generation Photovoltaics 3 program under Contract No. DE-AC36-08-GO28308. This research uses the resources of the Ohio Supercomputer Center and the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center, which is supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. H.M.Z thanks the support from the 973 Program of China (2015CB932203).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ra19476a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016