 DOI: 10.1039/C2EE22854H
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9881-9888

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Min
Guo
,

Keyu
Xie
,

Jia
Lin
,

Zehui
Yong
,

Cho Tung
Yip
,

Limin
Zhou
,

Yu
Wang
 and 

Haitao
Huang
*

Department of Applied Physics and Materials Research Centre, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China. E-mail: aphhuang@polyu.edu.hk; Fax: +852-2333-7629; Tel: +852-2766-5694

Department of Mechanical Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China

Received
14th July 2012
, Accepted 27th September 2012
First published on 27th September 2012
In order to conquer the challenges in the current technology to couple a dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) with a photonic crystal (PC), we propose a novel design of PC-based photoanode, composed of a thick TiO2 nanoparticle absorption layer and a thin TiO2 nanotube photonic crystal (TiO2 NT PC) membrane. In this architecture, the bandgap of TiO2 NT PC can be precisely tailored by modulating the anodization parameters using the current-pulse anodization process. Owing to the selective reflectivity of TiO2 NT PC, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the electrodes reveals a strong wavelength dependence. Strategies to enhance the efficiency of the newly designed DSSC and its relation to the selective reflection of the photoanode are discussed and evaluated by experimental and simulated results. Meanwhile, the functionality of TiO2 NT PC, offering both PC and light-scattering effects, has also been clarified. The combined effects of PC and light-scattering yield the maximum enhancement in PCE (39.5%) when the tailored TiO2 NT PC, with the best matching of its reflectance maximum to the dye absorption maximum, is integrated into a DSSC. The work presented here provides new insights into the design and tailoring of a photonic crystal to enhance the PCE of DSSCs for practical applications.

Dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are recognized as viable alternatives to compete with conventional solid state solar cells, being inexpensive and able to be mass produced using simple fabrication processes. Both chemical and physical methods are frequently used to enhance the efficiency of DSSCs. Among them, coupling to the DSSC by a photonic crystal (PC) is supposed to be an effective way to enhance light harvesting and the solar power conversion efficiency. In this work, a novel design of PC-integrated photoanode, composed of a thick TiO2 nanoparticle absorption layer and a thin TiO2 nanotube PC membrane has been presented. In this architecture, the thick TiO2 nanoparticle layer works as the absorbing layer, while the thin TiO2 nanotube PC, whose photonic bandgap can be precisely tailored by modulating the electrochemical anodization parameters, provides its multi-functionality by contributing to the light harvesting through both the PC effect and the diffuse light scattering. The work presented here provides new insights into the design and tailoring of PC to enhance the efficiency of DSSCs for practical applications.


The soaring carbon dioxide emissions and depletion of fossil fuels have kindled worldwide research interest in developing and refining greener, more efficient renewable and sustainable energy technologies, in particular, the photovoltaic technologies. Since O'Regan and Grätzel published their pioneering work in 1991, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have been recognized as the leading photovoltaic alternative to the currently dominant silicon-based solar cells. Using a nanopourous TiO2 film sensitized with dye soaked in redox electrolyte, DSSC has drawn considerable interest as an ideal photovoltaic concept for the production of renewable, clean, and affordable energy. High efficiency (up to 12%), low-cost and an eco-friendly fabrication process, transparency, and simplicity are some of the significant advantages offered by DSSCs.

In general, manipulation of semiconductor oxide with different morphologies and the quest for new dyes are two major strategies explored for enhancing the absorption of incident light and the collection of photo-generated carriers to further improve the overall power conversion efficiency (PCE) of DSSCs. To date, however, most efforts have not led to significantly improved PCE of DSSCs, due to the lack of efficient ways to achieve the improvement in light harvesting or carrier collection without affecting other factors. Apart from the above-mentioned chemical methods, physical concepts, such as the introduction of optical elements (scattering layer, photonic crystal, plasmonic nanometal and so on), are supposed to be effective ways to enhance the light absorption with little adverse effect on the carrier collection. Unfortunately, in practice, using large TiO2 micron-sized particles as the scattering layer leads to completely opaque DSSC, thus depriving it of one of its significant advantages over other competing photovoltaic technologies. While using plasmonic nanometals, the back reaction and corrosion of nanometals often take place at the nanometal/dye and nanometal/electrolyte interfaces, decreasing the PCE and long-time stability of DSSCs.
An effective way to enhance light harvesting is to modify the optical design of the DSSC by coupling it to a photonic crystal (PC), such as 1D SiO2/TiO2 alternate layers and 3D TiO2 (or Si) inverse opal layer, onto the mesoporous TiO2 layer. In this strategy, photon localization, light reflection, and formation of photon resonance modes are the three major mechanisms offered by a PC and can greatly enhance the light harvesting within the dye-sensitized photoanode. Experimentally, however, growth of a 3D inverse opal PC with high optical quality on a rough and porous photoanode is still a challenge. The inverse opal PC could only be formed on a flat transparent electrode by using a colloidal crystal as the template at the early stage. Until recently, a series of modified methods to prepare inverse opal PC on the mesoporous photoanode has been developed by using a protective polymer layer, spin-coating the colloidal crystal, and integrating a mesoporous underlayer with 3D PC overlayer. Nevertheless, these methods still suffer from one or more of the following intrinsic drawbacks: (1) poor physical contact between the PC and the TiO2 absorbing layers, (2) electrolyte being easily clogged at the interface, (3) the photonic bandgap being impossible to be continuously tuned for the optimization of light harvesting, and (4) the thickness of the absorbing layer, as laid by the processing method, having to be very thin to satisfy the stringent requirement on interface flatness. For the use of nanoparticle-based 1D PC (SiO2/TiO2) in DSSC, the enhancement of photocurrents was not as high as expected, and the photovoltage and fill factor both decrease simultaneously, due to the clogging of the channels for electrolyte infiltration by the dense nanoparticle alternate layers. Very recently, by further optimizing the nanoparticle-based 1D PCs with increasing porosity, an obvious enhancement in both photocurrent and photovoltage can be achieved, which results in the enhanced PCE of DSSCs. Compared to the conventional DSSCs, however, the fill factor is still slightly lower, which may be attributed to the non-conductive nature of the introduced SiO2 layers in DSSCs that hinders the charge transport.
In order to overcome the above drawbacks, a novel and single-step approach to the seamless coupling of a TiO2 nanotube (NT) PC layer to a TiO2 NT absorbing layer has been developed in our group. A PCE of 5.61% was achieved in this PC-based DSSC. However, the efficiency is still low as compared to the nanoparticle-based counterpart due to the relatively lower surface area of NT-based photoanode. Hence, a new design of structured architecture is desired for further enhancement in PCE of PC-based DSSC.
Herein, we design a novel architecture, consisting of a thick TiO2 nanoparticle (NP) layer and a thin TiO2 NT PC (Fig. 1). In this architecture, the TiO2 NT absorbing layer used in our previous design is replaced by a thick TiO2 NP one, since the surface area of TiO2 NTs for dye absorption is insufficient, and the electron mobility of TiO2 NT is as low as that of TiO2 NP layer due to the existence of exciton-like trap states, confirmed by the latest reports. The thin TiO2 NT PC not only provides multi-functionality, such as acting as a scattering layer, localizing photons, reflecting the light, and forming the photon resonance modes, etc., but also preserves the transparency of DSSCs. Moreover, the new design also shows other advantages according to our previous work: (1) the transfer of the TiO2 NT PC layer and the fabrication process of the photoanode is facile and highly controllable, (2) good physical contact between the TiO2 NT PC layer and the TiO2 NP layer can be obtained, (3) the TiO2 NT PC overlayer will not clog the channels for electrolyte infiltration, (4) the bandgap of TiO2 NT PC can be easily and continuously tuned by adjusting the anodization parameters, and (5) flat TiO2 NT PC membrane can be achieved by a two-step anodization process. As a result, by tailoring the bandgap of the multifunctional TiO2 NT PC, a high PCE of up to 6.96% can be achieved in the PC-based DSSCs equipped with this newly constructed photoanode. Moreover, based on the theoretical and experimental results for front-side illuminated PC-based DSSCs, the effect of the bandgap of TiO2 NT PC on the PCE of DSSCs and the functionality of TiO2 NT PC are clarified. We believe that this work is greatly helpful for further development of high efficiency PC-based DSSCs for practical applications, such as integrated photovoltaics for automotive and building windows.

All materials and reagents were used without further purification or treatment. Titanium foils (99.7%) were purchased from Strem Chemical (USA). Ethylene glycol (EG, 99.5%), ammonium fluoride (96%), acetone, and ethanol were obtained from International Laboratory (USA). Deionized (DI) water (18.2 MΩ cm) was produced by Direct-Q 3 Water Purification Systems (Millipore).

The TiO2 NP paste (13 nm), FTO glass (Nippon Sheet Glass), Pt-coated FTO glass, thermal adhesive film (25 μm thick, Surlyn-1702), N719 dye (Solaronix) and the electrolyte (DMPD: 1.0 M, LiI: 0.1 M, 4-TBP: 0.5 M, I2: 0.12 M, 3-methoxy propionitrile) were purchased from Wuhan Geao Instruments Science and Technology Co. Ltd (China).

The TiO2 NT PC was fabricated by periodic current-pulse anodization as in our previous work. Briefly, the titanium foils were pre-treated by anodization at 60 V for 15 min, using an electrolyte consisting of 0.5 wt% ammonium fluoride in an aqueous EG solution (3 vol% D.I. water in EG) in a two-electrode electrochemical cell. Then the flat Ti surface was subjected to a subsequent ultrasonic treatment in D.I. water for 5–10 min. Periodic current pulse anodization with alternating high current (HC) and low current (LC) was adopted to fabricate the TiO2 NT PC on the pre-treated foil. The value of the HC current density was so determined to achieve an anodization voltage of around 60 V. The number of pulses and the pulse duration determined the number of periods and the lattice constant, respectively, of the PC layer, and hence the optical properties. For all samples, the thickness of the TiO2 NT PC was fixed to ∼2.3 μm in this study.


To construct the proposed photoanode (TiO2 NT PC/TiO2 NP), the as-grown TiO2 NT PC membrane was firstly heat treated at 270 °C for 1 h. Then it was detached with a subsequent anodization at a bias voltage of 60 V for 2 h in the same electrolyte as reported in our previous work. After being washed with ethanol, the TiO2 NT PC membrane was detached from the titanium substrate, and then adhered to the FTO substrate with TiO2 NP paste via a doctor-blade method. The adhered samples were then annealed at 450 °C for 3 h under heating and cooling rates of 1 °C min−1. The photoanodes were then soaked in a dye-containing solvent (0.3 × 10−3 M N719 in ethanol) at 60 °C for 24 h, followed by rinsing in pure ethanol for 1 min to remove non-chemisorbed dye, before being assembled in solar cells. Subsequently, the dye-sensitized TiO2 electrode and Pt-counter electrode were assembled into a sandwich type cell and sealed with a thermal adhesive film. The electrolyte was infiltrated into the cells by placing the electrolyte droplet in the cavity of the active area of the device before the device was sealed with UV epoxy. In this study, TiO2 NP photoanodes (∼12 μm) and TiO2 normal nanotube/TiO2 nanoparticle (TiO2 NT/TiO2 NP) photoanodes, with the thickness of TiO2 NT the same as TiO2 NT PC, were also prepared for comparison.


Reflectance spectra were acquired using a typical microreflectivity/microtransmission system (Ocean Optics(R) USB2000 + fiber spectrometer) over a sample area of roughly 5 × 5 μm2 with a magnification of 100×. A spectral range of 400–800 nm was explored using a tungsten–halogen lamp. A field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, JEOL JSM-6335F) was used to study the microstructure. I–V characteristics were measured using a Keithley 2420 source meter. For white-light efficiency measurements (at 100 mW cm−2), a Newport 91160 solar-light simulator with an AM 1.5 filter was used. All measurements were performed in air over an active area of 0.16 cm2. For EQE measurement, the light source was from a Newport 66902 solar simulator. The wavelength of light was tuned with a Newport 74125 monochromator. The photocurrent was measured with a Newport 2931-C power meter. The light intensity was measured with a Newport 2931-C power meter equipped with a 71675_71580 detector probe. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) data were collected at the open circuit voltage with an AC perturbation amplitude of 10 mV and a frequency within 0.05 to 105 Hz. Dye amounts were measured by desorption in 0.1 M NaOH aqueous solution and the absorbance was measured by a UV-vis spectrophotometer (Model UV-2550, Shimadzu, Japan).


Finite-element full wave simulation was employed for numerical calculation of reflection spectra. The PCs were modelled as TiO2 NTs arranged in a hexagonal lattice with the geometric features similar to the experimental samples, i.e., the outer diameter and the wall thickness being 110 and 10 nm, respectively. The TiO2 NT PC layer (∼2.3 μm in thickness) was deposited on a TiO2 NP layer (10 μm in thickness), and both the TiO2 NT PC and NP layers were sensitized by ruthenium dye N719. In our models, the incident light first passes through a conductive transparent substrate (refractive index n1 = 1.45) at normal incidence. It then reaches the TiO2 NP layer with 50% porosity. The TiO2 NT PC layer is placed under the NP layer with the axial direction of NTs perpendicular to the conductive transparent substrate. The refractive indices of different layers were calculated by the effective medium theory, using nTiO2 = 2.51.

By assuming that the electrolyte (with n = 1.403, similar to that of 3-methoxy propionitrile electrolyte) fills all the pores, the effective refractive index of the TiO2 NP layer is n3 = 2.03. The absorption coefficient of the ruthenium dye, which is represented by the frequency-dependent imaginary part of the complex refractive index, is obtained by fitting photocurrent and absorptance spectra of similar TiO2 NP layer and device. For comparison, the standard Grätzel solar cell is modelled with two TiO2 NP slabs, one being the same as the TiO2 NP layer in the PC-coupled cell, the other having the same thickness as the TiO2 NT PC layer. Similar to the treatment in ref. 21, the electrolyte was the last layer to be modelled in our system. More details about the simulation and theoretical calculation can be found in the ESI.

A schematic representation of the typical construction procedure of TiO2 NT PC/TiO2 NP architecture for PC-based DSSCs is illustrated in Fig. 2.

First, the TiO2 NT PC with a periodic structure along the axial direction was obtained under periodic current-pulse anodization. Compared to the PC obtained by spin-coating alternate layers or template-synthesized inverse opals, the bandgap of TiO2 NT PC can be easily and continuously tuned by adjusting the anodization parameters as confirmed below. Then, a self-detaching anodization was applied to form free-standing TiO2 NT PC membrane with open ends and ultra-flat surface for easy electrolyte infiltration and high-quality optical properties, according to our previous reports. Next, the detached TiO2 NT PC membrane was transferred and attached onto a transparent FTO substrate coated with a thick absorbing layer of TiO2 NP paste (∼10 μm) via a doctor-blade method. Finally, the photoanode was calcined at 450 °C for 3 h to ensure good physical contact between the TiO2 NT PC membrane and the TiO2 NP layer. This novel TiO2 NT PC/TiO2 NP photoanode is expected to overcome the current challenges mentioned above for PC-based DSSCs to a certain extent, and offer new degrees of freedom in exploring PC-based DSSCs with enhanced PCE.
One of the keys to success in the design and tailoring of the TiO2 NT PC for high efficiency DSSCs is to realize the highly controllable modulation of the bandgap of PC. Fortunately, using the current-pulse anodization method, the lattice constant of the PC layer can be easily and precisely determined by adjusting the HC pulse duration (Fig. 3a–d). The lattice constant of the PC layer is almost linearly increased to about 120, 150, 190 and 230 nm at different HC pulse durations of 20, 30, 40 and 50 s, respectively (Fig. 3e). Accordingly, the PC membranes displayed different colours over the whole visible spectrum, from purple (150 nm), green (190 nm) to red (230 nm) after annealing at 270 °C (Fig. S1). The linear dependence of the lattice constant on the HC duration indicates that the current pulse duration plays a crucial role in determining the lattice constant and hence the optical properties of the PC layer. Most importantly, this allows the bandgap of the TiO2 NT PC to be tuned at will to match the absorption range of any dye molecule for DSSC applications.

Fig. 4a shows the experimental and simulated reflectance spectra of the TiO2 NT PC/TiO2 NP with different lattice constants deposited in air. With increasing lattice constants, the reflection peak of the PC layer shifted to longer wavelengths. The distinct reflection peaks over the entire visible spectrum correspond well to the Bragg peaks of the samples (150-PC/TiO2 NP, 190-PC/TiO2 NP and 230-PC/TiO2 NP). The stop band positions are located at about 450, 550, and 640 nm, corresponding to purple, green, and red, respectively. It should be noted that no visible reflectance peak of 120-PC/TiO2 NP can be seen in Fig. 4a, since its reflection is in the ultraviolet spectral range (below 400 nm). The experimental results agreed well with the simulated reflectance spectra of the TiO2 NT PC layer in terms of peak position. In addition, due to the change of the refractive index contrast, when the sample was infiltrated with ethanol, whose refractive index is close to the solvent (3-methoxy propionitrile) used in the electrolyte, a red-shift of the reflection peak could be observed, compared with that of the samples in air (Fig. S2). Take 150-PC/TiO2 NP as an example, when the sample was infiltrated with ethanol, the reflection peak of the 150 PC layer shifted from 450 nm (in air) to 510 nm, which was close to the absorption peak (∼500 nm) of the N719 dye.
Encouragingly, though the transparency of these PC-coupled photoanodes in the visible range is lower than that of TiO2 NP based photoanode, the semi-transparency property is still maintained (Fig. 4b and c). It is noted that in the case of using micron-sized particles as the diffuse scattering layer to increase the photocurrent of DSSCs, the transmittance is reduced to 0%. Hence, these semi-transparent PC-coupled photoanodes are very attractive for DSSC applications, especially for automotive and building integrated photovoltaics. As seen from Fig. 4b, at the stop band position of the corresponding PC sample (450, 550 and 640 nm for 150-PC/TiO2 NP, 190-PC/TiO2 NP and 230-PC/TiO2 NP, respectively), there is a small dip in the transmittance spectrum, which agrees well with the reflectance maxima of these photoanodes.
In order to demonstrate the effect on light harvesting of the PC-coupled photoanodes, the photocurrent vs. voltage curves of the assembled cells were measured and compared with the reference cells without a PC layer. A total of 4–6 cells were tested for each type of cells. The electron lifetime (τr) was calculated from the Bode phase plots (Fig. S4) and listed in Table 1. The lifetime in a single layer photoanode (TiO2 NP) is slightly lower than in the bilayer counterparts (TiO2 NT/TiO2 NP and TiO2 NT PC/TiO2 NP). But the difference is not large enough to induce any significant change in the power conversion efficiency of DSSCs (see ESI for detailed discussion). The insignificant increase in lifetime due to the coupling of TiO2 nanotubes is an expected result since the nanotube used in the bilayer photoanode has a very limited thickness as compared to the nanoparticle layer. As clearly shown in Fig. 5 and Table 1, there are also two interesting phenomena that can be readily found. One is the noticeable increase in short circuit current with the coupling of the TiO2 NT PC, which is strongly dependent on the matching of the respective reflectance spectrum of the electrode and the absorption spectrum of the N719 dye. The Jsc is 14.76, 15.63, 14.30, and 12.61 mA cm−2 for 120-PC/TiO2 NP, 150-PC/TiO2 NP, 190-PC/TiO2 NP, and 230-PC/TiO2 NP, increasing by 29.1, 36.7, 25.1, and 10.3%, respectively, compared to the reference cell (11.43 mA cm−2), while the dye loading amounts of these photoanodes are almost at the same level. In principle, the increase in Jsc mainly originates from the enhancement of optical absorption caused by the back reflection from the TiO2 NT PC, which acts as a highly efficient dielectric mirror. Consequently, the maximum ΔJsc/Jsc (36.7%) is obtained in DSSC with the 150-PC/TiO2 NP photoanode, whose reflectance peak (about 510 nm in ethanol) is close to the absorption peak of the N719 dye. With the gradually decreasing absorption of the N719 dye at longer wavelength (>600 nm), ΔJsc/Jsc decreases greatly to 25.1% and 10.3%, respectively, for DSSCs with 190-PC/TiO2 NP and 230-PC/TiO2 NP photoanodes, whose reflectance peaks are located at about 640 and 760 nm, respectively, in ethanol (Fig. S2). The selective reflection of the tailored photoanode and its effect on the enhancement of Jsc provides new guidance on the manufacture and design of high efficiency TiO2 NT PC based DSSCs for practical applications.
Photoanode
Thickness

V
oc


J
sc

FF

η

ΔJsc/Jsc
Δη/η
Dye loading

τ
r


a Thickness: (μm). Voc: open circuit voltage (V). Jsc: short circuit current (mA cm−2). FF: fill factor (%). η: power conversion efficiency (%). ΔJsc/Jsc: percentage enhancement in Jsc (%). Δη/η: percentage enhancement in η (%). Dye loading: (nmol cm−2). τr: electron lifetime (ms).

TiO2 NP
∼12
0.680
11.43
64.20
4.99
—
—
136.55
10.6
TiO2 NT/TiO2 NP
∼2.3 + 10
0.692
12.54
63.12
5.48
9.7
9.8
129.31
13.7
120-PC/TiO2 NP
∼2.3 + 10
0.701
14.76
61.95
6.41
29.1
28.5
124.63
12.7
150-PC/TiO2 NP
∼2.3 + 10
0.684
15.63
65.10
6.96
36.7
39.5
126.77
13.5
190-PC/TiO2 NP
∼2.3 + 10
0.693
14.30
62.66
6.21
25.1
24.4
128.15
13.7
230-PC/TiO2 NP
∼2.3 + 10
0.695
12.61
65.95
5.78
10.3
15.8
118.80
13.2
The other interesting thing, as found from Table 1, is that the enhancement of short circuit current (ΔJsc/Jsc) agrees fairly well with the enhancement of power conversion efficiency (Δη/η). Since the FF and Voc in these TiO2 NT-PC based DSSCs are more or less the same, according to η = FF × Jsc × Voc/Pi (where Pi is the power density of the incident light), Δη/η is expected to be equal to ΔJsc/Jsc. Indeed, Δη/η is 28.5%, 39.5%, 24.4% and 15.8%, respectively, for various TiO2 NT PC based DSSCs, which is very close to the corresponding ΔJsc/Jsc (29.1%, 36.7%, 25.1% and 10.3%, respectively). Hence, ΔJsc/Jsc, instead of Δη/η, can be used as a measure in the following discussion on the light harvesting effect of PC layers.
In order to better understand the significance of the structural design of TiO2 NT PC on the enhancement of light harvesting in DSSCs and the underlying mechanism, numerical simulations are conducted on the DSSCs coupled with the newly designed TiO2 NT PC based photoanode. The spatial distribution of the squared amplitude of the electric field in different parts of the TiO2 NT PC/TiO2 NP photoanode were calculated by simulation and shown in Fig. S5 of the ESI. Meanwhile, the simulated absorptance results are compared with the incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurement as well (Fig. 6). Compared with the reference DSSC, those coupled with TiO2 NT PC show an appreciable increase in measured IPCE near the Bragg positions of those PCs infiltrated with electrolyte, i.e., at 410, 510, 640 and 760 nm for 120-PC/TiO2 NP, 150-PC/TiO2 NP, 190-PC/TiO2 NP, and 230-PC/TiO2 NP, respectively. These results are highly in accordance with the simulated reflectance spectra, where significant enhancement in reflectance can be found at these Bragg positions. Hence, it can be concluded that ΔJsc is mainly attributed to the enhanced optical absorption caused by the TiO2 NT PCs.
To visualize the photocurrent efficiency enhancement effect due to the coupling of a PC layer, the experimentally measured ΔJsc/Jsc and the theoretically calculated one are compared in Fig. 7. It can be seen that ΔJsc/Jsc strongly depends on the position of the stop band of the TiO2 NT PC as described above. When the stop band of the PC (with a lattice constant of 150 nm) overlaps with the absorption peak of the N719 dye (∼500 nm), theoretical ΔJsc/Jsc reaches its maximum value of 22%, and when the stop band of the PC (with a lattice constant of 230 nm) shifts to the low absorption range of N719, theoretical ΔJsc/Jsc decreases drastically to only 4.0%. For the DSSC coupled with 120 PC, the stop band shifts from below 400 nm in air to about 410 nm in electrolyte, which is located at the relatively high absorption range of the N719 dye. Therefore, the theoretical ΔJsc/Jsc is even higher than that of 190-PC/TiO2 NP and 230-PC/TiO2 NP coupled DSSCs.
Notably, both the experimental and simulated increases in photocurrent show a very similar trend with respect to the lattice constant of PC, demonstrating a good match between the experimental and simulated results (Fig. 7). Nevertheless, the simulated ΔJsc/Jsc of each DSSC is lower than the experimentally measured values. The reason is that our theoretical calculation only considers the effects originated from PC itself, such as the reflection of light in the photonic bandgap, localization of photons near the band edge, and possible formation of the photon resonance modes. The scattering effect of the TiO2 NTs is neglected in our theoretical calculation. The strong light scattering effect in the anodic TiO2 NT layer has been reported before. A careful re-examination of the IPCE results (Fig. 6, top band) reveals that, apart from the appreciable IPCE increase at the stop band of the PC, there is also noticeable IPCE increase in almost the entire visible range due to the scattering effect of TiO2 NTs. This scattering effect can also be inferred from the decrease of transmittance in NT PC coupled photoanodes (Fig. 4b). The scattering effect is further confirmed from the measurement on the DSSC with the TiO2 NT/TiO2 NP photoanode. As can be seen from Table 1, ΔJsc/Jsc of TiO2 NT/TiO2 NP is about 9.7%. This enhancement in photocurrent mainly comes from the light scattering effect since the anodic TiO2 NT layer used in this photoanode does not have a PC structure. Hence, in the PC-coupled DSSC, the tailor-made TiO2 NT PC demonstrates its multi-functionality, that is, it not only offers a strong PC effect (where the maximum efficiency can be obtained when the stop band of PC matches the peak absorption range of dye), but also acts as a scattering layer (where enhancement in light harvesting exists almost in the entire visible range).

To conclude, a novel design of PC-based photoanode, composed of a thick TiO2 nanoparticle absorption layer and a thin TiO2 nanotube PC membrane has been presented. In this architecture, the thick TiO2 NP works as the absorbing layer, while the thin TiO2 NT PC provides multi-functionality, not only offering the PC effect, but also acting as a scattering layer. Based on the high controllability of current-pulse anodization, the bandgap of TiO2 NT PC can be precisely tailored for maximum PCE. Due to the selective reflectivity of TiO2 NT PC, the enhancement in PCE of the DSSCs revealed a strong wavelength dependence, which has been discussed and evaluated by both experimental and simulated results. Compared to the normal TiO2 NP based DSSCs, the combined effects of PC and light-scattering yield the maximum enhancement in PCE (39.5%) when the stop band of TiO2 NT PC best matches the absorption maximum of the dye molecules. Our work presented here provides new insights into the design and tailoring of photonic crystal to enhance the power conversion efficiency of DSSCs for future practical applications, especially photovoltaics integrated in automotive and building windows.


This work is supported by grants received from the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (Project no. PolyU5187/09E, PolyU5349/10E and PolyU5163/12E) as well as grants from Hong Kong Polytechnic University (Project no. A-SA76 and RT5W).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2ee22854h
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012