 DOI: 10.1039/D2NJ02589B
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2022, 46, 15155-15167


Suprabha S.
Sahoo
,

Manilal
Murmu
,

Priyabrata
Banerjee
*,

Habib M.
Pathan
 and 

Sunita
Salunke-Gawali
*

Department of Chemistry, Savitribai Phule Pune University, Pune 411007, India. E-mail: sunita.salunke@unipune.ac.in

Department of Physics, Savitribai Phule Pune University, Pune 411007, India

Surface Engineering & Tribology Group, CSIR-Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, M.G. Avenue, Durgapur 713209, West Bengal, India. E-mail: pr_banerjee@cmeri.res.in

Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), AcSIR Headquarters CSIR-HRDC Campus, Sector-19, Kamla Nehru Nagar, Ghaziabad, 201002, India

Received
24th May 2022
, Accepted 2nd July 2022
First published on 5th July 2022
Three benzo[α]phenoxazine-based dyes were designed by tailoring donor (D) and anchoring (A) moiety to benzo[α]phenoxazine template via DFT and TD-DFT method for dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) applications. The transformation of basic benzo[α]phenoxazine by incorporating triphenylamine as a donor (D) plus cyanoacrylic/cyanoacetic acid as the anchoring group (A) at selective and reactive sites to produce a typical D–π–A architecture was accomplished by a molecular engineering approach. The benzo[α]phenoxazine scaffold was used as a precursor or π-linker despite the highly explored phenoxazine scaffold to harness more solar radiation and impede the aggregation issues. The designed dyes are endowed with a planar shape, tuneable light-harvesting capacity, efficient intra-molecular charge transfer (ICT), suitable HOMO and LUMO position, and high dipole moment. Among the three modified dyes, M-3 possesses the highest absorbance, up to 892 nm, while M-2 has high light-harvesting efficiency due to the reduced HOMO–LUMO energy gap, high dipole moment, effective adsorption, and compatible non-covalent interactions. Moreover, dye regeneration, injection efficiency, and effective intramolecular charge transportation provided a significant driving force for the operation of DSSC devices. Thus, incorporating D and A groups successfully manipulates π–π stacking and hydrogen bonding interactions in benzo[α]phenoxazine moiety. The positional impact of the D and A groups on the photosensitizer's architecture is fine-tuned with various structural, optoelectrical, chemical, and electrochemical characterizations. Hence, re-functionalizing less explored organic scaffolds to produce efficient DSSC dye by tailoring D and A groups is a new protocol for dye designing before laboratory execution.

The contribution of organic dyes to energy production and storage is extensively explored to restrain the upcoming energy crisis in an eco-friendly manner. In this framework, the efforts of O’Regan and Michael Grätzel with the discovery of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are highly endearing. Cost-effectiveness, simple manufacturing process, utilization of flexible substrates, and application of nontoxic materials of DSSC are the significant advantages over the market-dominated first and second-generation solar cells. However, the lower solar power conversion efficiency of DSSC is a considerable obstruction to its direct field application. As such, to enhance the solar power conversion efficiency, variations in the field of dyes design and synthesis are highly explored. Although, after infusing several complex dyes with transition metals, and rare earth metals, comparable solar cell efficiency is achieved with existing contemporary photovoltaic devices, their toxicity and expensiveness have led the researcher's quest for new organic dyes. Organic dyes possess high absorptivity, cost-effectiveness, non-complicated manufacturing processes, tuneable optical properties, excellent thermal, electrochemical, photostability, and desirable redox nature.

Moreover, managing the critical parameters to achieve synthetic targets using agile molecular tailoring approach is the most crucial characteristic of organic dyes for producing efficient DSSC dyes. Hence, extensive research has been carried out with porphyrins, coumarins, indoline, carbazole, azo dyes,etc. In this perspective, we investigated a versatile benzo[α]phenoxazine moiety to design a more effective D–π–A dye. Thus, a systematic analysis was conducted to represent the hidden inherent and intrinsic properties of these benzo[α]phenoxazine dyes as a potential candidates for DSSC.
Over the last decades, phenoxazines, and phenothiazines containing electron-rich heteroatoms such as nitrogen, oxygen, and sulfur have been used as efficient electron donors for DSSC applications. Few reports are available where phenoxazine and phenothiazine act as π-linkers. However, significantly fewer reports are available on applications of benzo[α]phenoxazine dyes in DSSC. Narrow absorbances toward the visible region, hydrogen bonding, and π–π stacking interactions present in benzo[α]phenoxazine dyes are the major limiting factors toward higher solar cell efficiency. Hence, many strategies, such as inserting adequate π-linker, efficient electron donor, and active anchoring groups are introduced experimentally and theoretically to the basic benzo[α]phenoxazine skeleton. In this context, a report that a single electron-donating group such as diethylamine on the benzo[α]phenoxazine framework produces a Nile red and Nile blue type of dye. These dyes are fascinated with inherent intramolecular charge transfer characteristics 20, extensively used in the dying, labeling, pharmaceutical, and biosensors industry. A prototypic architectural design with benzo[α]phenoxazine moiety without disturbing its original intrinsic chemical nature is investigated here by the DFT/TD-DFT method. We have reported benzo[α]phenoxazine as the mainstay and tailored electron-donating group such as triphenylamine(TPA) and one electron-withdrawing plus anchoring group such as cyanoacrylic/cyanoacetic groups at the active sites of the benzo[α]phenoxazine skeleton to enhance the solar cell efficiency. It is a well-known fact that incorporating donors enhances the ease of dye regeneration, which increases the light-harvesting efficiency (LHE). Specifically, triphenylamine has been extensively used as an influential donor for DSSC dyes due to its active optoelectronic nature, hole-transporting capacity, and stereo-chemical adaptability to reduce aggregation. Similarly, tailoring cyanoacetic and cyanoacrylic groups is often used as electron-withdrawing and anchoring groups, which accepts the electrons and forms bidentate bridging with carboxylic acid part with the semiconducting metal oxide. The cyano group's presence enhances the electron-withdrawing nature of the anchoring moiety, which ultimately affects the electron injection efficiency and is a viable component for an efficient sensitizer.
To this end, we have tailored one anchoring group (A) and one donating group (D) to benzo[α]phenoxazine at selective positions, as shown in Fig. 1. As per literature reports, the typical π-conjugation effect is dominant in the benzo[α]phenoxazine skeleton via the heteroatom nitrogen from the crystallographic data of M-0. A similar inference is also prevalent in Nile red, Nile blue, and various prototypic frameworks. Therefore, we have used these benzo[α]phenoxazine cores as a linker or spacer for the transduction of charge carriers possessing one electron-donating group at one end and one electron-withdrawing group entangled with the anchoring group at the opposite end, generating a typical D–π–A type of architecture. Thus, three dyes named as (2E)-3-(9-(4-(diphenylamino)phenyl)-5-oxo-5H-benzo[α]phenoxazine-6-yl)-2-cyanoacrylic acid (M-1), (2E)-2-(9-(4-(diphenylamino)phenyl)-6-methyl-5H-benzo[α]phenoxazine-5-ylidene)-2-isocyanoacetic acid (M-2) and 2-(2-(4-(diphenylamino)phenyl)-6-methyl-5H-benzo[α]phenoxazine-5-ylidene)-2-isocyanoacetic acid (M-3) were designed computationally to engineer efficient photosensitizers for DSSCs, prior to laboratory execution. The solar cell impact of these engineered dyes was analyzed through their geometrical, optoelectrical, electrochemical, and chemical nature associated with frontier molecular orbital values. Most importantly, the proper positioning of the electron-donating and anchoring group inculcates a smooth intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) inside the moiety by establishing a “push–pull” interaction that modifies the light-harvesting efficiency many folds. In this regard, a comparative literature survey has been performed, and a few research articles showing similar investigations with phenoxazine or benzo[α]phenoxazine dyes endowed with various optoelectrical and solar cell parameters are presented in Table 1. It shows that the designed dyes have the highest absorbance and a lower HOMO–LUMO gap. As optoelectrical and electrochemical properties are two major deciding parameters, current research only focuses on these two for calculating solar cell performance. Hence, a systematic analysis of benzo[α]phenoxazine using DFT/TD-DFT was performed to design the best DSSC dyes before their synthesis to obtain tunable optoelectronic properties by varying structural arrangements to produce desired dyes with low cost and reduced synthetic constraints in a stipulated time frame.
Compound name

λ
max(nm) (Abs)

ε
max (dm3 mol−1 cm−1)

λ
PL (nm)

E
HOMO


E
LUMO


E
0–0


η%
Ref.
Where λmax(nm) (Abs) – absorbance maxima, λPL(nm) – emission maxima, εmax – molar absorption co-efficient, EHOMO – highest occupied molecular orbital, ELUMO – lowest unoccupied molecular orbital, E0–0 – intersection of absorbance and emission spectra, η% – solar cell efficiency.
TH301
491
22000
610
1.07
−1.17
2.24
6.2

28

TH305
517
28000
640
0.87
−1.28
2.15
7.7

28

IB1
486
21000
638
0.91
−1.28
2.19
6.2

29

POZ-2
465
16100
593
0.25
−2.05
2.30
6.5

17

MP-13
491
18800
607
1.09
−1.16
2.25
6.7

30

POZ-4
476
20600
601
0.27
−1.98
2.25
7.1

31

Oxazine-750
662
8250
—
0.81
−1.06
1.87
—

32

J6
668
—
0.65
−1.61
2.26
2.0

33

PTZ-9
816
0.41
−1.40
1.81
—

34

DTTP-4
693
0.57
−1.45
2.12

35

M-1
709
—
—
0.78
−1.07
1.86
—
Present work
M-2
791
—
—
0.79
−0.81
1.60
—
Present work
M-3
892
—
—
0.73
−0.86
1.59
—
Present work

The geometrical optimizations of the organic molecules were performed using the ORCA program package (Version 2.7.0) employing the hybrid B3LYP functional with TZV(P) and SV(P) basis set. To obtain an insight into optical and electrical properties, time-dependent density functional theory (TD-DFT) was calculated using B3LYP functional with a def SV (P) basis set for the carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and hydrogen atoms basic set. The COSMO model was used to incorporate the effect of the solvent. In this experiment, acetonitrile was used as a solvent. The ORCA program calculated the contributions of molecular orbitals from various organic entities. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) values were calculated using the B3LYP functional to calculate the electron density at the ground and excited states. The plots of molecular orbitals were visualized and generated using Molekel 4.3 software. Similarly, to obtain the precision and reliability of the data, TD-DFT computation studies were conducted to get oscillator strength. Similarly, dipole moment calculations were carried out using the ORCA program package to investigate the light-harvesting ability of the dye. TURBOMOLE V7.0 was used to perform the NBO analysis with TMoleX interface 4.1.1 [Developed by TURBOMOLE GmbH, Karlsruhe, 2015] by employing hybrid B3LYP functional with def SV (P) basis set [Orbital cut off: 0.60]. Non-Covalent Interaction (NCI)-A multifunctional wave function analyzer was used to perform reduced density gradient (RDG) analysis; Multiwfn v. 3.6., 2019; [Isosurface cut off: 0.60]. For the adsorption study, the initial geometry optimizations of the molecules were performed using the Forcite module by Material Studio™ (Version 6.1) software [Materials Studio 6.1 Manual, Accelrys Inc., San Diego, CA, (2007)]. Monte Carlo (MC) simulation was performed using the Adsorption Locator module in the same software. For TiO2, semiconducting metal oxide anatase (101) surface was used.


Benzo[α]phenoxazine dyes are the class of molecules that can act as an excellent precursor to tailor efficient donor and anchoring moieties to produce efficient DSSC dyes. Before commencing any molecular engineering work upon the benzo[α]phenoxazine template, the most crucial step was to keep the framework intact such that all the fundamental characteristics of the dye are unchanged. The properties of untailored benzo[α]phenoxazine dyes are fine-tuned with the prerequisites of DSSC dyes, such as; (i) long-range absorbance from UV to the visible region, (ii) high molar absorption coefficient, (iii) adequate redox nature with well-positioned energy levels HOMO (−6.19 eV, effectively below the redox potential energy of liquid I−/I3− electrolyte that is −4.8 eV) and LUMO (−3.73 eV sufficiently above the conduction band of TiO2 semiconducting metal oxide), (iv) high intermolecular charge transfer capacity through alternate single bond and double bond character, (v) long-range coupling, (vi) excellent thermal, electrochemical, and photostability, (vi) feasibility of internal intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) through the heteroatoms infused in the aromatic ring.

It can even be boosted by tailoring the exemplary anchoring moiety and an appropriate pushing group to the benzo[α]phenoxazine skeleton at the correct positions, whose impact on the electrochemical, structural, and optical properties discussed here has direct control on the solar cell efficacy. The literature survey shows that positions 2, 5, and 9 are the highly reactive sites (active positions) of untailored benzo[α]phenoxazine skeletons, as highlighted in Fig. 2. These positions are prone to various substitutions in the moiety to produce Nile red, Nile blue, and different prototypic frameworks. As such, tailoring of the electron-donating group (D) and electron-withdrawing plus anchoring group (A) in the skeleton was performed to establish efficient charge transport in the moiety (ICT), effective dye regeneration, and successive electron injection into the semiconducting metal oxide with utmost synthetic feasibility. Therefore, substitutions in the D and A groups were carried out with carbon numbers 2, 5, and 9 of the basic M-0 dye to design three new dyes where internal intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) is very prominent (videFig. 6). From the understanding of the nature of intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) inside the parent benzo[α]phenoxazine dye from single-crystal XRD data of our previous report, both electron-donating and anchoring groups are tailored in such a position that enhances the ICT in the moiety. The addition of electron-rich moieties improves the optoelectronic property. A bathochromic or hypsochromic shift is observed from which the best position can be easily chosen.
Similarly, when the electron-withdrawing plus anchoring group is inserted in the moiety, it enhances the electron injection rate, hence, it directly affects the electron injection efficiency. Thus, absorption spectra and molecular orbital analysis using TD-DFT/DFT calculations indicate that the best positioning of the cyanoacetic and cyanoacrylic groups in the benzo[α]phenoxazine framework can be predicted as a suitable candidate for DSSC dye. In addition, the mode of conjugation and the extent of delocalization play a crucial role in positioning the D and A groups in the organic framework. However, the placement of the anchoring moiety in the quinonoid ring facilitates a πphenyl ring stabilization energy; an added advantage to manipulating the backelectron transfer from the surface of TiO2 to the dye interface due to the aromatic ring stabilization energy, which invigorates the process of electron transfer from the dye to TiO2 semiconducting metal oxide and not the reverse one.
Thus, the molecular engineering approach is performed with the help of single-crystal XRD data on (methyl substituted benzo[α]phenoxazine), the representative of benzo[α]phenoxazine dye. It produces three new dyes with selective positioning of D and A groups, as shown in Fig. 1 with an improvised D–π–A motif in a modified way to obtain the effective DSSC dye with benzo[α]phenoxazine template as presented in Fig. 2.

Mode of aggregation, degree of conjugation, and different geometrical arrangements of photosensitizers are the most significant parameters for controlling solar cell efficiency. The π–π stacking interaction is very prominent in benzo[α]phenoxazine dyes, enhancing the molecular aggregation on the semiconductor surface and impeding the solar cell efficacy. Various structural modifications are adopted to reduce the aggregation. Hence, the triphenylamine (TPA) group is tailored to the benzo[α]phenoxazine skeleton to minimize the aggregation and acts as a pushing group. The optimized geometry of all the three dyes and parent benzo[α]phenoxazine dye is represented in Fig. 3, and the corresponding parameters are tabulated in Table S1 (vide the ESI). As the dyes were used in a liquid state with acetonitrile solvent, as such, all the TD-TDF/DFT calculations for structural optimizations were carried out in the liquid phase with the same solvent. In this work, the three dyes were designed by tailoring the TPA group at positions 9 and 2 along with the cyanoacetic and cyanoacrylic groups at positions 5, and 6, respectively, to establish a push–pull mechanism in the moiety with D–π–A architecture. From the dihedral angle (vide Table S1, ESI), it was found that all the dyes are planar in shape, so it is favorable for electron transportation from the donor to the anchoring site. The results of a quantum chemical calculation based on DFT/TD-DFT illustrate that the whole moiety is fully conjugated through the heteroatoms infused in the ring.

To obtain a concrete idea about the weak non-covalent interactions present in the designed dyes, the non-covalent interaction-reduced density gradient (NCI-RDG) analysis was carried out. The NCI-RDG plot gives a graphical visualization of several non-covalent interactions in the moiety, such as hydrogen bonding, van der Waals interaction, and steric repulsion. The NCI plots are plotted with reduced density gradient (RDG) versus (sign λ2)ρ between −0.05 to +0.05 a.u., where (sign λ2)ρ is the electron density multiplied by the sign of the second Hessian eigen value (λ2). The tricolored referencing line with (sign λ2)ρ values in the positive (sign λ2)ρ > 0 direction indicates strong non-bonded repulsive interactions or steric interactions designated with red color. Similarly, (sign λ2)ρ < 0 values signify strong, attractive interactions with a blue coloration. In addition, stronger engaging interactions were visualized in the NCI plot at a higher density region ρ > 0.01 a.u. While weak or dispersive interactions have appeared at low electron density and low gradient ρ < 0.01 a.u. with several spikes, as shown in Fig. 4(e)–(h). As such, we can find that the weak non-covalent interactions are present in the designed moiety in real space through this NCI-RDG plot. A glance toward M-0 reveals that steric hindrance is quite prominent compared to minimal hydrogen bonding interaction in the moiety, whereas the van der Waals interactions are not observed. The 3D spatial isosurface image is shown in Fig. 4(b), closely resembling the XRD data. In this respect, the following inferences were drawn on analyzing the NCI scattered plots of M-1 to M-3 engineered dyes, as shown in Fig. 4.
(i) All three molecules, M-1 to M-3, have prominent repulsive steric interactions in the moiety. They were observed as dispersive spikes toward the positive end (sign λ2)ρ > 0; generated due to starburst triphenylamine groups and aromatic rings, as shown in Fig. 4(a)–(d).
(ii) Only M-1 molecule possesses dispersed weak van der Waals interactions at low gradient (−0.01 a.u. < (sign λ2)ρ < +0.01 a.u.) Fig. 4(c) and (d).
(iii) The strong hydrogen bonding interactions are significantly less feasible in the region −0.05 < ρ < −0.01, confirming the absence of hydrogen bonding in the moieties.
(iv) On the other hand, by analyzing 3D isosurface images of the corresponding molecules, firm green concave disc-like surfaces are very prominent among the TPA moiety, portraying the presence of weak van der Waals interactions, as shown in Fig. 4 and Fig. S1 (vide the ESI).
(v) One crucial piece of information obtained from this isosurface analysis is that in M-1 and M-2 molecules, the carboxylic acid group of the anchoring moiety is not engaged in bonding interactions hence is free for binding with the semiconducting metal oxide, TiO2via strong hydrogen bonding, producing smooth transportation of charge carriers. Therefore, it may be a strong candidate for high light-harvesting capacity compared to M-3.
(vi) Due to the proximity of the donating group (D) near the anchoring group (A) in the M-3 dye, the ease of various strong nonbonding interactions is profound in the benzenoid and quinonoid rings of the M-3 dye. Hence, the probability of bonding with the TiO2 surface is reduced.
As such, from this analysis, we confirmed that the probability of solid covalent interactions, such as hydrogen bonding is less feasible, as verified by the coloration of NCI plots. The anchoring part of the moiety is available for adequate binding with semiconducting metal oxide. Similarly, the weak interactions such as π–π stacking, van der Waals interaction, and ring closure in the designed dyes validated fewer chances of molecular aggregation, hence inculcating better photo-sensing activity.

The absorption spectra of the newly modified dyes M-1, M-2, M-3, and M-0, are plotted in Fig. 5 with acetonitrile as a solvent by the TD-DFT method. M-0 shows a strong n–π* transition at 465 nm obtained using TD-DFT calculation, which strongly resembles the experimental data, which offers a bathochromic shift of 15 nm for the same transition ∼450 nm. On the contrary, the π–π* transition, which is very prominent in the M-0 molecule, was obtained at 351 nm from experimental UV-Visible spectra, showing nearly a ∼20 nm redshift from the experimental value and obtained at 371 nm by TD-DFT analysis. The simulated UV-Vis spectra of the designed dyes contain a well-separated π–π* transition of nearly 400 nm to 500 nm, whereas n–π* is shifted from 700 to 900 nm near the IR region videFig. 5. A few substituted Nile blue and Nile red types of dyes show similar types of extended absorbance spectra ∼650–700 nm. The absorption maxima near 465 nm in the parent M-0 dye were red-shifted significantly up to 709 nm in M-1, 791 in M-2, and 892 nm in M-3 molecules due to the increased conjugation and reduced HOMO–LUMO gaps of the designed dyes. Among the three modified dyes, M-1 and M-2 have triphenylamine groups in the ring “d” at position number 9 (Fig. 2), which has a strong pushing impact through the heteroatom nitrogen. The anchoring group's position on ring “b” also directly impacts the absorption spectra showing that M-2 has a longer absorbance than M-1. However, M-3 possesses the longest wavelength among the three dyes due to the direct conjugation among the donor group and anchoring moiety via the shortest π-linker, a phenyl ring. The donor moiety on the ring “a” at position 2 has a better conjugation impact due to the favorable geometrical and unique arrangement of the entire moiety, as shown in Fig. 3. The corresponding impact is reflected in the UV-Vis spectra shown in Fig. 5. Each excitation in the moiety is associated with various transitions in the dyes due to the transfer of electrons. A few transitions with their absorbance maxima are presented in Table 2 with their corresponding oscillatory strength (the probability of absorbance corresponding to a specific transition). M-3 possesses the highest absorbance ∼892 nm among all the dyes, with the lowest oscillatory strength. As such, it is regarded as a weak transition, whereas M-2 exhibits the highest absorbance at 791 nm with 89% oscillatory strength, demonstrating the powerful transition in the moiety associated with the n–π* transition.

Dyes name
Absorbance maxima λmax (nm)
Other probable transition wavelengths (nm)
Oscillatory strength (f)
M-1
709
458.94
0.319
709.28
0.663
M-2
791
525.79
0.898
791.74
0.898
M-3
892
412.36
0.366
561.52
0.558
892.01
0.17
M-0
426
356.16
0.409
426.00
0.348
Moreover, in the M-2 dye, the π–π* transition contributes the same as other transitions presented in Table 2. It is a well-known fact that the more the absorbance, the more significant the current density in the device, meaning that the absorbance spectra directly impact the Jsc of the device. Hence, it can be assumed that M-2 is a potential candidate to harness more solar radiation among the three designed dyes.

The energy gap between the frontier molecular orbitals (FMO) significantly contributes to the transition behavior and the dyes’ electronic excitation property, which TD-DFT calculations can be well explained. By analyzing the molecular orbital data obtained from the ORCA program with hybrid B3LYP functional, we obtained the HOMO and LUMO values. The oscillatory strength was determined using Turbomole (V.7.0) with TMoleX interface 4.1.1, as shown in Fig. 6. M-0 dye's electron density in HOMO orbitals is highly diffused throughout the ring, specifically on the whole benzo[α]phenoxazine moiety, excluding the benzenoid ring from the naphthoquinone fragment. In contrast, the electron density on LUMO orbitals is highly delocalized toward the carbonyl carbon and quinonoid part (Fig. 6). However, in both scenarios, the electron density on both the heteroatoms is equally dense. In the designed dyes’ electron cloud of the HOMO, orbitals are highly delocalized and concentrated on the triphenylamine donor part.

In contrast, in LUMO orbitals, the charge density is concentrated on the π-linker to anchor part of the dye. A keen observation shows that the LUMO orbitals and higher LUMO orbitals gradually move from the π–A segment to the anchoring group (A) only, while higher HOMO orbitals such as HOMO−1, HOMO−2, the electron density is highly diffused. So from the molecular orbital diagram, we can conclude that the electron cloud is moved from the donor group HOMO orbitals to anchoring segment LUMO orbitals on exposure to light, which promotes easy electron transduction from the anchoring moiety to the conduction band (CB) of semiconducting metal-oxide. It reasonably justifies that tailoring of the anchoring group efficiently injects electrons from the anchoring moiety to the conduction band in the device. In addition, the position of HOMO orbitals below the work-function of the redox electrolyte and the LUMO orbital energy level above the conduction band of the semiconducting metal oxide also significantly affect the efficacy of solar cells, as explained in the latter part of this paper.
To reconfirm the intramolecular and intermolecular charge transfer proficiency through the benzo[α]phenoxazine moiety with and without tailoring the D and A groups, we carried out the natural bond orbital (NBO) analysis. It revealed an even lesser energy gap between HOMO–LUMO orbitals with the same trend obtained from FMO analysis. However, intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) through the benzo[α]phenoxazine moiety was visible as the density of the electron cloud present at the donor moiety in the HOMO orbital is wholly shifted to anchoring sites located at LUMO orbitals, as presented in the NBO analysis shown in Fig. 7 and the corresponding energy-level values in Table S2 (ESI).

Besides the optical and electrical analysis of the dyes, a few chemical parameters were also calculated using the DFT and TD-DFT analysis to better understand their molecular properties. The chemical parameters such as ionization potential (I.P.), electron affinity (E.A.), chemical hardness (η), electrophilicity index (ω), electron-donating power (ω+), electron-accepting power (ω−), and their impact on solar cell performance were analyzed for the understanding of chemical reactivity of the designed dyes. It is well cited that lower ionization potential (I.P.) induces higher hole transport ability, and higher E.A. facilitates more accessible electron transport capacity, which is very conducive for DSSC application. On the contrary, chemical hardness refers to the resistance of charge transfer, which is inversely proportional to the Jsc of the device. The lower the chemical hardness, the more will be the intramolecular charge transport in the device. Hence, the intramolecular charge transport is faster in M-3 than in M-2, M-1, and M-0, as per the calculated values presented in Table 3. Similarly, a higher electrophilicity index produces more stability of dyes as electrophilicity describes the stabilization energy of the dyes. The decreasing order of electrophilicity is M-2 > M-3 > M-1 > M-0, as such M-2 possesses the highest stabilization energy. Again electron-accepting power and electron-donating power can be evaluated as the ease of electron acceptance and donation, hence, lower electron-donating power gives a better electron donation capacity, and high electron acceptance power drags the electron cloud and propagates easily, thus, facilitating more short-circuit current density in the device. Therefore, considering all the chemical parameters presented in Table 3, we can conclude that M-2 dye is a suitable candidate having higher I.P., enhanced E.A., more electronegativity, reduced chemical hardness, and high electrophilicity index among the three designed dyes with the benzo[α]phenoxazine scaffold.

Dyes name
Ionization potential (I.P.)
Electron affinity (A)
Electro negativity (χ)
Chemical hardness (η)
Electro philicity index (ω)
Electro accepting power (ω+)
Electro donating power (ω−)
M-0
5.98
2.99
4.49
1.49
13.48
41.97
82.24
M-1
5.28
3.43
4.35
0.93
20.39
28.14
43.21
M-2
5.29
3.69
4.49
0.80
25.16
26.93
38.54
M-3
5.23
3.64
4.43
0.79
24.71
25.95
37.19

The amount of dye adsorption on TiO2 semiconducting metal oxide directly impacts the enhancement of current density (Jsc) in the device. The quantity of dye/TiO2 adsorption energy portrays the interaction strength between the dye molecule and the TiO2 photoanode. Higher adsorption energy enhances the electron transfer rate among the interface, producing a more current density in the device. The information obtained from photophysical, chemical, and electrochemical analysis using the DFT/TD-DFT method can be more precisely and reasonably interpreted for the DSSC application after studying the dye/TiO2 adsorption profile. Thus, to obtain a deeper insight into the realistic way of dye and TiO2 interaction, Monte Carlo (MC) simulation with the optimized dye and TiO2 anatase (101) surface was studied.

The adsorption energy and bond distances are presented in Fig. 8 and Fig. S2 (ESI), respectively. Among several types of bonding interactions between carboxylic acid oxygen and Ti atoms, we explain only the most preferred bidentate chelation and bidentate bridging in Fig. 8, where the bond distance between Ti and O (i.e., carboxylic acid oxygen) is in the range of 2 Å to 4 Å. In M-2, the bidentate bridging is more feasible, whereas, in M-1 and M-3, bidentate chelation is very prominent. This may be the primary reason behind high LHE in M-2 among the dyes, as the strength and amount of the dye adsorption are more in M-2. In M-1 and M-3, the shortest bond distance between Ti and O (i.e., carboxylic acid oxygen) is 2.9 Å, whereas, in M-2, it is 2.76 Å. The corresponding adsorption energy (Eads) and the values associated with each entity are presented in Table S3 in the ESI The radial distribution plot in Fig. S2 (ESI) indicates the detailed bond distances among TiO2 and dye molecules. It shows the initial peaks of 2 Å to 3 Å for all the dye molecules, confirming the chemisorption phenomenon. Among the three dyes, M-2 is tightly bonded with the TiO2 surface facilitating effective electron transport and leading to the highest current density in the device. The primary reason behind this enhanced adsorption in M-2 is its localization of charge density on the LUMO and higher LUMO orbitals.
Furthermore, the ease of intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) in M-2 manifests better charge transfer dynamics among the three dyes due to its higher order of bonding interaction with shorter bond distance, which induces more solar conversion efficiency. The presence of O and N heteroatoms also enhances the bonding interaction between the dye and TiO2 surface atoms, as shown in Fig. 8. All possible modes of interaction are shown in Fig. 8. The exact interplay between the dye molecule and the semiconducting metal oxide plays a crucial role in light-harvesting efficiency (LHE) and charge transfer dynamics, which needs more critical analysis to unfold the mechanism; from the future perspective of this work.

The charge transfer mechanism is highly affected by the excited state lifetime. This means that a prolonged excited state lifetime enhances the feasibility of charge transfer more efficiently. The dye's excited state lifetime (τ) is calculated using the formula (), where ‘E’ is the excitation energy of different electronic states, and f is the oscillatory strength of the corresponding electronic form. The oscillatory strength was obtained from the TD-DFT method. The excited-state lifetimes are tabulated in Table 4, which manifests a steady increment in the designed dye's lifetime compared to M-0. The longer excited-state lifetime in the M-3 moiety is credited to its structural features and more stable LUMO orbital with the lowest bandgap energy. In addition, the inter-linked arene rings without any heteroatoms infused in conjugation in M-3 moiety along with faster charge transport are probably the primary reasons behind this long-lived excited-state lifetime of the M-3 molecule. M-1 and M-2 show nearly the same lifetime of ∼10 nm in the excited state presented in Table 4. On the contrary, all three dyes offer a longer excited-state lifetime than the parent benzo[α]phenoxazine moiety M-0.

Dyes name

λ
max (nm)
LHE
HOMO
LUMO
ΔGinj (eV)
ΔGregn (eV)

μ (Debye)

τ (ns)
Energy (cm−1)
M-0
465
0.551
−5.9898
−2.9958
−1.004
1.1897
6.863
8.13
−24116
M-1
709
0.782
−5.2849
−3.4249
−0.575
0.4849
12.033
10.06
−15001.9
M-2
791
0.873
5.2992
−3.6925
−0.307
0.4992
20.968
10.02
−12904.9
M-3
892
0.322
−5.2312
−3.6391
−0.361
0.4312
14.198
53.93
−12824.2

It is well known that solar cell efficiency (η) is directly related to the open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current (Isc), and fill factor (FF), which is calculated by the equation

(1)
where
Pin is the incident solar power intensity. To enhance the solar cell efficiency, the factor mentioned earlier needs to be improvised, for which all the intervening aspects need to be explored in detail.


The short-circuit current density (Jsc) is calculated by the following formula

(2)
where LHE(
λ) is the light-harvesting efficiency, Φinj is the electron injection efficiency, and ηcoll is the charge collection efficiency. As the working electrode is not changed during the fabrication process, ηcoll remains constant for the experiment, and only photosensitizers are changed. So, to obtain enhanced current density, Φinj, and LHE values should be more. LHE is the most crucial parameter that directly affects the current density in the device. The LHE is directly linked to the oscillatory strength obtained from absorbance spectra and calculated using the following formula

LHE = 1 − 10−f
(3)
where
f is the dye's oscillatory strength corresponding to a specific wavelength (absorbance maxima λmax). It can be visible that the higher the f value more is the light-harvesting efficiency. As it is visible that LHE is directly proportional to the current density in the device, from Table 2, eqn (2) and (3), we found that M-2 has high LHE among the three dyes. So, M-2 can produce higher Jsc in the device due to the higher LHE.

The cofactor Φinj (the electron injection efficiency) is also an important parameter directly affecting Jsc. It is directly related to ΔGinj, known as the driving force of electron injection. It is a well-known fact that the lower will be ΔGinj more will be Jsc of the device. The ΔGinj values can be calculated using the following equation
ΔGinj = Edye* − ECB = (Edye + E0–0) − ECB
(4)

Edye* is the energy in the dye's excited-state, ECB is the conduction band edge of the semiconducting metal oxide (here TiO2), and Edye is the ground-state oxidation potential energy associated with the dye molecule E0–0 is the vertical electronic transition energy corresponding to λmax. Here, we consider the ECB of TiO2 as 4.0 eV vs. vacuum because of the highly accepted value used in numerous research publications. All three dyes produce a negative ΔGinj value indicating adequate driving force for injecting the electrons from the excited dye molecule to the conduction band (CB) of the semiconducting metal oxide (videFig. 9). From Table 3, it is visible that M-2 has the lowest |ΔGinj| value of −0.30 eV hence a higher Jsc value.

Considering both LHE and Φinj values calculated using the TD-DFT method (Table 3), we can assume that M-2 has the potential to produce enhanced Jsc value among the three dyes with high LHE and lower |ΔGinj| values.

The second most important factor controlling the efficiency of the solar cell is open-circuit voltage (Voc); the following equation can be used to calculate it,

(5)
where
ECB is the conduction band edge of the semiconducting material used (here TiO2), q is the unit charge, k is Boltzmann constant, T absolute temperature, NC is the number of electrons in the conduction band, NCB is the density of accessible states in the conduction band, Eredox is the redox potential of the electrolyte (here −4.80 eV for I−/I3−) and ΔECB is the shift in the conduction band after dye adsorption. In this equation, q, k, T, NCB, and Eredox are assumed to be constant quantities, whereas NCB is highly affected by electron injection and electron recombination. The electron recombination restricts the electron flow, causing a negative impact or retarding phenomena for electron transportation. As such, the major factor that controls the variation or change in Voc is ΔECB, which can be expressed as follows

(6)
where,
μnormal is the dipole moment component perpendicular to the TiO2 surface, γ is the coverage of the dye adsorbed onto TiO2 semiconducting metal oxide, and ε/ε0 are dielectric constants. It is very prominent from eqn (4) and (5) that a higher dipole moment induces higher ΔECB, ultimately increasing the open-circuit voltage (Voc). The theoretical simulation found that M-2 possesses the highest dipole moment, followed by M-3 and M-1, as presented in Table 4.

Herein, we have discussed the factors influencing both Voc and Jsc in the device. The values are represented in Table 4, which shows that the highest LHE is for M-2, then M -1, followed by M-3. It can be seen from the data that in each case, ΔGinj is more than 0.2 eV, which is sufficient to drive the electron injection process. On top of that, the lower conduction band edge of M-2, as displayed in Fig. 6(b), facilitates faster electron injection or better Φinj in M-2 dye, enhancing the higher photo-conversion efficiency Jsc, as compared to the other two dyes. Similarly, the highest dipole moment of the M-2 molecule also enhances Voc compared to the other three. So, the combination of high Voc and more Jsc makes M-2 a potential candidate compared to the other dyes.

An extensive investigation of variously reported studies on phenoxazine-based dyes divulges both experimentally and theoretically that the solar conversion efficiencies are in the range of 4.5% to 7.8%, with an extended absorbance maximum of up to 517 nm in these phenoxazine-based dyes. Though several factors affect the PCE photocurrent conversion efficiency of DSSCs, geometrical architecture is a crucial parameter to enhance the light-harvesting efficiency by trouncing synthetic methods to produce targeted and efficient dyes. To attain the modified performance of these phenoxazine-based dyes, several anchoring and donating groups are tailored at selective positions on the benzo[α]phenoxazine moiety, and its impact on different photovoltaic parameters are calculated before synthesis, and the following inferences can be drawn.

• The benzo[α]phenoxazine dyes with triphenylamine donor, and cyanoacrylic and cyanoacetic acid acceptors have well-positioned HOMO–LUMO energy levels for adequate electron injection and electron regeneration (videTable 4).
• The reduced HOMO–LUMO gap resulted after tailoring of the proper donor(TPA) and anchoring group (A) cyanoacetic acid and cyanoacrylic acid groups; facilitating absorption up to longer wavelengths, which induces high LHE in the designed dyes (videTables 2 and 4)
• The introduction of cyanoacetic and cyanoacrylic moieties and TPA donors increases conjugation by establishing a typical D–π–A architecture through the heteroatom that provides a good platform for the internal charge transfer (ICT). The substitution of donor and acceptor groups on positions 9 and 5/6 on the bare benzo[α]phenoxazine scaffold set a long-range conjugation, a push–pull mechanism in the skeleton-like Nile blue and Nile-red type of reputed laser dyes (videFig. 5).
• The TPA group at position-9 acts as a donor and prevents aggregation due to bulky arene rings, as shown in Fig. 4. (as aggregation is highly impeded due to TPA moiety, reflected through NCI-RDG plot)
• The high I.P., E.A., electrophilicity, and lower chemical hardness of the designed dyes are the significant factors for producing high LHE.
• Higher adsorption energy with effective bonding interaction provides smooth transduction of charge carriers in the designed D–π–A dyes.
• The designed dyes’ high dipole moment and longer excited-state lifetime indicate increased Voc and Jsc due to good bridging among the dye stuffs and the photoanode material through the anchoring moiety.
• The previously reported studies (videTable 1) have a substitution on the heteroatom “N” of the phenoxazine moiety to functionalize as a donor or to reduce aggregation and anchoring group at the same position 7, whereas, this is for the first time, we report the whole benzo[α]phenoxazine skeleton itself as an excellent π-linker apart from a typical π-electron donor. Therefore, it will function as an efficient D–π–A type of dye for the DSSC industry in an eco-friendly and synthetically viable manner before synthesis to produce an efficient DSSC dye.

Three benzo[α]phenoxazine dyes (M-1, M-2, and M-3) were successfully designed and analyzed as efficient photosensitizers developed from M-0 elementary dye molecules. To improve the power conversion efficiency, molecular designing has been productively performed by tailoring efficient donors such as triphenylamine (TPA) and anchors such as cyanoacrylic, or cyanoacetic acid on the benzo[α]phenoxazine template. The dyes perform functionalization, such as a prototypic D–π–A dye, where carboxylic acid forms a bidentate bridging and bidentate chelation with the surface of titanium dioxide. Thus, the transportation of electrons becomes more accessible and convenient compared to unsubstituted M-0 sensitizer.

Furthermore, the designed dyes have an efficient optoelectrical nature with extended absorbance up to the NIR region and tuneable HOMO–LUMO positioning. High oscillatory strength for longer wavelengths, which facilitates more light absorption (LHE) tuned with high dipole-moment, resulted in modified Jsc and Voc in the device. Most importantly, the π–π stacking interaction causing aggregation in benzo[α]phenoxazine moiety is effectively controlled by incorporating the TPA moiety. Thus, a simple modification of selective and reactive sites on the benzo[α]phenoxazine template produces the desired output mandate for DSSC application. Among the three designed dyes, M-2 showed high power conversion efficiency due to the collective impact of high dipole moment, more light-harvesting efficiency, longer excited-state lifetime, adequate amount of dye adsorption with effective bonding interaction, efficient chemical parameters, and high electron injection efficiency.
However, the strategy implemented in this work exploits the benzo[α]phenoxazine scaffold as a robust platform for photosensitizers to be worked upon. Though the basic benzo[α]phenoxazine dyes were previously well explored in the dye industry, a few advancements on the template remodeled them as an efficient photosensitizer for the DSSCs industry. Due to synthetic limitations, we only studied tailoring one donor and one anchoring moiety at one or two places for better results. DFT, TD-DFT, NBO, and NCI RDG studies were conducted to explore the theoretical insight into the designed dye molecules. The adsorption study described the interaction/adsorption capability of the dyes on the TiO2 surface using MC simulation. The streamlining approach of implementing molecular engineering work with changing donors and anchoring moieties at different positions with various precursors will produce a competent photosensitizer for DSSC before the laboratory synthesis. Thus, the selection, designing, and systematic investigation to study hidden intrinsic chemical properties of organic dyes can also be adopted for less explored organic moieties to harness more solar radiation to proficiently replace the metal-complex-based expensive dyes in an eco-friendly manner, computationally, before the experimental synthesis.

Suprabha S. Sahoo: conceptualization, data curation, writing – review, and editing. Sunita Salunke-Gawali: conceptualization, review and editing, data curation, supervision, funding acquisition. Manilal Murmu: data curation. Priyabrata Banerjee: data Curation, writing – review, and editing, funding acquisition. Habib M. Pathan: conceptualization, review and editing, data curation, supervision, funding acquisition.


The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.


HM and SSG are grateful to the Solar Energy Research and Development (SERD) Department of Science and Technology (DST), Government of India, for financial support through the Major Research project vide Sanction order DST/TMD/CERI/RES/2020/47(G). PB is very thankful to the Department of Higher Education, Science & Technology and Biotechnology, Govt. West Bengal, India, provides financial assistance to accomplish this research work [vide sanction order no. 78(Sanc.)/ST/P/S&T/6G-1/2018 dated 31.01.2019 and project no. GAP-225612]. MM acknowledges the National Fellowship for Higher Education of Scheduled Tribes Students [Erst, known as Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship of Schedule Tribes Students] grantedby University Grants Commission and Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Govt of India, New Delhi, India, award letter no. F1-17.1/2014-15/RGNF-2014-15-ST-JHA-71559.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2nj02589b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022