 DOI: 10.1039/D0PY00134A
(Paper)
Polym. Chem., 2020, 11, 2883-2888


Liuyuan
Lan
,

Xiang
Deng
,

Jie
Zhang
,

Jingdong
Luo
* and 

Alex K.-Y.
Jen
*

Shenzhen Research Institute, City University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China

Department of Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR, China. E-mail: jingdluo@cityu.edu.hk

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR, China. E-mail: alexjen@cityu.edu.hk

Received
26th January 2020
, Accepted 22nd March 2020
First published on 23rd March 2020
An efficient post-functionalization protocol of the Mitsunobu reaction between a commercial reactive polymer of poly(4-vinylphenol) (PVP) and 9-(2-hydroxylethyl)-N,N,N,N-tetrakis(4-methoxyphenyl)-9H-carbazole-2,7-diamine is reported to synthesize a novel side-chain polymer (PVP-CZ) with a high density of hole transporting moieties. The polymer PVP-CZ exhibits adequate solvent resistance and excellent film forming ability for the fabrication of inverted perovskite solar cells (PVSCs). The thermal, optical and electrochemical properties of PVP-CZ were investigated in detail. The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) decay showed the excellent hole-extracting ability of dopant-free PVP-CZ from the perovskite layer. As a result, the inverted PVSCs delivered a respectable power conversion efficiency of 17.75% with a high fill factor of 81.07%. These results indicate that the synthetic strategy using the post-functionalization of the Mitsunobu reaction is a promising protocol to develop novel side-chain hole transporting polymers for highly efficient PVSCs.

The study of hole-transporting materials (HTMs) for the fabrication of perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) has received considerable attention since they play a critical role in determining the photovoltaic performance by efficiently facilitating hole extraction and transfer, as well as blocking electron transport from the photoactive layer to the counter electrode. Over the past several years, a large number of organic p-type semiconductors serving as HTMs for PVSCs have been developed with the research focus on rational molecular design and synthesis, which enable the significant achievement of power conversion efficiency (PCE) exceeding 20% for PVSCs. Generally, these organic HTMs can be divided into two categories: small molecules (SMs) including the most widely used HTM 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD), and conductive polymers (CPs), such as poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS), poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethyl-phenyl)amine] (PTAA), etc. As is well known, two types of HTMs have their own merits. SMs have a well-defined molecular weight, high purity and facile structural modification for the systematic studies of the structure–property relationship, while CPs usually possess excellent film-forming property, decent thermal stability and good hydrophobicity. Nevertheless, these two kinds of HTMs for PVSCs have been developed relatively independent of each other; thus there are no synergistic advantages to be gained. In this instance, it is of particular interest to explore new synthetic methods that can efficiently construct new HTMs with combined advantages of SMs and CPs for the fabrication of PVSCs.

Also note that the Mitsunobu reaction has been widely used in organic synthesis since the first report by Mitsunobu and co-workers in 1967. This reaction allows a dehydration facilely occurring between alcohols and various Brønsted–Lowry acids thereby forming C–O, C–S and C–N bonds in the presence of a combination of diethyl azodicarboxylate (DEAD) (or diisopropyl azodicarboxylate, DIAD) and triphenylphosphine (TPP) under mild conditions. This type of reaction has been used previously in the synthesis of side-chain hole transporting polymers (SC-HTPs), high glass transition electro-optic polymers, and crosslinkable polymers through cycloaddition. Notably, Jen et al. developed two crosslinkable SC-HTPs by incorporating trifluorovinyl phenyl ether groups and tetraphenylenebiphenyldiamine units into the poly(4-vinylphenol) backbone using a post-functionalization protocol via the Mitsunobu reaction. By adopting the crosslinkable polymers as the hole transporting layer, a high external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 12.8% was obtained for saturated red light-emitting diodes, wherein a neutral osmium complex doped into a bipolar polymer was used as the emissive layer; meanwhile a peak EQE of 3.17% was also reached for blue polymer light-emitting diodes with PVK-FIr6 (10 wt%) as the emissive material.
In this respect, the Mitsunobu reaction can be further explored as a general applicable synthetic scheme in the design of new SC-HTPs with optimal combination of mobility, energy levels, stability and solution processibility for PVSCs. The design guidelines of SC-HTPs can not only be built upon an abundant molecular library of small molecule HTMs, but also add new structural features such as polymeric backbones, space groups and crosslinking capability for enhanced performance and novel properties.
Furthermore, the HTMs based on carbazole-derived SMs have attracted great attention in PVSCs. The carbazole chromophore with strong electron-donating capability is quite versatile since it can be easily functionalized at the 2, 3, 6, 7 and nitrogen positions to fine-tune the optoelectronic and bulk properties of HTMs. Recently, Sellinger and Snaith et al. prepared a simple carbazole-based HTM denoted EH44 for n-i-p-type PVSCs. By doping EH44 with its pre-oxidized salt, a PCE of 13.2% has been demonstrated, which could be further improved to 18.5% upon device optimization. Due to the high hydrophobicity of the molecule, the fabricated devices showed exceptional stability and can retain 94% of their peak PCE after 1000 hours of continuous, unencapsulated ambient operation.
One trend in the recent research of PVSCs is the design and synthesis of high performance HTMs for the study of p-i-n-type PVSCs (also known as inverted PVSCs) in order to explore the advantages of such device structures, such as low-temperature processing, cost-effectiveness, reduced device hysteresis, etc. Herein we present a new synthetic approach to prepare a novel SC-HTP for inverted PVSCs via N-hydroxyethyl functionalization of an EH44-based derivative and subsequent Mitsunobu coupling with the commercially available poly(4-vinylphenol) (PVP). The reactive polymer PVP involved has been widely applied in developing photoresist materials that must meet the precise control of product quality in the semiconductor industries. Thus a mature and reliable supply for PVP can be ensured. Furthermore, both Huang's group and Xu's group have recently developed several side-chain polymer HTMs based on carbazole derivatives via free-radical polymerization for conventional n-i-p-type PVSCs, respectively. In comparison with their approaches of free-radical polymerization, our post-functionalization of polymers via the Mitsunobu reaction is a simpler and more efficient way to achieve high molecular weight side-chain polymer HTMs without batch-to-batch variations for the fabrication of inverted PVSCs. By using this new side-chain polymer (PVP-CZ in Scheme 1) with adequate solvent resistance and excellent film forming ability as the HTM, inverted PVSCs were fabricated, wherein the perovskite layer was capable of forming a compact and relatively smooth film without obvious pinholes, and a maximum PCE of 17.75% was obtained under AM 1.5G illumination. This study highlights the chemical strategy involving the Mitsunobu reaction as a promising protocol to synthesize novel SC-HTPs with a variety of hole-transporting molecular moieties for the fabrication of highly efficient inverted PVSCs.

The synthetic route for attaching the carbazole-cored diphenylamine small molecule to the side chain of poly(4-vinylphenol) (PVP) is outlined in Scheme 1. Detailed synthetic procedures and chemical characterization are described in the ESI.N-Hydroxyethyl functionalized 2,7-dibromocarbazole (2) can be obtained by the electrophilic substitution reaction of 2,7-dibromocarbazole (1) with 2-bromoethanol in N,N-dimethylformamide. A hydroxyl protective reaction was then performed between compound 2 and p-toluenesulfonyl chloride to obtain compound 3, which was subjected to Buchwald–Hartwig amination with bis(4-methoxyphenyl)amine to afford compound 4. Next, compound 4 was reacted with magnesium in methanol to remove the hydroxyl-protecting group, thus resulting in compound 5. Finally, PVP-CZ was readily prepared via the typical Mitsunobu reaction between the commercially available PVP and compound 5 under mild conditions.


1H NMR and 13C NMR were used to verify all the compounds. By comparing the relative integration of the characteristic peaks of hydroxyl hydrogen with the chemical shift of 9.25 ppm in the 1H NMR spectrum, it was found that the degree of carbazole functionalization for PVP was around 93%, indicating a very high grafting degree of the Mitsunobu reaction. To appraise the thermal property of PVP-CZ, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) were performed. As shown in Fig. S1 in the ESI, the decomposition temperature corresponding to 5% weight loss for PVP-CZ was determined to be 259 °C, indicating its adequate heat resistance during the resulting PVSC fabrication. Besides, a relatively high glass transition temperature (Tg) was observed at 95 °C (Fig. S2), which is obviously elevated compared to that of the carbazole-based small molecule HTMs such as EH44. The relatively high Tg of PVP-CZ is beneficial for the fabrication and stable operation of PVSCs.

PVP-CZ showed excellent solubility in common organic solvents such as methylene dichloride, THF and cyclopentanone. The normalized UV–vis absorption spectra of cyclopentanone solution and the thin film for PVP-CZ are shown in Fig. 1a. One can see that the maximum absorption wavelength (λmax) of PVP-CZ as a thin film is located at 386 nm. According to the absorption onset at 423 nm, the optical bandgap (Eg) was estimated to be 2.93 eV. It is worth noting that, compared with the reported small molecule analogue AS44, the post-functionalized polymer PVP-CZ exhibited a red shift in the solution absorption spectrum, which might be ascribed to the facile aggregation between side chains of the polymer. In terms of its weak absorption, PVP-CZ is appropriate for use as a HTM in inverted devices since it can allow most of the sunlight to reach the perovskite light absorbing layer. We performed cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurement to elucidate the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of PVP-CZ, with the corresponding electrochemical characteristic shown in Fig. 1b. The oxidation potential (Eox) of PVP-CZ against ferrocene/ferrocenium (Fc/Fc+) was found to be 0.02 V. Thus the HOMO energy level (EHOMO) for PVP-CZ was calculated to be −4.82 eV based on the equation: EHOMO = −(Eox + 4.80) eV. Considering our used perovskite absorber of BF4−-containing Cs0.05(FA0.17MA0.83)0.95Pb(Br0.17I0.83)3, wherein MA and FA represent methylammonium and formamidinium, respectively, had a valence band level of −5.75 eV, utilizing PVP-CZ as the dopant-free HTM is favorable for driving the interfacial hole transfer efficiently. This also could be evidenced by the results of steady-state photoluminescence and time-resolved photoluminescence measurements, which will be discussed later.
In order to evaluate the photovoltaic properties of PVP-CZ used as the dopant-free HTM in PVSCs, inverted solar cell devices were fabricated with a configuration of ITO/PVP-CZ/perovskite/PC61BM/BCP/Ag, which is illustrated in Fig. 2a, where bathocuproine (BCP) serves as a hole blocking layer. The mixed-ion perovskite of BF4−-containing Cs0.05(FA0.17MA0.83)0.95Pb(Br0.17I0.83)3 (FA: formamidinium, MA: methylammonium) was adopted as the light-harvesting layer since it could exhibit excellent photovoltaic performance, and its detailed preparation is described in the ESI. The current density–voltage (J–V) curve for the best-performing PVSC measured under AM 1.5G 100 mW cm−2 simulated solar irradiation is shown in Fig. 2b. As shown, through a forward scan direction, the device delivered a respectable PCE of 17.75% with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.97 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 22.57 mA cm−2, and a high fill factor (FF) of 81.07%. The high FF might be ascribed to the well-matched energy levels between PVP-CZ and perovskite thereby providing sufficient driving force to facilitate effective hole extraction at the interface. The histogram of PCEs in Fig. S3 shows a relatively narrow distribution of PCEs for the resultant devices using PVP-CZ as the dopant-free HTM. The average PCE measured from 27 devices was 16.61 ± 0.74%. In addition, when using dopant-free poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine (PTAA) as the HTM for comparison, the fabricated devices with similar structures and processing conditions exhibited a PCE of 18.85% (see Fig. S14,Jsc = 22.63 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.05 V, FF = 79.36%). We further measured the contact angle of the PVP-CZ film to evaluate its surface wettability (Fig. S15, ESI). It can be seen that the contact angle value for PVP-CZ is 73.2°. The hydrophilic surface property is beneficial for film-forming of the perovskite precursor solution.
To determine the deviation of Jsc of the resultant device, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum was obtained. As shown in Fig. 2c, the device based on dopant-free PVP-CZ exhibited a photocurrent response in the range of 300 to 800 nm. The integrated current density value from the EQE spectrum is calculated to be 20.76 mA cm−2. The stabilized photocurrent density and PCE of the champion solar cell device based on PVP-CZ as the dopant-free HTM were also measured at the maximum power point for 300 s under AM1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). As shown in Fig. 2d, the steady-state photocurrent is around 20.98 mA cm−2, corresponding to a stable operating efficiency of 17.2%.
The charge transport property of the HTM is crucial for fabricating high-performance PVSC devices. Accordingly we measured the hole mobility of dopant-free PVP-CZ by using the space-charge limited current (SCLC) method. The structure of a hole-dominated device is ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVP-CZ/MoO3/Ag (ITO: indium tin oxide, PEDOT:PSS: poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/polystyrene sulfonate). Its J–V curve is displayed in Fig. 3. According to the Mott–Gueney law, the hole-mobility of PVP-CZ was calculated to be 3.1 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1.
Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) measurements were carried out to examine the capability of hole extraction and transfer at the interface of perovskite/HTM. As shown in Fig. 4a, the pristine perovskite film presented intense photoluminescence with the wavelength ranging from 700 nm to 820 nm, whereas the PL intensity of the perovskite film deposited on the PVP-CZ substrate was significantly quenched. The drastically reduced PL intensity indicates that the excitons formed in the perovskite film were well separated and the thus generated holes transferred efficiently from the perovskite layer to the hole transporting layer. To further elucidate the charge carrier dynamics at the interface between the perovskite and PVP-CZ, time resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) decay was characterized. The TRPL curves were fitted to a single exponential function. As shown in Fig. 4b, the pristine perovskite film showed a fitted carrier lifetime τ1 of 6.84 ns. In contrast, the PL lifetime was reduced to 1.84 ns for the perovskite deposited on the HTM of PVP-CZ, which again demonstrated that PVP-CZ facilitates the hole transfer across the perovskite/PVP-CZ interface. Overall, both PL and TRPL results manifested that our designed SC-HTP was capable of efficiently extracting holes from the perovskite layer, which was beneficial for achieving high Jsc and high FF.
To detect the surface topography of the perovskite, tapping mode atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurement was performed. As shown in Fig. 5, the surface of the perovskite layer coated on PVP-CZ exhibited a compact and relatively smooth topography without obvious pinholes, indicating the good film-forming property of the perovskite precursor solution on the top of the PVP-CZ layer. The value of the root mean square (RMS) is 19.92 nm. The uniform morphology was in favor of transporting the hole thereby reducing charge recombination in the bulk perovskite film and across the perovskite interface, which could partially explain the obtainment of high FF when employing PVP-CZ as the dopant-free HTM in inverted PVSC devices. Furthermore, the top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the perovskite film deposited on PVP-CZ were characterized, which is shown in Fig. S16. It was noted that a uniform morphology with large perovskite grains could be present on the top of PVP-CZ, consistent with that shown in its AFM image.

Through the Mitsunobu reaction, a carbazole-cored diphenylamine small molecule HTM can be efficiently attached to the side chains of a PVP polymer to afford a new HTM of PVP-CZ with improved solvent-tolerance and excellent film forming ability. Inverted PVSC devices based on dopant-free PVP-CZ exhibited a PCE of 17.75% with an outstanding FF of 81.07%. The achieved FF is among the highest values reported for the perovskite solar cell devices based on carbazole-derived HTMs. The relatively high efficiency of the PVSC can be ascribed to the excellent hole extraction and transfer at the interface of the perovskite/hole-transporting layer. Our study therefore underscores the synthetic strategy of the Mitsunobu reaction as a promising protocol to synthesize novel side-chain HTPs with a variety of hole-transporting molecular moieties for the fabrication of inverted PVSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the Fundamental Research (Discipline Arrangement) Project funding from the Shenzhen Science and Technology Innovation Committee (grant no. JCYJ20180507181718203) and APRC CityU New Research Initiatives/Infrastructure Support from Central (project no. 9610389).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0py00134a
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020