 DOI: 10.1039/D0TC03614E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 13430-13438


Francesco
Tintori
,

Audrey
Laventure
,

Josh D. B.
Koenig
 and 

Gregory C.
Welch
*

Department of Chemistry, University of Calgary, 2500 University Drive N.W., Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 1N4. E-mail: gregory.welch@ucalgary.ca

Received
30th July 2020
, Accepted 7th September 2020
First published on 8th September 2020
Raising the open circuit voltage (Voc) of organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices is one of the key parameters to enhance performance and increase utility. We report an active layer composed of a quinoxaline-based donor polymer and an N-annulated perylene diimide (PDI) dimer which are stable and readily scaled materials and as blended solutions can be processed into films using non-halogenated solvents and slot-die coating methods. OPV devices with a high Voc exceeding 1.2 V were obtained under one sun illumination. Furthermore, the practical application of indoor light recycling is demonstrated, reporting a high device Voc of 1.1 V under LED illumination. Modification of the cathode interlayer or addition of a third component using perylene diimide (PDI) based materials is shown to further enhance device Voc under all operating conditions.

Organic photovoltaic (OPV) technology has evolved over the last two decades becoming quite mature, being commercialized and finding utility in universal and niche applications. Solar cells and solar fields, portable power, indoor light recycling, and integration with green houses are notable examples. Key parameters necessary for the application of OPV technology are high efficiency, which has been the main focus of academic research, long-term stability, and the viability for practical manufacturing and use, which has been an emerging theme in recent years. For the latter, the use of simple active layer materials that can be synthesized on industrial scale and the ability to process such materials via roll-to-roll compatible methods is important, including transitioning away from halogenated solvent usage and inert atmosphere conditions.

Among the strategies targeting high efficiency systems, obtaining high open circuit voltages (Voc) has been among the necessary parameters. The use and evolution of non-fullerene acceptor (NFA) materials have allowed the fine tuning of electronic energy levels, often targeting the destabilization of the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO). This leads to a larger energy difference from the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the donor material, subsequently leading to an increased Voc of the OPV device. Reports of NFAs with high Voc can be found as early as 2011, where diketopyrrolopyrrole derivatives as small molecule electron donors were paired with vinazene derivatives as electron acceptors. OPV devices using these materials achieved a Voc as high as 1.25 V, but with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) value lower than 1%. It is not uncommon for OPV devices to have high Voc values and low PCEs of 1%. Recent advances in materials design put forward by Ding et al. and Zhang et al. have lead to OPV devices with Voc values >1.3 V and improved PCEs of 3.2% and 6.0%, respectively. Among reported high Voc OPV devices, however, we identified a lack of scalable bulk heterojunction (BHJ) active layer fabrication methods, including large-scale and low-cost materials synthesis/purification, halogen-free processing in air, and use of roll-to-roll compatible deposition methods. In this work we target a high Voc OPV system that can be processed with scalable conditions, in particular using non-halogenated solvents and solvent additives, and slot-die coated active layers fabricated in air using simple, scalable materials.
In the quest for high Voc values in OPV devices, quinoxaline-based polymers have been identified as excellent donor material candidates due to deep-lying HOMO energy levels. In previous studies, the benzodithiophene-quinoxaline polymer QX-3 (chemical structure shown in Fig. 1A) was used as an electron donor to obtain OPV devices with high Voc (1.07 V) when coupled with the perylene diimide (PDI) non-fullerene acceptor tPDI2N-EH (Fig. 1A), using a scalable BHJ fabrication method (slot-die coating) and halogen-free processing. The compound tPDI2N-EH is a twisted N-annulated PDI dimer (Fig. 1A) that was previously reported working as electron acceptor with a variety of different donor polymers and leading, in all cases, to Voc > 1 V. Introduction of the pyrrolic N-atom at the bay position of the PDI chromophore destabilizes the LUMO energy level making the N-annulated PDI a great building block for which to construct NFAs for high Voc OPV devices.
Herein, the thiophene-quinoxaline polymer PTQ10 was identified as a logical progression in donor material selection owing to the deep HOMO energy level and simplified chemical structure, to prepare OPV devices with increased Voc values. Fig. 1A highlights the structural simplification of QX-3 towards PTQ10. PTQ10 is reported as having a facile synthesis from low-cost building blocks, is soluble in non-halogenated solvents, and is commercially available. PTQ10 has a large energy gap (Egap, ca. 2.6 eV, Fig. 1C) which can be attributed to the relatively weak electron donating and accepting nature of the thiophene and quinoxaline moieties, respectively. This can be observed in its blue shifted optical absoprtion profile compared to QX-3, which corresponds to a higher onset energy (Eonset, ca. 1.90 eV, Fig. 1B), and the deeper HOMO energy level than that of QX-3 (−5.6 eV vs. 5.4 eV, Fig. 1C). As a consequence, a greater HOMOD–LUMOA energy gap is obtained with PTQ10:tPDI2N-EH (ca. 2.0 eV, Fig. 1C) which in turn increases the potential energy in an OPV BHJ system, ideally enabling a higher Voc system.
The halogen-free processability of this PTQ10:tPDI2N-EH system was explored using toluene, o-xylene and 1,2,4-trimethylbenzene (TMB) and the spin-coating method. These halogen-free solvents have been identified as suitable for large area processing owning to an ability to deliver uniform film formation and a reduced environmental toxicity, relative to the halogenated counterparts. The comparison was made by using the same processing conditions with the casting solution concentration adapted to maintain similar film thickness/optical absorbance (Fig. 2A). Diphenyl ether (DPE, 1% (v/v)) was utilized as a solvent additive to enhance film formation and subsequent OPV performance as demonstrated here (Fig. S1, S2 and Table S1, ESI) and in our previous work. In all cases good OPV device performance with average PCEs > 5% were achieved (Table 1 and Fig. 2B). All OPV devices with BHJ active layers processed from each solvent gave Voc values >1.20 V, which is among the highest reported for OPV single junction devices, confirming our hypothesis that pairing PTQ10 with tPDI2N-EH would increase the Voc of OPV devices. Short-circuit current densities (Jsc, slightly >8 mA cm−2) were comparable for all three types of OPVs, and fill factors (FF) were slightly better for OPVs with toluene processed active layers (55% vs. 50%). Similar results were observed in a recent report that compared these three processing solvents for NFA based OPVs.
Processing solvent

V
oc (V),

J
sc (mA cm−2),
FF %,
PCE %,

a Device architecture used: glass/ITO/ZnO/Active Layer BHJ/MoOx/Ag.
b Values are calculated from average of 8 or more devices.
c Solutions contain 1% (v/v) DPE additive.
d Active layers formed via spin-coating.
e Full details, error and best device data can be found in Table S1.

Toluene
1.21
8.2
55
5.5

o-Xylene
1.22
8.0
54
5.3
TMB
1.21
8.3
50
5.0
The toluene-processed BHJ active layer (which gave best OPV device PCE) was translated to slot-die coating processing to demonstrate the viability of the system for upscaling (see ESI, for processing details). Such a transition is not trivial and often results in a decrease of PCE, but for this PDI based system a similar OPV performance was obtained maintaining a Voc of 1.20 V (Table 2 and Fig. 2D). The optical absorption properties of slot-die coated BHJ films were slightly different (as also slightly noticeable from the appearance of the films, Fig. S3, ESI) from the spin-coated films (Fig. 2C), suggesting a different morphology. This was shown by atomic force microscopy (AFM, Fig. S4, ESI), where slot-die coated films are rougher (root mean square roughness, RMS = 4.1 nm vs. 2.0 nm) with slightly more granular surface features than spin-coated films, in-line with the slower film drying time allowing for the morphology to evolve. This is among the highest reported Voc for OPVs with roll-to-roll compatible coated active layers for OPV. The consistency in performance of the OPV devices with halogen-free solvent/in-air processed active layers via spin or slot-die coating, and the use of inexpensive photoactive materials, make this system very attractive for large-area manufacturing.
One sun (AM 1.5)
Low-light (LED, ca. 2000 lux)

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF %
PCE %
LED temp.

V
oc (V)

J
sc (μA cm−2)
FF %
PCE % ,

a Measured under an absolute irradiance (Power input) of 568 μW cm−2.
b Measured under an absolute irradiance (Power input) of 610 μW cm−2.
c Values are a calculated average over 8 or more devices.
d Device architecture used: glass/ITO/ZnO/(PDICA, for “Interlayer”)/active layer BHJ/MoOx/Ag.
e Films processed from toluene solutions with 1% (v/v) DPE additive.
f Full details, error and best device data can be found in Table S6.

Slot-die coated
1.20
8.0
52
5.0
2700 K
1.07
105
51
10.1
6500 K
1.08
118
50
10.4
Interlayer 
1.24
8.9
55
6.1
2700 K
1.09
112
51
10.9
6500 K
1.07
139
48
11.7
Ternary blend 
1.24
7.7
40
3.8
2700 K
1.10
101
48
9.2
6500 K
1.11
116
47
9.9
One of the emerging and viable practical applications of OPV technology is indoor light recycling (i.e. indoor OPV, iOPV). This involves harnessing artificial light with OPV devices to produce enough electricity to power small electronic devices such as sensors connected to the Internet of Things (IoT), which only require power inputs in the order of milliwatts (mW). A number of studies have considered this application and are well summarized in recent reviews. Artificial light sources have varied emission, thus OPV devices with different light absorption properties are needed for spectral matching. Due to the large Egap of both PTQ10 and tPDI2N-EH, the absorption of the blend is localized between 450 and 650 nm and is matched with the “cool” and “warm” white light LED bulb emission, corresponding to 6500 K and 2700 K, respectively (Fig. 3A).
A key parameter needed for iOPV is high Voc since the devices tend to operate at lower voltages (commonly a 0.2 V loss vs. operation under one sun) with lower-light intensity. This voltage loss limits many of the high efficiency OPV systems measured under one sun illumination that have Voc values under 1 V. A recent survey of the literature has helped identify only two reports that showcase OPV devices with Voc higher than 1 V for indoor OPV. Cui et al., for instance, employed a ring-fused NFA (IO-4Cl) with less electron withdrawing groups on the end-caps to raise the LUMO energy. When coupled with the fluorinated polymer PBDB-TF, OPV devices with a Voc of 1.10 V under 1000 lux illumination (302 μW cm−2) were obtained. Ding et al. identified an all-polymer OPV system with Voc of 1.14 V under 1000 lux LED (360 μW cm−2) and fluorescent (345 μW cm−2) bulb illumination. Due to the good spectral match with LED light sources and very high Voc obtained under one sun, indoor light recycling was identified as a viable practical application for the presented system. Unfortunately, there is still a lack of a standard iOPV testing protocols and details on low-light calibration methods, making it difficult for direct comparison to the literature beyond Voc values. We have provided a detailed account of our testing procedure in the ESI.
OPV devices with slot-die coated active layers were tested under a LED artificial light of ca. 2000 lux. Table 2 shows the corresponding OPV parameters, while Fig. 3B shows the correlated J–V curves. It is not unusual for OPV systems to have higher PCEs at low light intensities than under one sun illumination as the lower charge density induced by the LED illumination reduces the chances of bimolecular recombination. In addition, the optical absorption of the active layer matches well the emission of the LED bulb, maximizing incident photon harvesting. PCE values of 10.1% and 10.4% were obtained under 2700 K and 6500 K LED light, respectively, with high Voc values of 1.07 and 1.08 V. These Voc values are among the highest reported for OPV devices tested under indoor light conditions. For reference, the OPV devices with spin-coated active layers have also been tested under different low-light conditions (ca. 400, 1000 and 2000 lux both with 2700 K and 6500 K LED light corresponding to input power Pin values between 113 and 610 μW cm−2, see Table S4, ESI) and are reported (Fig. S10 and Tables S7, S8, ESI). At lower intensities, a further drop in Voc was noticeable, which is consistent with literature. OPV devices maintained a high Voc of 1.0 V at ca. 400 lux. The increased photocurrent generation observed for OPV devices illuminated with 6500 K vs. 2700 K LEDs was attributed to the better overlap of the 6500 K LED emission and active layer optical absorption (Fig. 3A). The lower energy portion of the 2700 K LED spectrum is not covered by the active layer absorption, leaving room for future improvement in terms of the molecular design of the active components. In addition, to address the limitations of the system in terms of charge recombination, Voc and Jsc were plotted as a function of light intensity (Fig. S11, ESI). The results suggest the presence of both monomolecular recombination at Voc and bimolecular recombinations at Jsc, which excludes that one or the other mechanisms are mainly responsible for any loss in OPV performance.
A valuable observation we made was about the consistency of the measurements under low-light conditions. In our testing, the device would be tested under one sun (AM 1.5), then moved under the LED bulb and tested under those conditions. It was observed that some devices would operate in the expected parameters under one sun but would not work at all or with extremely low voltages (close to an ohmic contact) when only exposed to the LED light. In the interest of the BHJ study, these devices were excluded from the average calculation. Nonetheless, it is our opinion that this is an important observation regarding the drastically different conditions of operation. We hypothesized that, because of the very small charge density generated by the low intensity light, small defects (pinholes) that are negligible during one sun operation, are instead a limitation at lower light intensities. This is supported by a 2011 study where devices with low shunt resistances showed large losses in performance under low-light conditions, but not under one sun. Here we hypothesize that devices with small defects in active layers can be approximated to low shunt devices, as they provide alternative channels for charges to travel. Moving forward, a transition to thicker active layers, which is a known strategy to reduce pinhole defects, should prove useful for increasing device tolerance.
Two strategies were evaluated to further improve the device PCE, and specifically the Voc. First, the known compound PDICA was used as a ZnO modifying agent (chemical structure in Fig. 4A) following our previous work, which showed increases in all OPV parameters when compared to ZnO-only devices. OPV data (Table 2) and relative J–V curves (Fig. 4C) under both one sun and ca. 2000 lux conditions for devices incorporating a PDICA cathodic interlayer are presented. A further boost in Voc was obtained under one sun, reaching an average of 1.24 V; Jsc also increased, which improved the PCE to over 6%. The EQE and optical absorption spectra (Fig. S5, ESI) of the devices confirmed the increase in the generated photocurrent. When tested under low-light conditions, Voc remained just under 1.1 V, but a boost in Jsc was observed, reaching a PCE over 11% for devices tested under 6500 K LED light. Following our previous analysis, the reason for the performance enhancement is that PDICA can effectively anchor itself to ZnO surfaces, lowering of the cathode work function and allowing for higher voltages. In addition, the PDICA layer was found to promote the accumulation of the acceptor material (i.e. tPDI2N-EH) at the cathode interface, which can allow for better electron extraction.
The second strategy adopted was the use of a third component in the active layer. PDI-EDOT-PDI (chemical structure in Fig. 4B, synthesis and characterization details can be found in the ESI, Fig. S12–S15) is a A–D–A type molecular material, of which a similar derivative with differing side-chains, gave OPV devices with Voc of 1.14 V. When paired with PTQ10 in binary blends, OPV devices obtained a remarkable Voc of 1.32 V (Fig. S6 and Table S2, ESI) but due to low Jsc and FF, PCE was only 1.8%. Owing to low voltage losses, together with the similar energetics to tPDI2N-EH, it was hypothesized that, in line with an alloyed model, using this material as a third component in PTQ10:tPDI2N-EH devices would allow for a Voc enhancement. The best ternary blend OPVs had an average Voc of 1.24 V under one sun illumination, and a Voc up to 1.11 V under ca. 2000 lux LED illumination (Table 2 and Fig. 4D), which represents a slight improvement compared to binary devices. Compared to devices incorporating a PDICA interlayer, the Jsc and FF were indeed reduced, leading to an overall lower PCE both under one sun and indoor illumination. Nonetheless this proof-of-concept strategy proved effective to raise the Voc of the system.
In summary, an OPV system consisting of a simple quinoxaline-based polymer PTQ10 and an N-annulated PDI dimer (tPDI2N-EH) was demonstrated to be a versatile OPV system, processable from various non-halogenated solvents and slot-die coated in air, yielding devices with a high Voc of 1.24 V under one sun illumination. The system viability for indoor light recycling application was also demonstrated obtaining high Voc of 1.1 V under ca. 2000 lux illumination, which is among the highest reported voltages for indoor OPV. It was demonstrated that the logical selection of OPV active layer material is an effective strategy to obtain high Voc OPV devices, which is a key parameter both for one sun and low-light conditions applications. These results are important as a step forward towards next generation OPV, which still need to transition towards scalable materials and manufacturing, and practical applications.

The authors declare the following competing financial interest(s): tPDI2N-EH is subject to US Patent 9865819 Nitrogen Annulated Perylene Diimides for use as Electron Transport Materials in Organic Electronics.


G. C. W. acknowledges the Canada Research Chairs Program, CFI JELF (34102), NSERC DG (2019-04392), and the University of Calgary. A. L. acknowledges the NSERC for a postdoctoral fellowship. J. D. B. K thanks the Alberta Graduate Excellence Scholarship (AEGS) program. This research was undertaken thanks in part to funding from the Canada First Research Excellence Fund (CFREF). All authors acknowledge and thank Dr Sergey Dayneko for the help provided in calculations and calibration of the indoor testing equipment, and Edward Cieplechowicz for the synthesis of tPDI2N-EH. All authors thank and acknowledge Dr Philippe Berrouard, Dr François Grenier and Dr Jean-Rémi Pouliot from Brilliant Matters (QC, Canada) for helpful discussions and Dr Jonas Bergqvist and Dr Thomas Österberg from Epishine (Sweden) for discussion and insight on testing OPVs under LED light.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Materials and methods; tables of OPV parameters and corresponding J–V curves of devices tested; optical absorption profiles, photoluminescent spectra, EQE profile and AFM height images of active layers; photovoltaic device testing under LED illumination procedure; PDI-EDOT-PDI synthesis and characterization. See DOI: 10.1039/d0tc03614e
‡ It was observed that, in literature, there exists a considerable variability in power readings for similar lux values. This is relatable to the nature of the unit, which is calculated based on experimental values related to human eye sensitivity. Because of this, the lux is not a sole reliable unit of measure for testing OPVs, and it should therefore be paid more attention to the absolute irradiance value which is indeed a more universal measure.
§ The lux intensities are approximative readings. The total power input was instead precisely calculated to be 610 μW cm−2 and 568 μW cm−2 for the 6500 K and 2700 K LED light, respectively. Devices were light soaked under one sun for 10 s before being tested. For more details, please refer to the ESI (pages S10–S13)
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020