 DOI: 10.1039/C8NR00758F
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6318-6322


Faming
Li
,

Yunhe
Pei
,

Fei
Xiao
,

Tixian
Zeng
,

Zhou
Yang
,

Jinjiang
Xu
,

Jie
Sun
,

Bo
Peng
 and 

Mingzhen
Liu
*

School of Materials and Energy, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, P.R. China. E-mail: mingzhen.liu@uestc.edu.cn

Center for Applied Chemistry, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, P.R. China

College of Physics and Space Science, China West Normal University, Nanchong 637002, P.R. China

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an 710062, P.R. China

Institute of Chemical Materials, China Academy of Engineering Physics, Mianyang 621900, P.R. China

National Engineering Research Center of Electromagnetic Radiation Control Materials, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, P.R. China

Received
26th January 2018
, Accepted 10th March 2018
First published on 12th March 2018
Inorganic CsPbI3 perovskites have shown promising potential for achieving all-inorganic photovoltaic (PV) devices. However, the black perovskite polymorph (α-phase) of CsPbI3 easily converts into yellow colour (δ-phase) in an ambient environment and it is only stable at high temperature (above 320 °C), which limits its practical application. Here we tailor the three-dimensional CsPbI3 perovskite into quasi-two-dimension through adding a large radius cation phenylethylammonium (PEA+). The incorporation of PEA+ into the CsPbI3 perovskite significantly improves the film morphology as well as the phase stability. An optimal CsxPEA1−xPbI3 perovskite film remains stable in the α-phase from room temperature to 250 °C in air and yields a power conversion efficiency of 5.7% for its solar device. The concept of using large radius cations in the 3D perovskite system provides a new perspective to further enhance the phase stability while retaining the device performance.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have become one of the most promising photovoltaic (PV) technologies due to their excellent optoelectronic properties and low fabrication costs. The light absorbing layer of PSCs usually employs hybrid organic–inorganic materials with an ABX3 structure, where A is an alkyl ammonium cation (CH3NH3 (MA) or NH2CHNH2 (FA)), and B is a bivalent metal (Pb or Sn) and X is halide or mixed halides (Cl, Br or I). Nevertheless, the use of organic cations affects the long-term stability of PSCs which remains a major obstacle for their industrial applications. To date, many studies have attempted to replace the organic cations with inorganic elements for improving the stability of the devices, as the hybrid ones usually generate volatile decomposition products at elevated temperature. Among all the inorganic pervoskite materials, CsPbI3 is considered as one of the most promising candidates for achieving stable structures because the radius of Cs is able to provide an appropriate tolerance factor for the lead halide perovskite. Unfortunately, the CsPbI3 perovskite film easily presents an orthorhombic yellow phase (or called the δ phase) at room temperature and it only exhibits a cubic black phase (or called α phase) with optoelectronic features when the CsPbI3 perovskite film is heated over 320 °C. A number of approaches have been proposed to improve the phase stability of the α-CsPbI3 perovskite film including solvent engineering, halogen exchange and bication component incorporation. Recently, the concept of applying a lower dimension structure of perovskite materials has been highly recognized to enhance the stability of PSC devices. The introduction of large radius cations into the 3D hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite such as CH3NH3PbI3 realized a 2D Ruddlesden–Popper structure, leading to devices with improved stability. However, rare studies have explored the possibility of tailoring the dimensions of inorganic perovskites through large cations (e.g., BA+) to enhance the stability, and the inorganic perovskite devices to date generally exhibit a lower performance than the devices made from the hybrid ones, which has plagued the potential broad adoption of inorganic perovskite materials. Hence, it is of fundamental importance to develop an in-depth study that can both leverage the benefits associated with the usage of large cations and achieve PSCs with good stability, while performing systematic characterization on both the optoelectronic and semiconducting properties towards a better understanding of the underlying mechanisms.

Here we studied a strategy for incorporating a large radius cation into an inorganic CsPbI3 perovskite structure that could effectively modulate the phase transition temperature and enhance the α-phase stability in an ambient environment. We found that these new derived CsxPEA1−xPbI3 (phenmethylammonium: PEA) films possess low dimensional features of quasi-2D perovskites through analyzing their optical properties. The in situ X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra reveal that the optimal CsxPEA1−xPbI3 perovskite film remains stable in the α-phase from room temperature (RT) to 250 °C in air, which is significantly superior to other organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite materials to the best of our knowledge. Moreover, we further explored the energy band structure and PV performance of quasi-2D CsxPEA1−xPbI3 perovskite films and achieved an optimal power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 5.7%.
To tailor the dimension of the CsPbI3 perovskite and seek a series of stable quasi-2D perovskite films, we first employed two aromatic compounds with different ionic radii, phenmethylammonium iodide (PMAI) and phenylethyl-ammonium iodide (PEAI) and partially substituted the Cs+ cation. The precursor solution was synthesized by dissolving cesium iodide (CsI), lead iodide (PbI2) and PEAI (or PMAI) in ratio in the N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) solvent with a small amount of HI. Then the precursor was spin coated on the prepared clean substrate followed by heating for 10 minutes (more details in the ESI). We used ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) spectroscopy to investigate the stability of CsPbI3, CsxPMA1−xPbI3, and CsxPEA1−xPbI3 (x = 0.9) films upon increasing the exposure time under the conditions of 40 ± 5% relative humidity (RH) in air, as shown in Fig. 1. The pristine CsPbI3 film exhibits poor moisture stability for the absorption intensity presenting a significant drop in the visible region within one hour and suggesting the transformation of the CsPbI3 film from the black to yellow phase (Fig. 1a). Along with the UV-vis absorption spectra, the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image shows the morphology of the CsPbI3 film with many pinholes after the exposure to air for 12 hours (Fig. 1a′). By contrast, the incorporation of large cations is beneficial for improving the stability (Fig. 1b). Meanwhile, the PEA+ cation becomes a better candidate than PMA+ because the absorption intensity of the CsxPEA1−xPbI3 film presents no decay after exposure to air for 72 hours (Fig. 1c). Also, the film morphology displays more uniform and dense crystal grains compared with the one with PMA+ (Fig. 1c′). The results above thus indicate that using PEA+ is more competent in improving moisture stability.
In accord with the principle of ionic coordination and Pauling's rules, PEA+ possesses a large ionic radius that does not fit into the corner-sharing [PbI6]4− octahedral 3D frameworks, and it separates the 3D perovskite architecture into layers. To identify the dimension of the new materials, typically the optical response associated with the number of exciton peaks in the UV-vis absorption spectra is considered. We noticed that the numbers of exciton peaks are varied by adjusting the ratio of PEA+ in the CsxPEA1−xPbI3 (x = 0.1–1) films. For the CsxPEA1−xPbI3 films, we only observed one absorption edge when x is greater than 0.7 and three exciton absorption peaks indicating the 2D feature appear when x is less than 0.7. In particular, the absorption edge and exciton absorption peaks are simultaneously displayed while tuning the composition to x = 0.7 (i.e., Cs0.7PEA0.3PbI3, see Fig. 2a and Fig. S1). It has been reported that the exciton energies of n = 3, n = 2 and n = 1 in PEA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 2D structures are 2.06 eV (601 nm), 2.19 eV (566 nm) and 2.41 eV (515 nm), respectively. The predicted peaks match well with our results shown in the absorption spectra, revealing that the incorporation of the PEA+ cation is able to tune the 3D CsPbI3 into lower dimension structures with 1, 2 and 3 layers. The fluorescence emission peaks of photoluminescence (PL) spectra in Fig. 2b further verify the layered structure in the CsxPEA1−xPbI3 film (Fig. 2b). Moreover, the band edge emission and exciton emission peaks in Cs0.9PEA0.1PbI3 are simultaneously observed by fitting with the Gauss peak spectra (Fig. S2), which suggest successful synthesis of the quasi-2D perovskite through introducing the PEA+ cation. It is very likely that the layered structures with 1, 2 and 3 layers were incorporated simultaneously into the films of all formulas. The above PL spectra confirm the presence of a multi-phase compound as a result of these layered structures, while the XRD pattern shows no peaks below 10° (Fig. 4), suggesting less layered structures compared to the 3D structure. Along with the absorption and emission spectra, the optical images of the CsxPEA1−xPbI3 films with varied compositions were taken while keeping them in air and the pristine CsPbI3 film presents faint yellow color indicating the loss of photoactive properties due to the absence of PEA+ (Fig. 2c).
We employed Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) to confirm the incorporation of PEA+ into these perovskite films, as illustrated in Fig. 3a. With increasing PEA+ in the CsxPEA1−xPbI3 films, the intensity of the PEA+ feature peaks, represented by the stretching vibration of protons on the benzene ring at 3300–2900 cm−1, increases and no peaks are found in the pure CsPbI3 film (Fig. 3b). Along with the FTIR spectra, Fig. 3(c–g) show the SEM images of the corresponding CsxPEA1−xPbI3 films. With an increased concentration of PEA+, the grain size is gradually reduced, which could be beneficial to the phase stability and humidity resistance due to the release of film stress. Moreover, we also observed some plate-like crystals in CsxPEA1−xPbI3 films (Fig. 3f and g), known as 2D perovskite platelets, which have been widely recognized in other studies.
Given that the incorporation of PEA+ leads to an enhancement in the moisture stability of the films, we further revealed the phase transition processing of the Cs0.9PEA0.1PbI3 film through in situ XRD spectroscopy at varied temperatures (Fig. 4b). In Fig. 4a, optical images of the Cs0.9PEA0.1PbI3 film heated from RT are presented, along with the images of the CsPbI3 films for comparison. The optical images clearly show that the Cs0.9PEA0.1PbI3 film remains in the black phase even at 150 °C where the CsPbI3 displays a phase transition from the black phase to the yellow phase (Fig. 4a). The in situ XRD (Fig. 4b) further certifies that the phase transition (from the α phase to the δ phase) temperature of the Cs0.9PEA0.1PbI3 film occurs at 250 °C. The diagram of the phase transition process is illustrated in Fig. S4 (ESI). This phase transition temperature of the Cs0.9PEA0.1PbI3 film is far superior compared with that of other perovskite compounds such as MAPbI3, which usually decompose below 100 °C because of the organic cations.
To verify the bandgap of the CsxPEA1−xPbI3 films, we plotted (αhν)2 ∼ hν curves in Fig. 5a based on the above absorption spectra. The bandgap shows a slight increase when x varies from 1 to 0.8 for the CsxPEA1−xPbI3 films. X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) and Ultraviolet Photoelectron Spectroscopy (UPS) were employed to evaluate the energy level shift of the CsxPEA1−xPbI3 (x = 0.8–1) perovskites as suggested in other reports.Fig. 5b presents the UPS spectra of the CsxPEA1−xPbI3 perovskite films as a function of the amount of PEA+. The work functions (WF) are evaluated from the cut-off region of the UPS spectra to be 4.40 eV (x = 1), 4.37 eV (x = 0.9), and 4.37 eV (x = 0.8) according to the equation of WF = hν − Ecut-off (hν = 21.22 eV). It shows that the addition of PEA+ does not shift the Fermi energy significantly. As shown in the valence band (VB) spectra, the distances from the valence band maxima (VBM) to the Fermi level are 1.28 eV (x = 1), 0.97 eV (x = 0.9) and 0.90 eV (x = 0.8) (on the right-hand side of Fig. 5b). Thus, the VBM of films are estimated to be 5.68 eV (x = 1), 5.34 eV (x = 0.9) and 5.27 eV (x = 0.8). This result suggests that an increase in the amount of PEA+ in the CsxPEA1−xPbI3 film pushes up the VBM closer to the Fermi level (Fig. 5c). Bandgap tuning is significantly affected by structural dimensionality and distortion according to the literature. In this case of the CsxPEA1−xPbI3 perovskite, adding more PEA+ contents leads to an increase in the bandgap, which is very likely attributed to the formation of lower dimensional structures and the rise of structural distortion. Therefore, careful tuning between the structural distortion and suitable bandgap would be very necessary to retain optimal performance.
PSCs with a structure of FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/quasi-2D perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au were fabricated to assess the PV performance. We obtained an optimal PCE of 5.7% (achieved by Cs0.9PEA0.1PbI3) with an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.838 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 10.96 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.62 (under simulated AM 1.5G irradiation) as shown in Fig. 5d. The bandgap of the optimized CsxPEA1−xPbI3 absorbing layer and current density Jsc are both very consistent with the literature. We examined the current density performance from different perspectives such as the scan direction and steady-state output, and the Jsc is stable under different circumstances. Such a device exhibits a stabilized efficiency of 5.6% at the maximum power point (Fig. 5e), indicating that the hysteresis is low. A preliminary test of stability in Fig. 5f shows that the optimal Cs0.9PEA0.1PbI3 device retains 75% of the initial PCE in air after 95 h without any encapsulation.

In conclusion, a large ionic radius cation PEA+ was introduced to tailor the dimension of the CsPbI3 perovskite. By partially replacing Cs+ with PEA+ cations, a series of quasi-2D CsxPEA1−xPbI3 perovskite films was symmetrically studied. Incorporating the PEA+ cation effectively improves both the film morphology and optoelectronic properties. An optimal composition retains the stability of the CsxPEA1−xPbI3 perovskite film in the black α phase in air, and it also enhances the phase transition temperature up to 250 °C. Solar cells based on the Cs0.9PEA0.1PbI3 absorbing layer exhibit a PCE of 5.7% with negligible hysteresis. We believe that the concept of using large ionic radius cations provides a promising strategy for tailoring 3D perovskite materials and this study will further contribute to overcoming the stability issues of perovskite devices.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National R&D Program of China (2017YFA0207400), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61604032) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of China (ZYGX2016J206).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nr00758f
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018