 DOI: 10.1039/C8NR03194K
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 20218-20225


Rousan
Debbarma
,

Sanjay K.
Behura
*,

Yu
Wen
,

Songwei
Che
 and 

Vikas
Berry
*

Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Illinois at Chicago, 810 S. Clinton Street, Chicago, IL 60607, USA. E-mail: vikasb@uic.edu; sbehura1@uic.edu

Received
19th April 2018
, Accepted 30th September 2018
First published on 1st October 2018
Van Hove singularity (VHS) induced enhancement of visible-frequency absorption in atomically-thin two-dimensional (2D) crystals provides an opportunity for improved light management in photovoltaics; however, it requires the 2D nanomaterial to be in close vicinity of a photojunction. In this report, we design a Schottky junction-based photovoltaic system with single-layer graphene atop n-type silicon (n-Si), which is interfaced directly with a few layers of tungsten disulfide (WS2) via a bottom-up CVD synthesis strategy. An enhanced power conversion efficiency in the architecture of WS2-graphene/n-Si is observed compared to graphene/n-Si. Here, the WS2 induced photon absorption, with only three atoms above the photo-junction, enhanced the short-circuit current density (Jsc), and the reconfiguration of the energy band structure led to effective built-in electric field induced charge carrier transport (enhanced open-circuit voltage (Voc)). Similar to a graphene/n-Si Schottky junction, the WS2-graphene/n-Si double junction exhibited non-linear current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics with a 4-fold increase in Jsc (2.28 mA cm−2 in comparison with 0.52 mA cm−2 for graphene/n-Si) and 40% increase in the Voc (184 mV compared to 130 mV for graphene/n-Si) with a 6-fold increase in the photovoltaic power conversion efficiency. Futuristically, we envision an evolution in 2D heterojunctions with sharp transitions in properties within a few nanometers enabling control on optical absorption, carrier distribution, and band structure for applications including tandem photovoltaic cells and 2D optoelectronic circuit-switches.

The abrupt gradients of optical and electronic properties within the stacked van der Waals heterostructures of two-dimensional nanomaterials (2DNs) and heterojunctions of 2D crystals and bulk materials can be harnessed to achieve advanced functionalities. The ultra-high charge carrier mobility and spectral transmittance of sp2-hybridized graphene produced via a catalytic chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process makes it an ideal candidate material for optoelectronic phenomena. Typical CVD-produced graphene interfaced with lightly-doped silicon (n-Si) forms Schottky junctions functioning as photovoltaic cells with illumination of light (air mass 1.5G). Such heterojunctions show a promising power conversion efficiency of >10%, and further enhancement in the performance can be achieved by polymer doping of graphene with trifluoromethanesulfonic acid and also by using a colloidal titanium dioxide (TiO2) layer as an antireflective coating (ARC).

Atomically-thin transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) exhibit strong light–matter interactions due to Van Hove singularities (VHS) in the electronic density of states. The Van Hove singularities in the density of states of TMDCs result in a sharp increase in the joint density of states in the visible region. This leads to an increased photo-absorption and electron–hole pair (exciton) generation in the visible range. In contrast, the VHS in graphene's density of states lead to a pronounced absorption peak in the ultraviolet region. Furthermore, TMDCs of thickness less than 1 nm can absorb up to 5–10% of incident sunlight compared to 2–3% absorption in monolayer CVD graphene. They also possess a finite and tunable band gap (1.4–2.1 eV) in the visible region and therefore they can absorb a broad range of wavelengths of the solar radiation spectrum (air mass 1.5G). Tungsten disulfide (WS2) is a member of the layered group-VI TMDCs made up of covalently bonded S–W–S in-plane sheets held together via weak out-plane van der Waals forces. The energy bandgap for WS2 transitions from an indirect bandgap of 1.4 eV in its bulk to a direct bandgap of 2.1 eV in its monolayer form. The chemical stability and the presence of only a weak impurity band compared to molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) makes WS2 better suited as an active absorber material for applications in photovoltaics as the lack of impurity bands will lead to less electron–hole pair recombinations. The CVD growth of single crystalline grains and large area WS2 has been reported in the literature. The CVD growth of TMDCs allows for a better control of the number of layers and helps in realizing clean interfaces by avoiding the use of polymer-based transfer techniques. The direct growth of WS2 and other TMDCs via CVD will enable bulk production and eventually these 2DNs will find their way into commercial applications. A few reports have investigated utilizing WS2 as a tunneling barrier in a graphene/WS2/metal or graphene/WS2/graphene vertical field-effect transistors (FETs) using mechanically exfoliated WS2 films. In another report, CVD grown WS2 were transferred onto CVD grown graphene to investigate the interfacial doping effect of WS2 on graphene.
In this report, we show (a) the direct CVD growth of WS2 on graphene via a bottom-up CVD synthesis strategy (shown for the first time), (b) the development of a double junction photovoltaic cell by vertically stacking WS2 on graphene on an n-type Si substrate, and (c) an enhanced power conversion efficiency (PCE) in WS2-graphene/n-Si photovoltaic solar cells over graphene/n-Si single Schottky junction solar cells. The mechanism of efficiency-enhancement is attributed to energy band restructuring, enhanced photon absorption, exciton generation and dissociation, and built-in electric field induced transport across the double junction.

The bottom-up synthesis strategy for creating vertically-stacked WS2-graphene/n-Si dual-junction nano-architecture is presented in Fig. 1. Here a single-layer of a CVD-produced graphene film on copper (Cu) foil is chemically transferred via a carrier-film method onto a heavily-textured and lightly-doped solar-grade n-Si (100) substrate (Fig. 1a) followed by the growth of atomically-thin WS2 layers (Fig. 1b) via a vapor-transport based low-pressure thermal CVD technique. As shown in Fig. 1b, the WS2-graphene/n-Si structures were prepared by growing WS2 on the graphene/n-Si substrates in a three zone CVD furnace with a one inch quartz tube. As shown in Fig. 1b, the graphene/n-Si samples were inverted and placed on top of a crucible containing 10 mg of WO3 powder in the third zone of the furnace and sulfur powder was kept in the first zone in a quartz boat. The CVD reaction chamber was vacuumed to 2 mTorr in 20 minutes and then a steady flow of 50 sccm of H2 was maintained throughout the process. After a pressure of 220 mTorr was stabilized, the first and the second zones were heated to 200 °C and the third zone was heated to 950 °C for 30 minutes. The temperatures in all the three zones were held for the next 30 minutes. After 30 minutes, the chamber was cooled down to 700 °C at a rate of ∼2 °C min−1. This was followed by fast cooling (∼100 °C min−1) of the chamber to room temperature. The details of the CVD synthesis of graphene on catalytic Cu foil and its chemical transfer onto n-Si substrates are provided in the Materials and methods section. In this work, ten different WS2-graphene/n-Si samples were produced via the CVD process. The synthesized vertically stacked heterojunction of WS2-graphene/n-Si (Fig. 1c) is elucidated by Raman spectroscopy. The spectrum for the stacked heterojunction shown in Fig. 2a exhibits the signature Raman vibrational modes for WS2 (in-plane E2g/347 cm−1 and out-plane A1g/415 cm−1) and graphene (D/1352 cm−1, G/1584 cm−1 and 2D/2700 cm−1) as well as the photoluminescence (PL) peak for WS2 (2344 cm−1 or 2.04 eV). The presence of the PL peak and a peak position difference of 68 cm−1 between the E2g and A1g peaks indicate that the WS2 film grown on the graphene/n-Si substrate is a few layers thick and not a bulk solid. The presence of semi-metal graphene quenches the strong PL of WS2.Fig. 2b shows the spatial mapping of the intensity of the WS2's E2g peak, which represents the in-plane phonon mode involving the vibration of the metal (W) and the chalcogen (S) atoms. The spatial mapping of the intensity of the graphene's G band (∼1600 cm−1), which represents the phonon mode for the in-plane stretching of a carbon–carbon bond, is shown in Fig. 2c. A continuous coverage of the WS2 layer on the graphene transferred onto the n-Si substrate can be confirmed from the spatial mappings in Fig. 2b and c. The variation in intensities in the spatial mapping is due to the surface texture of the underlying n-Si substrate, which is intentionally made on the n-Si substrate for enhanced light absorption. Because of the surface texturing, some portion of the scanned area is above or below the focal plane used in the Raman measurement, which ultimately leads to the variations in the intensities. The textured surface can also be seen in the optical micrographs and the atomic force microscopy (AFM) topography image of the WS2-graphene/n-Si device, which are shown in Fig. 2d–f.


Fig. 3a and b show the dark current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the graphene/n-Si and WS2-graphene/n-Si heterojunction devices, respectively. Both devices have an active area of 0.1 cm2. The I–V curves show non-linear diodic features for both the heterojunctions. The typical dark I–V relationship for a diode is given by:
(1)
where
IO is the reverse saturation current, Rs is the series resistance, n is the diode ideality factor and VT is the thermal voltage . The above equation is generally for a single p–n junction diode. In our case, even though we have a double junction structure (WS2-graphene/n-Si), the electron transport occurs from WS2 to graphene and then to n-Si (explained later) and so we can model the device as a single p–n junction diode and analyze the aforementioned parameters. The diode parameters for the dark I–V relationship were determined by employing a non-linear implicit curve fitting method. The ideality factors determined from the non-linear implicit fitting of the I–V curves are 2.78 and 20.6 for the graphene/n-Si and the WS2-graphene/n-Si devices, respectively. A previous work involving gallium nitride (GaN) based heterojunctions reported anomalously high ideality factors. It has been shown that the rectification of the individual junctions in the heterojunction can lead to high ideality factors and the measured ideality factor is the sum total of the ideality factors of the individual junctions. Here both the WS2/graphene and graphene/n-Si junctions in the WS2-graphene/n-Si structure contribute to the high ideality factor compared to just the one junction in the graphene/n-Si device.

The diode and photovoltaic parameters outlined in Table 1 show that the addition of a thin film of WS2 on the graphene/n-Si structure leads to a four-fold increase in the short-circuit current density (Jsc) and the open-circuit voltage (Voc) increases by 40%. This leads to a 6-fold improvement of the solar cell power conversion efficiency (η) from 0.015% to 0.1% via inclusion of a few layers of WS2 on graphene/n-Si. The kink in the J–V curve (Fig. 3c) can be attributed to the native oxide layer on the n-Si surface, which leads to an increased recombination current. This results in low fill factors of 21% and 21.35% for the graphene/n-Si and the WS2-graphene/n-Si devices, respectively. The large active area can also be attributed to the low fill factor, which contributes to the low efficiencies observed in our solar cell devices. A further improvement in the performance of the WS2-graphene/n-Si device can be achieved via (a) chemical or physical doping, (b) plasmonic enhancement via nanoparticle anchoring, (c) anti-reflection coating for improved light management, (d) improving the isolation of electrodes, and (e) maximizing the optical absorption via the optimization of the number of WS2 layers. To understand the increase in the short circuit current density and the open circuit voltage, we need to look into the electrostatics and energetics of the photo-junction interfaces.
Photovoltaic parameters
Graphene/n-Si
WS2-graphene/n-Si
Dark saturation current, IO (μA)
0.05
125
Series resistance, Rs (Ω cm−2)
21.1
28.9
Ideality factor, n
2.78
20.6
Short-circuit current, Isc (mA cm−2)
0.52
2.28
Open-circuit voltage, Voc (mV)
130
184
Fill factor, FF (%)
21
21.3
Power conversion efficiency, η (%)
0.015
0.1
The deposition of n-type WS2 layers on graphene/n-Si leads to the formation of a double junction photovoltaic cell. Unlike a single p–n junction where electron transport is from the p-side to the n-side upon absorption of light with photon energy higher than the bandgap of the junction material, the transport of electrons in the WS2-graphene/n-Si is from the n-type WS2 to p-type graphene and then to the n-Si side. This can be attributed to the stronger built-in electric field in the graphene/n-Si interface (ξSi–G) compared to the WS2-graphene interface (ξWS2–G) as represented in Fig. 3d and e. The electric field in the depletion region is directly proportional to the doping density and inversely proportional to the permittivity of the material. The built-in electric fields at the WS2-graphene and graphene/n-Si interfaces can be modelled using the following equations:
(2)
(3)
where
x is the distance from the given interface, q (1.6 × 10−19 C) is the elementary charge, ND is the intrinsic dopant concentration (ND[Si] ≈ 1018 cm−3), Wn is the depletion region width, εWS2 = 4.4 − 11.5 (monolayer to bulk) and εSi = 11.68 are the relative dielectric constants and εo (εo = 8.85 × 10−12 F m−1) is the vacuum permittivity. The intrinsic doping concentration for WS2 can be written as  where NS (NS ≈ 109 cm−2) is the surface doping density and t is the WS2 thickness. The maximum electric field for both the junctions will be at the interface (x = 0). The WS2-graphene forms an abrupt 2D junction with no inter-diffusion and depletion region. In eqn (2), the width of the depletion layer can be replaced by the thickness of the WS2 layer, t. The depletion region width for the silicon–graphene junction can be expressed as:

(4)
where
Vbi and Vb are the built-in and applied bias voltages, respectively. For Vbi = 0.5 V and Vb = 0 V, the depletion region width is (Wn) ≈ 0.01 μm. Performing an order of magnitude analysis, we can show that |ξWS2–G(x = 0)| ≈ 104 V m−1 and |ξSi–G(x = 0)| ≈ 107 V m−1 and so the electric field along the silicon–graphene direction is three orders of magnitude higher  than the electric field along the WS2-graphene direction. As mentioned earlier, the presence of a native oxide layer on the n-Si surface leads to a low fill factor of ∼20%. This native oxide layer will also shield and make the net electric field weaker by a factor (|ξSi–G net| = |ξSi–G net|/εox), which is the dielectric constant of the oxide layer (εox). The oxide layer can be approximated to have the same dielectric constant as silicon dioxide (εox = 3.9). Therefore, the net electric field along the silicon–graphene direction is still of the order of 106–107 V m−1 and two to three orders of magnitude higher  than the electric field in the WS2 → graphene direction. Once this electric field penetrates the WS2 layer, it is further weakened by a factor given by the dielectric constant of WS2 (εWS2). Since WS2 has a low dielectric constant, the net effective field ξSi–G net in the WS2 layers is still two to three orders of magnitude higher than ξWS2–G. Therefore, despite the shielding of the electric field by the native oxide layer and the opposing electric field in the WS2 → graphene direction, the relatively strong electric field in the n-Si → graphene interface penetrates the atomically thin WS2-graphene junction, and that leads to an effective electric field along the n-Si → WS2 direction. The effective field will drift the electrons towards n-Si and holes in the opposite direction towards WS2.

The native n-type doping of WS2 similar to that in MoS2 can be attributed to sulfur vacancies. It has been reported that on transferring the WS2 layer onto the graphene surface, the WS2 becomes less n-doped and the underlying graphene covered by the WS2 becomes less p-doped via exchange of electrons. However, for the direct CVD grown WS2 on graphene, we observed the opposite trend. A higher n-doping is seen on WS2 grown on graphene/n-Si compared to the WS2 grown on the SiO2/Si surface. The increase in the doping level of WS2 can be seen in the PL spectra shown in Fig. 4a and b. The PL spectra for WS2 on SiO2 and on graphene/n-Si in Fig. 4 have been deconvoluted using Lorentzian fitting into two different peaks representing the exciton emission (X) and the trion emission (X−). The PL of WS2 on graphene/n-Si shows a third peak that can be attributed to the 2D Raman vibrational mode for graphene. The blue-shift in the peak energy for the WS2 on graphene compared to WS2 on SiO2 can be attributed to the structural imperfections and n-doping effects. The two peaks have an energy difference of 21.67 meV for WS2 on graphene/n-Si and 25.55 meV for WS2 on SiO2 which is the sum of the trion binding energy and the Fermi energy. The intensity ratio of the trion emission peak to the exciton emission peak is higher for the WS2 on graphene/n-Si  compared to that for WS2 on the SiO2/Si  substrate. Further analysis is required to understand the increased trion concentration in the directly grown WS2 on graphene via CVD. Although the PL analysis is not enough to confirm the doping effects on WS2, the PL peak deconvolution and analysis does allow us to infer the ratio of trions to neutral excitons in the given system, which can be an indirect way of deducing the doping effect. The net negative charge of trions will aid in their drift under the effective in-built electric field towards the WS2-graphene interface where they will dissociate into electrons and holes. The neutral excitons, due to the chemical potential difference, will diffuse both towards and away from the interface and they will eventually dissociate at the WS2-graphene interface.
The open-circuit voltage (Voc) of a solar cell is directly dependent on the built-in potential and parameters that affect the built-in voltage. In the WS2-graphene/n-Si device both the WS2/graphene and graphene/n-Si junctions have built-in voltages that contribute to the Voc of the device. In multi-junction solar cell devices, the Voc increases with the number of additional junctions. It has been shown that the Voc in multi-cell (tandem junctions) devices is close to the sum of the Voc of single cells. So the Voc in the WS2-graphene/n-Si device is the sum of the Voc for WS2-graphene and graphene/n-Si single junction devices. The presence of an extra junction in the WS2-graphene/n-Si device leads to the increase in the Voc.
The increase in the short circuit current density (Jsc) can be attributed to the higher light absorption coefficient of WS2 compared to graphene. The Van Hove singularities in the density of states of WS2 lead to a sharp increase in the joint density of states in the visible region (∼2–3 eV) which ultimately corresponds to the improved photo-absorption and generation of excitons. In comparison, the Van Hove singularities in graphene result in the absorption peaks in the ultraviolet (UV) range. A 3-fold increase in the absorption in the visible range on deposition of WS2 on top of graphene is observed as exhibited by the absorption spectra shown in Fig. 4c. The absorption for graphene exhibits a rapid reduction going from 300 nm to 400 nm (UV to visible range) compared to the slow reduction in the absorption for WS2-graphene. The absorption spectrum for WS2-graphene is more uniform in the wavelength range (300–900 nm) tested. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the WS2-graphene/n-Si solar cell in Fig. 4d shows a low efficiency (10–20%) in the blue and green spectrum of light and a relatively higher efficiency (∼50%) in the near infrared region. The low EQE in the blue end of the light spectrum can be because of the carriers generated close to the front surface being affected by the higher rate of recombination in the front region. The low EQE in the green region can be due to the low diffusion length or the high bulk recombination rate that affects the collection probability from the bulk of the solar cell. The higher EQE in the near IR region can be attributed to the ability of the charge carriers being generated towards the rear end of the device getting transported to the junction.
Utilizing the Van Hove singularity induced absorption peaks in the visual and ultraviolet range of light, a 4-fold increase in the Jsc of the stacked heterostructure (WS2-graphene/n-Si) has been achieved. Thus the deposition of a few layers of WS2 on graphene/n-Si led to (a) an increased light absorption leading to a 4-fold increase in the Jsc and (b) an increase in the Voc by 40% due to the introduction of an additional photo-junction. In combination, a 6-fold increase in the solar power conversion efficiency of the WS2-graphene/n-Si double-junction photovoltaic cell is found in contrast to the graphene/n-Si single Schottky junction photovoltaic cell.

In this work, we reported the direct-CVD growth of atomically-thin semiconducting WS2 layers on graphene and obtained a stacked WS2-graphene/n-Si dual-junction heterostructure. Employing the technique of CVD, we have been able to create a clean interface between WS2 and graphene avoiding the polymer-based chemical transfer process. The CVD approach provides us avenues to control the number of layers of WS2 and moreover this simple and fast process is also scalable. The stacked heterostructure helped in realizing atomically sharp interfaces. The abrupt changes in properties within a few angstrom distances helps in realizing sharp interfaces without inter-diffusion. As a consequence of the atomically thin WS2-graphene interface and the stronger built-in electric field in the graphene/n-Si junction, the net built-in electric field is towards WS2. Because of the net electric field, the photo-generated electrons will move toward the n-Si side and the holes toward WS2 to be eventually collected by the metal electrodes on top. We leveraged the Van Hove singularity induced improved optical absorption of WS2 in the visible range to enhance the light absorption of the graphene/n-Si device via deposition of a few layers of WS2. By synthesizing the stacked heterostructure, we have shown an improvement in the photovoltaic performance of a graphene/n-Si solar cell by depositing a few-layers of WS2via CVD. Hence the improvement in the photovoltaic performance can be attributed to the increased light absorption and the reconfiguration of the energy levels at the WS2/graphene junction as a consequence of the deposition of WS2 layers on the graphene/n-Si substrate. The realization of stacked heterojunctions via CVD will pave the way for future integrated nanostructures with unique optoelectronic functionalities.


The monolayer graphene samples were prepared via chemical vapor deposition (CVD) on (1′′ × 2′′) copper foils (25 μm, 99.98% purity) with methane (CH4, 99.95% purity, Praxair) as the precursor gas and hydrogen (H2, 99.9999% purity, Praxair) gas as the reducing agent. The wash cycle of copper foil involved washing with a copious amount of water followed by acetone and then isopropyl alcohol. After the first wash the copper foil was immersed in a solution of Fe(NO3)2:HNO3 (1 M:3 M) for 10 minutes to remove native oxide. This was followed by a second wash cycle and then sonication in acetone to remove further ions. The third and final wash cycle was followed by drying with a flow of purified air for 2 minutes. The copper foil was subsequently loaded into a one inch quartz tube on a single heating zone CVD furnace and the reaction chamber was vacuumed to a pressure of 1 militorr (mTorr) in 5 minutes. A steady flow of 100 sccm of H2 gas was maintained throughout the rest of the synthesis process. After flushing the system with H2 gas for 10 minutes, the temperature of the furnace was increased to 1050 °C in 15 minutes. This was followed by annealing the Cu foil at 1050 °C for 30 minutes. The reaction was carried out by flowing 10 sccm of CH4 into the chamber for 1 minute. Subsequently, the CH4 was turned off and the furnace was opened and allowed to cool down to room temperature quickly.


The monolayer graphene produced was transferred to the n-Si substrates using polymethyl-methacrylate (PMMA). The procedure involved spin-coating a 25 mg ml−1 solution of PMMA (MW 996000, Sigma Aldrich) in anisole (99% purity, Acros Organics) onto the graphene containing Cu foil. This was followed by air drying the PMMA-Gr/Cu foil for 5 minutes and then etching copper by floating the foil in a HNO3 acid solution (1:3 volume ratio of HNO3 to deionized water) for 1 hour. The floating PMMA-graphene was picked up using a quartz substrate and then transferred to a container with deionized water. This process was repeated twice to remove the ions. Eventually the PMMA-graphene samples were picked up using the target n-Si substrates. The PMMA-graphene-Si samples were left to air dry for 1–2 hours. The PMMA removal procedure involved baking the samples on a hot-plate at 60 °C for 20 minutes followed by immersing the sample in a container with acetone. The graphene-Si samples were further washed with acetone to remove any remaining PMMA on the surface.


To prepare the final solar cell devices a lift-off photolithography process was employed. Two out of the ten CVD prepared WS2-graphene/n-Si samples produced were designed for photovoltaic cell architecture. The graphene-Si and WS2-graphene/n-Si samples were first spin coated with a photoresist (PR OIR-90612) liquid followed by exposing it to ultraviolet (UV) light through a mask with our gridded electrode patterns. The samples were then developed by immersing the exposed samples in a developer solution (OPD 4262) for 1 minute which washed away the photoresist from the areas exposed to the UV light. The next step involved depositing the metal electrodes, 10 nm of chromium followed by 50 nm of gold, via electron-beam evaporation. The samples with deposited metals were then washed with acetone to remove metals from the photoresist covered areas leaving behind a gridded electrode pattern. A coating of conducting silver paste was used as the back contact for the solar cell devices.


The Raman spectroscopy analyses for the samples were done on the WITEC-300RA Raman-AFM system using a 532 nm laser excitation source.


The AFM measurements were performed on the WITEC-300RA Raman-AFM system. Tapping mode AFM was performed using silicon tips with a spring constant of 3 N m−1 and a resonant frequency of 62 kHz.


The photo-electrical measurements on the final devices were performed on a Keithley SMU 2612 source meter using the two-probe method. The photovoltaic effects of the devices were analyzed by measuring the I–V characteristics on the Keithley source meter under irradiation of AM 1.5 illumination from a solar simulator (Sciencetech).


The measurements were performed on the Oriel Cornerstone 130 monochromator system. To measure the absorption percentage, graphene films with and without WS2 were transferred onto clean quartz slides. Using the monochromator, light from the UV and visible range (280–900 nm) was irradiated onto the samples. The intensity of light transmitted through the samples was measured using a photodetector (Newport UV-818). The intensity of transmitted light through an empty quartz slide was fixed as the base intensity used in calculating the percentage absorption through the graphene and WS2-graphene samples. The EQE measurement involved irradiating the fabricated device with light of different wavelengths using the monochromator and measuring the corresponding photocurrent through the Keithley SMU 2612 source meter.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


V. B. acknowledges financial support from the National Science Foundation (Grants: CMMI-1503681 and CMMI-1030963) and the University of Illinois at Chicago. V. B. and S. K. B. acknowledge Mr Michael R. Seacrist from SunEdison Semiconductor for providing silicon wafers. The authors acknowledge Prof. Reza Shahbazian-Yassar's research group for help in transmission electron microscopy studies.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nr03194k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018