 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA07969A
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24110-24115


Menghua
Zhu
,

Weiwei
Liu
,

Weijun
Ke
,

Sarah
Clark
,

Ethan B.
Secor
,

Tze-Bin
Song
,

Mercouri G.
Kanatzidis
,

Xin
Li
* and 

Mark C.
Hersam
*

School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, State Key Lab of Urban Water Resource and Environment, Harbin Institute of Technology, 150001, China. E-mail: lixin@hit.edu.cn

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Northwestern University, 2220 Campus Drive, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA. E-mail: m-hersam@northwestern.edu

Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan Road, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA

Received
10th September 2017
, Accepted 8th November 2017
First published on 10th November 2017
In recent years, hybrid organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) have emerged as leading candidates for next-generation photovoltaic technologies. The architecture of PVSCs rely on charge transport layers to enable optimal efficiency and stability. In particular, tin oxide (SnO2) has been shown to be an effective electron transport layer (ETL) due to favorable energy level alignment, relatively wide band gap, and high environmental and thermal stability. However, traditional processing of SnO2 necessitates a high-temperature and/or long-duration sintering step that limits substrate choice and introduces manufacturing challenges. To overcome this limitation, we present here a rapid, low-temperature, solution-based method for SnO2 film fabrication based on intense pulsed photonic annealing. Following a comprehensive survey of the precursor solution and photonic annealing conditions, light exposure as short as 20 milliseconds is shown to provide a high-quality nanocrystalline SnO2 film at room temperature, enabling PVSCs with low hysteresis and high power conversion efficiencies exceeding 15%. Overall, this work establishes a processing pathway for SnO2-based PVSCs that is compatible with flexible substrates and high-throughput, roll-to-roll manufacturing.

Hybrid organic–inorganic halide perovskites have attracted significant attention for photovoltaics due to their superlative, compositionally-tunable electronic and optical properties including bipolar transport and long photogenerated carrier diffusion lengths. In recent years, through improved materials and processing parameters, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of hybrid organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) has risen from 3.8% (ref. 9) to 22.1%, with the potential to surpass that of crystalline silicon solar cells. Most of the reported high-efficiency PVSCs are based on either planar or mesoporous metal-oxide electron transport layers (ETLs) such as compact titanium dioxide (TiO2). This type of ETL typically requires a high-temperature (∼500 °C) and/or long-duration (1–3 hours) sintering step to increase crystallinity and achieve sufficiently high charge carrier mobility. However, these sintering conditions have significant drawbacks for high-throughput, low-cost production and integration with mechanically flexible substrates.

Several strategies have been pursued to realize low-temperature processing of high-performance ETLs for PVSCs, using alternative film preparation methods or replacing TiO2 with other metal oxides. For example, a low-temperature magnetron sputtering process has been employed to prepare high-density TiO2 layers with the resulting PVSCs exhibiting PCEs as high as 15.1% on plastic substrates. In addition, planar PVSCs have been demonstrated using a low-temperature, solution-processed zinc oxide (ZnO) nanoparticle ETL with PCEs up to 15.7%. Recently, there has been significant interest in employing SnO2 as an ETL for PVSCs due to its superior stability, wide band gap, and high electron mobility compared to ZnO, TiO2, and other metal oxides. Indeed, planar PVSCs have been realized using solution-processed nanoparticle SnO2 ETLs with an average PCE of 16.0%. Furthermore, PCEs in excess of 18% have been achieved by using atomic layer deposition (ALD) to prepare SnO2 ETLs. Using an ultraviolet-ozone treatment, Huang et al. also demonstrated a low-temperature, sol–gel SnO2 ETL for PVSCs, resulting in an efficiency as high as 16.2%. Although these early reports have shown that high-quality SnO2 ETLs enable high-performance PVSCs, these methods necessitate long annealing or growth times. These long processing times present a bottleneck for rapid, large-scale manufacturing, which is a key motivation and cost driver for widespread deployment of PVSCs.
In this regard, intense pulsed photonic annealing presents a compelling fabrication capability to dramatically improve process throughput and compatibility. This method uses short millisecond-scale, high-intensity pulses of broadband light, typically from a xenon flash lamp, to selectively and rapidly anneal optically absorbing materials. The short duration of the process enables high local temperatures in the optically absorbing material without damaging thermally sensitive substrates, such as flexible plastics. Moreover, the large-area nature of this technique, combined with its short duration and substrate compatibility, is ideally suited for versatile integration in roll-to-roll fabrication platforms. Due to their compelling benefits for efficient manufacturing, rapid light-based annealing strategies have been demonstrated previously for PVSCs. For example, near-infrared annealing of a co-deposited Al2O3–CH3NH3PbI3 PVSC for 2.5 seconds achieved a PCE of 10.0% compared to 10.9% for a 45 minute oven-annealed device. Subsequent work utilized flash photonic annealing with a reduced processing time of 1.15 milliseconds, resulting in PCEs up to 11.3% compared to a PCE of 15.2% for hotplate-annealed devices. Using a 2 millisecond light pulse to anneal a CH3NH3PbI3 film on a layer of thermally-sintered mesoporous TiO2, a champion PCE of 12.3% has also been achieved. However, these demonstrations still employ ETLs requiring high temperature (∼500 °C) processing, limiting the benefits afforded by photonic annealing. For direct application to the ETL, photonic annealing has been shown only for TiO2, resulting in a PCE as high as 15.0% for planar PVSCs. Given the aforementioned benefits of SnO2, namely improved charge carrier mobility, wide band gap, and environmental stability, the extension of this strategy to SnO2 ETLs presents an important development for scalable, high-throughput fabrication of PVSCs with broad process and material compatibility.
Here, we present a low-temperature, solution-based method combined with intense pulsed photonic annealing to rapidly fabricate high-quality SnO2 ETL films on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates. With an optimized concentration of SnO2 precursor solution and corresponding photonic annealing time, we achieve PVSC PCEs up to 15.3% when measured under reverse voltage scan. The SnO2 ETL photonic annealing process occurs following only 20 milliseconds of light exposure, without the need for additional thermal annealing, offering promise for integration with roll-to-roll manufacturing processes on flexible substrates. This work advances the prospects for PVSCs in practical solar energy applications.

Unless stated otherwise, all materials were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received. Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) with a sheet resistance of 14 Ω sq−1 on glass was purchased from Asahi Glass (Japan). The purity of the gold used for the top contact is 99.99%.


The SnCl4-based precursor solution was prepared by diluting anhydrous SnCl4 with ultrapure H2O to the desired concentration. The FTO substrates were treated with ultraviolet ozone for 15 min preceding SnO2 film formation. For optimal SnO2 ETL film fabrication, 0.1 M SnCl4 precursor solution was spin-coated onto the FTO substrate at 2000 rpm for 30 s, followed by photonic annealing for 20 ms (Xenon Sinteron 2010-S; power = 2.3 kW cm−2, total energy = 46 J cm−2, see Fig. S1 for more details). Photonic annealing leads to the formation of SnO2 films according to the following reaction:
SnCl4 + 2H2O → SnO2 + 4HCl
The perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 films were prepared by the two-step method. First, 462 mg PbI2 dissolved in 1 mL dimethylformamide was stirred at 70 °C for 12 h. The solution was then spin-coated onto the FTO substrates with SnO2 ETLs at a low speed of 500 rpm for 3 s followed by a high speed of 2000 rpm for 30 s. Second, the substrates were dipped into a 10 mg mL−1 solution of CH3NH3I dissolved in isopropanol for 5 min and then dipped into clean isopropanol at room temperature. Finally, the films were annealed in air at 70 °C for 30 min.
The PTAA film was prepared by spin-coating PTAA (EM index, MW = 17500 g mol−1)/toluene (15 mg mL−1) solution with 13.6 μL Li-bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl) imide (Li-TFSI)/acetonitrile (28.3 mg mL−1) and 6.8 μL 4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP) at 2000 rpm. Following spin-coating, the as-prepared film was thermally annealed at 70 °C for 5 min. Finally, an 80 nm thick Au layer was deposited by thermal evaporation. The active area of the solar cell was defined by a metal mask with a 0.09 cm2 aperture.

X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra of the prepared films were measured using a Rigaku SmartLab X-ray diffractometer, while XRD experiments of the powder isolated as an intermediate phase were performed using a Rigaku Ultima IV with an X-ray tube (Cu Kα λ = 1.5406 Å). Ultraviolet-visible absorption spectra were recorded on a Shimadzu UV-3101 spectrophotometer in the 200 nm to 800 nm wavelength range at room temperature. BaSO4 was used as a non-absorbing reflectance reference. The morphologies of the surfaces of bare FTO and the SnO2-coated FTO substrates were characterized by atomic force microscopy (AFM) (SPM-9500j3). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) measurements were performed with a Hitachi SU8030 scanning electron microscope equipped with an Oxford X-max 80 SDD EDS detector. Data were acquired with an accelerating voltage of 15 kV. J–V characteristics were measured using a solar simulator (Spectra-Nova Class A Xenon Arc Lamp) with AM 1.5 G optical irradiation (100 mW cm−2), calibrated with a Si-reference cell certified by NREL. A Keithley 2400 source meter was used for electrical characterization. External quantum efficiency (EQE) was characterized using an Oriel model QE-PV-SI instrument equipped with a NIST-certified Si diode. Monochromatic light was generated from an Oriel 300 W lamp.


The SnO2 films were prepared through solution processing. In particular, a SnCl4-based precursor solution was spin-coated and then immediately annealed preceding drying via exposure to high-intensity optical pulses from a xenon lamp as shown in Fig. S1. To improve substrate wetting and increase infiltration of the aqueous SnCl4 precursor solution, the FTO substrates were treated with ultraviolet ozone for 15 min prior to spin-coating. To examine the efficacy of these photonically-annealed SnO2 films as an ETL in PVSCs, planar devices with the configuration FTO/SnO2/CH3NH3PbI3/PTAA/Au were fabricated. The device structure using PTAA as the hole transport layer (HTL) is illustrated in Fig. 1a, with the accompanying energy band diagram shown in Fig. 1b.Fig. 1c includes a cross-sectional SEM image of the completed device, which shows that each layer forms a conformal contact with its adjacent layers. The measured film thicknesses of the SnO2 and perovskite layers are ∼50 nm and ∼400 nm, respectively.

Further details on the process for forming the photonically-annealed SnO2 ETL are presented in Fig. 2a. The SEM image in Fig. 2b shows the resulting morphology and coverage of the SnO2 thin film on the FTO substrate. In addition, Fig. S2 provides AFM images of the SnO2 film before and after photonic annealing. The AFM-measured surface roughness values before and after photonic annealing are 32.4 nm and 22.9 nm, respectively, indicating that the SnO2 film is smoother following photonic annealing. These results confirm that photonic annealing results in compact, nanocrystalline SnO2 that is suitable for templated casting of perovskite films (Fig. 2c).
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was conducted in order to assess the conversion of SnCl4 to SnO2 after photonic annealing. The full XPS survey spectrum contains elemental O, Cl, and Sn peaks as shown in Fig. 3a. The binding energies of 487.2 eV and 495.7 eV correspond to the Sn 3d5/2 and Sn 3d3/2 peaks, respectively (Fig. 3b). Furthermore, the binding energy of 531.1 eV can be attributed to O 1s, which is the O2− state in SnO2 (Fig. 3c). The higher binding energy can be assigned to the hydroxyl group OH bond. As shown in Fig. 3d, only trace amounts of chlorine remain after the SnO2 films are photonically annealed, indicating near complete conversion of the SnCl4 to SnO2.
On top of the photonically annealed SnO2 ETL, CH3NH3PbI3 films were deposited via an established two step method. A top-view SEM image of a representative perovskite film deposited on the SnO2/FTO substrate is provided in Fig. 2c, revealing a continuous film free of holes or crevices between grains. The inset in Fig. 2c shows a higher-magnification SEM image of the perovskite film surface, indicating that the grain size is ∼500 nm. XRD measurements, provided in Fig. S3, confirm that the film is composed of the perovskite phase as well as residual PbI2, the presence of which has been shown to benefit device performance by suppressing carrier recombination.Fig. 4 shows the absorption and photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the CH3NH3PbI3 film on the SnO2/FTO substrate. The absorption spectrum shows a sharp band edge at ∼760 nm as expected. The second absorption peak located at ∼500 nm has been attributed to a double-valence band or charge-transfer excited state. The photoluminescence peak at ∼773 nm agrees well with values reported in the literature for high-quality perovskite films.
The photovoltaic device parameters for different SnO2 photonic annealing times are summarized in Table S1, and the corresponding photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves are displayed in Fig. S4. Suboptimal photovoltaic performance was observed for photonic annealing times of 5 ms. However, increasing the photonic annealing time to 20 ms significantly improved all of the photovoltaic parameters of the resulting cells, boosting the PCE from 9.7% to 15.3%. Further increasing the SnO2 photonic annealing time again reduced the efficiency of the corresponding PVSCs. Evidently, the SnO2 photonic annealing time is a key parameter in controlling the effectiveness of the ETL and thus PVSC performance. The XPS analysis in Fig. S5 provides chemical insight into the effect of photonic annealing time on the SnO2 film. Specifically, the survey and Cl 2p XPS spectra reveal that the chlorine is fully photolyzed after 20 ms of photonic annealing. Importantly, this annealing condition is compatible with plastic substrates such as PET and PEN, offering compelling prospects for leveraging this strategy to enable lightweight, flexible PVSCs (Fig. S6). In this regard, the development of low-temperature and short-duration fabrication routes for high-performance ETLs is a key challenge for flexible PVSC development, and critical for realizing the benefits of high-throughput, roll-to-roll processing desired for widespread deployment of solution-processed photovoltaics.
In addition to the photonic annealing time, the ETL thickness is critical to PVSC performance. The thickness of the ETL is tuned by the concentration of the original SnCl4 solution. Therefore, to study the effect of film thickness on device performance, several SnCl4-based precursor solutions were prepared with SnCl4 concentrations varying from 0.05 M to 0.2 M.
Fig. S7 shows the PVSC performance for different concentrations of SnCl4 with the photovoltaic parameters summarized in Table S2. At low SnCl4 concentrations, the coverage of the SnO2 film on the FTO surface is incomplete, allowing for direct contact between the perovskite and the FTO substrate. Direct contact is well-known to increase recombination, resulting in deleterious decreases in open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF). Conversely, for high SnCl4 concentrations and thus thicker SnO2 films, photonic annealing is unable to completely convert the SnCl4 precursor solution to SnO2. In addition, larger ETL thicknesses increase the series resistance, which further reduces PCE. The best performance was obtained for the 0.1 M SnCl4-based precursor solution.
Representative J–V curves and external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements for the optimized cell (0.1 M SnCl4; 20 ms photonic annealing time) are shown in Fig. 5. The average of the J–V curves from the forward and reverse voltage scans (Fig. 5a) possesses a short-circuit current (Jsc), Voc, FF, and PCE of 20.9 mA cm−2, 1.03 V, 0.64, and 14.0%, respectively, under the standard AM 1.5 G optical irradiation condition (100 mW cm−2). The respective parameters for the forward and reverse voltage scans are 20.4 mA cm−2, 1.01 V, 0.66, and 12.79% versus 21.4 mA cm−2, 1.06 V, 0.67, and 15.3%, which indicate relatively low hysteresis (87.6% forward/reverse) for photonically-annealed SnO2 ETLs. The EQE curve shows a strong spectral response in the range from 350 nm to 750 nm with a peak EQE close to 83%. The integrated current density (20.7 mA cm−2) from the EQE curve agrees well with the Jsc (20.9 mA cm−2) obtained from the J–V curve.

In summary, we have demonstrated a rapid, low-temperature photonic annealing approach for preparing SnO2 ETLs for efficient PVSCs. Systematic exploration of the processing phase space revealed that the photonic annealing time and SnCl4-based precursor solution concentration are the key parameters in controlling the morphology, chemistry, and performance of the resulting SnO2 ETL. The optimized processing conditions (0.1 M SnCl4; 20 ms photonic annealing time) yielded PVSCs with low hysteresis and high PCE (15.3%), Voc (1.06 V), Jsc (21.4 mA cm−2), and FF (0.67) under the standard AM 1.5 G optical irradiation condition. This rapid, low-temperature, solution-processing methodology is ideally suited for ongoing efforts to realize large-scale, roll-to-roll manufacturing of low-cost, high-performance, and mechanically flexible PVSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported as part of the Argonne-Northwestern Solar Energy Research (ANSER) Center, an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U. S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences under Award No. DE-SC0001059. We also thank the Specialized Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education (20122302110043) and the State Key Laboratory of Urban Water Resource and Environment of the Harbin Institute of Technology (2016DX07). Menghua Zhu gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Joint Educational PhD Program of the Chinese Scholarship Council (CSC). This work made use of the experimental facilities of the Northwestern University NUANCE Center, which has received support from the Soft and Hybrid Nanotechnology Experimental (SHyNE) Resource (NSF NNCI-1542205); the MRSEC program (NSF DMR-1121262); the International Institute for Nanotechnology (IIN); the Keck Foundation; and the State of Illinois.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta07969a
‡ M. Zhu and W. Liu contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017