 DOI: 10.1039/C9CC02676B
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 7486-7489


Wenwen
Ma
,

Wenjing
Li
,

Ruiyuan
Liu
,

Mengyan
Cao
,

Xiujian
Zhao
 and 

Xiao
Gong
*

State Key Laboratory of Silicate Materials for Architectures, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan 430070, China. E-mail: xgong@whut.edu.cn

School of Biomedical Engineering, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China

Received
6th April 2019
, Accepted 30th May 2019
First published on 30th May 2019
We used N-doped carbon dots and TPFE-Rho aggregation-induced emission (AIE) fluorescent materials to fabricate tandem luminescent solar concentrators. The fluorescence quantum yields of N-CDs and TPFE-Rho are 79.65% and 34.88%, respectively. High-performance tandem LSCs can be obtained.

Luminescent solar concentrators (LSCs) were initially introduced in 1976 and are optical devices in which luminophores are dispersed into polymer waveguide materials to capture sunlight and convert it to fluorescence. And then the fluorescence can be transmitted to the slab edges based on the principle of total internal reflection (TIR). Photovoltaic cells are installed on the edge of the LSC, which can effectively absorb high-intensity fluorescence, thus improving the photoelectric conversion efficiency of solar cells. Unlike traditional solar concentrators, LSCs do not require a tracking and cooling system, which can significantly reduce the cost of photovoltaic energy production. As a new type of concentrator technology, LSCs can not only achieve high power output but can also change the way solar energy is used, such as the use of solar energy in the walls or windows of future buildings, which helps to realize building-integrated photovoltaics (BIPV).

Since the concept of LSCs was introduced in the 1970s, in addition to the earliest proposed LSCs in the form of slab optical waveguides, researchers have introduced new structures of LSCs. The most common structure is the flat LSC, and the flat type LSC is further divided into a single-layer structure and a tandem structure. The tandem LSC is composed of a plurality of single-layer LSCs, compared with the single-layer LSC. The advantages of tandem LSCs are striking, and each layer is designed to absorb different wavelengths of sunlight and broadens the use of the solar spectrum, which can significantly improve the efficiency of LSCs.
To date, a variety of quantum dots (QDs) have been used for LSC fabrication such as CdSe, InP/ZnO, CdSe/CdZnS, and Si. Compared with the above QDs, carbon dots (CDs) have many unique advantages such as high stability, optical adjustability, easy fabrication, low cost and low toxicity. In 2017, we first reported N-doped carbon dots (N-CDs) as luminophores to fabricate LSCs, revealing that N-CDs are a promising candidate as fluorescent materials for the fabrication of photovoltaic windows.
Conventional luminophores exhibit strong photoluminescence (PL) in dilute solutions, however, their fluorescence was often weakened or even completely quenched in concentrated solutions or in the solid state. The main causes of concentration quenching are related to the formation of aggregates, so this phenomenon is often called aggregation-caused quenching (ACQ). In 2001, Tang's group found that some of the silole molecules hardly glowed in solution, but the luminescence was greatly enhanced in the aggregate state or within the solid film. They defined this phenomenon as aggregation-induced emission (AIE). Recently, because of their good photostability, large Stokes shift, and low toxicity, AIE luminescent materials have been extensively used in chemo-sensors, bio-sensors, cell-imaging, protein conformation study, and photovoltaics.
N-CDs could exhibit very high fluorescence luminescence quantum yield, while AIE luminescent materials also show enhanced fluorescence behavior in the solid state. To the best of our knowledge, there is still no report on tandem structured LSCs using N-doped carbon dots and aggregation-induced luminescent materials. Therefore, we selected near infrared (NIR) fluorescent organic nanoparticles (TPFE-Rho nanoparticles) and N-doped carbon dots as luminophores to fabricate high-performance LSCs. Carbon dots can absorb light in the 300–450 nm range, and TPFE-Rho can efficiently absorb sunlight in the range of 400 nm to 570 nm. Coupling the two types of luminophores leads to absorption of sunlight in the range of 300 nm to 570 nm, matching well with the Sun's spectrum, compared to carbon dots or TPFE-Rho individually. In this way, compared to single layer LSCs, tandem structure LSCs based on carbon dots and TPFE-Rho could significantly enhance the power conversion efficiency of devices.
In this paper, we report new tandem luminescent solar concentrators fabricated using carbon dots and AIE molecules. The first layer of LSCs was fabricated using N-CDs/PVP thin films, and a TPFE-Rho/PMMA nanocomposite slab was used to fabricate the second layer. The results showed that the value of the overall power conversion efficiency η could reach up to 4.06%, which guarantees their suitability for their outdoor use.
The absorption and PL spectra of N-CDs in ethanol solution and thin films are shown in Fig. 1a and c. The spectra revealed that N-CDs had a broad absorption band in the wavelength range of 300–450 nm and a maximum absorption at around 365 nm with fluorescence peaking at around 430 nm. Specially, the overlap between the absorption and emission spectra was very small, indicating low self-absorption. In addition, a comparison of the two spectra of N-CDs in the solution and polymer thin films showed that there was no significant red shift or blue shift. The absorption and PL spectra of TPFE-Rho in a water/THF mixture and TPFE-Rho/PMMA nanocomposite slabs are shown in Fig. 1b and d. The TPFE-Rho nanoparticles showed a broad absorption band from 400 to 550 nm with a maximum absorption at about 470 nm in solution or nanocomposite slabs. It is worth noting that the broad absorption results are very favourable for a luminescent collector configuration, especially in harvesting photons in the UV-visible range. The fluorescence peak of TPFE-Rho in a water/THF mixture was around 600 nm and a strong red fluorescence appeared under 365 nm UV illumination. However, the PL peak of the TPFE-Rho/PMMA nanocomposite slabs was at around 570 nm. Compared with TPFE-Rho in the water/THF mixture, the fluorescence in the solid state showed a significant blue-shift. Such a difference may be ascribed to the fact that the presence of water in THF solution leads to TPFE-Rho aggregation, causing the TPFE-Rho nanoparticles to change from the single-molecule state to the aggregated state, and these nanoparticles become larger compared with TPFE-Rho nanoparticles dispersed in a PMMA polymer matrix. The SEM image revealed that the TPFE-Rho nanoparticle sample had a diameter of around 110 nm.

Fig. 2a shows the PL spectra of the N-CDs/PVP thin film excited by light with different wavelengths. The fluorescence emission of the N-CDs/PVP thin film first increased, and then decreased with the increase of the excitation wavelength. The maximum fluorescence emission appeared at around 430 nm under 370 nm excitation. With the increase of the excitation wavelength, the PL peak of the N-CDs/PVP thin film exhibited a red shift. This is due to the wavelength dependence of the CDs, which is determined by their fluorescence properties.

Fig. 2b shows the PL spectra of the TPFE-Rho/PMMA nanocomposite slabs excited by light from 420 nm to 550 nm. Compared with the N-CDs/PVP thin film, the PL spectra of the TPFE-Rho/PMMA nanocomposite slabs had the same regularity. The peaks of the TPFE-Rho/PMMA nanocomposite slabs shifted from 560 nm to 583 nm when the excitation wavelength changed from 420 nm to 550 nm. The maximum fluorescence emission of the TPFE-Rho/PMMA nanocomposite slabs appeared at 573 nm under 470 nm excitation. The PL decay curves of the N-CDs/PVP thin film and the TPFE-Rho/PMMA nanocomposite slabs were also studied, as shown in Fig. 2c and d. The lifetime of the N-CDs in water solution was ∼12.92 ns, which is longer than that of N-CDs in polymer thin films. The lifetime of TPFE-Rho in a THF/water mixture was ∼4.03 ns, and the lifetime of the TPFE-Rho/PMMA nanocomposite slabs was ∼4.47 ns, which indicates that there is no significant effect on the PL dynamics of TPFE-Rho in solution and in the polymer matrix. The fluorescence quantum yields of N-CDs and TPFE-Rho are 79.65% and 34.88%, respectively (Fig. S2, ESI).
We prepared three N-CDs/PVP thin film LSC samples with five layers by spin-coating. As shown in Fig. 3a–c, the thicknesses of these N-CDs/PVP thin film LSC samples were 12.087 ± 0.07 μm, 12.642 ± 0.03 μm, 11.923 ± 0.04 μm according to the SEM cross-sectional images, respectively. These similar film thicknesses indicate that the films of the three samples prepared by the spin-coating method are rather uniform. Fig. 3d shows a photograph of the prepared N-CDs/PVP thin film and TPFE-Rho/PMMA nanocomposite slabs after post-processing. All the three sets of samples appeared highly transparent, indicating their promising potential for application in the walls or windows of future buildings.

Fig. 4a–d show the photographs of the N-CDs/PVP thin film and TPFE-Rho/PMMA nanocomposite slab based LSCs illuminated by a 365 nm UV lamp. LSCs based on N-CD/PVP thin films emitted bright blue light at the edges while LSCs based on TPFE-Rho/PMMA nanocomposite slabs emitted bright yellow light. Fig. 4e shows a schematic illustration of tandem LSCs based on N-CDs/PVP thin films (top) and TPFE-Rho/PMMA nanocomposite slabs (bottom). The short-wavelength portion of the solar spectrum is absorbed by the LSC's first layer (N-CDs/PVP thin film), and most of the emitted photons are trapped inside the LSC by total internal reflection and guided to the edge-mounted Si photovoltaic cell. The long-wavelength portion of the solar spectrum passing through the first LSC layer is collected by the bottom LSC, which is equipped with a Si photovoltaic cell.
In our study, we prepared six samples. Among which, three samples were N-CDs/PVP thin films with different dimensions, and the other samples were TPFE-Rho/PMMA nanocomposite slabs with different dimensions. In these samples, the width and thickness of the N-CDs/PVP thin film and the TPFE-Rho/PMMA nanocomposite slabs were fixed, only the length changed, and the length was 2.5 cm, 4.5 cm, 6.5 cm, respectively. The photoelectric conversion efficiency (η) is an important parameter to evaluate the performance of LSCs, the photovoltaic parameters of the tandem LSCs are shown in Table S1 (ESI). η is defined as η = (Voc × Jsc × FF)/Pin, where Jsc is the short circuit current density, Voc is the open circuit voltage, Pin is the incident solar power, and FF is the fill factor. These values can be obtained from the photocurrent density–voltage curves. In the tandem-structured LSCs, the first layer based on N-CDs showed an η of 1.76%, 1.69%, and 1.51% with the increase of length, respectively. Similarly, the second layer based on TPFE-Rho showed an η of 2.30%, 2.20%, and 2.04% with the increase of length, respectively. The overall efficiency of tandem LSCs was 4.06%, 3.89% and 3.55%, respectively. The results also showed that the η of the LSCs could be slightly affected by the geometrical factor (G).
In summary, we designed high-efficiency tandem LSCs fabricated using two types of fluorescent materials. For the top layer, we used N-CDs to prepare LSCs because of their excellent advantages such as broad absorption, low toxicity, and easy fabrication. For the bottom layer, we used TPFE-Rho nanoparticles as luminophores that exhibit large Stokes shift and low self-absorption. With the increase of the geometric factor G, the efficiency of photoelectric conversion slightly reduced due to the self-absorption in LSCs. The results showed that the LSC (2.5 × 2.0 × 0.1 cm3) based on N-CDs had an η of 1.76%, and the LSC (2.5 × 2.0 × 0.2 cm3) based on TPFE-Rho showed an η of 2.30%. Compared to the single-layer devices, the tandem LSCs exhibited a considerable boost in efficiency, which reached up to 4.06%. These data illustrate that tandem LSCs are expected to be used in the walls or windows of future buildings to realize BIPV.
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21774098), the Open Foundation of the State Key Laboratory of Silicate Materials for Architectures at WUT (No. SYSJJ2018-04), and the Excellent Dissertation Cultivation Funds of Wuhan University of Technology (2017-YS-007). M. Y. Cao acknowledges the National Students’ platform for innovation and entrepreneurship training program (20181049721002) for the financial support of this research. W. J. Li acknowledges the Independent Innovation Foundation of Wuhan University of Technology (195259002) for the financial support of this research.

There are no conflicts to declare.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cc02676b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019