 DOI: 10.1039/C6TC05069G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 1121-1127


T.
Fujihara
,

S.
Terakawa
,

T.
Matsushima
,

C.
Qin
,

M.
Yahiro
 and 

C.
Adachi
*

Innovative Organic Device Laboratory, Institute of Systems, Information Technologies and Nanotechnologies (ISIT), Fukuoka Industry-Academia Symphonicity (FiaS), 2-110, 4-1, Kyudaishinmachi, Nishi-ku, Fukuoka 819-0388, Japan. E-mail: adachi@cstf.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Fukuoka i3-Center for Organic Photonics and Electronics Research (i3-OPERA), 5-14, Kyudaishinmachi, Nishi-ku, Fukuoka 819-0388, Japan

Center for Organic Photonics and Electronics Research (OPERA), Kyushu University, 744 Motooka, Nishi, Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan

International Institute for Carbon Neutral Energy Research (WPI-I2CNER), Kyushu University, 744 Motooka, Nishi, Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan

Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), ERATO, Adachi Molecular Exciton Engineering Project, 744 Motooka, Nishi, Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan

Received
22nd November 2016
, Accepted 6th January 2017
First published on 6th January 2017
The development of lead-free organic–inorganic perovskite absorbers for solar cells is an important step toward commercializing this technology. Tin halide perovskites are a proposed alternative to lead perovskites; however, their performances show high levels of instability owing to the low quality of these perovskite films. In this work, we used a modified solvent bathing method to fabricate tin halide perovskite films. To control the formation speed of the perovskite films, we combined anti-solvents with miscibilities different to those of the precursor solvent in an appropriate ratio and at an appropriate temperature. Thus, we were able to significantly improve the coverage of the perovskite films. A planar perovskite solar cell with a film prepared using this method showed an efficiency of 2.14 ± 0.35% with an open circuit voltage of 0.45 ± 0.01 V, which is higher than that of solar cells with a conventionally prepared active layer. Additionally, we achieved a significant reproducibility in performance in comparison with previously reported devices. Further, the solar cells had unexpectedly long lifetimes of over 200 h under 1 Sun degradation conditions (AM1.5, 100 mW cm−2); generally, tin perovskites degrade quickly. We propose that the comparably high open circuit voltage and stable photovoltaic properties of our tin halide perovskite solar cells is the result of the high surface coverage of the perovskite film, which was achieved using the modified solvent bathing method.

Inorganic–organic perovskite solar cells, which can achieve high photoconversion efficiencies of over 20% and be fabricated via low-cost solution processing, are an attractive option for power generation. These high efficiencies have been recorded for cells with lead halide perovskite absorbers and are the result of a high exciton dissociation efficiency caused by a small exciton binding energy, long hole and electron diffusion lengths owing to low trap densities, high electron and hole mobilities, and a wide absorption spectrum with high absorption coefficients ranging up to the near-IR. These characteristics can be exploited in lead halide perovskites since the fabrication processes have been established and because the above-mentioned fundamental properties of the perovskite films have been fully explored.

Although lead halide perovskite solar cells promise excellent performances, lead also has a high environmental impact that includes being highly toxic for humans. Therefore, the lead in the perovskite structure should be replaced with a less toxic metal for commercialization.
In tin perovskites the lead centers have been replaced by tin to yield lead-free perovskites. Although other group 14 metals like germanium are also potential candidates for creating alternative perovskite structures, there are few reports on such structures owing to the chemical instabilities of their expected oxidation states. Generally, tin halide perovskites with small organic cations such as CH3NH3+ or HC(NH2)2+ or inorganic cations such as Cs+ have been investigated as photovoltaic absorbers. Notably, N. K. Noel et al. demonstrated the fabrication and performance of tin halide perovskite solar cells employing CH3NH3SnI3 (MASnI3). They achieved a benchmark power conversion efficiency (η) of 6.4% with a high open circuit voltage of 0.88 V under 1 Sun illumination conditions. However, it has been pointed out that the performance of these devices varied widely owing to the uncontrollable doping effect caused by Sn4+ being introduced into the device structure via the oxidation of Sn2+. The suppression of Sn2+ oxidation is thus one important approach for improving and stabilizing device performances. It has been reported that excess SnI2 or addition of SnF2 can help to solve this problem.
Additionally, it is also important to control the morphology of the perovskite layer, which is strongly dependent on the fabrication method. For lead perovskites, fabrication methods such as vacuum deposition, one-step or two-step spin casting, and solvent–solvent extraction have been proposed. Especially in solvent–solvent extraction, fast deposition crystallization (FDC) is often used, since it ensures a comparably high and stable solar cell performance by allowing a flat and grain-like morphology to be obtained with good reproducibility. In a similar way to FDC, solvent bathing (SB) is another promising method for obtaining large area films; it has the same inherent advantages of FDC while also being geared toward industrial use.
However, methods that are suitable for the fabrication of tin perovskite films are more limited because of the material's faster crystallization speed and good solubility. The resulting uncontrollable crystallization in solution process causes poor quality films, e.g., with micrometer scale pin holes; this issue is a serious bottleneck for increasing the performance of these types of solar cells. Therefore, it is important to develop fabrication methods that can produce films without pin holes. The fabrication methods suitable for tin perovskite films were initially developed with a focus on the intermediate state using coordinate solvents as well as lead perovskite films and on the formation speed in a vaper-assisted solution process (VASP). Recently, more successful results have been reported for formamidinium tin iodide (FASnI3) perovskite solar cells. S. J. Lee et al. reported an improvement of the morphology by employing the additive pyrazine to stabilize the crystallization process. W. Liao et al. demonstrated the fabrication of high quality tin perovskite films by employing diethyl ether as an anti-solvent in the FDC method. They pointed out that the intermediate state, which has a reddish color, plays an important role for successful fabrication by suppressing the rapid formation of tin halide perovskites.
As mentioned above, it is important to control the formation speed to form high quality perovskite films. In this work, we directly investigated the influence of the formation speed on a MASnI3 perovskite film fabricated from a precursor solution and studied its morphological and photovoltaic properties in detail by employing the SB method. In the SB method, good solvent in the precursor solution is extracted by an anti-solvent bath via miscibility processes, where the extraction speed strongly depends on the miscibility between the solvents. The combination of anti-solvents, which should show very different miscibilities to the good solvent of the precursor solution, enables us to control the extraction speed, meaning that we can achieve a formation process that is suitable for creating high quality, flat-surface tin perovskite films with a high surface coverage on top of the planer hole transporting layer. Solar cells prepared using this SB technique showed better photovoltaic properties than those prepared using the conventional SB technique. A short circuit current of 11.82 ± 1.20 mA cm−2, open circuit voltage of 0.45 ± 0.01 V, fill factor of 0.40 ± 0.03, and η of 2.14 ± 0.35% were obtained. Additionally, the significant reproducibility was obtained in comparison with cells prepared by other methods. Further, η was unexpectedly stable for a lifetime of over 200 h under AM1.5 simulated sunlight with 100 mW cm−2, although there was an initial period of rapid decrease in performance caused by the degradation of the short circuit current.

MASnI3 perovskite layers were fabricated using the SB method. Before use, glass substrates patterned with 100 nm-thick layers of indium tin oxide (ITO) were cleaned by general ultrasonication followed by ultraviolet-ozone treatment. The hole transporter poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) was deposited on the cleaned substrates via a two-step spin coating process (500 rpm for 3 s followed 3000 rpm for 60 s); then, the substrates were annealed on a hot plate at 200 °C for 10 min in air. The precursor solution was prepared by dissolving methyl ammonium iodide (MAI), tin(II) iodide (SnI2), and tin(II) fluoride (SnF2) in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) in a molar ratio of 1.0:0.8:0.2. It has been reported that MAI and MAPbI3 are slightly dissolved into toluene in the SB method for lead perovskite when toluene is employed as an anti-solvent. The precursor solution was then filtered through a 0.45 μm membrane filter and spin-coated onto PEDOT:PSS at 6000 rpm for 30 s; then, the sample was dipped into a beaker full of the anti-solvent for 2 min to form the perovskite structure. We used a 1:1 vol mixture of toluene and hexane (mix), toluene (T), and hexane (H) as the typical anti-solvents. The temperature of the anti-solvent was controlled on a cooling plate set to 13 °C (low temperature, LT-) and 25 °C (room temperature, RT-) during dipping. The above-mentioned solvent ratio is the optimized solvent ratio; other ratios decreased the film quality (see, Fig. S1, ESI). Subsequently, the perovskite film was dried and annealed on a hot plate at 100 °C for 5 min. All processes after the PEDOT:PSS deposition were carried out in a nitrogen-filled glovebox (H2O concentration <0.1 ppm and O2 concentration <1.0 ppm). To fabricate the perovskite solar cells, a 30 nm-thick fullerene (C60), 10 nm-thick 2,9-dimethyl-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline (BCP), and 100 nm-thick Ag layer were successively vacuum-deposited on top of the perovskite layer as an electron transporting layer, exciton blocking layer, and metal electrode, respectively. The fabricated solar cell was encapsulated in a nitrogen-filled glovebox with glass cap. PEDOT:PSS, SnI2, and SnF2 were purchased from HERAEUS (Clevios™, AI 4083), Sigma Aldrich (anhydrous, 99.99%), and Sigma Aldrich (99%), respectively, and used as purchased. MAI was synthesized via the chemical reaction of MA with HI (both purchased from Wako), followed by recrystallization from a toluene-ethanol blend. Anhydrous DMSO, toluene, and hexane were purchased from Wako and used without any additional treatment. C60 (Frontier Carbon Corp., SUH) and Ag (99.999%, Nilaco) were used without purification, and BCP (Tokyo Chemical Industry) was purified twice by sublimation.


The thickness, optical density, morphology, and surface profiles of the samples and roughnesses were measured with a stylus profiler (Dektak XT, Bruker), an absorption spectrometer (LAMBDA 950, Perkin Elmer), a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (JCM-5700, JEOL), and an atomic force microscope (AFM) (JSPM-5400, JEOL), respectively. Structural properties were probed with an X-ray diffractometer (XRD) using the 2θ/θ technique (λ = 1.54 Å (CuKα), Ultima IV, Rigaku).

The formation speed (from precursor to perovskite) during SB was evaluated from the temporal change of the transmittance of the perovskite films at a wavelength of 532 nm. For this, a laser diode (CPS532, Thorlabs) and a photodiode (DET100A, Thorlabs) were employed. The irradiated point was carefully centered and the incident beam was normal to the substrate surface to achieve accurate measurements.
The current density–voltage (J–V) curves and incident photon to electron conversion efficiencies (IPCEs) were measured with a AM1.5 solar simulator (OTENTOSAN III, Bunko-keiki) with 100 mW cm−2 equipped with a source meter unit (2400, Keithley) and a double monochromator (CT-25, Bunko-keiki). A forward scan with a scan speed of 0.05 V s−1 and a dwell time of 0.2 s was employed. The lifetime measurements were conducted using a measurement system (OSA-11, System Engineers) equipped with a source meter (2400, Keithley). Between measurements, the encapsulated devices with glass caps were connected to a 1 kΩ dummy load to form a closed circuit and stored in ambient air under continuous simulated AM 1.5 irradiation (intensity of 1 Sun).

It is thought that there are three fundamental requirements for obtaining high quality perovskite films using the SB method; (1) the precursor materials should be highly soluble in the good, polar solvent (SnI2 and MAI in our case), and the solvent should have a high boiling point to keep the precursor film stable before the solvent-extracting process; (2) the extracting solvent (anti-solvent) should not dissolve the perovskite and precursor materials and should have a low boiling point for facilitating the drying process; and (3) the good- and anti-solvents should be well-miscible in each other, and the precursor films should quickly reach supersaturation. The formation speed is governed by the speed of extracting the good solvent from the precursor films, which depends on the miscibility between the good solvent and the anti-solvent. However, the solvent combinations satisfying all of the above three requirements are limited by the finite number of solvent types. An ideal formation speed can be realized by employing a solvent mixture consisting of anti-solvents with very different miscibilities with the good solvent (Fig. 1). For this, it is important that the anti-solvents are miscible with each other. One solvent combination to achieve the above is the combination of DMSO, toluene, and hexane as a good solvent, miscible anti-solvent, and an immiscible anti-solvent, respectively. Moreover, the temperature of an anti-solvent also can affect the formation speed since temperature affects the miscibility.

When the precursor film was immersed in the anti-solvent, the color of the film gradually changed from yellow to light brown. Since the transmittance of the films varies for visible wavelengths, the formation speed can be evaluated via transmittance. The temporal changes of the films' transmittances at a wavelength of 532 nm for the different anti-solvents at 13 °C are shown in Fig. 2(a). After the substrate with the precursor film was immersed into the anti-solvent at t = 10 s, the power of the transmitted light stayed relatively constant for a short time before beginning to rapidly decrease. The total time from immersion until the transmittance stopped decreasing naturally depended on the kind of anti-solvents used. This indicates that the formation speed can be changed by using a co-solvent mixture (LT-Mix). Further, the above-mentioned parameters also depended on the temperature of the anti-solvent; the formation speed increases with the temperature (Fig. S2, ESI).
The optical densities of the perovskite films fabricated under various conditions are shown in Fig. 2(b). The spectra appear similar despite the use of different anti-solvents. The slight increase of the optical density for the LT-T film is likely caused by interference and/or the light scattering originating from its surface morphology (Fig. 3(b)). The thickness and surface roughness results are listed in Table 1. The thickness of the perovskite film fabricated with the LT-Mix condition was 120 nm, which was thinner than those fabricated with the LT-T (195 nm) and with LT-H (214 nm) conditions. Based on the results of the optical density and thickness measurements, we assume that a high density film that scatters minimally was obtained with the moderate formation conditions (LT-Mix).
LT-Mix
LT-T
LT-H
Thickness (nm)
126
195
214
Roughness: Rq (nm)
7.3
41
19
The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of samples fabricated under different conditions are shown in Fig. 3(a–c). When the formation speed was fast (LT-T), some pin holes appeared evenly distributed across the film, causing very poor coverage. For the slower condition (LT-H), a grain-like morphology with a gap was formed. Conversely, a perovskite film with a high coverage was achieved using the moderate condition (LT-Mix). The particles dispersed on the surface might be caused by partial crystallization owing to phase separation. Additionally, the root-mean-square surface roughness (Rq) of the perovskite film fabricated with the LT-Mix condition was 7.3 nm, which is smaller than that with LT-T (Rq ∼ 41 nm) or LT-H (Rq ∼ 19 nm); this indicates that a flatter surface was obtained with LT-Mix.
The results of the structural property measurements using X-ray diffraction are shown in Fig. 3(d). In all of the films, diffraction peaks at angles of 14.06° [001] and 28.47° [002] were observed, and the calculated lattice parameter of 6.29 Å for these peaks corresponds to the tetragonal α-phase of MASnI3. While the peaks exhibited in the LT-H film are similar to those that have been previously reported, only peaks originating from the [001], [002], and [003] lattice planes remain for the LT-T and LT-Mix. Notably for the LT-Mix film, the diffraction peak intensities at these angles were two orders of magnitude larger than those observed for the LT-H film (Fig. S5, ESI). These results indicate that the perovskite film fabricated with the LT-Mix condition is strongly oriented along the [001] direction while the LT-H film contains crystals that are much less ordered. Based on the SEM and XRD results, the flat perovskite film fabricated with the moderate condition (LT-Mix) might be composed of small and highly oriented perovskite crystals (these details are still being studied).
Employing the perovskite films fabricated under the various conditions, planar solar cells were fabricated with the following device structure: glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MASnI3/C60/BCP/Ag. The J–V curves and key photovoltaic parameters of the solar cells are shown in Fig. 4(a) and listed in Table 2, respectively. The active area was defined using a 1.8 mm × 1.8 mm shadow mask that was placed in front of the device; without the mask, the active area was defined by the overlap area of the ITO and Ag electrodes (2 mm × 2 mm). It is noted that the Jsc obtained without shadow mask is often over-estimated owing to the influence of current generated outside of the active area when the overlap of the transparent electrode and metal electrodes is used as the active area. As reported in ref. 23, this phenomenon can occur when PEDOT:PSS and DMSO are used as a HTL layer and a good solvent for the precursor, respectively, owing to the enhanced conductivity of PEDOT:PSS. The over estimation of Jsc obtained without mask was also observed in our devices (Table 2 and Fig. S6(b) and (d), ESI). The open circuit voltage (Voc) for the LT-H devices was 0.46 ± 0.01 V, 0.45 ± 0.01 V for the LT-Mix devices, and 0.38 ± 0.01 V for the LT-T devices; Voc therefore appears to be related to the surface-coverage of the perovskite films (Fig. 3 and Fig. S4, ESI). The short circuit current (Jsc) for the LT-Mix devices was 11.82 ± 1.20 mA cm−2, 10.73 ± 0.51 mA cm−2 for LT-T devices, and 5.55 ± 0.71 mA cm−2 for LT-H devices. The small fill factor (FF) of the LT-H devices was caused by the high series resistance evident in the device's J–V curve. This might be caused by excess MAI and/or SnF2 in the perovskite layer formed more slowly under conditions like LT-H resulting in the formation of an insulating layer near the surface of perovskite film. From these values η was calculated and was 2.14 ± 0.35% (LT-Mix), 1.66 ± 0.10% (LT-T), and 0.94 ± 0.18% (LT-H). The IPCE spectra for these solar cells are shown in Fig. 4(b). Photon to electron conversion was observed in the near-IR region up to 1000 nm, reflecting the formation of the perovskite structure of MASnI3.
LT-Mix w/mask (w/o mask)
LT-T w/mask (w/o mask)
LT-H w/mask (w/o mask)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
11.82 ± 1.20 (16.62 ± 0.92)
10.73 ± 0.51 (12.83 ± 1.81)
5.55 ± 0.71 (8.15 ± 0.54)

V
oc (V)
0.45 ± 0.01 (0.44 ± 0.01)
0.38 ± 0.01 (0.39 ± 0.01)
0.46 ± 0.01 (0.47 ± 0.02)
FF
0.40 ± 0.03 (0.40 ± 0.04)
0.40 ± 0.02 (0.36 ± 0.04)
0.36 ± 0.04 (0.35 ± 0.02)

η (%)
2.14 ± 0.35 (2.95 ± 0.34)
1.66 ± 0.10 (1.82 ± 0.39)
0.94 ± 0.18 (1.32 ± 0.12)

R
s (Ω)
330 ± 67 (257 ± 67)
420 ± 60 (404 ± 219)
954 ± 444 (599 ± 179)

R
sh (Ω)
3043 ± 503 (1720 ± 295)
3323 ± 364 (1707 ± 120)
4568 ± 854 (2435 ± 468)
The planar perovskite solar cell prepared using the LT-Mix condition showed a higher efficiency than the cell prepared using the conventional method with only a simple combination of solvents. Moreover, our solar cell showed a significant reproducibility in performance in comparison with previously reported devices (Table 2, Fig. S7, S8, and Table S3, ESI). These results indicate that the modified SB method to control the formation speed is useful for obtaining high quality and reproducible tin perovskite films. Using this method, films with smooth surfaces and high surface coverage could be obtained; both of these properties play an important role in achieving high photovoltaic performances. Compared with Pb perovskite solar cell, the Voc of 0.45 V obtained with the moderate condition is relatively low. As mentioned in ref. 19, the low Voc may be the result of carrier recombination due to the additive SnF2 and/or the existence of impurity levels originating from the undesirable Sn4+ state, so methods to remove or suppress these materials could help to improve Voc.
The deterioration of the key photovoltaic parameters for the best performing cell fabricated with the LT-Mix condition was evaluated under AM1.5 simulated sunlight with 100 mW cm−2 (Fig. 5). The largest change was observed in the Jsc, which initially increased to 110%, then, decreased drastically and monotonously to ∼60% of its initial value. The Voc and fill factor showed a small increase after an initial drastic decrease. η mainly matched the changes in Jsc, with an initial peak and subsequent drastic decrease of ∼50% if its initial value over a 10 h period; after that, η remained stable for over 200 h. The initial increase in the parameters can be explained via the well-known light soaking effect that is caused by ionic behavior of ion migration, and/or the generation of the photo-activated meta-stable traps. The exact origins of the light soaking effect in our perovskite films is still unclear, but we propose that it may originate from the existence of ions caused by an excess of MAI. Notably, the stability of η for over 200 h after the initial drastic decrease is in contrast to the expectation for tin perovskites to be unstable and degrade quickly. In lead perovskite solar cells, not only the photovoltaic performance but also the long term stability depends on the morphology of the perovskite layer. The particularly long lifetime of our tin perovskite solar cells might be caused by the formation of a flat perovskite film with less pin holes.
The relationship between the miscibility of the solvents and the morphology of the fabricated perovskite films was also studied for lead halide perovskites using the SB method. Y. Zhou et al. demonstrated that huge, crystal-like grains with a lumpy surface were obtained when utilizing a lower miscibility, i.e., a slower formation speed, with MAPbI3. The combination of γ-butyrolactone as a good solvent and dimethyl silicone oil as an anti-solvent allowed them to achieve the moderate formation by controlling the miscibility of solvents via the temperature. Further, they pointed out that the generally stated requirement for the SB method that the precursor solution should quickly reach supersaturation state is not always necessary and depends on the target form. Our results with MASnI3 support this statement. We found that the formation speed significantly affected film morphology; faster film formation resulted in a nonuniform surface with a low coverage owing to partial aggregation and the appearance of pin holes, while slower film formation causes rough surfaces owing to the spontaneous formation of grains. Choosing an appropriate formation speed is thus important to enhance the performance of perovskite photovoltaic solar cells.

An appropriate formation process for tin perovskite films can be achieved using the appropriate combination of anti-solvents with different miscibilities of the good solvent and the precursor solution in a modified SB method. By modifying the extraction speed, flat perovskite layers with a high surface coverage can be obtained. Additionally, our results imply that the crystalline layers formed using this method were highly oriented. Planar type solar cells with such a perovskite film showed higher performances (η = 2.14 ± 0.35%) with good reproducibility. In particular, a high open circuit voltage was obtained owing to the flat morphology and reduced number of pin holes in the surface. Moreover, η was stable for over 200 h under 1 Sun illumination; although a rapid initial decrease was observed.

However, in some cases our perovskite films displayed a smooth morphology with small grain size even though the moderate set of conditions was employed. Based on the literature, a large grain size is expected to yield highly efficient, stable perovskite solar cells. To improve the performance and lifetime of solar cells, it should be important to enlarge the grain size of the active layer, while maintaining a high surface coverage and good crystalline properties, which might be realized by further tuning the bathing conditions to reduce the crystallization nuclei. We believe the strategy presented here, namely the modification of the extraction speed in the SB method, can also be applied to other kinds of perovskite layers, thereby potentially leading to further improvements to the fabrication procedures of lead-free perovskite films.

This work was partially supported by the Chemical Materials Evaluation and Research Base (CEREBA).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6tc05069g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017