 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA06088B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19884-19891


Xin
Jin
,

Xunyong
Lei
,

Chunyan
Wu
,

Guoshun
Jiang
,

Weifeng
Liu
,

Hualing
Zeng
*,

Tao
Chen
* and 

Changfei
Zhu
*

Key Laboratory of Materials for Energy Conversion, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology of China, No. 96 Jinzhai Road, Hefei, Anhui Province 230026, China. E-mail: tchenmse@ustc.edu.cn; cfzhu@ustc.edu.cn

ICQD, Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Science at the Microscale, CAS Key Laboratory of Strongly-coupled Quantum Matter Physics, The University of Science and Technology of China, No. 96 Jinzhai Road, Hefei, Anhui Province 230026, China. E-mail: hlzeng@ustc.edu.cn

Received
13th July 2017
, Accepted 27th August 2017
First published on 29th August 2017
Cu2−xGeS3 is a kind of inorganic semiconducting compound with earth abundant elemental storage, excellent chemical stability and environmentally friendly characteristics. It has been used as a light absorption material in traditional p–n junction thin film solar cells. This research presents that Cu2−xGeS3 can also serve as a highly efficient hole transporting material for perovskite solar cells with enhanced stability. The results show that perovskite solar cells based on the Cu2−xGeS3 film can retain 95% power conversion efficiency when exposed to 50% relative humidity for 30 days in air under room lamp light irradiation, while the device using spiro-OMeTAD as the hole transporting material degrades considerably in 2 days and nearly completely degrades in 10 days. Mechanistic investigation shows that the inherent stability and hydrophobic nature of the Cu2−xGeS3 film contribute to the enhanced moisture stability. This investigation provides a material choice for high-efficiency perovskite solar cells with enhanced moisture stability.

Since the initial utilization of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites in solar cells in 2009, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) has surpassed 20%. For a practical solar cell, it should simultaneously meet the requirements of high efficiency, low cost and long-term stability. A major concern thus far regarding perovskite solar cells (PSCs) is their durability. It has been realized that organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites suffer from rapid degradation upon exposure to moisture, leading to a very short device lifetime. In general, there are two approaches to improve the moisture stability. One is to engineer the crystal structures of perovskites to improve their intrinsic stability. For example, substituting CH3NH3+ (MA) in MAPbI3 for formamidinium (FA), Cs+ or Rb+ ions could considerably enhance the moisture stability. The other strategy is to use stable electron and hole transporting materials (ETMs and HTMs) to protect perovskite absorbing materials from moisture invasion. The ETMs are generally inorganic metal oxides such as TiO2 and SnO2, possessing high efficiency and good stability. In comparison, the organic p-type 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) is widely adopted as a HTM in most state-of-the-art perovskite solar cells. Nevertheless, spiro-OMeTAD possesses low hole mobility (10−4 cm2 V−1 S−1) and low conductivity (10−5 S cm−2) in its pristine form. Doping spiro-OMeTAD with lithium-bis(trifuoromethane)sulfonimide (Li-TFSI) and 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) is the standard method to achieve appreciable mobility and conductivity. Due to the highly hygroscopic nature of the lithium-based dopant, however, this treatment is accompanied by attracting water molecules into the device, thus speeding up the decomposition and degradation of the perovskite. In addition, the spiro-OMeTAD is very expensive, posing a challenge in cost effective mass production. To address this problem, inorganic materials including Cu-based compounds and metal oxides have been utilized as alternative HTMs in PSCs. For example, CuI and CuSCN have been applied as HTMs in perovskite solar cells and delivered a PCE of 6.0% and 18%, respectively. Other binary sulphides such as PbS and CuS also show promising application in perovskites. The Yang group found that NiOx layers show a significant improvement in stability in ambient air compared with devices fabricated with organic hole transporting layers. Most recently, a quaternary compound Cu2ZnSnS4 was also employed as a HTM in perovskite solar cells. It has been gradually acknowledged that inorganic HTMs are superior to organic ones in terms of device stability improvement.

Cu2−xGeS3 (CGS), as a p-type semiconductor with a band gap of about 1.55 eV, has been utilized as a light-absorption material in the traditional p–n junction thin film solar cells. Because of its p-type conductivity, it would also be possible to apply it as a HTM in perovskite solar cells. In this article, we present that the CGS nanoparticle (NP) film can serve as a new kind of cost-effective HTM for perovskite solar cells. The employment of CGS yields a more favourable energy level alignment at the interface between the perovskite and the HTM without using an additional interfacial layer. What's more, the CGS nanoparticle film forms a compact layer with relatively high hydrophobicity, which impedes water molecule permeation into the perovskite absorbing layer and in turn enhances the moisture stability of the devices. At a relative humidity (RH) of 50% in air, the device can maintain 95% of its initial PCE after storage for 30 days, while the device based on the spiro-OMeTAD HTM shows considerable degradation in 2 days.

Considering that organic–inorganic perovskites cannot sustain high temperature annealing, here we resort to synthesize CGS nanoparticles firstly (Fig. 1a). Afterwards, spin-coating the nanoparticle ink on top of the perovskite absorber layer with additional low annealing temperature (<150 °C) leads to the formation of a thin CGS film (Fig. 1b). In order to synthesize colloidal CGS nanoparticles, an organometallic compound diaquabis(oxoacetato-O,O′′)germanium [Ge(C2H2O3)2(H2O)2, denoted as Ge-gly], was prepared as the Ge precursor according to the reported method, where germanium dioxide and glycolic acid were used as starting materials. Subsequently, copper(II) chloride dihydrate (CuCl2·2H2O) and Ge-gly were placed in a three-neck flask containing oleylamine (OLA) at room temperature. The mixture was repeatedly purged with argon three times with vigorous stirring. The obtained light-yellow solution was further heated to 210 °C and then the sulfur precursor prepared by dissolving sulfur powder in OLA was quickly injected into the flask. After 20 min, the flask was taken away from the oil bath and allowed to cool down to room temperature (more details are provided in the Experimental section). The as-synthesized product was washed twice via repeated precipitation with isopropyl alcohol and re-dispersed in toluene to remove the excess surfactant. One of the key steps in the deposition of sulphide thin films from the nanoparticles is the formation of an available ink. In addition, three aspects should be considered when choosing an appropriate solvent for dispersing the nanoparticles. (1) The solvent should have a functional group that can stabilize the nanocrystals effectively. (2) The solvent should be easily removed after coating. (3) The solvent should have a good ability to wet the substrate. We have tried to use many solvents (for example, toluene, 1-hexanethiol and chlorobenzene) to disperse CGS NPs, eventually 1-hexanethiol yielded the highest device efficiencies in our study. Actually, 1-hexanethiol has a moderate boiling temperature (150–154 °C), which enables detaching it from the film at a low temperature, especially with the help of vacuum evacuation. So the synthesized nanoparticles were finally dispersed in 1-hexanethiol to form a homogenous ink for the following application.


Fig. 2a shows the powder XRD pattern of the as-synthesized product. Three broad diffraction peaks present at 29.14, 48.65 and 57.61° are assigned to the (111), (220) and (311) lattice planes of cubic CGS, respectively. In the Raman spectrum (Fig. 2b), the major peaks centred at 324, 363 and 386 cm−1 are also confirmed to stem from the vibrational modes of CGS. Therefore, it can be concluded that the as-synthesized nanoparticles are pure CGS without noticeable secondary phases. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed to reveal the microstructure of CGS NPs. As shown in Fig. 2c, the low-magnification TEM image reveals that CGS nanoparticles are in the monodisperse form with an average diameter of about 7 nm. The high-resolution TEM (HRTEM, Fig. 2d) image shows well-formed crystallinity with a d-spacing of 0.31 nm, consistent with the (111) plane of the cubic CGS. Meanwhile, the corresponding Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) pattern shown in Fig. 2e matches well with the structure of CGS (JCPDS 65-5562), as indicated by the diffraction spots corresponding to the (111) and (220) planes. The optical band gap of the CGS thin film was determined to be 1.53 eV from the plot of (αhν)2versus hν (Fig. 2f), which corresponds to the reported value.

To evaluate the hole extraction ability of CGS from the MAPbI3 film, we conducted steady-state photoluminescence (PL) measurements upon excitation at 514 nm (Fig. 3a). In this regard, samples composed of glass/MAPbI3, glass/MAPbI3/CGS and glass/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD were prepared. The PL emission of bare MAPbI3 in the absence of a quenching layer appears at 766 nm with strong intensity (Fig. 3a, black line). When CGS and spiro-OMeTAD are applied, the PL intensities are significantly suppressed (Fig. 3a, red and blue lines), which originates from the carrier extraction across the interface. The PL quenching ratio for CGS is slightly larger than that of spiro-OMeTAD, indicating more efficient charge transfer between MAPbI3/CGS.

Further, time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectroscopy was used to investigate the charge transfer kinetics from MAPbI3 to spiro-OMeTAD and CGS HTLs. Fig. 3b displays the TRPL spectra with fitting curves from the bare perovskite and perovskite/HTM bilayers. The TRPL was recorded via time-correlated single photon counting by integrating the whole PL peak emission at 766 nm. The decay of PL intensity could be described with a biexponential eqn (1):
(1)
where
τ1 and τ2 represent the decay times, A1 and A2 are the corresponding decay amplitudes of the component, and B is a constant for the base-line offset. The average recombination lifetime (τave) is estimated from the fitting parameters according to eqn (2):

(2)
The fitted Ai, τi and τave values are listed in Table S1 for comparison. For the perovskite film deposited on glass, τave is 18.02 ns, which is comparable to the reported values. The long decay time indicates a long exciton diffusion length and low density of defects in the bulk of the perovskite. By contrast, the introduction of either spiro-OMeTAD or CGS quenching layers on the surface of the perovskite pronouncedly accelerates the PL decay. The τave for the spiro-OMeTAD HTM decreased to 6.79 ns, while it reduced to only 4.86 ns when CGS was used as the HTM. This feature indicates that hole transfer in the CGS/perovskite is faster than that in the spiro-OMeTAD/perovskite, which is consistent with the observation from the above steady-state PL quenching measurements, reaffirming the potential application of CGS in perovskite solar cells as a competitive HTM.

For the device fabrication, we use a TiO2 compact layer (c-TiO2) as the ETM, CGS and spiro-OMeTAD as HTMs, and an Au film as the metal contact, respectively. The device was constructed with a planar structure described as FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au as shown in Fig. 1c, where the MAPbI3 light harvester was synthesized by an anti-solvent assisted crystallization approach with minor modification. Details are provided in the Experimental section. The typical cross-sectional images of completed devices using spiro-OMeTAD and CGS as HTMs are shown in Fig. 4a and b, respectively. Both the devices exhibit a similar thickness of each functional layer. It can be seen that the as-synthesized perovskite thin films consist of densely packed grains with a thickness of about 270 nm (Fig. 4a, b and S1). The crystallinity of the perovskite was revealed by the X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. As shown in Fig. S2, sharp diffraction peaks at 14.09°, 28.40° and 31.87° are attributed to the tetragonal MAPbI3 phase, corresponding to (110), (220) and (310) crystal planes, respectively. No additional diffraction signals were detected. The surface images of spiro-OMeTAD and CGS films coated on the perovskite are shown in Fig. 4c and d, showing uniform surface morphologies. The white spots appearing in spiro-OMeTAD resulted from the electron bombardment during the measurement due to the vulnerable nature of organic species. To quantify the surface roughness of the HTL, we carried out AFM measurements on the CGS film deposited on the perovskite and compared with those of spiro-OMeTAD. As shown in Fig. S3, the stacked films maintain a dense and smooth surface after the deposition of either spiro-OMeTAD or CGS on the perovskite. The root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of CGS coated on the perovskite is only 1.63 nm which is comparable to that of the spiro-OMeTAD reference (RMS = 1.14 nm). It should be noted that in the fabrication of the CGS film, a post-annealing treatment was conducted; this process leads to the growth of CGS nanoparticles and in turn forms a dense hole transporting layer (Fig. 4d and S4).

During the device performance investigation, we conducted a systematic optimization of the composition, thickness and post annealing conditions of the CGS HTL (ESI, Tables S2–S5). When a 120 nm-thick CGS layer with a Cu/Ge atomic ratio of 1.66/1.00 was deposited onto MAPbI3 followed by annealing at a moderate temperature of ∼140 °C for 5 min, the devices exhibit good performance. It should be noted that such a short post-annealing process did not deteriorate MAPbI3 films as evidenced by XRD, PL and TRPL measurements before and after the annealing process (Fig. S5). Actually, the coated CGS on the perovskite can effectively prohibit the volatilization of CH3NH3I from the perovskite during the post-annealing process, contributing to the stabilization of the perovskite to some extent.
To check the reproducibility of the results, we fabricated two batches of a total of 34 devices under the optimized conditions. Among them, 68% of the cells have a PCE above 12% as shown in Fig. S6. The scan direction measurements are then performed to check the J–V hysteresis behaviour of the CGS-based device. Typically, solar cells with a PCE of ∼12% were selected to perform the test. Fig. S7a shows the J–V curves of a planar MAPbI3 solar cell using CGS as the HTM with the scan direction from short circuit to forward bias (forward) and back from forward bias to short circuit (reverse). The hysteresis behaviour causes a significant difference in the fill factor of the devices. This hysteresis behaviour is often observed in perovskite solar cells. Mostly, ionic migration/accumulation is the main cause of the observed hysteresis in MAPbI3 cells. Fig. S7b shows the stabilized photocurrent of the device at a maximum power output bias (0.75 V) along with calculated PCE. The photocurrent saturated at ∼14.02 mA cm−2 right after the light was switched on, giving a stabilized PCE of about 11.08% which is close to the value derived from J–V curves.
The best performed cell with the CGS HTL delivers a PCE of 14.48% with a short circuit current density (JSC) of 22.61 mA cm−2, open circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.03 V and fill factor (FF) of 0.62, as shown in Fig. 5a. For the solar cell using spiro-OMeTAD as the HTM, the highest PCE achieved was 13.81% with JSC = 18.33 mA cm−2, VOC = 1.09 V and FF = 0.69, which is comparable to the average PCE in the literature with the same device structures. It can be seen that CGS can generate a slightly improved energy conversion efficiency when compared with conventional spiro-OMeTAD. Fig. 5b shows the corresponding EQE spectra; the overlapping absorption edges indicate that the introduction of CGS did not extend the light-absorption range. It is understandable in view of the very similar band gap of MAPbI3 (1.6 eV) and CGS (1.53 eV). The increased quantum efficiency in the visible region is responsible for the enlarged JSC. However, the replacement of spiro-OMeTAD by CGS should have a limited ability to enhance light absorption due to the high absorption coefficient of the front perovskite film and the poor crystallinity of back CGS. As shown in Fig. 5c, the nearly identical absorption curves of the perovskite coated with two different HTMs also validate this conclusion. So the improved short circuit of the CGS-based device has no direct relationship with the light-absorption process. However, nanoparticles usually possess a large amount of surface defects which would cause recombination loss and thus decreased VOC and FF, and surface passivation would further increase the device performance.
The improved performance should be ascribed to the suitable band alignment between CGS and MAPbI3. As shown in Fig. 5d, the higher conduction band (CB) of CGS compared with MAPbI3 is able to effectively block the undesired electron injection from the perovskite. The valence band (VB) of CGS (−5.41 eV) is shallower than that of MAPbI3 (−5.6 eV), which favours hole injection from the perovskite into the CGS HTL. In comparison, spiro-OMeTAD has a shallower VB of −5.22 eV than CGS. Thus the employment of CGS gives rise to a more favourable energy level alignment between the VBM of the perovskite and the HTM for efficient hole collection without using an extra interfacial layer. Therefore, the replacement of spiro-OMeTAD by CGS can effectively alleviate the potential barrier at the interface and facilitate the hole extraction from the perovskite to CGS, which is consistent with the above TRPL analysis. In addition, the conductivity of doped spiro-OMeTAD and CGS layers was measured on a spin-coated thin film on a glass substrate by a four-point probe method, showing a value of 1.7 × 10−4 and 6.2 × 10−5 S cm−1, respectively. Although the conductivity of CGS is lower than that of the doped spiro-OMeTAD, it is sufficient for good performance in devices with an about 120 nm thick CGS film.

The long-term stability of devices is regarded as a key index to evaluate the performance of a perovskite solar cell. In this case, the device lifetime was examined under a RH of 50% at 25 °C with room lamp irradiation without any encapsulation. Fig. 6a–d show the performance degradation behaviour in terms of PCE, VOC, JSC and FF for devices with two different HTMs. It can be seen that the photovoltaic performance of the device based on spiro-OMeTAD nearly completely degraded in 10 days. Actually, considerable degradation was observed in the first 2 days. In contrast, the CGS-based device shows markedly improved stability that retains more than 95% of its initial efficiency even after 30 days.

To explore the underlying reasons associated with the enhanced stability of the devices, we study the structural change of the perovskite active layer coated with different HTLs during the degradation through XRD characterizations lasted for 36 days. Fig. 6e and f show the XRD patterns ranging from 10 to 15° for the MAPbI3 film coated with CGS and spiro-OMeTAD, respectively; the full diffraction patterns are depicted in Fig. S8. From Fig. 6e, it can be observed that the diffraction peaks of the perovskite for the CGS-based sample remain unchanged even after 36 days. In comparison, the diffraction intensity of the (110) peak of MAPbI3 (2θ = 14.06°) coated with spiro-OMeTAD becomes weaker and weaker with prolonged aging time (Fig. 6f). In addition, a new diffraction peak (2θ = 12.6°) is observed from the second day (Fig. 6f). This peak arises from the (001) plane of PbI2, indicating the decomposition of MAPbI3 under a humid environment. After 36 days, the overwhelming peak of PbI2 reveals that the MAPbI3 is almost completely decomposed in the presence of moisture. This moisture-induced degradation of MAPbI3 can be intuitively identified by the comparison of colour changes, as shown in Fig. S9.
The enhanced device stability should be firstly ascribed to the intrinsic stability of CGS when compared with organic spiro-OMeTAD. To further probe the reason why the CGS film can considerably enhance the device stability, we conducted measurements on the contact angle of perovskite/CGS and perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD films (Fig. 4e and f). It turns out that the perovskite film coated with CGS shows a water contact angle of 91°, while that of the spiro-OMeTAD film exhibits a smaller value of around 48°. This observation indicates that the CGS film is more hydrophobic than the spiro-OMeTAD film, which prohibits the water ingression into the perovskite film more efficiently. In the CGS nanoparticle film preparation, although we made surface ligand exchange of OLA with 1-hexanethiol, presumably the surface would leave some OLA and 1-hexanethiol. Since both of them are insoluble in water, they contribute to the hydrophobic properties of the CGS film. In contrast, Li-TFSI used as the dopant to enhance the conductivity of spiro-OMeTAD is hygroscopic, which increases the probability of water molecule permeation into the MAPbI3 film and deteriorates the device performance.

In summary, for the first time we show that Cu2−xGeS3 can be an alternative hole transporting material in perovskite solar cells. Compared with the conventional spiro-OMeTAD, the Cu2−xGeS3 nanoparticle film can generate 5% improvement in power conversion efficiency. The improved performance stemmed from the well-matched energy level and better charge transport at the interface of the perovskite/hole transporting layer. More importantly, the Cu2−xGeS3 nanoparticle film is able to considerably improve the moisture stability of the perovskite solar cells, due to the inherent stability of the inorganic compound and the hydrophobic effect of the nanoparticle film. Since Cu2−xGeS3 is a semiconducting material with earth-abundant and environmentally friendly characteristics, the employment of Cu2−xGeS3 as a hole transporting material is expected to reduce the cost and increase the long-term stability of perovskite solar cells.


Diaquabis(oxoacetato-O,O′′)germanium [Ge(C2H2O3)2(H2O)2] was prepared by adding germanium dioxide (0.52 g, 5 mmol) to an aqueous solution (100 mL) of glycolic acid (1.52 g, 20 mmol) and refluxing the acidic mixture at 115 °C for 1 h. Then the mixture was concentrated using a rotary evaporator. The obtained colorless crystals were collected and then transferred to a vacuum drying oven at 100 °C for 2 days (for convenience, the product is denoted as Ge-gly). A typical synthetic procedure of CGS NCs is briefly described below. First, 1.5 mmol copper(II) chloride dihydrate, 0.75 mmol Ge-gly and 10 mL oleylamine were mixed at room temperature and cycled between vacuum and nitrogen three times in a 100 mL three neck flask connected to a Schlenk line. Afterward, the mixture was kept at 120 °C under vacuum for 40 min with stirring and then the temperature was raised to 210 °C (solution A). 4 mL oleylamine and 2.25 mmol S powder were mixed in a separate round flask at 150 °C under vacuum. When the S powder was completely dissolved, the mixture was then cooled to room temperature (solution B). Finally, solution B was injected into solution A under vigorous stirring and the reaction was maintained for 20 min. The mixture was cooled to ∼100 °C, followed by adding 5 mL toluene and 40 mL isopropanol. The nanocrystals were collected by centrifugation at 5000 rpm for 10 min. The supernatant, which contained the unreacted precursor and byproducts, was discarded. The precipitate was washed again with 7.5 mL toluene and 45 mL isopropanol to remove the excess oleylamine from CGS NPs.


Methylammonium iodide was synthesized by reacting 17.4 mL methylamine (40 wt% in water) and 16.6 mL hydroiodic acid (57 wt% in water) in a 250 mL round bottom flask at 0 °C for 2 h with stirring. After the reaction, the white solid of MAI was recovered by rotary evaporation and then washed with diethyl ether and recrystallized twice with ethanol. The CH3NH3I powder was collected and dried at 50 °C in a vacuum oven for 24 h. To prepare the perovskite precursor solution, CH3NH3I and PbI2 (Aldrich) were dissolved in a mixed solvent of anhydrous N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) and dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) (7:3 in volume) in 1 M concentration. The solution was stirred overnight at 60 °C and filtered with 0.22 μm PVDF filters before spin-coating.


Prior to the deposition of the TiO2 compact layer, the FTO substrate (15 Ω sq−1) was etched with zinc powder and 2 M HCl to obtain the desired pattern. The etched FTO substrate was sequentially cleaned by ultrasonication in acetone, isopropanol and de-ionized water for 40 min each and then treated in a UV/O3 cleaner for 20 min. A dense TiO2 blocking layer of ca. 40 nm thickness was spin-coated onto FTO with a mixture solution of 140 μL of titanium isopropoxide, 2 mL of ethanol, and 26 μL of HCl (2 M) at 2000 rpm for 40 s, followed by annealing at 500 °C for 1 h in a muffle furnace. To deposit perovskite films, the CH3NH3PbI3 solution (18 μL) was first dropped onto a TiO2 coated FTO substrate (1.5 cm × 2 cm). The substrate was then spun at 4000 rpm for 30 s. During this process, anhydrous chlorobenzene (100 μL) was quickly dropped onto the center of the substrate twelve seconds ahead of the end of rotation. Subsequently, the obtained films were then dried at 60 °C for 30 s and further annealed at 100 °C for 10 min to form crystallized MAPbI3. To complete the fabrication of devices, two hole transporting materials (spiro-OMeTAD and CGS) were spin-coated onto the perovskite films, separately. For the deposition of the spiro-OMeTAD HTL, 73.2 mg spiro-OMeTAD was first dissolved in 1 mL chlorobenzene, and then 28.8 μL 4-tert-butyl pyridine and 18.8 μL Li-TFSI solution (520 mg Li-TFSI in 1 mL acetonitrile) were added. The as-prepared spiro-OMeTAD solution was spin-coated onto the CH3NH3PbI3 films at 3000 rpm for 30 s. For the deposition of the CGS HTL, the synthesized CGS NPs were dispersed in 1-hexanethiol to form a stable ink with a concentration of 200 mg mL−1. The CGS NP ink was then spin-coated onto the perovskite films at various speeds for 30 s. In the experiment, we adopt a facile method to control the thickness of CGS by changing the spin speed. When the spin speed was increased from 1000 rpm to 7000 rpm with a step of 1000 rpm, the thickness of CGS decreased from 390 nm to 60 nm. After that, the films were transferred into a heated vacuum chamber placed in a glove box to remove the solvent. Finally, device fabrication was completed by thermally evaporating 80 nm of gold layer with a mask (well-defined area size of 0.12 cm2).


The crystal structure characterization of MAPbI3 and CGS thin films was conducted using an X-ray diffractometer (XRD, D/Max-rA) with Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å). The Raman spectra of CGS films were recorded at room temperature using a LABRAM-HR micro-Raman system in the back-scattering configuration with laser sources of 514 nm. The surface morphology and elemental composition were determined by field emission SEM (FE-SEM Sirion 200). Steady-state photoluminescence was measured using a LabRamHR system with excitation at 514 nm. AFM measurements were performed on an XE-7 scanning probe microscope in non-contact mode (Park systems, Korea). The optical absorption spectrum was recorded on a UV-vis-365-type spectrophotometer in the range of 200–1600 nm. Contact angles were measured using a CAM instrument (Data-Physics, Germany). The current density–voltage (J–V) characterizations were conducted using a Keithley 2400 source measurement unit under simulated AM1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2) with a standard xenon-lamp-based solar simulator (Oriel Sol 3A, USA), and the solar simulator illumination intensity was calibrated using a monocrystalline silicon reference cell (Oriel P/N 91150 V, with KG-5 visible color filter) calibrated by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra were obtained using the time-correlated single-photon counting technique (TimeHarp 260) under excitation provided by picosecond pulsed sources (PicoQuant Solea) at a wavelength of 540 nm with a repetition frequency of 2.5 MHz. All the samples were excited from the glass side. The data were fitted with biexponential functions of the form A1exp(−t/τ1) + A2exp(−t/τ2) + B, where A1 and A2 are prefactors and τ1 and τ2 are time constants.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the Recruitment Program of Global Experts, the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under no. WK2060140022, WK2060140023, and WK2060140024, the Major/Innovative Program of Development Foundation of Hefei Center for Physical Science and Technology (2016FXZY003), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant No. 11674295 and National Key Research and Development Program of China (2017YFA0205004).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta06088b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017