 DOI: 10.1039/D2TA02022J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 17237-17245


Jun
Liu
,

Ming
Wang
,

Jinhong
Lin
,

Guojie
Chen
,

Baoxing
Liu
,

Jincheng
Huang
,

Meng
Zhang
,

Guangxing
Liang
,

Lei
Lu
,

Ping
Xu
,

Bingbing
Tian
,

Hoi-Sing
Kwok
 and 

Guijun
Li
*

Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Devices and Systems of Ministry of Education and Guangdong Province, College of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, P. R. China. E-mail: gliad@connect.ust.hk

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, Shenzhen, 518055, China

Institute of Microscope Optoelectronic, College of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, P. R. China

State Key Lab of Advanced Displays and Optoelectronics Technologies, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, 999007, Hong Kong

Received
15th March 2022
, Accepted 23rd July 2022
First published on 25th July 2022
Wide bandgap inorganic perovskites have attracted intensive attention owing to their potential applications in high-efficiency tandem solar cells and indoor photovoltaics. However, the performance of wide bandgap inorganic perovskite solar cells (PSCs) suffers from large energy loss due to a high degree of atom (or lattice) disorder and trap defects induced by phase transformation. Herein, the defect states of 1.82 eV inorganic CsPbI3−xBrx perovskite are investigated by thermal admittance spectroscopy, photoluminescence spectroscopy, transient photovoltage, and space-charge-limited current measurement. It is found that the deep-level interstitial defects with an activation energy of 321 meV can be reduced by two orders of magnitude under prolonged storage under low-humidity ambient conditions. Admittance spectroscopy in the low-frequency region also reveals the evolution of activation energy for ion migration. The self-healing process, which is assisted by the ion migration, is proposed to explain the mitigation of the deep-level interstitial defects. Device characterization and drift-diffusion model-based simulation further elucidate the reduction of nonradiative Shockley–Read–Hall recombination and the enhancement of carrier extraction, both attributed to the mitigation of the trap defects. This work highlights the critical roles of the self-healing process in diminishing the deep-level interstitial defects for high-performance inorganic perovskite optoelectronics.

Halide perovskites have gained tremendous progress in the photovoltaic field. The most efficient perovskite solar cells are based on low bandgap organic–inorganic perovskites, with power conversion efficiency (PCE) exceeding 25%. Meanwhile, inorganic cesium lead halide perovskites (CsPbX3) have also been widely studied due to their inherent thermal stability. Among inorganic CsPbX3, mixed-halide CsPbI3−xBrx (0 < x < 1) perovskites exhibit tunable bandgaps of 1.70 to 1.92 eV. A suitable bandgap offers a versatile opportunity for being integrated with different kinds of low bandgap solar cells such as c-Si, CIGS, and CdTe, as a top cell in a configuration of a series-connected tandem structure. Additionally, wide bandgap CsPbI3−xBrx (0 < x < 1) perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are also promising for indoor photovoltaic applications due to matching of the spectra with those of ambient light. Alternatively, CsPbI3−xBrx perovskites with 0 < x < 1 also possess a low phase transition temperature, which simplifies the preparation process and improves their phase stability under ambient conditions. Nevertheless, the performance of wide bandgap inorganic CsPbI3−xBrx (0 < x < 1) PSCs leaves much room for further improvement, mainly due to the large energy loss. For example, the energy loss for most of the inorganic CsPbI3−xBrx PSCs lies between 0.6 and 0.8 eV, which is much larger than that of organic–inorganic hybrid PSCs. The origin of the energy loss in wide bandgap inorganic PSCs is closely related to the unavoidable deep-level defects formed in the absorber.

Trap defects are undoubtedly among the most critical physical issues to develop highly efficient PSCs. Compared with organic–inorganic perovskites, defects and impurities are prone to form in inorganic perovskites due to the complicated phase transformation, inevitable grain boundaries, unbalanced stoichiometry, ambient induced decomposition, etc. In inorganic perovskites, possible intrinsic point defects include vacancies, interstitials, and substitutions. Among different kinds of point defects, vacancy defects are widespread and primarily categorized as shallow-level defects, which do not affect the energy loss according to the high defect tolerance properties. In comparison, deep-level defects, including interstitial and antisite defects, often lead to a severe deficit of carrier extraction for being the dominant non-radiative Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination centres to trap free charge carriers. Therefore, deep-level defects would affect the device performance and even result in film decomposition. Previously, substantial efforts have been made to partially passivate the deep-level defects to improve the performance and stability of inorganic PSCs.
Here, we studied the trap defects in wide bandgap inorganic CsPbI3−xBrx perovskite using thermal admittance spectroscopy (TAS). TAS is a powerful tool to measure the admittance or impedance of a junction as a function of the frequency and the temperature, giving helpful information of activation energy, capture cross-section, and the trap density of states. It was found that the deep-level defects in a fresh CsPbI3−xBrx perovskite film, which were identified as interstitial defects, could be reduced by two orders of magnitude under prolonged storage under low-humidity ambient conditions. The TAS result also revealed the evolution of activation energy for ion migration, pointing out a self-healing process of mitigating the deep-level interstitial defects. Device characterization and simulation further elucidated the suppression of the nonradiative SRH recombination and the enhancement of the charge extraction. With the diminishing of the deep-level defects, highly efficient 1.82 eV wide-bandgap inorganic CsPbI3−xBrx PSCs can be obtained on a SnO2-based n-i-p structure with a PCE of 18.30%, along with a high fill factor (FF) of 0.80, a remarkable open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.27 V, and a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 18.01 mA cm−2.


Fig. 1(a) shows the typical electronic band structure of the inorganic perovskite, where the conduction band minimum (CBM) is determined by the orbital interactions between Pb 6p and X 4s orbitals in the PbX6 octahedra and the valence band maximum (VBM) is governed by the antibonding hybridization between Pb 6s and X 4p. According to density functional theory (DFT) calculation, there are three types of defects in the inorganic perovskite: vacancies, interstitials, and substitutions. These defects can be classified into shallow- and deep-level defects. As Fig. 1(b) illustrates, halide vacancies contribute to shallow-level defects near the band edges. Interstitials and substitutions are deep-level defects located at the middle transition levels within the bandgap. Here, we employed TAS to investigate the energetic distribution of the majority-carrier trapping defects of the wide bandgap CsPbI3−xBrx perovskite. TAS was performed for photovoltaic devices with the active layer prepared as the fresh or the aged CsPbI3−xBrx perovskite. CsPbI3−xBrx was prepared from spin coating of the precursor solution (the molar ratio of CsI:HPbI3:PbBr2 is 1:0.5:0.5) in a N2-filled glovebox. The as-obtained (fresh) CsPbI3−xBrx film was aged under low-humidity ambient conditions (relative humidity (RH) < 10%) for a timescale of 168 hours. The details of the fabrication process are given in the Experimental section. The fresh and aged films show the same absorbance, with a Tauc bandgap (Etaucg) of 1.82 eV (Fig. S1). The absorbance spectra suggest that, after the aging process, the CsPbI3−xBrx film does not degrade or undergo a phase transition. TAS measurement was carried out from 210 K to 300 K to obtain the temperature-dependent admittance spectra for the fresh and aged CsPbI3−xBrx devices (Fig. 1(c) and (d)). TAS spectroscopy of PSCs typically shows two capacitance signatures at low-frequency (<103 Hz) and high-frequency (103 Hz < f < 106 Hz). It is well known that the density of defects in perovskite absorber layers or at the interfaces dominates the capacitance behavior at high-frequency, whereas ion migration often contributes to the capacitance signature at low-frequency <103 Hz. In the high-frequency regime, the characteristic transition angular frequency (ωT) is extracted from the derivative of the capacitance–frequency in the corresponding ω(dC/dω) versus ω spectra, as shown in Fig. 1(e) and (f). The activation energy (Ea) can be calculated by fitting the corresponding Arrhenius plots using the following equation.

ωT = βT2exp(−Ea/kT)
(1)
where
β is a temperature-dependent parameter, k is the Boltzmann's constant, and T is the temperature. The Arrhenius plot (Fig. 1(g)) derived from the temperature-dependent ωT and fitting curves revealed that the activation energy of the fresh and aged CsPbI3−xBrx perovskite devices is 321 meV and 266 meV, respectively. The trap density of states (DOS) (Fig. 1(h)) in the fresh and aged perovskite absorbers is calculated to illustrate the energetic profile using the following equations.

Eω = kTln(βT2/ω)
(2)
(3)
where
Eω is the demarcation energy, ω is the applied angular frequency, Vbi is the built-in-potential, and W is the depletion region width. The Vbi and W are obtained from Mott–Schottky analysis (Fig. S2). As shown in Fig. 1(h), the DOS exhibits a Gaussian-type distribution. As expected, the fresh device exhibits relatively large DOSs on the order of 2 × 1018 m−3 eV−1 at a deep energy level of 321 meV. Previous DFT calculations have suggested that this defect-state level of 321 meV could be ascribed to the interstitial defects. When carriers are captured by the deep-level interstitial defects, it is hard for them to escape, inducing SRH recombination and degrading carrier extraction and transport. Interestingly, the aged device shows a remarkable reduction of the DOSs by two orders of magnitude and exhibits a narrow shallow-level defect distribution around 266 meV. The shallow-level defects may be ascribed to the vacancies. Trapped carriers by shallow-level defects such as Cs and halide (X) vacancies are likely to release or emit with the help of photon absorption, which has little influence on the device performance. From the capacitance signature in the low-frequency region (<103 Hz), the Ea for ion migration is calculated. As shown in Fig. S3, the Ea of the aged film (108 meV) is higher than that of the fresh film (23 meV). This result suggests that the ions are easily migrated in the fresh film owing to the small Ea comparable to the thermal energy, which becomes difficult for the aged film due to a large Ea of 108 meV.

According to previous reports, a perovskite film is likely to undergo a self-repairing process under external light stimuli. A similar process may also apply to our case. SEM images in Fig. 2(a) show the transformation from a wrinkled morphology for the fresh film into a flat morphology with grains uniformly distributed after prolonged storage. The appearance of the wrinkle morphology has been ascribed to the buckling effect, which was explained as a result of local compressive stress. The compressive stress has been reported to induce trap defects in the film. After storing under low-humidity ambient conditions for a long time, the lattice stress is released due to the ion migration, and the release of the lattice strain is confirmed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurement. Fig. 2(b) shows that the prominent XRD peaks shift to lower diffraction angles for the aged film. The blue shift of the XRD peaks is ascribed to the lattice expansion, thus implying strain relaxation. Based on the above results, the mitigation of the deep-level interstitial defects to shallow-level vacancy defects in inorganic CsPbI3−xBrx perovskite is explained by a self-healing process, which is illustrated in Fig. 2(c). In the beginning, the interstitial defects appear in the fresh CsPbI3−xBrx perovskite due to the compressive stress. After prolonged storage under low-humidity ambient condition, the stress is released by ion migration. The ion migration is accessible in the fresh film due to the featured small Ea (23 meV) determined from the low-frequency admittance spectra (Fig. S3). In the second step, the interstitial ions find their place in the lattice during the ion migration. The driving force of this step is believed to be correlated with the existence of a small amount of water. Although the presence of small quantities of water has been shown to increase the local conductivity through passivating traps at the grain boundaries and play a self-doping role in the organic–inorganic perovskite, the effect of water on the already-fabricated inorganic perovskite film during the aging process is different from that when it is introduced as an additive in the perovskite precursor. The statistical data of the device performance show that the introducing of a small amount of water into the inorganic perovskite precursor has a negative impact on the perovskite quality and the device performance (Fig. S4). It should be noted that the self-healing process is not obviously observed under inert N2 or O2 gas storage, which will be shown later.
The reduction of the trap defect density was further confirmed by auxiliary measurements. Fig. 3(a) shows the space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) measurement of the fresh and aged films, using an electron-only device structure of ITO/SnO2/perovskite/PCBM/Ag. From the SCLC data, the onset of the trap-filled limit voltage, VTFL, is extracted to be 0.82 V and 0.43 V for the fresh and aged film, respectively. The density of defect states, Ntrap, which is linearly proportional to the VTFL, is estimated using the following equation:
Ntrap = 2ε0εVTFL/ed2
(4)
Here, ε is the relative dielectric constant of the perovskite, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, q is the elementary charge of the electron, and d is the film thickness. Accordingly, Ntrap is calculated to be 9.07 × 1015 cm−3 and 4.75 × 1015 cm−3 for the fresh and aged films, respectively. When 532 nm green light is incident, the aged film demonstrates higher steady-state photoluminescence (PL) than the fresh one (Fig. 3(b)). As the PL is directly related to the radiative recombination process, the significant PL intensity indicates reduced non-radiative recombination in the bulk of the aged film. Time-resolved PL (TRPL) was employed to confirm the carrier lifetime (Fig. 3(c)). The lifetime can be estimated from the bi-exponential fitting of the PL decay. The fresh film has a lifetime of 33 ns, whereas the aged film shows a lifetime of 46 ns. The prolonged lifetime after the aging process manifests the self-healing of the trap defects for the CsPbI3−xBrx film. The prolonged lifetime of the aged film was also confirmed by transient photovoltage (TPV) measurement (Fig. 3(d)). During the TPV measurement, a solar cell device is constructed and illuminated under pulse light. There will be photon-generated electrons and holes, followed by photovoltage generation when the light is on. After the light is off, the photovoltage decreases due to the recombination of electrons and holes at defect sites. As expected, the aged device shows a slow voltage decay with a characteristic lifetime of 155 μs, whereas the fresh device exhibits a fast voltage decay with a typical lifetime of 108 μs. The large characteristic lifetime of the aged device manifests the reduction of the deep-level trap defects.
Devices were fabricated with an n-i-p architecture of ITO/SnO2/CsPbI3−xBrx/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag. The cross-sectional SEM image shown in Fig. S5 indicates the layers of ITO, SnO2, CsPbI3−xBrx, spiro-OMeTAD, and Ag. Fig. 4(a) shows the typical J–V characteristics of the fresh and aged solar cells. The fresh device exhibits a typical PCE of 15.80% with a Jsc of 16.81 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.19 V, and an FF of 0.78. In comparison, the aged device has a PCE of 17.83%, a Jsc of 17.47 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.23 V, and an FF of 0.83, respectively. However, the device under inert N2 gas storage exhibits lower performance compared with that stored under low humidity conditions, even though the SCLC measurement indicates that VTFL can be slightly reduced from 0.84 to 0.65 V (Fig. S6). In addition, the O2 effect has been excluded by the comparison of the fresh CsPbI3−xBrx PSC and the device fabricated from the aging process conducted under pure O2 conditions. As can be seen from Fig. S7, the device performance shows little improvement when stored under O2 conditions. These results indicate that the origin of the aging effect mainly comes from the residual water, instead of from the O2 and N2 under the low humidity ambient conditions. The improvement of the photocurrent is further confirmed by external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurement (Fig. 4(b)). The EQE of the aged device shows an overall improvement across a wide wavelength range from 350 to 670 nm, which can be ascribed to the suppression of the non-radiative loss in the bulk of the absorber. Fig. 4(c) shows the statistical data of the fresh and aged devices. With the self-healing process, a remarkable improvement of Voc, FF, Jsc, and PCE is achieved. Particularly, the improvement of the PCE mainly comes from the boost of the defect-related Voc and FF. Fig. S8 presents the J–V characteristics of the PSCs fabricated from the aging process under different humidity conditions (RH = 5, 10, 15, 20, 30%). The device parameters are summarised in Table S1. The highest CsPbI3−xBrx PSCs are obtained from the aging process with an RH of 10%. The device performance will deteriorate when the RH exceeds 10%. As shown in Fig. S9(a), the aged device demonstrates the highest PCE of 18.30%, along with an FF of 0.80, a remarkable Voc of 1.27 V, and a Jsc of 18.01 mA cm−2. The integrated photocurrent from the EQE measurement is 17.32 mA cm−2 (Fig. S9(c)). The aged device shows a hysteresis of 16.4%, which is slightly smaller than that of the fresh device (18.4%) (Fig. S9(b)). The steady-state output (SPO) of the current and PCE shown in Fig. S9(d) suggest that the aged device has a higher and more stable current and power output. Compared with the aged device, the fresh device demonstrates a long tail of the Jsc decay at the initial stage (light on), which indicates that the fresh device possesses a high degree of ion migration, whereas it is alleviated in the aged perovskite. This result is well consistent with the Ea calculated by admittance spectroscopy (Fig. S3). Compared with the fresh sample, the aged device demonstrates good stability, degrading only 4% after storing under RH < 30% ambient conditions for 600 hours (Fig. S10).
We performed device simulation using drift-diffusion model-based simulation (SCAPS) to shed light on the effect of the defect energy level and DOS on the device performance. The details of the device structure and semiconductor parameters used for the simulation are given in ESI Table S2. Two kinds of defects, namely, deep-level defects with an activation energy of 0.34 eV and shallow-level defects with an Ea of 0.25 eV, were introduced into the inorganic CsPbI3−xBrx light-absorbing layer. Both defects are characterized by a Gaussian-type distribution. Fig. 4(d) shows the device J–V curves with different deep-level defect densities (Nt). Here, Nt is given as the peak value of the defect density. When Nt increases from 1016 cm−3 eV−1 to 1018 cm−3 eV−1, both FF and Voc suffer severe degradation. Meanwhile, when increasing the defect energy level from an Ea value of 0.2 eV to 0.4 eV, FF and Voc decrease accordingly. However, the shallow-level defect density change shows little influence on the device performance (Fig. S11). The simulation result is in good agreement with the experimental result, both of which suggest the crucial roles of mitigating the deep-level defects through a self-healing process in the performance improvement of the wide bandgap inorganic CsPbI3−xBrx PSCs.
Based on the reciprocal relationship between a photovoltaic process and an electroluminescent (EL) process, the nonradiative recombination process via trap defects is responsible for the photovoltage loss.Fig. 5(a) shows the EL spectra of the fresh and aged devices. Obviously, the aged device shows EL intensity 10 times higher than that of the fresh device. In addition, the aged device has a blue-shifted EL peak from 684 nm to 678 nm. Because both fresh and aged films have the same bandgap of 1.82 eV, the blue-shift of the EL peak and the remarkably enhanced EL intensity indicate suppressed trap defects in the aged sample. The recombination mechanism was also verified by measuring the light dependence Voc. Fig. S12 shows the Voc measured under a range of light intensity. In principle, photogenerated carriers are eventually dissipated by the recombination process under open-circuit conditions. The slope of the Voc–light intensity plot is the reflection of trap-induced recombination behavior in PSCs. A lower slope of the aged device (1.41kBT/q) compared with the fresh device (1.61kBT/q) manifests reduced trap-assisted S–R–H recombination. We further investigated the performance of the fresh and aged devices by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). The Nyquist plots (Fig. 5(b)) show two semicircles in the high-frequency regime at zero bias. The radius of the semicircle represents the recombination resistance. Again, a large recombination resistance of the aged device confirms suppressed nonradiative recombination after a self-healing process. Fig. 5(c) and (d) show the Bode plots of intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) and intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS). From the Bode plots of IMPS and IMVS, we calculate the charge transport time constant (τtr) and charge recombination time constant (τrec) to get deep insight into the charge extraction ability. Here, the time constants are calculated from the characteristic frequency of IMPS and IMVS according to the following equations.
τtr = 1/(2π × fIMPS)
(5)
τrec = 1/(2π × fIMVS)
(6)
The τtr decreases from 0.79 μs for the fresh device to 0.62 μs for the aged device, while τrec increases from 2.4 μs to 4.3 μs accordingly. The charge extraction efficiency hcc can be calculated from the equation:
hcc = 1 − τtr/τrec
(7)
The hcc is improved from 0.68 for the fresh device to 0.85 for the aged device. The high charge extraction efficiency of the aged device is derived from the fast charge transport and suppressed nonradiative recombination, both of which predict the improvement of the Voc and the FF.

We have investigated the defect states of wide bandgap inorganic CsPbI3−xBrx perovskite by TAS, PL spectroscopy, transient photovoltage, and SCLC measurement. It was found that the fresh film shows a high density of deep-level interstitial defects located around 321 meV and a small activation energy of 23 meV for ion migration. These deep-level defects of the film can be self-healed when storing the fresh film under low-humidity ambient conditions for a long time of 168 hours. The self-healing effect is proposed due to the stress relaxation due to the ion migration and the interstitial annihilation assisted by the small amount of polar water. Device characterization and simulation further elucidate the reduction of the nonradiative SRH recombination and the enhancement of the carrier extraction, both attributed to the reduction of the trap defects. Without the judicious selection of the charge transport layers and the use of complicated bulk and interface passivation, a high efficiency of 18.30% can be achieved for 1.82 eV inorganic CsPbI3−xBrx PSCs with a planar SnO2 based n-i-p structure. This work highlights the critical roles of the self-healing process in diminishing the deep-level interstitial defects for high-performance inorganic perovskite optoelectronics.


CsI (99.99%), HPbI3 (99.5%), and PbBr2 (99.99%) were purchased from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp. N,N-Dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.8%), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, 99.8%), chlorobenzene (CB, 99.7%), and isopropanol (IPA, 99.8%) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. 2,2′,7,7′-Tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD, 99.8%), 4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP, 98%), tris(2(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tert-butylpyridine)cobalt(III)–tris(bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide) (FK209, 99%) bis (trifluoromethylsulfonyl) amine lithium salt (Li-TFSI, 99.99%), and 2-phenylethanamine bromide (PEABr, 99.5%) were purchased from Luminescence Technology Corp. The SnO2-colloidal precursor (tin(IV) oxide, 15% in H2O colloidal dispersion) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. The CsPbI3−xBrx precursor solution was prepared by mixing 1 M CsI, 0.5 M HPbI3, and 0.5 M PbBr2 in anhydrous 1 mL DMF:DMSO (1:1 = v/v), and the PEABr solution was prepared by dissolving 0.5 mg PEABr in 1 mL IPA.


The ITO glass substrates were cleaned with liquid detergent, deionized water, and IPA for 15 min, respectively. After drying with nitrogen and putting in an oven at 95 °C overnight, the ITO substrates were treated with oxygen plasma for 20 min. The SnO2 precursor was prepared by mixing the SnO2 colloidal solution with DI water at a volume ratio of 1:5. The compact SnO2 layer was spin-cast from the SnO2 precursor solution on top of the clean ITO/glass substrate with a spin rate of 3000 rpm for 30 s and annealed at 150 °C for 30 min in air. The CsPbI3−xBrx precursor solution was spin-coated onto the SnO2/ITO substrates at 6000 rpm for 30 s and then annealed at 170 °C for 8 min. After cooling, 50 μL PEABr solution was added dropwise onto the as-annealed CsPbI3−xBrx/SnO2/ITO substrates at 5000 rpm for 30 s. For the aged sample, the as-obtained perovskite film was stored under low-humidity ambient conditions (relative humidity (RH) < 10%) for a timescale of 168 hours. The aging process was carried out in a humidity control storage box without light illumination at room temperature. Then, the spiro-OMeTAD solution, consisting of 72.5 mg spiro-MeOTAD, 35 μL Li-TFSi (260 mg mL−1 in acetonitrile), 29 μL FK209 (300 mg mL−1 in acetonitrile), 28.8 μL tBP, and 1 mL chlorobenzene, was spin-coated onto the perovskite film at 4000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, 100 nm Ag electrodes on the top of the cell were deposited by thermal evaporation.


The J–V characteristics of perovskite solar cells were recorded using a Keithley 2400 Source Meter under one sun (AM 1.5G) illumination using a solar simulator (EnliTech, Taiwan), and a KG-5 Si photodiode was used to obtain the solar simulator's light intensity. The photovoltaic cells were measured in reverse scan (1.3 V → 0 V, step 0.02 V) and forward scan (0 V → 1.3 V, step 0.02 V) in a nitrogen glove box. The active area of the solar cell was 0.12 cm2. The SEM images, including the morphology and cross-sectional structure of devices, were obtained with a FEI NanoSEM650. X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded by using an X-ray diffractometer Bruker D8 Advance. The absorption spectra were recorded on a Shimadzu SolidSpec-3700 UV-Vis spectrophotometer. Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) were carried out using a PicoQuant Fluo Time 300 and the wavelength of excitation light was 532 nm. Electrochemical EIS, capacitance–voltage (C–V) characteristics Jsc and Voc transient analysis were performed by using a Zennium (Zahner). The EQE curves were recorded using an EnliTech (Taiwan) QE-R measurement system. Temperature-dependent capacitance–frequency measurements were conducted within the frequency range of 100 Hz–1 MHz. The devices were mounted inside a Janis VPF-100 cryostat during the TAS measurement and cooled with liquid nitrogen.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work is financially supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province, China (2020A1515010792 and 2020B1515120022), the Science and Technology Innovation Commission of Shenzhen (JCYJ20210324095003011) and Grant No. SGDX20190918105001787 and SGDX20201103095607022 from the Science and Technology Program of Shenzhen jointly with Hong Kong from the Innovation and Technology Fund. H.S.K. acknowledges the funding from the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Joint Laboratory (Grant No. 2019B121205001). The authors acknowledge the assistance from the Photonics Center of Shenzhen University.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta02022j
‡ Jun Liu and Ming Wang contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022