 DOI: 10.1039/C9EE04199K
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1309-1317


Yulong
Wang
,

Yang
Wang
,

Lei
Zhu
,

Haiqin
Liu
,

Jin
Fang
,

Xia
Guo
,

Feng
Liu
,

Zheng
Tang
,

Maojie
Zhang
* and 

Yongfang
Li


Laboratory of Advanced Optoelectronic Materials, College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China. E-mail: mjzhang@suda.edu.cn

China Frontiers Science Center for Transformative Molecules, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China

Center for Advanced Low-dimension Materials, State Key Laboratory for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, China

Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, CAS Key Laboratory of Organic Solids, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China

Received
30th December 2019
, Accepted 30th March 2020
First published on 2nd April 2020
In this work, a wide-bandgap small molecule donor, BTTzR, that incorporates the electron-donating alkylthienyl-substituted benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b']dithiophene (BDT-T) unit and the electron-deficient thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole (TTz) unit as the building block units is designed and synthesized. BTTzR exhibits strong absorption in the wavelength range of 400–650 nm with a wide optical bandgap of 1.88 eV, a low-lying highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy level of –5.58 eV, and an ordered molecular orientation and packing. Hence, optimized all-small-molecule organic solar cells (SM-OSCs) based on BTTzR as a donor and Y6 as an acceptor achieve an outstanding power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 13.9%, which is among the highest values reported in the literature to date. More importantly, the devices exhibit a very small non-radiative energy loss of 0.18 eV, which is similar to those of inorganic solar cells. These results indicate that BTTzR is a promising small molecule donor material for SM-OSC application and provide new insight into the design of photovoltaic materials to reduce the non-radiative energy loss in the OSCs.

All-small-molecule organic solar cells (SM-OSCs) have attracted considerable attention owing to the merits of small molecules, such as easy purification, well-defined chemical structures and less batch-to-batch variation. To achieve high-performance SM-OSCs, the rational design of well-matched donor and acceptor materials to reduce energy losses is extremely essential. In this work, we developed a novel wide-bandgap small molecule donor, namely BTTzR, by first introducing the thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole (TTz) unit as the building block. Optimized SM-OSCs based on BTTzR and Y6 exhibited an outstanding power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 13.9%. More importantly, the devices demonstrated a very small non-radiative energy loss of 0.18 eV, which is similar to that of inorganic counterparts. This work indicates that BTTzR is a promising small molecule donor material for high-performance SM-OSC application and provides new insight into material design to reduce the non-radiative energy loss in the OSCs.


Solution-processed bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells (OSCs) have drawn considerable attention in recent years owing to their unique advantages of low cost, light weight, and potential for making large-area flexible devices through roll-to-roll processing. Typical BHJ-OSCs are based on blends of electron-donor materials (conjugated polymers or small molecules) and small molecule (SM) electron-acceptor materials. Recently, OSCs based on p-type conjugated polymer donors and n-type non-fullerene small molecule acceptors (SMAs) have made a significant breakthrough with over 16% power conversion efficiency (PCE) for binary or ternary single-junction solar cells. However, batch difference in polymers is inevitable, which potentially limits the reproducibility of the device performance. Therefore, SM-OSCs have attracted considerable attention owing to the merits of small molecule donors, such as easy purification, well-defined chemical structures and molecular weights and less batch-to-batch variation. With the development of photoactive layers by combining small molecule donors and SMAs, state-of-the-art SM-OSCs have achieved a PCE of over 13%, which demonstrates their considerable potential for practical application. However, the progress of SM-OSCs has severely lagged behind that of polymer solar cells (PSCs).

To achieve higher device performance, photoactive layers consisting of well-matching SM donors and SMAs play a crucial role in SM-OSCs. Considering the rapid development of SMAs, the exploration of new SM donors is the most urgent issue in the current stage. For the design of SM donors for SM-OSCs, the following criteria need to be satisfied: (1) complementary absorption spectra to harvest more light for high short-circuit current density (Jsc); (2) well-matched energy levels with SMAs to ensure efficient charge separation and to maximize the open-circuit voltage (Voc) with minimal energy losses (Eloss, defined as Eloss = Eg − qVoc, where Eg is the lowest optical bandgap of the active layer); and (3) a favorable morphology of the SM-donor/SMA blend active layer with nanoscale phase separation and appropriate crystallinity to balance exciton separation and charge transport. For SM donors, the construction of an acceptor–donor–acceptor (A–D–A) structure by combining an electron-rich unit (D) as a central building block and two electron-deficient units (A) as end groups has been proven to be an effective strategy to tune the optical absorption ability, molecular energy level, and molecular aggregation state. Alkylthienyl-substituted benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (BDT-T)-based molecules are the main material system to achieve high efficiency OSCs. To optimize the optical and electrical properties of molecules, many studies have been performed to vary side chains, π-bridges, or electron-deficient units. Recently, Li et al. and Zhang et al. introduced electron-deficient units into the molecular backbone and synthesized a series of wide-bandgap SM donors with complementary absorption and matched energy levels combined with low-bandgap SMAs. Moreover, the multiple D–A structure can modulate molecular packing to facilitate blend morphological optimization. Thus, SM-OSCs can achieve a satisfactory performance with a PCE of approximately 10%. Therefore, this strategy is promising for achieving high efficiency SM donors for SM-OSC applications.
In the past few years, out of the many electron-deficient units, the thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole (TTz) unit has attracted considerable attention in the design of polymer donors for OSCs, profiting from its planar and ordered π-stacking structure and high charge carrier mobility. Besides, owing to the strong electron-deficient properties of TTz, the low-lying HOMO energy level is expected for the donor with the TTz unit, which leads to higher Voc and lower energy losses in devices. OSCs based on TTz-containing polymers have exhibited outstanding performance with high Voc. However, TTz-based SM donors have been seldom explored. In this study, a new acceptor–π–donor–π–acceptor (A1–A2–D–A2–A1)-type SM donor material, BTTzR (shown in Scheme 1), which is based on BDT-T as the electron-donating core, TTz along with two thiophene units as electron-deficient units (A2) and rhodanine (TR) as the end groups (A1), was designed and synthesized. Its optical, electrical, and thermal properties as well as photovoltaic performance were investigated.
BTTzR has appropriate energy levels with a low-lying HOMO energy level of −5.58 eV and a complementary absorption spectrum with the star acceptor Y6. In addition, BTTzR exhibits high crystallinity and ordered molecular packing with a high hole mobility of 3.39 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 to facilitate charge transport. Thus, SM-OSCs based on BTTzR:Y6 achieve an optimized PCE of 13.9% with a Voc of 0.88 V, a Jsc of 23.2 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.68 under AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2 illumination. More importantly, the devices exhibited a very small non-radiative energy loss of 0.18 eV, which is comparable to those of inorganic solar cells based on Si.
The synthetic route of BTTzR is shown in Scheme 1, and the detailed synthesis and characterization data are provided in the ESI. BTTzR dissolves well in typical halogenated solvents such as chloroform (CF) and chlorobenzene (CB). Theoretical calculations were performed to investigate the geometry and frontier molecular orbitals of BTTzR by density functional theory at the B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level. All of the alkyl side chains were replaced with methyl groups to simplify the calculations. As shown in Fig. 1a, the optimized geometry of BTTzR exhibited a small dihedral angle of 4.0° between TTz and BDT-T along the molecular backbone and hence a nearly planar structure, which is favorable for the π–π stacking between the molecule backbones, which resulted in high carrier mobility. In addition, both the HOMO and LUMO of BTTzR are delocalized along the entire π-conjugated backbone of the molecule, as shown in Fig. S1 in the ESI.
As shown in Fig. 1b, a clear endothermic peak with a melting enthalpy (ΔHm) of 31.1 J g−1 at 288 °C and an exothermic peak with a crystal enthalpy (ΔHc) of 24.8 J g−1 at 239 °C are shown in the differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) thermogram, which indicates that BTTzR has strong crystallinity. In addition, a high decomposition temperature (Td) of 385 °C with 5% weight loss is achieved in thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) (see Fig. S2, ESI), which shows excellent thermal stability of BTTzR.
The normalized ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra of BTTzR and Y6 are shown in Fig. 2a. In solution, BTTzR exhibits a maximum absorption peak at 528 nm. Compared with the absorption in solution, a red-shifted main peak is located at 565 nm and a shoulder peak is located at 605 nm in a thin solid film, which indicates strong intermolecular interaction and aggregation in the solid film. The thin film of BTTzR demonstrates an absorption edge (λedge) at 659 nm, which corresponds to an optical bandgap (Eoptg) of 1.88 eV, which indicates a well complementary absorption spectrum with the acceptor of Y6 for achieving higher Jsc in the device. In addition, BTTzR shows excellent conformational and morphological stabilities in the film, as indicated by temperature-dependent absorption measurements (Fig. S3 in the ESI). When annealed from 25 to 180 °C, or at 120 °C up to 180 min, no apparent changes were found in the absorption spectra of the films.
Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was carried out to investigate the electronic energy levels. As shown in Fig. S4 (ESI), the onset oxidation potential (φox) and onset reduction potential (φre) of BTTzR are 0.85 V and −1.14 V vs. Ag/Ag+, respectively. Therefore, according to the equations HOMO = −e(φox + 4.73) (eV) and LUMO = −e(φre + 4.73) (eV), the HOMO and LUMO energy levels of BTTzR are calculated to be −5.58 eV and −3.59 eV, respectively. It is known that Voc is proportional to the energy level difference between the HOMO of the donor and the LUMO of the acceptor. Thus, we expect to obtain a high Voc in BTTzR-based OSCs owing to the low-lying HOMO energy level of the BTTzR donor. In addition, as shown in Fig. 2b, for the acceptor Y6, the lower LUMO (−4.10 eV) and HOMO (−5.65 eV) energy levels than those of BTTzR can match well with the donor BTTzR.
Devices with a conventional structure of indium tin oxide (ITO)/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)/BTTzR:Y6/poly(9,9-bis(3′-((N,N-dimethyl)-N-ethylammonium)-propyl)-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)) (PFN-Br)/Ag were fabricated to investigate the photovoltaic performance of OSCs. The active layers were spin-coated from blend solutions of BTTzR:Y6 in chloroform. In order to optimize the photovoltaic performance of OSCs, the solvent vapor annealing (SVA) time, donor/acceptor weight ratios and cathode interface layer were scanned (Fig. S5 and S6 and Tables S1 and S2, ESI). In this work, CS2 was chosen as solvent for SVA according to the solubilities of the donor and acceptor, which has been proven to be an effective approach in SM-OSCs.Fig. 3a shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of OSCs based on a BTTzR:Y6 (1:1, w/w) blend treated for different SVA times and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. The as-cast devices showed very poor performance with a very low PCE of 0.1%, which should be caused by the inferior phase separation as shown in the late morphological characterization. After SVA treatment, the devices exhibited dramatically improved Jsc and FF with slightly decreased Voc. The decreased Voc of the devices with SVA could be due to the increasing intermolecular interaction between the donor and acceptor. With the SVA treatment for 90 s, the device achieved an optimal PCE of 13.9% with a Voc of 0.88 V, a Jsc of 23.2 mA cm−2 and an FF of 0.68. More importantly, the PCE values could still remain over 13% when the SVA time varied from 60 s to 200 s, which is beneficial for the reproducibility of the device performance. In addition, as shown in Fig. 3b, the histogram of the device performance also exhibited a narrow distribution from 13.5% to 13.9% with an average value of 13.7%. As shown in Fig. 3c, the devices exhibited a broad photo-response range from 300 nm to 950 nm. Notably, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) values of over 60% were achieved in the range from 430 nm to 852 nm, which indicates efficient exciton separation and charge transport and collection in this matched blend. In addition, the integral Jsc values calculated from the EQE curves matched well with the Jsc values obtained from the J–V measurements.
Time (s)

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
Cal. Jsc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)

a Values calculated from EQEs. The average values and standard deviations of the device parameters based on 20 devices are shown in brackets.

As-cast
0.97 (0.96 ± 0.01)
0.3 (0.2 ± 0.1)
0.2
0.36 (0.34 ± 0.02)
0.1
60
0.88 (0.87 ± 0.01)
22.6 (22.4 ± 0.2)
22.1
0.68 (0.67 ± 0.01)
13.5 (13.3 ± 0.2)
90
0.88 (0.87 ± 0.01)
23.2 (23.0 ± 0.2)
22.6
0.68 (0.67 ± 0.01)
13.9 (13.7 ± 0.2)
120
0.88 (0.87 ± 0.01)
22.8 (22.6 ± 0.2)
22.3
0.66 (0.65 ± 0.01)
13.2 (13.0 ± 0.2)
200
0.88 (0.87 ± 0.01)
22.7 (23.4 ± 0.3)
22.2
0.65 (0.64 ± 0.01)
13.0 (12.8 ± 0.2)
Compared to other binary SM-OSCs with PCEs over 13% reported in the literature, our system has a high Voc, while good Jsc and FF values are maintained. In order to understand the reason for the high Voc in the BTTzR:Y6-based device, the total energy losses (Eloss), defined as Eloss = Eg − qVoc, are analysed. In the framework of detailed balance theory,Eloss in OSCs is mainly determined by three factors: (1) ΔECT, the driving force for charge transfer (CT) from the donor or the acceptor phase to the CT state. It is defined by the difference between the energy of the Eg in the BHJ system and the energy of the CT state (ECT); (2) ΔEr, defined as energy losses due to the radiative recombination of charge carriers; and (3) ΔEnr, energy losses due to the non-radiative recombination of charge carriers. Here, we deduce the Eg of the solar cell from the derivative of the EQE edge, which is relatively easy to implement as well as physically motivated. As shown in Fig. S7a (ESI), Eg is determined to be 1.39 eV. Thus, the BTTzR:Y6 device exhibits a low Eloss of 0.51 eV. To determine ECT, highly sensitive external quantum efficiency (sEQE) and electroluminescence (EL) measurements were performed. As shown in Fig. 4a, ECT = 1.38 eV can be determined by fitting the curve of sEQE using Marcus theory. The fitting results are varied by the reduced EL spectra of the CT states. Therefore, ΔECT of the BTTzR:Y6-based solar cell is estimated to be only 0.01 eV, which means that the driving force for charge separation is negligible. Note that the peak in the higher energy region in the EL spectrum of the BTTzR:Y6-based device is due to emission from the pure acceptor Y6 phase (Fig. S7b, ESI). Furthermore, we measured electroluminescence quantum efficiency (EQEEL) from the solar cells to evaluate ΔEnr, according to the formula as ΔEnr = kBTq−1ln(EQE−1). As shown in Fig. 4b, the EQEEL of the device reaches ∼7.65 × 10−4, with an injection current close to the photocurrent generated under solar illumination; this gives a low ΔEnr of 0.18 eV. Notably, the value of 0.18 eV is among the lowest ΔEnrs reported for solution-processed OSCs. Fig. 4c shows the comparison of ΔEnrs in this work and the others reported in the literature (more information is given in Table S3, ESI). It is clear that the ΔEnr of the BTTzR:Y6-based solar cell is much lower than those of the previously reported OSCs and similar to that of c-Si solar cells. Finally, ΔEr of solar cells was obtained, by subtracting ΔECT and ΔEnr from Eloss, giving the value of 0.32 eV for the BTTzR:Y6-based solar cell, which is unavoidable. In summary, the low ΔEnr is the major reason for the high Voc in the BTTzR:Y6-based device. Fig. 4d and Table S4 (ESI) summarize the representative efficient SM-OSCs (PCE > 8%) based on various photoactive blends in recent years. Two special regions are defined according to PCE and Voc values: high PCE (>12%) region and high Voc (>0.85 V) region, in which we can learn that just very limited reported SM-OSCs can achieve excellent PCE and Voc at the same time. Our best photovoltaic parameters of BTTzR:Y6 SM-OSCs are located in the overlap region with high PCE and high Voc simultaneously. The BTTzR:Y6-based device achieves a high PCE of 13.9% with a high Voc of 0.88 V; to the best of our knowledge, this value of Voc is the highest among the binary SM-OSCs with PCE >13%. Our results indicate that pursuing a high Voc while good Jsc and FF values are maintained is still one of the most effective ways to achieving high-performance SM-OSCs.
To probe the charge carrier mobilities of the blend films, the space charge limited current (SCLC) method was employed. As shown in Fig. S8 and Table S5 in the ESI, the hole mobilities (μh) and electron mobilities (μe) of the blend films were measured with the device structure of hole-only ITO/PEDOT:PSS/BTTzR:Y6 (1:1, w/w)/MoO3/Ag and electron-only ITO/ZnO-gel/BTTzR:Y6 (1:1, w/w)/ZnO-NPs/Ag, respectively. The values of μh are 7.51 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the as-cast blend film and 1.79 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the blend film with the SVA treatment. The related values of μe are 3.15 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the as-cast film and 1.82 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the SVA-treated film. The electron/hole mobility ratio (μe/μh) values are calculated to be 0.42 and 1.02 for the as-cast and SVA-treated films, respectively. Therefore, the higher and more balanced carrier mobilities for the blend film lead to higher Jsc and FF values for the devices with the SVA treatment.
As shown in Fig. S9a (ESI), the dependence of the photocurrent (Jph) on the effective voltage (Veff) was measured to probe the exciton dissociation and charge collection process in non-fullerene SM-OSCs. Herein, Jph is defined as JL – JD and Veff is defined as V0 – V, where JL and JD are the current densities under illumination and in the dark, respectively, and V0 is the voltage at which the photocurrent is zero, and V is the applied voltage.Jph reaches the saturation current density (Jsat) at high Veff (≥2 V in this case). Thus, the charge dissociation probability P(E,T) can be measured using the Jph/Jsat ratio. Under the two conditions of short-circuit and maximal power output, the ratios of 96.9% and 82.2% for the same device with SVA treatment were obtained, respectively. The high P(E,T) value shows a more efficient exciton dissociation and charge collection for the devices.
To study the charge recombination behavior in the SM-OSCs, the Voc and Jph values under different light intensities (Plight) were evaluated. Fig. S9b (ESI) shows the plot of the relationship between Voc and Plight. The degree of trap-assisted or bimolecular recombination can be estimated by the slope of Vocversus log(Plight). Specifically, when the slope of Vocversus log(Plight) is equal to 1kT/q or 2kT/q, the dominant recombination mechanism is bimolecular recombination or trap-assisted recombination, respectively. In this study, the device treated with SVA exhibited a clearly lower slope of 1.01kT/q, which indicates that trap-assisted recombination was suppressed by SVA, and the bimolecular recombination was dominant in the device treated with SVA. We adopted the formula Jph ∝ (Plight)S to describe the relationship between Jph and Plight. In the formula, the extent of bimolecular recombination is determined by the exponential factor S, and weak bimolecular recombination should have a linear dependence of log(Jph) on log(Plight) with the S value close to 1. As shown in Fig. S9c (ESI), the related S value for the device treated with SVA is 0.95, which implies lower bimolecular recombination in the device.
To gain more insight into the exciton dissociation and charge transfer behavior of BTTzR and Y6 pure films and their blends, photoluminescence (PL) spectra were also measured. As shown in Fig. S10 (ESI), compared to the PL spectra of the BTTzR and Y6 pure films, more than 96.0% and 73.8% of PL quenching for the donor and acceptor, respectively, can be achieved for the as-cast BTTzR:Y6 blend films. Notably, the blend films with the SVA treatment showed higher PL quenching of over 97.2% and 93.0% for the donor and acceptor respectively. Therefore, in the devices with the SVA treatment, a more effective charge transfer between BTTzR and Y6 was achieved, which helps in obtaining high Jsc values in the devices.
Grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurement was used to probe the effect of SVA treatment on the morphology of BTTzR:Y6 blend films. Fig. 5a–c and Table S6 (ESI) show the 2D GIWAXS patterns, corresponding scattering profiles, and correlation calculation of the pure and blended films without and with the SVA treatment. For the pure BTTzR film, the in-plane (IP) and out-of-plane (OOP) profiles show pronounced (100) diffraction peaks, which means strong crystallinity in the film. In addition, the OOP and IP profiles also exhibit a sharp and intense (010) diffraction peak at 1.73 Å−1, which corresponds to the tightly π–π stacking of BTTzR with a d-spacing of 3.64 Å. These results imply that there are two kinds of molecular orientations in the BTTzR film with respect to the substrate, i.e. face-on and edge-on. The Y6 film shows clear (100) diffraction peaks at 0.28 Å−1 in the IP direction. Meanwhile, the Y6 film also shows a distinct (010) diffraction peak at 1.72 Å−1. Thus, the neat Y6 film exhibits a face-on dominated molecular orientation. In the as-cast blend films, there is a (100) diffraction peak at 0.33 Å−1 in the IP direction and a clear (010) diffraction peak at 1.78 Å−1 in the OOP direction. Furthermore, compared with the as-cast blend films, when the blends were treated by SVA, the peak intensities for both the (100) and (010) packing planes improved markedly, which corresponds to the enhancement of crystallinity for both BTTzR and Y6. Thus, the blend films with SVA treatment have a strong face-on molecular orientation. In addition, we calculated the crystal coherence length (CCL) deduced from the full width at half maximum of the (100) diffraction peak in the IP direction and the (010) diffraction peak in the OOP direction using the Scherrer equation. Relative to the as-cast blend films, the CCL(100) and CCL(010) of the blend films with SVA treatment substantially increased from 5.49 nm to 7.14 nm and from 1.87 nm to 2.61 nm, respectively, which means that the overall crystallinity and the π–π stacking of the blend films with the SVA treatment enhanced. Subsequently, as shown in Fig. S11 (ESI), compared with the as-cast film, the blend film with SVA treatment showed significant red-shifts and the absorption strength of the donor part enhanced remarkably. These results are beneficial for higher Jsc in the device.
Resonant soft X-ray scattering (R-SoXS) was used to probe the phase separation and average domain purity in the BTTzR:Y6 blend films. The resonant photon energy of 284.8 eV was selected, where the material contrast dominates scattering. As shown in Fig. 5d, the as-cast blend film exhibits scattering peaks at q ∼ 0.080 nm−1, while the film treated with SVA shows scattering peaks at q ∼ 0.067 nm−1, which corresponds to the domain sizes of 39 and 47 nm, respectively. Moreover, compared to the as-cast blend film, the blend film with SVA treatment achieves purer domain purity. The purer domain can reduce bimolecular recombination and lead to high performance. Therefore, appropriate domain size and higher domain purity are beneficial to exciton dissociation and charge transport. Thus, higher Jsc, FF, and PCE values are obtained for the device with SVA treatment.
To better understand the surface and bulk morphology of the active layers, atomic force microscopy (AFM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurements were carried out. As shown in the AFM images in Fig. S12a and d (ESI), the root-mean-square (RMS) value is 2.03 nm for the as-cast blend film. After the SVA treatment for 90 s, an apparently increased RMS value of 2.64 nm was obtained. Furthermore, the clearly rougher surface means better ordering of molecular chains, which results in higher crystallinity. In the TEM images in Fig. S12c and f (ESI), the as-cast blend film shows excessive miscibility, which leads to inferior performance. However, the BTTzR:Y6-based blend films with the SVA treatment showed a more clear phase separation of donors and acceptors with a bi-continuous interpenetrating network, which is beneficial for exciton dissociation and charge transport. Thus, enhanced Jsc and FF values were obtained.
In conclusion, a new A1–A2–D–A2–A1 type organic SM donor, BTTzR, which is based on BDT-T as the electron-donating core, TTz along with two thiophene units as electron-deficient units and TR as the end groups, was designed and synthesized. Owing to the strong electron-deficient properties of TTz, BTTzR has a low-lying HOMO energy level. In addition, it exhibits strong absorption in the wavelength range of 400–650 nm with a wide optical bandgap of 1.88 eV and an ordered molecular orientation and packing. Thus, an optimized device based on BTTzR as the donor and Y6 as the acceptor achieved an excellent PCE of 13.9%, which is among the highest values of SM-OSCs reported in the literature to date. More importantly, the device exhibited a very small non-radiative energy loss of 0.18 eV, which is similar to those of inorganic solar cells based on Si. Our results indicate that BTTzR is a promising small molecule donor material for SM-OSCs and provide new insight into the design of photovoltaic materials to reduce the non-radiative energy loss in the OSCs.

Measurements and fabrication of OSCs are described in the ESI.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (no. 51573120, 51773142, 51973146 and 21734009), the Jiangsu Provincial Natural Science Foundation (Grant No. BK20190099), the Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science & Technology, the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions, and the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (No. 2016YFA0200700). Portions of this research were carried out at beamlines 7.3.3 and 11.0.1.2 at the Advanced Light Source, the Molecular Foundry, and the National Center for Electron Microscopy, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, which was supported by the DOE, Office of Science, and Office of Basic Energy Sciences.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee04199k
‡ Yulong Wang and Yang Wang contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020