 DOI: 10.1039/B814529F
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 1713-1718

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Wei
Zhou
,

Kai
Pan
,

Lili
Zhang
,

Chungui
Tian
 and 

Honggang
Fu
*

Laboratory of Physical Chemistry, School of Chemistry and Materials Science, Heilongjiang University, Harbin, 150080, People’s Republic of China. E-mail: fuhg@vip.sina.com; Fax: +86 (0)45186673647; Tel: +86 (0)45186608458

Received
21st August 2008
, Accepted 8th December 2008
First published on 28th January 2009
Wire-like TiO2–β-cyclodextrin–MWCNT composites have been successfully fabricated through a solar-induced self-assembly process. The wires were stable for more than several months both in water and under air in dry conditions. The composites were characterized in detail by scanning electron microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, Fourier transform infrared spectra, Raman spectra and Raman mapping. The results revealed that the wires with a mean diameter of 1 μm were uniform. MWCNT and β-cyclodextrin can interact with each other, which was confirmed in our previous research, meanwhile, monodisperse TiO2nanoparticles can also associate with β-cyclodextrin. Thus, β-cyclodextrin molecules acted as linkers between MWCNT and monodisperse TiO2nanoparticles. A reasonable mechanism was also proposed to explain the formation of this wire. Furthermore, the dye-sensitized solar cells were assembled with a sandwich-structured electrode containing the wires and they exhibited an enhanced power conversion efficiency. This may be attributable to the compact composite-structure of the wires and the unique electronic properties of MWCNT, which favor the transportation of photogenerated electrons.

In recent years, the optical and electronic properties of TiO2 and carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have been extensively investigated. TiO2, owing to the nontoxicity, low cost, high chemical stability and superior photoelectronic properties, has been intensively studied in the fields of photocatalysis, water splitting, sensors and solar cells. The electronic structure of TiO2 is characterized by a valence band filled with electrons, and an empty conduction band. Upon light absorption, electrons and holes are generated. The photogenerated electrons and holes can react with electron acceptors and electron donors adsorbed on the TiO2 surface, respectively. However, the rapid recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes results in low quantum-efficiency, which is disadvantageous for most of these applications. Therefore, to suppress the recombination of electron-hole pairs of TiO2 is of great importance to practical applications.


Multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) have attracted intensive research interest in many fields because of their unique electronic, mechanical and chemical properties. Recently, some efforts have been made to synthesize TiO2–CNTs hybrid materials in order to enhance the quantum efficiency of TiO2. In this hybrid system, the photogenerated electrons are trapped and transported by CNTs, which promotes an interfacial charge-transfer process. Thus, improved photoelectrical properties can be obtained. However, many of them were prepared by a simple mixture or electrophoretic deposition method, which failed to produce a compact link between TiO2 and the CNTs, subsequently the interfacial charge-transfer was not improved effectively. Therefore, a further improvement of the TiO2–CNTs interface is still a great challenge. Recently, Ginley et al. reported that cyclodextrin (CDs) could irreversibly coat the surface of anatase TiO2 particles under UV irradiation to form wire-like composites. They found that the self-assembly of CDs played an important role in the formation of these wires. In addition, MWCNT–β-CD composites have been successfully synthesized using the self-assembly behavior of β-CD and the van der Waals forces between MWCNTs and β-CD. Therefore, it is possible to utilize β-CD as a linker for fabricating TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT composite, because β-CD can interact with both MWCNTs and TiO2nanoparticles.
On the basis of the above considerations, combining the self-assembly behavior of β-CD, and its interaction with TiO2nanoparticles and MWCNTs, we design and synthesize a novel TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT composite wire with a composite structure of zero-dimensional and one-dimensional nanomaterials through self-assembly process of monodisperse TiO2nanoparticles and MWCNT–β-CD composite under solar irradiation. The wires with the mean diameter of about 1 μm are uniform and stable. The compact composite structure of TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT wire offers the possibility to increase the separation and transportation of photogenerated charges. Therefore, we design a sandwich-structured electrode including TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT wires in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and the cells exhibit enhanced power-conversion efficiency. This is because the compact composite-structure of TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT wire and the unique electronic properties of MWCNTs favor the transportation of photogenerated electrons in this sandwich structure.

The details for the synthesis of MWCNT–β-CD composites, and monodisperse TiO2nanoparticles are given elsewhere. In a typical synthesis of TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT composite wires, 1 mg TiO2 and 5 mg MWCNT–β-CD was mixed with 1 mL distilled water. The mixture was sonicated for 5 min and then transferred to a weighing bottle. The pH of the suspension is about 7. After irradiating with sunlight at room temperature for three weeks, wire-like composites were observed in the suspension. These wires were separated from the suspension with tweezers and washed with distilled water thoroughly. The products were very stable in water and under air in dry conditions for more than several months. Meanwhile, a control experiment of UV irradiation with a 20 W UV lamp was conducted and the results were similar to those of under solar irradiation.



Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) micrographs were taken using a Philips XL-30-ESEM-FEG instrument operating at 20 kV. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) experiment was performed on a JEM-3010 electron microscope (JEOL, Japan) with an acceleration voltage of 300 kV. Carbon-coated copper grids were used as the sample holders. Raman measurements were performed with a Jobin Yvon HR 800 micro-Raman spectrometer at 457.9 nm. The laser beam was focused with a 50× objective lens to a ca. 1 μm spot on the surface of the sample. The laser intensity at the sample was kept below the threshold for any laser-induced changes in the Raman spectra and electrical transport characteristics. The Raman mapping was obtained by focusing the laser beam with a 50× magnification. FT-IR spectra were recorded on a PerkinElmer Spectrum One spectrometer using KBr pellets.


TiO2 paste was obtained by homogeneously mixing 2 ml of ethanol and 680 mg of TiO2nanoparticles (Degussa P25). The longer FTO (F-doped SnO2 layer, sheet resistance is 20 Ω square−1) edges were covered with transparent adhesive tape as a spacer to control the film thickness, and 0.1 mL of the paste was spread over the surface. The sandwich structure electrode consisting of three-layer thin-films was prepared according to the following process. The first layer of the TiO2 was prepared by a doctor-blade method on the FTO substrate and then sintered at 450 °C for 30 min. The second layer (middle layer) was obtained by homogenously mixing 1 mL distilled water and 1 mg TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT wires and then spread on the first layer. The third layer was also prepared by the doctor-blade method on the second layer. This sandwich structure film was finally pressed at 1000 kg cm−2 between stainless-steel plates in a hydraulic press using aluminium foil to prevent adhesion to the press plates. This electrode was designated as Electrode A. As a control, another sandwich structure electrode with the middle layer of MWCNTs which was prepared by electrophoretic deposition method, was fabricated, denoted as Electrode B. Moreover, the electrode with two layer TiO2 thin films was also prepared, designated as Electrode C. The thickness of all three samples measured by the SEM were estimated to be around 15 μm.

The films were immersed in a 0.5 mM (C4H9)4N)2[Ru-(4-carboxy-4′-carboxylate-2,2′-bipyridine)2(NCS)2] dye (N719, Solaronix SA, Switzerland) in acetonitrile and tert-butanol (volume ratio, 1:1) for 12 h at room temperature, respectively. Platinum counter electrodes were fabricated following literature. The Ru complex dye-sensitized film electrodes and the Pt counter electrode were cohered together with epoxy resin. The electrolyte that was composed of 0.6 M 1-propyl-2,3-dimethylimidazodiumiodide, 0.05 M I2, 0.1 M LiI, and 0.5 M tert-butylpyridine (TBP) in 3-methoxypropionitrile (3-MPN) was admitted by capillary action. The N719 sensitized solar cells assembled with Electrodes A, B, and C were designated as Cell A, B, and C, respectively. Photocurrent–photovoltage curves were recorded by BAS100B Electrochemical Analyzer. A 400 W xenon lamp with a UV filter was used as a light source. Its intensity was about 40 mW cm−2. The irradiation area of the working electrode was about 0.12 cm2.

The wire-like TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT composite was fabricated under solar irradiation. Representative SEM images and TEM image of TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT wires under solar irradiation are shown in Fig. 1. From Fig. 1(A) we can see that the TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT wires are long and uniform. The mean diameter is about 1 μm. The uniformity of TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT wires maybe attribute to the introduction of MWCNTs. The special 1D structure of MWCNTs may be more in favor of the formation of uniform wires. The amplified SEM image of the wire shown in Fig. 1(B) indicates monodisperse TiO2 particles cover the surface of the wire uniformly. A TEM image of TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT wires under solar irradiation is shown in Fig. 1(C). Uniform wires with a mean diameter of about 1 μm can be observed clearly. We can also see the assembly of monodisperse TiO2 particles along the wires. The result is consistent with the SEM observations. A control experiment using UV irradiation was also conducted. Fig. 1(D) shows the representative SEM image of TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT wires under UV irradiation. We can see that wire-like composites are formed and the result is similar to that under solar irradiation. Therefore, we can use convenient, clean and economical solar energy instead of UV radiation to fabricate the wires.



FT-IR was used to confirm the functional groups and the interaction of different molecules in the samples. Fig. S1 shows the FTIR spectra of TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT wires (see the ESI). Absorption bands appearing at 2880 cm−1 and 2925 cm−1 are clearly observed, which are the typical –CH2– and –CH– bands vibration of β-CD. The IR peak appeared at 800 cm−1 and reflects the O–C–C–O relative ring vibration. This information is important for apprehending the interaction between β-CD and the titanium in TiO2 crystals. The stretching vibration for C–O appeared at about 1160 cm−1 (ESI Fig. S1c–d) confirms the association of β-CD with TiO2. The IR peaks appeared at 1380 cm−1 and 1460 cm−1 and are attributed to the C–H deformation and scissor-vibration and the CH2 deformation-vibration, respectively. It also confirms the existence of the interaction of β-CD with TiO2. The FT-IR data suggest that β-CD accommodate into the titanium octahedral complex. On the other hand, we can clearly see an obvious absorption peak centered at 1570 cm−1 (ESI Fig. S1d), which can be assigned to the CC stretching vibration of MWCNT backbones.β-CD wrapping around MWCNTs by van der Waals forces has been confirmed by our previous research. The results confirm that the TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT composite is formed by the interaction of β-CD between MWCNT and monodisperse TiO2nanoparticles, and β-CD plays the role of linker between monodisperse TiO2nanoparticles and MWCNTs.


In order to investigate the distribution of monodisperse TiO2nanoparticles and MWCNTs in this wire, Raman measurements were performed. Fig. 2 shows the image of light microscopy of a single TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT wire under solar irradiation and its corresponding Raman spectra and Raman mapping. As to whether monodisperse TiO2nanoparticles and MWCNTs distribute uniformly in this wire, Raman measurements were chosen with five different points. The points of 1, 2, 4 and 3, 4, 5 are longitudinal and lateral distribution of the wire, respectively (Fig. 2(A)). From Fig. 2(B) we can clearly see two types of Raman peaks. The peaks at 149, 199, 393, 513, and 635 cm−1 can be ascribed to Eg, Eg, B1g, A1g(B1g), and Eg modes, respectively, which are the characteristics of the anatase TiO2. These results demonstrate that the anatase TiO2nanoparticles in the TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT wires conserve their anatase crystal features. As shown in Fig. 2(B), the characteristic D-band at 1361 cm−1 and G-band at 1580 cm−1 of MWCNTs, corresponding to the disordered mode and tangential mode, respectively, could be clearly observed, indicating the existence of MWCNTs in this composite. In addition, compared with pristine MWCNTs, the Raman peaks were not changed obviously, indicating the pristine character of the as-prepared MWCNTs was preserved in this structure. The Raman analysis confirms that this wire is composed of TiO2 and MWCNTs.


Raman mapping of the defined area of a single TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT wire is shown in Fig. 2(C) and (D). Fig. 2(C) and (D) present the distribution of the Eg (149 cm−1) mode of monodisperse TiO2nanoparticles and the D-band (1361 cm−1) of MWCNTs, respectively. The color bars are designed to enhance the peak intensity of the Eg mode and D-band. From Fig. 2(C), we can clearly see that monodisperse TiO2nanoparticles distribute uniformly along the wire. In parallel, uniform distribution of MWCNTs is also observed clearly from Fig. 2(D). From Raman spectra and Raman mapping analysis, we can confirm that monodisperse TiO2nanoparticles and MWCNTs distribute uniformly in the TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT wire.

The results above indicate TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT wires have been successfully fabricated under solar irradiation. Monodisperse TiO2nanoparticles and MWCNTs distribute uniformly in TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT wires. In order to understand the formation of TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT wires and the effect of β-CD, a control experiment without β-CD was conducted and no TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT wires were observed even after one month. Therefore, we believe that β-CD plays an important role in the formation of this wire. A possible formation mechanism of this wire is proposed and described in Scheme 1. MWCNT–β-CD composite was obtained through assembling the β-CD molecules on the surface of MWCNTs by layer-by-layer self-assembly method. We consider the van der Waals forces between MWCNTs and β-CD and the hydrogen-bonding interaction between the adjacent β-CD molecules are the dominant driving forces during the β-CD wrapping and self-assembly process. It is well-known that electron-hole pairs can be generated when TiO2 surface was irradiated by UV irradiation. They can be separated if one of them was captured by other compound. Recently, it has been reported that polyhydroxyl compounds can scavenge holes efficiently. Therefore, the photo-excited TiO2 surface has a tendency to associate with β-CD that can offer adequate hydroxyls. When the hydroxyls were adsorbed onto the photoexcited TiO2 surface, the crystal coordinate bonds between oxygen and titanium was formed. That is the multiple Ti–O–R bonds were formed during the reaction of TiO2nanoparticles and β-CD under UV or solar irradiation.β-CD plays an important role during the self-assembly process. As linker molecules, on the one hand, β-CD wrapped MWCNTs by van der Waals forces and interacted with adjacent β-CD by hydrogen-bonding. On the other hand, β-CD interacted with photoexcited TiO2 surface and formed coordinate bonds between oxygen atoms and titanium atoms finally. Thus, a wire-like TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT composite was fabricated finally through the self-assembly process of β-CD under solar irradiation. Although the real formation processes of this wire is difficult to be clarified, the success may be attributed to the distinct energy face of the titanium crystals combined with the lowest-energy principle.


In general, rapid electron transport in the TiO2 films is important to ensure their efficient collection when in competition with the recombination process in DSSCs. In an anatase TiO2nanoparticle film, the electron transport across particles is susceptible for recombination loss at the grain boundaries. Fabrication of films from one-dimensional structures has been proven to be an effective way to facilitate electron transport. However, compared to nanoparticles films (roughness factors > 1000), it is notably lacking in roughness factor (<200). In order to obtain rapid electron transport and a high roughness factor similar to TiO2nanoparticles, we design a sandwich-structured electrode to improve the efficiency in DSSCs. The schemetic representation of sandwich structure electrode is presented in Scheme 2. The first layer of TiO2 thin film is prepared on the FTO substrate and the wires which are in the middle layer are between two layers of TiO2 thin films. The sandwich structure electrode can be used as photoanode in DSSCs.

To probe the beneficial aspects of TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT wires in DSSCs, we constructed photoelectrochemical cells using Electrodes A, B, and C as photoanodes. The magnitude of the photocurrent represents the improvement of the charge-collection efficiency of the electrode surface. Fig. 3 shows the short-circuit photocurrent generation of the electrodes. All of them are prompt in generating photocurrent with very stable and reproducible response to on-off cycles. It is very interesting to note that the films containing TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT wires exhibited a roughly 15% higher photocurrent than that without wires. This is attributed to the introduction of wires, especially the compact composite structure of TiO2-MWCNTs, whose 1D structure can act as guided electron channels in electrodes.

Fig. 4 depicts the photocurrent–voltage characteristics of each solar cell consisting of Cell A, B, and C, respectively. Table 1 summarizes the DSSCs performance parameters. Each value for cell performance was taken as an average of at least 3 samples. It can be seen that the short-circuit current density and the overall power conversion efficiency of Cell A was higher than that of Cell B and C. One factor for the increase in short-circuit current density is attributed to the introduction of the wires. The photoresponse of the DSSCs with the sandwich structure electrode containing TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT wires (Cell A) exhibited a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 6.75 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.672 V and a fill factor (FF) of 0.714 to give a power conversion efficiency η = 7.9%. In contrast, the DSSCs without this wire (Cell C) showed a Jsc of 6.25 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.636 V and a FF of 0.721 to yield η = 7.3%. And the DSSCs with MWCNTs (Cell B) showed a Jsc of 6.35 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.631 V and a FF of 0.719 to yield η = 7.4%. Enhancement in the power conversion efficiency in the present experiments suggests that charge collection and transport in these films are improved by the introduction of the wires. Considering the small differences in FF, we attribute the 8% greater power conversion efficiency to mainly the 8% higher Jsc and the 5.7% higher Voc. Especially owing to the incorporation of wires, the film thickness of the three electrodes are the same, that is to say the wires replace some TiO2 particles, so the roughness factor of Cell A is slightly lower than Cell C, which is testified by the amount of dye adsorption. Therefore, the higher current density from Cell A should not come from dye loading. So, we speculate the enhanced Jsc can be ascribed to the rapid electron transport rate through wires which possess of the compact composite structure. We can also see that the incorporation of MWCNTs (Cell B) can increase the Jsc, however, the influence on the efficiency of DSSCs is not obvious. This is attributed to the incompact link between TiO2 and CNTs. This phenomenon is similar to that of Kamat et al. The higher Voc of Cell A can be explained as a consequence of reduced recombination, which results in an increase of electron density in TiO2, and consequently the shift of Fermi level. The enhancement of Voc can attribute to the unique electronic property of MWCNTs and the compact composite structure of TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT in this structure in favor of the transportation of photogenerated electrons, subsequently reduced recombination. These results show that employing sandwich structure electrode including TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT wires represents a promising approach for further improving the power conversion efficiency in DSSCs.

Cell


J
sc
/mA cm−2

V
oc/V

FF


η (%)

1 Note: Jsc: short-circuit photocurrent. Voc: open-circuit photovoltage. FF: fill factor. η: the power conversion efficiency.


Cell A
6.25
0.636
0.721
7.3

Cell B
6.35
0.631
0.719
7.4

Cell C
6.75
0.672
0.714
7.9

In summary, wire-like TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT composites have been successfully fabricated by an economical solar-induced self-assembly approach. The wires were long, uniform and very stable both in water and under air in dry conditions. The analytical results confirmed that MWCNT and β-CD interacted via the van der Waals forces, meanwhile, β-CD and monodisperse TiO2nanoparticles could also associate with each other. It was also confirmed that monodisperse TiO2nanoparticles and MWCNTs distributed uniformly in this wire. During this self-assembly process, β-CD molecules acted as linker between MWCNTs and monodisperse TiO2nanoparticles. The distinct energy facets of the titanium crystals combined with the lowest-energy principle may explain the control of the formation of the wire. Moreover, the sandwich structure electrode containing this wire exhibited the 8% enhanced power conversion efficiency in DSSCs. This was attributed to the introduction of this wire and the unique electronic property of MWCNTs, especially the compact composite structure of TiO2–MWCNTs in favor of the transportation of photogenerated electrons in this sandwich structure. These photoactive and stable TiO2–β-CD–MWCNT wires with special composite structure of zero-dimensional and one-dimensional nanomaterials may have more promising potential applications, such as sensors, switches, etc.


This work was supported by the Key Program Projects of National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 20431030), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 20671032), the Key Program Projects of the Province Natural Science Foundation of Heilongjiang Province (no. ZJG0602-01).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: FT-IR data. See DOI: 10.1039/b814529f
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2009