 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA01200G
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11750-11755


Jiang
Liu
*,

Cheng
Gao
,

Lizhu
Luo
,

Qinyan
Ye
,

Xulin
He
,

Liangqi
Ouyang
,

Xiaowei
Guo
,

Daming
Zhuang
,

Cheng
Liao
*,

Jun
Mei
 and 

Woonming
Lau


Chengdu Green Energy and Green Manufacturing Technology R&D Centre, Chengdu Development Center of Science and Technology, China Academy of Engineering Physics, Chengdu, 610207, China. E-mail: 546jiang@163.com; cliao315@hotmail.com

School of Optoelectronic Information, University of Electronic Science and Technology, Chengdu, 610054, China

Science and Technology and Surface Physics and Chemistry Laboratory, 71835, Mianyang, 621907, Sichuan, China

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

Received
13th February 2015
, Accepted 28th April 2015
First published on 30th April 2015
Organic–inorganic halide perovskites possess excellent chemical, optical, and electronic properties that make them attractive for next-generation solar cells. In this paper, we introduce all-low-temperature processed perovskite solar cells using metal sulfide as an electron transport layer. First, we evaluated the alignment of energy levels at the perovskite/metal sulfide layer interface. The properties of metal sulfide and the perovskite layer, as well as the corresponding device performance, were then investigated. Using a CdS layer as an electron transport layer, we have achieved a maximum power conversion efficiency of 11.2% under reverse scans. The successful use of the CdS layer in perovskite solar cells likely would create new pathways and opportunities for the advancement of device design.

The last two years have seen an unprecedented growth of interest in organic–inorganic halide perovskite based solar cells due to their distinct combination of high efficiency and easy preparation. Impressive progress in improving the photovoltaic performance has been made in this field. In 2009, Kojima et al. first reported the use of lead halide perovskites as photosensitizers in liquid-type sensitized TiO2 solar cells and achieved a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.8%. However, these liquid-type perovskite solar cells encountered serious problems with durability and stability. All-solid-state perovskite solar cells were then developed to achieve good stability and high efficiency using spiro-OMeTAD as a hole transporting material. Many literature studies have also confirmed that under normal photovoltaic operating conditions perovskite solar cells are not excitonic style solar cells, differing from some organic photovoltaic devices in which photogenerated species are strongly bound and cannot spontaneously dissociate into free carriers. This means that perovskite solar cells are comparable to inorganic solar cells and may reach above 20% efficiency with the addition of the features of ambipolar charge transport and long electron–hole diffusion length. Until now, an increasing number of research groups have demonstrated perovskite-based solar cells with efficiencies >15%.

Mesoscopic and planar perovskite-based solar cells both have shown a very promising photovoltaic performance. Evolving from dye-sensitized solar cells, initially a metal-oxide scaffold is always employed in perovskite solar cells. Since the pioneering work of Liu et al., who demonstrated a simple planar heterojunction solar cell with an efficiency of over 15%, planar perovskite devices have been receiving great attention due to the simplicity in processing. Although the perovskite layers could be prepared at a relatively low temperature (around 100 °C), most of these highly efficient perovskite solar cells typically have employed high-temperature (>450 °C) processed TiO2 as an electron transport layer, which significantly limits the application of perovskite solar cells in a broader range of substrates. Lots of efforts have been made to produce all-low-temperature perovskite solar cells. Snaith's group have developed low-temperature processed anatase TiO2 nanoparticles and achieved a maximum power conversion of over 15%. Inverted planar perovskite solar cells with organic charge material PCBM ((6,6)-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester) have also been developed to obtain low-temperature processing conditions. In addition, many groups have demonstrated low-temperature processed n-type semiconductors (ZnO, CdSe (ref. 27)) as electron conductors in perovskite solar cells. Such a simple substitution for the TiO2 layer also results in improvements to device performance, greatly showing potential for other similar alternative materials.
In this manuscript, we introduced all-low-temperature TiO2-free planar perovskite solar cells, in which n-type TiO2 is replaced with metal sulfide (CdS, ZnS) as an electron transport layer. These metal sulfides have achieved success in the application as buffer-layer materials to CIGS or CdTe solar cells, due to their good optical and electrical properties. Further, they can be deposited through a solution process at low temperature, making it compatible with flexible substrates. The feasibility of the perovskite solar cells with a metal sulfide layer was first evaluated using photoemission spectroscopy. The characterization of device performance was carried out under both forward and reverse scans. By applying solution processed CdS as an electron selective layer, the perovskite solar cells with ITO/CdS/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au planar structures deliver a maximum power conversion efficiency of 11.2% under reverse scans. Our results show the application possibility of more inorganic semiconductor materials, akin to CdS, in perovskite-based solar cells, and also provide the principle for the choice of the electron transport layer for efficient perovskite solar cells.

The device structure used in this study is shown in Fig. 1a. In this configuration, a thin ZnS or CdS film was first deposited on tin-doped indium oxide (ITO) glass by chemical bath deposition (CBD), and then a CH3NH3PbI3 light harvester was deposited through a solvent washing process. The details of the experimental methods are described in the ESI. After a short-time thermal annealing, an organic hole transport layer spiro-OMeTAD and a gold contact electrode were sequentially deposited on the top of the perovskite layer to complete solar cells with an ITO/CdS (or ZnS)/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au planar structure.

To gain insight into the interface properties of the solar cells used in this study, ultraviolet photoelectron spectra (UPS) were obtained to determine the band offset at the CdS (or ZnS)/perovskite hetero-interface, as shown in Fig. 1(c and d). Obvious difference can be observed between these films. The data are presented as photoemission intensity versus binding energy. The binding energy cutoff in the range of 15–20 eV (Fig. 1c) can be used to obtain the work function by subtracting the energy from the He I photon energy (21.22 eV), while the low binding energy onset region (Fig. 1d) in the range of 0–6 eV can be used to calculate the valence bands relative to the Fermi level. In order to eliminate the possible instrumental bias during data acquisition, the spectra from sputter-etched gold (Au) was used for reference. Determining the binding energy shift between Au and the films under test yields the valence band maximum (VBM) positions (relative to the Fermi level) to be 1.46 eV for the CH3NH3PbI3 layer, 2.34 eV for CdS and 3.41 eV for the ZnS film. Taking into account the reported band gap for these films (1.55 eV for CH3NH3PbI3, 2.4 eV for CdS and 3.6 eV for the ZnS film), the energy band diagram is summarized in Fig. 1b. Obviously, the prepared CdS and ZnS films, as well as the perovskite film, exhibit as n-type semiconductors with the Fermi level closer to the conduction band than to the valence band, consistent with previous work. The obtained conduction band energy (relative to the vacuum level) for the perovskite layer is approximately 3.9 eV, which is also in good agreement with previously reported results. The conduction band offset (CBO) between the perovskite and electron transport layer (ETL) may strongly influence the electron injection across the interface. From Fig. 1b, the CBO at the CdS/perovskite interface was determined to be −0.1 eV, while that was +1.3 eV at the ZnS/perovskite interface. This led us to predict that CdS may behave better as an electron transport layer than ZnS.

Fig. 2a shows the XRD spectra of the CdS film on the glass substrate. Only one weak peak at 2θ = 27° could be found, which may be attributed to the CdS cubic structure (111) or hexagonal structure (002). Fig. 2b shows the SEM surface morphology of the CdS film. We can find that the grain size was very uniform and the substrate was completely covered by the CdS film, which also could act as a compact layer to prevent leakage current. XRF measurement (Fig. 2c) shows that the prepared CdS film exhibits an S/Cd atomic ratio of 0.85, which can be explained by the presence of CdO. Hall-effect measurement (Fig. 2d) further confirms that the prepared the CdS film is an n-type semiconductor, where carrier mobility and concentration are 4.66 cm2 V−1 s−1 and −2.65 × 1014 cm−3, respectively. Obtaining uniform, pinhole-free perovskite films on a planar substrate is important for achieving high-performance devices. In this study, we adopted the solvent-engineering process described in a study of Jeon et al., in which non-polar solvent (toluene) was dripped on the substrate during spinning to improve film morphology. In order to obtain a 300–400 nm thick perovskite layer, 1.2 M CH3NH3I and PbI2 precursor solution was adopted for spin coating at 3000 rpm after multiple trials (Fig. S2). A typical surface SEM image of the perovskite film grown on the ITO/CdS substrate is shown in Fig. 2e. We can find that the perovskite film has a dense-microstructure with grain sizes in the range of 100–300 nm and shows a 100% coverage, together with an extremely flat surface. Fig. 3a shows the cross-sectional SEM image of a finished device with CdS as an electron transport layer. Each layer could be clearly defined according to the contrast variation of the cross-sectional image. The addition of the hole transport layer (spiro-OMeTAD) can also completely coat the perovskite film.
In order to probe the effect of metal sulfide on device performance, perovskite solar cells with and without the electron transport layer were fabricated. Fig. 3b shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curves for these cells. The photovoltaic parameters are also summarized in Table 1. The device without an electron transport layer presents an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.08 V, a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 7.05 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 0.47, corresponding to a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.58%. The Voc is remarkably high, but the Jsc and FF are very low, which could be attributed to the inefficiency in electron transport arising from the spike band alignment at the ITO/perovskite interface. The combination of all these parameters only yields a very low efficiency. When ZnS was used as an electron transport layer, the device shows an even lower PCE of 0.98% with a Voc of 0.98 V, a Jsc of 2.25 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.44. This is primarily due to the large conduction band offset between ZnS and the perovskite layer (Fig. 1), together with the low crystallinity and high surface roughness of the ZnS layer (Fig. S4). Therefore, the addition of the ZnS layer would not improve the charge transport, and instead introduces an increased contact resistance. In contrast, devices with CdS layers show a good performance. To obtain the optimal CdS layer, varied CdS film thickness was performed on ITO by controlling the deposition condition (Fig. S5). When a thin CdS layer of about 30 nm was used, a Voc of 1.05 V, a Jsc of 16.14 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.66 were achieved, resulting in the champion PCE of 11.17%. The devices with an approximately 50 nm thick CdS layer resulted in very similar results. As the CdS layer thickness is further increased to about 100 nm, the device performance exhibits obvious loss in Jsc and FF. Typically, a thicker CdS layer results in more absorption loss, thus the reduced Jsc. The FF is also largely affected by the series resistance effects from large CdS thickness. Therefore, further increase of CdS thickness would not show improvement in device performance. The common TiO2-based planar devices were also fabricated in our lab to compare with CdS-based devices. The champion TiO2-based solar cell exhibited a power conversion efficiency of 12.8% compared to 11.2% for the champion CdS-based device. Although that, we believe the use of CdS is advantageous in providing a simple low-temperature preparation process. Besides, we compare the hysteresis of perovskite devices with CdS and TiO2. Typical J–V curves under forward and reverse scan directions for the two kinds of perovskite devices are shown in Fig. S6. This CdS-based perovskite solar cell exhibits a little hysteresis of photocurrent, although it is not more serious compared to the TiO2-based planar perovskite solar cells.
Device

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
ITO
1.08 (0.97)
7.05 (4.23)
0.47 (0.36)
3.58 (1.54 ± 0.88)
ITO/ZnS
0.98 (0.76)
2.25 (1.73)
0.44 (0.28)
0.98 (0.53 ± 0.37)
ITO/CdS (30 nm)
1.05 (1.02)
16.14 (15.58)
0.66 (0.58)
11.17 (9.24 ± 1.48)
ITO/CdS (50 nm)
1.01 (1.05)
16.78 (15.05)
0.65 (0.60)
11.00 (9.55 ± 1.07)
ITO/CdS (100 nm)
0.96 (0.87)
13.93 (11.32)
0.63 (0.47)
8.52 (5.16 ± 3.24)
FTO/TiO2
0.99 (0.95)
17.95 (16.76)
0.72 (0.67)
12.80 (10.35 ± 1.75)
The high charge carrier mobility of the perovskite, along with the right charge conductor, can allow for the generation of high voltages. From Table 1, it also appears surprising that Voc is not affected by lack of the electron transport layer. We surmise that the perovskite layer could behave as a n-type semiconductor and the built-in electric field (or the voltage) is mainly produced at the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD interface. The high coverage of the perovskite layer further minimizes the voltage loss. In order to better understand the performance differences between with and without the CdS layer, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was used to compare their charge transport properties. The obtained spectra (Fig. 4) for both samples exhibit obvious differences. According to the previous report, the lower frequency arc of the impedance spectra is commonly attributed to the recombination resistance (Rrec) and Rrec is inversely related to the recombination rate. Obviously, the recombination at low bias (<0.8 V) for the CdS/Perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD based devices is lower compared to CdS-free based devices. In addition, the Rrec in the device with the CdS layer decreases slowly until the applied bias voltage (Vapp) reached 0.7 V. However, for CdS-free devices the variation with Vapp goes gently, even increased slightly at low Vapp and then declined slightly at high Vapp. This phenomenon could be explained that the device without the electron transport layer is deviated from the common diode model. Very recently, Liu et al. reported that a compact layer free perovskite solar cell can also yield a PCE of up to 13.5% using a two-step solution processed perovskite layer. However, our devices without the electron transport layer here behave badly, which may be explained by the differences of the perovskite preparation process or charge separation interfaces without residual unreacted PbI2.
To investigate the air-stability and photocurrent hysteresis in this kind of device, we have also characterized the device performance of a unencapsulated perovskite solar cell as a function of storage time in ambient air (30–40% relative humidity and 20–25 °C temperature) under forward (−0.2 V → 1.2 V) and reverse (1.2 V → −0.2 V) scans, as shown in Fig. 5. The device exhibits a little increased power conversion efficiency during the initial storage time, which could be attributed to the conductivity variation (p-doping) of the spiro-OMeTAD layer from the oxidation (exposure in air). The perovskite solar cell exhibits 50% degradation of PCE after 24 hours. The degradation rate is very close to the reported result for compact layer free perovskite solar cells. This may indicate that the CdS is not the dominant factor affecting the air-stability. The PCE under reverse scans is 0.4–1.7% higher than that under forward scans during short (<12 hours) storage time, but then turns lower after over 30 hours storage time.

In summary, we have demonstrated the use of metal sulfide by solution-process deposition as an electron transport layer in planar perovskite solar cells. This kind of device allows relatively low temperature processing. The conduction band offset at the interface between perovskite and the electron transport layer was found to be very important to reduce energy loss for charge transportation and collection. The photovoltaic performance and impedance spectroscopy reveal that the presence of the CdS layer results in efficient collection and reduced recombination. We believe that the successful use of the solution processed CdS film in perovskite-based solar cells likely extends to more analogous inorganic semiconductor materials, including those n-type semiconductors (CdSe, ZnSe, In2S3) which could be used as an electron selective layer, as well as those p-type semiconductors (CuInSe2, CdTe) used as a hole selective layer.


This work is supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (51202227), the Science and Technology Development Foundation of China academy of Engineering Physics (2014A0302015 and 2014B0302054), the National High Technology Research and Development Program of China (2012AA050704), the Sichuan International Cooperation Research Project (no. 2014HH0068) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of China (no. 2672012ZYGX2012J065).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta01200g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015