 DOI: 10.1039/D1TA06247F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 27541-27550


Seojun
Lee
,

Jun
Ryu
,

Seong Soo
Park
,

Saemon
Yoon
,

Dong-Gun
Lee
,

Janghyuk
Moon
,

Yu Jin
Kim
* and 

Dong-Won
Kang
*

Department of Smart City, Chung-Ang University, Seoul 06974, Republic of Korea. E-mail: kangdwn@cau.ac.kr; yujinkim88@cau.ac.kr

School of Energy Systems Engineering, Chung-Ang University, Seoul 06974, Republic of Korea

Received
24th July 2021
, Accepted 17th November 2021
First published on 18th November 2021
The structural engineering of crystal frameworks has emerged as a highly useful technique in the development of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) to realize highly efficient devices with superior chemical and electrical properties. The introduction of organic spacer cations into perovskite crystals is one of the major topics currently being explored in the field of structural engineering research. However, intercalated organic molecules in three-dimensional (3D) perovskite structures generate low-dimensional perovskite phases, resulting in inefficient carrier transport due to a reduction in 3D dimensionality. Maintaining the 3D crystal structures of organic-cation-inserted perovskites remains a major issue and a challenging task to be solved. In this work, we created an ideal organic-layered 3D crystal structure using an n-butylammonium (n-BA) halide salt in a FA0.83Cs0.17Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 perovskite. The cation allows a self-assembled hierarchical structure in which the n-BA organic analog is layered on the surface and at the bottom of the perovskite without a reduction of the 3D crystal dimensionality. Based on X-ray scattering results, the existence of a vertically oriented crystal structure, from both external and internal structural perspectives, demonstrates the creation of an ideal n-BA-capped 3D perovskite crystal. Furthermore, the self-assembling n-BA cations facilitate an enhancement of the device stability of Pb–Sn PSCs, due to the suppression of the generation of silver iodide at the top interface and the degradation of PSS in poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) by sulfuric acid at the bottom interface. These structural and chemical stability effects lead to the creation of a highly efficient Pb–Sn PSC with nearly 19% efficiency.

Organic–inorganic metal halide perovskites have become a subject of tremendous interest at the center of photovoltaic research. As one of the leading photovoltaic materials, they have outstanding properties, such as energy bandgap tunability, long charge diffusion lengths, low exciton binding energies, and low-temperature processability. These advantages have facilitated a competitive increase in related power conversion efficiency (PCE) values to a new record value of over 25%.

One of the reasons that record PCEs have been achieved is structural engineering in the perovskite framework. Perovskites that incorporate organic spacer cations allow low-dimensional perovskites, such as two-dimensional (2D) or quasi-2D three-dimensional (3D) examples, in the crystal matrix. A 2D-layered 3D perovskite structure (representative examples include 2D-layered Ruddlesden-Popper and Dion-Jacobson perovskites) provides superior oxygen passivation effects and good thermal and structural stability compared to 3D perovskites. Ultimately, these structures improve the stabilities of perovskites that have a hydroscopic nature or issues relating to the release of organic interstitial cations, especially methylammonium (MA+), from the crystal lattice. However, the 2D quantum-well phase in the crystal shows dielectric and quantum confinement, resulting in a high exciton binding energy and a large bandgap in the perovskite. The reduction of 3D dimensionality results in the inhibition of effective charge carrier movement along the out-of-plane direction, and relatively low PCEs are achieved. Therefore, clear criteria are required when selecting organic spacer cations and designing perovskite structures in order to maintain an intact 3D phase. It is suggested that inorganic sheets with an extremely high n value should be created as the 3D perovskite, with an ultrathin 2D organic analog as a phase-separated layer (2D organic analog capping layer), which could be an “ideal 2D-capping 3D structure” in a perovskite absorber system.
Based on this perspective, we created an organic cation-capped 3D framework in a Pb–Sn binary perovskite using an n-butylammonium (n-BA) halide salt. To generate a 3D phase without a decrease in the dimensionality of the cubic crystal, cesium (Cs) ions were incorporated into the perovskite, because they have considerably strong binding affinity, which leads to organic cations at the edges rather than intercalation. Thus, n-BA cations can be naturally generated at the surface, and at the bottom, a self-assembled hierarchical structure was obtained. In addition, the existence of Cs in formamidinium (FA)-based perovskites has shown outstanding merit from the perspective of crystal structure; Cs assists the crystallization of the black perovskite phase (α-phase) via entropic stabilization. From our strategy, ideal n-BA organic-passivated 3D hierarchical architecture was created in a FACs-based Pb–Sn binary perovskite. A small quantity of n-BA, with a 2% molar ratio, facilitates the ideal perovskite, with the composition of BA0.02(FA0.83Cs0.17)0.98Pb0.5Sn0.5I3. Self-assembling n-BA on the surface and at the bottom supports the high chemical stability of the perovskite, suppressing the generation of a silver iodide compound at the top interface and the degradation of PSS in poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) by sulfuric acid at the bottom interface. These structural crystallinity and chemical stability effects lead to the achievement of one of the highest performing PSCs in the current field of Pb–Sn binary perovskite solar cells, with near 19% efficiency.

To theoretically understand the stable state of self-assembling n-BA cations on the surface or at the bottom of the FA0.83Cs0.17Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 perovskite, density functional theory (DFT) calculations were conducted. Depending on the atomic positions of Cs and n-BA on the surface (S) or in the bulk (B) of the cubic crystal, surface crystal structures were designed and investigated (Fig. 1a and S1). In the first case, Cs is in S or B positions of the perovskite without n-BA (Fig. 1a, 1st row); in the second case, Cs is in S or B positions in the perovskite with n-BA positioned in a S position (Fig. 1a, 2nd row); and in the third case, Cs is in S or B positions in the perovskite with n-BA positioned in a B position (Fig. 1a, 3rd row). The corresponding formation energy (ΔEf) values were calculated and compared (Fig. 1b). The second configuration, with n-BA on the (100) surface, showed the lowest ΔEf values of −1.640 eV for BA(S) Cs(S) and −1.459 eV for BA(S) Cs(B). This indicates that the most stable state of the Pb–Sn perovskite structure is with the existence of n-BA, especially at the surface. More interestingly, it is a more stable system than the cases without n-BA cations (Cs(S) and Cs(B)). Consequently, our strategy for the creation of an ideal n-BA organic-capping 3D structure in the form of an n-BA-induced perovskite can be realized, which suggests a self-assembled n-BA-capped hierarchical structure (Fig. 1c).


With the theoretical results in hand, experimental data prove that n-BA (2%) molecules were positioned on the surface and at the bottom of the FA0.83Cs0.17Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 crystal, and a self-assembled hierarchical structure was generated. A time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) depth profile with a 3D-rendered image demonstrates that the n-BA ions are dominantly distributed at the top and bottom of the perovskite framework (Fig. 2a, all components are shown in Fig. S2). The few research studies into the guest effects of n-BA in perovskites have mainly reported its tendency to assemble as a capping phase in perovskites without positional information. Thus, our direct observation of self-assembled layers provides a meaningful result in this n-BA system. The self-assembled n-BA organic capping layers do not allow for a 2D perovskite phase in the crystal, which can be confirmed based on the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns in Fig. 2b. The peak at 12.71° arising from the 2D perovskite lattice shows an intensity of practically zero (details of other peak positions will be discussed below). At higher n-BA concentrations, such as n-BA 5% and n-BA 10%, however, strong diffraction peaks were observed. The Snaith group identified plate-like features from the 2D crystal phase of n-BA-induced perovskites in SEM images. In our system, non-plate-like perovskite crystalline morphology was observed (Fig. S3). Therefore, we suggest two points: (1) the 2D perovskite phase was not created at an n-BA concentration of 2% in the FA0.83Cs0.17Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 crystal; and (2) the n-BA 2% molecularly assembled structure was developed with a very thin organic capping layer that does not form a 2D perovskite phase.

The n-BA capping layer on the FA0.83Cs0.17Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 crystal increases the hydrophobicity of the perovskite surface (Fig. 2c). Images of a water droplet show a higher contact angle value for the n-BA 2% perovskite film (77.06°) than that of n-BA 0% (57.26°) at the initial dropping time. After 1 min, the water droplet spread out on the FA0.83Cs0.17Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 surface (45.43°), whereas it was mostly maintained on top of BA0.02(FA0.83Cs0.17)0.98Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 (73.08°) (Fig. S4). A surface passivation effect from the n-BA 2% capping layer induced the changes in hydrophobicity, which can suppress the penetration of water molecules into the perovskite crystal. Higher stability in the long term can therefore be expected in a perovskite photovoltaic device using the n-BA 2% passivated 3D perovskite. The assembled structure with n-BA molecules at the bottom of the perovskite crystal provides another benefit in terms of the stability. In general, Pb–Sn binary perovskite solar cells are fabricated with an inverted positive–intrinsic–negative (p–i–n) structure, and PEDOT:PSS is used as a hole-transporting layer. The sulfonate groups (SO3−) of PSS can interact with the ammonium groups of n-BA molecules, with the formation of ionic bonds (Fig. 2d). Our DFT calculations reveal stronger interactions between n-BA molecules and sulfonate than between FA and sulfonate (Fig. S5). This indicates that the combination of self-assembled n-BA on the surface of the perovskite and PEDOT/PSS can suppress the corrosion of perovskite by styrene sulfonate. This enables the device to resist degradation by sulfuric acid.
Therefore, the self-assembled n-BA structure at the two edges of the crystal provides a highly stable Pb–Sn binary perovskite due to its dual advantages. Stability issues can develop in tin-based perovskite solar cells. The preventative effects against the oxidation of tin molecules were evaluated via X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Two Pb–Sn binary perovskites without and with n-BA (2%), respectively, were exposed to air, and the divalent (Sn2+) and tetravalent (Sn4+) cation signals in their surface states were investigated from deconvolution of the Sn 3d5/2 spectra (Fig. 2e). Sn species can easily be oxidized (Sn2+ → Sn4+) due to oxygen in the environment, which was observed in the FA0.83Cs0.17Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 perovskite (high proportion of Sn4+; Fig. 2e, left panel). On the other hand, a highly non-oxidized state, with a large Sn2+ signal, was revealed in the BA0.02(FA0.83Cs0.17)0.98Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 perovskite (Fig. 2e, right panel). When we investigated the core-level oxygen signals from the perovskites, the O 1s peak appeared with a significantly lower signal in the BA0.02(FA0.83Cs0.17)0.98Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 film (Fig. 2f). Following on from these result, we directly confirmed the oxidation tendencies of the two perovskites; the perovskite precursor with n-BA (2%) cations remained as a yellow solution after air exposure, whereas the precursor without n-BA (0%) exhibited a change from yellow to orange (Fig. S6). The lower oxygen adsorption energy of the BA0.02(FA0.83Cs0.17)0.98Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 perovskite crystal (−0.679 eV; the value for FA0.83Cs0.17Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 is −0.949 eV) provides a theoretical basis for the oxygen passivation effect (Fig. S7, a detailed description is given in the ESI), supporting all the experimental results.

The ideal n-BA organic-capped 3D hierarchical architecture, with its corresponding dual-effect chemical properties, allows for highly efficient Pb–Sn binary perovskite solar cells. A p–i–n planar heterojunction structure was adopted as the device architecture, in the form of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/Pb–Sn perovskite/PCBM/BCP/Ag (Fig. S8). Fig. 3a shows the current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the best devices with and without n-BA (2%), respectively, measured under the following air mass conditions: AM 1.5G irradiation. They were selected from 20 devices under each condition with different n-BA molar ratios, which are evaluated in detail in Fig. S9–S10 and Tables S2–S5. The FA0.83Cs0.17Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 perovskite device displayed a PCE of 16.22%, a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 28.45 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 0.76, and an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.76 V. The BA0.02(FA0.83Cs0.17)0.98Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 solar cell with the ideal hierarchical structure yielded an enhanced PCE of 18.66%, with Jsc of 28.10 mA cm−2, a FF of 0.82, and Voc of 0.81 V. This suggests that its performance is one of the highest of reported Pb–Sn binary perovskite solar cells, especially in terms of the FF. The excellent Jsc value of over 28 mA cm−2 also contributes to achieving superior device performance. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra (Fig. 3b, left axis) and integrated Jsc data from the EQE data (Fig. 3b, right axis) support this argument, with less than 4% error (Fig. 3b). The considerably high FF value of the n-BA 2% induced perovskite device can be demonstrated based on Voc from a trap-assisted or surface recombination perspective. The n-BA 2% passivated 3D perovskite structure facilitated the suppression of defects and the reduction of the trap-site density. The dependence of Voc on the logarithm of the light intensity shows the following relationship (eqn (1)):

Voc = (nkT/q)ln(Jph/J0) + constant
(1)
where
n is the ideality factor, k is the Boltzmann constant, q is the elementary charge, T is the cell temperature, Jph is the photocurrent density, and J0 is the saturated current density under dark conditions. It has been reported that a trap-free system shows a slope of Voc = kT/q from the diode equation, and an n value approaching 2 indicates that trap-assisted Shockley–Reed–Hall (SRH) recombination dominates. The ideality factor decreased from 1.51 for the n-BA 0% perovskite device to 1.25 for the n-BA 2% capped 3D perovskite structure (Fig. 3c), demonstrating that trap-assisted SRH recombination is effectively suppressed by the n-BA 2% capping layer located at the absorber surface. This self-assembled n-BA 2% passivated phase on the surface of the perovskite also inhibits non-radiative recombination caused by surface defects; stronger emission intensity at ca. 955 nm in the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectrum of the perovskite with n-BA 2% was seen (Fig. S11). Transient photovoltage (TPV) decays facilitates an understanding of the time constants relating to the charge recombination kinetics of the devices (Fig. S12). The decay profiles were evaluated through fitting to a bi-exponential decay function (Table S7) and the average photogenerated carrier lifetimes were obtained. It is found that the n-BA 2% capped 3D perovskite structure device shows a carrier lifetime of 3.44 μs, which is approximately one order of magnitude higher than that of the n-BA 0% perovskite solar cell (0.45 μs). The longer carrier lifetime indicates slower charge recombination, delivering an increase in Voc and FF in the n-BA 2% capped 3D perovskite structure cell. A comparison of the relative trap state densities was carried out based on the dark J–V characteristics of hole-only devices (the device structure is ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/P3HT/Ag). As shown in Fig. 3d and e, a linear current relationship was observed due to the ohmic responses of the devices at low bias, which sequentially increased, and a more rapid rise was exhibited with an increase in voltage. A cross-point can be defined between the behaviors in the high and low voltage ranges, which is defined as the trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL). From this, the trap state density (Nt) can be determined using eqn (2):

(2)
where
ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, εr is the relative dielectric constant of the Pb–Sn binary perovskite, q is the elementary charge, and L is the thickness of the perovskite film. The estimated VTFL values are 1.91 V for the n-BA 0% perovskite device (Fig. 3d) and 0.86 V for the perovskite cell with the n-BA 2% capping layer (Fig. 3e), and the corresponding calculated Nt values are 3.30 × 1016 cm−3 and 1.48 × 1016 cm−3, respectively. The BA0.02(FA0.83Cs0.17)0.98Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 perovskite solar cell with an ideal 3D hierarchical structure showed a trap state density that was less than half that of the BA-free counterpart, resulting in higher Voc and FF values, with fewer defect sites. The Urbach energy (Eu) can also be used to demonstrate the trap state densities of perovskite films with and without n-BA (2%) based on the optoelectronic properties. It represents the energetic disorder at the band edge, and it can be determined using the relation α = α0exp(E/Eu), where α is the absorption coefficient and E (= hν) is the photon energy.Eu was calculated to be 50 meV in the case of the n-BA 0% perovskite film, whereas it decreased to 41 meV with n-BA 2% (Fig. S13). This means that the n-BA 2% capped 3D perovskite film has lower band edge disorder and a lower defect density.

Overall, the n-BA 2% cation induced Pb–Sn perovskite solar cells have a low density of trap states and, correspondingly, few recombination issues, resulting in higher device performance with superior Voc and FF values.
In addition, for the Voc factor, the BA0.02(FA0.83Cs0.17)0.98Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 perovskite film showed a lower highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level (−5.19 eV) than the n-BA 0% perovskite film (−5.36 eV) based on the Fermi levels and valence band minima calculated based on ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) (Fig. S14 and S15). With a phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) top interlayer, the maximum theoretical photovoltage can be determined based on quasi-Fermi level splitting, as follows: Voc = (Efermi-PCBM − Efermi-perovskite) × q−1. Based on this relationship, the Pb–Sn perovskite device with n-BA (2%) showed a lower Voc value; however, the n-BA 0% perovskite device exhibited a lower Voc factor in the experimental results. This suggests that the n-BA 2% passivated 3D perovskite structure device has a lower defect density and lower possibility of recombination.
It is noteworthy that the n-BA 2% capped 3D perovskite structure encourages device stability in tin-based perovskite solar cells. The stability was investigated in an ambient environment without encapsulation (under measurement conditions, devices were kept inside a N2-filled glove box) (Fig. 3f). After 72 days, the n-BA 2% capped 3D hierarchical structure device maintains ∼91% of its initial PCE, but the PCE dropped to ∼50% for the n-BA 0% perovskite solar cell. In a series of studies of the stability, the variation of the steady-state photocurrent output with time at a voltage close to the maximum power point was investigated (Fig. S16). On the basis of the Jsc values from transient J–V measurements, the current density gradually dropped under continuous illumination, showing a value that was 9% lower after 1000 s (Fig. S16a). Excellent steady-state photocurrent stability without current loss was revealed from the n-BA 2% capped 3D perovskite structure device (Fig. S16b). As well as the effects of moisture passivation by n-BA (2%) on the FA0.83Cs0.17Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 surface, we were motivated to explore another reason for the high stability of the Pb–Sn perovskite solar cell: the inhibition of the formation of silver iodide (AgI) due to iodine migration in the crystal. In terms of the color changes of the top electrodes of the devices, the n-BA 0% perovskite solar cell showed a color change to yellow, whereas silver electrodes were maintained in the FA0.83Cs0.17Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 device with n-BA 2% (Fig. S17). This suggests that the n-BA cations on the perovskite surface suppress the formation of AgI due to the lower energy of iodine defect formation in the crystal (Fig. S18).

The self-assembled n-BA cations in the Pb–Sn perovskite crystal enable the creation of a 3D hierarchical structure, even enhancing the crystallinity. Fig. 4a shows the typical XRD pattern resulting from the FACsPbSnI3 perovskite lattice, with (100), (110), (111), (200), (210), and (211) diffraction peaks present in the n-BA 0% perovskite crystal pattern (Fig. 4a, black line; the (100), (110), (111), (200), (210), and (211) peaks are positioned at ca. 14.1°, 20.0°, 24.5°, 28.3°, 31.7°, and 34.9°, respectively). Both the (100) and (200) diffraction peaks corresponding to the perpendicular direction were prominent, and the intensities of other crystal planes were diminished in the n-BA 2% capped perovskite crystal pattern (Fig. 4a, red line). This means that the n-BA cations induce higher crystallinity and a more phase-pure perovskite film with a hierarchical structure. To quantitatively understand the enhanced crystallinity of the vertical plane, the (100) lattice was focused on, and the crystallite size was calculated using the Scherrer equation. The slightly reduced broadness of the diffraction peak from the (100) plane provides a smaller full width at half maximum (FWHM) value, resulting in a larger crystallite size of around 118 nm for the n-BA 2% capped 3D perovskite crystal (around 95 nm for the n-BA 0% perovskite, Fig. 4b). Along with the FWHM value of the (100) plane, the FWHM values of other diffraction peaks were determined, and a Williamson–Hall plot was constructed (Fig. S19). Williamson–Hall analysis is related to the broadness of XRD diffraction peaks, and it can define broadness as a combination of crystallite size and microstrain, as shown in eqn (3)53:

βT(total broadness) = βc(crystallite size) + βs(microstrain)
(3)

β
c and βs are associated with the Scherrer equation and a broadening function regarding the microstrain, respectively, and eqn (3) can thereby be re-arranged to the following eqn (4) and (5):
(4)
(5)
where
K (0.9) is the shape factor, λ is the wavelength of the X-ray source, D is the crystallite size, ε is the strain, and θ is the XRD peak position in radians. The slope of the plot indicates the strain component (ε), indicating the degree of lattice deformation in the crystal due to the formation of defect states and trap centers. As shown in Fig. S19, the extracted strain component values were 0.108 and 0.062 for the n-BA 0% and n-BA 2% perovskite crystals, respectively. The lower lattice strain in the n-BA 2% capped 3D perovskite suggests a reduction in disorder in the internal crystal structure, with suppression of nonradiative recombination. This result strongly supports the above data regarding the trap state density reduction from a crystal structure point of view.

The perovskites were observed from a two-dimensional crystallographic perspective, and grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) patterns were investigated (Fig. 4c and d). To clearly understand the crystal architecture in the 3D structures, images were obtained from three different incident angle positions (αi: incident angle; αi = 0.08, 0.12, and 0.26°). The X-ray with αi = 0.08° (αi ≪ the critical angle of the film (αc)) is relatively scattered in the very-near-surface regions of the film, that with αi = 0.12° is at the critical angle position (αi = αc), and that with αi = 0.26° is diffracted in the deep bulk section of the film (αi > αc). First of all, we can find that the n-BA 2% capped 3D perovskite film showed a more vertically ordered crystal structure, particularly in the bulk region (Fig. 4c and d shows the n-BA 0% perovskite film). From the patterns that demonstrate the surface region (αi ≪ αc), the n-BA 2% capped 3D perovskite crystal showed clearly stronger scattering patterns for the main diffraction rings (qz ≈ 0.97 Å−1 for the (100) lattice plane and qz ≈ 1.94 Å−1 for the (200) lattice plane). On the other hand, the n-BA 0% perovskite film showed relatively weak scattering rings with various crystal phases, which is consistent with the XRD patterns in Fig. 4a. In the GIWAXS data from the critical angle position (αi = αc), bright spots at qz ≈ 0.97 Å−1 and qz ≈ 1.94 Å−1 were revealed in the n-BA 2% perovskite film, whereas scattering rings without distinct peak spots were observed in the n-BA 0% perovskite film. Bright spots were additionally observed at qxy,z ≈ 0.97 Å−1 and qxy,z ≈ 1.94 Å−1, respectively, in the (100) and (200) diffraction rings of the n-BA 2% perovskite film. This result is strongly related to diffraction rings in the bulk region (αi > αc). All demonstrated information can be confirmed in detail from line cut profiles extracted from the GWIAXS results (Fig. S20). Therefore, the n-BA (2%) cations allow for vertically well-oriented FA0.83Cs0.17Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 perovskite crystals in the 3D structure. This can be visually confirmed from cross-sectional SEM images. Randomly stacked crystal domains were observed in the n-BA 0% perovskite (Fig. 5a), whereas more single crystal structures with vertical growth were formed in the n-BA 2% passivated 3D perovskite system (Fig. 5b) (low-magnification cross-sectional SEM images are shown in Fig. S21).
The inner structure of the perovskite also has a vertically oriented crystal framework (Fig. 5c and d); a longer diffraction pattern with more sharpness along the perpendicular direction (qz position) was revealed for the n-BA 2% capped 3D perovskite crystal in the grazing-incidence small-angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS) image (Fig. 5d). This can be confirmed in detail from the one-dimensional extracted out-of-plane profiles (Fig. S22). In addition, we can understand the surface roughness of perovskite film using the concept of fractals from profiles. The correlation can be expressed as shown in eqn (6):
I(q) = IAq−α
(6)
where
q = 4πsinθ/λ is the scattering wavevector, 2θ is the scattering Bragg angle, λ is the X-ray wavelength, IA is a constant, and α is a parameter related to the fractal dimension (0 ≤ α ≤ 4). Eqn (6) converts to InI(q) = −αInIAInq, and the slope of α in the profile can have a range of 3 < α ≤ 4, indicating the existence of a surface fractal from the irregular surface. Its dimension (Dsf) can be expressed in the form Dsf = 6 − α, where a larger Dsf value indicates a rougher film surface. Based on this concept, we investigated the Dsf values in the two perovskite crystals with and without n-BA cations based on double logarithmic plots of I(q) versus q, as shown in Fig. 5e and f. From fitting in the linear region (red lines), the fractal dimension parameters, α, were estimated to be 3.07 and 3.53 for n-BA 0% and n-BA 2%, respectively. The corresponding Dsf values are 2.47 and 2.93, respectively. This means that the n-BA 2% passivated 3D perovskite crystal has smoother surface morphology. This result can be directly confirmed from the atomic force microscopy (AFM) images in the insets of Fig. 5e and f. The performance of a perovskite solar cell is highly related to the quality of the perovskite film that has planar contact with interlayers. Thus, the smoother surface of the n-BA 2% perovskite film provides preferable contact with the PCBM layer, which might be one of the reasons for the excellent FF. Therefore, based on external and internal structure analysis of crystals, our main argument that the n-BA 2% capped FA0.83Cs0.17Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 perovskite maintains 3D dimensionality can be proved. This statement is extended to include more enhanced crystallinity with vertical growth in the n-BA 2% capped 3D perovskite system.


In this work, we created an ideal perovskite structure that retains its 3D crystal dimensionality using n-BA cations in a Pb–Sn perovskite. A small amount (2% molar ratio) of n-BA allows for a self-assembled hierarchical structure in the FA0.83Cs0.17Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 perovskite framework, with n-BA positioned at the surface and at the bottom. The n-BA 2% capped 3D perovskite crystal does not adopt a 2D perovskite phase, thus BA0.02(FA0.83Cs0.17)0.98Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 maintains a 3D crystal structure. From a chemical property aspect, the n-BA position at the two edges of the perovskite has two advantages. The n-BA molecules on the surface controlled the hydrophobicity of the FA0.83Cs0.17Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 perovskite, preventing the penetration of water molecules into the perovskite film. Furthermore, they facilitated a passivation effect against oxygen molecules. Regarding the bottom-positioned n-BA cations, their ammonium groups can interact with SO3− from PSS in PEDOT:PSS, forming ionic bonds. This enables the prevention of perovskite degradation by sulfuric acid. Therefore, these numerous advantages allow long-term stability in the resulting Pb–Sn perovskite solar cells. In terms of device performance, the n-BA 2% capped 3D perovskite structure cell showed a high device efficiency of nearly 19%, with superior Voc and FF values. The lower trap site density, lower levels of non-radiative recombination, and lower band-edge disorder allow excellent Voc and FF values to be achieved, assisting device performance. It is noteworthy that these values are some of the highest in the Pb–Sn- or Sn-based solar-cell field, especially the FF value. One of the main reasons for the high performance of the device with the n-BA 2% capped 3D perovskite structure is the vertically well-oriented perovskite crystal architecture, which supports our hierarchical structure concept. From external and internal crystallographic structure analysis, the n-BA 2% capped 3D perovskite showed a highly well-oriented crystal framework with vertical growth. Consequently, our work provides guidelines on how to maintain the 3D crystal phase in perovskite crystals and how to enhance the chemical stability of Pb–Sn-based perovskite solar cells.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by a National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korean government (MSIT) (NRF – 2021R1A2C4002045, 2021R1A4A2001687, and 2021R1C1C1008383). This work was also supported by a Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) and the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (MOTIE) of the Republic of Korea (20193020010440). The authors thank our group members Sungwon Cho and Yurim Bae for fruitful discussion and help with making figures using Origin software.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta06247f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021