 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA10319F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4436-4443

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Van-Duong
Dao
,

Chinh Quoc
Tran
,

Seung-Hyeon
Ko
 and 

Ho-Suk
Choi
*

Department of Chemical Engineering, Chungnam National University, 220 Gung-Dong, Yuseong-Gu, Daejoen 305-764, Korea. E-mail: hchoi@cnu.ac.kr; Fax: +82-42-822-8995; Tel: +82-42-821-5689

Center for Nanoscale Science and Technology, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 20899, USA

Institute for Research in Electronics and Applied Physics, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA

Received
21st January 2013
, Accepted 24th January 2013
First published on 24th January 2013
A dye-sensitized solar cell (DSC) can be a promising device as a ubiquitous power source, if it is flexible. Since the annealing step of TiO2 nanoparticles (NPs) is a major obstacle to using a thermoplastic film as a transparent photoanode (PA), a transparent counter electrode (CE) using a thermoplastic film as a photo illumination window can be a reasonable alternative for developing a flexible DSC together with a non-transparent PA using a flexible metal foil coated with TiO2 NPs. To achieve this purpose together with improving photo conversion efficiency, it is necessary to deposit highly active supported platinum (Pt) NPs with homogeneous size dispersity on the surface of a transparent conducting oxide (TCO). Various methods developed so far, however, have critical process restrictions such as high temperature, low pressure, liquid environment, and chemical toxicity, which render them difficult to develop into an economic continuous process. Here we report an excellent method of directly depositing Pt-NPs on the surface of a TCO using dry plasma reduction (DPR) under atmospheric pressure without using any toxic chemicals while keeping the temperature below 70 °C. After determining an optimum concentration of Pt precursor solution to maximize the photovoltaic performance of DSCs, we successfully demonstrate a new flexible DSC which is composed of a non-transparent PA using thin Ti foil coated with TiO2 NPs and a transparent CE, as a photo illumination window, using Pt-NPs supported on a PET/ITO film.

A dye-sensitized solar cell (DSC) was proposed in 1991 by Gratzel and O'Regan. Because of its low fabrication cost and clean energy conversion, many attempts have been made to improve its efficiency. A DSC primarily consists of a photoanode (PA), an electrolyte, and a counter electrode (CE). Although the PA has a large potential to improve the photo conversion efficiency of DSCs, the CE also has an important role of transferring electrons into the redox system and catalyzing the reduction of electrolytes. For this purpose, electrical conductivity, catalytic activity, and transmittance need to be improved. However, it is not easy to simultaneously satisfy the above three aspects.

Platinum (Pt) is the most popular material for the CE of DSC because of its catalytic functionality, high conductivity and chemical stability in an acid/base environment. Thus, for coating the Pt layer on a conductive substrate, several methods have been developed such as sputtering, thermal decomposition (TD), electrochemical deposition and chemical reduction. Pt-sputtering has many drawbacks such as requiring a large amount of noble metal, needing expensive vacuum equipment, and producing non-transparent electrodes. TD requires not only a long aging time for reduction but also heat treatment above 380 °C. High temperature above 150 °C can be an obstacle to developing flexible DSCs with plastic films. While electrochemical deposition and chemical reduction are relatively simple and inexpensive, they require additional washing and drying steps for removing organic reagents which decrease the catalytic activity of the CEs.
Plasma has also been used to synthesize supported metal NPs, while Au- and Pt-NPs deposited on carbon nanotubes have been successfully synthesized using the liquid-plasma reduction technique. Although the metal NPs showed excellent performance, the technique is not only complex but also expensive because of the use of an ionic liquid and the necessity of a purification step. Dry plasma reduction (DPR) has also been applied for preparing supported metal NPs, and reducing graphene oxides using hydrogen and ammonia gas. The method additionally needs a thermal calcination step for preparing supported metal NPs and requires hydrogen as a reducing gas. The dielectric barrier discharge (DBD) was also employed to prepare metallic Pd NPs uniformly dispersed on graphene sheets without any surfactants and chemical reducing agents. The major problem of DBD devices, however, is their inhomogeneity due to the appearance of streamer discharge channels. Furthermore, the previous DPR used vacuum chambers, rendering it difficult to develop into an economic continuous process.
The main motivation of this study is to overcome the process restrictions previously mentioned, especially high temperature, low pressure, liquid environment, and chemical toxicity. Here, we present a new process to efficiently synthesize supported Pt-NPs using a DPR at near room temperature under atmospheric pressure. First, we show the successful synthesis of Pt-NPs supported on FTO glass using RF plasma under atmospheric pressure while maintaining the temperature below 70 °C. Second, we optimize the concentration of Pt precursor solution to maximize the photovoltaic performance of DSCs with Pt-NPs CEs under both PA-side and CE-side illuminations. Third, we compare the photovoltaic performances of three DSCs prepared using sputtering, TD and DPR. Finally, we demonstrate a new flexible DSC which is composed of a non-transparent PA using thin Ti foil coated with TiO2 NPs and a transparent CE, as a photo illumination window, using Pt-NPs supported on a PET/ITO film.

A Pt precursor solution containing 0.1, 1, 10, and 100 mM H2PtCl6·xH2O (≥37.5% Pt basic, Sigma-Aldrich) in iso-propyl alcohol (IPA) (99.5%, Sigma-Aldrich) was first prepared. 8 μl of Pt precursor was deposited on 2 × 2 cm2 specimens of FTO glass (∼8 Ω □−1, Pilkington, USA) or pre-plasma treated PET/ITO (∼14 Ω □−1, Solaronix, Switzerland) and the solvent was allowed to evaporate at 70 °C for 10 min. The specimens were then reduced using Ar plasma under atmospheric pressure at a power of 150 W, a gas flow rate of 5 lpm, a treatment time of 15 min, and a substrate moving speed of 5 mm s−1.

For comparison, a CE was prepared through the TD method after dropping 10 mM solution of chloroplatinic acid hydrate in IPA onto the substrate and annealing at 400 °C for 15 min, and a Pt-sputtered CE was prepared through DC-sputtering Pt at 10 mA and 2 × 10−3 Torr for 5 min.

We fabricated the DSC working electrode coated with a TiO2 layer of 0.7 × 0.7 cm2 on the FTO glass or Ti foil (0.032 mm thickness, 99.7% metals basis, Alfa Aesar, A Johnson Matthey Company) of 2 × 2 cm2 through the following procedure. The substrates were first cleaned in acetone (Fluka) using an ultrasonic bath for 30 min. After cleaning, the substrates were immersed in a 40 mM aqueous TiCl4 solution at 70 °C for 30 min and washed with water and ethanol. A transparent film of 20 nm TiO2 particles (Solaronix, Switzerland) was coated on the substrates by screen printing (200 T mesh), kept in a clean box for 3 min so that the paste could relax to reduce the surface irregularity and then dried for 3 min at 125 °C. This screen-printing procedure (coating, storing, and drying) was repeated until the thickness of the working electrode was around 14 μm. We then also coated a 4 μm thick scattering layer of TiO2 paste (DSL 18 NR-AO, Dyesol-Timo, Australia) on a working electrode prepared on the FTO glass substrate or the Ti foil substrate. The electrodes coated with the TiO2 paste were gradually heated under air flow at 325 °C for 5 min, at 375 °C for 5 min, at 450 °C for 15 min, and finally at 500 °C for 15 min under ambient conditions. After annealing, the TiO2 film was treated with a 40 mM TiCl4 solution as described above, rinsed with water and ethanol and sintered at 500 °C for 30 min. After cooling down to 80 °C, the TiO2 electrodes were immersed in a 0.3 mM N719 dye solution in a mixture of acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich) and tert-butyl alcohol (Aldrich) (volume ratio of 1:1) and kept at room temperature for 24 h to complete the sensitizer uptake.


The dye-covered TiO2 electrode and the Pt-counter electrode were assembled into a sandwich type cell and sealed at 120 °C/5 min with a thermobonding polymer (Surlyn, DuPont) of 60 μm thickness. A drop of the electrolyte, a solution of 1-methyl-3-butylimidazolium iodide (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.03 M I2 (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.10 M guanidinium thiocyanate (Sigma-Aldrich), and 0.50 M 4-tert-butylpyridine (Aldrich) in a mixed solvent of acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich) and valeronitrile (volume ratio of 85:15), was placed in each hole (0.8 mm) in the back of the working electrode. The holes were sealed with a Surlyn layer.


The characterization of the synthesized Pt-NPs was performed using a transmission electron microscope and an energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometer (JEM-2100F, Joel, Japan). For TEM analysis of a highly magnified Pt-NP, we scratched part of the coated layer with a diamond tip, crushed the debris in an agate mortar in an ethanol suspension, and transferred it to a holey carbon grid. The absorption spectra of the CEs were recorded using a U-3310 spectrophotometer (integrating sphere, Hitachi). X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed on a Rigaku D/MAX-RC (12 kW). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed on a Multilab 2000. Cold type field emission scanning electron microscopy (HRSEM) was performed on a JEOL JSM-7000F. The change in sample surface temperature during plasma treatment was measured with a thermocouple equipped with a temperature controlling device (Testo 175).

Photocurrent–voltage characteristics were measured with an IVIUMSTAT under illumination from a Sun 3000 solar simulator composed of 1000 W mercury based Xe arc lamps and AM 1.5 G filters. Light intensity was calibrated with a silicon photodiode. A cyclic voltammogram (CV) was measured in the electrolyte consisting of 10 mmol l−1 LiI, 1 mmol l−1 I2, and 1 mmol l−1 LiClO4. The data were then recorded from 900 mV to −900 mV at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) of DSC was performed under constant light illumination (100 mW cm−2) biased at open-circuit conditions. The measured frequency range was 100 kHz to 100 mHz with a perturbation amplitude of 10 mV. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy of symmetric dummy cells was performed under open-circuit conditions. The measured frequency range was 100 kHz to 100 mHz with a perturbation amplitude of 20 mV. The obtained spectra were fitted using the Z-view software (v3.2c, Scribner Associates, Inc.) with reference to the proposed equivalent circuit.

The whole fabrication process of the DPR is sketched in Scheme 1. The process starts with the preparation of the metal precursor solution and the pretreatment of the substrate surface using plasma. The plasma treatment allows the substrate surface to be more solvophilic and the solvent to be uniformly spread out. We omit this step, however, for FTO glass because H2PtCl6·xH2O could be well spread over the FTO glass substrate, forming a thin layer, due to the Lewis acid–base interaction between the H2PtCl6·xH2O and fluorine-doped SnO2. As the first step, a drop of the precursor solution is loaded on the substrate, followed by a complete drying process of the solvent at 70 °C for 10 min. During this drying process, H2PtCl6·xH2O is partially reduced to Pt atoms through alcoholic reduction based on XPS analysis (ESI, Fig. S1, S2, and Tables S1–S3) showing that the atomic ratio of Cl/Pt was 2.8 after drying the solvent in the precursor solution. This supports the alcoholic reduction. For the second step, the remaining salts on the dried surface are further reduced to Pt-NPs through the irradiation of RF atmospheric pressure plasma with Ar gas under previously optimized conditions such as a power of 150 W, gas flow rate of 5 lpm, substrate moving speed of 5 mm s−1, and reduction time of 15 min. In order to optimize the conditions of the RF plasma, we have previously explored various parameters including reduction time, power, flow rate, and substrate moving speed (ESI, Fig. S2–S5). The optimum condition with respect to each parameter was obtained through XPS analysis (ESI, Tables S2, S4–S6). The plasma equipment used in this work can raise the temperature of the sample surface to 280 °C after 120 seconds treatment with Ar gas, which causes the serious problem of melting of any thermoplastic substrates. In order to avoid this drawback, we used a stepping motor to ensure the sample moved back and forth, keeping the temperature under 70 °C (ESI, Fig. S6) while reducing Pt ions to Pt atoms. Using this system, we maximized the effect of plasma treatment on the reduction of metal ions to metal atoms, while minimizing the effect of thermal energy on the reduction. We can also extend the application of the method to the fabrication of metal NPs supported on thermoplastic materials. Moreover, this system allows us to develop a continuous process for mass production of various supported metal NPs on the surface of many common plastic films.

The HRSEM images in Fig. 1 show a sequential change of the FTO glass surface (a) before dropping H2PtCl6·xH2O solution onto the substrate, (b) after drying the solvent, and (c) after DPR under pre-optimized conditions. Fig. 1(c) clearly shows the Pt-NPs, with a size of a few nanometers, which uniformly formed on the surface of FTO glass without any aggregation through DPR. This uniform and dense distribution of Pt-NPs provides a large specific surface area for catalytic activity without losing further optical transmittance of the FTO glass. Fig. 1(d) shows the TEM image of Pt-NPs immobilized on the FTO glass. The lower right inset image in Fig. 1(d) shows the crystal structure of a highly magnified Pt-NP which shows a characteristic spacing of the Pt crystal. The estimated lattice spacing is 1.96 Å, which coincides well with Pt {200}. The TEM image also reveals that some particles are not completely separated from each other, but because they are also not coalesced into tight agglomerates, the size measurements of each particle are still possible. XPS spectra (ESI, Fig. S1) of (b) and (c) represent the change in Pt binding energies before and after plasma reduction, respectively, and also confirm the reduction from ionic Pt to metallic Pt. The two Pt4f bands observed at 75.9 and 72.5 eV for ionic Pt are shifted to 74.0 and 70.9 eV, respectively, after plasma treatment. The later binding energies indicate metallic Pt. The physiochemical conversion of H2PtCl6 into metallic Pt was further confirmed by energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDX) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) (ESI, Fig. S7 and S8). Fig. 1(e) shows a TEM image of Pt-NPs immobilized on a Cu grid, prepared in order to analyze the size distribution of Pt-NPs. The average size of the Pt-NPs was measured as 2–3 nm. Fig. 1(f) shows the change in the Cl/Sn ratio and surface morphology with respect to DPR time, with the inset image showing the change in the Pt/Sn, O/Sn, and Cl/Pt ratios with respect to DPR time. Most chlorine quickly disappeared during the first 1 min and the remaining chlorine gradually disappeared during the last 14 min. Initially, NPs smaller than 1 nm appeared, then became increasingly larger. The amount of Pt gradually decreased for 5 min and then leveled off until the end of treatment. The initial Cl/Pt ratio of about 2.8 reduced to about 1.0 after 1 min and maintained the value for 5 min. The initial O/Sn ratio of about 1.7 quickly increased to 5.3 for the first 1 min and finally reverted to 1.7 after maintaining the value of about 5.8 for 5 min. From these observations, the following scenario can be inferred. Through the drying process, the H2PtCl6·xH2O precursors are converted into PtCl4 ions and Pt atoms through alcoholic reduction. The Pt atoms can also form small Pt nuclei. According to Schnering's suggestion, mixed-valent platinum trihalides, a mixture of the Pt6IICl12 cluster molecule and one of the enantiomeric helices of edge-condensed PtIVCl2Cl4/2 octahedra in cis-Δ-configuration, can also be formed. Once plasma treatment begins, the plasma ionic bombardment first starts breaking the Pt–Cl bonds to remove a large amount of Cl from the PtCl4 ions or mixed-valent platinum trihalides and subsequently results in the formation of PtCl2 and Pt atoms from PtCl4. The resulting Pt atoms also start forming many nuclei and these nuclei spontaneously start growing to form Pt-NPs. At this stage, part of the volatile Pt6IICl12 cluster molecules, if they exist, may be formed from the clustering of PtCl2 ions and simultaneously disappear through the flow from the plasma flame, causing “Cl and Pt missing”. An abrupt decrease of the Cl/Pt ratio for 1 min also supports the suggestion that plasma ionic bombardment can be a dominant cause of Cl removal at the initial stage up to 1 min compared with the Cl removal through the volatile Pt6IICl12 cluster molecules. The “Pt missing” observed until 5 min, which was also confirmed through measuring the weight difference before and after plasma reduction (ESI, Table S7), is assumed to be due to the removal of other unknown volatile Pt complexes which do not contain Cl, as well as volatile Pt6IICl12 cluster molecules, since the unchanged Cl/Pt ratio from 1 to 5 min cannot be explained as the removal of only the volatile Pt6IICl12 cluster molecules, which have the Cl/Pt ratio of 2. Since an abrupt increase in oxygen content was observed for 5 min, various oxygen-containing complexes, including volatile ones, can be formed through the reaction between various Pt-containing mixtures and reactive oxygen radicals. Thus, the unknown volatile Pt complexes can be small metal oxide complexes formed from Pt atoms and/or a small Pt nucleus to be an independent source of “Pt missing” for maintaining the Cl/Pt ratio unchanged from 1 to 5 min. “Pt missing” not observed after 5 min also explains that the small metal oxide complexes as well as the volatile Pt6IICl12 cluster molecules must be removed after 5 min. In addition, the oxygen content suddenly reverted to around 1.7 after 15 min. This can be explained as the decrease of oxygen- and/or chlorine-containing functional groups formed on the surface of Pt-NPs, which is large enough not to be volatile, since the specific surface area of Pt-NPs was reduced due to the growth and agglomeration of Pt-NPs.

The performance change of the Pt-NPs CE prepared using the DPR method was investigated at different concentrations of Pt precursor solution (Fig. 2). Considering the CE-side illumination required for flexible DSCs using non-transparent metal foil substrates, the good light transmittance of the CE is crucial for high performance of the DSCs. The light transmittance of bare FTO glass is near 80%, and decreases with increasing concentration of H2PtCl6 as shown in Fig. 2(a) (ESI, Fig. S9). The HRSEM images in Fig. 2(a) clearly show the dependence of transmittance on the amount and coverage of Pt-NPs (ESI, Fig. S10, Table S8). The size and number density of Pt-NPs increase with an increase in the concentration of Pt precursor. The increase in Pt-NP size with increasing concentration of H2PtCl6·xH2O in IPA can be explained as the increase in active monomer concentration, which implies the faster rate of monomer addition to the seed surface compared with that of monomer diffusion or the agglomeration of many small particles (<1 nm) into ensembles.


Fig. 2(a) also shows the efficiency comparison between the PA-side illumination and the CE-side illumination of DSCs with Pt-NPs CEs prepared using DPR at different concentrations of H2PtCl6·xH2O in IPA. They were obtained from the photocurrent density–voltage curves (ESI, Fig. S11, Table S9). The corresponding open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and conversion efficiency (η) are presented in Table S9. The conversion efficiency increases with an increase in the concentration of H2PtCl6·xH2O in IPA. It reaches a maximum at 10 mM of H2PtCl6·xH2O in IPA, at which the Jsc, Voc, FF, and η of DSC are 18.48 (±0.25) mA cm−2, 795.00 (±4.08) mV, 67.27 (±0.83)%, and 9.88 (±0.12)%, respectively, for the PA-side illumination and 14.00 (±0.35) mA cm−2, 772.50 (±11.90) mV, 69.66 (±1.23)%, and 7.53 ± 0.17 (%), respectively, for the CE-side illumination. When the concentration of H2PtCl6·xH2O in IPA is 100 mM, the efficiency shows a similar value of 9.84 (±0.13)% for the PA-side illumination, but a smaller value of 6.81 (±0.25)% for the CE-side illumination. The corresponding Jsc, Voc and FF values were 18.55 (±0.40) mA cm−2, 785.00 (±12.91) mV, and 67.59 (±0.78)% for the PA-side illumination, respectively, and 12.76 (±0.50) mA cm−2, 757.50 (±11.90) mV, and 70.45 (±0.27)% for the CE-side illumination, respectively. For the PA-side illumination, the small increase in Jsc and FF with an increase in the concentration from 10 mM to 100 mM was observed due to low Rct. The Jsc of the CE-side illumination, however, significantly decreased from 14.00 mA cm−2 to 12.76 mA cm−2 with an increase in the concentration from 10 mM to 100 mM. This must be mainly due to the decrease of CE transmittance.

Fig. 2(b) shows two anodic current peaks (Ipa1: 3I− = I3− + 2e−, Ipa2: 2I3− = 3I− + 2e−) and two cathodic current peaks (Ipc1: 3I− + 2e− = 2I3−, Ipc2: I3− + 2e− = 3I−). The coverage and size of Pt-NPs prepared at different concentrations of H2PtCl6·xH2O in IPA show an obvious influence on the electrochemical catalytic activity of I3− reduction on the surface of Pt-NPs CEs. Although the oxidation and reduction peaks of I−/I3− on the Pt-NPs CEs appear similar, an increased peak current density was observed when the Pt-NPs CE was prepared with a suitable concentration of H2PtCl6·xH2O in IPA. The two I−/I3− redox peaks are related to the oxidation of I− ions and the reduction of I3− ions. In the CV curves, the oxidation and reduction peaks of I−/I3− on the Pt CEs are similar and the increased peak current is observed when the Pt CE is prepared at a high concentration of H2PtCl6·xH2O in IPA. The high peak current implies the high catalytic activity of the Pt CEs.

Fig. 2(c) shows the changes in charge transfer resistance values (Rct) and constant phase element-T (CPE-T) with respect to Pt CEs prepared using DPR at different concentrations of H2PtCl6·xH2O in IPA. They were obtained from the Nyquist plots (ESI, Fig. S12 and Table S10). The value of Rct decreases with increasing concentration of H2PtCl6 as shown in Fig. 2(c) (ESI, Table S10). The decrease of Rct implies an acceleration of the triiodide reduction because of the large active area of Pt-NPs, which serve as a catalyst for triiodide reduction. When the concentration of H2PtCl6 exceeds 10 mM, the rate of decreasing Rct becomes smaller. A small Rct represents an increase in exchange current density (Jo = RT/nFRct) which corresponds to the cathodic peak current density in CV of Fig. 2(b), and finally an increase in current density according to the Bulter–Volmer equation. The constant-phase element (CPE = (CPE-T)−1(jw)−(CPE-P)) of the CE also confirms that the active surface areas of the CEs become larger with increasing concentration of H2PtCl6 as shown in Fig. 2(c) (ESI, Table S10). The large CPE-T value represents an increase in active surface area.

To compare DPR with currently popular methods such as sputtering and TD, we prepared three Pt CEs using sputtering, TD and DPR methods. Fig. 3(a) shows that the total transmittance of the Pt CE prepared using DPR is a little higher than that of the Pt CE prepared using TD at the same concentration as that of the Pt precursor, while showing very poor transmittance (∼0.1%) of the Pt-sputtered CE (ESI, Fig. S13). The difference of transmittance results from the coverage of Pt-NPs on the surface as shown in the HRSEM images of Fig. 3(a). In the case of the Pt CE prepared using TD, Pt-NPs mainly form aggregates at the grain boundary of FTO crystals with a size of around 200 nm. The optical transmittance of the Pt sputtered CE is very poor, but the reflection is very high due to the mirror effect. As mentioned previously, the high transmittance of the CE is beneficial to high efficiency in the case of the CE-side illumination of DSCs. It was also reported that the short-circuit current density increased with an increase in the transmittance of the CE in the case of the CE-side illumination of DSCs. This is one of the main virtues of the Pt CE prepared using DPR. Thus, the DPR can be applied to the fabrication of transparent, flexible, and aesthetically pleasing DSCs.


Fig. 3(a) also shows the efficiency comparison between the PA-side and CE-side illuminations with CEs prepared using sputtering, TD and DPR. The Voc, Jsc, FF and η are presented in Fig. S14 and Table S11 (ESI). In the case of PA-side illumination, the DSC prepared using DPR shows the energy conversion efficiency of 9.88 (±0.12)%, which is similar to 9.91 (±0.15)% of the DSCs prepared using sputtering and higher than 9.06 (±0.23)% of the DSC with the Pt CE using TD. In the case of CE-side illumination, energy conversion efficiency is 7.53 (±0.17)%, which is higher than 6.75 (±0.19)% of the DSC prepared using TD and 0.42 (±0.05)% of the DSC prepared using sputtering. When we consider the PA-side and CE-side illuminations together, the DSC prepared using the DPR method is the best among the three methods. Thus, the DPR method allows us to synthesize highly active supported metal NPs, which facilitate the diffusion of the electrolyte and provide a large active area for triiodide reduction, with homogeneous size dispersity, which maintains excellent high transmittance.
As shown in Fig. 3(b), the peak positions of the CV curve for the Pt CE prepared using DPR are very similar to those of the Pt CE prepared using TD and sputtering, illustrating that the Pt CE prepared using DPR has a similar electrocatalytic function for the redox reaction to other Pt electrodes. The stability of the electrode materials is very important for applications. The DSC with the Pt CE prepared using DPR showed good stability (ESI, Fig. S15). This stability was confirmed by the stability of the current–voltage curves over time for the redox system with the Pt NP working electrode and the Pt mesh CE. A slight decrease in the current was observed after the 1000th cycle. It is, however, better than that of the Pt CE prepared using TD. As shown in Table S12, all parameters for the working electrode interface did not show any significant difference between the three DSCs. The Rct1 values of the Pt CEs prepared using DPR and sputtering, however, were as small as 0.68 Ω cm2 and 0.72 Ω cm2, respectively, while that of the Pt CE prepared using TD was 1.02 Ω cm2. Fig. 3(c) shows that the apparent reduction rates for the Pt CEs prepared using DPR and sputtering were faster than that for the Pt CE prepared using TD. Because the peak current, ip, increases with increasing the apparent reduction rate and eventually Rct = RT/nFip, the Rct values of the Pt CEs prepared using DPR and sputtering decrease compared to that of the Pt CE prepared using TD, which coincides well with the values of current in CV of Fig. 3(b). Table S12 also shows that the Rh value of the Pt-sputtered electrode measured in the high frequency range is 1.60 Ω cm2, which is lower than the value of 2.34 Ω cm2 for the Pt CE prepared using TD, and 2.38 Ω cm2 for the Pt CE prepared using DPR. This is because the conductivity of the Pt CE prepared using sputtering is higher than that of Pt CEs prepared using DPR and TD, confirmed by the sheet resistance of 1.33 Ω □−1 for the Pt CE prepared using sputtering and 7.62 Ω □−1 of the Pt CEs prepared using TD and DPR. The high conductivity helps improving the short-circuit current density in the performance of DSCs.

In order to demonstrate a successful synthesis of Pt-NPs supported on the surface of a thermoplastic film, we fabricated a flexible DSC equipped with Pt-NPs supported on a PET/ITO film by following the same procedure as shown in Fig. 1. Before dropping a 10 mM Pt precursor solution onto the PET/ITO film, however, the substrate was pre-treated by plasma for 5 min to make it become more solvophilic (ESI, Table S13), since the surface of the PET/ITO film is solvophobic. Fig. 4(a) shows I–V characteristics of the flexible DSC under CE-side illumination, which represent Jsc = 11.53 (±0.31) mA cm−2, Voc = 758 (±7.58) mV, FF = 57.74 (±2.43), and η = 5.05 (±0.29)%. These values are smaller than those of Ito et al.'s flexible DSC, because not only did they use different materials such as a PEN/ITO film, thick Ti foil with a thickness of 0.2 mm and thin thermobonding tape with a thickness of 25 μm, but also a different method like electrochemical deposition, while we used a PET/ITO film, thin Ti foil of 0.032 mm and a thick thermobonding polymer of 60 μm. Moreover, Ito et al.'s DSC was equipped with a well optimized TiO2 layer with an area of 0.25 cm2. Thus, our flexible DSC, while not prepared using optimized materials, still has more space to improve the power conversion efficiency. Fig. 4(b) shows the flexibility of our DSC. Fig. 4(c) shows a HRSEM image of Pt-NPs deposited on a PET/ITO film, which presents homogeneous size dispersity. The main virtue of the DPR is the low temperature fabrication of Pt-NPs with high catalytic activity, while maintaining the transmittance of the CE. This is the key to fabricating the flexible DSC.


We developed a new process to directly deposit Pt-NPs with homogeneous size dispersity on the surface of a TCO using RF plasma reduction under atmospheric pressure without using any toxic chemicals while keeping the temperature below 70 °C. The most significant virtue of this method is that it allows us to easily synthesize highly active supported metal NPs with homogeneous size dispersity without any process restrictions such as high temperature, low pressure, liquid environment, and chemical toxicity. Different Pt loadings through changing the concentration of H2PtCl6·xH2O in IPA influenced the morphology and transmittance of TCO electrodes deposited with Pt-NPs, which further influenced the catalytic activity of the Pt CEs and the photovoltaic performance of DSCs. The method also allows us to use the light illuminated through the CE for photovoltaic conversion, which can be a solution to the problem of developing flexible DSCs since the annealing process of TiO2 NPs used as a transparent PA material has been a major obstacle to developing flexible DSCs. The maximum conversion efficiency reached 9.88 (±0.12)% for PA-side illumination, 7.53 (±0.17)% for CE-side illumination of the DSC fabricated on the FTO glass substrate at 10 mM of H2PtCl6·xH2O in IPA, and 5.05 (±0.29)% for flexible DSCs using Ti foil as a PA and a PET/ITO/Pt film as a CE. Considering CE-side illumination, our DSCs provide more potential for reducing the manufacturing cost as well as improving the power conversion efficiency than other DSCs prepared using sputtering, TD, and electrochemical deposition. The DPR method presented here can also be further extended to the production of various metal NPs supported on the surface of many common plastic films, which can have potential applications in the field of printed and flexible electronics.


This research was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (2010-0006120).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta10319f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013