 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM30272A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6285-6290

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Jian
Li
,

Qin-Ye
Bao
,

Huai-Xin
Wei
,

Zai-Quan
Xu
,

Jin-Peng
Yang
,

Yan-Qing
Li
*,

Shuit-Tong
Lee
 and 

Jian-Xin
Tang
*

Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices, Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China. E-mail: jxtang@suda.edu.cn; yqli@suda.edu.cn

Center Of Super-Diamond and Advanced Films (COSDAF) and Department of Physics and Materials Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China

Received
14th January 2012
, Accepted 6th February 2012
First published on 7th February 2012
The mechanism of charge recombination in transition metal oxide-based interconnectors for tandem organic photovoltaic cells is investigated, where the interconnector is composed of an abrupt heterointerface between a Mg-doped 4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline (Mg:BPhen) layer and a MoO3 film. Based on the results of the interface energetics determined by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy, as well as the corresponding device characteristics, it is revealed that the MoO3 layer pronouncedly modifies the energy level alignment of the interconnector, which is beneficial for the charge recombination process at the interface between MoO3 and the adjacent donor material for electrons and holes injected from stacked subcells. The incorporation of Mg:BPhen is essential for the conduction of the generated electrons from the bottom subcell into the conduction band of MoO3.

In recent years organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs) have attracted tremendous interest because of their potential as truly clean and renewable energy sources with low cost, easy processability for large-area fabrication, and compatibility with flexible substrates. Tremendous efforts have been devoted to increasing the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of small molecule- and polymer-based OPVs through utilizing new photovoltaic materials and novel device configurations. However, for an OPV with a single active layer, only a small fraction of the incident light can be harvested due to the limited absorption width, short exciton diffusion length, and low charge-carrier mobility of organic molecules and polymers. To gain a high PCE, a tandem or stacked OPV, consisting of multiple subcells in series, ideally with nonoverlapping absorption maxima and widths, offers one possibility to overcome the limitations encountered in single cell OPVs, and therefore the photon energy can be used more efficiently. Theoretical calculations predict that a PCE with values of 16% to 23% is technically feasible given the availability of optimized subcells in tandem OPVs.

The interconnector that serves as the charge recombination layer (CRL) between subcells plays a decisive role in the realization of high-efficiency tandem OPVs. The interconnector should ensure the presence of suitable interface energetics for efficiently recombining the electrons and holes generated from subcells, and for avoiding the formation of a reverse built-in potential that reduces the open-circuit voltage (Voc) of tandem OPVs. In an ideal tandem structure, the overall Voc is exactly the sum of that of the subcells. In addition, the interconnector should be optically transparent to avoid absorption and reflection when the incident light passes through the bottom cell into the top cell. Various concepts for CRL structures have recently been proposed, including junctions between doped p–n organic heterojunctions, the insertion of thin metal layers, and the insertion of metal oxides. In particular, the use of transition metal oxides (TMOs), such as molybdenum trioxide (MoO3), tungsten trioxide (WO3), and vanadium oxide (V2O5), has drawn much attention for interconnectors due to their high work functions and high optical transparencies in the visible region for photon transmission. However, aside from the various structures employed as interconnectors in tandem OPVs, the mechanism of charge recombination in TMO-based CRLs has not yet been clarified.
In this work, we present a detailed study of the electronic structure of an interconnector used in tandem OPVs, in which an abrupt heterointerface is formed between a Mg-doped 4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline (Mg:BPhen, 10 wt%) layer and a MoO3 layer. The energy level alignment of the corresponding CRL is systematically characterized via ultraviolet and X-ray photoemission spectroscopies (UPS and XPS). The impact of electronic structure on the functionality of TMO-based CRLs for tandem OPVs is identified by characterizing the interfaces and the corresponding devices.

Tandem OPVs were fabricated with two identical sub-cells, which are separated by a TMO-based CRL. For comparison, a control device with a single cell was also prepared. All the devices were prepared on UV-ozone treated indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates with a sheet resistance of 20 Ω □−1. The commonly used copper phthalocyanine (CuPc) and fullerene (C60) were, respectively, used as donor and acceptor for both bottom and top subcells. The device structures of the single cell and tandem OPVs are listed in Table 1. All of the organic and inorganic layers were thermally deposited in a high vacuum deposition system at a base pressure of 2 × 10−6 Torr. Deposition rates and film thicknesses of different layers were monitored with quartz-crystal monitors. The doping of the organic layers was realized by thermal co-evaporation of the dopant and host materials from separate sources, which were controlled by individual quartz-crystal monitors. The effective area of each cell was determined to be 0.1 cm2 by the overlap of the ITO anode and Al cathode. Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of tandem OPVs without any encapsulation were measured with a programmable Keithley model 2612 power source in the dark and under AM 1.5 solar illumination from a Newport 150W solar simulator. Illumination intensity was measured with a calibrated Oriel radiant power meter.

Devices or units
Layer structures
Single-cell
ITO/CuPc(30 nm)/C60(40 nm)/BPhen(10 nm)/Al(100 nm)
Tandem A
ITO/CuPc(30 nm)/C60(40 nm)/CRL1/CuPc(30 nm)/C60(40 nm)/BPhen(10 nm)/Al(100 nm)
Tandem B
ITO/CuPc(30 nm)/C60(40 nm)/CRL2/CuPc(30 nm)/C60(40 nm)/BPhen(10 nm)/Al(100 nm)
Tandem C
ITO/CuPc(30 nm)/C60(40 nm)/CRL3/CuPc(30 nm)/C60(40 nm)/BPhen(10 nm)/Al(100 nm)

CRL1

Mg:BPhen(40 wt%, 10 nm)/MoO3(3 nm)

CRL2

Mg:BPhen(40 wt%, 10 nm)

CRL3

BPhen(10 nm)/MoO3(3 nm)

Interface studies were conducted in a Kratos AXIS Ultra-DLD ultrahigh vacuum photoemission spectroscopy system, which is composed of a fast entry air lock (base pressure < 1 × 10−8 Torr), a multiport carousel chamber (<5 × 10−10 Torr), an evaporation chamber (<5 × 10−10 Torr), and an analysis chamber (<3 × 10−10 Torr). Organic and inorganic films were in situ evaporated in steps onto UV-ozone treated ITO glass substrates in the evaporation chamber at a growth rate of 1–2 Å s−1. The film thickness and deposition rate were monitored by a quartz crystal microbalance. Prior to film deposition, all the materials were entirely out-gassed. After each deposition step, samples were transferred to the analysis chamber, without breaking the vacuum, for UPS and XPS measurements. UPS measurements with an unfiltered HeI (21.2 eV) gas discharge lamp and a total instrumental energy resolution of 0.1 eV were performed to characterize the valence states and the vacuum level (VL). For UPS measurements, samples were negatively biased for the collection of secondary electrons. XPS measurements using a monochromatic Al Kα source (1486.6 eV) with a resolution of 0.5 eV were carried out to study the interfacial chemical reactions. All the measurements were performed at room temperature. The Fermi level (EF) of the system was referenced as the zero binding energy (BE) in all the UPS and XPS spectra, and was calibrated by determining the Au4f7/2 peak position and the Fermi level edge of a gold film.



Fig. 1 plots the J–V characteristics of tandem OPVs with identical top and bottom CuPc/C60 subcells, which were fabricated in the same lot by changing the shadow mask. Three different sets of CRLs were used for tandem OPVs, including (1) Mg:BPhen/MoO3, (2) Mg:BPhen, and (3) BPhen/MoO3. The control device with a single cell is also shown for comparison. The detailed layer structures of the corresponding devices are listed in Table 1, and the characteristic values of the prepared OPVs are displayed in Table 2. As shown in Fig. 1, the device performance of the tandem OPVs changes significantly with the variation of CRLs, indicating that the CRL plays a critical role in the charge recombination process in the operation of tandem devices. Since no optical space layer was used between the top and bottom subcells in terms of the optical field distribution, the number of absorbed photons in the two subcells and the resulting photocurrent were not optimized, leading to a low short-circuit current (Jsc) as compared with that of the control device. It is also evident that the tandem OPV with a CRL of Mg:BPhen/MoO3 has the largest Voc of 0.91 V, which is almost twice that of the control device of 0.50 V. The result indicates that the Mg:BPhen/MoO3 CRL can provide an efficient recombination region for holes and electrons generated from the top and bottom subcells, respectively. However, devices with only Mg:BPhen or BPhen/MoO3 in the CRL have a Voc of 0.42 V or 0.39 V, which is even lower than that of the control device with a single cell. Moreover, these two tandem devices exhibit S-shaped J–V curves, revealing the presence of accumulated charges at the interface between the CRL and the adjacent subcells. It should be noted here that for the achievement of high-efficiency tandem OPVs, the optimized film thickness of the top and bottom subcells in tandem OPVs is critical for balanced optical absorption and thereby matched photocurrent.

Devices

V
oc/V

J
sc/mA cm−2
Fill factor
PCE (%)
Single-cell
0.50
4.33
0.57
1.24
Tandem A
0.91
2.18
0.55
1.09
Tandem B
0.42
1.54
0.37
0.24
Tandem C
0.39
0.24
0.10
0.01

To understand the origin of the difference in device performance and especially the role of constituent materials in the functionality of TMO-based CRLs, the electronic structures of the aforementioned interconnectors were studied via XPS and UPS measurements. The energy level alignment at the interface can be identified simultaneously by the measurement of the superimposed highest occupied molecular orbitals (HOMOs) of both materials within a thin overlayer. The VL offsets are obtained from the shifts of the secondary electron cutoff at the high BE side. The detailed results for the electronic structures at the interfaces of Mg:BPhen/MoO3 and BPhen/MoO3 on ITO substrates studied here are in good agreement with previous data. The remarkable formation of interface dipoles and large energy level bending occur with the deposition of a 3 nm thick MoO3 film on Mg:BPhen and BPhen layers. However, the spectral features of the 3 nm thick MoO3 layer are identical for these two substrates.


Fig. 2 shows the HeI UPS spectra with the incremental deposition of CuPc on the MoO3 layer, where the CuPc thickness ranges from sub-monolayer (∼2 Å) to 100 Å. The bottom spectrum was recorded from a 3 nm thick MoO3 film deposited on a Mg:BPhen-coated ITO substrate, where the valence band edge is located at 2.8 eV below EF and deep lying gap states are present in the forbidden gap due to the oxygen deficiency and partial reduction of the Mo6+ cation, as evidenced by XPS measurements. Considering the energy gap of 3.1 eV,EF is pinned slightly below the conduction band edge, indicating the n-type semiconductor properties of MoO3 due to oxygen vacancies. It is noted that the frontier molecular orbitals of CuPc exhibit a progressive shift towards the higher BE region upon the deposition of the CuPc overlayer, which is accompanied by a VL shift of 2.35 eV (the onset of the high BE side). The top spectrum corresponds to a 100 Å thick CuPc layer, from which the HOMO edge determined by linear extrapolation at the low BE side of the HOMO peak maximum is 0.55 eV below EF. In addition, there are no observable features in the organic energy gap region, suggesting a physical adsorption process at the MoO3/CuPc interface. Moreover, the evolution of the UPS spectra of the MoO3/CuPc interface on the BPhen-coated ITO substrate (not shown here) is almost identical to that for Mg:BPhen-coated ITO, implying the independence of the electronic structures of MoO3/CuPc interfaces from the underlying substrate.
For comparison, Fig. 3 shows the HeI UPS spectra of the Mg:BPhen/CuPc interface as a function of the CuPc thickness. The bottom spectrum corresponds to the 100 Å thick Mg:BPhen layer deposited on the ITO substrate. In accordance with previous reports, two gap states with an energy difference of 2.8 eV can be observed in the forbidden energy gap of BPhen due to the Mg doping. However, in contrast to the MoO3/CuPc interface, the deposition of a CuPc overlayer on Mg:BPhen with increasing thickness causes a progressive shift of all the characteristic emission features towards the lower BE region, resulting in the HOMO edge of CuPc at 1.6 eV below EF and a VL shift of 0.6 eV.
To determine accurately the chemical interactions occurring at the interface, XPS measurements were also performed after each deposition step. The evolution of the XPS spectra for the MoO3/CuPc interface is shown in Fig. 4. It should be mentioned that the C1s signal arising from Mg:BPhen is still detectable with a 3 nm thick MoO3 overlayer (see Fig. 4(c)), and there is an overlap between the Mo3p3/2 and N1s core level spectra, as observed in Fig. 4(d). As noted in Fig. 4, the intensities of Mo3d and O1s from MoO3 are attenuated gradually, while those of C1s, N1s, and Cu2p core levels from CuPc are concurrently saturated upon CuPc deposition on the MoO3 films. In addition, there is a negligible shift and no observable new features in all the core level spectra, revealing the absence of chemical bonding between CuPc and MoO3.

Fig. 5 shows the XPS spectra for the Mg:BPhen/CuPc interface. As evident in Fig. 5, all the core levels exhibit a trend similar to that seen at the MoO3/CuPc interface. However, all the core level peak positions for CuPc on Mg:BPhen were located at higher BE compared to those on the MoO3 substrate. For example, the C1s, N1s, and Cu2p3/2 peaks are shifted from 283.9 eV, 398.2 eV, and 934.7 eV to 284.9 eV, 399.2 eV, and 935.7 eV, respectively. These BE differences are consistent with the VL shift observed in Fig. 2 and 3.

Using the results from UPS and XPS measurements, the energy level diagrams are schematically illustrated in Fig. 6 for Mg:BPhen/MoO3/CuPc, BPhen/MoO3/CuPc and Mg:BPhen/CuPc interfaces on ITO substrates, with EF aligned in a thermodynamic equilibrium state. Here, the HOMO (or valence band) edges for the organic and MoO3 layers were extracted from the UPS spectra, and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) (or conduction band) positions were estimated by adding on the charge-transport gaps (4.2 eV for BPhen, 4.5 eV for Mg:BPhen, 1.9 eV for CuPc, and 3.1eV for MoO3, respectively). Interface dipole formation was distinguished by subtracting the contribution of energy level bending from the VL shift, without considering the screening effect.

According to the energy level diagrams schematically displayed in Fig. 6, the functional effectiveness of the materials used and thus their impacts on the corresponding tandem OPVs can be deduced. As shown in Fig. 6(a), a p–n junction is formed between CuPc and MoO3 with a very small energy level offset between CuPc's HOMO and MoO3's conduction band. Upon the operation of a tandem OPV, charge conduction and recombination processes can easily occur at the MoO3/CuPc interface, and the voltage drop here can be neglected because of the very small energy level offset at the interface. As a result, the Voc of tandem OPVs with a Mg:BPhen/MoO3 CRL will be nearly the sum of the two subcells, as shown in Fig. 1. On the contrary, when the MoO3 layer is not used in the CRL (see Fig. 6(c)), the large energy level offset between CuPc's HOMO and Mg:BPhen's LUMO will lead to a counterproductive built-in potential at the interface and will limit the charge recombination. Therefore, the tandem OPV with a Mg:BPhen CRL will suffer from a loss in Voc compared to the sum of the single cell voltages. This is the reason why the tandem device with a Mg:BPhen/MoO3 CRL exhibits better electrical properties, as shown in Fig. 1.
It is also found that the incorporation of an n-type doped organic layer in the CRL is critical for tandem OPVs to function efficiently. As shown in Fig. 6(a) and 6(c), the LUMO position of Mg:BPhen is closer to EF compared to that of the pristine BPhen layer in Fig. 6(b), indicating the formation of a heavily n-type doped layer and the favorable electron extraction from the C60 acceptor of the bottom subcell to the conduction band of MoO3 due to a small injection barrier at the Mg:Bphen/MoO3 interface. However, without Mg doping in the BPhen layer, the large energy level offset between MoO3's conduction band and BPhen's LUMO will produce a reverse built-in voltage between the top and bottom subcells, which leads to the reduction of the overall Voc and poor charge transport. Therefore, tandem devices without an n-type doped organic layer in the TMO-based CRLs exhibit poor electrical properties and hence low PCEs. These findings suggest that a comprehensive picture of the electronic structures at interfaces is essential for the understanding and optimization of CRLs in tandem OPVs.

In summary, the key factors affecting the functionality of TMO-based CRLs used for tandem OPVs have been systematically investigated by correlating the interfacial electronic structures and the corresponding device characteristics. The CRL with a Mg:BPhen/MoO3 structure is capable of realizing electrical connection in series for tandem OPVs. The role of MoO3 in the charge recombination process is identified; MoO3 provides a matching energy level alignment for the recombination of electrons and holes generated from the bottom and top subcells. Meanwhile, the incorporation of an n-type doped organic layer in the CRL is indispensable for performance enhancement, which facilitates the electron extraction from the acceptor of the bottom subcell into MoO3 and removes the reverse built-in voltage between BPhen and MoO3.


The authors acknowledge the financial support by NSFC (No. 91027041, 61007020, 61107022, 61036009), 973 program (No. 2011CB808404, 2010CB934500), 863 Program (No. 2011AA03A110), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (No. BK2011280, BY2009007), the Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education of China (No. 20103201120019), and a project funded by the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012