 DOI: 10.1039/C5NR03309H
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 17473-17481


Hyekyoung
Choi
,

Jung Hoon
Song
,

Jihoon
Jang
,

Xuan Dung
Mai
,

Sungwoo
Kim
 and 

Sohee
Jeong
*

Nano-Mechanical Systems Research Division, Korea Institute of Machinery and Materials (KIMM), Daejeon, 305-343, Republic of Korea. E-mail: sjeong@kimm.re.kr

Korea University of Science and Technology (UST), Daejeon 305-350, Republic of Korea

Graduate School of Nanoscience and Technology, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, 306-701, Republic of Korea

Department of Chemistry, Hanoi Pedagogical University No. 2, Vinh Phuc, Vietnam

Received
20th May 2015
, Accepted 11th September 2015
First published on 14th September 2015
We fabricated heterojunction solar cells with PbSe/PbS core shell quantum dots and studied the precisely controlled PbS shell thickness dependency in terms of optical properties, electronic structure, and solar cell performances. When the PbS shell thickness increases, the short circuit current density (JSC) increases from 6.4 to 11.8 mA cm−2 and the fill factor (FF) enhances from 30 to 49% while the open circuit voltage (VOC) remains unchanged at 0.46 V even with the decreased effective band gap. We found that the Fermi level and the valence band maximum level remain unchanged in both the PbSe core and PbSe/PbS core/shell with a less than 1 nm thick PbS shell as probed via ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). The PbS shell reduces their surface trap density as confirmed by relative quantum yield measurements. Consequently, PbS shell formation on the PbSe core mitigates the trade-off relationship between the open circuit voltage and the short circuit current density. Finally, under the optimized conditions, the PbSe core with a 0.9 nm thick shell yielded a power conversion efficiency of 6.5% under AM 1.5.

Colloidal quantum dots (CQDs) have attracted scientific and technological interest for various applications such as light emitting devices (LEDs), photodetectors, biolabeling, and photovoltaic (PV) devices due to their unique properties which deviate from the corresponding bulk materials. The optical and electrical properties of these nanoparticles are tunable by controlling the size of CQDs in a strong quantum confinement regime. Specifically, the CQDs facilitate simple, low-cost, and solution-based processes. Among the CQD materials, lead chalcogenide (PbX, X = S, Se, Te) CQDs are promising materials for next-generation PV cells because of the tunable optical band gap from the visible to the near-infrared (NIR) wavelength range. Recently, PbS CQD-based solar cells have been reported with a power conversion efficiency (η) of 9.2% by using hierarchical structuring.

Particularly, PbSe CQDs have attracted attention because of their large dielectric constant (ε/ε0 = 24.0), and a large exciton Bohr radius (aB = 46 nm) which is two times higher than that of PbS (aB = 23 nm). Further, the enhancement in photocurrent via multiple exciton generation (MEG) with an external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 114% has only been demonstrated in PbSe CQD based PV cells. However, a recent research trend in CQD PV cells has been towards PbS CQD-based PV cells despite the aforementioned advantages with PbSe CQDs. The reason for this trend is attributed to their poor air-stability compared to PbS CQDs. Moreover, in some studies, it has been shown that PbSe CQD-based solar cells have a lower open-circuit voltage (VOC) compared to PbS CQDs because of the presence of surface traps due to facile Se oxidation in PbSe CQDs.
Theoretically, the VOC in heterojunction PV cells is determined by the energy difference between the Fermi level in the n-type transparent oxide semiconductors such as TiO2 or ZnO and the Fermi level in the p-type CQDs. The VOC can also be affected by a total recombination related to the trap density in a real device system. The most simple way to enhance the VOC in CQD PV cells is by using PbSe CQDs with a large band gap by size control. However, there is a trade-off relationship between the VOC and the short circuit current density (JSC) in PV cells. Consequently, the optimal band gap energy in single junction PV cells according to the Shockley–Queisser one-sun efficiency limit is about 1.3–1.4 eV. Another way to improve the VOC is by reducing the surface trap density of PbSe CQDs.
One of the strategies to obtain stable PbSe CQDs could be to overcoat these materials with a shell, forming a core/shell structure. It is expected to solve both the poor air-stability and the low VOC problem in PbSe CQD PV cells. The PbSe/PbS core/shell structure has been the most widely investigated because they constitute a quasi-type-II core/shell system which allows us to tune the effective band gap by changing the shell thickness in addition to the core size. The PbS shell-thickness-dependent energy levels and the electrical properties of nanocrystal solids need to be further explored to utilize them for efficient solar cells.
In this paper, we demonstrate how the thickness of PbS shells affect the optical properties, electronic structures, as well as the solar cell performances of PbSe/PbS quantum dot solar cells. The PbS shell less than 1 nm does not change their Fermi energy level and valence band maximum level but reduces their effective band gap and trap states density. As a result, the PbS shell formation on the core leads to increase of the JSC without losing VOC in heterojunction architectures. Further adopting halide treatment processes and optimizing the thickness of quantum dot layers allow us to achieve the power conversion efficiency of 6.5% with a 0.9 nm thick shell.

Lead(II) oxide (Aldrich, 99.999%), oleic acid (OA, Alfa Aesar, 99%), 1-octadecene (ODE, Aldrich, 90%), bis(trimethylsilyl)sulfide (TMS2S, Aldrich, 9.999%), bis(trimethylsilyl)selenide (TMS2Se, JSI Silicone), tetrabutylammonium iodide (TBAI, Aldrich), oleylamine (OAm, Sigma), tetrachloroethylene (TCE, ≥99%, Aldrich), 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA, Sigma, 99%) and TiO2 nanoparticles (Solaronix) were used as purchased without further purification.


All manipulations were performed using the standard Schlenk line techniques. In a typical synthesis, a mixture of lead oxide (0.46 g, 2 mmol), OA (2 mL, 6.2 mmol), and ODE (10 mL) in a three-necked flask was degassed under vacuum and heated to 110 °C for 2 hours. Further the solution was heated to 145 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere. TMS2Se (128 μL, 0.5 mmol) in 4 mL of ODE was loaded into a syringe in a nitrogen-filled glove box and then rapidly injected into the solution after removing the mantle. The flask was then transferred to a glove box where acetone was added to the reaction solution to isolate PbSe CQDs by precipitation. The resulting precipitate was washed twice with acetone to remove the surfactant and residual reaction debris and then was dispersed in hexane at 100 mg mL−1 for the PbSe/PbS core/shell structures.


For a 0.5 nm thick shell, the PbS shell was deposited onto bare PbSe CQDs. We prepared a Pb precursor solution with lead oxide (0.23 g, 1 mmol), OA (2 mL, 6.2 mmol), and ODE (10 mL) in a three-necked flask. This solution was heated up to 110 °C under vacuum for 2 hours then cooled down to 50 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere. The as prepared PbSe CQD core dispersed in hexane was injected into the Pb precursor solution. The solution was degassed at 50 °C for 30 minutes. TMS2Se (210 μL, 1 mmol) in 10 mL of ODE was loaded into a syringe in a nitrogen-filled glove box and then injected into the solution by drop-wise addition (2 mL min−1) at 50 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere. The solution was reacted for 5 minutes at 50 °C for growth, and then allowed to cool down to room temperature. The flask was then transferred to a glove box where acetone was added to the reaction solution to isolate the PbSe/PbS core/shell CQDs by precipitation. The resulting precipitate was washed twice with acetone to remove the surfactant and residual reaction debris and then was dispersed in hexane at 100 mg mL−1. For PbSe/PbS core/shell with a 0.9 nm thick shell, the PbS shell was deposited onto a bare PbSe/PbS core/shell with a 0.5 nm PbS shell. All processes are the same with PbSe/PbS core/shells with a 0.5 nm thick shell except the injection temperature that varies from 50 °C to 60 °C. For a 1.3 nm thick shell, the PbS shell was further deposited onto the bare PbSe/PbS core/shell with a 0.9 nm PbS shell. We prepared the Pb precursor solution with lead oxide (0.12 g, 0.5 mmol), OA (1 mL, 3.1 mmol), and ODE (9 mL) in a three-necked flask. The rest of the process was identical for the deposition of the PbSe/PbS core/shell with a 0.9 nm thick shell.


For halide treatment, 50 mg mL−1 of the PbSe cores and the PbSe/PbS core/shell CQDs in octane are prepared after purification. TBAI (2.21 g, 6 mmol) dissolved in OAm (10 mL) was heated at 200 °C for 2 hours under a nitrogen atmosphere and degassed for 2 hours at 100 °C. This halide precursor solution (6 M, 50 μL) was injected into 1 mL of a CQD solution (50 mg mL−1). Then the mixed solution was vortexed for 10 seconds. A washing step was performed as with untreated CQD purification and the solution was finally redissolved in octane at a concentration of 50 mg mL−1 for fabrication of solar cells.


Prior to the fabrication of heterojunction solar cells, fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass was cleaned using acetone, methanol, and deionized water in a sonication bath. The TiO2/FTO substrate was made using TiO2 nanoparticles from Solaronix. Briefly, TiO2 nanoparticles were deposited on a FTO substrate by the spin-coating process at 2500 rpm for 60 s. This film was annealed at 450 °C for 30 min. Then, the film was immersed in the TiCl4 solution (60 mM in deionized water) at 100 °C for 30 min. The treated film was rinsed using DI water and annealed at 450 °C for 30 min. The CQD films were deposited by the layer-by-layer spin-coating method. Subsequent ligand-exchange in the solid-state was performed using MPA to reduce the inter-CQD distance. These steps were repeated to obtain the desirable film-thickness and annealed at 90 °C for 5 min. Finally, the devices were completed by employing a 10 nm thick Mo2O5 layer, a 50 nm thick Au layer, and a 100 nm thick Al layer on the top of CQD solids as a top electrode using the thermal evaporation technique.


Absorption measurements were conducted using a Thermo scientific EVOLUTION 201 spectrophotometer. Photoluminescence measurement was performed using a light source (High-Power Xenon Light Source HPX-2000, optical power >150 mW for visible range, 785 nm spectrum stabilized laser module power >350 mW for IR range) and a detector (Maya 2000 Pro for visible range, NIR Quest for IR range).


Electron micrograph images of CQDs on a carbon-coated Cu mesh grid were obtained using Tecnai F30 Super-Twin (FEI Co., Hillsboro, OR, USA; Yun-Chang Park, KAIST NanoFab). X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained using a Rigaku Ultima III diffractometer equipped with a rotating anode and a Cu Kα radiation source (λ = 0.15418 nm).


The base pressure of the analysis chamber was maintained under low 10−10 Torr. The ultraviolet and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS and XPS) measurements were performed using a hemispherical electron energy analyzer with a CCD camera (SES-100, VG-Scineta). The UPS measurement used a He I (hω = 21.22 eV) gas discharge lamp as an excitation source with a sample bias of −10 V for a secondary electron cut-off region. The XPS measurement used an Al Kα (hω = 1486.5 eV) without a monochromator. The energy resolutions were 0.1 and 1.0 eV, respectively.


Current–voltage curves were measured using a Keithley 2400 source meter. A solar simulator (94023A, Newport Inc.) with a 450 W Xe lamp light source operating at 100 mW cm−2 as calibrated by a standard silicon solar cell was used to simulate the solar spectrum under AM 1.5 G conditions. The pre-sweep delay time was 1 s, the dwell time at each voltage step was 200 ms, and 40 data points were measured between −0.1 and 0.70 V in both forward and reverse directions. External quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements were conducted on a custom built set-up (SPIQE200-5327, Newport Inc.) which consists of a 300 W Xe lamp, a power supply, a monochromator generating 20 nm band width, and a Merlin lock-in amplifier. A beam size of 0.01 cm2 was used to excite the solar devices with an active area of 0.03 cm2. All current–voltage and EQE measurements were carried out in a glove box filled with nitrogen.


We synthesized PbSe/PbS core/shell materials with varying shell thicknesses for our studies. We added PbO as Pb precursors and highly reactive TMS2S as sulfur sources for controlled shell formation on the synthesized PbSe CQD surfaces. Unreacted shell precursors were carefully removed after each layer of shell coating to prevent the formation of PbS cores [Scheme S1].

The increase in the size of the particles was observed in transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Fig. 1(a–d) show the overall sizes averaged with a standard deviation across over 60 particles. The thicknesses of the PbS shells are calculated from the PbSe/PbS core/shell overall sizes compared to the PbSe core sizes. The PbS shell thicknesses correspond to 0.5 nm, 0.9 nm, and 1.3 nm respectively. The average thickness of the shell is estimated to be 0.45 nm which is estimated from the method reported previously. The particle size distributions of the PbSe core and PbSe/PbS core/shell CQDs with 0.5, 0.9, 1.3 nm- thick PbS shell are 11.8, 8.2, 7.0, and 9.4% respectively. The PbSe/PbS core/shell CQDs have a narrower size-distribution than the PbSe cores regardless of the thickness of the shell. The better uniformity could be attributed to ‘size-focusing’ synthesis achieved by drop-wise injection of shell precursors. The continuous red shift is observed in both absorption and emission spectra as the PbS shell grows from minimum 100 nm for 0.5 nm thick shells and to maximum 300 nm for 1.3 nm thick shells in the absorption spectra. The origin of the shrinking HOMO–LUMO gap as the PbS shell thickness increases in our size region is the extension of the wave function to the PbS shell as discussed extensively before. That is the reason why the energy levels are mainly determined by the total size of PbSe/PbS core/shell CQDs.
As synthesized, the core/shell CQDs showed better air-stability compared to the core as depicted in Fig. S1. UV-Vis-NIR spectra were employed to monitor the air-stability of the CQDs. While PbSe core CQDs showed poor air-stability from the absorbance peak within 2 days of exposure to air [Fig. S1(a)], the PbSe/PbS core/shell was found to be stable even after 2 weeks of exposure [Fig. S1(b)]. Clearly, the PbS shell prevents the formation of SeO2 or PbSeO3.

Fig. 2a shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra of PbSe cores as well as PbSe/PbS core/shells with different PbS shell thicknesses. The crystal structures of both PbSe cores and PbSe/PbS core/shells correspond to the rock-salt structure. The peaks corresponding to the shell material sharpen as the thickness of the shell increases as predicted by the Scherer equation. In addition, the diffraction pattern also shifts closer towards the shell materials (and moves away from the core materials) as the shell thickness increases. Both the core and core/shell CQDs were further characterized by using X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) [Fig. 2b]. The XPS data confirms the presence of both Se and S in the core/shell CQDs. Also, the chemical shift to lower binding energy in the Pb 4f peak is observed in the core/shell CQDs due to the fact that the electronegativity of the S atom is lower than that of Se.

PbSe/PbS core/shell CQDs with a precisely controlled shell thickness are expected to be advantageous for photovoltaic applications because their electronic structures are suitable for efficient carrier management. Also, spatially separated quasi-type-II excitons could enhance the carrier separation and extraction. Energy level positions of both the core and core/shell CQD films were measured by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). The UPS measurement has been widely employed to ascertain the Fermi level energy and the valence band maximum (VBM) level positions. The conduction band minimum (CBM) levels are obtained by the optical band gap energy (Eg) from the absorption spectra [Fig. 1e]. In particular, we determine the VBM from the Fermi level energy using the semi-logarithmic plot method which gives more reliable results when treating materials having a lower band gap such as lead chalcogenide CQDs than using a linear plot method. Combining the results obtained in both UPS and UV-Vis-NIR, we determine the CBM, VBM and Fermi level energy of both the core and core/shell CQDs [Fig. 3c]. The energy level positions are largely influenced by the original properties of the PbSe cores, if the PbS shell thickness is small. Further, the ratio of the effective density of state of the valence band (NV) and the carrier concentration (p) were calculated using the Maxwell–Boltzmann equation based on the measured Fermi level and the VBM.
The values of NV/p in the PbSe core and PbSe/PbS core/shell are 7 × 106 [for core], 1 × 106 [for 0.5 nm thick shell], 5 × 106 [for 0.9 nm thick shell], and 1 × 105 [for 1.3 nm thick shell], respectively. These values are important factors in determining the open-circuit voltage in CQD solar cells.
We fabricated PbSe/PbS CQD heterojunction PV cells using shell-thickness-varying CQDs and investigated the solar cell parameters. For this study, we chose the small sized PbSe cores with 1.85 nm diameter (band gap of 1.7 eV) because the optimal band gap in the single junction solar cells is around 1.1–1.4 eV and PbS shell layer leads to a smaller band gap compared to pure PbSe core CQDs. The device substrate constitutes TiO2 as n-layer deposited on a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass slide [Fig. 4a]. A conventional layer-by-layer coating method was employed to fabricate CQD PV cells. By exchanging long chain fatty acid, and OA, with a shorter MPA, the dot-to-dot distance was reduced, with an increase in conductivity. The thickness of CQD layers on the device is 173 ± 4.1 nm as obtained from the cross-sectional secondary electron images (SEM) in Fig. S2.
In Fig. 4b, variations of the short-circuit current density, JSC and band gap energy with increasing shell thicknesses are shown. The results indicate that the shell-thickness leads to a monotonic increase in the JSC from 6.3 to 12.3 mA cm−2 (95% increment). The optical band gap decreases while adding PbS shell layers, which leads to an increase in a higher amount of photons from the sun's broad spectrum. Therefore, the JSC is enhanced as follows:
where
q is the elementary charge, ϕ is the photon flux and EQE is the external quantum efficiency at the wavelength, λ. The short circuit current density is also influenced by carrier transport characteristics. An increase in the mobility with a larger particle size was previously observed in CQD films because both Coulombic charging energy of an individual particle and the total number of inter-particles decrease. Additionally, the smaller surface area in the CQD solids with larger particles could play a role in improving the JSC due to the reduced surface trap density.

The fill factor (FF) increases as the shell thickness increases up to 0.5 nm and 0.9 nm and then decreases with the additional layers. The FF is directly related to the trap state density in the nanocrystal array film. Therefore the increase in FF in the PbSe/PbS core/shells with less than 1 nm thick shells could be attributed to a decrease in the surface trap which is supported by a relative quantum yield measurement of the PbSe/PbS core/shells [Fig. 4c, pale green diamonds]. The FF of the device using the PbSe/PbS core/shells with a 1.3 nm thick shell decreases again which correlates well with the lower quantum yield of these materials. The dislocations and grain boundaries in the morphology of the shell during the thick shell formation often introduce nonradiative recombination sites resulting in a decrease in the photoluminescence efficiency.
The VOC of our heterojunction PV cells depending on the PbS shell thickness is shown in Fig. 3d. The VOC of PV cells with the PbSe cores and the PbSe/PbS core/shells having a thin shell with less than 1 nm is around 0.46 V, even though the effective optical band gap energies vary as shown in Fig. 4b. The factors determining the VOC in the quantum dot solar cells are (1) the band energy position of the Fermi energy level and valence band maximum at the junction, (2) the band gap of the quantum dot layer, and (3) the extent of recombination related to the trap states. In our study, the PbS shell formation on the PbSe cores decreases its effective band gap as shown in Fig. 4b (orange squares), while the band energy positions of the Fermi energy level and valence band maximum do not change as confirmed by the UPS measurement in Fig. 3c. Thus, the VOC should decrease assuming that they have the same trap state and carrier concentrations. To clarify the influence of the band gap on the VOC, we further simulated the VOC as a function of the PbSe cores and the PbSe/PbS core/shell band gap and the simulated VOC decreases as the band gap decreases as shown in Fig. S4. However, we observed that the VOC remains the same even with the decreasing band gap because the PbS shells reduce the trap states, as suggested in the previous studies on VOC increasing upon trap passivation in the PbS/CdS core shell system. The VOC for the PbSe/PbS core/shell with a 1.3 nm thick shell dramatically decreases again down to 0.33 V (27% decrement), which might be originated from the increased trap density as confirmed by a relative quantum yield using the absorption and PL measurement [Fig. 1e and f]. The PbS shell thickness dependency is totally different from the PbSe CQD size dependent tendency in terms of solar cell performances even though in both the cases the band gaps are tuned. On the whole, the power conversion efficiency depending on the shell thickness is shown in Fig. 3e. We obtained the best efficiency of an average of 3% from the PbSe/PbS core/shell with a 0.9 nm thick shell. Table S1 indicates the performance parameters (VOC, JSC, FF, and η) of the PbSe cores and the PbSe/PbS core/shell PV cells averaged with standard deviation across over 12 cells.
As we mentioned in Fig. 3d, the VOC is influenced by both the trap density and the band gap. Therefore, we carefully investigated the electronic structure of nanocrystal solids created with the PbSe/PbS core/shell materials with varying PbS shell thicknesses.
Further, under optimized conditions, the device made with PbSe/PbS core/shell having a shell thickness of 0.9 nm exhibits the highest solar cell performance among our samples. For optimizing the device performances, we first increased the thickness of the PbSe/PbS core/shell CQD films from 170 nm to 250 nm as all solar cell parameters (VOC, JSC, FF, and PCE) are greatly influenced by the thickness of their absorbing layers. Further the introduction of halide ligands provide not only a higher carrier mobility but also a longer diffusion length in the CQD solar cells, which leads to improvement in the solar cell performance. Lastly, we used a TiO2 layer with TiCl4 treatment, which plays a role as a blocking layer. We also fabricated solar cells with PbSe cores and PbSe/PbS core/shell-0.5 nm under optimized conditions. Fig. S5 shows their J–V curves. The power conversion efficiencies in solar cells with the PbSe cores and the PbSe/PbS core/shell-0.5 nm after optimization are 3% and 5.5%, respectively, which are lower than 6.5% with the PbSe/PbS core/shell-0.9 nm solar cells after treatment. This result clearly shows the contribution of the PbS shell layer to improving the solar cell performance.

Fig. 5 shows the J–V curves (a) and the EQE spectra (b) of the device prepared from the PbSe/PbS core/shell with a 0.9 nm thick shell after optimization under simulated 100 mW cm−2, AM 1.5 G irradiation. The device exhibits JSC of 21.7 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.5 V, FF of 57%, and a power conversion efficiency (η) of 6.5%. The value of JSC under AM 1.5 conditions is in agreement with that of approximately 21.0 mA cm−2 from an external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum [Fig. 5b]. Furthermore, the histogram in Fig. S6 shows the distribution performance of our devices and indicates an excellent reproducibility.
Compared to the performance of the PbSe/PbS core/shell CQD PV cells without post treatment of the halide, all the parameter values (VOC, JSC, FF, and η) increase. In particular, among the parameters, an improvement of the current density from 14.0 (core) to 21.0 mA cm−2 (core/shell) is remarkable. This is because the halide treatment in the solution-state resulted in improvement in the charge transport due to the increased carrier mobility. Therefore the enhanced current density in the PbSe/PbS core/shell after optimization is considered from the advancement in electronic transport characteristics by reducing the number of deep trap states.
Further, the CQD layer thickness of 250 nm nearly approaches the depletion width in the CQD heterojunction solar cells, which leads to an increased optical generation rate in the optimized cells.

By controlling the reaction conditions, PbSe CQDs could be coated with a PbS shell with a precise thickness corresponding to 0.5, 0.9, and 1.3 nm. The synthesized PbSe/PbS core/shell quantum dots exhibited a narrow size-distribution below 10% and enhanced air stability. When the PbS shell thickness was increased up to 0.9 nm, the JSC and the FF increased while maintaining the VOC despite the reducing band gap, which is distinctive behaviour compared to the core only solar cell devices. Apparently, the PbS shell layer not only reduces the trap state density of the PbSe core but also relieves the trade-off relationship between the JSC and the VOC in heterojunction solar cells. We report the best performance of 6.5% using PbSe/PbS core/shell CQDs with 0.9 nm-thick shells after further optimizing the device performances. This new strategy for energy level tuning as well as reducing the trap states using the PbSe/PbS core/shell approach could be one of the ways for increasing the efficiency of PbSe based solar cells.


This work was supported by the Global Frontier R&D Program by the Center for Multi-scale Energy Systems funded by the National Research Foundation under the Ministry of Education, Science, and Technology (2011-0031566) and the Global R&D program funded by KIAT.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5nr03309h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015