 DOI: 10.1039/C6CC00522E
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 4231-4234


Kisu
Lee
,

Chang-Min
Yoon
,

Jungchul
Noh
 and 

Jyongsik
Jang
*

School of Chemical and Biological Engineering, College of Engineering, Seoul National University, 599 Gwanangno, Gwanakgu, Seoul, 151-744, Korea. E-mail: jsjang@plaza.snu.ac.kr; Fax: +82 2 888 1604; Tel: +82 2 880 7069

Received
19th January 2016
, Accepted 17th February 2016
First published on 17th February 2016
In meso-superstructured perovskite solar cells, the scaffolding layer, composed of insulating metal oxide nanoparticles, plays an important role in the loading efficiency of the perovskite layer. This communication describes 1D mesoporous silica nanoparticles that were successfully used as scaffolds to enhance the electron extraction from the perovskite absorber layer to the working electrode.

Since the first report of CH3NH3PbI3-sensitized, solid-state solar cells in 2012, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) based on organometallic trihalide absorber materials have developed rapidly as one of the most promising third-generation photovoltaic technologies. Generally, four types of device architectures have been studied in PSCs: (1) mesoscopic PSCs with active scaffolds, using semi-conducting metal oxide nanoparticles (e.g., TiO2 and ZnO) as the electron-transporting layer, (2) meso-superstructured PSCs with passive scaffolds, using insulating metal oxide nanoparticles (e.g., Al2O3, ZrO2 and SiO2), (3) conventional “n–i–p” planar PSCs without scaffolds, and (4) inverted “p–i–n” planar PSCs. Among these device architectures, meso-superstructured PSCs exhibit a large open-circuit voltage (Voc) by circumventing the energy losses at the electron-transporting layer/perovskite layer interfaces due to the insulating characteristics of the scaffolds. Additionally, since they do not contain mesoporous TiO2, scaffolds of meso-superstructured PSCs may be prepared at relatively low temperatures and do not require sintering at 500 °C.

In our previous work, we reported the use of SiO2 nanoparticles as passive scaffolds in PSCs and demonstrated a maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 11.4%. In particular, the size of the SiO2 nanoparticles was optimized (50–100 nm) to fabricate an effective scaffolding layer. Using a suitable particle size, the perovskite layer was deposited uniformly with good pore-filling between the scaffold nanoparticles, which is a key issue in meso-superstructured PSCs. However, it is hard to achieve high short-circuit current density (Jsc) and PCE by varying only the size of the nanoparticles. In this regard, novel-structured scaffolds may make up for the limitations of spherical nanoparticles.
Recently, one-dimensional (1D) nanomaterials, such as nanorods or nanowires, have received a great deal of attention as efficient scaffolds in PSCs due to better pore-filling of the perovskite layer relative to that obtained with nanoparticulate structures. Several studies have demonstrated the use of 1D nanostructured TiO2 and ZnO as electron-transporting layers, but there is no report on meso-superstructured PSCs employing 1D nanostructured insulating scaffolds, including SiO2, Al2O3, and ZrO2.
In this communication, we report the fabrication of PSCs based on mesoporous SiO2 nanorods (mSiO2 NRs) and examine the morphological effects of the nanorod scaffolds. The morphology of mSiO2 nanoparticles was controlled from nanospheres to nanorods simply by changing the concentration of reagents in the synthetic procedure. When applied to a scaffolding layer in PSCs, randomly stacked mSiO2 NRs provided more permeable space for the perovskite layer than that obtained with spherical mSiO2, and facilitated better electron transfer to the working electrode. Under our experimental conditions, a maximum PCE of 13.9% was achieved for mSiO2 NR-based PSCs, which is 13% higher than that obtained with mSiO2 nanosphere-based PSCs (12.3%).

Fig. 1 shows transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of mesoporous silica (mSiO2) nanoparticles with different morphologies. The images show that mSiO2 nanospheres with an average diameter of ca. 80 nm were successfully fabricated. Two kinds of mSiO2 nanorods were synthesized via a modified Stöber method, resulting in a fixed diameter of ca. 50 nm and varying lengths of ca. 150 nm and 250 nm. Consequently, three kinds of mSiO2 nanoparticles were fabricated with aspect ratios (L/D) of 1 (sphere), 3 (S-rod), and 5 (L-rod). The morphology of the mSiO2 nanoparticles was readily controlled by changing the reagent concentrations in the reaction medium. With an increasing amount of water, the mSiO2 nanoparticles transformed from nanospheres to nanorods via anisotropic growth due to the directional supply of silica species in a limited region. Under our conditions, the maximized aspect ratio of the mSiO2 material was limited to 5. The mSiO2 rods could be grown further, but the resulting structures were distorted. Fig. 1d–f show scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of spin-coated MAPbI3−xClx (CH3NH3 = methylammonium, MA) films on each mSiO2 nanoparticle. All MAPbI3−xClx films were thoroughly loaded on mSiO2 scaffolds with high surface coverage. XRD analyses were also conducted in order to obtain structural information of the MAPbI3−xClx films (Fig. S1, ESI). All of the resulting diffractograms indicated a well-crystallized MAPbI3−xClx layer, showing dominant peaks at 16° and 28°, which correspond to the (110) and (220) planes of the perovskite structure.

Fig. 2a shows UV-vis absorption and photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the prepared MAPbI3−xClx films on glass/compact TiO2/mSiO2 nanoparticles. These films had been fabricated using the same spin-coating process. Although the absorption spectra of MAPbI3−xClx films on all scaffolds were analogous, the PL spectra exhibited significant differences. The PL spectrum of the MAPbI3−xClx film was quenched markedly when L-rod scaffolds were used, indicating a less radiative recombination of excited electrons due to increased electron extraction from the perovskite absorber layer to the compact TiO2 layer. The difference in behavior of excited electrons in the MAPbI3−xClx layer was studied more in detail by time-resolved PL measurements (Fig. 2b). The PL decay curve of the MAPbI3−xClx film on L-rod scaffolds dropped rapidly, compared with those obtained with sphere and S-rod mSiO2 scaffolds. PL decay lifetimes (τ) were obtained by fitting the decay curves with a single exponential function. The lifetimes of samples with sphere, S-rod, and L-rod scaffolds were 35.1 ns, 31.6 ns, and 14.8 ns, respectively. Note that the MAPbI3−xClx film on the L-rod scaffold exhibited the shortest lifetime, 14.8 ns, demonstrating an improvement in electron transport. mSiO2 nanoparticles do not participate in the actual transport of electrons or holes due to their insulating properties. They only support the formation of the MAPbI3xClx film. That is, the MAPbI3−xClx layer transports electrons autonomously to the compact TiO2 layer. Thus, the perovskite precursor solution had to infiltrate into the interstitial spaces between mSiO2 nanoparticles in order to make efficient contact with the compact TiO2 layer. As illustrated in Fig. 3a, compact packing of spherical mSiO2 nanoparticles possibly impedes the infiltration of precursor solution into the deeper spaces, resulting in poor pore-filling of the perovskite layer. However, the rod-like mSiO2 nanoparticles were stacked randomly due to their morphology. Thus, the precursor solution was able to efficiently penetrate into the void spaces created by mSiO2 nanorods. Atomic force microscope (AFM) images of stacked mSiO2 nanoparticles (Fig. 3b and c) show the distribution of these void spaces between the particles. In the case of L-rod scaffolds, the black-colored regions, corresponding to the deeper spaces, are well distributed and suggest an increased possibility of precursor infiltration and pore-filling. Consequently, more complete contact of the MAPbI3−xClx layer with the compact TiO2 layer, which enables facile electron extraction, was achieved using L-rod mSiO2 scaffolds.
We fabricated PSCs, as shown in Fig. S2 (ESI), to evaluate the effect of mSiO2 nanoparticle morphology on device performance. All layers were fabricated using a spin-coating process except for the gold layer, which was deposited by thermal evaporation. The thickness of the entire fabricated cell was ca. 700 nm, including the ca. 300 nm-thick MAPbI3−xClx layer.

Table 1 summarizes the photovoltaic parameters of PSCs based on the mSiO2 nanoparticles evaluated in this study. All of the PSCs displayed a large open-circuit voltage (Voc) above 1.0 V due to the insulating nature of mSiO2. Devices based on sphere and S-rod scaffolds showed similar performance, but the average PCE of devices using L-rod scaffolds increased to 13.04%, along with increases in short-circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF). The enhancements in PCE likely result from better electron extraction capabilities, as discussed previously. J–V curves and photovoltaic parameters of the best performing devices made with each type of mSiO2 nanoparticle are presented in Fig. 4a and Table S1 (ESI), respectively. The best performing device fabricated with L-rod scaffolds exhibited a Jsc of 19.42 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.02 V, a FF of 0.70, and a PCE of 13.91%. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the cells are shown in Fig. 4b. The Jsc values of these cells, calculated by integrating the EQE spectra, were consistent with their J–V measurements. All EQE spectra effectively covered the wavelength range from 350 to 750 nm. In particular, the L-rod scaffolds yielded an EQE enhancement, showing a flat spectrum around 80%. The hysteresis effect of the cell fabricated with L-rods was also investigated (Fig. S3, ESI), which is a critical vulnerability of meso-superstructured PSCs originating from the insulating characteristic of the scaffolds. Considering the insulating properties of SiO2 owing to the high conduction band energy, L-rod scaffold-based PSCs exhibited a small hysteresis at the forward scan mode due to increased charge transfer and reduced charge accumulation (forward scan: 10.39%; reverse scan: 13.27%).
Sample

V
oc
 (V)

J
sc
 (mA cm−2)
FF

η
avg
 (%)

η
max (%)

a Average values of the parameters were obtained for 15 devices.

Sphere
1.03
17.32
0.66
11.85 ± 0.46
12.36
S-rod
1.03
17.42
0.65
11.82 ± 0.41
12.57
L-rod
1.02
18.30
0.69
13.04 ± 0.44
13.91
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were carried out to further evaluate the charge transfer at the PSC interfaces. Nyquist plots in Fig. 5 were recorded at an applied bias of 0.8 V and over a frequency range of 1 Hz to 3 MHz under full illumination. Arcs of the Nyquist plots in the high-frequency region represent the contact resistance at the interfaces of the perovskite layer. The Nyquist plot of the PSC made with L-rod scaffolds has a smaller arc than those based on sphere and S-rod scaffolds, indicating a lower interfacial charge transfer resistance. Since all of the device conditions, except for the scaffolding layer, were identical, the low interfacial resistance of the L-rod-based device was attributed to higher electron transport through the scaffolds from the absorber layer to the compact TiO2 layer. The results of EIS measurements were consistent with the observed photovoltaic performance of the PSCs.
Additionally, we fabricated MAPbI3-based perovskite solar cells using mSiO2 nanorod scaffolds. Although MAPbI3 is not a very suitable absorber for an insulating scaffold because of its short diffusion length relative to that of MAPbI3−xClx, mSiO2 nanorods functioned as efficient scaffolds in these devices, exhibiting a PCE of over 10%. The best performing MAPbI3-based PSC using an L-rod mSiO2 nanoparticle showed a PCE of 12.61%, a Jsc of 19.55 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.03 V, and a FF of 0.63. The related J–V curve is presented in Fig. S4 (ESI).
In conclusion, mSiO2 nanorods with controlled aspect ratios were used successfully as scaffolding layers in perovskite solar cells. In particular, devices incorporating a relatively long mSiO2 nanorod with an aspect ratio of 5 exhibited the highest conversion efficiency (13.9%). This was attributed to greater electron extraction resulting from the rod-like morphology of the scaffold.
This work was supported by the Global Frontier R&D Program of the Center for Multiscale Energy System funded by the National Research Foundation under the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning, Korea (2011-0031573).
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Detailed experimental procedures, XRD patterns of the perovskite layer on different mSiO2 nanoparticles, digital photograph and cross-sectional SEM image of PSC using L-rods, hysteresis analysis, a J–V curve of MAPbI3 PSC using L-rods, and photovoltaic parameters of the best performing devices. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cc00522e
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016