 DOI: 10.1039/C9CP00751B
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 9564-9573


Iuliana
Mihalache
*,

Alexandra
Purcarea
,

Eugeniu
Vasile
,

Cristina
Pachiu
,

Sandra A. V.
Eremia
,

Antonio
Radoi
* and 

Mihaela
Kusko


National Institute for Research and Development in Microtechnologies – IMT Bucharest, 126A Erou Iancu Nicolae Street, Bucharest, 077190, Romania. E-mail: iuliana.mihalache@imt.ro; antonio.radoi@imt.ro

Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Organic Chemistry, Biochemistry and Catalysis, Research Centre of Applied Organic Chemistry, University of Bucharest, 90 Panduri Street, Bucharest, Romania

Faculty of Applied Chemistry and Material Science, Politehnica University, No. 1-7 Gh. Polizu Street, 011061 Bucharest, Romania

Centre of Bioanalysis, National Institute of Research and Development for Biological Sciences, Bucharest, 296 Splaiul Independentei, 060031 Bucharest, Romania

Received
6th February 2019
, Accepted 12th April 2019
First published on 12th April 2019
An interconnected graphene network (IGN) structure with excellent photoluminescence (PL) properties was synthesized using a one-pot microwave-assisted hydrothermal carbonization route. The material exhibited intense and excitation-wavelength dependent PL emission located mainly in the UV-blue light range (300–450 nm). The result demonstrates that graphene networks could also be included in the emerging class of tunable PL carbon nanomaterials. Furthermore, we have taken a first step towards their incorporation into solar cell devices by fabricating IGN/p-SiNWs radial heterojunctions using the versatile potentiostatic electrodeposition technique. The IGN modified p-SiNW solar cell showed the best performance with an overall enhancement of power conversion efficiency of 7.5 times higher than the reference cell. We emphasize that the structural and electronic characteristics of the as-prepared IGN combined with tapering effects are directly responsible for the tripled short circuit current density and 9% improvement of open circuit voltage with respect to the reference cell. Finally, we have demonstrated that the IGN successfully passivated the Si nanowires’ surface using intensity modulated photocurrent/photovoltage spectroscopy (IMPS/IMVS). These promising findings indicate that further IGN exploitation may help to gain efficiency in future energy conversion applications.

The innate affinity of carbon for energy applications is intensely exploited nowadays while the emergence of new materials paves the way towards tackling heterojunctions for photovoltaics, developing high-performance optical sensors or achieving electrodes for flexible and transparent advanced charge storage devices. In this regard, graphene materials demonstrated remarkable properties such as low cost and abundant raw materials, solution processability, chemical inertness and stability, high UV photon absorption, capacitance and electronic transport which are effectively explored in applications related to electrocatalysis, sensors, supercapacitors, lithium batteries and carbon based solar cells.

In the last decade, a novel class of carbon materials have distinguished themselves by their broad and excitation wavelength dependent photoluminescence spectra capable of covering the whole UV-Visible domain with the use of adequate surface chemistry. These unique optical properties have been associated mostly with carbon nanodots or graphene quantum dots; however, other forms of graphene-derived carbon nanostructures, including graphene oxide derivatives, carbon nano-rods and carbon nano-onions, sharing the same PL features are currently emerging.
In recent years, solar cells based on the carbon/silicon interface have attracted a growing interest as a promising approach for the fabrication of future high efficiency hybrid solar cells using simplified and low-temperature processing routes towards reduced production costs. The latest research on the fundamentals of the graphene and silicon (Gr/Si) interface showed that surface modification of the graphene layer along with new technological developments has contributed to the remarkable enhancement of the performance of Gr/Si heterojunction solar cells. Also, the Schottky junction between Si and other carbon-based materials including carbon nanotubes (CNTs), fullerenes and amorphous carbon has demonstrated that such materials could successfully serve as a photo-active layer for charge separation and transport due to their high carrier mobility, absorption coefficient, band gap and chemical stability. Moreover, nanostructuring the Si surface as vertical nanowires, nanocones or nanotips has been found to successfully improve light absorption and charge collection capability. Particularly, one-dimensional (1D) silicon nanowire arrays (SiNWs) with a high surface to volume ratio and less than 100 nm in diameter have attracted considerable attention for a wide variety of applications due to their ability to enhance light harvesting and to support various hybrid architectures using alternative eco-friendly coating schemes. Thus, the development of a reliable and sensitive platform based on carbon/silicon NWs demonstrated improved performance and stability not only for solar cells but also for various applications such as photoelectrochemical activity, multiwavelength lighting and photodetection.
However, the technology employed to fabricate a hybrid heterojunction based on SiNWs is a challenging step in itself taking into account that it plays an important role in the efficient bandgap engineering and, subsequently, in the device performance. On this line, for achieving a conformal deposition on the nanostructured Si substrate different approaches have been proposed including chemical vapor deposition and solution processing routes. We stress that, even if the latter one is rapid and gives a cost benefit, to overcome the difficulty of solution infiltration, additional treatments are necessary to achieve complete surface coverage, such as preliminary surface functionalization, or the use of low pressure-assisted coating instead of spin-coating methods. In this context, the potentiostatic electrochemical deposition is a versatile technique suitable for large and complex surfaces that offers advantages in terms of compact and continuous layer formation and superior electrical contact at the interface between silicon and the active layer when compared to other deposition methods.
This work reports a facile one-pot microwave-assisted hydrothermal synthesis of an interconnected graphene-like carbon network using two aqueous precursors as the carbon and nitrogen source. The as-prepared material exhibits excellent photoluminescence properties such as tunability and strong emission in the UV/blue range. This is the first experimental study to reveal the ability of the interconnected graphene network (IGN) to exhibit intense and tunable photoluminescence emission and may open new paths for its potential application in bioimaging and optoelectronics. Moreover, we explored the ability of the IGN as an enhancer for p-type silicon (100) nanowire solar cells due to several advantages including a large band offset combined with tailored energy levels induced by surface functionalization. We designed and fabricated a solar cell based on the IGN/p-SiNWs heterojunction with type I band alignment wherein the contact region between the transparent electrode, IGN and p-SiNWs had been dramatically improved by the synergetic effects of tapering and electrodeposition. Consequently, the stimulated photogenerated charge carrier effective separation in the interface regions and the efficient collection at the electrodes boost the power conversion efficiency to over 7.5 times compared to the reference cell.
The morphological, optical and electrochemical properties of the self-assembled carbon framework were analyzed and its influence on the solar cell performance was further investigated by means of current density–voltage, incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE), intensity modulated photocurrent and photovoltage spectroscopy measurements.

Siegert Wafer GmbH (Germany) supplied 4′′, p-type, Si(100) wafers (10–15 Ω cm resistivity). Acetone, H2O2 (31%), HCl, H2SO4 (96%), HF (50%) and HNO3 (69%) were from BASF, Germany. Ethanol, AIGNO3, acetonitrile (ACN), sucrose, 2-amino-2-(hydroxymethyl)-1,3-propanediol, dimethylformamide (DMF), and diethyl ether were acquired from Sigma, Germany. Extran® solution was from Merck Millipore, Germany. Tetrabutylammonium perchlorate (TBAP) was provided by Molekula GmbH. Deionized water was used for different solution preparations and during cleaning steps. Indium tin oxide (ITO) and Au targets were used during the physical deposition of top transparent and bottom contacts, respectively.


A novel photoluminescent carbonaceous material was synthesized using a single step microwave assisted hydrothermal treatment at low reaction temperature (below 300 °C). A microwave acid digestion vessel (4781 type, by Parr Instrument Company, USA) and a commercial microwave oven were used during synthesis. In a typical procedure, 10 g of sucrose and 16 g of 2-amino-2-(hydroxymethyl)-1,3-propanediol were mixed with 20 mL of water and solubilized over a period of 1 h, at 60 °C and ultrasound (25 kHz). A volume of 25 mL of the viscous mixture was sealed in the microwave vessel and 700 W was applied for 40 s. The Teflon vessel was allowed to cool down at room temperature for 45 minutes. The reaction mixture was filtered through a 1.2 μm Nylon syringe filter and centrifuged at 20000 rpm for 1 h at 10 °C. The supernatant was collected, diluted with water up to 100 mL and extracted with 8 × 50 mL of diethyl ether. Finally, the diethyl ether was removed using nitrogen steam and the as-prepared sample was resuspended in 20 mL of dimethylformamide.


Vertical Si nanowire (SiNW) arrays were fabricated using the metal-assisted chemical etching (MACE) technique. Si wafers (100, p-type) were immersed in a series of different cleaning solutions in the following order: (i) 5% HCl (5 minutes), (ii) 2% HF (3 minutes), (iii) Piranha (15 minutes) and (iv) 2% HF (3 minutes). In between each step rinsing with water was done, and finally the wafers were dried under nitrogen flush. Back metallic contacts consisting of a layer of 100 Å Cr and 2000 Å Au were deposited using electron beam evaporation. After the metallization step, the 4′′ wafer was cut into 1 cm pieces, then sonicated in ethanol, acetone and (5% v/v) Extran® solution (for 15 min) and ultimately cleaned in Piranha solution (3:1 v/v H2SO4 and H2O2) for 30 minutes at room temperature; between each step rinsing with deionized (DI) water was done. Substrates were immersed in 4.8 M HF and 0.02 M AgNO3 aqueous solution for 1 minute at room temperature achieving a silver deposition on the silicon surface, then rinsed thoroughly with DI water to remove the unreacted silver. In the second step, samples were etched in the presence of 4.8 M HF and 0.1 M H2O2 solution for 3 minutes, in dark conditions, at room temperature, then washed with DI water. Finally, samples were dipped in HNO3 (65%) for 30 minutes in order to remove any residual metallic catalyst, the resulting black surface samples being copiously washed with DI water and dried under a N2 flow. The solar cell configuration makes use of the entire nanowire substrate.


The fabrication process flow used for obtaining the proof of concept solar cells consists of two steps. In the first step the potentiostatic electrodeposition of the IGN onto Si nanowires was achieved by employing an electrochemical workstation with 3-electrode configuration where the entire specific area of the SiNW substrate was used as a working electrode and a clean platinum wire and a nonaqueous Ag/AgNO3 (10 mM AgNO3) electrode were used as a counter electrode and reference electrode, respectively. The IGN film was electrodeposited from solution containing IGN dispersed in dimethylformamide under a constant potential of −2 V (vs. Ag/AgNO3) applied for 300 s. The thickness of the carbonaceous layer was controlled by adjusting the applied potential, time and concentration while monitoring the degree of density modification in silicon nanowires caused by tapering effects. In the second stage, the IGN covered silicon nanowires were rinsed with water and dried under N2 flow. A layer of 200 nm indium tin oxide (ITO) was deposited onto the IGN/p-SiNWs heterostructure by DC magnetron sputtering and used as a typical transparent top contact.


Morphological and compositional analyses of the SiNWs and IGN-covered SiNWs were performed using a transmission electron microscope (TEM, FEI, 300 kV Tecnai G2-F30) and a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Quanta Inspect F with EDAX analyzer). Raman measurements were carried out using a confocal Raman microscope (Alpha-SNOM 300 S, WITec. GmbH, Germany) equipped with a 532 nm laser in backscattering configuration. Optical absorption and reflection spectra of the samples were collected using a fluorescence spectrometer (FLS920 with ps-pulsed laser EPL-375 for lifetime measurements, Edin. Inst. Ltd, UK). Electrochemical investigations were performed in 0.1 M TBAP electrolyte prepared in N2 purged ACN, using the Autolab/PGSTAT302N potentiostat/galvanostat. The PV performance and J–V curves of the cells were measured using Keithley 4200, under dark and 1 Sun AM 1.5G 100 mW cm−2 illumination using a LED solar simulator (LSH 7320, Newport, USA) measured by a National Institute of Standards and Technology traceable thermopile detector. The incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE) was measured using a monochromatic light source (FLS920) with previously calibrated intensity and photocurrent was recorded using the PGSTAT302N potentiostat. Intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS) and intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) measurements were performed under the illumination of blue (470 nm) and red (627 nm) LED sources managed through Autolab Optical bench/PGSTAT302N (Eco Chemie) and calibrated using a reference diode (FDS100 – CAL, Thorlabs). All measurements were carried out in ambient conditions, at room temperature.


The high resolution TEM image illustrating the morphology of the as-prepared carbonaceous material is shown in Fig. 1a. Remarkable for this low temperature range carbonization is the formation of a significant number of short-range ordered domains with parallel stacks of 2–6 graphene-like layers embedded in a disordered carbon framework. Fig. 1b and c show representative straight and curved graphene layers revealed by the micrographs. The revealed graphene-like nanosheets viewed edge-on have enlarged fringe separation ranging between 0.34 and 0.40 nm along (002), similar to other structures observed in graphitic carbons. Interestingly, the curvature of layers led to the formation of quasi-spherical concentric structures known as carbon nano-onions (CNOs). These very fine structures contain from 3 to 5 fullerene-like shells, have an average outer diameter as small as ∼4 nm and were observed mostly at the edge of the sample; however, intermediate stage shells could be found randomly distributed inside the carbon matrix.

The experimental Raman spectrum was analyzed using the Lorentzian deconvolution – Fig. 2.
In the first-order region of the spectrum, one can identify the G peak (∼1590.8 cm−1) originating from the symmetric E2g mode in sp2 carbon rings and a strong disordered-induced D peak (∼1345.5 cm−1) caused by symmetry breaking in the sp2 lattice due to the structural defects. The D/G band intensity ratio has been commonly used to estimate the amount of disorder in carbonaceous materials. In this case, the calculated value of ID/IG ∼ 0.78 suggests the existence of a high density of defects associated with the locally ordered graphene network with a specific content of C atoms bonding in sp2 as well as sp3 hybridized states. Moreover, three other peaks were obtained (D1 @ 1239.1 cm−1, D2 @ 1466.2 cm−1 and D′ @ 1557.4 cm−1) which could be useful to identify the type of defects ascribed to disordered graphitic lattice, amorphous carbon and surface graphene layers, respectively. Thus, the additional bands D1 and D2 may be related to functional group defects meanwhile the D′ band is ascribed to the vacancies and/or pentagonal and octagonal defects. The defects identified in this work are comparable to those reported for fluorescent carbon nanodots in recent studies, when Raman spectroscopy was also corroborated by electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy (EPR), which is a highly sensitive technique suitable for the detection of extrinsic and intrinsic defect states.
In the second-order region of the Raman spectrum, the displayed 2D band (∼2873.2 cm−1) is associated with two phonon lattice vibration processes which confirm the presence of multilayer graphene disposed in short range arrangements.
The absorption band shown in Fig. 3a is located primarily in the UV region with a small tail extending to the visible wavelength range. The most prominent absorption peak centered on ∼4.35 eV corresponds to the transition from the valence band to the conduction band and is assigned to π electrons originating exclusively from the rich content of sp2 hybridized C atoms organized in six-fold rings which represents a common feature of all graphene-based materials. Furthermore, the sample had been investigated using both steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence (PL).
This particular form of the graphene-like carbon network exhibited intense ultraviolet and blue PL emission dependent on the excitation wavelength and showed strong visual PL upon illumination (Fig. 3b inset) corresponding to a relatively high quantum yield of 13.41%. As can be seen in Fig. 3b, PL emissions range between 300 nm and 600 nm; however, the most intense PL bands are located in the UV/blue region from 300 nm to 450 nm with the maximum emission peak centered at 427 nm. Moreover, the red shift behavior of emission bands observed in the 280 nm to 500 nm excitation range is accompanied by a rapid decline of peak intensity as the excitation wavelength moves from 400 nm to 500 nm across the absorption tail. Fig. 3c evidences the existence of several PL excitation bands overlapping with each other, showing fixed positions and varying intensities with respect to the shift of the emission peaks. These PLE bands should be related to multiple electron transition associated with the absorption of photons in the UV/blue light range. The PL lifetime was measured with 375 nm picosecond pulse laser excitation. The obtained decay curve (Fig. 3d) was well fitted by a tri-exponential function also indicating the presence of multiple emissive components. The decay times are 1.04 ns (14%), 3.25 ns (40%) and 10.03 ns (46%) resulting in an average lifetime of 6.05 ns.
Although blue photoluminescence was observed in various graphitic nanostructures, excellent tunability over a broad wavelength range has been the unique feature of carbon nanodots which made them attractive for a wide range of applications. This study shows that similar optical features can be achieved with heteroatom doping or oxygen and nitrogen functional groups attached on the surface or in the vicinity of spatially clustered sp2 carbons. In this case, multiple electronic transitions demonstrated by the experimental results could be explained based on surface trap energy levels created between π and π* states associated with clustered sp2, which emphasize the strong influence of this type of bonding on the optical emissive properties of carbon based materials.
Cyclic voltammetry measurements had been employed to identify the energy levels and further determine the electrochemical band gap and the resultant data are depicted in Fig. 4.
The onset potentials of the oxidation and reduction peaks related to electron and hole injection into the conduction and valence bands were consequently used to determine the highest occupied molecular-orbital energy level EHOMO (from Eox,onset) and the lowest unoccupied molecular-orbital energy level ELUMO (from Ered,onset) using the following two equations:
EHOMO = −e(4.75 + Eox,onset) (eV)
(1)
ELUMO = −e(4.75 + Ered,onset) (eV)
(2)
The cyclic voltammograms show the oxidation peak situated at +1.96 V corresponding to the EHOMO energy level and the reduction peak situated at −1.30 V corresponding the ELUMO energy level. The energy level values calculated from the peak onsets were EHOMO = −6.55 eV and ELUMO = −3.7 eV, respectively, resulting in the electrochemical band gap energy Eg,ec ≈ 2.85 eV. The appearance of supplementary oxidation and reduction peaks indicates the presence of intermediate energy levels induced inside the band gap during thermal microwave-assisted hydrothermal synthesis. Whereas on the oxidation side one additional level is located near the HOMO level (−6.03 eV), on the reduction side two additional levels appeared near the bandgap center (−5.12 eV, −4.28 eV).
The potential of the graphene-derived material to be a promising candidate for enhancing solar cell performance due to these remarkable properties was further tested by fabricating a hybrid proof-of concept Si nanowire photovoltaic device.

Fig. 5a shows the SEM cross-sectional view of an electroless etched SiNW array prepared from a p-type Si substrate. The nanowires which possess a uniform diameter of approximately 60 nm and a length of 5 μm are arranged in a high density array being straight and perpendicular to the substrate bottom-ends and bunched top-ends, as can be seen in Fig. 5a inset. The HRTEM image in Fig. 5b reveals that a compact and homogeneous IGN coverage with a thickness of about 10 nm was achieved after electrodeposition. The IGN layer preserved the original morphology and thus domains of ordered interconnected graphene planes appeared on the surface of Si nanowires. The tilt-view SEM image in Fig. 5c displays the surface morphology of the final ITO/IGN/p-SiNWs structure and reflects the reduction in length and density of NWs as a consequence of tapering occurring concurrent with the formation of the IGN shell. Clearly, by increasing the separation between NWs the diffusion profile of the IGN during electrodeposition is significantly improved allowing uniform covering from the nanowire bottom to the top. Following ITO deposition, the NWs’ length was determined to be approximately 1.6 μm while their diameter at the top is almost double when compared to the bottom. Additionally, the elemental composition analysis confirmed that the deposited layers are wrapped around the entire nanowire surface. Fig. 5d illustrates the distribution of carbon from the IGN layer and In and Sn from the structure of ITO on different areas of the nanowire after the fabrication of the heterojunction. Moreover, no traces from the metal catalyst were detected.
Prior to device characterization, it is worth noting the major contribution of the interconnected graphene-like carbon nanostructures formed spontaneously during synthesis, which possess a high degree of delocalization for π electronic states, in achieving enhanced electronic conduction properties. Additionally, the energy levels induced into the large bandgap of IGN are expected to behave as assisting charge transport pathways in the IGN/p-SiNWs heterojunction configuration envisioned for solar cell application.
A series of electrical measurements were employed to investigate the solar cell performance. The current density-to-voltage curves (J–V) taken at 1 Sun AM 1.5 G illumination for the IGN covered SiNW solar cell (ITO/IGN/p-SiNWs/Cr/Au) and the uncovered SiNW reference solar cell (ITO/p-SiNWs/Cr/Au) are shown in Fig. 6 and the resultant photovoltaic parameters of the cells are presented in Table 1. The inset illustrates the schematic configuration of the fabricated hybrid device.
Cell

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)
ITO/SiNWs/Cr/Au
3.61
0.22
0.24
0.19
61.3
ITO/IGN/SiNWs/Cr/Au
12.17
0.31
0.38
1.43
13.3
The IGN/p-SiNWs based solar cell achieved a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1.43% which is considerably higher than that of the reference solar cell (0.19% PCE) leading to over 600% enhancement in power conversion efficiency. Furthermore, the short circuit current density (Jsc) of the covered SiNW device increased from 3.61 mA cm−2 to 12.17 mA cm−2, the open circuit voltage (Voc) increased from 0.22 V to 0.31 V and the fill factor (FF) also increased from 24% to 38% following the formation of the IGN/p-SiNWs heterojunction. The strong enhancement of Jsc by 237% could be associated with the attainment of a more efficient charge transport and collection in the wavelength range between 400 and 800 nm. This result supports the idea that creating a certain degree of separation between NWs although reduces the surface reflection will maintain an effective light trapping effect of the NW arrays. The extracted series resistance (Rs) decreased nearly five times for the IGN covered SiNW solar cell reaching a value of 13 mΩ cm2. The convenient reduction of series resistance could be associated with a great improvement in the quality of electrical contact on SiNWs. Herewith, tapering is responsible for shortening accompanied by enlarged separation of nanowires so that each of them is completely and homogeneously covered first with the IGN layer and subsequently with the top contact film.
Incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurements were made over the Vis-NIR wavelength domain (Fig. 7a) and revealed the influence of IGN coverage on light-induced processes in the solar cell. The IGN covered SiNW solar cell exhibited the highest IPCE of ∼60% at 740 nm wavelength, and thus the coverage leads to an enhancement by a factor of 3 while preserving the shape of the SiNW solar cell spectrum. A similar enhancement trend is observed in the absorbed photon-to-current conversion efficiency (APCE) spectrum obtained by employing the absorbance data collected from the surface of covered and uncovered SiNWs (Fig. 7b).
In order to understand the phenomena leading to significant improvement of the photoresponse the electrical results were firstly correlated to the energy levels’ alignment between the components of the hybrid system (Fig. 8). The HOMO and LUMO values of the IGN were estimated in this work while previously reported energy level values were used for p-type SiNWs and metal electrodes.
Under illumination the IGN shell allows photons transmitted by the transparent anode to penetrate deep into the heterojunction photo-generating excitons in both SiNWs and IGN that diffuse within the carbon/silicon interface where charge separation through the built-in electric field takes place. Finally, the charge carriers are extracted at metallic electrodes leading to the generation of current in the photovoltaic device. The IGN film exhibits a slightly high LUMO (−3.8 eV) and a much lower HOMO (−6.5 eV) compared to p-SiNWs which indicates that the silicon band gap will be completely contained in the band gap of the carbon forming a type I band alignment. Thus, the IGN coverage introduces a large potential barrier at the IGN/p-SiNWs interface that although has the role of increasing Voc and consequently the power conversion efficiency may also appear as a hole blocking layer hindering charge transport to the anode. However, as cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements demonstrated, the IGN possesses intermediate band gap energy levels that support the possibility of charge transport pathways for hole transfer from p-SiNWs to the ITO anode. The electron transfer process uses highly conductive cascade aligned energy levels, while hole transfer benefits from the existing multiple surface trap energy levels instead.
Intensity modulated photocurrent/photovoltage spectroscopy (IMPS/IMVS) was carried out to gain more insight into the charge transfer dynamics of the proof of concept solar cells. Thus, we analyzed the periodic photocurrent and photovoltage responses to a small (<10%) sinusoidal perturbation of incident light intensity, superimposed on a larger steady background level. Furthermore, in order to clearly evidence the influence of IGN deposition on SiNWs, we performed an in-depth analysis, investigating the effects of excitation energy on both the photocurrent and photovoltage response. Hence, we measured the IMPS/IMVS spectra of the IGN/p-SiNWs based solar cell and reference solar cell with 470 nm and 627 nm excitation that preferentially excite IGN and silicon NWs, respectively. Fig. 9 shows the IMPS and IMVS responses in the complex plane (a1 and a2) and the frequency-dependent photocurrent magnitude (b1 and b2).
The Nyquist plots of both IMPS and IMVS responses display typical semicircles in the complex plane (Fig. 9a1 and a2). Taking into account that the IMPS data were recorded under short circuit conditions, they provide information regarding the dynamics of charge transport. Accordingly, using the characteristic frequency at the minimum of the IMPS imaginary component we estimate the charge transport time from the expression
(3)
where
ftr is the characteristic frequency at the minimum of the IMPS imaginary component.

A different behavior can be observed as a function of the wavelength of incident light. Under blue light illumination the obtained charge transport times for the reference cell and IGN/p-SiNWs cell have close values, 14.15 μs and 12.79 μs, respectively, while under red light illumination, the difference increases: 10.27 μs and 7.26 μs. Taking into account that in the 600–750 nm wavelength region the photo-generated charge carriers are more prevalent in silicon, the rapid transport is beneficial. Moreover, the Bode plots (Fig. 9b1) reveal the magnitude of the recorded photocurrent, which becomes three-fold larger after IGN electrodeposition, in agreement with IPCE measurements.
Also, the IMVS data show the electron–hole recombination dynamics under the open-circuit condition, where the rate of charge injection is equal to the charge recombination rate and consequently the carrier lifetime can be determined using a similar relationship:
(4)
where
fr is the characteristic frequency at the minimum of the IMVS imaginary component (Fig. 9b2).

Accordingly, the following values were obtained for the recombination times associated to the reference and IGN/p-SiNWs based solar cell: 3.12 μs and 3.45 μs under blue light illumination, and 2.82 μs and 7.72 μs under red light illumination, respectively. They are even more explanatory for the conversion efficiencies obtained for the covered and uncovered SiNW cell analyzed in this work. The small electron lifetime estimated for the reference solar cell indicates that the majority of the generated charges suffer serious recombination at the trapping sites or recombination centers existing in the system. The longer τr obtained for the IGN/p-SiNWs solar cell suggests essentially less overall charge recombination that should be attributed to the efficient passivation of surface trap states in Si nanowires or defects in bulk silicon. The results associated with red light illumination clearly demonstrate the success of this coverage approach with immediate effects such as the reduction of loss and enhancement of both photocurrent and photovoltage. In the way of the improvement of the solar cell performance parameters, several possible approaches could be used including tailoring the electronic structure and the thickness of IGN coverage in order to maximize optical absorption. The electrodeposition process could be adjusted for different nanowire lengths. In addition, the charge carrier collection efficiency could be greatly improved by using top metal mesh or micro-grid electrodes.

In conclusion, we report the synthesis of a novel tunable photoluminescent carbonaceous material based on the arrangement of agglutinated short-range ordered graphene-like nanosheets which we call the interconnected graphene network (IGN). The as-prepared IGN exhibits intense wavelength dependent emission in the UV-blue range and superior electronic properties owing to the presence of trap state energy levels that could be associated with functional groups attached to its surface. Remarkably, a significant amount of ordered graphitic nanostructures were formed during the low temperature hydrothermal carbonization of sucrose/2-amino-2-(hydroxymethyl)-1,3-propanediol precursor solution. We explored the potential of the IGN as an optoelectronic material by fabricating the IGN/p-SiNWs radial heterojunction solar cell via a scalable and versatile potentiostatic electrochemical deposition technique. A remarkable PCE improvement of up to 7.5 times (0.19% to 1.43%) was achieved in the case of the IGN/p-SiNWs based solar cell in comparison with the reference cell due to the combined influence of several factors. Thus, photocurrent showed a 3-fold increase upon the modification of NW morphology whereas the IGN/p-SiNWs heterojunction effects contributed to the enhanced charge carrier separation and transport in the cell. In particular, the IGN possesses a large bandgap found to increase Voc by 9% and multiple surface trap energy levels to foster more effectively charge injection into nanowires. Moreover, IMVS/IMPS spectroscopy revealed a decrease in the charge transport time as well as a strong increase of the recombination time from 2.82 μs and 7.72 μs which demonstrates that the IGN coverage provides an efficient passivation of the trapping sites located on the Si nanowire surface. We anticipate that further exploitation of PL-tunable IGNs could open new paths for their application in the energy-harvesting field.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by a grant of Ministry of Research and Innovation, CNCS - UEFISCDI, project number PN-III-P4-ID-PCE-2016-0618, within PNCDI III.


This journal is © the Owner Societies 2019