 DOI: 10.1039/C3EE00060E
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1589-1596

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Abhishek
Kumar
,

Giuseppina
Pace
,

Artem A.
Bakulin
,

Junfeng
Fang
,

Peter K. H.
Ho
,

Wilhelm T. S.
Huck
,

Richard H.
Friend
 and 

Neil C.
Greenham
*

Cavendish Laboratory, Department of Physics, University of Cambridge, J. J. Thomson Avenue, Cambridge CB3 0HE, UK. E-mail: ncg11@cam.ac.uk

Melville Laboratory for Polymer Synthesis, Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Lensfield Road, Cambridge CB2 1EW, UK

Department of Physics, National University of Singapore, Lower Kent Ridge Road, S117542, Singapore

Received
7th January 2013
, Accepted 19th March 2013
First published on 19th March 2013
We report that we can enhance the performance of polymer photovoltaics by introducing materials with dipoles at the donor–acceptor interface of the polymer solar cells. We use a zwitterionic conjugated polyelectrolyte (ZCPE) as an interfacial layer in a model bi-layer system consisting of donor and acceptor polymers. We find an increase in short-circuit current and fill factor when a 2 nm thin layer of ZCPE is introduced between donor and acceptor polymers. Absorption of light in the ZCPE interlayer contributes to the photocurrent, and, as revealed by time-resolved pump–push optical spectroscopy, the interlayer reduces the probability of electron–hole recombination at the donor–acceptor interface.

Recently, much attention has been paid to organic photovoltaics (OPV) due to their advantages including solution processability, low processing costs, flexible architecture and improving efficiencies. Bulk heterojunction devices based on blends of donor and acceptor polymers have potential advantages of higher open-circuit voltage, higher extinction coefficients, and flexibility in materials design. Recent reports of 5.2% power conversion efficiency in all-polymer solar cells demonstrate continued promise for this approach. Polymer:polymer blends often suffer from geminate recombination of electron–hole pairs that can trap at the donor–acceptor (D–A) interface, and optimization of charge dynamics at this interface is crucial. Several approaches have been investigated to improve the performance of polymer:polymer bulk heterojunction solar cells, such as optimizing the D–A morphology by thermal annealing, solvent treatment, use of solvent additives, incorporation of block-copolymers, and nano-imprinting techniques. Most of these methods foster the formation of relatively pure and more crystalline donor and acceptor domains leading to a better charge transport, but do not specifically address the problem of geminate recombination and charge separation at the D–A interface. Only a few approaches have been developed capable of directly affecting the energetics of the states determining charge separation processes at the D–A interface, such as by shifting the interfacial HOMO and LUMO energy levels and/or varying the local dielectric constant. Examples include the use of ferroelectric compounds, molecular dyes giving a cascade energy level structure, and dipolar surfactants, introduced as interfacial layers between the donor and acceptor polymers. Such modifications lead to the increase of the open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current (Isc) and fill factor (FF).

Conjugated polyelectrolytes (CPEs) are a class of materials which combine semiconducting properties (allowing light absorption and charge transport) with unusual dielectric properties. Moreover, they can be processed from polar solvents that are orthogonal to the solvents used for deposition of the other layers. CPEs have been already proved useful in OPVs and polymer light-emitting diodes (PLEDs) due to their semiconducting and amphiphilic properties. In PLED devices, CPEs have been demonstrated to enhance the electron injection from the metal electrode to the organic layer. Recent publications in OPVs also report improved charge collection and higher fill factor on incorporating an interfacial layer of CPEs between the active layer and the metal electrode. However, mobile ionic charges in CPEs can diffuse into the active layer thereby redistributing the built-in electric field and introducing trap sites. Zwitterionic CPEs (ZCPEs) provide the advantages of a CPE but with no mobile ions. The ionic charges are covalently bound to the polymer chain which makes them immobile. Recent reports have shown that, when a thin layer of ZCPE is introduced between the active layer and metal electrode, it enhances the electron injection in PLEDs.
In this report we have used a polyfluorene-based ZCPE, (F(NSO3)2, poly[(9,9-bis((N-(4-sulfonate-1-butyl)-N,N-dimethylammonium)-ethanyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)]) as an interfacial layer to modify the donor–acceptor interface of PFB/F8BT bilayer devices (PFB – poly[9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-bis-N,N-(4-butylphenyl)-bis-N,N-phenyl-1,4-phenylenediamine] and F8BT – poly[9,9-dioctylfluorene-alt-benzothiadiazole]). The PFB/F8BT system has already been extensively investigated; it shows a high open-circuit voltage (Voc > 1.2 V) but does not absorb at low enough energies to give good power conversion efficiency. The short-circuit current and fill factor are limited by the formation of tightly bound and immobile charge transfer, CT, states at the interface which do not separate to free electron–hole pairs. It has also been reported that a large percentage of the CT states formed in this system undergo conversion to triplet states, thereby limiting the photovoltaic efficiencies. In this work, we show that it is possible to improve the efficiency of charge generation and separation in this system by introducing a suitable F(NSO3)2 interlayer at the D–A interface in a bilayer structure. We find that the performance of the devices containing the ZCPE interfacial layer is improved, primarily by the F(NSO3)2 contributing to the photocurrent but also by the F(NSO3)2 interlayer decreasing the relative yield of bound charges at the interface. Using an F8 (poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene)) interlayer, having the same backbone as F(NSO3)2 but no zwitterionic side chain, the performance does not improve, indicating the importance of the ionic dipole in the process.

F8BT (Mn = 94 kD, polydispersity index = 2.47) and PFB (Mn = 60 kD, polydispersity index = 2.8) were received from Cambridge Display Technology. F(NSO3)2 was synthesized as described elsewhere. PEDOT:PSS was used as hole collecting layer. The crosslinker bis(fluorophenyl azide) (FPA6) was synthesized as previously described.


F8BT, F8 and PFB polymer solutions were prepared separately by dissolving in p-xylene. 1.5 wt% of FPA6 was added in the PFB solution and stirred for 10 min at room temperature to allow crosslinking of the PFB films. The F8BT, F(NSO3)2, and PFB solutions were spin coated on quartz substrate for characterization by optical absorption and photoluminescence emission measurements. For device fabrication, ITO glass substrates were cleaned by sonicating in acetone and isopropanol for 15 min successively, followed by treatment with oxygen plasma for 10 minutes. A 40 nm thick layer of PEDOT:PSS was spin coated on top of the ITO, followed by annealing at 235 °C for 30 minutes under continuous nitrogen flow. The prepared substrate was transferred into a nitrogen glovebox and heated at 100 °C for 10 min before further processing. First the prepared solution of crosslinker:PFB was spin coated on top of the PEDOT:PSS. Then the film was crosslinked by exposing it to 254 nm wavelength illumination for 10 min from an 8 W low-pressure Hg lamp followed by 10 min of baking at 130 °C. The crosslinked film was then spin-rinsed with p-xylene to wash out any un-crosslinked PFB. The thickness of the prepared PFB film was 40 nm. To make the interlayer film, F(NSO3)2 was spin coated from methanol solution. The thickness of the interlayer was controlled by changing the concentration of F(NSO3)2 in solution. Control experiments by spin-coating just the methanol solvent were also done. For the formation of F8 interlayers, the F8 solution was mixed with 1.5 wt% FPA6 crosslinker. The prepared solution was then spin coated on the top of the previously crosslinked PFB layer. The F8 film was then also crosslinked using the same procedure applied for PFB. The thickness of the F8 interlayer film was controlled by changing the concentration of the F8 solution. Finally, on top of the interlayer, a 50 nm layer of F8BT was spin coated from p-xylene solution. All devices were completed by evaporation of a 75 nm thick layer of Al under high vacuum (<10−6 mbar) through a 8-pixel shadow mask. After Al deposition the devices were annealed at 130 °C for 10 min inside the glovebox. All devices were encapsulated before testing.


External quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra were measured using a 100 W tungsten halogen lamp, dispersed through a monochromator. A Keithley 237 source measure unit (SMU) was used to measure the short circuit current as a function of wavelength. The incident light intensity was continuously monitored during measurement by a reference photodiode calibrated by placing a Hamamatsu S8746-01 calibrated photodiode at the sample position. Current–voltage (I–V) characteristics were measured under 100 mW cm−2 equivalent AM 1.5G conditions using an ABET Sun2000 solar simulator calibrated to a silicon reference cell, correcting for spectral mismatch. Both the dark and light current–voltage characteristics were measured using the Keithley 237 SMU. For measuring the light-emitting diode, current density versus applied voltage was measured by a Keithley 2400 source measurement unit and brightness was measured using a calibrated reference Si photodetector located in the forward direction. Electroluminescence spectra were recorded with an intensity calibrated Ocean Optics USB2000 spectrometer.


Pump–push photocurrent experiments were performed using a Ti:sapphire amplifier (Solstice, Spectra Physics) pumping a home-built non-collinear optical parametric amplifier to provide pump pulses at 530 nm, with a collinear optical parametric amplifier (TOPAS, Light Conversion) providing push pulses at 2200 nm. The pulse width was ∼150 fs for the visible pump and 200 fs for the IR push. Reference photocurrent from the photodiode was detected at the pump repetition frequency of 1 kHz by a lock-in amplifier. The push beam was mechanically chopped at 500 Hz and its effect on the photocurrent was also detected by a lock-in technique. To avoid saturation of photocurrent due to bimolecular recombination, the device was excited at a pump excitation density of 100 nJ cm−2 per pulse, producing carrier densities that are close to those present in the steady state under 1 sun solar illumination. The details can be found elsewhere.



Fig. 1(a) shows the structure of PFB, F8BT and F(NSO3)2. While maintaining the same conjugated backbone motif as poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene) (F8), the ZCPE differs from the neutral derivative by the presence of zwitterionic side chains on alternate fluorene units. The zwitterionic side chains introduce a dipole but they do not introduce free mobile ions, so that there is no long-distance ionic motion into the polymer matrix. However the zwitterionic dipoles may realign due to an applied electric field. Fig. 1(b) compares the absorption spectra of the F(NSO3)2, the crosslinked PFB, and the F8BT films spun on quartz substrates. The absorption maxima for F(NSO3)2, PFB, and F8BT were found at 400 nm, 388 nm and 470 nm respectively, consistent with previous reports.Fig. 1(c) shows a schematic of the multilayer architecture used in the OPV device and Fig. 1(d) shows the energy level cascade allowing the flow of electrons to the F8BT layer and holes to the PFB layer. The energy levels were obtained from ref. 31–33, where the HOMO levels were estimated based on cyclic voltammetry and LUMO levels were calculated through the absorption peak. We note that the energy levels derived in this way do not take into account the columbic binding energy of excitons and charge-transfer-states, and thus only give a rough guide as to whether charge transfer from an exciton will occur. Nevertheless, they give a clear indication that PFB/F(NSO3)2/F8BT provides a cascade structure, which could favor the flow of photogenerated charges through the interlayer and to the electrodes. The same cross-linking procedure was applied to the PFB layer in all cases, for consistency. Although F(NSO3)2 is processed from an orthogonal solvent, deposition of other layers (F8, F8BT) would potentially dissolve the underlying PFB in the absence of cross-linking.


Fig. 2(a) shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) vs. wavelength of the reference PFB/F8BT bilayer device and of devices incorporating different thicknesses of the F(NSO3)2 interlayer (2 nm and 14 nm). Fig. 2(b) shows the J–V characteristics in the dark and under simulated AM 1.5G illumination. The EQE for the PFB/F8BT reference devices was measured to be 3.5% at 470 nm. This value is lower than the reported ∼5% found for bulk heterojunction cells, and is consistent with the reduced interfacial area between donor and acceptor polymers in the bi-layer. In spite of the correct energy cascade, when the thickness of the F(NSO3)2 interlayer was 14 nm, the EQE at 470 nm reduced drastically from 3.5% to 1%. The current measured under AM 1.5 illumination also decreased sharply with the 14 nm interlayer. However, when the F(NSO3)2 interlayer thickness was reduced to 2 nm, we observed a consistent increase in the EQE to 4.0% at 470 nm. The increase was more pronounced at 410 nm, where the EQE value improved from 3.5% to 4.5%. Under AM 1.5 illumination, the short-circuit current was increased by ∼10% with a minor improvement in fill factor (FF). On normalizing the EQEs at 470 nm (Fig. 2(a), inset) where only F8BT absorbs, it is evident that, though the overall EQE value reduced in the case of the 14 nm F(NSO3)2, the relative EQE value at 410 nm was increased. Control experiments by spin-coating just the methanol solvent did not show such effects (Fig. SI 3). This could be a signature of the contribution of the F(NSO3)2 absorption to the photocurrent, however it cannot explain the strong drop in performance observed on increasing the interlayer thickness. To explain this, it is important to understand the interfacial processes and energy level structure between each polymer and F(NSO3)2. Hence, we investigate the device characteristics of PFB/F(NSO3)2 and F(NSO3)2/F8BT bilayer devices as follows.
We first compare PFB/F(NSO3)2-(14 nm) bilayer devices with devices containing only a PFB layer. Fig. 3(a) shows the energy level diagrams of PEDOT:PSS/PFB/F(NSO3)2/Al and PEDOT:PSS/PFB/Al devices. Fig. 3(a) shows EQE spectra of the devices, where we can observe a 3.5 fold increase in the EQE value at 410 nm by adding the F(NSO3)2 layer. The increase in photocurrent could originate from photogeneration in the F(NSO3)2 or in the PFB, and is consistent with exciton dissociation occurring at the F(NSO3)2/PFB interface. When the devices are operated as light-emitting diodes, the J–V curves in Fig. 3(b) show a tenfold reduction in the current of the PFB/F(NSO3)2 device with respect to the PFB single-layer device, and a fourfold increase in electroluminescence. Due to the high energy barrier for electron injection at the Al electrode, and the favorable hole injection at the ITO/PEDOT:PSS electrode the current in the PFB single-layer device is dominated by holes, and the electroluminescence is inefficient. The higher electroluminescence with lower current density in the bilayer device shows that the F(NSO3)2 layer suppresses the extraction of the holes (a hole-blocking effect), leading to a better balance of electron and hole injection accompanied by more efficient charge recombination. When illuminated under the solar simulator, the PFB/F(NSO3)2 device showed 8 times higher short-circuit current then the PFB-only device (Fig. 3(c)). Though quite low in efficiency, these devices demonstrate that the PFB/F(NSO3)2 interface of the cascade works, resulting in charge transfer across the interface. The electroluminescence measurements show that a 14 nm thick F(NSO3)2 layer has a hole-blocking effect at the PFB/F(NSO3)2 interface. This hole-blocking effect could be either due to the energy barrier introduced by F(NSO3)2 or due to poor hole transport properties of F(NSO3)2. We will further understand this issue by investigating the interfacial process in F(NSO3)2/F8BT devices.
To gain a better understanding of the F(NSO3)2/F8BT interface, we compared bilayer F(NSO3)2-(14 nm)/F8BT devices with single-layer F8BT devices. The energy level diagrams of these devices are shown in Fig. 4(a). The EQE data presented in Fig. 4(a) shows a peak at around 410 nm, consistent with absorption in the F(NSO3)2, but also has a shoulder extending past 500 nm, which must arise from absorption in the F8BT (see absorption spectra in Fig. 1). On selectively exciting F8BT at 470 nm, the photocurrent of the F(NSO3)2/F8BT device was smaller than that of the F8BT-only device. Conjugated polyelectrolytes are known to have low hole mobility, and it is possible that after successful hole transfer from F8BT excitons to the F(NSO3)2 the low hole mobility in F(NSO3)2 blocks the photocurrent. Alternatively the HOMO energy offset between F(NSO3)2 and F8BT might not be sufficient to drive hole transfer from excitons at the interface. The photocurrent generated by excitation at 410 nm in the F(NSO3)2/F8BT devices could either originate from excitons splitting at F(NSO3)2/F8BT or at the PEDOT:PSS/F(NSO3)2 interface. However, owing to poor hole transport of F(NSO3)2 it is more likely that the PEDOT:PSS/F(NSO3)2 interface is the main contributor.
So far we have clear evidence that the light harvesting by the ZCPE contributes to the photocurrent in PFB/F(NSO3)2/F8BT trilayer devices. However, the 14 nm thick F(NSO3)2 interlayer leads to poor overall performance due to its poor charge transport properties. The devices with a thin (2 nm) F(NSO3)2 interlayer (Fig. 2), were intended to overcome the effects of poor transport in F(NSO3)2 on the device performance. Although the films were of nominal thickness 2 nm (estimated from the optical absorption), we found that when these films are deposited on top of PFB, they are discontinuous, on a characteristic length-scale of about 50 nm (see atomic force microscope (AFM) images, ESI, Fig. SI 1). The AFM image also shows that this discontinuous self-assembled monolayer covers approximately 50% of the PFB surface. This discontinuous nature of thin CPE layers was also reported by Seo et al. The F(NSO3)2 coverage became more continuous as the thickness was increased to 14 nm. Therefore, the device containing a 2 nm interlayer contains PFB/F8BT interfaces as well as PFB/F(NSO3)2/F8BT interfaces. The discontinuous layer, while allowing a small amount of absorption in the F(NSO3)2 which contributes to the photocurrent, also maintains the charge-transfer state at the PFB/F8BT interface. Exciton splitting at the PFB/F8BT interface therefore provides an important contribution to the photocurrent in device with the thin interlayer.
Even discontinuous domains of F(NSO3)2 may play an important role in suppressing recombination and enhancing charge separation at the interface, particularly for charge pairs that end up (through charge transfer or bimolecular recombination) separated on either side of the F(NSO3)2 interface. The physical separation of the charges should prevent recombination, and the high dielectric constant (see ESI, Fig. SI 6) of the F(NSO3)2 layer with possible permanent dipole across the layer may assist charge separation (see Fig. 4(b)).
To discriminate between these mechanisms, we have made control devices using a cross-linked interfacial layer of the neutral polyfluorene (F8) instead of F(NSO3)2. The F8 interlayer thickness was 3 nm, similar to the thin F(NSO3)2 interlayer used in the previous set of experiments. Fig. 4(c) inset shows the energy level diagram of PFB/F8/F8BT. The shows that the charge transfer cascade should work in a similar manner to F(NSO3)2. However, the EQE data in Fig. 4(c) indicates that on inserting a 3 nm interlayer of F8 in the device (i.e. PFB/F8/F8BT) the efficiency decreased with respect to the reference PFB/F8BT device. The EQE values further decreased as the interlayer thickness was increased from 3 nm to 15 nm. No contribution of the F8 absorption to the photocurrent was observed, in contrast to the case of F(NSO3)2. Under solar simulator illumination the device with the F8 interlayer showed no improvement with respect to the reference devices (Fig. SI 2(b)). Though the charge transfer mechanisms of the individual bilayer systems (i.e. PFB/F8 and F8/F8BT devices) were not investigated in detail in this report, previous investigations of PFB/F8 interfaces indicate that a charge-transfer state can form at the PFB/F8 interface but thermal excitation to reform bulk excitons in PFB is an important decay channel. Investigations of F8/F8BT blends have shown exciton transfer from F8 to F8BT via Förster transfer, whereas our results suggest that at least some hole transfer to the F8 can occur from F8BT excitons. It is likely that the system is on the borderline between Type-I and Type-II heterojunction behavior. Although we cannot completely rule out the effects of different surface coverage or subtle deviations in energy levels between F8 and F(NSO3)2 in explaining the differences seen in our measurements, the results suggest that the zwitterionic side chains in F(NSO3)2 contribute directly to the performance enhancement seen when it is used as an interlayer.
In order to study the effects of the F(NSO3)2 interlayer the dynamics of bound charges, we employed the newly developed ultrafast optical ‘pump–push’ photocurrent-probe technique. The device was excited by a weak 530 nm wavelength pump pulse thereby populating it with excited states created only in the F8BT layer. The created photexcitations dissociate into charges at the F8BT/F(NSO3)2/PFB and F8BT/PFB interfaces, producing a ‘reference’ photocurrent (J). This photocurrent reflects the number of free charges generated after exciton dissociation at the interface. However, significant fraction of charges stay bound at the interface and eventually recombine. A second IR ‘push’ pulse is subsequently incident on the device, delayed with respect to the pump pulse. This pulse is absorbed by bound and free charges. When absorbed by bound charges, the IR photon provides them with extra energy and promotes them into a more delocalized state, making them easier to dissociate and causing an increase in the photocurrent. This change in photocurrent (ΔJ) induced by the IR ‘push’ pulse is recorded as a function of the delay between pump and push. The absolute value of ΔJ is therefore related to the density of bound states in the device, and the relative quantity ΔJ/J reflects the probability of bound state formation after photoexcitation of the F8BT.

Fig. 5 shows the relative increase in the photocurrent (ΔJ/J) as a function of the decay time between pump and probe for PFB/F8BT, PFB/F(NSO3)2-2 nm/F8BT and PFB/F8-3 nm/F8BT devices. For all samples, at negative delay time the effect of the ‘push’ is negligible which indicates that there are no bound/trapped states with a lifetime >1 ms. For positive delays, the ΔJ/J signal increases due to push-induced dissociation of bound CT states produced by the pump pulse. The increase occurs on a ∼100 ps time scale reflecting the arrival of F8BT excitons at the interface. Following the initial 100 ps rise the signal decays as the number of bound states decreases due to recombination. The sharp peak at zero delay is probably related to a non-resonant artifact of the pump–push pulse interaction or to other multi-photon processes. The PFB/F(NSO3)2-2 nm/F8BT cell demonstrates a consistently lower ΔJ/J level than the PFB/F8BT cell which indicates that there are relatively more free and fewer bound charges formed by the first pump pulse. In contrast, the PFB/F8/F8BT cell showed a consistently higher ΔJ/J signal, suggesting a low efficiency of charge separation and a high yield of bound CT states. These measurements support the hypothesis that the high dielectric constant (Fig. SI 6) of the F(NSO3)2 layer has a direct effect on the charge separation process. The effect of inserting a high dielectric constant insulating material at the interface between donor and acceptor has recently been studied by Crone and coworkers. Using layers of LiF, they find an increase in Jsc, and model this as arising from enhanced CT state dissociation and reduced recombination, similar to the model we propose above, but the layer must be kept very thin (∼1 nm) to prevent charge transfer from being suppressed. The particular advantage of using in F(NSO3)2 is that it combines beneficial dielectric properties with semiconducting properties, and can thus participate directly in photon absorption and charge transport.

We provided evidence for a consistent increase in the efficiency of polymer/polymer bilayer PVs, upon introduction of a 2 nm thin interlayer of zwitterionic conjugated polyelectrolyte at the D–A interface. In addition to contributing a small amount of additional photocurrent through absorption in the interlayer, the formation of bound charge-pair states at the interface is suppressed, most likely due to the unusual dielectric properties of the interlayer. Zwitterionic conjugated polyelectrolytes are already known to improve the performance of polymer PVs when deposited next to the electron-collecting interface; our work shows that they can also play a useful role at the donor–acceptor interface. More work to control the structure of thin interfacial layers will be valuable to achieve further improvements in performance.


The authors thank Dr Girish Lakhwani for discussion regarding device physics. A. K. is grateful for an NRF Singapore scholarship. A. A. B. acknowledges the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO) for support through Rubicon and VENI fellowships. Financial support from the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council is acknowledged.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee00060e
‡ Current address: Center for Nano Science and Technology @PoliMi Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia Via Pascoli, 20133 Milano, Italy.
§ Current address: FOM institute AMOLF, Science Park 104, Amsterdam 1098 XG, The Netherlands.
¶ Current address: Ningbo Institute of Materials Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ningbo, 315211 Zhejiang, P.R. China.
|| Current address: Radboud University Nijmegen, Institute for Molecules and Materials, Heyendaalseweg 135, 6525 AJ Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013