 DOI: 10.1039/C0CS00211A
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 4232-4243

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Hiroaki
Tada
*,

Musashi
Fujishima
 and 

Hisayoshi
Kobayashi


Department of Applied Chemistry, School of Science and Engineering, Kinki University, 3-4-1, Kowakae, Higashi-Osaka, Osaka 577-8502, Japan. E-mail: h-tada@apch.kindai.ac.jp

Department of Chemistry and Materials Technology, Kyoto Institute of Technology, Matsugasaki, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8585, Japan

Received
14th December 2010

First published on 13th May 2011
Heteronanojunction systems consisting of narrow gap semiconductors represented by metal sulfides and TiO2 are highly expected as visible-light-active photocatalysts and the key materials for various photoelectrochemical devices. The common central issue is increasing efficiency of the light-induced interfacial electron transfer from the metal sulfide quantum dots (QDs) to TiO2. We have newly developed simple and versatile low-temperature photodeposition techniques for directly coupling metal sulfide QDs and TiO2 by taking advantage of its photocatalysis and the photoinduced surface superhydrophilicity. This critical review summarizes the recent developments in the photodeposition techniques and their unique characteristics. Subsequently to the Introduction, a theoretical view of the interfacial electron transfer is presented to obtain the guidelines for the design of the heteronanojunction systems. Then, the itemized description is given for the photodepositions of several kinds of metal sulfides on TiO2 followed by the summary of the features of the photodeposition technique. Finally, the applications of the resulting heteronanojunction systems to the photocatalysts and QD-sensitized solar cells are described, and the excellent performances are discussed by relating with the features of the photodeposition technique (87 references).

Hiroaki Tada

Hiroaki Tada received his BS and MS in Engineering from Kyoto University. He worked at Nippon Sheet Glass Co. as a researcher from 1981 to 1996. He received his Dr degree in engineering from Kyoto University in 1991. He joined the staff of Environmental Research Laboratory at Kinki University in 1997, and the research group of Prof. A. T. Bell at University of California, Berkeley, as an invited scholar in 2002. In 2004 he became a staff of School of Science and Engineering at Kinki University, where he is currently a full professor.

Musashi Fujishima

Musashi Fujishima received his BS in Engineering from Tohoku University and MS in Materials science from Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology in 1999 and 2001, respectively. He received his Dr degree in Science from Tsukuba University in 2004. Since then, he has been working as a research associate in School of Science and Engineering at Kinki University. His research interests include semiconductor photocatalysts coupled with various transition metal oxide clusters and inorganic quantum dot-sensitized photoelectrochemical cells and solar cells.

Hisayoshi Kobayashi

Hisayoshi Kobayashi received his BS in Science from Tokyo Metropolitan University and MS in Engineering from Kyoto University. He worked at Kyoto Prefectural University as an instructor and lecturer of chemistry from 1979 to 1995. He received his Dr degree in Engineering from Kyoto University in 1982. He joined the research group of Prof. D. R. Salahub at University of Montreal from 1990 to 1991 as a visiting researcher. In 1995 he became a full professor of Kurashiki University of Science and the Arts, and in 2005 he moved to the present affiliation, Kyoto Institute of Technology.

The establishment of the technologies for producing sustainable energy sources replacing fossil fuels is the urgent subject imposed on scientists. Since the discovery of the Honda–Fujishima effect, a great deal of attention has been focused for the last few decades on semiconductor photocatalysts centering on TiO2 with a photoinduced strong redox power. The present major challenge in photocatalysis is to develop highly visible-light-active photocatalysts enabling effective utilization of inexhaustible sunlight as an energy source. A promising strategy to achieve this is appropriate coupling of narrow gap semiconductors and wide gap semiconductors such as TiO2. On the other hand, dye-sensitized solar cells, in which dye-adsorbed mesoporous TiO2 nanocrystalline films (mp-TiO2) are used as a photoanode, have attracted much interest because of their possible compatibility of cost and performance. However, the efficiency and life time need to be improved before their practical use. Robust inorganic narrow gap semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) have a great potential due to the large intrinsic dipole moment, the tunable band gap by the particle size and shape, and the multiple exciton generation by impact ionization. In this manner, the narrow gap semiconductors represented by metal sulfide–TiO2 coupling systems are of importance in both photocatalysis and photovoltaics, where the common key process is the light-induced interfacial electron transfer from metal sulfide QDs to TiO2 (p3 in Scheme 1). The self-assembled monolayer (SAM) technique using bifunctional coupling molecules such as mercaptoacetic acid is frequently used for the loading of metal sulfide QDs on mp-TiO2. Although this method allows us to precisely control the particle size, the loading level of QDs is limited below monolayer coverage, and thus the amount of light absorbed by the device becomes low (p1↓). Also, a large fraction of the TiO2 surface is in direct contact with the electrolyte solution, which increases the probability of the back electron transfer from TiO2 to the oxidant in the electrolyte solution (p5↑). In addition, the insulating molecules intervening between QDs and TiO2 at the junction could retard the interfacial electron transfer (p3↓). At present, the successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) technique is believed to be the best way to prepare the metal sulfide QD-loaded TiO2 films. However, it is unsuitable for the application to the particulate system because several times repetition of adsorption and rinsing is necessary. Meanwhile, subsequently to the discovery of the metal photodeposition on TiO2 by Kraeutler and Bard, the photocatalytic synthesis has been developed for preparing TiO2-based nanocomposites with metal complexes,polymers, and metal oxides. Currently, it is being revealed to have a wide possibility of constructing the metal chalcogenide–TiO2 coupled particle and film systems. In the nanocoupling systems, the efficient interfacial electron transfer (p3↑) may be expected since the photoinduced redox reactions on the TiO2 surface are taken advantage of for the preparation.

This review summarizes the recent developments in the low-temperature photodeposition technique for preparing directly coupled metal sulfide–TiO2 heteronanojunctions, and their applications to the conversion of solar energy to electrical and chemical energy.

The in-depth understanding of the interfacial electron transfer processes at an electronic level should be helpful to the improvement in the performances of the visible-light-photocatalysts and photoelectrochemical cells. Here we discuss the interfacial electron transfer in the CdS–TiO2 system as a typical metal sulfide–TiO2 coupling system. The transient absorption spectroscopic study showed that the interfacial electron transfer from CdS QDs to TiO2 occurs with a rate constant >2 × 1010 s−1, which is still much smaller than that for the relaxation of the excited electrons in the conduction band (CB) of CdS (>1013 s−1). The interfacial electron transfer from the CB bottom of CdS would take place after relaxation of the excited electrons in preference to the electron transfer from the higher energy levels as is suggested in the dye-sensitization system. Also, in the CdS QD–TiO2 system formed using mercaptocarboxylic acids as a coupling agent, Dibbell and Watson have found that the photoluminescence intensity of CdS QDs weakens as the molecular length of mercaptocarboxylic acids (r) decreases. From their data, the ratio of the rate constant of the electron transfer to that of the radiative recombination (ket/kd) was calculated as a function of r (Fig. 1). Apparently, the rate constant ratio decreases exponentially with an increase in r. Consequently, the interfacial electron transfer may also be considered within the framework of the nonadiabatic electron-transfer theory in the same manner as the back electron transfer process in the dye molecule–TiO2 and CdS QD–TiO2 coupling systems. According to the theory, the rate constant of the electron transfer (ket) between donor (CdS) and acceptor (TiO2) states with a spatial separation r is expressed by

ket = {H02exp(−βr)/(4πλkBT)1/2}exp{−(ΔG0 + λ)2/4λkBT}
(1)
where
β is the damping coefficient depending on the shape and height of the barrier, H02exp(−βr) is the electronic coupling between the donor and acceptor states, ΔG0 is the reaction free energy, and λ is the reorganization energy.

Thus, the adjustment of the three parameters H0, r, and ΔG0 through the interfacial bonding and the metal sulfide particle size is of great importance for the design of the QD–TiO2 nanocoupling systems.
We performed the density functional theory (DFT) calculations for the CdS–TiO2 system (Fig. 2). Models (a) and (b) having the atomic compositions of Ti12O28H8Cd12S12 and Ti48O112H32Cd13S13 were employed for the models of the bulk- and nano-coupling systems, respectively. Further, the surface of model (b) was modified with six H2S molecules (Ti48O112H32Cd13S13–(H2S)6 (c)) to examine the electronic effect by the sulfur-containing molecules frequently used as a linker and a stabilizer. The optimized structure of the CdS slab model (a) shows that the bonding mode depends on the atoms at the interface layers, and the Cd–O and Cd–Ti bonds are formed, while in the CdS QD models (b) and (c), only three Cd–O bonds are formed on the TiO2 surface. The formation of the chemical bonds can enhance the electron transfer from CdS to TiO2 as a result of the increase in their electronic coupling. In the direct coupling system prepared by the SILAR technique, ultrafast interfacial electron transfer occurs on the time scale of 10–50 ps, whereas in the indirectly coupled system prepared by the SAM method using mercaptocarboxylic acids as a linker, the electron transfer from CdS to TiO2 was shown to be retarded with an increase in r.
The calculations for bulk TiO2 (anatase) and CdS (zinc-blende) afforded the band gaps (Eg) of 2.60 and 1.24 eV, respectively, while the experimental values are 3.23 and 2.42 eV. Note that relative values of the Eg and band position are reliable, although the Eg is underestimated due to the demerit of the current DFT calculations. The density of states (DOS) for the bulk coupling model (Fig. 3) shows that the valence band maximum (VBM) for the TiO2 part appears at ca. −2 eV, and the band in the energy region between −2 to 0 eV is mainly composed of the S3p band with smaller mixing of Cd5s,5p bands. The conduction band minimum (CBM) of the CdS part is only slightly higher than that of the TiO2 part. On the other hand, the DOS for the nanocoupling model system (Fig. 4) shows that both the VBM and CBM for the CdS part are located in a higher energy region than those for the TiO2 part, and the band gap for the CdS part increases to ca. 2 eV. This band gap widening can be attributed to the quantum confinement effect, which was experimentally confirmed at the CdS particle size <6 nm in the CdS–TiO2 coupling system. The CB-offset between CdS and TiO2 (or −ΔG0) in the bulk coupling system is estimated to be ca. 0.4 eV, whereas the nanocoupling system provides a much larger −ΔG0 value ∼1 eV. Consequently, the size quantization of metal sulfides can increase the rate of the interfacial electron transfer due to the increase in its driving force.
It is also worthy noting that effective overlapping between the TiO2 band and the CdS band near the CBM of CdS is seen in both the bulk- and nano-coupling systems. The resulting large electronic coupling can also contribute to the ultra-fast interfacial electron transfer in the CdS–TiO2 coupling systems.
The other factor affecting the interfacial electron transfer is the contact area between CdS and TiO2. In the direct coupling systems formed by the photodeposition and SILAR techniques, a large contact area between CdS and TiO2 is usually obtained, while the contact is limited to a point contact in the indirect coupling system prepared by the SAM method.
The serious problem in common with metal sulfides is the photocorrosion in liquids due to the self-oxidation by the VB-holes, which is pronounced with downsizing the particles to nanoscale. A peak at the zero energy in the DOS for the nanocoupling model system (Fig. 4) is ascribable to the dangling bonds or surface levels mainly consisting of S3p orbitals. Unlike the bulk coupling model, the CdS cluster size is ca. 9.5–10 Å, and thus the dangling bonds or surface states increase in number. When the Cd13S13 cluster is modified with H2S molecules (Ti48O112H32Cd13S13–(H2S)6 unit cell) (Fig. 5), the surface states centered at 0 eV lower in energy to be a part of the VB as a consequence of the S–S bond formation between the CdS cluster and H2S molecules (Fig. 2c). This result explains the fact that the adsorbed S2− ions can stabilize the surface levels to prevent the photocorrosion of CdS QDs. Also, the surface level control is important to restrict the recombination in the QD-sensitized solar cells (QD-SSCs).
These theoretical considerations point to the importance of (1) the interfacial bonding, (2) the control of the relative CBM and VBM positions by the size quantization, (3) the overlapping between the donor–accepter levels, (4) the surface level control, and (5) the interfacial contact area for the design of the narrow gap semiconductor–TiO2 heteronanojunctions.

UV-light irradiation to TiO2 in an ethanol solution of Cd2+ ions and S8 causes the deposition of CdS to yield the directly coupled CdS–TiO2 system at 298 K (CdS/TiO2). Many nanometre-sized particles are deposited on the TiO2 surfaces in a highly dispersed state (Fig. 6A). A high resolution transmission electron microscopic (HRTEM) image shows two parallel lattice fringes, of which the nearest distances are in agreement with the values for the (101) and (011) planes of hexagonal CdS (Fig. 6B). Apparently, the interface exhibits good contact between TiO2 and CdS with a fairly large contact area. In the energy dispersive X-ray spectrum (EDS) (Fig. 6C), the signals of Cd and S are present besides those of Ti and O, while the Cu signals arise from the copper grid used for analysis. The amount of CdS deposited increased with increasing irradiation time. The photodeposition rate significantly increased with an increase in the initial concentration of Cd2+ ions, whereas its dependence on the S8 concentration is weaker.


UV-Vis
absorption spectra of CdS/TiO2 prepared by varying irradiation time show that new absorption due to the CdS interband transition grows in the visible region, and the absorption edge significantly redshifts with increasing irradiation time (Fig. 7A). The Eg and mean particle size (d) of CdS were calculated as a function of irradiation time by the Tauc plot and from the Brus equation (eqn (2)), respectively.
ΔEg = (π2ℏ2/2R2)(me*−1 + mh*−1) − 1.8e2/4πε0εR
(2)
where Δ
Eg is a shift in Eg from the bulk Eg, R is the radius of CdS particle, me* and mh* are the effective masses of electron and hole in CdS, respectively, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, and ε is the relative permittivity of CdS.

The plots of the Eg and d (= 2R) as a function of irradiation time (Fig. 7B) show that the Eg of CdS increases as compared to the bulk value because of the quantum confinement in the range of irradiation time below 4 h. Consequently, not only the loading amount but also the Eg of CdS can be controlled by the irradiation time in this process.
(Photo)electrochemical measurements provide the information about the photodeposition mechanism. Cyclic voltammograms of the mp-TiO2 electrode were measured in aqueous electrolyte solutions (Fig. 8A). In the presence of S8 (a), a small current of its reduction flows in the range of the electrode potential (E) < −0.3 V. In the Cd(ClO4)2 solution (b), a much larger current due to the reduction of Cd2+ ions is observed at E < −0.1 V, accompanied by the corresponding oxidation with a current peak at −0.37 V. In the copresence of S8 and Cd2+ ions (c), the reduction current starts to flow at E ≈ −0.1 V, whereas the oxidation peak is absent. Photochronopotentiometry is also a powerful tool to clarify the photodeposition mechanism (Fig. 8B). Upon UV-light irradiation, the E abruptly shifts towards the negative direction as much as −0.80 V, which is attributable to the Fermi energy upward shift due to the current doubling effect of ethanol. In curve (a), the first addition of Cd2+ ions shifts the E to −0.57 V close to the standard electrode potential of Cd2+/Cd0 (−0.60 V), and the subsequent S8 addition causes a slight negative shift to −0.55 V. In curve (b), the first addition of S8 hardly changes the E, while it is moved to −0.55 V by the subsequent Cd2+ addition. In curve (c), the simultaneous addition sharply shifts the E to −0.57 V. After the measurements, all the mp-TiO2 electrodes changed from white to yellow, which is indicative of the CdS formation on the TiO2 surface. The agreement of the E for the CdS formation with the standard electrode potential of Cd2+/Cd0 leads to the conclusion that the CdS photodeposition on TiO2 progresses by way of the reduction of Cd2+ ions to Cd0 (atomic route, left in Scheme 2). In contrast, the photodeposition of CdS on Au nanoparticle-loaded TiO2 proceeds via the preferential reduction of sulfur (ionic route, right in Scheme 2), yielding Au(core)–CdS(shell) nanoparticles on the TiO2 surface.

PbS photodeposition has firstly been reported by Zhukovskiy et al. A subject to be solved in the photodeposition technique is the size control of the QDs, which is important for increasing the interfacial electron transfer efficiency as described in Section 2. By using mercaptoacetic acid (MAA) as a surface modifier, PbS QDs can be photodeposited on the TiO2 surface at 298 K with their size controlled. In the XRD patterns of the sample obtained after irradiation, new diffraction peaks of PbS crystals appear in addition to the diffraction peaks of anatase TiO2 (Fig. 9A). The HRTEM image for a nanometre-sized deposit on the TiO2 surface (Fig. 9B) shows the lattice fringes with spacings of 0.352 nm for the substrate and 0.297 nm for the deposit that are in agreement with the values for the anatase TiO2(101) plane and the PbS(200) plane, respectively. The PbS particle is in contact with the TiO2 surface with a large contact area, and the PbS particle has a hemispheric shape, which is true for most particles observed by TEM (vide infra). The angle between the TiO2 [101] and the PbS [200] is ca. 35°, and the 0.352 nm × sin55° is equal to 0.29 nm, close to the PbS(200) spacing, which suggests the epitaxial growth of PbS QDs on the TiO2 surface at least in a limited region. Thus, the PbS likely has a good contact with TiO2 at an atomic level and a large contact area. In the EDS (Fig. 9C) and the electron energy loss spectrum (EELS) (Fig. 9D), the Pb- and S-signals were clearly observed, respectively. Evidently, UV-light irradiation to TiO2 in an ethanol solution containing Pb2+ and S8 gives rise to the deposition of PbS nanocrystals to form the PbS–TiO2 heteronanojunction (PbS/TiO2).

The PbS particle size was determined by TEM observation for many particles. The addition of MAA greatly affects both the PbS particle size and its distribution (Fig. 10). Without MAA, the mean PbS particle size is 66 nm. The addition of a small amount of MAA reduces the particle size approximately by one-order of magnitude. Another noticeable effect is that the MAA addition sharpens the PbS particle size distribution as shown by the drastic decrease in the standard deviation σ. Hirai et al. previously reported a similar size-control effect by the MAA addition in the thermal synthesis of CdS colloids from the aqueous solutions containing Cd2+ and S2− ions. Time courses for the PbS photodeposition under various MAA concentrations (Fig. 11A) show that in each case, the PbS amount reaches a saturated value within 10 min of irradiation. Surprisingly, the photodeposition is drastically enhanced with the MAA addition, whereas the growth of each PbS particle is suppressed. In contrast to the CdS photodeposition without surface modifiers, the PbS amount can be controlled by not the irradiation time but the MAA concentration. Bulk PbS has the Eg of 0.41 eV corresponding to the absorption edge of 3020 nm. In the absorption spectra of PbS/mp-TiO2 prepared under various MAA concentrations, the MAA addition causes a dramatic blueshift of the absorption edge from the bulk value (Fig. 11B). Clearly, the quantum confinement of PbS emerges for the samples prepared by the MAA-assisted photodeposition, and the Eg is tunable by the MAA concentration.
Diffuse reflectance FT-IR spectra indicated that deprotonated MAA is adsorbed on the PbS surface with fission of its S–H bond. The strong adsorption and high surface coverage with MAA molecules on the PbS surface would hinder the coagulation of the PbS particles and the supply of the starting materials to suppress the crystal growth and yield the uniform QDs. (Photo)electrochemical measurements revealed that the photodeposition of PbS on TiO2 follows the atomic route in a manner similar to the CdS photodeposition.

Scheme 3 represents a schematic for the essential mechanism of the MAA-assisted photodeposition of PbS QDs on TiO2. In the dark, Pb2+ ions are in adsorption equilibrium. UV-light irradiation to TiO2 triggers the interband transition to generate electron–hole pairs. The holes in the VB(TiO2) escaping the recombination preferentially oxidize ethanol to ˙C2H4OH. This radical having a strong reduction power injects another electron to the CB(TiO2) to produce CH3CHO and H+. The electrons accumulated in TiO2 reduce the Pb2+ ions adsorbed on TiO2 to Pb0. The reaction of Pb0 with S8 yields PbS nuclei. Once PbS nuclei are formed in the presence of MAA, which is adsorbed on the surfaces due to the strong affinity, excitation of the PbS nuclei causes the MAA oxidation by the holes in the VB(PbS), while the excited electrons in PbS are transferred to TiO2. Hyun et al. have recently shown by photoluminescence spectroscopy that the visible light-induced interfacial electron transfer from PbS to TiO2 occurs for PbS QDs with diameters below ca. 5 nm. The excess electrons in TiO2 are consumed for the successive formation of PbS nuclei. As a result of the excellent hole(PbS) capturing ability of MAA and its blocking effect on the PbS crystal growth, the PbS nucleus number increases to reduce the mean particle size, while the PbS deposition is greatly enhanced.

In recent years, the single-source precursor chemical vapor deposition technique attracts much attention due to its controllability of the composition of the multi-component deposits. UV-light irradiation to TiO2 in a (NH4)2MoS4 aqueous ethanol solution yields MoS2 nanocrystals on TiO2 (MoS2/TiO2) at ambient temperatures. This single-source precursor photodeposition in the presence of hydrazine was originally developed by Hoet al. We replaced hydrazine by ethanol as a safe and nontoxic reductant with more mild reducing ability to inhibit the direct chemical reduction of MoS42− ions. The HRTEM image (Fig. 12A) shows the photodeposition of a nanocrystal with a layered structure on the TiO2 surface with a large contact area. Clear lattice fringes almost in parallel with the TiO2 surface have the nearest distance of 0.59 nm coinciding with the value for the (002) plane of hexagonal MoS2. In the EDS (Fig. 12B), the Mo signals are observed at 2.32 and 17.4 keV besides those of Ti and O, while in the EELS (Fig. 12C), the S signal is present at 194 eV. This geometrical feature would be induced by the low surface energy of the MoS2 basal plane, which should be favorable for the interfacial charge transfer.

The (photo)electrochemical measurements clarified that this reaction occurs by the TiO2-photocatalyzed two-electron reduction of MoS42− ions to MoS2. In this photodeposition, the Eg of MoS2 was controllable between 1.75 and 3.0 eV by changing the irradiation time.

The application of the photodeposition technique to mp-TiO2 offers the additional unique and important characteristics. Elemental depth profiles for CdS/mp-TiO2 prepared by the photodeposition (PD) and SILAR methods indicate that both Cd and S are distributed towards the inner part of the mp-TiO2 film (Fig. 13). On the other hand, in the SAM sample, the CdS QD deposition on mp-TiO2 occurs only at the thin upper part of the film. Pore size distribution in the mp-TiO2 without CdS (Fig. 14(a)) shows a peak pore size of ca. 20 nm. In the PD sample (Fig. 14(b)), the mesopores remain almost intact after the CdS deposition, although the peak diameter decreases approximately 35%. In contrast, in the SAM sample (Fig. 14(c)), the pore size distribution hardly changes, and only the pore volume significantly decreases. Further, the pristine mp-TiO2 possessed a pore volume of 0.72 cm3 g−1, which was almost maintained after the CdS photodeposition. However, the values for CdS(SILAR)/mp-TiO2 and CdS(SAM)/mp-TiO2 decreased to 0.20 and 0.25 cm3 g−1, respectively.

The features of the photodeposition technique can be summarized as follows: (I) a large amount of metal sulfides can be directly formed on TiO2 during a fairly short period with excellent reproducibility, (II) the band energies of metal sulfides QDs are widely tunable by irradiation time or surface modifier concentration, (III) metal sulfide QDs can be deposited on not only the external surfaces but also the inner ones of mp-TiO2 without pore-blocking, (IV) the simple solution-based technique at low temperature enables the low-cost production.
On UV-light irradiation to mp-TiO2, the apparent water contact angle decreases, and its decreasing rate increases with increasing light intensity (Fig. 15). As a result of pre-illumination of UV-light, the loading amount of CdS further increased, which is probably caused by the photoinduced surface superhydrophilicity enhancing the penetration of the reaction solution into the mesopores. Thus, feature III can be attributed to the two photoinduced properties of TiO2, i.e., photocatalysis and surface superhydrophilicity.
The knowledge of the kind of metal sulfides, to which this photodeposition technique is applicable, is important for future material search. A useful information can be obtained from the standard Gibbs energy of metal sulfide formation (ΔfG0)–metal redox potential (E0/V vs.SHE) diagram (Fig. 16), in which the metal sulfides so far synthesized by the photodeposition technique (CdS, PbS, CuS, Ag2S, MoS2) are shown in red. Apparently, the metal sulfides are situated in the region of E0 > −0.5 V and ΔfG0 > −300 kJ mol−1. As aforementioned, the photodeposition of the metal sulfides is initiated from the reduction of metal ions by the electrons photoexcited to the CB(TiO2). Therefore, the E0 value must be more positive than the potential of the CB edge of TiO2 (∼−0.5 V). On the other hand, the relatively high ΔfG0 indicates that the metal sulfides with more covalent character than ionic character undergo the photodeposition. Fortunately, such metal sulfides have a narrow energy gap, which is a prerequisite for the light absorbing material for the application to the solar energy conversion. In this manner, this technique has a wide possibility for coupling TiO2 and narrow gap metal sulfides suitable for the applications to the solar energy conversion, and the versatility can be claimed as another feature of the photodeposition technique (feature V).

Production of H2 from organic compounds is an attractive process because H2 is of great importance as a next generation clean energy source. UV-light irradiation to MoS2/TiO2 in a HCOOH aqueous solution yields H2 and CO2 (Fig. 17). H2 generation needed both the catalyst and UV-light irradiation. Loading a slight amount of MoS2 increases the rate of H2 generation by two orders of magnitude. The activity reaches a maximum for the sample with 0.047 Mo mass%, and the quantum efficiency at λ = 355 nm was estimated to be ca. 1%. This striking promoting effect by the loading of MoS2 QDs is ascribable to both the efficient interfacial electron transfer from TiO2 to MoS2 through the direct large-area contact (feature I) and the high electrocatalytic activity of MoS2 nanocrystals for the water reduction. Another intriguing point is that the amount of H2 generated is in proportion to the irradiation time at >1 h. Also, in the MoS2(0.047 mass%)/TiO2 system, the mole number of H2 generated at 5 h of illumination (11 μmol) is ca. 73 times that of the MoS2 loaded (0.15 μmol). These results are indicative of a high photostability of MoS2, which can be explained in terms of the electronic levels. Both the CB and VB of MoS2 are mainly composed of Mo 4d orbitals, and thus the photoexcitation would not significantly weaken the Mo–S bond. Interestingly, the MoS2/CdS coupling system has recently been reported to show a high activity for the H2 generation from an aqueous solution of lactic acid under illumination of visible-light. Further, CdS/TiO2 with Pt nanoparticles loaded selectively on the TiO2 surface exhibits a visible-light-activity for H2 generation from water containing sacrificial agents. This high level of activity in the well-designed three component system can be achieved by the effective charge separation due to a vectorial electron transfer through the direct contact between the components.

The descriptions here were limited to the H2 generation from aqueous solutions of organic compounds using the semiconductor nanocoupling photocatalysts, whereas intensive researches on the semiconductor-photocatalyzed water splitting to H2 and O2 have been intensively continued for several decades. The long history has recently been reviewed, and further, recent progress and future challenges to the water splitting using visible-light-active semiconductor catalysts have been reported.

The development of QD-SSCs is rapidly in progress, and the works hitherto performed have recently been reviewed. To study the influence of the CdS–TiO2 heterojunction state on the cell performance, incident photon-to-current conversion efficiencies (IPCEs) at λex = 420 nm calculated from eqn (3) were compared for the QD-SSCs using the CdS/mp-TiO2 photoanodes prepared by the SAM, SILAR, and PD methods (Fig. 18).

IPCE (%) = (JscNAhc/IFλ) × 100
(3)
where
Jsc is the short-circuit current, NA is the Avogadro constant, I (W cm−2) is the light intensity, F is the Faraday constant, h is the Planck constant, and c is the speed of light.

The maximum IPCE is on the order of CdS(PD)/mp-TiO2 (85%) > CdS(SILAR)/mp-TiO2 (73%) ≫ CdS(SAM)/mp-TiO2 (6.3%). Much greater amounts of CdS can be deposited on mp-TiO2 by the PD and SILAR techniques as compared to the SAM method. However, even at the same loading amount of CdS, the IPCE for CdS(SAM)/mp-TiO2 is significantly smaller than those for CdS(PD)/mp-TiO2 and CdS(SILAR)/mp-TiO2. This difference indicates the importance of the direct contact between metal sulfides and TiO2 as well as the light absorption intensity for the increase in IPCE (feature I). The comparison between the direct coupling systems indicates that the IPCE of CdS(PD)/mp-TiO2 is further greater than that of CdS(SILAR)/mp-TiO2 in spite of the smaller CdS loading amount. This superior performance of CdS(PD)/mp-TiO2 over CdS(SILAR)/mp-TiO2 was attributed to the large contact area between CdS and the electrolyte solution owing to its non-pore-blocking character (feature III). Also, there are optimum CdS loading amounts in the CdS(PD)/mp-TiO2 and CdS(SILAR)/mp-TiO2 systems. In these techniques, the loading amount and particle size of CdS concomitantly increase with an increase in the irradiation time or SILAR cycle number. The higher CdS loading amount increases the light absorption. On the other hand, the increase in the CdS particle size decreases the driving force for the interfacial electron transfer due to the lowering in the CB(CdS) (inset of Fig. 18B), whereas the charge recombination can be suppressed. In the CdSe/TiO2 nanocoupling system, the electron-transfer rate constant has recently been shown to increase with decreasing CdSe particle size. Thus, the balance between the light absorption intensity, the driving force for the interfacial electron transfer, and the recombination process is considered for determining the optimum loading amount or particle size of CdS (feature II).
Power conversion efficiencies were evaluated for a sandwich-type cell consisting of the CdS/mp-TiO2 photoanode |0.1 mol dm−3LiI + 0.05 mol dm−3 I2 + 0.6 mol dm−31-propyl-2,3-dimethylimidazolium iodide + 0.5 mol dm−34-tert-butylpyridine (solvent = 3-methoxypropionitrile)|Au film counter electrode (Scheme 1). Photocurrent–voltage curves for the cells using the photoanodes prepared by the PD, SILAR, and SAM techniques under illumination of one sun (AM 1.5, I = 100 mW cm−2) were compared under each optimum condition (Fig. 19). The open circuit voltage (Voc), Jsc, fill factor (ff), and the power conversion efficiency (η) for the cells are summarized in Table 1. The η can be calculated by eqn (4).
η (%) = (Jph × Voc × ff/I) × 100
(4)
A power conversion efficiency of 2.51% has been attained for the sandwich-type solar cell using the CdS(PD)/mp-TiO
2 photoanode, whose value is much greater than those for the cells using the CdS/mp-TiO2 photoanodes prepared by the conventional SILAR and SAM techniques.

Architecture

J
sc/mA cm−2

V
oc/V
ff

η/%

CdS(PD)/mp-TiO2 (tp = 3 h)
6.53
0.69
0.56
2.51

CdS(SILAR)/mp-TiO2 (N = 7)
2.73
0.70
0.64
1.21

CdS(SAM)/mp-TiO2–L (ta = 24 h)
0.49
0.64
0.46
0.14
It is well known in QD-SSCs that the coating of narrow gap metal sulfide QDs with ZnS monolayers greatly improves the cell performances through the suppression of the photocorrosion and the recombination of the photogenerated charge carriers. Bulk ZnS with a Eg of 3.6 eV possesses much higher CBM and lower VBM as compared to those of narrow gap metal sulfides. The stabilization effect can be rationalized in terms of the bonding between the non-bonding surface S3p orbitals (Fig. 4, right) and Zn valence orbitals. Also, the increase in the conversion efficiency was attributed to the blocking of the back electron transfer from TiO2 to the oxidant in the electrolyte solution. A similar remarkable effect was obtained in a CdS/CdSe QD-SSC by forming a SiO2-blocking layer selectively on the TiO2 surface.
Recent intensive researches towards the optimization of hole conductors, counter electrodes as well as the light absorbing QDs have achieved the QD-SSC efficiencies of 4–5%. It is deserving special mention that a power conversion of 5.2% at 0.1 sun has been reported for a solid-state Sb2S3 QD-SSC using 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobi-fluorene as a hole conductor, and 250% increase in the cell efficiency has been attained by the dye overlayer formation as compared to a CdS QD monolayer cell. Further, a perspective for the QD-SSCs heightening absorber materials and their preparation methods, surface treatments, and nanocomposite absorbers has recently been reported.

Simple and versatile photodeposition techniques, taking advantage of the photoinduced properties of TiO2, photocatalysis and surface superhydrophilicity, have been developed for coupling metal sulfide QDs and TiO2 on a nanoscale. The coupled metal sulfide–TiO2 systems possess the following characteristics: (I) a large amount of metal sulfides can be directly formed on TiO2 during a fairly short period with excellent reproducibility, (II) the band energies of metal sulfide QDs are widely tunable by the irradiation time or surface modifier concentration, (III) metal sulfide QDs can be deposited on not only the external surfaces but also the inner ones of mp-TiO2 without pore-blocking, (IV) the simple solution-based technique at low temperature enables the low-cost production, (V) this technique has a wide possibility for coupling TiO2 and narrow gap metal sulfides suitable for the applications to the solar energy conversion. These unique features produce the excellent performances of the resulting heteronanojunction systems as photocatalysts and the photoanodes for QD-SSC. The present approach combined with photocatalysis and photoelectrochemistry, with the aid of the recent rapid progress in the technology for preparing nanostructured TiO2 such as nanotube arrays, should greatly contribute to the development of the solar energy conversion into electric and chemical energy.


The authors express sincere gratitude to Dr Tomoki Akita (National Institute of Advanced Technology) for the HRTEM measurements and analysis, and to Takanori Hattori and Yasutaka Sumida (Nippon Shokubai Co. Ltd.) for helpful discussion. This work was partially supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (B) No. 20350097 from the Ministry of Education, Science, Sport, and Culture, Japan.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011