 DOI: 10.1039/C4TA00152D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6734-6739


Riming
Nie
,

Aiyuan
Li
 and 

Xianyu
Deng
*

Research Centre for Advanced Functional Materials and Devices, Shenzhen Engineering Lab of Flexible Transparent Conductive Films, Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Advanced Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shenzhen Graduate School, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 518055, P. R. China. E-mail: xydeng@hitsz.edu.cn; Fax: +86-755-26033504; Tel: +86-755-26033211

Received
10th January 2014
, Accepted 29th January 2014
First published on 29th January 2014
Appropriate interfacial modification plays an important role in the high performance of organic solar cells. We report that a transparent cathode of indium tin oxide (ITO) modified with an ultrathin layer of peptide, an environmentally friendly biomaterial, shows an obvious reduction in the work function. Investigation of the device exhibits that the power conversion efficiency (PCE) was significantly increased from 2.12% to 8.13% with the use of the peptide modification. The inverted device with the peptide-modified ITO as the cathode showed significantly longer time efficiency delay in air than conventional forward devices with an active metal as the cathode. Because peptides are biological materials that exist naturally in living things, the results provide an environmentally safe method to fabricate highly efficient and air-stable organic solar cells.

Organic based solar cells (OSCs) have been attracting growing interest due to their unique advantages, such as low fabrication cost, light weight, and high mechanical flexibility, all of which make them suitable for potential applications in low cost and renewable energy sources. With the continuous improvement of organic solar cells, the future of fabrication will require more environmentally friendly techniques and better integration of green technology for sustainable organic devices. Biomaterials and natural compounds have the particular advantages that they are environmentally friendly and naturally occurring, so they can contribute sustainably to organic electronics. However, despite these advantages, few biomaterials have been reported as functional elements in the fabrication of organic based solar cells. Here, we report the use of peptide, the biomaterial that is found widely in biology, as an interfacial modifier in the fabrication of organic solar cells.

The basic structure of organic solar cells includes a bulk heterojunction layer, where conjugated polymers act as electron donors and fullerene derivates act as electron acceptors, which is sandwiched between a bottom electrode of transparent indium tin oxide (ITO) and a metal counter electrode. Compared with conventional forward organic solar cells, where the ITO is a hole collection electrode, inverted organic solar cells with the ITO being an electron collection electrode are more stable due to the lack of acidic conducting polymer and active metal. Inverted solar cells also take advantage of vertical phase separation, which results in richer acceptor materials near the bottom electrode and richer donor materials near the top electrode. However, ITO electrodes generally do not have good electron selectivity because their work function (about 4.7 eV) is seriously mismatched with the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy level of organic acceptors. Therefore, lowering the work function of the ITO is key to realizing highly efficient inverted organic solar cells. Some alternative methods have been employed to overcome the problem of work function mismatch. One method was the insertion of an n-type metal oxide between the ITO and the organic active layer, including TiOx, ZnOx, or an interfacial layer of alkali metal salt such as Cs2CO3. Another method was solution-depositing a 5–10 nm layer of organic material on top of the ITO, including polymer electrolytes, neutral insulating polymers and zwitterions. These additional layers can adjust the energy barrier and form an electron selective contact between the ITO and the organic active layer, resulting in largely improved electron collection efficiency and an increased open circuit voltage (Voc). However, the inserted layers have some intrinsic drawbacks, in that they unavoidably affect properties such as the conductivity, transparency, and surface roughness of the ITO. To overcome this shortcoming, modification of the ITO surface with a self-assembled molecular monolayer (SAM) has been employed, since SAM modification requires only a small amount of material and it can tune the surface work function with little change to the bulk electrical properties. Several SAMs have been reported to lower the ITO work function. These SAM materials include N(C4H9)4OH, tetrakis(dimethylamino)ethylene (TDAE), and 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES). However, most of the previous SAM materials are chemically toxic and are processed in organic solvents, which are toxic and harmful to the environment.
In this contribution, we report the results of the modification of ITO with a SAM of the non-toxic and water soluble biomaterial peptide. It significantly lowered the work function of the ITO and provided a good match of energy levels of the ITO and organic active materials to achieve highly efficient and air-stable inverted OSCs. Fig. 1 shows the device structure, in which the active layer is a blend of poly[4,8-bis(2-ethylhexyloxy)-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl-alt-(4-octanoyl-5-fluoro-thieno[3,4-b]thiophene-2-carboxylate)-2,6-diyl] (PBDTTT-CF) and phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM), and the chemical structure of two peptides used in this study, glycylglycine (Gly–Gly) and glycine–L-leucine (Gly–L-Leu). Because the peptides contain carboxylic acid groups (–COOH), the peptides can be chemically adsorbed on the surface of a metal oxide by the reaction of –COOH with the metal oxide or –OH on the metal oxide surface. The adsorption of peptides on the ITO surface produces molecular dipole moments arranged on the surface. Consequently, the work function of the ITO can be largely reduced to achieve high efficiency inverted organic solar cells. X-ray and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS and UPS) were used to investigate the work function of the ITO substrates and the effect of the peptide SAMs on the surface composition.


Fig. 2(a) shows the full spectrum of XPS acquired from the bare ITO, Gly–Gly treated ITO, and Gly–L-Leu treated ITO after a water rinse. The appearance of the N 1s peak related to –N– at around 400 eV, and the disappearance or weakening of the peaks due to indium atoms on the Gly–Gly deposited ITO clearly indicate the adsorption of Gly–Gly on the surface of ITO. From the high-resolution XPS picture shown in Fig. 2(b), an obvious shift occurred in the In 3d peak of the Gly–Gly treated ITO compared to that of the bare ITO, which proves the presence of a chemically adsorbed monolayer of Gly–Gly on top of ITO. A similar result was also observed for the other peptide Gly–L-Leu, as shown in Fig. 2.

To investigate the effect of the peptides on the morphology of the ITO surface, we carried out AFM measurements on the ITO substrates with and without peptide SAMs. The AFM images shown in Fig. 3(a) illustrate that the roughness values of the bare ITO, the rinsed Gly–Gly treated ITO, and the rinsed Gly–L-Leu treated ITO are 3.46 nm, 3.28 nm, and 3.36 nm, respectively, indicating that the peptide SAMs modification did little to affect the morphology of the ITO surface. According to previous reports, the morphology and orientation of organic layers covering the modified ITO may be affected because of the change in surface affinity. We also compared the morphologies of PBDTTT-CF:PC71BM films that were spin-coated on ITO substrates with and without Gly–Gly or Gly–L-Leu. As shown in Fig. 3(b), the roughness values of the PBDTTT-CF:PC71BM films on the original ITO, the Gly–Gly modified ITO, and the Gly–L-Leu modified ITO are 1.12 nm, 1.36 nm, and 1.41 nm, respectively, indicating that the modification of ITO had little effect on the morphology of the active organic layer.

Fig. 4(a) shows the UPS spectra of ITO with and without peptide modification. For all of the curves in the kinetic energy spectra, the edge of the Fermi-level was close to the energy of the HeI source (21.22 eV), which is at near zero in the binding energy spectra. Thus, the value of the work function was determined by the cut-off edge of kinetic energy according to the method discussed in the literature. The work function of the bare ITO was 4.69 eV, which was similar to the value given in previous reports. With the modification of the ITO using Gly–Gly and Gly–L-Leu, the work function was reduced to 3.33 eV and 3.63 eV, respectively. The decrease in the work function of the ITO was attributed to the surface dipole moment of self-assembled molecules, which is shown in Fig. 1. The change in the work function of substrate, Δϕ, can be given by the simple equation:
Δϕ(n) = eNμ(n)cos(θ)/ε0εSAM
(1)
where
N is the surface density of the molecules, μ is the molecular dipole moment, θ is the average dipole tilt angle from the normal to the surface, and εSAM is the dielectric constant of the SAM. The positive amine group and the negative carboxylic group in the peptide molecule produced a large intrinsic dipole moment on the surface of the ITO. On the other hand, it was easy for the peptides to form hydrogen bonds between the carbonyl group (CO) and the amide group (NH). This is different from other modifying molecules containing amino groups in neutral molecules or polymers and conjugated or non-conjugated polyelectrolytes. The hydrogen bonds are stronger than van der Waals forces, which help produce the molecule dipoles along the direction perpendicular to the ITO surface. This helps achieve a large reduction of the work function.

To further investigate the effect of the peptides on the electronic structure of the interface between the ITO and the organic active layer, UPS measurements of an ultra-thin PBDTTT-CF:PC71BM were made. Fig. 4(b) shows the valence band spectra of the PBDTTT-CF:PC71BM on top of the bare ITO and ITO with peptide modification. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of the PBDTTT-CF:PC71BM on the original ITO was 4.9 eV, which was close to the HOMO of PBDTTT-CF reported in the literature. This phenomenon suggests that the top of the film surface was rich in PBDTTT-CF after a vertical phase separation of PC71BM and PBDTTT-CF, which has also been demonstrated in another commonly used blend system, P3HT:PCBM. With the addition of peptide, there was a shift of the HOMO toward higher binding energy (BE) by 0.5 eV for Gly–Gly, and by 0.7 eV for Gly–L-Leu. The energy level alignments are shown in Fig. 4(c). They indicate that the modification of the ITO substrate with Gly–Gly and Gly–L-Leu results in a 0.8 eV and a 0.5 eV decrease of the barrier height between the Fermi level and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO), respectively.

Fig. 5 shows the current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics and external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the PBDTTT-CF:PC71BM based OSCs with and without SAMs of peptides on the surface of the ITO. The device performance was optimized by altering various parameters during the process of the device fabrication (see Fig. S1 to S5). As expected, the device using the bare ITO exhibited the lowest power conversion efficiency (PCE), 2.12%, while the device with ITO/Gly–Gly and the device with ITO/Gly–L-Leu had PCEs of 8.13% and 7.92%, respectively. The enhanced PCE was due to a comprehensive enhancement in open circuit voltage (Voc), short circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF). The Voc, the Jsc and the FF were increased, respectively, from 0.37 V, 15.20 mA cm−2 and 38% to 0.73 V, 17.69 mA cm−2 and 63% for the device with Gly–Gly, and to 0.72 V, 17.22 mA cm−2 and 64% for the device with Gly–L-Leu. The large increase in the Jsc and FF was attributed to the decrease of the series resistance (Rs). As shown in Fig. 5, it was observed that the Rs of the devices with SAMs of peptides significantly decreased from 12.02 to 7.03 (Gly–Gly) and 6.73 (Gly–L-Leu) Ω cm2, respectively. The dramatic enhancement of the device performance can be firstly attributed to the lowered work function of the ITO resulting from the modification with peptides, which led to a reduction of the barrier height of the electron collection interface, thus improving the ohmic contact of the ITO with the photoactive layer. The enhanced ohmic contact facilitates electron transport to the ITO, which can not only produce high efficiency electron collection to increase Jsc and FF, but can also help obtain the maximum achievable Voc, which is dependent on the difference between the quasi-Fermi levels of the holes and the electrons. The peptide modified ITO has a work function that is obviously lower than that of the bare ITO, which indicates that the device with peptide modified ITO has a much larger quasi-Fermi level difference than that of the device without the modification. Thus, the OSCs with the peptide modified ITO have much higher Voc compared with the OSCs using the bare ITO.
The stability of the inverted OSCs was measured under conditions where the devices were exposed to air without any encapsulation. Fig. 6 shows the changes in Voc, Jsc, FF and PCE with time for the two inverted OSCs with peptide modification, and the traditional forward OSC with Ca. The forward device with Ca shows rapid degradation in performance. After 5 hours, the efficiency of the device with Ca reduces by nearly 80% of its initial value, accompanied by obvious decrease of Voc, Jsc, and FF. However, the efficiency of the device containing ITO/peptide remains at approximately 90% of its intial value after 24 hours. The results indicate that the inverted OSCs with peptide as a transparent cathode modifier exhibit significantly improved air stability compared with the conventional device with Ca. The decreased performance of the forward device is primarily caused by the rapid reaction of metallic Ca with H2O and O2 from the air, which enter into the device through pin holes on the evaporated metal electrode. The acidic conducting polymer PEDOT:PPSS could also possibly affect the device stability, because it releases acidic or ionic matter that may damage the ITO electrode and the active layer. The inverted devices do not contain any active metal elements or acidic polymers. The modifying peptides are molecularly stable and chemically bonded on top of the ITO, which makes the interface of the cathode with ITO more stable. Thus, the OSCs with peptide modified ITO show better air stability than the conventional device with Ca.
A comparison of the performance of inverted OSCs with different interlayers used to modify ITO is shown in Table 1. For each interlayer type, we used different deposition conditions to optimize the performance. The values shown in Table 1 are the averages obtained from ten devices. The devices containing solution-processed TiO2 showed the lowest repeatability, the reason for which is the difficulty of forming TiO2 crystals with uniform crystallinity and size by a sol–gel process. For the devices with the commercial polymer poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) as the interfacial material, although a high Voc of 0.75 V and Jsc of 17.23 mA cm−2 were achieved, the PCE was only 6.34% due to the low FF of 49%. The reason for this is that the insertion of PEO increased the series resistance due to the strongly insulating nature of PEO. We note that the use of PEO as an interfacial modifier produced significantly enhanced performance in an inverted OSC based on P3HT:PCBM as an active layer, according to a previous report. The different effects of PEO in P3HT and PBDTTT-CF based devices could be attributed to their different fabrication processes. For a high performance P3HT:PCBM solar cell, the active layer generally needs to undergo a slow drying process and an annealing treatment at around 110 °C, which could change the formation of the PEO on the surface of ITO. PEO has also been widely used as an interfacial material to achieve high performance in organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs) and OSCs with a traditional forward structure. However, the original mechanics of the PEO in the inverted structure may be different to that of PEO in a conventional forward structure, where the reaction occurring between the –O– of PEO and the thermally evaporated metal atom can produce n-type doping at the interface between the metal cathode and the organic layer. The high electron concentration from the doping could achieve high conductivity, which can compensate for the disadvantage of the highly insulating character PEO in a forward structure. In this work, peptide molecules are chemically adsorbed on the ITO surface so that they are insusceptible to the deposition of the organic layer on top of it. An obvious enhancement of performance induced by the peptide modification was also observed for P3HT:PCBM based inverted solar cells (see Fig. S6). Chemisorption also covers the ITO with a self-assembled monolayer, which effectively improves the surface properties but has little affect on the characteristics of the bulk. On the other hand, peptides are good alternative interlayer materials because they are environmentally friendly and are deposited via a non-toxic process. Moreover, there are many structures and types of peptides found in nature, and the ITO electrode is also a window electrode widely used in other optoelectronic devices, such as inorganic–organic hybrid solar cells. Therefore, it is promising to use peptides to further enhance the efficiency of organic solar cells and other optoelectronic devices.
Modifying material

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
Calculated Jsc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Average
Best
TiO2
0.74
17.39
17.20
57
5.18
7.29
PEO
0.75
17.23
17.09
49
6.26
6.34
Gly–Gly
0.73
17.69
17.40
63
8.02
8.13
Gly–L-Leu
0.72
17.22
17.00
64
7.84
7.92

In conclusion, we have demonstrated that highly efficient inverted organic solar cells can be produced by modifying the surface of indium tin oxide (ITO) cathodes with self-assembled peptide molecules. With Gly–Gly as the modifier, the inverted organic solar cells based on PBDTTT-CF:PC71BM exhibited the highest PCE of 8.13% accompanied by a Jsc of 17.69 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.73 V and a FF of 63%. The role of the peptide SAMs was to effectively decrease the work function of the ITO surface to improve the ohmic contact between the ITO electrode and the organic active layer. As a biomaterial found widely in living things, and produced by a solution-processing method in water, the peptides provide a low cost, non-toxic and environmentally friendly route for the fabrication of organic solar cells.


Indium tin oxide (ITO) coated glass substrates with a sheet resistance of 7–10 Ω sq−1 were purchased from CSG Holding Co., Ltd. Peptides were purchased from Aladdin®. The electron donor material PBDTTT-CF and electron acceptor PC71BM for solar cells were purchased from Solarmer Energy., Inc. and Sigma-Aldrich®, respectively, and they were used in the state in which they were received.


ITO substrates with patterns were first ultrasonically cleaned with detergent, deionised water, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol, for 10 min each. The cleaned substrates were dried under a nitrogen stream and subsequently treated with UV–ozone for 15 min. After this, the substrates were soaked in a 10 mM aqueous peptide solution at 90 °C for 2 h in order to form self-assembled SAMs of peptides on the surface of the ITO. Then, the substrates were rinsed with pure water to remove the residual physically adsorbed peptide molecules, and then transferred into a nitrogen glove box with H2O and O2 contents less than 1 ppm to dry for 1 h.


Inverted solar cells were fabricated on top of the peptide deposited ITO and the original cleaned ITO as a comparison. A solution of 10 mg ml−1 PBDTTT-CF and 25 mg ml−1 PC71BM was blended in dichlorobenzene solvent with the additive 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) (3% v/v) and spin-coated on top of the peptide modified ITO sheets with a speed of 1000 rpm for 60 s. Then, they were dried under nitrogen gas at room temperature for 10 min. Finally, a 5 nm thick MoO3 layer and a 120 nm thick Al layer were successively deposited by thermal evaporation onto the top of the active layer in a vacuum chamber with a pressure of less than 10−4 Pa. The typical active area of the devices in this study was set to about 0.12 cm2 by using a shadow mask during the anode evaporation.


The current density (J)–voltage (V) characteristics of the devices were recorded with a computer-controlled Keithey 2400 source meter. Simulated AM 1.5 sunlight with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 was provided by a solar simulator whose light intensity was calibrated by using a Newport Oriel 91150V PV cell as a standard single-crystal Si cell. The measurement of incident photon–current conversion efficiency (IPCE) was carried out with a quantum efficiency (QE)/IPCE measurement system (SR830, Stanford Research Systems). A standard Si photodiode calibrated from Hamamatsu was tested as a reference before each sample measurement. The standard Si photodiode was regularly calibrated with another standard Si photodiode calibrated from Newport, to confirm whether it was being degraded or not. Work function was measured by ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy (UPS) under ultra-high vacuum (UHV). UPS measurements were performed with an unfiltered HeI (21.22 eV) gas discharge lamp and a total instrumental energy resolution of 100 meV. All the UPS measurements of the onset of photoemission for determining the work function were done using standard procedures, with a −10 V bias applied to the sample to enhance the signals with kinetic energy (KE) near zero. XPS measurements were carried out using a monochromatic Al Kα source (1486.6 eV). Both the UPS and the XPS measurements were performed at room temperature. The morphologies of the samples were characterized by atomic force microscopy (AFM) from Veeco NanoScope IV Multi-Mode in tapping mode.


We are grateful to Mr S. Z. Zheng, Prof. K. Y. Wong (the Chinese University of Hong Kong) and Mr Nick K. C. Ho (the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology) for the XPS and UPS measurements. We acknowledge financial support from the Natural Scientific Research Innovation Foundation at the Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT.NSRIF, 2009142), the Shenzhen Research Foundation Project (JC201005260119A, C201105160573A, JC201104220174A) and NSFC (no. 60706017).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta00152d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014