 DOI: 10.1039/C1JM15047B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2166-2172

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Thirumal
Krishnamoorthy
,

Mu Zhi
Tang
,

Akshara
Verma
,

A. Sreekumaran
Nair
*,

Damian
Pliszka
,

Subodh G.
Mhaisalkar
 and 

Seeram
Ramakrishna
*

NUS Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Initiative (NUSNNI)-NanoCore, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117576

Engineering Science Programme, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117576

Amity Institute of Nanotechnology, Amity University, Sector-125, Noida, U.P, India

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798

Department of Mechanical Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 117574, Singapore

Received
7th October 2011
, Accepted 17th November 2011
First published on 9th December 2011
We demonstrate a large-scale production of aligned SnO2 nanofibers with a multi-nozzle electrospinning method combined with an air-shield enclosed rotating drum collector. The production rate by this multi-nozzle approach is several times higher than that of the single-nozzle electrospinning. The nanofibers produced were having a short range of diameters similar to the case of nanofibers produced by single nozzle electrospinning. The well-aligned nanofibers are subsequently processed into vertically oriented SnO2 nanowires on an FTO substrate. The average diameter and length of the wires were 75 ± 25 nm and 19 ± 2 μm, respectively. Dye-sensitized solar cells using this nanostructured material as the working electrode yielded a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 9.9 mA cm−2 (which is 42% higher than that achieved by nanowires produced by other methods), an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.525 V and a power conversion efficiency (η) of 2.53%. We believe that improvement of the multi-nozzle electrospinning is highly promising for commercialization due to simplicity and easiness of fabricating the spinneret, control over the diameter and spatial orientation of the fibers.

A paradigm shift from fossil fuels to renewable sources has been taking place because of the realization of the limitation of fossil fuels, climate change issues and the need for creating a sustainable living environment. Economically viable and stable energy conversion devices with efficiencies surpassing those presently available are fundamental to such a transition, requiring a new generation of materials offering superior charge transport and broad-spectrum light harvesting properties. Dye-sensitized mesoporous nanocrystalline TiO2 solar cells have received considerable attention as potential cost-effective alternatives to costly silicon solar cells. The anode of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) consists of a random network TiO2 nanoparticle film that serves both as a high-surface-area support for dye molecules and as an electron-transporting medium. DSCs based on TiO2 nanoparticulate systems have shown a record efficiency of 11.5%. Despite achieving high power conversion efficiencies, further improvement in the photovoltaic performance has been limited because of slow electron transport in the TiO2 nanoparticles’ film.

Several studies have addressed the use of alternative metal oxides with high electron mobility such as ZnO, SnO2, and Nb2O5. ZnO and Nb2O5 are possible candidates, since they have a more negative conduction band edge than TiO2, but suffer from chemical instability and poor dye chemisorption properties. SnO2 has two advantageous features compared to TiO2 for DSC applications. It has higher electron mobility in both single crystal SnO2 (250 cm2 V−1 s−1) as well as its nanostructures (125 cm2 V−1 s−1) and is orders of magnitude higher than that of both single crystal TiO2 (<1 cm2 V−1 s−1) and TiO2 nanostructures (1–5 cm2 V−1 s−1). It has a larger band gap (3.6 eV) than anatase TiO2 (3.2 eV), which would create fewer oxidative holes in the valence band so as to facilitate long-term stability for the DSCs.
Semiconductors with higher electron mobility may also require faster charge transport through the metal oxide framework to allow for complete charge collection under cell operating conditions. One-dimensional (1-D) nanostructures are expected to increase the charge collection by transporting charge through highly ordered nanostructures. It has been inferred that transport is limited by a distribution of localization (waiting) times that electrons spend in traps. 1-D nanostructured materials have less grain boundaries and reduce the number of dead-ends which are sufficient in the nanoparticle films. Thus, the nanostructured 1-D architecture is expected to strongly affect the transport and recombination dynamics. Recent works showed that DSCs based on SnO2 nanowires exhibited high open-circuit voltage, Voc (520–560 mV), faster electron transport and slower electron recombination characteristics compared to the ones based on SnO2 nanoparticles. However, the wires reported in the work were not well-ordered or perpendicular to the substrate which are not the ideal configurations for DSCs. Therefore, it may be expected that the well-ordered and perpendicular nanowires can provide enhanced surface area and electron transport.
There have been a few reports on the preparation of well-aligned, 1-D nanostructured arrays of SnO2 by approaches such as hydrothermal, sol–gel and template-assisted fabrication methods. However, the reported approaches require either high energy consumption or a relatively complicated procedure. Hydrothermal methods are limited in tuning the diameter, height, porosity and packing density of vertical nanowires concurrently and also the long wires produced by this method are typically fused at their roots, which is largely due to the widening of the wires as they grow along. As a result, a significant percentage of the surface area gained by increasing the wire length is lost. The template-assisted fabrication method is one of the most efficient methods for the fabrication of highly ordered and well-distributed 1-D nanomaterials especially for nanotubes and nanowires but removing the template is a tedious process. Fabrication of arrays of long vertically aligned 1-D nanostructures of SnO2 by an economically viable method remains challenging. Thus there is a strong need for a new method which can produce SnO2 nanowires on a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate and tune their structural properties easily. While many fabrication methods have been and continue to be investigated, the use of electrospinning could provide a low-cost approach that is quite versatile in achieving controllable diameters and porosity for the nanowires. In a typical electrospinning process, the sol–gel solution is passed through a spinneret at a desired flow rate. Upon electrifying the solution between the two electrodes (the needle tip and the collector), the droplet changes its shape into a Taylor cone and elongates towards the other electrode (the collector) depending on a dynamic balance of viscosity, surface tension, electrostatic, coulombic, and gravitation forces. The nanofibers get collected in the form of a freestanding mat. However, conventional electrospinning produces an arbitrary orientation of the nanofibers on the electrode which unfortunately eliminates the advantages of the one-dimensionality. Therefore, in our previous report, we have first aligned the TiO2 nanofibers, collected the nanofiber mats and processed to make them vertical to the FTO substrate. This method of producing vertically aligned ceramic nanowires has a difficulty with the throughput of electrospinning hence tuning material properties to their best to show better electronic device performance remains very challenging.

The sol–gel solution for electrospinning was prepared by dissolving 0.3 g of polyvinylpyrrolidone polymer (Mw = 1300000, Sigma Aldrich) in a mixture of ethanol and acetic acid (3.5:1.0), then 0.5 g of tin(II) 2-ethylhexanoate precursor (Sigma Aldrich) was added and then stirred well for 0.5 h. Subsequently, the above precursor solution was drawn into a hypodermic syringe which was connected to nozzles (27 G1 1/2 stainless steel needle) by using equal-length tubes [Tygon 2375] and T-connectors (1/16′′). As shown schematically in Fig. 1, twenty-four nozzles were arranged on a molded polypropylene plate [micro-tip box] in three rows. Aluminium (Al) foil was used to connect all the nozzles and connected to a high voltage power supply (Gauss High Voltage Research Inc. model RR50-1). The solution feed rate was set to 0.2 mL h−1 per nozzle for PVP/SnO2 composite nanofibers. The positive voltage applied to the tip was 15 kV and the distance between the nozzle tip and the collector was 10 cm. An Al strip with the breadth of 10 cm was rolled over the rotating disc of diameter of 20 cm. The rotating drum was placed with the air-shield. The speed of the rotating drum was set at 1200 rpm and the well-aligned nanofibers on copper strips were collected for 4 h. The fibrous strip was subsequently peeled off from the copper strip without any damage.


Polymer solution for polymer nanofibers was prepared by dissolving polyvinylpyrrolidone polymer (Mw = 1300000, Sigma Aldrich, 13.5% w/v) in a mixture of ethanol and dimethylformamide in the ratio of 1:1. The flow rate was fixed at 0.0125 mL h−1 and other electrospinning conditions were the same as for the SnO2/PVP composite nanofibers.

SnO2
nanoparticle paste was prepared by mixing 0.1 g of SnO2 nanoparticles in a mixture of 0.8 mL of ethanol, 0.02 mL of acetic acid, 0.3 g of terpineol and 0.075 g of ethyl cellulose to form a slurry and then the mixture was sonicated in an ultrasonic bath to form a viscous white SnO2 paste of right rheology.Ethanol was removed by a rotary-evaporator at 60 °C under reduced pressure. The average fiber diameters (AFDs) were measured by using j-image software (http://rsbweb.nih.gov/ij/).

The throughput of single-nozzle electrospinning systems ranges from 0.2 mL h−1 to 1 mL h−1, depending on the solution properties, which is very low for commercial production of nanofibers. In the case of ceramic nanofiber production, the throughput is also very low because of the evaporation of the polymer, the solvent and the acid (the components of the electrospinning mixture) during the sintering process. Conversion of the high molecular weight organometallic precursor to low molecular weight metal oxides also leads to a further decrease in the throughput. For example 0.5 g of tin(II) 2-ethylhexanoate precursor (Mw = 405) was used with 3.5 mL of ethanol and 1 mL of acetic acid. With the set flow rate of 0.2 mL h−1, the throughput of the SnO2 ceramic nanofibers was only 7 mg h−1. This low throughput of the single-nozzle electrospinning limits its use in producing vertical oxide nanowires and exploring its applications in nanoelectronics. There are two approaches to improve the throughput of electrospinningi.e. nozzle-less electrospinning and multi-nozzle electrospinning. Although the output is high by the nozzle-less electrospinning approach, there still remain many challenges with ceramic fiber production such as the higher voltage required (>30 kV) than the conventional electrospinning, the diameters of the fibers fabricated in this way were not uniform, varying from 25 to 500 nm, and also it produces fibers with larger diameters (and thus lower surface area). The main disadvantage of the nozzle-less electrospinning is the exposure of the sol–gel solution to the atmospheric moisture which leads to the conversion of the organometallic precursor to the metal oxide which changes the rheology of the sol–gel solution before electrospinning itself. Therefore, we have decided to use multi-nozzle electrospinning for the mass production of aligned ceramic nanofibers. Jie Yu et al. demonstrated the use of multi-nozzle/multi-collector electrospinning to produce well-aligned nanofibers with the length over 13 cm collected over a lateral area of 68 cm. However, there was no information on how thick a film could be produced by this method, an important factor for handling the nanofibrous film during the post-processing step to make it vertical. Many researchers investigated multi-nozzle electrospinning for producing randomly oriented nanofibers by changing the configuration of nozzle arrangement in the spinneret, the process parameters (voltage, distance, polarity) and studied the jet formation, jet–jet interactions, deposition areas aspect, and nanofiber morphology. Theron et al. investigated the jet–jet interaction in multi-nozzle electrospinning and stated that reasonable stability of the electrospinning process and uniformity of the as-spun nanofibers can be achieved with an inter-nozzle distance of about 1 cm. As shown in Fig. 1, twenty four Male Luer Integral Lock Rings (200 Series Barb, 1/16′′ ID tubing natural polypropylene) were glued on a molded polypropylene plate (micro-tip box) with 1.1 cm gap and then twenty four nozzles (stainless steel needles 27G 1 1/2) with a length of 1 cm were connected to the lock rings. Unlike other designs of multi-nozzle spinnerets, nozzles of any size could be fixed and also could be changed easily in the case of nozzle clogging. Marek Szadakowski et al. constructed three types of multi-nozzle electrospinning heads, series, elliptic, and concentric in compact forms, investigated their usefulness in electrospinning and concluded that the concentric was the best one with respect to both the efficiency and quality of the fibers. The above reported studies have been for the production of randomly oriented nanofibers, but for the production of aligned nanofibers by a mechanical method, the rotating circular drum was used as a collector where a limited horizontal portion is available. Therefore, we have decided to go for a rectangular arrangement of nozzles; twenty four nozzles were arranged in three rows with the gap of 1 cm. These nozzles were connected to syringes using T-connectors (1/16′′) and equal-length tubes [Tygon 2375]. Most of the spinnerets used in the previous studies were custom-built. Yamin Srivastava et al. designed a multi-nozzle spinneret using micro-channels cast in PDMS. G. G. Chase et al. used a porous polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) tube with holes drilled in two rows spaced 1 cm apart. Alessio Varesano et al. used the multi-nozzle electrospinning pilot plant consisting of a spinning head fed with polymer solution through a 4 mm internal diameter tube from an air-pressurized vessel controlled by a fine manometer (P) which is manufactured by Nuova ROJ Electrotex Srl. Whereas the spinneret used in this study could be fabricated very easily in an in-house laboratory and the number of nozzles could be varied with the size of the collector. Ying Yang et al. studied the electric field distribution of single nozzle electrospinning under metal plate and confirmed that uniformly distributed electric charge produces fibers of smaller diameter. Therefore, all twenty four nozzles were connected by a folded aluminium foil with the size of 2.5 cm × 10 cm and the length of the nozzles exposed outside the foil was maintained at 1 cm.

Multi-nozzle electrospinning has the advantage of producing multi-component nanofibers. Therefore, we have decided to produce PVP nanofibers along with SnO2/PVP composite nanofibers. This helped us to produce the vertical SnO2 nanowires without the clumping of nanowire tips during the sintering process. This will be discussed later in detail. Therefore, sixteen nozzles in two rows were connected to a single syringe using the electrospinning tubes with equal length and T-connectors. Similarly, eight needles in the other row were connected to another syringe. Nozzle clogging is the major issue with the multi-nozzle electrospinning. A typical sol solution includes the organometallic precursor for metal oxide and ethanol, plus a variety of other additives (see the Experimental section). When the sol solution comes in contact with the atmospheric moisture, it forms a gel through a series of condensation reactions, which clogs the nozzle tip. In order to avoid clogging of the nozzle, the organometallic precursor tin(II) 2-ethylhexanoate with a lower reactivity was chosen. This precursor takes time to absorb moisture and transfer to the gel therefore it did not clog the nozzle.
The voltage applied was 15 kV and the distance between as the single nozzle system and the speed of the rotating drum was optimized and set at 1200 rpm to get decently well-aligned nanofibres. The distance between the nozzle and the collector was fixed at 10 cm. Electric field distribution and nanofiber trajectories were modeled using SIMION Version 8.0 (Scientific Instrument Services, INC., USA)—though it is usually used for ion beam trajectories modeling in electron optics devices, it has also been found useful for our purpose. The software used has a possibility to create 3D models of the electrode setups used in the experiments. Since its main application is in beam trajectories modeling, results indicate distribution of the as equipotential lines of the electric field, which acts as an electrostatic lens on all charged objects passing it. Flexibility and ease of preparation of different designs is a big advantage of the SIMION. One can note that the ion beam may be considered far from the electrospinning jet, but modeling results have shown great accordance with observed experimental results, therefore this method allowed us to avoid spending much time on testing arrangements experimentally. Modeling showed that despite the number of needles in the spinneret, the electric field is uniform in the area between the collector and spinneret (Fig. 2). Repulsive interaction between electrospun jets caused by neighbouring needles is greatly suppressed giving uniform coating of the collector by nanofibers. Most problematic could be the outermost jets, but simulation showed that they are attracted by the enhanced electric field at the edge of the collecting drum. This flinging corresponds with the experimental results where no deposition of the nanofibers outside the collector was observed.
The compositions of the PVP polymer solutions were optimized to electrospin and align the PVP nanofibers at the same electrospinning conditions as those of the SnO2/PVP composite nanofibers. The scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the aligned PVP polymer nanofibers is shown in Fig. 3A. The aligned SnO2/PVP composite nanofibers and PVP nanofibers were produced and the fibrous strip was peeled off from the collector and the thus produced nanofibrous strip has the dimension of 10 × 60 cm as shown in Fig. 4A. The diameter of the SnO2/PVP composite fibers produced by single- and multi-nozzle spinnerets at the same electrospinning conditions was compared and found to be nearly the same. Ethanol was sprayed on both sides of the nanofibrous strip using a spray gun in order to enhance the attachment between the folded strips and to make a continuous film after the post-treatment process. As reported in our previous paper, a single nanofibrous strip was folded along the fiber aligned direction resulting in 1.5 cm breadth and this strip was rolled up on a small paper strip to form a compact strip roll. The paper strip was subsequently removed and the strip roll was hot-pressed to the optimum level at a desired temperature. The hot-pressed nanofibrous sheet was transferred into a beaker containing paraffin wax (melting point 65 °C) and heated to 70 °C and kept for 30 min. After the wax diffused through the nanofibrous sheet, it was taken out of the beaker and cut into two pieces using a fine band saw blade across the fiber-aligned direction.
The cut fibrous sheet was affixed in a vice such that the aligned fibers were standing upright, and the top surface of the cut-side sheet was leveled using a sharp edge knife, and then fixed vertically on a glass plate using acrylic glue. The 40 μm thick metal spacer was placed on a glass plate surrounding the vertical fibrous sheet, and the protruding portion of the vertical nanofibrous sheet was removed using a sharp pen knife and trimmed to the thickness of the spacer. The metal spacer was subsequently removed. Cross-sectional analysis of this film using SEM shows uniform thickness at all places and this can be seen clearly in Fig. 5A. The thickness was measured to be 40 μm as shown in Fig. 5B. In the total thickness of 40 μm, acrylic glue covered the thickness of ∼10 μm and the vertically erected nanofibers covered ∼30 μm. The glass plate with vertical composite nanofibers, wax and glue was covered with another glass plate placing a 100 μm thick metal spacer in between them and taken into the furnace. This helped to avoid curling of the film during the sintering process. The temperature of the furnace was increased to 500 °C with a ramp of 2 °C and annealed for 4 h. The wax melts at lower temperatures and decomposes with polymer and acrylic glue at higher temperatures leaving behind the freestanding vertically aligned SnO2 nanowire film. The thus produced film was attached on an FTO plate using carbon tape for characterization by a scanning electron microscope. Fig. 5C shows the side view of the vertically aligned SnO2 nanowires film with the uniform height throughout the film. Thickness of the film was measured to be 19 ± 2 μm which is very close to the thickness of the best performing SnO2 nanoparticle DSCs. This shows the potential of this method in fabricating vertically aligned oxide nanowires of desired thickness by electrospinning. The average fiber diameter (AFD) was found to be 75 ± 25 nm (Fig. 3B).
Top view of this film showing the good attachment between the folded strips and continuity of the film are evident from Fig. 6A. A higher magnification image is shown in Fig. 6B showing an individual nanowire tip. This is because of the introduction of a small amount of PVP nanofibers into the SnO2/PVP composite nanofibers. These PVP fibers reduce the entanglement of the SnO2/PVP nanofibers and lead to a loosely packed SnO2 nanowire film after the sintering process. This helps the incident photons to enter into the matrix but optimization of the amount of polymer fibers is an important factor to balance the film porosity at the top of the film without scarifying the SnO2 nanowires.
The crystal structure of SnO2 nanowire sample was characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD). As shown in Fig. 7, the XRD pattern revealed that the SnO2 nanowires are polycrystalline rutile structures, consistent with the high-resolution-transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) image shown in Fig. 8B, which showed the lattice fringes with the d spacing of 0.318 nm corresponding to the (110) lattice plane of tetragonal rutile SnO2. All diffraction peaks can be indexed to the rutile SnO2 with the tetragonal lattice constant a = 4.738 Å and c = 3.186 Å, which match well with the reported values for the SnO2 crystal (JCPDS car, no. 41-1445). The average grain size was calculated to be 10 nm based on the Scherrer equation, D = (0.89λ)/β(cos θ), where λ is the wavelength for Kα1 (1.54056 Å), β is the peak width at half-maximum in radians and θ is Bragg's angle using the first and second peaks. This is consistent with the grain size obtained from the TEM image analysis (Fig. 8A). The diffraction rings of the SAED pattern for the product, as displayed in Fig. 8C, reveal that the nanowires are polycrystalline. The brightest diffraction ring can be indexed to the (110) plane. The thus prepared free-standing film with the size of 0.15 cm2 was used to fabricate the DSCs. A schematic representation of the device structure used in this study is shown in Fig. 9. The NP–SnO2 paste was first coated on TiCl4 pre-treated FTO plate by the doctor blade technique using a 10 μm thick metal spacer. This is in order to promote adhesion of the SnO2 nanowires to the FTO surface and this layer solely acted as an interfacial modification layer. The as-fabricated vertically aligned SnO2 nanowires film was subsequently adhered onto this NP layer under a slight pressure by covering with a glass slide and then the FTO plate with the NP and the NW layers were sintered in a muffle furnace (500 °C for 1 h). An SEM image (side view) of these nanowires with nanoparticles is shown in Fig. 5D. The 3.0 μm thick NP–SnO2-based DSC was also fabricated without a vertical SnO2 nanowire film for comparison. These porous electrodes were soaked in 0.5 mM N-719 dye solution prepared in a solvent mixture of 1:1 tert-butanol and acetonitrile. The dye-anchored electrodes were rinsed with ethanol and dried. A parafilm spacer with the thickness of 50 μm was placed in between the anode and a Pt sputtered FTO cathode to assemble into DSCs. The electrolyte containing 0.1 M LiI, 0.03 M iodine, 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine, and 0.6 M 1-propyl-2,3-dimethyl imidazolium iodide in acetonitrile was injected between the photoanode and the counter-electrodes. The photovoltaic parameters of the DSCs were measured under 1 Sun illumination (100 mW cm−2) by using a solar simulator (San Ei, Japan equipped with an AM 1.5 filter). DSCs with the vertically aligned SnO2 nanowires with the nanoparticulate adhesion layer exhibited a photocurrent density (Jsc) of 9.9 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.525, a fill factor (FF) of 48.7 and an efficiency (η) of 2.53% (Fig. 10). DSCs having only the SnO2 nanoparticles as the active layer exhibited a Jsc of 2.38 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.516 V, a fill factor (FF) of 40.5 and a η of 0.5% (Fig. 10 and Table 1).
Anode

J
sc/mA cm−2

V
oc/V
FF

η (%)

SnO2 NP
2.38
0.516
40.5
0.50

SnO2 NW + NP
9.90
0.525
48.7
2.53
The photovoltaic parameters observed in the present case were comparable to the best performing DSCs employing a 10–15 μm thick mesoporous SnO2 nanoparticulate electrode (Jsc of 15 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.44, and η of 2.3%) and those utilizing loosely packed nanowires produced by the reactive vapor transport method (Jsc of 5.7 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.522, and η of 2.1%).DSCs based on electrospun nanowires exhibited a 42% higher photocurrent and this could be attributed to the higher surface area (and hence increased dye-loading, the values of which were 2.3 × 10−8 mol cm−2 and 1.20 × 10−7 mol cm−2, respectively, for the DSCs based on nanoparticles and the nanowire–nanoparticle composite) that can be expected from the well-aligned and well-packed electrospun SnO2 nanowires, the semi-directed electron transport through the nanowire network and better scattering of light at the red part of the solar spectrum. A study on the charge transport mechanism through the SnO2 nanowire network is underway and would be published separately.

In summary, we have demonstrated a simple high-throughput electrospinning with a multi-nozzle spinneret having a single inlet of sol–gel solution. The throughput was several times higher than the single-nozzle electrospinning and this could be increased to even higher levels depending on the availability of a horizontal surface area on the rotating drum. The aligned SnO2/PVP composite and the PVP multi-component nanofibrous strip were produced with the size of 60 × 10 cm2. The structural properties of the nanofibers produced by this method were the same as the fibers produced by the single nozzle electrospinning. The nanofibrous strip was transformed into vertically aligned SnO2 nanowires on FTO substrates using the SnO2 nanoparticle adhesion layers. The introduction of polymer nanofibers between the PVP–SnO2 layers reduced the clumping of nanowire tips. The height and diameter of the nanowires were 19 ± 2 μm and 75 ± 25 nm, respectively. DSCs using this nanostructured material as the working electrode yielded a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 9.9 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.525 V and a power conversion efficiency (η) of 2.53%. These results were comparable to DSCs consisting of loosely ordered, hydrothermally produced nanowires and 10–15 μm thick mesoporous SnO2 nanoparticles. The present method could be extended to the mass production of core–shell nanofibers, hollow nanofibers and side-by-side nanofibers as well which make the methodology versatile.


This work was supported by Singapore NRF-CRP grant on “Nanonets for harnessing solar energy and storage”. The authors also thank NUS, NUSNNI-NanoCore and NTU for providing facilities to carry out the research.


† These two authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012