 DOI: 10.1039/D1TA01763B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 13297-13305


Junjie
Fang
,

Zicheng
Ding
*,

Xiaoming
Chang
,

Jing
Lu
,

Tinghuan
Yang
,

Jialun
Wen
,

Yuanyuan
Fan
,

Yalan
Zhang
,

Tao
Luo
,

Yonghua
Chen
*,

Shengzhong (Frank)
Liu
* and 

Kui
Zhao
*

Key Laboratory of Applied Surface and Colloid Chemistry, Ministry of Education, Shaanxi Key Laboratory for Advanced Energy Devices, Shaanxi Engineering Lab for Advanced Energy Technology, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an 710119, China. E-mail: zcding@snnu.edu.cn; zhaok@snnu.edu.cn

Key Laboratory of Flexible Electronics (KLOFE), Institution of Advanced Materials (IAM), Nanjing Tech University (NanjingTech), Nanjing 211816, China. E-mail: iamyhchen@njtech.edu.cn

Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy, iChEM, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian 116023, China. E-mail: szliu@dicp.ac.cn

Received
1st March 2021
, Accepted 12th May 2021
First published on 27th May 2021
Solution-processed perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have made great progress in past years. However, most fabrication methods of PSCs in the lab cannot be directly transferred to industrial printing, and the toxic volatile processing solvents are hazardous to human health and environment. Here, we demonstrate ambient green-solvent printing for high-performance methylammonium lead iodide-based perovskite solar cells enabled by a well-regulated microstructure and lattice strain in a printed perovskite layer. A smooth and uniform perovskite layer can be obtained from green solvents via controlling the wetting and spreading of viscous perovskite precursor ink on the hot substrate. The residual lattice strain in the hot-printed perovskite layer was effectively decreased with addition of methylammonium bromide additive, which also largely increased the perovskite grain size. This morphological improvement contributes to decreased defect density, improved charge transport and suppressed charge recombination. As a result, the solar cell based on ambient green-solvent printed key layers achieves an efficiency as high as 20.21% (average efficiency of 19.27%). The demonstration of ambient green printing and lattice strain control for high-quality printed layer paves the way towards the future commercialization of PSCs.

As emerging and promising light-harvesting materials, organic–inorganic hybrid halide perovskites have attracted great attention due to their advantages of realizing high photovoltaic efficiency through cheap solution-based manufacturing processes. Through material composition optimization as well as device engineering, an unprecedented advance in photovoltaic performance has been achieved for perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Recently, a certified record power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 25.5% has been demonstrated for PSCs, and it is predicted that there is potential for further improvement in device efficiency. Nevertheless, most of the perovskite layers studied in the laboratory were fabricated by spin-coating, because it yields simple and reproducible fabrication of uniform layers. However, spin-coating suffers from the serious waste of precursor materials, and it is incompatible with continuous, large-area manufacturing processes. Therefore, realizing high-efficiency devices through a scalable printing strategy is vital for the commercial application of PSCs.

Blade-coating is a simple, scalable, solution-printing method, which shows good compatibility with roll-to-roll production. Recently, large-area PSC modules with blade-coated perovskite films have been demonstrated by several groups. During solution-fabrication, the processing solvents are critical to the film quality of perovskite layers and thus to the device performance of the resultant PSCs. To obtain high-crystallinity, compact perovskite layers, polar aprotic solvents such as N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) and γ-butyrolactone (GBL) are chosen to prepare the precursor solutions. In addition, aromatic or halogen solvents, e.g. toluene and chlorobenzene, are often used as the anti-solvents to fabricate the perovskite layers or as the processing solvents for the typical hole transport layer (HTL), 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD). However, most of these solvents are toxic and flammable, which are dangerous to both people and the environment, and thus cannot be used under ambient conditions. Fortunately, through judicious material design and careful solvent selection, a number of green-solvent processed high-quality charge transport layers have been developed. For example, Park et al. have demonstrated a high PCE of 21.2% in a PSC based on a tetraethylene glycol-substituted polymer as the HTL with 3-methylcyclohexanone as the processing solvent.
However, it remains a challenge to produce high-quality perovskite films using green solvents, particularly during one-step printing under ambient conditions. This is partially due to the lack of green solvents for both high solubility and controllable film formation dynamics during fabrication. Meanwhile, the complexity of the film formation process and perovskite crystallization in scalable printing processes are not yet clear compared to spin-coated PSCs. Recently, the molten salt methylammonium acetate (MAAc) has been used as the liquid precursor for PSCs due to its green attributes and strong interaction with lead halide. Efficient and stable methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) based PSCs can be achieved based on a spin-coated perovskite layer with PCE approaching 20%. Regardless of the above positive results, printed PSCs with both charge transport layers and perovskite layer processed from green solvents have not been demonstrated yet.
Here, we demonstrate high-performance green-printed MAPbI3-based PSCs by regulating film microstructure and lattice strain during blade-coating. Specifically, we blade-coat the multiple functional layers from green solvents under ambient conditions, including the electron transport layer (ETL) of tin oxide (SnO2) nanoparticles from water, the mixed cation perovskite layer of GA0.12MA0.88PbI3 from MAAc (GA is guanidinium), and the HTL of spiro-OMeTAD from ethyl acetate (EA). Compared with the common processing solvents chlorobenzene, DMF and GBL, these solvents are less toxic, and thus the PSC devices are fabricated by an ambient green printing process. By carefully optimizing the processing temperature and the content of methylammonium bromide (MABr) additive, we not only improve the film-formation ability of the highly viscous precursor solution, but also effectively promote the crystallization of GA0.12MA0.88PbI3 perovskites in thin films. As a result, we can fabricate uniform perovskite layers with large crystalline grains and reduced lattice strain. Benefiting from the reduced defects, enhanced carrier dynamics and suppressed nonradiative recombination in the optimized GA0.12MA0.88PbI3 layer, our ambient green-printed PSC with an over-700 nm-thick perovskite layer shows a maximum PCE of 20.21% (average PCE of 19.27%).

PSCs were successively fabricated by blade-coating the key functional layers from the green solvents on fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrates in the ambient environment with a relative humidity of 30–35% (Fig. 1a). Briefly, the SnO2 ETL and spiro-OMeTAD HTL were fabricated from aqueous solution and EA, respectively. The MA-based perovskite (GA0.12MA0.88PbI3) layer was fabricated from the precursor mixture containing the molten salt MAAc solvent and perovskite components with different processing temperatures. To further improve the film quality of the perovskite layer, a small amount of MABr additive was introduced to improve film morphology and lower lattice strain (Fig. 1b; details will be discussed below).

We first investigated the film formation behaviours of the GA0.12MA0.88PbI3 precursor via blade-coating. In contrast to traditional DMF or dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) based perovskite solutions, the MAAc based GA0.12MA0.88 PbI3 perovskite precursor formed a gel at room temperature, and was too viscous for solution processing to give a continuous uniform film. The high viscosity is reported to originate from strong hydrogen bonding between MAAc molecules and partial coordination between the Ac− anion and the Pb2+ cation. The CO stretching vibration in Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra (Fig. S1, ESI) suggests that a small amount of MAAc is preserved in perovskite films. At high temperatures, the gel turned into a low-viscosity flowing solution, and thus could spread across and wet the underlying SnO2/FTO substrate efficiently during blade-coating. Fig. 2a compares the top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images for perovskite films blade-coated from molten salt MAAc at different processing temperatures. As the processing temperature increased from 130 to 190 °C, the grain size increased from ∼200 nm to >1 μm, accompanied by the significantly reduced grain boundaries. The enlarged grain size can be attributed to the suppressed nucleation but promoted growth of perovskites at higher temperatures. The reduced grain boundaries is also believed to be beneficial for suppressing trap formation. However, distinct voids were formed in the film on further increasing the processing temperature to 210 °C. The best film quality for the perovskite layer processed at 190 °C was further confirmed from cross-sectional SEM images (Fig. 2b). The 190 °C-cast sample exhibited good connection of large perovskite grains with both HTL and ETL layers, which is helpful for the vertical charge transport in the resultant PSCs. By contrast, small, tilted or irregular crystal grains were easily observed for the films fabricated at other processing temperatures. It is worth noting that the crystalline morphology of the perovskite films fabricated from molten salt MAAc here differs significantly from the MAPbI3 films blade-coated from traditional solvents such as DMF or DMSO, where large spherulites (ca. tens of micrometers) consisting of elongated grains with a length of several hundred nanometers were observed.
Crystal structures of blade-coated perovskite films from molten salt MAAc were evaluated using X-ray diffraction (XRD). All the perovskite films exhibited two strong diffraction peaks at around 14.2° and 28.5° (Fig. 2c), which can be attributed to the (110) and (220) planes of the tetragonal phase of MAPbI3 perovskite. It is interesting to note that the diffraction peaks shifted to lower angles with increasing processing temperatures. For instance, the (110) peak shifted from 14.24° to 14.10° as the temperature rose from 130 to 210 °C (Fig. 2d), indicating larger lattice plane spacing at high temperature. This may be due to the enhanced replacement of small MA+ with large GA+ at higher processing temperatures, which makes the lattice slightly expand. Nevertheless, it has been reported that the large GA+ is not suitable to construct 3D perovskites, and the high content of GA+ is conducive to the formation of 2D perovskites. With these in mind, we estimated the lattice strain of different perovskite films using the Williamson–Hall equation based on the XRD results. As shown in Fig. 2e and S2 (ESI), small residual lattice strain was observed in different perovskite films, and the strain monotonically increased from 1.68 × 10−3 to 2.82 × 10−3 as the temperature was elevated from 130 to 210 °C. This is consistent with the increased lattice expansion for the film at high processing temperatures. Nonetheless, the residual strain has been demonstrated to be unfavourable for the stability and charge transport of the perovskite layer.
The optoelectronic properties of the blade-coated perovskite films were further characterized. Although different strains did not change the bandgaps (Eg) of perovskite (ESI, Fig. S3), the temperature-dependent grain boundaries had significant influences on charge recombination. The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) intensity significantly increased with temperature (Fig. 3a), with the highest value at 190 °C. The time-resolved PL (TRPL) spectra were fitted with a biexponential function to evaluate the charge carrier dynamics (Fig. 3b and ESI, Table S1). The perovskite film at 190 °C showed an average carrier lifetime of 283 ns, which was significantly longer in contrast to other films (∼140–210 ns). Both steady-state and time-resolved PL results indicate that the trap-induced nonradiative recombination was efficiently suppressed for the 190 °C-cast film, where less grain boundaries were observed. The trap density and charge transport behaviours of the blade-coated perovskite films were evaluated by measuring the dark current–voltage (I–V) curves of electron-only devices (ESI, Fig. S4). The perovskite film at 190 °C exhibited the lowest trap density (ntrap) of 1.38 × 1016 cm−3 and the highest electron mobility (μe) of 7.95 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Fig. 3c), which agrees well with the highest film quality.
The improved optoelectronic properties of perovskite film at 190 °C further contributed to the enhanced performance of ambient green-printed solar cells. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the champion PSCs based on the GA0.12MA0.88PbI3 films blade-coated at different temperatures are shown in Fig. 3d, and the distributions of photovoltaic parameters are shown in Fig. S5 (ESI). The champion device based on 190 °C-cast perovskite film achieved a PCE of 18.41%, with the open-circuit voltage (VOC), short-circuit current density (JSC) and fill factor (FF) of 1.11 V, 22.77 mA cm−2 and 73.01%, respectively. This PCE is much higher than those of cells fabricated at lower temperatures (PCE = 12.90% at 130 °C) or higher temperatures (PCE = 16.76% at 210 °C), which is mainly due to improvements of the VOC (1.11 V vs. 0.98–1.06 V) and FF (∼73% vs. ∼64–70%). Such improvements highlight the crucial role of defect control during blade-coating key functional layers from green solvents in nonradiative recombination losses in complete solar cells. Although the film-formation ability and perovskite morphology can be largely improved by controlling the temperature during blade-coating, the device efficiency is still inferior to those of the state-of-the-art MAPbI3-based PSCs. This impels us to further control the lattice strain and defects of perovskite layers during blade-coating.
A small amount of MABr additive was introduced into the perovskite precursor to reduce lattice strain and suppress traps during film formation. Fig. 4a shows SEM images of the perovskite films with different MABr contents. 8% MABr yielded less grain boundaries and larger crystalline grains (ca. 2–3 μm) in the perovskite layer, which are also observed from cross-sectional SEM images (ESI, Fig. S6). Nevertheless, further increasing MABr to 12% led to a rougher surface. The XRD patterns exhibited an increase in diffraction intensity after the incorporation of MABr (Fig. 4b), which is consistent with the enlarged crystalline grains. These observations indicate that crystallinity of blade-coated perovskites from green solvents can be efficiently improved with addition of MABr, which may result from the Ostwald ripening. Interestingly, the (110) peak shifted from 14.12° to 14.24° with the MABr content (Fig. 4c), indicating an increase in the out-of-plane lattice parameters. The lattice change should be due to the partial substitution of larger I− (ionic radius of 2.07 Å) by smaller Br− (ionic radius of 1.84 Å) within PbX6 octahedra. We further evaluated the role of the additive in the lattice strain based on the Williamson–Hall analysis of XRD patterns (Fig. 4d and ESI, Fig. S7). The strain decreased from 2.27 × 10−3 for the film without the additive to 2.14 × 10−3 and 1.63 × 10−3 for the films with 4% and 8% MABr, and then increased to 1.94 × 10−3 for the film with 12% MABr. Surprisingly, the perovskite film with 8% MABr showed similar lattice strain to the scraped perovskite powder without MABr (ca. 1.57 × 10−3), where the strain is fully relaxed. These results indicate that the residual lattice strain of GA0.12MA0.88PbI3 film can be released efficiently with the addition of MABr during blade-coating. This may be because the incorporation of the small-size Br− in the nearby MAPbI3 lattice can create sufficient space and make room for the large GA+ (Fig. 1b), and the presence of both GA+ and Br− is helpful to stabilize the whole lattice structure. The strain engineering of halide perovskites with large A cations and small X anions has been demonstrated by several groups. The lattice change also affects the optical properties of the perovskite layer. Blue-shift of absorption spectra was observed (Fig. 4e and f), accompanied by the increased Eg from 1.605 to 1.642 eV as the MABr content increased. Meanwhile, the steady-state PL spectra showed an 18 nm blueshift of the emission peak with increasing MABr concentration (Fig. 4g), which is a similar trend with the change of the bandgaps. The 8% MABr-treated perovskite film exhibited the highest PL intensity, suggesting the lowest trap density.
The increased grains and reduced strain significantly improved the charge carrier dynamics in the additive-engineered perovskite layer. We characterized the charge transport and recombination by TRPL and transient absorption (TA) spectra. Compared with the control film without MABr, the films with 4–12% MABr showed longer charge decay lifetimes on the SnO2/FTO substrate (Fig. 5a, ESI, Table S2), with the longest average lifetime of 454 ns achieved for the 8% MABr-treated film. This suggests a suppressed nonradiative recombination. The photobleaching band at ca. 754 nm, which is related to state filling of perovskite, showed a slightly faster buildup of its kinetics with increasing MABr concentration to 8% (Fig. 5b and ESI, Fig. S8). However, the film with 12% MABr displayed a much faster decay than the other three cases, suggesting too much (>8%) MABr whereas increased nonradiative recombination, which is consistent with the steady-state and time-resolved PL observations. The total quantity of the trap states in perovskite films was calculated from dark I–V characteristics and electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analyses. The trap densities ntrap dropped from 1.38 × 1016 to 6.02 × 1015 cm−3 with addition of 8% MABr, with the electron mobilities μe increasing from 7.95 to 15.10 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Fig. 5c and ESI, Fig. S9). Meanwhile, the EIS results exhibited a decrease in series resistance (Rs) from 9.1 to 5.7 Ω and an increase in recombination resistance (Rrec) from 28.0 to 40.6 Ω with addition of 8% MABr, suggesting an improved charge transport within perovskite crystals after strain relaxation and superior contact between the perovskite layer and the charge transport layers (Table S3). However, we also observed deterioration in the film with too much MABr in terms of ntrap, μe, Rs, and Rrec values.
To verify the effect of improved film morphology and charge carrier dynamics on the photovoltaic outcome, PSC devices were fabricated based on the additive-treated perovskite films. The 8% MABr-treated device exhibited improvements of VOC from 1.11 to 1.17 V and FF from 73.01% to 76.37% (Fig. 6a and ESI, Fig. S10), with the champion PCE reaching 20.21% (the related average PCE is 19.27%, see the ESI, Fig. S11). Nonetheless, further increasing MABr concentration to 12% led to a decline in the VOC and FF to 1.10 V and 74.80%, respectively. The decreased VOC and FF may result from the severe nonradiative recombination caused by the increased number of defects. We further compared the device performance of our solar cells with those of previously reported MAPbI3 based perovskite solar cells based on spin-coated or printed perovskite films from either toxic or green processing solvents (Fig. 6b and ESI, Table S4). Although all the key functional layers were blade-coated from green solvents, the PCE of 20.21% in this work was comparable to the values of the state-of-the-art devices based on the MAPbI3 films. This convincingly demonstrates the validity of our ambient green-printing fabrication process.

Fig. 6c shows the stabilized JSC and efficiency with maximum-power point tracking at AM1.5 G illumination under ambient conditions. The device showed a stabilized output efficiency of 19.72% and a higher stable JSC of 22.66 mA cm−2 without attenuation for 600 s, indicating the high device stability. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra and integrated JSC of the two devices are shown in Fig. S12 (ESI). Compared to the device without MABr, the EQE edge around 800 nm showed a slight blueshift for the device with 8% MABr, which agrees with the absorption spectra in Fig. 3c. Nevertheless, the EQE values were a little higher in the range of 550 to 760 nm for the film with 8% MABr. As a result, the devices without and with 8% MABr showed comparable integrated JSC values of 22.23 and 22.10 mA cm−2, respectively. The integrated JSC values from the EQE spectra are consistent with the measured JSC values from J–V characterization, suggesting the validity of our results. Besides the improved performance, we also found that the MABr-modulated device showed superior stability. As shown in Fig. 6d, upon exposing the unencapsulated devices to ambient conditions in the dark, the PCE for the device with 8% MABr dropped slowly and maintained 91% of the initial efficiency after 30 days, while the device without MABr showed faster degradation and led to a larger decrease in the efficiency (ca. 21% for the same time). The higher stability of the MABr-modulated device may be due to the enlarged perovskite grains and reduced lattice strain, which may decrease the film defects, limit the ion migration and prevent the diffusion of water and oxygen into the perovskite layer.

In summary, we have demonstrated high-performance PSCs by blade-coating all functional layers with green solvents under ambient conditions. A densely packed GA0.12MA0.88PbI3 perovskite layer without pinholes can be fabricated from the green solvent MAAc at an elevated temperature. The addition of 8% MABr additive can further increase crystalline grains, reduce lattice strain, and slightly enlarge the bandgap of the perovskite layer. The high-quality perovskite layer not only produces a low defect density and long charge carrier lifetime, but also contributes to high electron mobility and suppressed charge recombination. As a result, our green-printed PSC device shows an average PCE of 19.27% and a maximum PCE of 20.21% with over-700 nm-thick perovskite layer, which is comparable to the efficiencies of the state-of-the-art MAPbI3-based PSCs. The demonstration of ambient blade-coated efficient PSCs in a simple and green way in this work is a significant advancement towards the commercial application of PSCs.


J. F. performed the blade-coating as well as the characterization of SEM, XRD, absorption, PL, FTIR and XPS. K. Z. conceived the project. K. Z., Z. D., Y. C. and S. L. supervised the work. X. C. and J. L. assisted with the device fabrication and optimization. J. W. and T. Y. acquired and analysed the TA measurements. Y. F., Y. Z. and T. L. assisted with the TRPL analysis. Z. D. and K. Z. drafted the manuscript with contributions and edits from all authors (J. F., X. C., J. L., T. Y., J. W., Y. F., Y. Z., T. L., Y. C., S. L.).


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2016YFA0202403, 2017YFA0204800), Key Program project of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51933010), National Natural Science Foundation of China (61604092, 61974085, 91733301, 51873204), National University Research Fund (GK201802005), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (GK202103104), the 111 Project (B14041), the National 1000 Talents Plan Program (1110010341), the Joint Research Funds of Department of Science & Technology of Shaanxi Province and Northwestern Polytechnical University (No. 2020GXLH-Z-007).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta01763b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021