 DOI: 10.1039/C6TC00747C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 7415-7419


Yukun
Wang
,

Dezhi
Yang
,

Xiaokang
Zhou
,

Saad M.
Alshehri
,

Tansir
Ahamad
,

Agafonov
Vadim
 and 

Dongge
Ma
*

State Key Laboratory of Polymer Physics and Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 5625 Renmin Street, Changchun, 130022, P. R. China. University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China. E-mail: mdg1014@ciac.ac.cn

Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, P. R. China

Department of Chemistry, King Saud University, Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Moscow Region 141700, Russia

Received
21st February 2016
, Accepted 3rd July 2016
First published on 5th July 2016
In this work, we manufactured high quality perovskite thin films via a vapour-assisted process. The film morphologies are qualified by XRD and SEM images. It can be seen that not only high efficiency solar cells, but also high detectivity photodetectors can be fabricated. The solar cells show a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of approximately 10% (with C60 as electron-transport layer). When PCBM serves as the electron-transport layer, the value exceeds 12%. In addition, the photodetectors also achieve a photodetectivity as high as 3 × 1012 Jones.

Organometallic lead trihalide perovskite materials have attracted tremendous interest for the development of printable and flexible electronic devices since 2009, due to their low cost and simple solution processability, and they have resulted in significant advances in solar cells since 2012. Although their basic electrical and optical properties have yet to be fully elucidated, these merits of intense broad-band absorption, superior polycrystallinity, high carrier mobility and long charge diffusion length have allowed the rapid increase of power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 3.8% to over 20%, which surpasses the record efficiencies of amorphous silicon and some semiconductors-based solar cells.

Nowadays, there are two typical architectures — i.e. meso-superstructured on TiO2 and planar heterojunction on poly(3,4-ethylenedioxy thiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) — to construct perovskite solar cells, and many deposition methods can be used to obtain perovskite thin films. Besides solar cells, organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), photodetectors (PDs) and lasers based on perovskite films have been invented and their performance has also continually improved, which demonstrates that perovskite materials have more applications.
Unlike meso-type devices, in planar-type devices, an absence of scaffold, and incomplete and non-uniform coverage are usually observed. A lot of efforts have been made to solve these problems, including using vapour deposition, which has allowed the conversion efficiency (PCE) of the fabricated solar cells to reach 15.4%, but the small molecular CH3NH3I is hardly monitored due to random diffusion. Yang and collaborators tactfully solved the problem via the Vapor-Assisted Solution Process (VASP), and the resulting PCE was 12.1%. Li et al. employed this method to obtain a PCE of 16.8%. Similarly, due to the dilute molecule concentration of CH3NH3I, vapour can effectively abate the over-rapid intercalating reaction rate and obtain uniform perovskite absorbers, P. Luo, et al. also received satisfying results. However, in these reports the typical synthesis process of TiO2 substrate needs extremely high temperatures (∼250 °C or 550 °C). As a universal organic substrate, PEDOT is considered to be a versatile material which can play roles at lower substrate temperature, and the experimental process is easier. Most recently in this work, we developed high-quality perovskite films by combining the VASP method with the PEDOT substrate. The film morphologies are qualified by XRD and SEM images. It can be seen that not only high efficiency solar cells, but also high detectivity photodetectors can be fabricated by using the planar heterojunction simply consisting of perovskite thin film and C60. The resulting solar cells show a PCE of 9.92% (reverse) and 9.35% (forward), and when PCBM serves as the electron-transport layer (Fig. S2, ESI), the PCE reaches 12.2%. In addition, the fabricated photodetectors achieve a photodetectivity as high as 3 × 1012 Jones, which should be a better result than the perovskite-based photodetectors fabricated by similar methods reported so far.

CH3NH3I was synthesized through the reaction of 24 ml methylamine (33 wt% in ethanol, Aldrich) and 10 ml hydroiodic acid (57 wt% in water, Aladdin, China) in 100 ml ethanol in an ice bath for 2 h with stirring. The precipitate was collected with a rotary evaporator at 50 °C to remove the solvent. Then the product was recrystallized from ethanol. The crystals were filtered and washed three times with diethyl ether. At last, the solid was dried at 60 °C in vacuum oven overnight.


PEDOT:PSS (Clevios 4083) was spin-coated onto a clean patterned indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass at 5000 rpm for 55 s and at 120 °C for 20 min in air. For deposition of the perovskite layer, 400 mg of PbI2 (Aldrich, 99.999%) in 1 ml of DMF (Aldrich, 99.9%) was heated at 60 °C for one night under magnetic stirring, then the mixture was spin coated onto the PEDOT and dried at 110 °C for 15 min. CH3NH3I powder was spread out around the PbI2 coated substrates and heated at 150 °C for desired time. After depositing the perovskite layer, 70 nm C60 (Aldrich) was evaporated at a rate of 0.05 nm s−1, or a 30 mg ml−1 PC61BM in toluene solution was spin-coated onto the CH3NH3PbI3 film at a speed of 800 rpm for 40 s. Finally, 100 nm Al was deposited as the back contact (0.04 cm2) through thermal evaporation.


The device structure and its energy diagram used in this study are shown in Fig. 1a and b, respectively. On top of an ITO-coated glass, the perovskite layer (CH3NH3PbI3) was sandwiched between PEDOT:PSS and a fullerene layer. Al was used as the top electrode. Further experimental details will be shown below.


It is well-known that the quality of perovskite films has a very large effect on the performance of resulting devices. In order to get a high quality active layer we first optimized the annealing time of the fabricated perovskite films. As the substrate annealing time was increased, it was found that the film became more continuous. In Fig. 2a–d, the XRD and SEM patterns at different stages are given, which show well the effects of the annealing processes. In Fig. 2b, the film is not annealed; in this case, there are some porosities on the thin film and so the vapour CH3NH3I(MAI) can easily react with the whole PbI2. When the film is annealed for 0.5 h, as shown in Fig. 2c, the reaction is not complete so PbI2 and MAPbI3 co-exist in the film, where two diffraction signals are clearly evident (Fig. 2a). After the film is annealed for 4 h, the reactivity is complete, which can be seen in the SEM and XRD images as shown in Fig. 2a and d. This result is nearly the same as that obtained by Chen et al. We proposed two possibilities for the formation of the perovskite as follows:

(1) CH3NH3I(s) → CH3NH3I(g)
CH3NH3I(g) + PbI2(s) → CH3NH3PbI3(s)
(2) CH3NH3I(s) → CH3I(g) + NH3(g)
CH3I(g) + NH3(g) + PbI2(s) → CH3NH3PbI3(s)
In any case, perovskite films have already been formed via a vapor-assisted solution process (VASP) on PEDOT:PSS, importantly at low temperature. Thus, a series of solar cells were fabricated by optimizing the annealing time. The corresponding device performance is characterized by current density (J)–voltage (V) measurement under simulated AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) solar irradiation in an N2 atmosphere. These devices exhibit open-circuit voltages (Voc), short circuit current densities (Jsc), fill factors (FF) and the resulting power conversion efficiencies (PCE) of 0.79–0.84 V, 16.5–19.1 mA cm−2, 0.53–0.62 and 7.4–9.9%, respectively. Fig. S1 (ESI) shows the stability of these optimized solar cells; the PCE is nearly invariant if the devices are in the glove box (under N2) for the whole time. Table S1 (ESI) shows the variation of PCE with different annealing durations. From this result, we verify that Voc, Jsc, and FF are lower than the ideal values. Actually, C60 is not an ideal fullerene passivation layer; PCBM or ICBA can passivate the surface of CH3NH3PbI3 more effectively, and Huang et al. explained adequately the reason for this phenomenon. Herein, we demonstrated the device with the architecture ITO/PEDOT/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61 BM(70 nm)/Al and Fig. S2 (ESI) shows the PCE of this device. It can be seen that the performance is improved, indicating that choice if an appropriate fullerene is indeed more important for achieving good performance.
As shown in Fig. 3a (C60 as electron-transfer layer), the optimum PCE value approaches 10% (1.0 V to 0.0 V), which has a Voc = 0.84 V, Jsc = 19.1 mA cm−2 and FF = 0.618. In the optimum solar cells, the estimate of the maximum Voc is given by:
Voc = ([EHOMOdonor] − [ELUMOacceptor]/e)
(1)
From the energy-level diagram in
Fig. 1b, the Voc is estimated to be 1.00 V. We know that there is experimentally only a 16% loss, which should be very low in the similar MAPbI3/fullerene heterojunction devices. To exploit the improvement, we measured the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum, and calculated Jsc(IC) = 18.4 mA cm−2 (Fig. 3b), which is within the error compared with that from the J–V curve (less than 5%), which can be attributed to the high-quality of the perovskite films.

According to the equivalent circuit, the J–V characteristics are described by:
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
where
J is the current flow through the external load, J0 is the reverse saturated current density,V is the applied voltage, A is the ideal factor, KB is the Boltzmann constant and T is the absolute temperature. As shown in Fig. 3c and d, by fitting the eqn (3) and (4), an excellent linear relationship between −dV/dJ vs. (Jsc − J)−1 or ln(Jsc − J) vs. V + RsJ (high voltage) is found. Thus the Rs is calculated to be 3.45 Ω cm2. Rsh ∼ 1.5 × 103 Ω cm2 is also carefully evaluated according to the J–V curve. Rsh is lower than the ideal value, implying that there is mass charge recombination, which may be the reason for the low FF. Surprisingly, the calculated Voc is the same as the value obtained from the J–V measurement, which means that the device we fabricated is a heterojunction solar cell with good performance.


In order to illustrate the application of VASP films in photodetectors, we studied the detection performance of the resulting devices based on the VASP films. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was firstly measured, as shown in Fig. 4a. The EQE values changed negligibly as a function of applied reverse biases. In the wavelength range of 350–750 nm, the value is over 60% and the peak reaches 80%, so theoretically it is suitable for visible-light broadband photodetection.

Moreover, the corresponding responsivity (R) can be calculated from the EQE by:
(6)
where
hμ is the energy of the incident photon, thus the R values are obtained, as shown in Fig. 4b. The maximum R reaches 0.4 A W−1, which represents for the high ratio of incident-light intensity to photocurrent density. The observed high EQE and R confirm the quality of films and excellent charge collection.


Fig. 4c shows the dark current density–voltage (DCD) characteristics. We observe a relatively low reverse bias dark current density of 5 × 10−8 A cm−2 (−0.1 V), which is about one order of magnitude lower than the similar structure, indicating that the 70 nm fullerene interlayer can completely cover the poly-crystalline perovskite film to form a heterojunction. As a result, the device exhibits very good diode characteristics, with a rectification ratio of 105 at ±1 V. It is exciting that this simple structure has such a low dark current.
Another key performance merit is detectivity (D), which is defined as the reciprocal of noise equivalent power (shown below). However, different detectors have different active areas. In order to compare our device with different detectors, we employed normalized detectivity (D*), which is given by
(7)
where,
R and Jd (dark current) have been established in Fig. 4b and c, respectively. D* is evaluated to be approaching 3 × 1012 Jones at −0.1 V, which exceeded the predicted value of about 2 × 1012 Jones at −0.1 V by Yang et al. The high detectivity of the device is mainly due to its extremely low dark current. In the device, there is no interface material or blocking layer, which manifests that the high-quality film is available for lower dark current.


Fig. 5a and b show the transient photocurrent response properties. Fig. 5a shows the frequency response of the detector with a device area of 4 mm2 at −1 V and −0.5 V, which reaches 0.45 MHz and 0.4 MHz, respectively. In fact, the frequency response can be controlled by the thickness and area of the active layer, the applied electrical bias and the interfacial charge transport materials. Here, we focused on studying the effect of the applied electrical bias on the bandwidth. Fig. 5b shows the normalized time response curves at 100 kHz at different biases, which correspond to −1 V, −0.5 V and the standard incident light, respectively. It can be clearly seen that the difference can be ignored. Fig. 5c shows the linear dynamic range (LDR), which is expressed as
(8)
where
Jph* is the photocurrent measured as a linear function of light intensity. Evidently, it can be seen that the photocurrent monotonically increases with the luminous intensity only if the intensity is under 6 W cm−2, which indicates that within a certain range, the input optical signal is faithfully converted to the output electrical signal without distortion. Beyond this range, the luminous signal cannot be calculated precisely. Actually, we cannot get the lowest exact signal because it is very close to the dark current. If we acknowledge Jd as the prescribed minimum, then LDR is evaluated to be over 95 decibels (dB).


Fig. 5d shows the calculated shot noise current (INSh) and noise equivalent power (NEP). Because of the experimental conditions, the traditionally calculated method of INSh and NEP is used as follows.
INSh2 = 2qIDC·Δf
(9)
(10)
where
IDC is the direct dark current through the device, Δf is the noise bandwidth of the measurement system, then we get the normalization INSh (left axis in Fig. 5d). R is shown in Fig. 4b. Assuming R is unchanged, as the LDR is measured at 520 nm, and R is 0.33 A W−1, then we evaluate the NEP (right axis in Fig. 5d). It can be seen that the device shows a small noise current of <1 pA Hz−1/2, which is one order of magnitude smaller than that of a silicon detector. The NEP is calculated to be lower than 1 pW. The very small INSh currents at low bias are important for achieving such small NEP values for the resulting perovskite photodetectors.


We realized high quality multi-functional perovskite thin films via a vapour-assisted solution process on PEDOT. The importance of this preparation is that the perovskite films are processed at a lower temperature. It can be seen that the resulting perovskite films exhibit not only high optical conversion efficiency in solar cells, but also high photodetectivity in detectors. The conversion efficiency of solar cells reaches 9.92% (reverse) and 9.35% (forward), and the photodetectivity is as high as 3 × 1012 Jones, and the transient frequency response is over 0.45 MHz. Such high performance should be attributed to the achievement of high quality perovskite thin films, indicating that the vapour-assisted solution process method can also fabricate high quality perovskite films, even at a lower temperature, instead of TiO2. Our results also imply that perovskite materials are promising candidates for low cost, high performance solar cells as well as photodetectors.


The authors gratefully acknowledge the International Cooperation Foundation of China (2015DFR10700), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51403203) and the Basic Research Project of Jilin Province (20150520018JH) for the support of this research. Prof. D. G. Ma extends his appreciation to the Distinguished Scientist Fellowship Program (DSFP) at King Saud University, Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for financial support. Prof. AgafonovVadim thanks the support of the Russian Ministry of Education and Science – state assignment no. 3.1579.2014/K.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6tc00747c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016