 DOI: 10.1039/C7CP07494H
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 6698-6707


Yan
Zhang
,

Yungen
Wu
,

Zhe
Sun
*,

Yanan
Kang
,

Tianyang
Chen
,

Hui
Wang
,

Mao
Liang
 and 

Song
Xue
*

Tianjin Key Laboratory of Organic Solar Cells and Photochemical Conversion, School of Chemistry & Chemical Engineering, Tianjin University of Technology, Tianjin 300384, P. R. China. E-mail: zhesun@tjut.edu.cn; xuesong@ustc.edu.cn

Received
6th November 2017
, Accepted 29th January 2018
First published on 31st January 2018
Self-assembly of organic sensitizer layers in cobalt complex-based DSCs was studied to elucidate its role in reducing the loss of charge recombination. DSCs with various dye loadings were fabricated by dye desorption without the aid of basic solvent. The FT-IR and UV results indicate the deprotonation of the anchoring organic sensitizers, which influences the conduction band of TiO2 remarkably by changing the surface potential. Positive band edge shifts and a decrease of the recombination rate constant are demonstrated to be the main factors affecting energy loss at open circuit. In contrast, absorbed photon conversion efficiency (APCE) analyses illuminate the crucial role of the packing of the anchoring sensitizer in reducing recombination loss at short circuit. This is further supported by numerical simulations, which show that APCE is primarily dependent on the recombination rate constant rather than the band edge shift at short circuit. These results highlight the importance of self-assembly of sensitizers with insulating groups in retarding charge recombination by forming overlapping molecular layers.

Harnessing solar energy for generating electricity or converting CO2 into fuels via artificial photosynthesis is regarded as a promising route to address the energy crisis. Dye sensitized solar cells (DSCs) have shown several advantages in these aspects, such as tuneable absorption spectra, transparency, wearability, and low fabrication cost. Currently, the prime target in the study of DSCs is still at the improvement of power conversion efficiency (PCE) in order to keep step with the swift development of perovskite solar cells as well as the recent blossoming of quantum-dot sensitized solar cells (QDSC). One route toward the optimization of DSCs is to exploit narrower bandgap sensitizers for extending light absorption to the near-infrared region and hence to increase photocurrent output. Another is to retard the recombination reaction at the TiO2/sensitizer/electrolyte interface because this has been demonstrated to be the major source of energy loss during cell operation. Recently, DSCs with organic or Zn–porphyrin sensitizers with high molar extinction coefficients have yielded PCEs of over 12%. Theoretically, their outstanding property in light absorption allows the loading of sensitizer in TiO2 electrodes to be minimized for retaining cell performance and reducing the cost of fabrication simultaneously. However, the feasibility of this strategy depends on whether recombination loss associated with the decreased dye loading can be readily controlled. It is thus vital to quantitatively assess the role of anchoring sensitizers in affecting charge recombination at the TiO2 surface.

In previous studies, many efforts have been devoted to correlating the kinetics of interfacial recombination with the morphology of the sensitizer binding in mesoscopic TiO2 films by measuring DSCs with different dye loadings. This loading variation is usually achieved by placing bare TiO2 films into a dye bath for a short time or by using a very dilute dye solution. However, O’Regan et al. pointed out that these methods can lead to non-uniform dyeing and hence give rise to unjustified observations. A modification was subsequently suggested by Pazoki et al. in which inert salt was added to the dye bath to accelerate the adsorption toward equilibrium. Alternatively, O’Regan et al. provided a multiple step method. After complete adsorption of the sensitizer, the dyed TiO2 films were partially desorbed with weak basic solution. The resulting films were then treated with acid solution to compensate for the negative shift of the conduction band during the basic treatment. We found that the desorption protocol is also suitable to study DSCs with organic sensitizers. This is because these dye molecules are easily desorbed by non-polar organic solvents. Any observed band edge shifts can be fully attributed to the removal of the sensitizer.
In fact, the concept of “uniform dyeing” in TiO2 films is only acceptable at the mesoscopic scale. If the dyed TiO2 film is observed at the angstrom level, the packing of the absorbed sensitizers may not be viewed as a homogeneous monolayer. Using neutral impact collision ion scattering spectroscopy (NICISS), Ellis-Gibbings et al. demonstrated that adsorbed ruthenium-based dyes (N719) tend to aggregate into islands or assemble into multiple layers. This statement was further supported by the work of Johansson et al. Irrespective of the complexity of the self-assembly of sensitizers, their effects on recombination loss at the TiO2 surface can be evaluated by two factors. Firstly, the absorption of sensitizers gives rise to a shift of the conduction band, which has a profound influence on the recombination rate. Ito et al. and O’Regan et al. determined separately that the blocking effect of N719 dye is very small. Variation of the recombination rate is mainly attributed to the band edge shift. However, it is still unknown whether this conclusion is applicable to organic sensitizers, in which bulky light harvesting groups in combination with flexible oxyalkyl chains are often designed to block recombination. Secondly, the blocking effect of the sensitizer layer is normally quantified by the recombination rate constant in the literature. This parameter is independent of the band edge but is relevant to the density of available sites for electron transfer and electron coupling between donor and receptor. Therefore, the rate constant partially quantifies the degree to which the morphology of sensitizer packing affects the rate of interfacial charge transfer.
In this study, we aim to reveal the origin of charge loss in DSCs with organic sensitizers. Cobalt complex redox couples were therefore utilized in electrolyte due to their simple electron transfer kinetics. DSCs with various dye loadings were fabricated by desorbing fully dyed TiO2 films with organic solvent. The partially dyed films were subsequently employed to determine the loss of light harvesting, the enhancement of the recombination rate, and the movement in the conduction band. Measurements and numerical simulations of the recombination kinetics were carried out at both short and open circuits. In this way, the distinct roles of the band edge shift and the packing of the sensitizer layer in the loss of recombination are highlighted.

Precleaned transparent conductive oxide (TCO) glass substrates (F-doped SnO2, 15 Ω square−1) were immersed in 40 mM aqueous TiCl4 solution at 70 °C for 40 min. A homemade TiO2 paste (18 wt%, average particle size of 20 nm) was then deposited onto the TCO substrates by screen printing. The deposited TiO2 films (5 mm diameter) were dried at 100 °C for 10 min and sintered at 500 °C for another 30 min. The TiO2/TCO substrates were placed into the TiCl4 solution at 70 °C for another 40 min, followed by further sintering at 500 °C for 30 min. The TiO2 films were sensitized by immersing the TiO2/TCO substrates in 0.3 mM dichloromethane (DCM)/ethanol (EA) (v/v: 1:4) solution of an organic dye (M26) for 12 h. After being rinsed with anhydrous ethanol and dried under air flow, the sensitized TiO2 electrodes were coated with a punched transparent adhesive tape (60 μm thickness). The TiO2 film was placed in the punched hole (6 mm diameter) to expose it. Prior to the photoelectrochemical measurements, a drop of electrolyte solution based on a cobalt complex was poured onto the tape-surrounded TiO2 film, which was subsequently covered with a platinized counter electrode. The assembly was clamped tightly with two clips. The cobalt complex-based electrolyte used in this work consisted of 0.25 M [Co(II)(phen)3](PF6)2, 0.05 M [Co(III)(phen)3](PF6)3, 0.1 M LiTFSI, and 0.5 M 4-tertbutylpyridine (TBP) in acetonitrile (ACN).

Sensitizer desorption was carried out by immersing the sensitized TiO2/TCO electrodes into DCM solution for a certain time and then rinsing them with anhydrous ethanol. If the sensitized electrodes were assembled for photoelectrochemical tests, the electrodes were firstly rinsed with ACN to remove the electrolyte solution. Subsequently, the electrodes were treated with anhydrous ethanol three times to desorb the residual TBP in the TiO2 films. After that, standard desorption treatment continued according to the procedure described above.

A UV-2600 spectrophotometer (Shimadzu, Japan) was employed to record UV-vis absorption spectra of the sensitized films and a solution of dye M26. Fluorescence spectra were measured by a Fe4500 fluorescence spectrophotometer (Hitachi, Japan). FT-IR spectra of the sensitizer-soaked TiO2 films were collected by a Tensor 27 FT-IR spectrometer (Bruker, Germany) with a resolution of 4 cm−1 in attenuated total reflectance mode. The film thicknesses were measured by a DektakXT profilometer (Bruker, Germany). Dye loading was determined by immersing the sensitized TiO2 film (5 mm diameter) into DCM solvent for a given time. The absorbance of the resulting solution was measured by a UV-2600 spectrophotometer (Shimadzu, Japan). Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements for the sensitized films were carried out using a Zennium electrochemical workstation (Zahner, Germany) at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. The three-electrode device for the CV tests included freshly polished glassy carbon as the working electrode, a Pt-wire counter electrode, and an Ag/AgCl reference electrode. 0.1 M tetrabutylammonium perchlorate (TBAP) in ACN was used as the supporting electrolyte.

The relationships between open circuit voltage (Voc) and light intensity (I0) were determined by a Zennium electrochemical workstation (ZAHNER, Germany). During the Voc–I0 measurements, steady green light was generated by a monochromatic LED (525 nm). The light intensity was calibrated by a PP211 potentiostat (Zahner, Germany) in combination with a silicon cell (S1337-BQ, Hamamatsu, Japan). Using this system, cell parameters, including open circuit voltage, short circuit current density, energy conversion efficiency, and fill factor, were collected by scanning current–voltage (j–V) curves. The charge quantities of the DSCs were determined by a charge extraction method. Current signals after switching DSCs from open circuit to short circuit were recorded by a LK2005A electrochemical system (Lanlike, China). Open circuit voltage decay (OCVD) measurements were conducted using an LK2005A electrochemical system. During sampling of the voltage signals, the illumination light was switched off at intervals of milliseconds using a computer-controlled electronic shutter (GCI-73, Daheng, China). The voltage decay data were processed numerically using the MATLAB program to yield the electron lifetimes.
Geometry optimizations for dye M26 were carried out with the Gaussian 03W program package using density functional theory (DFT). The calculations were performed using the B3LYP functional at the 6-31G(d) level to determine the molecular dipole moments. Charge transport and recombination in the DSCs were simulated using a set of reaction–diffusion equations. The equations were solved numerically on the MATLAB software platform. The experimental data shown in Table 1 were employed as the kinetic parameters for simulating the recombination reaction as well as the distribution of trapped electrons.
No.

Π
dye


V
oc/V

J
sc/mA cm−2

η

FF

β


ΔEc/eV

a All cells were measured with a green LED (525 nm) of 20 mW cm−2. Voc: open circuit voltage, Jsc: short circuit current density, η: energy conversion efficiency, FF: fill factor. The active area of the DSCs was 0.156 cm2.
b The ideality factor (b) was obtained by fitting the Voc–I0 curves.
c The shift of the conduction band edge (ΔEc) was determined by fitting the plots of electron density.

(1)
1.00
0.918
7.02
0.236
0.73
0.720
0
(2)
0.64
0.789
6.98
0.193
0.70
0.752
−0.023
(3)
0.52
0.758
6.50
0.165
0.67
0.739
−0.039
(4)
0.47
0.729
6.29
0.149
0.65
0.735
−0.051
(5)
0.43
0.710
5.73
0.131
0.64
0.708
−0.077
(6)
0.40
0.697
5.47
0.111
0.58
0.698
−0.082
(7)
0.34
0.659
4.48
0.087
0.58
0.703
−0.086
(8)
0.33
0.639
4.39
0.081
0.57
0.702
−0.101
(9)
0.31
0.589
3.80
0.067
0.59
0.700
−0.120

The TiO2 film electrodes used in this work were sensitized with organic dye M26, which bears a phenothiazine unit. Its molecular formula is indicated in Fig. 1b, while its photophysical and electrochemical data are given in the ESI. We monitored the process of dye desorption by immersing dyed TiO2 electrodes into dichloromethane (DCM) solution to engender the release of the anchored dye molecules. Images of the resulting electrodes at various desorption times are displayed in Fig. 1a. As expected, desorption did not affect the homogeneity of the dye distribution inside the TiO2 films at the macroscopic scale. This confirms the reliability of the “dye desorption” protocol in fabricating TiO2 films bearing different dye loads. Moreover, the anchored dyes were found to exhibit swift release from TiO2 film during the first 30 min. After that, this desorption process became sluggish, as indicated by the images of the electrodes (5)–(9). It appears that this damped desorption is relevant to the formation of multiple dye layers, as several studies have reported. However, the mechanism underlying such desorption behavior seems to be rather complicated because all the dye molecules are shown to contribute to the conduction band displacement (see below). This means that the anchor carboxylate group in each dye molecule is expected to coordinate with the surface of the TiO2 nanoparticles. Therefore, the desorption behaviour of dye M26 is probably related to the diverse binding types of the anchoring dye molecules.

We performed Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) measurements of the dye-anchored TiO2 films. This technique is well established in the literature for distinguishing the binding modes of anchoring carboxylate groups. When the anchoring carboxylate groups are deprotonated, at least three binding types have been identified: monodentate ester, bidentate chelating, and bidentate bridging. Deacon et al. have shown the inherent relationship between the binding type and the frequency interval (Δν) between symmetric (νs) and asymmetric (νas) bond stretching of carboxylate ion. Relative to free carboxylate ion, the anchoring carboxylate groups show a frequency interval order of monodentate > free carboxylate ion > bidentate bridging > bidentate chelating.
FT-IR spectra of the fully sensitized and partially desorbed TiO2 films are shown in Fig. 1c. The FT-IR response of the ionized dye M26 carboxylate salt is also depicted as a reference. We found that most of the adsorbed dye molecules are deprotonated because the stretching band of the carboxyl group (ν(CO)) at 1738 cm−1 is as weak as that of the dye carboxylate salt. More importantly, the fully sensitized TiO2 film (electrode (1)) shows asymmetric and symmetric stretching peaks at 1539 and 1413 cm−1, respectively. This indicates that the frequency interval is 126 cm−1. In contrast, the Δν of the free dye ions is much larger (1573–1402 = 171 cm−1), implying that the adsorption of dye M26 onto the surface of TiO2 mainly takes the form of bidentate bridging/chelating (see Scheme 1). When the dyed TiO2 film was desorbed for 2 h (electrode (5)), the asymmetric stretching peak shifted to 1525 cm−1. The narrower frequency interval (1525–1413 = 112 cm−1) relative to the Δν of the fully sensitized TiO2 film implies that the dominant binding mode is bidentate chelation, which appears to be more stable under desorption treatment. In addition to this, the FT-IR spectra illuminate the absence of the monodentate binding mode in the coordination of the dye carboxylate salt. As a result, all the adsorbed dye M26 molecules are expected to stand on the TiO2 surface at similar angles. In other words, those molecules show the same vertical dipole components. We found that it is crucial to understand the relationship between the movement of the conduction band edge and the variation of dye loading.
Dye desorption from TiO2 films is known to inevitably attenuate their response to light harvesting. This energy loss further causes deterioration of the photocurrent and photovoltage. With the aid of UV-vis spectra, the light absorption behaviours of the TiO2 films under desorption treatment are illustrated in Fig. 2a. It is not surprising to observe a decrease of absorbance with the dissociation of the anchoring dye molecules. Meanwhile, the position of the absorption peaks appears to be unchangeable. We also treated the partially dyed TiO2 films with 1 M ethanol solution of HCl. As displayed in Fig. S5 in the ESI, the resulting spectrum shows a red shift of 24 nm. This further indicates that the binding molecules remaining after desorption are still deprotonated and hence maintain their binding conformations. In this work, we excluded the alternate treatment of “base/acid” for promoting dye dissociation and subsequent correction of the conduction band edge. This method probably increases the risk of unjustified conduction band movement originating from the density variation of embedded protons at the TiO2 surface. Instead, organic solvents, i.e. DCM solution, were employed because dye M26 shows good solubility in these agents and they have no influence on the association/dissociation of protons. In this situation, any displacement of the band edge is directly related to desorption of dye molecules.
UV-vis spectra were employed here to estimate the absorption coefficients of the dyed films (εfilm). In Fig. 2b, the absorption coefficients for different degrees of desorption are plotted against the normalized dye loading (Πdye). The absorption coefficient is attained with an incident wavelength of 525 nm, i.e. the wavelength of the LED employed for detecting photocurrent responses (shown below). Note that normalized dye loading is frequently denoted as surface coverage in the literature, although aggregation of the anchoring dye molecules may lead to non-proportionality between Πdye and the surface coverage.Fig. 2b indicates that εfilm is approximately linear to Πdye when it is below 0.5. Above this value, deviation from linearity is evident. Certainly, similar results can be obtained at other incident wavelengths (see Fig. S6 in the ESI). These results imply that only the εfilm at low Πdye can be used to represent dye loading due to the linear relationship between them. Otherwise, Πdye can be underestimated, as indicated in Fig. 2b. In addition, εfilm was utilized to calculate the light harvesting efficiency (ηLH) based upon the following expression:
ηLH(λ) = (1 − 10−εfilm(λ)×d)TFTO
(1)
where
d represents the film thickness and TFTO accounts for the transmittance of the FTO-coated glass sheet. Note that TFTO is 0.82 for incident light of 525 nm. It was found that about 70% loss of dye loading engenders a reduction of ηLH of only 0.96 to 0.80. This is consistent with the high molar extinction coefficient of dye M26, which shows a maximum of 1.92 × 104 M−1 cm−1 at 532 nm (cf. ESI).

The usage of sensitizers with high molar extinction coefficient means that fewer dye molecules are required to engender sufficient light absorption. However, as indicated below, the decrease of dye loading has a profound influence on the photovoltaic performance of DSCs. J–V characteristics for DSCs with different Πdye values are depicted in Fig. 3. The corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. One can see considerable degradation of the energy conversion efficiency (η) from 0.236 to 0.067 and even of the fill factor (FF) from 0.73 to 0.59. Furthermore, about 36% of the open circuit voltage (Voc) and 46% of the short circuit current density (Jsc) are lost due to desorption treatment. It is obvious that the loss in photovoltaic performance is due to the acceleration of recombination because more vacancies on the TiO2 surface are left for the back reaction. However, this is not a final interpretation, because the recombination rate depends on the conduction band edge, the electronic coupling between donor and receptor, the packing of the anchoring sensitizers, and even the distribution of the trap states at the TiO2 surface.
The influence of dye desorption on the recombination kinetics was characterized using plots of Voc against the illumination intensity (I0). As indicated in Fig. 4a, the Voc–I0 plots exhibit semi-logarithmic relationships when I0 is greater than 3 × 1015 cm−2. This is normal for DSCs with either cobalt complex mediators or iodine redox couples, reflecting the exponential form of the recombination kinetics. Because the absorbed photons in DSCs are absolutely consumed at open circuit, the recombination rate (Urec) can be empirically written as a function of the density of the conduction band electrons (nc):
Urec = krnβc
(2)
where
β is the ideality factor and kr is the recombination rate constant. It follows that Voc is related to the logarithm of I0 as follows:

(3)
where
ηinj is the electron injection efficiency and q is the elementary charge. By fitting the slopes from the semi-logarithmic parts of the plots, we obtained the ideality factors, which are shown in Table 1. It was found that the ideality factors for the DSCs with different dye loadings are in the range from 0.698 to 0.750. Normally, deviation of the ideality factor from unity implies that not only the conduction band electrons but also the electrons localized at the surface states are involved in the recombination reaction with the oxidized forms of the cobalt complexes.

It is also observed that the semi-logarithmic plots of Voc–I0 became curved under weak illumination, particularly for the DSCs with less dye loading. Cameron et al. attributed the curved Voc–I0 plots to the recombination reaction with the electrons at the FTO layer. Later studies also demonstrated the validity of modifying the FTO layer, such as coating the inert blocking layer, in retarding the back reaction. Here, we show that although the FTO sheets in this work were pretreated with TiCl4 solution, the presence of dye brushes at the FTO surface is still vital to decrease the recombination rate. In other words, desorption treatment gives rise to acceleration of the back reaction occurring at the surface of the FTO layer. Fortunately, the bending of the semi-logarithmic Voc–I0 plots is evident only at weak illumination. This means we can reasonably neglect the effects of recombination via the FTO layer when the DSCs are studied under strong illumination.
In addition to the ideality factor, we also estimated the displacement of the conduction band edge (ΔEc) with dye loading using the well-established charge extraction technique. According to a previous report, the plots of electron density (n) versus the Fermi-level (EF,n) in Fig. 4b can be fitted with the aid of a biexponential distribution function:
(4)
where
α is the parameter characterizing the profile of the trap state distribution, NT is the total density of the traps, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the absolute temperature. The subscripts “s” and “d” in eqn (4) represent deep and shallow traps, respectively. As indicated in Fig. S7 of the ESI, the biexponential distribution function was found to show good fits to the curves of electron density. The fitting results in Table S2 in the ESI show that αs and αd are around 0.50 and 0.051, respectively. Notably, neither of these values were found to apparently depend on dye loading. Moreover, the invariance of αs allows the displacement of the conduction band to be evaluated according to the fitting parameters. Table 1 shows that a 70% loss in Πdye results in a positive shift of the band edge by ∼120 mV. This is consistent with the fact that the adsorbed sensitizers are deprotonated. Due to the departure of these sensitizers, the surface potential of TiO2 becomes more positive. In addition, another probable origin of the positive band edge movement is the embedding of lithium ions and/or protons because more vacancies are left at the TiO2 surface after dye desorption.

The obtained parameters, i.e. conduction band edge movement, ideality factor, and light harvesting efficiency, were further employed to elucidate the loss in Voc. According to eqn (3), the decrease of the open circuit voltage (ΔVoc) with respect to Voc at Πdye = 1.0 can be decomposed into the following parts (cf. ESI):
ΔVoc = ΔEc − ΔEk + ΔELH
(5)
where Δ
Ec represents the shift of the conduction band edge and ΔEk accounts for the losses in voltage from kinetic factors, which is given by ΔEk = kBT/qΔ(lnkr/β). The third term in eqn (5) indicates the voltage loss from the decreased light absorption, namely ΔELH = kBT/qΔ(lnηLH/β).

The values of ΔVoc, ΔEc, and ΔELH at different dye loadings were calculated according to the experimental data in Table 1 and Fig. 2b. The contributions of ΔEc and ΔELH to ΔVoc are subsequently illustrated in Fig. 6a. It was found that the loss in Voc cannot be fully attributed to the positive shift of the band edge because the decrease of Voc by 329 mV is only associated with the positive band edge displacement of 120 mV. This means that ΔEc contributes about 36% of the Voc loss. Apparently, the band edge shift is relevant to the variation of surface potential (ΔV) at the dye M26/TiO2 interface. The ΔV can be written as
(6)
where
Ndye is the coverage of dye dipoles, μ⊥ is the normal component of the molecular dipole moment, ε0 is the permittivity in a vacuum, and εr is the relative dielectric constant of the dipole layer. Note that εr has been reported to be 5.3 for aromatic molecules in monolayers. We determined μ⊥ by performing DFT calculations on dye M26 in a solution of ACN. The results show that the adsorbed dye molecules have a normal dipole moment of 9.23 D. By measuring the concentration of the released dye molecules in the desorption agent, we determined an absolute dye loading of 21.9 nmol cm−2. Accordingly, Ndye, which is proportional to Πdye, is about 4.30 × 1013 cm−2. Therefore, the variation of the surface potential is 195 mV, given that Πdye decreases from 1.0 to 0.31. This value agrees with reported surface potentials arising from organic sensitizers bearing bidentate coordination. However, the predicted surface voltage is remarkably higher than the determined Ec shift of 120 mV (cf.Table 1). A possible explanation is the accumulation of lithium ions, protons, and even cobalt complexes at the TiO2 surface, which partly compensates the dipole effect from the adsorbed sensitizers.


Fig. 6a also displays the variation of ΔELH with dye loading. The decrease of light harvesting efficiency is shown to engender a voltage loss of less than 10 mV. This is attributed to the high molar extinction coefficient of dye M26. In the derivation of eqn (5), we actually assumed invariance of the electron injection efficiency (ηinj) during the process of dye desorption. Previous studies propose the density of shallow trap states to be 2.0 × 1020 cm−3. The conduction band edge of the fully dyed TiO2 film is thus estimated as −0.50 V vs. NHE. Because the LUMO level of dye M26 is −1.17 V vs. NHE (cf. ESI), the driving force for electron injection is roughly over 670 mV (see Fig. 5). Therefore, we can speculate efficient injection in the DSCs with full loading of sensitizer. Furthermore, dye desorption was shown to engender a positive shift of Ec, which further increases the driving force for electron injection. As a result, the loss in voltage cannot be attributed to a deficiency of electron injection.
Dye regeneration efficiency (ηreg) is also neglected when evaluating the loss in voltage. According to its definition, ηreg is expressed as
(7)
where
nCo(II) is the concentration of the reduced form of the cobalt complex, kreg is the rate constant for dye regeneration, and krD+ and χ are the rate constant and reaction order of the dye cations involved in recombination, respectively. It was found that the total electron density (n) is decreased by dye desorption (see the inset of Fig. 4b). However, krD+ may be invariant with regard to Πdye because this factor primarily depends on electron coupling between TiO2 nanocrystals and dye cations rather than dye loading. Moreover, the departure of some sensitizer indeed facilitates the access of electron donors to the oxidized sensitizers, hence increasing kreg. In fact, Pazoki et al. observed that the time for dye regeneration increases slightly with dye loading. This means that ηreg can increase rather than decrease with dye desorption. Therefore, variation of ηreg is not the origin of the loss in voltage.

To determine the origin of recombination acceleration, we further evaluated the voltage loss using a kinetic factor, i.e. ΔEk, in terms of eqn (5). As displayed in Fig. 6b, ΔEk is found to increase remarkably during the process of desorption. This reflects that the loss in voltage is highly relevant to the packing of the anchoring dyes at the TiO2 surface. Furthermore, the ΔEk results indicate an increase of the recombination rate constant (kr) because β is nearly invariant. Therefore, we can see more rapid charge transfer across the uncovered TiO2 surfaces. It is obvious that kr is independent of the conduction band edge but relies on the probability of cobalt complexes to access the TiO2 surface. Desorption treatment evidently enlarges the area of the uncovered TiO2 surface, which accordingly enhances the probability of interfacial charge transfer. It should be noted that the change in kr leads to a loss in voltage of 202 mV as Πdye decreases to 0.31. In this sense, the enlarged charge recombination probability contributes to about 61% of the loss in Voc. For comparison, the positive shift of the conduction band, as shown above, leads to 36% of the photovoltage loss. This result is inconsistent with the conclusion drawn by O’Regan et al. In their work, they argued the role of anchoring sensitizers in retarding the recombination reaction because the band edge shift is superior to the variation of kr in determining the rate of back reaction. This discrepancy may originate from the different sensitizers. In this work, the bulky planar phenothiazine group in conjunction with the flexible oxyalkyl chains in dye M26 were more effective than dye N719 in retarding the recombination reaction. In addition, the I3− ions in their work are much smaller than the cobalt complexes employed here. I3− ions can cross the sensitizer layer much more readily and can then react with the injected electrons.
The average rate of the recombination reaction can be evaluated by the apparent electron lifetime (τn), which is given by
(8)
Note that the density of deeply trapped electrons is not included because we only consider the case of strong illumination, where ns is much higher than nd. According to the experimental data shown in Table 1, we obtained a decreased lifetime (τrel) with respect to that for the fully dyed TiO2 film. Its value is calculated as the ratio of the τns values before and after desorption. Combining eqn (2), (3) and (8), τrel is written as
(9)
where the subscript “1” indicates the parameters obtained at
Πdye = 1.0. The dependence of τrel on Πdye was assessed at an illumination intensity of 20 mW cm−2, as displayed in Fig. 6b. It was shown that the reduction of Πdye to 0.31 results in a decrease of τrel from 1.0 to 0.013. Accordingly, the average recombination rate in this situation is 77 times faster than that for the untreated DSCs.

A similar conclusion was drawn from the measurements of the open circuit voltage decay (OCVD). In Fig. 6, the relative Fermi level is corrected with the shift of the conduction band edge. In this way, the densities of the conduction band electrons at each abscissa are identical. For this reason, the variation of electron lifetimes (τOCVD) at different Πdye values is attributed to the kinetic factor. As expected, τOCVD decreased remarkably with Πdye. This agrees with the statement that an increase in interfacial recombination plays a key role in decreasing the photovoltage. Additionally, this partly supports our above analysis that neither ηinj nor ηreg can be the determinative factor for the charge loss by dye desorption because the OCVD measurements were performed in the dark.
To elucidate the energy loss at short circuit, we determined the incident power conversion efficiency (ηIPCE) at an incident wavelength of 525 nm. Fig. 7a shows that dye desorption results in a sharp decrease of ηIPCE from 0.82 to 0.45. In contrast, as shown in Fig. 2b, ηLH only decreases to 0.80 as Πdye decreases to 0.31. This suggests that desorption engenders a substantial recombination loss when the DSCs function at short circuit. Normally, ηIPCE is formulated as the product of ηLH and the absorbed photon conversion efficiency (ηAPCE):
ηIPCE = ηLH × ηAPCE
(10)
It follows that ηAPCE can be evaluated according to the obtained data of ηIPCE and ηLH. Fig. 7a indicates that dye desorption results in a dramatic reduction of ηAPCE, particularly when the dye loading is below 0.5. In essence, ηAPCE reflects the proportion of the electrons at the LUMO level that can be extracted to external circuits rather than quenched via diverse recombination processes.
Here, we attempted to determine whether the dominant factor affecting the charge loss at short circuit is kr or Ec. Because the cell parameters such as Πdye, Ec, β, and ηLH have been determined, one can reasonably estimate kr at short circuit with the aid of simulations using reaction–diffusion equations. Many groups have demonstrated the validity of this equation set in scrutinizing charge transport and recombination in DSCs. Here, this set is employed to determine the value of kr by which the experimental of ηAPCE results can be mimicked. The equation set was solved numerically with the relaxation scheme. The equations, parameters, and numerical techniques are described in detail in the ESI. The numerical results show that the experimental ηAPCE data cannot be reproduced by simulations when invariance of kr is assumed. The gray dashed lines in Fig. 7a reveal that the experimental data of Ec in combination with constant kr gives rise to rather flat ηAPCE curves. This indicates that the loss of ηAPCE cannot be attributed entirely to the shift of the conduction band. Instead, the sharp decrease of ηAPCE implies an increase of kr. This conclusion was further supported by solely investigating the effect of the band edge shift on the variation of ηAPCE. In the simulations, we only changed the band edge and kept the other parameters invariant. As shown in Fig. S8 in the ESI, a positive shift of the band edge engenders a substantial decrease of ηAPCE at high bias voltage but has no effect at low bias voltage. This means that the shift of the band edge is less important to the recombination loss at short circuit. If we consider the case where the recombination kinetics is ideal (β = 1), it can be seen that ηAPCE at short circuit is actually independent of Ec.
As shown in Fig. 7b, simulated kr values satisfying the requirement of ηAPCE data were obtained and plotted as a function of Πdye. It can be seen that the decrease of Πdye engenders a substantial enhancement of kr. It is noted that the simulation results of kr depend on the presetting of the product of ηreg and ηinj. Regardless of which value of ηinjηreg is chosen, however, the increase of kr with Πdye can always be observed (see Fig. S9 in the ESI). This indicates that the loss in ηAPCE originates from the accelerated recombination at short circuit. Interestingly, the increase primarily occurs when Πdye is below 0.45 (see the gray regime in Fig. 7b). This non-linearity between kr and Πdye implies that desorption of dye molecules in the late stage (Πdye < 0.45) rather than the initial stage results in considerable charge loss. The calculated kr also enables diffusion length (Ln) to be evaluated via numerical simulation (see eqn (S22) in ESI). Fig. 7b shows that the ratio of Ln to film thickness decreased from 7.6 to 0.41 during the process of dye desorption. This further demonstrates that the increased charge loss at short circuit is related to the increase of kr. Otherwise, invariance of Ln with respect to Πdye will be attained. A possible explanation is that the sensitizers anchored at the TiO2 surface tend to form a molecular layer by aggregation. As a consequence, the oxyalkyl chains and the phenothiazine groups in the sensitizer M26 are expected to overlap. This overlapping allows some of the sensitizers to be removed without leaving sufficient space for the approach of bulky cobalt complexes. When a large amount of sensitizer is desorbed, however, the anchoring molecules may become isolated. As a result, the overlapping morphology can be destroyed, and remarkable enhancement of kr is observed.

In this work, cobalt complex-based dye sensitized solar cells (DSCs) with various dye loadings were fabricated using stepwise dye desorption. The IR and UV-vis spectra of the TiO2 films indicate that desorption treatment with organic solvent allows the anchoring dye molecules to retain their deprotonated state. As a result, the recombination reactions at different dye loadings show the same recombination behaviour. Moreover, desorption treatment is demonstrated to engender considerable deterioration of cell performance. The influence of the charge transfer rate constant and the shift of the conduction band edge on the recombination losses are different at open and short circuits. Combining the measurements of electron density with the absorbance of partially dyed TiO2 films, we show that about 36% of the loss in open circuit voltage is due to the positive shift of the conduction band edge. Meanwhile, the enhancement of recombination rate constant, which is related to the packing of sensitizers on TiO2 surface, contributes to 61% of the voltage loss. The decrease of the absorbed photon conversion efficiency is interpreted using a reaction–diffusion model. The simulation results indicate that the recombination loss at short circuit is not due to the band edge shift. The dominant factor in this situation is the recombination rate constant. In this sense, the overlapping of dye molecules on the TiO2 surface plays an active role in decreasing the charge loss. Therefore, careful design of light harvesting groups as well as insulating chains to form compact dye layers may be vital to optimize the performance of DSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The support of the National Nature Science Foundation of China (21103123) and Tianjin Natural Science Foundation (13JCZDJC32400) is gratefully acknowledged.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Photophysical and electrochemical parameters for dye M26, variation of light absorption spectrum of the M26 sensitized TiO2 film under HCl treatment, absorption coefficient and light harvesting efficiency at the wavelength of 630 nm, details on the fits to the curves of electron density versus the Fermi level, derivation of eqn (5), reaction–diffusion model for simulating DSCs and numerical details, effect of the conduction band edge shift on absorbed photon conversion efficiency, and dependence of the recombination constant on dye loading. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp07494h
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2018