 DOI: 10.1039/C9EE00453J
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1910-1917


Mousa
Abuhelaiqa
,

Sanghyun
Paek
,

Yonghui
Lee
*,

Kyung Taek
Cho
,

Sung
Heo
,

Emad
Oveisi
,

Aron Joel
Huckaba
,

Hiroyuki
Kanda
,

Hobeom
Kim
,

Yi
Zhang
,

Robin
Humphry-Baker
,

Sachin
Kinge
,

Abdullah M.
Asiri
 and 

Mohammad Khaja
Nazeeruddin
*

Group for Molecular Engineering of Functional Materials, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1951 Sion, Switzerland. E-mail: nsyhlee@gmail.com; mdkhaja.nazeeruddin@epfl.ch

Interdisciplinary Centre for Electron Microscopy, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland

Toyota Motor Corporation, Toyota Motor Technical Centre, Advanced Technology Div., Hoge Wei 33, B-1930 Zaventum, Belgium

Center of Excellence for Advanced Materials Research (CEAMR), King Abdulaziz University, P. O. Box 80203, 21589 Jeddah, Saudi Arabia

Received
8th February 2019
, Accepted 15th April 2019
First published on 15th April 2019
Organic–inorganic lead halide perovskites with over 23% power conversion efficiency have attracted enormous academic and industrial attention due to their low-cost fabrication and high device performance. Self-passivated tin oxide as an electron transport layer has shown potential mainly due to the enhanced electron transfer, stability and reduced hysteresis device features. Here we report on novel, non-colloidal tin oxide precursors based on acetylacetonate (one halide free and two halogenated with Cl and Br respectively). We explore the unique film morphology acquired from the non-colloidal precursors and the improved device performance they yield. Our results show that the halide residue in the films plays an impactful role in the thermal durability of the fabricated SnO2 film, as well as providing a passivation layer. Moreover, our optimized tin oxide films achieved an unprecedented power conversion efficiency of 22.19% in planar perovskite solar cells (21.4% certified by Newport), and once upscaled to large-area modules, 16.7% devices based on a 15 cm2 area were achieved.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are efficient photovoltaic devices composed of a light absorbing layer which is sandwiched between two charge extracting layers. Passivated tin oxide is extensively used as an electron extracting layer due to its excellent optoelectronic properties. Here, we fabricate high-performing passivated tin oxide films with three novel metalorganic precursors based on acetylacetonate complexes. We demonstrate with various tools the film morphology, optoelectronic properties, and elemental analysis yielded with each precursor and correlated with the device performance. Our champion devices obtained a 22.19% and 16.7% power conversion efficiency for small-sized cells and 15 cm2 mini-module devices, respectively.


Hybrid organic–inorganic lead halide perovskite solar cells are swiftly emerging as standalone photovoltaic technology. Since the first study by Kojima et al., the power conversion efficiency (PCE) has undergone rapid improvement from 3.8% to over 23% in under a decade of development. The high efficiency attained from perovskite materials is due to their excellent optoelectronic properties, which were optimized by adjusting the composition and ratio of cations and anions within the perovskite lattice. These compositionally engineered, photoactive perovskite layers can be deposited using either one or two step solution processable methods. In addition to the perovskite composition, the horizon of research has expanded to enhancing the electron transporting layer (ETL), perovskite absorber and hole transporting layers (HTL) and implementing scalable fabrication techniques. For TiO2 based ETLs, relatively high resistivity is known to cause insufficient charge separation at the compact TiO2 (c-TiO2)/perovskite interface. Therefore, an additional layer of mesoporous TiO2 (mp-TiO2) is usually adopted to complement the deficient charge collection. Recently, SnO2 based electron transporting layers have been extensively used due to SnO2's high conductivity and superior charge collection ability compared to TiO2 ETLs. SnO2 has a wide bandgap ranging between 3.6 and 4.1 eV, and its favourable conduction band edge in relation to perovskites makes SnO2 a good candidate to overcome challenges which occur particularly with c-TiO2 ETLs. Previously, low-temperature processes were mostly used to form SnO2 layers to avoid pin-holes on an FTO or ITO substrate with a rough film surface. However, the metal-like nature shown in degenerate semiconductors, i.e., the carrier density of non-doped SnO2 is ca. 1020 cm−3 (in the range of semimetals), seems to generate another serious shunting pathway, decreasing the fill factor (FF) and open-circuit voltage (Voc). We have demonstrated previously that the low PCE is due to the deteriorated hole-blocking ability of the SnO2 ETL caused by loss of self-passivating materials such as SnOCl2 and residual precursor of tetrakis-dimethyl-amine-tin (TDMASn). By using different precursors and depositing them with various techniques such as spin-coating and atomic layer deposition methods, we proved the advantages of the low-temperature process are not limited to preventing pin-holes but also include electrically passivating the SnO2 ETL. In this work, we investigated the film and device performance for planar-type perovskite solar cells using tin acetylacetonate based precursors for SnO2. To better understand the role of halides, one of the chosen precursors is halide-free and two are based on chloride and bromide respectively. The optimized devices achieved a high efficiency of 22.19% in a small-size cell and 16.73% in a large area 15 cm2 module.



Fig. 1 shows the device architecture of a planar perovskite solar cell consisting of fluorine-doped SnO2 (FTO)/c-TiO2/SnO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/gold layers. In our previous work, we confirmed that the ‘Type 1’ passivation ETL by combining a c-TiO2 underlayer with the passivated tin oxide (PTO) top layer provides better hole-blocking ability than a single passivated SnO2 layer, which resulted in the further enhanced PCE. For tin oxide layers, we investigated three metalorganic tin precursors from the same family, tin(II) bis(acetylacetonate) (hereafter Acac), tin(IV) bis(acetylacetonate) dichloride (hereafter Cl2) and tin(IV) bis(acetylacetonate) dibromide (hereafter Br2), with DMF as a solvent.


The structure of the SnO2 films is characterized with transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Films are prepared by dropping precursor solutions on a carbon support grid and heat-treating at 180 °C for 1 h in air. Pairs of bright field (BF) and dark field (DF) TEM images and corresponding selected area electron diffraction patterns (SAEDP) are presented in Fig. 2. The SAEDP show reflections for [110], [101], [200], and [211] index planes for all films, corresponding to rutile-type SnO2. TEM images show that the films are comprised of small crystallites (<2 nm), as is further confirmed by high-resolution TEM (HR-TEM) images (Fig. S2, ESI). The acquired TEM images and SAEDPs indicate the co-presence of short to medium range ordered regions in the SnO2 films, a property which we previously observed in SnO2 films prepared with e.g. colloidal SnCl4 and atomic layer deposited TDMASn at low temperature. We monitored the composition of the films using energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry in scanning TEM mode (EDXS-STEM). High-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) STEM images and corresponding EDXS elemental maps (Fig. S1, ESI) indicate that the layers formed from all the precursors are comprised of Sn and O elements, as well as residual halogenated by-product, after post-annealing at 180 °C for Cl2 and Br2 films. High-resolution TEM images are shown in Fig. S2 (ESI). For the Acac film, plenty of pinholes and randomly sized crystallites are observed. On the other hand, other precursor films have compact surfaces with an average crystallite size of around 2 nm and 1 nm respectively for Cl2 and Br2 films.

To evaluate the compatibility for the ETL, we measured the photoluminescence (PL) of the bi-layered electron transporting layer (BETL)/perovskite films as seen in Fig. 3a. Despite differences in the PL intensity, all BETLs show a faster electron quenching efficiency than the c-TiO2 film. According to the result, Acac shows the fastest quenching rate, and Cl2 and Br2 show slightly slower electron transfer as indicated by the PL peaks. Therefore, a higher PCE was expected with the Acac devices, but the device performance demonstrated in Fig. 3b shows that the trend of the PL measurement does not match well with the device efficiency. The highest PCE is gained from the Cl2 precursor due to the contribution of enhanced FF and Voc. For Br2, the high Voc is promising. However, the Br2 devices show a relatively low FF and a slightly lower short-circuit current density (Jsc) than c-TiO2. Unlike the PL result, we found that the Acac precursor may not contribute to distinct efficiency enhancement. To explain this observation, we utilized scanning electron microscopy (SEM) to examine the surface morphology of SnO2 fabricated with Acac. The full-size image of the complete cells is shown in Fig. S3 (ESI). Moreover, we performed absorbance and X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD) on SnO2 samples spin-coated with perovskite as seen in Fig. S4 (ESI) and examined the perovskite surface morphologies with SEM as seen in Fig. S5 (ESI). The absorbance, XRD pattern and SEM imaging confirm that the perovskite films deposited on SnO2 have roughly similar thickness and morphology regardless of the SnO2 precursor. However, in the cross-sectional SEM images in Fig. S5 (ESI), the Cl2 and Br2 films clearly show an increase in the SnO2 film thickness. However, for the Acac devices, there is no observable increase of the ETL thickness when compared with the c-TiO2 SEM cross-sectional image. Fig. S6 (ESI) shows SEM top-view images of c-TiO2 and c-TiO2/PTO films formed on the FTO substrate. The magnified images show all SnO2 precursors form a thin and similarly uniform top layer over the c-TiO2 underlayer. However, different film morphology can be observed for the SnO2 prepared with Acac when the magnification is increased. Randomly distributed big particles potentially caused by the aggregation of the precursor are detected on the film surface. The particle sizes range from 1 to 2 μm in diameter and induce huge bumps on the perovskite film as seen in Fig. S7 (ESI). The poor morphology in Acac films could be due to the meta-stability of the tin oxidation state. For Acac, the Sn2+ metal center is four coordinate with two bidentate acetylacetonate ligands. While for Cl2 and Br2, the Sn4+ metal atom is six coordinate with two bidentate acetylacetonate ligands and two monodentate halogen ligands. In this configuration, Sn4+ is more likely to be stable in a DMF solution, unlike the case with Sn2+, which could be oxidized more readily in DMF. In a preliminary test, we found that Acac dissolves easily in DMF and forms a transparent solution, but starts to precipitate in a couple of hours as seen in Fig. S7 (ESI). Whereas for Cl2 and Br2 dissolved in DMF, the solutions do not lose transparency over a month. For Acac, the bumps observed in Fig. S7 (ESI) could potentially provide a shunting route particularly for planar-type cells by forming a thin PTO layer which increases the possibility of pinhole formation. These findings indicate that there are complex challenges associated with Acac in terms of film reproducibility and performance. X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) analysis was further performed to characterize the Cl2 and Br2 films. Strong peaks at 486 and 494 eV attributed to Sn4+ ions indicate the formation of SnO2 as seen in Fig. 3d. A weak asymmetry shown in all spectra can be explained by Sn2+ ions originating from oxygen vacancies (Voc) on the SnO2 surface, which are assumed to be the origin of the high conductivity of the SnO2 film. Strong asymmetry of the spectra indicating the presence of sub-bonds is also observed in the O 1s region (Fig. 3e), which is associated with the binding energy for the O–S bond (Sn4+) with higher intensity at 529.2 eV. The smaller peak at 530.5 eV can be associated with oxygen impurities such as OH ligands and water adsorption on the film. In addition, we found a small peak assigned to Cl 2p at 197 eV from the Cl2 film, and a strong peak of Br 3d at 68 eV from the Br2 film. This is in good agreement with the result of EDX analysis in Fig. S1 (ESI). For the Cl2 film, when varying the annealing temperature, the highest intensity peak of the film slightly decreases from 100 °C to 180 °C annealing. Moreover, the Cl bond peak is still present at 220 °C but is significantly minimized. A similar trend is observed from the Br2 film, however, it is noteworthy that the intensity of the Br 3d peak remains strong even when annealing at 220 °C.
To find the optimal annealing temperature, we carefully prepared SnO2 films between 160 °C and 350 °C for Cl2 and Br2. Fig. 4a shows a statistical summary of the device efficiency with respect to temperature. The best PCE is found at 200 °C for Cl2, while the highest PCE is obtained at 220 °C for the Br2 device. It should be noted that the Br2 devices show a relatively gentle drop of PCEs at high temperatures while the Cl2 devices demonstrate a steep decrease after the maximum value. Both devices show a rapid increase of Jsc according to the ramping of the temperatures until the maximum Jsc is reached (close to 24 mA cm−2 at 200 °C). An analogous trend is observed in the FF. Although a high FF is shown with the 160 °C devices, we found a severe drop of electron transfer as seen in Fig. S8 (ESI). Here, it is noteworthy to remember the film formation of the tin oxide layer from SnCl4 and other chloride-based precursors. Unlike Cl2/Br2 precursors in DMF, SnCl4 immediately reacts with H2O to form SnO2 nanoparticles and amorphous SnOCl2 which are not reversibly dissolved in water, indicating the solution is in fact colloidal. As with water-based colloidal SnO2 precursors i.e., AlfaAesar 15% SnO2, an impressively low temperature processing is required, 150 °C. However, surface passivation can potentially occur by SnOCl2 and base sources potentially added for stable dispersion of the colloid, i.e. NaOH, KOH, if SnO2 nanoparticles are synthesized using chlorine based tin precursors (Fig. S9, ESI). Therefore, despite a lower device performance, the film contains more crystalline SnO2, therefore no current loss (decrease of Jsc) is found despite film drying at 100 °C. However, the Cl2/Br2 precursors do not visibly react with DMF and sustain their solution form, which means smaller or fewer SnO2 crystallites can be formed at low temperatures, and more residual precursor exists on the film, which can cause higher series resistance at low-temperature annealing. This explains the reason for the different behaviour shown in Fig. 4a and b. With the same reason, a high Voc is measured for the 160 °C film probably caused by electron accumulation. An unexpected result is found from the Voc trend of the Br2 devices. A gradual drop of Voc is seen when increasing the annealing temperature beyond 250 °C. Nevertheless, the Br2 devices maintain a Voc over 1.1 V even at 350 °C. This result implies that the bromide residue is more strongly bound to the film than the chloride counterpart, even at exceptionally high annealing temperature. Further statistical comparison with mp-TiO2 based cells is summarized in Fig. S10 (ESI). To supplement this analogy thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was conducted and is displayed in Fig. 4b. For both Cl2 and Br2 the precursors start to lose weight at ca. 150 °C, mainly attributed to thermal decomposition. For Cl2, roughly 90% of weight is lost by crystallization at 250 °C, followed by a gradual weight drop implying complete removal of Cl on the film. Br2 shows rather slower weight loss, and the conversion to SnO2 appears to finish roughly at 300 °C. The subsequent drop that goes up to 500 °C can be attributed to removal of residual Br. Considering Cl sublimes more easily than Br, this finding is reasonable. The TGA curves further support the result and agree well with the EDX and XPS results. J–V curves at the optimal conditions are depicted in Fig. 4c. PTO layers clearly show better PCEs. The highest PCE of 21.12% is obtained from Cl2. A bit lower PCE is measured with Br2, but it also shows a high PCE over 20%, which is still higher than that with a single c-TiO2 ETL. We confirmed the optimized bi-layered c-TiO2/PTO layers show lower PL emission than the 180 °C films (Fig. 4d). We measured the reflectance of the films, and the optical bandgap (Eg) was calculated by applying the Kubelka–Munk (F(R)) method by plotting (F(R) × hν)2 as a function of energy. Subsequently, an Eg of 3.92 and 3.93 eV for Cl2 and Br2 respectively was estimated (Fig. 4e). Fermi-levels (Ef) were measured by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS), confirming that both Cl2 and Br2 films have the same Ef of 4.21 eV. The Eg and Ef estimations imply that the Cl2 and Br2 films possess similar optical and electronic properties. Additionally, the c-TiO2/Cl2 ETL was tested for a monolithic series module, and a 16.73% PCE was obtained with a 15 cm2 aperture area (Fig. S11, ESI).
The champion small cell was fabricated using a two-step deposition method for the perovskite. The best device seen in Fig. 5a shows promising photovoltaic values in a planar structure with a Jsc of 24.78 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.13 V, a FF of 0.79, and a PCE of 22.19% under 1 sunlight illumination conditions when scanned backward. With forward scanning, the values are slightly lower, and very small J–V curve hysteresis is measured in a planar-type device. We assume the better PCE is from extended light absorption and enhanced perovskite film quality as seen in the EQE and SEM top-view images (Fig. S12 and S13, ESI). We confirmed the Jsc value from the solar simulator agrees with the calculated Jsc. The device shows excellent performance in the stabilized condition measurement (Fig. 5b). We also found BETL based perovskite cells have outstanding long-term stability until 200 days when cells are stored in a drawer without encapsulation (Fig. S14, ESI). To get reliable data, our cells are measured again at Newport. Although a small loss of Voc is found potentially due to use of a smaller active area and possible degradation in air, a similar and certified PCE of 21.37% on average was confirmed (Fig. 5c and Fig. S15, ESI).

We investigated the film and device performance with non-colloidal SnO2 precursors based on acetylacetonate, namely tin(II) acetylacetonate (Acac), tin(IV) bis(acetylacetonate) dichloride (Cl2) and tin(IV) bis(acetylacetonate) dibromide (Br2). We have confirmed with TEM the presence of rutile type SnO2 in the film with varying degrees of crystallinity, contributing to self-passivation and improved device performance. Moreover, while the Acac precursor produced randomly sized and distributed SnO2 crystallites, Cl2 and Br2 produced dense SnO2 films with a passivating, halogenated by-product. In addition, we demonstrated the ability of Br2 to retain the Voc of the devices with up to 350 °C annealing post-treatment due to the delayed sublimation of the bromide by-product as confirmed with TGA. This finding could extend the application of passivated tin oxide to high-temperature processed perovskites such as lead-free CsSnI3. Ultimately, we confirm the importance of surface passivation for SnO2, specifically for perovskite solar cell applications due to its metal-like nature. Cl2 and Br2 are proved to provide excellent surface passivation to enhance the hole-blocking ability. The champion cell achieved a PCE of 22.19% and was obtained using Cl2. Our findings highlight the importance of passivation for SnO2 and suggest inspiring ideas for broader and diverse passivation routes for SnO2 based solar cells.


Tin(II) acetylacetonate (99.9%, Sigma-Aldrich), tin(IV) bis(acetylacetonate) dichloride (98%, Sigma-Aldrich), tin(IV) bis(acetylacetonate) dibromide (97%, Sigma-Aldrich). Dimethylformamide (99.9%, Acros), dimethyl sulfoxide (99.9% Acros), PbI2 (TCI), PbBr2 (TCI), formamidinium iodide (Dyesol), methylammonium bromide (Dyesol), methylammonium chloride (Dyesol), spiro-OMeTAD (Borun), tBP (Sigma-Aldrich), Li-TFSI (Dyesol), FK-209 (Dyesol).


FTO glass substrates (Nippon sheet glass) were sequentially cleaned with detergent and ethanol. A compact TiO2 layer was coated by spray pyrolysis deposition on the cleaned FTO substrates heated at 450 °C. SnO2 layers are prepared by spin-coating a precursor solution of tin acetylacetonate based precursors dissolved in dimethylformamide. 0.1 M SnCl4 aqueous solution was spin-coated at 5000 rpm for 10 s on the substrates to get a ∼20 nm thickness. Then the substrates were transferred onto a hotplate and heated between 160 °C and 350 °C for 1 h and cooled down. The (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 precursor solution was prepared by mixing PbI2 (1.15 M, TCI), PbBr2 (0.2 M, TCI), FAI (1.05 M, Dyesol), and MABr (0.2 M, Dyesol) in a mixed solvent of DMF:DMSO = 4:1 (volume ratio). The precursor solution was spin-coated at 1000 rpm for 10 s and continuously at 5000 rpm for 30 s. During the second step, 100 μL of chlorobenzene was poured on the film at 15 s. Films are post-annealed at 100 °C for 60 min. For the two-step deposition method, PbI2 (1.3 M) containing 2.5 mol% PbBr2 was dissolved in 1 mL of DMF and DMSO (ratio = 4:1) solution at 80 °C. Then the solution was spin coated on the SnO2 substrate at 3000 rpm for 30 s, and a mixture solution of FAI:MABr:MACl (80:10:10 mg in 1 mL IPA) was spin coated on the PbI2 substrate at 5000 rpm for 30 s. Films were annealed at 150 °C for 25 min and 100 °C for 30 min. Finally, spiro-OMeTAD was spin-coated at 4000 rpm for 25 s. The 70 mM spiro-OMeTAD solution was prepared by dissolving in chlorobenzene with 4-tert-butylpyridine, Li-TFSI in acetonitrile, and Co[t-BuPyPz]3[TFSI]3 (FK209, Dyesol) in acetonitrile at a molar ratio of spiro:FK209:Li-TFSI:TBP of 1:0.03:0.5:3.3. Devices were completed with thermal evaporation of 70 nm thickness gold counter electrodes.


XRD analysis was carried out using a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer in an angle range of 2θ = 10° to 40°. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) measurements were carried out on a ZEISS Merlin at 5 kV, and images were acquired by an in-lens secondary electron detector. Transmission electron microscopy imaging and energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis were performed on a FEI Tecnai Osiris at 200 kV. This microscope is equipped with a high brightness X-FEG gun and silicon drift Super-X EDX detectors and Bruker Esprit acquisition software. Samples for TEM imaging were prepared via depositing the SnO2 film on a TEM grid with a carbon support film. The TEM grids were then heat-treated at 180 °C. XPS analysis was done using equipment (a Quantum 2000 system) with an Al Kα X-ray source (hν: 1487 eV) and a hemispherical electron analyzer. The XPS results provide average chemical information on a spatial area of 100 μm diameter and a depth of 5–10 nm. Absorbance and reflectance were measured with an integrating sphere using UV/vis/NIR spectroscopy (PerkinElmer Lambda 950S). The photoluminescence emission was measured with a fluorescence spectrometer (PerkinElmer LS 55). TGA analysis (TGA 4000 PerkinElmer) was done at a scan rate of 10 °C min−1 from 30 °C to 500 °C. The UPS measurements were performed using a home-made photoemission spectroscopy system, which consists of an ultraviolet source (VUV 5000) and an electron analyzer (SES-100) in an ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) chamber. A He II source of 40.8 eV, controlled using a monochromator, enables us to obtain precise electronic structures from UPS spectra.


The solar cell measurement was done using an Oriel solar simulator (450 W xenon, AAA class). The light intensity was calibrated with a Si reference cell equipped with an IR-cutoff filter (KG3, Newport), and it was recorded prior to measurement. Current–voltage characteristics of the cells were obtained by applying an external voltage bias while measuring the current response with a digital source meter (Keithley 2400). The voltage scan rate was 100 mV s−1 and no device preconditioning, such as light soaking or forward voltage bias applied for a long time, was applied before starting the measurement. The cells were masked with an active area of 0.16 or 0.89 cm2 to fix the active area and reduce the influence of the scattered light. The EQE was measured with an IQE200B (Oriel) without bias light.


M. A., Y. L. and M. K. N. conceived the ideas and wrote the manuscript. M. A., Y. L., K. T. C., S. H., and E. O. prepared and characterized the films. M. A., Y. L., S. P., and Z. Y. fabricated and characterized the small cells and mini-modules. S. P., A. J. H., H. K., H. K., S. K., and A. M. A. contributed to testing the stability of the devices and efficiency certification. R. H.-B. set up and calibrated all the device measurements.


There are no conflicts to declare.


Mousa Abuhelaiqa thanks the Qatar National Research Fund (QNRF) for scholarship support. The authors acknowledge financial support from SNSF NRP 70 project; number: 407040_154056, CTI 25590.1 PFNM-NM, Solaronix, Aubonne, Switzerland, Toyota Motor Corporation, Toyota Motor Technical Centre, Advanced Technology Div., Hoge Wei 33, B-1930 Zaventum, Belgium, US Army grant agreement No. W911NF-17-2-0122 and the European Project APOLO (H2020-LCE-2017-RES-RIA), grant agreement number 763989. The authors also thank Borun New Material Technology for providing high quality spiro-OMeTAD.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee00453j
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019