 DOI: 10.1039/C1CC11053E
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4908-4910

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Ergang
Wang
*,

Zaifei
Ma
,

Zhen
Zhang
,

Patrik
Henriksson
,

Olle
Inganäs
,

Fengling
Zhang
 and 

Mats R.
Andersson
*

Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering/Polymer Technology, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-412 96 Göteborg, Sweden. E-mail: ergang@chalmers.se; mats.andersson@chalmers.se; Fax: +46 (0)31 7723418; Tel: +46 (0)31 7723401

Biomolecular and Organic Electronics, IFM, Linköping University, SE-58183 Linköping, Sweden

Received
22nd February 2011
, Accepted 7th March 2011
First published on 24th March 2011
A new low band gap polymer (Eg = 1.6 eV) with alternating thiophene and isoindigo units was synthesized and characterized. A PCE of 3.0% and high open-circuit voltage of 0.89 V were realized in polymer solar cells, which demonstrated the promise of isoindigo as an electron deficient unit in the design of donor–acceptor conjugated polymers for polymer solar cells.

Solar energy is unlimited, clean, and renewable, which makes it one of the most promising energy sources of the future. Photovoltaic (PV) technology using polymer solar cells (PSCs) has been paid close attention in recent years, as it is a simple and efficient way to convert solar energy into usable electricity. PSCs have advantages of solution processing and low fabrication cost compared to inorganic solar cells. The most efficient device structure of PSCs was based on the concept of bulk heterojunction (BHJ), which consists of a blend of conjugated polymers and fullerene derivatives as electron donors and acceptors, respectively. The past few years have witnessed intensive development of new conjugated polymers and optimization of the nanostructure of BHJ composites, resulting in encouraging progress with PSCs and attainment of power conversion efficiency (PCE) over 7%.[6,6]-Phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) and [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) have been the most widely used acceptors in BHJ systems. Thus, most of donor polymers have been designed to meet three important criteria which are, (a) well matched HOMO/LUMO positions between polymers and PCBM to ensure enough driving force for charge separation and high open-circuit voltage (Voc), (b) appropriate solubility and miscibility to achieve optimal nanostructure in active layers, and, (c) narrow band gap to harvest more solar photons. A common design of low band gap polymers is to combine electron-rich (donor) and electron-deficient (acceptor) groups as repeating units, forming internal donor–acceptor (D–A) structures. The photophysical, electrochemical and PV properties of the polymers can be fine-tuned by choosing appropriate donor and acceptor units.


Isoindigo is a symmetrical molecule consisting of two indolin-2-one units, which contribute towards its strong electron-withdrawing character. As reported by Reynolds et al., oligomers with bithiophene as donor and isoindigo as acceptor showed promising absorption spectra, electrochemical and PV properties. Although they also disclosed the photophysical and electrochemical properties of isoindigo-based polymers, their PV performance was not investigated. During the preparation of this communication, Zhang et al. reported a series of isoindigo-based polymers showing PCE from 0.92% to 1.91%. Here, we independently synthesized a new high-molecular-weight polymer, PTI-1, which consists of thiophene and isoindigo units with designed side chains (different from the literatures). PSCs fabricated from PTI-1 and PC71BM as the photoactive layer showed a PCE of 3.0% and high Voc of 0.89 V.
The synthetic route towards PTI-1 is depicted in Scheme 1. For commercialization of PSCs, polymers should be easily synthesized with simple synthetic routes and low cost.6,6′-Dibromoisoindigo was easily synthesized in high yield by refluxing the commercially available 6-bromoisatin and 6-bromooxindole in a mixture of acetic acid and hydrochloric acid. To ensure enough solubility of the resulting polymer and appropriate miscibility with PCBM, 2-hexyldecyl groups were attached to both nitrogen atoms of isoindigo to yield the isoindigo monomer (2). Finally, PTI-1 was synthesized by copolymerization of 2 and commercially available 2,5-bis(trimethylstannyl)thiophene (1) viaStille coupling reactions. The polymer was soluble in common organic solvents such as chloroform, toluene, o-dichlorobenzene (ODCB), and exhibited a high number average molecular weight (Mn) of 86,000 with polydispersity index of 2.2. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) analysis showed no noticeable thermal transition from 20 °C to 250 °C, and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) demonstrated an excellent thermal stability of the polymer with a decomposition temperature of 400 °C (1% weight loss).
The UV-vis absorption spectra of PTI-1 both in ODCB solution and in the solid state are shown in Fig. 1. Compared to the weak absorption band at 478 nm in solution, the intense absorption at 697 nm, originating from the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) between thiophene and isoindigo segments, indicates the strong electron-withdrawing effect of the isoindigo groups. The absorption coefficient (ε) of PTI-1 at 597 nm measured in ODCB solution is as high as 66 L g−1 cm−1. Compared to the absorption spectrum in solution, the broader absorption spectrum in the solid state indicates that there are aggregations and/or orderly π–π stacking formed in the solid state, which is beneficial for improving the charge mobility of the resulting films. The optical band gap (Eg) of PTI-1 determined by the onset of the absorption in the solid state is 1.6 eV, which is in the ideal region for PSCs.
The HOMO/LUMO positions of the polymer were estimated from the oxidation and reduction potentials as determined by square-wave voltammetry (SWV) measurement. The HOMO and LUMO levels were calculated according to the formula HOMO = −(Eox+5.13) eV and LUMO = −(Ered+5.13) eV, by setting the oxidative peak potential of ferrocene/ferrocenium (Fc/Fc+) vs. the normal-hydrogen electrode (NHE) to 0.63 V and the NHE energy level relative to vacuum to 4.5 eV. The low-lying HOMO level of −5.85 eV indicates the high Voc of PTI-1 in the resulting PSCs since Voc is correlated to the difference between the LUMO level of acceptors and HOMO level of donor polymers. The LUMO level of −3.88 eV is positioned 0.25 eV above that of PC71BM (4.13 eV, measured under the same condition), which offers reasonable driving force for electron transfer.
The broad absorption spectrum, high ε and appropriate HOMO/LUMO positions make PTI-1 a promising candidate as donor in BHJ PSCs. PSCs were fabricated in the configuration glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTI-1:PC71BM/LiF/Al. PC71BM was chosen as the electron acceptor instead of PC61BM for two reasons. One is that PC71BM has similar electronic properties to PC61BM but a considerably higher absorption-coefficient in the visible region. The other is that a slightly lower (about 0.1 eV) LUMO level of PC71BM offers larger driving force for charge transfer in the resulting PSCs. The weight ratio of PTI-1:PC71BM was optimized from 1:1, 1:2 to 1:3 and the relative PV parameters are summarized in Table 1. Using pure ODCB as processing solvent, only modest PCE of 1.7% can be achieved with the blend of PTI-1:PC71BM (1:2), due to low photocurrent. The high ε of the polymer and the broad absorption spectrum of the 1:2 blends (Fig. 1) encouraged us to investigate the reason for the low photocurrent by analysis of the morphology of the active layer. As the atomic force microscopy (AFM) image shown in Fig. 2a revealed, the 1:2 blend processed from ODCB shows large domains, which indicates a non-optimal nanostructure and likely big phase separation barring charge separation and transport. This might be one of the main reasons for the low photocurrent. 1,8-Diiodooctane (DIO) is known as an additive in the processing solvents to improve the morphology of the active layer and affording much finer nanostructures. As expected, the active layer from the 1:2 blends processed by 2.5% (wt.) of DIO in ODCB presents a much better morphology (Fig. 2b), where the big domains were broken into pieces, indicating a better miscibility and larger interface. The improved morphology can explain the enhanced photocurrent (5.4 vs. 3.1 mA cm−2) and efficiency from the devices processed with additive. The relative parameters are summarized in Table 1 and current density-voltage (J–V) curves of the solar cells based on PTI-1:PC71BM (1:2) blends processed from ODCB and 2.5% (wt.) of DIO in ODCB, respectively, are plotted in Fig. 3. A PCE of 3% with high Voc of 0.89 V, short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 5.4 mA cm−2 and decent fill factor (FF) of 0.63 was obtained, under illumination of AM 1.5G simulated solar light (100 mW cm−2), from devices containing the 1:2 blend as the photoactive layer and processed by the addition of 2.5% (wt.) of DIO in ODCB. To confirm the accuracy of the measurements of the devices, the corresponding external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the solar cells was measured under illumination of monochromatic light. The Jsc calculated from integration of the EQE with an AM 1.5G reference spectrum agrees well with the Jsc obtained from the J–V measurement. As shown in Fig. 4, the photoreponse of the solar cells extended from 350 nm to 750 nm, which is consistent with the UV-vis absorption spectrum of the blend film (Fig. 1). It is striking that the high Voc of 0.89 V, which is among the highest values recorded for efficient PSCs, can be achieved by a conjugated polymer with band gap as low as 1.6 eV. The Voc is also close to the upper limit of its theoretical value according to the empirical formula eVoc = Eg − 0.6 eV. With regard to the tradeoff between low-lying HOMO to ensure high Voc and low band gap (higher HOMO and lower LUMO) to harvest more solar photons and enhance Jsc, this polymer is a good example of how to achieve a balance in the design rules of donor polymers for efficient PSCs.

Solvent

Weight ratio
Thickness (nm)

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)

a 2.5% (wt.) of DIO in ODCB.
b Weight ratio of PTI-1:PC71BM.


ODCB

1:1
85
0.92
2.4
0.49
1.1
1:2
75
0.92
3.1
0.59
1.7
1:3
75
0.93
2.6
0.60
1.5

DIO

1:2
85
0.89
5.4
0.63
3.0
In summary, we developed an easily synthesized isoindigo-based polymer PTI-1via only three steps in a high overall yield (68%). The polymer presents promising absorption spectrum, high ε and appropriate HOMO/LUMO positions, leading to PCE of 3% and Voc of 0.89 V in the resulting PSCs. It’s rare to achieve so high Voc for a conjugated polymer with band gap of only 1.6 eV. The preliminary PV performance demonstrated the high promise of the easily accessible isoindigo groups as electron-deficient units in designing D–A polymers for efficient PSCs. Further improvement in performance can be anticipated by optimization in chemical structures, such as choosing appropriate donor groups and side chains, as well as by improving the active-layer morphology through thermal annealing and by varying the processing solvents and additives.
We thank the Swedish Energy Agency for financial support.
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details and electrochemical curves. See DOI: 10.1039/c1cc11053e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011