 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM35048C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24721-24726

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Peixu
Li
,

Zhen
Li
,

Luhui
Zhang
,

Enzheng
Shi
,

Yuanyuan
Shang
,

Anyuan
Cao
*,

Hongbian
Li
,

Yi
Jia
,

Jinquan
Wei
,

Kunlin
Wang
,

Hongwei
Zhu
 and 

Dehai
Wu


Key Laboratory for Advanced Materials Processing Technology and Department of Mechanical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P. R. China

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China. E-mail: anyuan@pku.edu.cn

National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, P. R. China

Received
29th July 2012
, Accepted 25th September 2012
First published on 26th September 2012
Controlled assembly of nanoparticles can lead to a variety of interesting structures and also is an important step in exploring potential applications. Here, we report a solution process for the self-assembly of macroporous, single-layer to hierarchical Ag2S nanoparticle membranes at the air–liquid interface, in which the trapping and releasing of air bubbles leads to the formation of a three-dimensional porous structure without the need to use a template. The resulting membranes contain close-arranged arrays of polygonal holes (mostly pentagons and hexagons) of a few micrometers in size, which are unanimously open upwards and are surrounded by thin nanoparticle walls. Energy and environmental-related applications are demonstrated based on these multifunctional Ag2S membranes, including photo-sensing, photocatalysis and photoelectrochemical solar cells. The porous nanoparticle membranes are distinct from other extensively studied structures such as densely packed crystal-like films and superlattices.

Inorganic nanoparticles have shown tailored particle sizes/shapes and tunable electronic/optical properties, and the ability for large-scale organization and the formation of hybrid systems with other-dimensional structures. As nanoscale building blocks, they can be assembled into various macroscopic functional structures via bottom-up approaches such as the Langmuir–Blodgett compression of nanocrystals with regular shapes, solvent evaporation at the air–liquid interface, gravitational sedimentation, and DNA-mediated programming. Some fascinating structures reported recently include the densest packing of polyhedral Ag nanocrystals with a surprisingly high long-range order, binary nanocrystal superlattices formed at the liquid–air interface that can be transferred to arbitrary substrates, as well as hierarchical core–shell supraparticles consisting of different nanoparticles. Potential applications corresponding to those assembled nanoparticle structures include plasmonic metamaterials, photonic crystals, magnetoresistive membranes and sensors. Most of the above methods yield dense (versus porous) films or monoliths because spherical or faceted nanocrystals tend to form arrangements resembling the lattice structure of crystalline solids, which is a spontaneous process and the arrangements can be tailored by the particle morphology, surface groups and external conditions.

On the other hand, porous nanoparticle assemblies have been synthesized by bubbling oxygen or nitrogen gases through oxide powders or a colloidal suspension, or the supercritical drying of a cross-linked gel to remove solvent while maintaining the three-dimensional network. In silica and chalcogenide aerogels, pores are formed by the interconnected channels through the aggregated nanoparticles, and only modest to moderate porosities can be obtained in those structures. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphene oxide sheets have also been assembled into aerogels or hydrogels, and the overlapping of CNTs or graphene produces the porous area. So far, porous vanadium oxide, CNTs, graphene, and other nanoparticles are mainly in the form of bulk aerogels and foams, rather than in thin films or membranes.
Recently, research interest in silver sulfide (Ag2S) nanostructures is emerging owing to their suitably narrow bandgap (∼1.1 eV) for making optoelectronic devices such as solar cells. Ag2S products in various forms of nanoparticles, nanowires, nanoplates, core–shell junctions and nanocomposites have been synthesized by solvothermal routes. Devices based on sintered nanoparticles or individual nanowires made by microfabrication show enhanced conductance upon illumination and sensitivity to the presence of oxygen, suggesting possible applications as photo-detectors and gas sensors. In addition, nanoparticle thin films or Ag2S–ZnO nanowire hybrid arrays were constructed into photoelectrochemical solar cells although the cell efficiency remains low even for hybrid anodes (0.49%). Although the synthesis of Ag2S-based nanomaterials has been reported intensively, to date the self-assembly of Ag2S nanoparticles, especially into porous structures, has seldom been investigated.
Here, we report a simple solution process, air–liquid interfacial assembly, for the self-assembly of Ag2S nanoparticles over a large area and obtaining multifunctional porous membranes. Air bubbles produced in the solution and trapped among the nanoparticles lead to the formation of highly porous membranes without involving templates or additional binders/ions for cross-linking. We also demonstrated potential applications of these semiconducting membranes in areas such as photo-sensing, photocatalysis and photoelectrochemical solar cells.

In a typical solvothermal procedure, AgNO3 (0.1 g) was used as the silver source and dissolved in 10 mL of oleylamine solvent at a temperature of 120 °C. Then sulfur powder (0.02 g) was added to the solution which was stirred magnetically. The solution was maintained at 120 °C and stirred continuously for 1 hour until the solution color changed to dark-brown due to the growth of highly concentrated Ag2S nanoparticles. After the reaction, to remove excess oleylamine molecules wrapped around the nanoparticles, the product solution was washed by hexane and centrifuged at 3000 revolutions per minute several times. Most of the oleylamine in the solution was washed away, but a certain amount of oleylamine was retained on the nanoparticle surfaces to ensure a good dispersion of the nanoparticles in hexane, which was crucial for the subsequent self-assembly step. The resulting uniform Ag2S–hexane suspensions were ready for use.


About 50 mL Ag2S–hexane suspension (0.54 mg mL−1) was carefully added onto the surface of DEG (70 mL) in a glass cultural dish (diameter of 100 mm). We obtained two layers of liquid in which the nanoparticle–hexane suspension with a lower density covered the top of DEG well and formed a clear interface. The hexane was used as received with some dissolution of air, but without any special air saturation treatment. The system was exposed to air but enclosed in a big plastic box at room temperature to allow the hexane to evaporate slowly and it usually took 3–5 hours until the hexane evaporation was complete, during which time air bubbles evolved and floated to the solution surface. The self-assembly process terminated when the hexane was consumed completely, and a brown-color membrane was floating on the DEG surface, which can subsequently be transferred to planar substrates (Si wafers or glass slides). In general, the collected uniform membrane area can readily reach above 1 × 1 cm2. The membrane thickness can be controlled by the initial nanoparticle concentration.


The photocatalytic properties of the Ag2S nanoparticle membranes were evaluated by testing the degradation of rhodamine B (RhB) molecules under white light irradiation by a 500 W Xe lamp (the intensity is about 80 mW cm−2). The membranes were immersed in the dye solution and optical absorption curves in the visible range were recorded after certain periods. For solar cell application, a 5 μm thick Ag2S nanoparticle membrane was transferred onto a Ti foil (thickness = 100 μm) substrate to make the photoanode. Insulating tape (thickness = 50 μm) was used to cover the membrane surface to leave an exposed window of about 1 mm × 1 mm in the center of the membrane. After that, a piece of freestanding semi-transparent CNT film was transferred to the top of the open window and collapsed by ethanol addition and vaporization to form a good contact with the underlying Ag2S membrane. A droplet of liquid electrolyte containing an aqueous mixture of 2 M KOH + 2 M Na2S + 1 M S was infiltrated in to the porous membrane through the CNT film. The CNT film (counter electrode) and the back contact to Ti foil were wired as the positive and negative electrodes of the solar cell, respectively. Illumination was directed to the solar cell via the top CNT electrode.


The sample morphology and crystalline structure were characterized using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (LEO 1530), transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (JEOL 2010) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectroscopy (Bruker-D8 Discover). UV-visible optical absorption curves were measured by a Perkin Elmer Lambda 35 spectrophotometer at a wavelength range of 300 to 900 nm for Ag2S nanoparticles and membranes, and 400 to 650 nm for RhB molecules. Water droplet contact angles to the Ag2S membranes were tested on a contact angle measuring instrument (JC2000X). Current–voltage characteristics of the photoelectrochemical solar cells were recorded using a Keithley 2635 source meter. Solar cell tests and photo-response tests were carried out using a solar simulator (Newport 91195 class A), under air mass 1.5 global (AM 1.5 G) at an illumination intensity of 100 mW cm−2 calibrated by a standard silicon cell.


We started from monodisperse Ag2S nanoparticles with an average diameter of 10 nm synthesized by a hydrothermal process, which were suspended uniformly in hexane by retaining a certain amount of oleylamine molecules on the particle surface. High resolution TEM and XRD characterization showed that the Ag2S nanoparticles had a single-crystalline monoclinic α-phase structure with a narrow particle size distribution (ESI, Fig. S1). For assembly, we adopted an air–liquid interfacial precipitation method for preparing macroscopic nanoparticles films floating on the liquid surface that can subsequently be transferred to substrates, as reported by another group on binary nanoparticle superlattices.Fig. 1 illustrates the assembly process in which dispersed nanoparticles are converted into a floating membrane. The Ag2S–hexane suspension was added to a pool of diethylene glycol (DEG) forming a top layer covering the DEG with a clear interface due to the relatively lower density of hexane. After that, the system was exposed to air at room temperature to allow the hexane to evaporate slowly while the nanoparticles gradually segregated at the interface with DEG. During the hexane evaporation, we observed tiny air bubbles evolved from hexane that were lifted up to the surface of the solution, and the solid membrane formed in the middle area on the DEG surface, growing larger by pushing the solid–liquid interface outward (Fig. 2a–c). The role of residual oleylamine was to disperse the nanoparticles in hexane and also promote bubble formation during the self-assembly. Without oleylamine, we observed the formation of a dense film embedded with irregular big pores (Fig. S2). As the nanoparticle concentration increased, the concentration was so high that many bubbles could not escape easily but were trapped among the Ag2S precipitate (Fig. 2c). The trapping of a large amount of nanoparticle-surrounded bubbles was the underlying mechanism for the assembly of porous membranes. Finally, when the hexane consumed completely, an integral black colored membrane floating on the surface of DEG was obtained. Generally we made membranes with areas of about 1 × 1 cm2 for testing (Fig. 2d), but in principle the membrane size can be readily scaled up by using a larger solution container. The membrane thickness was controlled by the nanoparticle concentration in the initial suspension, and hierarchical structures consisting of multiple layers of pores were obtained at higher concentrations.

The self-assembled Ag2S nanoparticle membrane was collected by a silicon wafer for structural characterization. Fig. 3a and b show the SEM images of the membrane surface with a honeycomb-like porous morphology. These close-arranged pores were formed by thin walls of self-assembled Ag2S nanoparticles surrounding an empty space that was left after bubble bursting. There was also a nanoparticle layer at the bottom of each pore, thus the entire membrane remained continuous (and conductive). We frequently observed cracks and wrinkles formed during the membrane transfer and drying processes, indicating a certain flexibility of the nanoparticle layers (Fig. 3b). A close view of the pore inside revealed a precipitated nanoparticle layer at the bottom consisting of densely packed particles, with wrinkles formed among the layer (Fig. 3c). Even though the nanoparticles formed very thin walls (<100 nm) vertical to the substrate, the whole membrane appeared to be stable. Another feature was that most of the pores were open upwards with bowl- and cup-like morphologies (Fig. 3d, left inset), which is useful for polymer or electrolyte infiltration if necessary. Similar foam-like structures have been produced in a CNT forest previously. By acetone wetting and evaporation-induced densification of an initially uniform film, the CNTs collapsed into a porous structure with thin walls and enclosed empty areas. Here, the Ag2S nanoparticles were directly assembled into pores, not by solvent-induced densification. We measured the pore sizes (inner widths or diameters) by counting hundreds of individual pores, and found that the size distribution was relatively wide (from 0.5 to 6 μm) although the majority of pores had diameters within the range of about 2–3 μm (Fig. 3d). Larger-size pores may be formed by the coalescence of smaller-size bubbles. Assuming an average pore diameter of D = 3 μm and wall thickness of δ = 100 nm, the ratio (P) of pore (empty) area relative to the entire membrane area can be estimated as . The membranes were also hydrophobic with water droplet contact angles of 117° for the one-layer structure and of 147° at an increased thickness (four-layer) (Fig. S3). Both the porous structure and the presence of oleylamine in the film contributed to the hydrophobicity of the membranes.
A higher initial concentration of the Ag2S–hexane suspension resulted in hierarchical nanoparticle membranes with multi-layer pores. The membrane had a flat surface embedded with a large amount of pores, and its thickness had increased from less than 2 μm of the thin membrane (shown in Fig. 3) to more than 5 μm due to the vertical stacking of 3–5 layer pores (Fig. 4a). Many pores had sizes in the range of 0.5–3 μm. Occasionally, there were some big pores present within the membrane, which allowed us to observe lower-level pores stacked at the bottom side (Fig. 4b). These pores were generally isolated from each other by the nanoparticle walls, but some of them were interconnected due to the collapsing of walls and formation of cracks. Here, the nanoparticle walls formed the skeleton for the three-dimensional porous network and interestingly, we found that they tend to make polyhedral pores rather than circular ones. From the top view on the surface-layer pores, the straight edges surrounding each pore were clearly revealed. Statistically, a large portion of pores had 4 to 7 edges, with a fraction of bigger ones having 8 to 10 edges (Fig. 4c). Most frequently, 5-edge pentagons and 6-edge hexagons were present in the membrane (Fig. 4d). We consider this type of configuration is a stable structure and also material-efficient, because adjacent pores share common edges made by very thin nanoparticle walls. The structure of the self-assembled membranes is analogous to a thin honeycomb due to the vertical stacking of several layer pores (Fig. S4), rather than the porous channels in the bulk aerogels made from other nanomaterials.
Because the Ag2S membranes are continuous, semiconducting and highly porous, many applications related to photo-detection, photo-catalysis and photoelectrochemical solar cells can be explored. The semiconducting Ag2S nanoparticles and membranes exhibited an optical absorption range covering the ultra-violet to visible regions (Fig. S1d), and therefore can provide free charge carriers under excitation. In a simple two-probe configuration and at an applied bias of 0.1–0.2 V, the current flow through the membrane showed an immediate and reproducible change in the dark or under illumination (Fig. 5a). Notably, the current value increased from about 0.3 to 0.8 nA under illumination (an enhancement of ∼170%) at a constant bias of 0.1 V, and the current enhancement remained ∼120% at a higher bias of 0.2 V. In comparison, densely packed Ag2S nanocrystalline films with photolithography defined channels showed about a 50% current increase when exposed to white light, and a up to 200% increase in photocurrent was detected in Ag2S–Ag nanowire core–shell structures. Such a stable current response to incident light over many cycles suggested possible uses as photo detectors and optoelectronic sensors. For example, the Ag2S membranes demonstrated effective photocatalytic decomposition of dye molecules under light irradiation (Fig. S5).
Finally, we constructed photoelectrochemical solar cells based on the porous Ag2S membrane, as illustrated in Fig. 5b. A relatively thick membrane (>5 μm) was transferred to a Ti foil from the DEG solution, and a thin single-walled CNT film synthesized by chemical vapor deposition was covered on the top as the transparent electrode. An SEM image showed that the CNT film formed good contact to Ag2S, while the network structure of CNTs still allowed liquid access to the underlying nanoparticle pores (Fig. 5c). A polysulfide electrolyte was then infiltrated into the porous membrane to help extract holes excited from nanoparticle walls and transport holes to the CNT electrode; without electrolyte, the solar cell showed negligible short-circuit current due to the very limited contact area between CNTs and Ag2S nanoparticles. The top CNT film also ensured a good protection of the electrolyte even without device encapsulation. In addition, the presence of a thin oxide layer on the Ti foil effectively prevented circuit shortage, and the removal of TiO2 by acid which would result in substantial device degradation. Based on this configuration, we obtained a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 1.25 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.26 V, a fill factor (FF) of 35%, and a power conversion efficiency (η) of 0.14% under AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2 illumination (Fig. 5d). Compared to the literature, a pure Ag2S nanocrystalline film showed a poor efficiency (0.06%) which was attributed to the presence of extensive grain boundaries and large series resistance in the solar cell, while grafting Ag2S nanoparticles onto aligned ZnO arrays resulted in an increased efficiency of 0.49% owing to enhanced charge transport. We found that the substrate (e.g. a Ti foil worked better) and membrane thickness had an influence on the solar cell characteristics, and the cell performance might be further improved by optimizing these parameters and combining other methods such as thermal annealing and hybrid structures.

In conclusion, we reported a simple solution method for the self-assembly of macroporous, hierarchical Ag2S nanoparticle membranes consisting of close-arranged arrays of polygonal holes surrounded by thin, stable nanoparticle walls. This process might be applicable for assembling multifunctional thin films from a wide range of other metallic or semiconducting nanoparticles with tunable pore sizes. Empty pores may be pasted or infiltrated by a layer of polymers or inorganic materials to make composite membranes with a tailored porosity. Compared to conventional methods such as the supercritical drying of nanoparticle gels that have been used in synthesizing bulk aerogels, our process is template- and polymer binder-free, less expensive, and more suitable for preparing relatively thin porous membranes. In the future, many potential applications related to sensors, catalysis and photovoltaics could be explored for these porous nanoparticle membranes.


This work is supported by the National Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under the grant number of 51072005.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm35048c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012