 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA03454D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15880-15886


Changwen
Liu
,

Weiguang
Kong
,

Wang
Li
,

Hong
Chen
,

Dedi
Li
,

Weijun
Wang
,

Baomin
Xu
,

Chun
Cheng
* and 

Alex K. Y.
Jen


Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology (SUSTech), Shenzhen, 518055, China

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, City University of Hong Kong (CityU), Kowloon 999077, Hong Kong SAR. E-mail: chengc@sustech.edu.cn

Received
1st April 2019
, Accepted 4th June 2019
First published on 4th June 2019
We report on a method of precursor engineering to prepare high quality and stable perovskites based on formamidinium/methylammonium (FAMA) mixed-cations. CsI is commonly used to inhibit the photoinactive phase in FAMA perovskites. However, the hydrophilic nature of CsI would result in a structural instability issue at high relative humidity (RH). Besides, in inverted perovskite solar cells (PSCs) based on organic hole transport layers, the low conduction band minimum (CBM) of FAMA perovskites would lead to small open circuit voltage (Voc) (∼1.0 V), and thus additional surface passivation/modification layers are normally employed, indicating that it is essential to improve the basic precursors for high quality perovskite films. Herein, the proposed method is realized via ternary precursor alloying which endows the perovskite with increased grain size, enhanced crystallinity, reduced trap states, and a pure photoactive phase without the assistance of CsI. Without passivation/modification layers, the device Voc is enhanced markedly from 1.0 V to 1.1 V on average, and a champion power conversion efficiency of 20.7% with negligible hysteresis is achieved. Moreover, as they are free of hydrophilic CsI, both the photoactive perovskite films and devices exhibit excellent stability in ambient air. At high RH (70%), the optimized device without encapsulation only loses 16% of its efficiency after 1000 h storage, indicating the potential for the development of efficient and stable PSCs.

Organic–inorganic metal halide perovskites have been receiving worldwide attention due to their excellent optoelectronic properties, e.g., high absorption coefficients, long charge carrier diffusion lengths, adjustable bandgaps, and small exciton binding energies. Compared with traditional silicon and thin film solar cells, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) develop very fast. It was first reported by Miyasaka and co-workers in 2009 with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.8%. Within a few years, the state-of-art efficiency surpassed 23%. Inverted PSCs with organic hole transport layers (HTLs), due to high performance, low temperature processable (<150 °C) and small hysteresis, have attracted extensive research in the photovoltaic community. In this type of PSC, a methylammonium (MA) based perovskite, e.g., MAPbI3 or MAPbI3−xClx, is normally employed as light absorber. However, there are concerns with respect to the structural phase transition and photo/thermal instability of these perovskites. In comparison, formamidinium (FA) and MA mixed-cation based perovskites, normally a combination of FAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 with different ratios, show improved optoelectronic properties and stability as a result of the larger ionic radius of FA and its dual-ammonia group that can effectively inhibit ion movement in the space surrounded by PbI6 octahedra. However, mixing MA with FA will pull down the conduction band minimum (CBM) of perovskites, which normally leads to a lower open circuit voltage (Voc) (∼1.0 V) in these devices. For instance, a Voc of 1.02 V was achieved via optimizing the annealing temperature of the HTL in the FAMA mixed-cation perovskite based inverted PSCs. By surface passivation with widely used phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester on the FAMA mixed-cation perovskite, the device Voc can be increased to 1.03 V. Although Voc can be enhanced via surface passivation, the additional layers introduced on perovskite films inevitably complicate the fabrication process and it is more essential to improve the quality of the perovskite film itself, thus it still remains challenging to enhance the Voc of this type of device in a simple way. Beyond that, it is known that FAMA mixed-cation perovskites tend to form a photoinactive yellow phase during the annealing process, and CsI is normally employed as the phase stabilizer to guarantee the formation of a photoactive black phase, whereas CsI is highly hydrophilic, which would probably cause structural instability of perovskite films at high relative humidity (RH). Therefore, it is worth exploring novel precursors to prepare FAMA mixed-cation perovskite films towards improved Voc and stability.

Herein, we report on a precursor engineering method to prepare FAMA mixed-cation based perovskite films, which has been proved to be an effective strategy to improve the device Voc (Table S1 in the ESI). For inverted PSCs without any modification/passivation layers, the device Voc is largely enhanced from 1.0 V to 1.1 V. Accordingly, a champion PCE of 20.7% with negligible hysteresis is achieved, which is comparable to the top efficiencies from normal FAMA mixed-cation perovskite based inverted PSCs with additional passivation layers. In addition, this precursor allows the formation of a pure photoactive perovskite phase without using the hydrophilic CsI, thereby the stability of devices at high RH (ca. 70%) in ambient air is significantly improved. Without encapsulation, the device only lost 16% of its efficiency after 1000 h storage. The proposed method of precursor engineering effectively simplifies the fabrication process and is promising for the development of stable inverted PSCs in the future.

The target precursor is composed of three independent precursors, which are FAPbI3 (A), MAPbBr3 (B), and MAPbI3−xClx (C). First, the precursors A and B were mixed to form a control precursor A0.83B0.17, and this is as the same as the normal method to prepare FAMA mixed-cation perovskite precursors. Then a certain amount of precursor C (y = 0–0.2) was added to the control precursor to form the ternary alloyed precursor (A0.83B0.17)1−yCy. The morphology of the respective perovskite films is investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), as shown in Fig. 1. For the control perovskite (y = 0), the crystal grain size distributes in a range of 100–400 nm, which is consistent with previous reports. By alloying with precursor C, the morphology changes evidently. For example, by increasing y from 0 to 0.1, several crystals with grain sizes as large as 500 nm appear, while small crystals (100 nm) remain existent in the film. Further increase in y to 0.15 results in the appearance of larger crystals with a grain size of 600 nm, and similarly, small crystals with sizes around 100 nm still exist. However, the grain size does not show a further increase when increasing y from 0.15 to 0.2. It is clear that chloride is introduced into the control precursor for alloying with precursor C. This introduction will lead to the formation of an intermediate phase during the antisolvent process, which can effectively reduce the amount of crystal nuclei in the as-prepared films. As the size of perovskite crystals is inversely proportional to the density of crystal nuclei, the intermediate phase is conducive to the increase of crystal size.

To characterize the effect of alloying on the quality of perovskite films, X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra were recorded, as shown in Fig. 2. For the control perovskite (y = 0), the dominant peak at 14.0° indicates the black phase of FAPbI3, and the small side peaks at 11.6° and 12.6° correspond to the photoinactive hexagonal yellow phase of FAPbI3 and cubic PbI2, respectively. The appearance of a yellow phase confirms the incomplete phase transition in the control film, demonstrating that only MAPbBr3 hardly restrains the growth of the photoinactive phase. By adding precursor C (y = 0.1), the intensity of the dominant photoactive peak is enhanced, indicating improved crystallinity of perovskite films. Besides, close inspection (inset to Fig. 2a) shows that the photoinactive phase is completely eliminated with the assistance of perovskite C, while the intensity of the PbI2 peak stays the same. This result demonstrates that, similar to CsI, the precursor engineering method is able to fully restrain the formation of a photoinactive phase. Further increasing y from 0.1 to 0.15 leads to a substantial increase of the dominant peak intensity along with a slight increase of the intensity of the PbI2 peak, suggesting better crystallinity of perovskite films in comparison with y = 0.1. The intensity of the photoactive peak does not show further enhancement for more alloyed films (y = 0.2), whereas that of the PbI2 peak shows an evident increase which suggests that more PbI2 was left. From the high contrast SEM images (Fig. S1 in the ESI), it can be seen that some white crystals appear on the surface of perovskite films. Similar results have been reported previously, and the white phases are actually PbI2. It is clear that more PbI2 is formed at y = 0.2 compared with that at y ≤ 0.15, which is consistent with the XRD results.
Absorption spectra (inset to Fig. 2b) show that alloying with perovskite C does not affect the bandgap of perovskites, suggesting that the wide bandgap MAPbCl3 in the intermediate phase is sublimed during the annealing process. However, its existence is supposed to influence the quality of the final perovskite films. TRPL spectra were recorded to further investigate the effect of alloying on perovskite qualities. For measurement, samples were prepared by growing perovskite films on quartz. The spectra exhibit a typical bi-exponential decay behavior, and the detailed fitting parameters are listed in Table S2 in the ESI. The control perovskite (y = 0) exhibits a decay lifetime of 203.9 ns. Longer lifetimes are achieved for the ternary alloyed perovskites, that is, 207.6 ns and 235.5 ns for perovskite films at y = 0.1 and 0.15, respectively. The evident increase of lifetime demonstrates that alloying with C can effectively reduce charge carrier recombination in the perovskite film, indicating that the defects within the film become fewer with increasing y up to 0.15. However, further increase in y results in a significantly decreased lifetime of 187.9 ns, indicating that over alloying will introduce extra recombination centers into the perovskite film which are not favorable to the charge dissociation. In order to get insights into charge transfer properties, TRPL measurements are also conducted on the perovskite/HTL samples (Fig. S2 in the ESI). It is found that the decay lifetime is significantly reduced from 196.7 ns to 137.5 ns by increasing y from 0 to 0.15, but further increasing y leads to an increased lifetime. The reduced decay lifetime indicates that the charge extraction efficiency is largely improved, and the efficiency reaches the maximum at y = 0.15.
Inverted devices with the typical structure of ITO/HTL/perovskite/C60/BCP/Ag were fabricated for investigation. A mixed HTL is employed based on our previous report, that is, 4,4′-cyclohexylidenebis[N,N-bis(4-methylphenyl)benzenamine] (TAPC) doped with 2 wt% poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA). Average J–V performances with detailed parameters are shown in Fig. 3a and Table 1. Compared with the control device (y = 0), ternary alloying enhances the device performance significantly at y = 0.1 and 0.15, and the best performance was achieved at y = 0.15. Further increase in y results in reduced Voc, short circuit current density (Jsc), and fill factors (FFs), indicating that the improvement in the quality of the perovskite film reaches the maximum at y = 0.15, which is consistent with the XRD and TRPL results. Accordingly, the averaged PCE is increased from 16.4% to 19.6% after optimization, and a champion PCE of 20.7% with negligible hysteresis is achieved with a Voc, Jsc, and FF of 1.11 V, 22.9 mA cm−2, and 81.3%, respectively. Note that the best efficiency is comparable to the top efficiencies of devices with extra passivation/modification layers. The increase of Jsc is verified by EQE spectra (Fig. 3c). The integrated Jsc is 20.9 mA cm−2 for the control device and 21.9 mA cm−2 for the best one. This enhancement is believed to originate from the improved quality of perovskite films by the precursor engineering method. Basically, the integrated values are in agreement with the results from the J–V curves (Table 1). Both the control (y = 0) and optimized (y = 0.15) devices exhibit good stability upon light exposure (Fig. S4 in the ESI). However, compared with the control ones, the humidity stabilities of both perovskite films and devices are improved significantly, as shown in Fig. 3d. The control and optimized perovskites were employed for this test in the form of films and devices, which without encapsulation were stored in the dark in ambient air at a RH of 70%. Clearly, the efficiency decays much slower in the device based on the optimized perovskite, with only 16% efficiency loss after 1000 h storage. In contrast, 60% loss was observed for the control device. The stability improvement of devices stems from more stable perovskite films. As shown in the inset, after 1000 h storage, the control film exhibits an evident characteristic of decomposition, whereas the alloyed film is just the same as its initial appearance after annealing. The improved stability correlates tightly with the evident decrease in the trap density of perovskite films, which will be studied in the following. Moreover, a stability test was also carried out on the FAMA mixed-cation perovskite with Cs+ doping (CsFAMA) which has been widely employed both in regular and inverted PSCs, as shown in Fig. S5 in the ESI. After 300 h storage at 70% RH in the dark, it is clear that a strong PbI2 peak appeared in the XRD pattern of CsFAMA perovskite, indicating the structural instability of the film although no photoinactive yellow phase was observed. Many decomposition spots can be seen on the CsFAMA film, similar to the appearance of the control film (y = 0). In contrast, both the XRD pattern and appearance of the optimized perovskite (y = 0.15) exhibit similar characteristics to the as-prepared film, which is indicative of improved structural stability by precursor engineering apart from inhibiting the yellow phase. Therefore, Cs+ is conducive to stabilizing the photoactive phase of the FAMA mixed-cation perovskite, but its hydrophilic nature is not favorable to the structural stability of the perovskite especially at high RH. However, these issues can be effectively addressed by the proposed method, demonstrating its potential for the development of highly stable PSCs.

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

J
sc
 (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a Average values with standard deviations were obtained from thirty devices from different batches measured under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).
b 
J
sc calculated from the EQE spectra (Fig. S3 in the ESI).


y = 0
1.00 ± 0.02
21.7 ± 0.6
20.9
75.4 ± 2.1
16.4 ± 1.1

y = 0.1
1.05 ± 0.01
22.3 ± 0.5
21.7
77.9 ± 1.6
18.2 ± 0.9

y = 0.15
1.10 ± 0.01
22.6 ± 0.3
21.9
79.1 ± 1.1
19.6 ± 0.7

y = 0.2
1.04 ± 0.01
22.1 ± 0.3
21.3
73.7 ± 1.5
16.9 ± 0.9
To get insights into charge carrier recombination within devices, light intensity (I)-dependent Jsc and Voc were studied (Fig. 3e and f). The correlation between Jsc and light intensity obeys the power law Jsc ∝ Iβ. The fitted β is 1.12 and 1.05 for devices with y = 0 and 0.15, respectively. All of the values are close to 1, indicating that no space charge effect is present in the devices. It is known that the deviation of β from 1 correlates closely with the nongeminate recombination within devices, and a smaller deviation indicates less recombination, and thus free charge carriers can be extracted more efficiently. Under open circuit conditions, all the photogenerated electrons and holes finally recombine with each other. Thus the variation of Voc with I can reflect recombination information within devices. The dependence of Voc on I is described as,
where
n, kB, T, and q are the ideality factor, Boltzmann constant, room temperature, and elementary charge, respectively. From Fig. 3f, n with the values of 1.18 and 1.06 are fitted for devices with y = 0 and 0.15, respectively, indicating the Shockley–Read–Hall trap-assisted recombination within these devices. Therefore, the closer β value and reduced n at y = 0.15 imply fewer trap states and reduced recombination within the device, which is consistent with the TRPL results.

As Voc depends closely on energy band alignment in PSCs, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was carried out to investigate the effect of alloying on the energy levels of perovskites (Fig. 4a). By subtracting the cutoff energy (Ecutoff) from the He(I) energy (21.22 eV), a work function can be obtained. Accordingly, the valence band maximum (VBM) of the perovskite is achieved by the summation of the work function and offset energy (Eoffset) that is determined from the low binding energy region in UPS. Based on the optical bandgap, one can calculate the CBM of the perovskite. The energy levels shown in Fig. 4b are referenced to a common Fermi level. It is clear that the CBM rises evidently with the increase in y from 0 to 0.15, whereas further increasing y only leads to a minor increase of the CBM. The rise in the CBM is supposed to be favorable to Voc enhancement, as Voc correlates with the energy level difference between the CBM of the perovskite and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the HTL and normally a larger difference leads to a higher Voc. However, the device Voc differs from this trend. It is decreased rather than increased when y increases up to 0.2. This indicates that trap states must be considered, because the recombination caused by them will affect the quasi-Fermi levels of electrons and holes. To investigate the variation of trap states in the perovskites, admittance spectra (Fig. 4c) were recorded. The trap density (NT) is derived from the angular frequency (ω) dependent capacitance (C) as
where
Eω, Vbi, and W are the energetic demarcation between the trap energy and VBM, built-in potential, and depletion width, respectively, and Vbi and W can be obtained from the Mott–Schottky analysis as described elsewhere. As shown in Fig. 4c, both shallow (Eω < 0.15 eV) and deep (Eω > 0.15 eV) trap states are significantly reduced in ternary alloyed perovskites (y = 0.1 and 0.15) as compared with the control one (y = 0). The decrease of shallow traps probably originates from the reduction of grain boundaries as a result of enlarged grain size (Fig. 1), while that of deep traps is due to the passivation effect of PbI2 on the surface. It is evident that more reduction of deep traps is observed at y = 0.15 in comparison with y = 0.1, indicating that passivation is more thorough from PbI2 with the slight increase of PbI2 phases (Fig. 2a and S1). It has been reported that manipulating perovskite films by defect passivation/elimination is favorable to enhancing the film/device stabilities. Particularly, reducing grain boundaries would effectively suppress the migration of moisture and ionic defects through them, where their mobilities are much faster than those of the bulk. Therefore, the significantly reduced shallow and deep traps can largely enhance the film/device stabilities. Note that the order of magnitude of NT is reported to be 1016 for MAPbI3 and 1017 for FAPbI3 at Eω = 0.15 eV, while 1015 is achieved for the ternary alloyed perovskite (y = 0.15), indicating better qualities of this film. Similar reduction of shallow traps is also observed at y = 0.2, but the deep traps are increased markedly. In consideration of the TRPL results, it is reasonable to conclude that excessive residual PbI2 mainly serves as a deep recombination center to trap charge carriers, which results in an evident decrease of the device Voc. To confirm the recombination change, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed (Fig. S6 in the ESI), from which selective contact resistance (Rsc) and recombination resistance (Rrec) were fitted, as shown in Fig. 4d. The Rsc reduces largely with increasing y, indicating improved charge transfer between the perovskite and selective contact layer. The Rrec first increases with y from 0 to 0.15, then it drops markedly when y is increased up to 0.2. Therefore, more recombination appears at y = 0.2.


In this work, a precursor engineering method was introduced to prepare high quality FAMA mixed-cation perovskite films. It is found that an appropriate amount of MAPbI3−xClx alloyed with FAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 enables the formation of a ternary alloyed perovskite with increased grain size, enhanced crystallinity, and reduced trap states. Most importantly, it can completely inhibit the formation of a yellow phase in the FAMA mixed-cation based perovskite by replacing the commonly used hydrophilic CsI that is found to be effective to stabilize the black phase but is not favorable to the structural stability of the perovskite especially at high RH. Thus, the stabilities of films and devices are improved significantly. It is found that the optimized device without encapsulation only loses 16% of its efficiency after 1000 h storage at 70% RH in ambient air. In addition, the average Voc increases markedly from 1.0 V to 1.1 V in typical inverted PSCs without any passivation/modification layers by improving the quality of perovskite films, which is beneficial to the simplification of fabrication processes. After optimization, a champion PCE of 20.7% with negligible hysteresis is achieved, which is comparable to the top efficiencies of devices with extra passivation/modification layers. Our major findings are expected to provide a guide to the development of highly efficient and stable PSCs in the future.


There are no conflicts to declare.


C. Liu and W. Kong contributed equally to this work. This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Project funding from the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (Grant No. 2016YFA0202400 and 2016YFA0202404), the Peacock Team Project funding from Shenzhen Science and Technology Innovation Committee (Grant No. KQTD2015033110182370), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51776094), the Guangdong Natural Science Funds for Distinguished Young Scholars (Grant No. 2015A030306044), and the Guangdong-Hong Kong joint innovation project (Grant No. 2016A050503012).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta03454d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019