 DOI: 10.1039/C8NR02856G
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 12100-12108


Maida
Vartanian
,

Pilar
de la Cruz
,

Subhayan
Biswas
,

Ganesh D.
Sharma
* and 

Fernando
Langa
*

Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha, Institute of Nanoscience, Nanotechnology and Molecular Materials (INAMOL), Campus de la Fábrica de Armas, 45071-Toledo, Spain. E-mail: Fernando.Langa@uclm.es

Department of Physics, The LNM Institute of Information Technology (Deemed to-be University), Rupa ki Nagal, Jamdoli, Jaipur (Raj.) 302031, India

Received
9th April 2018
, Accepted 22nd May 2018
First published on 23rd May 2018
In an effort to improve the short-circuit current and fill factor, organic solar cells have been developed with ternary blending in a single bulk heterojunction active layer. We report here several all small molecule organic solar cells based on ternary bulk heterojunction active layers. These layers consist of two small molecule porphyrin donors (MV71 and MV72), which have the same backbone but different end-capping acceptor units, and PC71BM as the acceptor. The organic solar cells showed overall power conversion efficiencies of 3.21% and 4.03% for the as-cast MV71:PC71BM and MV72:PC71BM binary active layers, respectively. However, the power conversion efficiency of the ternary active layer, i.e., MV71:MV72:PC71BM (0.2:0.8:2), was 6.72% and this is higher than the two binary active layer counterparts. The enhancement in the PCE of the ternary active layer is mainly related to the improvement in both the short-circuit current and fill factor and is related to the synergistic effect of the good miscibility of the two donors and improved hole transportation due to the slightly deeper highest occupied molecular orbital energy level of MV72 than MV71. The PCE was further improved to 9.44% with an enhanced short-circuit current and fill factor when the ternary active layer was subjected to solvent vapour annealing for 40 seconds. The ternary organic solar cells showed higher values of the incident photon to current conversion efficiency across the entire wavelength region when compared to the binary counterparts. The same donor backbone facilitates miscibility at the molecular level and the different HOMO and LUMO energy levels of the donors enable charge transport in the devices based on the ternary active layers. The increase in the power conversion efficiency after SVA treatment may be attributed to the migration of MV71 from the mixed region to the donor–acceptor (D–A) interfaces, which in turn affects the charge transfer and recombination processes and is confirmed by the impedance spectroscopy and dark current–voltage measurements.

The finite nature of traditional fossil energy sources and the environmental problems associated with them have encouraged the study of organic solar cells (OSCs) with bulk heterojunctions (BHJs) as an alternative, renewable and environmentally friendly energy source due to the low cost, ease of processing and ability to manufacture large-area devices. Over the years, research on OSCs has mainly focused on the quest for suitable electron donor and acceptor materials, which can be either polymers or small molecules, and single-layer BHJ OSC solar cells have recently achieved power conversion efficiency (PCE) values in the range of 11–13% based on fullerene and non-fullerene acceptors. However, these values are still lower than those obtained for their inorganic counterparts and it is therefore desirable to improve the PCE of OSCs further.

A promising strategy for further efficiency improvement is the use of the so-called tandem OSCs, in which two or more sub-elements with complementary absorption spectra are integrated into one device in series or in parallel. Impressive progress in the field of tandem OSCs has provided a solid basis for improving the PCE by 40–50%, which demonstrates their great potential for practical applications. Nevertheless, the complexity of manufacturing processes for tandem OSCs and the high production costs limit their practical application. OSCs based on ternary BHJs (consisting of three components in the active layer) are considered to represent an effective strategy to overcome the limitations of binary OSCs and expand the light absorption range, which results in a high short-circuit current (Jsc) and high efficiency in single-layer devices with a bulk heterojunction. Compared to the classical bulk heterojunction (BHJ), which consists of a binary mixture of donor and acceptor materials, ternary mixtures that contain either two donor polymers and one acceptor or two acceptors and one donor (a polymer or small molecule) provide the ability to correct light absorption, energy levels and morphology, with the advantages of forming cascade ladders for power transmission and provision of multi-transport channels for charge carriers. It is assumed that the third component provides complementary light absorption to increase the short-circuit current (Jsc) and facilitates the formation of ordered molecular packing, which in turn will enhance charge transport and form equalized cascade energy levels, which is advantageous for charge transfer at the D–A interface and can help to reduce energy losses and increase the open-circuit voltage (Voc). Ternary OSCs have great potential to achieve high photocurrent generation while maintaining the simple fabrication conditions used to create binary BHJ solar cells and it is expected that the overall PCE can be increased to 10–12%. Moreover, by selecting the appropriate energy levels for the donor and acceptor components in the ternary active layer, the energy loss can also be reduced and this is the crucial factor for efficient OSCs.
The ternary devices reported to date are dominated by donor polymer-based solar cells. All small-molecule (SM) ternary OSCs have rarely been reported and their PCEs are still lagging behind those of their polymeric counterparts. Despite the lower PCE values, SM-OSCs are more attractive for commercialization since small molecules have some outstanding advantages, including a well-defined molecular structure, higher batch-to-batch consistency, easy purification, and good solubility. Recently, Nian et al. reported a PCE of around 11% for an OSC based on a ternary BHJ active layer consisting of two SM donors and an acceptor and this system showed great potential for achieving high performance and realizing industrial production. Recently a PCE of 14% has been reported for OSCs based on a ternary active layer consisting of a polymer donor, PC71BM and a non-fullerene acceptor.
Among the small molecules, porphyrins have been explored as donors for the BHJ active layers of OSCs due to their superior light harvesting ability in the visible-NIR region and their easily tuned photophysical and electrochemical properties by structural modification.
In this communication, we report the investigation of ternary organic solar cells based on two donors, MV71 and MV72, and the PC71BM acceptor. Although these two donors consist of the same porphyrin core and linking group but different end-capping acceptor groups, they showed slightly different absorption spectra and did not show wider absorption as expected from the ternary system. The incorporation of 20% MV72 provided an as-cast ternary device with an overall PCE of 6.72% with a Jsc = 13.02 mA cm−2, a Voc = 0.89 V and a FF = 0.58, which are higher values than those obtained for binary BHJ-OSCs based on either MV71 (3.11%) or MV72 (4.03%) fabricated under identical conditions. Due to the same backbone, the enhancement in the Jsc and FF may be attributed to the synergistic effect of the good miscibility of the two donors and the improved hole transportation contributed by the deeper HOMO energy level of MV72. Moreover, the PCE of an OSC based on the ternary active layer subjected to solvent vapor annealing (SVA) treatment improved the efficiency to 9.44% with a Jsc = 15.98 mA cm−2, a Voc = 0.85 and a FF = 0.695. The enhancement after SVA is attributed to the transformation of an alloy-like model to a cascade model.


MV71 and MV72 were prepared as described previously.


Organic solar cells were fabricated with a conventional architecture, i.e. ITO-coated glass/PEDOT:PSS/binary or ternary blend/PFN/Al. Firstly, all of the ITO-coated glass substrates were cleaned by successive sonication in detergent, deionized water, acetone and finally isopropanol (10 min each) and then dried in a vacuum oven for 1 hour. The PEDOT:PSS solution was spin-coated onto the clean ITO substrates at 2000 rpm followed by baking at 120 °C for 15 min in air. A ternary active layer (MV71:MV72:PC71BM) with a varied weight ratio between MV71 and MV72, but with the weight ratio of PC71BM kept constant, was first dissolved in chlorobenzene (CB) and then spin-coated onto the top of the PEDOT:PSS layer at 2500 rpm for 60 s. The sample was then dried at 40 °C for 10 min. For solvent vapor annealing, the active layers were placed in a Petri-dish containing THF for 40 s and then removed. A methanol solution of PFN with a concentration of 1.5 mg mL−1 was then spin-coated on top of the active layer at 3000 rpm for 30 s. The thickness of the active layers is 85 ± 5 nm. Finally, an Al top electrode was deposited onto the top of the PFN buffer layer by thermal evaporation at a base pressure of 2.0 × 10−5 Pa. The effective area of the devices was around 16 mm2. OSCs based on binary BHJ active layers were also prepared for comparison. The hole-only and electron-only devices with ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/Au and ITO/Al/active layer/Al architectures were also fabricated in a similar way in order to measure the hole and electron mobilities, respectively. The current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the BHJ organic solar cells were measured using a computer-controlled Keithley 2400 source meter in the dark and under simulated AM 1.5G illumination of 100 mW cm−2. A xenon light source coupled with an optical filter was used to provide the stimulated irradiance at the surface of the devices. The incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) of the devices was measured by illuminating the device through the light source and the monochromator and the resulting current was measured using a Keithley electrometer under short-circuit conditions.


The chemical structures of MV1, MV72 and PC71BM are shown in Fig. 1.

The absorption spectra of MV71 and MV72 in thin films are shown in Fig. 2. The absorption spectra of both donors are almost identical, although MV72 showed a slightly stronger and red-shifted ICT band.
The absorption spectra of the ternary thin films (Fig. 3) are somewhat broader, from 350 nm to 900 nm, due to the combination of all components.
In the ternary BHJ-based OSCs, the energy levels of the three organic semiconductors employed are important for exciton dissociation, charge transport and charge collection. The HOMO/LUMO energy levels of MV71 and MV72 are −5.24/−3.55 eV and −5.29/−3.67 eV, respectively.
The binary and ternary OSCs were fabricated with conventional ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/PFN/Al device structures. Firstly, the performance of the ternary active layer processed with CB (chlorobenzene) was optimized by scanning the effect of the weight ratio between MV71 and MV72 with a constant content of PC71BM as for binary active layers.
The values of the PCE of the binary BHJ solar cells using the as-cast/SVA treated MV71:PC71BM and MV72:PC71BM are 3.21/7.61% and 4.03/8.80%, respectively. It was found that the best photovoltaic performance was obtained when the content of MV71 was 20 wt% in the ternary active layer. The current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the OSC based on the optimized ternary active layer under AM1.5G illumination with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 are shown in Fig. 4a and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are collected in Table 1. For the ternary OSCs, the Jsc and FF increased to 13.02 mA cm−2 and 0.58, respectively, by the incorporation of 20 wt% MV71 in donor MV72. The increase in the FF of the ternary OSC can be explained by the higher shunt resistance (Rsh) and lower series resistance (Rs) (Table 1) compared to binary OSCs. The increase in the FF also confirms the reduction of recombination in the ternary OSC. The HOMO energy level of MV72 is slightly deeper than that of MV71 and this fact can lead to a lower Voc value for ternary OSCs than binary MV72:PC71BM OSCs. The enhancement in the performance of the ternary OSC may be attributed to the enhanced photon harvesting for Jsc and balanced charge transport for FF. The IPCE spectra of the ternary OSC and its binary counterpart are shown in Fig. 4b and they closely resemble the absorption spectra of the ternary active layer (Fig. 3), thus indicating that all components in the ternary active layer contribute to the exciton generation and thereby photocurrent generation. Moreover, the enhanced IPCE values crossing the entire wavelength region for the ternary OSC are also attributed to the better charge transportation induced by MV71, since MV72 has a slightly deeper HOMO energy level than MV71 and MV72 acts as a hole relay to facilitate the hole transport to the anode after the exciton dissociation into free charge carriers, which results in enhanced IPCE values over the entire wavelength range. The calculated Jsc values obtained by integrating the IPCE spectra of OSCs are 11.18 mA cm−2, 12.96 mA cm−2 and 15.87 mA cm−2 for the as-cast MV72:PC71BM, as-cast ternary and SVA-treated ternary active layers, respectively, and the values are consistent with the value observed from the J–V characteristics under illumination.
Active layer

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
sh (Ω cm2)

a Average of 8 devices.


MV72:PC71BM (1:2) (as-cast)
11.25 (±0.23)
0.92 (±0.01)
0.39 (±0.015)
4.03 (±0.14) (3.89)
28.13
766

MV71:MV72:PC71BM (0.2:0.8:2) (as-cast)
13.02 (±0.21)
0.89 (±0.02)
0.58 (±0.016)
6.72 (±0.12) (6.60)
24.45
835

MV71:MV72:PC71BM (0.2:0.8:2) (SVA)
15.98 (±0.26)
0.85 (±0.02)
0.695 (±0.013)
9.44 (±0.13) (9.31)
14.31
934
PL spectra (Fig. 5) were recorded in order to obtain information about the kinetics of the energy transfer and charge transfer processes in the ternary blend films. As can be seen from Fig. 5, there is some overlap between the PL emissions of MV71 and MV72, therefore Forster energy transfer is energetically favorable at the MV71–MV72 interface. The excitons generated in MV71 diffuse efficiently to MV72 prior to diffusion at the interface with PC71BM for dissociation. The PL emissions of pristine MV71 and MV72 are, significantly, quenched upon blending with PC71BM. On incorporating MV71, the PL peak corresponding to MV72 is still observed, but the PL shoulder observed for the MV72:PC71BM binary film disappeared completely. This finding is consistent with the charge transfer between MV72 and PC71BM being enhanced by MV71 in the ternary blend.
The energetic processes of charge carriers and excitons in the ternary OSC are represented schematically in Fig. 6.
The excitons in MV71 and MV72 can be dissociated into free charge carriers at their individual interface with PC71BM. The exciton in MV71 can also transfer its energy to MV72 through a Förster resonance process and then be dissociated at the MV72/PC71BM interface. The photogenerated electrons will be transported to the Al electrode through the PC71BM channel that is formed. The photogenerated holes in MV72 prefer to transfer toward MV71 and most of these holes will transport along MV71 channels formed in the ternary active layers.
The hole mobilities of the blend films were estimated using the dark J–V characteristics of hole-only (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/blend/Au) devices, respectively, as shown in Fig. 7 and fitting the plots with a space-charge-limited current (SCLC) model.
The hole mobility was enhanced from 4.32 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 7.76 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 with the incorporation of 20 wt% of MV71 into MV72:PC71BM. We also measured the electron mobility using the electron-only devices and found that the electron mobility for the ternary blend containing 20 wt% of MV71 is 2.48 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is slightly higher than that of the MV72:PC71BM binary film (2.41 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1). The improved hole mobility of the ternary active film is also attributed to the efficient hole transport and more balanced charge transport leading to enhanced Jsc and FF values.
In order to gain a greater understanding of the difference in the overall PCE of OSCs fabricated with MV72:PC71BM and MV71:MV72:PC71BM, the relationship between the photocurrent (Jph) and the effective voltage (Veff) for the OSCs was investigated. The results are shown in Fig. 8.
The Jph value is defined as Jph = JL − JD, where JL and JD are the current densities under illumination and in the dark, respectively. Veff is estimated from Veff = Va − Vo, where Va is the applied voltage and Vo is the voltage at which Jph is zero. It can be seen from this figure (Fig. 8) that the Jph values for low Veff values of the OSC based on the ternary active layer are higher than those of its binary counterpart, which suggests more effective exciton dissociation into free charge carriers and their subsequent collection. The exciton dissociation efficiency (ηdiss) and charge collection efficiency (ηcoll) were estimated from the expressions Jph/Jphsat at short circuit and Jph/Jphsat at the maximum power point, respectively, where Jphsat is the Jph at the highest Veff value. The ηdiss/ηcoll values are 0.80/0.59 and 0.875/0.75 for binary and ternary active layers, respectively. The higher values of both ηdiss and ηcoll for the ternary OSC, when compared to its binary counterpart, indicate that the exciton dissociation and charge collection efficiency are more efficient in the OSCs based on the ternary blend. In general, at high Veff values, the efficiencies of exciton dissociation and charge collection approach unity, and Jphsat mainly depends on the exciton generation rate (Gmax) and it is expressed as Jphsat = qLGmax, where q is the elementary charge and L is the thickness of the active layer. Gmax is calculated to be 1.05 × 1028 m−3 s−1 (Jphsat = 14.88 mA cm−2) for the ternary device, which is higher than 0.99 × 1028 m−3 s−1 (Jphsat = 14.08 mA cm−2) for the MV72:PC71BM binary device. The enhanced Gmax indicates that more excitons are generated in the ternary solar cells due to the broader absorption spectra.
In order to obtain the information about the effect that the incorporation of MV71 has on the charge recombination in the ternary active layer, the J–V characteristics of MV72:PC71BM (1:2) and the optimized ternary OSC were measured as a function of illumination intensity (Pin) and the values of Jsc and Voc were extracted. The variations of Jsc and Voc with Pin are shown in Fig. 9.
In general, the variation of Jsc with Pin follows the power law (Jsc ∝ Pγin), where γ is the exponential factor and is close to unity, when the bimolecular recombination in the active layer of the OSC is weak. The fitted values of γ for the binary (MV72:PC71BM) and optimized ternary active layers were found to be 0.88 and 0.94, respectively, which suggests that the bimolecular recombination is suppressed for the ternary OSC. The relationship between the Voc and Pin determines the extent of trap-assisted recombination and is described as
where
k is Boltzmann's constant, T is the temperature and q is the elementary charge. If the slope is kT/q, then bimolecular recombination is the main loss in the OSCs. However, when the slope for the variation of Voc with Pin is higher than kT/q, then trap-assisted recombination is involved under open-circuit conditions. The slopes estimated from the Voc–Pin for the as-cast binary and ternary OSCs are 1.38 kT/q and 1.24 kT/q, respectively, and this indicates that the incorporation of MV71 can suppress the trap-assisted recombination.

In order to improve the PCE of the ternary OSCs further, we subjected the optimized ternary active layer to solvent vapor annealing (SVA) (THF) for 40 s prior to the deposition of the PFN/Al cathode. The J–V characteristics of the OSC based on the SVA-treated ternary active layer are shown in Fig. 4a and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are compiled in Table 1. The overall PCE of the OSC based on this ternary active layer was improved to 9.44% with a Jsc value of 15.98 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.85 V and a FF of 0.695. The IPCE spectrum of the SVA-treated ternary OSC is shown in Fig. 4b and this closely resembles the corresponding absorption of the active layer film (Fig. 3). The IPCE values of the ternary OSC are higher over the entire wavelength region when compared to those of the binary OSC. The estimated Jsc value from the integration of the IPCE spectra of the SVA-treated ternary OSC is around 15.89 mA cm−2, which is in good agreement with the value observed from the J–V characteristics under illumination.
The hole mobility estimated from the J–V characteristics of the hole-only device (Fig. 7) based on the SVA-treated ternary blend is around 1.98 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is higher than that for the as-cast ternary blend and also confirms the improved FF and Jsc values. The Pdiss and Pcoll values calculated from the variation of Jph with Veff (Fig. 8) are 0.97 and 0.89, respectively, for SVA-treated ternary OSCs and this indicates that the exciton dissociation and charge collection are more efficient in these OSCs than in their as-cast counterpart. The enhanced value of Gmax (1.16 × 1028 m−3 s−1) also indicates that more excitons are generated in the SVA-treated ternary solar cells due to the enhanced absorption spectra (as shown in Fig. 3).
The exponential factor estimated from the Jsc–Pin plot (Fig. 9a) is 0.96, and this indicates that the ternary blending with SVA further diminishes the bimolecular recombination in the OSC. Moreover, the slope, estimated from the Voc–Pin plot, for the SVA-treated ternary blend OSC is about 1.18 kT/q, which suggests that the trap-assisted recombination has been suppressed further with SVA treatment. These results indicate that the SVA treatment of ternary blends leads to a reduction in the bimolecular and trap-assisted recombination, compared to the as-cast counterpart, and this change results in high Jsc, FF and PCE values.
As discussed earlier, the recombination of charge carriers is suppressed in the ternary active layer compared to the binary counterpart and is further suppressed after the SVA treatment. In order to confirm this fact, we have also measured the current–voltage characteristics of these devices in the dark as shown in Fig. 10.
It can be seen from Fig. 10 that the dark current at reverse bias in the ternary-based devices is reduced indicating that the recombination of charge carriers has been suppressed in the active layer, since the dark current is an indication of the recombination of charge carriers. Moreover, the devices based on ternary active layers showed a high dark current at forward bias which is related to the decrease in Rs which favours better charge extraction in the ternary devices due to the improved morphology and phase separation.
In order to obtain further information about the recombination kinetics of charge carriers at the interfaces, we have employed impedance spectroscopy. Moreover, the diode ideality factor for the devices based on the binary, as-cast ternary active layer and SVA-treated ternary is 1.56, 1.44 and 1.35, respectively, which also indicate that the recombination of charge carriers has been reduced for ternary OSCs.

Fig. 11 shows the Nyquist plots of the devices exhibiting semicircles in the complex plane. The intercept with the Re (Z) axis in the high-frequency region (left-hand side) represents Rs.
The value of Rs for the binary OSC is about 24 Ω cm−2 which is dropped to 18.02 Ω cm−2 for the ternary OSC and further reduced to 14.04 Ω cm−2 when the SVA-treated ternary active layer is used. These values are consistent with the values estimated from the J–V characteristics (Table 1). The decrease in Rs may be related to the better charge extraction. The intercept of the Nyquist plot in the low-frequency region (right-hand side) on the Re (Z) gives the recombination resistance (Rrec). The value of Rrec for the devices with the as-cast and SVA ternary active layer is 57 Ω cm−2 and 69 Ω cm−2, respectively, and larger than that for the binary counterpart (51 Ω cm−2). Since Rrec is related to the charge recombination, a higher value of Rrec for ternary devices indicates the suppression of charge recombination leading to the improvement in the value of the FF.
Moreover, the average charge carrier lifetime (τn) can be estimated from the frequency (f) at which the Im (Z) is the maximum using the expression τn = 1/2πf. The τn of charge carriers follows the same trend as that observed for Rrec. The SVA-treated ternary device showed the highest value of τn (34 ms) which is higher than that for the as-cast ternary (27 ms) and binary (18 ms) devices, attributed to less recombination (high Rrec) leading to efficient charge extraction.
The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the binary MV72:PC71BM and optimized ternary films are shown in Fig. 12.
The MV72:PC71BM binary film exhibits a (100) peak at around 2θ = 4.92 and a (010) π–π stacking peak at 2θ = 23.46. For the ternary film, the intensity of the (100) peak was enhanced and the (010) stacking peak broadens and becomes more intense, thus indicating the formation of a 3-D texture in the binary blend film. This finding indicates that the incorporation of MV71 may act as a regulator to adjust the molecular arrangement of the MV72 donor. Therefore, the molecular arrangement (3-D texture) may be beneficial to charge transport along the normal direction and provide more charge transport channels in the ternary active layer, which in turn leads to an improvement in the FF of ternary OSCs.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurements were carried out in an effort to obtain information about the morphology and phase separation in the active layers. The TEM images are shown in Fig. 13.
As can be seen, the as-cast binary active layer showed poor phase separation, which hinders the charge transport. However, the as-cast ternary film showed improved phase separation and this was further improved upon SVA treatment. The improved phase separation is beneficial for charge transport and this leads to an enhancement in the overall PCE.

A PCE of around 6.72% for an all-small-molecule organic solar cell has been achieved with the optimized as-cast MV71:MV72:PC71BM (0.2:0.8:2) ternary active layer. This PCE value is higher than that of its binary BHJ-based MV71:PC71BM (3.21%) and MV72:PC71BM (4.03%) counterparts. The enhancement in the PCE of the OSC based on a ternary active layer is attributed to the higher Jsc and FF values, which are related to the improved light harvesting efficiency, exciton dissociation efficiency and charge transport efficiency. The PCE of the OSC was further improved to 9.44% when the ternary active layer was subjected to SVA treatment. This increase can be attributed to the improved nanoscale morphology of the ternary active layer, which is beneficial for charge transport and leads to a significant improvement in charge transport. The higher values of Rrec and τn for the ternary-based devices estimated from the impedance spectra also confirm that the charge recombination has been suppressed and this improved the charge extraction and collection efficiency leading to an enhancement in the PCE for the ternary OSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We are grateful for the financial support from MINECO, Spain (CTQ2016-79189-R). GDS and SB would like to thank the Department of Science and Technology (DST), Government of India project no: DST/TMD/SERI/D05 (C) for financial support.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018