 DOI: 10.1039/C6NR01927G
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10806-10813


Weihai
Sun
,

Yunlong
Li
,

Senyun
Ye
,

Haixia
Rao
,

Weibo
Yan
,

Haitao
Peng
,

Yu
Li
,

Zhiwei
Liu
*,

Shufeng
Wang
,

Zhijian
Chen
,

Lixin
Xiao
,

Zuqiang
Bian
* and 

Chunhui
Huang


Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Rare Earth Materials Chemistry and Applications, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, P. R. China. E-mail: bianzq@pku.edu.cn; zwliu@pku.edu.cn

Institute of Modern Optics and State Key Laboratory for Artificial Microstructure and Mesoscopic Physics, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China

Received
7th March 2016
, Accepted 25th April 2016
First published on 26th April 2016
During the past several years, methylammonium lead halide perovskites have been widely investigated as light absorbers for thin-film photovoltaic cells. Among the various device architectures, the inverted planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells have attracted special attention for their relatively simple fabrication and high efficiencies. Although promising efficiencies have been obtained in the inverted planar geometry based on poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) sulfonic acid (PEDOT:PSS) as the hole transport material (HTM), the hydrophilicity of the PEDOT:PSS is a critical factor for long-term stability. In this paper, a CuOx hole transport layer from a facile solution-processed method was introduced into the inverted planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells. After the optimization of the devices, a champion PCE of 17.1% was obtained with an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.99 V, a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 23.2 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 74.4%. Furthermore, the unencapsulated device cooperating with the CuOx film exhibited superior performance in the stability test, compared to the device involving the PEDOT:PSS layer, indicating that CuOx could be a promising HTM for replacing PEDOT:PSS in inverted planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells.

In the past few years, organometal halide perovskites have been considered as promising absorber materials for thin-film photovoltaic cells because of their low cost, simple fabrication, and superior photonic properties, such as high charge carrier mobility and long diffusion length. Owing to the breakthrough in replacing the liquid hole transport electrolyte with the first solid hole transport materials (HTMs) [2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenlamine)-9,9′-spiro-bifluorene] (spiro-MeOTAD), perovskite solar cells can exhibit a power conversion efficiency (PCE) beyond 9%, and remarkable efforts have been made to advance the PCE beyond 20%.

Two architectures (mesoscopic and planar heterojunction) have been successfully developed for perovskite solar cells. Regardless of the mesoscopic or planar heterojunction configuration, the structures of perovskite solar cells can be divided into two types (conventional and inverted structure), depending on the electron or hole transport employed as the perovskite layer's substrate. Currently, the conventional perovskite solar cells consist of a compact or mesoporous TiO2 electron-transport layer, which requires sintering up to 500 °C before use, making the device fabrication infeasible for plastic or flexible substrates. Given that the diffusion length of a hole is shorter than that of an electron in the perovskite layer, inverted planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells were obtained by depositing the perovskite film on a planar layer of HTMs, such as poly(3,4-ethyl-needioxythiophene):poly(styrene-sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) and followed with fullerene (C60) or [6,6]-phenyl –C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) as electron-transport materials (ETMs). Recently, Nie et al. proposed a solution-based hot-casting method to fabricate pinhole-free films of perovskites on the PEDOT:PSS substrate. The corresponding devices exhibited a decent PCE approaching 18%, with small variability. However, PEDOT:PSS is not a perfect HTM, owing to its high cost, relatively low hole mobility, acidic and hygroscopic nature. Therefore, we selected a series of conductive polymers, such as polythiophene, poly(p-phenylene) and poly(4,4′-bis(N-carbazolyl)-1,1′-biphenyl), prepared via electrochemical polymerization, as HTMs in inverted perovskite solar cells, exhibiting superior device performance comparable to the conventional perovskite solar cells incorporated with PEDOT:PSS. Inorganic HTMs, such as NiOx, graphene oxide, MoO3, CuSCN,etc., are potential substitutes for PEDOT:PSS in perovskite solar cells due to their advantages of excellent stability, high hole mobility and low cost. However, the PCEs of inverted perovskite solar cells based on inorganic HTMs are still lower than that of classical devices using PEDOT:PSS. Very recently, Han et al. proposed heavily p-doped NixMg1−xO and n-doped TiOx selective contacts to effectively extract photogenerated charge carriers from the inverted planar perovskite-PCBM film architecture. Although a PCE exceeding 18% was achieved by enhancing the electrical conductivity of both the hole selective layer and the electron selective layer, the deposition of NiO using spray pyrolysis requires high-temperature processing, which is not appropriate for large scale production. Therefore, seeking better HTMs is an important research area for the perovskite solar cells.
Stable copper oxides (CuOx), namely, cupric oxide (CuO) and cuprous oxide (Cu2O), are well-known p-type semiconductors. Due to the natural abundance of copper, CuOx is a promising alternative for photovoltaic systems. Recently, CuOx was used as a hole transport layer in polymer solar cells (PSCs), since it could form the ohmic contact between the polymer active layer and the anode. Nejand et al. introduced Cu2O as a HTM by the magnetron sputtering technique in conventional perovskite solar cells, with PCE of 8.93%. Zuo et al. proposed a facile low-temperature method to prepare Cu2O and CuO films by in situ conversion of CuI film in aqueous NaOH solution, and employed them as HTMs in inverted planar perovskite solar cells, achieving PCEs of 13.35% and 12.16% for Cu2O and CuO devices, respectively.
Herein, in order to simplify the film process of HTM and improve the PCE of perovskite solar cells, a CuOx layer was introduced into a planar inverted perovskite solar cell as a hole transport layer, by a facile solution-processed method. The solution-processed CuOx layer exhibits a smooth surface and high transparency in the visible region. A maximum PCE of over 17% was achieved by employing CuOx as the hole transport layer. Remarkably, the device based on the CuOx layer shows excellent stability in air. The results demonstrate that CuOx has great potential as an alternative HTM for highly efficient perovskite solar cells.

A cupric acetylacetonate (Cu(acac)2) precursor was deposited onto the patterned ITO by a spin-coating method, followed by annealing at 80 °C for 20 min in air and ultraviolet-ozone (UV-O3) treatment for 15 min. The pristine ITO substrate was checked using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) images, as presented in Fig. 1a and c, respectively. The root mean square (RMS) of the ITO was 4.7 nm, and after modification with CuOx film (Fig. 1b and d), the RMS decreased slightly to 4.2 nm. It is obvious that the smooth surface is beneficial in decreasing the possibility of current leakage. After modification with CuOx, the ITO substrate showed improved light transmittance, due to the smooth surface of the CuOx film (Fig. 1e).

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed to study the chemical component of the CuOx film. The full XPS spectrum displayed in Fig. 2a confirms the presence of Cu and O; the main peaks of Cu 2p1/2 and Cu 2p3/2 are located at around 953 and 933 eV, respectively (Fig. 2b). The peaks of the Cu 2p3/2 spectrum are usually used to analyze the ratio of Cu2+/Cu+. The Cu 2p3/2 peak is split into two peaks at 932.7 eV and 934.4 eV (Fig. 2c), which are assigned to Cu+ and Cu2+, respectively, and the ratio of Cu+/Cu2+ in the CuOx film, calculated from the deconvolution of the Cu 2p3/2 peak is 2.0:1. Fig. S1 shows the XPS spectra of the Cu 2p3/2 peaks for CuOx films prepared by varying the UV-O3 treatment times. It can be seen that the ratio of Cu2+ in the CuOx films increases proportionally to the UV-O3 treatment time, owing to the oxidation reactions.
The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the CuOx film strongly depends on its chemical composition. Ultraviolet photoelectron yield spectroscopy was used to determine the HOMO of the CuOx layers fabricated under the different UV-O3 treating times (Fig. S2), and the results are displayed in Table S1. As shown, the as-deposited CuOx film gives a relative higher HOMO (−5.2 eV). When the pristine CuOx film was transferred into the ultraviolet-ozone for treatment for 15 min, the HOMO level decreased slightly to −5.3 eV. As the UV-O3 treatment time increased, the HOMO level of the CuOx film continued to decrease. This phenomenon is attributed to the increased oxygen concentration and Cu2+ content in the CuOx film, thus indicating the enhanced p-type semiconductor characteristics of the CuOx film after UV-O3 treatment.
The device architecture is schematically shown in Fig. 3a, and the corresponding cross-sectional SEM image is displayed in Fig. 3b. A series of influence factors, including the comparison of two different perovskite fabrication methods, the optimization of the fast deposition-crystallization (FDC) method, the different ratios of Cu2+/Cu+ in CuOx films and the thickness of CuOx films, were used in the optimization of the device (see the ESI). Fig. 3c shows the current density-voltage (J–V) curve obtained for the best performance of the perovskite solar cell with the CuOx hole transport layer (where the perovskite films were deposited by the FDC method and CuOx layers were treated by UV-O3 for 15 min), measured under AM 1.5 G simulated light. A PCE of 17.1% was obtained with a Voc of 0.99 V, a Jsc of 23.2 mA cm−2 and a FF of 74.4%. The incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectrum (Fig. 3d) of the best performing device exhibits a strong response (above 80%) in the broad wavelength range from 400 to 760 nm. The integrated photocurrent density from the IPCE spectrum is 21.6 mA cm−2, and is slightly smaller than that obtained for the device from the J–V curve, with a deviation of 7%.
To study the photocurrent hysteresis in perovskite solar cells using the CuOx hole transport layer (with UV-O3 treatment for 15 min), we measured the J–V curves of our devices using both reverse and forward scans with a scan rate of 300 mV s−1 (Fig. 4a). The device obtained a PCE of 16.6%, a Voc of 1.01 V, a Jsc of 21.9 mA cm−2 and a FF of 74.8% under the reverse scan. A PCE of 16.2%, a Voc of 0.99 V, a Jsc of 22.3 mA cm−2 and a FF of 73.4% were achieved in the same device, under the forward scan. Additionally, as can be observed from Fig. 4b, the J–V curves of the device measured at different scan rates (100 mV s−1, 300 mV s−1, 500 mV s−1) were almost consistent with each other, suggesting that our perovskite solar cells with the CuOx hole transport layers have a negligible hysteresis (the corresponding device parameters are shown in Table 1). Furthermore, the steady photocurrent output curve under continuous light illumination is recorded in Fig. 4c. The equilibrium photocurrent density generated at 0.800 V was 20.4 mA cm−2 and the corresponding PCE deduced was 16.3%, indicating that the PCE of our inverted devices is stable and reliable.
Scan mode
Scan rate (mV s−1)

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Reverse
100
1.00
22.2
75.7
16.8
Reverse
300
1.01
21.9
74.8
16.6
Reverse
500
1.00
22.3
74.8
16.7
Forward
300
0.99
22.3
73.4
16.2
To check the reproducibility of the performance of the inverted perovskite solar cells with the CuOx hole transport layer, 30 independent solar cells were fabricated and measured. The statistics of the PCEs are presented in Fig. 5a. The distribution of the PCEs for the 30 cells is mainly concentrated in a small range from 16% to 17%, which indicates that our solution-processed CuOx layer could be a potential inorganic HTM for inverted perovskite solar cells. The histograms of the other performance parameters of Voc, Jsc and FF for the 30 perovskite solar cells are shown in Fig. S7. To explore the charge transfer at the interface between the different HTMs and the perovskite layer, we fabricated the perovskite films on the CuOx layer and the PEDOT:PSS layer. Fig. 5b presents the time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the PEDOT:PSS/perovskite and the CuOx/perovskite. The PL lifetimes of these two samples were fitted with a bi-exponential decay function, including a fast decay and a slow decay process. The fast decay process is supposed to be the consequence of the hole carrier transport from the perovskite layer to the HTMs, and the slow decay process is ascribed to the radiative decay of the free carriers in the perovskite layer; the fitting parameters are summarized in Table S2. For the PEDOT:PSS/perovskite, the fast decay lifetime and the slow decay lifetime are 2.5 ns and 6.8 ns, and the weight fractions are 53.9% and 46.1%, respectively. However, as far as the CuOx/perovskite is concerned, the fast decay lifetime decreases to 0.9 ns while its weight fraction increases to 79.9%, which indicates that the fast decay is the dominating decay mechanism and more hole carriers are efficiently transferred from the perovskite layer to the CuOx layer rather than to the PEDOT:PSS. This informs us that CuOx could be a potential HTM instead of the conventional PEDOT:PSS. Furthermore, Fig. 5c shows the electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) of perovskite solar cells with PEDOT:PSS and CuOx. The semicircle in the high-frequency range is mainly ascribed to the contact resistance at the PEDOT:PSS/perovskite or CuOx/perovskite interface. It is obvious that the radius of the semicircle for the CuOx/perovskite is smaller than that of the semicircle for the PEDOT:PSS/perovskite, suggesting the lower contact resistance at the CuOx/perovskite interface, which is a major factor for the high FF obtained in the perovskite solar cells with CuOx as the HTM. The long-term air stabilities of perovskite solar cells with PEDOT:PSS and CuOx stored in air are exhibited in Fig. 5d. The CuOx based device maintained nearly 90% of its initial PCE after 200 hours, while for the PEDOT:PSS based device, its PCE attenuated to only 50%, which resulted from the hygroscopic and acidic nature of the PEDOT:PSS. Additionally, devices without hole transport layers were fabricated, and the photovoltaic parameters of devices with or without CuOx layers are presented in Table S7. As can be seen, the devices employing the CuOx layer as the hole transporting material demonstrated a superior performance to that of the devices without the CuOx layer, suggesting that CuOx plays a significant role in the perovskite solar cells, even though the content of CuOx on the surface of the ITO is very small.

In summary, we fabricated a planar inverted perovskite solar cell by the incorporation of a solution-processed CuOx hole transport layer, where the perovskite layer was deposited by a one-step, fast deposition-crystallization method. The highest PCE of 17.1% was obtained after further optimization of the CuOx based device. It was demonstrated that the high performance of the CuOx based device could have originated from the fast hole carrier transfer from the perovskite to the CuOx layer, and the lower contact resistance of the CuOx layer. Furthermore, the inverted perovskite solar cells employing CuOx as a hole transport layer showed superior stability to that of the perovskite solar cells with PEDOT:PSS. Of significance is the fact that the solution-processed CuOx layer is a simple, inexpensive and controllable way to provide potential and the large-scale fabrication of HTM for inverted perovskite solar cells.


Copper(II) acetylacetonate (Cu(acac)2, purity >99.9%), PEDOT:PSS (Clevious P VP AI 4083), PbI2 (99.9985%), C60 (99.9%) and 2,9-dimethyl-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline (BCP) (99.9%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, H. C. Stark Company, Alfa Aesar, Puyang Yongxin Fullerene Technology Co., Ltd and Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp. (PLT), respectively. Indium tin oxide (ITO) coated glass substrates with a sheet resistance of 8 Ω sq−1 and ITO thickness of 180 nm were purchased from Huayulianhe Co. Ltd. Methylammonium iodide (CH3NH3I) was synthesized according to the procedure reported previously. All these commercially available materials were used as received without any further purification.


The ITO coated glass substrates were sequentially cleaned by ultrasonication in detergent, deionized water, acetone and isopropyl alcohol, and treated with ultraviolet-ozone for 10 minutes. The CuOx film was deposited by spin-coating Cu(acac)2 in 1,2-dichlorobenzene solution (1.5 mg mL−1) at 4000 rpm for 60 s on the ITO electrode, and then annealing at 80 °C for 20 min in air. After washing by spin-coating with methanol, the CuOx film was transferred into ultraviolet-ozone for treatment for several min (0 min, 15 min, 30 min, 60 min). Afterwards, a layer of perovskite was deposited by either the fast crystallization-deposition (FDC) method or the two-step coating method. Finally, C60 (40 nm), BCP (8 nm) and Ag (100 nm) layers were sequentially deposited on the CH3NH3PbI3 film by thermal evaporation under vacuum (10−6 mbar). The active area of the devices was 0.100 cm2.


All measurements of photovoltaic performance were performed in a glove box. The current–voltage curves of perovskite solar cells were measured using a Keithley 4200 Semiconductor Characterization System (scan speed of 300 mV s−1). The solar cells were illuminated using an Oriel 300 W solar simulator (Thermo Oriel 91160-1000) as an excitation source (100 mW cm−2 white light illumination under AM 1.5 G conditions). The incident-photo-to-current conversion efficiency was recorded on a Keithley 2400 source meter under the irradiation of a 150 W tungsten lamp with a 1/4 m monochromator (Spectral Product DK 240). Scanning electron microscope (SEM) and atomic force microscope (AFM) images of CuOx film and CH3NH3PbI3 film were collected on a Hitachi S-4800 and SPI3800/SPA400 SPM (Seiko Instrument Inc), respectively. The thickness of the thin films was measured with a KLA-Tencor Alpha-Step Surface Profiler. The work functions of the CuOx films were measured by using ultraviolet photoelectron yield spectroscopy (Riken Keiki). X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) were obtained by an AXIS Ultra instrument (Kratos UK) at a base pressure of about 10−8 torr and 295 K. Impedance spectra were recorded at 0.8 V bias on a CHI660 electrochemical workstation (CH Instrument Inc. USA). Unless otherwise specified, the CuOx films for characterization and device fabrication were prepared under O3 treatment for 15 min. The femtosecond time-resolved fluorescence spectra were recorded by a high resolution streak camera system (Hamamatsu C10910). All the samples were excited by 517 nm at room temperature with a 135 nJ cm−2 per pulse. The lifetime was obtained by fitting the PL measured from the perovskite films with a bi-exponential decay function of the form

This work was supported by the National Basic Research Program (2011CB933303) and the National Nature Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (Grant No. 21321001 and 21371012).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6nr01927g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016