 DOI: 10.1039/C8CP00563J
(Communication)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 7395-7400


Xuewen
Zhang
,

Chunjun
Liang
*,

Mengjie
Sun
,

Huimin
Zhang
,

Chao
Ji
,

Zebang
Guo
,

Yajun
Xu
,

Fulin
Sun
,

Qi
Song
 and 

Zhiqun
He
*

Key Laboratory of Luminescence and Optical Information, Ministry of Education, School of Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China. E-mail: chjliang@bjtu.edu.cn; zhqhe@bjtu.edu.cn

Received
25th January 2018
, Accepted 22nd February 2018
First published on 23rd February 2018
Planar perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have gained great interest due to their low-temperature solution preparation and simple process. In inverted planar PSCs, an additional buffer layer is usually needed on the top of the PCBM electron-transport layer (ETL) to enhance the device performance. In this work, we used a new buffer layer, zirconium acetate (Zr(Ac)4). The inclusion of the Zr(Ac)4 buffer layer leads to the increase of FF from ∼68% to ∼79% and PCE from ∼14% to ∼17% in the planar PSCs. The UPS measurement indicates that the Zr(Ac)4 layer has a low HOMO level of −8.2 eV, indicating that the buffer layer can act as a hole-blocking layer. Surface morphology and surface chemistry investigations reveal that the elements I, MA and Pb can diffuse across the PCBM ETL, damaging the device performance. The covering Zr(Ac)4 molecules fill in the pinholes of the PCBM layer and effectively block the ions/molecules of the perovskite from diffusion across the ETL. The resulting more robust PCBM/Zr(Ac)4 ETL leads to weaker ionic charge accumulation and lower diode leakage current. The double role of hole-and-ion blocking of the Zr(Ac)4 layer explains the improved FF and PCE in the PSCs.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted wide and continuous attention. Their power conversion efficiency (PCE) increases from the original 3.8% to a certified 22.1% in a short period of time. There are two primary device structures for perovskite solar cells, mesoscopic and planar structures. Planar PSCs have gained great interest due to their low-temperature solution preparation and simple process. Fullerene and its derivatives, PCBM, are often used as the electron transport layer (ETL) in inverted planar PSCs. PCBM can passivate trap states of perovskite films and effectively transport electrons, resulting in less hysteresis in PSCs. However, an additional buffer layer is usually needed on the top of the PCBM ETL to enhance the device performance. BCP, the exciton and hole blocking layer, is a commonly used buffer layer on the top of PCBM in planar PSCs. A metal acetylacetonate thin layer is another effective buffer layer on PCBM. Although it has been shown that additional buffer layers have significant impact on the device performance, the detailed understanding on the mechanism behind is still lacking.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite has a low-energy barrier for ion/molecule migration within the light absorbers. Under an electric field, the mobile ions pile up at the interface of the perovskite. The accumulated ionic interface charge (IIC) affects the function of perovskite devices significantly. It changes the band bending of perovskite semiconductors, leading to the fabrication of polarity-switchable photovoltaic devices and light-emitting electrochemical cells. The IIC affects the charge-collection efficiency and the hysteresis behaviour of PSCs. Recently, it has been reported that the ion/element diffusion into the adjacent charge transport layer, particularly under high temperature and light illumination, has an important impact on the device performance. A nanostructured carbon layer, containing a carbon quantum dot buffer layer on a modified PCBM layer, was designed to suppress the diffusion of ions/molecules within perovskite solar cells, resulting in enhanced PCE and stability.
In this work, we used a new buffer layer, Zr(Ac)4, on top of the PCBM ETL. The inclusion of the Zr(Ac)4 buffer layer leads to a significant increase of FF and PCE in the planar PSCs. The UPS measurement indicates that the Zr(Ac)4 layer has a low HOMO level of −8.2 eV, indicating the hole-blocking ability of the buffer layer. Surface morphology and surface chemistry investigations reveal that the elements I, MA and Pb can diffuse across the PCBM ETL, damaging the device performance. The covering Zr(Ac)4 molecules fill in the pinholes of the PCBM layer and effectively block the ions/molecules of the perovskite from diffusion through the ETL. The resulting more robust PCBM/Zr(Ac)4 ETL leads to smaller IIC and lower diode leakage current.
The NiOx powder was prepared according to the published literature. PbI2 (99.99%) and MAI were purchased from Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Corp. PC61BM was purchased from Nano-C. Zr(Ac)4 was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The device structure is ITO/NiOx (30 nm)/perovskite (290 nm)/PCBM (30 nm)/Zr(Ac)4 (2 nm)/Au (80 nm). The glass substrate with an ITO conductive layer was washed with detergent, deionized water, ethyl alcohol in an ultrasonic cleaner for three times, respectively. The substrate was then treated in an UV zone for 20 min. NiOx was dissolved in deionized water to form a 20 mg mL−1 NP solution. The NiOx film was deposited with spin coating at a speed of 2000 rpm for 60 s in air. The perovskite thin film was formed by spin coating the mixed solution of PbI2 (1.1 M) and MAI (1.1 M) in a co-solvent of DMSO:GBL (5:5 vol ratio) at 1000 rpm for 20 s and then at 3000 rpm for 40 s. After spin coating for 50 s, methylbenzene (500 μL) was dropped quickly on the film. The drop casting of methylbenzene can remove excess DMSO and lead to rapid formation of an intermediate phase. Then it was heat treated at 60 °C for 5 min and 100 °C for 5 min. The ETL was deposited with spin coating the o-DCB solution of PCBM (20 mg mL−1) at 3000 rpm for 40 s. The Zr(Ac)4 buffer layer was covered on the PCBM layer by spin coating in an alcohol solution (2 mg mL−1) at 4000 rpm for 40 s. Finally, an Au electrode was deposited with thermal evaporation in a vacuum chamber.
The current density–voltage characteristics were recorded using a Keithley source meter. Illumination was provided by an Abet 2000 solar simulator with AM 1.5G spectra at 100 mW cm−2. The absorption spectrum was acquired on a Shimadzu UV-3101 PC spectrometer. The energy level of the inserting layer Zr(Ac)4 was measured using ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy. Film thickness was checked using an Ambios XP-2 profilometer. AC impedance analysis was performed using an SI 1260 impedance/gain-phase analyzer (Solartron). EQE measurements were performed using a QE/IPCE Measurements Solar Cell Scan 100 (ZOLIX) system equipped with a calibrated silicon photodiode as the reference cell.
The perovskite planar architecture is shown in Fig. 1a. NiOx is used as a hole-transport layer. Zr(Ac)4 acts as a buffer layer. Fig. 1b shows the energy-level diagram of the device. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy level of Zr(Ac)4 is measured using ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). Fig. 1c and d show the secondary electron cutoff (Ecutoff) and onset energy boundary in the UPS spectrum for the Zr(Ac)4 layer. The work function Φ is determined by the difference between the photon energy and the binding energy of the secondary cutoff edge, with Φ = hν − Ecutoff = 21.2 − 16.8 = 4.4 eV. The HOMO energy level is −8.2 eV according to the measured work function and the onset energy edge in Fig. 1d. The band gap of Zr(Ac)4 is 3.4 eV as measured by UV absorption. Therefore, the LUMO energy is −8.2 + 3.4 = −4.8 eV. These results indicate that the Zr(Ac)4 layer has a much lower HOMO level than the other layers, thus can function as an efficient hole-blocking layer in the photovoltaic device. The hole-blocking layer prevents the holes in the absorber generated by photoexcitation from reaching the cathode Au layer, reducing the recombination loss at the interface.
The photovoltaic performance of the device shows significant improvement with the Zr(Ac)4 buffer layer. Fig. 2a shows the current–voltage characteristics of the optimized PSCs with and without the Zr(Ac)4 layer. The PCE of the device increases by 19% from 14.4% to 17.1% upon the inclusion of the Zr(Ac)4 layer. The open-circuit voltage (Voc) and short-circuit current density (Jsc) increase slightly from 1.04 V and 19.66 mA cm−2 to 1.06 V and 20.23 mA cm−2, respectively. The fill factor (FF) changes significantly from 70.7% to 79.6%. The increased FF is the major contribution to the improved PCE. Fig. 2b and c show the statistics of FF and PCE in 20 PSCs with and without the Zr(Ac)4 layer. These results confirm that the insertion of the Zr(Ac)4 layer leads to significant improvement in FF and PCE in the PSCs. Fig. 2d shows the EQE spectrum of optimized devices with and without the Zr(Ac)4 layer and the integrated Jsc is 19.05 mA cm−2 and 18.44 mA cm−2, respectively, which are comparable with the Jsc from the J–V scanning. There is obvious EQE enhancement in the range of 600–750 nm with the inclusion of the Zr(Ac)4 layer. Since there is no obvious optical absorption from Zr(Ac)4 in this region, the enhancement could be due to the optical interference effect in multilayer thin films.Fig. 2e shows the UV absorption of the films. The absorption intensities of the perovskite, perovskite/PCBM, and perovskite/PCBM/Zr(Ac)4 films are almost identical. The Zr(Ac)4 layer has negligible influence on the absorption due to the small film thickness (∼2 nm). Fig. 2f shows that there is no obvious diffraction peak in the position of 12.8° contributing to the PbI2 crystal phase, which indicates that PbI2 almost completely reacted into MAPbI3.
In Fig. 3, the SEM and AFM images indicate the change in surface morphology of the perovskite covered by PCBM and the Zr(Ac)4 layer. The SEM image of the perovskite surface (Fig. 3a) shows clear perovskite grains and boundaries. The covered PCBM film makes the surface smoother. The Zr(Ac)4 layer further smoothens the surface (Fig. 3c). The trend is also confirmed via the AFM measurement, which shows that the roughness (root mean square, RMS) of the perovskite film is 6.68 nm; after the deposition of the PCBM film, the RMS decreases to 1.73 nm. The results indicate that small molecular PCBM can fill in the pinholes and the gaps between the perovskite grains, leading to a much smoother surface. After Zr(Ac)4 deposition, the RMS drops further to 1.54 nm, indicating that the Zr(Ac)4 molecules may fill in the pinholes in the PCBM layer and can further improve the smoothness of the perovskite/PCBM surface.

Fig. 4 shows the XPS spectra focusing on the surface of perovskite/PCBM and perovskite/PCBM/Zr(Ac)4 films. XPS measurement was used to detect the I, N and Pb elements in the vicinity of the surface (within 3 nm) of the PCBM and Zr(Ac)4 films. Here the nitrogen element represents the CH3NH3 (methylammonium or MA) molecular species in the perovskite. There are strong XPS peaks of I3d (Fig. 4a), N1s (Fig. 4b) and Pb4f (Fig. 4c) on the surface of the perovskite/PCBM film, indicating the significant ion/molecule diffusion of iodide, MA and Pb from the perovskite into the PCBM layer and eventually they travel to the PCBM surface. However, at the surface of the perovskite/PCBM/Zr(Ac)4 film, the XPS intensities of I3d (Fig. 4a), N1s (Fig. 4b) and Pb4f (Fig. 4c) all become significantly lower, indicating that the Zr(Ac)4 layer effectively blocks the ions/molecules of the perovskite from diffusion to the surface of the PCBM/Zr(Ac)4 layer.

Fig. 5a shows current–voltage characteristics of the device under forward and backward scans at the scan rate of 0.05 V s−1. The PSCs without Zr(Ac)4 display apparent photocurrent hysteresis, but the device with the Zr(Ac)4 layer exhibits negligible hysteresis. Fig. 5b shows the measured discharge current of the PSCs after a previous bias of 1 V for 10 s. The IIC density can be calculated from the integration of the discharge current, which is 6.5 μC cm−2 in the PSCs without the Zr(Ac)4 layer, but it decreases to 1.6 μC cm−2 in the device with the buffer layer. This result indicates that the inclusion of the Zr(Ac)4 layer weakens the accumulation of the ions at the device interfaces. This result is also consistent with the previous finding that a lower IIC density leads to a weaker hysteresis, and the high IIC density is associated with a strong hysteresis phenomenon.
For most diodes, the dark current at a low voltage range (<0.20 V) obeys Ohm's law and is referred to as a leakage current. At a high voltage range, the current obeys the exponential law of diode equation. From Fig. 5c, the leakage current of the PSCs without Zr(Ac)4 is higher than that with Zr(Ac)4, indicating that the insertion of the Zr(Ac)4 layer effectively suppresses the Ohmic leakage current of the semiconductor device. This result is further confirmed by the measurement of AC impedance spectroscopy (Fig. 5d), which shows that the impedances of the devices without the Zr(Ac)4 layer at DC 0 V are smaller than those of the PSCs with Zr(Ac)4. The size of the semicircle in the impedance spectra measured at DC 0 V is a reflection of the shunt resistance of the semiconductor device. A low leakage current represents a high shunt resistance, which is beneficial for a high FF in the device. The low current leakage explains the improved FF and PCE values in the device with the Zr(Ac)4 layer.

In summary, we demonstrated the inclusion of a new buffer layer Zr(Ac)4 on the conventional PCBM ETL (30 nm). The inclusion of the buffer layer leads to the increase of FF (from average 68% to average 79%) and PCE (from average 13.5% to average 16.8%) in the planar PSCs. The effect of the Zr(Ac)4 buffer layer was systematically investigated through a combination of characterizations. The UPS measurement indicates that the Zr(Ac)4 layer has a low HOMO level of −8.2 eV, indicating that the buffer layer acts as a hole-blocking layer. The investigations of the surface morphology using SEM and AFM images and the surface chemistry using XPS spectra suggest that the covering Zr(Ac)4 molecules fill in the pinholes of the PCBM layer and effectively block the ions/molecules of the perovskite from diffusion in the ETL. The resulting more robust PCBM/Zr(Ac)4 ETL leads to weaker ionic interface charge accumulation and hysteresis-free performance. More importantly, the inclusion of the buffer layer leads to the suppression of the leakage current, and an increase of the shunt resistance. The double role of hole-and-ion blocking of the Zr(Ac)4 layer explains the improved FF and PCE in the PSCs. We hope this work could provide a fairly new approach for high performance perovskite device fabrication and help people understand the mechanism behind perovskites.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61574014, 11474017, 21174016, and 61475014) and the Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education of China (No. 20120009110031).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cp00563j
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2018