 DOI: 10.1039/C1CP21517E
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 21487-21491

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Raheleh
Mohammadpour
,

Azam
Iraji zad
*,

Anders
Hagfeldt
 and 

Gerrit
Boschloo
*

Institute for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Sharif University of Technology, Teheran 14588-89694, Iran. E-mail: Iraji@sharif.edu; Fax: +98 2166164119

Department of Physical and Analytical Chemistry, Uppsala University, Box 259, 75105 Uppsala, Sweden. E-mail: gerrit.boschloo@fki.uu.se; Fax: +46 184713633

Received
11th May 2011
, Accepted 14th October 2011
First published on 3rd November 2011
In this work, we report on fabrication and characterization of dye-sensitized solar cells based on TiO2 nanotube/nanoparticle (NT/NP) composite electrodes. TiO2 nanotubes were prepared by anodization of Ti foil in an organic electrolyte. The nanotubes were chemically separated from the foil, ground and added to a TiO2 nanoparticle paste, from which composite NT/NP electrodes were fabricated. In the composite TiO2 films the nanotubes existed in bundles with a length of a few micrometres. By optimizing the amount of NT in the paste, dye-sensitized solar cells with an efficiency of 5.6% were obtained, a 10% improvement in comparison to solar cells with pure NP electrodes. By increasing the fraction of NT in the electrode the current density increased by 20% (from 11.1 to 13.3 mA cm−2), but the open circuit voltage decreased from 0.78 to 0.73 V. Electron transport, lifetime and extraction studies were performed to investigate this behavior. A higher fraction of NT in the paste led to more and deeper traps in the resulting composite electrodes. Nevertheless, faster electron transport under short-circuit conditions was found with increased NT content, but the electron lifetime was not improved. The electron diffusion length calculated for short-circuit conditions was increased 3-fold in composite electrodes with an optimized NT fraction. The charge collection efficiency was more than 90% over a wide range of light intensities, leading to improved solar cell performance.

The dye-sensitized solar cell (DSC) is a promising technology for achieving efficient solar-to-electric energy with relatively inexpensive materials and manufacturing processes. Generally, the photoanode of DSCs consists of a three-dimensional network of randomly interconnected metal oxide nanoparticles (NPs) with a large internal area available for dye adsorption. The large surface area of the mesoporous film enables adsorption of much dye in a monolayer resulting in efficient light harvesting, but also yields a large interface for charge recombination. The charge collection efficiency, which depends on the electron transport time and the electron lifetime, can be a limiting factor for the efficiency of DSCs.

Both electron transport and recombination kinetics in DSCs are relatively slow and dependent on incident light intensity, or more generally, on the local quasi-Fermi level in the TiO2. This behaviour has been explained using the multiple trapping model, which assumes the presence of a high density of trap states located in the bandgap of TiO2. The origin of such states could be surface states and grain boundaries. Changing the morphology of the porous TiO2 electrode can significantly alter the charge collection efficiency. For instance, charge collection in DSCs based on one-dimensional TiO2 nanotubes is reported to be enhanced, because of much greater electron lifetime in these nanotubular matrices.
In order to improve the charge collection efficiency of DSCs, considerable research has been done on one-dimensional nanostructures of TiO2, which can provide directional channels for electron transport. One of the most common methods to synthesize such structures is anodization of Ti foil, which leads to the formation of TiO2 nanotube arrays, oriented perpendicularly to the titanium substrate. Using such nanotube (NT) structures as electrodes has some disadvantages; the titanium foil prevents illumination through the substrate on the NT electrode, instead it must be illuminated through a transparent counter electrode, when a 2-electrode sandwich configuration is used. This causes optical as well as electrical losses. Furthermore, nanotubular electrodes have a lower roughness factor (less surface area) than nanoparticulate electrodes of the same thickness, which limits the amount of adsorbed dye and thus the light harvesting efficiency.
In our recent article we investigated the dynamics of electron transport and recombination in TiO2 nanotube electrodes used in DSCs. We found that TiO2 nanotubes have relatively more deep traps than TiO2 nanoparticles per unit volume. This causes the electron transport time to be quite comparable in both electrodes, in spite of higher degree of order in one-dimensional structure in NTs. On the other hand, the electron lifetime, the diffusion length and the diffusion coefficient of electrons were significantly longer in nanotubular TiO2 electrodes. In this study, we aim to combine the advantageous properties of NTs with the large surface area obtained with NP electrodes, by fabricating composite NT/NP electrodes on transparent substrates. In some previous studies the effect of addition of one-dimensional TiO2 nanostructures (synthesized viahydrothermal method) on nanoparticulate electrodes was investigated. An enhancement in DSC performance was generally found because of the enhancement in light scattering and electron transport.
Here, we will investigate the dynamics of electron transport and recombination in composite TiO2 electrodes containing varying amounts of nanotube bundles. Aligned TiO2 nanotube bundles were fabricated through electrochemical anodization of the Ti metal, followed by separation of the TiO2 nanotube layer from the metal, grinding and dispersion of the nanotube bundles into a TiO2 nanoparticle paste. Our findings indicate that addition of nanotube bundles to nanoparticulate electrodes can improve the current density of the dye-sensitized solar cell by decreasing electron transport time and increasing electron lifetime under short-circuit conditions.


TiO2 NT arrays were prepared by anodization of Ti foil (thickness 0.25 mm; purity 99.5%; Alfa Aesar) in a two-electrode electrochemical cell with a platinum foil as a cathode. The electrolyte was ethylene glycol containing 0.2 vol% H2O and 0.3 M NH4F. The Ti foil was biased at 60 V for 30 min at room temperature to grow a nanotubular TiO2 layer. The nanotube membrane is separated from the Ti foil by immersing in 0.1 M HCl and 0.1 M HF, which dissolves the compact amorphous TiO2 layer at the Ti/TiO2 NT interface. NT membranes were annealed at 520 °C for 6 h in pure oxygen with heating and cooling rates of 1 °C min−1, resulting in pure anatase nanorods, and were ground to obtain NT bundles. NT/NP composite electrodes were prepared by blending a concentrated colloidal TiO2 (anatase, size 20 nm) paste with different amounts of NT (2.5, 5, 15 and 18.5 wt% with respect to TiO2 NP content), followed by doctor-blading onto FTO substrates (fluorine-doped tinoxide coated glass, TEC8 by Pilkington), drying, and heating to 450 °C in air on a hot plate for 0.5 h. The resulting film thickness was 10 μm. The electrodes were immersed in a 0.5 mM ethanolic solution of N719 while still hot (80 °C) and left for 48 h. The electrodes were assembled with platinized FTO counter electrodes using a thermoplastic frame. A redox electrolyte was introduced through small holes drilled in the counter electrode that were sealed afterward. The composition of the electrolyte was as follows: 0.1 M I2, 0.1 M LiI, 0.6 M tetrabutylammonium iodide, 0.5 M 4-tertbutylpyridine in acetonitrile.

A LEO 1550 field-emission scanning electron microscope was used for morphological characterization of the samples. The nanotube length and also the thickness of nanoparticulate electrodes were obtained from SEM cross-section images of electrodes. The current–voltage characteristics of the cells were measured using a Keithley 2400 source/meter under simulated AM 1.5 illumination (100 mW cm−2) provided by a solar simulator (Newport 91160). Electron transport time and lifetime measurements were performed by recording the photocurrent and photovoltage response to a small square wave modulation of light intensity. A white light emitting diode (Luxeon Star/O, 1W) was used as a light source with an intensity equivalent to (i.e. giving the same photocurrent as) 0.34 to 100 mW cm−2 light with AM1.5G spectral distribution. The relation between open-circuit voltage and accumulated charge, VOC–QOC, was obtained by recording VOC after 5 s of continuous illumination at different light intensities, followed by switching off the light and integrating the current over 10 s to obtain the extracted charge. The accumulated electrons in the TiO2 electrode under short-circuit conditions, QSC, were measured by switching off the light source and integrating the current for 5 s.


Fig. 1a shows a cross sectional view by a scanning electron microscope of a freestanding TiO2 nanotube membrane. Under the anodization conditions used in this study the internal TiO2 tube diameter is 50 nm and the wall thickness is 20 nm, while the length could be up to 10 micrometre. Fig. 1b is a scanning electron microscope image of a TiO2 NT/NP composite electrode. In the preparation of the composite films, i.e., detachment of the nanotube membrane from the titanium substrate followed by heating, grinding and mixing with the nanoparticle paste, the NT membrane breaks into NT bundles with a length reduced to a few micrometres, as was evident from SEM analysis. There is an intimate contact between NT bundles and nanoparticles in the composite film, which should allow for efficient electron transfer between the two nanostructures.


Fig. 2 shows current–voltage characteristics of DSCs based on composite TiO2 electrodes containing different percentages of NT. The solar cell performance under AM 1.5 illumination (100 mW cm−2) is summarized in Table 1. A maximum efficiency of 5.6% with values of short circuit current (JSC) of 12.6 mA cm−2 and open circuit voltage (VOC) of 775 mV was obtained using composite electrodes containing 5 wt% NTs. It is apparent that the short-circuit current density of DSCs improves upon addition of NTs. This enhancement can be due to two effects: firstly, there can be increased light absorption in the film, since the micrometre-sized nanotube bundles act as light-scattering centers. Secondly, the improved short circuit current could be due to an improvement of the charge collection efficiency.
Composition

η
 (%)

V
OC/V

J
SC/mA cm−2
FF

a Power conversion efficiency.
b Fill factor.

NP
5.08
0.78
11.1
0.61
NP + 2.5 wt% NT
5.33
0.77
12.0
0.62
NP + 5 wt% NT
5.64
0.775
12.6
0.62
NP + 15 wt% NT
5.30
0.76
12.9
0.60
NP + 19 wt% NT
5.50
0.725
13.3
0.61
The optical properties of bare and dyed composite films were investigated using an UV-vis spectrometer equipped with an integrating sphere (see Fig. S1 in ESI). The results suggest negligible differences in the light harvesting efficiencies of the investigated films. Dye desorption studies showed, however, that the amount of absorbed dye, and thus the accessible surface area of the composite films, decreased with NT content, see Fig. S2 in ESI. Improvement of the charge collection efficiency appears therefore to be the main cause for improved solar cell performance. We have investigated electron transport, accumulation and recombination in the composite electrodes, in order to explain the effects of incorporation of TiO2 nanotube bundles into TiO2 nanoparticle films.
Charge extraction experiments were performed to measure the electron concentration in composite TiO2 electrodes as a function of open-circuit potential of the DSC. Results are shown in Fig. 3. The extracted charge is converted into an electron concentration in the TiO2 by assuming 50% porosity in all TiO2 electrodes. A clear trend is found: the electron concentration at a given VOC (or quasi-Fermi level in the TiO2 electrode) increases with increasing NT content. This can be attributed to an increase of trap density in the electrode with NT content in the composite electrodes. This observation was expected, as we have determined a greater trap density in pure NT electrodes than in NP electrodes in our previous study. The extracted charge is the sum of conduction band electrons and trapped electrons, but is considered to be dominated by trapped electrons. An exponential distribution of trap states (g(E), see eqn (1a)) is usually applied to describe the traps in the mesoporous TiO2 electrode of dye-sensitized solar cells. The concentration of trapped electrons is then given by eqn (1b).
(1a)
(1b)

EF0 is the Fermi level of the TiO2 in the dark (equal to the redox energy of the electrolyte), g0 is the trap density at EF0, and mc the slope of the exponential trap distribution (or the characteristic energy of the trap distribution, corresponding roughly to the average trap depth). The fitted characteristic trap energy mc in Fig. 3 ranges from 87 meV to 111 meV with increasing NT content, while g0 values increase from 1015 to 1016 cm−3eV−1, see Table S1 in ESI. These changes were not unexpected, since we measured high values for mc and g0 for pure nanotubes in our previous study (198 meV and 2.7 × 1018 cm−3eV−1, respectively).

In order to investigate the effect of NT-content in the TiO2 electrodes on charge collection efficiency, the transport and recombination times of electrons were studied by measuring the photocurrent and photovoltage response to a small square wave modulation of light intensity. The results are shown in Fig. 4. The photocurrent response time under short circuit conditions, assumed here to be equal to the electron transport time, decreased when the fraction of NT in the electrode was raised. This favorable improvement in electron transport in the composite NT/NP electrodes is therefore somewhat surprising, because in our recent investigation we found that electron transport time, and thus the effective electron diffusion coefficient, was very similar in pure nanotubular and nanoparticulate electrodes. It was, however, also found that the quasi-Fermi level was lower by about 0.2 eV in the nanotube electrodes under the measurement conditions, implying that the diffusion coefficient of conduction band electrons in the nanotubes was in fact much higher than that in nanoparticle films (by about 3 orders of magnitude). In the composite electrodes investigated here, the quasi-Fermi level will be locally uniform in the electrode. Under these conditions, conduction band electron concentration is locally equal in NT and NP (because equal conduction band edge positions are assumed) and electron transport in the nanotubes should be much faster than in the nanoparticles. The actual improvement of transport time is quite modest here, probably because the nanotube bundles are not specifically oriented in the film, nor necessarily in direct contact with the conducting substrate.
Increasing the fraction of NTs in the composite electrodes leads to small changes in electron lifetime under open circuit conditions, see Fig. 5. While lifetime was nearly unaffected at low amount of NT, a decrease was found for 19% NT. As the surface area of the electrode is decreasing with NT-content (which should in principle lead to an increased lifetime), the decrease in lifetime must be attributed to relatively faster recombination in the nanotubes between electrons in TiO2 and triiodide in the electrolyte. The increased recombination can be caused by the much larger concentration of trapped electrons in the nanotubes at a given potential. Analysis of electron lifetime as a function of the accumulated charge in the composite electrodes supports this conclusion (Fig. S3 in ESI).
In order to calculate the charge collection efficiency of the solar cells it is necessary to determine the electron transport time and lifetime under the same conditions. The electron lifetime under short-circuit conditions was determined using an indirect method. The accumulated charge in the DSC was measured under short circuit conditions (Fig. S4, ESI), and with help of the relation between electron lifetime and accumulated charge at open-circuit (Fig. S3, ESI), the lifetime under short circuit was determined. The assumption made is that equal electron concentrations in the electrode under open and short-circuit conditions yield the same electron lifetime. From the results shown in Fig. 4 it is clear that increasing the amount of NTs in composite electrodes greatly improves the electron lifetime under short circuit conditions. This is caused by the lower quasi-fermi level in the composite TiO2 films with higher NT content, because of their faster electron transport.
The diffusion length and charge collection efficiencies of DSCs based on composite electrodes were determined in order to quantify the effect of addition of NTs to nanoparticulate electrodes on JSC. Results are shown in Fig. 6. The effective electron diffusion length (L) was calculated using eqn (2) (where w is the film thickness) and the charge collection efficiencies calculated using eqn (3).
(2)
(3)
For an accurate calculation, both the electron lifetime and transport time were determined under conditions of equal charge in the TiO
2 electrodes (leading to equal quasi-Fermi levels) in short-circuit conditions. Addition of NTs to NP electrodes leads to longer electron diffusion length (∼20 μm for NP electrodes, ∼70 μm for NP + 19 wt% NT). The charge collection efficiency of composite electrodes are also greatly improved in comparison to nanoparticulate electrodes and reached more than 90% for all light intensities. Improvement in diffusion length of electrodes and charge collection efficiencies will result in an enhancement of the short circuit current of the DSCs. While improved diffusion length is perhaps not so important for iodide/triiodide based electrolytes, where L is usually much larger than the film thickness, it could be crucial in the case of solid-state DSCs and DSCs that use alternative redox mediators, which have much smaller diffusion lengths.


Addition of TiO2 nanotube bundles to TiO2 nanoparticle electrodes used in dye-sensitized solar cells leads to improved electron transport. This can be explained by the higher apparent electron diffusion coefficient in nanotubes compared to nanoparticles under conditions of equal quasi-Fermi level. The composite TiO2 nanotube/nanoparticle electrodes demonstrate improved electron diffusion length and charge collection efficiency, despite relatively poor electron lifetimes in the nanotube material. Composite electrodes containing nanoparticles for large surface area and dye adsorption and larger 1-D structures (wires) for charge collection and transport may be a solution for improved DSC performance.


We thank Leif Häggman for TiO2 paste preparation and the Hi-Tech Center of the Ministry of Industries and Mines (Iran) and the Swedish Research Council (VR) for financial support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c1cp21517e
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2011