 DOI: 10.1039/D1TA00444A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 8248-8278


Namsheer
K.
 and 

Chandra Sekhar
Rout
*

Centre for Nano and Material Sciences, Jain University, Jain Global Campus, Jakkasandra, Ramanagaram, Bangalore-562112, India. E-mail: r.chandrasekhar@jainuniversity.ac.in; csrout@gmail.com

Received
17th January 2021
, Accepted 24th February 2021
First published on 2nd March 2021
Photo-powered energy storage devices are attracting significant research interest due to their potential application in smart electronics. They have become a promising alternative to current energy sources and are suitable as next-generation power sources. Both planar and flexible/fiber photosupercapacitors are in the limelight due to their ease of fabrication, economic compatibility and multi-axial flexibility. A large number of integrated devices have emerged in the last decade, and among them, solar cell devices combined with supercapacitors have unique photo conversion and storage properties with promising overall efficiency. Thus, researchers have tried a wide variety of device combinations, and all reports are well sorted in this review. Herein, we comprehensively discuss different types of photo-powered supercapacitors with their design configuration, working mechanism and fabrication. Finally, the future direction, opportunities and challenges in this research field are discussed.
Namsheer K.
Namsheer K. received his B-Tech in Polymer Engineering from Mahatma Gandhi University (Kerala, India) in 2016 and M-Tech in Nanoscience and Technology from Pondicherry Central University (Pondicherry, India) in 2019. He is currently a Nanoscience Doctoral Student at the Centre for Nano & Material Science, Jain University working under Prof. Dr Chandra Sekhar Rout. His current research focuses on designing and fabricating polymer nanocomposite/2D materials for energy storage applications.
Chandra Sekhar Rout
Chandra Sekhar Rout is an Associate Professor at the Centre for Nano & Material Sciences (CNMS), Jain University. Before joining CNMS, he was a DST-Ramanujan Fellow at I.I.T. Bhubaneswar, India (2013–2017). He received his BSc (2001) and MSc (2003) Degrees from Utkal University and his PhD from JNCASR, Bangalore (2008) under the supervision of Prof. C. N. R. Rao. He did his Postdoctoral Research at the National University of Singapore (2008–2009), Purdue University, USA (2010–2012) and UNIST, South Korea (2012–2013). His research interests include 2D materials for sensors, supercapacitors and energy storage devices, field emitters and electronic devices.

Solar energy is an all-energy source for various natural processes. Radiant energy (solar energy) plays a crucial role in controlling the atmospheric temperature. The total global energy utilization has been reported to be 1.04 × 108 GW h per year and fossil fuels are at the top with 84% total consumption. The indiscriminate usage of fossil fuels has resulted in the massive production of CO2, causing global warming and other crucial environmental and health issues. The drastic increase in population, depletion of fossil fuel, and deficiency in conventional energy sources have caused a switch to the use of renewable energy sources such as wind, tidal, hydro, and solar energy. Among them, solar sources are preferred due to the worldwide availability of sunlight, zero pollution, and low cost. It is known that radiant energy is clean and that it can be converted into electrical energy using solar cell devices. Earth receives more than 3.6 × 104 TW of radiant energy per hour, which is more than the total energy consumption by humans in a year. These novel features of solar energy have triggered researchers to focus on the efficient conversion of solar energy to electrical energy for fulfilling the needs of society. The motivation behind the development of solar cell devices is Edmond Becquerel's invention (in 1839) of a light-dependent voltage produced between electrodes submerged in an electrolyte. In 1956, Bell Laboratories fabricated the first crystalline silicon solar cell. The last six decades of continuous research on solar cell devices have led to unbelievable evolutions in electrode materials, design architecture, fabrication methods, and conversion efficiency.

Accordingly, energy storage devices such as batteries and supercapacitors (SC) have received great attention in the global energy market. Considering the electrochemical energy storage capacity, some energy devices deliver power for a long time (batteries) and some are only suitable for use for a very short period (supercapacitors) with a high-rate capability. Batteries store energy by redox reactions followed by a phase change with a diffusion-controlled mechanism, whereas supercapacitors store energy either in an electrical double layer formed in the electrode–electrolyte interphase or by fast redox reactions, which occur due to the surface interaction on the active electrode materials or by the combination of both.
In the early stage, solar energy was successfully stored using batteries and supercapacitors via an external wire connection. In this case, both the solar cell and battery/capacitor are a separate system and not an integrated one. However, this architecture requires a complex fabrication process and results in a heavy size and high space consumption. Furthermore, the external interconnection to couple both the solar cell and energy storage devices causes power loss due to the high external resistance offered by the interconnection.
This issue has been solved empirically by coupling both solar cells and energy storage devices into a single module. Different bifunctional energy conversion systems such as piezoelectric nanogenerators, triboelectric nanogenerators and pyroelectric nanogenerators have been reported prior to photo energy-powered systems. All these systems harvest electrical energy from mechanical or thermal action. However, the main drawback of these nanogenerators is the insufficiency of the energy sources for these mechanisms, which are not in good alignment with the demand. Also, due to the low energy density and poor cyclability of batteries, they have limited applicability in photo rechargeable modules. Thus, to overcome the above-mentioned limitations of batteries, supercapacitors are widely used for the fabrication of bifunctional photo-powered energy storage systems. Supercapacitors have higher power density compared to batteries and good energy density than conventional capacitors. Due to instantaneous changes in illumination conditions in solar sources, supercapacitors have been used for quick charging. They deliver power when the solar supply is scarce, and thus the load is still satisfied. When a photovoltaic cell is exposed to light, the cell voltage reaches a certain value and it suddenly becomes zero when the cell is not illuminated. However, if it is interconnected with a supercapacitor, the cell voltage does not become zero immediately. Therefore, the power delivery is not interrupted when integrated with supercapacitors, and thus the device power output is more reliable.
Herein, in this review, we provide a brief discussion on photo-powered supercapacitors. We focus on the different types of photosupercapacitors (PS) based on DSSCs, QDSSC, OSCs, and PVSC, and their working and integration mechanism, recent advances and applications (Fig. 1).

Among the renewable energy sources, solar cell devices are promising due to their abundance, continuous supply, and environmentally friendly nature. Solar cell devices are mostly fabricated based on their photosensitization mechanisms. Among them, silicon-based solar cell devices have wide industrial applications due to their high photoconversion efficiency and environmental stability. Due to the expensive and complicated fabrication of silicon solar cells, thin-film technology has emerged for the fabrication of new solar cell devices.

Due to their low cost, easy fabrication, and optimum photo conversion efficiency, DSSCs are another set of promising solar cell alternatives to conventional Si solar cell devices. Each of their components including the photoanode, counter electrode, dye material, and electrolyte plays an important role in balancing the photoconversion efficiency. However, the type of photoanode material and its structure dominate the determination of the open-circuit voltage, photogenerated current density, light absorption, and fill factor of the solar cell. The maximum theoretical efficiency of DSSCs is predicted to be 32% and in real-time application, they exhibit an efficiency of 12.3%. ZnO and TiO2 have been widely studied as photoanode materials due to their similar conduction band edge, work function, and high carrier mobility. However, the application of ZnO is limited due to its high corrosion tendency in an acidic environment and degradation with dye aggregates. The working mechanism of DSSCs involves light inducing the photogeneration of an electron from the dye sensitizer, which is then ejected into the conduction band of the semiconductor (Fig. 2(a)). The dye gets reduced by receiving an electron from the electrolyte containing the I/I3− redox system. The photogenerated electron travels to the conducting transparent substrate attached to the semiconductor and leaves the device through an external circuit with the counter electrode. When an external load is applied under light illumination, the device becomes a photovoltaic energy conversion system and is stabilized by the regeneration of electrons. However, the overall efficiency of the device is affected by the undesirable recombination of dye/redox electrolyte before connecting to an external load.
As mentioned before, DSSCs have been considered as low cost and high photo conversion efficiency solar cells in the last three decades. However, vast research has been carried out on the fabrication of high-efficiency solar cell devices. Quantum dot-based solar cell devices have been at the forefront due to their novel optoelectronic outputs. The QD material property is size dependent and they have a tunable bandgap, excellent photostability, wide excitation spectra, high extinction coefficient, and multiple exciton generation. Nevertheless, presently, the efficiency of QDSSCs is limited to 16.6% and research is in progress to improve it. Recent research has mainly focused on developing green routes for the synthesis of QD to reduce the production of hazardous waste and aimed at making renewable energy research more meaningful. The modus operandi of QDSSCs is similar to that of DSSCs (Fig. 2(b)), where under light illumination, electron–hole pairs are generated. The generated electron moves to the conduction band of the QD and then to the CB of the wide bandgap semiconductor by leaving a hole in the VB of the QD. Then the electron moves towards the conducting transparent substrate through the semiconductor attached to the photoanode. Subsequently, the electron travels through the external circuit and is retained in the counter electrode. The amount of voltage developed during this process is perceived as the solar cell efficiency. The voltage developed is the difference between the quasi-Fermi level of the electron in the photoanode and the redox potential of the electrolyte.
Perovskite solar cell devices are third-generation, emerging photovoltaic devices that work similar to QDSSCs, in which perovskite acts as the photosensitizer. The high absorption co-efficient, bandgap tunability, long diffusion length, wide availability of material, low-cost processibility and potential to exceed the Shockley–Queisser limit make them the favourite candidates among the emerging photovoltaics. Perovskite devices have reached an efficiency close to that of commercialised silicon devices. Generally, perovskites act as photosensitizers instead of quantum dots in QDSSCs. The most widely used perovskite is MAPbI3, in which materials such as TiO2 and SnO2 are widely used as the electron transport layer and spiro-OMeTAD, P3HT, and PEDOT: PSS act as hole transport layers. Nowadays, to enhance the efficiency of solar devices, tandem devices have been implemented. Perovskite silicon tandem devices are emerging tandem devices in which the tandem efficiency has already crossed that of single-junction silicon solar cell devices (Fig. 2(c)).
Organic photovoltaics work differently from other solar cell devices. Upon light illumination, free charge carriers such as electrons and holes are generated. The dissociation of the electron–hole pair will be fulfilled by the two different materials present in the active layer, i.e., an electron acceptor and electron donor layer. The donor layer has a high ionization potential and the acceptor layer has high electron affinity. When an electron is excited from the HOMO to LUMO of the donor, it is further transferred to the LUMO of the accepter only if the bandgap energy is less than that of the donor material. The voltage output is the result of the energy difference between the donor HOMO and acceptor LUMO, with an empirical limit of 0.6 eV less than the bandgap of the absorber (Fig. 2(d)).

The energy storage part or supercapacitor section is another component of photosupercapacitors. Rechargeable batteries are the widely used energy storage units in electronic devices. Capacitors and supercapacitors have also emerged for energy storage applications. Compared to conventional capacitors, supercapacitors have outstanding power density and few-order higher capacitances. They also have lower energy densities compared to batteries. The main advantage of supercapacitors is their quick charging and cyclability. These novel features can be of great use in the field of photosupercapacitors. Basically, supercapacitors are classified as three-electric double-layer capacitors (EDLC), pseudocapacitors and hybrid capacitors depending on their charge storage mechanism. In EDLC, the charge storage mechanism occurs via coulombic charge absorption in the electrode–electrolyte interface, whereas in the case of pseudocapacitors, the charge storage mechanism occurs through redox reactions. The combination of both the EDLC and pseudo mechanism is used in the case of hybrid supercapacitors.


In a conventional di-electric supercapacitor (Fig. 3(a)), the capacitance heavily depends on the separation between two electrodes. In the case of EDL capacitors, the interfacial area plays the main role in charge storage. The electrostatic charge storage occurs due to the effect of reversible adsorption of ions from the electrolyte on the stable electrochemically active electrode material. The formation of the electric double layer will be satisfied when electric polarization occurs in the electrode–electrolyte interface. The charge is stored only in the double layer without penetrating the anode or cathode electrode. Here, the generation of the surface charge occurs via the dissociation of the surface, the adsorption of ions on the electrode and the crystal defects of the electrode material. The ion size and the electrolyte affect the thickness of the electric double layer, which is 5–10 Å for concentrated electrolytes. In supercapacitors constructed of electrodes adhered over metallic current collectors, the two electrodes are placed in electrolyte separated by ion-permeable membranes. In the case of conventional capacitors, the capacitance is influenced by the separation length of the electrodes. Conversely, in the case of EDL capacitors, the capacitance depends on the electric double layer formed between the electrode–electrolyte interface. The width of the ED thickness will always be less than that of the ion-permeable membrane.

Pseudocapacitors are another type of supercapacitor, whose mode of operation belongs between that of a battery and supercapacitor. The charge storage process in pseudocapacitors is a surface phenomenon (Fig. 3(b)). The working mechanism of pseudocapacitors mimics the storage mechanism of a battery to some extent. Materials such as transition metal oxides and conducting polymers show pseudocapacitive behaviour. The energy storage mechanism in conducting polymers occurs through redox reaction in the pi-conjugated chain during the electrochemical doping/de-doping process. In the case of transition metals, charge storage is achieved via methods including under-potential deposition, fast redox reactions caused by the intercalation of protons, alkali metal cations and intercalation mechanism. Under potential-deposition occurs only when there is positive potential with respect to the Nernst potential. In the case of redox pseudocapacitors, the converted reduced species is electrochemically absorbed on the surface of the oxidized species, and the oxidized species are either electrochemically absorbed on the reduced species or in the vicinity of the reduced species via a faradaic process. Materials such as RuO2 and MnO2 work under the aforementioned mechanism. In intercalation-based pseudocapacitors, ion intercalation towards redox-active electrode materials occurs without any crystallographic phase changes. The intercalation in pseudocapacitive materials depends on the crystallinity and crystalline phase of the electrode material irrespective of the capacitance. The main advantage of pseudocapacitors is that they store more charge within a short period due to solid-state diffusion. Transition metal oxides have a higher theoretical capacitance compared with conducting polymers, but in reality, they have low electrical conductivity and low stability and have a trade-off between energy and power density.
The working principle of hybrid supercapacitors is a combination of both EDLC and pseudocapacitors (Fig. 3(c)). The limitations in the EDL supercapacitor are not visible in pseudocapacitors and vice versa, and their combination rectifies the limitation of individual EDLC and pseudocapacitive material electrodes. A hybrid supercapacitor with two different electrodes possesses good electrochemical activity and result in a higher specific capacitance than that with a symmetric architecture. However, one of the major issues with hybrid capacitors is the imbalance in the charge/discharge rate between the electrodes due to their difference in energy storage mechanism. This imbalance in storage will limit the maximum energy utilization of the intercalation electrode, which is reflected on the overall efficiency of the entire system. This imbalance is rectified by the use of a high intercalation pseudocapacitive material as the anode material. Hybrid capacitors result in a higher energy and power density than EDLC with high cycle stability. Supercapacitors are classified as symmetric, asymmetric, and composite hybrids based on their electrode configuration and the active materials used.
Batteries and supercapacitors store charge electrochemically, and different mechanisms determine their energy and power density. As discussed above, supercapacitors store energy either electrostatically or by a faradaic electrochemical process. They utilize high surface area electrode materials and very thin dielectric space to gain high capacitance compared to conventional capacitors. In batteries, charge storage occurs via diffusion-controlled redox reactions. Redox reactions are not needed for the charge storage mechanism in a supercapacitor, which achieve storage by the adsorption of electrolyte ions on the surface of the active electrode materials (Fig. 4(a–d)). Compared to batteries, supercapacitors have fast charge–discharge rates within seconds or minutes and low energy density. Supercapacitors have a high power density, long cycle life, high efficiency, high operating stability, and are safe. However, the main difference between batteries and supercapacitors is that in the latter, at constant current charging, the voltage response linearly increases, and at current discharging the voltage response decreases.

Based on the design geometry, supercapacitors can be classified into five types, including 1D, 2D stacked, 2D in-plane, 3D stacked, and 3D in-plane supercapacitors. 1D supercapacitors are fiber/wire/yarn type with a micrometre diameter and length of millimetres (Fig. 5(a)). The main advantages of 1D supercapacitors are they have higher mechanical flexibility compared to other topologies and they can be easily integrated in to small spaces. In the case of the 2D stacked architecture, the anode, cathode separator, and electrolyte are stacked vertically over a bottom-top current collector. Conversely, in the case of 2D in-plane supercapacitors, the architecture is inverse to that of 2D stacked. The construction is done by interdigital mode, where both the anode and cathode electrodes are parallelly separated by micrometre interspaces. In the 3D stacked geometry, the conformal stacked layers of the electrodes, electrolyte, and current collector are integrated on a 3D vertically aligned substrate. In the 3D in-plane architecture, the vertically aligned pillar interdigital electrodes are assembled over a current collector. The ion movement in the stacked configuration is via vertical diffusion throughout the thickness, whereas that in the in-plane configuration occurs parallelly between the microscale separated electrodes. Both the 2D and 3D in-plane supercapacitors are well explored, whereas research on 3D stacked configurations is still in the preliminary stage (Fig. 5(b and c)).

3D electrode topologies enhance the amount of mass loading, improve the mass transport kinetics, and reduce the ionic diffusion distance, and therefore the interface between the electrode–electrolyte is comparable to that of other topologies. The layer-by-layer integrated electrodes are vulnerable to breaking due to their film-like arrangement, whereas the 3D topology with building blocks is mechanically stable and provide a longer cycle life. A large variety of templates have been investigated to fabricate the 3D topology including nanowires, nanowalls, nanosheets, and nanotubes. However, 3D templating suffers from spacing issues, such as proper distancing between the nanostructures to get the conformal deposition of active electrode material over the surface. 3D supercapacitors are widely fabricated by making cavities via etching, and the active material is deposited in these cavities. In this case, the topology is similar to that of layer-by-layer fabrication, where the main difference is in terms of burying the electrode material in the cavity. Generally, methods including 3D printing, lithography, plasma etching, and inkjet printing are employed to fabricate 3D supercapacitors. Among them, 3D printing is used to produce effective prototyping, which is also known as additive manufacturing. 3D printing begins with a software-designed 3D model, where sliced layers of 2D objects are produced via computer programming, and finally a 3D structure is realized. There are several parameters that play a crucial role in 3D printing, which are beyond the scope of this review article and their details are available elsewhere.

The rapid development of wearable electronic devices for biomedical, self-powered sensors and wearable self-monitoring devices are in the limelight, which require miniaturized energy devices. Conventional electrochemical batteries are limited for these applications due to their low power density and poor cycle stability. For long-term applications, supercapacitors are a better choice due to their high cycle stability as alternatives due to the shortcoming of batteries. Conventional thin film supercapacitors used to fulfil the demands of wearable electronics are in their budding stage, and currently miniaturized micro-supercapacitors are being using widely for this. In typical supercapacitors, the electrode thickness hinders the fast ion transport and affects the power density badly. Accordingly, micro-supercapacitors have emerged to overcome these issues, in which microelectrode fingers are separated precisely in the micrometre range to achieve enhanced ion transport. However, their working mechanisms are similar with that of conventional supercapacitors. In this type of device, the isolation of electrode fingers eliminates the possibility of short circuit, and finally it can be easily integrated with other functional electronic devices (Fig. 5(d)). There are numerous fabrication strategies available to develop micro supercapacitors including lithography, deposition of active electrode materials over a prepatterned substrate, laser writing, plasma etching, and direct inkjet printing.


Electrochromism is defined as the voltage-induced reversible change in the optical property of a material, i.e., the material exhibits a colour change during redox and oxidation reactions involved in the electrochemical process. These types of materials have wide application in the field of optoelectronic devices and in energy storage devices such as supercapacitors and batteries. Conducting polymers and transition metal oxides show an electrochromic effect and are widely using for fabricating the abovementioned devices. In the case of supercapacitors, the charge storage occurs either via the EDL or by pseudocapacitive mechanism. When the faradaic reaction occurs, charge transfer occurs and the materials undergo some colour change (Fig. 5(e)). The materials show electrochromism during charge injection or ejection, and thus the integration of electrochromic materials inside the supercapacitor device gives a visual idea about the state of charge. Electrochromic devices are intelligent devices because the electrochromic supercapacitor communicates the changes in predictable manner, and we can easily get an idea about the energy consumption and current energy state of the device.


In practical application, electrode materials are susceptible to breaking due to mechanical bending/folding/compressing or the charge/discharge process. This breaking of the electrode materials affects the electrochemical performance of the device and its safety. Thus, the ideal supercapacitor function is not only to give better capacitance, but also to retain the electrochemical parameters even after mechanical damage. To overcome these issues, self-healing supercapacitors are at the forefront. When animals and plants are injured, they heal themselves. Supercapacitors mimic the same process, which is fulfilled either by microencapsulation or the interdiffusion of molecules. Generally, self-healing supercapacitors are fabricated by integrating suitable self-healing materials into the supercapacitor, which retain the structural as well as the electrochemical integrity of the device. Generally, the SC is fabricated over a self-healing polymer substrate. If any cracks occur, the ruptured surface gathers together and heals itself (Fig. 5(f)). The main challenge with self-healing materials is that most of them adversely affect the properties of the supercapacitor and optimization of a suitable material is difficult. Some polymers will polymerize only at higher temperatures and under light-induced reaction conditions, which may affect the performance of the supercapacitor, and thus all these factors must be optimized before fabricating the device.

There are other types of supercapacitors including electrochemical flow supercapacitors, AC filtering supercapacitors and flexible supercapacitors, which are in the limelight but beyond the scope of this review article, and details about them are available elsewhere.

Photosupercapacitors are fabricated by the integration of dye-sensitized perovskite and organic or silicon solar cell devices with supercapacitors (EDLC, pseudo, and hybrid) into one module. The fabricated device must share a common electrode or it must be in the same substrate. The bifunctional solar charged energy storage devices are constructed as either the planar or fiber design. The various design strategies are explained below.


According to the literature, the first photo-supercapacitor was fabricated by Miyasaka and co-workers in 2004. The fabricated device performs in situ energy storage of radiant energy as electrical energy with a high solar power conversion efficiency. This solar charged supercapacitor adsorbs visible light using a dye-sensitized crystalline film. The design architecture of photosupercapacitors consist of a photoelectrode for the effective absorption of sunlight, redox-free liquid electrolyte, and a counter electrode. Both the electrode and counter electrode have a heterojunction with a porous layer of activated carbon for better charge accumulation. The dye-adsorbed semiconductor nanoparticles in the photoelectrode transfer the photogenerated electrons to the conduction band of the semiconductor and dye sensitization occurs. After the completion of charge separation, the photogenerated electrons and holes move towards the activated carbon layer attached to the photoelectrode and counter electrode. Moreover, the attached activated carbon layer enhances fast discharging in the photoelectrode and fast charging and discharging action in the counter electrode (Fig. 6(a)). The separated photogenerated electrons and holes form an electric double layer between the interphase of both the electrode and electrolyte, thereby storing charge. The charging and discharging process in the integrated module act similar to conventional supercapacitors. The working mechanism behind DSSC-based PS is described below.

Dye + hν → dye*
(i)
dye* + TiO2 → TiO2ecb− + dye+
(ii)
dye* → dye
(iii)
2dye+ + 3I− → 2dye + I3−
(iv)
dye+ + ecb−TiO2 → dye + TiO2
(v)
I3− + 2e− (catalyst) → 3I−
(vi)
I3− + 2ecb−TiO2 → 3I− + TiO2
(vii)
The process involves steps wherein the dye molecule gets excited to a higher energy state by absorbing light energy (eqn (1)) and transfers photoinduced electrons to the CB of the TiO2 semiconductor (eqn (2)), and after successfully completing the deactivation of a dye reaction (eqn (3)), pushing holes through the sensitizer hole regions.
Photosensitization has also been performed using quantum dots, organic materials, and perovskite, and materials for charge accumulation besides porous carbon have been investigated, but the literature on these topics is scarce. The typical working principle of QDSSC-based two-electrode photo-supercapacitors was well explained by Cortes and co-workers. In this work, they fabricated ZnO nanorod arrays decorated with Ag2S quantum dots as the photoanode, PEDOT charge storage material as the counter-electrode, and PVP/[HEMIm][BF4] as the electrolyte. Upon light irradiation, the Ag2S QDs get photoexcited and the generated electrons move toward the ZnO nanorods, and these photogenerated electrons move to the counter-electrode (PEDOT) through an external circuit, where a negative charge builds up. Meanwhile, a PEDOT film is deposited over the ZnO nanorods, which has a partial positive charge. The BF4− ions are attracted towards the ZnO nanorod and HEMIm moves towards the negatively charged PEDOT, electrical double layer action takes place and charge storage action is triggered. In the discharge time, the electric double layer is reorganized. The photosensitization mechanism is done without having dye and this architecture has good charge storage efficiency.
In the case of organic photo-supercapacitors, they capture and simultaneously store energy, which are generally referred to as photo-rechargeable systems. Intrinsically conducting polymers and high electron affinity organic molecules act as the donor and acceptor, respectively, which are potential candidates for the fabrication of organic solar cells for cost-effective energy conversion devices. Upon light-harvesting, these materials generate photogenerated charge carriers, which subsequently diffuse in the donor–acceptor interface. These excitons are forced to stay separated by the energy gap between the energy level (LUMO) of the donor and energy level (HOMO) of the acceptor and the accumulated electrons and holes drift from the cathode and anode, respectively.

Miyasaka observed that two-electrode-based PS have high internal resistance and show a slow discharging process due to the return of the electron towards the photoelectrode via the space charge Schottky barrier existing in the TiO2 layer attached to the photoelectrode. To overcome the discharging issue in photo-rechargeable batteries, which consist of dye-sensitized TiO2, Nagai and coworkers incorporated one more electrode to obtain fast discharging by efficient redox reaction. Inspired by Nagai's investigation, Miyasaka fabricated the first three-electrode PS based on DSSC. The proposed working mechanism of the three-electrode DSSC PS was well explained (Fig. 6(b)). They introduced a bifunctional electrode between the photoelectrode and charge storage electrode. This bifunctional electrode split the device into two separate parts as DSSC SC and ES devices. This intermediate electrode has two parts, where one part serves as the photoconversion electrode and the other acts as the energy storage electrode. The bifunctional electrode works with the use of different electrolytes, namely a redox electrolyte for the photoconversion part and non-redox electrolyte for the energy storage device. During the photo charging process, both the counter electrode and photoelectrode are connected and the intermediate electrode remains open. When light is illuminated on the dye attached to the photoelectrode, the photons are adsorbed and charge separation occurs. Electrons move towards the counter electrode part through the conduction band of the semiconducting material incorporated with the photoelectrode and gets stored in the electric double layer. Meanwhile, the Li attached to the electrolyte captures the photogenerated holes and degrades the dye gradually. I3− moves towards the intermediate electrode, which results in the regeneration of iodine ions and efficient charge storage. Conversely, in the case of the discharging process, the intermediate electrode and counter electrode are connected and the photoelectrode remains open so that SC delivers the stored energy. The main advantage of the integrated device is that it overcomes the high internal resistance due to the return of the electron towards the photoelectrode through the space charge Schottky barrier existing in the semiconductor material. The two-electrode configuration has a high internal resistance of 2.6 kΩ, which is exponentially reduced to 330 Ω by the integration of a bifunctional intermediate electrode. The device also resists the penetration of the redox electrolyte into the supercapacitor electrode.

The working principle of QD-based photosupercapacitors mimics that of DSSC-based photosupercapacitors, where the only difference between them is that the sensitization material in QD PS is a quantum dot inorganic material. All the processes including photocharge generation, hole and electron separation, electron and hole transport, formation of an electric double layer and regeneration of electrolyte are same as that of DSSC-based PS. QDPS have several advantages over conventional DSSCPS such as high theoretical capacitance, generation of more than one exciton from a single photon, quantum confinement effect, tunable bandgap and size-dependent behaviours.

Based on their architecture, planar photosupercapacitors can be classified into sandwich and in-plane types. The conventional supercapacitors, micro-supercapacitors, and photosupercapacitors are fabricated layer by layer in a sandwich-type integration. Interestingly, the novel in-plane PS has several advantages over the conventional sandwich- and fiber-type PS. This architecture enhances the accessibility of the active electrode material due to edgewise electrode–electrolyte exposure. Thus, the device shows an ultra-high-power density that is larger than that of conventional devices. The small interspace between the electrodes and separator-free construction of in-plane devices reduce the ion mobility resistance, and thus a high-frequency response can be achieved. They can be easily integrated over on-chip electronics/microelectronic devices as a discrete power source, and they are very thin and highly flexible. The reports available on in-plane type are limited due to the difficulties in design and fabrication techniques such as lithography, plasma etching, and inkjet printing compared to the sandwich type. The first two-electrode structured DSSC-based PS was developed long before by Miyasaka, and its design and working mechanism have been explained before. The main problem observed in the two-electrode design is when the discharge process starts, there is a chance of the electron returning from the electrode (of energy storage parts) to the photoelectrode part through the Schottky barriers of the semiconductor attached to the photoelectrode. This heavily affects the discharge process. The photoconversion part consists of a liquid redox electrolyte and there is a chance of penetration towards the energy storage electrode, causing self-discharging or short circuit. The conventional DSSC consists of a dye attached to a TiO2 semiconductor photoanode fabricated on a transparent glass substrate, electrolyte with the I−/I3− redox couple and a counter electrode made of platinum. There are two ways to enhance the photoconversion efficiency of DSSC. The dye must have (1) a wide absorption spectrum and (2) must have efficient electron charge transfer property towards the counter electrode. The co-sensitization process is very important in both QDSSC and DSSC for achieving a high internal photoconversion efficiency (Fig. 7). The absorption of most dyes is limited to the visible region, and thus co-sensitization helps to improve absorption edge of the resultant spectrum. In the co-sensitization process, two different dyes or QDs are used to absorb different areas of the solar spectrum, resulting in a panchromatic absorption spectrum. The co-sensitization process helps to increase the short circuit current density through high sunlight harvesting. It also helps to form a tightly packed monolayer of two dyes, which limits the return of the electron from the counter electrode back to the photoelectrode through the semiconductor, thereby enhancing the open circuit voltage.

The counter electrode in DSSC plays a predominant role in the reduction of tri-iodide shuttle species by receiving electrons from the external circuit. Generally, DSSCs use platinum materials as the counter electrodes. However, due to their high corrosion tendency and high cost, they have been replaced by low cost, eco-friendly polymer-based and carbon-based materials. Conductive polymers are widely used as electrode materials for supercapacitors due to their high specific capacitance, high electrical conductivity, low cost, high charge density and easy synthesis. Traditional DSSCs fabricated on FTO glass substrates are fragile and rigid in nature. Their low-cost feature is the main reason behind the mass production of glass-based DSSC. However, due to the lack of flexibility of glass-based DSSCs, plastic-based flexible DSSCs have receive great attention due to their high flexibility, low weight and easy mass production. Instead of a glass substrate, ITO-polyethylene naphtalate or polyethylene terephthalate is used for the fabrication of the TiO2 attached photoanode for achieving high shape flexibility. However, the main disadvantage of polymer-based flexible DSSCs is their low operational temperature, which must be below 150 °C. If the temperature is greater than 150 °C, they may get degraded. In contrast, glass-based DSSCs have a high operational temperature in the range of 450–500 °C and this high annealing temperature offers better adhesion of the photoanode over the glass substrate. Nevertheless, are several methods to improve the adhesion at low working temperature, i.e., adhesion can be modified by adding a weak base such as ammonia to acidic TiO2. This also offers low temperature chemical sintering, which results in high photoconversion efficiency.
Hsin-Wei Chen and co-workers fabricated a DSSC-based three electrode photosupercapacitor and TiO2-based photoanode, and this integrated system was fabricated on the surface of ITO-PEN. In this work, they used an N719-TiO2 active layer as the photoanode, PEDOT as the supercapacitor electrode and a platinum electrode as the intermediate common electrode. TiO2 was incorporated over the plastic substrate via an electrophoretic deposition technique. The deposited TiO2 film showed a high amount of light scattering, but was crack rich in nature. This crack-rich film did not offer better adhesion and the deposited film was easily exfoliated. Thus, to overcome these issues, the deposited film was mechanically pressed at a particular pressure, causing the film to be smoothened and evened on the crack region. Mechanical pressing improved the interconnection or bonding among the TiO2 particles, providing better adhesion with plastic flexible substrates. According to the J–V curve, it is clear that mechanical compression heavily depends on the Jsc value, which increases with the mechanical loading. Here, the device showed a high photoconversion efficiency of 4.37%, short-circuit current density Jsc of 8.4 mA cm−2 and fill factor (FF) of 0.71 under 100 mW cm−2. Due to the internal resistance of 160 Ω, some voltage drop was observed during photo charging. The device showed a maximum charging voltage of 0.68 V during the completion of 80 s of charging, and a specific capacitance of 0.52 F g−1 at a current density of 2 mA cm−1.
In most photosupercapacitors, the photo-conversion part is constructed using ruthenium and methylammonium lead iodide perovskite for achieving a better photoconversion efficiency. Carbonaceous materials, transition metal chalcogenides and conducting polymers are used to construct charge storage electrodes. However, compared to conducting polymers, carbonaceous materials store more energy due to their higher number of active sites, high surface area and porous nature, but conducting polymers have good redox activity. They have interesting chemical stability after long term cyclability. Besides poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT), poly(3,4-propylenedioxythiophene) (PProDOT) has been widely used as both the charge storage electrode and counter electrode in photosupercapacitors due to its fast-redox switching and lower oxidation potential. However, the main drawback of polymer electrodes is their swelling and shrinkage during the charge–discharge process due to counter ion doping and de-doping. This results in mechanical stress, leading to the delamination of the polymer from the current collector. Thus, to overcome this drawback of polymers, composites with carbonaceous materials and bismuth are incorporated with the polymer to act as a buffer layer. This helps to prevent shape changes, achieve a high cycle life, minimize volume changes and get high mechanical strength in the electrode. Das and co-workers developed a photosupercapacitor consisting of TiO2/SNGP/CdS as the photoconversion part, and poly(3,4-propylenedioxythiophene) (PProDOT) incorporated with carbon microspheres (CMS) and bismuth nanoflakes (BiNF) as the counter electrode and the charge storage part. In this construction, SNGP was obtained by replacing some carbon atoms by sulphur and nitrogen in the graphitic lattice. The introduction of more defect spaces in the graphene lattice improves the overall electrical and mechanical properties. In this design architecture, nickel foam was placed in between the two electrodes to avoid the intermixing of the redox and non-redox electrolytes. Here, the integrated module showed a high photoconversion efficiency of 9.41% and overall efficiency of 6.8%, short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 18.16 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.81 and fill factor (FF) of 0.63 under 100 mW cm−2. The charge storage part worked good with as specific capacitance of 180.8 mF cm−2 and energy density and power density of 25.1 ηW h cm−2 and 0.05 mW cm−2, respectively (Fig. 8(a)–(d)).
Ultimately, DSSC research is focused on enhancing the photoconversion efficiency while keeping the production cost low, which is crucial. Since the discovery of dye-sensitized solar cells, light sensitization is performed using Ru-based dyes due their high absorption spectra and numerous anchoring sites. The absorption of the functional groups of a dye on a semi-conducting material to enhance the PCE is defined as the sensitization process. The main disadvantage of Ru-based dyes is their toxicity due to the presence of a transition metal. Also, they are more expensive than organic dyes. The use of organic dyes is preferable due to their high molar extension coefficient and high charge transportation ability. A new approach has been introduced to achieve the maximum photoconversion efficiency by using co-sensitizing dyes with small band gap quantum dots. QDs have a large intrinsic dipole moment, quantum confinement and tunable band gap, which enable tailored optical properties with high absorption spectra. The role of the electrolyte is crucial in the performance of DSSCs. Generally, electrolytes enable the regeneration of the dye by injection of exited electrons into the conduction band of the electrolyte. For achieving long-term stability in solar devices, the electrolyte must maintain some criteria including high electrical conductivity and optimum viscosity. The contact between the photoanode and counter electrode is found to be good, it does not degrade the dye and it does not absorb radiant energy.
Due to the novel structure, high mechanical and electrical properties of carbon nanotubes, they are usually used as an electrode for supercapacitor, photovoltaic and battery devices. Especially in DSSCs, carbon nanotubes are used as both the counter and working electrode due to their high photoconversion efficiency similar to platinum electrode. However, no studies have been reported on integrated photosupercapacitors based on CNTs. Yang et al. developed a DSSC-based three-electrode photosupercapacitor with intermediate and energy storage electrodes of aligned MWCNT and the working electrode of the photovoltaic device was a dye-incorporated TiO2 electrode. Generally, CNTs show a random dispersed distribution, but aligned CNTs are more efficient compared to randomly arranged CNTs. Here, in this integrated module, a gel electrode/non-redox electrolyte was filled between the MWCNT electrodes for energy storage action and a redox electrolyte was used for the photoconversion part. MWCNTs were grown over the Si substrate via a chemical vapour deposition method and the thickness of the grown MWCNT affected the overall efficiency of the fabricated module, exhibiting outstanding conductivity of 104 S cm−1. The integrated module exhibited a photoelectric conversion efficiency of 6.1% with Voc of 0.75 V, Jsc of 13.41 mAcm−2, and fill factor of 0.61. The specific capacitance of the grown MWCNTs was recorded as 48 F g−1 and the specific capacitance decreased with an increase in the thickness and stabilized at a value of 26 F g−1. The device exhibited good capacitance retention even after 100 cycles, showing a slight decrease of less than 5%. The device showed a maximum charging voltage of 0.7 V and outstanding charge storage efficiency of 84%. Further, they fabricated a composite of MWCNT-PANI to improve the device performance. They used a MWCNT-PANI electrode for the energy storage part and the CV curve of the composite showed a redox peak due to its pseudocapacitance nature. The composite film showed a specific capacitance of 83 F g−1, which was much higher than that of the pristine MWCNT and composite thickness played an important role in maintaining the specific capacitance. The composite film with a thickness of 10 μm showed a very high specific capacitance of 208 F g−1. Due to the high flexibility of the aligned MWCNTs, they have fabricated a flexible integrated module and its performance was almost similar to that of the solid integrated device (Fig. 9(a)–(f)).
Generally, the DSSC photoanode is constructed of TiO2 with a photosensitive dye due to its high photoconversion ability. However, other materials such as SnO2 with dye have been used as photoanode materials for the fabrication of DSSCs. SnO2 is considered an important semiconductor with a band gap of 3.2 eV, which has wide applications in the field of energy storage devices, opto-electronic devices and sensors. SnO2 enables the fast transfer of excited electrons from the conduction band to the dye molecule. Recently, Sangeetha et al. developed a new integrated module made up of SnO2 with a photosensitive dye as the photoanode, graphene coated on FTO substrate as the common electrode for both the photoconversion and energy storage part, and a PVP/PVA blend with varying concentrations of potassium iodide as the electrolyte for the module. The charge–discharge curve of the integrated device showed very quick change after sunlight irradiation of 6.4 s. The device showed a moderate performance with a specific capacitance of 20 F g−1, fill factor of 0.42 and photoconversion efficiency of 0.56%.

As discussed before, quantum dot-sensitized solar cells work similar to DSSCs, where the only difference is the usage of QD inorganic nanomaterials in the former as the photosensitizer instead of dye molecules (Fig. 10). The hybridization of plasmon nanomaterials with a semiconductor increases the photoconversion efficiency. Small metal nanoparticles localize the electromagnetic field and large particles scatter the incident field in all directions. The main reason for the enhanced photoconversion efficiency in the QD/semiconductor assembly is enhanced light absorption in the semiconductor by near-field and far-field light scattering. The direct transfer of plasmons from the metal to semiconductor occurs, which enhances the charge separation in the semiconductor.

The first QDSSC was fabricated by Narayanan and co-workers in 2015. Specifically, CdS quantum dots acted as the photosensitizer, the photoanode was obtained through the hybridization of TiO2/CdS (QD)/Au fibers, MWCNT/FTO/glass/Ag/MWCNT was the intermediate electrode and the counter electrode for the photoconversion part was MWCNT/FTO. The energy storage part was made up of a symmetrical assembly of MWCNT electrodes, where Ag/MWCNT was one electrode and the other one was made up of a single MWCNT/FTO electrode. The photoanode was filled with Na2S/polyacrylamide gel-type redox electrolyte and the electrolyte for the energy conversion part was LiCF3SO3/PC/PMMA gel. The intermediate electrode consisted of two independent electrodes and the glass present in this assembly was made conductive by applying a silver paste coating. The working mechanism of this integrated module is described as follows. Upon light illumination, the photogenerated holes and electrons move from the QD to the CB of TiO2 and later reaches the MWCNT/FTO electrode of the supercapacitor by external connection. In between, the electron on the Ag/MWCNT electrode moves towards the MWCNT/FTO electrode of the solar cell. The reduced electrolyte in the counter electrode of the photoconversion part recombines with the hole present on the photoanode and regenerates the CdS quantum dots. The integrated device gave a moderate performance, having a photoconversion efficiency of 3.4%, Joc of 10.64 mAcm−2 and Voc of 735 mV. The energy storage performance showed a specific capacitance of 150 F g−1 and 68% capacitance retention after 25 cycles, which seem to be very poor.
As stated before, ZnO semiconductor materials are promising alternative materials to TiO2 due to their high electron mobility, less recombination loss, easy crystallization, and anisotropic growth. Recently, wide bandgap semiconductor materials including CdS, CdSe, PbS, Ag2S, and PbSe have been used as photosensitizers instead of dye. Among them, Ag2S has great prospects in this field due to its similar bandgap to single-junction photovoltaics. Conducting polymers such as P3HT, PEDOT, and PEDOT:PSS exhibit high hole-transport properties and charge storage properties, which provide wide applications in flexible electronics and photovoltaics. Cortes and co-workers fabricated a photosupercapacitor with ZnO/Ag2S/PEDOT as the photoanode, PEDOT as the charge storage electrode, and PVP/[HEMIm][BF4] as the electrolyte. Here, ZnS was deposited over ZnO/Ag2S QD to passivate the surface and diminish the recombination effect. The working mechanism is similar in all cases. The charge storage is done by the formation of an electric double layer between PEDOT attached to the photoanode and PEDOT/FTO electrode of the charge storage part. The device showed a specific capacitance of 0.667 mF cm−2, charge storage efficiency of 6.38% and overall efficiency of 8.25 × 10−4% (ref. 74) (Fig. 11(a)–(c)).

Organic photovoltaic devices based on conducting polymers are emerging technology and have been widely researched during the last two decades. As stated before, the polymer used for photosensitization contains a donor and accepter material, which results in an acceptable photoconversion efficiency. The integration of solar cell devices with a supercapacitor module to achieve bifunctional activity has been a current research trend and some interesting reports are available. The main problem with DSSC-based PS is the usage of liquid redox electrolyte, which acts a barrier in fabricating flexible devices due to the possibility of its leakage. However, organic PSs do not require a liquid electrolyte, which is why they can be used as electrodes for flexible electronics. Achieving high flexibility and good efficiency is still a challenge due to the trade-off between thickness and performance. Fiber-shaped devices are preferable in high flexibility applications, but the electrochemical property is limited in fiber-type devices, which needs to be rectified.

Recently, Liu and his co-workers developed an ultrathin planar flexible device based on organic materials. They fabricated the photoanode over an atomically thin polyimide substrate, ZnO as the electron transport layer, bulk heterojunction of poly[4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b; 4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl-alt-(4-octyl-3-fluorothieno[3,4-b]thiophene)-2-carboxylate-2-6-diyl] (PBDTTT-OFT) polymer with [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) as the photosensitizer and thermally evaporated MoOx as the hole transport layer. The entire photoanode was encapsulated by a 1 μm thick parylene layer over the Ag electrode for better passivation. The intermediate electrode was made up of Au and a PEDOT:PSS/CNT/H2SO4:PVA Gel/PEDOT:PSS/CNT symmetrical electrode beneath the photoanode for storing energy. The fabricated device only had a thickness of 50 μm, exhibiting good mechanical flexibility. Under light illumination, the photoactive layer generates an electron–hole pair and this photogenerated charge carrier separates and moves towards the corresponding electrode by the effect of the built-in electric field present in the integrated module. This process is repeat until the voltage of the supercapacitor reaches the open-circuit voltage of the photovoltaic. Here, the PEDOT:PSS/CNT symmetrical electrode is used as the charge storage module and the introduction of CNT enhances the mechanical, electrochemical, and electrical property of the supercapacitor electrode. The CNT enhances the porosity of the electrode, which facilitates better penetration of the electrolyte into the electrode surface and results in a better capacitance. The weight percentage of CNT enhanced the capacitance value from 20 to 273 mF cm−2. Beyond a threshold value, it resulted in the breakage of the film due to thermal expansion, causing the shrinkage of CNT during the evaporation of water. The device exhibited a high capacitance retention of 96% after 10000 cycles at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in the charge–discharge cycle. The electrode possessed a good tensile strength of 54.46 MPa, more than 200% of that of pristine PEDOT:PSS. Its photovoltaic performance was also outstanding. The device showed a high PCE of 9.73% with a Jsc of 17.82 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.78 V, and FF of 0.699. According to the above results, it is clear that this device gives new insight into fabricating solar-charged flexible photosupercapacitors (Fig. 12(a)–(e)).
Printed electronic devices have emerged with a great global market in flexible and wearable electronics. A conventional microfabrication technique was earlier followed to fabricate ultra-thin electronic modules. However, its complicated process, toxicity, and high material wastage of the module paved a new path towards printable electronics. Compared to the microfabrication technique, printed electronics have some novel features. The additive manufacturing process used for the fabrication of printed materials and their functionality do not interfere with the performance of the substrate. Wee and co-workers fabricated a printed organic photosupercapacitor with high performance. They fabricated the integrated module over an ITO-coated glass plate. The photoanode was made via the layer-by-layer coating of organic materials, where the first layer was spin-coated PEDOT: PSS, followed by a blend of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM), which was spin-coated, and finally the Al cathode was placed over the blend. The supercapacitor was fabricated over the photovoltaic module. The CNT/PVA-H3PO4/free-standing CNT symmetrical architecture acted as the energy storage part. The entire assembly was very thin and light weight and the electrolyte leakage was rectified by patterning over the electrode through moulding. The individual performance of both the supercapacitor and solar cell was found to be very good, but the integrated device exhibited only a minimum performance. The individual SC gave a specific capacitance of 86 F g−1, while the integrated device gave only a capacitance of 26 F g−1. The individual photovoltaic device gave a Jsc as high as 10.37 mA cm2, an open circuit voltage Voc of 0.6 V and conversion efficiency (h) of 3.39%. The internal resistance of the integrated device was reduced by 46% compared to the individual device.
MXenes have some inherent advantageous properties such as biocompatibility and high optoelectronic, electrochemical and mechanical properties. Due to this baffling performance, MXenes have wide applications in the field of sensors, bioelectronics, and optoelectronic devices. Furthermore, functionalized MXenes have tunable properties and overcome the limitations of pristine MXenes. The surface functionality of MXenes enable solution processability by spin, spray and dip coating. Quin et al. developed a photo supercapacitor based on water-processed MXenes with organic sensitizers. The photovoltaic part was constructed on PET, and the first layer was made up of spin-coated water processed MXene to which a PEI/P3HT:ICBA/PEDOT:PSS organic donor accepter assembly was merged. The energy storage part was made up of a symmetrical assembly of semi-transparent Ti3C2Tx/ionogel/Ti3C2Tx over a PDMS substrate. The photovoltaic performance of the integrated photosupercapacitor was a photoconversion efficiency of 2.5%, and Voc of 0.81 V, Jsc of 6.89 mA cm−2, and FF of 0.45. The device gave a high specific capacitance of 410 F cm−3, which was greater than that of the un-integrated individual supercapacitor. This result gives insight into the fabrication of new integrated devices. The device exhibited a charge storage efficiency of 88% and overall device efficiency of 2.2%. This solution-processed transparent MXene-based PSC is promising for the production of flexible cost-effective devices.
Improving the power conversion efficiency of solar cell devices is still a challenge. The high-efficiency fabrication of DSSCs requires high-temperature processing, which is energy consuming. Organic photovoltaic devices are air-sensitive, and thus need hermetic sealing, which is very costly. Hybrid solar cell devices comprised of both organic conducting polymers and inorganic semiconductor Si are in limelight due to their high photoconversion efficiency. Many research efforts have been focused on integrating hybrid photosupercapacitors. Liu and his team performed this successfully for a powerpack application. They fabricated an integrated module over a common Au substrate, where the photoanode electrode was made up of PEDOT: PSS/Si nanowires and the energy storage assembly had a symmetric graphene architecture. The device possesses a good photoconversion efficiency of 12.37% with a specific capacitance of 16.37 mF cm−2 and a high energy density of 1.42 × 107 W h. The result summarizes that the fabricated powerpack is useful for practical applications.

Research based on perovskite solar cells highlights their easy fabrication, high photoconversion efficiency, and high optical absorption efficiency. Organic halide perovskites have a bandgap tunability ranging from 1.55 eV to 3.2 eV when subjected to changes in halide composition. Perovskites have a low carrier and micron-scale carrier diffusion length, a novel property that helps to attain maximum photoconversion efficiency with minimum loss. The perovskite solar cell devices are superior in photoconversion efficiency compared to DSSC, QDSSC, and organic solar cell devices. This provides insight into fabricating bifunctional devices based on perovskite-based solar cell devices. From a practical viewpoint, there are several factors that affect the performance of solar cell devices including inconsistency in solar light and its direction. The photoconversion efficiency heavily depends on the abovementioned fluctuations, and thus researchers have sought the possibility of effective charge storage in solar cells. Their integration with charge devices effectively enhances the individual charge conversion and storage regardless of the day cycle. Also, the stored energy can be easily delivered to an external load (Fig. 13).

The first integration of a perovskite solar cell with a supercapacitor was demonstrated by Xu et al. in early 2015. Here, the photoanode is made up of mesoporous, n–i–p, CH3NH3PbI3 and a symmetrical assembly with two electrodes of bacterial cellulose membrane/polypyrrole nanofibres/MWCNT as the supercapacitor electrodes. In this construction, the supercapacitor module acts both as an energy storage and power delivery system. Supercapacitors are not just used for energy storage purposes but also to stabilize the fluctuations in power supply by reducing the voltage. Integrated supercapacitors are used to stabilize the weather-related fluctuations in the module. They fabricated three different devices based on the TiO2 present in the photoanode material. All the devices showed different properties with a high overall efficiency of 10% (ref. 108) (Fig. 14(a)–(d)). Subsequently, Xu et al. fabricated a fully mesoporous perovskite-based photosupercapacitor. In this integration, a PEDOT-carbon electrode acted as an intermediate junction electrode for both the supercapacitor and solar cell. The photoanode was fabricated on FTO glass with TiO2, ZrO2 and perovskite material. The coating of the perovskite layer (CH3NH3PbI3) was done by direct dipping of the precursors. The intermediate electrode was deposited over the substrate by electropolymerization at a suitable voltage range and the LiClO4− electrolyte was placed between the ClO4− PEDOT mesoporous layers. The photo-charging and discharging of the integrated device were performed under light illumination, and the supercapacitor achieved a high voltage of 0.7 V within short time of 7 s. This demonstrates the high storage capacity of the supercapacitor electrode. The device has an areal capacitance of 12.8 mF cm−2, which is more than that of the capacitance driven by an external load. The device exhibited an energy density of 7.83 × 10−7 W h cm−2 and a power density of 7.4 mW cm−2, respectively. The integrated module exhibited a high energy density storage efficiency of 73.7% and overall efficiency of 4.7%.
Huey and et al. fabricated an integrated asymmetric supercapacitor with cesium lead halide inorganic perovskite-based solar cell devices. The integration was done without an external wire connection. The photoconversion electrode was constructed using a mesoporous titania layer as a semiconducting material, CsPbBr3−xIx as the light-harvesting material, and spiro-OMeTAD as the hole transporting material. The photoanode was coupled with an asymmetric module and made using a PEDOT:PSS-coated RZCo layer as the positive electrode and PyR as the negative electrode. They fabricated the CsPbBr3−xIx photoanode with different ratios of Br/I because the concentration of iodine is critical, where it showed a low stability at higher iodine concentration. Here the solar cell in the integrated module retained 70% of the PCE after one week in highly humid conditions. The device exhibited a power conversion efficiency retention of 33% under the same conditions after 24 h. The device exhibits a high areal capacitance of 30 mF cm−2 and the asymmetric assembly alone showed a capacitance of 150 mF cm−2. This investigation is a new turn in the fabrication of green energy storage devices.
Liang et al. introduced an integrated module consisting of a supercapacitor and solar-cell. In this device, MAPbI3 served as the photosensitizer, and the perovskite layer was fabricated over a TiO2 semiconductor layer on an FTO-coated glass substrate. The perovskite layer was coated via a two-step method. Firstly, PbI2 was spin-coated and then the substrate was dipped in a solution of MAI for 120 s. Here, the supercapacitor was a symmetrical assembly of two carbon electrodes separated by a PVA–H3PO4 non-redox gel electrolyte. The intermediate carbon electrode aids in hole transport and the counter electrode functions as a solar cell unit. The integrated device performance was analysed under the illumination of an AM 1.5 G solar light illuminator with different intensities in the range of 45–100 mW cm−2. Under the maximum light intensity, the device showed a high photoconversion efficiency of 8.9% with a Voc of 0.92 V. The device performance was almost similar under various illumination conditions and showed a high photoconversion efficiency of 9.6% at a lower light intensity of 45 W cm−2. The integrated device exhibited a high specific capacitance of 15.3 mF cm−2 at a current density of 0.5 mA cm−2 with a high energy and power density. This integrated device is a breakthrough in fabricating solar power-based portable energy storage devices (Fig. 15(a)–(f)).
The highly flexible, solid-state, graphene-based supercapacitors are one of the best electrode materials for charge storage purposes. Due to their high mechanical flexibility and electrochemical performance, they are always in the limelight. Du et al. constructed an integrated photosupercapacitor device with a perovskite solar cell to achieve power conversion and storage together. Here, ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/PC61BM/Al acted as a high-performance perovskite photosensitizer and it was integrated with a symmetric supercapacitor fabricated with two graphene electrodes. The individual supercapacitor performance was outstanding with a specific capacitance of 245 F g−1 and capacitance of 83% after 10000 charge–discharge cycles. The integrated device showed a high short circuit current of 22.50 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage of 0.9 V, fill factor of 69.5%, and photoconversion efficiency of 14.13%. The charged supercapacitor discharge from a voltage of 0.75 V, which was less than the open-circuit voltage. Thus, the fabricated device is suitable for both energy conversion and storage purposes (Fig. 14(e) and (f)).

Fibrous/wire-type electronic devices have great potential in the field of wearable and flexible gadgets for energy harvesting and efficient conversion. The demand for portability, wearability and flexibility in mobile phones and medical devices has pushed researchers to focus their efforts into developing novel constructions. The main advantage of wire-type devices over the conventional two-dimensional device is that they have a micro-dimensional diameter. This enhances their bending action, and thus they are preferred in the field of flexible devices. There are numerous reports available regarding fibrous devices such as fibrous supercapacitors, solar cell devices, nanogenerators, and lithium batteries.

In accordance with the typical solar cell devices, novel flexible fibrous solar cell devices have also been reported previously. Several design architectures such as coaxial, parallel, and twisted have been engineered (Fig. 6(c)–(e), respectively). The first DSSC-based solar cell in the fibrous form was developed by Baps et al. in early 2002. Here, they fabricated the working electrode by coating dye-attached TiO2 on steel wire and using a conducting polymer-coated transparent polymer tube as the counter electrode. Both electrodes were separated by the injection of redox electrolyte. Here, they achieved the minimum current due to the low conducting nature of the polymer and corrosive behaviour of the redox electrolyte. Liquid redox electrolytes limit the application of wearable and flexible devices due to the chance of leakage. Thus, this work encouraged researchers to do more work in the area of wearable devices and it was the steppingstone towards fibrous solar cells. According to the literature review, it is clear that inorganic materials such as silica are not compatible with wearable electronic applications, and thus most fibrous solar cell devices have been developed using organic and hybrid materials. Efficient light absorption and conversion are the key factors of solar cell devices, which are effectively achieved using bifacial devices. Bifacial electrode materials are preferable for the fabrication of wearable devices due to their high photoconversion efficiency. They also harvest radiant energy on both sides. Generally, bifacial device electrodes are made up of cheap materials such as steel and titanium. The additional use of TiO2 nanowire arrays attached with a Ti electrode enhances the electron transfer and photoconversion efficiency. There is a need for energy supply in wearable microelectronic devices. Accordingly, fibrous supercapacitors, a perfect choice, have a potential market in the wearable electronics industry. Yarns with suitable mechanical properties such as flexibility, mechanical strength, and high energy storage properties are acceptable for the fabrication of fibrous supercapacitors. Fibrous supercapacitors are classified into twisted and coaxial types depending on their design architecture. In the twisted design, two fibrous flexible electrodes are twisted around each other. In the case of the coaxial type, it is constructed with inner and outer electrodes made of fibrous- and paper-type electrode materials, respectively. As mentioned above, liquid electrolyte restricts the flexible and bending action due to the chance of leakage. Thus, this problem has been overcome by using a gel-type electrolyte such as polyvinyl alcohol electrolyte. This type of solid electrolyte acts as a separator and prevents short circuit. Flexible electrodes need high mechanically strong flexible fibrous structural support with good electrochemical and behaviour, but most of them are not electrochemically stable and merely act as mechanical support. Thus, to enhance the electrochemical performance of fibrous electrodes, active materials such as AC, CNTs, GN sheets, MnO2, and PANI are coated over the fibrous structure via electrodeposition or dip coating. According to the literature, it can be observed that the volume fraction of fibrous structural support must be higher than that of the coated active materials given that the weight difference causes an imbalance in the electrochemical performance and alters the electrochemical activity.
Fibrous photosupercapacitors are mechanically flexible and they can be woven into various shapes, and thereby play an integral role in the wearable electronics industry. The integrated photocapacitor module consists of two separate parts, including an energy storage and photoconversion part, which share a common fiber substrate. The design architecture is mainly categorized into three types, i.e., coaxial, parallel, and twisted forms. In the case of the coaxial type, the separately developed ES part and PC part are fabricated on a common fibrous substrate such as rubber, fiber, and plastic, or on a metallic fibrous structure. In the case of the twisted design, two fibrous substrates are twisted into a spiral structure. The twisted device does not show any reduction in electrochemical performance. However, the main drawback of the twisted device is that there is a chance of separation while twisting, which affects the overall electrochemical performance of the integrated module.

The first DSSC-based fiber photosupercapacitor was fabricated early 2011 by Joonho and co-workers. The integrated module consisted of a nanogenerator, supercapacitor, and solar cell. This multifunctional device was constructed over a micro-size fiber substrate, which was used as a common electrode for all these devices. The entire device was fabricated over a PMMA plastic fibrous substrate. This fiber, wrapped by Au, acts as a common electrode for all the devices. Quasi-aligned ZnO nanowires were grown over the Au-coated fibrous structures via a chemical approach, acting as an electrode for the device, and copper mesh surrounded with graphene sheets acted as the outermost electrode for the module. The DSSC device was fabricated using an Au-coated fiber electrode and graphene. Here, the dye was injected between the ZnO NW and fiber structure and the redox electrolyte was filled between both electrodes. A supercapacitor was fabricated using ZnO NW on the plastic fiber as one electrode and graphene on Cu mesh as a second electrode. The device energy conversion efficiency and storage efficiency were found to be unremarkable. However, considering the photo conversion part, the Jsc was 0.35 mA cm−2, Voc was 0.17 V, FF was 0.39, and the device photoconversion efficiency was observed to be only 0.02%. In the case of the energy storage part, the areal and length capacitance at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 were 4 mF cm−2 and 0.025 mF cm−1, respectively.

As discussed before, the fabricated devices are mainly based on planar or bulky structures. However, these devices do not act as an alternative to flexible devices due to their mechanical rigidity and heavy size. Thus, the fabrication and modelling of fibrous devices are in the limelight due to their high applicability in wearable and portable devices. Nevertheless, the efficient performance of fibrous devices is not expected due to their limited electrochemical performance and the complexity in the selection of right fibrous material. Carbonaceous materials are a class of materials for both charge storage and as the counter electrode for solar cell devices. However, in the case of fibrous devices, their performance does not match expectations. The carbon fiber counter electrode in DSSCs shows a very low photoconversion efficiency of 1%, whereas doping with suitable materials enhances its efficiency. In the case of supercapacitor electrodes, carbon fibers show the lowest capacity retention and low specific capacitance even at a low scan rate. Generally, the wire-type, dye-sensitized supercapacitor is called “power fiber” or “energy wire”. Recently, Liang et al. fabricated a fibrous electrode for both energy storage and conversion purposes and the device performance was interesting. Here, the wire-type coaxial device was fabricated by coating MoS2 ultrathin sheets over TiO2-coated carbon fibers. The synergetic electrochemical performance of both MoS2 and CF enhanced the performance of both the DSSC and supercapacitor. CF@TiO2@MoS2 acted as the counter electrode and the photo anode placed over the counter electrode was separated by a redox electrode. The symmetrical capacitor was fabricated with two CF@TiO2@MoS2 wire-type electrodes and one CF@TiO2@MoS2 electrode acted as the counter electrode for the DSSC and as the cathode for the supercapacitor. Under light illumination, the supercapacitor only took 7 s to reach the open circuit voltage of the device, which was less than the time taken in galvanostatic charge discharging mode. The device showed a specific capacitance of 18.5 mF cm−2 with a device overall efficiency of 1.8%. The DSSC performance was also outstanding with Voc, Jsc, FF, and efficiency values of 0.74 V, 16.95 mA cm−2, 0.75, and 9.5%, respectively. Thus, this MoS2-based fibrous electrode is an efficient power source to support wearable electronic devices (Fig. 16(h)–(k)).
As stated above, the performance of fibrous flexible devices is not as expected. Most electrodes only exhibit a limited electrochemical performance. Thus, to achieve improved device performance, an electrode with better charge conversion and storage must be invented. Conducting polymers are promising materials for both the working electrode (for the energy storage part) and counter electrode (for the charge conversion part) due to their high inherent conductivity, long cycle life and improved mechanical property. Wang et al. fabricated a PEDOT:PSS fibrous photosupercapacitor, where a highly crystalline fibrous electrode resulted in high photoconversion efficiency and overall efficiency with long term stability. Here, the common electrode was made up of TiO2 nanotube-coated PEDOT fibers. The symmetrical assembly of two TiO2@PEDOT electrodes acted as a supercapacitor and the solar cell was made by placing photoanodes parallel to each other in a capillary tube or plastic tube filled with electrolyte. The PEDOT electrode exhibited a good conductivity of 1055.6 S cm−1 and high mechanical property with a tensile strength of 179.9 MPa. The device showed a high-power conversion efficiency of 8.2% with a high energy density of 19.6 μW h cm−2. The device exhibited a high capacitance retention value of 76.1% after 20000 cycles. The device was highly stable even after 63 days with a high overall efficiency of 5.1%.
The self-charging of electrodes can be achieved from radiant energy, mechanical or from thermal energy. Wen et al. fabricated a fibrous self-charging supercapacitor not only for harvesting solar energy but also for storing mechanical energy from human body motions. The device was fabricated by stacking the mechanical energy harvesting nanofabric based on a triboelectric nanogenerator and fibrous DSSC radiant energy harvesting fabric. The electrical energy from the triboelectric generator was transferred to the DC using a bridge rectifier, and simultaneously the generated energy was stored in the supercapacitor. The integrated device showed a Voc of 0.74 V and Jsc of 11.92 mA cm−2 with an overall power conversion efficiency of 5.64% (ref. 128) (Fig. 16(a)–(g)).
Nowadays, graphene fibers are in limelight because of their high surface area, good electrochemical and excellent mechanical property. Usually, graphene fibers are formed via the wet spinning of a graphene oxide suspension followed by a reduction process. Very recently, Yao et al. fabricated a graphene fiber-based integrated energy conversion and storage device. The graphene fibers were synthesised via CVD technique over a copper wire. The polyaniline grown inside the graphene nanofiber acted as one segment and the platinum grown inside the graphene fiber acted as another segment, and PANI//Pt@G acted as a common electrode. The symmetrical assembly of two PANI/G fiber electrodes acted as a supercapacitor and a DSSC-based photoanode with Pt@G counter electrode acted as the solar cell part. The integrated device exhibited a very high performance and the device showed a very high specific capacitance value of 284 mF cm−2; meanwhile, the solar cell part showed an outstanding photoconversion efficiency of 4.73%. The device showed an overall photoconversion and charge storage efficiency of 3.07%. The performance of integrated fibrous devices is still in the preliminary stage, and thus great focus needs to be applied to get good performances for commercializing these products.

Perovskite solar cell devices are currently in the limelight due to their high photoconversion efficiency and ease of fabrication. The current research interest is focused on fibrous perovskite solar cell devices due to the unexpected growth in flexible and wearable devices and perovskite solar cell devices. Fibrous devices exhibit properties similar to that of solid-state devices, and they also retain their performance after continuous mechanical bending and stretching. Planar energy conversion/storage devices lack mechanical flexibility, which limits their application in flexible electronics. Playability, foldability, and wearability are the most important parameters necessary for flexible devices. Integrated fibrous devices are fabricated in two ways, either through interlacing of electrodes by twisting or by fabricating planar-based integrated devices over a fibrous textile. The reports based on perovskite fibrous supercapacitors are very limited, but here we aim to minimize the knowledge gap between planar perovskite photosupercapacitors and fibrous photosupercapacitors.

Li et al. fabricated an energy harvesting and storing ribbon that integrated a solar cell and supercapacitor to deliver high performances. Cu wire acted as the common electrode for charge transfer purposes. Here, the ultrathin perovskite was stacked over the supercapacitor via a solvent-assisted perovskite growth technique. As discussed before, the Cu ribbon not only acted as an electron collecting layer for solar cells but also as a substrate for generating the CuOH nanotubes for forming the supercapacitor. The symmetric supercapacitor was fabricated with two CuOH NT electrodes and the perovskite-based photoanode was made using CH3NH3PbI3. The integrated device showed a high specific capacitance of 247.5 F g−1 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 with a rate capability of 68.8%. The energy density and power density were 1.15 mW h cm−3 and 125.5 mW cm−3, respectively. The device resulted in a capacitive retention of 98% even after a 100-bending cycle at 90°. The photoconversion efficiency of the device was more than 10%, which can motivate researchers to fabricate new fibrous integrated devices (Fig. 17(a)–(f)).
Carbon fibers, carbon cloth, copper wires, and wearable conducting textiles are widely used as substrates to fabricate flexible devices. Zhang et al. fabricated an integrated perovskite-based photosupercapacitor based on bi-polar TiO2 nanotube arrays (TNARs). The TNRAs allowed the transfer of photogenerated electrons towards the charge storage part. Here, the solar cell (CH3NH3PbI3) and supercapacitor were fabricated over TNRAs. The Co9S8-MnO2-based supercapacitor and counter electrode of the solar cell were grown over a carbon cloth. The device was fabricated like bamboo slips and it had high mechanical flexibility and foldability. The performance of the device was outstanding, where the supercapacitor reached a voltage of 0.63 V within a short span of 30 s during charging and the solar cell exhibited a high photoconversion efficiency of 4.9% with a storage efficiency of 80%.
The performance of integrated devices is not close to other geometries such as planar devices, which is mainly due to the difference in their active area. The fabrication of photosupercapacitors is more difficult compared to planar devices due to the layer-by-layer deposition of the material, which must be done cautiously. For achieving precise deposition of the material over the substrate, dip coating can be undertaken. However, the adhesion and bonding with the substrate are found to be lower. There is hardly any literature on perovskite-based fibrous photosupercapacitors. Thus, there is an urgent need to undertake research to develop better flexible devices with dual functioning.

Polymer and quantum-sensitized photosupercapacitors are emerging fields of research. There are numerous reports available on planar organic photosupercapacitors, whereas the research on the fibrous type is limited. The fiber-based integrated devices are generally woven into cloth and they may have either the coaxial or co-electrode mode. The function of fiber photosupercapacitors is similar to that of planar devices. During light radiation, the photogenerated charges are continuously separated and transported, resulting in a high photocurrent. Compared with the twisted electrode architecture, the coaxial device gives a better performance due to its high effective contact area. This allows better charge transportation. Furthermore, the introduction of MWCNT into the system enhances the mechanical and charge storage properties and charge conversion efficiency. Zhang et al. fabricated a coaxial-type photosupercapacitor in early 2013, which was one of the primary attempts to fabricate organic-based integrated fiber devices. Ti wire was modified with titania nanotubes and the aligned MWCNT acted as the electrodes. P3HT: PCBM PEDOT: PSS layers coated over the Ti wire wrapped with MWCNT acted as the photoconversion part. Ti wire and MWCNT were separated with a gel electrolyte made up of PVA/H3PO4, which acted as the energy storage part. The integrated device resulted in a maximum photoconversion efficiency of 1.01%, length specific capacitance of 0.077 mF cm−2, and energy density of 1.61 × 10−7 with an energy storage efficiency of 65.6%. The device also had a high capacitive retention even after 1000 bending cycles (Fig. 18(a)–(e)).

The areas of individual fiber photosupercapacitors and solar cells have been extensively studied and well established. Conventional organic solar cells and supercapacitors are highly flexible due to the non-brittle nature of organic polymers. 2D flexible organic photosupercapacitors can only bend in one direction (perpendicular), whereas 1D fiber-based integrated devices allow multi axial bending and are also compatible with the weaving process. Jin et al. fabricated a light-weight, flexible and self-charged organic fiber photosupercapacitor. A large area 5 × 5 TCE/ZnO/PTB7-Th: PC71BM/PEDOT:PSS/Ag solar cell and two identical electrodes of rGO-PEDOT:PSS separated by PVA/LiCl gel electrode acted as the fabricated supercapacitor. The device performance was very good with a photoconversion efficiency of 6.34% and specific capacitance of 52 mF cm−2 even after slitting. The integrated device was capable of charging up to a voltage of 3.2 V in a short time of 5 min. The overall performance of the integrated module was good with 4.9% overall efficiency. Accordingly, this device can be used in textile-based smart electronics (Fig. 18(f)–(j)).
Photosupercapacitors are suggested to be an alternative to electric vehicle batteries due to the heavy size and additional requirement of an external electricity source to charge batteries. Rahman and co-workers fabricated an organic photosupercapacitor based on C-ZnO/CuO-doped polymer and carbon fiber as the roof top panel for electric vehicles. The device was tested at a solar temperature of 30 °C. The module resulted in an energy storage efficiency of 19%, specific capacitance of 20.15 μF cm−2 with a higher energy density and power density of 120 W h kg−1 and 20 kW kg−1, respectively. The device was capable of reducing the battery size up to 15% and weight up to 75% (Table 1).
Configuration
Flexible/rigid
Photo voltaic
Supercapacitor
Specific capacitance
Cycle performance
Photoconversion efficiency

V
oc of Solar cell
Overall efficiency
Ref.
Planar
Rigid
PeSC
MWCNT-PPy/MWCNT-PPY
572 mF cm−2
—
13.6
0.97
10

108

Planar
Rigid
DSSC
Au/NaCl/Au
20 mC cm−2
97% after 10000 cycles
4.33
0.63
3.72

141

Planar
Rigid
PeSC
PEDOT-C/LiClO4/PEDOT-C
12 mF cm−2
—
6.21
0.96
4.7

142

Planar
Rigid
PeSC
PANI-CNT/PVA-H2SO4/PANI-CNT
422 mF cm−2
96.2% after 50 cycles
2.17
0.96
5.26

143

Planar
Rigid
DSSC
EY/ZnO NPs/H3PO4/PVP
450 F m−2
—
4.12
1.2
3.78

144

Planar
Flexible
DSSC
PPy/rGO
308.1 F g−1
70.9% after 50 cycles
2.4
1
—

145

Planar
Flexible
OSC
Carbon black
130 mF cm−2
—
6.2
0.92
1.57

146

Planar
Flexible
DSSC
PProDOT-Et2
6.5 F cm−2
80% after 5000 cycles
—
0.75
—

147

Fiber
Flexible
DSSC
PDMS RuO2. xH2O/Cu
1.9 mF cm−1
—
5.64
0.74
—

128

Fiber
Flexible
OSC
Ag/PEDOT
52 mF cm−2
96% after 5000 cycles
6.43
3.2
4.94

139

Fiber
Flexible
DSSC
CNT fiber
2 mF cm−2
—
2.2
0.68
1.5

148

Fiber
Flexible
DSSC
MWCNT/PVA-H3PO4/MWCNT
21.7 F g−1
85.7%
6.47
0.68
1.83

149

Fiber
Flexible
QDSC
Carbon mesh
483 mF cm−2
—
1.83
—
0.5

150

Fiber
Flexible
DSSC
PANI@G
284 mF cm−2
98% after 10000 cycles
4.73
0.64
3.07

131

Fiber
Flexible
OSC
Carbon fabric
—
—
22
2.8
—

140

Fiber
Flexible
DSSC
PEDOT-MS
238 mF cm−2
76.1% after 20000 cycles
8.2
0.7
5.1

127

Fiber
Flexible
OSC
MWCNT
0.077 mF cm−2
—
0.79
—
—

138

Fiber
Flexible
DSSC
CF/TiO2/MoS2
—
81% after 1000 cycles
9.5
0.74
1.8

125


There are various types of solar cell devices such as silicon solar cell devices, DSSCs, OSCs and PeSC, which have been integrated successfully with supercapacitors to achieve self-charged supercapacitors. The integrated PS module collects solar energy and converts it into electrical energy instantly. The energy storage part stores electrical energy in its electrodes and it start its discharge when the device is connected to an external load for power distribution. The overall efficiency of the integrated module is calculated by multiplying the individual efficiency of solar cell devices and supercapacitor or by dividing the light energy stored during light illumination by energy stored during the photo-charging process.

ηTE = ηsηsc
(1)
The photoconversion efficiency of the photovoltaic system under light illumination is calculated using the following equation
(2)
where
Voc, Jsc, FF, and Pin are the open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current density, fill factor, and incident-light power density (100 mW cm−2), respectively.

Capacitance also plays an important role in calculating the overall efficiency of the integrated PC module. The specific capacitance of supercapacitors can be evaluated using three equations depending upon the electrochemical technique followed. The mathematical equations for measuring the specific capacitance by cyclic voltammetry, galvanostatic charge–discharge curve, and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy are described below.
(3)
(4)
(5)
where
I is the current, t is the time, dv/dt is either the potential scan rate in cyclic voltammetry or slope of the v–t curve of the galvanostatic charge discharging curve, and f is the frequency. The output energy (Eoutput), power density (PA, W cm−2), and energy density (EA, W h cm−2) of the supercapacitor during charging can be evaluated using the following equations.

(6)
(7)
(8)
The total efficiency of the integrated photosupercapacitor module is obtained using the following equations
(9)
Elight = Pint
(10)
where
Asolar is the area of the solar cell and Elight is defined as the energy received by the solar cell device during charging.

As mentioned above, the overall efficiency is calculated by dividing the light energy stored during light illumination by energy stored during the photo-recharging process. On analyzing the overall efficiency, there are some factors that affect the overall efficiency of the integrated module. (1) Due to the intermittent nature of the solar source, it is unpredictable and unstable. Therefore, the charging time will vary according to the testing conditions. (2) In general, SCs store only a part of the full capacitance at the maximum ηoverall. (3) Generally, fixing the open-circuit voltage of integrated PS devices takes 2–3 min. Thus, the photo-charging time plays a vital role in determining the overall efficiency, but it is insignificant in real practice. The characterization of the integrated module is always done at low voltage, which is not even enough to power a small electronic device in real practice. Thus, the series connection of many solar cell devices increases the voltage across the device. Supercapacitors are connected parallelly to get higher capacitance and in series for high voltage.

A photoelectrochemical capacitor is a novel device that allows both photoelectric conversion and storage similar to a photosupercapacitor. In the previous sections, we discussed all the aspects of a photocapacitor in detail. In the case of photosupercapacitors, photoconversion and storage are achieved using separate photoanode and charge storage electrodes. However, this type of integration causes more spacing and weight limitations. These constraints can only be addressed by introducing novel materials having both charge conversion and storage capability. Here, bifunctional activity is achieved by ion adsorption followed by solar irradiation on a semiconductor electrode material. Semiconductor materials such as TiO2 show this bifunctional activity, and thus have significant research prospect in this field.

The typical working mechanism of a photoelectrochemical supercapacitor is as follows. When a bifunctional semiconductor electrode is immersed in an aqueous electrolyte, a space charge layer is formed over the semiconductor electrode. Upon light irradiation on the electrode material, photogenerated electrons and holes develop. The photogenerated holes move towards the surface of the electrode and are captured by the anions present in the electrolyte. The photogenerated electrons move inside the semiconductor material due to the electric field of the space charge layer. The electron accumulation reduces the potential of the semiconductor electrode material to attract the cations from the aqueous electrolyte on its surface. The cations in the electrolyte thereby get stored in the electric double layer at the top surface of the bifunctional material. If the electrode is connected to a counter electrode via an external circuit, the electrons flow through the external circuit, whereas cations desorb and return to the electrolyte. Pristine semiconductors show poor discharge capacity due to their low cation adsorption capacity, and this limitation can be overcome by compositing with suitable materials such as MnO2 and RuO2. For achieving both photosensitivity and charge storage application, the electrode materials must have some properties as follows: (1) the material must have a bandwidth in the range of 1.8–3 eV to absorb more visible light, (2) the material must be transparent, (3) the material must be capable of separating photogenerated electrons and holes and (4) long life of excited holes. Furthermore, the material should possesses a core–shell structure, porosity and capability of both electron and ion transportation and also aid in the charge separation of photogenerated carriers (Fig. 19(a)).
All semiconductor materials cannot be used as photoelectrodes in integrated devices. The band structure and reversible redox potential of the anode/cathode are important selection parameters. Energy level matching should be considered during material selection, i.e., if the VB and CB of the semiconductor are within the redox potential window, the photogenerated electron–hole pair is formidable to reduce or oxidize the cathode or anode. Conversely, if the VB and CB cross the redox potential window, the material results in excellent redox activity. Complete photo-charging is achieved only when the charging voltage is 0 V. The absorption wavelength is low for larger bandgap materials, which results in a reduction in absorption efficiency of solar light. Materials with a low bandgap are suitable as photoanodes for achieving high photoconversion efficiency. The design of a solar-powered device entirely based on a photoactive material is challenging because other design parameters such as recombination of photogenerated charge pairs should also be considered when balancing the energy level matching.
An et al. fabricated an electrochemical photosupercapacitor based on the aforementioned results. They utilized a nonporous Cu@Cu2O hybrid electrode as the photo-working electrode. The performance studies of the device were carried out in both in the dark and under illumination. The supercapacitor exhibited a very high capacitance of 782 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1, which was 37.9% more than the device tested in the dark. Another device based on Ni(OH)2 was also reported. Here, Ni(OH)2 electrode was deposited over the surface of TiO2. The TiO2 photoelectrode material is capable of absorbing light and producing electron and holes. Upon light illumination, the photogenerated charges will be directly stored in the electrode and holes will be released as electricity in dark conditions. In the case of conventional supercapacitors, they lead to gas evolution side reactions, which may lead to the decomposition of the electrode material. Similar reactions have been observed in photoelectrochemical supercapacitors. For achieving high coulombic and cycle stability, the gas evolution side chain reaction must be minimized. Safshekan and co-workers developed a photoelectrochemical photosupercapacitor based on a BiVO4/PbOx heterostructure photo-capacitive electrode. PbOx was synthesized via the controlled oxidation of colloidal PbS quantum dots. Here, the bifunctional electrode performance was observed with a specific capacitance of 6 mF cm−2 at a low current density and the device showed an OCV of 1.5 V with high stability after 100 GCD cycles. According to the aforementioned information, Zhu et al. fabricated a device based on a core–shell nanorod Fe2O3@Ni(OH)2 photoelectrochemical supercapacitor. The device performance was comparable to the already developed BiVO4/PbOx material, which was 4.5 times better than that of the existing BiVO4/PbOx with a specific capacitance value of 20.6 mF cm−2.
As discussed above, in a conventional photosupercapacitor, the photogenerated electrons must shuttle from the photoanode to the respective energy storage electrode. The device with a bifunctional material having both photoconversion and storage has profound research prospect. Together with supercapacitors, photo-batteries with bifunctional materials are also in the limelight, Podjaski et al. fabricated a photoelectrochemical battery consisting of 2D cyanamide (CNC−)-functionalized polyheptazine imide. Upon light excitation, the photogenerated electrons accumulate as stable pi radicals over the bifunctional electrode material and the holes shuttle to the counter electrodes. These trapped electrons over the bifunctional material are collected in the dark.

The effective utilization of waste heat is an important source of energy to improve the energy efficiency. Thus, the source of heat from industry and solar energy are utilized to improve the performance of supercapacitors. Among the heat sources, the solar source is in the limelight due to its clean nature. The problem related with the solar energy source is its inadequacy and difficulty in optimization. The main difference between conventional supercapacitors and thermally charged supercapacitors is that faradaic, non-faradaic or the combination of both are used to store energy in supercapacitors. However, in the case of thermally charged supercapacitors, they directly convert the heat to electricity and store the energy as surface charges. There are several factors that influence the performance of thermally charge supercapacitors, including the type of electrolyte, size of cation and anion and work function of the electrode material. Solar thermal-driven supercapacitors are a novel and good strategy to enhance the capacitance However, their practical application is hampered by the reduced photothermal conversion of active materials and this limitation obstructs the wide solar spectrum absorption and thermal loss. Photothermal materials have wide research interest beyond environmental application including energy harvesting and energy enhancement applications. The emerging functional materials such as plasmonic metallic particles, metal oxides, conducting polymers, graphene oxide and other carbonaceous materials are used to design and fabricate photothermal devices, where among them, photothermal capacitors are in their budding stage. The working principle of photothermal supercapacitors has been explained well and parameters such as temperature, conductivity of both the electrode and electrolyte, the electric double layer capacitance, the reaction rate constant and diffusion coefficients play a crucial role in their performance. The electrochemical double layer capacitance increases with an increase in light intensity. This is because of the increase of the dielectric constant of electrolyte due to the photothermal temperature. In the case of thin materials, the effect of the diffusion coefficient is insignificant, and it does not affect the capacitance value. In the case of large reactions, more ions are induced to take part in the reaction but the available reaction ions will be limited by the diffusion process and the rate constant further increases (Fig. 19(b)).

Yi et al. fabricated a symmetrical photothermal supercapacitor based on PEDOT:PSS conducting polymer over a 3Dh-graphene form. The device performances including specific capacitance, energy density and power density were enhanced due to the photothermal effect. The fabricated device had a light absorption of more than 92% in the full solar spectrum and the surface temperature change was 39 °C. The performance without illumination and with illumination was tested. The capacitance, energy density and power density of the pseudocapacitor increased by 1.5, 1.5 and 1.6, respectively, but in the case of the double layer capacitor, the capacity enhancement under illumination was 3.7 times greater. Recently, Zhao et al. developed and tested the performance of a photothermal capacitor made of two symmetrical electrodes of N-doped mesoporous carbon nanosphere-intercalated 3D graphene hydrogel (N-MCN@GH) separated with PVA/H2SO4 gel electrolyte. The capacitor exhibited a specific capacitance of 8.1 F cm−3 with a high energy and power density of 1.13 mW h cm−3 and 13.30 mW cm−3, respectively. A micro-supercapacitor based on a cellulose nanofibril-graphene-conjugated polymer showed a photothermal-induced capacitance enhancement. Here, the device showed a two-time greater capacitance, energy and power density.

In short, we provided a detailed discussion and the recent advances in photo-powered supercapacitor devices. The working principles, factors influencing the device performance, its evaluation parameters and recent developments on photo-charged supercapacitor devices were successfully summarized. However, the research on solar cell-based integrated devices is still in the early stages and more attention is needed for further development and demonstration for real applications. The challenges during the fabrication of solar-charged bifunctional devices need to be solved to achieve high performance integrated devices (Fig. 20).

Some of the important factors that need to be given special attention in the overall performance and proper functioning of the device can be classified as follows: (1) material compatibility: material selection is fundamental in the fabrication of photosupercapacitors because the selection of the correct combination of materials reduces the electron recombination and enhances the photoconversion efficiency. The material must not react with each other and the inter-reaction will affect the device durability and stability. The selection of redox couples is also important due to their limited availability. The binder comes in contact with both the solar cell part and the storage part. As an insulator, it causes an increase in the resistivity of the integrated module. (2) Electrolyte selection: electrochemical energy storage devices and most solar cell devices use liquid electrolytes for achieving enhanced ion mobility. However, the use of this type of electrolyte may result in leakage or evaporation, which can significantly affect the performance and functioning of the device. Better packing must be considered because the solid electrolyte performance is not compatible with electrochemical devices, where it can seriously affect the power density. (3) Lack of standardized testing protocols and long-term feasibility: there is no common testing protocol available for analysing the same benchmark for different devices, i.e., the overall efficiency reported by the newly fabricated device does not follow any common procedure or testing strategy. It varies with the device. The long-term feasibility of the designed device is also questionable because the reported papers only reveal the novelty and run-time efficiency of the material. Thus, further research needs to be carried in these directions to achieve high conversion efficiency and capacitance retention under harsh conditions and after aging.
The main difficulty behind commercializing integrated device arises due to the usage of liquid electrolyte. The risk of leaking from the device pushes more research on solid-state electrolyte-based integrated devices. When the device operates at high temperature conditions, there is the chance of accidents. However, no studies have been reported on how additional thermal effects cause the abovementioned effects in integrated devices. The size of the final fabricated device is also crucial when considering space and cost constraints. Recently, there has been tremendous attention in emerging photovoltaic devices based on advanced materials and their heterostructures such as perovskite/silicon and perovskite/CIGS tandem solar cell devices with higher photoconversion efficiency, but to date, no integrated photo-powered devices are available based on these solar cell devices. The integration of supercapacitors with these types of highly efficient solar cell devices will produce high charge storage performances. Microsupercapacitors are in the limelight due to their potential application in both flexible and smart electronics. Hence, it is an emerging area of research for future electronics if we can integrate them with photo-powered devices.
Integrated supercapacitors face great challenges and unlimited opportunities simultaneously. They may be the next-generation power source for driving the future, and thus future energy storage device market may be led by photosupercapacitors. However, there is hardly any research output to address the current challenges of photosupercapacitors. Thus, further research must focus on overcoming the existing obstacles and the fabrication of prototypes.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.


The authors would like to acknowledge financial support from SERB Early Career Research project (Grant No. ECR/2017/001850), Department of Science and Technology (DST/NM/NT/2019/205(G); DST/TDT/SHRI-34/2018), Karnataka Science and Technology Promotion Society (KSTePS/VGST-RGS-F/2018-19/GRD NO. 829/315), start-up grant, Jain University (11 (39)/17/013/2017SG), Nanomission (SR/NM/NS-20/2014) for the characterization facilities.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021