 DOI: 10.1039/C1JM12433A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14869-14875

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Guang
Zhu
,

Likun
Pan
*,

Ting
Lu
,

Tao
Xu
 and 

Zhuo
Sun


Engineering Research Center for Nanophotonics & Advanced Instrument, Ministry of Education, Department of Physics, East China Normal University, Shanghai, 200062, China. E-mail: lkpan@phy.ecnu.edu.cn; Fax: +86 21 62234321; Tel: +86 21 62234132

Received
31st May 2011
, Accepted 18th July 2011
First published on 19th August 2011
Reduced graphene (RG)-carbon nanotubes (CNTs) composite films are successfully fabricated by electrophoretic deposition and used as counter electrodes of dye-sensitized solar cells. RG is obtained by microwave-assisted reduction of graphite oxide dispersion in aqueous solution using a microwave synthesis system. By the optimization of CNTs content, photovoltaic conversion efficiency of the cell with RG-CNTs counter electrode reaches a maximum of 6.17% at one sun (AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2) which is comparable to the cell with conventional Pt counter electrode. The results suggest that the RG-CNTs composite films provide a potential feasibility for replacing conventional Pt counter electrodes for DSSCs.


Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) represent a key class of cell architecture that has emerged as a promising candidate for the development of next generation solar cells due to their high power conversion efficiency and low production cost. A typical DSSC is composed of a photoanode and a counter electrode separated by an electrolyte containing an iodide-triiodide (I−−I3−) redox couple. So far, Pt thin film as a catalyst has been widely used as the counter electrode in DSSCs due to its high electrical conductivity and high electrochemical catalytic activity for triiodide reduction. However, its high cost, poor stability in corrosive electrolytes, and high processing temperatures necessitate the development of alternative counter electrode materials.


Carbon based materials, such as graphite, carbon black, carbon fibers and carbon nanotubes (CNTs), have been reported as the counter electrodes of DSSCs instead of Pt due to their low cost, superior chemical stability, and good catalytic activity. Recently, graphene, a rising star in the carbon family, has also been proposed as alternative counter electrode because of its excellent electronic, conductive and mechanical properties, superior chemical stability and high specific surface area. By now, the chemical approach by oxidation and reduction of graphite can fulfil the large-scale production of graphene sheets. However, in this method, incomplete chemical reduction or large aggregates are often observed, which causes poor electrical conductivity and catalytic activity of graphene electrodes. Currently a particularly attractive option is to design and develop hybrid films based on graphene sheets to solve the above problems. Attempts to combine highly conductive CNTs and chemically reduced graphene have been reported in efforts to obtain hybrid films with superior mechanical, electrical, catalytic or optical properties. Such significant property enhancement observed is ascribed to the existence of CNTs which serve as an electrical conducting network, bridging the defects for electron transfer and increasing the basal spacing between graphene sheets. Recently, Choi et al. deposited CNTs on drop-coated graphene layer by using chemical vapor deposition method and used them as counter electrodes in DSSCs. A conversion efficiency of 3% under one sun illumination had been achieved. However, further exploration on the optimization of graphene-CNTs counter electrode for DSSCs is necessary because its current performance is still insufficient for practical applications.
As an economical and versatile processing technique, electrophoretic method, envisaged as the most interesting deposition method in view of potential technological applications, has been used to deposit the films on the surface of conductive substrate. The films obtained by electrophoretic deposition (EPD) from suspension exhibit outstanding advantages, such as high deposition rate, excellent uniformity, controlled thickness, large scale, and without any binders. Pimanpang et al. fabricated DSSCs based on CNTs counter electrodes prepared by EPD method and a conversion efficiency of 1.08% was achieved. Choi et al. used EPD method to prepare graphene counter electrodes for DSSCs. It was found that the DSSCs exhibited a high conversion efficiency of 5.69%. Despite the above progress to date, EPD method is seldom employed to synthesize graphene-CNTs composite materials for DSSCs.
In this work, reduced graphene (RG)-CNTs composite films with different proportions of CNTs are deposited onto graphite substrate by EPD method and used as counter electrodes of DSSCs. RG is synthesized by microwave-assisted reduction of graphite oxide (GO) dispersion in aqueous solution without any toxic chemicals using a microwave synthesis system. Microwave irradiation can facilitate mass production in a short time with little energy cost and has been successfully applied in the reduction of GO to prepare RG. The as-synthesized DSSCs based on RG-CNTs counter electrodes show a maximum conversion efficiency of 6.17% under one sun illumination, which is comparable to the one based on conventional Pt counter electrode.

GO dispersion solution was prepared using the method reported in our previous works, and pH value of the GO solution was adjusted to 9 by adding NaOH. Subsequently, the solution was heated at 150 °C with microwave irradiation power of 80 W for 10 min using a microwave system (Explorer48, CEM Co.). The color of solution evolved from bright-yellow into black, indicating that GO had been transformed to RG. After being filtered and washed with deionized water, the final product was dried in vacuum oven at 60 °C.

Multi-walled CNTs (Shenzhen Nanotech Port Co., Ltd., China) were dispersed in the mixture solution of acetone and ethanol (volume ratio 1:1) with RG, and then ultrasonicated for 24 h to produce a uniform suspension. 10 mg Al(NO3)3·9H2O was added into the suspension to increase the deposition rate and improve the adhesion of the powder particles to substrate. The conductive graphite papers (2 cm × 2 cm) were used as substrates, connected to the negative potential, and the counter-electrode was a graphite sheet with same area. Two electrodes were kept parallel at 1 cm apart in the suspension. The EPD was carried out by applying a constant DC voltage of 30 V for 30 min, as shown in Fig. 1. The composite electrodes deposited from the mixtures of RG and CNTs with 0, 20, 40, 60, 80, and 100 wt% CNTs in the suspension, named as RGC-0, RGC-2, RGC-4, RGC-6, RGC-8, and RGC-10, were dried in air at 40 °C for 2 h. The conventional Pt films and pure graphite substrate were also used as counter electrodes for comparison.
The working electrodes of DSSCs were prepared by screen printing of TiO2 paste on FTO glass (resistivity: 14 Ω/□, Nippon Sheet Glass, Japan), followed by sintering at 500 °C for 30 min. After cooling to 80 °C, sintered electrodes were immersed into 0.5 mM N-719 dye solution in a mixture of acetonitrile and tertbutyl alcohol (volume ratio 1:1) and kept for 24 h at room temperature. The active area of the cell is 0.2 cm2. The dye-treated electrodes were rinsed with ethanol and dried under nitrogen flow, and assembled with as-prepared RG-CNTs or Pt counter electrodes using a 25 μm spacer (Surlyn). The redox electrolyte was composed of 1 M DMII, 50 mM LiI, 30 mM I2, 0.5 M tert-butylpyridine, and 0.1 M GuNCS in a solvent mixture of 85% acetonitrile with 15% valeronitrile by volume.
The surface morphology and structure of the samples were characterized by an atomic force microscopy (AFM, SPI 3800N), a field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Hitachi S-4800), and a high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, JEOL-2010), respectively. The cyclic voltammetry (CV) experiment was carried out by using Autolab PGSTAT 302N electrochemical workstation in a three-electrode mode, with a standard calomel electrode as reference electrode and a Pt foil as counter electrode at a potential scan rate of 50 mV s−1. The electrolyte was composed of 10 mM LiI, 1 mM I2, and 0.1 M LiClO4 in acetonitrile solution.
Photocurrent-voltage (J–V) measurement was performed with a Keithley model 2440 Source Meter and a Newport solar simulator system (equipped with a 1 kW xenon arc lamp, Oriel) at one sun (AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2), which was calibrated with a reference Si reference solar cell (P-N 91150V, Oriel). The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed using an electrochemical workstation (AUTOLAB PGSTAT302N) under 100 mW cm−2 illumination in the frequency range of 0.1–100 kHz, and the applied bias voltage and ac amplitude were set at open-circuit voltage of the cells and 10 mV between the counter electrode and the working electrode, respectively.


AFM was used to characterize the as-prepared RG on a hydrophilic-treated silicon substrate by simply drop casting of dilute RG dispersion in ethanol solution. From Fig. 2, it can be observed that RG with large area is formed. Height profiles show the thickness of RG is about 3 nm, corresponding to three or four layers based on theoretical value of 0.78 nm for single-layer RG and the thickness contribution from residual oxygen-containing groups on the faces. It should be noted that the remaining oxygen groups on RG sheets could not only result in a uniform dispersion but also make it possible for controllably fabricating composite electrodes by EPD.


Fig. 3 shows FESEM images of different RG-CNTs composite electrodes. It is clearly observed from Fig. 3(a) that corrugated and scrolled RG sheets interact with each other to form an open pore system for electrolyte ions easily accessing the surface of RG, while the CNTs entangle with each other and show a network structure, as shown in Fig. 3(f). When CNTs are incorporated into the composite, as illustrated in Fig. 3(b), CNTs are scattered on the surface of RG sheets with many vacancies between them. It can be seen from Fig. 3(c) and (d) that further adding of CNTs forms an extended, conjugated network with individual CNTs bridging gaps between RG sheets. The large RG sheets cover the majority of the total surface area, while the CNTs act as wires connecting the large sheets together and filling the vacancies. Such a network structure can serve as fast electronic and ionic conducting channels, providing ideal electrodes for DSSCs. When the CNTs content is further increased, as shown in Fig. 3(e), it displays that RG nanosheets are dispersed in a randomly distributed percolating network of CNTs, showing the obvious domination of CNTs in the composite.
The cross section FESEM image of RGC-6 film in Fig. 4(a) displays that the thickness of as-prepared RG-CNTs composite electrodes is ca 20 μm. Fig. 4(b) is magnified FESEM image of the black pane area marked in Fig. 4(a), showing the integration between RG sheets and CNTs, which further confirms the formation of RG-CNTs network structure by EPD technique.

Fig. 5(a) and (b) show low-magnification HRTEM images of RGC-6 electrode. It is observed that the surface of the RG sheets were bestowed with a great deal of CNTs with a diameter of about 20 nm. Fig. 5(c) is HRTEM image of the black pane area marked in Fig. 5(b), which indicates a junction between a multi-walled CNTs and RG sheets. It is confirmed that a good contact between RG and CNTs is formed by EPD technique, which favors electron transfer between them.
To further confirm the better contact between RG and CNTs, the electrical contact between RG and CNTs was measured by using two-point-probe measurements on the top of electrodes and Fig. 6 shows the current–voltage (I–V) curves of various RG-CNTs electrodes. The result displays that the electrical conductivity of composite film increases with the increase of CNTs content, which indicates that an electrical conducting network is formed by introducing CNTs.

Cyclic voltammetry is an important and efficient tool for analyzing the ion diffusivity and the catalytic mechanism acting in an electrochemical system. Fig. 7 shows the cyclic voltammograms of the various RG-CNTs and Pt electrodes under the potential from −0.5 to 1.2 V. In the case of Pt electrode, two pairs of oxidation and reduction peaks are observed. The pair on the left is attributed to the redox reaction (1), while that on the right results from the redox reaction (2).
3I− ↔ I−3 + 2e−
(1)
2I−3 ↔ 3I2 + 2e−
(2)
In the DSSCs, electrons are injected into photo-oxidized dye from I− ions in the electrolyte [eqn (1)], and the produced I3− ions are reduced on the counter electrode [eqn (2)]. From Fig. 7, it can be observed that RG-CNTs composite electrodes display higher current density than Pt electrode. The improved current density is due to the large specific surface area in the composite electrodes for catalysis and the non-faradaic current caused by charging process of the porous electrodes. This indicates that RG-CNTs film can be used as an efficient electrocatalyst counter electrode in DSSCs. Among all electrodes, RGC-6 shows a highest current density, which is ascribed to the good network structure for conductive bridge of the gaps between RG nanosheets by incorporating appropriate CNTs. However, the current density decreases with further increase of CNTs content, which should be ascribed to the lower specific surface area of CNTs than RG.

Fig. 8(a) shows the typical EIS spectra of the cells with various RG-CNTs and Pt counter electrodes, and the inset is the corresponding equivalent circuit. Fig. 8(b) displays a magnified plot at the high frequency region. Two semicircles, including a large one at high frequency and a small one at low frequency, are observed in the Nyquist plots of EIS spectra. The high frequency semicircle is related to the charge transfer resistance (RCT) and interfacial capacitance (CPE1) at the interfaces of the electrolyte/counter electrode and the low-frequency one is related to the charge transfer resistance (RW) and interfacial capacitance (CPE2) at TiO2/dye/electrolyte. As listed in Table 1, the fitted RCT value of the cell with RGC-6 (9.8 Ω) is very close to that of the cell with Pt electrode (8.2 Ω), showing its comparably high electrocatalytic performance. The higher RCT values of other composite electrodes indicate their less catalytic sites, which is not beneficial to the fill factor and conversion efficiency. The corresponding Bode phase plots of the cells with various counter electrodes are shown in Fig. 8(c), allowing ready identification of the characteristic frequencies. The phase shift of the frequency peak at the high frequency region is greatly reduced from 33° for the cell with RG electrode to 16° for the cell with RGC-6 electrode. Correspondingly, the characteristic peak position is shifted from about 2900 Hz to 8400 Hz, consistent with the results reported by Choi et al., which indicates a high electrocatalytic performance for RGC-6 electrode. As a result, from both the Nyquist plots and Bode phase plots, it shows that the electrochemical properties of RG electrodes are greatly improved by introducing CNTs.

Counter electrode


RCT/Ω
Jsc/mA cm−2
Voc/V
FF (%)

η (%)

RGC-0

29.4
13.84
0.73
35.7
3.63

RGC-2

23.7
13.57
0.75
40.3
4.10

RGC-4

11.3
12.14
0.77
59.6
5.61

RGC-6

9.8
12.86
0.78
61.3
6.17

RGC-8

11.1
12.57
0.77
59.0
5.67

RGC-10

11.5
13.3
0.74
55.6
5.48

Pt

8.2
15.04
0.77
68.5
7.88
The J–V curves of DSSCs with various RG-CNTs and Pt counter electrodes are shown in Fig. 9. The open circuit potential (Voc), short circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and conversion efficiency (η) of all cells are listed in Table 1. The η value of DSSCs with pure graphite substrate as counter electrode is only 0.48%, which shows the contribution from graphite substrate to the whole cell is very low and can be neglected. The Jsc value of the cell with RG counter electrodes is higher than the one with RG-CNTs composite electrode, which can be ascribed to the following reasons. The first one is a higher adsorption capacity of the dye on RG electrode due to the higher specific surface area of RG than CNTs. The second one is ascribed to the longer electron lifetime for the cell with RG counter electrode, which can be indicated by its lower frequency of characteristic peak at low frequency region in Bode phase plots (Fig. 8c). That may be due to a shorter pathway of electron transfer in two dimension graphene sheets. However, it is observed that for the cells with RG-CNTs counter electrodes, the values of FF and η obviously increase with the increase of CNTs content, which is ascribed to the formation of a good network structure combining RG with high surface area and CNTs with good electrical conductivity. The large graphene sheets covered the majority of the total surface area, while the CNTs acted as wires connecting the large sheets together, filling any vacancies. After reaching a maximum value of 61.3% and 6.17% for RGC-6, the values of FF and η decrease with further increase of CNTs content. This is due to the lower specific surface area of CNTs than RG. It should be noted that a maximum η of 6.17% for the cell with RG-CNTs counter electrode is lower than that for Pt counter electrodes (7.88%) due to lower FF and Jsc caused by a smaller diffusion impedance of redox species and an unabsorbed incident light reflected back to the TiO2 photoanode for re-absorption for the semi-transparent Pt counter electrode. However, such a performance of RG-CNTs counter electrode is still competitive to the one of conventional Pt counter electrode considering the low cost and superior chemical stability of carbon materials.

In summary, RG-CNTs composite films have been successfully fabricated by EPD method and used as counter electrodes of DSSCs. The results of electrochemical experiments indicate that compared to pure RG and pure CNTs, RG-CNTs composite films exhibit high electrical conductivity and excellent catalytic activity due to a synergistic effect of RG and CNTs in which CNTs act as wires conductively connecting the large RG sheets together. A maximum conversion efficiency of 6.17% under one sun illumination has been achieved for the cell based on RG-CNTs counter electrodes, which is comparable to the one based on conventional Pt counter electrodes. The present synthetic strategy should be a promising fabrication technique for a low-cost production of catalytic, flexible, and conductive counter electrodes for DSSCs.


This work was supported by Special Project for Nanotechnology of Shanghai (No. 1052nm02700).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011