 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA11800K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3655-3663


Lu-Lu
Jiang
,

Zhao-Kui
Wang
*,

Meng
Li
,

Chun-He
Li
,

Peng-Fei
Fang
* and 

Liang-Sheng
Liao
*

Department of Physics, Hubei Nuclear Solid Physics Key Laboratory, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China. E-mail: fangpf@whu.edu.cn

Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices, Joint International Research Laboratory of Carbon-Based Functional Materials and Devices, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China. E-mail: zkwang@suda.edu.cn; lsliao@suda.edu.cn

Received
7th December 2018
, Accepted 17th January 2019
First published on 17th January 2019
2,2,7,7-Tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)9,9-bifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD) is a widely employed hole-transporting layer (HTL) in typical n-i-p structure perovskite solar cells (PSCs). And the p-type dopants of bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt (Li-TFSI) and tert-butylpyridine (tBP) have to be utilized to improve the hole mobility and film conductivity of Spiro-OMeTAD. However, the incorporation of these additives will cause the issue of deliquescence, strongly speeding up the degradation of the Spiro-OMeTAD layer and thus of the perovskite layer. Herein, we developed a modified Spiro-OMeTAD layer using MoS2 with the 2H semiconducting phase and flower-like microstructure. The addition of MoS2 played an important role in improving the hole mobility and enhancing the film stability of Spiro-OMeTAD. The resulting PSCs based on the MoS2-modified Spiro-OMeTAD HTL delivered a champion power conversion efficiency as high as 20.18%. More importantly, the incorporation of MoS2 could suppress the Li+ migration in the HTL owing to the strong adsorption ability and large specific surface area of flower-like MoS2 nanoparticles. As a result, the fabricated PSC without encapsulation exhibited promising stability by retaining almost 85% of the initial PCE even after 300 h exposure to air while the reference device only retained about 30% of its initial PCE.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have shown an unprecedented rise in power conversion efficiency (PCE) up to 23.3% based on the optimizations of the perovskite absorber layer and device architecture. Typically, a planar PSC device consists of a perovskite light-absorber layer, an electron-transporting layer (ETL) and a hole-transporting layer (HTL), which are sandwiched between two electrodes. The aforementioned three layers mainly determine the device efficiency and stability of PSCs. Particularly, the unsatisfactory device stability of PSCs, which is mostly induced by ionic migration, light irradiation, moisture corrosion and oxygen infiltration under ambient conditions, is a serious issue that restricts the potential application of PSCs. In addition to the cell stability, the current–voltage hysteresis originating from the charge traps, ferroelectric properties of the perovskites, and ion migration in the devices, is another critical issue that influences the device performance.

Although the HTL plays a positive role in hole transportation and extraction, the HTL itself is also one of the main sources of cell stability and current–voltage hysteresis. So far, most reported HTL materials for PSCs cannot work effectively in their pristine form. 2,2,7,7-Tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)9,9-bifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD) is a widely employed HTL in n-i-p structure PSCs due to its matchable energy level and non-reactivity to the perovskite layer. However, p-type dopants such as bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt (Li-TFSI) and tert-butylpyridine (tBP) have to be utilized to improve the hole mobility and film conductivity of Spiro-OMeTAD. Unfortunately, the incorporation of these dopants in Spiro-OMeTAD will cause other new issues such as hydroscopicity and deliquescence, which are regarded as the main factors in speeding up the degradation of the Spiro-OMeTAD layer and thus of the perovskite layer. In addition, Li+ migration from Li-TFSI is also a rebarbative problem and there were no valid methods to address this issue effectively heretofore.
The motivation in this work is to develop an effective method to resolve the issue of Li+ migration in the Spiro-OMeTAD layer and improve the hole mobility and film stability of Spiro-OMeTAD. Our strategy is to introduce a two-dimensional (2D) transition metal dichalcogenide, molybdenum disulfide (MoS2), into the Spiro-OMeTAD layer to modify the optoelectronic properties of the HTL, and especially to immobilize the Li+ ions for retarding the HTL degradation. MoS2 with a 2H semiconducting phase and a flower-like microstructure is synthesized by a hydrothermal method. MoS2 is one of the transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) with a 2H crystal arrangement and suitable band gap for many opto-electronic applications. MoS2 has been used as a channel material for high performance unipolar or ambipolar field-effect transistors (FETs). The potential of MoS2 has been reflected in a few interesting attempts to evidence photovoltaic properties. Apart from its role as an absorber layer, a high carrier-mobility and a relatively large band gap of MoS2 are indicative of its potential as a charge-transport material in solar cells. The flower-like microstructure enables the MoS2 to possess a powerful adsorption capacity of Li+ ions due to its large specific surface area. In addition, the incorporation of MoS2 realizes the p-type doping of Spiro-OMeTAD, resulting in improved hole mobility. Consequently, the resulting champion solar cell delivers a PCE as high as 20.18%. And the sorbent role of flower-like MoS2 enables the device to present excellent environmental and thermal stability by retaining almost 85% of the initial PCE even after 300 h exposure in 20% relative humidity at room temperature.

All the chemicals ((NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O and CH3CSNH2) used in the synthesis of MoS2 were obtained from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd, Shanghai and used without further purification. The flower-like MoS2 was prepared by a method as follows. 1.2410 g (NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O and 1.0629 g thioacetamide (TAA) [CH3CSNH2] were mixed together and then vigorously stirred for 0.5 h until a homogeneous solution was formed. Subsequently, the resulting liquid was poured into a Teflon reactor (50 mL) and heated at 220 °C for 6 h. After the reaction, a black precipitate was obtained and then washed using ethanol and water respectively three times before being dried at 80 °C in a vacuum chamber.


The CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layer was deposited by a one-step spin-coating method including an anti-solvent step. CH3NH3I (99%), PbI2 (99.999%), Spiro-OMeTAD, bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)-imide lithium salt (Li-TFSI), tris(2-1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP) and the solvents dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 1,4-butyrolactone (GBL) (anhydrous, amine free; 99.9%), chlorobenzene and acetonitrile were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. All the chemicals were used as received without any further purification. The precursor solution for the perovskite layer was prepared by dissolving CH3NH3I and PbI2 (1.2 mol:1.2 mol) in DMSO:GBL (3:7 (v/v)). The Spiro-OMeTAD solution was prepared by mixing 90 mg in 1 mL chlorobenzene with 23 μL Li-TFSI and 36 μL tBP. The MoS2 precursor solution was prepared by adding 50 mg MoS2 in 3 mL acetonitrile solvent.

Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) was used as cathode substrates with a sheet resistance of 15 Ω sq−1. The cleaned FTO-coated glass substrates were treated with UV–ozone for 20 min. The TiO2 compact layer was prepared by soaking in titanium tetrachloride precursor solution (performed by a mixture of ice-cube ultrapure water and titanium tetrachloride solution) and deposition in an oven preheated to 70 °C for 1 h, finally rinsing and drying. The perovskite precursor solution was deposited on FTO/TiO2 substrates via spin-coating (2000 rpm for 20 s and then 4000 rpm for 40 s). Chlorobenzene was dropped onto the substrates during the second step after 20 seconds. An instant darkening of the film was observed quickly after annealing at 100 °C for 10 min in the glovebox. And then the Spiro-OMeTAD layer was deposited on top of the perovskite layer at 5000 rpm for 40 s. Finally, a 100 nm Ag electrode was evaporated through a shadow mask to define the device area of 9 mm2.

X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the perovskite films and TiO2 were obtained using PANalytical 80 equipment (Empyrean, Cu Kα radiation). The film surface morphologies were evaluated using an atomic force microscope (AFM, Veeco Multimode V instrument) and scanning electron microscope (SEM, Quanta 200 FEG, FEI Co.). The UV-Vis absorption spectra were collected using a Shimadzu spectrophotometer (PerkinElmer Lambda 750). The steady state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the perovskite films on different HTLs were collected using a Horiba Jobin-Yvon LabRAM HR800 with 480 nm excitation wavelength. Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of PSCs were obtained using a programmable Keithley 2400 source meter under AM 1.5G solar irradiation (100 mW cm−2). Room temperature Hall-effect measurements were performed with a Lake Shore Model 8404 Hall-Effect Measurement System with DC and AC magnetic fields of ±1.7 T (DC) and ∼1.2 T RMS (AC, 100 mHz), respectively. Hall mobility was determined from the measured Hall voltage and the measured 4-point resistivity for the particular excitation current and magnetic field (Hall factor set to unity). Sheet carrier concentration was determined likewise from the Hall voltage. TOF-SIMS measurements (Model TOF-SIMS 5, ION-TOF GmbH) were performed with the pulsed primary ions from a Cs+ (2 keV) liquid-metal ion gun for the sputtering and a Bi+ pulsed primary ion beam for the analysis (30 keV).


MoS2 is synthesized based on a hydrothermal method by using the source materials (NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O and CH3CSNH2. The molecular structures of Li-TFSI and MoS2 are presented in Fig. 1a. The obtained MoS2 has a 2D structure. As shown in Fig. 1b, Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 composite films are prepared by a direct mixing of MoS2 solution (in acetonitrile) and Spiro-OMeTAD precursor (in chlorobenzene). After MoS2 incorporation, there is a distinct change in the Spiro-OMeTAD solution color from light pink to light cyan. Fig. 1c shows the scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of synthesized MoS2. The MoS2 nanoparticles have a diameter around 300 nm. The magnified SEM image shown in the inset of Fig. 1c gives a clear picture of the flower-like microspheres for these as-prepared MoS2 nanoparticles. The transmission electron microscopy image presented in Fig. 1d further verifies the microsphere-like appearance of MoS2 nanoparticles with an average diameter of 300 nm, which agrees well with the SEM images. Fig. 1e presents the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of prepared pure MoS2. The diffraction peaks are located at 14.2°, 33.1° and 58.7° corresponding to the diffraction planes of (002), (101) and (110), respectively. These characteristic diffraction peaks indicate a high purity of the products. Furthermore, the maps of S and Mo elements in the Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 film suggest a uniform distribution of MoS2 in the Spiro-OMeTAD layer (ESI Fig. S1). The optimized Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 film is deposited on the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layer to fabricate PSCs with an n-i-p structure as shown in Fig. 1a.

The optoelectronic properties of the Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 film are first investigated to better understand the charge transfer between Spiro-OMeTAD and MoS2. Electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy is a powerful technique to evaluate the charge states among different molecules. Fig. 2a gives the plots of ESR signals as a function of magnetic field for pristine Spiro-OMeTAD and Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 solutions. Pristine Spiro-OMeTAD displays no other obvious radical signals in its ESR spectra. In contrast, the Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 sample presents very strong signals at 326.1 mT and 326.6 mT, which is obvious evidence of efficient charge transfer between Spiro-OMeTAD and MoS2. A comparison among the ESR signals of the as-prepared and aged (72 h) Spiro-OMeTAD and Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 samples under dark and illumination (5 min) conditions, further confirms the stable charge transfer behavior between Spiro-OMeTAD and MoS2 (ESI Fig. S2). Efficient charge transfer will result in improved hole mobility and film conductivity of the Spiro-OMeTAD layer. Fig. 2b shows the J–V characteristics of Spiro-OMeTAD and Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 based on hole-only devices with a structure of FTO/PEDOT:PSS/Spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/Ag. The improvement of film conductivity could be reflected from the enhancement of current density in the whole bias range especially the space charge limited current (SCLC) region. The hole mobilities (μ) in Spiro-OMeTAD and Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 films are extrapolated to be 3.3 × 10−3 and 6.8 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 S−1, respectively, according to Mott–Gurney's equation μ = (8JL3)/(9εε0V2) by using the J–V data in the SCLC region, where ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, ε is the dielectric constant of the Spiro-OMeTAD film, and L is the thickness of the Spiro-OMeTAD layer. The Hall effect measurements shown in Fig. 2c further verify the enhancement of electrical conductivity in the Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 film. In addition, the Hall mobility in the Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 film exhibits a suppressed decay process compared with that in the pristine Spiro-OMeTAD film. This indicates that the MoS2-doped Spiro-OMeTAD film possesses good stability, which enables the corresponding PSCs to have better device stability. To determine the valence bands (VBs) of Spiro-OMeTAD and Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 films, the ultraviolet photoelectron spectra (UPS) and the corresponding UPS cutoff edge and Fermi edge are plotted in Fig. S7. The bandgaps of the Spiro-OMeTAD and Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 films were extrapolated from the optical absorption spectra as shown in Fig. S9. The bandgap of the Spiro-OMeTAD film shows no changes with the introduction of MoS2. A schematic of the calculated energy levels of the Spiro-OMeTAD and Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 films and the PSCs based on these films is shown in Fig. S9. Obviously, the Fermi energy of the Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 decreases and the VB is closer to the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of CH3NH3PbI3 compared to that of the pristine Spiro-OMeTAD. The closer VB of Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 enables more effective hole transporting from perovskite to the HTL. This means that better hole extraction of the HTL could be obtained effectively by the integration of MoS2. Fig. 2d shows the photoluminescence (PL) spectra of CH3NH3PbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD and CH3NH3PbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 samples at an excitation wavelength of 530 nm. An obvious decrease in the PL intensity is observed in the MoS2-doped sample due to the PL quenching. This suggests that the MoS2-doped Spiro-OMeTAD film is more beneficial to hole extraction when utilizing it as an HTL in practical perovskite solar cells. As for the time-resolved PL (TRPL) spectra (Fig. S8), the emission lifetime for the films Spiro-OMeTAD and Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 (0.6 wt%) was fitted by using a two-component exponential decay model. The average life time, which reflected the quenching rate of the charge-carriers by the charge-extraction layer, was 8.78 ns for spiro-OMeTAD and 4.31 ns for Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 (0.6 wt%), respectively. The PL decay spectra were fitted to a biexponential decay function consisting of two time intervals, corresponding to a fast and a slow decay process. The fast decay process was associated with the quenching of free carriers in the perovskite domain through charge transfer to the Spiro-OMeTAD or the Spiro-OMeTAD:MoO3, and the slow decay process was related to the radiative decay.

The solution-processed Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 film is used as the HTL to fabricate CH3NH3PbI3 based n-i-p structure PSCs. First, the doping ratio of MoS2 is optimized based on the evaluation of device performance. Fig. 3a shows the J–V curves of PSCs based on Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 HTLs with varied ratios (0–0.8 wt%) of MoS2 under standard air mass (AM) 1.5G illumination with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. Compared to 17.79% PCE for the reference device, the 0.60 wt% MoS2 based device delivers a PCE of 20.18%, which is the highest value among all devices. Fig. 3b shows the histogram of PCE distributions in Spiro-OMeTAD and Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 based PSCs. The average efficiencies (PCEave) are calculated to be 19.88% and 17.21% for the control device and the reference device, respectively. There is no overlap of PCE distribution between the two types of devices, indicating excellent reproducibility of the high efficiency in the Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 based devices. From Table 1, it can be found that the improvement of PCE by MoS2 doping is attributed to a simultaneous increase in the cell parameters of short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF). The steady state photocurrent and efficiency measured over a period of 200 s at the maximum power point in the Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 based device are presented in Fig. 3c. By holding a bias near the maximum power output point of 1.05 V, the PCE and the photocurrent density are stabilized at 20.07% and 23.37 mA cm−2, respectively. Fig. 3d shows the plot of the external quantum efficiencies (EQE) of the reference and the control devices. Obviously, the Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 based device exhibits higher EQE than the Spiro-OMeTAD over almost the entire visible light wavelength range. Particularly, MoS2 doping results in a largely suppressed current hysteresis in the control device. Fig. 3e shows the J–V curves of the reference and the control devices with forward and reverse scan directions. The hysteresis factor (HI) of the reference device is calculated to be 0.07. With MoS2 doping, it is reduced to 0.03. Even after aging for 72 h in air, the control device retains a HI as low as 0.04, whereas it increases to 0.12 for the reference device (ESI Fig. S3). In general, Li+ migration originated from Li-TFSI, which is regarded as one of the main factors causing the current hysteresis, and always occurs in the Spiro-OMeTAD layer due to the good liveness of Li ions. The lower HI in the Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 based device suggests a positive role of the MoS2 incorporation in inhibiting Li+ migration in the Spiro-OMeTAD layer. Besides the high efficiency, the device stability, especially the operational stability, in ambient air is another critical concern for perovskite solar cells. To study the effect of MoS2 incorporation on the device stability, the PCEs of the reference and the control devices (without encapsulation) are measured every 12 h until 300 h of aging in air. The devices are stored in a glass oven keeping the humidity at 40% and the temperature at 25 °C during the measurement intervals. As shown in Fig. 3f, the MoS2-included device exhibits excellent long-term stability compared with the reference device. After 300 h of aging, the PCE of the reference device decreased severely from 17.79% to 5.45%, only retaining 30% of the initial value. Surprisingly, the efficiency of the control device still retained 86% of the initial one with a slight reduction from 20.18% to 17.85%. We attribute the prolonged lifetime to the MoS2 incorporation which improved the stability of the Spiro-OMeTAD layer, and can serve as a good protective barrier for the CH3NH3PbI3 layer.

HTL

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
PCEave (%)
Spiro-OMeTAD
23.54
1.05
72
17.79
17.21 ± 0.64
Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 (0.20 wt%)
24.14
1.06
72
18.42
18.05 ± 0.49
Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 (0.40 wt%)
24.34
1.07
73
19.02
18.82 ± 0.37
Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 (0.60 wt%)
24.48
1.10
75
20.18
19.88 ± 0.54
Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 (0.80 wt%)
24.15
1.07
74
19.12
18.78 ± 0.64
To better clarify the effect of MoS2 incorporation on the stability of the Spiro-OMeTAD layer, the top SEM images of the Spiro-OMeTAD films with and without MoS2 incorporation are evaluated. The Spiro-OMeTAD films are deposited onto the CH3NH3PbI3 layer with an overnight oxidative process in order to reflect the practical device situation. Fig. 4a and b show the SEM images of the Spiro-OMeTAD film and Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 film, respectively. As shown in Fig. 4a, many corrosion traces are observed on the surface of the Spiro-OMeTAD film. Due to the amorphous nature of the Spiro-OMeTAD film, moisture and oxygen easily intrude into the Spiro-OMeTAD layer. Continuous intrusions of moisture and oxygen cause the generation of corrosion traces, which will accelerate the decomposition of the perovskite film. In contrast, fewer corrosion traces are observed on the surface of the Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 film. Due to the sensitivity to moisture and oxygen, severe aggregation and crystallization will happen in these organic-based small molecule films. Actually, the incorporation of inorganic-based materials can solve the issues of instability and aggregation of the organic-based films. In the present case, suppressed aggregation and crystallization due to MoS2 incorporation reduces the pinholes and voids in the Spiro-OMeTAD layer. Fig. 4d and e present the SEM images of the aged (72 h in air) Spiro-OMeTAD film and Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 film, respectively. After erosion for a long time, the pinholes and voids in the Spiro-OMeTAD layer become larger and larger. Compared to the MoS2-included sample, the pristine Spiro-OMeTAD film presents a more coarse morphology (ESI Fig. S4). The difference in the surface morphologies between the two samples is further confirmed by their corresponding optical microscope images (ESI Fig. S5). And the layered device configuration could be reflected by a cross-sectional SEM image of the device as presented in Fig. S6. The thickness of Spiro-OMeTAD and Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 layers was about 350 nm and 380 nm, respectively. The additives Li-TFSI and tBP have the issue of strong deliquescence, which is prone to attract water molecules and thus accelerate the degradation of the Spiro-OMeTAD layer. Noticeably, many clusters appear on the surface of the Spiro-OMeTAD. From the XRD patterns shown in Fig. 4c and f, the emerging clusters are confirmed to be the aggregated PbI2. After long time intrusions, the moisture and oxygen can penetrate into the perovskite layer through these pinholes and voids, resulting in partial decomposition of CH3NH3PbI3 and thus the generation of PbI2. In contrast, few PbI2 clusters are observed on the surface of the Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 film, indicating excellent film stability owing to the suppressed intrusion paths for moisture and oxygen.
In addition, Li+ migration from Spiro-OMeTAD to the perovskite layer is a challenging issue due to the good liveness of Li+ ions. The reduced HI in the Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 based devices (Fig. 3e) suggests an inhibited Li+ migration behavior owing to the incorporation of MoS2. To better understand the role of MoS2 in suppressing Li+ migration, an investigation into the element (especially Li+) distributions in the reference and the control devices is carried out. Fig. 5a and b show the plots of the time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy (TOF-SIMS) depth profiles (lengthwise distributions) including Li, Mo, S, and I elements in the aged (200 h in air) Spiro-OMeTAD and Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 based devices, respectively. As shown in Fig. 5a, obviously, Li+ ions migrated from the Spiro-OMeTAD layer to the perovskite layer. And a few I− ions are distributed in the Spiro-OMeTAD layer, indicating that the poor stability of the pristine Spiro-OMeTAD film could not prevent the I− migration from the perovskite layer to the Spiro-OMeTAD layer. From the TOF-SIMS depth profile (Fig. 5b) of the Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 based device, S2− and Mo4+ are mainly located in the Spiro-OMeTAD layer. In sharp contrast, there are nearly no Li+ ions in the perovskite layer, indicating an effective suppression of Li+ ion migration from the Spiro-OMeTAD layer to the perovskite layer. And the I− migration from the perovskite layer to the Spiro-OMeTAD layer is also restrained since very few I− ions are observed in the Spiro-OMeTAD layer.
Combined with the comprehensive effects, we think that MoS2 nanoparticles can have three positive functions in the Spiro-OMeTAD layer. First, MoS2 can serve as a p-type dopant for Spiro-OMeTAD to enhance the film conductivity and increase the hole mobility. Second, the inorganic nature of MoS2 can improve the stability of the organic based amorphous Spiro-OMeTAD film. Third, the flower-like MoS2 nanoparticles with layered petals can act as powerful sorbents for Li+ ions due to their large specific surface area. Fig. 6 gives a schematic of the absorbent function of flower-like MoS2 nanoparticles for Li+ ions in the Spiro-OMeTAD layer. In the case of the pristine Spiro-OMeTAD based device, moisture easily penetrates into the perovskite layer through the intrusion paths in the Spiro-OMeTAD layer due to the ease of aggregation and crystallization of the amorphous Spiro-OMeTAD film. When MoS2 nanoparticles are doped into the Spiro-OMeTAD layer, the layered petal structure of MoS2 nanoparticles can adsorb and immobilize Li+ ions in the Spiro-OMeTAD layer. This means that the incorporation of MoS2 nanoparticles could suppress the Li+ migration from the Spiro-OMeTAD layer to the perovskite layer, resulting in reduced intrusion paths for moisture and oxygen to the perovskite layer. We regard this as the main reason for the improved cell stability and the reduced current hysteresis in the Spiro-OMeTAD:MoS2 based PSCs.

In summary, we have demonstrated an effective method to enhance the device performance of perovskite solar cells by modifying the Spiro-OMeTAD layer with flower-like MoS2 nanoparticles. The incorporation of MoS2 realized efficient charge transfer with Spiro-OMeTAD molecules, giving enhanced film conductivity and increased hole mobility in the Spiro-OMeTAD films. The resulting PSCs delivered a champion PCE as high as 20.18%. In addition, the incorporation of MoS2 nanoparticles largely improved the stability of the Spiro-OMeTAD layer, resulting in remarkably improved cell stability by retaining 86% of the initial efficiency even after 300 h of aging without encapsulation in air. More importantly, the flower-like MoS2 nanoparticles with layered petals can act as powerful sorbents for Li+ ions, which could suppress the Li+ migration from Spiro-OMeTAD to the perovskite layer, resulting in the reduced current hysteresis of the PSCs. The findings in this work provide an effective strategy to improve the efficiency and stability of Spiro-OMeTAD based PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors acknowledge financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 91733301 and 61674109), the National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2016YFA0202400), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (No. BK20170059), and the Open Fund of the State Key Laboratory of Integrated Optoelectronics (IOSKL2018KF07). This project is also funded by the Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, by the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD), and by the “111” Project of The State Administration of Foreign Experts Affairs of China.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta11800k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019