 DOI: 10.1039/D1TC04925A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 1357-1364


Teng
Zhang
*,

Baohua
Zhao
,

Zhi
Li
,

Shanshan
Liu
,

Chengben
Liu
,

Xinmei
Li
,

Heyuan
Liu
,

Yanli
Chen
,

Zhaobin
Liu
 and 

Xiyou
Li
*

School of Materials Science and Engineering, China University of Petroleum (East China), Qingdao, 266580, P. R. China. E-mail: xiyouli@upc.edu.cn; tzhangae@connect.ust.hk

College of Science, China University of Petroleum (East China), Qingdao, 266580, P. R. China

Shandong Energy Group Co., Ltd., 19/F, High Salary Wanda J3 Office Building, 57-1, Gongye South Road, High Tech Zone, Jinan City, Shandong Province, China

Received
14th October 2021
, Accepted 6th December 2021
First published on 7th December 2021
The imperfect perovskite/carrier selective layer (CSL) interface is the main reason for the unsatisfactory performance and poor stability of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Therefore, introducing surface passivation molecules at selective interfaces has been widely used to improve the efficiency and stability of PSCs. In this work, we synthesize two kinds of surface passivation molecules, namely, 2-(4-ethylaminobenzene)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (BSBF–NH2) and 2-(4-methylcarboxylicbenzene)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (BSBF–COOH). The molecules are carefully designed with spirobifluorene cores and polar amino (carboxy) side groups. Compared with the control devices (18.27%), the PCE of BSBF–NH2 and BSBF–COOH passivated PSCs has been increased to 20.05% and 19.23%, respectively, mainly due to an improved Voc and FF. The increased performance can be explained by the significantly accelerated hole extraction efficiency from the perovskite layer up to the hole transport material (HTM) after the surface treatment (BSBF–NH2 passivated), as confirmed from the femtosecond transient absorption (fs-TA) measurement. Besides, benefitting from the anchoring groups (–NH2/–COOH), the defect density of the devices is reduced. Moreover, thanks to the hydrophobic nature of the organic molecule, the stability of PSCs can be improved for BSBF–NH2 passivated devices. Finally, the results of this research are insightful for designing new organic passivation molecules for perovskite optoelectronic applications.

Owing to their excellent photo-physical properties, perovskite light absorbers have captured the attention of both research and industry. In 2009, perovskite materials were first introduced as light absorbers in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). This prototype received a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.8%. Bach et al. later replaced the liquid electrolyte with 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-4-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD) and boosted the PCE to >10% in 2011. After almost ten years of development, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have reached a certified PCE exceeding 25%. Although great achievements have been made, the current record PCE (25.5%) of PSCs is much lower than the theoretical limit (∼31%) predicted from the Shockley–Queisser (S–Q) theory. This is mainly due to the soft nature of perovskite light absorbers. To be more specific, the organic space cation and the inorganic matrices are bonded via weak hydrogen bonding. Vacancies, antibonding and dangling bonds are unavoidable in the prepared films. The situation can be worse at the perovskite/carrier selective layer (CSL) interface. This leads to excess defect states and finally results in carrier recombination. The non-radiative recombination of the photogenerated carriers at these charged defects is one of the important reasons that hinders the PCE of PSCs reaching the S–Q limit. To reduce the defects related to carrier recombination, H. Tan introduced the idea of imperfect interfaces, and by using Cl-doped TiO2 nanocrystal films as an electron-selective layer, they achieved a certified PCE of 19.5% with an active area of 1.1 cm2. Surface passivation was later proposed to push the PCE to approach the S–Q limit. H. Snaith suggested that the uncoordinated iodine ions at the perovskite/CSL interface were the main recombination centers during the photo-carrier transportation. You et al. highlighted phenylethylamine iodide (PEAI) as an effective passivator, and the PCE of PEAI passivated PSCs can be as high as 23.32%, which was once a world record. By increasing the thin layer of lead oxysalts on top of the perovskite layer, water-resistant PSCs were developed. Very recently, A. Hagfeldt introduced 2,5-thiophenedicarboxylic acid at the perovskite/hole transport material (HTM) interface. An enhanced bonding can be guaranteed, and they achieved super-stable PSCs.

According to M. Grätzel, HTMs were intrinsically hydrophobic and nonpolarized, so the perovskite/HTM interface suffered from contact issues. This contact issue has always been ignored during the design of surface passivation molecules. Inspired from the structure of Spiro-OMeTAD, 9,9′-spirobifluorene, which has a rigid three-dimensional structure, can effectively avoid π–π stacking between molecules and inhibit the aggregation of molecules. Therefore, molecules with 9,9′-spirobifluorene cores can be a good transition layer between the perovskite and the HTM. In this work, we selected 9,9′-spirobifluorene as the core and two molecules, namely, 2-(4-ethylaminobenzene)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (BSBF–NH2) and 2-(4-methylcarboxylicbenzen)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (BSBF–COOH) are synthesized respectively. Compared with the control devices (18.27%), the PCE of BSBF–NH2 and BSBF–COOH passivated PSCs has been improved to 20.05% and 19.23%, respectively. BSBF–NH2 passivated PSCs exhibited the best performance. The carrier transport kinetics before and after surface passivation has seldom been clearly addressed. In this work, transient absorption (fs-TA) spectra are recorded to evaluate the hole extraction efficiency at the perovskite/HTM interface. Faster hole extraction can be confirmed after BSBF–NH2 passivation, which supported a better contact. We also obtained a bonus by using BSBF–NH2. The PEC of the passivated PSCs dropped by less than 20% after 35 days of exposure under ambient conditions with 40–50% relative humidity. Finally, this work not only proposes a new kind of surface passivation molecule, but also provides an effective experimental method to investigate the carrier transport kinetics in PSCs, both of which are insightful for designing high-performance PSCs.

In this work, two surface passivation molecules, namely, BSBF–NH2 and BSBF–COOH, are synthesized. The synthetic details are described in the ESI. The chemical structure of the corresponding molecules is shown in Fig. 1a. The structure and purity of the synthesized materials are characterized by 1H NMR spectroscopy, MALDI-TOF mass spectroscopy and infrared spectroscopy (Fig. S1–S5, ESI). Furthermore, we provide the characterization of the spirobifluorene derivative molecules BSBF–NH2 and BSBF–COOH including the melting point in Table S1 (ESI). The (FAPbI3)0.97(MAPbBr3)0.03 mixed halide perovskite has been selected as the light absorber and the perovskite layer has been prepared via a two-step spin-coating method. The experimental details are listed in the ESI (Experimental Section). Surface passivation molecules are introduced onto the perovskite films through dynamic spin-coating, followed by annealing to completely remove the residual solvent (Fig. 1b).

To start with, we focus on whether the two synthesized molecules can improve the achievable PCE and to what extent the PCE can be enhanced. The PCEs of PSC devices passivated with different concentrations of BSBF–COOH and BSBF–NH2 are shown in Fig. 2a, b and Tables S2 and S3 (ESI). The PCE is increased regardless of the type of surface passivation molecules. This performance enhancement is mainly due to an improved open circuit voltage (Voc) and a fill factor (FF). A further increase in the concentration of surface passivation molecules brings down the PCEs. As shown in Fig. 2a and b, to achieve the best-performed PSCs, the concentration of surface passivation molecules has been fixed to 2.5 mmol L−1. Compared with the control devices (18.27%), the PCE of BSBF–NH2 and BSBF–COOH passivated PSCs has been improved to 20.05% and 19.23%, respectively. As shown in Fig. 2c and Table 1, the short circuit current (Jsc) remains almost at 23 mA cm−2 regardless of passivation. The Jsc integrated from the incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) (Fig. S6, ESI) is 22.7 mA cm−2, which agrees well with the Jsc calculated from the J–V curves. The Voc has been steadily increased from 1.06 V (control) to 1.08 V (BSBF–COOH passivated) and 1.10 V (BSBF–NH2 passivated). The reduced Voc loss of BSBF–NH2 passivated PSCs can be ascribed to the excellent surface passivation potential of the phenethylamine (PEA) side groups. For the reproducibility of the devices, 25 cells have been selected for both the control and BSBF–NH2 passivated devices. The BSBF–NH2 passivated devices show a higher average PCE and a narrow distribution of PCEs (Fig. 2d). Thus, the improved reproducibility of the BSBF–NH2 passivated devices can be confirmed.

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)
Control
23.62
1.06
0.73
18.27
BSBF–COOH
23.12
1.08
0.77
19.23
BSBF–NH2
23.67
1.10
0.77
20.05
To find out the reason behind the performance enhancement, we investigated the morphological and structural transition before and after surface passivation. Fig. 3a, b and Fig. S7 (ESI) show the SEM images of the control, BSBF–NH2 and BSBF–COOH passivated perovskite films. For the control film, the prepared perovskite films are polycrystalline with a crystal size of 1–2 um. A visible bright spot can be observed, which might be the aggregation of unreacted PbI2. After BSBF–NH2 and BSBF–COOH passivation, an interesting point is that the perovskite films are still clear with distinct grain boundaries (Fig. 3b and Fig. S7, ESI). This is quite different from our previously reported TPA–PEABr case. The surface of the TPA–PEABr passivated perovskite is slightly dim with invisible grain boundaries, which suggests that the TPA–PEABr molecules are uniformly deposited on the perovskite surface. The unchanged SEM morphology of the BSBF–NH2 passivated perovskite can be explained by the formation of a new crystal structure (possibly a 2D perovskite) or the BSBF–NH2 molecules are not fully covered on the perovskite surface. The UV-vis absorption spectra of the perovskite films before and after passivation are almost the same (Fig. 3c), which basically rules out the possibility of 2D perovskite formation. Besides, for XRD characterization (Fig. 3d), no additional peaks appear on the passivated perovskite, indicating that the introduction of passivating molecules does not change the crystal structure, which also deprecates the 2D perovskite formation. So, the BSBF–NH2 and BSBF–COOH molecules are partially spread on the perovskite surface.
Next comes the photophysical characterization of the prepared films. Recording the steady-state PL spectra is an effective approach to distinguish radiative recombination from non-radiative recombination in the perovskite films. Under the same conditions, the higher the PL intensity, the stronger the radiative recombination. Compared with the control films, the PL intensity of the BSBF–NH2 and BSBF–COOH passivated perovskite films is more than doubled (Fig. 3e). This points to an enhanced radiative recombination of the perovskite films after BSBF–NH2 and BSBF–COOH passivation. At the same time, we find that the PL intensity of the perovskite film after BSBF–NH2 passivation is higher than that after BSBF–COOH passivation, which indicates that BSBF–NH2 has a better defect passivation potential. Moreover, the time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) decay profiles are obtained to investigate the charge trapping and detrapping process of the perovskite films. The PL decay curves, measured at the peak emission, show a bi-exponential decay with a fast (τ1) and a slow (τ2) component. The short lifetime (τ1) refers to the non-radiative recombination from the defects and the long lifetime (τ2) is the radiative recombination due to the bulk perovskite.Fig. 3f plots the TRPL decay curves obtained from the perovskite film before and after modification. The proportion of the faster-lifetime (A1) decreases in BSBF–COOH and BSBF–NH2 passivated films, pointing to a reduced defect density. Besides, an increased proportion of the slow-lifetime (A2) can be seen in Table S4 (ESI), and the τ2 also increases after BSBF–COOH and BSBF–NH2 passivation. The τ2 of BSBF–COOH and BSBF–NH2 passivated perovskite films is 323.82 and 350.61 ns, respectively, which are ∼1.5 and ∼1.6 times that of the control film (212.37 ns); this supports the long-lived photocarriers (reduced non-radiative recombination) in the passivated perovskite films. These results further prove that the defect state passivation effect of BSBF–NH2 is better than that of BSBF–COOH. Therefore, the PSCs modified by BSBF–NH2 have a higher Voc and PCE.
We are also interested in the influence of surface passivation molecules on the carrier transporting kinetics at the perovskite/HTM interface. Compared with the bare perovskite films (Fig. 4a), the generated photocarriers are transported to the HTM layer of the perovskite/HTM films. So, the lower the PL intensity, the better the carrier extraction efficiency. Compared with the control samples (perovskite/HTM), the PL intensity has been reduced by more than 70% and 80% for BSBF–COOH and BSBF–NH2 passivated perovskite/HTM films, highlighting a greatly enhanced carrier extraction. The PL intensity (perovskite/HTL) of the BSBF–NH2 modified perovskite film is slightly lower than that of the BSBF–COOH-modified perovskite film, indicating that the introduction of BSBF–NH2 is more conducive to hole extraction. Besides, femtosecond transient absorption (fs-TA) spectroscopy instead of TRPL spectroscopy is used to characterize the carrier transporting process of the perovskite/HTM films. TRPL is not used because the TRPL decay signal of the perovskite/HTM films is too weak to be detected. The fs-TA spectra are listed in Fig. 4b–e. The fs-TA spectra of both the control and BSBF–NH2 passivated perovskite films show excited state signals (positive part) and ground state bleaching signals   (negative part). The ground state bleaching (GSB) peak at about 775 nm can be ascribed to the band-to-band emission of the perovskite films. It should be noted that the GSB signals gradually decrease with a prolonged delay time, indicating that the photoinduced holes in the perovskite films are progressively extracted by the Spiro-MeOTAD layer. Fig. 4f presents the two-exponential fittings (eqn (1)) of the GSB decay with time using the equation
y = y0 + A1exp(−x/τ1) + A2exp(−x/τ2).
(1)
Here, the adjusted
R squared (R2) values exceeded 0.997, indicating the good quality fitting, and the relevant decay time constants are shown in Table S5 (ESI). The faster time component (τ1) can be assigned to the electron–hole injection from the perovskite film up to the HTL. The longer-lifetime component τ2 is representative of carrier recombination in the perovskite films. Specifically, after BSBF–NH2 passivation, the τ1 of the GSB bleaching peak is sharply reduced to 139 ps from 302 ps (Fig. 4g and h). As a result, the τ1 of BSBF–NH2 passivated films is less than half that of the control films. According to previous studies, the introduction of bipolar small molecules promotes the carrier extraction efficiency at selective interfaces. Finally, the strongly enhanced hole extraction efficiency is confirmed. The results verify the role of BSBF–NH2 in enhancing the PCE of PSCs.

As shown in Fig. 5a, the electrochemical impedance spectrum (EIS) is recorded under dark conditions at 0 V. The Rrec has been increased from 5.39 × 104 Ω in the control device to 9.81 × 104 Ω in the BSBF–NH2 passivated PSCs. The larger the Rrec, the lower the rate of carrier recombination. The EIS results support the effective carrier extraction after BSBF–NH2 passivation. Besides, the space charge limited current (SCLC) measurement is used to evaluate the defect density (Nd) of the corresponding devices. We calculated the trap-state density using the following equation (eqn (2))
(2)
where
e is the elemental charge, L is the thickness of the perovskite film (about 600 nm), ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, εr is the relative dielectric constant and VTFL is the intersection voltage of the trap-filled limit and ohmic regime. The VTFL can be extracted from the J–V curves (Fig. 5b). The Nd of both the control and BSBF–NH2 passivated devices was calculated to be 1.99 × 1015 cm−3 and 1.41 × 1015 cm−3. So, we suggest that the BSBF–NH2 molecules also possess defect passivation potential.

For PSCs, stability is the core issue of concern, so we also investigated the stability of BSBF–NH2 passivated PSCs. Fig. 5c shows the water contact angle of the pristine and passivated perovskite films. The water contact angle of the perovskite film has been increased from 65.18° (control) to 92.69° (BSBF–NH2 passivated), which is attributed to the hydrophobic nature of ethyl and the 9,9′-spirobifluorene group in this bipolar molecule. This suggests that BSBF–NH2 can effectively slow down the penetration of water molecules to the perovskite film and improve the stability of PSCs. The BSBF–NH2 passivated PSCs retain 80% of their original efficiency after being kept at ambient temperature and 40–50% humidity for a month, while the efficiency of the control device decreased by more than a half (Fig. 5d). These results highlight the role of BSBF–NH2 molecules in enhancing the stability of PSCs.

In summary, two ambipolar spirobifluorene derivative molecules, BSBF–NH2 and BSBF–COOH, were synthesized and introduced at the perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD interface. With the help of the fs-TA spectrum, we confirmed that the hole extraction efficiency can be increased after BSBF–NH2 passivation, mainly due to the better contact. Meanwhile, the amino group in BSNF–NH2 can passivate the defect in the perovskite film to further improve the achievable PCE of the device. As a result, the Voc and FF of BSBF–NH2 passivated PSCs have been improved and the final PCE reached 20%. Besides, due to the hydrophobic nature of BSBF–NH2 molecules, the passivation of perovskite films with BSBF–NH2 molecules can remarkably promote the stability of passivated PSCs. Our findings provide a new idea for the design and development of passivated materials for PSC applications.


The SnO2 colloid precursor was purchased from Alfa Aesar (tin(IV) oxide). N,N-Dimethylformamide (DMF) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) were purchased from J&K Chemicals. PbI2, formamidinium iodide (FAI), methylammonium bromide (MABr), and methylammonium chloride (MACl) were obtained from Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Corp. The other materials if not stated were purchased from TCI.


ITO glass was cleaned with detergent, deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol (IPA) ultrasonic baths for 15 min. Before using, the ITO glass was cleaned by UV-Ozone for 15 min. The SnO2 precursor was obtained by mixing the SnO2 (450 μL) colloidal dispersion and LiCl (300 μL) aqueous solution (17 mg/4 mL) with water (2 mL). A thin layer of SnO2 was spin-coated onto the as-cleaned ITO at 3000 rpm for 30 s and annealed at 170 °C for 30 min. The perovskite films were fabricated by a two-step deposition method introduced by J. You. First, 1.3 M PbI2 in DMF/DMSO (9.5:0.5 by volume) was spin-coated onto SnO2 at 1500 rpm for 30 s, and then annealed at 70 °C for 1 min. After that, the mixture solution of FAI:MABr:MACl (60 mg:6 mg:6 mg in 1 mL of IPA) was spin-coated onto the PbI2 at 1500 rpm for 30 s. The as-prepared films were annealed at 150 °C for 15 min under 30–40% relative humidity conditions. After the deposition of the perovskite films, the BSBF–NH2 IPA solutions with concentrations ranging from 0 mmol L−1 to 5 mmol L−1 were spin-coated on the perovskite film at 5000 rpm for 20 s and annealed at 70 °C for 5 min. The hole-transport layer was prepared by spin-coating at 3000 rpm for 30 s using a chlorobenzene solution which contained Spiro-OMeTAD (72.3 mg mL−1), tert-butylpyridine (28 μL mL−1) and bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt (18 μL mL−1, 520 mg mL−1 in acetonitrile). Finally, 80 nm of Au was deposited by thermal evaporation.


The 1H NMR spectra of the synthesized organic compounds were recorded using a Bruker 300 MHz NMR spectrometer with chemical shifts reported in ppm (TMS as an internal standard). The MALDI-TOF mass spectra were recorded with a Bruker/ultra flex instrument. The melting point was measured using a microscopic melting point tester. The infrared spectra were recorded using a Fourier red spectrometer (Nicolet iS 10). For the perovskite films and devices, the XRD patterns of the samples were obtained using an Ultima IV X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. The J–V curves, EIS and SCLC were collected with an electrochemical workstation (CHI-760). The active area of the device was defined using a metal mask with an area of 0.08 cm2. The morphologies of the perovskite films were determined using a JSM-6510A SEM instrument. The UV-vis absorption spectra were recorded using a Hitachi UV-3900 instrument. The steady-state PL spectra (excited at 445 nm) were recorded with an FLS980 (Edinburgh Instruments Ltd). The time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) profiles were obtained using an FL980 by the time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) method under a 375 nm laser excitation. The fs-TA characterization study was conducted using a pump beam generated from a regenerative amplified Ti:sapphire laser system from Coherent (800 nm, 100 fs, 6 mJ per pulse, and 1 kHz repetition rate). The fluence of the 400 nm excitation pump was 0.2 mW. The contact angle was measured with a Rigaku JC2000Y.


The manuscript was written through the contributions from all the authors. T. Zhang and B. Zhao contributed equally; T. Zhang designed the project and wrote the original draft; B. Zhao conducted most of the experimental work; S. Liu and C. Liu conducted the electrochemical experiments and the kinetics test; X. Li and H. Liu took part in the experiments; Z Li, Y. Chen and Z. Liu provided insightful ideas; X. Li was in charge of supervision and revised the draft; all the authors gave approval to the final version of the manuscript.


There are no conflicts to declare.


Financial support from the Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province (ZR2017MB006, ZR2017ZB0315, and ZR2017BB027), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (18CX02052A, 18CX02053A, 20CX06004A), the Fellowship of China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2020M672163), the Talent Introduction Program of China University of Petroleum (East China) (ZX20190162) and the Tsingtao Postdoc Program (qdyy20190062) and Post-graduate Innovation Project of China University of Petroleum (East China) (YCX2021140) is acknowledged. We also thank the support from the Yankuang Group 2019 Science and Technology Program (YKKJ2019AJ05JG-R60). Prof. X. Li and Dr T. Zhang thank the Taishan Scholar Program of Shandong Province (ts201712019, tsnq201909069) for financial support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc04925a
‡ T. Zhang and B. Zhao contributed equally to the work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022