 DOI: 10.1039/C3EE43541E
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1103-1109


Do Hwan
Kim
,

Jianguo
Mei
,

Alexander L.
Ayzner
,

Kristin
Schmidt
,

Gaurav
Giri
,

Anthony L.
Appleton
,

Michael F.
Toney
 and 

Zhenan
Bao
*

Department of Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, 381 North–south Mall, Stanford, California 94305-5025, USA. E-mail: zbao@stanford.edu

Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA

Department of Organic Materials and Fiber Engineering, Soongsil University, Seoul, 156-743, Republic of Korea

Received
25th October 2013
, Accepted 10th January 2014
First published on 13th January 2014
We demonstrate high-performance sequentially solution-processed organic photovoltaics (OPVs) with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 5% for blend films using a donor polymer based on the isoindigo-bithiophene repeat unit (PII2T-C10C8) and a fullerene derivative [6,6]-phenyl-C[71]-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM). This has been accomplished by systematically controlling the swelling and intermixing processes of the layer with various processing solvents during deposition of the fullerene. We find that among the solvents used for fullerene deposition that primarily swell but do not re-dissolve the polymer underlayer, there were significant microstructural differences between chloro and o-dichlorobenzene solvents (CB and ODCB, respectively). Specifically, we show that the polymer crystallite orientation distribution in films where ODCB was used to cast the fullerene is broad. This indicates that out-of-plane charge transport through a tortuous transport network is relatively efficient due to a large density of inter-grain connections. In contrast, using CB results in primarily edge-on oriented polymer crystallites, which leads to diminished out-of-plane charge transport. We correlate these microstructural differences with photocurrent measurements, which clearly show that casting the fullerene out of ODCB leads to significantly enhanced power conversion efficiencies. Thus, we believe that tuning the processing solvents used to cast the electron acceptor in sequentially-processed devices is a viable way to controllably tune the blend film microstructure.

We demonstrate high-performance sequentially solution-processed heterojunction (SHJ) organic photovoltaics (OPVs) with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 5% based on films using an isoindigo donor polymer (PII2T-C10C8) and [6,6]-phenyl-C[71]-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM). This has been accomplished by systematically controlling the swelling and intermixing processes of a PII2T-C10C8 donor layer with various processing solvents. We found that a distinguishable nanostructure with densely packed, one-dimensional (1D) nanofibrils with widths of 15–20 nm was derived from ortho-dichlorobenzene (ODCB) induced swelling, intermixing, and reorganization of PII2T-C10C8 chains with PC71BM molecules. This might be governed by reorganization during solvent evaporation, giving rise to well-ordered nanofibrillar structures in SHJ films, which creates enhanced interfacial area as well as pure interfaces with the electrodes. Furthermore, we show that sequential processing of PC71BM derived from ODCB induced a change of molecular orientation from predominantly edge-on to more isotropic orientation in PII2T-C10C8 layer, allowing efficient charge and likely exciton transport in the out-of-plane direction. We believe that our findings provide an alternative strategy to manufacture a desirable OPV morphology for high performance devices.


In organic photovoltaics (OPVs), manipulating the morphology of the organic photoconversion layer enables the opportunity to optimize the OPV power conversion efficiency (PCE). This has resulted in PCEs exceeding 10%, close to that of amorphous Si solar cells. Normally, solution-processed OPVs can be fabricated with two typical architectures: a solution-blended bulk heterojunction (BHJ) device based on self-organization of donor and acceptor molecules or a sequentially solution-processed heterojunction (SHJ) based on sequential processing of donor and acceptor layers. Recently, highly organized nanostructures that bring these two geometric approaches together into a nanostructured or ordered heterojunction have received considerable attention.

Current state-of-the-art solution-processed OPVs are mostly fabricated in the BHJ architecture from a solution of a mixture of the donor and acceptor to achieve a nanoscale bicontinuous network in the blend film. In particular, BHJ devices enable a larger interfacial area between the donor and acceptor for efficient charge separation compared to SHJ devices, which gives rise to high BHJ PCEs of more than 9–10%. However, the PCE of BHJ devices are strongly affected by phase separation of the donor and acceptor components. In addition, due to partially unfavorable donor–acceptor segregation in the vertical direction, it is difficult to ensure that the electron-collecting electrode (cathode) is primarily in contact with the electron acceptor, and vice versa for the hole-collecting electrode (anode). A related issue pertains to the poor vertical connectivity of the donor and/or the acceptor domains. Good connectivity (a bicontinuous network) is required for efficient charge-transport through the film, while poor connectivity results in a significant fraction of the charge carriers recombining at donor–acceptor interfaces before reaching their respective electrodes.
In contrast, processing to form the SHJ structure is more flexible compared to processing methods to achieve the desired BHJ morphology. For example, it has been demonstrated that sequential processing allows each layer to be tuned and optimized nearly independently and achieves better vertical connectivity with metal–organic interfaces that are enriched with the proper component of the device (e.g. hole transporting to the anode). Recently, several groups reported SHJ architectures with sequential solution casting using poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM). It was found that P3HT/PC61BM SHJ solar cells can be prepared by sequentially spin-casting PC61BM using an orthogonal solvent of dichloromethane (DCM) for P3HT, which allows a PCE of 3.5%, approaching and sometimes exceeding that of the BHJ device made of the same materials. It was later confirmed by detailed structural analysis that intermixing of annealed, sequentially-processed P3HT and PC61BM took place, resulting in a bicontinuous network morphology similar to the standard BHJ films. However, as the chemical structure of the conjugated polymer is changed to lower the bandgap and enhance light absorption in the near infrared, the solvents that retain orthogonality between polymer and fullerene will necessarily vary. In addition, the P3HT/PCBM original study did not explore the consequence of using solvents that span the range from fully orthogonal to fully soluble for the donor and acceptor molecules.
Here, we report the preparation of sequentially-processed, nanostructured solar cell devices, based on a tunable swelling process by selective solvents, to achieve high-efficiency. We found that ordered, one-dimensional (1D) nanofibrillar structures with a width of 15–20 nm were induced by selective solvent swelling of an isoindigo-based donor polymer (PII2T-C10C8) and by reorganization with [6,6]-phenyl-C[71]-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) during solvent evaporation, resulting in large donor–acceptor interfacial areas. We also found that sequential solution processing of PC71BM from ortho-dichlorobenzene (ODCB) induced a change of crystallite orientation in the PII2T-C10C8 from strongly edge-on to more isotropic, allowing more efficient charge-transport in the out-of-plane direction. The SHJ device performance depends on the solvent used for PC71BM with the maximum performance comparable to that of an optimized BHJ OPV cell. We fabricated SHJ devices showing a maximum PCE of 5%, which is one of the high efficiency SHJ OPV devices, with a high fill factor (FF) of 0.6. In contrast, our optimized BHJ devices have a maximum PCE of ∼5.6% with a FF of 0.5. This suggests that our processing method for nanostructured OPVs is promising for achieving high-efficiency devices.

PII2T-C10C8 and PC71BM (Nano-C inc.) were used in this study. The detailed synthetic procedure and optoelectronic properties for PII2T-C10C8 have been reported in our previous study.


PII2T-C10C8/PC71BM SHJ solar cell devices were fabricated on glass substrates with the architecture of indium tin oxide (ITO)/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)/PII2T-C10C8:PC71BM/LiF/Al. The ITO coated glass substrate was ultrasonically cleaned in detergent, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol and dried under nitrogen. The substrates were placed in a UV ozone chamber for 30 min prior to the deposition of PEDOT:PSS (Clevios P VP AI 4083) by spin-casting from solution to form a 30 nm thick film. The substrate was annealed for 20 min at 150 °C on a hotplate in air, and then transferred into a glove box to deposit the active layer and counter electrode of LiF/Al. PII2T-C10C8 thin film was cast onto the ITO/PEDOT:PSS (30 nm) substrates from a hot chloroform solution held at 55 °C and annealed at 150 °C for 30 min to improve ordering, and then we deposited a drop of PC71BM dissolved in several solvents with varying solubility for PII2T-C10C8 (dichloromethane (DCM), toluene, chloroform (CF), chlorobenzene (CB), ortho-dichlorobenzene (ODCB)) on the top of PII2T-C10C8 layer. After giving enough time for swelling and interdiffusion to develop a nanostructure in the film, PC71BM was spin-cast and subsequently annealed at 100 °C for 10 min, and finally the cathode of LiF/Al (1 nm/100 nm) was deposited by thermal evaporation in a vacuum of about 5 × 10−6 torr, where the active area of the cells was 0.09 cm2. The electrical characteristics were measured using Keithley 2400 source meter in the dark and under AM1.5 solar illumination (91160 Oriel 300W solar simulator equipped with a 6258 ozone-free Xe lamp). The light intensity was calibrated using an NREL calibrated silicon photodiode with a KG5 filter which had a spectral mismatch factor error of less than 2% for the devices analyzed. External quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements were taken at short circuit using monochromated white light from a tungsten lamp which was modulated by an optical chopper. The current from the devices were measured as a function of wavelength and compared to the current obtained from a photodiode with a NIST traceable calibration photocurrent action spectrum.


AFM images were taken using tapping mode (light tapping regime) using a Multimode AFM (Veeco). Thickness was measured by a Dektak 150 profilometer (Veeco Metrology Group). 2D-GIXD images were collected in reflection mode with a planar area detector and with the OPV films in a He atmosphere at BL 11-3 of the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource (SSRL). The sample-detector distance was 400 mm, and the incidence angle was 0.12°; the X-ray wavelength was 0.9758 Angstroms. Incident slits were set to 150 μm and 50 μm in the horizontal and vertical directions, respectively.



Scheme 1 outlines the fabrication steps of our sequentially solution-processed OPVs, where we use the casting solvent to modulate the film microstructure via variable solvent swelling and dissolution, as discussed below. As a representative of the low bandgap, isoindigo class of conjugated polymers, we use PII2T-C10C8 (chemical structure shown in Scheme 1), which has a bandgap of 1.6 eV. As the first step, a PII2T-C10C8 thin film with a thickness of order 100 nm was deposited onto ITO/PEDOT:PSS substrates from a hot chloroform solution, and films were subsequently annealed. Next, we dispense the PC71BM dissolved in different solvents on top of the PII2T-C10C8 film. Having allowed sufficient time for swelling and intermixing to develop a particular nanostructure in the film (as discussed later), the sample was spun to form the final film.

We first investigated the morphological features after sequential processing of PC71BM derived from dichloromethane (DCM) and toluene, which are good solvents for PC71BM and are orthogonal solvents for PII2T-C10C8. The optical micrographs in Fig. 1a and b show that PC71BM formed inhomogeneous aggregates on the top of the PII2T-C10C8 bottom layer, which might be due to the hydrophobic character of PII2T-C10C8 as evidenced from the more than 100° water contact angle (Fig. 1a inset). Furthermore, even the areas of PII2T-C10C8 without large PC71BM aggregates in the optical image have many nanoaggregates of PC71BM as observed by atomic force microscopy (AFM), (see Fig. S1) which indicates that a continuous smooth layer of PC71BM over the entire surface of PII2T-C10C8 is not formed by sequential solution processing unlike some reported P3HT cases.
In order to improve the efficiency of our SHJ devices, one needs to effectively enable the swelling of the PII2T-C10C8 film to increase the donor–acceptor interfacial area and thus exciton harvesting. Thus, we used solvents such as chloroform (CF), chlorobenzene (CB), and ortho-dichlorobenzene (ODCB) with good or partially good solubility for PII2T-C10C8 to deposit the PC71BM. We observed that CF is the best solvent for PII2T-C10C8, and CB dissolves PII2T-C10C8 well only above 60 °C. ODCB was selected as a partially good solvent, but much less than CF and CB for dissolving the polymer. After preparing the sequentially solution-processed films, we characterized the morphologies and film thickness by AFM and profilometry. Fig. 1c–e show AFM topographs after spin-casting and drying of PC71BM solution dissolved into ODCB, CB, and CF on top of the PII2T-C10C8 films, respectively. For PII2T-C10C8:PC71BM films derived from ODCB, closely packed nanofibrills with a width of 15–20 nm are seen in Fig. 1c just as in the PII2T-C10C8 film before PC71BM deposition (Fig. 1f). However, the density of the nanofibrills decreased in PII2T-C10C8:PC71BM film derived from CB (Fig. 1d). For CF as the solvent, only a few nanofibrills were observed in the PII2T-C10C8:PC71BM film (Fig. 1e), which suggests that a good solvent for PII2T-C10C8 largely dissolves the preformed nanofibrills (Fig. 1f). Also, we found that film thickness was not changed before and after deposition of the PC71BM layer from CB or ODCB on the PII2T-C10C8 layer. This is presumably due to the swelling of the polymer film by the PCBM solvent.
Further, we found that there is no dramatic change in AFM topographs for neat PII2T-C10C8 films swollen by pure ODCB and CB solvents and then annealed at 100 °C (Fig. S2). However, there are substantial differences between the surface topography of polymer films briefly treated with ODCB vs. CB. We believe this fact presumably arises due to a difference in primarily three factors: (1) polymer solubilities in these solvents, (2) the ability of the solvent to swell the insoluble polymer fraction, and (3) the kinetics of dissolution.
Since the polymer film is swollen by exposure to the solvent, this promotes miscibility between the two components and results in fullerene molecules efficiently permeating the polymer matrix and preferentially filling the lower density amorphous regions of the polymer film. This leads to the formation of a highly intermixed bulk heterojunction-like morphology. We believe this effect is driven by a combination of swelling of the polymer matrix and partial dissolution and re-deposition of some polymer chains. An intimate heterojunction is still formed through this sequentially solution process. Therefore, we expect that a large fraction of fullerenes on average reside within an exciton diffusion length away from a polymer domain. However, the film thickness decreased from 126 nm to 65 nm after deposition of the PC71BM layer from CF (from profilometry and AFM, Fig. 1), which is caused by partial dissolution of the polymer by the solvent, consistent with the large solubility of the polymer in CF.
In order to directly investigate the internal morphology and the thickness variation, we removed the PC71BM part from the SHJ film using DCM, which is a good solvent for PC71BM and a bad solvent for PII2T-C10C8. Fig. 2a shows densely packed nanofibrills after removal of PC71BM initially deposited from ODCB. Interestingly, the thickness of the film decreased to 106 nm, compared to the thickness of 122 nm before PC71BM removal. We note that when the same procedure was applied to the neat PII2T-C10C8 film, we did not see a thickness reduction. It is possible that this change of 16 nm in thickness corresponds largely to the removal of a PC71BM-rich overlayer layer as well as extraction of the fullerene from the bulk of the polymer film.
In contrast, after removal of the PC71BM layer initially deposited from CB and CF, AFM images showed that the remaining polymer film displayed relatively different morphological features based on a loosely packed fibrillar network (Fig. 2b) and a macroscopically uneven structure with an inhomogeneous fibrillar network (Fig. 2c). Previous work has shown that when DCM was used to extract the fullerene from a blend-cast (P3HT/PC61BM common solution) bulk heterojunction film, the morphology of the polymer underlayer was significantly affected relative to the pristine blend film. This presumably occurs because fullerenes are extracted from regions deep within the polymer matrix, inevitably inducing some morphological rearrangements in the film as the acceptor is dissolved out. Because the solvents we use to cast the fullerene in this study are not entirely orthogonal to the polymer, we believe that a similar morphological rearrangement takes place in our sequentially processed films, although likely not to as great an extent as if the donor and acceptor had been cast from a common solution.
To determine the impact of the nanostructured PII2T-C10C8/PC71BM SHJ films after sequential solution-processing on solar cell performance, we measured the bias-dependence of the photocurrent. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics under AM1.5 G are shown in Fig. 3a as a function of different solvents used to deposit PC71BM. The PII2T-C10C8:PC71BM devices deposited from DCM and toluene only show PCEs of ∼0.1% due to the non-uniform aggregation of PC71BM on the PII2T-C10C8 surface. However, we found that PII2T-C10C8:PC71BM devices deposited from ODCB, CB, and CF showed a substantially greater short-circuit current (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and open circuit voltage (Voc). The relevant photovoltaic parameters obtained from Fig. 3a are summarized in Table 1. In particular, we note that a SHJ device derived from ODCB displayed the highest PCE (5.0%) which is comparable to the efficiency of the conventional BHJ devices, showing 5.6%.
Sample

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCEave (%)
PCEmax (%)

a Note: we used a blend ratio of 1:1 by weight for BHJ cell.

CF
−1.69
0.815
0.67
0.92
1.12
ODCB
−9.98
0.845
0.56
4.76
5.02
CB
−4.28
0.845
0.68
2.45
2.83
Tol
−0.29
0.875
0.35
0.08
0.13
DCM
−0.21
0.855
0.43
0.07
0.09
BHJ cell with 4% (v/v) DIO
−12.02
0.865
0.49
5.10
5.60
We found the optimal thickness to be ∼126 nm for PII2T-C10C8:PC71BM (ODCB) devices, which was determined by tuning the concentration of PII2T-C10C8 in solution (see Fig. S3 and Table S1). Also, the external quantum efficiency (EQE), as shown in Fig. 3b, displayed increased photon harvesting efficiency across all wavelengths for SHJ devices based on PC71BM (from ODCB). Furthermore, SHJ solar cell devices have a higher FF of 0.56–0.68 compared to the BHJs (a FF of ∼0.5). We speculate that this is due to a more favorable vertical distribution of electron- and hole-conducting regions, allowing for more efficient carrier collection.
To gain a better understanding of the difference between BHJ and SHJ devices, we have also prepared planar C70/polymer control devices, where the C70 was sublimed under vacuum on top of spin-cast PII2T-C10C8 films. C70 was chosen because there is no evidence that PC71BM can be sublimed while avoiding chemical degradation. We found that devices based on PII2T-C10C8/C70 bilayers showed an optimal efficiency of 1.4% with a Jsc of only −3.95 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.55 (see Fig. S4).
It is interesting to note that FF for the bilayer device is lower than the average SHJ FF but is larger than that of the BHJ. The FF is a function of both the degree of similarity of electron and hole extraction rates as well as the rate of bimolecular recombination. In the bilayer film, the latter is assumed to be minimal, since any intermixing should increase recombination. Moreover, due to the high density of fullerene–fullerene nearest neighbor contacts, it is reasonable to believe that the inter-fullerene electron transfer rate in the planar heterojunction film is comparable to or larger than the highest performing SHJ or BHJ. The fact that the SHJ FF is larger than both the bilayer and the BHJ films suggests that transport in the SHJ films cast from CB and ODCB is more facile than in the BHJ, suffering less from imbalanced extraction and/or bimolecular recombination. We believe that this is likely due to a more favorable SHJ microstructure that is characterized by better connectivity between polymer domains due to more tie chains linking domains and a vertical phase segregation profile that is more conducive to efficient out-of-plane charge transport. However, the Jsc of the SHJ suffers slightly relative to the BHJ due to a slightly smaller density of donor–acceptor interfaces in SHJ films.
Although AFM images of the film surface are able to give us a sense for how processing solvents used to deposit the fullerene layer affect the polymer nanostructure, this is insufficient to correlate device data with nanoscale morphology in the film. To elucidate the impact of swelling, interdiffusion, and reorganization on morphology in PII2T-C10C8:PC71BM SHJ films made with PC71BM from different solvents, we performed grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXD). Fig. 4a shows the 2D GIXD pattern for a PII2T-C10C8 neat film prepared onto PEDOT:PSS/Si-wafer. Polymer crystallites pack in a strongly edge-on manner, such that the π-stacking between adjacent chains occur in-plane, corresponding to pi-stacking Bragg reflections near the horizon (Qxy = 1.67 and Qz ≈ 0, labeled as (010)). This is consistent with our previous results for this polymer.Fig. 4b shows that when the fullerene was deposited from CB, the polymer crystallite orientation distribution changes very little relative to the pure polymer film as judged by the intensity of the (100) reflection as a function of the polar angle (angle between substrate surface normal and the normal to crystallite Bragg plane).
Upon depositing a PC71BM layer from ODCB on the PII2T-C10C8, we observed a change in the polymer crystallite orientation distribution (Fig. 4c). The (100) peak is now more spread around a constant radius arc with some intensity peaked near Qz = 0. This shows that the film possesses a population of crystallites, where the π-stacking direction is distributed over a range of orientations, presumably leading to more efficient charge transport in the direction relevant for the photovoltaic architecture. In order to make this point more clear, we have also plotted the intensity in (Q, polar angle) space in Fig. 4d and e of a blown-up region centered about the (100) reflection. It is clear that the intensity distribution over the polar angle is significantly broader in the ODCB relative to CB. Furthermore, to confirm that fullerene molecules can diffuse both into and out of the film without disrupting the distribution of polymer crystallite orientations, we used DCM to largely extract PCBM from the blend film. Interestingly, the GIXD data in Fig. 5a and b show that removing the fullerene using DCM negligibly affects the crystallite orientation. This suggests that there is no significant rearrangement of polymer crystallites that occurs when the amorphous polymer regions are swollen by exposure to DCM, leading to fullerene extraction into the solvent.
From these results, we suggest the schematic representation as shown in Fig. 5c and d for CB and ODCB solvents systems, respectively. We believe the reason that using ODCB as the fullerene casting solvent results in the highest performing devices is as follows. First, as seen in AFM images, ODCB brings out the largest density of polymer nanofibrils, which may lead to enhanced hole transport compared to films where CB was used. Second, the broad orientation distribution of polymer crystallites is significantly more conducive to out-of-plane charge transport since a charge carrier will often be able to find a nearby crystallite with a favorable relative orientation for charge and likely exciton transfer. This is not the case for films cast from CB, since most crystallites pack edge-on; hence, transport is efficient primarily in-plane. Thus, carriers are expected to remain localized for a longer amount of time, raising the probability of bimolecular recombination. The significantly worse performance of CF-cast films can be explained with a drop in absorption as per the drop in thickness that we observed.

In conclusion, we have shown the preparation of nanostructured SHJ solar cells by tuning swelling and interdiffusion processes in PII2T-C10C8 low bandgap polymers through the use of different solvents to dissolve PC71BM. This, ultimately, leads to a high PCE of 5%. We revealed that densely packed, one-dimensional (1D) nanofibrillar structures with widths of 15–20 nm can be formed by sequential solution processing of PC71BM derived from ODCB solvent on PII2T-C10C8 film. This leads to efficient photon harvesting and likely a vertical donor/acceptor distribution that is conducive to facile carrier extraction. Also, sequential processing of PC71BM from ODCB induced a change of molecular orientation from edge-on to more isotropic in PII2T-C10C8 layer, allowing efficient charge and likely exciton transport in the vertical direction. We believe that the above findings provide a possible alternative strategy to manufacture a desirable OPV morphology for high performance devices.


This work was partially supported by the Center for Advanced Molecular Photovoltaics, award no. KUS-C1-015-21, made by King Abdullah University of Science and Technology and the Department of Energy, Laboratory Directed Research and Development funding, under contract DE-AC02-76SF00515 (M.F.T. and K.S.). We also acknowledge support from the Global Climate and Energy Program at Stanford and the Camille and Henry Dreyfus Postdoctoral Program in Environmental Chemistry (J.M. and A.L.A). D.H.K acknowledges financial support by a grant (Code No. 2011-0031628) from the Center for Advanced Soft Electronics under the Global Frontier Research Program of the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning, Korea. GIXD measurements were carried out at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory, a national user facility operated by Stanford University on behalf of the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee43541e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014