 DOI: 10.1039/D1TC00277E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 4240-4247


Senya
Zhang
,

Hao
Gu
,

Shan-Ci
Chen
* and 

Qingdong
Zheng
*

College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350116, P. R. China

State Key Laboratory of Structural Chemistry, Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 155 Yangqiao West Road, Fuzhou, 350002, P. R. China. E-mail: qingdongzheng@fjirsm.ac.cn; scchen@fjirsm.ac.cn

Received
20th January 2021
, Accepted 14th February 2021
First published on 9th March 2021
Tin oxide (SnO2) has recently emerged as a promising electron transport layer (ETL) for all-inorganic perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) owing to its excellent optical and electrical properties. However, the defects of the perovskite film and the mismatch of the energy levels between the SnO2 ETL and the perovskite film result in an increased energy loss (Eloss) which therefore leads to PVSCs with reduced open-circuit voltages (VOCs) and efficiencies. Herein, we demonstrate the use of KF-doped SnO2 as an ETL for high efficiency all-inorganic CsPbI2Br PVSCs. Through KF doping, the conduction band of the SnO2 film can be regulated to better match that of the perovskite film thereby enhancing the electron mobility and the VOC of the corresponding PVSCs. In addition, fluorine ions from the ETL can migrate to the bottom of the perovskite layer and passivate the interface between the ETL and the perovskite layer. As a result, the VOC of PVSCs increases from 1.18 V to 1.31 V and the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the resulting PVSCs increases from 13.40% to 15.39%. This facile defect passivation strategy on the ETL should be valuable for fabricating PVSCs with enhanced performance.

In recent years, metal-halide perovskite materials have attracted extensive attention due to their excellent photoelectric properties, including long exciton lifetime, high carrier mobility, adjustable bandgaps, etc. Many high-performance photoelectric devices based on perovskite materials have been reported, such as solar cells, photodetectors, etc. Among many types of perovskite materials, all-inorganic perovskite materials are emerging for perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) because they may have better thermal stability than the organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite materials.

By changing their composition, all-inorganic perovskite materials with a broad range of bandgaps (Egs) can be designed and synthesized. So far, CsPbI2Br has been widely used as the light-absorbing layer for PVSCs due to its lower phase transition temperature, and better phase stability with a suitable Eg. However, CsPbI2Br-based PVSCs are still susceptible to severe energy loss (Eloss = Eg − eVOC) thereby leading to their decreased open-circuit voltages (VOCs). It is found that the Eloss is strongly dependent on the nonradiative charge recombination and mismatch of energy level alignment in PVSCs. Therefore, reducing the Eloss is vital for enhancing the VOC of PVSCs. So far, VOC of CsPbI2Br-based PVSCs still has a great promotion potential considering the relatively low values of reported devices (<1.2 V). Some methods including composition doping and surface engineering have been employed for preparing CsPbI2Br perovskite films with reduced trap state density, aiming at the increased VOC and finally the enhanced power conversion efficiency (PCE). For example, recently our group used zinc cations (Zn2+) as a dopant to passivate the defects of the CsPbI2Br perovskite, resulting in the slow growth of grains and the increased grain size during the formation of the CsPbI2Br perovskite phase. Yang et al. doped Eu(Ac)3 into the CsPbI2Br perovskite film to obtain high-quality CsPbI2Br films with low defect density and long carrier lifetime.
In addition to the perovskite layer, the electron transport layer (ETL) of the PVSCs is also important for high-performance devices. It is well known that in the n–i–p structured PVSCs, TiO2, ZnO, SnO2, etc. are the commonly used ETLs. Among them, SnO2 has a more suitable bandgap, high electron mobility, and low processing temperature, making it a good ETL for all-inorganic PVSCs. Since the ETL plays a significant role in promoting the VOC and PCE of PVSCs, researchers have developed several strategies such as surface modification and chemical doping to further improve the quality of the SnO2 ETL. For example, Liu et al. used KCl to treat the surface of the SnO2 ETL to passivate both positively and negatively charged ionic defects of the perovskite film, thus leading to enhanced VOC. Zuo et al. introduced different self-assembled monolayers with different functional groups onto the SnO2 films to form various chemical interactions with the perovskite layer. They verified that the enhanced device performance was a result of proper chemical interactions which can reduce the trap state density and facilitate interfacial charge transfer. In addition, some researchers used organic molecules or inorganic salts as a dopant for the SnO2 layer. For example, our group has previously introduced poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP) into SnO2 to form a smoother surface with fewer defects and lower the conduction band of the SnO2. Zhu et al. found that the addition of KCl to the SnO2-based ETL can effectively improve the VOC and the PCE of corresponding PVSCs. The K+/Cl− ions can simultaneously passivate the defects at the ETL/perovskite interface and the grain boundaries of the perovskite film because the ions from the ETL can diffuse through the perovskite film. Similarly, Gong et al. prepared Cl-doped SnO2 (SnO2–Cl) through a simple solution mixing process. The Cl-doped SnO2 provides a high-quality interface where the perovskite film with high crystallinity and large grains can be obtained easily. Combined with the better-aligned energy level between the perovskite and the ETL, SnO2–Cl based PVSCs exhibited an increased VOC together with an improved PCE.
The above approaches are usually used in organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells but they are rarely adopted in the all-inorganic ones. Previous works have shown that doping with inorganic salts is an efficient way to adjust the bandgap, to regulate the work function, and to optimize the interfacial contact, and thus to improve the VOC of the corresponding device. In the previous reports, the dopants are usually limited to chlorides such as KCl, NH4Cl, etc., and fluorine ions have never been introduced into the SnO2 ETL for PVSCs, to the best of our knowledge. As mentioned previously, it has been found that ions in the ETL layer can migrate to the grain boundary of the perovskite layer to passivate the ETL/perovskite contact. Accordingly, we notice that as the halogen atom with the smallest radius, fluorine ions can easily migrate thereby leading to the application potential in interface passivation. In this work, for the first time, we doped KF into an aqueous solution of SnO2 to prepare a KF-doped SnO2 ETL. We found that KF-doped SnO2 showed enhanced electron mobility and a deep conduction band which is more compatible with that of the perovskite layer. Meanwhile, fluorine ions from the ETL can migrate to the bottom of the perovskite layer and passivate the interface between the ETL and the perovskite layer. Therefore, a significant increase in the PCE from 13.40% to 15.39% together with the enhancement of VOC by 130 mV is obtained for the PVSC based on SnO2 with KF doping. In addition, the stability of the PVSCs has also been improved to some extent.

To introduce KF into SnO2, 6 mg of KF was mixed with the commercially available SnO2 colloidal solution (details are provided in the ESI). After the addition of KF, the resulting solution (named SnO2-KF) turned from transparent to bluish white (Fig. 1a). To evaluate the influence of KF on the SnO2 colloidal dispersion, particle size distributions of SnO2 solution and SnO2-KF solution were measured using a laser particle analyzer (Fig. 1b). The test results showed that the average particle size of the SnO2-KF solution is about 10.2 nm, which is larger than that of the SnO2 solution (8.4 nm). The increased average particle size indicates the coagulation of the colloid, thus leading to the stronger light scattering and color change of the solution. The SnO2-KF ETL was formed by spin-coating the SnO2-KF solution on the indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was used to study the surface morphology of the obtained films. As shown in Fig. 1c and d, the root-mean-square (RMS) roughnesses are 1.54 nm and 3.79 nm for the SnO2 film and the SnO2-KF film, respectively. The rougher surface of the SnO2-KF film is attributed to the larger particle size thereby making the perovskite layer come in contact with the ETL more closely.

To investigate the optical properties of SnO2 films with and without KF, the optical transmission spectra of the bare ITO glass, ITO covered with SnO2, and ITO covered with SnO2-KF (Fig. 2a) were measured. It is found that the doping of KF promotes the transmittance of the SnO2 film in the wavelength range from 350 nm to 450 nm. The electrical properties of SnO2 and SnO2-KF films were investigated by fabricating an electron-only device (glass/Al/ETL/Al) by the space charge-limited current (SCLC) method. As shown in Fig. 2b, the electron mobility of the SnO2-KF film was calculated to be 1.60 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1, while that of the SnO2 film was 6.60 × 10−7 cm2 V−1 s−1. The increased electron mobility indicates that the addition of KF in the SnO2 solution enhanced the electron transport of the ETL, which is beneficial for improving the VOC of resulting solar cells.
In order to explore whether KF is doped in the ETL or not, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was used to detect surface elemental compositions of SnO2 and SnO2-KF films. The corresponding results (Fig. 2c, d, and Fig. S1a, ESI) show that a typical F 1s peak (located at 682.8 eV) and K 2p peaks (located at 291.2 eV and 294.1 eV, respectively) are observed for the SnO2-KF film. It is worth noting that K 2p peaks can also be found on the surface of the SnO2 film (Fig. S1a, ESI) because of the stabilizer (KOH) in the commercially available SnO2 colloidal solution. These results indicate the successful incorporation of KF into SnO2.
Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) and absorption spectra were recorded to identify the effect of KF doping on the energy level position of the SnO2 ETLs. The magnified UPS spectra of the valence band edge (Eonset) and secondary electron cutoff edge (Ecutoff) are depicted in Fig. 2e. The valence band maximum (VBM) values can be calculated according to VBM = 21.22 eV − Ecutoff + Eonset. Based on the absorption spectra of ETLs (Fig. S1c, ESI), the bandgaps can be obtained, which can be used to calculate the conduction band minimum (CBM). For example, Ecutoff of 17.32 eV and Eonset of 3.38 eV are found for the SnO2 film, and thus the corresponding VBM and CBM values for the SnO2 film are calculated to be 7.28 eV and 3.23 eV, respectively. Similarly, the corresponding VBM and CBM values for the SnO2-KF film are calculated to be 7.29 eV and 3.34 eV, respectively. The full spectra are shown in Fig. S1b (ESI), and all the calculated parameters can be found in Table S1 (ESI). The energy band alignment of two different ETLs and the perovskite film are depicted in Fig. 2f. The results indicate that KF doping in SnO2 deepens the conduction band of the electron transport layer, which is more favorable for an efficient electron extraction from the perovskite.
X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were performed to study the crystallinity and phase purity of CsPbI2Br based on different ETLs. Fig. S2a (ESI) shows the XRD patterns of the CsPbI2Br perovskite films deposited on SnO2 and SnO2-KF. It is found that both films exhibit two main peaks at 14.7° (100) and 29.6° (200), indicating that both films have the same crystal structure and good crystallinity. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used to study the surface morphology of the CsPbI2Br films based on SnO2 and SnO2-KF, and the corresponding top-view SEM images are shown in Fig. 3. The grain size of the perovskite film based on SnO2-KF is about 400–1300 nm, while the perovskite film based on SnO2 has smaller grain sizes (300–1000 nm). The increase in the grain size might be related to the F− ion migration from the SnO2-KF film during the formation of the perovskite film.
In order to evaluate the trap state density of the devices based on the electron transport layers of SnO2 or SnO2-KF, electron-only devices with a structure of ITO/SnO2 (or SnO2-KF)/CsPbI2Br/PCBM/Al were fabricated. Typical dark J–V curves of the electron-only devices based on SnO2 and SnO2-KF are shown in Fig. 4a, and the trap state density is calculated using the following equation:
where the
VTFL is the trap-filled limit (TFL) voltage which is determined by the onset voltage of the TFL region. The trap density is directly proportional to the VTFL. The perovskite film deposited on the SnO2-KF film shows a smaller VTFL (0.69 V) than that of the sample on the SnO2 film (0.91 V), implying that the device based on SnO2-KF has a lower trap density (7.17 × 1015 cm−3) compared with the trap density of 9.46 × 1015 cm−3 for the device based on SnO2. Meanwhile, according to the dark J–V curves of the optimized PVSCs based on SnO2 and SnO2-KF (Fig. S2b, ESI), the dark current density of the PVSC with SnO2-KF is much lower than that of the device with SnO2. This also indicates a lower defect density for the device based on SnO2-KF.

Photoluminescence (PL) is another effective tool to study the charge dynamics of a perovskite film. The steady-state PL spectra of the perovskite films deposited on SnO2 and SnO2-KF films are shown in Fig. 4b. Under the same test conditions, the PL intensity of the perovskite film deposited on the surface of the SnO2-KF film is stronger than that deposited on the SnO2 film. The stronger PL intensity suggests that the nonradiative recombination of the perovskite film on SnO2-KF was suppressed. Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectroscopy provides more information about the charge dynamics of the perovskite films deposited on the SnO2 and SnO2-KF film. The TRPL curves are shown in Fig. 4c, and the detailed TRPL parameters are listed in Table S2 (ESI). It is found that the perovskite film based on the SnO2-KF film showed a longer decay time (τavg = 13.33 ns) than that deposited on the SnO2 film (τavg = 1.38 ns), suggesting the reduced nonradiative recombination which could be ascribed to the passivation effect of F− ion migration from the SnO2-KF film. The TRPL result is consistent with the steady-state PL result. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed to study the charge carrier recombination in the devices, and the corresponding Nyquist plots are presented in Fig. S3 (ESI). It is found that the PVSC based on SnO2-KF exhibits lower series resistance (Rs) and much higher recombination resistance (Rrec) than the control device, indicating that the charge recombination was effectively suppressed in the device based on SnO2-KF. Furthermore, Mott–Schottky analysis was carried out to investigate the built-in potential (Vbi) of the PVSCs. As shown in Fig. S4 (ESI), the Vbi increased from 0.83 V for the PVSC based on SnO2 to 1.05 V for the PVSC based on SnO2-KF. The larger Vbi provides a stronger driving force for the carrier transfer thereby leading to the increased VOC.
The vertical compositional profiles of the CsPbI2Br film deposited on different ETLs were further investigated using XPS depth profiling. The XPS spectra of Cs 3d and F 1s peaks obtained at different etch-times are shown in Fig. S5 (ESI). Both Cs 3d and F 1s peaks can be observed for the sample with the SnO2-KF-based ETL after etching for 600 s, while no F 1s peak can be observed for the sample with the SnO2-based ETL at the same depth (Fig. 4d). This phenomenon indicates that when the perovskite film comes in contact with the SnO2-KF film, fluorine ions will migrate to the bottom of the CsPbI2Br layer, which can passivate the ETL/perovskite interface.
In this work, we utilized the SnO2-KF film as an ETL to fabricate planar n–i–p type PVSCs with a configuration of ITO/ETL/CsPbI2Br/Spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/Ag. The device structure is shown in Fig. 5a and the corresponding cross-sectional SEM image is shown in Fig. S6a (ESI). The thicknesses of SnO2 and perovskite layers were about 10 and 320 nm, respectively. We optimized the performance of PVSCs based on SnO2-KF by varying the concentration of KF in the SnO2 colloidal solution. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of PVSCs with different KF concentrations are shown in Fig. S6b (ESI). The best-performance device was obtained using an ETL with a KF concentration of 6 mg mL−1 (Table S3, ESI). To confirm the effectiveness of KF doping on the photovoltaic performance of PVSCs, we compared the performance of the devices based on SnO2 and SnO2-KF (6 mg mL−1 KF) with the same device structure. The J–V curves of the best-performance PVSCs based on SnO2 and SnO2-KF are shown in Fig. 5b, and the detailed photovoltaic parameters of the PVSCs are summarized in Table 1. The device based on an ETL with 6 mg mL−1 KF exhibited the best performance with a PCE of 15.39%, a VOC of 1.31 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 14.79 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 79.15% under reverse scan. In comparison, the best-performance control device showed a PCE of only 13.40% with a JSC of 14.59 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.18 V, and a FF of 77.74%. As shown in Table 1 and Fig. S7 (ESI), the enhanced PCE of the PVSCs with SnO2-KF is mainly due to the increased VOC value, which is related to fewer traps at the interface and a better-aligned energy level between the perovskite and the SnO2-KF films. Fig. 5c shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra and the corresponding integrated JSC curves for the best-performance PVSCs based on SnO2 and SnO2-KF ETLs. The integrated JSC values for the PVSCs based on SnO2 and SnO2-KF were 14.11 mA cm−2 and 14.44 mA cm−2, respectively, which are in agreement with the measured values (J–V curves) within 5% error. The PCE distributions of 15 devices based on SnO2 and SnO2-KF are shown in Fig. 5d, the PCE distribution of the devices based on SnO2-KF is narrower, with a standard deviation of 0.29, than that of the devices based on SnO2 with a standard deviation of 0.34. Other photovoltaic parameters are shown in Fig. S7 (ESI). It should be mentioned that the hysteresis effect still exists in the J–V curves of the best-performing PVSCs based on SnO2 and SnO2-KF (Fig. S8a, ESI). This hysteresis could be ascribed to the migration of halide ions or interstitials driven by the external electrical bias. The long-term stability of the encapsulated PVSCs using SnO2 and SnO2-KF as ETLs are shown in Fig. S8b (ESI), the devices based on SnO2-KF exhibited better storage stability than the devices based on SnO2. After 22 days of storage, the PVSC based on SnO2-KF maintained 40% of its initial PCE, while the PVSC based on SnO2 retained only 25% of its initial PCE after the same storage time.
ETL

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a Average PCEs and standard deviations were obtained from 15 devices.

SnO2
1.18
14.59
77.74
13.40 (12.90 ± 0.34)
SnO2-KF
1.31
14.79
79.15
15.39 (14.85 ± 0.29)

In summary, we have demonstrated a low-cost method by introducing KF into the SnO2 solution to obtain an efficient ETL. The KF-doped SnO2 ETL exhibited enhanced electron mobility and a deep conduction band. Besides, F− ions can migrate into the perovskite film thereby reducing the nonradiative recombination and trap density of the perovskite film. As a result, the planar inorganic perovskite solar cells based on SnO2-KF showed a champion PCE of 15.39%, together with a significantly enhanced VOC of 1.31 V. In contrast, the control device showed a PCE of only 13.40% with a VOC of 1.18 V. Meanwhile, the stability of the devices based on SnO2-KF has also been improved to some extent. This work provides a simple method using inorganic salts for improving the stability and efficiency of inorganic perovskite solar cells.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We appreciate the support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. U1605241) and the Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province (No. 2018J01026).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Materials and solution preparation, fabrication and characterization of PVSCs, photovoltaic properties of PVSCs fabricated under different conditions, SEM images, UPS and absorption spectra of SnO2 and SnO2-KF films, XRD, TRPL and XPS results of perovskites. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc00277e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021