 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA08465G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22420-22428


Dewei
Huang
,

Pengfei
Xie
,

Zhenxiao
Pan
,

Huashang
Rao
* and 

Xinhua
Zhong
*

College of Materials and Energy, South China Agricultural University, 483 Wushan Road, Guangzhou 510642, China. E-mail: raohsh@scau.edu.cn; zhongxh@scau.edu.cn

Received
3rd August 2019
, Accepted 3rd September 2019
First published on 6th September 2019
All-inorganic CsPbBr3 perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are attracting tremendous interest owing to their outstanding stability, especially under high temperature and humidity atmospheres. Limited by the low solubility of CsBr in most common solvents, it is still a great challenge to prepare high-quality CsPbBr3 films with sufficient thickness for PSC applications by the convenient one-step solution method. Herein, a novel precursor engineering strategy with the use of cesium acetate (CsAc) and ionic liquid methylammonium acetate (MAAc) is developed to increase the concentration of the CsPbBr3 precursor solution to 1.0 M and form uniform and high coverage CsPbBr3 films with large sized crystalline grains. The formation mechanism for this high-quality CsPbBr3 films is mainly due to tailoring the crystallization kinetics by MAAc. Correspondingly, high light-harvesting capacity and suppressed trap state related charge recombination are realized in the resultant PSCs. The champion CsPbBr3 PSCs achieve an efficiency of 7.37% (JSC = 7.40 mA cm−2, VOC = 1.22 V, and FF = 0.841). This device has also displayed good stability with negligible decay over a period of 1500 h under an ambient atmosphere with 30–35% relative humidity.

Due to distinguished optoelectronic properties, lead halide perovskites (APbX3, A = Cs, MA, FA, or their mixture, X = I, Br, Cl, or mixed halogen) have become one of the most promising photovoltaic materials, and the recorded power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the corresponding perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has been improved to more than 24%, highlighting the huge potential for their commercial applications. To date, most of the perovskite materials used in high efficiency PSCs contain organic cationic methylamine (MA) and formamidine (FA) constituents, which are easily decomposed at high temperature, thereby affecting the long-term stability of the devices. Consequently, a series of high temperature resistant all-inorganic perovskite CsPbX3 materials have been used for PSCs. Among them, the black phase α-CsPbI3 has a more suitable band gap (1.73 eV), so the PCE of the resultant solar cells is also the best among all inorganic PSCs. However, the thermodynamically unstable α-CsPbI3 at room temperature is highly sensitive to moisture and is easily converted to the photovoltaic inert yellow phase δ-CsPbI3. Although using mixed halogens (CsPbBrxI3−x), cation doping, post treatment, and other strategies have been used to improve the stability of iodine-based inorganic perovskite materials, the moisture stability of such materials is still unsatisfactory. In contrast, CsPbBr3 exhibits excellent stability at high temperatures and high humidity. In addition, the high photovoltage characteristics of CsPbBr3 solar cells make the CsPbBr3 material suitable for applications in some special fields, such as for the preparation of tandem solar cells. Therefore, it is of great significance to carry out research on the preparation and device application of CsPbBr3 thin films.

The quality of perovskite films determines the performance of the resultant solar cells. Therefore, designing and developing a suitable approach for high quality perovskite films (pinhole-free, large grain size, monolayer alignment, etc.) is the most important procedure in the construction of high performance PSC devices. The preparation of perovskite films through a solution-processing method is a crucial factor for realizing a low-cost PSC device. The solution-processing method can be divided into one-step and two-step (or modified multi-step) approaches as shown in Scheme 1. In the one-step approach, all precursors, such as lead halides (PbX2) and monovalent halide salts (AX), are dissolved in a suitable solvent (mainly dimethyl sulfoxide DMSO, and dimethylformamide DMF), and the target APbX3 film is then obtained by spin-coating or doctor blade-coating the precursor solution on a conducting substrate, followed by an annealing process at a suitable temperature. In the two-step approach, a lead halide (PbX2) film is first deposited on the substrate, and then converted to an APbX3 film by immersing in AX solution or spin-coating an AX solution in one or multiple cycles. Obviously, the one-step approach is a more simple procedure and easier to be scaled up through the roll-to-roll process, and therefore an ideal approach for obtaining high quality perovskite films. The access of highly concentrated precursor (AX and PbX2) solution is the prerequisite for the preparation of a high quality perovskite film for photovoltaic (PV) applications via the one-step approach. Since MAX/FAX, CsI, and lead halides have a high solubility in the commonly used DMF/DMSO solvent system, it is convenient to obtain a high quality organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite (APbX3, A is MA or FA) and iodide based inorganic perovskite (CsPbBr3−xIx, x = 1–3) films through the one-step approach. However, due to the low solubility of CsBr in DMSO or DMF, it is a great challenge to prepare a high quality CsPbBr3 film with an appropriate thickness (usually more than 400 nm) for PV applications through the one-step approach. For the above reasons, currently most of the CsPbBr3 films for PV applications are prepared through the two-step or multi-step approach, and an efficiency of ∼10% is obtained for the corresponding PSCs by optimizing the experimental processes. It is noted that, in the two-step approach, fine control of the immersion period or the cycle number of spin-coating CsBr solution is necessary in order to ensure the stoichiometry of CsPbBr3 in the formed films and avoid the formation of mixed phases (such as Cs-rich or PbBr2-rich phases) that deteriorate the photovoltaic performance of the resultant PSCs. In a report with the use of the one-step approach by Jiang et al., the dilemma of low solubility of the CsBr source in DMSO was solved by the high solubility of CsAc under the coexistence of a HPbBr3 precursor. This strategy offered a CsPbBr3 film with desired thickness, but the PCE of the resultant cell devices was 5.96%, indicating that the quality of the obtained film needs further optimization and improvement.
In this work, based on precursor engineering we developed a one-step solution-processing method to prepare high quality CsPbBr3 films and applied them in the construction of solar cells. Two main novel strategies are used to improve the quality of CsPbBr3 films: (i) with the introduction of MAAc ionic liquid into the precursor solution, the crystallization dynamics can be tailored by the strong interaction between Ac− and Pb2+; (ii) with the adoption of highly soluble CsAc, the limitation of low concentration of precursor solution is then overcome, and a thickness of up to 600 nm is thus obtained for the resultant films, ensuring a high light harvesting capacity in the corresponding cell devices. The implementation of these strategies has effectively improved the photovoltaic performance of CsPbBr3 PSCs. Consequently, the champion PSCs based on the optimized precursor solution achieved a PCE of 7.37% (JSC = 7.40 mA cm−2, VOC = 1.22 V and FF = 0.841), which is more than two times higher than that of the control counterpart. Furthermore, this device has also displayed a good stability with negligible decay over a period of 1500 h under an ambient atmosphere with 30–35% relative humidity.

As shown in Fig. 1a, all CsPbBr3 films obtained in this work were prepared via a one-step approach by spin coating a precursor solution on an FTO/TiO2 substrate, followed by a two-step annealing process to improve the quality of the film. In a control experiment for reference samples, the precursor solution was obtained by dissolving an equimolar amount of the classical precursors CsBr and PbBr2 in DMSO. Limited by the solubility of CsBr, the maximum concentration of this precursor solution is only 0.5 M. SEM images (Fig. 1b(1)) indicate that the formed reference CsPbBr3 film with a small grain size cannot completely cover the substrate, and a large number of exposed TiO2 particles can be observed. This leads to a serious interfacial recombination process and deteriorates the photovoltaic performance of the resultant cell devices. The corresponding cross-sectional SEM (Fig. 1b(2)) image also shows that the thickness of the CsPbBr3 crystal layer is only ∼60 nm and the whole thickness of the CsPbBr3 film is less than 400 nm, which cannot harvest the incoming solar photons completely and limit the photocurrent of the resultant cell device. In order to obtain a smoother and higher coverage CsPbBr3 films, we added MAAc ionic liquid to the above precursor solution. Due to the extremely low vapor pressure of MAAc, it can remain in the spin-coated film at a relatively high temperature. In this case, the coordination between Ac− and Pb2+ decreases the growth rate of CsPbBr3 crystals. During the subsequent annealing process, the Ac–Pb bond is replaced by the Br–Pb bond. This facilitates the uniform nucleation and growth of the film. The SEM results (Fig. 1c) show that the introduction of MAAc results in a full coverage and uniform CsPbBr3 film on the FTO/TiO2 substrate. Furthermore, a smooth and complete CsPbBr3 crystal layer with a thickness of ∼100 nm has been found on the mesoporous TiO2 layer. Meanwhile, the grain size in this CsPbBr3 film is slightly increased in comparison with that in the reference CsPbBr3 film due to the slow crystal growth process. However, the film thickness is not substantially improved due to the limited precursor concentration (details shown in Fig. S1 in the ESI).

In order to obtain a higher concentration of precursor solution, we used CsAc with higher solubility instead of CsBr as the Cs source and PbBr2 as the Pb source. Meanwhile, MABr was used to make up for the deficiency of Br in CsAc. With this modification, the highest concentration of CsAc in DMSO can be enhanced from 0.05 M to more than 2.0 M with the co-existence of MAAc in the solution system (Fig. S1). However, a clear precursor solution cannot be obtained when mixing all the precursors together in a DMSO medium because of the formation of CsBr with low solubility from the reaction of CsAc and MABr. To overcome this obstacle, MABr and PbBr2 were dissolved in DMSO to get stock solution A, and CsAc was dissolved in a mixture of DMSO and MAAc to obtain stock solution B. Then, a 1.0 M “CsPbBr3” precursor solution (CsAc/MAAc based-precursor) was obtained by mixing the stock solutions A and B in an equal volume. It is noted that a fresh precursor solution is required for spin-coating of CsPbBr3 films to ensure that no insoluble materials are formed in the solution system. As shown in Fig. 1d, the CsPbBr3 film obtained via this CsAc/MAAc based-precursor can uniformly and completely cover the substrate, and the size of the crystal grains (up to the micro-scale) in the film is greatly increased compared to those obtained in the previous two routes. This favors the reduction of the density of defect states in the film and therefore reduce the non-radiative recombination process in the resultant cell devices. In addition, the thickness of the CsPbBr3 crystal layer is significantly increased to ∼300 nm, which increases the whole thickness of the entire CsPbBr3 film to 600 nm, ensuring the complete harvest of incoming solar light (Fig. S2).
XRD characterization was used to track the evolution of the crystal phase and explore the crystallization kinetics of the formed film with the use of the CsAc/MAAc-based precursor route. Since MABr was introduced into the precursor solution, the corresponding MAPbBr3 film was prepared with the use of the MABr/PbBr2 precursor solution system for comparison. As shown in Fig. 2a, the diffraction signals attributed to the substrate of FTO (JCPDS card no. 46-1088) can be observed in all samples. The inconspicuous diffraction signal at 25.4° belongs to the (101) crystal plane of compact and mesoporous TiO2 layers (JCPDS card no. 71-1168). For the film samples that have undergone a 160 °C annealing treatment (sample 160 °C), there are four distinct characteristic peaks at 15.3°, 21.2°, 30.8°, and 34.4°, ascribed to the (100), (110), (200) and (210) crystal planes of cubic CsPbBr3, wherein the peak intensity ratio of the (200) crystal plane in CsPbBr3 to the (200) crystal plane in FTO is 5.4. The sample 45 °C also shows a similar XRD pattern, but the corresponding peak strength ratio is decreased to 1.6. This indicates that the crystallinity of the obtained perovskite films is improved systematically with the increase of the annealing temperature. Since both CsPbBr3 (a = 5.897 Å) and MAPbBr3 (a = 5.938 Å) belong to the cubic phase and the unit cell parameters are at a similar level, both films exhibit a similar XRD pattern. As shown in Fig. 2b and Table S1, when magnifying the XRD patterns and correcting the peak position in each sample with the (200) crystal plane of FTO as an internal standard, the peak position of the (100), (110), and (200) crystal planes of the sample 45 °C are located between the corresponding crystal planes of both the sample 160 °C (CsPbBr3) and MAPbBr3. From this observation, we can deduce that a mixed perovskite of Cs and MA (CsxMA1−xPbBr3) was formed at the intermediate annealing temperature of 45 °C. Furthermore, CsPbBr3 films based on different precursor solutions in this study exhibited a typical cubic phase, and the two dominant peaks with the highest intensity were assigned to the (100) and (200) crystal faces of CsPbBr3, indicating that all CsPbBr3 films grow along with the [100]-orientation. Therefore, the use of different precursor solution formulations can regulate the growth of the film, but does not affect the phase purity of CsPbBr3.
Based on the above results, we can infer that the CsAc/MAAc-based CsPbBr3 film exhibits crystallization kinetics as shown in Fig. 2c. In the CsAc/MAAc-based precursor solution, all the components are disordered; after spin coating and low temperature annealing processes, part of the components are crystallized to form a CsxMA1−xPbBr3 crystal film due to the volatilization of the DMSO solvent. The reaction can be described as in eqn (1):
xCsAc + MABr + PbBr2 = CsxMA1−xPbBr3 + xMAAc
(1)
In this case, the first stage annealing temperature is insufficient to enable volatilization and disappearance of the MAAc and MABr components, and therefore a large amount of these components is still adsorbed and encapsulated on the surface of the CsxMA1−xPbBr3 grains. Due to the existence of the Ac–Pb bond, the crystallization process of the CsxMA1−xPbBr3 crystal film can be delayed, and therefore uniform nucleation sites are supported to form a flat and high coverage film (Fig. S3). In the following high temperature annealing process, the constituent of MA in CsxMA1−xPbBr3 will be replaced by Cs to form CsPbBr3 (as shown in eqn (2)), and the free PbBr2 together with CsAc and MABr will incorporate into the formed CsPbBr3 crystals, and the residual DMSO solvent and other organic components will be evaporated (eqn (3)).
CsxMA1−xPbBr3 + (1 − x)CsAc = CsPbBr3 + (1 − x)MAAc
(2)
CsAc + MABr + PbBr2 = CsPbBr3 + MAAc
(3)
In this process, the substitution and re-growth reaction are beneficial to increase the CsPbBr3 grain size in the formed film.
Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and PL decay spectra were used to verify the effect of the solvent engineering strategy on suppressing the non-radiative recombination process in CsPbBr3 films. The PL decay rate can reflect the density of trap state defects, since the existence of trap state defects can support additional recombination routes for charge carriers, and therefore accelerate the PL decay. All film samples were deposited on an insulated quartz substrate in these experiments. As shown in Fig. 3a, the PL peak positions of all CsPbBr3 films are approximately located at 530 nm, which is consistent with the absorption onsets in the corresponding absorption spectrum (Fig. S2). The PL intensity follows the order of CsAc/MAAc-based > MAAc-based > control. The improved PL intensity can be ascribed to the enhanced grain size, which can reduce the grain boundaries and further reduce the density of surface defect states. Compared with the reference CsPbBr3 film, the grain size in the MAAc-based CsPbBr3 film has not been significantly improved, but a more uniform nucleation growth process favors the reduction of the density of defect states. Fig. 3b shows the PL decay curves for different CsPbBr3 films, which can be well fitted with the use of a biexponential function, and the fitted results are shown in Table S2. The control, MAAc-based, and CsAc/MAAc-based CsPbBr3 films have average carrier lifetimes (τavg) of 1.5, 2.5 and 6.2 ns, respectively. This increased value further confirms that the CsAc/MAAc-based preparation process can effectively reduce the density of defect states in the obtained CsPbBr3 films, thereby inhibiting the non-radiative recombination process, which is consistent with the previous analysis.

The above-mentioned CsPbBr3 films were applied to fabricate sandwich-like PSCs with an architecture of FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/CsPbBr3/carbon. Fig. 4a shows a cross-sectional SEM image of the CsAc/MAAc-based PSC, which has a uniform CsPbBr3 top layer with a thickness of around 300 nm covering the mesoporous TiO2 (m-TiO2) layer. The total thickness of the light-absorbing CsPbBr3 layer is ∼600 nm. Herein, a copper phthalocyanine (CuPc) layer with a thickness of about 5 nm (Fig. S4) was deposited on the CsPbBr3 layer through vacuum evaporation. Its function is to prevent the charge carrier interface recombination of perovskites with carbon electrodes and improve the hole-extraction efficiency.

The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of different CsPbBr3 PSCs were measured under one sun illumination (AM 1.5G). The distribution diagram of photovoltaic parameters (short-circuit current density (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF) and PCE) is shown in Fig. 4b, and their average values are shown in Table S3. The control-based PSCs displayed a poor photovoltaic performance with a maximum PCE of 2.81% and average JSC, VOC, FF, and PCE of 4.59 mA cm−2, 0.86 V, 0.645, and 2.53%, respectively. This is because the incomplete coverage CsPbBr3 crystal layer (Fig. 1b) cannot avoid the contact between m-TiO2 and the hole-transport material (HTM), resulting in serious interface recombination. By contrast, the MAAc-based PSCs have a more uniform, smooth and complete coverage CsPbBr3 crystal layer than the former one due to the function of MAAc controlling crystallization kinetics. Thus, its photovoltaic performance has been significantly improved, especially JSC and VOC. The CsAc/MAAc-based PSCs have the highest average PCE of 6.48%, which benefitted from the overall and remarkable enhancement of average JSC (7.19 mA cm−2), VOC (1.23 V) and FF (0.731). The champion device of CsAc/MAAc-based PSCs provided a high PCE of 7.37%, which is much higher than that of the control-based and MAAc-based PSCs. These remarkably enhanced photovoltaic performances should be ascribed to the increased light harvesting capacity (Fig. S2) by the more thick CsPbBr3 layer and the suppressed charge recombination with more desirable crystal size (Fig. 1d). It is noted that the obtained photovoltaic performance in this work is remarkably higher than that in previous work adopting the one-step deposition approach, but is poorer than those obtained with the use of the two-step deposition route. We believe that better photovoltaic performance can be expected by exploring techniques such as elemental engineering and interfacial engineering in future work. Furthermore, the novel strategy based on precursor engineering enables a low-temperature fabrication of CsPbBr3 PSCs, which is the lowest temperature in the literature that has been reported so far.
Furthermore, the device performances have been taken into account under forward/reverse voltage scanning directions and stabilized power output (SPO). As a result, the J–V curves show a little hysteresis of 7.37% and 6.79% in reverse and forward directions (Fig. 4c and Table S4). The SPO efficiency was evaluated to be 6.91% at 1.06 V forward bias and remained stable for 100 seconds (Fig. 4c). The incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the CsAc/MAAc-based PSC is shown in Fig. 4d, which exhibited an onset wavelength of around 540 nm corresponding to the absorption spectrum. Its integrated short-circuit current was estimated to be 7.04 mA cm−2, consistent with the J–V result. The long-term stability of CsAc/MAAc-based PSCs stored under constant temperature (around 25 °C) and humidity conditions (around 30%) was also taken into account. Fig. 4e shows the temporal evolution of the photovoltaic parameters. It is found that during a course of 1500 h storage, the PCE of the device remained essentially unchanged compared to the original one, showing excellent stability.

For further understanding the limited charge recombination behaviors, light intensity-dependent J–V measurement was employed, and the corresponding results are shown in Fig. 5. The relationships between the response photoelectric parameters (JSC and VOC) and applied light intensities (I) can be described by the following formulae:

JSC ∝ Iα (α ≤ 1)
(4)
VOC = nkBTln(JSC/J0)/q = αnkBTln(I)/q + c
(5)
where
α is an empirical parameter, n is the ideal factor, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature (298 K), J0 is the reverse saturation current density, q is an elementary charge, and c is a fitting parameter. As shown in Fig. 5a, the α values of all PSCs are close to unity, indicating good linear relationships between the photocurrent and light intensity and unserious bimolecular recombination during the charge extraction under short-circuit conditions. However, the n value of the control PSC was estimated to be 2.77, which is much larger than the values of MAAc-based (1.45) and CsAc/MAAc-based (1.19) PSCs (Fig. 5b). In numerical terms, n close to 1 indicates a dominant process of bimolecular recombination, whereas its deviation from 1 indicates an increased ratio of trap-assisted recombination. These data suggest that the CsAc/MAAc-based PSC is the most prominent in suppressing trap-assisted recombination. This improvement may be attributed to the reduced defect states and enlarged grains. This observation conforms to the result of the PL measurements.

The devices of FTO/TiO2/CsPbBr3/PCBM/Au were constructed to investigate the carrier transport and defect state density properties of the CsPbBr3 films prepared with different precursors by the space charge limited current (SCLC) method. The detailed experimental procedure can be found in the ESI, and the corresponding data are shown in Fig. S5. The dark I–V characteristics displayed an Ohmic region at the low bias and a trap-filled limit region at the middle bias. The trap filled limit voltage (VTFL) of control, MAA, and CsAc/MAAc samples is 0.59, 0.54, and 0.29 V, corresponding to calculated trap densities (ntrap) of 2.98 × 1017, 9.82 × 1016, and 5.86 × 1015 cm−3, respectively. The CsAc/MAAc sample provides the lowest ntrap, which is consistent with the previous PL and light intensity-dependent J–V measurement results, further revealing the advantage of the CsAc/MAAc based approach in improving the crystal quality of CsPbBr3 films. The CsPbBr3 film is excited by photons to generate photogenerated electrons and holes when the PSCs are working. Some of the photogenerated electrons are captured by the defect states in CsPbBr3 films, and the remaining are injected into the electron transport layer (TiO2). The ntrap of CsPbBr3 films is a key factor in the distribution of these two competitive processes. A lower ntrap means a more efficient electron injection from CsPbBr3 to TiO2, resulting in higher charge collection efficiency for the corresponding cells. Therefore, the CsAc/MAAc-based PSCs exhibit a significant increase in VOC, JSC, and PCE relative to the other two PSCs.

In summary, a one-step solution technique based on precursor engineering was employed to fabricate all-inorganic CsPbBr3 films, and applied them in the construction of PSCs. The resulting CsPbBr3 films via this technique displayed a high coverage, large crystalline grain, and low defect state density. With the introduction of CsAc and MAAc into the precursor solution system, the concentration of the precursor solution can be significantly improved, and therefore high-quality CsPbBr3 films with a thickness up to ∼600 nm were obtained. The PSCs based on the optimized precursor solution achieved the best PCE of 7.37%, and displayed good stability with negligible decay over a period of 1500 h under an ambient atmosphere. We believe that this one-step solution deposition method can also be applied to fabricate other high-quality all-inorganic films, such as CsPbI2Br and CsPbI3.


MAAc was synthesized by a modified method from a previous report. In detail, 40 mL CH3NH2 (30–33 wt% in methanol) was added dropwise slowly into a 120 mL solution mixture of acetic acid (99%, Aldrich) and ethanol (1:5 vol%) at 0 °C for 2 h with stirring. The clear solution was concentrated using a rotary evaporator, resulting in a colorless and viscous liquid. The sample was further dried in a vacuum oven for 24 h.


The control precursor solution was obtained via dissolving an equimolar mass of CsBr and PbBr2 in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) solvent with a concentration of 0.5 M. The preparation of the MAAc-based precursor solution is consistent with the control counterpart, but the solvent was replaced with a solution mixture of MAAc and DMSO (1:7, vol/vol). The CsAc/MAAc-based precursor solution was formulated by mixing the stock solutions A and B (1:1, vol/vol). The stock solution A contained an equimolar ratio of MABr and PbBr2 dissolved in DMSO with a concentration of 2.0 M. The stock solution B dissolved CsAc in a mixed solvent of MAAc/DMSO (1:3, vol/vol) with a concentration of 2.0 M. All of the precursor solutions should be filtered with a syringe filter before spin-coating.


F-Doped SnO2 (FTO) transparent conducting substrates were patterned with Zn metal powder and 2 M HCl aqueous solution, and then ultrasonically cleaned in deionized water, acetone, and ethanol. A compact TiO2 (m-TiO2) layer was prepared on the FTO substrates by spin-coating a solution mixture of titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) diluted in ethanol (1:3, vol/vol) at 4000 rpm for 40 s, and then annealed at 450 °C for another 30 min. The mesoporous TiO2 (m-TiO2) layer was deposited by spin coating at 4000 rpm for 30 s using a 30 nm-TiO2 particle paste (Dyesol) diluted with ethanol (1:3, weight ratio). Subsequently, the substrate was annealed at 500 °C for 30 min. After cooling to room temperature, the c-TiO2/m-TiO2 substrates were immersed in an aqueous solution of 0.04 M TiCl4 at 70 °C for 30 min, and then sintered at 500 °C for 30 min. Prior to deposition operation of perovskites, the substrates should be further treated with a UV-ozone cleaner for 15 min. The CsPbBr3 films were prepared via spin-coating the different precursor solutions at 1000 rpm for 10 s and 2000 rpm for 60 s, followed by a two-step thermal treatment process, which included a first stage at 45 °C for 5 min and a second stage at 160 °C for 20 min. The 5 nm-CuPc layer was deposited on the CsPbBr3 layer under high vacuum (<3 × 10−4 Pa) using a thickness monitor to determine the thickness and deposition rate. Finally, the carbon electrode was prepared by doctor-blade coating a carbon paste (Shanghai Materwin New Materials Co., Ltd.) and then dried at 120 °C for 10 min. The area of PSCs was determined by using a mask of 0.09 cm2.


The morphology of the CsPbBr3 film was characterized by using an ultrahigh resolution field-emission scanning electron microscope (FEI, Nova Nano SEM 430) operating at 3 kV. XRD was performed on a powder X-ray diffractometer (XRD) (MSAL XD-2, Beijing, China) with Cu Kα1 (0.15405 nm) irradiation at 36 kV and 30 mA. The UV-vis spectra were collected using a Shimadzu UV-2600 UV-visible spectrophotometer. The current–voltage (J–V) curves of the perovskite solar cells were recorded using a Keithley 2401 source meter and a Newport solar simulator (ORIEL-SOL3A 94023A) with an AM 1.5G source (100 mW cm−2). The light intensity was calibrated to 100 mW cm−2 using a standard Si cell. A shadow mask with 0.09 cm2 active area was applied for all J–V measurement. The light intensity-dependent J–V measurements employed neutral-density filters to modulate the light intensity. Incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were recorded on a Keithley 2000 multimeter with the illumination of a 300 W tungsten lamp and a Spectral Product DK240 monochromator. The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved PL were measured via an Edinburgh Instruments LTD (FLSP920) with an excitation light of 406.2 nm.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


This research is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NFSC No. 21805093, 51732004, 21703071).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The photographs of various precursor solutions. XRD patterns, absorption spectra, and TRPL parameters of the CsPbBr3 films prepared with different precursors. Top-view SEM images of the CaAc/MAAc-based perovskite film after annealing at low temperature. Top-view of the CsPbBr3 film deposited with 5 nm-thick CuPc. The peak parameters extracted from XRD patterns. The photovoltaic parameters of different PSCs. SCLC measurement method and data. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta08465g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019