 DOI: 10.1039/D1SE00303H
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 2595-2601


Zhihai
Liu
,

Lei
Wang
,

Chongyang
Xu
* and 

Xiaoyin
Xie
*

School of Opto-Electronic Information Science and Technology, Yantai University, Yantai 264005, China

School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Technology and Business University, Beijing 100048, China

School of Intelligent Science and Engineering, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin 150001, China. E-mail: xcy110@126.com

School of Chemistry and Chemical Technology, Hubei Polytechnic University, Huangshi 435003, China. E-mail: xyxie@hbpu.edu.cn; Tel: +86-714-6348814

Received
1st March 2021
, Accepted 4th April 2021
First published on 6th April 2021
Recently, Ruddlesden–Popper two-dimensional (2D) perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been intensively studied, owing to their high power conversion efficiency (PCE) and excellent long-term stability. In this work, we fabricated electron-transport-layer-free 2D PSCs using modified poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) as an organic cathode. After treatment with phosphoric acid, the sheet resistance of the PEDOT:PSS electrode was significantly reduced from 1095 to 82 Ω sq−1. After coating with polyethylenimine (PEIE), the work function of PEDOT:PSS can be tuned from −5.08 to −4.02 eV, which is suitable for electron extraction from a perovskite film. As a result, the complex preparation of TiO2 can be skipped, which significantly lowers the total processing temperature of the PSCs to 120 °C. PEDOT:PSS/PEIE-based 2D PSCs on glass substrates exhibit a PCE of 10.2% (under forward scan), which is comparable to that of TiO2-based conventional PSCs. However, the stability of the PSCs fabricated using PEDOT:PSS/PEIE as the cathode becomes better, with PCE degradation suppressed from 31.3% to 15.7% after a duration of 15 days. The flexible 2D PSCs on polyethylene naphthalate substrates exhibited a PCE of 8.5% with good bendability. Our results indicate that PEDOT:PSS/PEIE is a promising cathode material for fabricating efficient, flexible and stable 2D PSCs.

Organic–inorganic hybrid metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been intensively investigated, owing to their advantages such as high power conversion efficiency (PCE), low cost, light weight and convenient fabrication. As shown in previous studies, the PCE of the PSCs has rapidly improved from 3.8% to recently certified 25.5%, which is comparable to that of silicon-based solar cells. However, PSCs also suffer from several disadvantages, such as poor stability and flexibility, which need to be solved for satisfying the requirements of future roll-to-roll production.

Conventional perovskite materials (MAPbX3, MA = CH3NH3, X = Cl, Br or I) can be easily hydrated and decomposed by the moisture from the external environment, which is a significant factor for the rapid degradation of PSCs. To overcome this problem, developing other perovskite materials with better stability becomes an important issue. Recently, all-inorganic and Ruddlesden–Popper 2-dimensional (2D) (or layered) perovskite materials have been intensively investigated for significantly improved stability of PSCs. However, due to large band-gaps (1.8–2.3 eV), light absorption of all-inorganic perovskites (CsPbX3, X = Cl or I) is not very sufficient, which limits the PCE of all-inorganic PSCs. Different from all-inorganic perovskites, Ruddlesden–Popper 2D perovskites (particularly (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1, where n is an integer and BA is CH3(CH2)3NH3) possess tunable band-gaps. When n is equal to 4, the (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite shows a similar band-gap (∼1.5 eV) to that of conventional MAPbI3, which is very suitable for fabricating high-performance PSCs. In conventional PSCs, usually fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) and TiO2 are used as the cathode and electron transport material, respectively. However, the rigid and fragile properties of these metal oxides are a restriction to the flexible application of PSCs. Moreover, sintering TiO2 requires a high temperature of 500 °C, which further limits the commercialization of PSCs. As a result, flexible charge-collecting materials need to be developed for improving flexibility and lowering the processing temperature of PSCs. For example, low temperature processed inverted PSCs have been developed, of which phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester can be used as an electron transport material. In case of a flexible electrode, some inorganic materials such as transparent graphene, carbon nanotubes, metallic meshes and silver nano-wires have been reported to replace FTO in MAPbI3-based PSCs. Although PCEs of these PSCs are relatively lower (7.9–14.2%) than those (over 15%) of conventional FTO based ones, the flexibility can be significantly improved. On the other hand, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is an organic material with good conductivity and transparency and is a good candidate as a flexible electrode. Previous studies indicate that highly conductive PEDOT:PSS films can be used as electrodes for fabricating organic thin film solar cells, showing a comparable performance with indium–tin-oxide (ITO). Moreover, PEDOT:PSS films can also be used as electrodes in MAPbI3-based PSCs, which results in a PCE range of 10.5–14.2%. Compared with FTO or ITO based PSCs, an approximately 10% degradation of PCE can be observed for PEDOT:PSS based ones, which may be induced by the contact between the electrode and other films. However up to now, there are no reports on the fabrication of flexible metal-oxide free Ruddlesden–Popper 2D PSCs. Thus it is very important to explore the effect of using PEDOT:PSS as the electrode in the fabrication process of Ruddlesden–Popper 2D PSCs.
In this work, we investigate the use of a modified PEDOT:PSS film as an organic cathode for fabricating Ruddlesden–Popper 2D PSCs. After simply treating with ethylene glycol (EG) and phosphoric acid (PA), conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS film was significantly enhanced, with sheet resistance reducing from 1095 to 82 Ω sq−1. Moreover, the deposition of polyethylenimine (PEIE) can raise the work function of the PEDOT:PSS film from −5.08 to −4.02 eV, which is very suitable for electron extraction from the perovskite film ((BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13). Consequently, PEDOT:PSS/PEIE-based PSCs can be fabricated without using TiO2, which exhibits a high PCE of 10.2% (on glass substrates). However, the highest processing temperature of the PSCs was significantly lowered from 500 °C to 120 °C. Compared with conventional FTO/TiO2-based PSCs, long-term stability of PEDOT:PSS/PEIE-based PSCs was also improved with suppressed PCE degradation. After being tested and stored for 15 days, the PCE degradation of the PSCs dramatically reduced from 31.3% (FTO/TiO2-based) to 15.7% (PEDOT:PSS/PEIE-based). Flexible 2D PSCs on polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) substrates showed a PCE of 8.5%. After being bent 500 times, the tested PSC still maintained a PCE of 6.9%, indicating its excellent flexibility.

Butylammonium iodide (BAI), lead iodide (PbI2), PEIE, bis(trifluoromethane) sulfonamide lithium salt, 4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), acetonitrile, 2-methoxyethanol, 2-propanol, EG, PA and chlorobenzene (CB) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (USA). Methylammonium iodide (MAI) and PEDOT:PSS (PH1000) were purchased from Advanced Election Technology Co., Ltd (China) and Heraeus Clevios (Germany), respectively. 2,2′,7,7′-Tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) was purchased from EM Index (Korea). 2D PSCs were fabricated on glass or PEN substrates with a structure of PEDOT:PSS/PEIE/(BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13/spiro-OMeTAD/Au. First, a PEDOT:PSS solution (containing 5 wt% EG) was spin-coated onto the glass or PEN substrates at 1000 rpm for 60 s. Then the samples were annealed at 120 °C to fully remove the residual solvent. After that, these substrates were dipped into a PA solution (85 wt%) at 120 °C for 3 min. Then, the samples were washed 3 times using deionized water and baked in an oven. Afterwards, the PEIE solution (0.4 wt% in 2-methoxyethanol) was spin-coated onto the surface of PEDOT:PSS at 5000 rpm, followed by thermal annealing at 100 °C for 10 min. The perovskite precursor was prepared by dissolving BAI, MAI, and PbI2 (molar ratio = 2:3:4) in DMF at a total concentration of 40 wt%. The perovskite precursor was spin-coated onto the PEDOT:PSS/PEIE substrates at 4000 rpm in a N2 filled glovebox. Then (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite films were formed after being thermally annealed at 100 °C. The spiro-OMeTAD solution was prepared by dissolving 75 mg spiro-OMeTAD, and 28 μL tBP and 18 μL mixtures of lithium salt (520 mg in 1 mL acetonitrile) in 1 mL CB. Subsequently, the spiro-OMeTAD solution was spin-coated onto the perovskite layers, followed by thermal annealing at 80 °C. Finally, Au anodes of about 100 nm were thermally evaporated onto the spiro-OMeTAD layers under a pressure of 10−4 Pa. The effective working area of the PSCs was 0.1 cm2, which was defined by a shadow mask.


The ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectrum was recorded using a PerkinElmer Lambda 750 (USA). X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed using an X-ray diffractometer (Panalytical, Netherlands). Cross-sectional images of the PSCs and top-view images of the perovskite surfaces were acquired using an SU8020 scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi, Japan) operated at an acceleration voltage of 8 kV. Surface morphologies of PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS/PEIE were measured using an atomic force microscope (AFM, Veeco, USA) in the tapping mode. The work functions of the films were measured by using an ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscope (UPS) with a He I (21.22 eV) radiation line. Photoluminescence (PL) spectra were measured using a spectrometer (FLS920, Edinburgh Instruments, UK). The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the devices were measured under an irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (AM1.5). The incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) was measured using a solar cell IPCE measurement system (Solar Cell Scan 100, Zolix, China).


The cross-sectional SEM image of a PEDOT:PSS/PEIE-based PSC is shown in Fig. 1(a), which reveals a typical condensed layer-by-layer structure. The PEDOT:PSS/PEIE film at the bottom is about 80 nm and is in good contact with the (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite film on top. The SEM image also shows that the thicknesses of the perovskite and spiro-OMeTAD layers are approximately 380 nm and 180 nm, respectively. Fig. 1(b) shows the schematic energy alignment of the involved functional layers, which indicates the charge transport process of the PSCs. When charges are generated in the perovskite absorber, holes can be transported through the spiro-OMeTAD layer to the Au anode, and electrons can be transported from the perovskite to PEDOT:PSS/PEIE cathode. To increase conductivity, using EG could partially remove the PSS component from the PEDOT:PSS film. As a result, EG treated PEDOT:PSS shows a uniform surface morphology with a sheet resistance of 1095 Ω sq−1. As shown in Fig. 1(d), after treating with PA, the surface of PEDOT:PSS becomes rougher, with the root-mean-square (RMS) roughness increasing from 1.5 to 2.7 nm. The conductivity of the electrode was significantly enhanced with sheet resistance reducing to 82 Ω sq−1, which is comparable to that (∼20 Ω sq−1) of FTO. Previous studies indicate that PA solution could further remove the PSS component from the PEDOT:PSS film, leaving PEDOT frameworks on the surface. Thus the enlarged domains in Fig. 1(d) may correspond to PEDOT aggregations, which are highly associated with enhanced conductivity.Fig. 1(e) shows the surface of PEDOT:PSS/PEIE, which indicates an even rougher morphology (RMS roughness of 8.1 nm). This is because PEIE molecules could aggregate at the surface of PEDOT:PSS, forming island-like domains. The conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS electrode was slightly decreased upon coating with PEIE, with sheet resistance increasing to 87 Ω sq−1. As shown in Fig. S1, the surface of the PEDOT:PSS/PEIE film is more hydrophobic than that of PEDOT:PSS, with the water contact angle increasing from 10° to 25°. As a result, coating with PEIE could reduce the hygroscopicity of the PEDOT:PSS electrode, which is beneficial for the stability of PSCs.


Fig. 2(a) and (b) show the information of work functions and transmittance for the PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS/PEIE films. Without PEIE, the bare PEDOT:PSS film shows a low work function of −5.08 eV, which is inconsistent with previous studies. Such a work function is much lower than the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite (−3.80 eV, see Fig. 1(b)). Due to mismatched energy levels, the generated electrons cannot be efficiently transported from the perovskite absorber to the PEDOT:PSS electrode. After coating with PEIE, the work function of PEDOT:PSS was tuned to −4.02 eV, which is slightly lower than the LUMO level of the (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite. As a result, the electron transporting barrier from the perovskite to electrode is much reduced. The mechanism of the tuned work function can be explained using the molecular structure of PEIE, which is shown in the inset of Fig. 2(b). The amine groups in PEIE molecules could induce surface dipoles on the PEDOT:PSS film, which raised the work function up to −4.02 eV. As seen from Fig. 2(b), both the PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS/PEIE electrodes show high transmittance (over 86%) at a wavelength in the range of 350–800 nm. Because light should pass through PEDOT:PSS/PEIE before being absorbed by the (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite, such a high transmittance is a basic requirement for sufficient light absorption of PSCs.
The quality of the perovskite film plays a very important role in fabricating high-performance PSCs. To characterize the quality of the prepared (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite, we measured the UV-vis absorption spectrum, XRD pattern and SEM image of the perovskite film, which are shown in Fig. 3. The UV-vis spectrum in Fig. 3(a) shows a standard absorption shape for the 2D (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite film with a broad absorption range (400–800 nm). A specific absorption peak can be observed at 608 nm, which is consistent with observations from previous studies. From the XRD pattern in Fig. 3(b), two dominant peaks at 14.2° and 28.5° can be found, representing the crystallographic (111) and (202) planes of the (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite, respectively. The strong and sharp peaks indicate good crystallization of the 2D perovskite film. The SEM image in Fig. 3(c) shows a uniform surface morphology with full coverage, in which 2D perovskite planes with a lateral dimension of 1–3 μm can be observed. As shown in Fig. S2, the 2D perovskite planes can also be clearly observed from the AFM phase image, which is in good agreement with the SEM image. The UV-vis absorption, XRD and SEM results demonstrate the good preparation of the (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite on PEDOT:PSS/PEIE.

Fig. 4(a) and Table 1 present the J–V performance results and device parameters of the studied 2D PSCs fabricated using PEDOT:PSS/PEIE as the cathode. Under forward scan, the PSCs exhibit a PCE of 10.2% (average value of 16 individual devices), with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.03 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 15.3 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 64.6%. The J–V characteristic curves also indicate a negligible hysteresis effect of the PSCs without significant gaps existing between these two curves. Under reverse scan, the PSCs exhibit a slightly higher PCE of 10.6%, which is mainly induced by the larger FF (65.8%). As indicated from the table, the calculated average PCE of the PSCs under forward and reverse scans is 10.4%. As shown in Fig. S3(a), the FTO/TiO2-based PSCs exhibit a PCE of 11.2%, which is similar to those in previous studies using the (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite as the absorber. The PCE of PEDOT:PSS/PEIE-based devices is only 8.9% lower than that of FTO/TiO2-based devices, which is mainly caused by the lower Jsc (15.3 mA cm−2). The lower Jsc may be induced by the relatively higher resistance (82 Ω sq−1) of PEDOT:PSS/PEIE and/or the contact between the perovskite and PEDOT:PSS/PEIE. Moreover, as shown in Fig. S3(b) and Table S1, PSCs fabricated using bare PEDOT:PSS as the cathode show a much lower PCE of 7.5%, indicating the benefit of using PEIE. This can be explained by the mismatched energy alignment. As shown in Fig. 1(b), the work function of bare PEDOT:PSS is −4.02 eV, which is far from the LUMO level (−3.80 eV) of the perovskite. Such an energy alignment could increase the electron transport barrier between the perovskite and cathode, leading to a larger series resistance of the PSCs. As a result, using PEIE could significantly improve the electron transport properties from the perovskite to PEDOT:PSS cathode, which further improved the Jsc and FF. However, the stability of PEDOT:PSS/PEIE-based PSCs is better than those of PEDOT:PSS- and FTO/TiO2-based ones. Fig. S3(c) shows the normalized PCE degradation of PSCs based on different cathodes, which have been stored under ambient conditions (under humidity of 30–40%, at 25 °C) without encapsulation. After 15 days of storage and testing, the PCE of FTO/TiO2-based PSCs was only 7.7%, corresponding to a high PCE degradation of 31.3% (original PCE = 11.2%).
Performance

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Best PCE (%)
Under forward scan
1.03 ± 0.01
15.3 ± 0.3
64.6 ± 1.3
10.2 ± 0.3
10.5
Under reverse scan
1.05 ± 0.01
15.3 ± 0.2
65.8 ± 1.1
10.6 ± 0.2
10.8
Average
1.04 ± 0.01
15.3 ± 0.3
65.2 ± 1.2
10.4 ± 0.3
10.7
PSCs fabricated using bare PEDOT:PSS as the cathode showed a final PCE of 4.65%, indicating a PCE degradation of 23.8%. In contrast, the PCE of PEDOT:PSS/PEIE-based PSCs was still 8.6%, suggesting an even weaker PCE degradation of 15.7% (original PCE = 10.2%). Compared with bare PEDOT:PSS, PEDOT:PSS/PEIE possesses a more hydrophobic surface (see Fig. S1), which is beneficial for suppressing moisture from air. Previous studies demonstrated the photocatalytic effect of TiO2, which could decompose perovskite materials into PbI2 under the irradiation of UV light. By using a PEDOT:PSS/PEIE-based cathode, the use of TiO2 can be skipped. As a result, the UV-induced decomposition of the perovskite can be avoided, which further leads to improved stability of the PSCs. Fig. 4(b) shows the IPCE spectrum of PEDOT:PSS/PEIE-based PSCs, which reveals the photon-to-electron response for a broad range of wavelengths (350–800 nm). The integrated Jsc from the IPCE spectrum is 15.1 mA cm−2, which is similar to that (15.3 mA cm−2) obtained from the J–V characteristic curves. As a result, the IPCE spectrum can demonstrate the high accuracy of the J–V measurements. The steady-state current density and PCE as a function of time for a specific PSC are shown in Fig. 4(c). The current density stabilized at 12.5 mA cm−2 for 300 s, yielding a stabilized PCE of 9.8%, which indicates a stable output of the PSC.
The electron extraction effect of using PEDOT:PSS/PEIE as the cathode can be characterized by recording the PL and time-resolved PL (TRPL) spectra of the bare perovskite and perovskite on PEDOT:PSS/PEIE. As shown in Fig. 5(a), the bare (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite film exhibits a specific PL peak at a wavelength of 775 nm, whereas the perovskite on PEDOT:PSS/PEIE showed a significantly quenched PL signal (approximately 90% intensity quenched). This indicates the exciton quenching effect of using PEDOT:PSS/PEIE as the cathode, which could effectively extract electrons from the LUMO of the perovskite film (see Fig. 1(b)). The TRPL spectra of the bare perovskite on glass and the perovskite on PEDOT:PSS/PEIE are shown in Fig. 5(b), which reveals a significantly reduced PL lifetime. By fitting bi-exponential curves to the spectra, the PL lifetimes are found to be 295 and 52 ns for perovskite films on bare glass and PEDOT:PSS/PEIE, respectively. The analysis of the PL and TRPL spectra demonstrates the excellent electron transport properties of PEDOT:PSS/PEIE when used as the cathode, which results in good J–V performance of the PSCs.
To investigate the flexibility of the PEDOT:PSS/PEIE electrode, we fabricated flexible PSCs on PEN substrates with the same structure. The forward scan J–V characteristics of the flexible PSCs are shown in Fig. 6(a) with the inset showing the photograph of a typical cell. The flexible PSCs exhibit a PCE of 8.5% with a Voc of 1.02 V, a Jsc of 14.7 mA cm−2 and a FF of 56.7%. The PCE of the flexible PSCs is only about 17% lower than that (10.2%) of the PSCs on glass substrates. As indicated in previous studies, plastic PEN substrates exhibit a rougher surface morphology than glass-based substrates, which could increase the series resistance of the PSCs. As a result, the flexible PSCs on PEN substrates showed a relatively lower PCE, which is mainly induced by the degraded Jsc and FF. The bending test result of the flexible PSCs is shown in Fig. 6(b), which shows the degradation tendency of the PCE for 9 individual devices. After being bent 500 times, the PSCs still have an average PCE of 6.9%, corresponding to a degradation of 19% (original PCE = 8.5%). Degradation is mainly induced by the degraded Jsc (to 13.2 mA cm−2) and FF (to 52.0%). The SEM image in Fig. S4 shows the surface morphology of the perovskite film after the bending test. Compared with the bare perovskite film shown in Fig. 3(c), some significant cracks can be found in the bent perovskite film, which may increase the bulk resistance of the perovskite and the contact resistance between the perovskite and charge transport layers. As a result, the performance of PEDOT:PSS/PEIE-based PSCs was degraded after the bending test.

In summary, we investigate the use of a PEDOT:PSS/PEIE film as an organic cathode for fabricating Ruddlesden–Popper 2D PSCs. The conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS film was significantly enhanced after treatment with EG and PA, with sheet resistance reducing from 1095 to 82 Ω sq−1. The use of PEIE could tune the work function of the PEDOT:PSS film from −5.08 to −4.02 eV, which is close to the LUMO level of the perovskite film. The UV-vis absorption, XRD and SEM measurements demonstrated the good quality of the prepared (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite. PL analysis indicated the excellent electron extraction properties of the PEDOT:PSS/PEIE electrode. PEDOT:PSS/PEIE-based PSCs (on glass substrates) showed a high PCE of 10.2%, which is comparable to that of FTO/TiO2-based conventional PSCs. The long term stability of the PSCs was improved upon using PEDOT:PSS/PEIE as an electrode, with PCE degradation significantly suppressed from 31.3% to 15.7% after a duration of 15 days. The flexible 2D PSCs on PEN substrates showed a PCE of 8.5% with good flexibility. After being bent 500 times, the tested PSC still maintained a PCE of 6.9%. Our results demonstrate that developing a low-temperature processed PEDOT:PSS/PEIE cathode is an effective technique for fabricating flexible Ruddlesden–Popper 2D PSCs with superior performance.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF), funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT (Grant No.: 2020R1GA1102816).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional figures. See DOI: 10.1039/d1se00303h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021