 DOI: 10.1039/C4CP01411A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 16103-16109


Qiaoshi
An
,

Fujun
Zhang
*,

Lingliang
Li
,

Zuliang
Zhuo
,

Jian
Zhang
,

Weihua
Tang
 and 

Feng
Teng
*

Key Laboratory of Luminescence and Optical Information, Ministry of Education, Beijing Jiaotong University, 100044, China. E-mail: fjzhang@bjtu.edu.cn; fteng@bjtu.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory of Catalysis, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy, 457 Zhongshan Road, Dalian 116023, China. E-mail: jianzhang@dicp.ac.cn

Key Laboratory of Soft Chemistry and Functional Materials, Ministry of Education, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, 210094, China. E-mail: whtang@njust.edu.cn

Received
1st April 2014
, Accepted 15th May 2014
First published on 15th May 2014
We present a route to successfully tackle the two main limitations, low open circuit voltage (Voc) and limited short circuit-density (Jsc), of polymer solar cells (PSCs) based on poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) as an electron-donor. The indene-C60 bisadduct (ICBA) was selected as an electron acceptor to improve the open circuit voltage (Voc). The narrow band gap polymer poly[(4,8-bis-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene)-2,6-diyl-alt-(4-(2-ethylhexanoyl)-thieno[3,4-b]thiophene)-2,6-diyl] (PBDTTT-C), as a complementary electron-donor material, was doped into the host system of P3HT:ICBA to form ternary cascade energy structured PSCs with increased Jsc. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of P3HT:ICBA-based cells was improved from 3.32% to 4.38% by doping with 3 wt% PBDTTT-C with 1 min 150 °C annealing treatment. The 4.38% PCE of ternary PSCs is still larger than the 3.79% PCE of PSCs based on P3HT:ICBA with 10 minutes 150 °C annealing treatment.

Excessive development and consumption of mineral materials have brought a series of problems to society’s progress, such as energy shortages, the greenhouse effect, and acid rain, as well as haze. Polymer solar cells (PSCs), as an inexpensive renewable energy source, have attracted enormous attention because of their easy fabrication, light weight, flexibility, and the abundance of their raw materials. One of the most accessible electron-donor materials is poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), which has relatively good charge transport properties and high crystallinity among the different conjugated polymers. In addition, compared with narrow band gap electron-donor materials, polymer P3HT has a relatively good stability during thermal treatment of blend films with fullerene derivatives. The system of P3HT and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) was the most studied for PSCs in the past ten years, and power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of 3–5% were obtained. However, further improvement to the PCE of PSCs based on P3HT:PCBM as the active layer may be limited by the following factors: (i) a low open circuit voltage (Voc) of ∼0.6 V results from the low lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy level of PCBM; (ii) a low short-circuit current (Jsc) is mainly due to limited photon harvesting (only 22% of the total photons in solar light) induced by the wide band gap ∼2 eV of P3HT.

It is well known that the Voc of PSCs is mainly determined by the difference between the LUMO energy level of the electron-acceptor material and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the electron-donor material. To improve the Voc of PSCs, a series of fullerene derivatives with high LUMO energy levels have been synthesized as electron-acceptors. Blom et al. reported that using a novel type of fullerene (bisPCBM) as an electron-acceptor and P3HT as an electron-donor achieved a relatively high Voc of 0.73 V. Hou et al. reported an excellent electron-acceptor material, indene-C60 bisadduct (ICBA), with a LUMO level 0.17 eV higher than that of PCBM. PSCs based on a P3HT:ICBA matrix achieved a higher Voc of 0.84 V compared with that of P3HT:PCBM cells. Furthermore, ICBA has a more facile synthesis, a higher solubility in common organic solvents, and stronger visible absorption for better photon harvesting in the photovoltaic process.
In order to extend the absorption range of the active layer for achieving high performance PSCs, different strategies have been extensively employed, such as the design and synthesis of narrow band gap polymers, or adopting tandem structures. However, both synthesizing new materials and fabricating tandem PSCs have serious technical challenges as well as high cost. Recently, a ternary cascade energy structure has been realized as a promising alternative strategy, extending the spectral response of wide band gap polymers into the near infrared (NIR) region, and resulting in Jsc and PCE improvement. In addition, the exciton dissociation and charge carrier transfer in blend films can be effectively optimized by the ternary cascade energy structure. Chen et al. reported that the design of complementary materials for ideal ternary PSCs is required to achieve a suitable energy-level offset, optimal panchromatic absorption, more balanced charge carrier transport and collection, as well as a high photon harvest efficiency.
In this research, we present an effective strategy to simultaneously improve the Voc and Jsc of PSCs based on P3HT as an electron-donor material. A narrow band gap polymer, poly[(4,8-bis-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene)-2,6-diyl-alt-(4-(2-ethylhexanoyl)-thieno[3,4-b]thiophene)-2,6-diyl] (PBDTTT-C), as a complementary electron-donor material, was blended into the host system of P3HT:ICBA to form ternary cascade energy structure PSCs. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of P3HT:ICBA based PSCs was improved from 3.32% to 4.38% by doping with 3 wt% PBDTTT-C with a 1 minute 150 °C annealing treatment, which corresponds to a PCE improvement of about 32%. The optimized PCE of ternary PSCs with the 1 minute 150 °C annealing treatment is also superior compared with binary PSCs with a 10 minute 150 °C annealing treatment.

Indium tin oxide (ITO) glass substrates (sheet resistance 15 Ω □−1) were cleaned consecutively in ultrasonic baths containing acetone, detergent, de-ionized water and ethanol. The cleaned ITO substrates were blow-dried by high purity nitrogen gas and then treated with UV-ozone for 10 minutes in order to further clean the substrates and increase the work function of the ITO substrates. Poly-(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly-(styrenesulphonicacid) (PEDOT:PSS) (purchased from H.C. Starck Co. Ltd) thin films were fabricated on the cleaned ITO substrates by the spin-coating method at 4000 revolutions per minute (RPM) for 40 s, and then annealed at 120 °C for 10 minutes under ambient conditions. The electron-donors, P3HT (purchased from Luminescence Technology Corp.) and PBDTTT-C (purchased from Luminescence Technology Corp.), were dissolved in 1,2-dichlorobenzene to generate 36 mg ml−1 blend solutions. The doping concentrations of PBDTTT-C in the donors are 0, 1 wt%, 3 wt%, 5 wt%, 30 wt% and 100 wt%. The electron-acceptor, ICBA (purchased from Luminescence Technology Corp.), was separately prepared in 1,2-dichlorobenzene at a concentration of 36 mg ml−1 and then mixed with the blend solutions of the donors. The weight ratio of electron-donor to electron-acceptor was kept constant at 1:1. The ternary mixed solutions were spin-coated onto a PEDOT:PSS layer at 800 RPM in a high purity nitrogen filled glove box to fabricate the active layers. The thicknesses of the active layers are about 160 nm, which was measured by an Ambios Technology XP-2 stylus profiler. The LiF/Al cathode (0.9 nm/100 nm) was deposited by thermal evaporation at 10−4 Pa and the thickness was monitored by a quartz crystal microbalance. The active area is about 3.8 mm2, defined by the vertical overlap of the ITO anode and Al cathode. Thermal treatment of the active layers was carried out at 150 °C for various times in a high purity nitrogen filled glove box after evaporation of the LiF/Al cathode. A series of ternary and binary PSCs were fabricated under the same conditions to investigate the effect of PBDTTT-C doping concentration on the performance of ternary PSCs. A schematic diagram of the configuration of the PSCs and the chemical structures of the materials used are shown in Fig. 1.


The thickness of the active layers was measured using an Ambios Technology XP-2 stylus profiler. Photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the films were measured using a Perkin Elmer LS-55 spectrophotometer. Absorption spectra of the films were obtained using a Shimadzu UV-3101 PC spectrometer. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the PSCs were measured using a Keithley 4200 semiconductor characterization system and an ABET Sun 2000 solar simulator. External quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the PSCs were measured using a Zolix Solar Cell Scan 100. X-Ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were collected using a Bruker D8 Advance X-ray diffractometer. The morphology of the films was investigated by atomic force microscopy (AFM) using a multimode Nanoscope IIIa operated in tapping mode.


The absorption spectra of the pure P3HT and PBDTTT-C films, as well as the PL spectra of the P3HT film, are shown in Fig. 2(a). It is apparent that the absorption spectra of the two electron-donor materials show an apparent complementarity in the range from 400 nm to 800 nm, which is beneficial for solar light photon harvesting in the ternary PSCs. The main absorption peaks of the P3HT and PBDTTT-C films are located at 518 nm and 685 nm, respectively. The emission spectrum of the P3HT film shows a wide emission range from 600 to 800 nm with an emission peak at 700 nm. The good spectral overlap between the PBDTTT-C absorption spectrum and the PL spectrum of P3HT indicates that Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) certainly occurs between the P3HT and PBDTTT-C molecules. The FRET between P3HT and PBDTTT-C may provide an additional route to improve exciton dissociation efficiency at the interfaces between the two electron-donor materials and ICBA. The energy level diagram of the materials used and the cathodes is shown in the inset of Fig. 2(a), which outlines the possible charge carrier transfer pathways in the blend system. The excitons formed in P3HT and PBDTTT-C may be directly dissociated into free charge carriers at their interfaces with ICBA, or may undergo a FRET process before dissociation. The HOMOs of P3HT and PBDTTT-C are very similar, which is beneficial for the intermolecular transfer of holes between P3HT and PBDTTT-C. Therefore, the narrow band gap polymer PBDTTT-C is an ideal complementary electron-donor material to P3HT for a widened photon harvesting range; meanwhile the matched energy levels are beneficial for charge carrier transfer or transport in the ternary blend thin films. The charge carrier transport should be influenced by the intermolecular charge transfer between P3HT and PBDTTT-C. Therefore, the performance of the PSCs is determined by the balance between photon harvesting and charge carrier collection. In order to confirm the influence of PBDTTT-C doping concentration on the photon harvesting of ternary blend thin films, the absorption spectra of the ternary blend films were measured and are shown in Fig. 2(b).

It is obvious that the binary blend P3HT:ICBA films show a relatively strong absorption in the range of 400 nm to 650 nm. The PBDTTT-C:ICBA films have a broad absorption in the longer wavelength range with an absorption peak at 695 nm. The relative absorption intensity from 650 nm to 800 nm of the ternary blend films was regularly enhanced with an increase of PBDTTT-C doping concentration, which indicates that more low energy photons have been harvested by the PBDTTT-C molecules. The absorption intensity of the ternary blend films shows a slight decrease in the visible light range when PBDTTT-C doping concentrations are less than 3 wt%; this means that the π–π stacking of the P3HT may not be disrupted at lower PBDTTT-C doping concentrations. However, the absorption intensity of the ternary blend films distinctly decreased with an increase of PBDTTT-C doping concentration, which may be due to the distorted P3HT molecular arrangement induced by doping with more PBDTTT-C molecules.
The J–V characteristics of the PSCs were measured under 100 mW cm−2 illumination intensity and are shown in Fig. 3. Taken from the J–V curves, the corresponding photovoltaic parameters of the PSCs are summarized in Table 1. The PCE of the ternary PSC with 3 wt% PBDTTT-C was 3.43%, with a Jsc of 6.91 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.8 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 62%. However, the PCE of the PSC based on P3HT:ICBA (control cell) was only 1.74% for the cell without annealing treatment, which is due to the serious horizontal phase separation in the active layers resulting from the highly symmetric ICBA molecule. We analysed the effect of the PBDTTT-C doping concentration on the performance of the PSCs without annealing treatment. The maximum PCE of the ternary PSCs was obtained for the cell with 3 wt% PBDTTT-C as the complementary electron-donor, which decreased with an increase of PBDTTT-C doping concentration. According to the absorption spectra of the binary and ternary blend films, the ordered P3HT molecular arrangement was disrupted by increased PBDTTT-C doping, resulting in an absorption intensity decrease in the visible light range. As we know, the disordered P3HT molecular arrangement may also decrease the charge carrier transport in the ternary blend films, which results in the decrease of Jsc along with an increase of PBDTTT-C doping concentration. Therefore, there is a balance between photon harvesting and charge carrier collection induced by doping with PBDTTT-C. The performance of the ternary PSCs decreased when the PBDTTT-C doping concentration exceeded 3 wt%, which may be attributed to more excitons from P3HT transferring to PBDTTT-C, or limited charge carrier transport in the ternary blend films. It is known that PSCs based on a PBDTTT-C:ICBA matrix showed a much lower PCE than that of PBDTTT-C:PCBM cells, which is due to the weak driving force for exciton dissociation due to the small difference in LUMOs between PBDTTT-C and ICBA. The Jsc and FF of the PSCs decreased with increased PBDTTT-C doping, which may be attributed to the disrupted interpenetrated network of the P3HT:ICBA matrix, resulting in the limit of charge carrier transport in the ternary blend films. In order to further confirm the effect of PBDTTT-C doping concentration on the charge carrier transport in the blend films, the dependence of the photocurrent density (Jph) on the effective voltage of the control cells and ternary cells (3 wt% PBDTTT-C doping concentration) was investigated (inset of Fig. 3). The Jph is defined as the difference between the current density under illumination (JL) and the current density in the dark (JD), thus Jph = JL − JD. The Jph of the ternary PSCs was saturated more rapidly than that of control cells, along with an increase of reverse bias; this means that the ternary blend films with 3 wt% doping concentration may provide effective charge carrier transport compared with the P3HT:ICBA films without annealing treatment.
PBDTTT-C in donors [wt%]

J
sc [mA cm2]

V
oc [V]
FF [%]
PCE [%]
Best
Average

a Average PCE: more than 50 PSCs without annealing treatment were evaluated.

0
5.33
0.68
48
1.74
1.65
1
6.34
0.79
60
3.00
2.90
3
6.91
0.80
62
3.43
3.35
5
6.02
0.81
65
3.18
3.07
30
5.89
0.83
59
2.88
2.77
100
5.90
0.98
37
2.15
2.09

Fig. 4(a) shows the EQE spectra of the PSCs with various PBDTTT-C doping concentrations. The EQE spectrum of the PSC with a 3 wt% PBDTTT-C doping concentration is the best among the PSCs, which matches with the observed performance from the J–V characteristics. The EQE spectrum of the PSC increases by more than 10% in the region from 400 nm to 620 nm by doping at a 3 wt% PBDTTT-C concentration. A change in the absorption spectrum of the film is not obvious in this region, which indicates that the EQE enhancement of the PSCs should be attributed to additional exciton dissociation and charge carrier pathways. Meanwhile, the EQE spectra of the ternary PSCs in the range of 620 nm to 800 nm continually improved with an increase of PBDTTT-C doping concentration. However, the EQE spectra of the ternary PSCs from 400 nm to 620 nm significantly decreased when the PBDTTT-C doping concentration exceeded 3 wt%. These results are in good agreement with the absorption spectra of the ternary blend films with different PBDTTT-C doping concentrations, as shown in Fig. 2(b). The enhancement of the EQE spectra is not distinct in the range of 620 nm to 800 nm when the doping concentration of PBDTTT-C is lower than 5 wt%. As seen from Fig. 4(b), it is very interesting that the dark current densities of the ternary PSCs (less than 5 wt% PBDTTT-C doping concentration) have a similar trend and values compared with that of the control cells. There is a relatively large leak current for the ternary PSCs with high PBDTTT-C doping concentrations, especially for the cells with 30 wt% and 100 wt% PBDTTT-C doping concentrations. It may be concluded that a higher PBDTTT-C doping concentration in the active layers may have a negative influence on charge transport and collection in the ternary PSCs, resulting in the distinctly decreased FF.
It is known that the crystallinity and nanomorphology of the P3HT-based films can be improved by annealing treatment, resulting in an improved performance of the PSCs. Li et al. reported that the interpenetrating network of the P3HT:ICBA matrix was enhanced by annealing treatment, which is beneficial for exciton dissociation and charge transport. In order to study the influence of annealing treatment on the performance of ternary PSCs, a series of control cells and ternary cells were annealed at 150 °C for different times. The J–V characteristic curves of the PSCs after annealing treatment are shown in the ESI. Typical J–V characteristic curves of the PSCs with different annealing treatment times are shown in Fig. 5(a) and the key parameters of the PSCs are summarized in Table 2. As shown in Fig. 5(b), the diffraction peak intensities of both the control and ternary (3 wt% PBDTTT-C doping concentration) films are increased by annealing treatment, which indicates that crystalline fibrils consisting of a more ordered packing of P3HT chains were formed during the annealing treatment.
PBDTTT-C in donors [wt%]

J
sc [mA cm2]

V
oc [V]
FF [%]
PCE [%]
Best
Average

a Average PCE: more than 50 annealed cells were evaluated.

0 + annealed (1 minute)
8.03
0.71
55
3.32
3.21
0 + annealed (10 minutes)
8.63
0.77
57
3.79
3.65
3 + annealed (1 minute)
9.41
0.79
60
4.38
4.30
3 + annealed (5 minutes)
9.13
0.82
47
3.55
3.42
The PCE of the control cells with a 1 minute 150 °C annealing treatment was improved to 3.32% from 1.74% for the PSCs without annealing treatment, resulting from the improvement of Jsc, Voc and FF. The PCE of the control cells was improved to 3.79% by a 10 minute 150 °C annealing treatment. It should be mentioned that the ternary PSCs with the 1 minute annealing treatment give the champion performance, with a Jsc of 9.41 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.79 V, FF of 60%, and PCE of 4.38%. However, the PCE of the ternary PSCs decreased to 3.55% with further increased annealing treatment time up to 5 minutes. The decreased performance of the ternary PSCs may be due to the degradation of PBDTTT-C induced by the prolonged annealing treatment time. Commonly, annealing treatment also results in the decreased performance of PSCs based on narrow band gap materials. The short time annealing treatment of the ternary blend PSCs may adjust the molecular arrangement and optimize the morphology of the active layer film for better exciton dissociation.
In order to further clarify the effect of annealing treatment and PBDTTT-C doping concentration on the performance of PSCs, the morphologies of the P3HT:ICBA films and the ternary films (3 wt% PBDTTT-C doping concentration) with or without annealing treatment were measured by atomic force microscopy (AFM). The preparation conditions of the films for AFM measurement were kept constant compared with those for fabricating cells. As clearly shown in Fig. 6(a), the surface morphology of the P3HT:ICBA film without annealing treatment is quite rough and the root-mean-square (RMS) roughness is about 27.5 nm, resulting in a relatively low PCE of 1.74%. Lin et al. reported that the highly symmetric molecule ICBA could cause serious horizontal phase separation of the incompatible organic–inorganic interface, and then render asymmetrical the blending of the acceptor/donor morphology, which has a negative influence on the performance of the PSCs. According to Fig. 6(b), the morphology of the control films becomes smoother with a RMS of 21.5 nm after annealing treatment at 150 °C for 1 minute, which is beneficial for exciton dissociation and charge carrier transfer. It is interesting to note from Fig. 6(c) that the surface roughness of the ternary blend film with the 1 minute 150 °C annealing treatment is about 12.7 nm. The noticeable change in the morphology can be explained by the fact that the addition of a suitable amount of PBDTTT-C into P3HT:ICBA allows tailoring of the miscibility between P3HT and ICBA, leading to more homogeneous films and optimal domain sizes with smooth surfaces. The optimized surface morphology and nanometer-scale phase separation of the films could provide a large interface area for exciton dissociation, as well as a continuous percolating path for hole and electron transport to the respective electrodes.

In conclusion, the performance of P3HT:ICBA-based cells was effectively improved by doping with the appropriate concentration of a narrow band gap material PBDTTT-C. With the simple strategy of employing a ternary cascade energy structure, the PCE of the PSCs was improved from 1.74% to 3.43% by doping with 3 wt% PBDTTT-C as a complementary electron-donor material. Moreover, the PCE of the ternary cell was further enhanced to 4.38% with a 1 minute 150 °C annealing treatment of the cell. The performance improvement of the ternary PSCs is predominantly attributed to the better exciton dissociation, charge carrier transport and collection. The strategy of employing this ternary blend film can be expanded to other low band gap conducting polymers for high efficiency bulk heterojunction PSCs, which has a far-reaching impact on the industrialization of PSCs due to the facile cell fabrication process.


This work was supported by Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2013JBZ004); National Natural Science Foundation of China (61377029, 21374120); National Natural Foundation of Distinguished Young Scholars of China (61125505); Beijing Natural Science Foundation (2122050) and the State Key Laboratory of Catalysis, CAS (n-11-09).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: J–V characteristic curves of control and ternary PSCs annealed at 150 °C for various times. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cp01411a
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014