 DOI: 10.1039/C1CE05756A
(Paper)
CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 1825-1832

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Minghua
Tang
,

Qiwei
Tian
,

Xianghua
Hu
,

Yanling
Peng
,

Yafang
Xue
,

Zhigang
Chen
*,

Jianmao
Yang
,

Xiaofeng
Xu
* and 

Junqing
Hu
*

State Key Laboratory for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University, Shanghai, 201620, China. E-mail: hu.junqing@dhu.edu.cn; zgchen@dhu.edu.cn

Research Center for Analysis and Measurement, Donghua University, Shanghai, 201620, China

Department of Applied Physics, Donghua University, Shanghai, 201620, China. E-mail: xxf@dhu.edu.cn

Received
21st June 2011
, Accepted 11th November 2011
First published on 9th January 2012
The in situ preparation of semiconductor films on a flexible metal foil has attracted increasing attention for constructing flexible solar cells. In this work, we have developed an in situgrowth strategy for preparing CuInS2 (CIS) films by solvothermally treating flexible Cu foil in an ethylene glycol solution containing InCl3·4H2O and thioacetamide with a concentration ratio of 1:2. The effects of solvothermal temperature, time and concentration on the morphology and phase of the CIS films are investigated. Solvothermal temperature has no obvious effect on the morphology of the final films, but higher temperature is favorable for the growth of CIS films with higher crystallinity. Reactant concentration plays a significant role in controlling the morphology of CIS films; if InCl3·4H2O concentration is relatively low (≤0.042 M), single-layered CIS films can be produced, which are composed of high ordered potato chips shaped nanosheets, otherwise, it prefers to form a double-layered film, for which the lower layer is similar CIS ordered nanosheets while the upper layer is composed of flower shaped superstructures. A possible mechanism of the CIS films is also investigated. UV-vis measurements show that all these CIS films possess a direct bandgap energy of 1.48 eV, appropriate for the absorption of the solar spectrum. Finally, single-layered CIS films on Cu foil were employed for fabricating flexible solar cells with a structure of Cu foil/CuInS2/CdS/i–ZnO/ITO/Ni–Al, and the resulting cells yield a power conversion efficiency of 0.75%. Further improvement of the efficiencies of the solar cells can be expected by optimizing the morphology, structure and composition of the CIS films, as well as the fabrication technique.

The quest and demand for clean and economical energy sources have increased widespread interest in the development of solar applications. In particular, direct conversion of solar energy to electrical energy by using semiconductor photoelectrodes has attracted much attention for many decades. Among various semiconductor materials used in solar cells, CuInS2 (CIS) and related I–III–VI2 chalcopyrite compounds have garnered considerable interest due to their myriad benefits, including large absorption coefficients, adjustable band gap, low toxicity and long-term stability. CIS-based film solar cells have exhibited a confirmed conversion efficiency of about 12.5%, but they are mostly fabricated via a high-cost vacuum-based process such as evaporation and sputtering on Mo coated glass substrates. Sophisticated vacuum-based set-ups and control systems require large capital investment, thereby hindering the emerging CIS-type solar cells from commercial utilization. In addition, the use of glass substrates in solar cells can raise some problems such as inflexibility and fragility, leading to much inconvenience in transport and installation.

To settle these problems, many efforts have been devoted to developing alternative deposition techniques for thin film CIS solar cellsvia non- or low-vacuum processes. They can be roughly divided into two categories depending on precursor types, in which the first approach uses nanoparticle-based precursors and the other uses the solution type precursors. On the one hand, the nanoparticle-based precursors are based on the preparation of CIS and related I–III–VI2 chalcopyrite nanocrystal inks.Nanocrystal inks offer the advantages of dispersibility in organic solvents for printing CIS and related I–III–VI2 chalcopyrite films on inflexible and/or flexible substrates, but a complicated synthesis of nanocrystals is necessary and the presence of organic ligands can leave residues that hurt device performance. On the other hand, the solution type precursors can be used to prepare CIS and related I–III–VI2 chalcopyrite film by spray pyrolysis,electrochemical deposition and direct coating-sintering. Among these deposition techniques, direct coating-sintering method is the most promising for the production of low-cost and high efficiency solar cells. Mitzi et al. utilized hydrazine as the solvent for dissolving metal chalcogenides as “precursor ink”, and then spin-casted onto the Mo coated glass substrate to fabricate Cu(In,Ga)Se2 and CuIn(Se,S)2 based solar cells, yielding a conversion efficiency of 10.3% and 12.2%, respectively. In addition, Moses and Cui developed, respectively, a molecular-based precursor ink with 1-butylamine as a solvent and an easily decomposable vulcanized polymeric ink with pyridine as a solvent to prepare CIS films on a Mo coated glass substrate, and the resulting CIS solar cells exhibited conversion efficiencies of about 4% and 2.15%, respectively. However, although direct coating-sintering method is a very exciting approach, it usually involves environmentally unfriendly solvent (such as hydrazine and pyridine) and a high temperature (250–550 °C) sintering process, which are considered to be an obstacle for the large-scale profitable operation and/or the fabrication of solar cells. Therefore, it is still desirable to develop novel methods to prepare CIS and related I–III–VI2 chalcopyrite films for solar cells.
It is well known that the rigid substrate materials for the solar cells have been limited due to mechanical brittleness and difficult processing, such as silicon, indium tin oxide (ITO) and fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO). The flexible solar cells have the advantages of light weight and foldability, and could be used on the curved surfaces of many buildings and instruments. Therefore, the development of solar cells based on the flexible substrates has become another hot focus following traditional cells. Very early, the flexibilization of silicon solar cells was proposed to reduce their thicknesses for the purpose of the flexible silicon solar arrays. Recently, in spite of a good flexible performance of the polymer substrates for the organic/inorganic hybrid solar cells, there are also worse problems in the practical applications, such as poor thermal stability, low melting point, and weak bonding between the substrates and as-grown materials. Hence, it is still meaningful to explore the solar cells based on flexible substrate materials for their wide applications. In particular, in situ preparation of semiconductor films on flexible metal foils has attracted much attention. For example, different semiconductor films, including TiO2 nanotube or nanowire films on a Ti foil and ZnO nanowire films on a Zn foil, have been successfully obtained for different kinds of solar cells. In addition, some groups also prepared Cu2O nanostructures,Cu(OH)2 and CuO nanoribbon arrays on Cu foils, and our group recently reported the in situ preparation of well-aligned Cu2-xSe nanostructures on Cu foils. Although some chalcogenide semiconductor films have been grown directly on Cu foil or other metal surfaces by a solvothermal route, there are few reports on the preparation of CIS and related I–III–VI2 chalcopyrite films on Cu foils for flexible solar cells.
Herein, we present a simple route for the in situgrowth of CIS thin films on the flexible Cu foil, thereby circumventing a complicated film fabrication process as above mentioned and employing toxic materials, in which the effects of reaction temperature, time and concentration on the morphology and phase of CIS films were carefully investigated. Single-layered and double-layered CIS films are obtained, and the solar cells with the structure of the flexible Cu foil/CuInS2/CdS/i–ZnO/ITO/Ni–Al are fabricated, and the solar cells based on the single-layered structures of CIS films exhibit a conversion efficiency of 0.75%.

All reagents were analytical grade and used without further purification. In a typical synthetic process, 0.6 mmol of thioacetamide was added into 12 mL of ethylene glycol solution containing InCl3·4H2O (0.025 M) under magnetic stirring, forming a clear and colorless solution. The resulting solution was transferred into a Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave with 30 mL capacity. Subsequently, a piece of Cu foil, which had been ultrasonically cleaned in a 3.0 M HCl aqueous solution, ethanol and distilled water for 10 min, respectively, was vertically and partly (∼ 3/4 of the foil length) immersed into the solution. The unsubmerged part of the Cu foil is kept to have a clean surface and act as the anode of the later fabricated solar cell device. Lastly, the autoclave was kept in a fan-forced oven at 180 °C for 16 h. After being air-cooled to room temperature, the CIS film deposited foil was washed with deionized water and absolute ethanol successively, and then dried in air. For comparison, the effects of solvothermal temperature (120–180 °C), reaction time (40 min–16 h), and InCl3·4H2O concentration (0.025–0.083 M) on the CIS films' growth were investigated. The concentration ratio of InCl3·4H2O and thioacetamide was maintained as a constant (1:2) for all the cases.



CIS film solar cells were fabricated as follows. CIS films (0.5 × 0.8 cm2) on the flexible Cu foils (∼ 0.1 cm thickness) were used as the absorber layer. The n-type junction partner CdS (∼ 50 nm thickness) was deposited on the CIS films by using a chemical bath approach, described as follows: the bath solution used in this process was composed of 30 mL of deionized H2O, 6.5 mL of NH4OH solution (25–28 wt%), 5 mL of CdCl2 (0.015 M), and 10 mL of NH2CSNH2 (0.375 M), which are mixed at room temperature. The as-formed bath solution together with the CIS film sample was transferred to a water-heated vessel, which was kept at 80 °C and constantly stirred by a magnetic chuck during the deposition process. After 5 min, the CIS film sample was taken out of the vessel, and washed with deionized water and absolute ethanol, successively. After that, two magnetron sputtering processes were utilized to deposit layers of intrinsic ZnO (∼ 70 nm in thickness) and transparent conductive indium tin oxide (ITO) (∼ 180 nm in thickness), respectively, on the CdS layer. Finally, a Ni (50 nm)/Al (3 μm) dual layer top contact grid was evaporated through a metal mask to facilitate collecting the photogenerated carriers as the cathode in the as-fabricated solar cell device. The resulting solar cell device (total area: ∼ 0.4 cm2) with a structure of Cu foil/CuInS2/CdS/i–ZnO/ITO/Ni–Al was defined by isolating the multilayer film areas via mechanical scribing.


The morphology and phase of CIS films were investigated by using scanning electron microscopy (SEM; Hitachi S-4800) and powder X-ray diffraction (XRD; Rigaku D/max-γ B) with a Cu-Kα radiation source (λ = 1.5418 Å). Structural analysis of the CIS films was carried out using transmission electron microscopy (TEM; JEM-2010F, at 200 kV). The samples for TEM characterization were prepared as follows: a drop of dispersing solution of the CIS material scraped from the Cu foils was placed on a Cu mesh coated with an amorphous carbon film, followed by evaporation of the solvent. An UV-vis spectrophotometer (Lambda 950 Spectrophotometer) was directly used to carry out the optical measurements of CIS films on the flexible Cu foils.

The photocurrent density–voltage curves of the cells were recorded under standard AM 1.5 solar illumination with an intensity of 80 mW cm−2 using a computerized Keithley Model 2400 SourceMeter unit. A 300 W xenon lamp (Newport Oriel) served as the light source.

Using a one-step solvothermal route, we have fabricated a series of in situ grown CIS films on the flexible Cu foil. The effects of the solvothermal temperature, time and reactant concentration on the morphology and phase of the CIS films have been systematically studied as follows.


The CIS films were prepared by treating Cu foils in ethylene glycol solution containing InCl3·4H2O (0.025 M) and thioacetamide (0.050 M) at different temperatures (120, 140, 160, 180 °C) for 16 h. Fig. 1 shows the XRD patterns of the resulting CIS films. Besides those existing peaks from the Cu foil (marked by triangles), the diffraction peaks at 27.8, 46.5 and 55.1° are assigned to (112), (204)/(220) and (312)/(116) planes of the CIS material, respectively, which are consistent with those in the literature and from the JCPDS card (no. 85-1575). This fact confirms that all films prepared at the above temperatures are chalcopyrite CuInS2. With the temperature increasing to 180 °C, the intensities of three main peaks of (112), (204) and (312) planes are significantly strong, suggesting that the CIS films grown at this temperature have higher crystallinity, compared to those grown at 120, 140, and 160 °C, as later revealed by the HRTEM imaging (Fig. 2d). A peak at ∼ 26.2° in the XRD patterns could be attributed to that from Cu9S5 (JCPDS card no 47-1748). It is suggested that with the increase of reaction temperature, a small quantity of Cu9S5 forms, which is also a p-type semiconductor for photovoltaic applications.

The morphologies of the samples prepared at different temperatures were characterized by SEM. Fig. 2 gives the typical morphologies of the CIS films prepared at 120 and 180 °C. When the reaction temperature is 120 °C, a large amount of highly ordered potato chips shaped CIS nanosheet arrays are densely packed and uniformly covered over the entire surface of the Cu foil (Fig. 2a), which should be attributed to Cu foil directly serving as the copper source, thus leading to in situgrowth of CIS nanosheet alignments. A high-magnification SEM image (inset in Fig. 2a) shows that individual nanosheets within this CIS film display a crooked shape with a thickness of ∼50 nm and length of ∼4 μm. These CIS potato chips shaped nanosheets with rough surfaces are assembled and inter-meshed with each other, forming a continuous net-like flat film. It is found that the solvothermal reaction temperature has no significant effect on the morphology of the final films. As the reaction temperature is elevated to 180 °C, keeping the other reaction conditions constant, the net-like film is composed of a great quantity of carpenterworm shaped CIS nanosheet arrays with a little higher density than that grown at 120 °C (Fig. 2b). Each nanosheet is further grown and well aligned in a denser array that is nearly perpendicular to the Cu substrate surface, resulting in uniform and densely aligned net-like film. Simultaneously, some peeled fragments (a substructure of the net-like film) can also be found, as shown in Fig. S1 (see ESI), which further indicates the good quality of these CIS nanosheets with a clear square laminar shape. A cross-sectional SEM image, Fig. 2c, reveals that the CIS film (grown at 180 °C) composed of carpenterworm shaped nanosheets is single-layered with a large grain size and a thickness of ∼1.5 μm. From the HRTEM image (Fig. 2d), the lattice spacing was measured to be ∼3.2 Å, corresponding to the (112) planes of the chalcopyrite CuInS2 crystal, further indicating the well-crystallized single crystals of these nanosheets within the as-grown CIS film.
To further investigate the composition of the CIS film, the energy dispersive X-ray spectroscope (EDX) spectrum (Fig. 3) was obtained from nanosheets scraped from the Cu foil. Only Cu, In and S signal peaks are observed, suggesting that the film consists of the elements of Cu, In and S. Quantitative EDX analysis indicates the atomic ratio of Cu, In and S is 1.6:1:2.2, indicating that the composition of the as-synthesized product is stoichiometric Cu1.6InS2.2. A copper/sulfur-rich CIS film should be attributed to the rapid dissolution, diffusion and reaction (with S) of Cu originating from the Cu foils in ethylene glycol solution at high temperature (180 °C).

The effect of reactant concentration on the morphology and structure of the as-prepared CIS films has been studied by varying the concentration of InCl3·4H2O from 0.025 M to 0.083 M at 180 °C for 16 h, while the concentration ratio of InCl3·4H2O and thioacetamide was kept as a constant of 1:2. It is found that the reactant concentration plays a significant role in the growth of the CIS films. When the concentration of InCl3·4H2O is low (0.025 M), the CIS film is uniform and composed of highly ordered carpenterworm shaped nanosheets (Fig. 2b). As the concentration increases to 0.042 M (Fig. 4a), the entire view of the film is not even and is embedded with some bumps, appearing as micro-scaled hierarchical superstructures with an average diameter of ∼2.6 μm. In fact, each hierarchical superstructure is completely assembled by branched nanoplates, which are relatively smooth and crooked and have an average thickness of ∼120 nm. With the further increase of the concentration to 0.058 M (Fig. 4b), there are numerous ball shaped assemblies on the surface of the flat CIS film. Each ball-like assembly is also a hierarchical micro-scaled superstructure, i.e., it is composed of many two-dimensional vertically standing and closely aligned nanoplates with an average thickness of ∼75 nm. When the concentration is as high as 0.083 M (Fig. 4c), flower shaped architectures with a diameter of 1.5–3 μm were spread over the whole film, whose “petals” are ultrathin with an average thickness of ∼20 nm and aligned perpendicularly to the spherical surface with clearly oriented layers, pointing toward a common center. In addition, many pores with different sizes can be found among spherical superstructures and their “petals”. To further confirm the structure of this sample, a cross-sectional SEM image (Fig. 4d), taken from a fracture of a broken Cu foil, clearly reveals the CIS film is double-layered. The upper layer is made up of many superstructures with flower shaped morphology, aggregating with each other intensely; the lower layer is a similar flat net-like film, where the composed nanosheets partly dissolve into bulks. The whole thickness of the double layers is as high as ∼6.5 μm.


We have also carried out a series of time-dependent experiments to examine a possible growth mechanism of the CIS films, which were prepared by treating Cu foils in ethylene glycol solution containing InCl3·4H2O (0.025 M) and thioacetamide (0.05 M) at 180 °C for different reaction times (2 h, 8 h, and 16 h). It is found that the reaction time shows a significant effect on the thickness, in particular, the density of the ordered nanosheets of the single-layered CIS film on the Cu foil. In a short time (e.g., 2 h), only a small amount of the CIS nanosheets grow loosely on the Cu foil, and the thickness of these nanosheets is estimated to be ∼30 nm (Fig. S2a, see ESI). When the reaction time is increased to 8 h, a great quantity of the CIS nanosheets appear on the Cu foil, and the density of the nanosheets obviously increases (Fig. S2b, see ESI). With the reaction time further increased to 16 h, the thickness and the density of the CIS nanosheets both further increase to a higher degree (Fig. S2c, the nanosheets with a thickness of ∼130 nm).

To further understand the growth mechanism of the double-layered CIS film, a medium concentration of InCl3·4H2O (e.g. 0.05 M) was adopted, since high concentration (such as 0.083 M) will result in a rapid growth and thus it is difficult to observe the intermediate state. Fig. 5 gives the surface morphologies of the CIS films prepared by treating Cu foils in ethylene glycol solution containing InCl3·4H2O (0.05 M) and thioacetamide (0.10 M) at 180 °C for different reaction times. At a short time (40 min, Fig. 5a), the net-like film was produced, but it is composed of many thin nanoplates with an average thickness of ∼15 nm, while each nanoplate intermeshes loosely, leaving many pores on the Cu foil. With further increasing the reaction time to 2 h (Fig. 5b), all nanoplates become thicker (a thickness of ∼85 nm) and denser, coexisting with a lot of nanoparticles on the surface of the nanosheets within the CIS film. 8 h of the solvothermal treatment (Fig. 5c) results in the formation of the flower shaped CIS architectures. When the reaction is further prolonged to 12 h (Fig. 5d), a mass of flower shaped architectures appear on the film, upwardly growing and self-aggregating with each other to form CIS double-layered films; the “petals” of the flower on the upper layer are as thin as ∼20 nm.
On the basis of the above results, a possible mechanism can be proposed for the formation of the CIS films including single-layered and double-layered structures, as shown in Fig. 6. Firstly, since the Cu element on the surface of the Cu foil can be easily oxidized to Cu2+ ions at high temperature while oxygen was simultaneously reduced, Cu2+ ions are released from the Cu foil into the solution. Then, these Cu2+ ions are reduced to Cu+ ions by ethylene glycol, which acts both as the reaction solvent and reductant (4Cu2+ + HO–CH2–CH2–OH → 4Cu+ + 4H+ + CHO–CHO). It has been revealed that thioacetamide can react with water to release H2S (CH3CSNH2 + H2O → CH3CONH2 + H2S), and then H2S decomposes to give S2− ions at the proceeding temperature (180 °C) (H2S → 2H+ + S2−). Herein, the existence of trace water contained in ethylene glycol and the crystal water (originating from InCl3·4H2O) is believed to be necessary and plays an important role in the formation of S2− ions. Subsequently, with a continuous supply of Cu+ from the substrate, S2− from thioacetamide, and In3+ from InCl3·4H2O, CIS nucleation occurs via a heterogeneous process and then in situgrowth carries out on the Cu foil (Cu+ + In3+ + S2− → CuInS2). In this growth process, a high density of CIS nuclei would lead to the concurrent growth of a large number of CIS nanosheets, resulting in the congested growth of the CIS nanosheets. The overcrowding effect would confine the propagation of these nanosheets predominantly in the vertical direction, forming a single-layered CIS film on the Cu foil. If the concentrations of InCl3·4H2O (≥ 0.05 M) and thioacetamide (≥ 0.1 M) are both high enough, with a large and continuous supply of Cu+, S2−, and In3+ in the solution, meanwhile, a homogeneous nucleation process goes on in the solution, and then the homogeneous nuclei grow into individual flower shaped architectures by Ostwald ripening process and self-assembling process. Some of these flower shaped architectures deposit on the earlier formed layer of ordered potato chips shaped nanosheets, forming a double-layered structure on the Cu foil. The fact that the above heterogeneous process happening on the Cu foil and the homogeneous process happening in the solution are due to the growth of the CIS films on Cu foil has been also confirmed in Fig. S3 (see ESI), in which both copper and non copper substrates (e.g., silicon wafer) are used as substrates for the CIS material growth upon the same experimental conditions. Of course, a double-layered film consisting of a lower layer of uniform ordered potato chips shaped nanosheets and an upper layer of the flower shaped superstructures form on the Cu foil, while only a few of the flower shaped superstructures instead of the double-layered films scatters and deposits on the Si wafer.

The optical absorption of all CIS films was measured by an UV-vis spectrometer, and their absorptions show similar spectra. Fig. 7 shows a typical diffuse reflection spectrum of single-layered CIS films obtained by treating Cu foils in ethylene glycol solution containing InCl3·4H2O (0.025 M) and thioacetamide (0.050 M) at 180 °C for 16 h in the autoclave. The sample presents a strong adsorption within a broad range between 400 and 800 nm, which is the characteristic absorption of the CIS material and consistent with the black color of the grown CIS film. Since CIS is a direct transition semiconductor, its absorption coefficient (α) and bang-gap (Eg) satisfy the equation:

(αhv)2 = A(hv − Eg)
(1)
The band gap (Eg) is obtained by extrapolation of the plot of (αhν)2vs. (hv) and is determined to be 1.48 eV, as shown in the inset of Fig.7. This band gap is very similar to that of the bulk CIS material and also appropriate for the absorption of the solar spectrum.
To clarify the potential of such an in situgrowth of the CIS films as a real low-cost and facile technology for a large scale operation, a larger area of Cu foil (1.5 × 6.5 cm2) was used to be directly coated by the CIS films. Fig. 8a and 8b give the comparable photographs before and after in situgrowth of the CIS film on the flexible Cu foil. One can find that the Cu foil and the resulting film both have an excellent flexibility. We have examined the stability (or adhered force) of the CIS films on the Cu foil during/after the bending process. No CIS material was observed to fall off from the films during the bending process, and no obvious cracks were found to form inside the CIS film after the bending, as shown in Fig. S4b (Fig. S4a showing the film before the bending). These results suggest that after the bending the grown CIS films still have a good stability or a considerably strong adhered force on the Cu foil, which should be attributed to the fact that the Cu foil not only acts as one of the source materials but also directly serves as the substrate, resulting in in situgrowth of the CIS nanosheet alignments. Subsequently, single-layered (thickness: ∼1.5 μm) and double-layered (thickness: ∼6.5 μm) CIS films were used to fabricate the flexible solar cells with a structure of Cu foil/CuInS2/CdS/i–ZnO/ITO/Ni–Al, as shown in Fig. 8c. During the fabrication process, CIS films (0.5 × 0.8 cm2) on the flexible Cu foils (∼0.1 cm thickness) were used as the absorber layer. Firstly, the n-type junction partner CdS (∼50 nm thickness) was deposited on CIS film by using a chemical bath approach. Secondly, two magnetron sputtering processes were utilized to deposit layers of intrinsic ZnO (∼70 nm in thickness) and transparent conductive indium tin oxide (ITO) (∼180 nm in thickness), respectively, on the CdS layer. Finally, a Ni (50 nm)/Al (3 μm) dual layer top contact grid was evaporated through a metal mask to facilitate collecting the photogenerated carriers as the cathode in an as-fabricated solar cell device. The resulting solar cell device (total area: ∼0.4 cm2) with a structure of Cu foil/CuInS2/CdS/i–ZnO/ITO/Ni–Al was defined by isolating the multilayer film areas via mechanical scribing.
Photocurrent density–voltage characteristics of the resulting solar cells were measured under standard AM 1.5 solar illumination with an intensity of 80 mW cm−2, as shown in Fig. 9. The solar cell based on single-layered CIS film exhibits open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 268 mV, short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 4.00 mA cm−2, fill factor (FF) of 0.56, yielding an overall solar-to-electric energy conversion efficiency (η) of 0.75%. But, the conversion efficiency from the solar cell based on double-layered CIS film is 0.33%, which is relatively low compared with that of the single-layered one. It should be noted that both conversation efficiencies of the as-fabricated solar cells are relatively not high, which should be mainly attributed to the following reasons. Firstly, it is well known that an important morphological feature for the high-efficiency film solar cells is that the film should be composed of large densely packed grains. In our cases, there are a plenty of grain boundaries and pores in both the single-layered and especially the double-layered CIS films, which are composed of small aligned nanoplates, leading to serious recombination and a reduction in the conversion efficiency. Secondly, the CIS films with copper-poor composition are desired for the high efficiency film solar cells, because an excess of copper has been revealed to lead to the formation of binary and/or ternary phases of copper chalcogenide, resulting in a poorer photoelectrical conversion performance. Thus, our CIS films with copper-rich composition result in relatively low conversion efficiencies. What's more, the fabrication technique (e.g., depositing n-type junction partner CdS layer using a chemical bath approach, depositing ZnO and ITO layers by magnetron sputtering processes, and constructing the cathode of a Ni/Al dual layer via an evaporation method) of the solar cell devices as a key factor determining the conversion efficiency needs to be improved, especially for such an in situgrowth of CIS thin films on the flexible Cu foil. Therefore, further improvement of the conversion efficiency of the flexible solar cells based on the as-grown CIS films can be expected by optimizing the morphology, structure and composition of the CIS films, as well as the device fabrication technique.

In summary, an in situgrowth of CIS films has been demonstrated by solvothermally treating flexible Cu foils in ethylene glycol solution containing InCl3·4H2O and thioacetamide. Solvothermal temperature has an obvious effect on the crystallinity of the final films, while reactant concentrations play a significant role in the morphology of the CIS films. By tuning the concentration of InCl3·4H2O and thioacetamide, single-layered (thickness: ∼ 1.5 μm) and double-layered (thickness: ∼ 6.5 μm) CIS films on flexible Cu foil are both obtained, respectively. All the CIS films exhibit a direct bandgap energy of 1.48 eV, which is appropriate for the absorption of solar spectrum. Flexible solar cells based on single-layered and double-layered CIS films have been constructed, and they exhibit a power conversion efficiency of 0.75% and 0.33%, respectively. Further improvement of the conversion efficiency of the flexible solar cells based on the as-grown CIS films can be expected by optimizing the morphology, structure and composition of the CIS films, as well as the device fabrication technique.


This work was supported from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant no. 21171035, 50872020 and 50902021), the Program for New Century Excellent Talents of the University in China, the “Pujiang” Program of Shanghai Education Commission (Grant no. 09PJ1400500), the “Dawn” Program of the Shanghai Education Commission (Grant no. 08SG32), the Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai-based “Innovation Action Plan” Project (Grant no. 10JC1400100), the “Chen Guang” project (Grant no. 09CG27) supported by the Shanghai Municipal Education Commission and Shanghai Education Development Foundation, the Program for the Specially Appointed Professor by Donghua University (Shanghai, P.R. China), the Shanghai Leading Academic Discipline Project (Grant no. B603), and the Program of Introducing Talents of Discipline to Universities (no. 111-2-04).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ce05756a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012