 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA13875E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2174-2186


Sai-Anand
Gopalan
,

Min-Ho
Seo
,

Gopalan
Anantha-Iyengar
,

Baoyin
Han
,

Sang-Won
Lee
,

Dae-Hyuk
Kwon
,

Seung-Ha
Lee
 and 

Shin-Won
Kang
*

School of Electronics Engineering, College of IT Engineering, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 702-701, South Korea. E-mail: swkang@knu.ac.kr; Tel: +82-53-950-6829 Tel: +82-53-950-8609

Research Institute of Advanced Energy Technology, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 702-701, South Korea

Department of Electronics Engineering, Kyungil University, Gyeongsan 712-702, South Korea

Department of Biomedical Engineering, Dankook University, Chungnam 330-714, South Korea

Received
26th September 2013
, Accepted 14th November 2013
First published on 15th November 2013
In this paper, we demonstrate a facile, mild wetting (short residence time) poor solvent [isopropyl alcohol (IPA)] treatment, carried out on the top surface of a spin-cast poly (3-hexylthiopene) (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) blend film, in order to fabricate high-performance polymer solar cells (PSCs). This method utilizes the hydrophilic and polar/hydrogen bonding interactions of IPA with the blend components (P3HT and PCBM). The photovoltaic (PV) performance of the fabricated PSCs was optimized by utilizing a preheated IPA wetting treatment and devices fabricated with the configuration: ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/M-IPA-T°/Al (T°: 25 °C/45 °C/65 °C/85 °C) (where “M” stands for modified IPA and “T” signifies the temperature used for the IPA wetting). Our investigation encompasses electrical, optical, crystalline, and morphological studies on the P3HT:PCBM blend films ,modified by preheated IPA, to elucidate the associated enhancements in the PV characteristics and performance. The device fabricated with IPA-85 °C (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/M-IPA-85 °C/Al) exhibited the best power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.51%, with an open circuit voltage of 0.65 V, a fill factor of 0.52, and a short-circuit current density of 10.20 mA cm−2. In contrast, the non-modified blend film device showed a PCE of only ∼3.04%. Ultraviolet-visible absorption studies and X-ray diffraction results suggest that the use of the pre-heated mild-wetting IPA treatment improves the crystallinity and self-organization of the blend layer. We rationalize our findings based on the interactions between IPA and the blend components, due to its high polar and hydrogen bonding Hansen solubility parameters to impart supramolecular assembly of P3HT chains during the blend film formation. This is the first report demonstrating that the poor solvent (IPA) can induce an optimal phase separation in a P3HT:PCBM blend through our proposed mild wetting preheated treatment, toward achieving high-performance PSCs.

Polymer-based photovoltaic systems, which can be solution-processed in the form of bulk heterojunction (BHJ) configurations, show great promise for fabricating low-cost, lightweight, large-area, and mechanically flexible organic energy conversion devices. BHJ polymer solar cells (PSCs) based on conjugated polymer (CP)/fullerene-type donor/acceptor (D/A) blends show good potential for achieving photovoltaic power conversion efficiency (PCE). Research activities have thus been intensively focused on BHJ PSCs, in order to modulate their optoelectronic properties, including light harvesting ability and energy level alignments. New low band gap CP based donor materials have been synthesized in order to extend the light absorption to over ∼900 nm and fabricate PSCs with PCE over ∼6%. A number of fullerene derivatives with different lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels have been reported for use as acceptors, in an effort to realize high performance BHJ solar cells. Among the fullerene derivatives, [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) has proven to be an ideal n-type acceptor material owing to its advantages, such as good solubility, high electron mobility and high electron affinity. Thus, there has been remarkable progress in the field of PSCs with the best certified PCE of 10.6% achieved for tandem solar cells.

One of the most actively investigated D/A blend systems in a BHJ is composed of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and PCBM. This blend provides a moderate PCE of ∼5% with an 85% internal quantum efficiency. This is primarily due to the unique properties of P3HT, which include a high degree of crystallinity, high hole mobility in the regioregular state (10−4 to 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1), extended absorption in the red region (∼650 nm), and good environmental stability. It has been reported that the PV characteristics of P3HT:PCBM BHJ solar cells critically depend on the three dimensional (3D) self-organized micro/nanostructure of the active layer in the cell configuration, the crystallinity of the domains formed in the photoactive blend film and the material miscibility. Parameters, such as the boiling point (bp) of the solvent used for blend film formation, post-deposition processing and polymer solubility have been reported to influence the morphology of the blend film. To control/modify the morphology of the photoactive layer, strategies such as slow growth, solvent vapor annealing (SVA), thermal annealing and the use of a co-solvent in the blend film casting have been utilized.
SVA is a versatile method for tuning the morphology of the blend layer. Typically, in the SVA approach, the blend film is exposed to a saturated atmosphere of solvent vapor. SVA can improve nanoscale BHJ morphology by promoting polymer self-organization via control over the evaporation rate of the residual solvent. However, it is difficult to deduce a quantitative correlation between the solvent-annealing conditions and the phase-separation of the active layer. Three important issues are considered with regard to the use of solvents in a blend film preparation. Firstly, good solvents can make P3HT and PCBM molecules more mobile than poor and non-solvents. Secondly, the molecular orientation and crystallinity of the blend film is dependent on the solubility of the blend components in the solvents. Thirdly, the bp of the chosen solvent mainly determines the crystallinity of the P3HT. High-boiling-point solvents provide enough time for P3HT crystallization and they facilitate a crystalline growth. Generally, chlorinated solvents (chlorobenzene variants) are preferred over non-chlorinated solvents (such as xylene and toluene) for PCBM, owing to its good solubility in those types of solvents for blend film formation. The effects of solvent mixtures/additives on the fabrication of BHJ PSCs have also been investigated. The solvent molecules diffuse into the deposited film layer, and the extent of diffusion is dependent on the solvent solubility, exposure time, and temperature. The solvent imparts an increased molecular mobility to the BHJ components, allowing the system to evolve toward a more thermodynamically stable morphology. Researchers have reported different morphologies for blend films that depend on the solubility of the blend components in the solvent and the consequent phase-separation process. It is difficult to effectively control both the P3HT crystallization and PCBM diffusion in order to ensure both the presence of bicontinuous pathways for efficient charge carriers and an appropriate interfacial area.
Two distinct stages in the active layer formation decide the PCE of solar cells: (i) the blend film casting and (ii) post (thermal) treatment. For the blend film casting stage, the basic concept is to choose a fast drying solvent in order to prevent droplets from re-dissolving into the D/A sublayers, but also one that is slow enough to allow for the fabrication of a homogeneous and pin-hole-free film. In the blend film casting stage, mixtures of good solvents and non-solvents have been tried, in which the non-solvent has a higher bp than the good solvent. This combination induces the formation of aggregates of P3HT during the solvent evaporation process. In all, a properly selected SVA process with an appropriate solvent and post-thermal treatment of the active layer is desirable for a better nanophase separation that results in improved PV characteristics.
In this study, we focused our attention on developing a different strategy to influence the microstructural and photovoltaic properties of the modified blend layer. Our new SVA approach involves the combination of the following: (i) a mild wetting treatment using a volatile poor solvent, which can however have molecular-level interactions with the blend components, on the top surface of the blend film; and (ii) controlling the percolation of the poor solvent into the blend layer by the preheating of the solvent. We chose isopropyl alcohol (IPA) as the poor solvent (solubility less than 0.1 mg mL−1 for both P3HT and PCBM); however it also has adequate Hansen solubility parameters (HSPs) for hydrogen bonding and polar interactions with the components in the P3HT:PCBM blend. The poor solvent (IPA) was able to percolate into the blend layer through mild wetting with the preheated solvent. To the best of our knowledge, there are no reports on the preheated (25 °C/45 °C/65 °C/85 °C) mild wetting treatment of IPA on the P3HT:PCBM surface for PSCs fabrication. We demonstrate a systematic approach to tuning the PV parameters by modifying the P3HT:PCBM blend film characteristics by utilizing a preheated a mild-wetting treatment with a volatile poor solvent (short residence time, 7–10 s). It is thought that the IPA, with a low-boiling point of ∼82.6 °C and adequate HSPs (polar and hydrogen bonding), can influence the morphology of a P3HT:PCBM blend film. A pictorial representation of the plausible microstructural changes due to mild wetting with IPA is shown in Scheme 1. We hypothesize that the mild wetting of a preformed P3HT:PCBM film with IPA can primarily lead to the adsorption of IPA molecules into the blend surface through its micro/nanopores (Scheme 1(a)). The penetration or diffusion of IPA into the blend film and the probable polar and hydrogen bonding interactions between the IPA molecules and PCBM can lead to microcrystalline modifications in the blend film (Scheme 1(b)). The diffused IPA molecules, which form hydrogen bonds with the –COOH group in the PCBM (PCBM-IPA complexes), migrate to permit a supramolecular re-ordering of the P3HT chains at the nanoscale (Scheme 1(b)). The penetration/diffusion rate of the IPA into the blend film was controlled by wetting the blend layer with preheated IPA at various temperatures (25 °C, 45 °C, 65 °C, 85 °C). The subsequent thermal annealing at 150 °C, a temperature considerably above the bp of IPA, resulted in a stable, reorganized blend film with modified bicontinuous pathways for P3HT and PCBM (Scheme 1(c)). This is the first demonstration of the effective tuning of the morphology and micro/nanostructure of a P3HT:PCBM film by a mild wetting treatment using preheated IPA. We also emphasize that our approach is substantially different from other phase-separation studies in which the morphology was controlled merely by independent solvent/co-solvents at the photoactive film casting stage, or by other thermal treatments.
Briefly, in this study, we introduce a facile and effective approach involving preheated IPA (25 °C, 45 °C, 65 °C, 85 °C) exposure on preformed P3HT:PCBM blend layers to generate modified P3HT:PCBM films (designated as P3HT:PCBM (M-IPA-T°)), where “T” stands for the temperature of the preheated IPA. Furthermore, we systematically evaluated the effect of IPA treatment on the electrical and optical properties, crystalline, and morphological variations of the P3HT:PCBM film, as well as on the PV characteristics of the fabricated PSCs.

P3HT (molecular weight, Mw = 45000 g mol−1) and PCBM (Mw = 840.75 g mol−1) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and American Dye Sources, Inc., respectively. Both materials were used without further purification. The PEDOT:PSS stock was obtained from Clevios PH 500, H. C. Starck, Inc. and was used as received. O-Dichlorobenzene (DCB) and IPA were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and were used as purchased.


The various stages in the device fabrication are detailed in Scheme 2. Prior to the device fabrication, patterned indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates (∼190 nm) with a sheet resistance of 20 Ω m−2 were cleaned with acetone, methanol, and deionized water for ∼2 min each (Scheme 2(a) and (b)). The substrates were then dried under a nitrogen flow and subsequently annealed in an air atmosphere at 150 °C for 10 min. The PSCs were fabricated by adopting a part of the procedure mentioned elsewhere by our research group. PEDOT:PSS (applied using a 45 μm PVDF pore filter) was utilized as a hole transport layer over the ITO substrates. For the fabrication of the BHJ PSCs, P3HT was used as a donor and PC70BM was used as an acceptor. A thin layer of PEDOT:PSS (∼40 nm) was first spin-coated onto the ITO surface and then soft-baked at 150° for 10 min (Scheme 2(c)). A mixture of P3HT (15 mg mL−1) and PCBM (15 mg mL−1) was dissolved in DCB in a concentration of 30 mg mL−1 and stirred overnight at 45 °C to maximize the mixing ratio of the two components. The blend solution was spin-coated atop the PEDOT:PSS layer, to provide an active layer with a thickness of ∼140 nm (Scheme 2(d)). The details of the blend film modified by a mild wetting IPA treatment are described in Section 2.3.


Layers of PEDOT:PSS and P3HT:PCBM were sequentially coated onto the ITO surface as described in Section 2.2. Then, the blend film was subjected to mild wetting with preheated IPA (25 °C, 45 °C, 65 °C, 85 °C). Typically, a calculated volume of preheated IPA was treated on the P3HT:PCBM surface with a glass pipette, and the mild treated blend film was kept for a short residence time (∼7–10 s) (Scheme 2(e)), followed by side etching with acetone (Scheme 2(f)) before the device fabrication was completed by the thermal deposition of an Al layer (∼150 nm) in a vacuum chamber with a base pressure of 10−6 torr (Scheme 2(g)). Finally, the post-annealing was performed at 150 °C for 10 min to improve the interfacial contact between the modified active layer and the Al cathode. Thus, we fabricated PSCs with the configuration; ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/M-IPA-T°/Al, where “T” signifies the temperature (25 °C, 45 °C, 65 °C, 85 °C) of the IPA used for the exposure.

For comparative purposes, a pristine device with the configuration ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al was also fabricated. The active area of the fabricated device, as defined by the shadow mask, was 9 mm2.

The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the PV cells were measured using a source meter (Keithley 2400) with a solar simulator (XES-301S, San-ei Electric Corp) equipped with a xenon arc lamp under an air mass (AM) of 1.5 G solar-simulated light irradiation of 100 mW cm−2. The incident-photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were measured using a QE/IPCE measuring kit (Newport Corporation). The intensity was adjusted before the measurement by using a calibrated Si reference cell (Fraunhofer ISE) for 1 sunlight intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (Scheme 2(h)). All the PV performance parameters were evaluated under ambient conditions.

For the thin film characterization, modified blend films prepared on the top of a dried active layer were subjected to ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption measurements and atomic force microscopy (AFM). The UV-vis absorption measurements were carried out using a UV-vis spectrophotometer (Shimadzu Corp.). The surface morphological changes of the modified blend films and crystallinity of the photoactive layer before and after IPA wetting were inspected by AFM (Multi-Mode Nanoscope, Vecco Dimension 3100, Inc) in the tapping mode, using the tips with a force constant of 0.5–9.5 N m−1. For Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction (XRD) characterizations, the modified blend was spin-cast on a Si substrate. The FTIR spectroscopy measurements were carried out using an FTIR spectrophotometer (PerkinElmer), and XRD patterns were obtained using an X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku).

The present study involved the modification of P3HT:PCBM films through preheated (25 °C, 45 °C, 65 °C, 85 °C) exposure of IPA on the top surface of a preformed P3HT:PCBM blend layer for a short residence time to probe the changes in the morphology, depth profile, and crystallization characteristics of the blend layer, as well as the corresponding performance improvements in the PCE of the fabricated devices (discussed in the forthcoming sections).

The solubility of a solvent is a critical parameter for influencing the conformation and statistical distribution of the polymer chains (P3HT in our case) in the blend film. The solubility of the mainly used processing solvents that are considered “good” follows the order DCB > chloroform > ortho-xylene > toluene, for both P3HT and PCBM. Further, PCBM is relatively more soluble (at least two times) in the above solvents, as compared to P3HT. Generally, aromatic solvents show a good solubility for PCBM over other solvents. However, the solubility of IPA toward P3HT (<0.1 mg mL−1) and PCBM (<0.1 mg mL−1) is very low as compared to good solvents such as DCB (∼15 mg mL−1 and ∼180 mg mL−1, respectively). One should not disregard the role of a non-solvent/poor solvent in influencing the morphological variations in the blend film. An interesting study revealed that P3HT chains are transformed from a random-coil conformation to a more ordered aggregated conformation in the presence of acetonitrile. Thus, P3HT chains, which lack any inherent tendency to from supramolecular ordering when modified with a good solvent, can be induced to have ordered structural confrontations in the presence of acetonitrile. In addition to the solvent–solute interactions, the kinetic parameters associated with the casting process can also impact on the molecular ordering, thin-film morphology and resultant P3HT charge transport characteristics. In one another report, the P3HT was processed with a combination of a good solvent (chloroform, bp: ∼61 °C) and a non-solvent (acetone, bp: ∼56 °C). The same report emphasized that the use of a low boiling non-solvent has no impact on the structure and morphology of the P3HT film. However, this investigation demonstrated that the use of the preheated poor solvent, IPA atop the P3HT:PCBM surface induced distinct morphological changes in the blend film through the possible re-organization of the pre-formed blend layer cast by using a good solvent, DCB.
An important factor that is useful to understand the polymer–solvent interaction is the total solubility parameter (∂), which in turn can be explained in terms of the cohesive energy density (E/V), the energy required to infinitely separate a unit volume of given species from its neighbours. The (∂) can be described by three contributions of HSPs, namely the dispersive (non-polar) (∂d), the polar (∂p) and the hydrogen (H) bonding (∂h) solubility parameters
where
E is the cohesion energy or sum of the evaporation enthalpies and V is the molar volume. The polymer–solvent interaction leading to polymer dissolution can be interpreted in terms of the interaction radius (Ro) which determines the radius of the sphere in the Hansen space. Typically, solvents falling within Ro dissolve the polymer, while the solvents outside the Ro are considered to be poor solvents for the polymer. The center of the Hansen sphere is fixed in terms of the HSPs (∂d, ∂p and ∂h) of the polymer. The ∂d, ∂p and ∂h of P3HT are 19.45 MPa1/2, 3.97 MPa1/2 and 4.19 MPa1/2, respectively. The distance between the polymer (P3HT) and solvent (IPA), HSPs is defined as Ra through the following equation:
Ra2 = 4(∂D1 − ∂D2)2 + (∂P1 − ∂P2)2 + (∂H1 − ∂H2)2
where the subscripts 1 and 2 represent P3HT and IPA, respectively. The relative energy difference (RED) (
Ra/Ro) gives an estimate of whether the P3HT and IPA are miscible or not. If the RED < 1, the IPA and P3HT are miscible, partially miscible when RED = 1, and non-miscible when RED > 1. Substituting, the values of the Hansen parameters for P3HT and IPA and knowing Ro = 4.20 MPa1/2, the RED for the P3HT:IPA pair was calculated to be 3.42. The higher RED value for the P3HT:IPA pair signified that IPA is a poor solvent for P3HT. IPA can therefore be regarded as a “poor solvent” for both PCBM and P3HT. The choice of IPA in this study is also based on the dispersion, polarity, and hydrophilic interactions of the P3HT chains or PCBM with IPA. The HSPs of IPA for the ∂d, ∂p and ∂h are 15.8 MPa1/2, 6.1 MPa1/2, and 16.4 MPa1/2, respectively. The ∂d, ∂p and ∂h values of DCB are 19.2 MPa1/2, 6.3 MPa1/2 and 3.3 MPa1/2, respectively. Thus, DCB, with its high dispersion contribution, has good dispersive interactions with the P3HT:PCBM blend components. On the contrary, the polar and hydrogen bonding interactions of DCB are comparatively lower than those of IPA. Hence, we presume that IPA with a higher hydrogen bonding and polar contributions can unfold the P3HT chains through respective interactions with P3HT and PCBM and can influence the morphology of the blend. It has earlier been demonstrated that an additive containing hydroxyl groups interacts with the hydrophilic part of the polymer chains and influences the phase separation. We envision that IPA molecules can have hydrogen bonding interactions with the carboxyl groups in the PCBM.

Considering the poor solubility of P3HT and PCBM in IPA and the hydrogen bonding interactions, we envision the sequence of changes that are expected in the blend film upon mild wetting with IPA; these are depicted in Scheme 1. First, the micro/nanopores in the spin-cast P3HT:PCBM layer can adsorb IPA (Scheme 1(a)) and the adsorbed IPA molecules percolate/diffuse into the blend film. The percolation/diffusion rate of IPA changes in accordance with the temperature of the preheated IPA, and hence, the percolation/diffusion of IPA into the blend layer occurred differently and caused microstructural modifications depending on the temperature of IPA. IPA is hydrophilic and contains –OH groups. The hydrogen bonding interactions between the carboxyl groups of PCBM and –OH groups in IPA results in complexation as the IPA molecules migrates by diffusion into the blend film (Scheme 1(b)). Hence, the associated PCBM molecules bind to IPA in the form of PCBM:IPA complex, separate from P3HT chains. The free P3HT chains undergo a supramolecular self organization, which can cause an increase in the crystallinity of the film (Scheme 1(b)). Besides, the modification in the crystallinity of the blend film, can induce changes in the interfacial grain boundaries. Furthermore, thermal annealing at 150 °C, a temperature much above the bp of IPA (∼82.6 °C) allowed the complete evaporation of the IPA molecules from the modified blend film and resulted in a more stable microstructural conformation and crystallinity for the blend components (Scheme 1(c)). During these processes, IPA molecules could interact with the PCBM through hydrophilic and hydrogen bonding interactions, to result in a stabilized microcrysalline arrangement (Scheme 1). Our results from UV-vis, XRD, AFM, and FTIR spectroscopic studies on the P3HT:PCBM films clearly revealed that the morphology, crystallinity, structure, and light absorption of the blend were influenced by the pre-heated IPA treatment atop the photoactive blend layer (discussions are presented under relevant subheadings).

Devices were fabricated with the configuration: ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/M-IPA-T°/Al (T°: 25 °C, 45 °C, 65 °C, 85 °C), and the PCE of the devices were evaluated by current density–voltage (J–V) measurements. Fig. 1 shows the J–V characteristics of the ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/M-IPA-T° (25 °C, 45 °C, 65 °C, 85 °C)/Al along with those of the pristine (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al) device. Table 1 summarizes the typical device parameters of the solar cells investigated in this study. The important PCE parameters such as open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), series resistance (Rs), and fill-factor (FF) are listed in Table 1. A close perusal of Fig. 1 and Table 1 clearly informs that the device performance depends on the temperature of the IPA used for the mild-wetting treatment on the surface of the P3HT:PCBM blend. The pristine device (without IPA modification) showed Voc, FF, and Jsc values of 0.64 V, 0.53, and 8.86 mA cm−2, respectively, with an overall PCE of 3.04%. In contrast to the pristine cell, the devices with the P3HT:PCBM film modified by the mild wetting strategy (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/M-IPA-T°(T°:25 °C, 45°C, 65 °C, 85 °C)/Al) clearly outperformed its pristine counterpart (as-cast P3HT:PCBM film) and showed much higher Jsc values. The increase in the overall PCE for the (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/M-IPA-T° (25 °C, 45 °C, 65 °C, 85 °C)/Al) is mainly due to the increase in Jsc from 8.86 mA cm−2 (for pristine) to 10.20 mA cm−2 (for ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/M-IPA-85°/Al) and a decrease in Rs that in turn results in a slightly improved FF. In this study, the IPA-modified device showed a marginal enhancement in Voc in comparison to the pristine device, as for BHJ PSCs, Voc depends on the energy difference between the HOMO edge of the donor and LUMO level of the acceptor.

Devices
Temperature (°C)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

R
S (Ω)
FF
PCE (%)

a PP:PEDOT:PSS.
b P3P:P3HT:PCBM.
c M-IPA: Modified IPA.
d Temperature used for mild wetting IPA.

ITO/PP/P3P/Al (Pristine)
—
0.64
8.86
175
0.53
3.04
ITO/PP/P3P/M-IPA-25 °C/Al
25
0.64
9.30
155
0.53
3.22
ITO/PP/P3P/M-IPA-45 °C/Al
45
0.65
9.49
131
0.54
3.37
ITO/PP/P3P/M-IPA-65 °C/Al
65
0.65
9.52
122
0.55
3.41
ITO/PP/P3P/M-IPA-85 °C/Al
85
0.65
10.20
119
0.52
3.51
The increased Jsc values for ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/M-IPA-T° (25 °C, 45 °C, 65 °C, 85 °C)/Al can be attributed to the balanced charge transport/collection at the respective electrodes because of the microstructural modifications induced by IPA. A similar increase in Jsc has been witnessed for PSCs with a solvent/co-solvent incorporated atop/inside the blend layer. The increase in Jsc is attributed to the enhanced mobility of the polymer chains, leading to the formation of well-ordered molecular structures through a better self-organization and phase separation. The balanced charge transport and bulk resistance of PSCs are the two important factors that could minimize the charge recombination and influence the PCE. A decrease in Rs value from 175 Ω for the pristine P3HT:PCBM cell to 119 Ω for the ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/M-IPA-85°/Al-based device was noticed. Rs reflects the ohmic loss for the overall device resistance that may originate from a combination of metal-organic interfaces and charge transfer at the interface. The lower Rs values arise from the less interrupted pathways for better charge transport in the modified blend layer (Table 1). Thus, the overall enhancement in the PCE for ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/M-IPA-T° (25 °C, 45 °C, 65 °C, 85 °C)/Al is attributed to the increase in Jsc, decrease in Rs and a marginal enhancement in Voc and FF (Table 1). Particularly, the ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/M-IPA-85 °C/Al device exhibited the best PCE of 3.51% with a Jsc of 10.20 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.65 V, and a FF of 0.52, whereas the device without IPA modification showed only an overall PCE of only ∼3.04%.
To understand the origin of Jsc enhancement in the (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/M-IPA-25 °C/85 °C)/Al devices and to verify the photo J–V measurements, the incident-photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the devices under an illumination of AM 1.5 were recorded (Fig. 2). The IPCE spectra obtained for IPA-modified blend films were broad in the wide spectrum range (360 nm–700 nm) (Fig. 2). As inferred from the J–V characteristics (Fig. 1), the ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/M-IPA-85 °C/Al device exhibited superior IPCE values over a wide wavelength range than the pristine device (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al). The ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/M-IPA-25 °C/Al and ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/M-IPA-85 °C/Al devices exhibited maximum IPCE values of 49% and 53%, respectively. The Jsc values calculated from the integration of IPCE curves agree well (<5%) with the experimental data measured from the J–V characteristics. The increase in Jsc upon IPA modification at 85 °C is attributed to the improved ability to adsorb photons and possible change in the crystallinity of the blend film. The latter was witnessed from our XRD results on IPA-modified blend films (discussed in one of the later sub-sections of this paper).

Fig. 3 shows the photovoltaic characteristics, such as Voc (V), Jsc (mA cm−2), Rs (Ω), and FF of the devices as a function of the temperature used for the IPA treatment. The ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/M-IPA-85 °C/Al device showed improved PV parameters and a best PCE of 3.51%. Table 2 compares the representative P3HT:PCBM based BHJ solar cells subjected to SVA treatment, depending on the solvent type. We achieved a comparatively higher PCE (3.51%) for the PV devices with our proposed mild wetting preheated IPA treatment on the blend layer. Importantly, the present study indicates that a poor solvent such as IPA could be utilized for tuning the PCE of BHJ solar cells. We believe that the improved PV characteristics for the devices are to the result of improved light absorption, molecular level interactions between IPA and the blend components and better interpenetrated morphology/reorganization of the crystalline domains of the P3HT chains, which allow for more balanced charge transport.
Solvent
Type
PCE (%)
Reference
Ethanol
Good solvent
3.25

41

Acetone
Non-solvent
3.29

44

Methylene chloride
Marginal solvent
3.27

44

Acetonitrile
Non-solvent
3.01

64

Carbon disulfide
Good solvent
3.46

93

Isopropyl alcohol
Poor solvent
3.51
Present work

UV-vis spectra (Fig. 4) of the as-spun P3HT:PCBM, IPA-modified (25 °C or 85 °C) blend film, and their corresponding thermally annealed (150 °C) blend films were examined to investigate the effect of mild preheated IPA treatment on the optical properties of the P3HT:PCBM blend films. In general, the P3HT:PCBM blend exhibits absorption peaks in the wavelength region of 330–650 nm. For the untreated P3HT:PCBM film (pristine), the UV-vis spectrum exhibited a strong absorption peak at 472 nm and two other weak shoulders at ∼560 nm and ∼610 nm. The shoulders in the spectrum indicate the crystallinity of the P3HT:PCBM blend film. Specifically, the vibronic shoulder at 610 nm is attributed to the interchain interactions of the π–π* stacking structure of P3HT. After the modification of the blend layer by IPA, the absorbances corresponding to all peaks were more pronounced, indicating the enhanced intrachain ordering of the P3HT originated from the improved π-stacking of P3HT. The P3HT:PCBM films modified by IPA at 25 °C and 85 °C exhibited peaks at 481 nm and 491 nm, respectively. Compared with the pristine film (non-IPA treated sample), the absorption spectrum of the IPA-treated P3HT:PCBM films showed a red-shift at the peak position of P3HT. These results indicate an enhanced conjugation length for the P3HT chains and a more ordered structure for P3HT.

Upon thermal annealing at 150 °C, the peak at 472 nm that corresponds to P3HT was red-shifted to 495 nm, 503 nm, and 508 nm for pristine, 25 °C and 85 °C IPA modified film, respectively. Compared to the untreated P3HT:PCBM film, the absorption intensities of the thermally annealed IPA blend films (25 °C or 85 °C) were stronger over the broad wavelength region from 480 nm to 670 nm, which correspond to the typical absorption peak region of P3HT. The increase in light absorption originates from the better crystallization of P3HT in the blend film. It should be noted here that the thermally treated pristine blend film showed a similar increase in absorption; however, the intensity was lower than that in the case of the IPA-modified blend films. It is conceivable that during the thermal treatment, the IPA molecules evaporate from P3HT:PCBM films, and in that process, induce a re-organization of the P3HT polymer chains. Overall, the blend films modified by a mild-wetting hot IPA showed a red-shift with an increased absorption in the peak region of P3HT, which accounts for the increase in light absorption, modification of the crystalline stacking of P3HT chains and results in the formation of highly ordered P3HT:PCBM microstructures (as supported by the XRD results). In particular, the IPA-85 °C-treated blend film exhibited a significant red-shift (from 472 nm to 508 nm) accompanied by a considerable improvement in absorbance, as compared to the pristine P3HT:PCBM film. However, the peak that corresponds to PCBM (∼340 nm) did not show any considerable change in absorbance or peak position upon IPA treatment. This indicates that the absorption characteristics are not influenced by thermal diffusion and aggregation into smaller clusters of PCBM molecules. Thus, the UV-vis spectra results reveal that IPA modification and further thermal annealing cause a self-ordering or rearrangement of the blend components, resulting in an improved molecular ordering of P3HT chains through π–π* stacking, that subsequently modify the absorption characteristics of P3HT.

To investigate the influence of the preheated IPA mild-wetting treatment on the chain packing of the P3HT and the crystallinity of the blend layer, the XRD patterns of the samples were analyzed. Fig. 5, shows the XRD patterns of the BHJ blend before (Fig. 5, curve a) and after the mild-wetting treatment with IPA at 25 °C (Fig. 5, curve b) and 85 °C (Fig. 5, curve c). All the XRD profiles showed a peak in the 2θ range from 5.16° to 5.22° (Fig. 5, inset), which is associated with the (100) reflection of P3HT. The reflection peak at 2θ = ∼5.20° corresponds to the a-axis orientation, lammellar packing along the P3HT chains parallel to the side chains and perpendicular to the substrate. After the IPA treatment, the intensities of the (100) diffraction peak for the P3HT:PCBM/IPA-25 °C (Fig. 5, curve b) and P3HT:PCBM/IPA-85 °C (Fig. 5, curve c) blend films became stronger (Fig. 5, inset) than that of the non-treated P3HT:PCBM film (Fig. 5, curve a), indicating a better local ordering of P3HT chains after IPA modification. Furthermore, the XRD pattern of the IPA-treated P3HT:PCBM/IPA-25 °C/85 °C blend films (Fig. 5, curves b and c) showed two other peaks at 2θ = 11° and 2θ = 16° that correspond to the (200) and (300) diffractions, whereas the pristine blend film did not show any discernible peaks. These observations are in good agreement with a previous report. The results give a clue that IPA treatment on the blend layer causes an enhancement in the crystallinity of the P3HT chains. We have also noticed a few other, interesting features from the XRD patterns of the IPA-treated P3HT:PCBM films (Fig. 5, curves b and c) as compared to that of the pristine P3HT:PCBM film (Fig. 5, curve a). Firstly, the peak due to the (100) reflections gradually shifts to a higher angle, from 5.16 to 5.24, between the pristine and IPA 85 °C treated film. This observation indicates that the d-spacing with the (100) plane increased, which may be due to the increased inter-digitation between the P3HT alkyl side chains. Secondly, in addition to the peaks at 2θ = 5.20° (100), 2θ = 11° (200), and 2θ = 16° (300) that correspond to large structural order associated with the lamellar stacking of P3HT:PCBM chains, a less intense peak was noticed at 2θ = 27.2° for the P3HT:PCBM/M-IPA-85 °C blend film, that may have originated from the diffusion of PCBM in the P3HT matrix and a possible reorganization of the P3HT:PCBM microstructures. Upon close inspection of the intensities of the (100) P3HT lattice peak at 2θ = ∼5.20°, it can be inferred that the structured ordering leading to the crystalline phase is lesser for the P3HT:PCBM film modified by the IPA-25 °C treatment, in comparison to that film modified by the 85 °C IPA treatment. From the XRD results (Fig. 5), it can therefore be concluded that the IPA-modified blend film exhibited a high degree of crystallinity and exhibited stronger interchain interactions. We believe that the combined improvement in P3HT crystallinity and controlled diffusion of PCBM that arises from the preheated IPA treatment (Scheme 1(b)) lead to the improved device performances as shown by the J–V characteristics (Fig. 1) and PV parameters (Table 1).


FTIR spectra of pristine P3HT (Fig. 6A, curve a), pristine PCBM (Fig. 6A, curve b), pristine P3HT:PCBM blend film (Fig. 6B, curve a) and P3HT:PCBM modified films by preheated (25 °C and 85 °C) IPA treatment (Fig. 6B, curves b and c) were compared to understand the structural modifications in the P3HT:PCBM film upon blend formation from the components (P3HT and PCBM), as well in the modified P3HT:PCBM blend film due to the mild wetting IPA treatment. The spectral characteristics of P3HT (Fig. 6A, curve a) and PCBM (Fig. 6A, curve b) were first compared with the spectrum of pristine P3HT:PCBM (Fig. 6B, curve a). The FTIR spectrum of pristine P3HT (Fig. 6A, curve a) exhibited a broad peak at approximately 3300 cm−1 (thiophene ring C–H stretching) and three clustered peaks in the range 2857 cm−1 to 2958 cm−1 (C–H band asymmetric and symmetric stretching vibrations, Fig. 6A, inset). The spectrum also showed peaks at 1509 cm−1, 1436 cm−1 (thiophene ring CC symmetric vibrations) and 815 cm−1 (C–H out of plane thiophene ring vibration). The FTIR spectrum of the PCBM (Fig. 6A, curve b) showed peaks that correspond to the –CH2– stretching vibrations (at approximately 3290 cm−1), aromatic C–H bending vibration at 740 cm−1 and a CO group at 1740 cm−1. It was difficult to notice any differences in the spectral regions of the spectrum of the pristine blend film and the spectra of the blend films modified by IPA-25 °C and IPA-85 °C (Fig. 6B, curves b and c) that correspond to the C–H stretching vibrations (2800 cm−1 to 3300 cm−1) and CC stretching vibrations (1490 cm−1 to 1520 cm−1). However, distinct differences were noticed in the wavelength region from 1730 cm−1 to 1760 cm−1, that typically correspond to the spectral characteristics of a CO bond (Fig. 6C).

To further clarify this phenomenon, Fig. 6C shows the FTIR spectra of pristine P3HT (Fig. 6C, curve a), pristine PCBM (Fig. 6C, curve b), pristine blend film (Fig. 6C, curve c), and IPA modified blend films (Fig. 6C, curves d and e) in the spectral region 1730 cm−1 to 1760 cm−1. There are no specific peaks in the spectrum of P3HT in this region (1730 cm−1 to 1760 cm−1). However, the FTIR spectrum of pristine PCBM (Fig. 6C, curve b) showed three peaks for the CO bands, one at 1741 cm−1 for amorphous PCBM and two other bands at 1750 cm−1 and 1732 cm−1 for crystalline PCBM. The appearance of a center band (1741 cm−1) with two additional bands are due to Davydov splitting. In the case of the pristine blend film (Fig. 6C, curve c), the spectrum showed three CO stretching peaks with a central band at 1736 cm−1 (amorphous) and two additional bands at 1743 cm−1 (crystalline) and 1730 cm−1 (crystalline). Thus, the CO stretching frequency of crystalline and amorphous PCBM shifted when PCBM was blended with P3HT. The shifts in the CO stretching frequency of PCBM in the spectrum of the unmodified blend film (Fig. 6, curve c) are attributed to the generation of interfacial dipoles in the blend due to phase separation. We envisage that the electric dipoles in the P3HT:PCBM blend film can be influenced by the preheated IPA mild wetting treatment, because the IPA solvent exhibits significant high hydrogen bonding with CO groups of PCBM, as indicated by the Hansen parameters. If such hydrogen bonding interactions are favored in the IPA modified blend films, the positions of the CO peaks are expected to shift. Taking this into consideration, we compared the position of CO frequencies in the spectrum of the pristine P3HT:PCBM film (Fig. 6C, curve c) with those of the IPA modified P3HT:PCBM films (Fig. 6C, curves d and e). The spectrum of the P3HT:PCBM film modified with IPA-85 °C showed significant shifting of the CO peak positions (Fig. 6C, curve e) as compared to the un-modified blend film (Fig. 6C, curve c). The spectrum of the P3HT:PCBM film modified with IPA-85 °C exhibited CO frequencies at 1749 cm−1 (amorphous) and at 1757 cm−1 and 1737 cm−1 (crystalline) as compared to the CO frequencies at 1736 cm−1 (amorphous) and 1730 cm−1 (crystalline) and 1743 cm−1 (crystalline) for the un-modified blend film (Fig. 6C, curve a). However, the spectrum of the P3HT:PCBM film modified with IPA-25 °C (Fig. 6C, curve d) did not show much shifting in CO stretching frequencies as compared to un-modified film (Fig. 6C, curve c). It is conceivable that the high temperature (85 °C) maintained during the mild wetting treatment resulted in a significant percolation of IPA molecules into the blend films, causing hydrogen bonding interactions with CO groups in the PCBM. This could cause a structural re-ordering in the P3HT:PCBM film (Scheme 1). The improved PV parameters noticed for the P3HT:PCBM (IPA-85 °C) based device (Table 1) are therefore attributed to the structural reordering resulting from hydrogen bonding interactions between the CO groups of the PCBM and IPA molecules. Thus, we conclude that IPA, although a poor solvent, has hydrogen-bonding interactions with the PCBM and induces molecular level re-structuring and crystallinity changes in the blend film which is evident from the results of the FTIR spectroscopy and XRD analysis (Fig. 5).

AFM was performed to investigate changes in the nanoscale morphology of the P3HT:PCBM film surface before and after IPA exposure. Fig. 7 shows the representative AFM tapping-mode height profiles (Fig. 7(a)–(f)) and phase images (Fig. 7(a′)–(f′)) of the as-cast and IPA-wetted P3HT:PCBM films, before and after thermal treatment. The root mean square (rms) roughness (nm) values of the pristine and IPA-wetted P3HT:PCBM films are presented in Table 3. A thermal treatment of IPA-modified and pristine blend films was carried out at 150 °C for 10 min. The as-cast P3HT:PCBM film (before thermal annealing) surface was rough, with a surface roughness of 5.91 nm (Fig. 7a). However, after the thermal annealing, the pristine blend surface became relatively smooth with a surface roughness of 5.55 nm (Fig. 7d). On the other hand, the P3HT:PCBM (M-IPA-25 °C) film (before thermal treatment) displayed randomly distributed nanopore/pin holes that could have resulted from the percolation of IPA molecules into the active blend layer. Interestingly, upon the thermal treatment, these nanopores/pin holes nearly disappeared and the widths and shapes of the nanofibrillar domains changed (Fig. 7e). The rms roughness value of the thermally treated P3HT:PCBM (M-IPA-25 °C) film was much lower (4.48 nm). The P3HT:PCBM (M-IPA-25 °C) surface showed a surface roughness rms value of 5.58 nm (Fig. 7b), which was slightly lower than that for the pristine film. Considering these observations, it can be inferred that the blend film underwent a reorganization of the polymer chains, to recover well-ordered structures. The XRD results (Fig. 5) corroborated well with our observations. The AFM image of the P3HT:PCBM (M-IPA-85 °C) blend film surface before the thermal treatment (Fig. 7c) showed a rough surface with an rms roughness of 5.58 nm, and the film did not contain a significant number of nanopores/pin holes, as was witnessed for the modified film surface of P3HT:PCBM (M-IPA-25 °C) (Fig. 7b). Thus, we envision that IPA evaporates faster at 85 °C than at 25 °C. As a result, nanotextured pores may have been generated on the surface of the P3HT:PCBM upon IPA-25 °C. We presume that the IPA temperature is mainly responsible for the surface morphological changes between the P3HT:PCBM (M-IPA-25 °C) (Fig. 7a) and P3HT:PCBM (M-IPA-85 °C) (Fig. 7c). The AFM image in Fig. 7f, exhibits highly aligned fibrillar nanostructures, with a minimum rms surface roughness of 3.99 nm. It is known that after the post-annealing treatment, a significant reduction in the series resistance can be expected on the completion of device fabrication. Another possible mechanism is the improvement of cathode contact due to morphology changes. After thermal annealing, the P3HT:PCBM (M-IPA-85 °C) film surface becomes smoother, and this in turn improves the interfacial contact. The highly crystalline reorganization and good phase separation of the thermally treated P3HT:PCBM (M-IPA-85 °C) film surface typically corresponds to the excellent PV performance noticed in this work. It has been previously reported that a slow drying/evaporation rate using a good solvent (DCB) could allow the P3HT chains to better self-align, leading to a better ordering. Through our results, we inferred that modifying the blend layer with a poor solvent (IPA) could lead to modest crystalline changes and a better structural ordering under fast evaporation conditions. IPA with a higher dispersion and hydrogen bonding contributions induce the reorganization of the P3HT chains and PCBM; this could result in the overall re-structuring of the P3HT:PCBM microstructures.

Surface roughness (nm)
Blend films
Without thermal treatment
With thermal treatment

a Samples annealed at 150 °C.

P3HT:PCBM (pristine)
5.91
5.55
P3HT:PCBM/M-IPA-25 °C
5.09
4.48
P3HT:PCBM/M-IPA-85 °C
5.58
3.99

We have examined the influence of a mild wetting isopropyl alcohol pretreatment (poor solvent) on the morphology, microstructures, and optical properties of P3HT:PCBM films, as well as on the performance of photovoltaic devices fabricated with these films. Our results clearly demonstrate that mild wetting, using preheated IPA on the P3HT:PCBM film surface, beneficially modified the electrical and optical properties, and induced a favorable surface topography with a significant improvement in the device performance. The Hansen solubility parameters (HSPs) were used to understand how the IPA molecules interact with the blend components (P3HT and PCBM) to result in a supramolecular ordering of the P3HT chains in the modified blend film. We believe that the results of this study could be judiciously extended for the fabrication of high-performance PSCs, using a low-boiling-point poor solvent, having adequate HSPs to interact with the blend components. Furthermore, our results should help in gaining a better understanding of the underlying relationship between the polymer: fullerene microstructural changes, that can subsequently improve the device characteristics for realizing efficient polymer solar cells.


This work was supported by Basic Science Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grants, funded by the Korean Government (Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning, MSIP) (no. 2008-0062437).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014