 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM31605F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15726-15731


Jian-Yu
Chen
,

Fang-Chi
Hsu
*,

Yun-Ming
Sung
 and 

Yang-Fang
Chen


Graduate Institute of Applied Physics, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National United University, Miaoli, 360, Taiwan. E-mail: fangchi@nuu.edu.tw

Department of Physics, National Taiwan University, Taipei, 106, Taiwan

Received
15th March 2012
, Accepted 2nd June 2012
First published on 7th June 2012
Control of interface properties is one of the important issues in optimizing the performance of hybrid polymer–metal-oxide solar cells. We select a soluble conductive small molecule, 2-naphthalenethiol (2-NT), to modulate the surface properties of the oriented ZnO-nanorod arrays before contacting with the polymer blend in an inverted hybrid solar cell configuration. This conductive molecule enhances the compatibility between polymer blend and metal-oxide, enlarges the exciton separation efficiency and subsequent charge transfer rate into the bulk of nanorods by the bond dipole field, reduces interfacial recombination and improves the ordering of charge transport network. As a result, there is a substantial improvement in photocurrent, open circuit voltage and fill factor leading to double the power conversion efficiency of the unmodified device from 1.86% to 3.71%. This value sets the record for the highest efficiency reported to date based on ITO/ZnO-nanorod/poly(3-hexythiophene):(6,6)-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT:PCBM)/Ag configuration.

Recently, polymer solar cells (PSCs) have drawn considerable attention from the scientific as well as industrial communities because this technology offers an economically competitive solution over inorganic semiconductor solar cells due to low-temperature manufacturing and solution-processable characteristics. In contrast to the common layering structure, PSCs adopt the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) concept using self-assembled nanostructured heterojunctions by phase separation of a conjugated polymer and a fullerene derivative to split excitons within the limited diffusion length. A large heterojunction surface area is, thus, created at the expense of an ordered charge transport path. For better control of the charge transport pathway, incorporating a nanostructured semiconducting metal-oxide into BHJ has been proposed. A power conversion efficiency (PCE) of a PSC based on ZnO-nanorod arrays in the most prominent photoactive system, poly(3-hexythiophene):(6,6)-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT:PCBM), has achieved 2.03% without the addition of a hole transport layer. However, this PCE value is not as encouraging as that (7–8%) reported for a pure organic one. From the material perspective, introducing a metal-oxide into organics raises an inorganic–organic interfacial problem due to the different surface characters. The semiconducting metal-oxides tend to be hydrophilic, while polymers are hydrophobic. The poor electrical coherence at the organic–inorganic junction could result in worse photovoltaic cell performance for severe charge recombination at the interface. In order to obtain a good electrical coupling between these two classes of materials, it is crucial to engineer the metal-oxide surface character to be compatible with organics in close proximity.

Among the inorganic semiconductors, ZnO is an environmentally friendly and low-cost semiconducting material with good air stability. In particular, it is highly processable using a low temperature solution-phase growth method or printing/coating techniques on a range of substrates. Successful use of ZnO nanostructures in the form of nanorods and nano-ridges as electron transporters in hybrid solar cells has been explored. A few research groups have intended to modify the ZnO-nanorod/ZnO film surface through the adsorption of Mercurochrome (C20H8Br2HgNa2O) and N719 dye molecules, as well as self-assembling a monolayer of alkanethiols and mixing molecules of octyltrimethoxysilane and aminopropyltrimethoxysilane. Though those surface modifiers function differently, an improvement in the performance of modified solar cells can be achieved. Unfortunately, those reported surface modifiers used in engineering ZnO surfaces are either environmentally unfriendly, high-cost or insulating against charge transport.
Conjugated (conductive) small molecules are another class of organic semiconductors with a higher structure order and mobility than partially ordered polymers. Generally, thin films made of those small molecules are deposited by vacuum sublimation. 2-Naphthalenethiol (2-NT), composed of two consecutive benzene rings (hydrophobic unit) with a thiol side group, is soluble and can self-assemble on a Au surface through the chemisorption of thiols. This aromatic thiol has been used as a capping ligand on Au nanoparticles in fabricating memory devices and the device shows a less abrupt switching behavior than the one capped with an insulating ligand due to its conductive property. Compared with other self-assembled molecules reported for organic layer deposition, 2-NT has a relatively simple chemical structure, is less costly, has a small molecular size and, most importantly, it is conductive.
In this paper, we use 2-NT to self-assemble a monolayer on a ZnO-nanorod surface through the available Zn–S bonding. This 2-NT layer with its hydrophobic group covering the nanorod surface will slightly increase the hydrophobicity of the surface. In turn, it will improve the physical contact property between the contacting P3HT:PCBM polymer blend and metal-oxide, resulting in a smoother polymer film surface. Further, it is preferential for photoexcited P3HT to transfer electrons to 2-NT than to pristine ZnO-nanorods, indicating a stronger interaction inbetween through the π–π interaction of the conjugated structures. The exciton dissociation efficiency is, thus, enhanced. Due to the static electric field established by the Zn–S bonding, electrons can be rapidly transferred across the 2-NT layer to prevent back recombination. The electrical property at the organic–inorganic interface is greatly enhanced. Meanwhile, the electron mobility improves as well, a result which is presumably due to the modulation of BHJ network nanomorphology arising from the 2-NT layer. Consequently, both interfacial and BHJ network transport properties are enhanced through 2-NT modification, leading to a substantial improvement in device performance.

The indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrate was cleaned by successive sonication in acetone and isopropanol for 15 min each and then dried in a N2 gas flow before used. A ZnO seed layer (ca. 30 nm in thickness) was then spin-coated onto the ITO-coated glass from a 0.35 M solution of zinc acetate dihydrate (Ridel-de Hagën) in the mixed solvents of monoethanolamine (Merck) and 2-methoxyethanol (Acros) at a rate of 3000 rpm, followed by 1 h thermal treatment at 200 °C to remove the residual organic solvents. The oriented ZnO-nanorod arrays were subsequently grown from the ZnO seed-coated substrates suspended in an aqueous solution of 50 mM zinc nitrate (Acros, 98% purity) and 50 mM hexamethylenetetramine (Acros) at 90 °C for 70 min in an oven. The preparation of the aligned ZnO-nanorod arrays was finished by dipping the substrate into deionized water to remove the residual salts and dried in N2 gas flow.

2-Naphthalenethiol (C10H7SH, 2-NT) was purchased from Aldrich Co. and used as received. Initially, 10−6, 2.5 × 10−6, and 10−5 M solutions of 2-NT in ethanol (99%) were prepared. The ZnO-nanorod arrays were modified with a monolayer of 2-NT by immersing the samples into a prepared 2-NT solution at 50 °C for 2 days in an oven. The modified ZnO-nanorods were then rinsed with ethanol to remove excess 2-NT before being dried in a N2 gas flow.

Inverted PSCs were fabricated on the ZnO-nanorod substrates before and after 2-NT modification. A polymer blend solution composed of 25 mg P3HT (Lumin. Tech. Co.) and 15 mg PCBM (Lumin. Tech. Co.) in 1 mL 1,2-dichlorobenzene (ODCB) was spin-coated on the ZnO-nanorod arrays to form a photoactive layer at 400 rpm for 40 s and then this was dried in a glass-covered petri dish in air. The resulting film thickness was ∼200 nm. Finally, a silver layer (100 nm) was thermally deposited on the photoactive layer at pressure of around 2 × 10−6 torr to complete the device fabrication. The typical photo-active area defined by the overlapping of the ITO and Ag electrodes for those devices was 3 mm2. Samples for the optical characterizations and surface morphological study were fabricated on ITO-coated glass following the same fabrication procedures as photovoltaic devices without metal deposition.


The J–V characteristics of the finished photovoltaic devices were evaluated using a Keithley Model 2400 source meter under an irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2 from a calibrated solar simulator (Newport Inc.) with a AM 1.5G filter. The calibration was done using a standard Si photodiode. The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were performed using a setup consisting of a lamp system, a chopper, a monochromator, a lock-in amplifier and a standard silicon photodetector (ENLI Technology). The UV-visible absorption and photoluminescence (PL) spectra were measured using a JASCO Model V-630 UV-vis spectrophotometer and a Jobin Yvon spec-1403 spectral system working in the double-grating mode, respectively. The time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectroscopy was performed using HPM-100 hybrid PMT module as a single-photon detecting system (Becker & Hickl GmbH) and exciting the samples by a 520 nm pulsed laser operating at 48 MHz with a duration of 300 fs.


The arrays of the ZnO-nanorod structure (see Fig. 1(a)) were grown using the hydrothermal method on a ITO-coated glass substrate. The average diameter, rod length and rod-to-rod spacing are ∼30, ∼120 and 20–40 nm, respectively. Fig. 1(b) presents the schematic photovoltaic device configuration, including the surface modifier, 2-NT, fabricated in this study.


Fig. 2 depicts the contact angle measurement result for water on ZnO-nanorod arrays before and after immersion in 2-NT solutions of various concentrations for the same period of time. The contact angle for pristine ZnO-nanorod arrays is 99° (Fig. 2(a)), while the values for those incubated in 10−6 (Fig. 2(b)), 2.5 × 10−6 (Fig. 2(c)) and 10−5 M (Fig. 2(d)) 2-NT solutions are 104°, 106° and 103°, respectively. There is a subtle increase (5–7%) in contact angle values after 2-NT solution treatment. The change in contact angle values can serve as an indicator for the existence of 2-NT molecules on the ZnO-nanorod surface and it also indicates that the ZnO-nanorod surface turns slightly more hydrophobic. It is known that thiols are weak acids and can dissolve portion of the ZnO-nanorods. For the same incubation time, greater dissolution of the ZnO-nanorods in 2-NT solution of high concentration is likely to occur and the resulting nanorod shapes, as well as the array morphology could be quite different. Due to the dissolution, more ZnO surfaces could be created aside from the Zn–S bonding portion. Those created ZnO surfaces raise the average surface energy and surface roughness, which are the main factors controlling the wettability. In this respect, a drop in contact angle value from (c) to (d) can be expected.
It is well-known that the surface wettability naturally varies with the surface modifiers and can have its impact on the surface morphology of the photoactive layer above. As the atomic force microscopy (AFM) images shown in Fig. 3, both film surfaces show similar features, a connection of granular-like structures, and the average grain sizes are slightly larger for the film on the modified substrate. Furthermore, the film surface on the pristine substrate is very rough, with a r.m.s roughness of 8.8 nm (Fig. 3(a)), while that on the modified one shows a roughness of 6.1 nm (Fig. 3(b)). The slightly reduced surface roughness reflects a relatively smoother photoactive layer with the treated-substrate and suggests an improved interfacial compatibility between the metal-oxide and polymer blend. The observation again suggests the existence of 2-NT molecules on the ZnO-nanorod surface and reveals its effect on heterojunction contact.

Fig. 4 depicts the UV-visible spectra for pristine ZnO-nanorods, ZnO-nanorods/2-NT, ZnO-nanorods/P3HT:PCBM and ZnO-nanorods/2-NT/P3HT:PCBM structures. The pristine ZnO-nanorod arrays show an absorption edge at 375 nm and the characteristics of the spectrum remain after modification. For the ZnO-nanorods/P3HT:PCBM structure, there are three additional pronounced absorption peaks at 515, 550 and 600 nm, which correlate with the vibronic state transition of a P3HT molecule due to the strong intrachain or interchain π–π interaction among polymer chains. As 2-NT molecules are introduced, there are negligible changes in both spectrum intensity and features, suggesting a similar photon-harvesting capability and microscopic polymer chain ordering. Hence, the presence of 2-NT molecules has the least contribution to the photon absorption activity and polymer crystallinity.
We evaluated the performance of those photovoltaic cells from the measured current–voltage (J–V) characteristics (Fig. 5(a)) and the results for the best set of devices are summarized in Table 1. The short circuit current (JSC), open circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF) for the 2-NT-free device (standard device) are 9.87 mA cm−2, 0.49 V and 38.69%, respectively, leading to a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1.86%. The performance of the standard device agrees well with the values reported in the literature. After 2-NT modification, the device performance exhibits a large improvement; i.e., of approximately 23%, 27% and 30% increments for JSC, VOC and FF, respectively, leading to a PCE of 3.71% at an optimal concentration of 2.5 × 10−6 M. The presence of 2-NT molecules doubles the PCE of the standard device and this PCE value, according to our knowledge, is the highest reported to date based on the ITO/ZnO-nanorod/P3HT:PCBM/Ag device configuration.
Sample 2-NT (M)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1)
0 (standard)
0.49
9.87
38.69
1.86
5.21 × 10−5
10−6
0.60
10.17
47.11
2.90
4.01 × 10−4
2.5 × 10−6
0.61
12.10
50.16
3.71
5.61 × 10−4
10−5
0.62
10.50
41.12
2.68
3.49 × 10−4
The JSC increase is also reflected in the incident-photon-conversion-efficiency (IPCE) spectra in the spectral range of 300–800 nm. Fig. 5(b) exhibits the IPCE spectra for another set of devices with JSC of 9.6 (standard) and 11.6 mA cm−2 (2-NT modified). Typically, the photocurrent at short wavelengths (≦400 nm) is primary contributed from ZnO-nanorods and that contribution from P3HT is in the region of 400–650 nm, where P3HT presents a high absorption intensity in Fig. 4. Despite the similar absorption capability of the blend, the IPCE values of the modified device are enhanced along the entire wavelength region compared to the standard one. As an example, an IPCE value of 56% at a wavelength of 500 nm for the standard device is increased to 70% for a 2-NT modified one. The result also indicates that the internal quantum efficiency (IQE) improves with the incorporation of the 2-NT layer. The enhanced IQE could result from an improved interfacial charge transport or bulk heterojunction morphology. To clarify the mechanism, we probed the carrier transport dynamic at the interface and measured the carrier mobility of the polymer blend to understand the impact of 2-NT molecules on the device improvement.
We conducted time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectroscopy to probe the charge transfer dynamics at the heterojunctions. Excitons generated on the P3HT backbone can experience three relaxation processes; i.e., direct recombination, being dissociated at the P3HT/PCBM or at P3HT/ZnO-nanorod interfaces. The obtained PL-decay lifetime involves the first radiative procedure and the latter two non-radiative routes. As shown in Fig. 6, the solid state PL decay of P3HT can be described by a single-exponential on the measurement time-scale. The obtained PL-decay lifetimes are 143 (unmodified) and 97 ps (modified). The reduced PL-decay lifetime indicates that a more effective non-radiative relaxation process occurrs in the modified structure. As with the energy band arrangement shown in the inset in Fig. 6, introducing the 2-NT layer into ZnO-nanorods/P3HT:PCBM system forms cascading band alignment for carrier transport in the P3HT–2-NT–ZnO-nanorod path. In addition to the common P3HT/PCBM heterojunction, excitons are separated at the 2-NT-modified ZnO-nanorod surface instead of pristine ZnO-nanorods. Thus, 2-NT receives electrons from a P3HT molecule more efficiently than the pristine ZnO-nanorods do, as suggested by the shorter PL-decay lifetime. The result implies a stronger interaction of the π-conjugated structure of 2-NT with the thiophene ring of P3HT to further enhance the compatibility. The exciton separation efficiency is, therefore, enhanced, leading to a higher photocurrent.
Another factor that might influence the transport is the Zn–S bonding. The sulfur atom has a larger electronegativity over that of the Zn atom, and it leads to the formation of a bond dipole on the ZnO-nanorod surface with an electric field pointing toward the active layer. This electric field can rapidly transfer electrons from 2-NT to the bulk of ZnO-nanorods, hence preventing back recombination. On the other hand, although there is ∼0.5 eV band offset between 2-NT–PCBM phases, this energy barrier is likely to suppress the electron flow collection in the PCBM phase. Fortunately, the barrier width (2-NT molecular size) is ∼0.5 nm, which is eligible for charge tunneling as compared to that seen in even larger insulating molecules. Those tunneled electrons can be immediately transferred to ZnO-nanorods with the aid of Zn–S bonding as well. In brief, electrons in the polymer blend can be rapidly transferred to ZnO-nanorods with the assistance of the bond dipole.
Bulliard et al. pointed out that the device performance increases with the hydrophobicity of the substrate and it is not distinguishable from the topography image obtained by AFM. In Fig. 3, we obtain a subtle difference in active layer morphology after 2-NT modification, revealing a slightly different mixing result of the P3HT and PCBM. Since the charge transport in the polymer blend system is through hopping, the hopping ability depends on the resulting blend morphology and can be physically characterized by carrier mobility. We employed the charge-extraction-from-linearly-increasing-voltage (CELIV) technique to measure both the electron and hole mobilities in individual transport network and only the fast carrier species, electron in this case, was detected. The obtained electron mobility values are summarized in Table 1. The electron mobility can be enhanced up to 10-fold after modification. The result suggests a formation of a much more ordered electron transport network by the PCBM phase and its counterpart, the P3HT network, should respond accordingly. The enhanced carrier mobility minimizes the charge carrier loss through recombination within the BHJ structures and is also an important factor to obtain a higher photocurrent.
According to the above studies, we obtain the following important results. The subtle change in contact angle values and AFM topography indicate the presence of 2-NT molecules on the ZnO-nanorod surface. Those conjugated molecules with their hydrophobic ends pointing away from the ZnO-nanorod surface slightly improve the physical contact ability between organic and inorganic materials, as revealed by a less rough film surface. Although there is a variation in topography, the difference is not significant enough to dominate the dramatic device improvement as for that reported by Li et al., which also exhibits an apparent change in the optical absorbance. However, from the charge transport perspective, the subtle topographical change in BHJ suggests a different mixing result of the dual substance, which can lead to up to a 10-fold increase in electron mobility in this case. Additionally, the compatible interface triggers a significant enhancement in the electrical transport across the organic–inorganic junctions as well. Photoexcited P3HT can transfer electrons more efficiently to 2-NT through the strong π–π interaction than to pristine ZnO-nanorods, resulting in an enhanced exciton separation rate. Subsequently, the bond dipole layer formed by Zn–S bonding facilitates electrons transferring from the 2-NT layer into ZnO-nanorods with its established electric field leading to minimizing back recombination events. The electron injection from the polymer blend into the ZnO-nanorods becomes more efficient due to enhanced electronic coupling. Consequently, both enhancements in photocurrent and FF can be well-understood.
Considering the improvement in VOC after 2-NT modification, firstly, the increased photocurrent due to larger free carrier densities in the constituent phase can enlarge the quasi-Fermi level separation and lead to an increase in VOC. Another factor affecting VOC is the surface passivation effect by 2-NT to lift the pinning of the Fermi level of ZnO-nanorods by surface defects. As illustrated in Fig. 7, the photoluminescence (PL) spectra of pristine ZnO-nanorods is composed of a direct band-to-band illumination centered at 380 nm and a broad-range defect band-to-band irradiation. The intensity of the latter decreases after a 2-NT layer is introduced, indicating a reduction in defect density. Generally, the defect states serve as the charge trapping and recombination centers, which cause the free carrier loss and internal voltage dropping. Those defects can be eliminated with the attachment of a 2-NT molecule, such that trapped charges are reduced and the Fermi level will move close to the band edge of ZnO, resulting in a higher VOC.
Finally, we would like to stress the fact that the hydrophobic nature of a nonpolar molecule can improve the polymer–metal-oxide contact by modifying the metal-oxide surface. Particularly, proper selection of a nonpolar molecule of π-conjugated characteristics can not only promote the surface compatibility but also improve the electrical properties of the polymer-metal oxide junctions through π–π interaction. This particular advantage of conductive 2-NT is in stark contrast to the insulating one commonly used. We mention here that the presented modified device can be further improved through various approaches, such as adding a hole transport layer underneath the anode, using a different surface modifier, etc. A systematic study based on the presented structure regarding efficient interfacial charge transport is also worth future investigation, which is among our ongoing research.

In conclusion, we present a novel, conductive and structurally simple small molecule, 2-NT, to self-assemble on ZnO-nanorod surface. In addition to better interfacial compatibility due to its hydrophobic nature, this interfacial modifier, 2-NT, plays important roles in two aspects in enhancing device performance. At the interface, the exciton separation and electron injection into the ZnO-nanorod become more efficient. In BHJ, the electron mobility is modulated through the change of blend morphology induced by the modifier. As a result, the charge transport properties in the whole device are improved leading to a double of PCE of the unmodified one. The application of conductive 2-NT molecule as an interface modifier should be able to generalize to other hybrid systems. We believe our finding provide a new insight of selecting self-assembled molecules to advance the hybrid solar cell research and play a key step for practical application.


This work is supported by the National Science Council, Taiwan (Project no. NSC 98-2112-M-239-001-MY3).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012