 DOI: 10.1039/C2TA00418F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1228-1238
Daesub Hwang, Dong Young Kim, Sung-Yeon Jang* and Dongho Kim*
Department of Chemistry, Yonsei University, Seoul 120-749, Korea
Optoelectronic Materials Lab, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul 136-791, Korea
Department of Chemistry, Kookmin University, Seoul 136-702, Korea. E-mail: syjang@kookmin.ac.kr; Fax: +82-2-910-4415; Tel: +82-2-910-5768
Received 24th September 2012, Accepted 12th November 2012
First published on 13th November 2012
Anatase amphiphilic TiO2 (am-TiO2) nanoparticles with an average diameter of ∼15 nm were synthesized using a sol–gel hydrothermal synthesis. The colloidal dispersion of am-TiO2 in alcoholic solvents had outstanding stability for several months at room temperature (RT). Hierarchically structured TiO2 nanospheres (TiO2-NSs) were then successfully prepared by an electrostatic spray (e-spray) method using the am-TiO2 dispersion at RT. The e-sprayed TiO2-NSs were employed as photoelectrodes for solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells (ss-DSSCs), in which a novel plastic crystal/polymer blend based solid-state electrolyte (PC-SSE), iodine-doped succinonitrile/polyacrylonitrile, was used. A photovoltaic power conversion efficiency (PCE) of ∼7.6% was reached under simulated AM 1.5 G (100 mW cm−2) illumination, while the incident photon-to-electrical current conversion was >60% upon excitation at 550 nm. The unique morphology of the TiO2-NSs, in which primary anatase TiO2 nanoparticles are interconnected within the submicron-scale spheres, exhibited superior characteristics as photoelectrodes for our ss-DSSCs compared to conventional TiO2 nanoparticles (TiO2-NPs). The nanoparticles-in-sphere shape offered enhanced surface area and pore volume for high dye-loading and beneficial solid-state electrolyte (SSE) infiltration, while the submicron-scale of the spheres induced efficient visible-light scattering. The efficient interconnection among the primary anatase TiO2 nanoparticles within the e-sprayed NSs offered enhanced charge collection efficiency and photoelectron density, which were confirmed by intensity-modulated photocurrent/photovoltage spectroscopy and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. These superior properties of the TiO2-NSs were manifested in the cell performance. The PCE of the TiO2-NS-based ss-DSSCs was >2 times higher than that of TiO2-NP-based ss-DSSCs, with notable concurrent improvement in the short-circuit current (JSC = 13.9 mA cm−2), open circuit voltage (VOC = 765 mV), and fill factor (FF = 71.6%). The optimized cell efficiency of 7.6% is thus far the highest reported efficiency for PC-SSE-based DSSCs. Both the single-crystal-like anatase primary particles and the advantageous morphology effectively contributed to the high performance of the ss-DSSCs. Since the e-spray method is a high-throughput, scalable process, our hierarchically structured TiO2-NSs are a promising material for high-efficiency ss-DSSCs, possessing a range of advantages over conventional TiO2-NPs.

Titanium dioxide (TiO2) has been widely investigated because of its unique electronic and catalytic properties. A variety of applications of TiO2 in the fields of environment and energy, such as photocatalysts, sensors, batteries, capacitors, and solar cells, have been reported. In these applications, nanostructured TiO2 has often been used because its high surface area and mesoporosity offers the desired properties. In general, the properties of nanostructured TiO2 are mainly determined by the size, shape, crystallinity, and the phase of the crystals, and thus, controlling the morphology and crystallinity of nanostructured TiO2 is of great interest for a range of applications. One of the widespread applications of nanostructured TiO2 has been its use as a photoelectrode for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs).

DSSCs have attracted significant attention as a promising solar conversion device that can compete with or complement other types of solar cells due to their easy, low-cost fabrication, color tunability, and semi-transparency. The technical development and scientific investigation of DSSCs in recent years have realized high power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of >12%, in which ∼10 μm thick films of TiO2 nanoparticles (TiO2-NPs) with diameters of ∼20 nm were prepared by the doctor-blade method and used as the photoelectrodes. Crystalline TiO2-NPs are the most popular materials for DSSC photoelectrodes, although other shapes of TiO2 nanostructures such as nanorods, nanotubes, and nanofibers have demonstrated their own advantages. In DSSCs, reducing the size of the nanostructured TiO2 can enhance the surface area available for dye attachment; however, the density of grain boundaries and defect sites that retard the electron transport can increase accordingly. Thus, the optimally sized TiO2-NPs for the DSSC photoelectrodes are known to be 15–20 nm in diameter. The pore size and distribution within the TiO2 photoelectrode layers is another crucial factor to consider in terms of the charge transport and the penetration of electrolytes (especially for viscous ones). In addition to the morphology of nanostructured TiO2, a preferred crystal orientation (anatase phase) with reduced surface defects is also an important factor for facilitating the charge transport through retarding charge recombination. Preparation of TiO2 photoelectrodes having favorable morphology and crystal orientation will be of pivotal importance for the development of high-efficiency DSSCs.
Construction of hierarchical structures is a novel strategy for achieving high-quality TiO2 photoelectrodes. Hierarchically structured TiO2 has been employed by several groups and has demonstrated a range of advantages: (i) high surface area and dye-loading, (ii) better penetration of electrolytes, (iii) fast electron transport and/or longer charge recombination lifetime, and (iv) light-scattering effects. Various methods such as sol–gel synthesis, solvothermal reactions, hydrolysis, and electrospinning techniques have been used to prepare hierarchically structured TiO2. Recently, our group reported 0-dimensional (0D) hierarchically structured TiO2 nanospheres (TiO2-NSs) prepared by an electrostatic spray (e-spray) technique using a dispersion of commercially available TiO2-NPs (P25, Dagussa). This method is a simple and cost-effective process that has the potential for large-scale production. The resulting uniformly sized “rice-ball-shaped” TiO2-NSs contained two different types of pores (macropores and mesopores) exhibiting high surface area for enhanced dye-loading and ample pore volume for easier electrolyte penetration.
In this study, colloidal dispersions of anatase amphiphilic TiO2-NPs (am-TiO2) in alcoholic medium were prepared by sol–gel hydrothermal synthesis. The colloidal stability of the am-TiO2 dispersion was sufficiently high to apply our e-spray method in order to form hierarchically structured TiO2-NSs. The e-sprayed TiO2-NSs showed bimodal pore size distribution and a prominent anatase phase after calcination. The TiO2-NSs were then used as photoelectrodes for solid-state DSSCs (ss-DSSCs), in which a novel plastic crystal-based solid-state electrolyte (PC-SSE), an iodine-doped polyacrylonitrile (PAN)/succinonitrile (SN) blend, was used. The TiO2-NS-based photoelectrodes showed superior properties for our ss-DSSCs because of their unique morphology and preferential crystal orientation. The cell performance and charge transport characteristics of the TiO2-NS-based ss-DSSCs (ss-DSSC-NSs) were compared to those of ss-DSSCs using TiO2-NP-based photoelectrodes (ss-DSSC-NPs), prepared by a conventional doctor-blade method from the same am-TiO2, and NS-based photoelectrodes that were formed using commercial P25 (ss-DSSC-P25) prepared by the e-spray method. Our ss-DSSC-NSs showed far superior PCE (7.6%), open circuit voltage (VOC, 765 mV), short-circuit current (JSC, 13.9 mA cm−2), and fill factor (FF, 71.6%) compared to conventional ss-DSSC-NPs (3.3%) and ss-DSSC-P25 (6.8%) under AM 1.5 G one sun illumination. The effects of unique morphology and crystal orientation on the performance characteristics of the ss-DSSCs were investigated, and the origin of the superior properties of our TiO2-NSs photoelectrodes was discussed. The enhanced charge collection efficiency and photoelectron density in our ss-DSSCs were revealed by analysis using intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS), intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS), and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). The porous morphology of the hierarchically structured TiO2-NSs, in which the primary anatase TiO2-NPs are well connected, was majorly responsible for the superior cell performance. The optimized performance of our ss-DSSC-NSs was far better than that of previously reported ss-DSSCs using PC-SSEs (5–6.7% at AM 1.5 G one sun illumination), revealing that our TiO2-NSs are a preferential material for SSEs.

The preparation of the am-TiO2 and hydrophilic TiO2 is schematically illustrated in Fig. 1. The am-TiO2 dispersion was prepared by hydrolysis of a titania precursor, followed by a hydrothermal reaction. First, an aqueous titanium(IV) isopropoxide solution was modified via acid-catalyzed hydrolysis, followed by condensation at room temperature (RT) to yield three-dimensional polymeric titania skeletons, which acted as the seeds for titania growth, as depicted in the following reactions:
2(RO)3−x–Ti–O–H → (RO)3−x–Ti–(OR)3−x + H2O
Once the polymeric skeletons were formed, the hydrolysis rate for the development of the Ti–O–Ti chains and the size of the resulting titania gels were determined by the water-to-titanium alkoxide ratio, r. It is known that relatively large titania gel aggregates (ranging from a few hundred nanometers up to a few micrometers in diameter) are obtained at sufficiently fast hydrolysis kinetics (r > 10). In our synthetic condition, an r value of ∼20 was used to facilitate nucleation and growth of the seeding titania polymeric skeletons. Thus, relatively large titania gel aggregates with diameters of ∼200 nm were obtained after precipitation of the mixture in an excess amount of water.
In order to obtain the desired uniform sizes of titania seed particles for the subsequent hydrothermal reaction, peptization of the resulting aggregates was carried out by adding nitric acid to the mixture, followed by heating at 80 °C. This process broke up the aggregates into smaller seed particles (∼1 nm). The resulting colloidal dispersion was light blue, translucent, and generally stable over a period of several months. The dispersed titania seed particles in colloidal solution were further grown by a hydrothermal reaction using autoclaves with Teflon liners under controlled temperature and/or pressure. The temperature could be elevated above the boiling point of water, reaching the pressure of vapor saturation. The temperature and the amount of solution added to the autoclave largely determined the internal pressure produced. The particle growth was performed at 120 °C for ∼16 h, resulting in aggregates of hydrophilic TiO2 particles. Finally, the resulting TiO2 aggregates were modified using an amphiphilic surfactant. The slow addition of tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (TBAOH) into the TiO2 aggregates in ethanol under ultrasonication effectively intercalated the aggregates to produce am-TiO2 nanoparticles. The organic-compatible TBA ligand groups on the TiO2 surfaces afforded a stable colloidal dispersion of am-TiO2 in ethanol, from which the conventional hydrophilic TiO2 was precipitated out (Fig. 1). The zeta potential of the am-TiO2 dispersion was <35 mV, confirming the high stability over a period of several months at RT. In solution-phase hydrothermal synthesis, coarsening processes involve the growth of larger particles at the expense of smaller particles. The rate constant for this coarsening process increases with temperature because of the temperature dependence of the solution viscosity and the equilibrium solubility of TiO2. The average TiO2 particle size increases linearly with time, in agreement with the Lifshitz–Slyozov–Wagner model for coarsening. Our optimized low-temperature hydrothermal reaction conditions yielded anatase TiO2 nanoparticles with a uniform diameter of ∼15 nm, which is suitable for DSSCs.

The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of am-TiO2 grown at 120 °C for 16 h are shown in Fig. 2A. The particle sizes ranged from about 10 to 20 nm in diameter and the interference patterns of their aggregates (Fig. 2B) illustrate that the particles are anatase-phase crystals [see the diffraction circles of the (101) and (200) anatase phases]. These crystals contained grain boundaries that were in obvious contrast to the amorphous titania, as shown in Fig. S1A in the (ESI). This result indicates that the crystallinity of our am-TiO2 particles was sufficiently enhanced during the hydrothermal reaction. These anatase particles may be grown by one of three pathways. They are (i) formed directly from the aggregates of smaller amorphous titania, (ii) grown by atom-by-atom recrystallization of smaller anatase particles, or (iii) formed by solid-state aggregation of adjacent small anatase particles adopting appropriate crystallographic orientations. The highly homogeneous morphology of the ∼15 nm anatase particles shown in Fig. 1A suggests that the anatase particles are formed either directly from an amorphous phase or by complete recrystallization of smaller anatase particles; thus, the hydrothermal reaction conditions were well optimized in order to prepare the uniform nanoparticles. In contrast, much larger TiO2 particles (∼50 nm) containing some misoriented domains (see the yellow arrows in Fig. S1B in the ESI) were formed when the reactions occurred at higher temperatures and/or over a longer period of time. Under these conditions, the reorientation of the particles leads to imperfect attachment, resulting in dislocations in the single crystals. Fig. 2C and D show high-resolution TEM (HR-TEM) images of the am-TiO2 particles, which show nearly single-crystal-like nanomorphology. The uniform fringes with an interval of 3.55 Å through entire particles, corresponding to the (101) lattice spacing of the anatase phase, confirmed the single crystallinity of the am-TiO2 particles.

TiO2-NS-based photoelectrodes were prepared using the am-TiO2 nanoparticles as the primary particles. A colloidal dispersion of the am-TiO2 in ethanol was e-sprayed onto a fluorine-doped SnO2 (FTO)-coated glass substrate, as described in our previous reports with a slight modification. The feed-rate of the am-TiO2 dispersion was controlled at 30–40 μL min−1. (The detailed e-spray conditions are described in the experimental section.) Fig. 2 and 3 show the TEM and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the e-sprayed TiO2-NSs respectively. Well-defined, hierarchically structured TiO2-NSs covered the entire substrate (Fig. 3A and B) and their size distribution was relatively narrow. The average size of the obtained TiO2-NSs was ∼700 nm, as determined from the fitting using the Gaussian function (Fig. 3D). It should be noted that high colloidal stability and proper solvent polarity of the am-TiO2 dispersion for e-spraying is a prerequisite for the fabrication of hierarchically structured TiO2-NSs, and the anatase-phase am-TiO2 dispersions in ethanol used in this study successfully fulfilled the requirements for e-spraying. The size of the TiO2-NSs was controllable by manipulating the e-spraying conditions (applied voltage, concentration of the dispersion, solvent composition, etc.). However, the average size of ∼700 nm was chosen for the TiO2-NSs in this study because of the enhanced light-harvesting efficiency due to appropriate light-scattering effect compared to the TiO2-NP film as shown in Fig. 3E and F. Within the TiO2-NSs, the primary am-TiO2 nanoparticles are effectively held together, displaying a nanoparticles-in-sphere shape, as depicted in Fig. 3C. After calcination at 500 °C for 30 min, the am-TiO2 primary particles were sintered together within the NSs, as indicated in TEM images (Fig. 2E and F). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the TiO2-NSs, shown in Fig. 4, are identical to those of the TiO2-NPs (the primary particles without forming the NSs), which confirms that all the e-sprayed TiO2-NS photoelectrodes consist of an anatase crystal phase after calcination. In order to study the effect of morphology on the performance of the photoelectrodes, conventional TiO2-NP-based photoelectrodes (hydrophilic TiO2) were also prepared by doctor-blading a paste of the am-TiO2 dispersion, followed by thermal annealing (details in the Experimental section). Note that the hydrophilic TiO2-NPs were not dispersible in any solvent for the e-spray method, and thus the e-spray method was not applicable. The SEM images of the TiO2-NP-based photoelectrodes are shown in Fig. S2B in the ESI.
The morphology of the TiO2-NSs was investigated using Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) and Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) analyses. The Type IV isotherms and H1 hysteresis at high relative pressures (P/P0 0.8–0.9) of the TiO2-NS- and TiO2-NP-based photoelectrodes are shown in Fig. 4B. The TiO2-NSs showed the characteristic bimodal pore-size distribution (macroscale and mesoscale) of the hierarchical nanostructures with enhanced pore volumes (83% higher) compared to conventional TiO2-NP-based photoelectrodes (Fig. 4C). In spite of the higher pore volume, the TiO2-NSs displayed a larger surface area (47% higher) than the TiO2-NPs because of the uniqueness of the nanoparticles-in-sphere structure. The presence of macropores in the TiO2-NSs, which were generated by the interspherical spaces, offered a higher pore volume, whereas the mesopores afforded a higher surface area. A summary of the physical properties of the TiO2 photoelectrodes is listed in Table 1. This macroporosity in our TiO2-NSs is beneficial for penetration of SSEs, which generally exhibit higher viscosity than conventional liquid electrolytes and undesired solidification can often occur during electrolyte filling. The pore volume and surface area of the TiO2-NSs was somewhat controllable by the process of lamination. Note that the e-sprayed TiO2-NS photoelectrodes were compressed under a pressure of ∼13 MPa at 120 °C before cell assembly to optimize their morphology for use in our ss-DSSCs. This lamination step can reduce the pore volume of the photoelectrode layers, which can in turn enhance the connectivity among the TiO2-NSs, in addition to enhancing the adhesion between the TiO2-NSs and the FTO/glass substrate. For our ss-DSSCs, ∼30% of the pore volume of the TiO2-NS photoelectrodes was strategically reduced by the lamination step in order to improve charge transport while maintaining good infiltration of the PC-SSE, as indicated in Fig. 4C and Table 1. SEM images of the laminated TiO2-NS layers are shown in Fig. S2C in the ESI.
TiO2 type
Surface area (m2 g−1)
Pore volume (cm3 g−1)
Dye adsorption (mol mg−1)
TiO2-NP
83.7
0.70
4.8 × 10−8
TiO2-NS
122.9
1.28
6.4 × 10−8
TiO2-NS (laminated)
93.7
0.93
5.8 × 10−8
The e-sprayed TiO2-NS photoelectrodes appeared semitransparent, suggesting lower transmittance of visible light compared to conventional TiO2-NP photoelectrodes (referred to Fig. 3F). The enhancement of the light-scattering ability of the TiO2 photoelectrodes can improve the light-harvesting efficiency and thus the photon-to-current conversion of the resulting DSSCs. The light-scattering effect of the TiO2-NSs was examined by diffuse reflectance spectroscopy. As shown in Fig. 4D, the reflectance capacities of the TiO2-NS photoelectrodes was ∼80% at short wavelengths and ∼70% at long wavelengths, whereas that of the TiO2-NPs was <40% for the entire visible wavelength. The reflectance of the TiO2-NPs decreased more rapidly from 450 nm to 800 nm because of the small particle size (ca. ∼15 nm) compared to the e-sprayed TiO2-NS films, in which higher diffuse reflectance was maintained from the visible to the near-infrared (IR) regions. The comparable size and distribution of our TiO2-NSs to the wavelength of visible light (ranging from 500 to 800 nm, as indicated in Fig. 3D) could enhance the diffused reflection capacity in the visible light region, as known by the Mie scattering theory.

The ss-DSSCs were fabricated using our PC-SSE and various photoelectrodes. The PC-SSE was prepared by mixing a PAN/SN blend (as the matrix) and 1-propyl-2,3-dimethylimidazolium iodide (DMPII), iodine (I2), and N-methyl benzimidazole (NMBI) as dopants to deliver enough ionic conductivity and sufficient dye-reduction rate. These five components were mixed at a high temperature (>90 °C) followed by cooling to RT.

The weight ratio of the blend was 1/9 (PAN/SN) and the molar ratio between SN/DMPII/I2/NMBI was 100/6/1/0.5. The chemical structures of these five components for the PC-SSE are depicted in Fig. 5A. This PC-SSE maintained a macroscopic solid-state up to ∼90 °C. Note that SN can dissolve PAN above its melting temperature (>62 °C) due to their structural similarities, and thus our PC-SSE was prepared without using any organic solvents. During the fabrication of the ss-DSSCs, melted PC-SSE was injected into the pre-assembled cell stained by N-719 dye at an elevated temperature (>90 °C) and then cooled to RT. During ss-DSSC fabrication, rapid penetration of SSE is a crucial factor for successful fabrication because the PC-SSE rapidly solidifies on a small excursion to lower temperatures. Fig. 6A shows the J–V characteristics of the ss-DSSCs fabricated using the two types of am-TiO2-based photoelectrodes (TiO2-NSs and TiO2-NPs). The PCE of ss-DSSC-NS was 7.6%, which is more than 2-fold higher than that of ss-DSSC-NP (3.3%), with improved VOC, JSC, and FF. The PCE of the ss-DSSC-NSs was far better than that previously reported for ss-DSSCs using PC-SSEs (5–6.7% at AM 1.5 G one sun illumination). The values of the J–V characteristics of the two cells are listed in Table 2. Because the photocurrent density of DSSCs is proportional to the light-harvesting by dye molecules, the enhanced dye-loading in TiO2-NSs (see Table 1) due to the high surface area contributed to the higher JSC values of the ss-DSSC-NSs. The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the ss-DSSCs was measured in order to understand the origin of the photocurrent over a range of wavelengths (Fig. 6B). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the ss-DSSCs using N-719 dye was maximized at ∼550 nm. The ss-DSSC-NSs exhibited much higher values of EQE compared to ss-DSSC-NPs over the entire visible light range, in accordance with the results of the J–V measurements. The maximum EQE of ss-DSSC-NSs was 60% whereas that of the ss-DSSC-NPs was 38%. The superior dye-loading and light-scattering effects of the submicrometer-sized TiO2-NSs were responsible for the enhanced IPCE of the ss-DSSC-NSs in the visible wavelength region.
Sample
VOC (mV)
JSC (mA·cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
R0 (Ω cm2)
R1 (Ω cm2)
R2 (Ω cm2)
R3 (Ω cm2)
Rtotal (Ω cm2)
ss-DSSC-NS
765 ± 10
13.9 ± 0.3
71.6 ± 0.5
7.59 ± 0.3
4.2
8.3
26.3
8.2
47.0
ss-DSSC-NP
634 ± 7
7.91 ± 0.4
65.3 ± 0.7
3.28 ± 0.2
4.4
8.5
88.3
43.6
144.8

In order to further understand the cell operation, EIS analysis was performed following the models of Adachi et al., who showed the equivalence of the models developed by Kern et al. and Bisquert The AC impedance measurements provided information on the fundamental properties of the cells related to the material quality and interfacial phenomenon, which elucidated the origin of the improved FF and PCE in the DSSCs. The complex impedance of a typical DSSC is the sum of each of the components, given as Z0, Z1, Z2, and Z3. The components are defined as the contact impedance, Z0, which is usually equal to the real-phase component R0; the counter electrode impedance, Z1; the complex impedance, Z2, which represents the interface between the dye attached semiconductor (TiO2 and the electrolyte; and the diffusion of triiodide ion-related (Warburg) impedance, Z3. Thus, total Z (Z′ + iZ′′) is equal to the sum Z0 + Z1 + Z2 + Z3, as shown in Fig. S3A in the ESI. An idealized plot of the real part of Z, Z′(ω), versus the imaginary part of Z, Z′′(ω), as a function of the modulation frequency for a set of operating parameters is given in Fig. S3B. In general, three semicircles are observed clearly in the measured frequency range 0.1–100 kHz. The ohmic resistance (R0) in the high-frequency region conforms to the electrolyte/FTO glass resistance, whereas the resistances R1, R2, and R3 relate to the charge-transfer resistance of the electrolyte at the counter electrode surface in the high-frequency region (R1), the resistance reflecting the photo-injected electrons within the TiO2 film in the middle-frequency region (R2), and the resistance corresponding to the Nernst diffusion with the electrolyte in the low-frequency region (R3). Fig. 7A shows the Nyquist plots with the best-fit model of the two types of am-TiO2-based ss-DSSCs in open-circuit conditions under one sun illumination. The Rtotal (Rtotal = R0 + R1 + R2 + R3) values, determined from the real component (Z′) of the ss-DSSC-NSs (47 Ω cm2), were less than one-third of the ss-DSSC-NPs (144 Ω cm2), as summarized in Table 2. These results are attributed to the fact that the enhanced infiltration of PC-SSE into the TiO2-NS layers is due to the significant portion of macropores, which facilitates hole transport and dye regeneration. This reduced impedance of the ss-DSSC-NSs was responsible for their higher FF. From the results of the Bode plots (Fig. 7B), the peak of the middle-frequency range of the ss-DSSC-NSs (∼30 Hz) was located at a much lower frequency compared to that of ss-DSSC-NPs (∼80 Hz), indicating the reduced charge-recombination rate. The effect of the improved charge-recombination lifetime in the ss-DSSC-NSs will be further discussed in the following section, along with the results of the intensity-modulated photoelectron analysis.

The charge-transport times (τCT) and recombination lifetime (τR) of the ss-DSSCs were characterized by IMPS and IMVS, respectively. The frequency of incident light modulation ranged from 100 to 0.1 Hz in our experiments. The values of τCT were obtained using the results of IMPS analysis, which is shown in Fig. 8A. The τCT values can be estimated from eqn (1):

(1)
where
fmin is the minimum current of the imaginary part of the low-frequency range in the IMPS spectra. As shown in the results of τCT as a function of the incident light intensity in Fig. 9A, the τCT of the ss-DSSC-NSs was more than 2 times shorter than that of the ss-DSSC-NPs, which is attributed to the lower junction density of the 0D hierarchical structure of the TiO2-NSs. The tightly connected TiO2 particles inside the TiO2-NSs (see the TEM images in Fig. 2F) function as a “highway” network, reducing the density of the grain boundaries, even though the total charge-transport distance of the layers may be longer due to the higher pore volume. The value of τR was obtained by analysis using the IMVS technique (Fig. 8B). The τR values can be calculated from eqn (2):

(2)
where
fmin is the minimum voltage of the imaginary part of the low-frequency range in the IMVS spectra. The value of τR of the ss-DSSC-NSs was ∼5 times more than that of the ss-DSSC-NPs at an incident photon flux of 3.18 × 1018 cm−2 s−1, as shown in Fig. 9C. The electron diffusion length (DL) can be calculated from the equation (D × τR)1/2, where D is the diffusion coefficient obtained by IMPS analysis, as shown in Fig. 9B. The DL value of the ss-DSSC-NSs was ∼20 μm, while that of the ss-DSSC-NPs was only ∼6 μm (Fig. 9D), indicating that the probability of the electrons arriving from the TiO2 photoelectrode layers to the electrode was considerably higher in the TiO2-NS photoelectrodes. Knowing τCT and τR, the charge-collection efficiency (ηCC) of the DSSCs is determined by the relation ηCC = 1 − (τCT/τR). The ηCC of the ss-DSSC-NSs was thus determined to be ∼5 times greater than that of ss-DSSC-NPs due to the superior charge-recombination lifetime and electron-transport time. The superior charge-collection efficiency coupled with the higher dye adsorption thus reveals the origin of the enhanced JSC in the ss-DSSC-NSs, as shown in Table 2.
The PC-SSE system generally uses an amount of I2 that is more than five times higher than that used by conventional organic liquid electrolytes because I− ions are mainly transferred through a Grotthuss-type exchange mechanism (GEM). A high iodine concentration helps to form polyiodides, which can facilitate GEM, a process that is schematically illustrated in Fig. 5C. However, this excess I2 can potentially counteract cell performance by enhancing the charge-recombination rate at the TiO2/electrolyte interface. As a result, ss-DSSCs can suffer from reduced VOC and JSC. Thus, the reduction of the charge-recombination rate is the most effective strategy for improving the performance of the PC-SSE-based ss-DSSCs. In our earlier report, PC-SSE-based ss-DSSCs using 1D hierarchically structured TiO2 nanofibers as the photoelectrodes displayed a PCE of ∼6.5% under AM 1.5 G one sun illumination. This was a significantly enhanced efficiency compared to other earlier reports that used TiO2-NP-based photoelectrodes, and the far longer τR of the TiO2 nanofiber-based photoelectrodes was responsible for the enhanced JSC and VOC.
The VOC of the DSSCs was also strongly influenced by τR because the value of VOC is determined by the energy-level difference between the reduction potential of the electrolyte and the quasi-Fermi level of the TiO2. The increment of the electron density in the TiO2 conduction band can shift the location of the TiO2 quasi-Fermi level to more negative potentials, elevating the VOC value. The photoelectron density (PED, n) of the ss-DSSCs was obtained by eqn (3):
(3)
where q is the charge of an electron,
φ is the ratio of injected electrons to incident photons, I0 is the incident photon flux density, p is the film porosity, and d is the film thickness. We assume that the recombination is irreversible. At open circuit and constant light intensity, the recombination current density (JR) equals the electron injection current density (Jinj). Neither JR nor Jinj can be measured directly; they are rather inferred from measurements of the short-circuit photocurrent density (JSC) and the quantum efficiency for the collection of injected carriers (α): qφI0 = Jinj = JSC/α = −JR. Based on this relationship, the PED of the TiO2 conduction band is proportional to the values of JSC and τR. Therefore, the PED of the ss-DSSC-NSs was estimated to be >3 times higher than that of the ss-DSSC-NPs, which can increase the VOC value by ∼130 mV. The boosted VOC in the ss-DSSC-NSs can also be confirmed by the EIS results. The maximum frequency (ωmax) at the middle range of the Bode phase plots (Fig. 7B) for ss-DSSC-NSs was much lower than that for ss-DSSC-NPs, which is consistent with the tendency of the inverse VOC. Under the illumination state, the relationship between VOC and the recombination lifetime can be described by eqn (4):

(4)
where
R is the molar gas constant, T is the temperature, F is the Faraday constant, β is the reaction order for I3− and electrons, A is the electrode area, I is the incident photon flux, n0 is the concentration of accessible electronic states in the conduction band, and k1 and k2 are the kinetic constants of the back reaction of the injected electrons with I3− and the recombination of these electrons with oxidized dyes (D+), respectively. Assuming that the recombination with the oxidized dye molecules can be neglected, the VOC will depend logarithmically on the kinetic constant of the back reaction of the injected electrons with I3− (k1). Because the concentration of I3− in the electrolyte and the incident photon flux were constant under our experimental conditions, the VOC is proportional to ln(1/ωmax), which demonstrates that the charge-recombination rate influences the VOC of the DSSCs significantly. The higher VOC values of ∼130 mV of the ss-DSSC-NSs compared to those of the ss-DSSC-NPs estimated using IMVS and EIS results correspond well with one another (see Table 2).


Based on the analysis results of our study, the considerably superior performance of our ss-DSSC-NSs seems to stem mainly from the morphological advantages of photoelectrodes over ss-DSSC-NPs. In order to deconvolute the effect of the preferential crystal phase (anatase phase) of our TiO2-NSs, we also investigated ss-DSSCs using hierarchically structured NSs, in which the primary particles are commercial P25. Because our primary particles, am-TiO2, are composed of an anatase phase only, whereas P25 contains a rutile phase (∼25%) and an anatase phase (75%), investigation of the effect of different types of primary particles on performance can further elucidate the origin of the superior properties of our TiO2-NSs. The P25-based NSs (P25-NSs) used in this study were nearly identical in size and morphology to our TiO2-NSs and were fabricated following the procedure described in our previous report. The optimized P25-NS-based ss-DSSCs (ss-DSSC-P25s) showed a PCE of 6.8%, with an VOC of 737 mV, a JSC of 13.7 mA cm−2, and a FF of 67.4% at AM 1.5 G (100 mW cm−2). The J–V characteristics of the optimized ss-DSSC-P25s are shown in Fig. S4 in the ESI. The PCE of the ss-DSSC-P25s was much higher than that of the ss-DSSC-NPs, even though it was lower than the PCE of the ss-DSSC-NSs. These results indicate that the nanoparticles-in-sphere morphology of the NSs is largely responsible for the superior performance of the photoelectrodes for ss-DSSCs. It should be noted that the main difference between the two NS-based cells was that our ss-DSSC-NSs had a VOC that was ∼30 mV higher than that of the ss-DSSC-P25s, while the other components (JSC and FF) were nearly identical. This is due to the fact that the charge recombination was reduced when anatase primary particles were used because of the preferential crystal phase with fewer defects. These results support the conclusion that the construction of hierarchical structures using single-crystal-like anatase TiO2 is an effective strategy for fabricating high-performance ss-DSSCs.


A stable colloidal solution of anatase am-TiO2 was prepared by suitably exploiting a two-step synthetic route. Using the am-TiO2 as the primary particles, hierarchically structured TiO2-NSs with an average size of ∼700 nm were prepared by e-spraying. When the resulting TiO2-NSs were employed as photoelectrodes for ss-DSSCs, in which a novel PC-SSE was used, a PCE of ∼7.6% was obtained, which is thus far the highest reported efficiency for PC-SSE-based DSSCs. The morphological advantage of the TiO2-NSs, i.e., the well-interconnected nanoparticles-in-sphere shape, offered remarkably improved cell performance when compared to a reference cell composed of conventional TiO2-NP-based photoelectrodes (ss-DSSC-NPs). The enhanced surface area resulted in greater dye-loading and the submicron-sized spheres induced efficient visible-light scattering, which led to an increase in JSC. The higher charge-transport time and recombination lifetime in the TiO2-NSs, which were confirmed by IMPV, IMPS, and EIS analysis, enhanced the charge-collection efficiency and photoelectron density, resulting in an improvement in JSC and VOC. The macropores among the NSs facilitated the infiltration of the PC-SSE, resulting in a high FF (>70%). The results of this study indicate that our TiO2-NSs are a promising material for the photoelectrodes of ss-DSSCs because of the hierarchical morphology that is composed of single-crystal-like primary anatase am-TiO2 particles. In addition to the fact that our e-spray method is a high-throughput, scalable process, our TiO2-NSs could facilitate the commercialization of ss-DSSCs. The development of high-efficiency ss-DSSCs by coupling our TiO2-NSs with various types of SSEs is currently underway in our group.


Titanium isopropoxide (TIP, Aldrich), tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (TBAOH, Aldrich), fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)-coated conductive glass (TEC-8, Pilkington, sheet resistance 8 Ω sq−1, glass thickness of 2.3 mm) were purchased from commercial sources and used as received. A ruthenium complex dye (Ru535-bis-TBA, Solaronix SA), cis-bis(isothiocyanato)-bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato)-ruthenium(II)bis-tetrabutyl-ammonium, generally known as N-719, was purified using ion exchange column chromatography. 1-Propyl-2,3-dimethylimidazolium iodide (DMPII, 99% c-tri), iodine (I2, >99.99% Aldrich), N-methyl benzimidazole (NMBI, >98% Aldrich), succinonitrile (SN, >99%, TCI), polyacrylonitrile (PAN, Aldrich), and chloroplatinic acid hexahydrate (H2PtCl6, Aldrich) were used as purchased without further purification.


Acetic acid (0.3 mol) was added dropwise to 0.3 mol of TIP under stirring at RT. The modified precursor was stirred for about 30 min and poured into 400 mL of water as quickly as possible with vigorous stirring. A white precipitate was instantaneously formed. One hour of stirring was performed to achieve a complete hydrolysis reaction. After adding 3.2 mL of 65% nitric acid, the mixture was heated from RT to 80 °C within 60 min and peptized for 2 h. The resultant mixture was kept in a titanium autoclave and heated at 120 °C for 16 h. The white precipitate was washed five times with water by centrifugation. Finally, TBAOH (about 500–1000 μL) was slowly added to the TiO2 solution in ethanol solvent.


The 10 wt% dispersed am-TiO2 solution was loaded into a plastic syringe that was connected to a high-voltage power supply (BERTAN SERIES 205B). Then, the dispersed am-TiO2 solution was electrosprayed directly onto the conducting FTO substrates (10 cm × 10 cm). The feed rate was controlled by a syringe pump at 20–30 μL min−1. In order to form a uniform thickness over a large area, the nozzle and the substrate were placed on a motion control system with a microprocessor. The am-TiO2 nanoparticle-based photoelectrodes (TiO2-NPs) were prepared using the doctor-blade method. The porosity was controlled by adding 20 wt% poly(ethylene glycol) (Aldrich, average Mw = 10000 g mol−1) and 20 wt% poly(ethylene oxide) (Aldrich, average Mw = 100000 g mol−1) to the TiO2 colloidal solution.

The morphologies of the e-sprayed TiO2-NS photoelectrode were investigated using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, Hitachi S-4100), with an accelerating voltage of 15 kV, and a high-resolution transmission electron microscope (HR-TEM, FEI Tecnai G2) operating at an accelerating voltage of 200 keV. The surface area and pore distribution properties were measured using a Sorptomatic 1990, with a surface area determined by the BET method and pore volume and size distributions determined by the BJH method using the adsorption branches of the isotherms. In order to measure the surface concentration of dye in the TiO2 photoelectrode, the dye was desorbed into a 0.1 M NaOH solution in distilled water and the absorption spectra of the desorbed dye solution were measured using a UV-vis spectrophotometer (Hewlett-Packard 8452A). Diffuse reflections of the resulting TiO2 films were collected on a Cary 5000 UV-Vis-NIR spectrometer with an integration sphere (Internal DRA-2500).

For the photoelectrodes, the TiO2 films were rinsed with water and then sintered at 450 °C for 30 min after post-treatment with 0.05 M TiCl4 for 20 min at 80 °C. After cooling to 80 °C, the TiO2 photoelectrodes were immersed into 3 × 10−4 M purified N719 solution for 15 h at RT. For the counter electrode, the FTO plates were drilled with a microdrill, washed with 0.1 M HCl solution in ethanol, and then subsequently cleaned in an ultrasonic bath with water and ethanol for 15 min. A Pt counter electrode was prepared by drop casting 5 mM of H2PtCl6 in isopropyl alcohol onto the washed FTO plates and then sintering the plates at 400 °C for 20 min under air conditions. The dye-adsorbed TiO2 photoelectrodes were rinsed with ethanol and dried under nitrogen flow. The dye-adsorbed TiO2 electrodes were assembled and sealed with the counter electrode using thermal adhesive films (Surlyn, Dupont 1702, 25 μm-thick) as a spacer to produce sandwich-type cells. The PC-SSE consisted of 1-propyl-2,3-dimethylimidazolium iodide (DMPII), iodine (I2), N-methyl benzimidazole (NMBI), succinonitrile (SN), and polyacrylonitrile (PAN). The electrolyte was introduced through a drilled hole on the counter electrode. Finally, the holes were sealed with hot-melt films and a cover glass.


The photovoltaic characteristics of the ss-DSSCs were obtained by applying an external potential bias to the cells and measuring the generated photocurrent with a Keithley model 2400 source meter, employing an AM 1.5 G solar simulator between the sample and a 450 W Xe lamp. The intensity of the simulated light was calibrated by a Si reference solar cell equipped with a BK7 filter for approximating AM 1.5 G radiation. The photovoltaic performance was measured by using black tape with an aperture area of 0.25 cm2. IPCE was measured as a function of wavelength from 400 to 800 nm using a specially designed IPCE system for dye-sensitized solar cells (PV Measurement, Inc.). A 75 W xenon lamp was used as the light source for generating a monochromatic beam. Calibration was performed using a NIST-calibrated silicon photodiode as a standard. IPCE values were collected at a low chopping speed of 5 Hz. The electrical impedance spectra were measured using an impedance analyzer (Solatron 1260) at an open-circuit potential under AM 1.5 G illumination (100 mW cm−2) at a frequency range 0.1 to 105 Hz. The magnitude of the alternative signal was 10 mV. Impedance parameters were determined by fitting of the impedance spectra using Z-Plot software. The electron-transport time and electron-recombination lifetimes were measured by intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) and intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS). A diode laser with variable power and modulation control (Coherent CUBE diode-laser, 40 mW, 445 nm) was used as the light source for these studies. The illumination light was always incident on the working electrode side of the solar cells. The intensity was measured using a calibrated Si photodiode. The output of the solar cell was connected directly to a lock-in amplifier (Frequency Response Analyzers, Solatron 1260 Impedance/Gain-Phase Analyzer). IMPS was performed by connecting the solar cell via a current amplifier (EG&G PAR 273) to the lock-in amplifier. During the IMVS and IMPS measurements, the cell was illuminated with sinusoidally modulated light having a small AC component (10% or less of the DC component).


The authors gratefully acknowledge the support from the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF, 2012045675), funded by the Ministry of Education, Science, and Technology, the Korea Research Council of Fundamental Science & Technology (KRCF) and KIST for “National Agenda Project (NAP)” program (SYJ), the KIST Institutional Programs (Project 2E22831 and 2K01970) (DYK), World Class University Programs (R32-2010-000-10217; the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, Korea (MEST)) (D.K.).

† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2ta00418f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013