 DOI: 10.1039/C3TC32520B
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 5077-5082


Baofeng
Zhao
,

Zhicai
He
,

Xiaoping
Cheng
,

Donghuan
Qin
,

Min
Yun
,

Meijuan
Wang
,

Xiaodong
Huang
,

Jianguo
Wu
,

Hongbin
Wu
* and 

Yong
Cao


Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, P. R. China. E-mail: hbwu@scut.edu.cn

National Center of Supervision & Inspection on Solar Photovoltaic Products Quality, Innovation & Creation Science Park, Suit A-10F, No 5 Xinhua Road, Wuxi 214028, P. R. China

Received
20th December 2013
, Accepted 7th March 2014
First published on 7th March 2014
Here we demonstrate flexible polymer solar cells with a record high power conversion efficiency of 8.7% and a very high specific power of 400 W kg−1, by depositing a physical blend of a conjugated semiconducting polymer and a fullerene derivative on a highly flexible polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate. The flexible device reported here performs basically as well as those based on rigid glass/ITO substrates with regard to most of the device parameters, however has a relatively lower fill factor, which can be further improved via interface engineering between the photoactive layer and electrodes or by the development of novel flexible substrates. The processing method for the flexible polymer solar cells is solution-based and all of the film deposition processes are completed at room temperature, thus this simplicity of preparing flexible polymer solar cells can offer easy-processability over a large area with fast deposition on an industrial scale at room temperature.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs) are being extensively investigated due to their perceived advantages as a lightweight and low-cost energy source. This new class of device relies on the physical blend of a conjugated semiconducting polymer (usually as an electron donor) and a fullerene derivative (as an electron acceptor) (typically an n-type fullerene derivative), and can be processed from solution-based technology, such as ink-jet printing, roll-to-roll manufacturing, micro-contact printing and solution spraying. Owing to the rapid advancements of the materials, device structures and processing techniques, the power conversion efficiency of state-of-the-art PSCs has increased dramatically in the past few years, reaching 8% since 2011 (ref. 10–12) and 9–10% more recently.

Nowadays, most of the reported high-efficiency PSCs are fabricated on rigid glass substrates which therefore does not make full use of the processing advantages of organic semiconducting materials and as a result limits their potential applications. In order to fully exploit the potential of PSCs, it is desirable to develop PSCs on flexible plastic or metal foil substrates, which are lightweight, mechanically flexible and conformable, and compatible with the high-throughput roll-to-roll manufacturing process as this may potentially reduce the cost of production and installation. The most straightforward strategy reported toward the realization of flexible PSCs was based on a conventional device structure, in which poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) with high conductivity or metal wires were incorporated atop a flexible substrate which was usually used as an anode for collecting photo-generated holes. In particular, Na et al. demonstrated that flexible PSCs with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 2.8% on a pre-coated PET substrate had high conductivity. Alternatively, flexible PSCs can be fabricated from an inverted structure, in which n-type metal oxide (ZnO, TiOxetc.) nanoparticles are usually used as an indium tin oxide (ITO) surface modification layer via a solution process or sol–gel process to facilitate electron transport and extraction. Recently, Wang et al. demonstrated flexible inverted PSCs on a poly(ethylene naphthalate) (PEN) substrate with a power conversion efficiency of 4.18% based on a ZnO layer, which was prepared by atomic layer deposition (ALD) at low temperatures (i.e., 40 °C and 80 °C). More recently, high performance flexible PSCs with a PCE of 6% on a PEN substrate were developed, which take full advantage of low temperature (below 150 °C) processing.
Nevertheless, post treatments such as annealing of the charge transporting metal oxide (over 200 °C) or photoactive layer (over 110 °C) are usually required to enhance device performance in many emergent flexible PSCs, making plastic substrates unsuitable for highly efficient PSCs. Therefore, the efficiency of flexible PSCs is inferior to that of the corresponding device on a rigid ITO/glass substrate and PCEs over 8% have not been reported in flexible PSCs. Before this kind of device can find practical application as a portable power source, significant progress must be made in improving the power conversion efficiency. Thus, further efforts should be devoted to the development of highly efficient PSCs on flexible substrates using low temperature technology without a big loss in efficiency.
We previously reported a technique to fabricate inverted type PSCs by incorporating an alcohol–water-soluble conjugated polymer, poly [(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamino) propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9–dioctylfluorene)] (PFN) as a surface modification layer atop of glass/indium tin oxide (ITO), resulting in high-efficiency PSCs with a certified PCE of 9.214%. This technique is solution-based and all of the film deposition processes are completed at room temperature, thus offering easy-processability over a large area. It is desirable to extend our optimized device structure from a glass substrate to a flexible plastic substrate. The efficiency of the reported flexible PSCs was typically limited by the inefficient utilization of photons and the non-ideal ohmic contact between the flexible substrate and the active layer. Here we report the fabrication of low temperature processed high-efficiency flexible polymer solar cells on a PET substrate pre-coated with ITO via this recently developed inverted PSC device structure. The PCE of the resulting flexible PSCs, based on a blend of low bandgap semiconducting polymer thieno[3,4-b]thiophene/benzodithiophene (PTB7) and [6,6]-phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM), is 8.7%, making these, to the best of our knowledge, the most efficient flexible PSCs and comparable to those on an ITO/glass substrate (∼9.2%). To further investigate the applicability of the PET/ITO/PFN substrate for flexible PSCs, we also utilized two other typical polymers, each having a different band gap, energy levels and processing conditions, in the device fabrication as the photoactive layers. The flexible devices based on these two polymers also showed encouraging device performances, indicating that the method reported here is a promising approach towards the realization of high-efficiency, flexible PSCs that can enable fast deposition on an industrial scale at room temperature.
The flexible PSCs in this study were fabricated on a commercially available polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate pre-coated with ITO (PET/ITO). Transmission spectra of the PET/ITO substrate in the UV, visible and infrared ranges were recorded and are shown in Fig. 1. The PET/ITO substrate depicted high optical transmittance (with an optical transmittance of 86% at 480 nm, 83% at 550 nm, and an average optical transmittance of 79.9%) in the wide range between 350 nm and 1100 nm, approaching that of the control glass/ITO substrate (85.6%). This is an essential prerequisite for flexible electronics applications. Nevertheless, the high transmittance of the PET/ITO substrate is somewhat compensated by its relatively higher sheet resistance of 40 ohm square−1. The root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of the PET/ITO substrate before and after PFN coating is 7.04 nm and 3.67 nm over a surface of 5 µm × 5 µm, respectively, while the RMS roughness of the glass/ITO substrate is 1.4 nm (Fig. 2). Therefore, we conclude that a smoother surface morphology is formed after PFN coating which can effectively avoid electrical short circuiting in the resultant devices. Apart from the surface morphology, the electrical properties of the substrate change upon incorporation of PFN. The work function of PET/ITO, evaluated by a Kelvin probe, decreased from 5.1 eV to 4.5–4.7 eV after PFN coating, implying that the substrate can form an ohmic contact with the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of PC71BM for efficient electron extraction.
To demonstrate flexible, high-efficiency polymer solar cells, low bandgap semiconducting polymer thieno[3,4-b]thiophene/benzodithiophene (PTB7) was employed as an electron donor material. The typical device structure of the flexible PSCs is PET/ITO/PFN/photoactive layer/MoO3/Al (device 2). Fig. 3a shows current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics of the best flexible device. For comparison, the best J–V characteristics of the flexible device with the absence of any electron transporting layer (device 1) are also shown. The device performance parameters deduced from the J–V characteristics and those of flexible devices with ZnO films, derived by a sol–gel process, as the electron transporting layers (device 3) and a reference of inverted PSCs on rigid glass (device 4) from previously reported literature are summarized in Table 1. The flexible device 1 from PTB7:PC71BM showed the highest PCE of 8.60%, with an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.74 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 17.4 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 66.8%, when measured under 1000 W m−2 AM 1.5G illumination. On the other hand, the control flexible device 2 only showed a moderate efficiency of 5.60%, while the flexible PSCs with ZnO film, derived by a sol gel process, as the electron transporting layer showed a PCE of 8.12% after annealing the obtained ZnO film at 120 °C for 10 min (Table 1). These results clearly demonstrated that the proposed device structure is indeed suitable for PET substrate-based flexible polymer solar cells. After encapsulation, the device was sent to the National Center of Supervision & Inspection on Solar Photovoltaic Products Quality of China (CPVT) for certification. Fig. 3b shows the certified J–V curve of the device measured under AM 1.5G illumination. A certified PCE of 8.709% was obtained (Fig. 3b), which is 94% of the PCE of our best cells on a glass substrate. To the best of our knowledge, the remarkable efficiency of over 8% is among the highest efficiency for flexible polymer solar cells reported to date. The device has a VOC of 0.7359 V, a JSC of 17.94 mA cm−2, and a fill factor of 65.9%. Comparison of the parameters of the flexible device on a PET/ITO substrate and the device on a rigid glass/ITO substrate indicates a difference in FF (65.9% vs. 69.99%, respectively, Table 1). On the other hand, the JSC values in both devices are very close despite the PET/ITO substrate having a slightly lower optical transmittance, which can be ascribed to interference effects in the flexible devices. We expect that further optimization of the interface between the photoactive layer and electrodes will result in an improvement in the FF and the overall device performance. Thus we believe flexible polymer solar cells with an efficiency above 9% should be achievable with this device structure.
Device

V
OC


J
SC

FF
PCE
(V)
(mA cm−2)
(%)
(%)

a Test performed in our laboratory, under AM 1.5G illumination with a light intensity of 1000 W m−2 and an effective device area of 0.16 cm2.
b Test performed at CPVT, under AM 1.5G illumination with a light intensity of 1000 W m−2 and a mask of 0.1377 cm2.
c Data obtained from our previous paper.

Device 1, PET/ITO/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Al
0.59
16
59.4
5.61
Device 2, PET/ITO/PFN/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Al
0.74
17.4
66.8
8.60
0.7359
17.94
65.9
8.709
Device 3, PET/ITO/ZnO/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Al
0.74
16
68.6
8.12
Device 4, glass/ITO/PFN/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Al
0.754
17.46
69.99
9.214

Fig. 3c compares the J–V characteristics of the devices fabricated in this study in the dark on a semi-log axis. Device 2 shows an obviously smaller leakage current with a reverse voltage and lower forward voltage region (between 0 V and the turn-on voltage) than the control devices (device 1 and the ZnO-based device 4), which is likely due to a smoother surface morphology in the PET/ITO/PFN substrate (Fig. 2).
To demonstrate the flexibility of the devices, a sheet resistance measurement under different bending conditions and a device performance test under different bending cycles were performed. Fig. S1(a) shows the sheet resistance of the PET/ITO substrate under different bending conditions. It was found that when the bending angle was varied between 0 and 90° or 0 and −90°, the measured sheet resistance remained nearly constant (at around 40 ohm square−1). Secondly, we investigated the device performance on convex bending–recovery cycles at a fixed angle (here it was fixed at 30°). We performed this test using a device fabricated 150 days ago that had a PCE of 6.8% before bending. Surprisingly, the device showed a better efficiency even after repetitive bending of up to 300 bending cycles (the overall efficiency, Voc, JSC and FF as a function of bending cycles are shown in Fig. S1(b)–(e) and summarized in Table S1 for comparison). It is not very clear why an enhanced performance was observed upon repetitive bending at this moment and a more in-depth study will be carried out in forthcoming research.
After simple encapsulation by epoxy resin, device 2 retained 92% of its initial efficiency when stored under ambient air conditions for 40 days, representing very good shelf storage stability. The device performance parameters of a typical device 2 stored for longer periods of up to 150 days are shown in Table S2, with corresponding J–V characteristics displayed in Fig. S2. In short, after 120 and 150 days in storage, the device retained 92% and 82% of its initial efficiency, respectively. It was observed that the PCE loss in the first four months was mainly due to the reduction in FF while in the subsequent stages, losses in JSC seemed to be dominant.
The PET/ITO substrate coated with PFN also works very well with the most commonly studied P3HT:PC61BM system, resulting in a highest PCE of 3.81%, which is very close to that of the glass/ITO-based device (4.15%) when considering the measurement errors.
The deformation of a series of flexible devices upon thermal treatment at different temperatures of 30, 80, 110, 140, 155 or 170 °C is shown in Fig. 4. We found that there was no appreciable deformation in the devices if the annealing temperature was below 140 °C (Fig. 4a–c) while annealing temperatures of 155 °C and 170 °C caused significant bending and complete roll-up, respectively. The J–V characteristics of a typical device 2 (here we take a device stored for more than 150 days as an example) after annealing at 110, 140 and 155 °C for 10 min are shown in Fig. S3 and the device parameters are summarized in Table S3. It was found that with increasing annealing temperature, the PCE of the flexible device decreased from 6.17% to 5.42%, 5.20%, and 4.88%. Nevertheless, since all of the film-forming procedures for the PFN photoactive layer were processed at room-temperature, the thermal deposition of the metal electrode did not result in high temperatures above 100 °C in the devices, and the PTB7:PC71BM system did not require additional thermal annealing, we therefore believe that the method reported here is indeed suitable for flexible PSCs and the fabricated flexible devices may find practical applications for different purposes.
In addition to the high power conversion efficiency of 8.7%, the fabricated device also has a very high specific power (defined as the electrical power output per unit weight) of 400 W kg−1, which is comparable with that of commercially available space-rated high-efficiency silicon cells (∼800 W kg−1). It is worth noting that the metric for this flexible device has the potential of reaching ∼10000 W kg−1 if an ultrathin (i.e. 2 µm) PET substrate is used. Thus these kinds of lightweight, flexible polymer solar cells can potentially outperform their inorganic counterparts in some environments and open up new opportunities for many novel terrestrial applications.
In summary, flexible polymer solar cells with a record high power conversion efficiency of 8.7% and a very high specific power of 400 W kg−1 have been demonstrated by depositing a physical blend of a conjugated semiconducting polymer and a fullerene derivative on a highly flexible polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate. The flexible device reported here performs basically as well as those based on a rigid glass/ITO substrate with regard to most of the device parameters, but has a relatively lower fill factor, which can be further improved via interface engineering between the photoactive layer and electrodes or the development of novel flexible substrates. Thus there is the potential for further improvement in device efficiency and an efficiency of above 9% should be achievable in a follow up study. It is worth mentioning that such flexible polymer solar cells could potentially be suitable for novel terrestrial applications, such as bendable, portable power sources etc, owing to their very high specific power. The processing method for flexible polymer solar cells is solution-based and all of the film deposition processes are completed at room temperature, thus this simplicity of preparing flexible polymer solar cells can offer easy-processability over large areas with fast deposition on an industrial scale at room temperature.

The polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate that was pre-coated with ITO (PET/ITO, with a sheet resistance of 40 ohm square−1, 125 µm thick) was provided by Kaivo Electronic Components Co., Ltd. (Zhuhai, China) and the control device, the ITO coated rigid glass (glass/ITO, 15 ohm square−1) was provided by CSG Holding Co., Ltd. (Shenzhen, China). The electron donor polymer, thieno[3,4-b]thiophene/benzodithiophene (PTB7), was purchased from 1-Material Inc. (St-Laurent, Quebec, Canada), while PC71BM and P3HT were purchased from Luminescent Technology Inc. and all were used as received. The PFN interlayer was synthesized in the lab following the literature. Device preparation and characterization were carried out under clean conditions with protection against dust and moisture. The fabrication of PSCs followed procedures described in our previous papers. The deposition of the sol–gel ZnO film followed a procedure described in the literature.


The power conversion efficiency values were determined from J–V characteristics measured by a Keithley 2400 source-measurement unit under AM 1.5G spectrum from a solar simulator (Oriel model 91192). Masks made from laser beam cutting technology with well-defined areas of 16.0 mm2 or 13.77 mm2 were attached to define the effective area for accurate measurement. The solar simulator illumination intensity was determined using a monocrystal silicon reference cell (Hamamatsu S1133, with a KG-5 visible color filter) calibrated by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). The incident photon-to-current efficiency spectra were measured by a solar cell–photodetector responsivity measurement system (Model DSR-100UV-B, Zolix, China). The film thickness of the as-spun PFN film was determined by a surface profiler (Alfa Step-500, Tencor), in combination with extrapolation from an absorbance–thickness curve that assumes a linear dependence of absorbance at 380 nm on film thickness. Transmittance measurements were obtained using a UV-VIS-NIR spectrophotometer (Shimadzu UV-3600). The film morphology was studied by atomic force microscopy (AFM, Veeco MultiMode V) operating in tapping mode.


H. W. and Y. C. thank the National Nature Science Foundation of China (no. 50990065, 51010003, 51225301 and 61177022) for financial support. The research is also supported by the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University (NCET-10-0400) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2014ZM0001, 2013ZP0012).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3tc32520b
‡ B. Z. and Z. H. contributed equally to the work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014