 DOI: 10.1039/C9QM00212J
(Research Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 1244-1252


Jiaming
Huang
,

Lingchao
Xie
,

Ling
Hong
,

Lirong
Wu
,

Yufang
Han
,

Tingting
Yan
,

Jianqi
Zhang
,

Liqiang
Zhu
,

Zhixiang
Wei
 and 

Ziyi
Ge
*

Ningbo Institute of Materials Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ningbo 315201, P. R. China. E-mail: geziyi@nimte.ac.cn

Center of Materials Science and Optoelectronics Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China

The National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, P. R. China

Received
2nd April 2019
, Accepted 24th April 2019
First published on 25th April 2019
Significant improvement in the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of polymer solar cells (PSCs) has been achieved due to the continuous development of highly efficient photoactive materials with tuned energy levels and molecular configurations. Herein, the effects of halogenation on polymers as well as the corresponding photovoltaic performances were systematically studied. Moreover, four fluorinated or chlorinated polymers, i.e., PDBT-X (X = F, Cl, 2F, and 2Cl), based on dithieno[2,3-d:2′,30-d′]-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′] dithiophene (DTBDT) were synthesized. Different kinds and extents of halogenations have different impacts on the energy levels and molecular configurations of the polymers; when the polymers are blended with the non-fullerene acceptor IT-4F, the devices based on PDBT-Cl:IT-4F exhibit the highest PCE of 12.6%, which is the best performance reported to date for devices based on the DTBDT polymer. The devices based on PDBT-F, -2F, and -2Cl showed the PCE of 10.0%, 10.2% and 6.2%, respectively. The low PCEs were attributed to the poor stacking and random orientation of the polymer:IT-4F blending films.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs) with distinguished characteristics, such as wide sources, low-cost, and easy processing, show indispensable applications in flexible and large-area devices. With their development in the past few decades, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has achieved significant improvement of over 15%, which shows favorable industrialization prospects. However, the synthesis of more high-performance candidate materials as active layers is still one of the cornerstones to further promote this field; recently, a series of popular materials, such as ITIC and IT-4F, also called “star molecules”, based on fused aromatic cores with strong electron-withdrawing end groups have been synthesized; they exhibit the advantages of easy to tune energy levels and strong absorption in the near-infrared region and have gradually occupied the most important place in the organic photovoltaic (OPV) fields. For donor materials, polymers such as PBDB-T proposed by HOU and P3TEA proposed by YAN are two representative kinds of high-performance candidates that have exhibited fine properties in PSCs; the dithieno[2,3-d:2′,30-d′]-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (DTBDT) unit is another high-performance candidate with a large conjugate plane and length, which can effectively facilitate charge transport and thus improve the short circuit current density (Jsc).

Side-chain engineering plays a significant role in the tuning of absorption range and energy levels and optimization of the solubility and film-forming property. The main strategies of side-chain engineering are tuning of the length of the alkyl chain, replacement of the alkyl chain with an alkoxy chain or an aromatic group, and introduction of electron donating/withdrawing atoms into the side chain. In particular, the introduction of halogen atoms into the side chains can effectively lower down the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and affect the π–π stacking with significant improvement in the open circuit voltage (Voc) and Jsc. In our previous study, fluorine atoms have been introduced into the side chain of DTBDT-based polymer donors to effectively enhance the PCE. Recently, some progress has been made in the development of chlorinated polymers, and it has been found that chlorine atoms can serve the same or even better function than fluorine atoms in increasing the performance of polymer donors; however, the influence of the quantity and position of halogen atoms in the side chain of a polymer on the performance of the polymer donor has rarely been systematically discussed.
Herein, four different polymers with different halogenated side groups (as shown in Fig. 1a) were selected as donors to blend with the non-fullerene acceptor IT-4F. Different kinds and extents of halogenation significantly affect the absorptions and energy levels of polymers; in addition, the Voc of the devices based on different halogenated polymers significantly varies (from 0.81 to 0.99 V) due to the variation in the energy levels. Moreover, phase separation between the donor and acceptor is a decisive factor for the PCE. The device based on PDBT-Cl:IT-4F shows the best “face-on” orientation and phase separation, which promote charge transport and reduce bimolecular recombination; thus, the PCE of 12.6% is achieved. In contrast, the phase separation of PDBT-F:IT-4F and PDBT-2F:IT-4F is relatively poor because of their random orientation, which impacts the performance, especially for FF.
Hence, the PCEs of the devices based on PDBT-F and -2F are only 10%. Moreover, the polymer PDBT-2Cl with the deepest energy level exhibits the pretty high Voc of 0.99 V due to the strong electron-withdrawing ability of the bis-chlorinated thiophene. However, the bis-chlorinated thiophene shows larger steric hindrance, which has an adverse effect on stacking and phase separation, thus influencing the charge transport and bimolecular recombination. Finally, the devices based on PDBT-2Cl show the low PCE of 6.2% despite high Voc.

The polymer donors PDBT-F and PDBT-2F were synthesized according to our previously reported study. Typically, two chlorinated polymer donors, i.e., PDBT-Cl and PDBT-2Cl, were designed and synthesized, and the synthesis process and characterization data of the products are shown in Fig. S1 in the ESI. All polymers exhibit moderate solubility in chlorobenzene (CB) but good solubility in chloroform (CF) and o-dichlorobenzene (o-DCB) at room temperature. The molecular weight (Mn) and polydispersity index (PDI) of the polymers were determined by gel permeation chromatography (GPC) and are summarized in Table 1. Thermogravimetric (TG) measurements were conducted to investigate the thermal stability of these polymers, and the results are shown in Fig. S2 (ESI); the temperatures at which all polymers have 95% weight remaining are higher than 390 °C; this means that these four polymers have high thermal stabilities. Note that the thermal decomposition temperature of chlorinated polymers (406 and 413 °C) is higher than that of the counterpart fluorinated polymers (375 and 398 °C). Moreover, no obvious glass transition temperature can be observed in the polymers in the range from r.t. to 300 °C except for PDBT-2Cl (as shown in Fig. S3, ESI); this indicates that the molecular configuration of PDBT-2Cl is most disordered.

Polymer

λ
solnmax (nm)

λ
filmmax (nm)

λ
filmedge (nm)

E
opt.g (eV)
HOMO (eV)
LUMO (eV)

M
n (kDa)
PDI
PDBT-F
577
584
692
1.81
−5.39
−3.57
96.9
1.46
PDBT-Cl
583
583
684
1.83
−5.41
−3.56
112.0
1.38
PDBT-2F
576
579
686
1.82
−5.43
−3.61
150.1
1.21
PDBT-2Cl
562
554
652
1.92
−5.49
−3.59
99.7
1.43

Density functional theory (DFT) at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level was employed to investigate the geometric properties and energy levels of different halogenated DTBDT units. Moreover, the dihedral angles between the core unit (DTBDT) and the side group (thiophene) were determined. According to Fig. 1b, the dihedral angles between DTBDT and mono fluorinated and chlorinated thiophene are similar (77.28° and 77.42°, respectively). As expected, this small difference in dihedral angels indicates that halogen atoms at the X-position (β-position of thiophene that remains away from the DTBDT core) do not significantly change the steric configuration of polymers. However, when mono halogenated side groups are replaced with bis halogenated side groups, the dihedral angles between thiophene and the DTBDT unit display entirely different values and tendencies. The dihedral angle is 73.20° for bis fluorinated polymer, which is smaller than that of the mono fluorinated polymer. This decrease can be explained by the S⋯F interaction between the fluorine atom at the Y-position (β-position of the thiophene, which is close to the DTBDT core) and the sulphur atom, which is connected to the benzene ring. At this point, non-bonding interactions dominate the dihedral angle. In contrast, the bis chlorinated thiophene shows the significantly larger dihedral angle of 85.70° to the DTBDT unit, which is a result of the large hindrance of the chlorine atom with relatively larger atomic radius. Although there is a Cl···S interaction, this attractive force cannot offset the steric hindrance generated by the chlorine atoms with large size. At this point, the steric hindrance dominates. Hence, in these four kinds of halogenations, the bis chlorinated side group displays largest dihedral angle and largest steric hindrance, which is orthogonal to the DTBDT conjugate plane, whereas the dual fluorinated side group displays smallest dihedral angle and steric hindrance. On the other hand, the planarities of the DTBDT units, which are affected by the side groups, were also investigated. The dihedral angles of the four carbon atoms in the DTBDT unit (shown in Fig. S4, ESI) are 179.33°, 179.48°, 179.56° and 179.97°. This result suggests that the side groups can distort the planarity of the DTBDT unit to some extent due to the interaction between the halogen atom in the side group and the sulphur atom in DTBDT. The properties of steric hindrance and planarity can work together to effectively influence the π–π stacking, crystallinity and charge transport capability that have a significant impact on Jsc.

The dipole moments of the halogenated thiophene were obtained from the DFT results. The dipole moments of the thiophene group substituted by F, Cl, 2F, and 2Cl are 0.65, 1.14, 1.75, 2.28, respectively. Dual-substituted polymers show larger dipole moments than mono-substituted polymers due to their stronger electron withdrawing ability. As is known, the fluorine atom has largest electronegativity among all elements. However, chlorinated thiophene displays larger dipole moments than fluorinated thiophene. This may be attributed to the 3d0 empty orbital, which causes electron delocalization from the thiophene ring to the chlorine atoms and thus leads to larger dipole moment. The energy levels of the halogenated DTBDT units were also calculated. The HOMO levels are −5.41, −5.45, −5.47, and −5.52 eV for DTBDT-F, DTBDT-Cl, DTBDT-2F, and DTBDT-2Cl, respectively. Moreover, the LUMO levels are −1.66, −1.71, −1.74, and −1.74 eV (Fig. S5, ESI). As expected, the values of the energy levels are consistent with the dipole moments of halogenated thiophene. The energy levels of the dual-substituted units are deeper than those of the mono-substituted units, whereas the energy levels of the chlorinated units are deeper than those of the fluorinated units.

UV-vis absorption spectra were used to measure the absorption of the polymer solutions and neat films. The parameters are also summarized in Table 1. As shown in Fig. 2a, all the polymers show broad and strong absorption in the range of 500–700 nm in chloroform solutions. The maximum peaks of PDBT-F, -Cl, -2F, and -2Cl are 577, 583, 576, and 562 nm, respectively. The absorptions of polymers in chloroform solutions are also in accordance with the colors of the solutions of PDBT-F and -Cl, which are dark blue, -2F, which is dark purple, and -2Cl, which is purple; in the absorption spectra of the neat films, the maximum absorption peaks are located at 584, 583, 579 and 554 nm. The absorption edges of the polymers are 692, 680, 686, and 652 nm with the corresponding optical band gaps (Eoptg) of 1.81, 1.83, 1.82 and 1.92 eV. Moreover, compared to that of the solution, the absorption spectra of the neat films have a red-shift for fluorinated polymers, whereas they have a blue-shift for chlorinated polymers. For the red-shift of PDBT-F and -2F, the interactions between fluorine and sulphur or hydrogen can be a reasonable explanation, which reduce the dihedral angles and strengthen the aggregation; this is consistent with the DFT results. The blue-shift for PDBT-2Cl may be attributed to large size of the chlorine atoms with a large steric hindrance, which impedes the aggregation of polymers in the films to some extent. In addition, for PDBT-Cl, no obvious variation in the absorption is observed because aggregation exists in both the solution and the films. The shoulder peaks of the fluorinated polymers in the films are more obvious than those in the solution, whereas the shoulder peaks of the chlorinated polymers do not change significantly. The shoulder peaks also suggest aggregation of the polymers; this is consistent with the spectral shift. Note that the aggregation of PDBT-2F extensively varies from solution to film according to the red-shift and the obvious emergence of the shoulder peak in the films.


Electrochemical cyclic voltammetry (CV) was employed to determine the energy levels of the four polymers (as shown in Fig. S6, ESI). The onset oxidation potentials obtained from the CV curves are 0.68, 0.70, 0.72 and 0.78 eV. The corresponding energy levels are −5.39, −5.41, −5.43, and −5.49 eV for the HOMO levels and −3.57, −3.56, −3.61 and −3.59 eV for the LUMO levels according to the following equation:
EHOMO/LUMO = −e(Eox/red + 4.71) (eV)
The HOMO levels of the polymers show the same tendency as those of the DTBDT unit determined via the DFT calculation; on the one hand, a simple comparison of the results of chlorinated and fluorinated polymers suggests that the 3d0 empty orbital of chlorine can effectively delocalize the electron cloud to deepen the HOMO levels despite the strongest electronegativity of fluorine. On the other hand, when the halogenated side groups are located at the X and Y position in thiophene, the effect of electron-withdrawing end groups and delocalization can work together to influence the energy level of the polymers; when the polymer is blended with a certain acceptor, a lower HOMO level of the polymer is beneficial to achieve higher Voc. Thus, the descending order of Voc for these four polymers is as follows: dual chlorinated, dual fluorinated, mono chlorinated, and mono fluorinated polymer. The LUMO levels of PDBT-F, -Cl, -2F and -2Cl are −3.57, −3.56, −3.61 and −3.59 eV, respectively. It is found that the LUMO levels of the donor do not vary significantly; this may be because the halogenated side groups are located in the D (DTBDT) unit, and the polymers have D–A structures; therefore, the LUMO is mainly located at the A (BDD) unit. Thus, halogen atoms influence the HOMO rather than the LUMO. As a result, the band gaps of the polymers vary; this is consistent with the optical band gaps obtained from the absorption edges.

To compare the photovoltaic performances of the four polymer donors, devices with the conventional configurations of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polymers:IT-4F (1:1)/perylene diimide functionalized with amino N-oxide (PDINO)/Al were fabricated. The details of the device fabrication are shown in ESI.Table 2 summarizes the parameters of the devices with active layers, which consist of different halogenated polymers as donors and IT-4F as the acceptor. The corresponding characteristic current density–voltage (J–V) curves are displayed in Fig. 3a. The PDBT-F:IT-4F devices show the PCE of 10.0% with the Voc of 0.81 V, the Jsc of 20.9 mA cm−2 and the fill factor (FF) of 0.59. Moreover, the PDBT-2F:IT-4F devices show the PCE of 10.2% with the higher Voc of 0.87 V, the Jsc of 20.6 mA cm−2 and the FF of 0.57. The obviously improved Voc can be attributed to a deeper HOMO level of PDBT-2F. In the case of mono-substituted polymers, all three parameters, i.e. Voc, Jsc and FF, show some enhancement for the chlorinated polymer as compared to those for the fluorinated polymer. Among the devices based on these four polymers, the PDBT-Cl:IT-4F devices exhibit the best photovoltaic performances, with the PCE of 12.6%, the Voc of 0.82 V, the Jsc of 22.3 mA cm−2 and the FF of 0.69; this is the best performance reported to date for devices based on DTBDT. However, among the dual-substituted polymers, the chlorinated polymer shows poorer performance than the fluorinated polymer. Although with the high Voc of 0.99 V, the low Jsc of 15.1 mA cm−2 and FF of 0.42 impact the PCE of PDBT-2Cl:IT-4F devices to only 6.2%. Based on the results of the device performances, indeed, small differences in the substituted thiophene can influence the Voc, whereas the PCE of these four systems is mostly influenced by FF, which may be greatly affected by molecular configurations.

Polymer

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

J
cal (mA cm−2)
FF
PCEmax (PCEave) (%)

a Average PCE in brackets for over ten devices.

PDBT-F
0.81
20.9
19.6
0.59
10.0 (9.6)
PDBT-Cl
0.82
22.3
20.7
0.69
12.6 (12.3)
PDBT-2F
0.87
20.6
19.4
0.57
10.2 (10.0)
PDBT-2Cl
0.99
15.1
14.8
0.42
6.2 (5.6)
External quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra were investigated to calculate the theoretical current density of the devices. Fig. 3b demonstrates that the PDBT-Cl devices have highest EQE values in the entire range from 300 to 850 nm; this is consistent with the absorption of the polymer:IT-4F blend. The PDBT-F and -2F devices show a similar range and intensity of EQE, which is slightly lower than that of PDBT-Cl. Moreover, the EQE of PDBT-2Cl devices is inferior to that of the other devices in the entire range. Note that in the devices fabricated herein, the concentration of IT-4F and the thickness of the active layer are identical, and the EQE values of the four devices in the range from 600 to 850 nm are different from each other. In this case, due to high Voc of PDBT-2Cl:IT-4F, the low EQE could be ascribed to the processes of exciton dissociation, charge transfer, transport and collection processes, such as charge recombination, and defect trapping.

To have a better understanding of the exciton dissociation and charge extraction processes, the probability of charge dissociation P(E, T) of the four different halogenated polymer-based devices was calculated by following equation:
P(E, T) = Jph/Jsat
where
Jph is equal to Jlight − Jdark, Jlight is the current density under 100 mW cm−2 and Jdark is the current density in the dark; Veff is the value of bias voltage when Jph = 0; and Jsat is the value of Jph when Veff ≥ 2 V. Fig. 4a illustrates the plot of Jphversus Veff for different polymer-based devices. Under the short-circuit current conditions, the Jph = Jsc. And the values of Jsat are 22.34, 22.86, 21.67 and 17.45 mA cm−2 for PDBT-F, -Cl, -2F, and -2Cl, respectively. The corresponding P(E, T) are 0.94, 0.98, 0.95 and 0.87. A high value of P(E, T) means sufficient exciton dissociation and charge extraction. Hence, compared to PDBT-F and -2F-based devices, the PDBT-Cl-based devices show higher Jsc due to highly efficient exciton dissociation and charge collection. For PDBT-2Cl devices, the low charge extraction efficiency associated with the coarse phase separation could possibly be the reason for achieving low Jsc and FF.

Furthermore, the light intensity dependence of Voc and Jsc was investigated to confirm the degree of recombination in the devices. Fig. 4b demonstrates the dependence of Voc and Plight of the devices based on four polymers. When the monomolecular recombination dominates, the slope of the fitting line equals 2kBT/q, whereas when the bimolecular recombination dominates, the slope equals kBT/q. The slopes are 1.98, 2.00, 1.75 and 1.39 kBT/q for PDBT-F, -Cl, -2F, and -2Cl, respectively. This result indicates that the PDBT-F, -Cl, and -2F-based devices are mainly dominated by monomolecular recombination, whereas the PDBT-2Cl-based devices are predominated by bimolecular recombination. When the monomolecular (trap-assisted) recombination dominates, the holes and electrons mainly recombine in the defects or trap state. When the bimolecular recombination dominates, the recombination of free charges of holes and electrons mostly occurs at the interface between the donor and acceptor. Thus, the biomolecular recombination of the PDBT-2Cl-based devices is significantly higher than that of other devices possibly due to the insufficient driving force or poor phase separation between D and A, which accounts for the low Jsc and FF. On the other hand, the suppressed biomolecular recombination of the PDBT-Cl-based devices contributes to high Jsc and FF. Moreover, Fig. 4c displays the relationship between Jsc and Plight. According to the following equation: Jsc ∝ PlightS, the values of S, slopes of the fitting lines, are 0.93, 0.99, 0.92 and 0.84 for PDBT-F, -Cl, -2F, and -2Cl, respectively. A weaker biomolecular recombination occurs when S is close to 1. This result reveals that mono chlorinated polymers can effectively reduce the biomolecular recombination to boost the photovoltaic performance, whereas dual chlorinated polymers have a strong biomolecular recombination; thus, they achieve a dismal performance. The space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) method was carried out to measure the charge mobility of the four polymer-based devices to figure out the impact of halogenation of the polymers on their charge transport ability (Fig. 4d). The charge mobilities were obtained from the hole-only devices with the configuration ITO/PEDOT/polymers:IT-4F/MoO3/Al. The corresponding hole mobilities μh of PDBT-F, -Cl, -2F, and -2Cl are 9.80 × 10−4, 2.03 × 10−3, 1.30 × 10−3 and 3.16 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. The differences in the hole mobility demonstrate the effect of the halogenated side group of the polymers. The higher mobility of PDBT-Cl is affected by the stronger planarity and small steric hindrance of the side group, which contribute to higher Jsc. The PDBT-2Cl-based devices show low mobility due to a large steric hindrance. PDBT-2F with strongest planarity does not show highest mobility; this may be due to the morphology of the blending films.

To understand how the configurations of different halogenated polymers would affect their molecular packing and morphology, a grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurement was carried out. All samples were spin-coated onto PEDOT:PSS on silicon wafers. The profiles of the neat films are shown in Fig. S7 (ESI). At first glance, the PDBT-F and PDBT-Cl neat films show strong (010) peaks of π–π stacking in the IP (in plane) direction and (100) peaks of lamellar stacking in the OOP (out of plane) direction; this means high crystallinity with “edge-on” orientations for the mono-halogenated polymers. In contrast, the PDBT-2F and PDBT-2Cl neat films show their (010) peaks in the IP direction and (100) peaks in the OOP direction with a “face on” orientation. This clearly demonstrates that the extent of halogen substitution can reverse the orientation of the polymers. Moreover, compared to the cases of mono halogenated polymers, both the (010) and (100) peaks of the dual halogenated polymers are relatively low; this indicates that the dual halogenated polymers have more disordered nanostructures. For the dual polymer PDBT-2Cl, the molecular packing would be greatly influenced by the large dihedral angle between the DTBDT unit and the side group as well as the large size of the chlorine atoms. Although the PDBT-2F polymer has smallest dihedral angel between core and side group, the stacking of PDBT-2F film is still disordered. This phenomenon could be explained by the relatively poor solubility of PDBT-2F, which deposited from chloroform too quickly and thus could hardly show an ordered orientation. PDBT-F and -Cl with suitable solubility and molecular configuration show ordered orientations.

However, when these four DTBDT-based polymers were blended with IT-4F, the orientations varied. Fig. 5a displays the 2D profiles of films blended with polymers and IT-4F. The blending films were fabricated under the conditions of optimized devices. The 1D profiles of the in-plane and out-of-plane lines are presented in Fig. 5b. All the four systems show (010) peaks in the OOP direction and (100) peak in the IP direction in the same range. However, the neat films of PDBT-F and PDBT-Cl display strong “edge-on” orientations, and both blending films are transformed to “face-on” orientations. This suggests that the polymers effectively reverse their orientation when mixed with the IT-4F acceptor. More specifically, the (010) peaks of PDBT-X are at 1.74, 1.74. 1.77 and 1.72 Å−1 for -F, -Cl, -2F and -2Cl, respectively. The corresponding π–π stacking distances are 3.61, 3.61, 3.55 and 3.65 Å. Similarly, the lamellar stacking distances are 19.75, 19.75, 19.49 and 20.01 Å. Although PDBT-2F shows small π–π stacking and lamellar stacking distances in the PDBT-2F:IT-4F blending film, which is consistent with its good planarity, it still exhibits an obvious ring in the 2D profile. A similar ring is also observed in PDBT-F. Despite the tight stackings of the fluorinated polymer in the blending films, the orientations are not as “face-on” dominated as in the case of the chlorinated polymers. Compared to the fluorinated polymers, the chlorinated polymers can form more ordered “face-on” orientations with IT-4F that may originate due to the good solubility of the chlorinated polymers. This prevents the polymers from depositing too fast and enables them to form good orientations. Moreover, the coherent lengths (Lc) in the OOP direction are calculated by the following equation:
Lc = 2πk/fwhm
where
k is a shape factor (typically 0.9) and fwhm is the full width at half-maximum of the diffraction peak. The π–π stacking coherence length of the polymers in the corresponding polymer:IT-4F systems are 1.18, 1.51, 1.22 and 1.05 nm for PDBT-F, -Cl, -2F and -2Cl, respectively. In this way, the PDBT-Cl:IT-4F blending film exhibits largest coherence length with a highly ordered orientation, whereas PDBT-2Cl shows smallest Lc and may as a result show a highly random nanostructure. This result is consistent with the charge carrier mobility and photovoltaic performance. Overall, the intensity of the π–π stacking, the order of the “face-on” orientation and the phase separation work together to promote charge transport to obtain higher PCE.

Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was used to measure the surface morphology of the active layer. All samples were prepared under optimized conditions. Fig. 6 shows the height images and phase images of PDBT-X:IT-4F. All samples show small roughness with the RMS values of 1.49, 2.17, 2.55 and 1.32 nm. From the AFM images, the PDBT-Cl and -2F show large scale phase separation whereas PDBT-2Cl show small phase separation. The mean grain sizes of the blend films were also calculated. The mean grain sizes of PDBT-F, -Cl, -2F and -2Cl are 16.6, 20.6, 18.7 and 14.2 nm, respectively (Fig. S8, ESI). The grain sizes obtained from the AFM results have the same tendency as the coherence lengths obtained from GIWAXS. Good phase separation can increase the interface for charge dissociation, whereas a continuous phase can facilitate charge transport and reduce the bimolecular recombination. The PDBT-Cl:IT-4F blending films exhibit a large scale phase separation and show the best photovoltaic performance; the different kinds and extents of halogenation of the polymers with varied nanostructures may cause different scales of phase separation of the blending films.

In conclusion, the influence of the halogenations of the polymer donors on their photovoltaic performance was systematically studied based on four halogenated DTBDT polymers. On the one hand, halogenation can vary the steric configuration of the polymers by the dual function of non-bonding interactions and a steric hindrance effect. PDBT-2F shows smallest dihedral angle, which means strongest crystallization. On the other hand, the halogenation of the polymers can effectively deepen the HOMO levels, which in the high-to-low order are as follows: PDBT-F, Cl, -2F and -2Cl. The corresponding Voc of the PDBT-X:IT-4F (X = F, Cl, 2F, and 2Cl)-based devices are 0.81, 0.82, 0.88 and 0.99 V. However, the devices based on PDBT-Cl:IT-4F show highest PCE among these four systems. Further detailed investigations indicate that the PDBT-Cl:IT-4F film forms a strong and ordered face-on orientation that facilitates charge transport and reduce the recombination to finally obtain the PCE of 12.6%. In this study, the best performance of devices based on DTBDT-polymers has been achieved, and the trade-off between the energy levels and the molecular configurations of the halogenated polymers is revealed; thus, this study provides guidance for the further improvement of the photovoltaic performance via the introduction of halogen atoms into polymers.


The authors declare no conflict of interest.


Jiaming Huang and Lingchao Xie contributed equally to this work. This work was financially supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2017YFE0106000), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21574144, 51773212, 61705240 and 21674123), the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (LR16B040002), the Ningbo Municipal Science and Technology Innovative Research Team (2015B11002 and 2016B10005), the CAS Interdisciplinary Innovation Team, the CAS Key Project of Frontier Science Research (QYZDBSSW-SYS030), and the CAS Key Project of International Cooperation (174433KYSB20160065).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9qm00212j
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2019