 DOI: 10.1039/D1SE01279G
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 6059-6065


Lei
Zhang
,

Xiaoyu
Ge
,

Bingquan
Han
,

Lingbo
Xu
*,

Xiaoping
Wu
,

Ping
Lin
,

Peng
Wang
 and 

Can
Cui
*

Key Laboratory of Optical Field Manipulation of Zhejiang Province, Department of Physics, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou 310018, People's Republic of China. E-mail: xlb@zstu.edu.cn; cancui@zstu.edu.cn

Received
20th August 2021
, Accepted 15th October 2021
First published on 16th October 2021
High-quality electron transport layers (ETLs) are a crucial component of high-performance perovskite solar cells (PSCs) with the n–i–p configuration. Herein, a facile and effective way to improve the properties of SnO2 ETLs is developed via introducing thiosemicarbazide (TSC) as a multifunctional additive. Due to the interaction between TSC and SnO2 nanocrystals, the oxygen vacancies in SnO2 could be effectively passivated, increasing the conductivity of SnO2 ETLs. Moreover, the morphology of SnO2 ETLs is improved and the wettability is also increased with TSC introduction, facilitating crystallization of perovskite films. Consequently, the PSCs based on TSC-complexed SnO2 ETLs achieved a significant increase of power conversion efficiency with much reduced hysteresis and increased stability.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have become a hot topic since their power conversion efficiency (PCE) has quickly increased from 3.8% to 25.5% in the past 12 years. Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites exhibit advantages of excellent photoelectric properties and low cost of raw materials, which is attractive for next generation photovoltaic technology. Now many research studies focus on planar type PSCs with the n–i–p configuration, which consists of electron and hole transport layers, and perovskite light absorber layers. As an essential component, the electron transport layer (ETL) largely affects the overall performance of PSCs, and many researchers have paid much attention to this field. Derived from dye sensitized solar cells, TiO2 has been the most widely used electron transport layer in PSCs ever since its first demonstration and contributes to many world record efficiencies. The drawback of TiO2 lies in its high sintering temperature (>450 °C), low mobility, and severe photocatalytic corrosion in perovskites. Other materials have been developed to replace TiO2, such as PCBM, ZnO, SnO2, BaSnO3, etc., among which SnO2 has attracted most attention due to its low-temperature processibility, high mobility, high transmittance, and high chemical stability.

Roose et al. demonstrated that oxygen vacancies in SnO2 would form traps and consequently cause nonradiative recombination, which degrades the overall performance of PSCs. By introducing graphene quantum dots, an electron transfer process would take place to fill these traps. Extrinsic element doping with Sb5+ or Nb5+ could also increase the conductivity of SnO2 and improve the performances of PSCs. On the other hand, the surface properties of SnO2 play a vital role in the formation process of perovskites, which is crucial for the final performances. Detao Liu et al. used a mixture of n-octyltrimethoxysilane and aminopropyltrimethoxysilane to tailor the surface of SnO2 and demonstrated remarkable enlargement in the perovskite grain size. There are also many reports about other surface modifiers such as self-assembled monolayers or fullerene derivatives. For example, Xiaofei Hu et al. used a fullerene-polymer mixing layer to passivate the defects at the SnO2/perovskite interface and improve the performances of PSCs. Nevertheless, strategies that simultaneously passivate defects in SnO2 and promote perovskite growth have rarely been demonstrated.
Here in this study, thiosemicarbazide (TSC) was introduced into SnO2 as a multifunctional additive. The introduction of TSC boosts the PCE from 15.74% to 18.17% with improved stability and reduced hysteresis. We systematically studied how the incorporation of TSC affects the structure and photoelectric properties of SnO2 and perovskites.

A TSC-complexed SnO2 nanocrystalline colloid was prepared by adding TSC into SnCl4 solution and then stored in a muffle furnace at 85 °C for 12 hours. Fig. S1(a) shows the photographs of the TSC solution, pristine SnO2 colloid, and TSC-complexed SnO2 colloid. The TSC solution and the pristine SnO2 colloid are transparent while the TSC-complexed SnO2 colloid is milky, indicating the strong chemical complexation between TSC and SnO2 nanocrystals. Fig. S1(b) shows the typical high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of TSC-complexed SnO2 nanocrystals. The lattice fringe spacing of 0.33 nm corresponds to the (110) planes of rutile SnO2. To get further insight into the size distribution of SnO2 nanocrystals, we have performed dynamic light scattering (DLS) measurement, as shown in Fig. S1(c). The main particle size distribution varies from 11.1 nm of pristine SnO2 to 12.7 nm of TSC-complexed SnO2, showing no obvious aggregation. Fig. S1(d) shows the Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of the SnO2 colloid. A small characteristic peak of the Sn–S bond at ∼1236 cm−1 could be observed in the FTIR spectrum of TSC-complexed SnO2. Moreover, the characteristic peak of the CS bond shifts from ∼1645 cm−1 in TSC to ∼1625 cm−1 in TSC-complexed SnO2, as shown in the inset. These observations indicate the coordination reaction between TSC and SnO2 nanocrystals in colloids, where they form a complex. The SnO2 nanocrystalline colloid was then spin-coated on ITO substrates to act as ETLs in PSCs. We labelled the samples based on the amount of TSC added into the precursors and the control sample stands for the pristine SnO2 ETL without TSC. Details about the experimental section are included in the ESI.


Fig. 1 shows the statistical photovoltaic parameters of CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) PSCs based on SnO2 ETLs with different amounts of TSC. Generally, the addition of TSC contributes to the improvement of the short-circuit current density (JSC) and fill factor (FF), and finally boosts the PCE with good repeatability. Among all the devices, the PSCs based on TSC-15 ETLs perform the best. The average open-circuit voltage (VOC), JSC, FF, and PCE increase from 1.095 V, 21.61 mA cm−2, 66.52%, and 15.74% of the control devices to 1.099 V, 23.24 mA cm−2, 71.18%, and 18.17% of TSC-15 devices, respectively. Fig. S2 shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra, and the integrated photocurrent extracted from the spectra is 20.90, 22.22, 22.69 and 21.57 mA cm−2 for PSCs based on the control ETL, TSC-10 ETL, TSC-15 ETL, and TSC-20 ETL respectively, which is consistent with measured JSC. In the following we will focus on the control sample and TSC-15 sample to verify the mechanism of how the TSC addition improves the performances of PSCs.

Fig. 2(a–c) show the XPS spectra of pristine SnO2 (control sample) and TSC-complexed SnO2 (TSC-15). Compared with the control sample, the N 1s peak and S 2p peak could be observed in the XPS spectrum of the TSC-15 sample, confirming the presence of TSC, as shown in Fig. 2(a) and S3. Two Sn related peaks could be observed at 486.4 eV and 495.02 eV in the XPS spectrum of the control sample, corresponding to Sn 3d5/2 and 3d3/2 peaks, respectively. These peaks blue shifted to 487.05 eV and 495.37 eV after complexing with TSC. The increased binding energy indicates enhanced positive charges around Sn atoms, confirming the successful anchoring of TSC on the SnO2 surface. This should stem from the S ions in TSC, which could either form bonds with dangling Sn or occupy oxygen vacancies (VO) on the SnO2 surface.Fig. 2(c) shows the O 1s core-level spectra. The O 1s peak could be divided into two components, one (lower binding energy) attributed to lattice oxygen (Olatt) and the other (higher binding energy) attributed to adsorbed oxygen (Oads) at VO. The ratio between the integrated peak area of Olatt and Oads increases from 2.3 to 4.2 after TSC introduction, confirming the passivation of VOvia TSC. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) spectra, as shown in Fig. S4(a and b), reveal that the work function of SnO2 only shows a slight variation of 0.03 eV after TSC introduction, which is in the range of measurement errors and thus should have minimal effect on charge transportation. Fig. S4(c) shows the UV-vis absorption spectra of SnO2 ETLs, and the band gap extracted from the Tauc plot is the same for the control ETL and TSC-15 ETL. Accordingly, we could calculate the valence band maximum and conduction band minimum of SnO2 ETLs and draw the energy level diagrams for PSCs, which is listed in Table S1 and shown in Fig. S4(d). The results demonstrate that TSC introduction doesn't change the band structure of SnO2 ETLs. Yet the J–V curves of SnO2 ETLs do demonstrate a significant increase in conductivity after TSC introduction, as shown in Fig. 2(d). Previous reports have demonstrated that incorporating SnO2 nanoparticles solely as the ETL would lead to low conductivity due to the numerous surface traps such as oxygen vacancies and Sn dangling bonds. By incorporating TSC into SnO2, these defects could be effectively passivated, as we have demonstrated through FTIR and XPS measurements. As a result, the conductivity of TSC-complexed SnO2 could be improved. The increased conductivity of TSC-complexed SnO2 ETLs reduces the overall series resistance, which is beneficial for the improvement of JSC and FF.
The surface properties of SnO2 ETLs have a vital effect on the growth of perovskite films. To verify the effect of TSC incorporation on the morphology of SnO2 ETLs, we have conducted atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurement. As shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b), the root mean square (RMS) roughness of the TSC-15 ETL shows a significant reduction from 2.2 nm of the control sample to 0.7 nm. According to Bi's report, the surface roughness of SnO2 ETLs largely depends on the colloid size, which is governed by agglomeration of SnO2 nanocrystals. The reduced roughness in our case suggests that TSC complexation could suppress the agglomeration of SnO2 nanocrystals and thus lead to better dispersion, similar to the case in Bi's report. Moreover, to study how TSC introduction influences the wettability of SnO2 ETLs, we have conducted contact angle measurements. As shown in Fig. 3(c) and (d), the contact angle decreases from 19.1° of the control ETL to 9.8° of the TSC-15 ETL. The increased wettability after TSC introduction is ascribed to the excellent hydrophilic nature of ammonium functional groups in TSC molecules, which is beneficial to the formation of perovskite films.

Fig. 4(a) and (b) show the top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of MAPbI3 perovskite films deposited on different ETLs. There are some pinholes in the perovskite film deposited on the pristine SnO2 ETL. In contrast, the perovskite film on the TSC-15 ETL exhibits improved coverage and an enlarged grain size. Fig. S5 shows the cross-sectional SEM images of MAPbI3 perovskite films deposited on different ETLs. The result is consistent with the top-view SEM images, where the perovskite film on the control ETL shows some pinholes and the counterpart on ETL-15 is denser. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of perovskites are also consistent with the results of SEM images. As shown in Fig. 4(c), three peaks at 14.15, 28.38, and 31.84° could be clearly observed in the XRD patterns, corresponding to the (110), (220), (310) crystal planes of cubic MAPbI3. The diffraction peak position is identical in the two samples while the peak intensity for the perovskite grown on the TSC-15 ETL increases significantly, indicating that TSC contributes to the crystallinity enhancement of perovskite without changing its crystal structure or inducing preferential orientation. The improved crystallinity was probably due to hydrogen-bonding or electrostatic interactions between the amino groups in TSC and the perovskite frameworks, which could facilitate the nucleation of crystals. Due to the improved morphology, the perovskite film deposited on the TSC-15 ETL shows a slight increase of absorbance as shown in Fig. 4(d), which is beneficial for charge generation.
It is believed that nonradiative recombination mainly occurs at grain boundaries of perovskite films where there are plenty of defects. Enlarging the grain size would thus eliminate defects and facilitate charge transport. To evaluate the defect density in perovskite films deposited on different ETLs, we have conducted space charge limited current (SCLC) measurement of electron only devices. As shown in Fig. 5(a), the trap filled limit voltage (VTFL) could be extracted by fitting the dark J–V curves of electron only devices, which is 0.128 V for the device based on the control ETL and 0.107 V for the device based on the TSC-15 ETL. Accordingly, the defect density is calculated based on VTFL, which is 3.26 × 1015 cm−3 for the perovskite on the control ETL and 2.73 × 1015 cm−3 for the perovskite on the TSC-15 ETL, showing a reduction after TSC introduction. Steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements were conducted to study the charge transfer between perovskites and ETLs. As shown in Fig. 5(b) and (c), the PL intensity shows a remarkable quenching and the PL decay is accelerated for the perovskite film on the TSC-15 ETL, compared with the one on the pristine SnO2 ETL. The decay traces are fitted with a bi-exponential function and the results are listed in Table S2. The calculated average lifetime of carriers is 66.17 ns and 45.11 ns for the perovskites on the control ETL and TSC-15 ETL, respectively. The PL results indicate that the charge transfer between perovskite films and SnO2 ETLs is accelerated after TSC introduction. We have further conducted electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) to study the charge transport behaviors in PSCs. Fig. 5(d) shows the Nyquist plots of PSCs measured in the dark under a bias of 0.8 V and the equivalent circuit used for fitting. The extracted charge transport resistance (Rct) is 4695 Ω and 3509 Ω for the devices based on the control ETL and TSC-15 ETL, respectively. The EIS results demonstrate that TSC-complexed SnO2 does effectively increase the charge transport capability of MAPbI3 PSCs, which is responsible for the improvement of JSC and FF.
Apart from increasing the PCE, TSC introduction also contributes to the reduction of hysteresis, as shown in Fig. 6(a). The hysteresis index (HI) is calculated by using the following equation:
(1)
where PCE
Reverse and PCEForward represent the PCE measured in the reverse scan and the forward scan, respectively. The HI reduces from 17.03% to 3.59% after TSC introduction. It is believed that the hysteresis effect mainly originates from charge accumulation at the interface and nonradiative recombination. As a result, increased conductivity of ETLs, facilitated charge transfer between perovskites and ETLs, and eliminated defects in perovskites after TSC introduction all contribute to the reduction of the HI in PSCs. Furthermore, ageing tests were carried out under ambient conditions with a relative humidity of ∼45%. As shown in Fig. 6(b), the unsealed PSC based on the TSC-15 ETL exhibits improved stability compared with the control sample, retaining 83% of its initial PCE after 1000 hours, while the PSC based on the pristine SnO2 ETL only retains 75% of its original PCE. Fig. S6(a–c) show the detailed ageing curves of VOC, JSC, and FF for corresponding PSCs. Generally, VOC is relatively stable during the ageing test, while JSC and FF show an obvious decline. This is possibly due to the degradation of perovskites by moisture and halogenation of Ag electrodes by I− ions from perovskite grain boundaries. TSC introduction results in a smoothened and passivated surface of SnO2 and enlarged grains of perovskites, which mitigates the above-mentioned effects and contributes to the improvement of stability.


In summary, we have demonstrated that incorporating TSC into SnO2 based ETLs could effectively improve the performances of PSCs. TSC acts as a multifunctional additive with the benefits of improving the morphology of SnO2, passivating VO in SnO2, and promoting crystallization of perovskites simultaneously. PSCs with TSC-complexed SnO2 ETLs yield an average PCE as high as 18.17% with much reduced hysteresis and significantly improved stability, showing only a 17% PCE drop after 1000 hours of storage in air. Our work provides a facile and versatile way for the fabrication of high-performance PSCs.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61704154), Natural Science Foundation of Zhejiang Province (No. LY20F040006, LQ18A040005, and LY19F040009), Fundamental Research Funds of Zhejiang Sci-Tech University (No. 2019Q069), and Science Foundation of Zhejiang Sci-Tech University (No. 15062021-Y).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1se01279g
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021