 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA13922B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 5308-5314


Xia
Yang
,

Hanjun
Yang
,

Xiaotian
Hu
*,

Wenting
Li
,

Zhimin
Fang
,

Kaifeng
Zhang
,

Rui
Huang
,

Jinming
Li
,

Zhou
Yang
* and 

Yanlin
Song
*

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China. E-mail: yangz@ustb.edu.cn

Key Laboratory of Green Printing, Institute of Chemistry Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS), Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: ylsong@iccas.ac.cn; xiaotian@iccas.ac.cn

Key Laboratory of Luminescence and Optical Information, Ministry of Education, School of Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China

Institute of Polymers and Energy Chemistry, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China

College of Materials Science and Engineering, Wuhan Institute of Technology, Wuhan 430205, China

Beijing Moderation Technology Co., Ltd, Beijing 100027, China

Center for Excellence in Nanoscience (CAS), Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication (CAS), National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, China

Received
20th December 2019
, Accepted 6th February 2020
First published on 6th February 2020
All-inorganic cesium lead halide (CsPbX3) perovskites exhibit superior thermal stability compared to their organic–inorganic hybrid counterparts. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of CsPbI2Br perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has been over 16%. However, high-temperature annealing limits the feasibility of their application in flexible devices. Here, low-temperature processed flexible CsPbI2Br PSCs are designed by introducing Al-doped ZnO (AZO) as an electron-transport layer and tert-butyl cyanoacetate (t-BCA) as a passivation layer. The thickness-insensitive AZO significantly enhances the quality of the perovskite films and the reproducibility of the PSCs. t-BCA can effectively passivate the trap states and suppress charge recombination of CsPbI2Br films as well. The as-optimized flexible CsPbI2Br PSCs exhibit a high PCE of 15.08% (with an active area of 0.1 cm2), which is one of the highest efficiencies for flexible all-inorganic PSCs. The devices show outstanding stability, retaining 93% of their original PCE after being stored for 60 days, and retaining 91% and 86% of the initial efficiency after continuously heating for 360 hours at 85 °C and storing under 65% RH for 30 hours, respectively. In addition, the PSCs exhibit excellent mechanical stability, and retain 85% of their original value after 1000 bending cycles at a curvature radius of 3 mm.

All-inorganic cesium lead halide (CsPbX3) perovskites have attracted increasing attention, owing to their much better thermal stability compared to organic–inorganic hybrid ones. CsPbX3 perovskite solar cells (PSCs) as a new class of promising photovoltaic cells show a rapid improvement in efficiency from 2.9% to over 18%. In many cases, high-temperature annealing (>250 °C) is necessary for achieving high-performance CsPbX3 devices, which require perovskite layers and interfacial layers. For example, Yang et al. introduced high-temperature processed and CuBr2 doped TiO2 (the temperature of formation is up to 450 °C) as the electron transporting layer (ETL) to retard the crystallization dynamic process exhibiting a high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 16.15%. Yang and co-workers demonstrated all-inorganic CsPbX3 PSCs with minimized Eloss achieved by polymer-passivation, for which perovskite annealing temperature is 265 °C, delivering a PCE of 12.02% and an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of up to 1.32 V. However, such a high-temperature process is undesirable for flexible substrates and future roll-to-roll fabrication.

CsPbI2Br is a feasible material which possesses relatively low phase transition temperature. Lately, some approaches for preparing CsPbI2Br films at low temperature (<150 °C), such as decreasing the formation energy barriers of the α-CsPbI2Br phase by DMSO, hot-casting, HI and NMP, as well as incorporating a small amount of metal into CsPbI2Br, have been proposed. Besides, surface defects and trap states seriously affect the device performance. As a result, some molecules which contain cyano groups, pyridine, amine, sulfhydryl, fullerene and carbonyl have been developed to passivate surface defects and the trap state. However, the efficiency of flexible inorganic PSCs (only 13.14%) remains much below that of PSCs with high annealing temperature. Therefore, it is still challenging to improve the efficiency of flexible inorganic PSCs using a low-temperature process.
In this work, it is proposed to fabricate high-efficiency flexible inorganic PSCs by interfacial engineering, which uses Al-doped ZnO (AZO) as an ETL and tert-butyl cyanoacetate (t-BCA) as an anodic passivation layer on CsPbI2Br perovskite films. The thickness-insensitive AZO not only provides an appropriate energy level alignment with perovskites to improve Voc but also enhances the quality of perovskite films and improves the reproducibility of the flexible CsPbX3 PSCs. Furthermore, t-BCA can effectively passivate the surface trap states of CsPbI2Br films in a low-temperature process. Thus, the resulting short circuit current density (Jsc), Voc, fill factor (FF) and PCE of the optimized flexible PSCs (with an active area of 0.1 cm2) are up to 1.26 V, 15.87 mA cm−2, 75.41% and 15.08%, respectively. This efficiency is one of the highest reported efficiencies for flexible inorganic PSCs. Besides, the flexible CsPbI2Br PSCs are extremely stable, which maintain 85% and 91% of their original PCEs after 1000 bending cycles with a curvature radius of 3 mm and continuous heating for 360 hours at 85 °C, respectively.

We introduce AZO as an ETL and t-BCA on the perovskite films to passivate the defects for preparing flexible PSCs with superior photovoltaic performance and device stability. The device structure of PSCs (high-conductivity PEDOT:PSS (hc-PEDOT:PSS)/AZO/CsPbI2Br/t-BCA/PTAA/MoO3/Ag) is shown in Fig. 1a. The hc-PEDOT:PSS shows excellent performance as flexible electrodes to replace the fragile indium tin oxide electrodes. As illustrated in Fig. 1b, the cyano groups of t-BCA can chelate with undercoordinating Pb2+ and Cs+ to passivate the defects on the surface of CsPbI2Br perovskites. Moreover, it has been demonstrated that AZO could serve well as an ETL for organic–inorganic PSCs. This also triggers us to explore its feasibility for all-inorganic PSCs. Fig. 1c, S2 and S3 show the energy level alignments between the perovskite and different ETLs, which results in an enhancement of Voc. The UV-vis absorption spectra and PL spectra of ZnO and AZO are shown in Fig. S4. As shown by ball-and-stick models of AZO and ZnO in Fig. 1d, the intrinsic defects of ZnO could be efficiently passivated by doping Al.

To investigate the quality of CsPbI2Br layers based on different ETLs, the top-view scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of the perovskites are firstly presented in Fig. 2a–c, S5 and S6. The perovskites with SnO2 and AZO layers are compact, while that with ZnO has obvious pinholes. Fig. 2d shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) peaks of the perovskite films with AZO and ZnO at 14.4° and 29.4°, which correspond to the (100) and (200) crystal planes of the CsPbI2Br cubic structure. The XRD peaks of CsPbI2Br based on SnO2 layers at 14.2° and 29.1° are likely attributed to the I-rich perovskite crystals grown on SnO2 at low temperature. According to the Scherrer formula:
Dhkl = Kλ/βhklcosθ
(1)
where
Dhkl is the crystallite size in the direction perpendicular to the lattice planes, hkl are the Miller indices of the planes being analyzed, K is a numerical factor frequently referred to as the crystallite-shape factor, λ is the wavelength of the X-rays, βhkl is the width (full-width at half-maximum) of the X-ray diffraction peak in radians and θ is the Bragg angle. The βhkl of the perovskites with AZO is lower than those with ZnO and SnO2, suggesting that the crystallinity of perovskite films on AZO is enhanced.Fig. 2e shows the UV-visible absorption spectra of the perovskite films with different ETLs. The low temperature prepared perovskite films have an absorption edge at ≈653 nm (1.9 eV), which is consistent with the previously reported results for α-CsPbI2Br. The absorbance is enhanced when using AZO as an ETL. Furthermore, the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) measurements are carried out to study the interfacial effects of different ETLs on CsPbI2Br films. As illustrated in Fig. 2f, the perovskites with the AZO film exhibit highly efficient PL quenching than those with ZnO and SnO2, whatever the excitation light from the air side (AS) or the glass side (GS), suggesting a stronger electron extraction capability of the CsPbI2Br films based on AZO. Comparing the PL intensity of the excitation light from the AS and the GS of different ETLs, the perovskites on ZnO and SnO2 films displayed a strong PL intensity at the top side, while the PL emission at the GS with a weak signal. The PL signals of the perovskite with AZO from different sides are similar. It demonstrates that both the top and bottom surfaces have similar optical properties, and the perovskites with AZO grow well. And the thickness of AZO is up to 56 nm, the thickness-insensitive AZO is more suitable for future roll-to-roll fabrication. So far, the effects of the flexible performance of PSCs with different ETLs are shown in Fig. S1 and Table S1, the device based on AZO shows the highest PCE (12.74%).

As for further improving the efficiency of flexible CsPbI2Br PSCs, a passivation layer is prepared on the surface of perovskite films. The XRD peaks of the CsPbI2Br films remain unaltered after passivating the t-BCA layer, which means t-BCA does not incorporate into and perturb the CsPbI2Br crystal lattice (Fig. S7). However, a slightly increased intensity of the main diffraction peaks is observed, suggesting the enhanced texturing or crystallinity of perovskites. In addition, we evaluate the dynamics of the charge recombination via a variety of measurements including steady state PL, time-resolved PL (TRPL) decay and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). As shown in Fig. 3a, the perovskite films with t-BCA layers show a blue-shifted PL peak (643 nm) compared with the perovskites without t-BCA (647 nm). Spontaneous radiative recombination from the surface or grain boundary trap states in the perovskite film could induce a red shift of the perovskite emission peak, while a recovery of the intrinsic bandgap with a blue-shifted PL emission could be realized by the passivation of those traps. The blue-shifted peak indicates that a high-quality CsPbI2Br film with reduced surface trap states is obtained by passivating t-BCA. Meanwhile, the perovskite films with t-BCA layers show obvious PL quenching, indicating the faster electron extraction from perovskites with t-BCA layers. We also calculate the corresponding PL lifetimes of the CsPbI2Br films with and without t-BCA layers on AZO using a single-exponential fit to the TPRL spectrum in Fig. 3b. The CsPbI2Br films without t-BCA layers on AZO exhibit a relatively long PL lifetime of 5.7 ns, whereas PL lifetimes of those with t-BCA layers decrease to 3.6 ns. Thus, the t-BCA can effectively passivate the surface defects and decrease the recombination loss of CsPbI2Br PSCs.
The interfacial charge transfer properties of PSCs are investigated by EIS measurements. Herein, the EIS spectra are measured at an applied bias of Voc with a frequency range from 1 MHz to 100 Hz and a 30 mV AC amplitude under working conditions. The Nyquist plots from the impedance spectra and the corresponding circuit model of the PSCs with and without t-BCA layers are shown in Fig. 3c and S8, respectively. The PSCs based on the t-BCA layers suffer due to larger recombination resistance (Rrec) than that of the control devices. So the recombination process could be effectively suppressed by t-BCA (Table S2), which indicates that the enhanced charge transport properties and a reduced recombination rate result in the efficiency improvement of the CsPbI2Br PSCs with t-BCA layers. To better understand the interactions at the interfaces between the perovskite and the t-BCA layer, the bonding interactions between CsPbI2Br and t-BCA are studied by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurement. Fig. 3d–f show that both the Cs 3d and Pb 4f peaks shift toward lower binding energy while the N 1s peak from t-BCA shifts toward higher binding energy as compared with the control samples. The results confirm the formation of coordination bonds between the N atom and the metal cation. In addition, this interaction reduces the content of metallic lead in perovskite films, which further suggests that t-BCA can passivate the perovskite surface trap states.
We evaluate the effects of t-BCA layers on the PSC performance via the above device structure. Fig. 4a and Table 1 depict the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the CsPbI2Br PSCs with and without t-BCA layers. The solar cells with t-BCA layers outperform the PSCs without t-BCA at 0.1 cm2, leading to a much higher PCE of 15.08%. The Voc, FF, and Jsc simultaneously increase to 1.26 V, 75.41%, and 15.87 mA cm−2, respectively. To the best of our knowledge, it is one of the highest PCEs of low-temperature processed flexible CsPbX3 PSCs as compared with the previous reports (Table S4). The optimized concentration of t-BCA is investigated at 1 mg mL−1 as shown in Fig. S9. All the measured values of Jsc in our study well match with the photocurrent density values calculated by integrating the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum with an error below 5% (Fig. 4b). The integrated Jsc of 15.2 mA cm−2 calculated from the EQE is comparable to the value estimated for the device without t-BCA (14.4 mA cm−2), in agreement with the J–V characteristics. The PSCs with t-BCA layers exhibit negligible hysteresis (Fig. S10). Moreover, the corresponding steady state outputs of current density and efficiency at the maximum power point are shown in Fig. 4c. To prove the suppression of charge carrier recombination, dark-current measurements are shown in Fig. S11. The reverse current density of the device with the t-BCA layer is reduced by one order of magnitude relative to the control device, which indicates the increased shunt resistance and the suppressed charge carrier recombination and leakage current. The histogram of PCE and Gaussian fitting for 30 PSCs exhibit an excellent reproducibility as shown in Fig. 4d. Compared with the control ones, the statistical PV performance of a device with a t-BCA layer in Fig. S12 shows an improvement in all the PV parameters, especially Jsc and the FF. Besides the higher efficiency, the PSCs with t-BCA layers also show desirable stability. When the device being stored in N2 for 60 days, there is a less than 8% drop in PCE for operation (Fig. 4e). In addition, it could remain above 90% and 86% of the pristine PCE after continuously heating the device at 85 °C for 360 hours and storing under a high RH of 65% for 30 hours (Fig. 4f and g). Finally, we monitored the photostability of CsPbI2Br PSCs with and without t-BCA passivation layers under continuous light illumination in ambient air (Fig. 4h). After 180 hours, the PSCs retained 80% of their initial PCE.
Conditions

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
w/o t-BCA
1.25
14.94
68.37
12.74
w/w t-BCA
1.26
15.87
75.41
15.08
In order to further examine the passivation effect of t-BCA layers on perovskites, several characterization techniques including the trap-state density based on a space-charge limited current (SCLC) measurement model and light intensity-dependent J–V measurement are illustrated in Fig. 5. The trap state density (Nt) values are calculated via the trap-filling limited voltage (VTFL) using the equation
Nt = 2ε0VTFLεr/qL2
(2)
where
q is the electron charge, L is the thickness of the perovskite layer, ε is the relative dielectric constant, and ε0 is the vacuum permittivity. For the electron-only device, as shown in Fig. 5a, the defect-state density was 1.32 × 1016 cm−3 for the device without the t-BCA layer and 1.01 × 1016 for the device with the t-BCA layer. The results of the hole-only device show that the VTFL is reduced from 0.82 V to 0.67 V with t-BCA passivation (Fig. 5b), which verifies the effective passivation by t-BCA. The device structures are shown in Fig. S13. Furthermore, the relationships between the photoelectric response and incident light intensity (I) are investigated to estimate the recombination reactions (Fig. 5c and d). The recombination mechanism can be understood according to the equations

Jsc ∝ Iα (α ≤ 1)
(3)
and

Voc = εKTIn(I)/q
(4)
where
α and ε are the ideal factors related to recombination, K is the Boltzmann constant, T is the Kelvin temperature, and q is the elementary charge. Under the open-circuit conditions, the deviation of the slope from 1KT/q indicates the occurrence of trap-assisted recombination. The PSCs with t-BCA layers show a smaller slope of Vocversus the natural logarithm of light intensity (1.58KT/q) than the control one (1.84KT/q), revealing the reduction in trap-assisted recombination. The value of α for the PSCs without space charge effect will be close to 1, and the PSCs with t-BCA layers (α = 0.932) are subjected to a smaller space charge effect than the control devices (α = 0.913), revealing the decrease of bimolecular recombination. These results prove that the efficient defect passivation of the perovskite with the t-BCA layer can restrain charge recombination, thus favoring the improvement of PV performance and device stability.

To investigate the mechanical stability, the mechanical durability of flexible CsPbI2Br PSCs with t-BCA layers is tested by the bending measurement with different curvature radii and cycle times. Fig. 6a shows the normalized PCE versus different bending curvature radii, and the inset shows the photograph of the flexible PSCs. The J–V curves of the flexible PSCs before and after bending at curvature radii of 3 mm for 1000 cycles are shown in Fig. 6b. The PCE of the flexible PSCs exhibits no significant degradation after bending with a curvature radius of 12 mm. In addition, the flexible PSCs show excellent mechanical flexibility. There is only about 15% attenuation of PCE values after 1000 bending cycles at a curvature radius of 3 mm.

In summary, we have demonstrated a significant improvement in device performance and stability of flexible CsPbI2Br PSCs via introducing AZO as an ETL and t-BCA as an anodic passivation layer. The perovskite films deposited with AZO reveal a stronger electron extraction capability and adjustable energy level alignment. Moreover, t-BCA can effectively passivate the perovskite surface trap states and enhance the charge transport properties. Thus, the as-optimized flexible CsPbI2Br PSCs show a high PCE of 15.08% at 0.1 cm2. This strategy provides a new avenue towards upscaling the flexible inorganic PSCs for further applications.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2017YFA0206600) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51973017, 51673023, 51773045, 21572041 and 21772030).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Supplemental information includes experimental and characterization details. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta13922b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020