 DOI: 10.1039/C5NR06234A
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6328-6334


Abd. Rashid bin
Mohd Yusoff
,

Mohd Asri
Mat Teridi
 and 

Jin
Jang
*

Advanced Display Research Centre, Department of Information Display, Kyung Hee University, Dongdaemoon-gu, Seoul 130-701, Korea. E-mail: jjang@khu.ac.kr

Solar Energy Research Institute, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysi, a, 43600 Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia. E-mail: asri@ukm.edu.my

Received
10th September 2015
, Accepted 8th October 2015
First published on 12th October 2015
Solution processed zirconium acetylacetonate (Zr(acac)) is successfully employed as an electron extraction layer, replacing conventional titanium oxide, in planar CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells. The as-prepared Zr(acac) film possesses high transparency, high conductivity, a smooth morphology, high wettability, compatibility with PbI2 DMF solution, and an energy level matching that of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite material. An average power conversion efficiency of about 11.93%, along with a high fill factor of 74.36%, an open circuit voltage of 1.03 V, and a short-circuit current density of 15.58 mA cm−2 is achieved. The overall performance of the devices is slight better than that of cells using ruthenium acetylacetonate (Ru(acac)). The differences between solar cells with different electron extraction layers in charge recombination, charge transport and transfer and lifetime are further explored and it is demonstrate that Zr(acac) is a more effective and promising electron extraction layer. This work provides a simple, and cost effective route for the preparation of an effective hole extraction layer.

Recently, perovskite solar cells have attracted continuous attention in developing our future roadmap for clean energy technology due to their potential of low-cost manufacturing, light-weight and mechanical flexibility. It all started with a work by Japanese scientists, where they reported an efficiency of 3.8%. Two years later, Im and co-workers demonstrated such an improvement in liquid junction perovskite solar cells incorporating perovskite quantum dots on nanocrystalline titanium dioxide (TiO2) surface. Later, a fully solid-state mesoscopic heterojunction perovskite solar cell featuring nanoparticles of methyl ammonium lead iodide (CH3NH3)PbI3 was demonstrated by Kim and colleagues. To date, the highest record of power conversion efficiency (PCE) for a perovskite solar cell is 20.1% at an illumination of 1 sun (100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5 G). The traditional design for the inverted perovskite solar cell is FTO (Fluorine-doped tin oxide)/electron extraction layer (EEL)/perovskite layer/hole extraction layer (HEL) with dopant such as tert-butyl pyridine (tBP) and Li-bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl) imide (Li-TFSI)/metal contact such as Au, Ag and Al. In a previous report, the presence of dopant was shown to improve the device performance by absorbing the humidity so that the device stability of perovskite solar cells was only slowly degraded under exposure to ambient humidity. Further improvement has been made by Liu et al. where the use of a dopant-free tetrathiafulvalene (TTF) derivative hole extraction layer has led to an increase in device stability compared to conventional perovskite solar cells with the presence of a dopant.

In parallel to the aim of achieving high efficiency devices, the fundamental principles of perovskite solar cells must be understood from various perspectives such as impedance spectroscopy, transient photovoltage and photocurrent, femtosecond transient optical spectroscopy and theoretical calculation, which need to be investigated in order to avoid defects in perovskite solar cell. At the same time, our attention must also be given to the J–V hysteresis behaviour of perovskite solar cells with respect to the forward and reverse scan directions, owing to the fact that they are originated from the charge accumulation or dielectric polarization by ferroelectric properties. Nevertheless, the J–V hysteresis was found to be significantly dependent on the p- and n-type contact materials and mesoporous versus planar structures. From this aspect, making full use of the inverted structure is highly desired since: (i) poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) can be replaced, (ii) a cathode buffer layer can be introduced and is be able to increase the device stability due to lower absorption of humidity in air and (iii) various electron conductive pathways is expected to reduce the J–V hysteresis.
Another factor that must be considered for long term stability (reduced degradation) is to improve the energy barrier between the perovskite layer and the electron extraction layer. By introducing the electron extraction layer the amount of physical and chemical damage, degradation and oxygen diffusion can be reduced. The electron extraction layer will also increase the built-in potential, the open-circuit voltage (VOC) and finally enhance the PCE. Such as in the case of organic photovoltaics (OPV), the same electron extraction layers have also been used in perovskite solar cells including transition metal oxides, conjugated polymers and conjugated polyelectrolytes. Very recently, a highly improved OPV was successfully fabricated using zirconium acetylacetonate (Zr(acac)) as an EEL and to the best of our knowledge, there is no report about using Zr(acac) and ruthenium acetylacetonate (Ru(acac)) as EEL in perovskite solar cells. It is also worth noting that our proposed EELs have lower mobility compared to other EELs, for instance perovskite oxide (STO); 5–8 cm2 V s−1.
In this manuscript, our aims are to investigate the effect of EEL on reducing the J–V hysteresis and degradation in the conventional perovskite solar cell. The structure of the perovskite solar cells used in this study are: (i) FTO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/Zr(acac)/Au and (ii) FTO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/Ru(acac)/Au. We report null J–V hysteresis and high stability of a conventional perovskite solar cell based on the FTO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/Zr(acac)/Au structure.


Fig. 1 shows the device schematic diagram along with the corresponding energy levels diagram. In this study, we adopted a two-step spin-coating deposition of perovskite film. We will discuss more on why we chose this technique rather than a one step deposition in the later section. As shown in Fig. 1b, we anticipated that the hole will be collected at the FTO side and the electron will be collected at the Au side. The proposed Zr(acac) possesses a 1.22 eV conduction band, which is relatively high to block any hole back diffusion. The inclusion of Ru(acac) is to demonstrate the energy level alignment rather than to illustrate it as a double EEL. The details of the device fabrication are provided in the Experimental section. Fig. 1c illustrates a cross-sectional SEM image of the as-prepared solar cells, indicating a well-defined layer organization with layer-by-layer intermixing. One also observes several voids in the Zr(acac) layer and detailed investigations are currently being conducted to determine their influence.


Fig. 1d displays the XRD patterns of PEDOT:PSS, CH3NH3PbI3, Zr(acac), and Ru(acac) layers deposited on FTO substrates. The FTO substrate exhibits diffraction peaks at 26.3°, 33.2°, 36.6°, 50.1°, 54°, 60.3°, and 65.22°, which correspond to the (110), (101), (200), (211), (220), (310), and (301) planes, respectively. Due to the amorphous nature of the PEDOT:PSS layer, the diffraction peaks of FTO/PEDOT:PSS are almost similar to those of FTO. The CH3NH3PbI3 diffraction peaks at 14°, 24.35°, 28.3°, and 31.88° correspond to the (100), (111), (200), and (210) lattice planes of cubic CH3NH3PbI3 crystals, respectively. The deposition of Zr(acac) onto FTO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3 results in strong diffraction peaks at 30.1°, 34.6°, 50.3°, and 60°. The same trend was observed when the Ru(acac) layer was deposited onto FTO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3, which displayed strong peaks at 11.4° and 14.3° corresponding to the (110) and (101) lattice planes, respectively.
The current–voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured in the dark and under simulated solar illumination (AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2). The J–V curves of the average devices of each EEL are presented in Fig. 2a, and the device performance parameters are tabulated in Table 1. The devices with the Ru(acac) layer demonstrated the lowest PCE of 9.61%, with an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.01 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 13.28 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 71.65%. After incorporating the Zr(acac) layer into the devices, VOC, JSC, FF, and PCE increased dramatically to 1.03 V, 15.58 mA cm−2, 74.36%, and 11.93%, respectively. Compared to the device with the Ru(acac) layer, the device with the Zr(acac) layer illustrated an enhancement of ∼24.14% in its photovoltaic efficiency.
Materials

J
SC (mA cm−2)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a The calculated values from EQE spectra.

Ru(acac)
13.28 ± 0.11
13.02
1.01 ± 0.01
71.65 ± 0.21
9.61 ± 0.11
Zr(acac)
15.58 ± 0.07
15.22
1.03 ± 0.01
74.36 ± 0.13
11.93 ± 0.04
To investigate the reproducibility of the fabrication process, 25 devices were fabricated for each type of EEL using the same process and parameters. The averages over 25 devices of each EEL together with the corresponding standard deviations are summarized in Table 1. Devices of each EEL demonstrated consistent photovoltaic performance, as demonstrated by the rather small standard deviations of the performance parameters. The average photovoltaic efficiency of the devices with the Zr(acac) EEL is 11.93%, whereas the devices with the Ru(acac) EEL exhibit an average efficiency of 9.61%.
The dark current–voltage characteristic curves of both EELs were also obtained to determine the blocking effect on these EELs. Compared to the device with Ru(acac), the improved blocking capability can be seen in the device with Zr(acac) where the dark current was greatly suppressed by the introduction of the Zr(acac) layer. A lower dark current and the onset at a higher bias was detected for the Zr(acac) layer compared to those of the Ru(acac). In general, the lower dark current in the PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/Zr(acac) device indicates not only negligible back diffusion of holes from FTO to CH3NH3PbI3 and/or the Zr(acac) but also insignificant hole–electron recombination. Therefore, the improvements of JSC and VOC are expected. Indeed, as observed in Fig. 3a and Table 1, the solar cells incorporating the Zr(acac) layer demonstrated slightly increased JSC, VOC and FF. Furthermore, the enhancement in JSC is verified by the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra. The EQE spectra of the devices with different EELs are shown in Fig. 2b. An improvement is observed within the wavelength range from 350 to 750 nm for the Zr(acac) device. In addition, short-circuit currents calculated from the EQE spectra are in agreement with the values obtained from the J–V plots, which are collected in Table 1.
To further understand the charge recombination kinetics, we measured the dependence of JSC under various light intensities from 10 to 90 mW cm−2 (Fig. 3a). A power-law dependence of the JSC can be written as
JSC ∝ Iα
(1)
For the perovskite solar cell utilizing the Zr(acac) as the EEL, α = 0.988, i.e. close to 1. This implies that the charge collection efficiency is independent of light intensity. This also demonstrates that there is sufficient electron and hole mobility with no significant space charge build-up in the integrated perovskite solar cell. Charge carrier losses in the CH3NH3PbI3 may be dominated by monomolecular recombination via defects, while bimolecular recombination may cause only rather minor losses.
Time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) characteristics were investigated to analyse the charge transfer which occurred at the interface of CH3NH3PbI3/EELs. The PL decay transient of the solar cell was fitted using a bi-exponential decay function. Fig. 3b presents the time-resolved PL decay transients on the different interfaces. We obtained an average PL decay time (τaver) of 91 ns for CH3NH3PbI3/Ru(acac) and 41 ns for CH3NH3PbI3/Zr(acac). These values are in agreement with the previously reported PL decay time of MAPbI3−XClX perovskite. Compared to the CH3NH3PbI3/Ru(acac) interface, the CH3NH3PbI3/Zr(acac) interface remarkably reduced the PL decay time. This suggests that electrons separated from generated excitons within the CH3NH3PbI3 layer are efficiently extracted from CH3NH3PbI3 to the Zr(acac) layer. The PL decay time of the pristine perovskite is 108 ns (data not shown). It is also safe to conclude that the time-resolved PL decay measurements demonstrate the capability of the Zr(acac) layer to extract and transport electrons from the CH3NH3PbI3 to the Au cathode. This result is in good agreement with data obtained using Zr(acac) as the EEL in organic solar cells. This corresponds to the fact that most free carriers generated by illumination are efficiently transferred to the EEL, and that faster transfer occurs at the CH3NH3PbI3/Zr(acac) interface than at that of CH3NH3PbI3/Ru(acac), confirming the potential advantages of using thin-film Zr(acac) instead of Ru(acac).
Next, we conducted electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) not only to understand the internal electrical processes but also to scrutinize the interfacial electron transfer as well as the recombination processes occurring in the solar cell. For example, in our fabricated perovskite solar cells utilizing a Zr(acac) EEL, several interfaces are involved including FTO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3, CH3NH3PbI3/Zr(acac) and Zr(acac)/Au. In our case, EIS is used to understand the electron extraction ability of EELs. Fig. 3c shows the Nyquist plots of the two devices with Zr(acac) and Ru(acac) as EELs, with a bias of 0.5 V in the dark. One observes that there are two RC (a resistance (R) in parallel with a capacitance (C)) arcs observed for both devices. As can be seen in Fig. 3c, the arc of Zr(acac) is obviously larger compared to that of the Ru(acac) based perovskite solar cell agreeing well with the other data discussed above. We conclude that the charge recombination has been significantly suppressed when utilizing Zr(acac) as the EEL compared to using a Ru(acac) EEL.
To date, perovskite solar cells are known to demonstrate current hysteresis at certain voltage scanning rates or scan directions as illustrated in Fig. 4. There are a few possibilities for this undesirable hysteresis such as: (i) charge traps due to the low quality perovskite film, (ii) an unbalanced electron and hole transport rate, and (iii) defects in the interphase. Thus, it is safe to conclude that the published efficiency along with current hysteresis is probably not truly representative of the device performance.
As shown in Fig. 4a, the J–V curves of the perovskite cell fabricated with a Zr(acac) EEL scanned at two different directions and scan rates (Fig. 4b) exhibits null hysteresis. Our observations indicate that the current hysteresis is perhaps due to the defects on the perovskite film and the interfaces of PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/Zr(acac), which can be partly solved using a high quality perovskite film prepared by employing a two-step deposition. In general, two-step deposition is the most promising technique to obtain highly crystalline, homogenous, smooth and continuous perovskite films. Moreover, the quality of the perovskite film strongly depends on the quality of PbI2 film. Thus, this is one of the reasons why we adopted a conventional structure, because obtaining a highly dense and smooth PbI2 film on the surface of PEDOT:PSS is easier compared to depositing a perovskite film because PbI2 is less ionic compared to MAPbI3. A highly dense, high quality and smooth PbI2 film can be obtained by mixing a small amount of water in the precursor solution. Moreover, the steady-state JSC and PCE (Fig. 4c) are found to be stable for the entire experiment of about 500 s. The absence of JSC decay suggests a high quality of the deposited perovskite thin film.
To further demonstrate the potential of the Zr(acac) EEL, we recorded the device performance as a function of exposure time to ambient conditions with a humidity of approximately 47%. As shown in Fig. 5, the device efficiency of the Zr(acac)-based solar cells was drastically superior and demonstrated only 1% deterioration after 5 weeks of stability measurement. It is generally accepted that the devices incorporating PEDOT:PSS would be mostly degraded under these conditions. Moreover, the hygroscopic and highly acidic properties of PEDOT:PSS can activate the decomposition of CH3NH3PbI3 components because the lightly fixed CH3NH3+ cation in perovskite crystals can be actively converted to CH3NH2 with the aid of moisture. As a consequence, the CH3NH3PbI3 is changed to hexagonal PbI2 with the emission of CH3NH2 components owing to its very low boiling point (17 °C), which could be accelerated by a PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite junction. Finally, after 10 weeks of lifetime measurement, the Zr(acac) perovskite solar cells exhibited a degradation of about 10% from their initial value. This improved stability performance is currently under further investigation and we will report our findings in terms of the improvement elsewhere; it will not be treated in the current manuscript.

CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells with a Zr(acac) electron extraction layer have been fabricated. By adopting a two-step technique and optimizing the PEDOT:PSS film thickness, a PCE of up to 11.93% has been obtained. The charge separation and collection processes have been investigated by photoluminescence measurements. The PL quenching time decreases from 91 to 41 ns after Zr(acac) is introduced into the PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3 film, indicating that the EEL can effectively quench photogenerated excitons at the perovskite EEL interface. Further investigation by EIS demonstrates that the charge transfer resistance of the Zr(acac)-based devices is higher than that of the Ru(acac) devices, implying the good hole blocking ability. Therefore, it is suggested that the Zr(acac) EEL may be a promising candidate compared to conventional TiO2 film. Furthermore, the CH3NH3PbI3 solar cell with Zr(acac) EEL demonstrates no current hysteresis and better stability when stored at room temperature for 10 weeks.


Solar cells were fabricated on pre cleaned FTO-coated glass substrates with a sheet resistance of 20 Ω sq−1. First, a thin PEDOT:PSS layer was spin coated onto the substrate at 4000 rpm for 30 s and baked at 120 °C for 10 min. A PbI2 solution (dissolved in N,N-dimethylformamide at a concentration of 460 mg ml−1) was then spin coated on top of the PEDOT:PSS layer at 3000 rpm for 15 s. After drying for several minutes in air, the substrate was dipped into a solution of CH3NH3I in 2-propanol (10 mg ml−1) for 40 s, then dried under a flow of clean air. Later, the Zr(acac) ethanol solution was simply made by adding the Zr(acac) powder into anhydrous ethanol solvent then stirring overnight, producing a colorless solution with a concentration of 0.25–2 mg mL−1. The Zr(acac) electron extraction layer was prepared by directly spin-coating (1500–6000 rpm) the Zr(acac) ethanol solution onto the CH3NH3PbI3 for 60 s to obtain films with of various thicknesses. It is worth noting that no additional thermal annealing or post-treatment was carried out. To complete the fabrication procedure, a 150 nm-thick gold layer was deposited by thermal evaporation at a base pressure of 1 × 10−7 Torr. Prior to any electrical measurements, all devices were encapsulated with glass slides. All our fabricated devices had 0.1 cm2 active area.


The performance of the perovskite solar cells was obtained from J–V characteristics measured using a Keithley 2400 LV source meter. Solar cell performance was measured using a solar simulator, with an Air Mass 1.5 Global (AM 1.5 G) having an irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2. All measurements were carried out at room temperature, under a relative humidity of 47%. The EQE measurements were performed using an EQE system (Model 74000) obtained from Newport Oriel Instruments USA and HAMAMATSU calibrated silicon cell photodiodes as a reference diode. The wavelength was controlled with a monochromator of 200–1600 nm.


Time resolved photoluminescence measurements were conducted using a Hamamatsu streak camera containing a photocathode sensitized from the visible spectrum to 1300 nm and operated in the synchroscan mode. The samples were excited at 425 nm by the frequency-doubled output of a mode locked Ti:sapphire laser.


The scanning was conducted using a SEM, Hitachi S-4700.


The surface morphology of the thin films was obtained by tapping mode using an atomic force microscope (AFM, Digital Instrument Multimode equipped with a nanoscope IIIa controller).


The film thickness was measured using a Dektak AlphaStep Profiler.


Electrochemical impedance spectra were obtained at different applied biasses under dark conditions on a Zahner IM6e electrochemical workstation in the frequency range from 50 to 106 Hz with a perturbation amplitude of 10 mV. The obtained impedance spectra were fitted with Zview software based on an appropriate equivalent circuit.


The authors would like to thank MOSTI, National University of Malaysia for providing financial assistance with grant number 03-01-02-SF1231. This work was also supported by Human Resources Development program (no. 20134010200490) of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) grant funded by the Korea government Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016