 DOI: 10.1039/D0CP06575G
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 6162-6170


Yanru
Guo
,

Shuai
Yuan
,

Dongping
Zhu
,

Man
Yu
,

Hao-Yi
Wang
,

Jun
Lin
*,

Yi
Wang
,

Yujun
Qin
,

Jian-Ping
Zhang
 and 

Xi-Cheng
Ai
*

Department of Chemistry, Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, China. E-mail: jlin@ruc.edu.cn; xcai@ruc.edu.cn

School of Materials Engineering, Xi'an Aeronautical University, Xi'an 710077, China

Received
20th December 2020
, Accepted 18th February 2021
First published on 20th February 2021
Grain boundary trap passivation in perovskite films has become one of the most effective strategies for suppressing the charge recombination and enhancing the photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells, whereas the relevant trap-state properties and the charge carrier dynamics need to be further clarified. In this work, the CH3NH3Cl (MACl) additive is introduced into the MAI:PbI2 precursor solution to obtain perovskite films comprising various grain sizes with distinct grain boundaries and trap-state properties. The influence of grain boundary traps passivated with the MACl additive on trap-state properties and charge carrier transport/recombination dynamics is systematically studied with time-resolved spectroscopic and transient photoelectric characterization. Specifically, the MACl amount determines the content of the PbI2 residual in the final perovskite, leading to photoluminescence quenching induced by charge transfer. The trap-state distribution result reveals that the deep-level traps at the grain boundaries as the main sources of charge recombination centers are dramatically passivated. Low-temperature photoluminescence spectroscopy distinguishes and compares the trap-state emission related to different perovskite phases. Transient photoelectric measurements including photovoltage decay and charge extraction further demonstrate that the boundary trap passivation can effectively promote charge transport and inhibit charge recombination in devices treated with the optimized MACl amount. As a result, the corresponding device possesses superior photovoltaic parameters to the control device. This work proposes a systematic understanding of the grain boundary trap passivation strategy and provides a new insight into the development of high-performance perovskite solar cells.

Organic–inorganic halide perovskite material-based solar cells have attracted countless research interest owing to their high power conversion efficiency (PCE) and low-cost device manufacturing. During the last decade, the PCE of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) had markedly risen from 3.8% to 25.5%. This is attributable to the excellent physical properties of perovskite materials, such as the high absorption coefficient, long charge carrier lifetime, high carrier mobility, long carrier diffusion length and high tolerance for trap states. In addition, the dramatic development of PSCs also benefits from the persistent exploration and optimization of fabrication processes, including solvent engineering, interface optimization, component regulation and so on.

Perovskite films obtained through facile solution spin-coating and annealing processes are polycrystalline in nature and inexorably have grain boundaries. Such grain boundaries are particularly crucial for the photoelectric performance of PSCs because they have been proposed to act both as charge recombination centers and as conduction pathways. The dangling bonds, vacancies and ions at the boundaries of the perovskite grains are the main source of deep traps, which could accelerate charge recombination, increase energy loss and ultimately reduce the photovoltaic performance of the device. Therefore, numerous efforts have been devoted to preparing large-grained perovskite films with reduced grain boundaries or passivating the boundary traps through appropriate post-treatments. Among them, incorporating CH3NH3Cl (MACl) in the perovskite precursor is a prevalent and effective strategy in fabricating the perovskite films with enlarged grain size and decreased grain boundaries. The mechanism of MACl-induced perovskite grain size increase has unveiled that MACl participates in the perovskite growth although Cl is absent in the final perovskite. In general, the Cl− anion partially replaces the terminal I− anion during the perovskite crystal nucleation process, and the tail of the [(PbI3)n]n− octahedron is terminated with Cl−. The Cl-containing intermediate phase could serve as a bridge, which reorients the primary crystal phase and decelerates down the perovskite crystallization rate. Ultimately, the nanoscaled perovskite grains fuse into large perovskite grains. The perovskite films fabricated via the aid of the MACl additive possess large-size and high-quality perovskite grains, exhibiting superior behaviors in inhibiting charge recombination and promoting carrier transport. For instance, Cao et al. introduced MACl into the MAPbI3 precursor to obtain large perovskite grains with good crystallinity, and the photovoltaic performance of the corresponding PSC was significantly improved. Kim et al. validated the potential of using only the MACl additive to obtain stable FAPbI3-based devices for over 24% efficiency. More recently, Fang et al. studied the influence of MACl amounts on the Br-free FAPbI3 film and found that adequate MACl could enable the formation of stable α-FAPbI3 films with appropriate PbI2 residues for high-performance device. Obviously, the significant role of MACl in the PSC community is widely recognized and more related work is to be anticipated, whereas, the effects of the MACl additive on the trap-state properties of the perovskite film and the charge carrier dynamics in the device are still lack of systemic investigation.
In this work, to deeply understand the above issues, we prepare perovskite films with different grain sizes by incorporating MACl in the perovskite precursor, and examine their influence on the trap-state properties and the photoelectronic conversion dynamic process. The trap state analysis shows that the trap density in the perovskite film with enlarged grain size is significantly reduced, especially the deep-level traps at grain boundaries. Interestingly, a variation of the PbI2 residue in the perovskite films upon the addition of the MACl additive amount gives rise to an unusual luminescence quenching phenomenon due to the heterogeneous charge transfer from the perovskite phase to the PbI2 phase. The transient dynamics measurements manifest that the grain boundary trap passivation is beneficial to the charge transfer promotion and charge recombination inhibition, thus improving the performance of the device. The corresponding device with the optimized MACl amount achieves superior photovoltaic parameters with an enhanced PCE of 18.49% from 15.57% of control.

The devices are fabricated with a structure of glass/FTO/SnO2/perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au. Laser-ablated FTO glass (Pilkington TEC-7, 7 Ωsq−1) is successively rinsed with detergent, deionized water, acetone and ethanol using an ultrasonic bath for 30 min, respectively. Subsequently, the substrates are treated with oxygen plasma for 20 min. A SnO2 layer is deposited on substrates by spin-coating SnO2 colloidal solution at 4000 rpm for 30 s, and then sintered at 150 °C for 30 min in ambient air. MAPbI3 is prepared by dissolving PbI2 (1.2 M), MAI (1.2 M) and different masses of MACl (0, 1, 2, 5, 10, and 15 mg mL−1) into the mixed solvents of DMF:DMSO (7:3, v:v). The solution is spin-coated at 2500 rpm for 10 s and 5000 rpm for 20 s, and 200 μL of chlorobenzene is dropped onto the film 22 s after the start of spin-coating. After annealing at 100 °C for 30 min, 40 μL hole transport material solution is spin-coated onto the perovskite film at 5000 rpm for 30 s. The solution is prepared by dissolving Spiro-OMeTAD in chlorobenzene (72.3 mg mL−1), with the additives containing 28.8 μL of 4-tert-butyl pyridine, 17.5 μL of Li-TFSI in acetonitrile (520 mg mL−1) and 29 μL of cobalt FK209 in acetonitrile (300 mg mL−1). Finally, 80 nm thickness of gold is thermally evaporated as a top anode via a shadow mask. Unless otherwise stated, all materials are purchased from Alpha Aesar and Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Co., Ltd. All the chemicals are used without any further purification.


The morphologies of the perovskite films are characterized by atomic force microscopy (AFM, Bruker Dimension ICON) and field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, Hitachi SU8010) at an accelerating voltage of 3 kV, which is equipped with an energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) analyzer at 15 kV. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis is conducted on a Shimadzu XRD-7000 diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation in the 2θ range from 10° to 50° at a scan rate of 2° per min. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is measured using Thermo K-Alpha+ instrument. UV-vis absorption spectra are recorded on an Agilent Cary 60 spectrometer. Steady-state, temperature-dependent, and time-resolved photoluminescence (PL, TDPL and TRPL) spectra are recorded by using an Edinburgh FLS 980 spectrometer. PL is carried out at an excitation wavelength of 475 nm with irradiation from the side of spin-coated materials. TRPL is performed using a picosecond diode laser (EPL-475, 95 ps). For the TDPL, the temperature range is set from 78 to 298 K with an excitation wavelength of 475 nm. The space-charge limited current (SCLC) of devices with an ITO/perovskite/Au layout is measured on a Keithley 4200 in the dark from 0 to 2 V. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and thermal admittance spectroscopy (TAS) are performed using a ZAHENR PP211 electrochemical workstation in the dark from 0.1 to 106 Hz. A small AC voltage of 20 mV is used, and the DC bias is kept at zero during the measurement.


The current density (J)–voltage (V) characteristics of PSCs are measured using a Keithley 2400 source meter. The targeted cells without light soaking or voltage treatment history are exposed to a standardized sunlight simulator, which is calibrated using a standard silicon reference cell to AM 1.5G one-sun illumination (100 mW cm−2). A metal aperture mask is used to fix the active area to 0.1 cm2. The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra are measured using an Enlitech QE-R and the detection wavelength range is set from 300 to 900 nm.


TPV measurements are conducted following a previous report. The PSC is illuminated from the substrate side using a laser diode with a central wavelength of 520 ± 5 nm to generate different bias photovoltages (Vph). Then a weak laser pulse (532 nm, 7 ns) is used to generate a small perturbation signal, which is controlled to be less than 5% of bias Vph. By adjusting the intensity of the laser diode, a series of desired Vph is obtained. The results of TPV are recorded using an oscilloscope (Lecroy 64Xs).


OCVD and TRCE measurements are conducted as previously reported. Briefly, a laser diode (520 nm) is used as the excitation source and an analogous electric switch with a response time of 4 ns is connected to the PSC in a parallel circuit. Both the PSC and the electric switch are controlled using a digital delay and pulse generator (DG535, Stanford Research System). The measurements are taken by switching between open-circuit and short-circuit conditions at different given times. The open circuit means that 1 MΩ is paralleled to the PSC, which records the photovoltage evolution. Meanwhile, the short-circuit conditions mean that 50 Ω is paralleled to the PSC to characterize the charge extraction process. The evolution of the electric signal is recorded using a digital oscilloscope (Lecroy 64Xs).


The SEM images of different perovskite films fabricated without and with the MACl additive are shown in Fig. 1a–d. In general, all the perovskite films are uniform with good crystal quality. The perovskite films with high coverage and quality can absorb and utilize light effectively, which in turn facilitates charge separation and transport, contributing to the photovoltaic performance. Obviously, the average grain sizes of the perovskite films with the MACl additive are larger than that of the film without MACl, as illustrated by the statistical distributions of the grain size (shown as inserted histograms in Fig. 1). The average grain size of the control film is about 270 nm, and the size increases to 410 nm, 580 nm and 600 nm with 1, 2 and 5 mg mL−1 of MACl additive in the perovskite precursor solution, respectively. For convenience, the four target perovskite films and the corresponding devices are referred to as GS-270, GS-410, GS-580 and GS-600 (here GS is the abbreviation of grain size), respectively, in the following description. The AFM images of the perovskite films (Fig. S1, ESI) also show that the grain size of the perovskite film is increased by adding MACl, in good agreement with SEM results. Consequently, the grain size of the perovskite can be simply controlled by the MACl additive, which could effectively reduce the grain boundaries of the perovskite film. EDS measurements are conducted to check if there is residue of Cl in the perovskite films after annealing. As shown in Fig. S2 (ESI), no Cl is detected from the EDS results, indicating that the Cl ion had evaporated during annealing. It is believed that the enlarged grain size and reduced grain boundaries could decrease the trap density of the perovskite film, beneficial to the photovoltaic performance. However, the standard deviation data of grain size statistics (Table S1, ESI) reveal that the increase of MACl leads to a wider grain size distribution, which may be detrimental to the film properties. Actually, the later photovoltaic measurements demonstrate that the PSC based on GS-600 with a standard deviation of 370.72 exhibits worse performance compared to that based on GS-580 with a standard deviation of 179.13.

The SCLC measurements are conducted to observe the trap density of the perovskite films and the results are displayed in Fig. S3 (ESI). From the SCLC curves, the voltages of trap-filled limit (VTFL) of GS-270, GS-410, GS-580 and GS-600 are estimated to be 0.59 V, 0.53 V, 0.36 V and 0.55 V, respectively. According to eqn (S1) (ESI), the density of trap states is proportional to the VTFL, thus the density of trap states in perovskite films decreases initially and then increases with the increase of average grain size, which also evidences that uniform grain size is the key factor for high-quality perovskite films. Therefore, in the following discussion, three target samples of GS-270, GS-410 and GS-580 will be discussed in detail to study the influence of grain boundary trap passivation on the trap-state properties and carrier dynamics in PSCs.
The XRD patterns demonstrate the phase composition and crystallinity of the perovskite films. As shown in Fig. 2a, except for the four characteristic peaks of the FTO/SnO2 substrate at 27.27°, 34.32°, 38.36° and 43.28°, the other typical peaks at 14.75°, 20.69°, 24.20°, 25.25°, 28.54°, 32.56°, 35.64°, 41.36° and 43.41° correspond to planes (110), (112), (211), (202), (220), (222), (312), (224) and (314) of the tetragonal perovskite phase, respectively, suggesting that the change in the film morphology did no alter the crystal structure of MAPbI3. Obviously, the GS-410 and GS-580 perovskite films have stronger diffraction intensity at the (110) plane, indicating the enhanced crystallinity of perovskite with large grain size. It is notable that there exists a trace amount of PbI2 (13.29°) in GS-410 and GS-580 samples, implying that Cl affects the nucleation and growth dynamics of perovskite films. A small amount of PbI2 has been considered favorable for the device performance owing to the passivation of interfacial traps.
The UV-vis absorption spectra of the perovskite films in Fig. 2b display that the GS-410 and GS-580 films achieve slight absorption enhancement compared with the control, mainly owing to the enlargement of the perovskite grain size. No evident change in the band edge for the samples suggests that the grain size has little effect on the band gap of the perovskite. The PL and TRPL measurements are performed to get insight into the photophysical properties and carrier recombination performance of the perovskite films. As seen in Fig. 2c, compared with the GS-270 film on quartz, the GS-410 and GS-580 films demonstrate unexpected PL quenching. In general, the PL emission would be enhanced for the enlarged perovskite crystals owing to the decrease of trap states and non-radiative recombination. We speculate that in our case the PL quenching comes from the charge transfer of heterojunctions from the perovskite to the PbI2 residue. To further explore the relationship of the PbI2 residue and PL quenching, a series of MACl additives were used to prepare the perovskite films (see the ESI for details). From the XRD results of the films (Fig. S4, ESI), the amount of the PbI2 residue is found to decrease with the increase of MACl, and the corresponding PL intensity presents an increase tendency (see the ESI, Fig. S4 and S5, for detailed results). It is conceivable that the existence of PbI2 at the perovskite grain boundary causes the formation of a heterojunction structure. The conduction band alignment between the perovskite and PbI2 makes it more favorable for e− transfer from the perovskite to PbI2, which reduces the charge radiation recombination and leads to the PL quenching in perovskite. Notably, the PL peaks of GS-410 and GS-580 show a red-shift compared with that of GS-270 due to the charge transfer from the perovskite to PbI2. This conclusion is further confirmed by the following TRPL results.
To further explore the behaviors of the charge carriers in the three kinds of perovskite films, the TRPL experiments were conducted and the results are presented in Fig. 2d. The TRPL data are fitted according to the biexponential functions:
where
A1 and A2 are the pre-exponential factors and τ1 and τ2 are the time constants. The detailed fitting parameters are summarized in Table S2 (ESI). All the samples exhibit biexponential behaviors with fast (lifetime τ1) and slow (lifetime τ2) regions, which are attributed to the band-to-band and trap-state-assisted charge recombination. The τ1 values for GS-410 and GS-580 are 3.08 ns and 3.16 ns, respectively, much shorter than 10.78 ns of GS-270, which is closely related to the rapid charge transfer from the perovskite to PbI2. In addition, the τ2 values for GS-410 and GS-580 are 31.32 ns and 36.36 ns, respectively, a little longer than 26.27 ns of GS-270. The lengthening of τ2 suggests that the traps in perovskite films diminish significantly with the enlarged grain size by the introduction of MACl. Consequently, the trap passivation enhances the capacity of photo-generated charge separation and transfer.

The XPS analysis of the perovskite films is provided in Fig. 3. The survey spectra clearly exhibit the presence of C, N, Pb and I elements (Fig. 3a), while no signal related to the Cl 2p electrons is found in perovskite films obtained with the MACl additive (Fig. 3b), which is consistent with EDS analysis. The Pb 4f peaks in Fig. 3c contain separated features assigned to Pb2+ species from Pb2+−I− bonding in the perovskite. As compared with the Pb 4f peaks of GS-270 at 143.10 eV and 138.21 eV, respectively, the two peaks of GS-410 and GS-580 shift to higher binding energies, which could be attributed to the reduction of the unsaturated Pb defects and the existence of PbI2 (144.01 eV and 138.9 eV for Pb 4f in PbI2). Similarly, in comparison with the I 3d peaks of GS-270 (619.40 eV and 138.90 eV), the peaks of GS-410 and GS-580 also shift to higher binding energies, indicating that the migratory I anion defect is passivated (Fig. 3d).
The trap-state properties of perovskite relating to the phase transformation can be obtained from low-temperature PL spectroscopy. We investigated the TDPL behavior of the perovskite films with different average grain sizes from 78 K to 298 K and the 3D contour maps are drawn in Fig. 4a, c and e. For all the samples, it is observed that a broad hump and a narrow peak dominate the emission spectra at low temperatures, and these two peaks shrink and vanish as the temperature reaches 168 K, being replaced by a strong single emission peak. The transition temperature coincides with the orthorhombic-to-tetragonal phase transition point of the MAPbI3 perovskite. Furthermore, the PL at 78 K is extracted to gain insight into the trap-state conditions in the three kinds of films. Fig. 4b, d and f illustrate the PL emissions at 78 K for the respective films, in which the resolved constituents of the emission peaks are marked. Apparently, the emission at low temperature is rather complicated, comprising different components. The peak at about 750 nm in all samples can be assigned to a band-to-band emission of the orthorhombic perovskite, and the corresponding magnified regions are shown in the insets. The peaks at about 795 nm (marked by deep purple shading) and at around 830 nm (marked by shallow purple shading) can be attributed to the band-to-band emission and trap-state emission of the tetragonal perovskite, respectively. It is noticeable that the area ratio of the latter to former deceases with the increase of the grain size (see detailed peak area analysis in Table S3, ESI), indicating effective passivation of the traps. The other two emission peaks around 860 nm and 900 nm can be assigned to the trap-state emissions of the orthorhombic perovskite considering the synchronous variation with the orthorhombic perovskite emission at 750 nm. These three peaks simultaneously decrease and vanish with increasing temperature owing to the complete orthorhombic-to-tetragonal phase transition.
Moreover, the important photophysical parameters of the perovskite materials, exciton binding energy (Eb), optical phonon energy (Eop) and polaron binding energy (Ep) can be acquired from the TDPL results. The parameters of the three perovskite films are summarized in Table 1 (see the ESI, Fig. S6 and S7, for details). Obviously, with the increase of grain size, Eb, Eop and Ep decrease gradually. The reduction of trap states weakens the phonon–exciton response and phonon polarization, thus suppressing phonon scattering and enhancing the shielding effect. As a result, GS-580 has the strongest charge shielding effect and the weakest phonon scattering effect, which facilitates the separation of the initial photo-induced excitons and the transfer of charge carriers, as well as the improvement of the ultimate photovoltaic performance.
Sample

E
b (meV)

E
op (meV)

E
p (meV)
GS-270
125.70
119.16
102.65
GS-410
119.15
37.91
32.66
GS-580
118.03
34.10
29.38
The benefit of trap passivation for improving the photovoltaic performance of devices is also demonstrated. The statistical distribution of the photovoltaic parameters for the PSCs based on different perovskite films is presented in Fig. S8 and Table S4 (ESI). Compared with the control PSCs, the GS-580 PSCs possess superior photovoltaic parameters with the average values of short-circuit current (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), and PCE increasing from 20.56 to 22.23 mA cm−2, 1.03 to 1.06 V, 0.72 to 0.75, and 15.22 to 17.50%, respectively. The champion J–V curves of three kinds of PSCs are displayed in Fig. 5a. The GS-270 PSC displays a VOC of 1.04 V, a JSC of 19.99 mA cm−2 and an FF of 0.73, resulting in a PCE of 15.57%. For the PSCs with MACl-treated perovskite films, the photovoltaic parameters increase initially and then decrease with the increase of MACl content, as seen in the statistical chart (Fig. S8, ESI). Amongst them, the GS-580 PSC delivers the best photovoltaic parameters of 1.07 V (VOC), 22.15 mA cm−2 (JSC) and 0.78 (FF), respectively, with the total PCE of 18.49%. The superior performance of the GS-580 PSC is attributed to the perovskite grain boundary trap passivation by the appropriate amount of the MACl additive, which is beneficial to the charge transfer promotion and charge recombination inhibition. By contrast, the photovoltaic parameters of GS-600 PSCs are slightly decreased on account of the uneven distribution of grain size and the increase of trap density, leading to the worsening of charge transfer and the speed of charge recombination.
The corresponding IPCE spectra accompanied by the integrated current densities of the PSCs are illustrated in Fig. 5b. For all PSCs, the IPCE curves show a broad range covering 300–770 nm, consistent with the absorption band edge of the perovskite film shown in Fig. 2a. The IPCE value improves with the increase of grain size, which indicates that the perovskite film with fewer traps can enhance the photon-to-electron conversion capability and promote the charge-collection proceeding. Correspondingly, the integrated current densities are 19.68 mA cm−2, 20.17 mA cm−2 and 20.99 mA cm−2 for the GS-270, GS-410 and GS-580 PSCs, respectively, in accordance with the JSC value obtained from the J–V curves (Fig. 5a). The steady-state power output near the maximum power point is used to further verify the photovoltaic performance difference of the devices. As shown in Fig. S9 (ESI), similar to J–V characteristics, the stabilized output measurement results of the three targeted PSCs are quite different, indicating that the trap passivation has a great impact on perfecting the photovoltaic performance. After light soaking for 200 s, the stabilized PCE of the GS-270 PSC becomes 14.48% and the current density at a voltage of 0.85 V becomes 17.15 mA cm−2, keeping 92% of the initial value. However, the GS-410 and GS-580 PSCs show stabilized PCEs of 16.66% and 18.15% respectively, which are well maintained during 200 s light soaking. The corresponding current density also exhibits good stability with 18.87 mA cm−2 (at 0.89 V) for the GS-410 PSC and 20.30 mA cm−2 (at 0.90 V) for the GS-580 PSC. These results show the significant effects in stabilizing the photovoltaic performance by passivating the grain boundary trap.
In order to elucidate the underlying influence of grain boundary trap passivation in the perovskite on charge transfer and recombination processes in devices, a series of transient photoelectric measurements (EIS, TAS, TPV, OCVD and TRCE) are carried out. EIS is widely used in PSCs to explore the electrical properties of interfaces such as charge transfer, carrier recombination and inner resistance.Fig. 6a shows the Nyquist plots of the PSCs and the equivalent circuit for simulation, and the fitted parameters are listed in Table S5 (ESI). The semicircle in the high frequency region is related to the charge transport and recombination process in PSCs, while the quasi-straight line in the low frequency region may originate from the relaxation/diffusion process of MA+/I− ions in the perovskite. The values of series resistance per surface units (Rs) for the GS-270, GS-410 and GS-580 PSCs are 226 Ω cm−2, 203 Ω cm−2, and 167 Ω cm−2, respectively, and the values of recombination resistance per surface units (Rrec) are 108 kΩ cm−2, 413 kΩ cm−2 and 695 kΩ cm−2, respectively. A high Rrec represents low recombination loss and efficient separation of charge carriers at interfaces. Under the same conditions, the GS-580 PSC shows the lowest Rs value and the highest Rrec value than the others owing to the trap passivation at grain boundaries by the introduction of MACl, which promotes carrier transfer and inhibits carrier recombination.
TAS was applied to characterize the distribution of trap states in the PSCs and the resulting dark capacitance–frequency (C–f) characteristics (frequency ranges from 0.1 to 106 Hz) are shown in Fig. S10 (ESI). The trap density of states (tDOS) is derived as a function of characteristic frequency-related energy (Eω), as exhibited in Fig. 6b (see details in the ESI). It is of importance that one can clearly observe significantly reduced tDOS for the GS-580 device in the deeper trap region (0.37–0.55 eV), which corresponds to the trap passivation at the grain boundaries. The shallower trap region (0.31–0.37 eV) is barely changed, indicating the comparable quality of the perovskite film bulk. As a consequence, the density of trap states can be determined by integrating the tDOS data as a function of Eω, which is 1.37 × 1018 cm−3 for the GS-270 PSC, 5.75 × 1017 cm−3 for GS-410 and 3.88 × 1017 cm−3 for GS-580, respectively. This result is comparable to the trap state density of the polycrystalline MAPbI3 perovskite film reported in the literature. The reasons for the remarkable reduction of trap-state densities upon adding the MACl additive are multifaceted. Firstly, the MACl additive helps to enlarge the grain sizes and increase the crystallinity, thus reducing the traps at grain boundaries of the perovskite films. Secondly, there is a moderate PbI2 residual in perovskite films obtained by adding MACl, which also contributes to the trap passivation. According to the corresponding trap state distribution in various PSCs, it could be confirmed that the traps at grain boundaries in perovskite films are deeper traps. The deeper traps mainly act as charge recombination centers, which are detrimental to charge separation and transfer, resulting in energy losses in PSCs.
The charge carrier recombination dynamic process is important in determining whether photo-generated charges can be extracted before recombination. In this context, the lifetime of the charge carriers could be mirrored by the carrier recombination because the net current flow through the device is zero at the open circuit and all photo-generated charges will recombine. To elucidate these behaviors, TPV measurement is performed to study the charge recombination dynamics of the targeted PSCs. Fig. S11 (ESI) illustrates the corresponding semi-logarithmic plots of normalized Vph decay curves against time for GS-270, GS-410 and GS-580 PSCs. Apparently, the PSCs present distinct decay profiles, suggesting their different charge carrier recombination processes. The charge recombination lifetimes (τr) are extracted by the exponential fitting of the decay traces, and the τr–Vph dependencies are plotted in Fig. 6c. To start with, the linear correlation between τr and Vph at the semi-logarithmic scale is observed, which suggests that the carrier recombination process follows the multiple-trapping model. In addition, the τr value crosses the magnitude of milliseconds to microseconds with the increases of Vph, attributed to the enhanced recombination rate at higher electron density. The τr values of GS-270, GS-410 and GS-580 are 3.27 × 10−6 s, 2.13 × 10−5 s and 4.09 × 10−5 s respectively when the Vph reaches 0.8 V, which is close to the magnitude of charge recombination time reported previously. It is obvious that the τr of the GS-580 PSC is the largest and the τr of the GS-270 PSC is the smallest over the whole Vph region, consistent with the trap density characterization and the photovoltaic performance of the devices.
Furthermore, the charge carrier behaviors were investigated by the OCVD and TRCE techniques. From the OCVD results in Fig. S12 (ESI), it is apparent that the voltage decay process gradually slows down with the increase of the grain size of perovskite films, which implies that the traps as recombination centers at grain boundaries are reduced and the photovoltage decay is suppressed. Consequently, the GS-580 PSC demonstrates the best photovoltage maintenance to ensure its superior photovoltaic performance. Based on the TRCE plots of the three PSCs in Fig. S13 (ESI), the charge quantity (Q) is obtained by integration of the extraction decay curve at certain photovoltage. The Q–Vph relations of the PSCs are displayed in Fig. 6d, from which the trap state properties could be estimated. Obviously, the GS-410 and GS-580 PSCs require a lower number of charges to reach the same photovoltage than the controlled GS-270 PSC. It demands 36.52 nC for GS-270, 22.84 nC for GS-410 and 21.66 nC for GS-580 to reach their VOC, which is close to the order of magnitude in MAPbI3-based PSCs. This result also suggests that the trap state density can be effectively passivated by increasing the grain size.

In summary, a series of perovskite films with distinct grain sizes are fabricated by adding MACl into the precursor solution, and then employed in PSCs to study the effects of grain boundary trap passivation on the trap-state properties and carrier dynamics. We found that upon addition of an appropriate amount of MACl additive (2 mg mL−1 in this work), there is a moderate PbI2 residual in the final perovskite film, which leads to the heterogeneous charge transfer from the perovskite to PbI2. The deep-level trap states at perovskite grain boundaries are effectively passivated via MACl-treatment, which plays a critical role in suppressing the non-radiative charge recombination. The transient dynamics measurements reveal that the MACl-induced grain boundary trap passivation significantly promotes the charge transport and inhibits the charge recombination in the devices. Owing to these advantages, the optimized PSC possesses superior photovoltaic parameters with a champion PCE of 18.49%, 19% higher than that of the control device. This work could provide a new insight into the influence of grain boundary trap passivation on the trap-state properties and carrier transport/recombination dynamics in PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2018YFA0208701) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21673287, 21773305, 21973112 and 21903062).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cp06575g
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2021