 DOI: 10.1039/B908673K
(Paper)
Dalton Trans., 2009, 10015-10020

Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical Terms
Mingkui Wang, Xin Li, Hong Lin, Peter Pechy, Shaik M. Zakeeruddin and Michael Grätzel*
Laboratory for Photonics and Interfaces, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, CH 1015, Lausanne, Switzerland. E-mail: michael.graetzel@epfl.ch; Fax: +41 (0)21 693 61 00; Tel: +41 (0)21 693 31 12
State Key Lab of New Ceramics & Fine Processing, Department of Material science and Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Received 30th April 2009, Accepted 16th June 2009
First published on 28th July 2009
We report a new class of molecular insulators that electronically passivate the surface of nanocrystalline titania films for high performance dye sensitized solar cells (DSC). Using electrical impedance measurements we demonstrate that co-adsorption of dineohexyl bis-(3,3-dimethyl-butyl)-phosphinic acid (DINHOP), along with the amphiphilic ruthenium sensitizer Z907Na increased substantially the power output of the cells mainly due to a retardation of interfacial recombination of photo-generated charge carriers. The use of phosphinates as anchoring groups opens up new avenues for modification of the surface by molecular insulators, sensitizers and other electro-active molecules to realize the desired optoelectronic performance of devices based on oxide junctions.

We report the findings on a new class of molecular insulators that electronically passivate the surface of nanocrystalline titania films. When used as coadsorbents along with a sensitizer, they enhance the performance of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) by increasing its open circuit voltage (Voc) without loss in short circuit current (Jsc). Our approach to increase the Voc is based on the interface engineering of the nanocrystalline TiO2/electrolyte junction. The dark current of the cell under forward bias can be reduced by the judicious design of the coadsorbent molecule to diminish the charge recombination and/or raise the conduction band edge energy level. Cografting of dyes with amphiphilic molecules containing carboxylate or phosphonate groups have been reported previously to enhance the stability and the efficiency of the DSCs. In the search for novel and more effective molecular insulators we conceived a new family of amphiphiles that contain phosphinic acid as an anchoring group. The structure of the first representative of this class of double chain amphiphiles, dineohexyl phosphinic acid, coded as DINHOP, is shown in Fig. 1.
DINHOP binds to titanium ions at the surface of titania via the phosphinate group. The binding is much stronger than that of aliphatic carboxylic acids, which bodes well for the long term stability of DSC's employing phospinates as anchoring groups for coadsorbents or even the sensitizer itself. The two neohexyl substituents attached to the phosphinic acid serve both as insulators and hydrophobic umbrellas protecting the TiO2 surface from being approached by water and the oxidized form of the redox mediator, e.g. triiodide ions. This should reduce the rate of recombination of the conduction band electrons injected by the photo-excited sensitizer into the titania nanoparticles with the triiodide ions. If so, one would expect DINHOP to increase the open circuit voltage of the DSC, as the suppression of the dark current allows higher electron concentrations to be reached in the film under illumination, which in turn augments their quasi-Fermi level. These expectations are borne out by the experiments reported here. In addition, exclusion of water from the titania surface promotes the long term stability of the device. The device also showed excellent stability under light soaking at 60 °C in simulated sunlight.

Preliminary experiments were conducted to evaluate the effect of DINHOP as a coadsorbent on the photovoltaic performance. The well known amphiphilic polypyridyl ruthenium complex, coded as Z907Na, was used as a reference sensitizer. Fig. 2 shows the ATR-FTIR spectra of mesoporous TiO2 electrodes stained with the Z907Na sensitizer alone or together with the coadsorbent, i.e., DINHOP. In the spectrum (a) of the transparent film coated with Z907Na alone, the single band at 2101 cm−1 arises from the ruthenium bound thiocyanato (NCS) group; the bands at 1598 and 1382 cm−1 are due to the asymmetric and symmetric stretching modes of carboxylate groups, indicating that the two carboxylic acid groups are deprotonated and involved in the adsorption of the dye on the surface of the TiO2via coordination of Ti(IV) ions; the peaks at 2924 and 2856 cm−1 correspond to the asymmetric and symmetric stretching modes of the CH2 units of the aliphatic chains. The sharp signals located at 1539, 1428 and 1235 cm−1 are due to the aromatic modes of bipyridine while the broad band centered at 3260 cm−1 is ascribed to the adsorbed water molecules. Spectra (b) and (c) were measured with the transparent TiO2 films coated with Z907Na and coadsorbent (DINHOP) in molar ratios of 4:1 and 1:1, respectively. As presented in the inset of Fig. 2, co-grafting of DINHOP is confirmed by the appearance of the P–O stretching bands at 1095 and 1045 cm−1. The surface adsorbed water peak at 3260 cm−1 was suppressed by DINHOP co-adsorption, confirming that access of water to the surface of the anatase nanocrystals is much more restricted in the case of the mixed monolayer than for the amphiphilic Z907Na dye alone. Alkylphosphonic acids are known to strongly bind to the oxide surfaces through formation of P–O–metal ion bonds, eliminating most of the hydrophilic surface sites that remain available for water adsorption even after grafting of the Z907Na dye. Changing the dye-to-DINHOP ratio from 4:1 to 1:1, resulted in a net increase in band intensity at 1045 cm−1 (in spectrum c) principally due to a higher DINHOP concentration on the TiO2 surface.
By monitoring the peak intensity at 1539 and 2101 cm−1, we observe that the dye concentration on the TiO2 surface was reduced by increasing the concentration of DINHOP in the dyeing solution. This result was further confirmed by measuring the UV-vis (Fig. 3) spectra of the transparent TiO2 films (film I) co-adsorbed with Z907Na and DINHOP at various molar ratios and monitoring the metal-to-ligand charge transfer transitions at 520 nm. It was found that the dye loading on the TiO2 surface decreased upon increasing the concentration of DINHOP in the dye solution. Thus the dye loading fell from 100% to 92% and 82% for dye solutions containing ((a) Z907Na alone, (b) Z907Na/DINHOP (4:1) and (c) Z907Na/DINHOP (1:1)), respectively. The decrease of the dye loading on the surface of the TiO2 film is caused by the competition of DINHOP adsorption with that of Z907Na.
EIS was employed to scrutinize the effect of DINHOP on the dark current, generated under forward bias at the nanocrystalline TiO2/electrolyte junction through the reduction of tri-iodide ions by conduction band electrons.
Fig. 4a compares the Nyquist plot of a bare nanocrystalline TiO2 film (device A) with that of A covered by a self-assembled DINHOP monolayer (device B), A stained by a monolayer of Z907Na (device C) and a mixed monolayer (Z907Na/DINHOP molar ratio 1:1, device D). The impedance data in Fig. 4a were measured at a forward bias of −0.525 V in the dark at 20 °C in the presence of iodide/tri-iodide redox electrolyte. The adsorption of DINHOP enlarges dramatically the diameter of the semicircle observed in the 1–200 Hz frequency range from device B compared to that of the bare nanocrystalline TiO2 film (device A). Because this diameter corresponds to the resistance of heterogeneous electron transfer from the TiO2 conduction band to tridiodide ions in the electrolyte, the increase indicates that the presence of a DINHOP monolayer causes a pronounced reduction in the dark current. The nanocrystalline TiO2 film loaded with the mixed monolayer of Z907Na/DINHOP (molar ratio 1:1 in the deposition solution, device D) shows the largest radius semicircle. The corresponding position of the phase angle maximum in the Bode plot exhibits a large shift towards lower frequency (ESI, Fig. S1), revealing an increase in the apparent recombination lifetime (τn, obtained by fitting the impedance data with the transmission line mode as discussed below) at a forward bias of −0.525 V from 38 ms (device A) to 254 ms (device B), 607 ms (device C), and 622 ms (device D). The dark current from impedance measurement under forward bias confirms the surface passivating effect exerted by DINHOP as shown in Fig. S2 of the ESI. These results show retardation of charge carrier recombination by the formation of an insulating barrier in the case of Z907Na/DINHOP (compared to that of Z907Na alone), thus enhancing the electron collection in the nanocrystalline TiO2 film.
The EIS spectra of devices C (sensitized with Z907Na) and D (co-grafted with Z907Na and DINHOP) in Fig. 4b present smaller electron transport resistance (Rt) in the TiO2 at the high frequency range (from 10 KHz to 200 Hz) than that for the bare TiO2 (device A). These spectra obey the transmission line model, suggested by Bisquert et al. Under forward bias, electrons are transferred from the FTO substrate into the TiO2 film, allowing electron propagation through its individual particles, the film resistance being Rt. The transport resistance relates only to the steady-state transport and reflects the rate of electron displacement in the conduction band. Thus, any TiO2 conduction band edge movement induced by the DINHOP and/or Z907Na adsorption can be inferred from tracing the electronic transport resistance (Rt) in the nanocrystalline titania film.Rt is inversely proportional to the concentration of the conduction band electrons, , which in turn depends exponentially on the difference in the position of the Fermi energy level (EFn) and the conduction band edge (Ecb) of the semiconductor, as expressed by eqn (1)
(1)
where [Ncb] is the concentration of accessible electronic states in the conduction band. Thus,
(2)
where R0 is the films resistance at the applied potential (U) where the electron Fermi level (EFn) matches the conduction band edge (Ecb), and EFp is the Fermi energy level of the redox couple in the electrolyte. The pre-exponential term R0 remains essentially constant for all of the devices provided that their geometrical dimensions are similar.
Fig. 5 presents the effect of the applied voltage on the transport resistance Rt under dark conditions for the four different mesoscopic TiO2 films. Rt exhibits the expected exponential behaviour, the bare nanocrystalline TiO2 film (device A) giving much higher Rt's when compared to the TiO2 films grafted with DINHOP (device B) and Z907Na/DINHOP (device D) at the same bias voltage (U). Device C (the TiO2 films sensitized with Z907Na) shows the smallest Rt values. The logarithm of the electron transport resistance shows parallel behaviour for the different surface modifications. The shift of log(Rt) indicates that the adsorbent changes the conduction band edge position with respect to the Fermi level of the electrons (Ecb−EFn). As the Fermi level in the nanocrystalline TiO2 is adjusted by the applied bias voltage U (in the dark U = EFn−EFp), a shift in the conduction band edge (Ecb) reveals itself by a displacement of the log(Rt) vs. U plot. Using eqn (2), we determined the shift of the TiO2 conduction band edge relative to the solution redox potential by extrapolating the log(Rt) line to the potential where it intersects the abscissa, corresponding to an Rt value of 0.1 Ω cm2. The latter value gives a good estimation of R0 in eqn (2) corresponding to the resistance of a titania film at an applied forward bias voltage for which the EFn approaches Ecb.
Fig. 5 illustrates that there is a small downward shift of the conduction band edge by about 20 mV for device B (the TiO2 surface modified with DINHOP) compared to that of device A (the bare TiO2). This arises from protonation of the titania surface by the phosphinate anchoring group. As a result, the concentration of the conduction band electrons at a given forward bias voltage U is higher for the DINHOP derivatized film than that for the bare titania. This should increase the rate of electron transfer to the tri-iodide ions. However, the electronically insulating action of the DINHOP's alkyl chains clearly overcompensates this increase of the interfacial electron transfer rate, resulting in a net retardation of the dark current as discussed below.
In order to compare the apparent recombination lifetime (τn, τn = RctCμ, Rct being the recombination resistance and Cμ being the chemical capacitance) with and without DINHOP surface modification for equal electron concentrations in the titania nanoparticles, the plot in Fig. 6a uses the difference between the conduction band edge and the Fermi level (Ecb−EFn) as abscissa instead of the applied forward bias voltage (U). The recombination resistance (Rct) and chemical capacitance (Cμ) were obtained by fitting the impedance data with the transmission line model. Strikingly, at the equal electron Fermi level offset, the DINHOP derivatized TiO2 electrode (device B) shows close to ten times longer τn than the bare film (device A). This demonstrates that the interfacial recombination between the electrons in the conduction band of the TiO2 with the tri-iodide ions in the electrolyte is strongly retarded by the self-assembled DINHOP monolayer. Fig. 6b shows that this results in a nearly fivefold increase of the electron diffusion length Le (, d being the film thickness) for device B than that of device A, which greatly benefits the charge carrier collection in dye-sensitized solar cells.
Fig. 7a presents the photocurrent–voltage curves of the different DSCs sensitized with Z907Na dye alone (device C) and with DINHOP as the coadsorbent (molar ratio 1:1, device D) measured under AM 1.5 full sunlight (intensity of the solar simulator 100 mW cm−2, spectral mismatch corrected). The photovoltaic parameters, i.e., the open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), short circuit current density (Jsc) and the photovoltaic conversion efficiency (η) for devices C and D are tabulated in Table 1. For the device C (Z907Na alone), the Jsc, Voc, and FF are 14.74 mA cm−2, 725 mV, and 0.67, respectively, yielding an overall conversion efficiency (η) of 7.2%. The corresponding parameters (Jsc, Voc, FF, and η) of device D are 14.8 mA cm−2, 763 mV, 0.70 and 7.9%, respectively. Thus DINHOP used as a coadsorbent along with Z907Na (device D) improves the Voc by 38 mV.
Device 
Adsorption condition
Jsc/mA cm−2
Voc/mV
FF
η/%
a The spectral distribution of our measurement system simulates AM 1.5 G solar emission. Short-circuit photocurrent density, Jsc; Open-circuit photovoltage, Voc; Fill factor, FF; Total power conversion efficiency, η. Cell area tested with a metal mask: 0.159 cm2.b Double layer films (film II) were used in the devices. The electrolyte composition is as follows: 1.0 M 1,3-dimethylimidazolium iodide (DMII), 0.15 M I2, 0.1 M guanidinium thiocyanate (GSCN), and 0.5 M N-butylbenzimidazole (NBB) in MPN.
C
Z907Na
14.74
725
0.67
7.24
D
Z907Na/DINHOP
14.8
763
0.70
7.91
Although a small amount of dye is replaced by the coadsorbent, determined by the UV-vis spectroscopy measurements shown in Fig. 3, the Jsc remained practically constant. This is attributed to the effect of the TiO2 overlayer composed of 400 nm sized particles applied in these experiments which augments the optical pathway by scattering, containing the photons in the nanostructure and rendering the light harvesting less sensitive to the loading of the film with sensitizer molecules than for the transparent nanocrystalline TiO2 films employed in Fig. 3. An alternative possible explanation is that the coadsorbent increases the electron collection efficiency due to an augmentation of the electron diffusion length. However in the present case, the electron diffusion length is sufficient even in the absence of coadsorbent to obtain a near quantitative collection of charge carriers.
EIS analysis was further used to understand the remarkable difference in the photovoltaic behavior of devices with and without the DINHOP as coadsorbent. In the case of the Z907Na grafted TiO2 film (device C), a downward shift of the conduction band edge energy level (Ecb) with respect to the Fermi level (EFp) of the redox couple by approximately 81 mV was observed compared to the bare TiO2 (device A) with the same electrolyte. A 52 mV downward shift of Ecb, relative to the bare TiO2, was witnessed for the Z907Na/DINHOP co-grafted TiO2 film (device D). The upward shift of the conduction band edge between devices C and D is therefore 29 mV. From these findings one expects the TiO2 film derivatized with the mixed monolayer to deliver a higher photovoltage than the film containing Z907Na dye alone, which is confirmed by the observation in Table 1 that the Voc of device D is 38 mV higher than that of device C. Device D shows a slightly longer recombination lifetime (τn) than device C at a given electron concentration as illustrated in Fig. 6a. As a result the electron diffusion length increases in the sequence C = D > B > A (Fig. 6b). Transient photovoltage decay measurements confirmed that the presence of DINHOP retards the interfacial electron recombination with tri-iodide (Fig. S3). These results are consistent with the above findings from the EIS study. Our findings also agree with earlier measurements showing that co-grafting of dyes with amphiphilic adsorbents containing carboxylate or phosphonate groups enhances the performance of the DSC.
The long term stability of the devices was tested by subjecting them to light soaking at 60 °C under full sunlight intensity. As shown in Fig. 7b, device D exhibited excellent stability. Even after the 1,000 h accelerated aging test, there was practically no change in the device efficiency, a small drop of 50 mV in Voc being compensated by an increase in the Jsc values. As we did not observe any change in the diffusion and redox overpotentials of electrolytes on the platinized counter electrode, the decrease of Voc should be mainly related to the surface protonation during the aging period. The Voc drop could be attenuated by our previously developed co-grafting protocol to improve the compactness of the hydrophobic monolayer on the titania surface. We are now systematically optimizing the molecular structure of the coadsorbent with phosphinate anchoring groups to further enhance the performance and stability of the DSCs.

In summary, we have identified dialkylated phosphinates as a new class of highly effective molecular insulators, which show great promise for improving the performance of dye- sensitized solar cells. Co-adsorption of the dineohexyl derivative DINHOP along with the amphiphilic ruthenium sensitizer Z907Na increased substantially the power output of the cells mainly due to a the retardation of interfacial recombination of photo-generated charge carriers. The device based on a mixed Z907Na/DINHOP monolayer also showed outstanding stability under prolonged light soaking at 60 °C which is critical for outdoor applications of the DSCs.


All solvents and reagents, unless otherwise stated, were of purest quality and used as received. Guanidinium thiocyanate (GNCS), N-butylbenzimidazole (NBB) and methoxypropionitrile (MPN) were purchased from Fluka. MPN was distilled before use. Coadsorbent bis-(3,3-dimethyl-butyl)-phosphinic acid (DINHOP) was synthesized with modifications to the reported procedure (N. V. de Bataafsche Petroleum Maatschappij, British patent 660918 (14.11.1951), CAN 46:48725) described below. The 400 nm TiO2 particles were received as a gift from CCIC (Japan).


To 3,3-dimethylbutene (4.00 g, 47.5 mM) hypophosphorous acid (aq. 50%) (0.80 g, 11.9 mM) and di-tert.-butylperoxide (neat, 0.30 g, 2.4 mM) was added in a Büchi reactor (10 mL), heated to 135 °C and stirred for 22 h. The solid formed was vacuum filtered, washed with water (1 ml, 2×), and with acetone (0.5 ml, 2×). Recrystallization from n-hexane yielded 1.01 g (73%) bis-(3,3-dimethyl-butyl)-phosphinic acid.

1H NMR (CDCl3) δ ppm: 0.92 (18H, s), 1.49 (4H, m), 1.64 (4H, m), 9.15 (1H, br).
31P NMR (CDCl3) δ ppm: 62.8 (s).
HR-MS m/z 235.1821 (C12H27O2P).

Two kinds of mesoscopic TiO2 films were used in this study. Film I (transparent film): A 5 μm thick transparent layer of 20 nm TiO2 particles was screen printed on the fluorine-doped SnO2 (FTO) conducting glass electrode. Film I was used in the UV-vis and FTIR spectroscopy measurements. Film II (double layer film): A 7 μm thick transparent layer of 20 nm TiO2 particles was first printed on the FTO conducting glass electrode and then coated with a 5 μm thick second layer of 400 nm light scattering anatase particles. Film II was used to make the devices for the I–V, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, photoelectrical transient decay and the photovoltaic measurements. The details for the preparation of the TiO2 films have been described elsewhere. The TiO2 films were first sintered at 500 °C for 30 min and then cooled to about 80 °C in air. Then, the TiO2 film electrodes were dipped into a 300 mM NaRu(4-carboxylic acid-4′-carboxylate) (4,4′-dinonyl-2,2′-bipyridyl) (NCS)2, (coded Z907Na) solution with and without the coadsorbent (in this experiment, DINHOP) in a mixture of acetonitrile and tert-butyl alcohol (volume ratio, 1:1) at room temperature for 16 h to adsorb the dye. After being washed with acetonitrile and dried by air flow, the sensitized titania electrodes were assembled with thermally platinized conducting glass electrodes. The two electrodes (the TiO2 photoanode and platinized counter electrode) were separated by a 25 μm thick Surlyn hot-melt gasket and sealed by heating. The internal space was filled with the liquid electrolyte using a vacuum back filling system. The electrolyte-injecting hole made with a sand-blasting drill on the counter electrode glass substrate was sealed with a Bynel sheet and a thin glass cover by heating. The non-volatile electrolyte composition is as follows: 1.0 M 1,3-dimethylimidazolium iodide (DMII), 0.15 M I2, 0.5 M N-butylbenzimidazole (NBB), and 0.1 M guanidinium thiocyanate (GNCS) in 3-methoxypropionitrile (MPN). In order for comparison, four devices were studied: device A using the bare TiO2 as the anode, device B using the TiO2 coated with the coadsorbent, device C using the TiO2 coated with Z907Na dye, and device D using the TiO2 co-grafted with Z907Na and DINHOP (molar ratio in the staining solution 1:1).


A 450 W xenon light source (Oriel, USA) was used to give an irradiance of 100 mW cm−2 (the equivalent of one sun at air mass (AM) 1.5) at the surface of the solar cells. The spectral output of the lamp was matched in the region of 350–750 nm with the aid of a Schott K113 Tempax sunlight filter (Präzisions Glas & Optik GmbH, Germany) so as to reduce the mismatch between the simulated and true solar spectra (less than 2%). Various incident light intensities were regulated with wavelength neutral wire mesh attenuators. The current–voltage characteristics of the cell under these conditions were obtained by applying external potential bias to the cell and measuring the generated photocurrent with a Keithley model 2400 digital source meter (Keithley, USA). Cell area tested with a metal mask: 0.159 cm2.


ATR-FTIR spectra were measured using a FTS 7000 FTIR spectrometer (Digilab, USA). The data reported here were taken with the ‘Golden Gate’ diamond anvil ATR accessory. Spectra were derived from 64 scans at a resolution of 2 cm−1. The samples were measured under the same mechanical force pushing the samples in contact with the diamond window. No ATR correction has been applied to the data. It also has to be appreciated that this ATR technique probes at most 1 μm of sample depth and that this depends on the sample refractive index, porosity etc. Some of the spectra show artifacts due to attenuation of light by the diamond window in the 2000 to 2350 cm−1 region. Dye coated films were rinsed in acetonitrile and dried prior to measuring the spectra. Electronic absorption spectra were performed on a Cary 5 spectrophotometer.


Electrochemical impedance spectra of the DSC were measured using the PGSTAT 30 frequency analyzer from Autolab (Eco Chemie B.V, Utrecht, The Netherlands) together with the Frequency Response Analyzer module providing voltage modulation in the desired frequency range. The Z-view software (v2.8b, Scribner Associates Inc.) was used to analyze the impedance data. The EIS experiments were performed at a constant temperature of 20 °C in the dark. The impedance spectra of the DSC devices were recorded at potentials varying from −0.8 V to −0.45 V at frequencies ranging from 0.05 Hz to 100 KHz, the oscillation potential amplitudes being adjusted to 10 mV. The photoanode (TiO2) was used as the working electrode and the Pt counter electrode (CE) was used as both the auxiliary electrode and the reference electrode. These obtained spectra were fitted (error <5%) with a transmission line model as mentioned in the Discussion section.


Hermetically sealed cells employing film II (7 + 5 μm) were used to monitor the long-term stability under visible-light soaking at 60 °C. A 50 μm thick polyester film (Preservation Equipment Ltd, UK) was used as a UV cutoff filter (below 400 nm). Cells were exposed at open circuit to a Suntest CPS plus lamp (ATLAS GmbH, 100 mW cm−2, 60 °C) over 1000 h. The cells were taken out every week to check the I–V performance.


This work was supported by the Stanford University KAUST center of Excellency and a grant from the United State Airforce. X. Li thanks the Chinese National Natural Science Foundation (50672041) for a grant to support a 6 months leave at the EPFL during which time his contribution to this work was performed. We thank Dr. Robin Humphry-Baker for fruitful discussions and Pascal Comte for the TiO2 film preparations.

† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Impedance measurement (bode plot and dark current) and Transient photovoltage decay measurement. See DOI: 10.1039/b908673k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009