 DOI: 10.1039/C5RA00057B
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 30889-30901

Shiva Moaven,
Leila Naji*,
Faramarz Afshar Taromi and 
Farhad Sharif

Department of Chemistry, AmirKabir University of Technology, 424 Hafez Avenue, P.O Box: 15875-4413, Tehran, Iran. E-mail: leilanaji@aut.ac.ir; Fax: +98 21 64542762; Tel: +98 21 64542767

Department of Color and Polymer, AmirKabir University of Technology, 424 Hafez Avenue, P.O Box: 15875-4413, Tehran, Iran

Received
2nd January 2015
, Accepted 24th March 2015
First published on 31st March 2015
The current work describes a simple low cost solution-based method to synthesis graphene silver (Gr/Ag) nanocomposite as electrode material in fabrication of flexible polymer solar cells (PSCs). Flexible and transparent Gr/Ag – based electrodes were easily prepared on a desired scale by spin coating of an aqueous solution of Gr/Ag nanocomposite on polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate at ambient conditions. With the optimization of the weight ratio of Gr/Ag and the electrode thickness, flexible electrodes with sheet resistance of as low as 83 kΩ sq−1 and transmittance of 47% were achieved. These electrodes were then utilized as transparent anodes in the fabrication of flexible PSC devices, replacing ITO. Photovoltaic performance of the fabricated devices was evaluated as a function of the anode electrode thickness under three conditions; at rest, inward bending and outward bending. The introduction of Ag into Gr resulted in a significant improvement in open circuit voltage (VOC), short circuit current density (JSC) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) compared to that considered for Gr-based devices. The Gr/Ag-based devices showed JSC of 1.46 mA cm−2 and a VOC of 0.71 V. Under bending, PSC devices showed considerably larger VOC and JSC compared to the rest position. Furthermore, PCE of the devices decreased about 5.6% when they were bent inward and increased about 34% as they were bent outward. This was in good agreement with the observed changes in the sheet resistance of the fabricated flexible electrodes under similar conditions. The advantages of the described method for fabrication of flexible transparent electrodes include simple solution-based process, production of Gr-based electrodes with high mechanical stability via a low cost and environmentally friendly method and finally, the compatibility and adaptability of the method with roll-to-roll manufacturing technique suitable for industrial production.

Flexible polymer solar cells (PSCs) have received increasing interest in the past decades due to their attractive applications in flexible solar modules, integrating solar cells in windows and fabrics, designing self-power actuators. Flexible PSCs are compatible with large-scale manufacturing technique since their fabrication involves solution processing of all comprising multilayer structure on flexible substrates by the combination of spin coating and physical deposition steps. Indium tin oxide (ITO) is applied as dominant electrode material in fabrication of rigid PSCs since it possesses high optical transparency, low sheet resistance, and appropriate work function. However, its rigid and brittle nature and also its high cost limit its applicability in construction of flexible PSCs. Many studies have been conducted to develop new transparent and conducting electrode material to replace ITO. The most significant results among these studies are silver grids, gold film, silver nanowires, PEDOT:SiOx composite, PEDOT:PSS, carbon nanotubes and polyaniline. However, these materials due to their surface roughness cause degradation in the performance of PSCs overtime and create major drawbacks for their use as electrodes. Recently, graphene (Gr) has been considered as a good alternative for ITO since it is low cost, highly conductive, optically transparent and thermally and mechanically stable. It can also retain its conductivity in an acceptable level when is subjected to external bending or stretching forces. Gr can be prepared via different methods including mechanical exfoliation of highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG), chemical reduction of graphene oxide (GO), epitaxial growth from SiC, and chemical vapor deposition (CVD) on metal surfaces. The mechanical exfoliation of HOPG is not suitable for large scale Gr production. The most convincing proposed method to prepare Gr-based electrodes is CVD since it can produce large-scale mono or few layer Gr films. However, this method requires low pressure, high temperature, and very expensive and complicated instruments. Furthermore, to prepare Gr electrodes, a multistep process is needed to transfer synthesized Gr to the desired transparent substrate. This increases the possible risks of contamination and formation of cracks in Gr film. Another method to make Gr electrodes is based on casting GO solution onto a substrate as a film and its subsequent reduction to Gr via high temperature annealing or chemical reducing agents such as hydrogen iodide and hydrazine with further thermal reduction. Thermal reduction of GO film is simple to produce large-area Gr electrodes, but it requires high temperature (up to 1000 °C) and inert atmosphere which is not suitable for substrate materials. On the other hand, chemical reduction of GO film does not provide Gr film with adequate electrical conductivity due to incomplete removal of oxygenated functional groups. Therefore, PSC devices prepared based on chemically converted Gr – electrodes provide low power conversion efficiency. To overcome this problem, compositing Gr with inorganic and organic conducting materials has been proposed. Researchers have shown that Gr sheets could be decorated with nanoparticles including metals, metal oxides and semiconductors via electrostatic interactions and that the applied nanoparticles could prevent the aggregation and restacking of Gr sheets. This has been found to be essential to form uniform Gr film with suitable mechanical properties and electrical conductivity. The current work describes a simple solution-based method to synthesis Gr/Ag nanocomposite as electrode material in fabrication of flexible polymer solar cells (PSCs). Flexible and transparent Gr/Ag – based electrodes were easily prepared on a desired scale by spin coating of an aqueous solution of Gr/Ag nanocomposite on polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate at ambient conditions. The effect of introducing Ag nanoparticles (AgNPs) onto Gr sheets were studied using characterization techniques including; Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), UV-Vis spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction (XRD) and transmittance electron microscopy (TEM). With the optimization of the weight ratio of Gr/Ag and the electrode thickness, flexible electrodes with sheet resistance of as low as 83 kΩ sq−1 and transmittance of 47% were achieved. The flexible electrodes were then utilized as transparent anodes in fabrication of flexible bulk heterojunction (BHJ) poly-(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT):C60 PSC devices, replacing ITO. Photovoltaic performance of the fabricated devices was evaluated as a function of the anode electrode thickness under three conditions; at rest, inward bending and outward bending. The introduction of AgNPs into Gr resulted in a significant improvement in open circuit voltage (VOC), short circuit current density (JSC) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) compared to that considered for chemically converted Gr-based devices. The Gr/Ag-based devices showed JSC of 1.46 mA cm−2 and a VOC of 0.71 V. Under bending, PSC devices showed considerably larger VOC and JSC compared to the rest position. However, PCE of the devices decreased about 5.6% when they were bent inward and increased about 34% as they were bent outward. These results were in good agreement with changes occurred in the sheet resistance of the fabricated flexible electrodes under similar conditions. These findings indicate that by further investigation and improvement chemically converted Gr/Ag nanocomposite could be considered as viable alternative electrode material instead of ITO to fabricate large area, low cost and flexible PSC devices.


Sodium nitrate (NaNO3), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and sulfuric acid (H2SO4) were purchased from Merck chemical company. Potassium permanganate (KMnO4) and sodium borohydride (NaBH4) were obtained from Scharlau. Silver nitrate (AgNO3) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. Poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate), (PEDOT:PSS), C60 and indium tin oxide (ITO) coated glass slides with surface resistance of 8–20 Ω sq−1 were purchased from Sigma Aldrich company. Polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrates with thickness of 0.175 mm were purchased from DuPont Teijin Films.


GO was prepared using a modified hummers method. In this method 1 g of graphite powder and 1 g of NaNO3 were added to 150 ml H2SO4 (98%) in a flask and stirred for an hour in ice water bath. Then, 3 g of KMnO4 (99%) were added gradually over 2 h to the flask and the mixture was stirred at 40 °C for 3 h. Over 30 min, 30 ml of deionized (DI) water was added to the flask and then diluted with 40 ml of DI water. In order to eliminate oxidant ions formed through the reaction 2 ml of H2O2 (31%) was added to the flask and the mixture was centrifuged for 30 min at 6000 rpm. The resulting brown residues, GO, was rinsed and centrifuged five times with water and HCl (5% v/v) solution. The purified GO was then dried in an oven at 50 °C and stored as powder. The prepared GO was applied as starting material for synthesis of chemically converted Gr and nanocomposite of Gr/Ag.


To prepare GO aqueous solution, 50 mg brown GO powder was dispersed homogenously in 30 ml water by mild ultrasonication for three minutes. NaBH4 aqueous solution (20 ml, 0.13 M) was then slowly added (over an hour) to the GO dispersed solution while it was magnetically stirring at 750 rpm and heated to 70 °C. As the reduction process was completed the Gr as black residue was centrifuged for 30 min at 6000 rpm and washed by DI water for five similar cycles. Gr aqueous solution was prepared simply by dispersing Gr in water by mild ultrasonication for several minutes. The resulting solution was remained homogenous in texture and did not precipitate over time while no surfactants or stabilizers were applied.


In order to study the influence of the loading level of AgNPs on the optical and electrical characteristics of Gr sheets, nanocomposite of Gr/Ag comprising of different weight ratio of AgNPs to Gr were prepared. To this end, predetermined weight of AgNO3 (corresponding to the desired weight ratio) were added to the dispersive solution of GO (described in Section 2.3) and the mixture were ultrasonicated for 3 minutes. Simultaneous chemical reduction of GO and Ag ions were carried out by gradual addition of 50 ml of NaBH4 (0.13 M) aqueous solution to the mixture while it was magnetically stirring and heated at 70 °C. The process of reduction was completed in an hour and the obtained Gr/Ag nanocomposite were centrifuged and washed by DI water for five cycles to ensure complete purification of the product. All prepared nanocomposites were given a name according to the applied weight ratio of AgNO3 to GO. Table 1 gives the names and the detailed process information for all nanocomposites.

Gr/Ag nanocomposite name
AgNO3 (mg)
GO (mg)
Ag/Gr (wt%)
GA1
1
100
1
GA5
5
100
5
GA10
10
100
10
GA15
15
100
15
GA33
33
100
33
GA50
50
100
50
GA100
100
100
100

For the preparation of the electrodes, flexible PET pieces of size 20 × 20 mm were used as substrates. Homogenous aqueous solutions of Gr (4 mg ml−1) and Gr/Ag nanocomposites (4 mg ml−1); GA1, GA5, GA10, GA15, GA33, GA50 and GA100, were prepared by mild ultrasonication and spin coated at room temperature on pre-cleaned PET. The applied cleaning procedure for substrates has been described elsewhere. Aqueous solution of Gr and Gr/Ag nanocomposite were coated on substrates in dynamic mode and spun at 3000 rpm for 10 min, with no use of any surfactants or stabilizers. This was followed by evaporating the solvent at room temperature overnight and additional baking at 150 °C for 15 min. The thickness of Gr/Ag nanocomposite layer on PET substrates was varied by varying the number of repeats of spin coating process from 1 to 8 cycles. This was carried out to study the influence of the electrode thickness on sheet resistance and transparency of the fabricated electrodes and to find the appropriate Gr/Ag electrode thickness for application in PSCs. Pictures of Gr/Ag-based electrodes with different thicknesses is shown in Fig. 1.


To evaluate physical and chemical characteristics of the synthesized materials, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), X-ray diffraction (XRD), UV-Vis spectroscopy and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) were applied. FTIR spectra were acquired from BOMEM MB series spectrometer as transmittance data with KBr as reference. XRD pattern were obtained using EQUINOX3000 Intel with Cu/Kα source, operated at a voltage of 40 KV and a current of 30 mA. Samples were scanned with rate of 10° per minute between 2θ of 2° to 120°. Interlayer spacing, d, were calculated from XRD peaks using X'Pert software as d = 2π/q where q = 4πsinθ/λ, and where λ and θ are the wavelength of the X-ray radiation and the measured diffraction angle, respectively. Perkin-Elmer Lambda 45 UV-Vis spectrometer was applied to study the influence of AgNPs on the optical characteristics of Gr sheets. For these tests, aqueous solution of same concentration were prepared from the synthesized materials by mild ultrasonication and their absorbance was measured in wavelength range of 200–700 nm, with a scan rate of 460 nm min−1 and slit width of 1 nm. Transmission electron microscope (TEM) observations were conducted using a Philips EM 208 and size of AgNPs was calculated by means of Manual Microstructure Distance Measurement software.


Film thickness and surface morphology of the prepared electrodes were studied using an atomic force microscopy (AFM, DME, DS 95 series). The transparency of the flexible electrodes was characterized using UV-Vis spectroscopy (Perkin-Elmer Lambda 45). Pre-cleaned bare PET substrate was used as blank in these tests. The electrical conductivity of the flexible electrodes was measured using digital multimeter (Victor VC97) and a four-point probe (Keithley model 2240 DMM) at room temperature and after they were annealed at 150 °C for 15 min. To decrease the contact resistance between the stainless alligator clips of digital multimeter and the electrode surface, the electrode surface were coated with aluminum foil at the positions of clip contact. The electrical conductivity of the flexible electrodes was studied under three conditions; at rest, inward bending and outward bending. The bending radius of the PET substrate curvature was kept constant to 10 mm.


An aqueous solution of PEDOT:PSS (1% w/w, 250 μl) was prepared and spin coated on the prepared flexible electrodes as hole transport layer at 3000 rpm for 5 min. To enhance the electrical conductivity of PEDOT:PSS layer the excess PSS was removed by immersing the wet film in a beaker containing 50 ml DI water. This was followed by a 15 min thermal annealing at 120 °C to evaporate water. The photoactive layer consisting of P3HT and C60 were prepared by mixing equal volume of P3HT (10 mg ml−1) and C60 (10 mg ml−1) solutions prepared in chlorobenzene. The mixture was then ultrasonicated for 20 min and then spin coated at 1500 spin rate on top of the PEDOT:PSS layer. All above-mentioned fabrication steps were carried out at ambient conditions. The production of PSCs was completed by physical vapor deposition of 100 nm aluminum forming a cathode area of 0.6 cm2. To create similar active area in all PSCs, aluminum layer was precisely deposited on the active layer using shadow masks with two equal windows to only allow deposits in specific areas on the substrate. Photovoltaic performance of the fabricated devices was evaluated as a function of the anode electrode thickness under three conditions; at rest, inward bending and outward bending. Fig. 2 shows a picture of the flexible PSC device with a Gr/Ag electrode and schematics of bulk heterojunction devices at rest position (parts (a) and (b)) and rear view of the bent devices in concave (Fig. 2c) and convex (Fig. 2d) curvature. Current density–voltage (J–V) measurements were performed at room temperature in air while the flexible PSCs were illuminated with a 500 W tungsten filament lamp under standard test conditions (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2) through the PET side, using PalmSens potentiostat/galvanostat. The electrical characteristics of the PSC devices were measured as they were bent to concave and convex curvatures with 10 mm radius. For these measurements, the devices were kept in the bent form under illumination using a cuboid PTFE sample holder and the distance between the sun simulator and the active area of the devices were kept constant. The performances of the flexible solar cells were compared with a reference cell with the following structure; glass ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:C60/Al, which was prepared using exactly similar conditions.


FTIR spectrum of the synthesized GO in Fig. 3(a) shows that GO contains many oxygenated functional groups. The broad band of 3200–3600 cm−1 is due to O–H stretching of alcohol and carboxylic acid functional groups, strong band at 1720 cm−1 and 1620 cm−1 is a result of CO in functional groups of aldehyde, ketone and carboxylic acid; the strong band at 1145 cm−1 is related to C–O stretching frequency of epoxy functional groups present on GO sheet. The effect of the presence of these oxygen functionalities was observed as facilitating the hydration of GO sheets in aqueous media. Most of the mentioned functional groups were eliminated on chemical reduction of GO to Gr (Fig. 3(a)). However, the comparison of FTIR spectra of Gr with GA1, GA5, GA10 and GA50 in Fig. 3(b) revealed that simultaneous chemical reduction of Ag ions and GO resulted in lower degree of elimination of these groups from Gr. This can be observed as increasing intensity of oxygen functionalities in FTIR spectra of GA1 to GA50 samples, containing increasing amount of AgNPs. The intensity of C–O stretching band of alcohol (at 1050 cm−1) and carboxylic acid (at 1270 cm−1) functional groups are intensified more than other bands. This might be attributed to possible interaction between silver ions with carboxylic acid and phenolic hydroxyl groups on the GO sheets, through the formation of a coordination bond or simple electrostatic attraction. These groups should therefore remain on the surface of the Gr sheets as confirmed by FTIR data. The effect of the presence of these groups was observed as the formation of well-dispersed Gr/Ag nanocomposite colloids.

The XRD pattern of GO shown in Fig. 4(a) exhibit a strong single peak at 2θ = 10.6 which correspond to a Bragg spacing of about 0.85 nm. Removal of oxygen functionalities from GO sheets through chemical reduction caused a significant decrease in the interlayer spacing of Gr (0.39 nm) while it was still higher than that considered for graphite (0.35 nm). This can be observed as broad peak between 2θ = 15–35° in the XRD pattern of the Gr in Fig. 4(a). This difference was attributed to the agglomeration and random packing of Gr sheets due to the incomplete removal of surface functionalities as was observed in FTIR data (Fig. 3). Fig. 4(b) shows the effect of increasing amount of AgNPs on XRD pattern of Gr. The broad peak observed in the XRD pattern of the Gr turned out to be considerably broadened for GA1 sample and weakened. The corresponding interlayer spacing for this sample was 0.26 nm which indicates that the interlayer spacing decreases (∼28%) as AgNPs are formed on Gr sheets. While, the trend remained the same for GA5 and GA10 samples, the superimposed diffraction peaks of AgNPs on the broad peak of Gr were intensified by increasing the amount of AgNPs from GA1 to GA10. A further increase in the amount of AgNPs in GA5 and GA10 samples showed no significant changes in the interlayer spacing of Gr sheets. For, Gr/Ag nanocomposites, the diffraction peaks of crystalline AgNPs were observed as superimposed on the characteristic broad peak of Gr. The intensity of these peaks increased from GA1 to GA10 sample and they showed the characteristic Bragg peaks of 2θ = 38° (111), 2θ = 44.5° (200), 2θ = 64.2° (220), 2θ = 77.8° (311) and 2θ = 82° (222) facets of the face center cubic (fcc) AgNPs.
UV-Vis absorption spectra of GO (0.03 mg ml−1) and Gr (0.03 mg ml−1) aqueous dispersions are shown in Fig. 5(a). For GO, an absorption peak was appeared at 233 nm which red-shifted to 255 nm, suggesting that the electronic conjugation system within Gr sheets was rearranged comparing with GO. Moreover, the small shoulder present at 300 nm in absorption spectrum of GO was disappeared in the spectrum of Gr, indicating successful removal of oxygen functionalities through chemical reduction of GO. Fig. 5(a) also shows that the absorption peak of the Gr dispersion at 255 nm gradually red shifted and reached a percolation threshold at 265 nm for GA10 sample and then gradually blue shifted as AgNPs content increased to higher values. The variation in the wavelength of maximum absorption of Gr/Ag nanocomposites as a function of AgNPs content can be followed in Fig. 5(b). Furthermore, the absorption in the whole spectral region decreased with increasing AgNPs content, suggesting that the electronic conjugation within the graphene sheets was attenuated. This can be explained by FTIR data. As shown in Fig. 3(b), the intensity of oxygen functionalities on the Gr sheets increased by incorporating a higher weight percentage of AgNPs in Gr/Ag nanocomposites. Thus, it is expected that Gr sheets containing a higher number of oxygen functionalities to have a smaller electronic conjugation system. In Fig. 5(a), an extra weak and broad peak was observed for GA10 samples at wavelength of 417 nm which ascribed to absorption peak of AgNPs. This peak appeared stronger for GA50, due to the presence of a higher weight percentage of AgNPs in this sample.
TEM image of the GA1 sample presented in Fig. 6 demonstrates the presence of a large number of AgNPs adhering to few layers of Gr sheets. This indicates the preventing effect of AgNPs on the agglomeration of Gr sheets. The average particle size of AgNPs was extracted from the TEM image and it was about 6 ± 4 nm.

The prepared Gr and Gr/Ag nanocomposite were applied for fabricating flexible electrodes. The sheet resistance (Rs), transparency (T) and surface topography of these electrodes were studied as function of AgNPs content, electrode thickness and thermal annealing. It was expected that the Gr/AgNPs based electrodes would possess a lower Rs comparing with the Gr electrodes due to the presence of AgNPs with high inherent electrical conductivity. Besides, it was important to make sure the electrode with highest electrical characteristic possess appropriate transparency to the white light. Thus, flexible electrodes based on Gr and Gr/Ag nanocomposite were fabricated and the effect of AgNPs content and electrode thickness on their sheet resistance and transparency was studied. Variation in sheet resistance of Gr- and GA1-based electrodes as a function of electrode thickness is shown in Fig. 7. As can be seen, there is a nonlinear inverse relationship between the sheet resistance and the thickness for both set of electrodes. However, sheet resistance of GA1 electrodes with increasing thicknesses is considerably lower, indicating the positive effect of AgNPs on the electrical conductivity of Gr sheets. For instance, sheet resistance of GA1 electrode with the thickness resulting of repeating eight cycles of spin coating on the PET substrate was appeared to be about 270 times lower than that of Gr electrode with the same thickness.

According to obtained FTIR and UV-Vis data, it is expected that the sheet resistance of Gr/Ag-based electrodes increases by increasing the amount of AgNPs on Gr sheets due to the presence of a higher number of oxygen functionalities. However, sheet resistance measurements of these electrodes revealed an interesting change in electrical behavior of Gr. Fig. 8(a) and (b) demonstrates the variation in sheet resistance (at transparency range of 47–53%) and transparency (at sheet resistance of 80–90 kΩ sq−1) of the Gr/Ag electrodes as a function of AgNPs content, respectively. As can be seen, sheet resistance of the flexible electrodes decreased proportional to the increasing amount of applied AgNPs on Gr sheets from GA1 to GA10 samples (Fig. 8(a)). However, a reverse trend was observed when the AgNPs content of the electrodes were increased to values higher than 10%. This implies that the presence of higher oxygen functionalities in Gr/Ag – based electrodes can be balanced to some extent by high intrinsic electrical conductivity of AgNPs for GA1 to GA10. However, this effect is diminished by increasing the number of oxygen functionalities for GA15 to GA50. In Fig. 8(b), roughly an opposite behavior in variation of transparency of the flexible electrodes as a function of AgNPs was observed. Transparency of the flexible Gr/AgNPs electrodes increased proportional to the increasing amount of applied AgNPs on Gr sheets from GA1 to GA10 and a reverse trend was observed when the AgNPs content of the electrodes were increased to values higher than 10%. The flexible electrodes prepared based on GA10 showed the highest transparency to white light. These data are consistent with UV-Vis data presented in Fig. 4. Therefore, GA10 was chosen as the best Gr/Ag nanocomposite since the electrodes prepared based on this composite showed the highest electrical conductivity and transparency amongst all samples. Increasing the electrode thickness appeared to possess a synchronized decreasing impact on sheet resistance and transparency of the electrodes as shown in Fig. 9(a). However, on increasing the number of repeated spin coating runs from 3 to 8 (corresponding to the electrode thickness range of 30 to 200 nm), this decrease occurred more severe in the case of sheet resistance (∼89%) compared to transparency (∼53%). Two plots of sheet resistance (in logarithmic scale) and transparency in Fig. 9(b) bisect each other at the electrode thickness resulting of repeating six cycles of spin coating on the PET substrate. This thickness was considered as the best choice in terms of appropriate high harmonized electrical conductivity and transparency. The influence of thermal annealing on sheet resistance and transparency of GA10 electrodes has also been illustrated as dashed lines in Fig. 9(a). As it is noticeable, both of sheet resistance and transparency were improved as the electrodes with increasing thicknesses heated to 150 °C. This can be attributed to the evaporation of the water molecules remained in the Gr/Ag nanocomposite layer during spin coating cycles and its subsequent improving effect on the electrode surface structure. The roughness of anode electrode surface is also an important factor, due to its possible influence on the free charge carrier transfer at the interface of the anode electrode and the active layer in PSC devices. Therefore, the effect of thermal annealing on the surface roughness of GA10-6 electrodes was studied using AFM. Fig. 10(a) and (b) demonstrates the AFM images of GA10-based electrodes captured before and after thermal annealing, respectively. The electrode surface appeared considerably smoother after thermal annealing. The data extracted from the matching height histogram built up from AFM images revealed that the average height distribution range of 50–250 nm of the electrode surface before thermal treatment decreased to 25 to 125 nm after thermal treatment. Results suggest that heating the electrodes to temperature up to 150 °C leads to the proximity of Gr sheets and so the enhancement of the electrical network in the Gr/Ag layer.
The data listed in Table 2 represents the measured sheet resistance of the GA10-based flexible electrodes with the optimal thickness of six under three applied conditions; at rest, inward bending and outward bending. When the flexible electrode underwent an outward bending its sheet resistance decreased about 10% while it increased about 13% on inward bending compared to that considered for the electrode at rest position. These measurements were repeated several times on the same electrode and also identical electrodes using digital multimeter and four points probe. In all cases similar behavior was observed. Although, the magnitude of the sheet resistance data obtained from four points probe was slightly different from that obtained using multimeter, but they still followed the same trend. The observed changes can be attributed to the highly stretched and ordered structure of Gr sheets upon outward bending and seemingly compressed and distorted structure of Gr upon inward bending. The fabricated flexible electrodes retained their electrical conductivity along the surface after being bent repeatedly for 500 times, indicating excellent mechanical stability of the electrodes due to excellent adhesion of chemically reduced Gr/Ag nanocomposite on the flexible substrate.
Electrode position
Sheet resistancea (kΩ sq−1)
Sheet resistanceb (kΩ sq−1)
Rest
83
70
Bent inward
94
79
Bent outward
75
63

In order to evaluate the photovoltaic characteristics of the prepared flexible electrodes they were applied as anode in fabrication of PSC devices. Table 3 summarizes the photovoltaic performance of the PSC devices fabricated based on flexible Gr- and GA10-electrodes with three different thicknesses resulting from 3, 6 and 9 repeated spin coating runs, named as GA10-3, GA10-6 and GA10-9, respectively. Except for GA10-6 based devices which were characterized at three states; at rest, bent outward and bent inward, other devices characterized at rest position. The lowest open circuit voltage (VOC), short circuit current (JSC), fill factor (FF) and PCE was obtained for the devices prepared based on pure Gr electrodes. Except for FF, all other parameters appeared considerably larger for GA10-6 based devices, due to their higher electrical conductivity and transparency. JSC, VOC and PCE were increased with increasing electrode thickness from GA10-3 to GA10-6 by a factor of 35, 12 and 273, respectively, while they decreased by a factor of 3.5, 7.6 and 21.7 by increasing electrode thickness from GA10-6 to GA10-9. However, the photovoltaic characteristics of GA10-9 based PSCs were still higher than those obtained from GA10-3 based devices. These results are in good agreement with data obtained from sheet resistance and transparency measurements of GA10 electrodes as a function of electrode thickness presented in Fig. 9(a). In Fig. 11(a) the VOC and JSC of the GA10-based devices with three different electrode thicknesses are compared with that of Gr-based devices to follow the mentioned changes more clearly. As can be seen, the devices prepared based on GA10-6 electrode with the optimum sheet resistance of 83 kΩ sq−1 and transparency of 47% showed the highest JSC of 1.46 mA cm−2 and a VOC of 0.71 V amongst other devices. These values are the highest observed so far for flexible PSCs fabricated based on chemically reduced Gr as anode, indicating the enhancing effect of AgNPs and the effectiveness of simultaneous chemical reduction of GO and AgNO3 method. While, JSC and FF of GA10-6 based devices are lower than that obtained for ITO-based devices, however, their VOC is about 2.7 times higher. Therefore, similar PCE (0.18%) was obtained for both devices. The photovoltaic characteristics of GA10-6 based devices were also determined as they were bent inward (shown in Fig. 2(c)) and outward (shown in Fig. 2(d)), considering Gr/Ag electrode position. Fig. 11(b) shows that the bent devices of GA10-6i and GA10-6o generally have a higher VOC compared to that considered for GA10-3, GA10-6 and GA10-9 at rest position. It also demonstrates that bending the GA10-6 device into concave shape (outward bending) results in the highest VOC (0.97 V) for GA10-6o. Similar trend was also occurred for JSC of the devices but in a smaller scale. It should be mentioned when the bent devices were released and they returned to a rest state they again showed the same PCE as that obtained for the GA10-6 devices at initial rest position. Data presented in Table 3 also shows that PCE of the flexible GA10-6 based devices increased about 34% and decreased about 5.6% when they were bent into concave (Fig. 2(c)) and convex (Fig. 2(d)) shape, respectively. As shown in Table 2, the sheet resistance of GA10-6 – based flexible electrodes changed as they were bent. When the flexible electrodes underwent an outward bending their electrical conductivity increased about 10% while it decreased about 13% on inward bending compared to that considered for the electrode at rest position. Therefore, the highest VOC, JSC and PCE obtained for the devices bent into concave shape to some extent can be explained by the higher electrical conductivity of Gr sheets in this form since other effective parameters were kept constant during J–V characterization of the devices. However, it should be considered that the photovoltaic performance of the bent devices can also be influenced by possible changes occurring in physical properties of all comprising layers of the PSC devices and the interfaces between these layers under bending deformation. Since the highest VOC, JSC and PCE were obtained for the flexible devices bent into concave shape it can be concluded that the physical properties of each individual layer or the interfaces between the layers have been improved to some extent. However, further studies are required to confirm these effects. Comparison of photovoltaic performance of flexible GA10-6 – based and ITO – based devices (reported in Table 3) however highlights that the latter is still better in the case of JSC and FF. This issue is of course of relevance and deserve further improvements in the process of chemical reduction of GO/AgNO3 mixture (using other relevant reducing reagents) for optimizing effective integration of this low cost solution processable electrode material in fabrication of high performance PSC devices.

Electrode name
JSC (mA cm−2)
VOC (V)
FF
PCE (%)
Electrode substrate
Gr
0.001
0.005
0.25
1.2 × 10−6
PET
GA10-3
0.042
0.059
0.26
6.4 × 10−4
PET
GA10-6
1.46
0.71
0.17
0.18
PET
GA10-6i
1.51
0.82
0.14
0.17
PET
GA10-6o
1.53
0.97
0.16
0.24
PET
GA10-9
0.41
0.094
0.21
8.1 × 10−3
PET
ITO
3.25
0.26
0.21
0.18
Glass

We have demonstrated an efficient simple solution-based method to synthesis Gr/Ag nanocomposite for fabrication of flexible conductive and transparent electrodes, suitable for PSC devices. This technique is particularly attractive considering that the flexible electrodes are fabricated at ambient conditions using spin coating method without high thermal treatment requirements. Gr/Ag-based electrodes with optimal transparency and electrical conductivity were determined by altering the Ag content of the nanocomposite and the electrode thickness. Electrical conductivity and transparency of the flexible Gr/Ag electrodes increased proportional to the increasing amount of AgNPs content and reached a percolation threshold at weight ratio of 10%. Increasing the electrode thickness exhibited a synchronized decreasing impact on the sheet resistance and the transparency of the electrodes while it was more severe in the case of sheet resistance compared to transparency. The flexible electrodes with optimum characteristics showed a sheet resistance of as low as 83 kΩ sq−1 and transmittance of 47% which was much lower than could be achieved previously for pure chemically converted Gr without high thermal annealing. The flexible electrodes retained their electrical conductivity along the surface after being bent repeatedly, indicating excellent mechanical stability of the electrodes due to excellent adhesion of chemically reduced Gr film at the surface of the flexible substrate. Furthermore, the fabricated flexible transparent electrodes were successfully integrated in PSC devices as anode, replacing ITO. Gr/Ag–based devices exhibited power conversion efficiency (PCE) of about 150000 times higher than that obtained for Gr-based devices prepared at the same conditions. Moreover, these flexible devices exhibited PCE similar to that observed for non-flexible ITO-based PSC devices fabricated in this work. However, their JSC and FF were lower. Bent PSC devices showed considerably larger VOC and JSC compared to the corresponding PSC devices at rest. However, PCE of the devices decreased about 5.6% when they were bent inward and increased about 34% as they were bent outward. Towards improving electrode conductivity and obtaining higher PCE from Gr/Ag-based PSC devices different combinations of chemical reduction parameters may enable the production of Gr/Ag electrodes with even lower resistance and higher transparency. The advantages of the described method for fabrication of flexible transparent electrodes include simple solution-based process, production of Gr-based electrodes with high mechanical stability via a low cost and environmentally friendly method and finally, the compatibility and adaptability of the method with roll-to-roll manufacturing technique suitable for industrial production.


Author gratefully acknowledges Nanotechnology Initiative Council for all the funding supports through this project.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015