 DOI: 10.1039/C9NR06611J
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 17460-17470


Hao-Cheng
Wang
,

Yu-Che
Lin
,

Chung-Hao
Chen
,

Chi-Hsien
Huang
,

Bin
Chang
,

Yi-Ling
Liu
,

Hao-Wen
Cheng
,

Cheng-Si
Tsao
 and 

Kung-Hwa
Wei
*

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 30010, Taiwan. E-mail: khwei@mail.nctu.edu.tw

Department of Materials Engineering, Ming Chi University of Technology, 24301 New Taipei City, Taiwan

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan

Institute of Nuclear Energy Research, Taoyuan 32546, Taiwan

Center for Emergent Functional Matter Science, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 30010, Taiwan

Received
2nd August 2019
, Accepted 12th September 2019
First published on 13th September 2019
In this paper we report the effect on the power conversion efficiency (PCE) and stability of photovoltaic devices after incorporating hydrogenated two-dimensional (2D) MoSe2 nanosheets into the active layer of bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic photovoltaics (OPV). The surface properties of 2D MoSe2 nanosheets largely affect their dispersion in the active layer blend and, thus, influence the carrier mobility, PCE, and stability of corresponding devices. We treated MoSe2 nanosheets with hydrogen plasma and investigated their influence on the polymer packing and fullerene domain size of the active layer. For the optimized devices incorporating 37.5 wt% of untreated MoSe2, we obtained a champion PCE of 9.82%, compared with the champion reference PCE of approximately 9%. After incorporating the hydrogen plasma-treated MoSe2 nanosheets, we achieved a champion PCE of 10.44%—a relative increase of 16% over that of the reference device prepared without MoSe2 nanosheets. This PCE is the one of the highest ever reported for OPVs incorporating 2D materials. We attribute this large enhancement to the enhanced exciton generation and dissociation at the MoSe2–fullerene interface and, consequently, the balanced charge carrier mobility. The device incorporating the MoSe2 nanosheets maintained 70% of its initial PCE after heat-treatment at 100 °C for 1 h; in contrast, the PCE of the reference device decreased to 60% of its initial value—a relative increase in stability of 17% after incorporating these nanosheets. We also incorporated MoSe2 nanosheets (both with and without treatment) into a polymer donor (PBDTTBO)/small molecule (IT-4F) acceptor system. The champion PCEs reached 7.85 and 8.13% for the devices incorporating the MoSe2 nanosheets with and without plasma treatment, respectively—relative increases of 8 and 12%, respectively, over that of the reference. These results should encourage a push toward the implementation of transition metal dichalcogenides to enhance the performances of BHJ OPVs.

Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) have attracted considerable attention as renewable energy sources because of their several attractive properties, including light weight, flexibility, low manufacturing costs, and compatibility with large-area fabrication. The development of ternary blend solar cells based on two donor components and one acceptor component (or one donor and two acceptors) has emerged as a facile method for increasing the absorption range toward longer wavelengths and, consequently, to increase the short-circuit current density (JSC). In addition to charge separation and transfer at the donor–acceptor interface, charge transfer with the third component is also realized in a ternary blend. Finding an ideal combination of the three materials—including matching the energy levels of the individual components—to create a cascade energy level effect within the active layer of the ternary blend system should allow more efficient extraction and transportation of the charges. With effective charge separation and transfer, the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of devices incorporating ternary blends as the active layer should also be improved.

Despite this potential advantage, it has been suggested that the open-circuit voltage (VOC) of ternary blend solar cells would necessarily be pinned to the smaller values of VOC of the corresponding binary blends of the constituent components, thereby limiting the potential improvement of incorporating a third component.
Two-dimensional (2D) materials possess unique chemical and physical properties and, thus, have attracted much attention for their applications. Among the wide range of available 2D materials, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), formed by a metal (e.g., Mo, W) atom sandwiched between chalcogenide atoms (e.g., S, Se, Te), have been studied widely for their various device applications, ranging from electronics and optoelectronics to spintronics. To further harness the potential of TMDs, scientists have adopted several methods for the functionalization of 2D materials to modify their surfaces and allow wafer-scale fabrication. Several studies have been reported regarding the functionalization of TMDs through plasma treatment using fluorine, oxygen, phosphorus, chlorine, and nitrogen gases. Fluorine- and oxygen-functionalized MoS2 sheets have been applied within highly rectifying diodes; phosphorus-, chlorine-, and nitrogen-functionalized MoS2 sheets have been employed to modulate the doping level of MoS2. Although hydrogen plasma treatment has been used widely for the hydrogenation of graphene, it has been less commonly applied to TMDs. Based on density functional theory calculations, hydrogenated TMDs should be the most stable because the bonding distance between the chalcogen and hydrogen atoms is shorter than those between chalcogen and other atoms. Hydrogen plasma treatment has been used previously only to etch Se in WSe2 to create vacancies and to etch Cl in chlorine-functionalized MoS2; it has not been used previously for the functionalization of TMDs (e.g., the formation of H–Se bonds).
To integrate organic and inorganic materials into the active layers of OPVs, scientists have adopted one promising concept—involving the bulk heterojunction (BHJ)—for the application of TMDs. The BHJ structure, which exploits a p-type polymer donor and n-type fullerene acceptor materials (mainly composed in the form of a polymer/fullerene matrix), maximizes the donor–acceptor interfacial area and allows exciton dissociation and charge transfer through the formation of a bi-continuous interpenetrated charge transport network in the active layer. Furthermore, to realize practical devices based on TMDs, the stability of such devices must be high. TMDs have been used previously as the hole transport layer (HTL), electron transport layer (ETL), interfacial layer, and protective layer within organic solar cells. There have been fewer studies, however, into the stability of active layers incorporating hydrogen plasma-treated TMDs.
In this study, we used a hydrogen plasma process to treat MoSe2 nanosheets that we had produced using a previously reported method: exfoliation of bulk MoSe2 compounds through quenching in liquid N2. We then used these surface-functionalized MoSe2 nanosheets to boost the PCEs of OPV devices based on a binary blend of PTB7-TH and PC71BM as the active layer. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) revealed the formation of H–Se–Mo bonds in the hydrogenated MoSe2; the degree of hydrogenation could be tuned by changing the radio-frequency (RF) power of the plasma. We ascribe the PCE enhancement after the addition of the MoSe2 to several concurrently occurring effects. Firstly, optimization of the ternary blend morphology with addition of MoSe2 led to enhanced exciton generation. Secondly, the more ideal blend morphology also facilitated exciton dissociation at the MoSe2 and PC71BM interface. Thirdly, charge transfer was optimized through the introduction of MoSe2 that can function as additional conducting bridges. Lastly, electron extraction to the back metal contact was enhanced due to the more balanced charge carrier mobility, thereby minimizing charge carrier accumulation at the interfaces and preventing the formation of a positive space-charge build-up at the photoanode. Furthermore, the device incorporating MoSe2 maintained 65% of its initial PCE after continuous heating at 100 °C for approximately 1 h. To demonstrate the universality of our approach, we demonstrate herein that the performance of devices based on a non-fullerene binary system (PBDTTBO:IT-4F) improved after incorporation of MoSe2.

The indium tin oxide (ITO) substrate was cleaned through ultrasonic treatment with detergent, deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol, and then dried. The pure ZnO solution was spin-coated onto ITO glass that had been subjected to UV/ozone treatment for 15 min and then annealed at 200 °C for 1 h. PTB7-TH and PC71BM (10 mg/15 mg; 1:1.5) was dissolved in chlorobenzene (970 μL), followed by the addition of 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) to give an overall DIO content of 3%. The MoSe2-based blends were prepared by incorporating a MoSe2 sample (with or without hydrogen plasma-treatment) in PTB7-TH and PC71BM at the same concentrations of extra 15%. (MoSe2 was added at 15 wt% in the 1:1.5 PTB7-TH/PC71BM blend.)

The PTB7-TH:PC71BM:MoSe2 solution blends were spin-cast on top of the film of the ETL; they were left for 30 min under ambient conditions prior to deposition of the anode. The thickness of each active layer film of PTB7-TH/PC71BM was approximately 110 nm. Device fabrication was complete after thermal evaporation of MoO3 and the Ag anode under high vacuum. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured using a Keithley 2400 source meter.
The photocurrents were measured under simulated AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2 using a Xe lamp-based 150 W solar simulator. External quantum efficiencies (EQEs) were measured using an SRF50 system (Optosolar, Germany). A calibrated mono-silicon diode exhibiting a response at 300–800 nm was used as a reference. For measurements of the hole and electron mobilities, devices were fabricated having the structures ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/Au and ITO/ZnO/active layer/Al, respectively. The J–V characteristics of these diodes were measured in the dark in a glove box under a N2 atmosphere. The mobilities were extracted by fitting the J–V curves to the Mott–Gurney relationship (space charge-limited current).
A UV–Vis spectrophotometer (Hitachi U-4100) equipped with an integrating sphere was used to acquire absorption spectra. A fluorescence spectrophotometer (Hitachi F-7000) was used to record steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra under ambient conditions (open to the air). Film morphologies were determined using atomic force microscopy (AFM) in the tapping mode (Veeco Innova) under ambient conditions. A high-performance low temperature and multi-function X-ray diffractometer (Bruker) was used to obtain the powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the MoSe2 films. Grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray spectroscopy (GIWAXS) and grazing incidence small-angle X-ray spectroscopy (GISAXS) were performed at the 23A beamline (10 keV) of the National Synchrotron Radiation Research Center (NSRRC), Hsinchu, Taiwan, using an incident angle of 0.2°. The states of the Mo and Se atoms were examined through XPS of the thin films, using the beamline BL-09A at the NSRRC.

MoSe2 (500 mg) was added to N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (100 mL) to create a MoSe2 dispersion (5 mg mL−1). The mixture was stirred for 24 h, and then it was rapidly quenched to low temperature in liquid N2. After quenching, the dispersion was subjected to exfoliation for 180 min in an ultrasonication bath (20 kHz) under a power of 130 W. The resulting exfoliated MoSe2 powder was collected through vacuum filtration through PVDF membranes (average pore size: 0.2 μm) supported on a fritted glass holder. After peeling off the PVDF membrane, the resulting MoSe2 powder, described herein as “exfoliated MoSe2”, was stored in a drying box at 70 °C until required for use.


A low-damage plasma treatment system (LDPT) in Ming Chi University of Technology, Taiwan was used to treat the samples and Scheme 1A shows the schematic representation of the system. The H2 plasma was generated by flowing 15 sccm H2 gas past an electrode, supplied with 100 W of 13.56 MHz RF power at 120 mTorr in an LDPT vacuum system exposing for 60 s. The MoSe2 nanosheets were placed 5 cm away from the plasma source in the system, in which ionized atoms or free radicals diffused toward the sample chamber with low energies.



Fig. 1a displays a schematic representation of a fabricated inverted device having the structure glass/ITO/ZnO/active layer/MoO3/Ag. Fig. 1b presents the chemical structures of the components in the active layer, based on a binary blend of PTB7-TH and PC71BM. MoSe2, both with and without hydrogen plasma treatment, was incorporated into the active layer to investigate its effects on the performance and stability of the OPV devices.

To characterize the MoSe2 samples, we employed high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), as presented in Fig. 2. The d-spacings of the MoSe2 with and without hydrogen plasma treatment were 0.27 and 0.29 nm, respectively, attributed to the (100) plane of MoSe2. The insets to the HRTEM images in Fig. 2b and d are the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns of the MoSe2 nanosheets; they confirm that the MoSe2 sample retained its hexagonal crystal structure after hydrogen plasma treatment. We suspect that the low energy of the hydrogen plasma effectively removed surface hydrocarbon impurities but did not damage the crystal structure of the MoSe2 nanosheets.

Fig. 3a displays the XPS characteristics of the MoSe2 samples prepared with and without hydrogen plasma treatment. For the pre-treated MoSe2, the Se 3d peak exhibits a well-known doublet feature, with peak positions at 55.70 and 54.85 eV, consistent with those reported previously. After hydrogen plasma treatment, the Se 3d peaks shifted to lower binding energies of 55.46 eV and 54.62 eV, indicative of the formation of H–Se–Mo bonds. The presence of H–Se–Mo bonds caused the transfer of electrons from the hydrogen atoms to the selenium atoms, thereby increasing the electron density around the selenium atoms and increasing the repulsive forces among the selenium atoms, facilitating the release of the photoelectrons during device operation. Therefore, the H–Se–Mo bonds shifted to a lower binding energy, consistent with results observed for hydrogenated MoS2.
To corroborate the XPS results, we used Raman spectroscopy to examine the electron transfer from hydrogen to MoSe2 after hydrogenation. Fig. 3b presents the Raman spectra of the MoSe2 sample recorded before and after hydrogen plasma treatment. The black line in Fig. 3b is the spectrum of the pre-treated MoSe2, with the sharp peak at the lower wavenumber of 241 cm−1 representing to the A1g vibration mode of MoSe2 (out-of-plane vibration) and the broader one at the higher wavenumber of 287 cm−1 originating from the E2g vibration mode (in-plane vibration).
According to Fig. 3b, the A1g mode of the hydrogenated MoSe2 was red-shifted, consistent with charge transfer from hydrogen to MoSe2. In addition, the intensity of the A1g vibration mode of MoSe2 decreased as a result of such charge transfer, consistent with the previously reported decreases in intensity of the A1g and E2g vibration modes as a result of enhanced electron–phonon coupling owing to excess charges in MoS2. Notably, however, it was difficult to investigate the intensity changes of the E2g vibration mode because it was broad and overlapped with other modes.

Fig. 4a presents the UV–Vis absorption spectra of the PTB7-TH/PC71BM films prepared with and without MoSe2. Fig. 4a provided an absorption coefficient of 4.8 × 104 cm−1 for the PTB7-TH and PC71BM binary blend prepared without MoSe2, consistent with previous reports. The addition of MoSe2 increased the absorption coefficient across the entire spectrum, from 300 to 800 nm. Although the addition of MoSe2 without hydrogen plasma treatment increased the absorption coefficient only slightly, the incorporation of the hydrogenated MoSe2 noticeably increased the absorption coefficient. A higher absorption coefficient is correlated with a higher short-circuit current density (JSC). We suspect that the presence of MoSe2 altered the packing arrangement of the PTB7-TH:PC71BM film to create more pathways for charges to transfer. This feature is discussed further in the section describing the sample morphology.
To examine the degrees of exciton dissociation and charge transfer in the blend films, we recorded their PL spectra (Fig. 4b and c). In Fig. 4b, the peak PL emission intensity of PTB7-TH increased after incorporating MoSe2. The addition of the hydrogen plasma-treated MoSe2 further increased the peak PL emission intensity, hinting that more photons were generated in the films. Fig. 4c presents the PL spectra of the PTB7-TH:PC71BM blends with and without MoSe2. The PL peak had its lowest intensity for the film of PTB7-TH:PC71BM:hydrogen plasma-treated MoSe2, whereas the peak intensity was the highest for the binary system of PTB7-TH:PC71BM prepared without MoSe2. The highly efficient PL quenching hints at ultrafast photoinduced charge transfer from the polymer to MoSe2 and PC71BM.Fig. 5a displays the J–V characteristics of the devices prepared with and without MoSe2; Fig. 5b provides the corresponding EQE curves. The integrated photocurrents for the devices based on pristine PTB7-TH:PC71BM, PTB7-TH:PC71BM incorporating MoSe2, and PTB7-TH:PC71BM incorporating the hydrogen plasma-treated MoSe2 were 16.17, 17.29, and 18.09 mA cm−2, respectively. Table 1 lists the corresponding device performances. The champion pristine binary system of PTB7-TH/PC71BM (1:1.5, w/w) as the active layer displayed a value of VOC of 0.78 V, a value of JSC of 17.58 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 64%, and a PCE of 9.02%. The device performance was improved slightly after the incorporation of MoSe2. The champion PTB7-TH/PC71BM device incorporating the hydrogen plasma-treated MoSe2 displayed a value of VOC of 0.78 V, a value of JSC of 18.69 cm−2, an FF of 70%, and a PCE of 10.20%—the latter representing an increase of 16% relative to that of the pristine reference device.
Active layer

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

J
SC, cal (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCEavg (%)
PCEmax (%)

a Weight ratio of D:A:MoSe2 = 1:1.5:0.375.
b Twenty devices were fabricated.

PTB7-TH:PC71BM
0.78 ± 0.01
17.58 ± 0.3
16.73
64 ± 0.3
8.8 ± 0.1
9.02
PTB7-TH:PC71BM:MoSe2
0.78 ± 0.01
17.91 ± 0.2
17.29
69 ± 0.2
9.63 ± 0.1
9.82
PTB7-TH:PC71BM:hydrogen plasma-treated MoSe2
0.78 ± 0.01
18.69 ± 0.2
18.09
70 ± 0.3
10.20 ± 0.1
10.44
To study the electron cascade effect caused by the MoSe2 and its contribution to the enhancement in PCE, we investigated the carrier transport properties of the films (Fig. S1a and S1b, respectively). For this purpose, we fabricated electron- and hole-only devices having the structures ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/Au and ITO/ZnO/active layer/Al, respectively. The electron (μe) and hole mobilities (μh) were calculated based on the Mott–Gurney equation.
(1)
From the SCLC measurements, we observed a significant improvement in the value of μe of the device incorporating the hydrogen plasma-treated MoSe2, suggesting cascade-like transport in the device.
The ratio of μh/μe can be considered a measure of charge accumulation in a device. Imbalanced carrier mobility can lead to positive space-charge build-up at the photoanode and, therefore, the trapping of electrons near the back electrode in the BHJ OPV. The addition of MoSe2 in the BHJ OPV dramatically decreased the μh/μe ratio: from 2.46 for the binary blend device (see Table 2) to 1.44 for the hydrogen plasma-treated MoSe2-based device. This improvement is significant because electron transport is considered a limiting factor for photocurrent generation in the PTB7-TH:PC71BM blend, where the value of μe is much lower than that of μh. The higher value of μe in the OPV device would minimize exciton recombination in the active layer and, thus, increase the achievable FF. Furthermore, the balanced charge carrier mobilities of the devices would decrease the charge accumulation effect, which is correlated with the improved value of JSC of the MoSe2-based BHJ OPV relative to that of the reference device prepared without MoSe2. The morphology of the active layer can have a dramatic effect on the performance of OPV devices, especially on their exciton dissociation and charge transfer properties. The surface morphology, characterized in terms of phase separation and roughness, can be investigated using AFM. Typically, the smooth morphology of a blend film having a low root-mean-square (RMS) roughness will facilitate the formation of an ideal interface between the active layer and the electrode, leading to enhanced device performance.
PTB7-TH:PC71BM
PTB7-TH:PC71BM:MoSe2
PTB7-TH:PC71BM:hydrogen plasma-treated MoSe2

μ
h (cm2 V−1 s−1)
8.67 × 10−4
2.03 × 10−3
3.34 × 10−3

μ
e (cm2 V−1 s−1)
3.52 × 10−4
1.01 × 10−3
2.32 × 10−3

μ
h/μe
2.46
2.03
1.44

Fig. 6 presents AFM topographic images of the PTB7-TH:PC71BM:MoSe2 blend films prepared with and without plasma-treatment. The incorporation of MoSe2 decreased the roughness to 1.79 nm and 1.89 nm from 2.42 nm for the pristine film. We assume that the variations in the topology of the active layer were caused by the incorporation MoSe2 nanosheets that are with and without plasma-treatment, and the FF of the corresponding devices increases to 70% for the plasma-treatment MoSe2 nanosheets incorporated ternary blend from 64% for the binary blend device. This feature would potentially improve the interfacial contact between the transport layers and the active layer, leading to improved PCEs. A more ideal interface would most likely feature fewer traps, thereby reducing the probability of recombination. Upon increasing the amount of incorporated MoSe2 in the films, the RMS roughness decreased slightly initially and then increased, indicating that the blending of a only a suitable amount of MoSe2 was beneficial to the smoothness of blend films (Fig. S2).

Fig. 7a–c present 2D GIWAXS patterns of the spin-coated pristine PC71BM film, the pristine PTB7-TH film, and the PTB7-TH:PC71BM blend films, respectively. The GIWAXS pattern of PTB7-TH film featured a main (100) diffraction spot at a value of qxy of 0.33 Å−1 in the in-plane direction (parallel to the film surface) and a (010) diffraction spot at a value of qz of 1.6 Å−1 in the out-of-plane direction (perpendicular to the film surface), revealing that the main orientation of the PTB7-TH crystallites was with the lamellar structure face-on. The inter-spacing distances between the (100) planes, d100, and between the (010) planes, d010, were 20.0 and 3.9 Å, respectively, according to the GIWAXS data. The GIWAXS pattern of the pristine PC71BM film featured a halo diffraction ring at a value of q of 1.35 Å−1 arising from PC71BM aggregates or clusters having an isotropic orientation. Fig. S3 provides the one-dimensional GIWAXS profiles reduced along the out-of-plane and in-plane directions for each film. According to the (100) peak width of the in-plane GIWAXS profile of the blend film, the average crystal size in the (100) direction (correlation length) of PTB7-TH single crystals was approximately 118.9 Å in the blend film.

Fig. 7d displays the 2D GIWAXS pattern of the PTB7-TH:PC71BM:MoSe2 blend film. In contrast to the PTB7-TH:PC71BM binary film, the 2D-like or lamellar structure of the MoSe2 crystals in the blend films had a main preferred orientation parallel to the substrate surface, indicated by presence of diffraction spots at a value of qz of approximately 1.0 Å−1 in the out-of-plane direction. Compared with the powder XRD pattern of the MoSe2 film, which featured a main diffraction peak at a value of q of approximately 1.0 Å−1 (Fig. S4), the spilt peaks at a value of qz of approximately 1.0 Å−1 in the out-of-plane GIWAXS profile (Fig. S3) may be attributed to the effects of film-processing leading to a difference in the derived lattice constant from the two measurements. Moreover, Fig. 7e displays the 2D GIWAXS patterns of the PTB7-TH:PC71BM:MoSe2 blend films incorporating the MoSe2 that had been treated with the hydrogen plasma.
The corresponding out-of-plane GIWAXS profiles (Fig. S3) reveal a large decreased in peak splitting of the MoSe2 crystals, suggesting better crystalline quality than that of the blend film with the untreated MoSe2. According to the integrated peak intensities of the (100) peaks at a value of qxy of 0.33 Å−1 in the in-plane GIWAXS profiles of all of the blend films (Fig. S3), the relative crystallinities of the PTB7-TH crystallites in all of the blend films were almost identical. The GIWAXS data proved that the incorporation of MoSe2 did not influence the existence, distribution, or thickness variation (see below) of the plate-like out-of-plane-oriented MoSe2 crystallites in the PTB7-TH crystallization with edge-on orientation.
We investigated the correlation between the BHJ structure and its effect on device performance. GISAXS is an effective tool for the quantitative study of the BHJ structures of the active layers in OPVs. Fig. 7f presents the GISAXS profiles of the PTB7-TH:PC71BM blend films prepared with and without MoSe2. The main GISAXS intensity in the low-q region (<0.01 Å−1) of the pristine PTB7-TH:PC71BM binary film exhibited a power-law behavior with an exponent of approximately 1.4 and is attributed to the large polymer structure. We attribute the shoulder in the GISAXS profile at 0.02 Å−1 to the presence of PC71BM aggregation clusters, consistent with previous reports. In contrast, the main GISAXS intensity in the low-q region (<0.01 Å−1) for all of the PTB7-TH:PC71BM:MoSe2 blend films had increased dramatically, with an exponent of approximately 2[I(q) ∝ q−m; m = ca. 2]. Because the increase in the low-q GISAXS intensity was caused purely by the addition of MoSe2 and was much larger than that of the PTB7-TH:PC71BM binary film, the low-q GISAXS intensity can be regarded as being contributed mainly by the presence of large MoSe2 crystallites. The value of the exponent m being 2 also provides direct evidence that the MoSe2 morphology had a plate- or disk-like shape, according to the theory. The GISAXS intensity profile in the low-q region (<0.01 Å−1) for all of the PTB7-TH:PC71BM:MoSe2 blend films could be modeled using the form factor of a simple cylinder having a radius RL and a thickness T (RL ≫ T), as given by
(2)
where
η is the volume fraction of plate-like MoSe2 crystallites; Δρ is the scattering length density contrast between the nano-plates and the surrounding amorphous PTB7-TH/PC71BM matrix; VP is the plate volume (equal to πRL2T); j0(x) is equal to sin(x)/x; and J1 is the first-order Bessel function. The integral over α averages the form factor over all possible orientations of the plate-like domains with a solid angle α with respect to q. The product of η and Δρ can be regarded as a pre-factor. The scattering vector q is equal to 4π/λsin(θ/2), where θ is the GISAXS scattering angle and λ is the incident radiation wavelength. On the other hand, the GISAXS intensity in the middle- and high-q regions (>0.02 Å−1), IS(q), contributed mainly by the PC71BM clusters, can be modeled approximately by the product of the form factor of a polydisperse sphere having a Schulz distribution of radius with a mean radius RS and the structure factor of a hard-sphere interaction between clusters, as described previously. Therefore, the total GISAXS intensity profiles contributed by the MoSe2 plates and PC71BM clusters in the different q regions can be modeled by

I(q) = IL(q) + IS(q) + b
(3)
where
b is the incoherent background.

The GISAXS profiles of all of our PTB7-TH:PC71BM:MoSe2 blend films were fitted well by eqn (2), as suggested by the solid curves in Fig. 7f. The mean thickness of the MoSe2 plates in the blend films, determined by model-fitting, was 14.2 nm. The fitted diameters or sizes of the MoSe2 plates were in the range 2000–2400 nm; that is, they were over the length scale corresponding to the lowest measured value of q of 0.003 Å−1. The fitted size is based on the extrapolation fitting, providing a reference for the minimal possible size. On the other hand, the fitted diameters of the PC71BM clusters in all of the blend films having the three MoSe2 contents are almost the same (ca. 10 nm). The size of the PC71BM clusters was independent of the MoSe2 content or plate thickness. Consistently, the sizes of the PTB7-TH crystallites were not affected by the MoSe2 content (as determined from the GIWAXS data). The MoSe2 plate crystallites had electron-transporting characteristics, similar to that of TiO2 or ZnO.

Fig. 7f displays the GISAXS profiles of the PTB7-TH:PC71BM:MoSe2 blend films. According to the GIWAXS patterns (Fig. S3), the crystalline quality of the PTB7-TH:PC71BM:hydrogen plasma-treated MoSe2 blend film was better (as seen from the larger number of peaks) than that of the film incorporating the untreated MoSe2. Therefore, the PCEs of the PTB7-TH:PC71BM:hydrogen plasma-treated MoSe2 device were also higher. In contrast, the GISAXS profile in the low-q region of the PTB7-TH:PC71BM:hydrogen plasma-treated MoSe2 blend film was distinct. The fitted thickness of the MoSe2 plates for this film was approximately 1.8 nm; a more favourable network was formed with the amorphous PTB7-TH:PC71BM matrix for improved electron transport. The corresponding sizes of the PC71BM clusters and PTB7-TH polymer for this film were the same as those of the other films, according to the GISAXS fitting data and comparing the (100) peaks of the GIWAXS profiles. This finding indicates that the presence of MoSe2 contributed to the electron transport and led to the improvement in performance. Therefore, we postulate that the thickness of the MoSe2 plates having good crystalline quality (a result of plasma treatment) played an important role in the performance of the OPV devices. To illustrate our findings from the structural characterizations using GISAXS and GIWAXS, Fig. 8 displays a schematic representation of the multiple-length-scale BHJ structures comprising face-on PTB7-TH crystallites, PC71BM clusters, out-of-plane-oriented MoSe2 crystalline plates, and the amorphous PTB7-TH/PC71BM matrix. The MoSe2 nanosheets functioned as additional conducting bridges for better charge transfer and transport and provided better thermal stability because of their intrinsic structure.
We investigated the stability of the devices heated at 100 °C in a N2-filled glove box without encapsulation. Fig. 9 presents the normalized PCEs, Voc, JSC and FF of the devices over time. As a result, we observed that the VOC degradation remained relatively identical regardless of the type of incorporated MoSe2 nanosheets. In contract, the JSC and FF of the devices incorporated with either type of MoSe2 degraded slower as compared to the control device without MoSe2 nanosheets. The devices incorporating the treated and untreated MoSe2 both retained 70% of their initial PCEs, even after heating for approximately 1 h, whereas the binary blend devices prepared without MoSe2 maintained only 60% of their initial PCE. This result confirms that the lifetimes of the devices were extended after incorporating MoSe2.
The OPV community is progressively transitioning to the use of non-fullerene systems. In this light, we also tested the effect of the incorporation of MoSe2 on the non-fullerene PBDTTBO:IT-4F system.Fig. 10a compares the J–V characteristics of the devices incorporating both the treated and untreated MoSe2 with those of the binary blend system prepared without MoSe2. Fig. 10b displays the EQE curves of the devices. The integrated photocurrents for the devices incorporating PBDTTBO:IT-4F, PBDTTBO:IT-4F: untreated MoSe2, and PBDTTBO:IT-4F: treated MoSe2 were 18.07, 18.34, and 18.42 mA cm−2, respectively. Table 3 lists the corresponding device performances. The binary blend system of PBDTTBO:IT-4F (1:1.2, w/w) as the active layer (i.e., without MoSe2) provided a value of VOC of 0.73 V, a value of JSC of 19.02 mA cm−2, an FF of 51%, and a PCE of 7.08%. The device performance improved slightly after incorporating MoSe2 into the active layer. The champion PBDTTBO:IT-4F device was that featuring the hydrogen plasma-treated MoSe2; it displayed a value of VOC of 0.73 V, a value of JSC of 19.37 cm−2, an FF of 56%, and a PCE of 7.92%—the latter being an increase of 12% relative to the PCE of the corresponding pristine device. This improvement is almost identical to that of the corresponding fullerene-containing system.
Active layer

V
OC (V)

J
SC, (mA cm−2)

J
SC, cal (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCEavg (%)
PCEmax (%)

a Weight ratio of D:A:MoSe2 = 1:1.2:0.33.
b Twenty devices were fabricated.

PBDTTBO:IT-4F
0.73 ± 0.01
19.02 ± 0.2
18.07
51 ± 0.02
7.08 ± 0.1
7.26
PBDTTBO:IT-4F:MoSe2
0.73 ± 0.01
19.14 ± 0.2
18.34
55 ± 0.04
7.68 ± 0.1
7.85
PBDTTBO:IT-4F:hydrogen plasma-treated MoSe2
0.73 ± 0.01
19.37 ± 0.2
18.42
56 ± 0.03
7.92 ± 0.1
8.13

We have demonstrated the impact of incorporating MoSe2 nanosheets on the performance and stability of OPV devices. We prepared the MoSe2 nanosheets through quenching in liquid N2 and then treated them with hydrogen plasma. The reference devices were based on a binary blend of PTB7-TH:PC71BM. We incorporated both the untreated and treated MoSe2 to create ternary blend systems and then investigated the effects of MoSe2 on the films and the devices. The integration of hydrogen plasma-treated MoSe2 nanosheets increased the PCE of the devices by 16% relative to that of the pristine binary blend. This enhancement in PCE following the addition of MoSe2 was strictly linked to the morphology of the added compound. Incorporating the hydrogen plasma-treated MoSe2 into the PTB7-TH:PC71BM blend resulted in the best photovoltaic performance, because of the establishment of optimized percolation pathways in the active layer. This phenomenon affected the transport properties of the active layer positively in several ways. Firstly, exciton generation was enhanced by the MoSe2. Concurrently, MoSe2 also facilitated exciton dissociation at the MoSe2–PC71BM interface. Moreover, charge transfer was optimized through the introduction of MoSe2 that acted as additional conducting bridge, and lastly, the more balanced charge carrier mobility facilitated more efficient electron extraction to the back metal contact, which minimized charge carrier accumulation at the interfaces and prevented the formation of a positive space-charge build-up at the photoanode. Our results demonstrate that 2D MoSe2 nanosheets having tunable morphological characteristics can boost the photovoltaic performances of OPVs significantly when used as third components in the active material blend. When featuring the MoSe2-incorporated active layer, the device retained 70% of its initial PCE after heating at 100 °C for approximately 1 h, demonstrating high stability. We also incorporated the untreated and treated MoSe2 into a non-fullerene system, yielding champion PCEs of 7.85 and 8.13%, respectively—relative increases of 8 and 12%, respectively, over that of the reference prepared without MoSe2.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


H.-C. Wang, Y.-C. Lin, C.-H. Chen, H.-W. Cheng, and Prof. K.-H. Wei thank the Ministry of Education Subsidies for Universities and Tertiary Colleges to Develop International Bilateral Program to Jointly Train World Class Professionals, Taiwan. This study was supported financially by the Center for Emergent Functional Matter Science of National Chiao Tung University from The Featured Areas Research Center Program within the framework of the Higher Education Sprout Project by the Ministry of Education (MOE) in Taiwan, as well as by the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan (MOST 107-2923-M-009 -004 -MY3).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9nr06611j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019