 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA00183E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9641-9648


Peng
Chen
,

Xingtian
Yin
*,

Meidan
Que
,

Xiaobin
Liu
 and 

Wenxiu
Que
*

Electronic Materials Research Laboratory, Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education, International Center for Dielectric Research, School of Electronic & Information Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China. E-mail: wxque@mail.xjtu.edu.cn; xt_yin@mail.xjtu.edu.cn; Fax: +86-29-83395679; Tel: +86-29-83395679

Received
6th January 2017
, Accepted 16th April 2017
First published on 4th May 2017
Organometallic halide-based perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted significant research attention among the next-generation photovoltaic technologies, in which the electron transport layer (ETL) plays a crucial role in the PSC performances of power conversion efficiency and long-term stability. Herein, we proposed a low temperature solution-processing route to prepare indium oxide thin films on ITO substrates with an acetylacetone-chelated precursor, which exhibit better film morphology, well-aligned band structure, and enhanced electron extraction capacity. As a result, the PSC fabricated from the as-prepared indium oxide film as the ETL shows a promoted maximum efficiency of 15.30% and steady-state efficiency of 14.39%, which are a record for indium oxide-based PSCs. More significantly, the indium oxide film shows minimum photocatalytic activity compared with ZnO and TiO2 films, which leads to excellent light and shelf-life device stability. After storage in the dark for three months, the power conversion efficiency of the unsealed PSCs based on the indium oxide films degrades slightly, which retain approximately 94% of their peak efficiency.

Solution processable organometallic halide perovskite solar cells have vastly stimulated photovoltaic research owing to their amazing progress over the past few years. Via optimizing perovskite film formation, compositional or/and bandgap engineering, and interface engineering, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has been promoted from their initial 3.8% (ref. 10) to 22.1%, and especially, much better perovskite films and device stability have also been demonstrated. Among the state of the art PSC designs, mesoporous TiO2 scaffolds were used in the typical n–i–p PSC architecture to improve its efficiency and reduce photocurrent hysteresis. However, the mesoporous TiO2 layer needs a high temperature annealing process, which is not cost-effective and incompatible with flexible substrates. Therefore, planar PSCs including regular and inverted structures have attracted increasing attention due to their simple structure and easy preparation process.

TiO2 and ZnO are the two most widely used electron transport layer (ETL) materials in planar PSCs, which hold the record efficiency among similar devices. Nevertheless, it is still necessary to investigate alternative materials considering their many intrinsic drawbacks: (1) TiO2 shows a much lower electron mobility (∼1 cm2 V−1 s−1) compared with the perovskite layer (∼24.8 cm2 V−1 s−1), resulting in unbalanced charge transport and consequently low efficiency. ZnO has a higher electron mobility (∼120–155 cm2 V−1 s−1), but it is chemically unstable, which affects the stability of PSCs. (2) TiO2 is extremely sensitive to UV irradiation, and both TiO2 and ZnO are typically efficient photocatalysts, which can accelerate the decay of PSCs. Besides these two materials, indium oxide (IO) is another potential ETL alternative for PSCs in view of its appropriate bandgap (3.7–3.85 eV), good optical transparency and relatively high electron mobility (∼14–226 cm2 V−1 s−1, summarized in Table S1). Despite the fact that IO films have been widely applied in transistors, and gas sensing, its PSCs applications are rarely explored. The first PSC based on a PCBM modified IO film obtained the maximum PCE of 14.83% (stabilized 12.68%); whereas a relatively low PCE of 13.01% (stabilized 10.41%) was obtained for IO-only PSCs due to the poor morphology of the IO film.
Herein, we report a modified solution processing route to deposit IO films, in which acetylacetone (acacH) is added to the spin-coating precursor to chelate In3+ and stabilize the precursor. Based on this route, we fabricate smooth IO films with improved coverage and enhanced photoluminescence quenching capacity. As a consequence, the maximum PCE of the IO based PSCs was promoted to 15.30% with a steady-state efficiency of 14.39%. Impressively, the as-prepared IO films show much lower photocatalytic activity for oxidizing perovskite materials compared with ZnO and TiO2, which is likely due to the relatively higher optical bandgap and weaker light absorption over ultraviolet range of IO. Benefitting from this, the IO based PSCs show good long-term stability. Without any encapsulations, the tested device retains 94% PCE of the peak value after being stored in the dark for three months.

Li bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI), 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP), dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO), chlorobenzene (CB) and N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) were purchased from Alfa Aesar. CH3NH3I (MAI, 95%) and lead iodide (PbI2, 99.9%) were obtained from Xi'an p-OLED. 2,2′,7,7′-Tetrakis (N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,90-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD, 99.5%) was supplied by Weihua Solar. Acetylacetone (acacH) was purchased from Aladdin. Other reagents were received from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent.


In2O3 (IO) thin films were prepared via a sol–gel method. Typically, 38.2 mg In(NO3)3·4.5H2O was dissolved in 1 mL ethanol followed by vigorous stirring at room temperature for 3–6 hours. To improve the stability of the sol–gel precursors and IO film formation, acetylacetone was added to chelate In3+ at a ratio of 2:1 (versus In3+). After adequate mixing, the precursors were filtered using a PTFE filter (0.45 μm) and aged for 48 hours. IO film was deposited on ITO substrates by spin coating the precursor at a rate of 2000 rpm for 30 s, and then annealed on a hot plate at 200 °C for 50 min in ambient air. Finally, the IO films were gradually cooled to room temperature before perovskite film deposition.


ITO substrates were patterned via selective etching with diluted HCl aqueous solution and Zn powder. The as-patterned substrates were cleaned by sequential ultrasonication in Hellmanex detergent diluted in deionized water, deionized water, acetone and ethanol, followed by UV-ozone treatment for 15 min. After deposition of the IO films, perovskite films were deposited on top of them via an anti-solvent, one-step method. Here, the perovskite precursor solution was prepared by dissolving 0.922 g PbI2 and 0.318 g CH3CH3I in a 2 mL mixture of DMF and DMSO with a ratio of 7:3 (v/v), then the solution was stirred at 70 °C overnight and filtered using a PTFE filter (0.45 μm). The CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) film was spin-coated on the IO coated substrates at 1000 rpm for 5 s and at 3000 rpm for another 30 s. At the end of the latter spin-coating step, 130 μL chlorobenzene was drop-casted on the wet film. Then, the MAPbI3 film was annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. After that, a spiro-OMeTAD layer was deposited by spin-coating a stock solution at 2000 rpm for 30 s, where the stock solution was prepared by dissolving 72.3 mg spiro-OMeTAD in 1 mL chlorobenzene with the addition of 28.8 μL 4-tert-butylpyridine and 35 μL Li-TFSI/acetonitrile (260 mg mL−1) solution. Finally, a silver counter electrode was thermally evaporated on the top on the substrate.


Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, Quanta F250, JEOL Inc., Japan) was used to study the morphology of the as-fabricated films. High resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM, JEM-2100, JEOL Inc., Japan), selected area electron diffraction (SAED) and X-ray diffraction (XRD, D/max 2400 X Series, Rigaku, Japan) were employed to investigate the crystallinity of the IO films and perovskite films. The roughness of the IO films was investigated via atomic force microscopy (AFM, Cypher S, Asylum Research). The band structure of the IO films was determined with X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (ESCALAB 250Xi, Thermo Fisher) using the He I emission line (21.22 eV). UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra of the films were measured on a JASCO V-570 UV/VIS/NIR spectrometer. Steady and time-resolved photoluminescence spectra were recorded using a fluorescence spectrometer (FLS980, Edinburgh Instruments). The photoelectrochemical properties of the various metal oxides were measured with a CHI660E electrochemical workstation (Chenhua, Shanghai) using the three-electrode configuration combined with a Ag/AgCl reference electrode and Pt wire counter electrode. The xenon light was manually chopped and the current–voltage curves were recorded at a scanning rate of 10 mV s−1 in a 2 wt% methylamine aqueous solution. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured using a PVIV-201V I–V Station (Newport Oriel), and the fabricated devices were reversely scanned (1.2 V → −0.1 V) with a time interval of 100 ms. External quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the devices were recorded using a Qtest Station 1000ADX system (Growntech, Inc.) in AC mode.


Indium oxide (IO) films were spin-coated on as-cleaned ITO substrates from pristine (without acacH) and modified (with acacH) precursors under the same spin-coating and annealing conditions. Fig. S1 shows the photographs of the two types of precursors. The pristine IO precursor without acacH turned turbid and inhomogeneous after aging for several days due to hydrolysis. However, the solution with acacH remained clear and homogeneous since acacH acts as a ligand stabilizer by chelating indium ions and forming an indium–acacH complex. This complexation was further confirmed by FT-IR measurement. Fig. S2 shows the FT-IR spectrum of the modified IO precursor. Referring to the standard spectrum from the National Institute of Standard and Technology (NIST), IR peaks near 1527, 1270, 933 and 780 cm−1 were detected and identified as indium acetylacetone complexes, which indicate that the In3+ ions were effectively chelated by acacH. Fig. 1a and b show the morphologies of the IO films observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). It can be seen that the pinholes in the IO films have different sizes and depths, where the deeper/larger pinholes have a more severe impact on the quality of the films. A reduction in the number of deep pinholes can be observed on the surface of the modified IO films, which suggests an improved hole blocking capacity compared with the pristine film. Besides, atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements were also conducted to further characterize the improvement in the IO film morphologies, and the corresponding three-dimensional AFM images (with an area of 5 μm × 5 μm) of the pristine and modified IO films are presented in Fig. 1c and d, respectively. The IO film deposited by the pristine precursor (Fig. 1c) shows many relatively deep valleys; whereas, the modified film (Fig. 1d) presents a smoother surface with reduced valleys and decreased root-mean-square roughness from 8.586 nm to 6.747 nm, which indicates that the modified IO film favors the deposition of the perovskite film and formation of good electronic contact between them, as demonstrated by other researchers.


Fig. 1e shows the high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) image and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of the modified IO film (scraped from the substrate and dispersed in ethanol) annealed at 200 °C. The HR-TEM image clearly reveals a lattice fringe with a spacing of 0.29 nm, which can be indexed to the (222) plane of IO with a bcc-bixbyite structure. The SAED pattern in the inset of Fig. 1e shows a set of diffraction rings, which indicates the polycrystalline nature of the prepared IO film annealed at a low temperature. Fig. 1f displays the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns collected to further determine the crystal structure of the films and its dependence on temperature, which are in good agreement with that of bcc In2O3 (included in PDF No. 06-0416). It is confirmed that the IO film can easily crystallize at temperatures above 200 °C, which is not affected by the addition of acacH. As demonstrated by the enhanced XRD intensity and narrower peak width, an increase in annealing temperature leads to improved crystallization and larger crystalline grains. Considering that small IO particles are beneficial for the formation of a compact layer and that a high sintering temperature increases the resistance of the ITO substrates, the IO films employed in PSCs were annealed at 200 °C. The crystallinity and optical transmittance of the films are compared in Fig. S3, in which it is observed that the modified IO film has a slightly higher transmittance than the pristine film. Fig S4 shows the J–V curves of the as-fabricated PSCs based on the IO films annealed at different temperatures. It can be clearly seen that the device fabricated from the IO film annealed at 200 °C shows the best device performance, which is consistent with the above discussion.
To determine the work function (WF) and valence band maximum (VBM) of the modified IO film, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) spectra were collected by applying a −5 V bias on the samples to improve the photoelectron collection and calibrate the Fermi level of the detector to zero binding energy. The secondary electron emission cut-off and VBM spectra are presented in Fig. 2a and b, from which the WF and VBM are estimated to be 4.3 eV and 3.3 eV (versus the Fermi level), respectively. The optical bandgap was estimated from UV-vis absorption spectra and Tauc formula (αhν)n = A(hν − Eg), where, Eg, α and ν refer to the optical bandgap, absorption coefficient and light frequency, respectively, and n equals 2 for the direct bandgap semiconductor. As illustrated in Fig. 2c, the calculated bandgap, Eg, for the modified IO film annealed at 200 °C and CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) film is 3.8 eV and 1.59 eV, respectively. Thus, the conduction band energy (Ec) is calculated to be 3.8 eV according to the equation Ec = WF + VBM − Eg, which is very close to that of MAPbI3 (3.9 eV) and suggests efficient electron extraction at their interfaces. Besides, at the IO/ITO interface, the small discrepancy between the IO and ITO substrates (4.1 eV, as shown in Fig S5) without UVO treatment contributes to a relatively low Schottky barrier.Fig. 3a shows the cross-sectional SEM image of the PSC based on the modified IO film, in which an MAPbI3 layer (∼350 nm), a spiro-OMeTAD layer (∼270 nm) and a silver electrode (150 nm) were successively deposited onto the IO film (∼40 nm, Fig. S6). The probable energy level alignment diagram is illustrated in Fig. 3b. As noted previously, it is well aligned between the conduction band of the IO film and that of the adjacent MAPbI3 layer.
The top-view SEM image and X-ray diffraction pattern of the perovskite film deposited on the IO coated ITO substrate are shown in Fig. 4a and b, respectively. A dense and pinhole-free perovskite film was formed on the surface of the IO film, which was well crystallized under the annealing conditions of 100 °C for 10 min. The three strongest peaks located at 14.2°, 28.5° and 31.9° can be indexed to the (110), (220) and (310) planes, respectively, which is in accordance with our previous report. Photoluminescence quenching is credible evidence of charge transfer from the perovskite layer to the charge transport layer (CTL).Fig. 4c shows the steady-state photoluminescence spectra (excited at 470 nm, recorded in the range of 700 nm to 850 nm) of the perovskite films on glass, ITO and the pristine and modified IO films. The PL peaks are fixed at 771 nm, which is in good agreement with the UV-vis spectra. It can be clearly seen that the modified IO film layer can quench the PL intensity of the upper perovskite layer more efficiently than bare ITO and the pristine IO film layer. To gain more insight into the charge-transfer kinetics at the perovskite/IO interface, time-resolved PL spectra were recorded, as presented in Fig. 4d. The PL decay curves were fitted using a bi-exponential relationship, as illustrated in following equation,
y = y0 + A1exp(t/τ1) + A2exp(t/τ2)
(1)
and the fitted parameters are summarized in Table S2
. Wherein, the decay part τ1 with a shorter timescale and τ2 with a relatively longer lifetime represent the bulk recombination and trap-state mediated species, respectively. In the case of the perovskite/modified IO sample, τ2 decreases from 34.5 ns to 28.1 ns, which suggests that there are reduced trap states at the perovskite/ETL interface. As discussed previously, the modified IO films have a smoother surface, thus suggesting better interconnection among the nanocrystals and improved grain boundaries, which are likely to account for the reduced trap states, as indicated by the above TRPL analysis.

Afterwards, a number of PSC devices based on the pristine and modified IO films were fabricated to investigate their photovoltaic performances. Fig. 5 shows the statistical distributions of the photovoltaic parameters including open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE), where the performances of the PSCs based on the pristine and modified films are compared. The mean values and standard deviations are listed and compared in Table 1. For the devices based on the pristine IO films, a PCE of 11.6 ± 1.0% combined with a Voc of 0.99 ± 0.02 V, Jsc of 18.5 ± 1.0 mA cm−2, and FF of 63.5 ± 3.7% were demonstrated on average. Under the same measuring conditions, the PSCs based on the modified IO films yielded an improved PCE of 13.8 ± 0.7%, which is mainly attributed to the enhanced Jsc of 20.7 ± 1.1 mA cm−2, together with the slightly increased Voc of 1.03 ± 0.01 V and FF of 65.0 ± 2.7%. The enhanced Jsc originates from more efficient charge extraction, as demonstrated by the PL quenching results, instead of charge accumulation or/and recombination at the perovskite/CTL interface. In addition, suppressed charge recombination, as indicated by the reduced PL decay time, should also contribute to the improved FF.
Substrate
Precursor

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Indium oxide
Pristine
0.99 ± 0.02
18.5 ± 1.0
63.5 ± 3.7
11.6 ± 1.0
Modified
1.03 ± 0.01
20.7 ± 1.1
65.0 ± 2.7
13.8 ± 0.7
The current density–voltage (J–V) curve obtained for the best-performing device fabricated from the modified IO film, together with the eternal quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum and steady-state photocurrent curve are shown in Fig. 6a, b and d, respectively. It can be seen that the device exhibited a Voc of 1.05 V, FF of 68.1% and Jsc of 21.3 mA cm−2 and consequently an impressively high PCE of 15.3%. The integrated photocurrent density was calculated using the EQE spectrum and AM 1.5 G standard sunlight photo flux, which yielded a value of 19.6 mA cm−2. The slight discrepancy between the integrated photocurrent density and that obtained from J–V curve is probably ascribed to the trap states of the ETL. As described in the Experimental section, the IPCE spectra were recorded under weak monochromic light without light bias, which leads to a lower carrier density and also a lower filling level of the trap states than the J–V measurement under 1 sun illumination. The lower filling level of the trap states lowers the charge collection efficiency and consequently lowers the recorded spectral photocurrent response, which causes the observed discrepancy. The hysteresis property was examined and shown in Fig. S7. To test the steady-state output of the fabricated device, the device was constantly biased at the maximum power point (derived from the J–V curves to be approximately 0.80 V) and its photocurrent was recorded for more than 200 s under simulated solar irradiation. Initially, after irradiation, the photocurrent gradually reached a stable value of about 17.99 mA cm−2 and the corresponding steady-state PCE was calculated to be 14.39%. It is noteworthy that, to the best of our knowledge, both the PCE value estimated from the voltage scanning J–V curve and the steady-state result of our device exceed the previous highest efficiency for IO based PSCs.
In addition to improving device efficiency, the issue of long-term stability of PSCs is another bottleneck for their practical application. The degradation arising from the electron transport layer (ETL) is a non-negligible factor, which can affect the stability of PSCs greatly. The as-fabricated devices were stored in a desiccator with the humidity of ∼20% without any encapsulations and tested in air using under same conditions. As can be seen in Fig. 6c, the PSC device with an initial PCE of 14.12% degraded to 13.34% after aging for 3 months, which indicates that the present devices have much better shelf stability than that employing ZnO and TiO2 as the ETL in our previous work.
It is well-known that both TiO2 and ZnO are efficient photocatalysts because they oxidize organic species with photo-generated holes and have a similar bandgap of 3.2 eV. In contrast, IO with a larger bandgap exhibits relatively poor photocatalytic activity due to its narrow absorption range and inferior photoelectrical activity. To better understand this impressive enhanced long-term stability of the IO based PSCs, we tested the photoelectrochemical (PEC) activity of ZnO, TiO2 and IO films with a 2 wt% methylamine (MA) aqueous solution. The ZnO and TiO2 films were spin-coated several times to obtain the appropriate thickness (details are provided in the ESI) according to our previous reports. To balance the simplicity and reliability of the experiments, the IO film was controlled to be thicker than the ZnO and TiO2 films, as shown in Fig. S8. As shown in Fig. 7, the IO sample exhibited the lowest photocurrent among the three tested metal oxides even though it was the thickest film, which indicates that the as-prepared IO film layer is the least efficient for the photocatalytic oxidation of MA. The poor photocatalytic activity (i.e. good PEC stability) of the IO films implies good long-term stability of the corresponding PSCs, which was confirmed from the aging test. In addition, the stability of the PSCs based on In2O3, ZnO and TiO2 under constant illumination was also characterized and compared. As shown in Fig. 7b, the PSCs based on In2O3 exhibited the best stability under illumination; whereas that based on ZnO and TiO2 significantly degraded over time, which is consistent with the PEC test results.

Efficient and stable perovskite solar cells have been fabricated from indium oxide as the electron transport layer. A record efficiency of 15.3% for the PSC based on the modified IO film has been demonstrated due to its improved morphology, electron extraction or/and PL quenching capacity and reduced trap states at the perovskite/ETL interface. It is more impressive that the poor photocatalytic activity of indium oxide film contributes to the long-term stability of the corresponding PSC device, which shows only approximately 6% decay in PCE after being stored in the dark for 3 months. This research work demonstrates that indium oxide is a promising alternative ETL material for PSCs. By means of element doping, interface modification and adopting more efficient perovskite absorbing layers, the PCE of IO based PSCs is expected to be further improved.


This work was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 51502239, China Postdoctoral Science Foundation under grant 2015M582659, Natural Science Basic Research Plan in Shaanxi Province of China under Grant No. 2016JQ6058, the Science and Technology Developing Project of Shaanxi Province under Grant No. 2015KW-001, and the 111 Project of China (B14040). The SEM work was done at International Center for Dielectric Research, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, P. R. China.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta00183e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017