 DOI: 10.1039/C6CP03273G
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 17957-17964


Yu Jin
Kim
,

Yun-Ji
Lee
,

Yun-Hi
Kim
 and 

Chan Eon
Park
*

POSTECH Organic Electronics Laboratory, Department of Chemical Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang, 790-784, Republic of Korea. E-mail: cep@postech.ac.kr

Department of Materials Engineering and Convergence Technology, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, 528-28, Republic of Korea

Department of Chemistry & RIGET, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, 528-28, Republic of Korea

Received
14th May 2016
, Accepted 10th June 2016
First published on 10th June 2016
Donor molecular structures, and their packing aspects in donor:acceptor active blends, play a crucial role in the photovoltaic performance of polymer solar cells. We systematically investigated a series of isoindigo-based donor polymers within the framework of a three-dimensional (3D) crystalline motif by modifying their chemical structures, thereby affecting device performances. Although our isoindigo-based polymer series contained polymers that differed only by their alkyl side chains and/or donating units, they showed quite different nanoscale morphological properties, which resulted in significantly different device efficiencies. Notably, blends of our isoindigo-based donor polymer systems with an acceptor compound, whereby the blends had more intermixed network morphologies and stronger face-on orientations of the polymer crystallites, provided better-performing photovoltaic devices. This behavior was analyzed using atomic force microscopy (AFM) and two-dimensional grazing incidence wide angle X-ray diffraction (2D-GIWAXD). To the best of our knowledge, no correlation has been reported previously between 3D nano-structural donor crystallites and device performances, particularly for isoindigo-based polymer systems.

The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of sunlight to electricity has been achieved at the 10% level with polymer photovoltaics having the desirable properties of low materials cost, high-throughput roll-to-roll production, mechanical flexibility and light weight. The most-studied polymer solar cells (PSCs) are composed of a conjugated polymer as the donor and a small-molecule fullerene derivative as the acceptor, which are generally blended to form a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) configuration.

For photovoltaic cells of polymer:fullerene BHJ systems, the extent of polymer crystallization and the average crystallite size are important morphological characteristics; these features strongly influence the charge separation efficiency. In addition, the molecular orientation of the polymer donor also influences the exciton dissociation efficiency, because the molecular orbital of the oriented donor can overlap differently with the acceptor and consequently affect the degree of geminate recombination. The control of molecular packing structures in PSCs should advance the photovoltaic performance.
Many articles have been published showing a correlation between the self-networking crystallites of donor molecular structures and device performance. However, studies focusing on isoindigo-based polymer systems are rare.
Hence, in this work, we systematically probed various donor molecular structures associated with different molecular packing crystallites to establish the relationship between their crystalline structures and photovoltaic performance. The research focused on four isoindigo-based polymer systems, identified herein as P-24-IID-TVT, P-24-IID-SVS, P-29-IID-TVT and P-29-IID-SVS (Fig. 1). The P-24-IID and P-29-IID series have different alkyl side chain lengths, and the P-IID-TVT and P-IID-SVS polymers have different backbone donating units, i.e., thiophene-vinyl-thiophene (TVT) and selenophene-vinyl-selenophene (SVS). A three-dimensional (3D) distribution diagram of the donor molecular crystallite motif in the blends was generated using the two-dimensional grazing incidence wide angle X-ray diffraction (2D-GIWAXD) technique and other analytical tools. In our isoindigo-based polymer systems, we found that a relatively more percolated morphology with stronger face-on stacking of polymer crystallites, in particular for the bulk region of the active films, provided higher photovoltaic performances. Thus, the P-24-IID-SVS system had the highest efficiency in the P-24-IID series and the P-29-IID-TVT blend exhibited better performance in the P-29-IID series. These findings will advance the development of isoindigo-based polymer systems in solar cell research.

Isoindigo-based copolymers (P-24-IID-TVT, P-24-IID-SVS, P-29-IID-TVT and P-29-IID-SVS) were made in-house, and their syntheses have been previously reported. [6,6]-Phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) was purchased from Nano-C Inc. (Westwood, MA, USA).


Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images (5 × 5 μm2) were collected using a Digital Instruments Nanoscope IIIa Extended Multimode instrument (Santa Barbara, CA, USA) in the tapping mode under ambient conditions. The 2D-GIWAXD measurements were performed at the 3C SAXS I beamline of the Pohang Accelerator Laboratory. Samples were prepared on ZnO-coated Si substrates using the same blend solutions as those used for the devices. The X-ray beam (λ = 1.1189 nm) was incident at a grazing angle from 0.08 to 0.13°. The scattered intensity was detected using a two-dimensional (2D) charge-coupled detector (CCD) (Roper Scientific, Trenton, NJ, USA) with a sample-to-detector distance (SDD) of 212.14 mm. Time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) analysis was performed on a finished cell using a Hamamatsu R3809U-51 time-correlated single photon counting system (Shizuoka, Japan). The system provided excitation via a 410 nm solid-state laser with an average power of 1 mW operating at 40 MHz and a duration of 70 ps.


The configuration of the photovoltaic devices was ITO/ZnO/active layer/MoO3/Ag. We chose an inverted structure for the PSC devices because of their better performance and stability. First, indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates were cleaned with detergent, distilled water, acetone and isopropanol in a sonication bath for 20 min, consecutively. Then, the cleaned substrates were dried in flowing nitrogen gas followed by a 25 min UV-ozone treatment. The ZnO precursor was prepared according to a previous method by spin-coating onto the ITO-coated glass substrates at a speed of 4000 rpm for 40 s. The ZnO layer-coated substrates were annealed at 150 °C for 1 h in air. Solutions of the donor polymer and the fullerene acceptor were prepared by premixing powders of the two starting materials in chloroform at a total concentration of 20 mg mL−1 under stirring for 8 h in the glovebox. These prepared active solutions were spin-coated onto ZnO substrates at a speed of 1000 rpm for 50 s. Then, 5 nm-thick coatings of MoO3 and 100 nm of Ag were deposited onto the active films by high-vacuum thermal evaporation (device active area = 9 mm2). None of the photovoltaic devices were encapsulated and all were tested under ambient conditions. A Keithley 2400 source-meter (Cleveland, OH, USA) was used to measure the current density vs. voltage (J–V) curves under AM 1.5 simulated illumination with 100 mW cm−2 intensity. The intensity was calibrated using an NREL-certified Si reference solar cell. Illumination for external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements was carried out using a photomodulation spectroscopic setup (Merlin model; Oriel Instruments, Irvine, CA, USA). A calibrated Si detector was used to measure the light intensity.


Hole-only devices were fabricated with the configuration of ITO/MoO3/polymer:PC71BM/Au. They were fabricated in a manner similar to the solar cell devices except for the MoO3 layer and the top electrode (which were thermally deposited at a thickness of ca. 10 nm and ca. 100 nm, respectively). The hole mobilities were measured using the space charge limited current (SCLC) method and calculated using the following equation:
where
J is the dark current density, V is the applied voltage, L is the active layer thickness, ε is the dielectric constant, ε0 is the permittivity of free space, μh is the hole mobility, and γ is the field activation factor.


The surface and inner film morphologies were investigated to explore the correlation between the chemical structures of the polymers and their resulting morphological characteristics. The surface topography of the active layer was recorded using an AFM operating in the tapping mode (Fig. 2a–d). The P-24-IID-TVT:PC71BM blend had a distinctly phase-separated nanodomain surface (clearly aggregated domains are circled in Fig. 2a) with a root mean squared roughness (Rrms) of 0.72 nm. A somewhat more intermixed surface topography was evident for blend films cast from P-24-IID-SVS having selenophene units (Fig. 2b). Notably, they showed less phase-separated aggregation and reduced Rrms values (0.34 nm). The case of P-29-IID-TVT and P-29-IID-SVS with a six-carbon alkyl spacer between the branching point in the side chains (Fig. 2c and d) was quite interesting: their AFM images were totally different from those of the P-24-IID-series polymers. A uniformly distributed, well-mixed heterojunction with low roughness (Rrms = 0.25 nm) was observed for the P-29-IID-TVT:PC71BM film. Large grains (ca. 100–200 nm) of donor-rich polymer crystalline domains were formed when P-29-IID-SVS was used; these appear as bright regions in the images. These findings are in agreement with other studies on the polymer:fullerene BHJ system.

The molecular structures of the inner film morphology were probed by 2D-GIWAXD to confirm that the phase-separated aggregated domains belonged to the polymer-rich crystallite phase. The X-ray beam was diffracted at an incident angle (αi) of 0.10°, which is the same scattering position as the critical angle (αc). Fig. 2e–h shows the isotropic halo reflections that were observed at a qx,y,z of ca. 1.34 Å−1 in diffraction patterns of all of the blend films, which indicated regions of phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) aggregation. Also, all of the scattering patterns indicated typical lamellar packing structures with well-developed out-of-plane Bragg peaks up to (200) for P-24-IIDs, and up to (300) for P-29-IIDs, suggesting that our polymers had an ordered edge-on structure. The higher ordered (300) lamellar scattering peak appeared in the P-29-IID systems, which meant that P-29-IIDs had more oriented crystalline packing structures than P-24-IIDs.
Compared with P-24-IID-TVT and P-24-IID-SVS (Fig. 2e and f), more ordered lamellar stacking configurations, indicated by higher scattering intensity – particularly for the (200) Bragg peak – were found for P-24-IID-TVT:PC71BM. This was confirmed through comparison of the one-dimensional out-of-plane and in-plane patterns (Fig. 3a, b, e and f). On the other hand, for the P-29-IID polymer series (Fig. 2g and h), the crystallinity of the P-29-IID-SVS polymer was much greater than that of the P-29-IID-TVT:PC71BM blend. This trend was consistent with the AFM results. Thus, the aggregated domains observed within the surface morphology were clearly related to the donor polymer's crystallites.
Further crystalline phase information for the blend was determined from the size of the polymer crystallites. This size was calculated using the Scherrer equation using the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the out-of-plane peaks of the (200) orientation (inset of Fig. 3a–d). The FWHM was that for curves fitted by a Gaussian distribution. The heterojunction film cast from P-24-IID-TVT had a larger crystallite size, of 61 Å, than that cast from P-24-IID-SVS (49 Å), whereas the crystallite sizes were estimated as 46 Å for P-29-IID-TVT and 88 Å for P-29-IID-SVS.
The results indicated that when decyltetradecyl alkyl side chains were introduced on the isoindigo units in the polymer (P-24-IIDs), the P-24-IID-SVS polymer with two selenophene groups had a more intermixed matrix with PCBM than P-24-IID-TVT composed of two thiophene units in heterojunction systems. Surprisingly, in P-29-IIDs (with the decylnonadecyl side groups), the P-29-IID-TVT polymer showed a more percolated morphology than P-29-IID-SVS. The crystallite size followed the order P-24-IID-SVS < P-24-IID-TVT for the P-24-IID series and P-29-IID-TVT < P-29-IID-SVS for the P-29-IID series.

To obtain depth-resolved information of the crystalline structure, only the upper monolayers of the blend films can be studied by 2D-GIWAXD because this technique only penetrates a few nanometers and is angle-dependent (Fig. 4). Thus, the X-ray with αi of 0.08° (αi ≪ critical angle of the film) is sensitively diffracted in the near-surface region of the film. As shown in the left column of Fig. 4, the 2D-GIWAXD diffraction patterns of all of the blend films showed the same trend as the 2D-GIWAXD patterns scattered at αi = 0.10°; i.e., semicircular band reflections appeared at a qx,y,z of ca. 1.34 Å−1 from PCBM domains; and a well-ordered layer-by-layer lamellar packing structure (h00) along the qz axis appeared at up to (200) for the P-24-IID series and (300) for the P-29-IID series. These findings signified that the polymer crystalline ordering patterns were retained intact in the near-surface region.

Moreover, to quantify the relative difference between the edge-on and face-on populations in the film, we conducted pole figure analyses for the (200) reflection and extracted the integrated intensity as a function of χ along the arcs (χ = −80 to 80°). For the pole figure analysis, we analyzed the distribution of the (200) Bragg peak to avoid the surface scattering effects resulting from the substrate. The diffraction data and intensity-corrected pole figure are plotted in Fig. 4 (right column). The important feature is that the broader intensity of the peaks at χ = 0° indicated a relatively strong preference for face-on packing of the crystallites. In this respect, P-24-IID-SVS had a relatively greater face-on structure than P-24-IID-TVT in the blends, whereas P-29-IID-TVT had a stronger face-on orientation than P-29-IID-SVS. Generally, a relatively strong face-on orientation is considered favorable for vertical charge carrier transport. It was therefore expected that the relatively strong face-on populations of the P-24-IID-SVS and P-29-IID-TVT would provide higher device performances.

The crystal properties of the P-24-IID-TVT, P-24-IID-SVS, P-29-IID-TVT and P-29-IID-SVS polymers were also investigated by 2D-GIWAXD measurements using an X-ray beam with αi = 0.13° (αi > αc), to penetrate the entire film thickness and thus provide diffractions from the bulk region of the film (Fig. 5). In this bulk area, surprisingly, the 2D-GIWAXD diffraction patterns were quite different from those of the surface region, particularly for P-24-IID-SVS and P-29-IID-TVT. In the P-24-IID-TVT:PC71BM systems, the P-24-IID-TVT crystallites ((200) lamellar structure stacked along the vertical axis) were clearly maintained in the bulk region. However, there were no reflection peaks corresponding to the polymer crystalline domains in the 2D-GIWAXD images of P-24-IID-SVS:PC71BM, which implied that the P-24-IID-SVS polymer intermixed considerably with PCBM molecules in the bulk area of the film. Likewise, in the P-29-IID-TVT polymer system, no crystal packing reflections were observed, which meant that P-29-IID-TVT had randomly mixed structures in the bulk region of its blends. Interestingly, distinct (h00) lamellar scattering was again observed in the 2D-GIWAXD patterns of P-29-IID-SVS:PC71BM.


Heterojunction photovoltaics were fabricated with the structure of ITO/ZnO/polymer:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag to probe the effect of molecular stacking/orientation of the donor polymers on solar cell performance. The same experimental conditions of the polymer:PC71BM weight ratio of 1:1, processing solvent of chloroform and total 20 mg mL−1 concentration were used for all solar cell fabrications to isolate the effect of changing molecular structure. Fig. 6a shows the current density vs. voltage (J–V) characteristics under 1 sun (100 mW cm−2) AM 1.5G of simulated solar illumination; the corresponding performance parameters are shown in Table 1. The J–V curves revealed that the open-circuit voltage (Voc) values were relatively higher for the P-24-IID-based devices than the P-29-IID-based devices, which was mainly related to the polymer's highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy levels; these were −5.30 eV for P-24-IID-TVT, −5.29 eV for P-24-IID-SVS, −5.25 eV for P-29-IID-TVT and −5.22 eV for P-29-IID-SVS. Generally, the Voc is considered to reflect the difference between a p-type material's HOMO levels and an n-type material's lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels. Consequently, devices using P-24-IIDs had higher Voc values. Furthermore, for the short-circuit current (Jsc) and fill factor (FF), solar cells using the P-24-IID polymers displayed higher values than the P-29-IID-based devices. The reason for these results was evident from the AFM and 2D-GIWAXD data discussed above, because the Jsc and FF are significantly related to the morphological characteristics of the blend active layer. The relatively more intermixed networks with less-ordered polymer crystallites of our isoindigo-based solar cells led to higher device performances because of more efficient charge separation via increased donor–acceptor interfaces.

Active layer

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a Integrated Jsc values from EQE data.

P-24-IID-TVT:PC71BM
0.79
12.7/12.1
42.2
4.34
P-24-IID-SVS:PC71BM
0.77
14.8/14.2
41.6
4.78
P-29-IID-TVT:PC71BM
0.67
11.1/10.7
37.9
2.84
P-29-IID-SVS:PC71BM
0.63
8.9/8.3
36.1
2.27
In comparison with the P-24-IID-TVT- and P-24-IID-SVS-based devices, the P-24-IID-SVS cells having a clearly more percolated morphology with smaller crystalline domains provided higher device performances, i.e., Voc = 0.77 V, Jsc = 14.8 mW cm−2, FF = 41.6% and PCE = 4.78% for the P-24-IID-SVS devices, but Voc = 0.79 V, Jsc = 12.7 mW cm−2, FF = 42.2% and PCE = 4.34% for the P-24-IID-TVT devices. The relatively great face-on populations of the P-24-IID-SVS crystallites, as well as the less stacked structures, provided efficient vertical charge transport, which was a major contributor to the enhanced device performance. Similarly, in the more mixed P-29-IID-TVT:PC71BM case with less phase segregation, particularly in the bulk region of the film, and relatively great face-on orientation of polymer crystallites, the device showed a higher efficiency (PCE = 2.84%) than the P-29-IID-SVS:PC71BM device (PCE = 2.27%).
With our isoindigo systems, the morphology of more intermixed donor–acceptor networks and greater face-on stacking of polymer crystallites were advantageous and resulted in better device performance. In order to exactly understand this conclusion, we drew a schematic illustration for P-24-IID-SVS:PC71BM (best systems) and P-29-IID-SVS:PC71BM blends (worst systems), which are shown in Fig. 6c. Notably, varying the alkyl side chain lengths and/or moiety in the polymer chain significantly varied the crystalline structures of the 3D heterojunctions and led to quite different solar cell results.
The corresponding EQEs of the optimized solar cells were measured to verify the accuracy of the obtained Jsc data. This was because the Jsc is considerably influenced by the charge generation efficiency.Fig. 6b shows that the solar cells of all of the semiconductor polymers exhibited a broad photoresponse from 300 to 800 nm. Notably, the photon to conversion efficiency followed the sequence P-24-IID-SVS > P-24-IID-TVT > P-29-IID-TVT > P-29-IID-SVS, which was consistent with the measured Jsc trend. Furthermore, the Jsc calculated from the integration of the EQE with an AM 1.5G reference spectrum was in good agreement with the Jsc determined from the J–V measurements (Table 1).

Additional studies were performed to confirm that the intermixed network was more effective because of more efficient charge separation. Time-resolved PL was used to monitor the peak emission at 752 nm. The PL decays were fitted by a global bi-exponential model to provide the lifetimes of carriers and/or excitons.Fig. 7a shows that an enhanced PL quenching rate was observed for P-24-IID-SVS in the P-24-IID series, and with P-29-TVT in the P-29-IID series. The fitted PL lifetimes (τ) were 2.7 and 3.3 ns for P-24-IID-SVS and P-24-IID-TVT, respectively, and 2.8 and 4.1 ns for P-29-IID-TVT and P-29-IID-SVS, respectively. The PL quenching rate likely originated from charge carrier dissociation across the interface and suggested that the photo-induced carriers in P-24-IID-SVS and P-29-TVT could be more efficiently separated because of their increased interfacial areas with PCBM. The PL results supported the solar cell performance data.

The hole carrier mobilities of the isoindigo-based semiconductor/PC71BM devices were measured using the SCLC method (Fig. 7b) to better understand the effects of donor molecular orientation on the charge carrier transport. The hole-only device configuration was ITO/MoO3/polymer:PC71BM/Au and its detailed fabrication is described in the Experimental section. The mobility data clearly showed that the hole carrier transport was slightly enhanced in diodes having domain morphologies that had relatively great face-on orientations of the polymer crystallites, e.g., 2.23 × 10−3, 4.65 × 10−3, 1.07 × 10−3 and 9.58 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 for P-24-IID-TVT, P-24-IID-SVS, P-29-IID-TVT and P-29-IID-SVS, respectively. The main hole carrier transports are vertical movements in a hole-only diode and thus higher hole carrier mobility was found for devices having morphologies with predominantly face-on crystallite populations.
The time-resolved PL and mobility data together explained why higher device efficiencies were observed for the P-24-SVS- and P-29-TVT-based devices.

A series of isoindigo-based semiconductors were systematically studied to establish correlations between the molecular structures of 3D active blends with solar cell performances. When our isoindigo-based donor polymer systems were mixed with molecular PCBM, the relatively few packing structures and strong face-on orientation of the polymer crystallites in the donor:acceptor blend led to higher solar cell efficiencies. When decyltetradecyl alkyl side chains were introduced on the isoindigo units in the polymer (the P-24-IID series), less-ordered polymer crystalline domains were observed in the blend morphology compared with isoindigo polymers having the decylnonadecyl side group (the P-29-IID series). Consequently, higher device performances were found in the P-24-IID systems.

Of the two semiconductors within the P-24-IID series, P-24-IID-SVS (which contained selenophene units in the polymer chains) showed a more intermixed network with PCBM, particularly in the bulk region of the film, and relatively greater face-on populations than P-24-TVT that contained two thiophene units. Surprisingly, the P-29-IID and P-24-IID series had opposite 3D morphological features. A more percolated matrix and stronger face-on polymer molecular orientation were found in P-29-IID-TVT:PC71BM than in P-29-IID-SVS:PC71BM. Consequently, higher device performances were found for P-24-IID-SVS:PC71BM and P-29-IID-TVT:PC71BM, i.e., PCEs of 4.78 and 2.84%, respectively. The trends in the measured device performances followed the trends in charge separation efficiency and transport.
Overall, this work demonstrated that the morphological properties could be significantly varied by controlling the alkyl side chains and/or alternating units in the polymer. Such morphological changes markedly affected the performance of solar cells. Our research suggests the possibility of fabricating high-performance and scalable isoindigo-based PSCs.

This work was supported by a New & Renewable Energy of the KETEP grant funded by the Korean government Ministry of Knowledge Economy (20123010010140).


This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016