 DOI: 10.1039/C8TC04723E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 1173-1181


Jungyun
Hong
,

Hyebin
Kim
 and 

Inchan
Hwang
*

Department of Electronic Materials Engineering, Kwangwoon University, Seoul 01897, Republic of Korea. E-mail: ihwang@kw.ac.kr

Received
18th September 2018
, Accepted 5th December 2018
First published on 7th December 2018
Light soaking and current density–voltage (J–V) hysteretic effects represent instability in the power output of organic–inorganic metal halide perovskite solar cells that exhibit promising potential in applications in the field of energy conversion. Ion migration/accumulation is known to be a key factor causing those effects, but the mechanisms to determine which accumulation region makes a more significant contribution need to be further elucidated. Copper iodide (CuI) has been diversely utilized as a hole-transport layer in solution-processed photovoltaic devices. In this work, for the first time, the power output instability that occurs seemingly at random with an incorporation of CuI in methylammonium lead triiodide perovskite solar cells is found to be, in fact, strongly aging- and CuI morphology-dependent. Light-soaking effects and hysteretic behavior particularly in the open-circuit voltage (Voc) appear differently for the fresh and aged devices. Device investigations with the aging time scale, electrical preconditioning, light intensity-dependent Voc, and scan rates demonstrate that the accumulation of iodide ions at the interface with an electron transport layer (PCBM) by the diffusive migration from the interface with CuI during aging is responsible for light soaking and hysteresis phenomena. Our study reveals which ion accumulation region may more significantly contribute to light soaking and hysteretic phenomena.

Despite increasingly outstanding photovoltaic performances, organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite-based solar cells often produce unstable power outputs accompanied by unfavorable phenomena, such as light-soaking effects and current density–voltage (J–V) hysteresis. These phenomena make it difficult to evaluate the real efficiency of photovoltaic devices, so they must be well understood and eliminated prior to commercialization of these devices for optoelectronic applications. In addition to the efforts to elevate efficiency by optimizing the quality of the perovskite light-absorbing layer, important research advances have been made in the development of device architectures that require making the right choice for charge transport materials considering band alignment, optical transparency, electrical conductivity, and surface properties. However, unexpected side effects involving light-soaking and hysteretic behavior have often been observed, resulting from the time-dependent electronic properties related not only to materials themselves in bulk, including perovskites and charge transport materials, but also to the interfacial constituents and morphologies.

The evolution of electrical properties in perovskite-based solar cells upon electrical and optical inputs is associated with one or a combination of several dynamical mechanisms involving slow ferroelectric polarization/depolarization, ionic interstitial or vacancy defect migration, and charge trapping/detrapping, largely happening at the interfaces between perovskite and its adjacent charge transport layers. Despite the possibility that light-soaking and hysteretic behavior could share a common origin, their correlation has been reported in only very few works, and in many cases light-soaking effects and hysteretic phenomena are considered to take place as independent events. Phase segregation for mixed halide perovskites, lattice distortion, trap-assisted recombination associated with ion migration, and changes in oxygen vacancy density in TiO2 are known to be responsible for the gradual increase in open-circuit voltage (Voc) upon continuous illumination. On the other hand, J–V hysteresis has been extensively studied, and many works have reported that it is attributable to the combined effects of ion migration and the filling/neutralization of the trap sites mediated by interstitial or vacancy ionic defects. Candidate ions that may migrate through the perovskite layer are lead (Pb2+), methylammonium (MA+), and iodide (I−). The activation energy that characterizes the migration rate is high for Pb2+ ions, and thus MA+ and I− ions are considered to be migrating species. As a matter of fact, both the theoretical and experimental studies suffice to provide direct evidence of their migration and allow researchers to draw the conclusion that their migration is responsible in part for the hysteresis. However, the question of which ion is of more significance needs to be further elucidated, because migration of different ions might behave differently depending on the device architecture and testing environment. A well-designed experiment monitoring a surface chemical change of a device cell structured with Pb/MAPbI3/AgI/Ag clearly reveals that the perovskite layer can be the channel for iodide ions.
Aside from conducting polymers and metal oxides, copper(I) iodide (CuI) has been popularly utilized as an inorganic hole-transport material for various types of photovoltaic devices such as organic solar cells, dye-sensitized solar cells and perovskite solar cells. A wide band gap (3.1–3.2 eV), high electrical conductivity, and optoelectronic tunability with excess iodine or thiocyanate are the intriguing features of CuI. CuI has been successfully employed via various deposition methods, including spraying, spin-coating and drop-casting for the device fabrication of both p-i-n and n-i-p structured perovskite solar cells, with promising efficiency. CuI has better long-term stability than PEDOT:PSS, which is acidic and hygroscopic causing device degradation. This is understood in the context of its hydrophobic properties. Unlike non-perovskite-based solar cells in which the active layer is halide ion-free, as both CuI and MAPbI3 commonly possess iodide ions, the chemical potential gradients can be set up from the interface between CuI and MAPbI3 to the other end of the perovskite layer. Thus, iodide ions are likely to readily migrate by diffusion into the perovskite layer after device completion. Nevertheless, the light-soaking effects and hysteresis have not yet been reported and investigated.
In this work, we have conducted in-depth investigations on the perovskite solar cells structured with ITO/CuI/MAPbI3/PCBM/ZnO NP/Ag to probe the potential of CuI as a hole-transport material for perovskite solar cells. Moreover, if iodide ions migrate, the photovoltaic performance is anticipated to be different for the fresh devices (iodide ions are accumulated at the interface with a hole transport layer) and the aged devices (iodide ions accumulated at the interface with an electron transport layer). The best device of ours gives a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of higher than 14%. However, with careful measurements of J–V characteristics, it is found that the photovoltaic device parameters are indeed strongly influenced by aging and light-soaking time. Although the efficiency is reproducible after light-soaking regardless of aging time, we found that the initial parameters, particularly Voc, are markedly reduced with aging, making the hysteresis between forward and reverse scans more severe. To provide evidence that iodide ions are responsible for such aging-induced light-soaking effects and hysteretic behavior, we have performed various characterization experiments for devices in different situations.

Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS, Clevios P VP AI 4083) was provided by Heraeus. Copper(I) iodide (CuI, 99.999% trace metals basis), anhydrous acetonitrile (99.8%), anhydrous N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.8%), anhydrous 2-propanol (IPA, 99.5%), anhydrous chlorobenzene (CB, 99.8%), and anhydrous dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, 99.9%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Lead(II) iodide (PbI2, 99.9985%), methylammonium iodide (CH3NH3I; MAI), and formamidinium iodide (CH(NH2)2I; FAI) were purchased from Alfa Aesar and GreatCell Solar. [6,6]-Phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) was purchased from Nano-C. Colloidal suspension of ZnO nanoparticles (Avantama N-10) was obtained from Avantama. All materials are commercially available and were used as received without further purification.


The p-i-n perovskite solar cells were fabricated with different combinations of ITO/hole transport layer (HTL): ITO/CuI, ITO/CuI/PEDOT:PSS and ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CuI. The device structure was ITO/HTL/perovskite/PCBM/ZnO NP/Ag. ITO-coated glass substrates were cleaned by sequential sonication in acetone and isopropyl alcohol (IPA) for 10 min each. N2 was blown to the glass/ITO substrates to complete the cleaning by removing IPA residues. Then oxygen plasma treatment was applied for 10 min. CuI solutions in acetonitrile with a concentration of 3 mg ml−1 were prepared and stirred at room temperature for 3 h in a nitrogen filled glove box. CuI solutions were spin-coated on the cleaned ITO/glass substrates at 2000 rpm for 1 min. For some devices, CuI was spin-coated on top of PEDOT:PSS, or PEDOT:PSS was spin-coated on top of the CuI layer prior to the deposition of perovskites. As the surface of the CuI layer is hydrophobic, when PEDOT:PSS was spin-coated on top of CuI, a small amount of Dynol 604 (surfactant) was added to the PEDOT:PSS solutions to ensure good film coverage, and then the resulting solution was filtered through a 0.2 μm PES filter. The filtered solutions were then spin-coated on the CuI-coated substrate at 3000 rpm for 1 min. All the following steps were performed in a glove box filled with nitrogen. PbI2 and MAI were dissolved (1.193 M for each) in a molar ratio of 1:1 in anhydrous DMF and the resultant mixture was stirred overnight at 70 °C to produce the perovskite precursor solution. For the FAPbI3 precursor solution, FAI and PbI2 were dissolved (1 M for each) in a molar ratio of 1:1 in a mixed solvent with DMF and DMSO in a volume ratio of 4:1. The solutions were filtered with a 0.2 μm PTFE filter before spin coating. The filtered perovskite precursor solutions were spin-coated at 5000 rpm for 55s on ITO/HTL substrates. During spin coating, 50 μl anhydrous CB was dripped onto the substrate at 4–5 s after spin coating started. After drying the perovskite films, MAPbI3 and FAPbI3 films were annealed on a hot plate at 100 °C and 150 °C for 20 min, respectively. Twenty milligrams of PCBM was dissolved in 1 ml anhydrous CB. To prepare the solution blends of PCBM and MAI, MAI was dissolved in anhydrous IPA at a concentration of 10 mg ml−1. Then a small volume of the MAI solution was added into the PCBM solutions. Either PCBM solutions or PCBM:MAI solution blends were spin-coated at 2000 rpm for 1 min on top of the perovskite layer. Then, ZnO nanoparticles were spin-coated at 4000 rpm for 40 s. To complete device fabrication, Ag was thermally evaporated with a thickness of 100 nm in a vacuum chamber (∼1 × 10−6Torr). The active area of the device is 5.25 mm2.


The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were recorded using a Keithely 2401 under 1 sun illumination (1000 Wm−2 AM 1.5 G) from a solar simulator (Oriel Sol3A Class AAA Solar Simulators, Newport) using a xenon lamp. A standard silicon reference cell was used to calibrate the light intensity. Scans of J–V characteristics were performed with a forward (from short circuit to open circuit) and a reverse (from open circuit to short circuit) direction. The scan rate was 113 mV s−1, unless indicated otherwise. To investigate the scan rate dependence, two different scan rates of 22.6 and 1130 mV s−1 were considered. To age the devices, they were kept in the dark in the glove box before J–V characteristics measurements. The top view image of the CuI films prepared on ITO and PEDOT:PSS, and the cross-sectional image of the ITO/CuI/perovskite were acquired by scanning electron microscopy (SEM; JSM-7610F, JEOL) at an accelerating voltage of 5 kV. The optical absorption spectra of the perovskite films were collected with an Agilent 8453 UV–visible spectrophotometer. All the tested devices were unencapsulated.



Fig. 1 presents the architecture of the device structured with ITO/CuI/MAPbI3/PCBM/ZnO NP/Ag, and SEM images for ITO/CuI/MAPbI3 (cross-section) and for CuI (top view) spin-coated on ITO. The cross-sectional SEM image shows that the spin-coated CuI layer is very thin, and the top-view SEM image for CuI shows that large particles are formed due to aggregation. This aggregation is attributed to the inhomogeneous CuI nucleation that occurs preferentially at the physical defects of the ITO surface. The PCE of our champion device was 14.53% with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1,024 mV, a fill factor (FF) of 0.76, and a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 18.68 mA cm−2. When the efficiencies of the best devices are compared, this efficiency is higher than that of the device with PEDOT:PSS and fairly comparable to that of the device with NiOx (Fig. S1a, ESI). This indicates that in terms of efficiency, CuI is a promising hole-transport material for perovskite-based solar cells. In addition, we present the histogram of the PCE for 180 light-soaked devices in Fig. S1b in the ESI.

When we performed the J–V scans, we found that severe light-soaking effects and hysteresis were often observed. At first glance, they seemed to be quite irreproducible and to have occurred randomly between each fabrication batch. One of our assumptions on the origin of light-soaking and hysteresis was that the photovoltaic performance might depend on how long devices were kept after fabrication had been completed.
To test our hypothesis, we conducted J–V scans after different aging times. Fig. 2 shows the aging dependence of light-soaking effects. Fig. 2a and b shows the forward scanned J–V characteristics upon continuous light illumination of the devices kept in the dark for two different aging times: 10 min and 130 min. The J–V characteristics of the devices aged for other times are presented in Fig. S2 (ESI). For the fair characterization of an initial J–V scan before the first J–V scan, all the unencapsulated devices were kept in the dark for 2 min, and then the voltage sweep begun right after illumination. To avoid possible influence of continuous J–V measurements, we also recorded the J–V characteristics only for the initial and 10–15 min light soaking scans (Fig. S3, ESI). The statistical photovoltaic parameters including Jsc and FF for the devices aged for a certain range of aging times are presented in Fig. S4 (ESI). The notable phenomena observed are the reduction of the initial Voc with increasing aging time and the different recovery speed of Voc depending on aging time (Fig. 2c–f). When the fresh devices (aged less than 10 min after device completion) were tested, Voc increases from approximately 800 mV to 1000 mV. The increase is slow, taking place over 20 min. However, when the devices were 3–4 hours aged, Voc of the initial J–V characteristics (initial open-circuit voltage, Voc,initial) dramatically dropped to approximately 450 mV, and upon continuous illumination, it rapidly recovered to nearly 1000 mV within a few minutes. After light soaking, Voc was found to reach the quasi-stable values by light soaking. In addition, the hours-aged devices show a kink in their J–V characteristics with forward scans, but the reverse scans are kink-free.
Continuous voltage sweeps on one single device can degrade the device performance. In order to avoid such degradation effects, J–V scans were carried out at each aging time for all the devices that were not tested previously. While Voc,initial decreases with increasing aging time, the maximum Voc (Voc,maximum) is independent of aging time (Fig. 2g). In the meantime, Jsc and FF are constant over aging time, and notably the initial and maximum or final values are almost indistinguishable (Fig. S5, ESI). As a result, the maximum PCE after light soaking for each aged device is almost constant with aging time, but the initial PCE decreases due to the decrease of Voc,initial. The photovoltaic parameters from the J–V characteristics scanned in the reverse direction as a function of device aging time are shown in Fig. S6 (ESI). The general trend is similar to that in the forward direction, but the decrease in Voc,initial is smaller, indicating that photovoltaic parameters are less aging-time dependent.
The hysteresis in J–V characteristics was investigated as a function of aging time. Fig. 3a shows the hysteresis index, which is defined in our work as (Voc,R−Voc,F)/Voc,R where Voc,F(R) is the open-circuit voltage determined from the forward (reverse) scanned J–V characteristics versus aging time. Fig. S7 and S8 (ESI) show their corresponding J–V characteristics of the device for each aging time without and with 10 min light soaking, respectively. The hysteresis index of the fresh devices (less than 10 min aging) both without light-soaking (initial hysteresis index) and with 10 min light soaking was found to be low, below 0.1. In contrast, the initial hysteresis index increases with increasing aging time. That is, the difference between the open-circuit voltages between forward and reverse scans is initially high due to the fact that Voc,F is more severely reduced than Voc,R by device aging. This high hysteresis index, however, was found to become reduced upon 10 min light soaking for all the devices.
The discrepancy between forward and reverse J–V scans can also be seen from the light intensity dependence of Voc. Fig. 3b shows the light intensity-dependent Voc,max. As Voc,initial depends strongly on light soaking and aging time, we focused on the investigation of the light intensity dependence of Voc,max. Under open circuit conditions, the fate of photogenerated charge carriers traces either of two independent pathways: trap-assisted recombination or bimolecular recombination. In the absence of trap-assisted recombination, the slope of Voc as a function of light intensity should be equal to kT/q. The slope for the reverse scan of our devices is 1.053kT/q, and for the forward scan, it is 1.203kT/q. This indicates that when the voltage was swept in the forward direction, trap-assisted recombination can partially occur. In contrast, when voltage is swept from open-circuit to short-circuit conditions, the defect sites for the trap become diminished, or at least effectively reduced, making trap-assisted recombination insignificant.
We investigated the J–V characteristics of the hours-aged devices after preconditioning at an electrical bias in the dark for different times. The J–V characteristics were recorded right after light-illumination without preconditioning (initial) and subsequently after keeping the devices in the dark at a certain bias for different minutes. Fig. 4 shows their electrical precondition-dependent J–V characteristics. When the aged devices were preconditioned at an applied bias of −0.5 V, Voc markedly reduced to approximately zero within a minute. Interestingly, even 0 V applied bias gradually decreases Voc within minutes. This seems to be strange because the change in Voc takes place on the hourly time scale. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that the change of the electrical field made during the voltage sweep redistributes ionic interstitials/vacancies or photogenerated charge carriers, and consequently influences Voc. When the devices were kept in the dark with preconditioning at a 0.9 V applied bias, which is close to Voc, it is found that Voc has the opposite behavior with the preconditioning time. After preconditioning at 1.5 V, Voc increases more swiftly.
To further investigate the preconditioning-dependent built-in voltage, we also recorded the dark J–V characteristics, as shown in Fig. S9 (ESI). The onset voltage is a measure of the built-in voltage of the device. A higher onset voltage implies a higher built-in voltage. As similarly observed for Voc, the behavior of the onset voltage with increasing precondition time distinguishably differs, depending on the applied bias. With increasing preconditioning time, the onset voltage decreases for a negative bias (−0.5 V) and increases for a positive bias (0.9 and 1.5 V). For 0 V applied bias, however, the onset voltage is kept unchanged regardless of the preconditioning time, implying that the built-in voltage is not influenced by the external bias. Therefore, the reduction in Voc observed for the 0 V precondition might be linked to photogenerated charge carriers. This observation can likely be explained by the fact that the photogenerated charge carriers have a higher responsivity than ionic interstitials or vacancies by a change in the electric field, which causes a reduction in the quasi-Fermi energy level splitting after every single completion of a voltage sweep.
To further elaborate the effect of single voltage sweep, we performed J–V scans at different scan rates. Fig. 5a shows that J–V characteristics of three-hour aged perovskite devices scanned at 22.6 mV s−1, 113 mV s−1 and 1130 mV s−1, after 10 min light soaking at which has demonstrated a suppressed hysteresis. Two features can be seen dependent on the scan rate. First, the hysteresis index was the highest for a slow scan rate. For a slow scan (22.6 mV s−1), the difference of the open-circuit voltages is 170 mV, 61 mV for an intermediate scan (113 mV s−1) speed, and 11 mV for a fast scan (1130 mV s−1). Second, a kink near Voc is observed for slow scans, while it disappears for fast scans.

Fig. 5b presents the J–V characteristics recorded during a continuous light illumination for 10 min. After each light soaking round, the device was kept in the dark for 3 min without applying an external bias. As similarly observed for J–V characteristics after preconditioning at 0 V (Fig. 4b), the initial J–V characteristics are found to further shift toward a lower Voc. That is, even after light soaking that enhances Voc, the initial Voc can be reduced after the device was stored in the dark.
A series of the abovementioned observations for the perovskite solar cells incorporating CuI as a hole-transport material can be consistently explained by drift and diffusive migration of ions. Absorption is identical for the fresh and aged devices, indicating no degradation in terms of perovskite decomposition (Fig. S10, ESI). The decrease in the initial Voc with increasing aging time can be explained mainly by the diffusion of iodide ions from the interface between CuI and MAPbI3 into the interface with PCBM. Because the decrease occurs over hours, the drift by the internal field is too fast to explain this observation. The ion diffusion is likely to be due to the chemical potential gradient at the interface with CuI, which can be found also with the device incorporating AgI as reported in the literature. We do not exclude the possibility that interstitial iodide ions can drift by the internal field or band bending, but this drift migration would occur in very short time scales just after device completion. The small increase in Voc for the fresh device upon continuous illumination might be evidence that interstitial iodide ions are initially migrated by drift or band bending right after device completion. As the iodide ions migrate toward a PCBM interface, the internal field is reduced due to ionic space charges, resulting in a decrease in Voc. Upon continuous light illumination, photogenerated charge carriers fill the trap site that are mediated by the presence of ions, neutralizing the interface defects. This recovers the built-in voltage, increasing Voc by light soaking.
Interstitial ion redistribution can be identified also by monitoring local emission from photoluminescence microscopy images. However, this characterization method cannot be applied to our devices due to the limited spatial resolution. If we collect PL from the whole region of the aged film, there might be compensation between the PL enhancement from the region with a reduced ionic defect density (near HTL) and the PL quenching from the region with an increased defect density (near ETL), leading to a marginal difference between PL from the aged sample and that from the fresh sample. Instead, the hysteresis analysis, electrical preconditioning and J–V scans with different scan rates can support the ion redistribution as well.
The hysteresis between forward and reverse scans in J–V characteristics might also be attributed to the interplay between ion migration and photogenerated charge carriers. For a forward voltage sweeping of aged devices, iodide ions are present at the interface with PCBM, producing a small Voc. Therefore, charge carriers that can be trapped at the interfacial defect sites mediated by the ions recombine with free charge carriers. However, for a reverse scan that applies a positive bias to the device at the beginning of the sweep, iodide ions can swiftly move away from the interface with PCBM, producing a high Voc, ideally as if the interface is free of ionic defect sites. In such cases, the interfacial defect sites are removed for a reverse scan, suppressing trap-assisted recombination.
The instant redistribution of iodide ions by a drift motion due to a change in the electric field with an external bias is supported by the phenomena observed with electrical preconditioning. The decrease of Voc and the onset voltage observed from the device preconditioned at a negative bias can be explained by the fact that more iodide ions are accumulated at the interface with PCBM, due to drift, weakening the internal field. In the meantime, the increase of Voc and the onset voltage with preconditioning at a positive bias (higher than Voc) is attributed to the removal of iodide ions from the interface, restoring the internal field strength.
It is well known that MAPbI3 itself contains ionic defects. Therefore, the changes in Voc after precondition can be assumed to be caused by the intrinsic iodide ions in the perovskites. We fabricated the device structured with ITO/CuI/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/ZnO NP/Ag, to block the inflow of iodide ions into the MAPbI3 layer from the interface with CuI. Fig. S11 (ESI) shows that Voc decreases by only a few hundred millivolts. It is not reduced to 0 V as observed for ITO/CuI. This confirms that the interface with CuI/MAPbI3 is the source for the additional supply of iodide ions into the perovskite layer.
It is now possible to explain the kink that is visible with a slow forward scan in the context of iodide ion diffusion. The accumulation of migrating iodide ions at the interface with PCBM proceeds until the net ionic current (the sum of diffusion and drift currents) is equal to zero. When a voltage is swept from a negative bias, iodide ions are more accumulated by drift compared to the status at short circuit, as experimentally demonstrated with electrical preconditioning. As the applied bias increases in the forward direction from a zero bias, iodide ions are able to escape from the interface with PCBM by diffusion, because for ions the diffusion current becomes larger than the drift current. A fast scan and a low density of accumulated ions do not provide enough time for iodide ions to transport by diffusion. However, a slow scan and a high density of ions enable accumulated ions to move away from the interface by diffusion during the voltage sweep before reaching the open circuit conditions. This results in a decrease in the iodide ions at the interface, and thus an increase in Voc by producing a kink in J–V characteristics.
The importance of ion accumulation at the interface with an electron transport layer was further investigated with the devices that intentionally contain iodide ions at the interface between MAPbI3 and PCBM in the fresh devices. The J–V characteristics of MAPbI3-based devices with different amounts of MAI contained in the PCBM layer are shown in Fig. 6. We prepared the MAI-containing PCBM layers by spin-coating the solution blends of PCBM and MAI on top of the perovskite film. All J–V characteristics were recorded within half an hour of device completion. Therefore, the accumulation of iodide ions by diffusive migration to the interface with PCBM might not be much. However, as the solution blends of PCBM and MAI are spin-coated, the iodide ions may be placed at the interface without diffusive migration even for fresh devices. In such cases, it is anticipated that a significant J–V hysteretic behavior and even a kink will be observed, if our hypothesis is correct. Indeed, a small amount of MAI (0.1 wt%) added to the PCBM layer produces a severe hysteresis, as similarly observed in the aged devices. Moreover, a further addition of MAI (0.3 wt%) shows a kink that is also observed for the longer aged devices or a slow scan.
Although it is known that the origin of hysteresis is associated with ion migration, it has still been unclear which accumulation region among the interfaces more importantly influences the hysteretic behavior. By designing a device architecture that induces iodide ion migration from one end of the perovskite layer to the other, our investigation reveals that the accumulation of iodide ions at the interface with a hole-transport layer causes a small hysteresis. In contrast, iodide ions accumulated at the interface with an electron transport layer (PCBM) play a key role in producing a significant hysteresis. This is ascertained by the investigation of the J–V characteristics of the devices with an electron transport layer containing iodide ions. This finding suggests that a careful design of device architecture should aim to decrease ion accumulation, particularly at the interface with an electron transport layer, to suppress J–V hysteresis.
The formation of CuI particles is sensitive to the surface properties of the underlying layer and the fabrication conditions. The iodide ions are concentrated at the surface or in the bulk of aggregated CuI particles, which are the starting point of the iodide ion migration. Therefore, we investigated the morphological dependence of CuI on light soaking and hysteretic behavior, by examining the J–V characteristics of the devices structured with ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CuI/MAPbI3/PCBM/ZnO NP/Ag. As shown in Fig. 7a, a few large particles can be seen due to some physical defects on the PEDOT:PSS surface, but most CuI is homogeneously dispersed on the surface without formation of large particles. With the inhibition of large particle formation, the devices show negligible light-soaking effects and a hysteresis-free behavior (Fig. 7b). In addition, the electrical preconditioning at a negative bias shows that Voc is reduced, but not as much as the device with aggregated CuI particles (Fig. S12, ESI). This observation reveals that the inflow of iodide ions into the perovskite layer can be suppressed without large CuI particles.
The impact of MA+ cations on the stability of the perovskite devices also has to be discussed. MA+ cations might be movable, but the contribution of MA+ cation migration might be small compared to that of iodide ions due to the relatively high activation energy and low diffusion coefficient. Even if MA+ cations do not directly participate in ion migration, theoretical studies reveal that their local reorientation can facilitate the migration of iodide ions. Therefore, substitution of MA+ cations with heavy cations such as formamidinium (FA+) or caesium (Cs+) cations can help a reduction in device instability. We investigated the power output instability of the devices based on FAPbI3, although our devices have not been fully optimized (Fig S13, ESI). Significant light-soaking effects can still be seen, which supports that interstitial iodide ions are the migrating ions that are mainly responsible for the instability of the devices with a CuI HTL. The hysteresis in J–V characteristics and the decrease in initial Voc were found to be reduced compared to those of the MAPbI3 devices, suggesting that iodide ion migration might be relatively suppressed by the introduction of FA+ cations replacing MA+ cations.

In summary, MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells incorporating CuI as a hole transport layer exhibited severe light-soaking effects and hysteretic behavior after hours of aging. This power output instability motivated us to understand these phenomena, by performing J–V measurements with temporal aging, electrical preconditioning, different scan rates, and intentional introduction of iodide ions into the interfaces with charge transport layers. While the efficiency after light soaking is found to be aging-independent, the aged devices exhibit a decrease in the initial efficiency and particularly Voc, subsequently with significant light-soaking effects. Besides, for the aged devices, the initial J–V characteristics show a significant hysteretic behavior and the light-soaked devices show a suppressed hysteresis. All the observations support the redistribution of iodide ions by diffusive movement from the interface with CuI to the interface with PCBM during aging, most likely due to chemical potential gradient. The chemical potential gradient can be tuned by the CuI morphology. Our results imply that iodide ion accumulation at the interface with an electron transport layer more significantly contributes to a production of hysteresis than at the interface with a hole-transport layer. The aging-dependent instability can also be seen for other types of perovskite devices that undergo ion migration toward the interface by diffusion. Thus, our study provides an understanding of how to design the architecture of devices based on perovskites to avoid output instability.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This research was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF), funded by the Ministry of Education (2016R1D1A1B03932615).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8tc04723e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019