 DOI: 10.1039/C5CP06385J
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 6722-6728


Changqiong
Zhu
 and 

Matthew J.
Panzer
*

Department of Chemical & Biological Engineering, Tufts University, 4 Colby Street, Medford, MA 02155, USA. E-mail: matthew.panzer@tufts.edu

Received
20th October 2015
, Accepted 9th February 2016
First published on 9th February 2016
Impurities at the surface of electrodeposited p-Cu2O films have been efficiently removed through the use of concentrated aqueous ammonia solution as a wet etching agent. The performance of the Cu2O homojunction photovoltaic devices incorporating etched p-Cu2O as the bottom layer is higher compared to devices with as-deposited p-Cu2O layers due to an improvement of the homojunction interface quality. Reducing the density of defect states that act as carrier recombination centers led to larger open circuit voltages. The ammonia etchant has been found to preferentially interact with the {100} facets of Cu2O and expose a greater number of {111} facets, resulting in increased interface area for etched homojunction devices, which also improved short circuit current density values.

Cuprous oxide (Cu2O), an earth abundant semiconductor with a direct band gap of approximately 2.2 eV, has attracted great attention for applications in photovoltaic (PV) devices due to its high optical absorption coefficient, compositional simplicity, and its environmentally-friendly characteristics. Electrodeposition of Cu2O is a popular fabrication technique because of its low energy input requirement and a high degree of controllability. This method has been widely used to synthesize Cu2O films for photovoltaic devices, such as p-Cu2O/n-Cu2O homojunctions and p-Cu2O/n-ZnO heterojunctions.

Recently, we reported observations of the presence of a significant quantity of impurities (sodium, in particular) at the electrodeposited p-Cu2O film surface when commonly-used deposition bath recipes at basic pH conditions are employed. Such impurities can create interface states within PV devices constructed using these films, and may be expected to have a significant influence on the built-in potential of the p–n junction, and hence, its photovoltaic performance. In fact, these Na impurities have already been observed to create undesirable interface states and reduce Schottky solar cell performance, according to our previous work. In some cases, CuO and other Cu2+ species, including Cu(OH)2 and CuCO3, have also been found in electrodeposited p-Cu2O films; Hoye et al. have reported that the presence of CuO is detrimental to Cu2O-based photovoltaic device performance. Therefore, it is important to find a simple method by which to treat these electrodeposited p-Cu2O films so that the impurities can be efficiently removed and the p–n junction interface made clean, which is expected to lead to improved device efficiency.
Cuprous oxide (Cu2O) powder is known to dissolve readily in concentrated aqueous ammonia (ammonium hydroxide) solution. Lin et al. employed an ammonia solution to etch Cu2O nanoparticles in order to achieve modified particle shapes for photocatalysis applications. Therefore, we hypothesized that ammonia solution could be used as a promising way to similarly etch the surface of electrodeposited cuprous oxide films and thereby increase their purity to obtain improved PV device performance.
In this report, we describe the use of an ammonia solution to modify the surfaces of electrodeposited p-Cu2O thin films for the first time. The goals of this work are: (1) to determine if, and how well, impurities at the surface of an electrodeposited p-Cu2O film can be etched away using an ammonia solution; (2) to investigate how etching proceeds from a nanostructural standpoint and examine the nature of interaction between the etching agent and the Cu2O thin films; (3) to measure the performances of Cu2O homojunction photovoltaic devices incorporating etched vs. as-deposited p-Cu2O films.

Copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate (Sigma-Aldrich, >98.0%), sodium D,L lactate solution (Sigma-Aldrich, 60% w/w), sodium acetate (Sigma-Aldrich, anhydrous), sodium hydroxide (Sigma Aldrich, 50% in H2O) and sulfuric acid (Sigma Aldrich, 95–98%) were used without further purification. Tin-doped indium oxide (ITO, resistivity 20 Ω sq−1) on glass substrates were obtained from Thin Film Devices, Inc. Ammonium hydroxide solution was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (ACS reagent, 28.0–30.0% NH3 basis).


The electrodeposition solution for the p-Cu2O films shown in Fig. 1, 3 and 4 consisted of 0.4 M copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate and 3 M sodium D,L lactate; the pH was adjusted to 12 using dilute NaOH and H2SO4 solutions. The ITO working electrode potential was fixed at −0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl. Films shown in Fig. 1 and 3 were electrodeposited for 20 min; films shown in Fig. 4 were electrodeposited for 5 min.

For the ∼750 nm thick p-Cu2O layer (Fig. 6a and b), the electrodeposition solution consisted of 0.02 M copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate and 0.34 M sodium D,L lactate; the pH was adjusted to 11 using dilute NaOH and H2SO4 solutions. The ITO working electrode potential was held constant at −0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl.
The electrodeposition solution used for growing the top n-Cu2O layers of the homojunction PV devices contained 0.01 M copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate and 0.1 M sodium acetate; the pH was adjusted to 5.8 using dilute NaOH and H2SO4 solutions. Each film was deposited using a constant applied potential of −0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl.
All Cu2O films were electrodeposited using a conventional three-electrode cell with a stainless steel counter electrode and a Ag/AgCl (4 M KCl solution) reference electrode at 60 °C. Films were deposited in potentiostatic mode using a VersaSTAT 3 potentiostat (Princeton Applied Research). Following deposition, all films were thoroughly rinsed with DI water and dried under ambient conditions. Some of the p-Cu2O films were placed vertically into the ammonium hydroxide solution for controlled periods of time in order to perform surface etching.

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was conducted using a Thermal Scientific K-Alpha XPS instrument with a micro-focused monochromatic Al X-ray source (excitation energy 1486.6 eV). Energy calibration was performed using the position of the primary C 1s peak at 285.0 eV. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Zeiss FESEM Ultra Plus) was used to characterize film morphology. SEM cross-section images were used to determine approximate film thicknesses. Optical absorption spectra were collected using an Agilent Cary 60 UV-visible spectrophotometer; a reference spectrum from the bare ITO-coated glass substrate was subtracted from all sample spectra. AC impedance spectroscopy measurements were conducted using a VersaSTAT 3 potentiostat with a built-in frequency response analyzer in the dark under various forward biases ranging from 0–0.5 V. The frequency was swept from 10 Hz to 1 MHz using a 10 mV AC voltage amplitude.


In order to measure the photovoltaic performance of homojunction devices, a bilayer top metallic contact consisting of approximately 60 nm Al capped by 30 nm Au was deposited via thermal evaporation; individual PV devices were defined using a shadow mask to produce multiple 1 mm × 1 mm square top contacts on each substrate. PV devices current–voltage characteristics were obtained using a 1600 W Newport Oriel solar simulator and a computer-controlled Keithley 2440 Sourcemeter. The illumination intensity was maintained at 100 mW cm−2 (1 Sun) using a neutral density filter and verified by a silicon standard PV test device (Oriel). The homojunction PV structures were illuminated from the bottom (through the glass/ITO substrate).


It is well known that cuprous oxide can dissolve in concentrated ammonium hydroxide solution. The chemical reactions leading to the dissolution are shown in eqn (1) and (2). Initially, cuprous oxide reacts with ammonia to form the colorless complex [Cu(NH3)2]+, which is then easily oxidized in the presence of dissolved O2 to the blue-colored complex [Cu(NH3)4(H2O)2]2+:

Cu2O + 4NH3·H2O = 2[Cu(NH3)2]+ + 2OH− + 3H2O
(1)
4[Cu(NH3)2]+ + 10H2O + O2 = 4[Cu(NH3)4(H2O)2]2+ + 4OH−
(2)

Fig. 1 shows a photograph comparing two p-Cu2O thin films grown under identical conditions; the one on the left is as-deposited (Fig. 1a), and the one on the right has been etched in the ammonium hydroxide solution for 10 minutes (Fig. 1b). The change of solution color expected during etching according to eqn (2) can be readily observed experimentally. In Fig. 1c, the transparent ammonium hydroxide solution is shown, while Fig. 1d displays the same solution after being used to treat the p-Cu2O film shown in Fig. 1a. This provides a visual indication that part of the p-Cu2O film has been etched and dissolved into the solution.
While the color change in the etching solution confirms that the Cu2O film can indeed by solubilized by ammonium hydroxide solution, it is important to verify whether or not the primary surface impurity (sodium) was removed along with Cu2O at the film surface. To answer this, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed on the top surface of the film. The Na 1s XPS spectra of the Cu2O film before and after ammonium hydroxide treatment for 10 minutes are shown in Fig. 2a. It is clear that there is a significant amount of sodium on the surface of the as-deposited film, which was found in our previous report. After etching, the Na 1s signal is minimal, which indicates that this etching process is very effective at removing the Na impurity. Mechanistically, the Na+ initially present only at the surface of the Cu2O film is likely liberated into the etching solution as a hydrated cation following copper ion complexation/solubilization by NH3.
There is also a noticeable change in the appearance of the Cu2O film after etching. The film after etching looks darker than the as-deposited film (Fig. 1bvs.Fig. 1a). One can also discern that the etched film appears less transparent than the as-deposited film by looking at the ruled lines on the sheet of paper underneath both samples. This is also confirmed by the UV-visible absorption spectra shown in Fig. 2b. The etched Cu2O film clearly absorbs more light across the visible region than the as-deposited Cu2O film. In order to determine why the etched film is more strongly absorbing than the as-deposited film in spite of its loss of some Cu2O due to etching, the morphologies of the films were carefully examined via SEM imaging (Fig. 3). The top view images (Fig. 3a and b) show that the etching process dramatically altered the film surface morphology, while the cross-sectional images (Fig. 3c and d) indicate that the film thicknesses before and after etching are very similar (∼2 μm). Therefore, the change in film absorption after etching is not attributed to any noticeable film thickness change, but rather, to the development of faceted, concave nanostructures that result in greater film roughness, which leads to stronger light scattering and makes the film less transparent. This etched Cu2O morphology, with its higher surface area and greater degree of light scattering, is expected to be a promising feature for building Cu2O-based PV devices.
In order to learn how the ammonium hydroxide etching agent interacts with the Cu2O film and how the rougher surface is formed during etching, SEM images of identically prepared Cu2O films after various etching times were captured, as shown in Fig. 4. According to our previous investigations, the polycrystalline Cu2O films grown in high pH conditions showed a clear 〈111〉 orientation preference. Therefore, we can identify the locations of the {100} and {111} facets as labeled in Fig. 4a and d. It is apparent that before etching, the exposed Cu2O facets are mainly {100}. After etching for 6 minutes, some {111} facets begin to emerge. Therefore, the etching solution mainly interacts with the films through the {100} facets and removes some material, leading to a very rough {100} surface and the emergence of smooth {111} facets. To illustrate the process more clearly, a cartoon schematic of the etching process is shown in Fig. 5. The top-down etching creates a jagged Cu2O polyhedral surface with {111} facets exposed. Considering the first reaction responsible for etching shown in eqn (1), NH3 should interact more strongly with the {100} Cu2O crystal planes, resulting in octahedral pyramids with exposed {111} facets.
In order to test the hypothesis that the etched p-Cu2O layer would indeed facilitate improved PV performance due to the removal of surface impurities, Cu2O homojunctions were prepared using the ∼2 μm thick p-Cu2O films shown in Fig. 3; a thin layer (∼250 nm) of n-Cu2O was grown via electrodeposition on top of each film to form the homojunction. While the homojunction created using the etched p-Cu2O film as the bottom layer did show significantly better power conversion under simulated solar illumination than its counterpart containing the untreated p-Cu2O layer (Fig. S1, ESI), the performance of both homojunctions were lower than previously reported devices because of the ∼2 μm thick bottom p-Cu2O layer (VOC < 0.3 V; |JSC| < 0.35 mA cm−2). This substantial thickness creates a large series resistance that makes hole extraction difficult, while also reducing the level of carrier generation near the p–n junction (illumination from the glass substrate side). However, importantly, we could attribute the increased open circuit voltage and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the homojunction containing the etched p-Cu2O bottom layer to the removal of sodium and other impurities at the junction. In addition to removing the impurities, this ammonia etching method can also be used to modify the p-Cu2O film surface morphology and create a more highly textured structure, which may have contributed to the larger observed short circuit current density (Fig. S1, ESI) in the etched homojunction device due to an enhanced p–n interfacial area. Notably, despite the dramatic difference in light absorption between the as-deposited and etched p-Cu2O layers alone (Fig. 2b), both the etched and untreated homojunctions exhibited nearly identical absorption spectra following the growth of the n-Cu2O layer on top of these films (Fig. S2, ESI).
Homojunction devices displaying improved PV performance were realized by reducing the bottom p-Cu2O layer thickness to ∼750 nm (Fig. S3, ESI) and modifying the electrodeposition growth solution conditions (see Experimental section). Again, one of two identically prepared p-type Cu2O layers was treated by submersion in ammonium hydroxide solution to etch the film surface and remove unwanted impurities. To avoid the formation of pinholes after etching the thinner p-Cu2O layer, the etched film was placed in ammonium hydroxide solution for only 1 minute. We can see from the SEM images of the bottom p-Cu2O layers shown in Fig. 6 that the etched film (Fig. 6b) demonstrates some subtle morphology change compared to the as-deposited film (Fig. 6a); however, the difference is not as dramatic as in the case of the previously described thicker films that were etched for 10 minutes. Just as in the case of the thicker homojunctions, however (Fig. S1, ESI), the top view morphologies following deposition of the n-Cu2O top layer were very similar (Fig. 6c and d). Representative current–voltage characteristics demonstrating the PV performance of the improved devices with the thinner p-Cu2O layers are shown in Fig. 6e. Homojunction devices containing an etched p-Cu2O layer exhibited improved performance (PCE of 0.16%, VOC of 0.36 V, JSC of 1.17 mA cm−2, and a fill factor of 37%) compared to devices containing the as-deposited p-Cu2O layer (PCE of 0.11%, VOC of 0.33, JSC of 0.9 mA cm−2, and a fill factor of 36%).
To understand why the etched homojunction device outperformed the untreated homojunction, several methods of characterization were employed. Once again, the presence or absence of impurities at the exposed surface of the p-Cu2O layer, which later becomes the homojunction interface after growth of the n-type Cu2O layer on top, was carefully investigated using XPS. The Na 1s XPS spectra of the ∼750 nm thick as-deposited and etched (1 min) p-Cu2O layer surfaces are shown in Fig. 7a. Importantly, it can be seen that the Na impurity is completely removed by etching with ammonium hydroxide solution for only one minute. Clearly, the use of the ammonium hydroxide solution is a very effective method by which to remove impurities from the top surface of the p-Cu2O film. In addition to sodium, carbon (primarily from the ligands) in the electrodeposition solution is also a known impurity in the p-Cu2O films. Fig. 7b shows that while the C 1s peak intensities are reduced following a one-minute etch, some carbon still remains. Notably, however, the signal intensities at the positions corresponding to adsorbed lactate ligand (C–OH at 286.3 eV and O–CO at 288.3 eV) are clearly lower following surface etching. Cupric oxide, CuO, has also been reported to reduce the performance of Cu2O-based PV devices. On the surface of the as-deposited p-Cu2O films, Cu2+ species including CuO and CuCO3 are always present to some degree, which is confirmed by the Cu 2p3/2 spectra (Fig. 7c) by the small shoulder peak near 935 eV. After being etched for one minute, this peak intensity is reduced. Reduction of the Cu2+ species peak after etching is more obvious when a greater amount of CuO is initially present, such as after the as-deposited film is left in air to oxidize for a few days (data not shown). In other words, besides the Na impurities, the Cu2+ species in the film surfaces have also been effectively etched away using the ammonium hydroxide solution. The removal of these impurities improves the homojunction interface quality and reduces the quantity of charge carrier recombination centers, which contributes to the improvement of the open circuit voltage, as discussed below.
Differences in homojunction quality were also investigated by measuring their AC impedance responses. AC impedance spectroscopy has been used as a powerful tool to characterize interface quality within solar cells. Nyquist plots of the impedance spectra for the two homojunctions are shown in Fig. 8. The semicircular arcs seen at low frequencies are typical of p–n junctions. The Cu2O homojunctions can be roughly modeled by an equivalent circuit consisting of a resistor in series with a parallel combination of a resistor and a capacitor. The parallel resistor characterizes carrier recombination and leakage paths through the cell. The bigger the arc radius, the higher recombination resistance. In Fig. 8, we can see that the arc radius decreases with increasing bias voltage, which indicates that the recombination resistance decreases with increasing bias. This is consistent with expectation, as the potential barrier to tunneling or carrier injection at the interface is reduced with larger forward bias. Comparing Fig. 8a and b, larger recombination resistances are uniformly observed for the etched homojunction. This confirms that a lower quantity of defect states caused by impurities, which act as recombination centers, exist at the etched homojunction interface. The reduction in interfacial recombination due to etching can also be seen in the lower reverse saturation current density for the etched homojunction current–voltage characteristic measured in the dark (Fig. S4, ESI). The decrease in the number of interface states is attributed to the etching in ammonium hydroxide solution to remove impurities, verified by the XPS results. This reduction in interface state density contributes to an increased resistance to charge carrier recombination and leads to a larger open circuit voltage observed for the etched homojunction.
In addition to the increased open circuit voltage, a larger short circuit current density is also observed for the etched homojunction device (Fig. 6e). UV-visible absorption spectra of the two homojunctions as well as for the as-deposited vs. etched p-Cu2O films are shown in Fig. 9. We can see that the two homojunctions exhibit very similar light absorption over the wavelength range of 500 nm to 900 nm. This is consistent with expectation, since they have similar total thicknesses (∼1 μm; Fig. S3, ESI) and similar top n-Cu2O surface morphology and surface roughness as shown by the SEM images in Fig. 6c and d. Notably, however, the 1 min etched p-Cu2O film alone shows slightly higher light absorption compared to the as-deposited p-Cu2O film. As discussed above, this is because etching leads to a higher surface area on the top of the film and consequently stronger light scattering. This higher surface area of the etched p-Cu2O layer surface also contributes to a larger interfacial area in the etched homojunction, which facilitates enhanced charge carrier separation and results in a larger short circuit current.

In conclusion, concentrated ammonia/ammonium hydroxide solution is found to be very effective in removing impurities present at the top surfaces of electrodeposited p-Cu2O films. The Na and Cu2+ impurities can be etched away after only one minute of treatment. Removal of the impurities significantly reduces the presence of interface states that act as carrier recombination centers, resulting in larger open circuit voltage and improved photovoltaic performance of the p-Cu2O/n-Cu2O homojunction. The ammonia etching method can also be used to create a highly textured Cu2O surface morphology by controlling the etching time. The NH3·H2O etchant preferentially attacks the polycrystalline Cu2O films via the {100} planes, resulting in roughened {100} planes and some exposed smooth {111} facets, which increases the roughness of the p-Cu2O film surface. As a consequence, the interfacial area of Cu2O homojunction photovoltaic devices can be increased, which contributes to a higher short circuit current for devices synthesized using an etched p-Cu2O film as the bottom layer.


XPS and SEM were performed at the Center for Nanoscale Systems (CNS), a member of the National Nanotechnology Infrastructure Network (NNIN), which is supported by the National Science Foundation under NSF award no. ECS-0335765. CNS is part of Harvard University.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional SEM surface topography and cross-sectional images, current density–voltage characteristics, and UV-visible absorption spectra. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cp06385j
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016