 DOI: 10.1039/C8TC06043F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 5260-5266


Ali Asgher
Syed
,

Chung Yan
Poon
,

Hung Wing
Li
 and 

Furong
Zhu
*

Department of Physics, Institute of Advance Materials, and Institute of Research and Continuing Education (Shenzhen), Hong Kong Baptist University, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong, China. E-mail: frzhu@hkbu.edu.hk

Received
30th November 2018
, Accepted 7th January 2019
First published on 8th January 2019
The properties of the hole transporting layer (HTL) play an important role in determining the performance of inverted planar perovskite solar cells (PSCs). High performance methylammonium lead iodide PSCs were demonstrated through controlled growth of the perovskite layer and suppression of charge recombination at the perovskite/electrode interfaces. In this work, the effect of the sodium citrate modified poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(4-styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) HTL on the growth of the perovskite active layer, the charge extraction properties and hence the performance of the PSCs was investigated. A power conversion efficiency (PCE) of >11.50% was achieved for low-processing temperature solution-processable PSCs made with a sodium citrate modified PEDOT:PSS HTL, and is >20% higher than that of a structurally identical control PSC with a pristine PEDOT:PSS HTL (9.13%). Photoelectron spectroscopy measurements reveal that sodium citrate solution modification partially removes the PSS on the surface of the PEDOT:PSS HTL, leading to an almost two times increase in the ratio of PEDOT to PSS as compared to that measured for the pristine PEDOT:PSS HTL. The light intensity-dependent J–V characteristics of the PSCs were measured to analyze the performance enhancement of the PSCs. The results reveal that the sodium citrate-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL benefits the efficient operation of PSCs in two ways: (1) it assists the crystal growth to increase in the perovskite domain size, and (2) it favors the charge collection in the PSCs.

The encouraging progress made in inverted planar perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has attracted increasing attention for preparing high performance inverted planar PSCs using a solution fabrication process. Although the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of conventional regular configuration PSCs is higher than that of inverted PSCs, the use of high sintering temperature TiO2 electron transporting layers (ETLs) in regular configuration cells has a limitation in the development of large size flexible PSCs. High performance low-process temperature solution-processable inverted planar PSCs offer a promising alternative photovoltaic technique for the development of large size flexible solar cells at a low-cost. The surface and electronic properties of the hole transporting layer (HTL) are critical for the controlled growth of the perovskite. The PEDOT:PSS layer is one of the commonly used HTLs in inverted planar PSCs and organic solar cells (OSCs). PEDOT:PSS is an aqueous-based solution that has been widely used for preparing a conducting polymer layer via solution fabrication processes, e.g., spin-coating and roll-to-roll printing, for different device applications.

It has been reported that a low open circuit voltage (VOC) of ∼0.90 V in inverted PSCs is primary limited by the PEDOT:PSS HTL due to its poor electron blocking capability. The acidic nature of PEDOT:PSS arises from the anionic PSS dispersant: (a) the PSS component is an aqueous soluble anionic polymer with a high sulfonation degree, (b) PSS is not electrically conducive and is a non-conjugated polymer having a regular molecular structure. Different methods have been adopted to improve the performance of the PSCs by modifying the surface and electronic properties of the PEDOT:PSS HTL. For example, the use of different polar organic solvent additives such as dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO),N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), ethylene glycol (EG) and sorbitol enhances the conductivity of solution-processable PEDOT:PSS thin films, achieving typically 2–3 orders of magnitude improvement in the film conductivity as compared to the pristine PEDOT:PSS film with the same layer thickness. The surface modification of the PEDOT:PSS HTL using graphene oxide dissolved in an organic solvent was shown to remove a portion of the hygroscopic PSS material, which has the advantage to enhance the moisture resistivity and lower the contact barrier at the HTL/perovskite interface contributing to the efficient operation of the PSCs. However, the surface modification of the PEDOT:PSS HTL using DMF and DMSO is not suitable for eventual production, as these chemical materials are toxic, expensive and non-environmental friendly.
In this work, we report our effort to modify the PEDOT:PSS HTL using environmentally friendly and non-toxic sodium citrate (Na3C6H5O7) for achieving high performance solution processable inverted planar PSCs. The effect of the Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL on the growth of the methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) perovskite layer and hence the overall performance of the MAPbI3-based inverted PSCs was investigated. A PCE of >11.50% was achieved for the PSCs made with a Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL, and is >20% higher than that of the control PSC (9.13%). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) analyses reveal that sodium citrate solution modification partially removes the PSS component on the PEDOT:PSS HTL surface. A ratio of PEDOT to PSS of 0.20 was observed on the surface of the Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL, and is almost two times higher than that of the pristine PEDOT:PSS layer (0.11). It is shown that the sodium citrate modified PEDOT:PSS HTL benefits the efficient operation of the PSCs in two ways: (1) it assists in the crystal growth to increase in the perovskite domain size, and (2) it favors the charge collection in the PSCs.

MAPbI3-based PSCs have a layer configuration of ITO/Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/phenyl-C60-butyric acid methyl ester (PC60BM)/bathophenanthroline (BPhen)/Ag. Control PSCs with a similar configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PC60BM/BPhen/Ag were also made for comparison study. A cross-sectional view of the inverted planar PSC is shown in the inset of Fig. 1(a). The pre-patterned ITO/glass substrates with a sheet resistance of 18 Ω per square were cleaned by ultra-sonication sequentially with diluted detergent, de-ionized water, acetone and isopropyl alcohol each for 30 min. The wet-cleaned ITO/glass substrates were subjected to the UV ozone treatment for 10 min to remove the possible chemical residuals on the ITO surface, forming a smoother surface to improve the adhesion and uniformity of the PEDOT:PSS layer on ITO. The PEDOT:PSS HTL was crosslinked by annealing at 120 °C for 10 min in air. After cooling down to room temperature, the surface of the PEDOT:PSS HTL was modified with a spin-coating Na3C6H5O7 solution in air. Na3C6H5O7 solutions with different concentrations were formulated by dissolving the respective amount of the sodium citrate powders in distilled water. It has been found that the Na3C6H5O7 solution with a concentration of 2.0 mM was optimal for the PEDOT:PSS modification, achieving best performance PSCs. The Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS/ITO/glass substrates were then transferred to a N2-purged glove box, with O2 and H2O levels being less than 0.1 ppm, for preparing a MAPbI3 layer. A 350 nm thick MAPbI3 perovskite layer was grown on the surface of the Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL by a solvent engineering-one step approach, followed by annealing at 90 °C for 10 min for obtaining polycrystalline MAPbI3 perovskite films. A 40 nm thick PC60BM ETL was then overlaid on the MAPbI3 layer by spin-coating at a rotation speed of 1000 rpm for 45 s, using a solution with a PC60BM concentration of 20 mg ml−1 in chlorobenzene. An approximately 10 nm thick BPhen cathode interlayer was then formed on the PC60BM ETL by spin-coating at a rotation speed of 2500 rpm for 50 s, using a solution (BPhen 0.6 wt% in ethanol). The samples were transferred to a vacuum chamber with a base pressure of 3.0 × 10−4 Pa, for deposition of a 100 nm thick upper silver (Ag) contact by thermal evaporation. The PSCs thus made have an active area of 3.0 mm × 3.0 mm, defined by an overlap between the stripe-shaped front ITO and the upper Ag contacts.


The effect of the Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL on the overall performance of the inverted PSCs, e.g., VOC, short circuit current density (JSC) and fill factor (FF), was investigated. Fig. 1(a) displays the typical current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics measured for the optimal PSCs made with a Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL and a control cell fabricated with a pristine PEDOT:PSS HTL. A summary of the cell parameters, averaged from more than 20 PSCs prepared using a modified PEDOT:PSS HTL and a pristine PEDOT:PSS HTL, is listed in Table 1. A PCE of 11.50% was obtained for the PSCs with a Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL, and is >20% higher than that of the control PSCs prepared using a pristine PEDOT:PSS HTL (9.13%), along with a higher JSC of 15.65 mA cm−2 and VOC of 1.01 V, as compared to a JSC of 13.09 mA cm−2 and a VOC of 0.92 V obtained for the control PSCs. The values of JSC measured for the PSCs were calibrated using the incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE). The J–V and IPCE spectra obtained for the PSCs fabricated with a modified PEDOT:PSS HTL and a pristine PEDOT:PSS HTL are shown in Fig. 1(a) and (b).

HTL
PCE (%)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PEDOT/PSS (ratio)
Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS
11.21 ± 0.24 (11.50)
15.45 ± 0.15
0.99 ± 0.01
73.02 ± 0.84
0.20
pristine PEDOT:PSS
8.95 ± 0.17 (9.13)
12.89 ± 0.21
0.92 ± 0.01
75.20 ± 0.81
0.11
PSCs with a Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL possess a higher VOC of 1.01 V, which is 9% higher than that of the control cell (0.92 V). It is known that the VOC of the solar cells is closely associated with the internal electric field across the active region. A HTL with a higher work function (WF) is desirable for obtaining a high VOC in the cell. To understand the enhancement in the VOC of the inverted PSCs with a Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL, the effect of the Na3C6H5O7-modification on the changes in the WF of the PEDOT:PSS HTL was analyzed using the UPS measurements. The UPS spectra and the secondary electron cut-offs in the UPS spectra measured for the Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS and pristine PEDOT:PSS films are shown in Fig. 2(a) and (b). There is a slight reduction in the WF of the Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS layer (5.06 eV) in comparison to that of the pristine PEDOT:PSS film (5.11 eV). It has been reported that deposition of methylammonium iodide (MAI) on PEDOT:PSS results in a reduced WF of 4.7 eV, due to the occurrence of the counter-ion exchange reaction between the PSS and MAI molecules on the PEDOT:PSS surface. The occurrence of the electron transfer between the MAI to PEDOT:PSS molecules induces an interface dipole, which is responsible for the decrease in the WF due to the vacuum-level shift. This work shows that the Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL is stable and advantageous for achieving a slightly higher VOC in the inverted planar PSCs with a Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL, enabled by its improved electron blocking ability due to a low lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of the Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL, as illustrated in Fig. 2(c).
The work function reported for the pristine PEDOT:PSS layer is in range from 4.7 eV to 5.4 eV. A thin PSS-rich layer usually appears on the surface of the PEDOT:PSS film due to vertical phase separation during the film formation. Because the work function of PSS is higher than that of PEDOT, the PEDOT:PSS film shows a little higher work function than that of neat PEDOT. Therefore reduction in the work function of the PEDOT:PSS layer can be obtained by removing the top thin PSS-rich layer via addition of high bolting temperature solvents or polar solvents. We have found that the modification of sodium citrate solution partially removed a small amount of PSS on the PEDOT:PSS surface, leading to a slight upper shift in the highest occupied molecular orbitals (HOMOs) of the PEDOT:PSS HTL, as illustrated schematically in Fig. 2(c). The elevated LUMO of the Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL assists in improving the electron blocking capability. The improvement in electron blocking is favorable for suppressing charge recombination and enhancing charge collection probability, resulting in a high VOC and a low leakage current as observed in the inverted planar PSCs with a Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL.
The compositional properties of the Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS and pristine PEDOT:PSS HTL films were further characterized by XPS measurements. The wide XPS spectra and S 2p XPS peaks obtained for the Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL and the pristine PEDOT:PSS HTL films are shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b), whereas the normalized S 2P XPS spectra obtained for the Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL and the pristine PEDOT:PSS HTL, and the corresponding deconvolution S 2p XPS spectra obtained by the Gaussian fitting are illustrated in Fig. 3(c) and (d), respectively. The S 2p XPS peaks in the binding energy range from 162 to 166 eV are attributed to the S atoms in the PEDOT chains, and the S 2p XPS peaks in the binding energy range from 166 eV to 172 eV are assigned to the S atom in the PSS chains.
From XPS analysis, we found that the ratio of PEDOT to PSS measured for the Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL is 0.20, which is almost two times higher than that measured for a pristine PEDOT:PSS HTL (0.11). This suggests that an appreciable amount of PSS content on the PEDOT:PSS surface was removed by the Na3C6H5O7 modification, leaving a PEDOT-rich PEDOT:PSS HTL surface. The partial removal of the insulating PSS component on the PEDOT:PSS surface promotes the contact between the perovskite and the PEDOT conductive part of the HTL, which is favorable for the charge extraction, and thereby improvement in JSC as observed in the PSCs with a Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL. Actually, the natural properties of PSS as mentioned in the introduction part are that it is highly soluble in water with a higher degree of sulfonation. PSS has a regular molecular structure which is not conductive enough for efficient hole transportation. The XPS results suggest that modification of the PEDOT:PSS HTL surface using sodium citrate solution leads to washing off a portion of the PSS component on the HTL surface. Apart from the partial removal of the PSS, the possible residue of the sodium citrate on the PEDOT:PSS surface may also have an influence on the surface work function of the PEDOT:PSS HTL. It is anticipated that the partial removal of the PSS in PEDOT:PSS is a dominant effect contributing to the efficient hole extraction at the HTL/MAPbI3 interface, thereby improving the performance of the PSCs made with a Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL.
The effect of Na3C6H5O7 modification on the surface morphology of the PEDOT:PSS HTL was also analyzed using atomic force microscopy (AFM). Typical topographic AFM images obtained for the surfaces of the PEDOT:PSS HTL films before and after the modification of Na3C6H5O7 are shown in Fig. 4(a) and (b). The AFM results reveal that the uniform ordering of the PEDOT domains, with a slight increase in the surface roughness (RMS) from 1.25 nm to 2.25 nm was observed for the Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL surface, suggesting the improved PEDOT molecular packing on the surface of the modified PEDOT:PSS HTL, similar to a previous observation with regard to the modification of the PEDOT:PSS film by incorporating ethylene glycol and DMSO in PEDOT:PSS. It is shown that a moderately rough interface seen in Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS also helps to improve the adhesion between the HTL and the MAPbI3 active layer in the inverted planar PSCs (Fig. 4).
The morphological properties of the perovskite layers grown on a Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL and a pristine PEDOT:PSS HTL were also examined using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements. SEM images, with different scales of 500 nm and 200 nm, obtained for the surfaces of the MAPbI3 layers grown on a Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL and a pristine PEDOT:PSS HTL are shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b). The results reveal that the pin hole free and full surface coverage dense MAPbI3 perovskite layers can be grown on both Na3C6H5O7-modified and pristine PEDOT:PSS HTL surfaces. The average grain size of the MAPbI3 perovskite layers grown on both the HTL surfaces lies in range of 150 nm to 250 nm. The XRD measurements also support the SEM observation.
The size distribution of the crystal grains was also calculated by using an image analysis method (ImageJ software) to obtain SEM images for the MAPbI3 films grown on the pristine PEDOT:PSS HTL and the Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL. From the image analysis, the average size of the crystal grains in the films was calculated statistically by estimating the number of the MAPbI3 domains in the SEM image scanned over a given area on the surface of the MAPbI3 films. It is shown that the MAPbI3 film grown on the Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL has a size distribution of the crystal grains over the range from 135 nm to 180 nm, with an average domain size of ∼157.5 nm. In comparison, the size distribution of the crystal grains obtained for the MAPbI3 film grown on the pristine PEDOT:PSS HTL is over the range from 120 nm to 167 nm, having a smaller average domain size of ∼143.5 nm. The image analysis suggests that the use of the Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL assists in the crystal growth of the MAPbI3 layer, resulting in an increased perovskite domain size in the active layer, which is favorable for the efficient operation of the PSCs.
The XRD patterns obtained for the MAPbI3 perovskite layers grown on the Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS are shown in Fig. 6. The (110) and (220) XRD peaks represent the perovskite phase. In this case both the peaks obtained for the MAPbI3 perovskite layers grown on the Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS and the pristine PEDOT:PSS HTLs are quite similar, suggesting that the complete transformation from the intermediate phase to perovskite phase takes place with no observable residual PbI2 phase appearing in the XRD patterns.
The contact angles measured for the surfaces of a Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL and a pristine PEDOT:PSS HTL are shown in the inset of Fig. 6. In the contact angle measurements, 8 μl of water was dropped on the surfaces of the Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS and pristine PEDOT:PSS HTLs, and the results show that after modifying the surface of the PEDOT:PSS HTL with sodium citrate solution, the contact angle slightly reduced from 3.95° to 3.75°, as shown in the inset of Fig. 6, suggesting an improved wettability of the perovskite precursor solution on the Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL surface.
The possible changes in the stretching and bending modes of the molecules in the Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS and pristine PEDOT:PSS HTLs were also analyzed using the Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) measurements. The results in Fig. 7 show that there is almost no observable change in the FTIR spectra obtained for the Na3C6H5O7-modified and pristine PEDOT:PSS films. It is anticipated that there were no strong chemical interactions taking place between Na3C6H5O7 and PEDOT:PSS molecules, as shown in the FTIR spectra in Fig. 7.
The photo current density–effective voltage (Jph–Veff) characteristics measured for the two sets of the inverted planar PSCs were studied. The dark J–V and Jph–Veff characteristics measured for the PSCs with a Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL and a pristine PEDOT:PSS HTL (control cell), plotted in double logarithmic scales, are shown in Fig. 8(a) and (b). ηCC, defined as the charge collection efficiency, reflects the probability of the photo-generated charges that can be extracted at the perovskite/electrode interface at different Veff values. Normally trap-assisted charge recombination is one of the primary causes that limits the ηCC in the PSCs, particularly at a low Veff, which can be represented by the relationship ηCC = Jph/Jsat.
The photocurrent measured for the PSCs with a Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL at a low Veff is an order of magnitude higher than that of a control device having a pristine PEDOT:PSS HTL. A higher ηCC was obtained for the inverted planar PSCs with a Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL, which decreases from 85%, obtained at the maximum power output, to that near to the open circuit condition of 60%. A lower ηCC was seen for the control device, which decreases from 60%, at the maximum power output, to the open circuit condition of 20%. The results confirm that the inverted planar PSCs with a Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL are more effective to suppress the interfacial charge recombination at the HTL/MAPbI3 interface, resulting in an efficient charge collection probability. Our results agree with a previous study which shows that the charge recombination rate plays a critical role in defining the VOC value. Hence, the reduction in charge recombination in the PSCs with a Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL enables a higher VOC than that in a control inverted planar PSC with a pristine PEDOT:PSS HTL. Charge extraction and charge recombination are the competing processes in a solar cell. Both charge extraction and the recombination processes are closely associated with the effective internal electric field. The bimolecular recombination is considered as the non-geminate recombination loss process. The recombination induced by the trap-assisted processes occurs when the trapped photo-generated charges recombine with the opposite charge carriers contributing to the loss of the photo current.
The light intensity-dependent J–V measurement is a useful approach for analyzing the recombination behavior in the solar cells. The Jph–I characteristics, measured for the PSCs having a Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL and a pure PEDOT:PSS HTL, plotted in double logarithmic scales, are shown in Fig. 9(a) and (b). The power law dependence of the photocurrent on the intensity of the incident light is clearly seen. According to the above discussion, Jph is calculated using Jph = J − JD, where J is the current density measured for the device in the presence of light, and JD is the current density measured for the cell in the absence of light. The relationship between Jph and light intensity can be explained using the equation, Jph ∝ Ia. If the photo-generated charge carriers are fully extracted, or charge recombination is very low, the exponent a approaches unity. This suggests that a smaller a value is associated with poor charge transport properties, and hence an inefficient charge extraction in the cell.
In Fig. 9(a), the results show that a α value of ∼1.0 is obtained for the PSCs with a Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL over the Veff ranging from 0.10 V to 0.83 V, e.g., for the PSCs operating at Veff = 0.83 V, corresponding to the short circuit condition, Veff = 0.18 V (maximum power output, Pmax, condition) and Veff = 0.10 V (near to the open circuit condition). The results reveal that a more efficient charge extraction process takes place prior to the charge recombination in the PSCs made with a Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL. While for structurally identical control PSCs, lower a values of 0.98 at the short circuit condition (Veff = 0.83 V), 0.98 at the Pmax condition (Veff = 0.18 V) and 0.87 at the open circuit condition (Veff = 0.10 V) were observed. It is shown that the charge extraction in the control PSC with a pristine PEDOT:PSS HTL is less efficient as compared to that of the inverted planar PSCs made with a Na3C6H5O7-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL.
For the commercialization of PSCs, there is a need to develop a robust and effective interfacial modification approach, which is reproducible in making a high-quality perovskite layer that can be fabricated by a solution-based processing route. The outcomes of this work are very encouraging. It has been demonstrated that environmentally friendly and non-toxic sodium citrate can be an attractive solution towards the development of high performance solution processable inverted planar PSCs at a low cost.

A sodium citrate-modified PEDOT:PSS hole transporting layer, a nontoxic and cost effective approach, has been developed for achieving high performance PSCs. The use of the sodium citrate modified PEDOT:PSS HTL layer favors the charge collection, due to the improved contact and reduced charge recombination loss at the HTL/MAPbI3 interface, as shown by the SEM, XRD, UPS, XPS and light intensity-dependent J–V characteristic measurements. A PCE of >11.50% was obtained for the low temperature solution-processed planar inverted PSCs with a sodium citrate-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL, and is >20% higher as compared to that of a structurally identical control cell.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China, Collaborative Research Fund (C5037-18GF) and Hong Kong Baptist University Inter-institutional Collaborative Research Scheme (RC-ICRS/15-16/04).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019