 DOI: 10.1039/C4PY00273C
(Paper)
Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 4984-4992


Zhenguo
Wang
,

Jie
Zhao
,

Ying
Li
 and 

Qiang
Peng
*

Key Laboratory of Green Chemistry and Technology of Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610064, P. R. China. E-mail: qiangpengjohnny@yahoo.com; Fax: +86-28-86510868; Tel: +86-28-86510868

School of Environmental and Chemical Engineering, Nanchang Hangkong University, Nanchang 330063, P. R. China

Received
24th February 2014
, Accepted 1st May 2014
First published on 2nd May 2014
A low band-gap copolymer, PDTS-FID, containing alternating dithienosilole (DTS) donor blocks and fluorinated isoindigo (FID) units, and its non-fluorinated counterpart, PDTS-ID, have been synthesized and characterized for photovoltaic applications. Compared to PDTS-ID, its fluorinated counterpart, PDTS-FID, exhibits broader and stronger absorption, lower-lying HOMO and LUMO energy levels, and higher hole mobility, resulting in an improved open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE). The positive effects were attributed to the fluorinated isoindigo block which favored a linear and planar conformation, giving rise to better backbone packing of the related copolymer, which was also confirmed by theoretical calculations (DFT). The conventional and inverted devices were fabricated and evaluated to explore the photovoltaic properties of the resulting copolymers. The best performance of 5.79% PCE was obtained from an inverted polymer solar cell (PSC) using PDTS-FID as the donor material, with a Voc of 0.84 V, a Jsc of 10.77 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.64. These low band-gap copolymers could be expected to be promising donor materials for application in PSCs.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs) have attracted a large amount of attention due to their unique advantages, such as low cost, light weight, flexibility and large-area manufacturing compatibility. To achieve better performance for commercialization of PSCs, the rational molecular design and effective preparation of polymeric donor materials are important. To enhance the absorption and improve the carrier mobility, low band-gap (LBG) conjugated polymers were developed by incorporating electron-rich donor (D) and electron-deficient acceptor (A) segments into the polymer backbones. This push–pull interaction of the donor and acceptor moieties can efficiently induce a lower-energy absorption band and control the energy levels (HOMO and LUMO) due to the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) processes and hybridization of their molecular orbitals. Based on this strategy, a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 7% was obtained by using LBG conjugated copolymers as donor materials in bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells.

Isoindigo (ID) is an efficient acceptor block due to its strong electron-withdrawing characteristics and a large optical transition dipole with two lactam rings, which could be utilized for constructing LBG copolymers. The application of isoindigo in organic solar cells was first introduced by Reynolds et al. in 2010; the reported isoindigo-based oligomer exhibited a PCE of 1.76%. Later, the same group designed and synthesized a series of isoindigo-based copolymers with broad absorption spectra, low-lying LUMO and HOMO energy levels, but their photovoltaic performance was not investigated. Almost at the same time, Zhang et al. and Zou et al. reported some isoindigo-based D–A copolymers with different donor blocks with PCEs ranging from 0.02 to 1.91%. Using thiophene as a donor block with designed side chains, Andersson et al. reported a new isoindigo-based copolymer, PTI-1, which showed a PCE of up to 3.0%. Shortly after that, the same group synthesized another isoindigo-based copolymer with terthiophene as a donor block affording 6.3% PCE. Some other types of donor blocks, such as dithienosilole, benzodithiophene, cyclopentadithiophene, 9-alkylidene-9H-fluorene, naphthalene and anthracene, were also copolymerized with isoindigo, and the resulting copolymers exhibited good photovoltaic performance in PSCs.
It is interesting to note that the isoindigo-based copolymers reported so far own low-lying HOMO (−5.50 to −5.90 V) and LUMO (−3.70 to −4.00 V) energy levels. These copolymers also exhibit promising broad absorption even towards the near-IR region by choosing appropriate conjugated donors with variable low bandgaps ranging from 1.3 to 1.8 eV. How to extend the photovoltaic application of isoindigo and modified isoindigo has emerged as a challenge for achieving high efficiency over 10% in the near future. In 2012, Pei et al. designed a fluorinated isoindigo unit (FID) and synthesized a new isoindigo-based copolymer (PFII2T) with lowered bandgaps, HOMO and LUMO energy levels. High-performance ambipolar field-effect transistors (FETs) with good ambient stability were obtained by using PFII2T as the active material. The electron mobility increases from 10−2 to 0.43 cm2 V−1 s−1 with a high hole mobility of up to 1.85 cm2 V−1 s−1. Very recently, we used bis(dialkylthienyl) benzodithiophene (BDTT) and fluorinated isoindigo units (FID) as the donor and acceptor, respectively, and prepared a new LBG conjugated copolymer (PBDTT-FID), which exhibited exciting solar cell performance with 7.04% PCE. Motivated by the merits of low-lying energy levels, extended light absorption as well as high hole mobility afforded by FID units, it is well worth studying the photovoltaic properties of other FID-based copolymers with different donor blocks. In this paper, we report in detail the synthesis, characterization and solar cell properties of a new LBG copolymer containing alternating dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]silole (DTS) and FID blocks. For deeper analysis of the fluorination effect, a copolymer with DTS and ID was also synthesized and investigated.

The synthetic route to the designed copolymers is shown in Scheme 1. 6,6′-Bis(5-bromothiophen-2-yl)-N,N′-(2-ethylhexyl)isoindigo (ID), 6,6′-bis(5-bromothiophen-2-yl)-7,7′-difluoro-N,N′-(2-ethylhexyl)isoindigo (FID) and 4,4′-dioctyl-5,5′-bis(tributyltin)-dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]silole (DTS-Sn) were synthesized according to the literature methods. Polymers PDTS-ID and PDTS-FID were prepared through Stille-coupling polymerization between the bromide isoindigo (ID or FID) and the organic tin monomers (DTS-Sn) under argon protection, using Pd2(dba)3 as a catalyst and P(o-tolyl)3 as a ligand. The crude copolymers were treated by continuous extraction with methanol, hexane and chloroform. The final chloroform solution was concentrated and reprecipitated in methanol to afford purified copolymers as dark purple solids. The molecular structures of the resulting copolymers were confirmed by 1H NMR spectroscopy and elemental analysis. As expected, both copolymers have good solubility in chlorinated organic solvents due to the alkyl side chains attached on the polymer backbones, such as chloroform, chlorobenzene, o-dichlorobenzene, which would be important for fabrication of their devices by wet processes. The number-average molecular weight (Mn) and the polydispersity index (PDI) were determined by using gel permeation chromatography (GPC) with CHCl3 as the eluent at 80 °C and monodisperse polystyrene as the standard. The PDTS-ID polymer has a Mn of 12.8 kDa and a polydispersity index (PDI) of 1.75, while PDTS-FID has a little higher Mn of 15.2 kDa and a larger PDI of 1.84. PDTS-ID and PDTS-FID also exhibit good thermal stabilities with decomposition temperatures over 370 °C (5% weight loss) under a nitrogen atmosphere, investigated by thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) (Fig. 1). The thermal properties are adequately suitable for PSC fabrication and evaluation. No phase transition was observed for both copolymers by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) from room temperature to 250 °C.



Fig. 2a shows the UV-vis absorption spectra of PDTS-ID and PDTS-FID in chloroform solutions and in thin solid films. The copolymers exhibit a similar feature with two main peaks, both in solutions and in films, which is a common feature of D–A copolymers. The weak absorption band in the high-energy region is attributed to the localized π–π transition, and the strong band in the low-energy region is related to an intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) between electron-rich donors and electron-poor acceptors. As shown in Fig. 2a, PDTS-ID showed wide absorptions ranging from 300 to 800 nm with main peaks at 438 and 736 nm. The PDTS-FID polymer with fluorine atoms exhibited a similar shape but a red-shifted absorption with main peaks at 439 and 742 nm. This could be attributed to the more planar geometry of the molecular backbone of PDTS-FID, favoring the overlap between the π-orbitals along the polymeric chain and extending the conjugation length of the whole polymeric system as confirmed by Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations (reported below). Compared to their counterparts in the solution state, both copolymers show slightly broader peaks in the wavelength range of 300–850 nm (Fig. 2b). Because of the difference of interchain packing, PDTS-ID and PDTS-FID films showed different red-shifts of 3, 3 nm and 7, 3 nm, respectively. These slight red-shift phenomena can be explained by the somewhat formation of π-stacked structures even in the chloroform solutions. The introduction of fluorine atoms would facilitate the aggregation of polymer backbones through some supramolecular interactions, such as F–H, F–πF and F–S interactions. The vibrational shoulder peak of a low-energy absorption band would also confirm this type of aggregation. The optical band-gaps of PDTS-ID and PDTS-FID were calculated to be 1.52 and 1.49 eV from the onset absorption edges of the corresponding UV-vis absorption in thin solid films. The obtained low band gaps of these copolymers with broad absorption bands are very important to harvest more solar photons in the fabricated PSCs later (Table 1).

Polymers
Yield (%)

M
w
 (kDa)

M
n
 (kDa)
PDI

T
d
 (°C)

a Molecular weights and polydispersity indices were determined by GPC in chloroform using polystyrene as standards.
b Onset decomposition temperature measured by TGA under N2.


PDTS-ID

86
22.4
12.8
1.75
375

PDTS-FID

90
28.0
15.2
1.84
394

Appropriate energy levels are important for the rational design and fabrication of high performance PSCs. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was employed to examine the electrochemical properties and evaluate the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels of the resulting copolymers. The measurements were performed in a three-electrode cell in 0.1 M tetrabutylammonium perchlorate (n-Bu4NClO4)–acetonitrile solution. A platinum plate coated with a thin film of the copolymer, a platinum wire and Ag/AgCl (0.1 M) were used as the working, counter and reference electrodes, respectively. The energy level of the Ag/AgCl reference electrode was calibrated against the ferrocene/ferrocenium (Fc/Fc+) system to be 4.40 eV by using previous methods.Fig. 3a shows the electrochemical properties of the thin polymer films, and the electrochemical data are summarized in Table 2. Reversible p-doping/dedoping and n-doping/dedoping processes occurred for both copolymers in the positive and negative potential range. The onset oxidation potentials (Eox,onset)/reduction potentials (Ered,onset) of PDTS-ID and PDTS-FID were 1.02/−0.58 and 1.10/−0.46 eV, respectively. Thus, the HOMO/LUMO energy levels of PDTS-ID and PDTS-FID were calculated to be −5.42/−3.82 and −5.50/−3.94 eV, respectively. The electrochemical band gaps (Eg) of PDTS-ID and PDTS-FID were calculated from the related energy levels to be around 1.60 and 1.56 eV, respectively. The discrepancies between the electrochemical and optical band gaps presumably resulted from the exciton binding energies of the copolymers and/or the interfacial barriers for charge injection. In order to make a clear comparison, the electronic energy level diagram of the copolymers and PC71BM is described in Fig. 3b. The LUMO gap of 0.06–0.18 eV and the HOMO gap of 0.50–0.58 eV between the copolymers and PC71BM are large enough to overcome the intrachain exciton binding energy and thus guarantee efficient exciton dissociation and transfer. From the CV results, the PDTS-FID polymer exhibits lower HOMO and LUMO energy levels as well a smaller band gap because of the introduced fluorination effect, which is helpful to obtain higher open-circuit voltage (Voc) and short circuit current density (Jsc) values of its PSCs.

Polymers
Abs. (nm) λSolmax
Abs. (nm) λfilmmax

E
g
 (eV)
HOMO (eV)
LUMO (eV)

E
g
 (eV)

a Optical band gap was estimated from the wavelength of the optical absorption edge of the copolymer film.
b Electrochemical band gap was calculated from the LUMO and HOMO energy levels.


PDTS-ID

438736
441739
1.52
−5.42
−3.82
1.60

PDTS-FID

439742
446745
1.49
−5.50
−3.94
1.56

In order to further investigate the impact of fluorine substitution on the optoelectronic properties of copolymers, theoretical calculations were also carried out to reveal the optimized molecular structures, HOMO and LUMO energy levels by using density functional theory (DFT) at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level (Fig. 4). For computational simplification, long alkyl chains were replaced by methyl groups because they did not significantly affect the equilibrium geometries or electronic properties. The polymer backbones were also simplified to three repeating units (trimers). The dihedral angle between the fluorinated isoindigo unit (FID) and the adjacent thiophene in the trimer of PDTS-FID (∼0.01°) is similar to that in PDTS-ID (∼20.85°). The small dihedral angle is indicative of planar conformation and effective conjugation through π orbitals. The calculated HOMO and LUMO wave functions of the trimers are shown in Fig. 4a. Both polymers show similar distributions for the HOMO and LUMO. The electron density of the HOMO and LUMO was mainly distributed in the middle part of the conjugated molecular skeleton, however, the HOMO and LUMO were mainly focused on the donor (DTS) and acceptor (ID or FID) units. Compared to HOMO, HOMO−1 orbitals moved from the middle part to two side parts and are still mainly distributed on the acceptor units, which implied that internal charge transfer was possible in these conjugation systems. On the other hand, a similar transfer trend is observed from the LUMO to LUMO+1. The HOMO and LUMO energy levels of PDTS-ID and PDTS-FID trimers were calculated to be −4.72/−2.87 eV and −4.78/−3.04 eV, respectively. The band gaps were then determined to be 1.85 and 1.74 eV. The calculation results indicated that the effect of fluorination on the energy levels and band gaps was similar to the results obtained from the CV and UV-vis evaluation. The optimized molecular geometries of the trimers of PDTS-ID and PDTS-FID are illustrated in Fig. 4b. The results indicated that they favored planar conformations both from top and side views, which could enable the electrons to be delocalized across the whole conjugated molecular system for achieving higher carrier mobility. It is interesting to note that PDTS-FID with a FID acceptor exhibits higher planarity than PDTS-ID, especially from side view observations. The linear and planar polymer backbones would enhance the intermolecular π–π stacking and enable PDTS-FID to obtain ordered packing in the solid state.


The effects of fluorination on the electrical transport properties of the resulting copolymers were studied by measuring the hole and electron mobility of each of the two copolymers. It is well known that high charge mobility will enable better charge transport within an active layer in PSCs without large photocurrent loss caused by the recombination of opposite charges. The enhanced carrier mobility would be expected by the introduction of fluorine atoms on the skeleton of isoindigo. Thus, hole-only (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polymer:PC71BM(1:2)/MoO3/Au) and electron-only devices (ITO/Al/polymer:PC71BM(1:2)/Ca/Al) were fabricated to measure the carrier mobilities of PDTS-ID and PDTS-FID blend films via a space charge limit current (SCLC) method. The mobility values were calculated by fitting the dark current to the model of a single carrier SCLC, which is described by the following equation:
where
J is the current, μh is the zero-field mobility, ε0 is the permittivity of free space, εr is the relative permittivity of the material, d is the thickness of the active layer, and V is the effective voltage. The effective voltage can be obtained by subtracting the built-in voltage (Vbi) and the voltage drop (Vs) from the substrate's series resistance from the applied voltage (Vappl), V = Vappl − Vbi − Vs. The hole mobility can be calculated from the slope of the J1/2–V curves. The results are plotted as J1/2vs. V, as shown in Fig. 5. According to the above equation and Fig. 5, the hole and electron mobilities of PDTS-ID and PDTS-FID blend films are determined to be 2.3 × 10−3, 3.8 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 6.5 × 10−4, 9.2 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. As expected, PDTS-FID blend films possess higher hole and electron mobility under the same conditions, which is about 1.7 and 1.4 times higher than those of PDTS-ID blend films. The increased carrier mobility of the PDTS-FID polymer originates from the better planarity and backbone packing with FID acceptor blocks, which has been discussed in the section of Theoretical calculations.


To explore the photoelectric conversion properties of these two copolymers, BHJ polymer solar cells were fabricated and evaluated with the device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/copolymer:PC71BM/Ca/Al. The device-fabrication procedure is described in the Experimental section. The performance of PSCs was strongly affected by the processing parameters, such as the choice of solvent, blend ratio of the copolymer and PC71BM, and the additive effects. We fabricated and investigated the performance of a lot of devices under various conditions. Optimal fabrication conditions were obtained from an o-dichlorobenzene (o-DCB) solution of a copolymer:PC71BM ratio of 1:2 (w/w) with 1% 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO). All the PSC devices in this work were evaluated under simulated 100 mW cm−2, AM 1.5G illumination. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves are plotted in Fig. 6a. For a clear comparison, the thickness of the active layers, open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the devices are summarized in Table 3. In agreement with the positive effect of fluorination on the performance,PDTS-FID was found to be a suitable donor material for PSC applications.

Polymers
Thickness (nm)

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)

a Measured from conventional devices.
b Measured from inverted devices.


PDTS-ID


110
0.83
7.62
0.53
3.39

PDTS-ID


105
0.81
7.92
0.60
3.85

PDTS-FID


100
0.86
9.07
0.55
4.29

PDTS-FID


95
0.84
10.77
0.64
5.79
As shown in Fig. 6a, the PDTS-ID device showed a PCE of 3.39% with a Voc of 0.83 V, a Jsc of 7.62 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.53. When using PDTS-FID as the donor material, the PSC exhibited a higher PCE of 4.29%. The superior performance was attributed to the improved Voc, Jsc as well as FF values. The fluorine substitution afforded PDTS-FID with a deeper HOMO energy level, a smaller band gap as well as a higher hole mobility, which is positive for increasing the Voc and Jsc of the related PSCs. The increased Jsc was also confirmed by the external quantum efficiency (EQE) evaluation (Fig. 6b). The photocurrent response of all the devices covered the range of 300–850 nm. However, PDTS-FID showed a broader and higher curve shape. The maximum EQE plateau of PDTS-FID reached 39%, which is higher than that of PDTS-ID, resulting in more efficient light harvesting and higher Jsc values. The Jsc values calculated by integrating the EQE curves with an AM 1.5G reference spectrum are within 5% error compared to the corresponding Jsc values obtained from the J–V curves. Moreover, the improvement in FF could be due to the formation of the optimal blend film morphology. The good phase separation of the active layer is known to be a very important parameter for obtaining high efficiency of the PSCs. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was employed here to study the morphology of the copolymer:PC71BM films (1:2, w/w, with 1% DIO). As shown in Fig. 7, the blend films based on PDTS-ID and PDTS-FID showed uniform and bi-continuous networks, indicating good miscibility between the polymer donor and PC71BM. The interpenetrating network between polymers and PC71BM provided a large interface area for efficient charge separation and transfer to achieve reasonable Jsc and FF in their PSCs. It is easy to see that both morphologies exhibited some fibril features. When the fluorine atoms were introduced, the fibril features of the PDTS-FID blend became more evident and the length of the fiber increased, which is also beneficial to improve charge separation and transport in photovoltaic devices.
The inverted device structures should have a higher performance and longer-term stability compared to conventional devices. Therefore, inverted PSCs were then fabricated and evaluated based on copolymer:PC71BM blends (1:2, with 1% DIO) as the active layers with the structure of ITO/ZnO/PNFBr/copolymer:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag. The inverted PSCs were also fabricated under the optimal conditions. ZnO and MoO3 were chosen as electron-transport and hole-transport layers, respectively. The illuminated J–V and EQE curves of the devices are plotted in Fig. 6, and the photovoltaic data are summarized in Table 3. The inverted devices exhibited an enhanced performance with PCEs of up to 3.85 and 5.79% for PDTS-ID and PDTS-FID, respectively, which are 1.14 and 1.35 times higher compared to those obtained from the conventional devices. The enhancement of efficiency is mainly a result of the increased Jsc and FF. Especially for polymer PDTS-FID, the Jsc increased from 9.07 to 10.77 mA cm−2, and the FF increased from 0.55 to 0.64, resulting in the highest PCE of 5.79%. The increased FF might be due to the improved interfacial contact in an inverted device structure, leading to a more efficient charge collection and less electron–hole recombination. On the other hand, the improved Jsc could also be confirmed by the EQE results. Compared to the conventional device based on PDTS-FID, the curve shape of the inverted device became broader and the maximum EQE increased to about 45% from 38%. The results indicated that this type of polymeric material containing DTS and FID segments would have a promising usage in large-area polymer solar cell applications. We believe that the photovoltaic performance of PSCs can be further improved by the molecular design and preparation processes, such as adjusting side chains, changing bridge groups, altering molecular weight and so on.

Isoindigo (ID) and dithienosilole (DTS) are important building blocks for the construction of efficient low band-gap photovoltaic copolymers. To investigate the effect of fluorination on the optical, electrochemical, carrier mobility and photovoltaic properties, two DTS copolymers (PDTS-ID and PDTS-FID) consisting of ID or FID were synthesized and characterized. The fluorination provides PDTS-FID with a smaller band-gap, lower-lying HOMO and LUMO energy levels as well as higher hole mobility, which could be attributed to the more electron-deficient character and more rigid planar structure of the FID moiety. BHJ polymer solar cells were fabricated and evaluated using the resulting copolymers as donor materials. Conventional devices exhibited 3.39% and 4.29% PCE for PDTS-ID and PDTS-FID, respectively. When using an inverted device structure, the Jsc and FF were improved simultaneously to afford higher efficiencies. The PDTS-FID device showed the best PCE of up to 5.79%, with a Voc of 0.84 V, a Jsc of 10.77 and a FF of 0.64. The results obtained in this work provide valuable information on the elaborate design of ID-based copolymers for the large-area PSC applications.


All chemicals were purchased in reagent grade from Aladdin, Adamas. Aldrich, Alfa Aesar and Acros Chemical Co., and used without further purification. All solvents were freshly distilled immediately prior to use. The dithienosilole monomers (DTS-Sn) and isoindigo monomers (ID and FID) were synthesized according to our previous procedures.


The nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra were collected on a Bruker ARX 400 NMR spectrometer with d-chloroform as the solvent and tetramethylsilane (TMS) as the internal standard. Elemental analysis was performed using a Carlo Erba 116 elemental analyzer. Molecular weights of the copolymers were determined using Waters 1515 GPC analysis with chloroform as eluent and polystyrene as standard. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was conducted on a TA Instrument Model SDT Q600 simultaneous TGA/DSC analyzer at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 under a N2 flow rate of 90 mL min−1. UV-vis spectra were obtained on a Carry 300 spectrophotometer. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were carried out at room temperature on a CHI660 potentiostat/galvanostat electrochemical workstation at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1, with a platinum wire counter electrode and an Ag/AgCl reference electrode in an anhydrous nitrogen-saturated acetonitrile solution (0.1 mol L−1) of tetrabutylammonium perchlorate (Bu4NClO4). The redox couple of ferrocene/ferrocenium ion (Fc/Fc+) was used as an external standard. The copolymers were coated on the platinum plate working electrodes from dilute chloroform solutions. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) investigation was performed on a JEOL EM-2100F TEM.


Conventional polymer solar cells (PSCs) were fabricated with ITO glass (15 Ω cm−2) as an anode, Ca/Al as a cathode, and the active layer of the copolymer and PC71BM as a photosensitive layer. After spin-coating a 40 nm layer of PEDOT:PSS (Baytron P VP Al 4083) onto the pre-cleaned ITO substrate, the photosensitive layer was subsequently prepared by spin-coating the o-dichlorobenzene solution of the copolymer and PC71BM (w/w) on the ITO/PEDOT:PSS electrode. For the inverted devices, a ZnO thin film of about 40 nm was deposited on the surface of ITO glass. The ZnO layer was pretreated with UV-ozone for 10 minutes and the conjugated polyelectrolyte of poly[(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)]dibromide (PNFBr) (5 nm) was spin-coated on the top of the ZnO layer. The photoactive layer was then spin-coated on the top of the above layer from o-dichlorobenzene solution. The photoactive layer was then thermally annealed at 110 °C for 10 minutes. Subsequently, about 10 nm MoO3 and 100 nm Ag were deposited in turn through shadow masks by thermal evaporation. The device area was 0.09 cm2. The current–voltage (I–V) characterization of the devices was carried out on a computer-controlled Keithley 236 Source Measurement system. The EQE was measured at a chopping frequency of 280 Hz with a lock-in amplifier (Stanford, SR830 DSP) during illumination with the monochromatic light from a xenon lamp. A solar simulator was used as the light source, and the light intensity was monitored using a standard Si solar cell. The thickness of the films was measured using a Dektak 6 M surface profilometer. All of the fabrication and characterization processes were conducted in a glove box.


Monomer DTS-Sn (0.300 g, 0.3 mmol) and monomer ID (0.242 g, 0.3 mmol) were dissolved in 15 mL toluene. The solution was flushed with argon for 10 min, and then Pd2(dba)3 (5.5 mg, 2 mol%) and P(o-tolyl)3 (7.3 mg, 8%) were added into the flask. The flask was purged three times with successive vacuum and argon filling cycles. The polymerization reaction was heated to 110 °C and the mixture was stirred for 48 h under an argon atmosphere. 2-Tributylstannyl thiophene (23.7 mL) was added to the reaction, and then after two hours 2-bromothiophene (7.5 mL) was added. The mixture was stirred overnight to complete the end-capping reaction. The mixture was cooled to room temperature and poured slowly into 350 mL methanol. The precipitate was filtered and washed with methanol and hexane in a Soxhlet extraction apparatus to remove the oligomers and catalyst residues. Finally, the polymer was extracted with chloroform. The solution was condensed by evaporation and precipitated into methanol. The PSTS-ID polymer was collected as a dark purple solid with a yield of 86%. 1H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz, δ/ppm): 9.2–8.6 (br, 2H), 7.8–6.2 (m, 10H), 4.0–3.6 (br, 4H), 2.0–1.0 (m, 44H), 1.0–0.8 (br, 24H). Anal. calcd for (C64H80N2O2S4Si)n: C, 72.13; H, 7.57; N, 2.63%. Found: C, 71.68; H, 7.66; N, 2.72%. Mn = 12800; Mw = 22400; PDI = 1.75.


Polymer PDTS-FID was synthesized as a dark purple solid with a yield of 83% according to the method used for the synthesis of the PDTS-ID polymer described above using monomer FID instead of compound ID. 1H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz, δ/ppm): 9.4–8.8 (br, 2H), 8.0–6.4 (m, 8H), 4.0–3.6 (br, 4H), 2.0–1.0 (m, 44H), 1.0–0.6 (br, 24H). Anal. calcd for (C64H78N2O2F2S4Si)n: C, 69.78; H, 7.14; N, 2.54%. Found: C, 69.01; H, 7.22; N, 2.64%. Mn = 15200; Mw = 28000; PDI = 1.84.


This work was supported by the NSFC (20802033, 21272164), the 863 Project (no. 2013AA031901), the Youth Science and Technology Foundation of Sichuan Province (2013JQ0032), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2012SCU04B01, YJ2011025).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014