 DOI: 10.1039/C4CC09111F
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2597-2600


Zhifeng
Liu
*,

Jianhua
Han
,

Keying
Guo
,

Xueqi
Zhang
 and 

Tiantian
Hong


School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tianjin Chengjian University, 300384, Tianjin, P. R. China. E-mail: tjulzf@163.com; Fax: +86 22 23085110; Tel: +86 22 23085236

Received
14th November 2014
, Accepted 29th December 2014
First published on 2nd January 2015
We report a novel promising semiconductor of Ag3CuS2 serving as absorber material in inorganic–organic solid-state solar cells for the first time, and the device (ITO/ZnO/Ag3CuS2/P3HT/Pt) exhibits a power conversion efficiency of 2.01%. This study opens up an available method to develop various ternary absorber materials for tertiary generation solar cells.

The tertiary generation solar cells (such as dye-sensitized solar cells, quantum dot solar cells, hybrid solar cells and extremely thin absorber solar cells) are reliable photovoltaic devices because of low-cost manufacturing, environmental stability and versatile applicability. The main research on tertiary generation solar cells was focused on photoanodes consisting of metal oxides (ZnO, TiO2, etc.) modified with a layer of semiconductor absorber material with a high absorption coefficient and an ideal band gap value. Tertiary generation solar cells based on organic absorber materials had exhibited excellent performance, however their applicability was restricted by the limited resources, instability and toxicity. As a result, inorganic semiconductor absorber materials have attracted much attention in recent years due to the large light absorption coefficients, spectrum absorption tunability and abundant raw materials.

Recently, a variety of absorber materials, such as CdS, CdTe, PbS, Sb2S3 and CuS, have been developed as sensitizers for solar cells. Most of these absorbers belong to the binary semiconductor materials, nevertheless, ternary absorbers are also promising materials for solar cells. As a result, developing a new type of non-toxic low-cost and efficient light absorber material as a sensitizer has become a promising approach to extend the light absorption region and enhance the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of solar cells. Lately, Yang et al. have fabricated a prototype FTO/CuSbS2/CdS/ZnO/ZnO:Al/Au solar cell by use of CuSbS2 as a sensitizer and obtained a solar conversion efficiency of 0.50%, Huang et al. have presented a new ternary inorganic sensitizer AgBiS2 for solar cells and achieved a power conversion efficiency of 0.53%.
However, as far as we know, there has been no report on photoelectrodes using a ternary semiconductor Ag3CuS2 as an absorber layer in tertiary generation solar cells and other photoelectric devices so far, which is normally used as a fast ionic conductor and gas sensitive. Silver copper sulfide, Ag3CuS2 (jalpaite), a relatively less developed ternary metal sulfide, has been proposed as a promising absorber material in solar cells and other photoelectric devices due to (a) a high absorption coefficient in visible light regions, (b) low toxicity and (c) abundant and economical raw materials. Attracted by the above advantages, we have fabricated Ag3CuS2 on ZnO nanoarrays and used as absorber material in hybrid solar cells through a simple hydrothermal chemical method for the first time. This method of hydrothermal chemical process for preparing ternary absorber material modified metal oxide nanoarrays is facile, inexpensive and environmentally-friendly. In this communication, Ag3CuS2 modified ZnO nanoarrays were fabricated on ITO glass substrates and applied as photoanodes of inorganic–organic hybrid solar cells (ITO/ZnO/Ag3CuS2/P3HT/Pt), and the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the photovoltaic device based on ZnO/Ag3CuS2 nanoarray photoelectrodes was up to 2.01%. It is found that the remarkable PCE can be attributed to the enhanced light absorption in the visible region, appropriate energy band gap of the composite structure and fast photogenerated charge transmission. This work opens up a promising method for the development of various different ternary absorber materials for tertiary generation solar cells (such as hybrid solar cells, quantum dot solar cells and extremely thin absorber solar cells) and other photoelectric devices.
The preparation process of Ag3CuS2 modified ZnO nanoarrays involves three steps: (i) preparation of ZnO nanorods; (ii) preparation of ZnO/ZnS nanotubes; and (iii) preparation of ZnO/Ag3CuS2. In the first step, the ZnO nanorod arrays were fabricated on ITO substrates as reported in our previous work. In the second step, the ZnO/ZnS nanotubes were prepared by a chemical etching process by using ZnO nanorods as templates; the ZnO nanorods were immersed in 0.1 M thioacetamide (TAA) solution at 90 °C for 4 h and obtained the product of ZnO/ZnS nanotubes.
In the last step, the ZnO/Ag3CuS2 nanotubes were prepared by a chemical conversion method based on the ion-exchange mechanism. After the CuS shell was grown around ZnO, the Ag2S shell was grown around the CuS shell. The double shell CuS/Ag2S was transformed into Ag3CuS2 by heating the product to 400 °C in a muffle furnace for 30 min. For the preparation of ZnO/CuS nanotubes, 242 mg of cupric nitrate was dissolved in 20 mL of triethylene glycol (TEG), and the sample of ZnO/ZnS nanotubes was immersed in the above solution and kept for 360 min at 28 °C. For the coating of the Ag2S shell, 4 mg of siliver nitrate was dissolved in 25 mL of deionized water, and the sample of ZnO/CuS nanotubes was immersed in the above solution kept for 20 min at 28 °C. The large difference in the solubility product constant of ZnS (2.93 × 10−25), CuS (1.27 × 10−36) and Ag2S (1.6 × 10−49) leading to ZnO/CuS/Ag2S can be formed adopting an ion-exchange process. Ultimately, the product of ZnO/Ag3CuS2 was obtained after heat treatment of the ZnO/CuS/Ag2S nanoarrays.
The fabrication process of Ag3CuS2 modified ZnO nanotube arrays can be schematically illustrated in Fig. 1. Firstly, large-scale ordered hexagonal ZnO nanoarrays were prepared on ITO substrates after the substrate coated with the ZnO seed layer was immersed in the growth solution. It should be noted that sulfidation reaction would occur spontaneously when there are sufficient differences in solubility product constants (Ksp) between reactants and products. As a result, when the ITO glass coated with ZnO nanoarrays was immersed in the solution containing 0.1 M thioacetamide (TAA), the sulfidation reaction on ZnO nanoarrays will take place because of the great difference between Ksp of ZnO (6.8 × 10−17) and ZnS (2.93 × 10−25). In this step, a large amount of sulphur ions (S2−) generated from TAA hydrolyzes and combines with zinc ions (Zn2+) (eqn (1)–(3)), thus the ZnO/ZnS core/shell nanotube arrays were prepared successfully. On the other hand, with sulfidation reaction proceeding, the ZnO nanoarrays were etched, and a lot of ZnS nanoparticles were accumulated on the apex and flank of ZnO nanotube arrays. Finally, the ZnO/ZnS nanotubes were fabricated on ITO substrates, which is attributed to a large number of H+ generated when TAA solution was at high concentration, and the potential of hydrogen (pH) was lower. As an amphoteric metal oxide, ZnO can react with H+ and become soluble salts (eqn (4)). In the etching process, the polar plane (002) of ZnO with high surface energy is unstable, thus the etching reaction was mostly concentrated on the top surface rather than the flank. Consequently, the etching rate of the top surface is faster than that of the flank. Next, the ZnO/CuS nanoarrays were prepared by the chemical reaction on ZnO nanoarrays due to the large difference of Ksp between ZnS (2.93 × 10−25) and CuS (1.27 × 10−36) (eqn (5)). Fig. S1 (ESI) shows the TEM images of ZnO/CuS nanotubes; it can be seen that the nanotubes were produced in this step. In the same mechanism, when the CuS shell was partially converted to the Ag2S shell due to the large difference of Ksp between CuS (1.27 × 10−36) and Ag2S (1.6 × 10−49) (eqn (6)), and thus the ZnO/CuS/Ag2S nanoarrays were prepared successfully. Eventually, the Ag3CuS2 phase was obtained by heating the CuS/Ag2S shell in a muffle furnace, and the ZnO/Ag3CuS2 nanotube arrays were fabricated on ITO substrates vertically.
CH3CSNH2 + H2O → CH3CONH2 + H2S
(1)
H2S → 2H+ + S2−
(2)
ZnO + S2− + H2O → ZnS + 2OH−
(3)
ZnO + 2H+ → Zn2+ + H2O
(4)
ZnS + Cu+ → CuS + Zn2+
(5)
CuS + 2Ag+ → Ag2S + Cu2+
(6)
The morphology and structure of the samples were observed using a HITACHI S-4800I field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM). Fig. 2(a) shows the SEM images of ZnO/Ag3CuS2 nanoarrays; large scale well-aligned Ag3CuS2 modified ZnO nanoarrays were fabricated on ITO substrates vertically. Fig. 2(b) displays the enlarged view SEM image of Fig. 2(a); it can be seen that abundant nanoparticles accumulated on the top of the nanoarrays. The structure of the samples was determined using a HITACHI H-7650 transmission electron microscope (TEM) operated at an accelerating voltage of 100 kV, and the TEM images of ZnO/Ag3CuS2 nanoarrays are shown in Fig. 2(c). TEM images of Ag3CuS2 modified ZnO nanoarrays display the size of Ag3CuS2 nanoparticles and their distribution on the ZnO nanotube backbone; it can be found that the surface of the ZnO nanotube was covered densely by abundant Ag3CuS2 nanoparticles, implying a high coverage of the surface of ZnO/Ag3CuS2 nanotubes. Furthermore, the crystalline lattice fringes of the ZnO/Ag3CuS2 nanotube are shown in Fig. 2(d), from the HRTEM image of the sample; the hexagonal wurtzite ZnO(002) plane with a lattice spacing distance of 0.26 nm and the jalpaite Ag3CuS2(004) and (332) plane with lattice spacing distances of 0.296 nm and 0.192 nm can be observed clearly, respectively. These experimental results proved that the ZnO/Ag3CuS2 nanotube arrays were fabricated successfully, in which ZnO is the core nanotube, Ag3CuS2 is the shell, and the nanotubes were covered up by many Ag3CuS2 nanoparticles.
To determine the chemical composition and crystal structure, X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the films were recorded using a Rigaku D/max-2500 using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.154059 nm). The inset of Fig. 2(b) shows the XRD patterns of ZnO and ZnO/Ag3CuS2 nanoarrays. The corresponding XRD pattern of ZnO nanorods is displayed in curve (1) in Fig. 2(b) inset; it can be seen that the as-prepared ZnO nanorods were mostly grown along the (002) direction, when compared with the standard ZnO diffraction pattern (JCPDS, No. 36-1451). The corresponding XRD pattern of ZnO/Ag3CuS2 nanoarrays is shown in curve (2) in Fig. 2(b) inset; besides the diffraction peak of ZnO, in comparison with the standard Ag3CuS2 diffraction pattern (JCPDS, No. 21-1336) some Ag3CuS2 peaks were observed. Corresponding to the diffraction peaks of ZnO in curve (1), the diffraction peaks of ZnO/Ag3CuS2 in curve (2) with 2θ values around 30.157° and 47.253°could be observed, which can be indexed to the (004) and (332) planes of Ag3CuS2, respectively. These experimental results give credible evidence for the chemical composition of the product, indicating that the ZnO/Ag3CuS2 nanoarrays were prepared successfully.
The optical absorbance properties of the samples were examined by using a DU-8B UV/VIS double-beam spectrophotometer by testing the UV-vis absorption spectrum of ZnO and ZnO/Ag3CuS2 nanoarrays on ITO substrates, which are shown in Fig. 3(a). It can be seen that the light absorption range of ZnO/Ag3CuS2 nanoarrays is significantly wider than that of ZnO nanoarrays; in other words, the ZnO/Ag3CuS2 nanoarrays display a remarkable red-shift compared with the pure ZnO nanoarrays. Therefore, the ZnO modified with Ag3CuS2 achieved high efficiency of light absorption in the visible light region. Based on the absorption spectrum of samples, we further calculated the band gap of ZnO and ZnO/Ag3CuS2 nanoarrays, as shown in Fig. 3(b). It should be noted that the approximate band gaps of ZnO and ZnO/Ag3CuS2 are determined to be ∼3.02 eV and ∼1.95 eV, respectively, indicating that the ZnO/Ag3CuS2 nanoarrays are more suitable for light absorption than ZnO nanoarrays. As a result, the ZnO/Ag3CuS2 nanoarrays can capture more photons, which is due to the ideal band gap value of ZnO/Ag3CuS2. Meanwhile, the photoelectric performance of the sample was enhanced significantly when ZnO was modified by Ag3CuS2. It can be concluded that the sensitizer of Ag3CuS2 can widen the photo response spectrum to the visible light region, due to the appropriate band gap and the high optical absorption coefficient of Ag3CuS2. The inset of Fig. 3(b) shows the photographs of ZnO and ZnO/Ag3CuS2 nanoarrays on ITO substrates. It can be seen that the color of ZnO/Ag3CuS2 became black compared with ZnO, demonstrating that the sensitizer of Ag3CuS2 was coated around the surface of ZnO nanoarrays.
In this work, the ZnO and ZnO/Ag3CuS2 nanoarrays were spin-coated at 2500 rpm for 60 s with a regioregular-P3HT (poly-3-hexylthiophene) chlorobenzene solution. The above cycle was repeated several times in order to achieve the compact fill of P3HT. Then the state inorganic–organic hybrid solar cells were assembled and covered with a platinum (Pt) sheet as a counter electrode. After being assembled solid state solar cell (ITO/ZnO/Ag3CuS2/P3HT/Pt) by using ZnO/Ag3CuS2 as photoanodes, using regioregular-P3HT as the solid electrolyte and the Pt as the counter electrode, the photoelectric performance of the samples was investigated under irradiation of a xenon lamp (100 mW cm−2) with global AM 1.5 condition, and current density–voltage curves of the solar cells were obtained using a potentiostat. During the photocurrent measurements, the PCE of photovoltaic devices is calculated using the following equations:
η = (VocJscFF)/Pin
(7)
FF = VoptJopt/VocJsc
(8)
where
Pin is the power of incident white light, FF is the fill factor, Vopt and Jopt are the voltage and current for the maximum power output, and Voc and Jsc are the open-circuit photovoltage and short-circuit photocurrent, respectively. The parameters of the solid state solar cell based on photoanodes of ZnO and ZnO/Ag3CuS2 nanoarrays are summarized in Fig. 4(a) and Table 1. The solar cell based on photoanodes of ZnO and ZnO/Ag3CuS2 nanoarrays shows a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 1.20 mA cm−2 and 6.55 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 269 mV and 536 mV, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.55 and 0.57, achieving a power conversion efficiency (η) of 0.18% and 2.01%, respectively. In comparison with the solar cell based on ZnO nanoarrays, the solar cell adapting Ag3CuS2 as the sensitizer shows an increase in Voc, Jsc and η of 99.3%, 436.9% and 1016.7%, respectively.

Photoelectrodes

V
oc (mV)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

η (%)
ZnO
269
1.20
55
0.18
ZnO/Ag3CuS2
536
6.55
57
2.01
It is generally known that there are three key factors which can determine the photoelectric properties of the solid state solar cell, such as (i) the efficiency of photon capturing, (ii) the value of the band gap and (iii) the velocity of electron/hole transmission. In this solid state solar cell structure (ITO/ZnO/Ag3CuS2/P3HT/Pt), the core of ZnO nanotubes served as a charge transmission pathway, Ag3CuS2 as an absorber material, P3HT as both a hole conductor and absorber. As shown in Fig. 4(b), one-dimensional (1D) nanotubes can provide a direct electron transmission pathway without crystal boundary resistance, thus the velocity of electron transmission was enhanced and the recombination rate of electron-holes was reduced. It can be found that the 1D Ag3CuS2 modified ZnO nanotubes were suitable for electron transmission, and the photoelectric performance was improved. When the ZnO nanoarrays were modified with the jalpaite Ag3CuS2 absorber material, an optimal band gap was achieved, and the photon absorption region was widened. Fig. 4(b) displays the photon transmission path, abundant Ag3CuS2 nanoparticles accumulated on the ZnO nanotube surface can increase the efficiency of photon absorption. It can be found that light can be reflected multiply in the nanoarrays and the nanoparticles, which is in favor of more efficient use of incident light. In other words, the photon capture efficiency was increased. Fig. 4(c) shows the band gap structure of ZnO/Ag3CuS2/P3HT; it can be seen that (i) the charge injection and collection were enhanced; (ii) separation of electrons and holes was enhanced; (iii) the recombination of electrons and holes was reduced, which is due to an effective energy gradient nanostructure constructed. Thus, more electrons and holes were utilized efficiently by use of Ag3CuS2 modified ZnO nanoarrays. Meanwhile, this band gap structure can remarkably decrease the dark current and benefit the power conversion efficiency. Consequently, the photoelectric properties were optimized by using Ag3CuS2 sensitized ZnO nanoarrays.
In summary, a novel promising ternary absorber material Ag3CuS2 was prepared and large-scale highly ordered Ag3CuS2 sensitized ZnO nanotube arrays were directly fabricated on ITO glass substrates using ZnO NRs as reactive templates. This method was a low-cost, facile and versatile hydrothermal chemical method based on the ion-exchange process. The Ag3CuS2 absorber material was firstly prepared and applied in hybrid solar cells, and the PCE was up to 2.01%. The excellent photoelectric performance proves that Ag3CuS2 was an appropriate absorber material in solar cells. It should be noted that the remarkable PCE was because of increased light absorption in the visible region, appropriate energy band gap of composite photoanodes and fast photogenerated carrier transmission. Interestingly, the PCE of this structure is still encouraging considering very limited optimization work done so far. Amelioration in Ag3CuS2 shell layer quality and interface engineering was being processed for the purpose of further increase in the PCE of this structure. Furthermore, non-toxicity, earth-abundance and a high absorption coefficient enable Ag3CuS2 a promising absorber material for solar cells, and this study is important for preparing various ternary semiconductor absorbers by a simple chemical method and their application to tertiary generation solar cells and other photoelectric devices.
The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from National Nature Science Foundation of China (51102174).
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cc09111f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015