 DOI: 10.1039/D0NR06360F
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 22202-22209


Caihong
Wang
,

Xueyong
Li
,

Jiwen
Zhou
,

Wen
Tian
,

Junyi
Ji
,

Shuai
Tan
* and 

Yong
Wu


School of Chemical Engineering, Sichuan University, No. 24 South Section 1, Yihuan Road, Chengdu 610065, China. E-mail: tanshuai@scu.edu.cn

Received
3rd September 2020
, Accepted 20th October 2020
First published on 21st October 2020
The development of an efficient electrolyte that combines fast charge transport and high stability for advanced energy devices remains a huge challenge because these two qualities are traded off during the normal design process. Nanostructured liquid crystals have shown potential as efficient charge transport media. However, the reported liquid crystal electrolytes showed limited performance in energy devices probably due to the charge transport barrier at the domain interfaces. Herein, a novel approach was proposed to construct self-assembled long-range charge transport channels in liquid crystal electrolytes by interconnecting the liquid crystal domains via flexible polymer networks. A liquid crystal gel electrolyte was prepared by solidifying a smectic electrolyte using polyethylene oxide (PEO) networks, and applied to improve the performance of the dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). In the gel electrolyte, the smectic assembly formed lamellar nanostructures for charge transport at the intra-domains, while the PEO networks aggregated amorphously at the domain interfaces, acting as bridges to interconnect the smectic domains for charge transport over the inter-domains. Based on the coordination of the smectic assembly and PEO aggregation, the charge transport in the liquid crystal gel electrolyte was greatly improved despite a higher viscosity. Conversely, the photovoltaic efficiency of the DSSC prepared from the liquid crystal gel electrolyte was about two times enhanced, with a champion efficiency of 7.2%, compared with that from the smectic electrolyte without PEO. The liquid crystal gel-based DSSC showed superior stable performance within a wide temperature range from 30 to 70 °C, and stored after 5000 h. Our work here provides a novel and convenient approach to break the trade-off for high-performance electrolytes towards efficient and stable energy devices.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have received worldwide attention in recent years due to their relatively high-energy conversion efficiency, low production cost and ease of fabrication. The state-of-the-art DSSCs have achieved efficiency values higher than 13%. The high efficiency in these DSSCs is commonly powered by liquid electrolytes composed of redox couples in organic solvents. However, the DSSCs containing liquid electrolytes have not achieved the anticipated commercial potential owing to the stability and lifetime issues of the device, which is largely due to the volatilization and potential leakage of the solvents under outdoor varations. Developing solvent-free or solid-state electrolytes that possess fast charge transport as liquid electrolytes and high stability in devices is essential to achieve efficient and stable DSSCs. A variety of electrolytes, such as the polymer gel electrolyte, ionic plastic crystals, hole transport materials and ionic conductors, have been proposed to rival the liquid electrolytes. However, the development of high-performance electrolytes remains a huge challenge because the high charge transport and high thermal stability are typically contradictory to each other in the normal design of electrolytes for energy devices.

Ionic liquid crystals, which combine the dynamically ordered nanostructures of liquid crystals and non-volatile property of ionic liquids, have shown potential as electrolytes for providing charge transport channels and improving the stability of energy devices. Ionic liquid crystals containing iodide/triiodide, thiolate/disulfide and selenocyanate/selenocyanogen redox couples have been reported for improving the performance of DSSCs. For example, Kato et al. designed a noncovalent smectic liquid crystal electrolyte based on the iodide/triiodide redox couple, which contained a lamellar molecular assembly for efficient charge transport. The derived DSSC exhibited an efficiency of 5.8% at room temperature, and achieved stable performance at 60 °C for 1000 h. Despite the thermal stability in DSSCs, the liquid crystal electrolytes showed limited performance due to the charge transport barrier at the domain interfaces. Typically, liquid crystals self-assemble into a polydomained nanostructure, which only forms partial continuous channels at the border of the polydomains. The boundaries at the domain interfaces may act as structural defects trapping the charge transport, which would hinder the overall charge transport in the electrolytes. Macroscopic alignment of the liquid crystal molecules could effectively construct uniformly aligned structures to significantly improve the charge transport. However, a similar approach could hardly be achieved in energy devices, considering the fabrication process and the uneven surface of the electrode. Constructing self-assembled long-range conducting channels in liquid crystal electrolytes could further improve the performance of the energy devices towards practical applications.
Herein, we propose a novel and convenient approach by interconnection of the liquid crystal domains using flexible polyethylene oxide (PEO) networks to self-assemble long-range conducting channels for efficient and stable electrolytes. A liquid crystal gel electrolyte containing the iodide/triiodide redox couple was prepared by introducing PEO networks into a 1-tetradecyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide ([C14MIm][I])-based smectic electrolyte (Fig. 1) and applied into a DSSC. In the gel electrolyte, the smectic [C14MIm][I] formed a polydomained lamellar assembly for charge transport at the intra-domains, while the PEO networks aggregated amorphously at the smectic domain interfaces, which served as bridges to interconnect the smectic domains and promote the charge transport at inter-domains via segmental motion. Based on the coordination of the smectic [C14MIm][I] and PEO aggregation, long-range continuous conducting channels spontaneously formed in the device. The interconnection of the smectic domains using PEO networks greatly improved the charge transport in the electrolyte, while promoting the device stability and lifetime. The resultant DSSC showed significantly improved photovoltaic performance with a champion efficiency of 7.2%, as well as thermally stable and long-term stable performance towards practical applications. Our work here provides a novel and controllable approach to construct self-assembled long-range conducting channels to improve both the charge transport and stability for high-performance electrolytes, which have great potential towards advanced energy devices.

All commercially available starting materials, reagents and solvents were obtained from TCI and Acros, and used as supplied. The viscosity average molecular weight of PEO used in this work was about 600000 g mol−1, with a polydispersity value of 1.39 determined by gel permeation chromatography (GPC) measurement. All reactions were carried out under a dry nitrogen atmosphere. 1-Tetradecyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide ([C14MIm][Br]) was synthesized according to the procedures described previously.


The 1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra were obtained in CDCl3 using a Bruker AV II-400 spectrometer. The Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra were measured with the use of a Thermo Fisher IS50 spectrometer. Polarized optical micrographs of the samples were observed using a Weitu XPL-30TF polarizing optical microscope (POM) equipped with a WT-3000 hot-stage. The differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements were performed by a TA DSC Q20 modulated instrument at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1. The small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) analyses were carried out by an Anton Paar SAXSess mc2 high flux small angle X-ray scattering instrument equipped with a Kratky block-collimation system and an image plate detector, using Cu-Kα radiation at 40 kV and 40 mA. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were collected on an EMPYREAN diffractometer system equipped with a three axis with DHS1100 and Co-Kα radiation at 40 kV and 40 mA. The temperature of the sample was controlled by a hot-stage. The temperature-dependent viscosity of the electrolytes was determined using a TA instrument AR2000 rotational rheometer. GPC measurements of PEO were performed on a Tosoh HLC-8320 high-speed liquid chromatograph system using CHCl3 as an eluent at 40 °C at a flow rate of 0.6 mL min−1 with two TSK gel Super HM-H columns (6 × 150 mm). The scanning electron microscope (SEM) observations were performed by a Nova NanoSEM450 field emission SEM at an accelerating voltage of 5 kV. The impedance spectra of the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS, Frequency range: 100 kHz–0.01 Hz, applied voltage: 10 mV) and cyclic voltammetry (CV, scanning rate: 10 mV s−1) measurements were recorded on an EG&G Princeton Applied Research P4000+ workstation connected to PC-running electrochemical impedance software. The interfacial resistance of the prepared DSSCs was obtained from EIS measurement at a bias voltage of −0.7 V under open-circuit condition in a dark environment. The ionic conductivity of the electrolyte was determined from EIS measurement with no bias voltage using Pt-coated FTO glass electrodes or comb-shaped golden electrode. The diffusion coefficient (Dapp) of the electrolyte was determined from the limited current (Jlim) obtained by CV measurement (scanning rate: 10 mV s−1) using a symmetric cell, as described in the literature. The photocurrent–voltage (J–V) and incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurements were performed on a PEC-S20 action spectrum measurement setup under AM1.5G solar light (100 mW cm−2) simulated by a Pecell-L15 solar simulator calibrated using a certified BS-520 C–Si solar cell. For J–V measurements, a reverse scan from open-circuit voltage to 0 V with a scanning rate of 10 mV s−1 was performed to obtain the photovoltaic performance of the devices. Before measurements, the device applying no bias was heated to a certain temperature by a hot-stage with light-soaking. During the measurement, the edges and the backside of the device were covered by a mask. At least five samples were prepared and tested to determine the actual photoelectrochemical properties and long-term stability of the DSSCs. During the electrochemical characterization, the temperature of the sample was controlled by a hot-stage.


Potassium iodide (0.55 g, 3.3 mmol) and [C14MIm][Br] (1.0 g, 2.8 mmol) were dissolved in methanol (10 mL). The mixture was stirred at room temperature for 24 h, and then chloroform (60 ml) was added to precipitate the resultant inorganic salt. The precipitate was separated through filtration, and the filtrate was then concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was washed with ethyl acetate and dried under vacuum to a constant weight at 40 °C to give [C14MIm][I] (1.05 g). Yield: 93%. 1H NMR (400 MHz CDCl3): 9.8 (s, 1H, N–C–N), 7.2 (t, 2H, N–C–C–N), 4.3 (t, 2H, C2N), 4.1 (s, 3H, C3-imidazole), 1.75–1.24 (m, 24H, C2), 0.86 (t, 3H, CH2C3). FT-IR (KBr) ν: 3087, 2925, 2845, 1634, 1569, 1468, 1363, 1163, 1032, 754, 620 cm−1.


4-Tert-butylpyridine (TBP) and N-methylbenzimidazole (NMBI) were applied as additives to improve the photovoltaic performance of the DSSCs. [C14MIm][I], I2, TBP, NMBI, and anhydrous lithium iodide (LiI) with a molar ratio of 5:1:1:2:0.5 were dissolved in acetonitrile. The solution was stirred for 30 min under dark conditions, and the solvent was removed under reduced pressure to give the liquid crystal electrolyte, ILCa. To prepare the liquid crystal polymer gel electrolyte, 10 wt% PEO (Mv ∼ 600000) was introduced into the electrolyte ILCa. The mixture was dissolved in acetonitrile, and the mixture was sonicated until the PEO was homogeneously dispersed. The solution was stirred for 2 h under dark conditions, and the solvent was removed under reduced pressure to obtain a liquid crystal polymer gel electrolyte, PEO-ILCa. PEO-ILCa was in a quasi-solid state, which showed no fluidity at 50 °C (Fig. 1b). The reference electrolytes, electrolyte ILC (consisting of [C14MIm][I] and I2 with a molar ratio of 5:1), and PEOadd (containing PEO and the same additives with a molecular ratio similar to PEO-ILCa) were also prepared.

The photoanode was prepared by screen-printing the TiO2 film (0.4 cm × 0.4 cm) on a Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrate, as described in the literature. An 8 μm thick layer of 20 nm-sized TiO2 particles was first printed on the substrate, and a 5 μm thick scattering layer of 400 nm-sized TiO2 particles was further coated. The sintered TiO2 electrode was immersed into a 0.5 mM ethanol solution of the N719 sensitizer for 20 h, and dried at room temperature. The active area of the photoanode was 0.16 cm2. The Pt counter electrode (CE) was fabricated by thermal decomposition method, as described in the literature.
The DSSC device was prepared as follows. The appropriate amount of the prepared electrolyte was sandwiched between the photoanode and CE using a coating press method. The device was heated at 90 °C for 3 min to allow full infiltration of the electrolytes into the photoanode. For the sealed device, the electrolyte was sealed between the photoanode and CE by a 25 μm thick hot melt Surlyn with a frame size of 6 mm × 6 mm at 100 °C. The DSSCs prepared based on the ILC, ILCa, PEO-ILCa electrolytes were denoted as ILC-DSSC, ILCa-DSSC, and PEO-ILCa-DSSC, respectively.

The mesomorphism of [C14MIm][I] and the prepared electrolyte was characterized by DSC measurements, POM observations and SAXS analyses. Multiple peaks in the DSC traces of [C14MIm][I] suggested the appearance of a mesophase from 41 °C to 146 °C during heating (ESI, Fig. S3a). The mesophase type was assigned as the smectic A (SA) phase based on the observed characteristic focal conic texture under POM (inset of Fig. S3a). The SA phase was preserved in the following prepared electrolytes. Both ILCa and PEO-ILCa also showed characteristic focal conic textures under POM at 40 °C (inset of Fig. 2). The DSC measurements were not performed to determine the exact temperature range of the smectic phase for the electrolytes due to the potential corrosion of I2, and the temperature range of the smectic phase for the electrolytes was determined by the texture change under POM observation (ESI, Fig. S4). As shown in Fig. S4, ILCa showed a smectic phase from room temperature to 78 °C, while PEO-ILCa exhibited a smectic phase from room temperature to 75 °C during heating. The result indicated that the addition of I2, additives and PEO in [C14MIm][I] lowered the phase transition temperatures.

Temperature-dependent SAXS measurements confirmed the presence of the SA phase. A sharp peak centered at q = 1.91 nm−1 appeared in the SAXS pattern of [C14MIm][I] at 40 °C (ESI, Fig. S3b), which indicated a lamellar structure with an interlayer spacing of 3.31 nm. The spacing was much longer than the length of [C14MIm][I] in the extended conformation (2.20 nm), and shorter than twice the length. The result suggested that [C14MIm][I] formed a partially interdigitated smectic A phase, as schematically illustrated in the inset of Fig. S3b, which was a typical molecular assembly for the smectic imidazolium liquid crystals. A similar SAXS pattern was also observed for ILCa at 40 °C (Fig. 2a). The derived interlayer spacing of ILCa was 3.57 nm (q = 1.76 nm−1), which was elongated in comparison with that of [C14MIm][I]. In view of this, the I2 and additives should be intercalated within the smectic layers to form lamellar charge transport channels in the smectic domains. PEO is a frequently applied polymer matrix for polymer electrolyte preparation in energy devices. However, the high crystallization of the PEO chains would greatly hinder the ion conduction. Interestingly, the SAXS pattern of PEO-ILCa was almost identical to that of ILCa after introducing PEO into the electrolyte, and no peak representing the crystallization was observed. XRD measurements were also performed for PEO-ILCa, ILCa and pure PEO (Fig. S5), and similar results were obtained. These results revealed that the introduction of PEO only solidified the electrolyte rather than disturbed the original molecular assembly, and the PEO chains were under an amorphous state in the smectic molecular assembly. A similar phenomenon was also observed in a discotic liquid crystal physical gel. The XRD pattern of PEO-ILCa was quite different from those of the PEO-lithium salt polymer electrolytes. In these reported PEO-lithium salt polymer electrolytes, the lithium salts also lowered the crystallinity of the PEO chains, but characteristic peaks at ∼15° were observed in the XRD patterns, representing the formation of lithium salt and PEO crystalline complexes. Nevertheless, a similar diffraction peak was not observed in the XRD pattern of PEO-ILCa, which might imply that the interaction between the PEO chains and lithium ions in the additives was rather weak in PEO-ILCa.
FT-IR measurements of PEO-ILCa, [C14Mim][I], PEOadd and pure PEO were performed to reveal the interaction between [C14Mim][I] and PEO in PEO-ILCa (Fig. S2, ESI). As discussed in the ESI, FT-IR measurements revealed that [C14Mim][I] lowered the crystallinity of the PEO chains, which was in agreement with the results obtained from the XRD measurements. By further comparing the FT-IR spectra of PEO-ILCa, PEOadd and [C14Mim][I], no new peak and no chemical band shift was observed in the FT-IR spectrum of PEO-ILCa, which implied that the molecular assembly in PEO-ILCa was mainly based on physical interactions.
DSC measurements of PEO-ILCa without iodine were also conducted to determine the phase transition behavior of the electrolytes, as shown in Fig. 3. The glass transition temperature and melting point of PEO determined by DSC measurement were 43 °C and 64 °C, respectively. Three endothermic peaks were detected in the DSC trace of PEO-ILCa without iodine during heating from −20 °C to 90 °C (Fig. 3a), indicating the appearance of multiple phase transitions. POM was applied to observe the texture change during the heating process to analyze the phase transition behavior of PEO-ILCa without iodine, as shown in Fig. 3b–e. PEO-ILCa without iodine showed the typical texture of the crystal phase at −5 °C (Fig. 3b). On heating, a texture change was observed at around 0 °C (Fig. 3c), but PEO-ILCa without iodine showed no fluidity within the temperature range from 0 °C to 17 °C. Based on this, the endothermic peak at −1 °C should be ascribed to a crystal-to-crystal phase transition, which might originate from the formation of phase segregated structures for the PEO/[C14Mim][I] mixture. On further heating to around 22 °C, characteristic focal conic textures appeared in most fields under POM observation, while the crystal domains remained in the other region (Fig. 3d). In view of this, the endothermic peak at 20 °C should represent the phase transition of [C14Mim][I] from crystal to smectic A phase, while PEO might be still under the crystal state at that temperature. This was quickly followed by the total disappearance of the crystal domain under POM observation at around 25 °C (Fig. 3e), which indicated the smectic molecular assembly might induce the crystalline PEO domains into an amorphous molten state. The clear point of PEO-ILCa without iodine under POM observation was about 95 °C, which was higher than that of PEO-ILCa.
Based on the results from SAXS, XRD, FT-IR, DSC and POM measurements, the PEO chains were under an amorphous state in the smectic PEO-ILCa. Considering that the smectic ILCa formed homogeneous polydomain structures, the PEO chains should only aggregate at the boundaries of the smectic domains, forming an amorphous physical network surrounding the smectic domains, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 2b. As a result, PEO-ILCa showed a soft solid-state combining both liquid crystals and physical gels.

In order to clarify the impact of the PEO networks on the liquid crystal electrolytes, the temperature-dependent viscosities (μ) of the liquid crystal and gel electrolytes were determined by rotational rheometer. The temperature range for the measurement was from 30 °C to 70 °C, and both ILCa and PEO-ILCa were under the smectic phase within that temperature range. As shown in Fig. 4a, the viscosities of both electrolytes decreased sharply with the increase in temperature. Due to the solidification of the electrolyte by the PEO networks, the viscosities of the PEO-ILCa were about 2.5 times enhanced compared with those of ILCa.

The charge transport properties of the electrolytes were further determined by temperature-dependent diffusion coefficients (Dapp) and ion conductivities (σ⊥). The detailed information about the measurements of the charge transport properties is described in ESI. The measured directions of Dapp and σ⊥ were perpendicular to the substrate, as illustrated in Fig. S7a. As shown in Fig. 4b and c, the measured Dapp and σ⊥ of both electrolytes increased with the increase in temperatures. Since the charge transport in the electrolytes is related to the viscosity, the higher viscosity of PEO-ILCa was thought to suppress the charge transport properties. However, the Dapp and σ⊥ values of PEO-ILCa were more enhanced than those of ILCa despite the higher viscosity (Fig. 4b and c). Meanwhile, the slopes of logDapp and logσ⊥versus T−1 for PEO-ILCa were much lower compared with those for smectic ILCa, revealing a lower activation energy for charge transport in PEO-ILCa. These results implied the existence of long-range continuous channels for highly efficient charge transport in PEO-ILCa. In order to analyze the enhanced mechanism of charge transport in PEO-ILCa, the conductivities of PEO-ILCa along the direction parallel to the substrate (σ∥) were further measured using comb-shaped golden electrodes, as shown in Fig. S7a. The directions of the measured conductivity are shown in Fig. 5. The resultant value of σ∥ for PEO-ILCa was almost identical to that of σ⊥ for PEO-ILCa, and also much higher than that of ILCa (Fig. 4c). This result indicated that the PEO networks promote the overall charge transport along different directions in PEO-ILCa. In view of this, the promotion mechanism of conductivity in smectic PEO-ILCavia PEO networks was quite different from the enhancement of conductivity via the macroscopically anisotropic alignment of smectic electrolytes. In the polydomained ILCa, the layered molecular assembly formed lamellar conducting pathways within the intra-smectic domains. The charge transport within the smectic domains would occur, and be enhanced along the lamellar channels (Fig. 5). However, the 2D channels were partially continuous, and the charge transport would be blocked at the boundaries at the inter-smectic domains because [C14MIm][I] only self-assembled into a polydomained nanostructure, which limited the overall charge transport in ILCa. After introducing PEO networks in ILCa, the PEO chains aggregated amorphously at the smectic domain boundaries. In this aggregation, the segmental motion of the amorphous flexible PEO networks were supposed to serve as bridges interconnecting the smectic domains to construct homogenous long-range continuous charge transport channels (Fig. 5), which facilitated the charge transport over the boundaries of smectic domains, rather than hinder the transport. As a result, the overall charge transport along different directions was promoted by the interconnection of the smectic domains via PEO networks in PEO-ILCa, despite the higher viscosity. The conductivities of PEO-ILCa were also much higher than those of PEOadd (Fig. S8, ESI), which revealed the importance of the PEO and [C14MIm][I] collaboration in forming continuous conducting channels for improving the charge transport in PEO-ILCa.

The liquid crystal electrolyte-based DSSCs were fabricated, and the photovoltaic performance of the prepared DSSCs were evaluated by J–V measurements under simulated AM1.5G solar light (100 mW cm−2) and IPCE measurements. The SEM images (Fig. S9) revealed that the PEO-ILCa had penetrated well into the photoanode in the PEO-ILCa-DSSC to provide an acceptable interfacial contact.

The J–V curves and IPCE spectra of the DSSCs at 40 °C are shown in Fig. 6 and Fig. S11, respectively. The integrated current densities obtained from the IPCE spectra were almost identical to that from the J–V curves. As shown in Fig. 6, the photovoltaic performance of ILC-DSSC was similar to that of the reported smectic [C12MIm][I]-based DSSC. The photovoltaic performance of ILCa-DSSC was improved due to the addition of the additives, and a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.4% with short-circuit current density Jsc = 10.4 ± 2.0 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage Voc = 0.65 ± 0.03 V and fill factor FF = 0.50 ± 0.07 was recorded. Introduction of the PEO networks in the smectic electrolyte further optimized the photovoltaic performance of the DSSCs, and PEO-ILCa-DSSC produced a PCE of 6.6% with Jsc = 17.5 ± 1.7 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.69 ± 0.01 V and FF = 0.55 ± 0.01. The desirable enhancement in PCE and Jsc of PEO-ILCa-DSSC should originate from the significant improvement in the charge transport of PEO-ILCa. The slight increase in the Voc of PEO-ILCa-DSSC was attributed to the suppression of the dark current by polymer chains covering the surface of the photoanode. The small increase in the FF value of PEO-ILCa-DSSC suggests that the PEO networks also improved the charge transfer at the CE/electrolyte interface.
Temperature variation is one of the most challenging issues that affects the photovoltaic performance and stability of DSSCs towards outdoor applications. Typically, DSSCs based on commonly used electrolytes would suffer from deteriorated efficiency at elevated temperatures. Liquid crystal electrolytes have shown great potential in addressing the thermal stability issues of DSSCs. In order to evaluate the temperature-dependent performance of PEO-ILCa-DSSC, photovoltaic characterizations were further performed during the heating process from 30 to 70 °C. The obtained Jsc, Voc, FF and PCE are presented in Fig. 7. The Jsc of PEO-ILCa-DSSC (Fig. 7a) increased gradually with increasing temperature, and reached a maximum of 22.3 ± 1.0 mA cm−2 at 70 °C. The increasing trend of the Jsc for PEO-ILCa-DSSC contrasted with the trends of ion conductivity and diffusion coefficient for PEO-ILCa, which revealed that the device fabrication and the uneven electrode surface did not disturb the self-assembly of the long-range continuous conducting channels in PEO-ILCa. The Voc of PEO-ILCa-DSSC (Fig. 7b) decayed slightly from 0.71 ± 0.01 V to 0.64 ± 0.01 V while heating the device from 30 to 70 °C. Both Jsc and Voc values of PEO-ILCa-DSSC were higher than those of ILCa-DSSC within the measured temperature range, which indicated the stable existence of the PEO networks in the smectic molecular assembly. The FF values of PEO-ILCa-DSSC were almost identical with that of ILCa-DSSC at 30 °C, and slightly higher than that of ILCa-DSSC from 40 to 70 °C (Fig. 7c). At higher temperatures, the improved segmental motion of the PEO chains might benefit the charge transfer at the CE/electrolyte interface of PEO-ILCa-DSSC for the relatively higher FF. Owing to the enhancement of Jsc during heating, a champion efficiency of 7.2% was obtained at 70 °C for PEO-ILCa-DSSC (Fig. 7d). To the best of our knowledge, this was the highest PCE achieved by DSSCs based on liquid crystal electrolytes (Table S1, ESI). Meanwhile, the PEO-ILCa-DSSC maintained relatively stable photovoltaic performance with PCE higher than 6.6% within a temperature range from 30 to 70 °C, demonstrating great potential in resisting the temperature variation for stable operating at outdoor conditions.
EIS measurements were further conducted for the as-prepared DSSCs at different temperatures under dark conditions at a bias voltage of −0.7 V to characterize the interfacial resistances at the electrode/electrolyte interfaces. As shown in Fig. S10, the impedance spectrum consists of two semicircles. The high frequency semicircle and the medium frequency semicircle represented the charge transfer process at the CE/electrolyte interface and the electron recombination process at the photoanode/electrolyte interface, respectively. The charge transfer resistance at the CE/electrolyte interface (RCE) and the recombination resistance at the photoanode/electrolyte interface (Rrec) were extracted, and are shown in Fig. 8. As shown in Fig. 8a, the RCE values of PEO-ILCa-DSSC and ILCa-DSSC decreased with the increase in temperature. PEO-ILCa-DSSC exhibited similar RCE at 30 °C, and lower RCE from 40 to 70 °C compared with ILCa-DSSC, which contributed to the higher FF of PEO-ILCa-DSSC from 40 to 70 °C. The higher Rrec corresponded to a lower recombination rate, which is beneficial to the photovoltaic performance because of the increased electron injection into TiO2. As shown in Fig. 8b, the Rrec values of both DSSCs decayed at elevated temperatures. At the same temperature, Rrec of PEO-ILCa-DSSC was higher than that of ILCa-DSSC. The PEO networks impeded the unfavored electron recombination, leading to the higher Voc of PEO-ILCa-DSSC. The EIS measurement results indicated that the PEO networks favored the overall charge transfer process in DSSC, which improved the FF, Voc and Jsc of the liquid crystal gel-based DSSC.

The PEO-ILCa-DSSC was stored at 85% relative humidity at 30 °C for 5000 h to investigate the long-term stability of the cells. The J–V curves of the PEO-ILCa-DSSC at the as-prepared state, unsealed state after 5000 h, and sealed state after 5000 h at 40 °C are shown in Fig. 9. The unsealed PEO-ILCa-DSSC suffered from a large decrease in FF after 5000 h, and retained only about 57% of its original PCE after storing for 5000 h. The decreased efficiency might be attributed to the gradual evaporation of the iodine, or the permeation of water and oxygen. After sealing the electrolyte in the cell, only slight decreases in Jsc, Voc and FF were observed and the sealed PEO-ILCa-DSSC retained more than 85% (PCE = 5.7% at 40 °C) of its original PCE after 5000 h. As shown in Table S1 in ESI, PEO-ILCa showed comparable photovoltaic performance to the reported PEO solidified liquid electrolytes in DSSCs, while providing superior thermal and long-term stability for the devices. This result suggested that PEO-ILCa-DSSC possessed a good long-term stability towards practical applications.


A liquid crystal polymer gel electrolyte was prepared by solidifying a smectic [C14MIm][I]-based electrolyte with PEO networks for efficient and thermally stable dye-sensitized solar cells. The PEO networks aggregate amorphously at the smectic domain interfaces to interconnect the lamellar assembly in the electrolyte, and the charge transport at the domain boundaries was promoted by the segmental motion of the PEO chains. As a result, the introduction of the PEO networks into the smectic electrolytes constructed self-assembled long-range continuous conducting channels in the device, and greatly promoted the charge transport compared with the smectic electrolyte without PEO. The DSSC resulting from the smectic gel electrolyte showed significantly improved photovoltaic performance with a champion efficiency of 7.2%, thermally steady performance within a wide temperature range from 30 to 70 °C, and long-term stability with more than 85% original efficiency retained after 5000 h. The interconnection of the smectic domains by the PEO networks in ionic liquid crystals provided a novel approach to construct self-assembled long-range continuous channels spontaneously to improve both charge transport and stability for high-performance soft solid-state electrolytes, which have great potential in the large-scale fabrication of advanced energy devices and flexible electronics applications.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21805199) and China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2019M663494).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: 1H NMR and FT-IR spectra, DSC measurements, POM observations, SAXS analyses of [C14MIm][I], SEM, CV and EIS measurements of the electrolytes and DSSCs. See DOI: 10.1039/d0nr06360f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020