 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA07968D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19810-19816


Bingcheng
Yu
,

Huiyin
Zhang
,

Jionghua
Wu
,

Yusheng
Li
,

Hongshi
Li
,

Yiming
Li
,

Jiangjian
Shi
,

Huijue
Wu
,

Dongmei
Li
,

Yanhong
Luo
* and 

Qingbo
Meng
*

Key Laboratory for Renewable Energy, Beijing Key Laboratory for New Energy Materials and Devices, Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: qbmeng@iphy.ac.cn; yhluo@iphy.ac.cn

School of Physical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China

Received
16th August 2018
, Accepted 9th September 2018
First published on 11th September 2018
All-inorganic perovskites have aroused great interest recently because of their prominent photoelectric properties and thermal stability for stable, highly efficient perovskite solar cells. Herein, a two-step multiple spin coating method has been developed for the first time to prepare cesium halide perovskite films. In particular, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) is introduced into CsBr/methanol precursor solution to increase the solubility of CsBr; in the meantime, it can also remarkably influence the morphologies, optical properties and photovoltaic performance of CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 (0 < x < 1) films. By regulating the content of DMSO, as high as 13.27% power conversion efficiency (PCE) has been achieved with a steady-state PCE of 12.5% under optimal conditions, which can maintain 98% of the initial PCE for 480 h under ambient conditions without encapsulation. The synergistic effect of the solvent-engineering method can provide a new access for good quality all-inorganic perovskite thin films for high performance optoelectronic devices.

Organic–inorganic halide perovskites (OIHPs) have emerged as promising photovoltaic materials due to their outstanding photoelectric properties, such as large absorption coefficients, high carrier mobility, long diffusion lengths and low exciton binding energy. In the past few years, the efficiency of OIHP solar cells has increased from 3.8% to 23.3%. However, this kind of star thin film solar cell is facing a series of stability issues (i.e. thermal, UV-radiation and humidity stabilities, and electrical field), which have already been a critical challenge to its practical application. Generally, OHIPs display relatively low thermal decomposition temperatures due to the existence of unstable organic monovalent cations. The thermal stability of OIHPs can be improved by partially replacing organic monovalent cations with cesium (Cs+) or rubidium (Rb+); however, this method cannot totally solve the problem. Therefore, all-inorganic halide perovskites by complete substitution of Cs+ for organic cations are considered to be a better alternative mainly due to their naturally stable structure and equally excellent optoelectrical properties compared to OIHPs. Currently, cesium halide perovskite solar cells also face some problems. For example, CsPbI3 in the black perovskite phase (α-phase) exhibits a bandgap of 1.73 eV, which is suitable for solar cells. You et al. have prepared a high-quality α-phase CsPbI3 film by using solvent-controlled growth in a dry environment, and achieved an efficiency of 15.7%, which is the highest efficiency reported for inorganic perovskite solar cells up to now. However, the α-phase CsPbI3 easily decomposes into a non-perovskite yellow phase (δ-phase) even under ambient conditions. Increasing the surface/volume ratios to develop nanostructured or colloidal inorganic perovskites can effectively stabilize the desired α-phase of the CsPbI3. Luther et al. synthesized CsPbI3 QDs films by AX post-treatment (A = FA+, MA+, Cs+ and X = I−, Br−) to improve the carrier mobility, which exhibited an exciting PCE record of 13.43%. However, this QD film fabrication process was complicated, including multi-cycle QD coating and ligand washing.

On the other hand, composition engineering by the substitution of some Br− for I− is adopted to balance the tolerance coefficient of α-phase CsPbI3 with inferior stability. And the PCE of CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 (0 < x < 1) perovskite solar cells has also exceeded 13.0%. Recently, Bai et al. and Liu et al. reported all-inorganic halide perovskite solar cells, respectively, by adopting a CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 quantum dot absorber layer, which presented PCEs over 12%.
Despite the above rapid progress, the efficiency of the cesium lead halide perovskite solar cells is still much lower in comparison with OIHP solar cells. Different from the mature preparation processes of OIHP solar cells, the research and application of all-inorganic perovskite materials are still in an early stage, and no comprehensive theory on the complex nucleation and growth processes of all-inorganic perovskite thin films has been established. So far, a two-step soaking reaction and nanocrystalline thin film deposition methods have been gradually developed. However, the surface morphology of the absorber layers is still difficult to control, which is no doubt essential to improve the cell efficiency.
In fact, compared with conventional two-step soaking fabrication processes, the two-step multiple spin-coating method has provided a high-efficiency, repeatable way to obtain high quality OIHP films. In this respect, we first employ a modified two-step multiple spin-coating method to prepare all-inorganic perovskite films. By using dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) as an additive in the precursor solution, high-quality CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 (0 < x < 1) perovskite films are obtained, which can present as high as 13.27% PCE and 12.5% stabilized PCE. It is found that the introduction of a small amount of DMSO (2 vt%) into CsBr–MeOH solutions can not only improve the solubility of CsBr but also improve the surface morphology, crystallinity and effectively lower the trap states of the perovskite film. This film fabrication method is supposed to provide a new way to improve the quality of all-inorganic perovskite thin films for high performance optoelectronic devices.

PbI2 was purchased from TCI (99.99%); PbBr2 was purchased from Aladdin (99.999%); CsBr and 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) were from Alfa-Aesar (99.999%); MeOH was from InnoChem (99.9%); N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and titanium isopropoxide (TTIP) (97%) were from Alfa Aesar; bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt (LiTFSI) was from Sigma-Aldrich (99.9985%); TiO2 paste (30NR-D) and tris(2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tert-butylpyridine)-cobalt(III) tris(bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide) (FK209) were from Dyesol; spiro-OMeTAD was from Luminescence Technology Corp. All of the chemicals were directly used without further purification. Laser-patterned FTO glass (Pilkington, thickness of 2.2 mm and sheet resistance of 15 Ω sq−1) was sequentially cleaned with a mild detergent, deionized water and ethanol in an ultrasonic bath. The substrate was treated with UV for 15 min prior to use.


In our work, a perovskite solar cell with a mesoscopic structure is adopted, which is fabricated on the transparent FTO substrate. First, a mildly acidic solution of TTIP in n-butyl alcohol (0.125 M) was spin-coated on FTO glass at 3000 rpm for 20 s, and subsequently calcined at 500 °C for 1 h to give a 30 nm-thick dense TiO2 layer. Then, a 2-methoxyethanolic solution containing 200 mg mL−1 30NR-D TiO2 paste was spin-coated on the top of the TiO2 compact layer at 3000 rpm for 20 s, dried at 80 °C for 30 min, and finally sintered at 500 °C for 1 h to give a 100 nm-thick TiO2 mesoporous layer. The films were treated with TiCl4 aqueous solution (25 mM) at 70 °C for 10 min, dried with N2 flow, spin-coated with LiTFSI acetonitrile solution (50 mM), and finally sintered at 500 °C for 1 h.

The perovskite layer was prepared by a two-step deposition method in a glovebox. PbBr2 (0.21 M) and PbI2 (1.19 M) were dissolved in 1 mL of DMF/DMSO mixed solvent, in which the molar ratio of Br and I is 3:17, and the molar ratio of Pb2+ and DMSO is 1:1. The above precursor solution was stirred overnight. Then, the PbI2/PbBr2 solution was spin coated on mesoporous TiO2 films at 2000 rpm for 45 s and was kept in a vacuum environment for 30 min in order to remove excess DMF. In the second step, CsBr mixed MeOH solutions with different amounts of DMSO were dropped onto the PbI2/PbBr2 films by a multicycle spin-coating process. The CsBr precursor solution was made as follows: 15 mg mL−1 CsBr was first dissolved in the MeOH, and then different volume ratios of DMSO were added to the CsBr methanol precursor solution to afford mixed precursor solutions. The CsBr precursor solutions were spin coated onto PbI2/PbBr2 films drop by drop at 4000 rpm. For each coating cycle, a drop of CsBr precursor solution (about 10 μL) was dripped onto the center of the substrate. After the previous layer dried, the next coating cycle would be initiated. After the coating cycle process completed, the substrate was kept spinning for another 20 s. Finally, the as-prepared perovskite films were heated at 280 °C for 30 min.
On the top of the perovskite film, a 200 nm-thick spiro-OMeTAD layer was deposited by spin-coating at 3500 rpm for 30 s by following the literature. That is, the spiro-OMeTAD solution was prepared by dissolving spiro-OMeTAD in chlorobenzene (60 mM) with the additives of Li-TFSI, FK209 and TBP at doping molar ratios of 0.5, 0.03 and 3.3. Finally, 80 nm thick Au electrodes were deposited via thermal evaporation at an atmospheric pressure of 10−7 Torr (Kurt J. Lesker).

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained on a Hitachi S-4800. Absorption spectra were recorded on a SHIMADZU UV-2550 from 350 to 850 nm. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was measured on a Bruker X-ray diffractometer using Cu Kα as the radiation source. UV-vis absorption spectra were measured on a UV-3010 spectrophotometer (Hitachi). Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) spectra were recorded using an AXIS ULTRA DLD (Kratos) with He I (21.22 eV) excitation lines and a sample bias of 9 V in a vacuum of 3.0 × 10−8 Torr. Steady state photoluminescence (PL) spectra were recorded on a PL spectrometer (FLS 900, Edinburgh Instruments), excited with a picosecond-pulsed diode laser (EPL-445) and measured at 550 nm after excitation. Photocurrent–voltage characteristics (J–V) were obtained on a Keithley 2602 Source Meter under AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2) from an Oriel Solar Simulator 91192. Solar cells were masked with a black mask to define the active area of 0.1 cm2. Reverse scan J–V curves were obtained in this work with a scan speed of 30 mV s−1. Incident-photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) was measured by the direct current (DC) method using a lab-made IPCE setup under 0.3–0.9 mW cm−2 monochromic light illumination without bias illumination.


In this study, the configuration of perovskite solar cells adopted is “FTO glass/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CsPb(IxBr1−x)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au”, as shown in Fig. 1a. Perovskite films are prepared by a modified two-step multi-cycle spin-coating method, as schematically depicted in Fig. 1b. Specifically, PbI2/PbBr2 solution (PbI2/PbBr2 = 85:15) with an equimolar ratio of Pb/DMSO in DMF was spin-coated on a 150 nm-thick mesoporous TiO2 substrate in a N2 atmosphere glovebox to form a solid precursor film. Then, 15 mg mL−1 CsBr methanol solution was continuously dripped onto the precursor films while the substrates were spinning at 4000 rpm, and in this process, each drop was dripped every 4 s (approximately 10 μL). Finally, the as-prepared perovskite films were annealed at 280 °C for 30 min.

As can be seen from Fig. 2a, the CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 perovskite film exhibits an unsatisfactory morphology with some large crystals and incomplete conversion to the perovskite mainly due to the unsatisfactory solubility of CsBr in methanol. In order to solve this problem, a mixed solvent is considered. Here, several solvent additives are attempted, such as water (H2O), iso-propanol (IPA), γ-butyrolactone (γ-GBL), dimethyl formamide (DMF) and DMSO. As shown in Fig. 2b–f and S1(a), the morphologies and crystallinity of the films from CsBr/MeOH solutions (2% volume ratio) with different solvent additives are quite different, indicating that the solvent additive not only can improve the solubility of CsBr but also strongly influence the microstructures of the as-prepared CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 perovskite films. Typically, the introduction of DMF or DMSO can result in a dense perovskite layer; in the meantime, the additive in CsBr/MeOH solutions (2% volume ratio) could control the reaction of the second step. This phenomenon can be explained by the mechanism of dissolution and recrystallization, that is, favorable solvent additives (i.e. DMF and DMSO) into CsBr/MeOH solution simultaneously have high solubilities of PbI2 and CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 would retard the early crystallization kinetics of perovskite heterogeneous nucleation at the CsBr/MeOH solution/PbI2 interface, which will result in a uniform nucleation rate of the CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 crystal through a homogeneous solid-state reaction. In order to confirm this, we compare the solubility of PbI2 in the above-mentioned additive solvents and find that PbI2 is highly soluble in DMF or DMSO (Fig. 2g). We further compare the preliminary PCEs of the devices prepared using CsBr/MeOH solutions without and with DMF or DMSO, and the devices prepared with a 2% DMSO additive exhibit the best performance (ESI, Fig. S1(b)). The reason for this difference may be related to the solubility of PbI2/PbBr2 in DMF and DMSO. Here, DMSO is finally adopted as a representative additive to the CsBr/MeOH solution in following studies.
First, the influence of different amounts of DMSO in CsBr/MeOH solution (in volume ratio) on perovskite films is investigated (ESI, Fig. S2). Fig. 3a shows XRD patterns of CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 films before annealing with respect to different amounts of DMSO additive in CsBr/MeOH solution. In all the samples, a weak peak at 9.9° assigned to the coordination between Pb2+ and DMSO can be found in comparison to the 0% DMSO sample. The diffraction peak at 14.9° of the CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 perovskite phase enhances when DMSO is introduced into the as-prepared film. A possible explanation is that the introduction of DMSO facilitates the nucleation of the perovskite phase. Fig. 3b shows XRD patterns of perovskite films after annealing with respect to different amounts of DMSO additives in CsBr/MeOH solutions. The peak at 9.9° disappears for all four samples, indicating a complete transformation of the perovskite phase. In the meantime, we can see that the XRD peaks located at 14.9°, 21.1° and 30.0° correspond to the (100), (110) and (200) planes of cubic phase CsPb(IxBr1−x)3, respectively. Here, one thing needs to be mentioned, the crystal quality of the 0% DMSO film is still poor even after annealing, in comparison to the other three samples. The enhancement of the above three diffraction peaks shows further crystallinity enhancement of the perovskite phase. As shown in Fig. 3c, a small gradual shift of the characteristic peak around 15° toward higher 2θ value is observed along with increasing the amount of DMSO in CsBr/MeOH solution, which is attributed to the shrinkage of the CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 perovskite lattice when too much DMSO affects the Br incorporation. Therefore, regardless of whether DMSO is involved or not, the annealed film is mainly a perovskite phase, which can be seen from XRD patterns (Fig. 3b). However, according to the absorption edge of the perovskite films in Fig. 3d, the amount of DMSO involved is found to directly affect the ratio of I/Br in the perovskite phase. That is, when the DMSO is involved, more Br− is introduced into the perovskite film, which will lead to a wider bandgap of the film. And a gradual blue shift of the absorption onset from 640 to 610 nm is observed while increasing DMSO addition to CsBr/MeOH solutions (Fig. 3d). Moreover, the CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 film prepared with CsBr/MeOH/2%DMSO has the highest absorbance intensity, suggesting that the 2% DMSO containing sample has the best perovskite-film quality.

Fig. 4a–d and e–h show the morphologies of CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 films before and after annealing, respectively. Whether DMSO is included or not, PbI2 is partially converted to the perovskite and cubic shape crystals could be observed on the surface of all kinds of pre-annealed perovskite layers (Fig. 4b). When using CsBr/MeOH solution, only a few sporadic island-like large grains can be seen. In contrast, perovskite layers prepared with CsBr/MeOH/DMSO solutions exhibit uniform small crystals. After annealing, crystal sizes increase gradually in a more controllable fashion, thus leading to a very compact perovskite layer. DMSO is a strong polar solvent which can dissolve PbI2/PbBr2 and the perovskite; however, excess DMSO in CsBr/MeOH solutions will damage the film with a rough surface decorated with pinholes, as shown in Fig. 4h. The perovskite film prepared with a 2% DMSO additive can present the best morphology with larger grain sizes and a flattened surface. And the cross-sectional SEM image reveals a compact CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 film with vertical and monolayer-aligned grains (ESI, Fig. S3).
Herein, a preliminary mechanism is proposed concerning the perovskite crystal growth by dissolution and recrystallization in the presence of DMSO in CsBr/MeOH solution. Because PbI2/PbBr2 has negligible solubility in MeOH, the DMSO coordinated with PbI2/PbBr2 can be washed away with methanol (ESI, Fig. S4). As is well known, once CsBr/MeOH solution comes in contact with the PbI2/PbBr2 film, perovskite nucleation occurs even prior to the annealing stage because of the partial diffusion of CsBr into the PbI2/PbBr2 layer, which is confirmed by the color change of bilayer films while spin-coating, that is, a heterogeneous nucleation process. Generally at the appropriate stoichiometric ratio, the inter-diffusion of unreacted PbI2/PbBr2 and CsBr occurs and PbI2/PbBr2 will fully convert to CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 as the film color changes to red in the annealing stage, which is characteristic of a compact CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 film. However, the perovskite layer formed prior to the annealing stage would hinder further diffusion of CsBr into the entire PbI2/PbBr2 layer to some extent. Therefore, the introduction of favorable solvent additives (such as DMSO) into CsBr/MeOH solution may result in high solubility of both PbI2/PbBr2 and CsPb(IxBr1−x)3, which would retard the early crystallization kinetics of perovskite heterogeneous nucleation at the CsBr solution/PbI2/PbBr2 interface. So, a uniform nucleation rate of the CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 crystal can be obtained by this method. Furthermore, the residual solvent effect of DMSO (BP: 189 °C) would facilitate the diffusion of precursor ions further into the film in a solvent-assisted process than would otherwise occur in a heterogeneous nucleation/diffusion process. This process may lead to a low roughness film surface while the nucleation and grain growth simultaneously occur, similar to the solvent vapor annealing process as demonstrated by Wu et al.
To further investigate the intrinsic properties of the perovskite films, Fig. 5 shows the steady-state PL spectra. As can be seen, the strongest PL intensity is observed for the film prepared with a 2% DMSO additive, indicating that the nonradiative carrier recombination is significantly suppressed in 2% DMSO additive based perovskites. Moreover, the PL peak of the film with a DMSO additive is also found to be a little blue-shifted compared to that without a DMSO additive, in good accordance with the UV-vis spectra.
The photovoltaic performance of CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 perovskite solar cells is strongly dependent on the amount of DMSO additive, as shown in Fig. 6a. In the case of an optimized DMSO ratio of 2%, the device shows a significantly enhanced PCE. By further increasing the amount of DMSO, the PCE of cells decreases rapidly. At the optimum DMSO concentration, an average PCE of 11.2% of 40 cells is achieved (Fig. 6b, inset). The champion CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 device presents 13.27% PCE with a stabilized PCE of 12.5% (Fig. 6b–c). Fig. 6d and S6 display the incident photon-to- current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of this series of devices. IPCE ends at 620 nm, which is consistent with the UV-Vis absorption spectrum of CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 (Fig. 3d). The integrated photocurrent density from the IPCE spectrum is 11.8 mA cm−2, basically in good accordance with the measured Jsc (ESI, Fig. S5 and S6).
Impedance spectra (IS) are further investigated to understand the influence of the amount of DMSO additive on the recombination properties of the cells, as shown in Fig. 7. The following equation describes the relation among Z, Rs and Rct under high-frequency conditions, where Z′ and Z′′ represent the real part and imaginary part of impedance, respectively; Rs is the series resistance and Rct is the recombination resistance.
So, this relationship is described as a circle function with variables of Z′ and Z′′ and a radius of Rs + (1/2)Rct. A larger recombination resistance value indicates reduced recombination in devices and beneficial charge-transport properties. It is clearly seen that the devices prepared with a 2% DMSO additive exhibits much larger Rct than those with other DMSO additives. It is thus supposed that the charge transfer current in the cell prepared with a 2% DMSO additive is much smaller than those of other cells, which is beneficial for achieving a higher photovoltage. This enhancement in Rct can be attributed to the highly efficient extraction of free carriers and a high built-in potential, where the charge recombination is significantly suppressed.
In addition to the device performance, the stability of CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 devices is also evaluated. In order to investigate the steady-state power output (SPO) performance, CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 solar cells were handled under 985 mV forward bias and AM 1.5 simulated sunlight illumination. Fig. 8a–d show the short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and PCE of unencapsulated CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 devices as a function of testing time under ambient conditions. As can be seen, CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 devices can maintain over 95% of the initial PCE after 120 min. In addition, the unencapsulated devices can retain around 95% of their initial PCE after 480 h storage under ambient conditions (ESI, Fig. S7), indicating their good long-term stability. We further examine the thermostability of the CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 film in a controlled humidity environment with <20% RH at 80 °C. XRD patterns reveal that characteristic peaks of the all-inorganic CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 perovskite phase remain identical without other impurities after 7-day thermal treatment, indicating no degradation when treated at 80 °C (ESI, Fig. S8).

In summary, we first report a modified two-step multiple spin coating method to improve the quality of CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 films. DMSO is introduced into CsBr/methanol precursor solution to increase the solubility of CsBr, and it can also remarkably influence the morphologies, optical properties and photovoltaic performance of CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 (0 < x < 1) films. By optimization of the DMSO amount, compact and pinhole-free perovskite films are obtained. In this system, DMSO is suggested to play a synergistic role in our multicycle spin-coating crystallite process, that is, the introduction of DMSO can improve the solubility of CsBr and also help the CsBr solution to penetrate into the PbI2/PbBr2 film to complete the reaction. As high as 13.27% PCE has been achieved based on CsBr/CH3OH/DMSO (2 vt%), with a steady-state output PCE of 12.5%. Besides, the devices can maintain good stability without encapsulation. Our results provide a facile approach to fabricate all-inorganic perovskite films with a good morphology for high-efficiency devices with better stability.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 91733301, 51761145042, 91433205, 11474333, 51421002, 51627803 and 51572288) and the International Partnership Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences (No. 112111KYSB20170089).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta07968d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018