 DOI: 10.1039/D0TA10270A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 4138-4149


Jiankai
Zhang
 and 

Huangzhong
Yu
*

School of Physics and Optoelectronics, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, Guangdong, China. E-mail: hzhyu@scut.edu.cn

The Key Laboratory of Functional Molecular Solids, Ministry of Education, Anhui Normal University, Wuhu 241000, Anhui, China

Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of New and Renewable Energy Research and Development, Guangzhou 510640, Guangdong, China

South China Institute of Collaborative Innovation, Dongguan 523808, Guangdong, China

Received
21st October 2020
, Accepted 8th January 2021
First published on 9th January 2021
The excessive energy loss (Eloss) mainly resulting from the energetic offsets between different layers and defect state-induced charge trapping and recombination limits the further development of perovskite solar cells (PVSCs). In this work, three solution-processed thiophene-based interlayers were firstly introduced to reduce the Eloss in PVSCs by optimizing the surface electronic states of the SnO2 electron transport layer (ETL) and improving the MAPbI3 film quality. The thiophene-based interlayers improve the conductivity and reduce the work function of SnO2 ETLs, resulting in more efficient electron transportation. Downward band-bending occurs at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface owing to the permanent dipole moment of these interlayers, which enables more efficient charge carrier extraction and lower Eloss for PVSCs. In addition, the sulfur atoms of the thiophene rings with a lone pair of electrons can bond with the under-coordinated Pb2+ of MAPbI3, thus passivating the ion defect states and reducing the defect state-induced charge carrier trapping and recombination at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface. These interlayers change the hydrophilicity of the SnO2 surface and promote the formation of high quality MAPbI3 films with larger grain size and fewer grain boundaries, improving the stability of PVSCs. Combining these desirable advantages, the optimized MAPbI3-based PVSCs achieve a highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 20.61% with a high open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.117 V and fill factor (FF) over 80%, which is higher than that of the pristine PVSCs with a highest PCE of 17.54%. The optimized PVSCs without any encapsulation show higher thermal and humidity stability compared with the pristine PVSCs. Therefore, this work demonstrates an effective way to reduce Eloss, as well as improving both the performance and stability of PVSCs by utilizing thiophene-based interlayers to modify the interface of SnO2/MAPbI3.

In the past decade, perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) have received considerable attention owing to their easy fabrication process and superior photovoltaic performance with a highest certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 25.5%. The obtained great achievement originates from the remarkable photovoltaic properties of perovskite materials including broad optical absorption, high carrier mobility and light absorption coefficient, long carrier diffusion lengths, and high defect tolerance. However, the PCE of methylammonium lead triiodide (MAPbI3)-based single-junction PVSCs is inferior to the Shockley–Queisser limit (theoretical PCE over 30%) on account of the severe energy loss (Eloss). The energy level mismatch between different functional layers and defect state-induced charge carrier trapping and recombination are the main factors that cause Eloss in PVSCs. It's a challenging task to effectively reduce Eloss caused by the energetic offsets between perovskite and transport layers and defect states at the same time without any complex preparation process.

On the one hand, high crystalline quality of perovskite films with a dense surface and large grain size plays a vital role in reducing the Eloss since the diffusion coefficient and the diffusion length of the charge carriers are determined by the crystallinity of the perovskite film. For solution processing polycrystalline perovskite films, intrinsic defect states including uncoordinated Pb2+ and lead clusters at the surface and grain boundaries are unavoidable, which act as non-radiative recombination centers that cause Eloss. These defect state recombination centers not only cause Eloss in devices, but also activate the perovskite films and accelerate the decomposition process caused by moisture and oxygen. Strategies such as passivating these defect states and preparing high quality perovskite films are proven to be beneficial to reduce the Eloss, thus improving the performance and stability of PVSCs.
On the other hand, narrowing the energetic offsets between perovskite and transport layers is importance to reduce Eloss in PVSCs. Tin dioxide (SnO2) has excellent properties in the application of PVSCs, for example high electron mobility, wide bandgap, and low-temperature processing. A highest certified PCE of 23.3% is achieved for devices using SnO2 as an ETL, which is close to that of traditional TiO2-based PVSCs (24.64%). Nevertheless, the SnO2 ETL still has drawbacks in the application of PVSCs. The SnO2 ETL has a conduction band minimum (CBM) of about 4.5 eV, which is much lower than the CBM of about 3.9 eV for MAPbI3. This large energy gap will cause a large energy barrier for electrons (ΔEe) to transport across the interface of SnO2/MAPbI3, which fundamentally results in severe Eloss in PVSCs. Here, ΔEe is defined as the energy difference between the Fermi level (EF) of the SnO2 and the CBM of perovskite. To fabricate high performance PVSCs with a lower level of Eloss, the ΔEe should be minimized or eliminated if possible to ensure the charge transport efficiency at the interface of SnO2/MAPbI3. To minimize ΔEe, one important strategy is to adjust the EF of the ETL towards the CBM of perovskite. Kahn and co-authors found that a hole transport layer (HTL) material with an appropriate energy level match with perovskite was beneficial to reduce losses of VOC and Eloss in PVSCs. Besides, band-bending induced by the passivation effect is found to reduce the energy barrier for hole transport (ΔEh) at the interface of perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD, which reduces Eloss and improves the VOC of PVSCs. The band-bending is caused by the difference in EF of the two contact layers, which is manifested as the shifting of the band structure. The presence of band-bending and the associated electric field can facilitate both the separation and transport efficiency of charge carriers. Up to now, tuning the Eloss and band-bending at the interface of n-type SnO2/MAPbI3 has rarely been reported.
In this work, we aim at reducing the Eloss in the PVSCs by adjusting the band structure at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface and improving the perovskite film quality in a simple solution-processed way. We firstly report a one-step surface treatment by utilizing thiophene-based molecules with carboxylic acid and thiophene functional groups including 3-thenoic acid (TA 1), thiophene-3-acetic acid (TA 2), and 3-thiophenepropanoic acid (TA 3) interlayers to optimize the energy level and surface defect states of the SnO2 ETL and the crystalline quality of perovskite films at the same time. The structures of these molecules are similar except for the length of the alkyl chains, and the different lengths of the alkyl chains will influence the dipole moments of these molecules. We try to explore their different effects on changing the band structure at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface in PVSCs. This idea is carried out based on the following merits: (1) the carboxyl groups can passivate the surface terminal –OH groups on the SnO2, which reduces non-radiative recombination and Eloss at the SnO2/perovskite interface; (2) these molecules with different dipole moments will cause band-bending at the interface of SnO2/MAPbI3, which facilitates charge transport and reduces Eloss; (3) the S atoms on the thiophene ring are expected to bond with the Pb atoms to adjust the perovskite film crystallization process, leading to reduced defect states and better perovskite film quality. Consequently, the Eloss is effectively reduced as a result of the favorable band-bending, reduced energy level mismatch, non-radiative recombination at the SnO2/perovskite interface, and reduced charge carrier trapping and recombination induced by defect states within the perovskite film. With the increase of the open-circuit voltage (VOC) from 1.072 V to 1.117 V and ultrahigh fill factor (FF) over 80%, the highest PCE of 20.61% is achieved for MAPbI3-based PVSCs after TA 2 interlayer modification, and the PVSCs modified with TA 1 and TA 3 interlayers also showed enhanced performance compared with the control devices. Moreover, the enhanced device stability along with reduced hysteresis are realized with the thiophene-based interlayer modification.

The molecular structures and electrostatic potential (ESP) maps of these molecules (TA 1, TA 2, and TA 3) are depicted in Fig. 1a and b. Density functional theory (DFT) is employed to calculated and visualize the ESP maps, which exhibit the charge distribution of these molecules at the B3LYP/6-31G level. The same color gradient for these molecules from red to blue in the ESP maps implies that the electron density increased from the thiophene rings to the –COOH groups. The molecule dipole moments of these thiophene-based molecules are 3.87 (TA 1), 4.03 (TA 2) and 2.86 Debye (TA 3) as calculated by DFT, indicating that these thiophene-based molecules with an abundance of electrons are suitable to modify the interface of SnO2/perovskite. These dipole moments associated with electron donation from thiophene rings to the SnO2 will change the surface electronic states of SnO2. As shown in Fig. 1c, these thiophene-based interlayers with –COOH terminal groups can bond with the SnO2 ETL, while the S atoms on the thiophene rings with the lone pair of electrons will bond with Pb ions in MAPbI3. It's expected that these interlayers can not only passivate the defect states on the SnO2 surface and adjust the surface electronic states of SnO2, but also passivate the under-coordinated Pb2+ defect states and regulate the crystallization process of perovskite films. All these effects ultimately achieve the goal of reducing Eloss and improving the photovoltaic performance and stability of PVSCs. The n–i–p planar device structure is shown in Fig. 1d, where the light absorbed layer is MAPbI3, and SnO2 and spiro-OMeTAD are selected as the ETL and HTL, respectively. The TA interlayers are inserted between MAPbI3 and SnO2 through a plain solution spin-coating process followed by annealing at 100 °C for 10 min. The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra for the pristine SnO2 and TA interlayer modified SnO2 ETLs recorded after washing the substrates with CB are shown in Fig. S1. The characteristic peaks at around 163 eV assigned to the S 2p core-level are observed for the SnO2 ETL after thiophene-based interlayer modification as shown in Fig. S2, confirming their existence on the SnO2 ETL surface.

Furthermore, XPS measurements were performed to investigate the bonding states between the thiophene-based interlayers and SnO2, as shown in Fig. 2a and b. The measurements were carried out after the samples were washed with CB. Two characteristic peaks located at 486.97 and 495.41 eV assigned to two spin–orbit splitting peaks corresponding to Sn 3d5/2 and Sn 3d3/2 are observed for SnO2 ETLs. For the SnO2 ETLs modified with TA 1 (SnO2/TA 1), TA 2 (SnO2/TA 2), and TA 3 (SnO2/TA 3) interlayers, the binding energy of these peaks decreases to 486.78 eV and 495.22 eV, respectively. The decreased binding energy indicates enhanced negative charges around Sn atoms, which confirms that these TA interlayers are successfully anchored to the surface of SnO2 ETLs and change their electron states. Further combining this with the ESP maps in Fig. 1b, we believe that the thiophene rings of these interlayers would donate electrons to the SnO2 substrates, which is expected to reduce the surface work function (WF) of the SnO2 ETL. The O 1s state for the interlayer modified SnO2 ETLs also shifts from 530.97 eV to 530.85 eV as shown in Fig. 2b, further indicating the presence of interactions between SnO2 and these TA interlayers. The broad peak of the O 1s state can be deconvoluted into two peaks, as shown in Fig. S3. The peak located at about 530.5 eV corresponds to the lattice oxygen atoms while the peak located at about 531.6 eV is attributed to the amorphous oxygen atoms that mainly come from the hydroxyl groups. By calculating the area of the divided peaks, we find that the intensity of lattice oxygen reduces and the intensity of amorphous oxygen increases after these TA interlayer modifications. The increased intensity of amorphous oxygen may come from the thiophene-based interlayers, which further confirms the existence of interlayers on the SnO2 surface. As demonstrated in Fig. 1b, these thiophene-based molecules exhibit a polarized charge distribution where the thiophene rings can donate electrons to the carboxylic acid side that links to the SnO2 substrates, which would change their surface electronic states. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurements were utilized to investigate the surface electronic states of SnO2 ELTs after TA interlayer modification. The onset (Eonset) and secondary electron cutoff (Ecutoff) curves of SnO2 ETLs with different TA interlayer modifications are shown in Fig. 2c and d and the calculated parameters are shown in Table 1. The work function (WF) is calculated by using the formula WF = 21.22 − Ecutoff. The WF of SnO2, SnO2/TA 1, SnO2/TA 2, and SnO2/TA 3 is calculated to be 4.65, 4.43, 4.36, and 4.51 eV, respectively. The decreased WF after modification probably originates from the surface dipole moments associated with electron donation from thiophene rings to the SnO2 substrates. These molecules with different dipole moments have different effects on changing the WF of the SnO2 surface, in which TA 2 molecules with the largest dipole moment has the most obvious effect. These interlayers play an important role in facilitating the charge carrier transport efficiency and decreasing charge carrier recombination at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface. The energy level of SnO2 films can be determined on the basis of the UPS measurement results and Kubelka–Munk plots obtained from the UV-Vis absorption spectra. The energy level diagram of spiro-OMeTAD and MAPbI3 and EF of SnO2 with different interlayer modifications are shown in Fig. 2e. The EF is determined by the difference between the photon energy (21.22 eV) and the value of Ecutoff, while the valence band maximum (VBM) is determined by the EF and Eonset, and the CBM is determined by the VBM and the optical bandgap (Eg) (Fig. S4a). The EF values of TA interlayer modified SnO2 ETLs are obviously closer to the CBM of MAPbI3 compared with that of the pristine SnO2 ETL, which is beneficial for the electron extraction and transport from the MAPbI3 to the SnO2 ETL.
Sample

E
cutoff (eV)

E
onset (eV)

W
F (eV)
VBM (eV)

E
g (eV)
CBM (eV)
SnO2
16.57
3.86
4.65
8.51
3.96
4.55
SnO2/TA 1
16.79
3.87
4.43
8.30
3.94
4.36
SnO2/TA 2
16.86
3.84
4.36
8.20
3.95
4.25
SnO2/TA 3
16.71
3.91
4.51
8.42
3.95
4.47
The charge carrier transport mechanism and band-bending occurring at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface are further analyzed according to the Schottky–Mott limit on the basis of the relative alignment of energy levels, where the CBM, VBM, Eg, and EF of MAPbI3 are −3.92, −5.52, 1.60, and −4.48 eV determined by UPS measurement and Kubelka–Munk plots obtained from the UV-Vis absorption spectrum as shown in Fig. S4b–d, which is consistent with previous reports. The detailed schematic band diagrams are shown in Fig. 3a–d. The ΔEh is determined by the energy difference between the EF of SnO2 ETLs and the VBM of MAPbI3 while the ΔEe is determined by the energy difference between the EF of SnO2 ETLs and the CBM of MAPbI3. For the pristine SnO2 with EF of −4.65 eV, an upward energy band configuration occurs in the MAPbI3 film as shown in Fig. 3a and e, which causes electron accumulation at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface, leading to Eloss in PVSCs. The ΔEe and ΔEh are calculated as 0.73 and 0.87 eV, respectively. The large ΔEe is unfavorable for electron extraction and the small ΔEh is insufficient to effectively block holes. Consequently, a large number of electron–hole pairs recombine at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface, resulting in large Eloss and VOC losses. Notably, this upward band-bending would reduce the built-in potential as well as the VOC of PVSCs. As shown in Fig. 3b, c, f, and g, the EF of SnO2 ETLs decreases to −4.43 and −4.36 eV, respectively, after TA 1 and TA 2 interlayer modification. As a result, better ohmic contact between the SnO2 ETL and MAPbI3 and expectant downward band-bending occur at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface. The ΔEe decreases from 0.73 eV for the pristine SnO2 to 0.51 and 0.44 eV, respectively, after TA 1 and TA 2 interlayer modification, while the ΔEh increases from 0.87 eV to 1.09 and 1.16 eV, respectively. The reduced ΔEe, enhanced ΔEh and the downward band-bending enable more efficient charge carrier separation and transportation, which is beneficial to reduce charge accumulation and Eloss at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface. As for the TA 3 interlayer modified SnO2 ETL, slight upward band-bending occurs as shown in Fig. 3d and h. Yet the decreased ΔEe and increased ΔEh after TA 3 interlayer modification are beneficial for electron transportation and hole blocking at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface compared with the pristine SnO2 ETL. From the point of view of band-bending, TA 2 is the most effective interlayer because it minimizes the Eloss at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface. The reduced Eloss at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface is expected to enhance the VOC and PCE of PVSCs after these interlayer modifications and it will be further discussed below. In addition, the vertical transportation of the pristine SnO2 and TA interlayer modified SnO2 ETLs was measured in the diode structure of ITO/SnO2 or TA interlayer modified SnO2/Ag. The dark current–voltage characteristic curves are shown in Fig. S5a. The enhanced charge transport ability of SnO2 ETLs after TA interlayer modification may be attributed to the fewer surface defect states and the increased free electrons donated by the TA interlayers. All SnO2 ETLs exhibit excellent light transmittance in the range of 300–800 nm, as illustrated in Fig. S5b. The high transparency minimizes light loss and ensures that high photocurrent can be generated to obtain high performance PVSCs.
The surface topography of the pristine and TA interlayer modified SnO2 ETLs was characterized by atomic force microscopy (AFM), as shown in Fig. 4a–d. The root-mean-square roughness (RMS) of the pristine SnO2 ETL is 1.62 nm, which is larger than that of the SnO2/TA 1 (1.33 nm), SnO2/TA 2 (1.08 nm), and SnO2/TA 3 (1.02 nm) ETLs. The smoother surface of the SnO2 substrate is conducive to the growth of flat and complete perovskite films. At the same time, the surface contact angle (CA) of the pristine SnO2 ETL is 27.0°, which increases after TA 1 (56.6°), TA 2 (60.9°), and TA 3 (54.3°) modification (Fig. 4e–h). The larger CA is beneficial to reduce the perovskite nucleus density during the preparation process, thereby growing perovskite films with larger grain size and fewer defect states. The crystallinity of perovskite films grown on the pristine SnO2 and TA interlayer modified SnO2 ETL substrates was investigated by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM), as shown in Fig. 4i–l. It's found that the perovskite grain size increases, especially for those grown on the SnO2 substrate with TA 2 modification, which is consistent with the slightly increased UV-Vis absorption (Fig. 5a). The cross-sectional SEM images of the control and TA interlayer modified samples are shown in Fig. S6a–d. All perovskite layers show a thickness of about 385 nm. For the control sample, perovskite grown on the surface of SnO2 shows smaller crystal size. Besides, obvious fissures and holes are observed within the control perovskite film, which will cause severe carrier recombination and Eloss in PVSCs. For perovskite films grown on the TA interlayer modified SnO2 ETLs, the perovskite crystals show larger size and many of the crystals grow vertically through the perovskite layer, which is of vital importance to facilitate charge transfer and reduce the Eloss in PVSCs. The non-radiative recombination in the bulk perovskite films mainly occurs at the grain boundaries where there is a large number of defect states. Thus, the larger perovskite grain size indicates fewer defect states and Eloss caused by non-radiative recombination. The improvement of perovskite film crystallinity is further confirmed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements, as shown in Fig. 5b. Peaks with obviously enhanced intensity assigned to the (110), (220) and (310) planes of perovskite films grown on TA interlayer modified SnO2 substrates are observed, with the same trend as in the SEM images. We further analyzed the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of these characteristic peaks and the results are provided in Table S1. The FWHM of perovskite films grown on TA interlayer modified SnO2 substrates decreases compared with that of the pristine one, coinciding with the larger perovskite grain size after TA interlayer modification observed from the surface and cross-sectional SEM images.
In addition to changing the surface morphology of MAPbI3 films, the thiophene rings of these interlayers are expected to coordinate with the under-coordinated Pb2+ and therefore passivate the defect states at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interfaces. The XPS spectra for the pristine MAPbI3 and thiophene-based molecule doped MAPbI3 films were measured to investigate the potential interactions between these molecules and Pb2+ in MAPbI3, as shown in Fig. 5c. Two peaks assigned to Pb 4f shift to lower binding energy for the thiophene-based molecule doped MAPbI3 films, indicating the presence of other negative charges donated by the thiophene rings around Pb atoms. This confirms the interaction between these thiophene-based molecules and MAPbI3, which is beneficial to reduce the defect state-induced charge carrier trapping and Eloss at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interfaces. The dark current–voltage curves of electron-only devices are used to characterize the trap density of perovskite films grown on the pristine SnO2 and TA interlayer modified SnO2 ETL substrates, as shown in Fig. 5d. The trap density can be calculated using , where VTFL is the onset voltage of the trap-filled limit (TFL) region, which is positively correlated with the trap density (Ntrap), q is the elemental charge, L is the thickness of perovskite films, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity and ε is the relative dielectric constant of the perovskite. The measured VTFL values are 0.59, 0.32, 0.26, and 0.35 V for MAPbI3 films grown on the pristine SnO2 and TA interlayer modified SnO2 ETL substrates. The corresponding Ntrap values are calculated to be 1.02 × 1016, 5.53 × 1015, 4.49 × 1015 and 6.05 × 1015 cm−3, respectively. Reducing trap density in the perovskite films is decisive in reducing Eloss caused by trap state-induced non-radiative recombination.
The carrier transfers and Eloss at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface are investigated by steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence (PL and TRPL) spectra. The carrier transfers and recombination processes of the competitive relationship exist simultaneously at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface. For PVSCs, the charge carrier recombination should be as low as possible because it causes Eloss. To minimize the Eloss caused by charge carrier recombination, the optimized energy level alignment between the SnO2 ETL and MAPbI3 and reduced defect states at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface are requisite. Fig. 5e shows the steady-state PL spectra of perovskite films grown on the pristine SnO2 and TA interlayer modified SnO2 ETL substrates. Obviously reduced PL intensity is observed for perovskite films grown on the TA interlayer modified SnO2 ETL substrates, which indicates that the charge carrier recombination at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface is effectively suppressed, and reduced Eloss is realized after these thiophene-based interlayer modifications. Particularly, the most effective PL intensity quenching is achieved for the perovskite film grown on the TA 2 interlayer modified SnO2 ETL, suggesting the best passivation effect on reducing interface Eloss of the TA 2 interlayer. Besides, the PL peak shows a slight blue shift, which may be attributed to the better crystallinity and reduced number of trap states within the perovskite films. Fig. 5f shows the TRPL spectra of MAPbI3 films grown on the pristine SnO2 and modified SnO2 ETL substrates. The spectra can be fitted with a bi-exponential decay model and the fitting results are shown in Table S2. The average PL lifetimes τave reduce from 53.83 ns to 39.68, 20.67 and 50.93 ns, respectively, which may be attributed to the enhanced electron extraction ability at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface after TA 1, TA 2 and TA 3 modification. The enhanced electron extraction ability may originate from the optimized energy level alignment and higher conductivity after TA interlayer modification for SnO2 films, which is conducive to improving the short-circuit current density (JSC) of PVSCs.
PVSCs modified by different TA interlayers with different concentrations were fabricated to investigate their effects on device performance. The corresponding current density–voltage (J–V) curves and average photovoltaic parameters of the pristine and TA interlayer modified PVSCs are shown in Fig. S7a–c and Tables S3–S5. The average PCE increases from 17.16% for the pristine PVSCs to 19.06%, 20.08% and 18.31% after TA 1, TA 2 and TA 3 interlayer modification. The severe hysteresis effect in PVSCs should be suppressed because it affects the accuracy of J–V measurements. The J–V curves of the champion PVSCs were measured in different scanning directions to quantify the hysteresis effect before and after TA interlayer modification, as shown in Fig. 6a and b. The corresponding photovoltaic parameters are shown in Table 2. The pristine PVSC yields highest PCEs of 16.91% and 17.54% in the forward and reverse scans with a visible hysteresis effect. The PVSCs modified with TA 2 show the most obvious performance improvement and yield highest PCEs of 20.40% and 20.61% in the forward and reverse scans, showing negligible hysteresis effect. The highest PCE and VOC are achieved for PVSCs after TA 2 interlayer modification, which is consistent with the previous discussion that the TA 2 interlayer has the highest dipole moment and it has the biggest effect on changing the band-bending and reducing the Eloss at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface. In the PVSC devices, the VOC derived from the splitting of the electron and hole quasi-Fermi levels is one of the most important parameters that determine the PCE of PVSCs. In this work, the increased VOC for TA interlayer modified PVSCs is a key factor that is responsible for the enhancement of PCE. The statistics of VOC distribution of the pristine and modified PVSCs are shown in Fig. 6c. The increased VOC after TA interlayer modification may be attributed to the better energy level alignment between SnO2 and MAPbI3 and favorable band-bending at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface. From another perspective, the VOC is closely related to the Eloss that can be describe as , where Eg is the bandgap of the perovskite film. The increased VOC means that the Eloss in the PVSC is effectively reduced after TA interlayer modification. Due to the better perovskite film crystallinity and more effective charge carrier transport at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface, both JSC and FF increase for TA interlayer modified PVSCs, as shown by the statistical distributions in Fig. S8a and b. The statistics of PCE distribution is shown in Fig. 6d; the obviously higher and narrow distributions indicate that the TA interlayer modified PVSCs have great performance and reproducibility. Fig. 6e shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra and corresponding integrated JSC curves of the pristine and TA interlayer modified PVSCs. The higher EQE and integrated JSC values after TA interlayer modification are attributed to the improved perovskite film crystallinity, better charge carrier transport at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface, and more efficient charge separation in the bulk perovskite films. The integrated JSC values calculated from the EQE spectra agree well with those measured from the J–V measurements with deviations less than 3%. Maximum power point (MPP) tracking was performed to evaluate the continuous output properties of the pristine and modified PVSCs, as shown in Fig. 6f. All PVSCs without any encapsulation show good photo-stability under 1 sun illumination with different biases.
Device
Scan direction

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
HI (%)

a 
.

Control
Forward
22.08
1.069
71.66
16.91
3.6
Reverse
22.26
1.072
73.53
17.54
TA 1
Forward
22.59
1.107
76.92
19.24
1.8
Reverse
22.68
1.109
77.89
19.59
TA 2
Forward
22.98
1.115
79.62
20.40
1.0
Reverse
23.03
1.117
80.12
20.61
TA 3
Forward
22.43
1.078
75.56
18.27
2.1
Reverse
22.49
1.081
76.79
18.67

J–V measurements under different intensities from 10 to 100 mW cm−2 were carried out to further investigate the photo-generated carrier recombination mechanism while the PVSCs are in operation. Fig. 7a shows the semi-logarithmic plot curves of VOCversus light intensity of PVSCs and the linear fit follows , where n is the ideality factor, k is Boltzmann's constant, T is the absolute temperature, and I is the light intensity. The smaller n values for PVSCs after TA interlayer modification indicate that the Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination is effectively suppressed owing to the improved perovskite film quality and reduced trap states at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface.Fig. 7b shows the double logarithmic plot curves of JSCversus light intensity of PVSCs with a fit to the power law (JSC ∝ Iα, where α is the exponential factor). The α value is close to 1 when all the excited carriers are captured by electrodes prior to recombination within PVSCs. For the present PVSCs, the values of α are closer to 1 after TA interlayer modification. This further corroborates that the bimolecular recombination and space charge effects are restrained for the TA interlayer modified PVSCs. The reduced recombination under JSC conditions due to the balanced carrier transport is very important for the preparation of high performance PVSCs. The improved perovskite film crystallinity and enhanced carrier transport at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface play important roles in minimizing charge carrier trapping and Eloss.
The charge transport and recombination behaviors of the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface were investigated by Mott–Schottky capacitance–voltage (C–V) measurements under dark conditions. Generally, the flat-band potential (Vfb) can be defined as the x intercept of the straight line in the C−2–V curves, as shown in Fig. 7c. The VOC of these PVSCs are related to the Vfb values as they used the same HTL (spiro-OMeTAD). The Vfb values of the TA interlayer modified PVSCs are higher than that of the pristine one due to the better perovskite film crystallinity and lower recombination at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface, which exhibits a similar trend to the UPS measurements and the VOC obtained from the J–V measurements. The higher Vfb values are beneficial for the separation of photo-generated carriers and the suppression of carrier recombination, thus reducing the Eloss in PVSCs.
Finally, the stability of the pristine and TA interlayer modified PVSCs was systemically investigated under different conditions. The MAPbI3 films grown on the TA interlayer modified SnO2 ETL substrates show larger grain size and fewer grain boundary defects as discussed above. The MAPbI3 films grown on different substrates are exposed to ambient conditions with relative humidity (RH) around 70% for 50 days for the humidity stability test. The decomposition process can be traced through the XRD patterns of the aged MAPbI3 films shown in Fig. 7d. A weak diffraction peak assigned to PbI2 at around 12.69° is observed for the fresh MAPbI3 film because the PbI2 is slightly excessive in the precursor solution. After exposure, the main peaks assigned to MAPbI3 at 14.18°, 28.52° and 31.97° for the MAPbI3 film grown on the pristine SnO2 substrate almost disappear while the peak intensity of PbI2 increases dramatically. This indicates that the MAPbI3 perovskite crystal decomposition process is induced by the moisture and oxygen in the air. For comparison, MAPbI3 films grown on TA interlayer (especially TA 2 interlayer) modified SnO2 substrates show less decomposition under the same conditions. Besides, the reference and TA interlayer modified PVSCs are exposed to ambient conditions (RH: ≈ 70%) for the long-term stability test, as shown in Fig. S9. The reference PVSCs almost completely fail on the sixth day while the modified PVSCs show better stability. All PVSCs show inadequate performance under this circumstance because the high humidity influences the performance of both the perovskite layer and charge transport layers. The better humidity stability of MAPbI3 films grown on TA interlayer (especially TA 2 interlayer) modified SnO2 substrates may be ascribed to the reduced grain boundaries and defect states which are impressionable to water and oxygen due to their high activity. The defect state passivation realized by thiophene rings from TA interlayers may reduce the under-coordinated Pb2+ defect states and help to prepared stable MAPbI3 films and PVSCs. The continuous thermal stability is a non-negligible issue since most photovoltaic devices work outdoors. Here, we replace the doped spiro-OMeTAD with PTAA because it is unstable under thermal conditions. PVSCs with a structure of ITO/SnO2 or TA interlayer modified SnO2/MAPbI3/PTAA/MoO3/Ag are fabricated and tested under continuous thermal conditions with temperature at 85 °C without any encapsulation (Fig. 7e). The TA interlayer modified PVSCs retain about 80% of the initial PCE after 130 hours of thermal annealing, showing better thermal stability compared with the pristine PVSCs. The enhanced thermal stability of the TA interlayer modified PVSCs may be attributed to the better MAPbI3 film crystallinity and the reduced –OH dangling bonds on the SnO2 surface which would accelerate the decomposition of MAPbI3 crystals. A long-term stability test was performed for the unencapsulated PVSCs stored in a glovebox, as shown in Fig. 7f. The TA interlayer modified PVSCs retain over 90% of the initial PCE while the pristine PVSCs retain about 20% of the initial PCE after 60 days.
In summary, we developed an effective and facile method to modify the interface of SnO2/MAPbI3 with thiophene-based interlayers, and demonstrate high photovoltaic performance and stable PVSCs with reduced Eloss, simultaneously. On the one hand, the thiophene-based interlayers with –COOH groups link with the SnO2 ETL and passivate the –OH dangling bonds on the SnO2 surface, leading to higher conductivity and more desirable work functions for the TA interlayer modified SnO2 ETLs. Owing to the permanent dipoles of these TA interlayers, downward band-bending occurs at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface, enabling more efficient charge carrier extraction and lower Eloss. On the other hand, the sulfur atoms bond with the under-coordinated Pb2+ thus reducing the ion defect states at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface. Furthermore, the interlayers improve the MAPbI3 film crystallinity and promote the formation of perovskite films with larger grain size and lower defect states. As a result, the TA 2 interlayer optimized PVSCs based on MAPbI3 achieve a highest PCE of 20.61% with negligible hysteresis effect, which is higher than those of the reference (17.54%), TA 1 interlayer modified (19.59%), and TA 3 interlayer modified (18.67%) PVSCs. The most efficient performance is achieved through TA 2 modification due to its largest dipole moment and its largest effect on changing the band structure and reducing Eloss at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface. Meanwhile, the TA interlayer optimized PVSCs show better thermal and humidity stability than the reference PVSCs. This work provides an effective strategy for high performance and stable PVSCs by utilizing thiophene-based interlayers at the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface.

Etched indium tin oxide (ITO) glass sheets (sheet resistance, RS ≈ 10 Ω sq−1) were purchased from CSG Holding Co., Ltd. Methyl ammonium iodide (MAI, 99.5%) was purchased from Borun New Material Technology. Lead iodide (PbI2, 99.99%), 4-tert-butylpyridine (96%), and spiro-OMeTAD (99.8%) were purchased from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp. Chlorobenzene (CB, 99.9%), dimethyl formamide (DMF, 99%), and lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI, 99.95%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, 99%) and SnO2 solution (15% in H2O colloidal dispersion) were purchased from Alfa Aesar. 3-Thenoic acid (99%) and thiophene-3-acetic acid (98%) were purchased from Aladdin Reagents and 3-thiophenepropanoic acid (97%) was purchased from Amatek Scientific Co. Ltd.


The etched ITO substrates were cleaned with water, acetone, and isopropanol by ultrasonic treatment for 20 min, respectively. The pre-cleaned ITO substrates were treated with oxygen plasma for 10 min to remove the organic residue before use. The ETLs were prepared by spin-coating the SnO2 precursor at 4000 rpm for 30 s, followed by annealing at a temperature of 150 °C for 30 min in the air. After cooling down, the substrates were transferred into a glovebox filled with nitrogen. The thiophene-based solution was spin-coated onto the ETL at 3500 rpm for 40 s followed by annealing at 100 °C for 10 min to form TA interlayers. Then the substrates were washed with 200 μL CB to remove the dissociated TA molecules while the reference substrates were treated with the same method. The MAPbI3 perovskite precursor was prepared by dissolving MAI and PbI2 (1:1.05) into a solvent mixture of DMF and DMSO (4:1, v/v). The perovskite precursor was then spin-coated onto the ETL or TA interlayers at 3500 rpm for 40 s. Within the first 10 s, 200 μL chlorobenzene was dropped as an antisolvent to remove the DMSO. The samples were then heated at 100 °C for 20 min to obtained black perovskite films. The as-prepared spiro-OMeTAD precursor (prepared by dissolving 72 mg spiro-OMeTAD in 1 mL chlorobenzene, followed by the addition of 29 μL 4-tert-butylpyridine and 18 μL Li-TFSI solution (520 mg mL−1 in acetonitrile)) was spin-coated onto the perovskite layer at 4000 rpm for 30 s to form the HTL. Finally, a 2 nm MoO3 capping layer and an 80 nm Ag electrode were thermally evaporated onto the HTL under a base pressure of 2.8 × 10−4 Pa.


The surface morphology and crystallinity of the perovskite samples were measured using a ZEISS Merlin microscope and a Bruker D8 Advance X-ray diffractometer using a Cu Kα radiation source (λ = 1.5418 Å), respectively. The AFM images of the samples were recorded using Multimode 8 instruments made by Bruker. The contact angle images were obtained using an OCA40 Micro. The absorbance spectra of the samples were recorded with a PerkinElmer Lambda 750 ultraviolet/visible/near-infrared (UV/Vis/NIR) spectrophotometer. The stead-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra were recorded with an FLS 920 spectrofluorometer (Edinburgh Instruments) equipped with a continuous wavelength xenon lamp (450 W). The wavelength of excitation light was 520 nm. The time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) decay spectra were measured using an FLS 920 spectrofluorometer (Edinburgh Instruments) equipped with an nF900 ultrafast nanosecond flashlamp. The excitation light illuminated the perovskite film surface at the same angles for all PL measurements. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) profiles were measured with a monochromatic He I light source (21.22 eV) and a VG Scienta R4000 analyzer. A sample bias of −5 V was applied to observe the secondary electron cutoff (SEC). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) profiles were measured with a Thermo Scientific Escalab 250Xi instrument. Current density–voltage (J–V) curves were measured using a Keithley 2400 source meter under a calibrated AM 1.5G solar simulator system (100 mW cm−2). The capacitance–voltage (C–V) curves were measured using an Autolab PGSTAT 302N electrochemical workstation.


The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61974045), the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (No. 2019A1515012092), the Key Laboratory of Functional Molecular Solids, Ministry of Education (No. FMS201905), the Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of New and Renewable Energy Research and Development (No. Y909kp1001), and a project funded by the Science and Technology Bureau of the Dongguan Government (No. 2019622163008).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta10270a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021