 DOI: 10.1039/D2CP01484J
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2022, 24, 15474-15483


Jitendra
Kumar
,

Ankur
Yadav
 and 

Monojit
Bag
*

Advanced Research in Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 247667, India. E-mail: monojit.bag@ph.iitr.ac.in

Centre of Nanotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 247667, India

Received
30th March 2022
, Accepted 1st June 2022
First published on 2nd June 2022
2D-perovskites are generally more stable than 3D perovskites while charge transport in 2D-perovskites becomes inefficient. On the other hand, the instability of 3D perovskite films under heat, light and environmental conditions makes them inapplicable for practical purposes. Therefore, quasi-2D perovskites could be the optimum solution for stable yet highly efficient devices. Using the post-fabrication treatment method, we have converted methylammonium lead tribromide (MAPbBr3) 3D perovskite films into a quasi 2D-perovskite interfacial layer. In situ photoluminescence measurement during spin coating indicates a rapid conversion of 3D-perovskite into 2D-perovskites. The kinetics of oxygen and moisture diffusion, ion diffusion and electronic charge transport can be estimated from the time dependent PL measurements in the 3D and 2D/3D perovskite samples. 2D terminated perovskite samples show enhanced photoluminescence and improved stability in moisture and UV-irradiation. We also propose that a relatively wide bandgap of 2D-perovskite can give rise to a graded energy landscape at the interface for favorable charge separation. Simulation results reveal that the power conversion efficiency can be improved from 2.83% to 4.02% due to an increase in open-circuit voltage and fill factor in 2D/3D based MAPbBr3 solar cells without using any electron transport layer.

In the last ten years, there have been tremendous efforts to understand the carrier loss mechanisms in perovskite materials. The interplay of the carrier trapping, augur recombination, and radiative recombination determines the ultimate device performance and must be understood to the deepest level possible. PL measurements can reveal the characteristics and signatures of various processes responsible for the decay of excess carriers injected through excitation (generally excited through a laser). These signatures can give us a great amount of information about the different physical effects, such as bimolecular radiative recombination, charge transport within the perovskite, charge transfer to the transport layer, carrier trapping, carrier accumulation and recombination at the interface. For application in light-emitting diodes, we clearly need to maximize the radiative recombination by minimizing all other nonradiative processes; however, nonradiative recombination under practical conditions seems to be inevitable. Although the device performances of halide perovskite (HP)-based solar cells have become comparable to crystalline Si-based devices, still perovskite technology is facing many issues due to their instability. The key reason behind such a huge success of these materials is thought to be their exceptional defect tolerance. It has been reported that the nonradiative sites are generally present towards the grain boundaries of the perovskite; this could be one reason why surface passivation in HPs happens to be such a success. There are several contrasting results published by many researchers in the quest of understanding the photophysics of these materials. The spectrum of the parameters reported for these materials is very broad due to the sky-scraping sensitivity of these materials during the fabrication steps. Perovskites are so sensitive to their fabrication steps that the properties of the perovskite films prepared by a particular method cannot be postulated a priori, and the ultimate properties must be tested case by case. Although the power conversion efficiencies of perovskite devices are already reaching their limiting values, a consensus about the true behaviour of neither a 3D nor quasi-2D perovskite film has yet been established. Researchers are now more concerned about the fundamental understanding of these materials. Recently, it has been discovered that halide perovskites are substantially softer materials generally having Young's modulus (YM) below 20 GPa, whereas purely inorganic semiconductors such as Si, GaAs and CIGS or other oxide perovskites usually have the YM on the order of hundreds of GPa. Therefore, even a little stress can trigger the decomposition of the perovskite lattice. There are several approaches to improve the stability of these materials; recently it has been demonstrated by many research groups that owing to their improved resistance towards ion migration and halide segregation, mixed cation and mixed anion-based perovskites are more stable compared to their controlled counterparts. Apart from this, 2D perovskites are generally found to be much more stable compared to 3D perovskites; however, they are unsuitable for application in light-emitting diodes or in solar cells due to their poor charge transport properties. Quasi 2D perovskites on the other hand, share the properties of both 2D and 3D perovskites making them suitable for LED applications. Recently it has been observed that the presence of a 2D or quasi-2D capping layer can significantly improve the stability of the underlying perovskite film under ambient conditions. In this article, we have demonstrated a facile route to prepare a heterojunction of 3D and quasi 2D perovskite films, in a top bottom manner, and these films are quite different from those presenting homogeneous regions of 3D and 2D perovskite throughout the film. Detailed optical measurement during the film formation as well after light soaking has been carried out to understand the role of the 2D-perovskite terminated interface on the 3D perovskite samples.


Controlled 3D perovskite samples were spin-coated on a glass substrate using the antisolvent treatment method; the antisolvent treatment method is generally found to give good quality perovskite films suitable for device application. We used a 0.6 M solution of MABr and PbBr2 in DMF, DMSO mixed solvent (7:3) for the spin coating of perovskite films. All the samples were spin coated at 3000 RPM for 60 seconds, using the antisolvent treatment method, and the antisolvent treatment was performed using chlorobenzene at the 20th second of spinning. We annealed all the samples at 100 °C for 15 minutes. As post-treatment, the 3D perovskite samples were carefully washed with iso-propyl-alcohol (IPA) mixed with 2% benzylamine (C7H9N) in it. For better understanding, this method is illustrated in Fig. 1. We have also shown that using different concentrations of Benzylamine in IPA, the ratio of 2D and 3D fractions of the perovskite films can be tuned; thus, we can precisely control the thickness of the 3D or 2D regions of the sample (Fig. S2, ESI). This method can be utilized to effectively confine the charge carries in perovskite films, which is required to obtain high-efficiency LEDs; when making a full coverage, smooth and leakage-free perovskite film below 100 nm thickness is not possible. Benzylamine is a bulky molecule with a strong tendency to attach itself to perovskites, and an excess amount of benzylamine in antisolvent can also form the 2D perovskite structure during antisolvent treatment, but this method produces a blend of 2D–3D perovskites, whereas the redissolution method used in this article provides a 2D perovskite layer on top and 3D perovskite at the bottom. A bi-layer of 2D/3D perovskite can act as a graded heterojunction diode at the interface of 2D and 3D perovskite regions and may change the surface recombination velocity for the charge carriers. Therefore, this method can be utilized as a surface modifier for HPs. In this article, we have confirmed the successful conversion of 3D perovskite films into 2D terminated 2D/3D perovskite films by using X-ray diffraction, steady state absorption and steady state photoluminescence spectroscopy. We have also performed XPS to examine the effect of benzylamine attachment to the perovskite lattice (Fig. S4, ESI).

We found that the peak intensity of the C–C (∼284.9 eV) bond in 2D/3D samples is around 1.4 times higher as compared to the C–C bond in the controlled 3D sample, whereas the C–O (∼286 eV) bond intensity is the same in both the samples. The increase in C–C peak intensity indicates the successful incorporation of benzylamine in the perovskite. Only one N1s peak is observed at peak energy ∼402 eV for both samples, which can be attributed to the formation of the silicon oxynitride (NSiO2) complex. The XRD patterns for controlled films, and films after post-treatment show the growing peak at ∼5° of 2θ which is attributed to n = 1 phase of 2D perovskites as shown in Fig. 2a. The absorption spectrum of 3D terminated perovskite films shows the absorption band-edge around ∼2.29 eV whereas 2D terminated perovskite samples show 2 absorption onsets corresponding to a 3D and 2D layer of the samples, at ∼2.29 eV and ∼3.02 eV, respectively. From the Tauc plot, the estimated bandgap of controlled 3D samples is found to be 2.295 eV, whereas 2D terminated perovskites show a bandgap of 2.305 eV; this 10 meV increase in bandgap could be either because of the incorporation of bulky benzylamine molecules causing the distortion in the 3D phase or because of the trap passivation due the 2D perovskite capping. The quasi 2D nature of the perovskite film is also confirmed with steady-state PL measurement. We have observed a 3D peak at 2.29 eV in controlled samples, whereas 2D terminated samples show a slight blue shift of ∼20 meV for low energy emission (emission from 3D region) and another peak at 3.02 eV which corresponds to the emission from 2D regions of the sample. We performed excitation intensity-dependent PL measurement and found that the nature of absorption at 3.06 eV (photon energy at 405 nm produced by laser) in controlled 3D samples is more like non-resonant absorption, whereas absorption in 2D terminated samples is more like resonant absorption. We also performed position-dependent photoluminescence measurements to check if there is any reduction in charge carrier diffusion coefficient due to the presence of a 2D terminated surface; we found that the photoluminescence intensity drops exponentially as we move away from the edge of the excitation region (defined by the illumination slit). We found that the characteristic length for the drop in PL intensity is almost similar in both the samples. This indicates that the charge carrier diffusion behavior in the underlying 3D film is not much affected due to the presence of a 2D terminated surface (see Fig. S5 and S9, ESI).

In any optically active materials, photogenerated charge carriers’ decay through a number of processes, an unambiguous identification of these processes will lead to a better understanding of the material properties. Generally, in an ideal semiconductor, electrons and holes recombine either radiatively to emit photons of energy equivalent to the band gap of the semiconductor or these charge carriers may be captured by a long-lived energy state and decay non-radiatively. These carrier trapping sites are termed as quencher sites. Steady-state photoluminescence measurement requires the presence of a hole and an electron to recombine radiatively, and therefore photoluminescence flux is generally found to obey the equation

YPL(ϕ) ∝ Bnp
(1)
Here
B is the bimolecular recombination coefficient, and n and p are the excited electron and hole concentrations, respectively. Fluorescence intensity is quenched in the presence of a hole and/or electron trapping species, these species are generally located at the interface due to the presence of foreign atoms or due to dangling bonds present at the surface; also, the presence of either a hole transport layer (HTL) or an electron transport layer (ETL) can heavily quench the photoluminescence intensity by extracting one type of carrier from the active layer. In this study we have studied the quenching efficiency of an ETL (1,3,5-tris(1-phenyl-1H-benzimidazol-2-yl)benzene (TPBi)) and the quenching efficiency of an HTL (poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT)) for both the controlled and 2D terminated perovskite films. 20 mg mL−1 TPBi or 10 mg mL−1 P3HT solution in chlorobenzene was spin coated on perovskite films at 3000 rpm for 30 seconds to prepare the charge extractor layer. We observed that the presence of TPBi over 3D samples quenches the PL intensity by 21.6%, whereas the presence of TPBi over 2D terminated perovskite films quenches the PL intensity by 48.3%. In the case of the P3HT layer on top of the controlled 3D films and 2D terminated perovskite samples, the PL intensity is quenched by 97.5% and 51.2%, respectively (Fig. 3). By partially washing the top part of the controlled 3D perovskite films, we can design a graded heterojunction diode. In the presence of an ETL, the quenching efficiency is increased due to the presence of a 2D terminated surface, whereas in the presence of a HTL the quenching efficiency of the 2D terminated samples is decreased. The schematic band diagram as shown in Fig. 4 illustrates the possible mechanism controlling the photoluminescence signal. Redissolution in the presence of bulky benzylamine stretches the metal–halide bond and lowers the valence band, and raises the conduction band in a disproportionate ratio as we move from the 3D region to the quasi 2D region, causing a high negative gradient in the valence band and low and positive gradient in the conduction band. Therefore, the 2D terminated surface acts as a barrier for holes reaching from the perovskite to P3HT and at the same time it favors electron extraction from the perovskite to TPBi due to decreased conduction band offset at the perovskite (2D)/TPBi interface. Therefore, 2D perovskite capping can improve the charge separation in the 2D perovskite capped film and improve device efficiency in perovskite solar cells.


The conversion of 3D perovskite film into 2D terminated perovskite film was observed in an in situ PL measurement set up specially built in our laboratory. 3D samples were converted to 2D terminated samples in an open air environment (T = 25 °C and RH = 60%). We observed that as soon as we drip the redissolving solvent, there is a sudden drop in PL intensity along with a sharp change in quasi-Fermi level splitting (QFLS) and in the full width at half maxima (FWHM) of the PL emission, as shown in Fig. 5. The conversion happens within a second of dripping the dissolving solvent. At the instant of dripping the dissolving solvent, the 3D perovskite structure goes into a highly disordered state having a lot of defects and distortions in the lattice. This is observed by a sudden blue shift (∼10 meV) in peak position (Fig. 5c). However, the perovskite sample recovers within 2–3 seconds and therefore, we get a constant QFLS and FWHM. It must be noted that the recovery of the PL intensity and peak position is much slower as compared to the change in QFLS and FWHM, which indicates the high defect tolerance of perovskites. PL peak position and PL intensity try to return to the initial values as the structure goes from a highly disordered state to an ordered state; however, the PL peak position shows a slight blue shift (∼4 meV) while the PL intensity is more than its initial value. From the improvement in QFLS, we can calculate the improvement in PLQY using the well-known relation

QFLS = QFLSrad + kTln(PLQY)
(2)
Here, QFLS is the experimentally measured quasi Fermi level splitting, and QFLS
rad is the quasi-Fermi level splitting in the radiative limit. We observed that the conversion from 3D to quasi 2D/3D samples can improve PLQY at least ∼3 times.


Halide perovskites are relatively softer materials with low activation energy for ion migration, which is the main reason for device degradation. Perovskite films/devices are found to degrade under heat, moisture or UV-irradiation. Halide perovskites suffer from halide segregation, which results in structural and mechanical instability. We performed a light soaking experiment in humid conditions with a continuous wave laser diode of wavelength 405 nm. The power of the laser diode was adjusted to 50 mW, and the photon flux for such an intensity is equivalent to 1 sun intensity at AM1.5. We observed that the spectrum of QFLS in the 3D sample is wider (∼700 meV), whereas the distribution of QFLS in 2D terminated films is much narrower (∼145 meV) compared to the controlled 3D sample. In this study we have calculated the QFLS using generalized Planck's law

(3)
Here,
YPL(E) is the absolute magnitude of the photon flux detected outside the sample, Δϕ is the QFLS, E is the photon energy, k is the Boltzmann constant and T is the sample temperature. Narrowing down of the distribution in QFLS strongly indicates that the processes responsible for PL quenching or PL activation are greatly suppressed in 2D terminated samples. Histogram plots of QFLS for both the samples are bell shaped unimodal distributions.

The shape of the QFLS distribution indicates that the rate of degradation and healing are of the same order for the controlled sample (Fig. 6c), and this is also the case of the 2D/3D sample (Fig. 6d); however, the rate of degradation/healing in the 3D sample is different from the rate of degradation/healing in the 2D/3D sample and these rates may also depend on the history of the sample. The range of QFLS values for controlled and 2D terminated perovskite show that the degradation under light is slowed down for 2D terminated perovskite samples. Both the samples show self-healing in the dark. The 2D terminated samples almost always show more than 95% recovery in the dark and, we rarely observe any overshooting of the PL intensity while self-healing. The amplitude of photodegradation is almost constant for all the cycles in the 2D terminated sample. On the other hand, 3D samples show faster degradation in the first cycle followed by relatively slower degradation in subsequent cycles under light soaking; also the probability of overshooting of the PL intensity in controlled 3D samples is much higher as compared to 2D terminated samples. Several samples were tested to verify the reproducibility of the observations as shown in Fig. S6 (ESI). The observed behavior in the controlled 3D and 2D terminated samples can be understood as the interplay between the generation and oxidation of metallic lead. When we shine light on the perovskite air interface, we impart energy to the perovskite lattice; this may lead to the breakdown of the perovskite lattice at the perovskite air interface. Breaking of the perovskite structure results in the generation of metallic lead, this process leaves its signature as continuous blue shifting in the peak position as long as we keep the laser on. The presence of metallic lead at the perovskite air interface starts to act as a quencher site and therefore we observe a decreasing PL intensity along with blue shifting in the peak position. Now the role of oxygen at the interface is to oxidize the metallic lead and form lead oxide, thus eliminating the quencher sites. Therefore, the magnitude of the PL intensity can be thought of as the result of a number of competing processes responsible for photodegradation and healing. The experimental results can be well fitted by the following equation
(4)
Here,
x denotes the number of dominant processes influencing the PL signal. an, bn and cn are the process parameters. The main reason behind such PL intensity variation is the presence of multiple accelerating processes in the sample. We found that most of the cycles in the light soaking experiment can be fitted with x = 4 (Fig. S8, ESI). These 4 prominent processes could be the variation of electron/hole diffusion coefficient, generation of free lead atoms, generation of PbO2 and the diffusion of oxygen/moisture through the perovskite air interface. The generation of lead oxide and reduction of the carrier diffusion coefficient leads to an increase in the PL intensity, whereas the generation of free lead and reduced probability of oxygen diffusion in the perovskite lattice leads to decreasing PL intensity due to strong PL quenching behavior of metallic lead. The physical significance of bn can be understood as the time-scale at which some particular process peaks, whereas the magnitude of cn describes the variation in the rate of the corresponding process. The distribution of bn in 3D samples is similar. Therefore, all the 4 processes are happening at the same time; this indicates uncontrolled/free diffusion of atmospheric oxygen into the perovskite lattice followed by the formation of lead oxide, as shown in Fig. 7a. On the other hand, b1 in 2D/3D samples shows more negative values, which indicates that the time scale for one process has changed significantly from the 3D sample to the 2D/3D sample. This process could be responsible for the contrasting PL intensity variation in both samples. The distribution of cn in the 3D and 2D/3D samples is also quite different. The c1 and c2 distribution show a broader range in the 3D film as compared to the 2D/3D film. This is an indication of more random/uncontrolled processes in the 3D samples. This variation is also consistent with the wider distribution in QFLS values in 3D as compared to 2D/3D samples. The photo-healing dominates in 2D terminated samples compared to photodegradation only in the first cycle of light soaking, while photodegradation is much more effective in all other subsequent cycles. Therefore, we speculate that in the first cycle, the generated free metallic lead may react with the trapped oxygen within the bulk film. This might be trapped at the time of spin coating. Once all the trapped oxygen has formed lead oxide, further formation of lead oxide in the subsequent cycle is prohibited due to less diffusion of oxygen from the environment to the sample. This observation again indicates that the diffusion of oxygen in 3D samples is much more effective as compared to 2D/3D perovskite. The schematic diagram in Fig. 7b shows various competing processes at the perovskite air interface. We observed that at a given excitation density in 3D samples both the processes, namely photodegradation and photo healing, are happening almost at similar rates because there are enough oxygen molecules at the interface as well as in the bulk available to convert metallic lead into lead oxide instantaneously. In 2D terminated samples we rarely see any photoactivation, since in 2D terminated samples the diffusion of oxygen is reduced and therefore only the metallic lead generated at the surface can be passivated effectively, whereas the lead into the bulk cannot be passivated. Thus, photodegradation becomes the dominating factor over the photo healing in 2D terminated samples. However, the overall stability of the 2D/3D perovskites is significantly improved due to less oxygen/moisture diffusion.


We simulated our proposed ETL-free devices using SCAPS 3.3.10 software. We have used the ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/Al device geometry for both devices. Most of the simulation parameters are taken from the literature. All the simulation parameters and simulation results can be found in Tables S2 and S3 (ESI). We observed that the presence of a capped 2D layer acts as a hole blocking/electron injection layer. The presence of the capped 2D layer improves the VOC from 0.93 eV to 1.17 eV and the power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 2.83% to 4.02% for a 300 nm thick MAPbBr3 film. We have also simulated the efficiency for different 2D layer thicknesses, keeping the overall thickness of the active layer constant (300 nm). The results suggest that a 2D graded layer is always better than pure 3D samples. Increasing the 2D layer thickness may result in decreasing photon absorption and hence decreasing short circuit current (JSC). The device efficiency can be improved by increasing the 3D perovskite layer thickness to beyond 500 nm and reducing the cathode electrode work function. Therefore, further optimization is needed to improve the current density and overall efficiency.


In conclusion, we have demonstrated a facile route to prepare 2D terminated 3D MAPbBr3 based perovskite films. Using a series of experiments, we have demonstrated that the 2D capped perovskites display a narrower distribution of quasi-Fermi level splitting compared to the controlled 3D sample in light soaking experiments. This indicates the higher stability of quasi 2D perovskite films. The UV-VIS spectrum of the converted quasi 2D perovskite samples shows an additional absorption peak at 410 nm; also the photoluminescence measurement displays the presence of both the emissions from 3D perovskite (at 540 nm) and the emission from quasi 2D perovskite (at 410 nm). Along with the UV-VIS spectrum and photoluminescence spectrum, the XRD spectrum was also collected to confirm the conversion of the 3D sample into 2D capped 2D/3D structure. Under light soaking experiments, 3D and 2D/3D samples show the coexistence of photo-healing and photodegradation, and our proposed model agreeably fits all the observations of the light soaking experiment and PL quenching behaviours with different interfaces. Photodegradation in perovskite films under light soaking occurs due to the interaction of high-energy photons with the low lattice energy perovskite; the high energy photons start to break the perovskite crystal structure and convert the perovskite structure into its constituent atoms. Generation of metallic lead leads to the creation of nonradiative sites (quencher sites) and at the same time the atmospheric oxygen oxidizes the metallic lead (free lead) and converts it into lead oxide. The conversion of free lead into lead oxide leads to trapping passivation in the perovskite. The rate of photodegradation and photo healing in the 3D samples suggests that our samples' degradation and passivation is happening instantaneously because of the uncontrolled supply of atmospheric oxygen. Our simulation results indicate that both the improved VOC and PCE can be obtained by employing 2D terminated perovskite films. Therefore, a bilayer of 2D/3D sample can be utilized to prepare high-efficiency perovskite LEDs and solar cells due to their heterostructure geometry and favorable graded energy landscape.


All the chemicals were used as received, including Methylamine Solution (40%, Central Drug House Pvt. Ltd), HBr (48%, Sigma-Aldrich), Ethanol (Analytical CS Reagent), Propan-2-ol (99.999% AR/ACS, SDFCL), N,N-Dimethylformamide (DMF, anhydrous 99.8%, Sigma-Aldrich), Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) dried, SRL Chemicals), Chlorobenzene (extra pure AR, SRL chemicals), Benzylamine (99% Sigma Aldrich), poly(3,4-ethylene di-oxythiophene)-poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS conductive grade, Sigma-Aldrich), and Lead bromide (99.9 Sigma-Aldrich).


The morphology and EDX of the perovskite samples were characterized by FE-SEM using a Carl Zeiss Gemini Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope.


The XRD spectrum was recorded on Bruker D8-Advance with 1.54 Å monochromatic radiation. The spectrum was recorded from 5° to 55° with a step size of 0.02°.


PL spectra were measured using a Thorlabs compact spectrometer (CCS 200).


XPS spectrographs were recorded using a VersaProbe III PHI 5000.

3D
3 dimensional
2D/3D
Quasi 2 dimensional
HPs
Halide perovskites

The work is supported by Department of Science and Technology, INDIA under project no. DST/INT/SWD/VR/P-13/2019 dated 14/12/2019.


There are no conflicts to declare.


M. B. acknowledges the Department of Science and Technology, INDIA under award no. DST/INT/SWD/VR/P-13/2019 dated 14/12/2020 for partial support to carry out this research work. J. K. acknowledges the Ministry of Education, Government of India for the PhD fellowship.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cp01484j
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2022