 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA08679J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26580-26585


Jiupeng
Cao
,

Qidong
Tai
,

Peng
You
,

Guanqi
Tang
,

Tianyue
Wang
,

Naixiang
Wang
 and 

Feng
Yan
*

Department of Applied Physics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong, P. R. China. E-mail: apafyan@polyu.edu.hk

Received
8th August 2019
, Accepted 30th October 2019
First published on 30th October 2019
As a promising lead-free perovskite candidate, tin-based halide perovskites such as FASnI3 have attracted extensive attention recently in photovoltaic applications. However, the relatively low efficiency and poor long-term stability of tin-based perovskite solar cells hinder their practical applications. Here, ammonium hypophosphite is introduced into the FASnI3 perovskite precursor to suppress the oxidation of Sn2+ and assist the growth of perovskite grains, leading to improved perovskite film quality and reduced defect density, and consequently, the device efficiency and open circuit voltage are substantially improved. More importantly, the solar cells exhibit pronounced enhancement of the long-term stability. This work provides a facile approach for improving the performance of tin-based perovskite solar cells by introducing ammonium hypophosphite as an antioxidant agent in the precursor solution.

Organic–inorganic hybrid halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been considered as the most promising candidate for the new generation photovoltaic technology because of their high power conversion efficiency (PCE), low cost and convenient fabrication processes. State-of-the-art lead-based halide perovskites exhibit excellent optoelectronic properties, like strong light absorption, long carrier diffusion length and low density of defects, leading to the record PCE over 25%. However, toxic lead may cause environmental problems when PSCs are widely used. Thus, it is imperative to develop lead-free perovskites with favorable physical properties. Among various alternative metal elements (Sn, Bi, and Sb) for replacing Pb in perovskites, Sn may have the highest potential because of the ideal optical and electrical properties of tin-based perovskites for photovoltaic applications. However, the device performance of tin-based PSCs still falls behind that of lead-based counterparts due to the following reasons. First, the major problem of tin-based perovskites is their poor stability because of the formation of Sn vacancies and the oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+, leading to high doping levels and recombination rates in perovskite films. Second, it is difficult to get uniform and pinhole-free tin-based perovskite films due to the fast crystallization of the films. So reported tin-based PSCs suffer from low efficiency and poor stability especially in air.

Tin-based PSCs have been studied by many groups and various approaches based on different principles have been developed to improve the device performance. To suppress the oxidation of Sn2+ and reduce the doping levels, SnF2 or SnCl2 has been incorporated into perovskite precursor solutions. However, an excess of SnF2/SnCl2 may cause phase separation in perovskite films (e.g. inhomogeneous dispersion) and deteriorate the device performance. To further suppress the oxidation process, Kanatzidis and co-workers prepared the perovskite films under a reducing vapor atmosphere. Moreover, solvent engineering and compositional engineering with mixed cations have been developed to prepare high-quality tin-based perovskite films. Very recently, a tin-based perovskite film with a hierarchy structure was designed to enhance oxidation resistance for improved device stability and performance. However, the photovoltaic performance and stability of tin-based PSCs still lag far behind those of lead-based PSCs. So, it is necessary to develop novel techniques that can not only retard the Sn2+ oxidation but also assist the preparation of compact and uniform perovskite films.
In this work, we introduced an ammonium hypophosphite (AHP, NH4H2PO2) additive in FASnI3 perovskite precursor solutions for the first time. AHP is a reducing agent that can prohibit the oxidation of Sn2+ in perovskites. Meantime, H2PO2− can form an intermediate phase with SnCl2 and lead to an improved film morphology and lower trap densities. In addition, we use CuSCN as a hole transporting material in the devices because of its high hole mobility and good energy alignment with FASnI3. The devices show a PCE of up to 7.3% with a short circuit current (JSC) of 19.39 mA cm−2, open circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.55 V and fill factor (FF) of 68.8%. More importantly, the devices exhibit good long-term stability both in pure N2 and ambient atmospheres. This work clearly indicates that the introduction of an appropriate antioxidant agent in precursor solutions can enhance the device performance and long-term stability of tin-based PSCs.

All chemicals were used as received without any further purification. Copper(I) thiocyanate (CuSCN, 99%) and SnCl2 (>99%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. CH(NH2)2I was purchased from Dyesol Ltd. SnI2 (99.999%) and phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) were purchased from Alfa Aesar and Nano-C, respectively.


The ITO-coated glass substrates were cleaned via ultrasonication in deionized water, acetone and isopropanol for 10 min, respectively. The process of preparing CuSCN on ITO was similar to previous reports. CuSCN dissolved in aqueous ammonia (10 mg mL−1) was spin-coated on the ITO substrate at 4000 rpm for 20 s in ambient air and then the films were annealed at 150 °C for 20 min on a hotplate in air. Then the films were transferred to a nitrogen-purged glovebox for later experiments. The FASnI3 perovskite precursor solution was prepared by dissolving 1 mmol SnI2 and 1 mmol FAI with 10 mol% SnCl2 in 1 mL mixed solvent (DMF:DMSO = 4:1). For the AHP included perovskite precursor solution, the molar ratio of AHP and SnI2 was 3%, 5% and 7%, respectively. The perovskite precursor solution was spin-coated on the CuSCN layer at 2000 rpm for 5 s and then at 5000 rpm for 30 s, and 100 μL chlorobenzene was dripped onto the perovskite film at the 11th s. The obtained films were annealed at 70 °C for 10 min. PCBM (20 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene) was spin-coated on the perovskite film at 1500 rpm for 30 s to function as an electron transporting layer. Finally, 90 nm silver electrodes were thermally evaporated on the PCBM layer under vacuum to complete the device fabrication. An active area of 0.048 cm2 was defined by a shadow mask.


The morphology of the films was recorded using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (Hitachi S-4300). The optical absorption spectra of perovskite films were measured using a Shimadzu UV-2550 spectrophotometer. XRD patterns were measured using a Rigaku SmartLab X-ray diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation. The time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) spectra were obtained at 850 nm with an excitation of 650 nm using an FLS980 fluorescence spectrometer (Edinburgh Instruments, England).

The current–voltage (J–V) curves of the solar cells were measured using a Keithley 2400 digital source meter under simulated air mass 1.5 G sunlight (Newport 91160, 300 W). The light intensity was calibrated using a standard monocrystalline silicon photodiode. EQE spectra were recorded on an Oriel integrated system. The Nyquist plots were recorded on a Zennium X electrochemical workstation (Zahner, Germany).
All the measurements of PSCs were carried out in ambient air at room temperature without encapsulation. For the stability test, samples were stored in a N2 filled glovebox or under ambient conditions (∼20% relative humidity) after measurements.

AHP was introduced into FASnI3 precursors as a reducing additive. To assess the reducing ability of AHP, a plain FASnI3 precursor solution was prepared and exposed to ambient air. At the beginning, the precursor solution showed a clear yellow color (Fig. 1a). After being exposed to air for 15 minutes, the solution turned to dark red, indicating the oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+. Interestingly, with the introduction of AHP (12 mol%) into the precursor solution, the color of the solution gradually changed to yellow again during the following reaction

Sn4+ + 3H2PO2− → Sn2+ + 2HPO32− + PH4+
(1)
This result clearly indicates the reducing ability of AHP and its effect on Sn ions in the perovskite precursor.
Due to the higher Lewis acidity of Sn than Pb, the crystallization of the Sn-based perovskite is much faster than that of its lead analogue, making it difficult to obtain homogeneous and compact perovskite films. To evaluate the influence of AHP on the perovskite film morphology, FASnI3 perovskite films prepared with various amounts of AHP were characterized under scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Many pinholes can be observed from the plain FASnI3 films (Fig. 1b) because of the fast and uncontrollable crystallization. Moreover, some needle-like aggregates formed on the film resulting from phase separation of SnCl2. With the introduction of 3 mol% AHP, phase separation almost disappeared while some pinholes still existed on the film (Fig. 1c). Notably, the inclusion of 5 mol% AHP in the precursor solution resulted in a pinhole-free and compact perovskite film (Fig. 1d), which is beneficial for device performance. However, when the amount of AHP was increased to 7 mol%, the perovskite film became much rougher and many pinholes could be found in the film (Fig. 1e).
Similar to our previous report, we consider that the AHP additive in the perovskite precursor can react with SnCl2 and form a complex to encapsulate perovskite grains. Notably, the PO bond in AHP can coordinate with SnCl2 and induce a uniform dispersion of the AHP–SnCl2 intermediate complex in the perovskite film and prohibit the phase separation of SnCl2. To confirm the interaction between AHP and SnCl2, a pure AHP film and an AHP–SnCl2 (molar ratio, 1:1) composite film were characterized using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). As shown in Fig. 2a, the vibration of the PO bond was shifted to an obviously lower wavenumber in the AHP–SnCl2 composite, which validates the strong interaction between AHP and SnCl2. Meanwhile, NH4+ can also form intermediate phases during perovskite film preparation. Thus, these intermediate phases can suppress the crystallization of SnCl2 and regulate the nucleation and crystallization of perovskites, resulting in a high-quality FASnI3 film.
The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of FASnI3 films prepared with different contents of AHP are shown in Fig. S1. The characteristic peaks of the FASnI3 films without and with AHP all matched well with the orthorhombic lattice structure of FASnI3. Moreover, the much sharper peaks observed from the FASnI3 film with 5 mol% AHP demonstrated its enhanced crystallinity. The absorption spectra of FASnI3 films without and with 5 mol% AHP are shown in Fig. 2b. All the films have a similar absorption onset of ∼890 nm with an estimated bandgap of 1.39 eV.
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were used to further evaluate the effect of AHP on the extent of Sn2+ oxidation in the perovskite films, and the corresponding XPS spectra are shown in Fig. S2a and b. The 5 mol% AHP modified perovskite film showed a much lower Sn4+ content, indicating the ability of AHP to suppress the Sn2+ oxidation, which is in accordance with the color change of the precursor solution (Fig. 1a). According to Fig. S2c, the content of Cl significantly decreased after argon etching, indicating that Cl was not incorporated into the perovskite lattice. Similar results were found for the P element from the XPS spectra (Fig. S2d). These elemental composition values further confirm that the AHP–SnCl2 complex can encapsulate perovskite grains on their surfaces.
To gain a deeper understanding of charge dynamics, the FASnI3 films were characterized using steady state and time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy. As shown in Fig. 2c, the plain FASnI3 film showed a PL peak at around 895 nm, corresponding to a bandgap of 1.39 eV. The AHP-modified FASnI3 film had a much stronger PL intensity indicating suppressed nonradiative recombination, which can be attributed to its improved film quality and reduced defect density. Moreover, the blue shift of the PL peak observed in the AHP-modified FASnI3 film also implied the improved crystallinity of the perovskite film. The time-resolved PL spectra are shown in Fig. 2d and are fitted by a bi-exponential decay model. The fast decay component τ1 can be attributed to bimolecular recombination and the long decay component τ2 comes from recombination of free carriers. As shown in Table S1,τ2 increased from 0.85 ns to 2.23 ns in the AHP-modified FASnI3 film, indicating a smaller trap density and reduced charge recombination induced by AHP. The increased carrier lifetime is favorable for the open circuit voltage of the resultant PSCs.
Inverted PSCs with the planar device structure of ITO/CuSCN/FASnI3/PCBM/Ag were prepared to evaluate the effect of the AHP additive on the photovoltaic performance (Fig. S3), and the corresponding energy diagram of the device is shown in Fig. 3a. The PCE statistics of FASnI3 PSCs prepared with different amounts of AHP are shown in Fig. 3b and the corresponding photovoltaic performance parameters are summarized in Table S2. The control devices without AHP showed an average PCE of 2.34 ± 0.71%, VOC of 0.25 ± 0.05 V, short circuit current density (JSC) of 17.72 ± 1.65 mA cm−2 and fill factor (FF) of 51.11 ± 9.01%. With the introduction of AHP, the device performance was improved substantially. The devices with 5 mol% AHP showed an average PCE of 6.25 ± 0.67%, VOC of 0.50 ± 0.03 V, JSC of 19.55 ± 0.79 mA cm−2 and FF of 63.71 ± 4.47%. As discussed before, the enhanced photovoltaic performance can be ascribed to the improved perovskite film quality and reduction of defects. However, more addition of AHP led to decreased device performance, which may come from deteriorated perovskite films with pinholes and high roughness.
The current density–voltage (J–V) curve of the champion PSC (5 mol% AHP) is shown in Fig. 3c, achieving a PCE of 7.34% and VOC of 0.55 V with negligible hysteresis. To verify the reliability of the device performance, the stabilized photocurrent and power output were measured at a bias of 0.43 V under AM 1.5 G illumination. As shown in Fig. 4a and d a stabilized output power of ∼7.0% was achieved, which is close to the value obtained from the J–V curve. Notably, the VOC of up to 0.55 V is among the highest values for FASnI3 based PSCs (Table S3) and can be attributed to decreased defect density in the perovskite film and the good energy alignment between the perovskite and the hole transporting material CuSCN. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum of the champion device is shown in Fig. S4, and the integrated current density is 18.8 mA cm−2, which is close to the value measured from the J–V curve (Fig. 3c). Moreover, the photovoltaic parameters of control and 5 mol% AHP-modified devices are shown in Fig. S5. The results clearly indicate that the introduction of AHP can improve both the reproducibility and efficiency of the devices. To evaluate the charge transport properties of the devices, we measured the dark current density, as shown in Fig. 4a. The plain FASnI3 solar cells suffered from high leakage current because of the high p-type doping. In contrast, the 5 mol% AHP modified FASnI3 solar cells showed good diode behavior with almost 1–2 orders lower leakage current than that of the control one, indicating their much reduced background carrier density. We further measured the trap state density in the perovskite absorber by the space charge limited current (SCLC) method. Electron-only devices with a structure of ITO/SnO2/perovskite/PCBM/Ag were prepared to obtain dark J–V curves, as shown in Fig. 4b. At low bias voltages, the J–V curves show a linear relationship, corresponding to the ohmic region. With the bias voltage exceeding the kink point, the current density quickly increases, implying that the trap states are fully filled. Using the trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL), we can obtain the trap state density Nt using this equation:
Nt = 2εε0VTFL/qL2,
(2)
where
ε and ε0 are the relative and vacuum dielectric constants, respectively, q is the elementary charge and L is the thickness of the perovskite film. The VTFL of the control and AHP-included devices is around 0.22 V and 0.12 V, corresponding to trap state densities of 3.45 × 1015 cm−3 and 1.88 × 1015 cm−3, respectively. The much lower trap state density of the AHP-modified perovskite film is favorable for the device performance.

To gain further insight into the charge transport characteristics of the solar cells, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy of the PSCs was performed.Fig. 4c shows the Nyquist plots of the FASnI3 solar cells without and with 5 mol% AHP addition, which were recorded at a bias of 0.3 V in the dark. Generally, the semicircle at low frequency can be attributed to the recombination resistance (Rrec) and constant phase element (CPE), and the charge recombination rate is inversely proportional to recombination resistance. The Rrec values of the control and AHP-modified solar cells measured at different bias voltages are shown in Fig. S6 and Table S4. The AHP-modified device had a much bigger Rrec, indicating a much lower recombination rate than the control.
The stability of the unencapsulated FASnI3 PSCs under light soaking test is presented in Fig. 4d. In previous reports, the unencapsulated devices degraded quickly in ambient air (Table S5). More than 60% of their original PCE was maintained after 10 h while the control devices degraded rapidly within 6 h because of the easy oxidation of Sn2+. We also examined the storage stability of the devices both in air and a N2-filled glovebox (without encapsulation), as shown in Fig. S7. In air, about 50% of their original PCE was maintained after the storage for 500 h while the control devices degraded rapidly within 100 h. When stored in a N2 environment, the devices with 5 mol% AHP could maintain 70% of their original PCE over 1000 h, while the control devices degraded more quickly and maintained only 50% of the initial PCE in the same period. The enhanced long-term stability induced by AHP can be ascribed to the reducing effect of AHP on the perovskite grains and the compact and pinhole free film morphology that can effectively suppress the permeation of oxygen.

In summary, AHP was introduced into the perovskite precursor to suppress the oxidation of Sn2+ and retard the fast crystallization of FASnI3. This method can substantially improve the film quality and decrease the trap density in the perovskite films. Meantime, inorganic CuSCN was used as a hole transporting material for FASnI3 PSCs to form a good energy level alignment of the devices. Consequently, improved photovoltaic performance was obtained in the resultant PSCs. Moreover, the AHP-included FASnI3 PSCs demonstrate an outstanding long-term stability both under N2 and ambient conditions. Our work suggests that the combination of an effective antioxidant additive and suitable hole extraction layer can improve the photovoltaic performance and the long-term stability of tin-based PSCs.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


This work was financially supported by the Research Grants Council (RGC) of Hong Kong, China (Project No. PolyU 152068/18E).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1–S7 and Tables S1–S5. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta08679j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019