 DOI: 10.1039/D1CC07041J
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 4787-4790


Yinan
Xiang
,

Huanxin
Guo
,

Zhiyuan
Cai
,

Chenhui
Jiang
,

Changfei
Zhu
,

Yongzhen
Wu
*,

Wei-Hong
Zhu
 and 

Tao
Chen
*

Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology of China, No. 96 Jinzhai Road, Hefei, Anhui Province 230026, P. R. China. E-mail: tchenmse@ustc.edu.cn

Institute of Fine Chemicals, School of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, East China University of Science and Technology, Meilong Road 130, Shanghai 200237, P. R. China. E-mail: wu.yongzhen@ecust.edu.cn

Received
15th December 2021
, Accepted 15th March 2022
First published on 17th March 2022
Herein, we demonstrate that a thiophene-modified quinoxaline core small molecule can be applied in Sb2(S,Se)3 solar cells. We reveal that the interaction between thiophene and Sb2(S,Se)3 through the Sb–S bond essentially improves the interfacial hole-extraction ability. This study provides a cost-effective dopant-free hole-transporting material for inorganic thin film solar cell applications with excellent stability.

Antimony selenosulfide, Sb2(S,Se)3, has attracted widespread attention as an alternative light harvesting material for solar cell applications. Due to the identical crystal structure and close radii of S and Se, the S/Se atomic ratio in Sb2(S,Se)3 is continuously tunable, which enables the band gap to fall in the range of 1.1–1.8 eV and perfectly match the solar spectrum for high efficiency solar cells according to the Shockley–Queisser limit. Remarkably, this class of materials shows excellent stability with oxygen and moisture, which is promising for practical applications.

In device fabrication, interfacial engineering plays a crucial role in determining whether the carrier is able to be efficiently transported for a good final power conversion efficiency (PCE). In terms of hole-transporting materials utilized in Sb2(S,Se)3 solar cells, the most efficient one to date is Spiro-OMeTAD, which delivers a PCE of around 10% in hydrothermal deposition-derived Sb2(S,Se)3 films. However, the utilization of Spiro-OMeTAD requires the doping of a Li-based salt to improve the hole-transporting capability, which seriously damages the stability of the devices as a result of the deliquescence and hygroscopicity of the Li salt. To cope with this challenge, various organic and inorganic hole-transporting materials (HTMs) have been explored to fabricate n–i–p structure devices; for instance, P3HT and PCPDTBT have been applied and generate PCEs of around 6%.
In this work, we demonstrate that dopant-free hole-transporting materials featuring a quinoxaline core via rational π-extension (denoted as TQ2 and TQ4) are able to be applied in Sb2(S,Se)3 solar cells and generate high efficiency. The quinoxaline core is easy to chemically modify because of the presence of the pyrazine heterocycle. We observed that the thiophene substituents on the pyrazine heterocycles can coordinate with the Sb atoms in Sb2(S,Se)3 so that the interfacial properties between the Sb2(S,Se)3 and HTM are improved. This interaction facilitates the hole-extraction efficiency, which significantly enhances the open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF). Meanwhile, the devices with TQ2 and TQ4 show excellent stability when compared with conventional organic hole-transporting materials.

Fig. 1 depicts the molecular structure of the HTMs, which are synthesized according to the reported method. In both TQ2 and TQ4, triphenylamine groups are symmetrically connected on both sides of the quinoxaline core and two thienyls are on the pyrazine ring. The difference between the two molecules lies in the fact that the two thienyls in TQ2 are distorted on the pyrazine ring (Fig. 1a) while those in TQ4 are almost planar relative to the quinoxaline core (Fig. 1b).
To investigate their potential as HTMs with Sb2(S,Se)3 films, we firstly measured the HOMO energy levels of TQ2 and TQ4 films through ultraviolet photoelectron spectrometry (UPS), which are determined to be −5.30 eV and −5.34 eV for TQ2 and TQ4, respectively (Fig. S2, ESI, details are provided in the Supporting Information). The light absorption properties were obtained by UV-Vis absorption spectroscopy and the band gap (Eg) can be extracted from the (Ahv)versus energy (hv) curves (Fig. S1, ESI). As a result, the Eg of TQ2 and TQ4 are estimated to be 2.38 eV and 2.09 eV, respectively. Therefore, we can calculate the LUMO energy levels of TQ2 and TQ4, which are −2.92 and −3.25 eV, respectively. Besides, the VBM and CBM of Sb2(S,Se)3 are −5.50 eV and −4.01 eV, respectively. Finally, we were able to depict the energy level diagram of the intended device (Fig. 2a), which shows suitable band alignment for hole extraction from Sb2(S,Se)3 and electron blocking. We utilized the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) method to evaluate the hole-transporting properties of TQ2 and TQ4. The device architecture for the SCLC measurements is similar to that of solar cells, so that the SCLC mobilities of the HTMs are relevant to our solar cell device. The J–V curves of the devices in the dark are shown in Fig. S3 (ESI). The hole mobility of the TQ4 film was measured to be 8.06 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 S−1, which is higher than that of the TQ2 film (6.20 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 S−1). We attribute this enhancement to the stronger π–π stacking and intermolecular charge transfer of the TQ4 film.
To explore the possible interaction between Sb2(S,Se)3 and the HTMs, we simulated the differential charge density diagram, as shown in Fig. 2b and Fig. S4 (ESI), which comes from the following expression:
ρcdd = ρtot − ρs − ρa
where
ρcdd represents the differential charge density, ρtot stands for the total charge density of the interface, and ρs and ρa represent the charge density of the surface and absorbate, respectively. The lattice space mesh of the three parts was kept consistent in the calculation process to ensure that the charge density could be subtracted properly. From the calculations, there was a strong interaction between Sb2(S,Se)3 and the HTMs. In particular, the electron cloud from the thiophene groups was strongly attracted to Sb2(S,Se)3.

Furthermore, we conducted X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) characterization to study the interfacial chemical interaction. As shown in Fig. 2c, after the deposition of TQ2 and TQ4, the binding energies of Sb 3d significantly decreased. This result suggests that the electron density around Sb atoms is increased. In addition, we found that the S 2p peak of TQ4 shifted to a higher binding energy (Fig. 2d), which could be ascribed to the interactions of S atoms on the electron-rich thiophene moieties and Sb atoms on Sb2(S,Se)3. Moreover, the S 2p peak of Sb2(S,Se)3 had a shift to a lower binding energy, while the Se 3d peak remained nearly unchanged (Fig. 2d and Fig. S5, ESI). Since S is a more electronegative atom than Se, it probably further attracts electrons around the Sb atoms. The same is true for TQ2. To summarize, both TQ2 and TQ4 present obvious interfacial interaction with Sb2(S,Se)3, which provides desirable channels for carrier transport.
We further investigated the carrier transport dynamics with a structure of FTO/CdS/Sb2(S,Se)3/HTMs using transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS). The transition dynamics were extracted from the 2D color images of TAS (Fig. 2e and f) and the decay characteristics at 620 nm were fitted using the mono-exponential model. As shown in Fig. 2g and Table S1 (ESI), FTO/CdS/Sb2(S,Se)3/TQ4 (2793.52 ps) shows a much faster delay lifetime than that of FTO/CdS/Sb2(S,Se)3/TQ2 (4861.23 ps). The shorter delay lifetime suggests stronger hole-extraction ability, which is probably due to the optimized energy level alignment and higher hole mobility of the TQ4 film.
In order to explore the capability of TQ2 and TQ4 as dopant-free HTMs in Sb2(S,Se)3 solar cells, we fabricated devices with structures of glass/FTO (fluorine-doped tin oxide)/CdS/Sb2(S,Se)3/HTM/Au. As shown in the cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image (Fig. 3a) of the device, the thicknesses of the CdS buffer layer, Sb2(S,Se)3 absorber layer, HTM, and Au electrode are about 60, 300, 30 and 60 nm, respectively. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the best-performing solar cells based on TQ2 and TQ4 measured under standard simulated AM1.5G are presented in Fig. 3b. Sb2(S,Se)3 solar cells without the HTM were also fabricated as reference devices. The detailed device parameters are summarized in Table S2 (ESI). From Table S2 (ESI), the champion device based on TQ2 exhibits a moderate PCE of 6.54%, with a Voc of 0.61 V, short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 18.17 mA cm−2 and FF of 58.74%, while the TQ4-based cell shows a significantly improved PCE of 7.46% with a Voc of 0.61 V, Jsc of 18.82 mA cm−2, and FF of 64.69%. In comparison, the reference device without HTM shows a PCE of only 4.55%, and all of the parameters show considerable decrease. Fig. S6 (ESI) shows that the change in average parameters was consistent with that of the champion devices based on the HTMs. The external quantum efficiencies (EQEs) of the TQ2 and TQ4-based devices exhibit nearly identical onset wavelengths (Fig. 3c). However, the TQ4-based device shows more efficient photocurrent response in the 300–750 nm range, suggesting a stronger hole-extraction ability. The statistical results of three kinds of Sb2(S,Se)3 solar cells also unambiguously demonstrate that TQ4 and TQ2 can serve as efficient hole-transporting materials (Fig. 3d), and TQ4 performs better than TQ2.
The energy alignment and molecular arrangement as discussed above should be attributed to the enhanced performance of the TQ4-based device. Furthermore, we also found that TQ4 can cover the surface of Sb2(S,Se)3 more uniformly (Fig. S7, ESI) than the TQ2 film. There are also some pin holes within the TQ2 film, leaving Sb2(S,Se)3 exposed, while the TQ4 film can completely cover the bulge of the Sb2(S,Se)3 film with a thickness of 200 nm (Fig. S8, ESI). Obviously, this interfacial morphology could lead to a better FF and Jsc of the devices.
The interfacial charge transfer property was further studied by electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements (Fig. 4a), which were recorded in the dark at an applied bias voltage of 0.6 V with the frequency ranging from 100 mHz to 1 MHz and an alternating current (AC) amplitude of 10 mV. Fig. 4a presents the Nyquist plots of the devices with different HTMs and the inset shows the corresponding equivalent circuit. The high-frequency component and low-frequency arc correspond to the transfer resistance (Rs) and recombination resistance (Rrec), respectively. Consequently, the TQ4 devices have a lower Rs and higher Rrec compared with those of other devices. The measured dark J–V curves (Fig. 4b) were used to investigate current leakage and charge carrier recombination. The TQ4 device had a much lower leakage current than that of TQ2 and reference devices from a bias of −0.8 to 0.5 V. In the forward bias region after 0.5 V, the TQ2 and TQ4 devices had a much higher injection current compared to the reference device. This suggests faster carrier extraction, which reduced interfacial carrier accumulation. The remarkable increase of FF is probably due to the optimized quality of the interface. Fig. S9 (ESI) shows a linear relationship between Voc and the logarithm of light intensity. The slope of Vocversus light intensity affords AkT/q according to the following equation:
where
A, k, T, and q represent the ideality factor, Boltzmann constant, temperature in Kelvin, and the elementary charge, respectively. As a consequence, the slope is in the order of reference device (1.73 kT/q) > TQ2 device (1.52 kT/q) > TQ4 device (1.41 kT/q), suggesting that the trap-assisted Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination is in the order of TQ4 device < TQ2 device < reference device. This is in agreement with the observations discussed above. To summarize, all the above results indicate that TQ2 and TQ4 are effective HTMs for Sb2(S,Se)3 solar cells, and can efficiently extract holes and suppress interfacial recombination. As compared to TQ2, TQ4 has better performance because of a close π–π stacking molecular arrangement that can facilitate intermolecular carrier transport.

Then, we compared the TQ4 devices with traditional Spiro-OMeTAD devices. As Fig. S10a and b (ESI) show, the PCE of the TQ4 device is about 0.5% lower than that of the doped Spiro-OMeTAD device, which is mainly due to the decrease of current density. The SCLC measurements (Fig. S10c, ESI) show that the hole mobility of doped Spiro-OMeTAD (3.23 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 S−1) is larger than that of TQ4 (8.13 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 S−1), which can explain the lower current density of the TQ4 device. However, Spiro-OMeTAD does not have a strong interfacial interaction with Sb2(S,Se)3, so we think that the TQ4 devices possess better interface quality resulting in a higher FF (Fig. S10d, ESI).
Finally, we studied the stability of the devices, which were stored in ambient air with relative humidity (RH) in the range of 15%–50% and room temperature (RT) for 100 days without encapsulation (Fig. 5d). Notably, the PCE of the TQ2 and TQ4-based solar cells barely decreased. However, the device with Spiro-OMeTAD, which is widely used in solar cells as an HTM, dropped by 38% of its initial PCE under the same storage conditions. As shown in Fig. 5a–c, the water contact angles on the surface of the TQ2 and TQ4 films are much larger than those of the Spiro-OMeTAD films. This means that the devices with TQ2 and TQ4 films have superior hydrophobicity to effectively impede water molecule intrusion and enhance device stability. Moreover, the doped heterolithium salt (Li-TFSI) in Spiro-OMeTAD is deliquescent and hygroscopic, which seriously damages the stability of the devices. The chemical interaction between HTMs and Sb2(S,Se)3 is probably also an important factor that improves the heterojunction quality and device stability.
In summary, we have demonstrated that the thiophene-modified quinoxaline core HTMs TQ2 and TQ4 can be applied as efficient hole-transporting layer materials for Sb2(S,Se)3 solar cells, and their corresponding power conversion efficiencies reached 6.54% and 7.46%. Sb2(S,Se)3 solar cells with TQ2 and TQ4 have favorable energy level alignment. The hole transport at the Sb2(S,Se)3/HTM interface improved due to the interaction of thienyls and Sb2(S,Se)3. Conjugated and crossed thienyls did not influence the interface interaction with Sb2(S,Se)3, while different molecular configurations could affect the hole-extraction efficiency because of different intermolecular structure arrangement and film morphology. This work provides promising candidates for hole-transporting materials in antimony chalcogenide solar cells, and presents a molecular design route for hole-transporting materials in terms of interfacial coordination and carrier transport.
This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2019YFA0405600), the Institute of Energy, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center (Grant No. 21KZS212) and the China National Natural Science Foundation of China (U19A2092, 21822504, 22179037).

There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental procedures, discussion, and supplementary figures. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cc07041j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022