 DOI: 10.1039/D0EE01833C
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3093-3101


Yi
Yang
,

Cheng
Liu
,

Arup
Mahata
,

Mo
Li
,

Cristina
Roldán-Carmona
,

Yong
Ding
*,

Zulqarnain
Arain
,

Weidong
Xu
,

Yunhao
Yang
,

Pascal Alexander
Schouwink
,

Andreas
Züttel
,

Filippo
De Angelis
,

Songyuan
Dai
* and 

Mohammad Khaja
Nazeeruddin
*

Beijing Key Laboratory of Novel Thin-Film Solar Cells, Beijing Key Laboratory of Energy Safety and Clean Utilization, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, P. R. China. E-mail: dingy@ncepu.edu.cn; sydai@ncepu.edu.cn

Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, EPFL Valais, 1951, Sion, Switzerland. E-mail: mdkhaja.nazeeruddin@epfl.ch

CompuNet, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Morego 30, 16163, Genova, Italy

Computational Laboratory for Hybrid/Organic Photovoltaics (CLHYO) Istituto CNR di Scienze e Tecnologie Chimiche “Giulio Natta” (CNR-SCITEC), Via Elce di Sotto 8, 06123 Perugia, Italy

Empa Materials Science and Technology, CH-8600 Dübendorf, Switzerland

Department of Chemistry, Biology and Biotechnology, University of Perugia, Via Elce di Sotto 8, 06123 Perugia, Italy

Chemistry Department, College of Science, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia

Received
9th June 2020
, Accepted 24th July 2020
First published on 24th July 2020
The emerging 2D perovskites exhibit superior stability and similar optoelectronic attributes compared to the 3D analogues, but their strong exciton-binding energy and inferior interlayer charge-transport reduce dramatically the device performance. Herein, we report a universal approach towards high-efficiency 2D perovskite solar cells (PSCs) by using the synergistic effect of NH4Cl and H2O to rotate the crystallographic orientation of 2D systems. The preferential adsorption of NH4Cl to the (202) crystal plane and the accelerated deprotonation of NH4+ by H2O guide the crystal growth of the 2D framework towards vertical out-of-plane orientation, which strongly improves the 2D crystallinity, charge mobility, and carrier lifetime. As a representative, (PEA)2(MA)3Pb4I13-based PSCs (n ≤ 4) prepared via the vertical-rotation process achieve a champion power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 17.03%, among the best PCEs reported for 2D PSCs. These findings offer a universal approach to rotate the orientation of 2D perovskites for efficient photovoltaics regardless of the perovskite composition.

Developing highly efficient two-dimensional (2D) perovskite solar cells (PSCs) with superior stability is inevitable for commercialization. At present, the performance of 2D PSCs is far behind that of 3D PSCs due to their strong exciton-binding energy and restrained charge transport. Although efforts on orientation control have been made to overcome this drawback, there is still a lack of general understanding about the oriented crystal growth and a universal method for further improving the performance of 2D PSCs. In this contribution, we design an effective and universal approach to enhance 2D PSCs’ efficiency by using the synergistic effect of ammonium chloride and water. The crystallographic orientation of 2D perovskites can be rotated perpendicularly to the electrodes, resulting in remarkably enhanced crystallinity, carrier mobilities, and carrier lifetimes by orders of magnitude. The resultant 2D PSC exhibits 17.03% efficiency, which is among the records reported for 2D (n ≤ 4) PSCs, and, more importantly, remarkable stability against moisture and temperature. This work elucidates the mechanism behind the aligned crystallization and provides a universal guideline to realize high-efficiency and stable low-dimensional PSCs.


The performance of organic–inorganic hybrid halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has dramatically developed to over 25% in a short time-period, increasingly approaching the Shockley–Queisser limit for a single-junction solar cell. However, their significant degradation under humidity, heat, and light soaking becomes more and more prominent and intractable, which is at present the main bottleneck impeding their commercialization. Previous studies demonstrate that the degradation of three-dimensional (3D) perovskites is primarily a surface and/or interface-initiated process that gradually progresses toward the bulk material, deteriorated by the heat stress above the tetragonal–cubic transition temperature. Efforts towards surface functionalization, interface modification, engineering of dopant-free hole transport materials (HTMs), and crystal-defect suppression have been made to overcome their poor stability. Recently, more promising stability has been demonstrated by the low-dimensional Ruddlesden–Popper (LDRP) or Dion–Jacobson (LDDJ) perovskites, which possess higher structure stability and suppressed surface moisture intrusion compared to those of traditional 3D perovskites. These perovskites are generally formed by substituting the small organic cations with bulkier cations, such as n-butylammonium (BA+) and 2-phenyl-ethylammonium (PEA+) for LDRP perovskites, or di-ammonium cations for the LDDJ perovskite. As the large organic cations cannot fit into the inorganic Pb–I framework (e.g., PbI64−), they intercalate between the inorganic sheets, forming a layered two-dimensional (2D) or quasi-2D system. The general formula of a LDRP and LDDJ perovskite is (R)2An−1PbnX3n+1 and DAn−1PbnX3n+1, respectively, where R is a large univalent cation, A is a small univalent cation, D is a divalent organic cation, X denotes a halide ion, and n stands for the number of inorganic slabs separated by the large cations. Thanks to the hydrophobic nature of these bulkier organic cations, they can effectively block surface water adsorption and provide remarkable long-term stability compared to the 3D analogues. Besides, the van der Waals interactions between the organic layers increase the desorption energy of volatile organic components, further enhancing the stability under external stresses. However, their strong insulating character provokes the formation of multiple quantum-wells (QWs), where the organic dielectric layers behave as charge transport barriers, and the inorganic sheets correspond to the wells. This results in dielectric confinement producing higher permittivity, larger exciton-binding energy and inhibited charge transport between the two adjacent conducting layers. Therefore, reducing the material dimension inevitably weakens the carrier transport, and sacrifices the efficiency of PSCs.

To overcome the poor charge transport, two main approaches have been proposed in the literature. The prior consists of increasing the number of inorganic sheets (the n value) located between the 2D-planes in an attempt to get closer to that of 3D, but at the expense of stability, contrary to the initial objective. The latter, on the contrary, promotes a specific crystallographic orientation of the 2D planes, perpendicular to the electrodes, providing a fluent and fast charge transport channel along the carrier collection direction. This option has demonstrated remarkable results during the past few years, applied to an extended variety of 2D perovskite compositions. Among them, the hot-casting technique was the first employed to report preferential out-of-plane crystal alignment in BA-based 2D perovskites. Similarly, by lowering the precursor saturation in the perovskite solution, vertically oriented BA- and PEA-2D systems have been successfully formed, mostly based on the precise tuning of the organic spacers and/or mix of solvents. Unfortunately, even though these strategies facilitated more efficient charge extraction, they also increased the complexity of the process, as they require strict conditions to precisely control the substrate temperature and compositions. Recently, an easier approach incorporating functional additives into the perovskite has demonstrated effective control of the crystal growth, providing a potential simple method to promote crystal orientation. Among the different candidates, DMSO, NH4SCN and MACl have successfully induced highly oriented PEA-, BA-, and 2-thiophenemethylammonium (ThMA)-based 2D perovskites, allowing cell efficiencies over 13%. These performances are however far below the state-of-the-art systems. In addition, despite the many options reported so far, most of the improvements observed in the literature have been driven by the arbitrary use of large ammonium cations. There is still a lack of understanding about the crystal growth in 2D perovskites and the universal interactions ruling the crystal orientation, which is necessary for developing easy-to-operate and reproducible approaches to allow further improvements in device efficiency.
In this contribution, we present a simple and universal approach through rotating the crystallographic orientation perpendicular to the electrodes to boost the efficiency of PSCs based on LDRP and LDDJ perovskites. By using specific functional additives, and their synergistic effect with water molecules, we can precisely control the crystallographic orientation of a variety of 2D perovskites, including BA-, PEA-, and 1-naphthylmethylamine (NMA)-based LDRP perovskites, as well as butane diamine (BDA)- and 1,4-phenylenediamine (PDA)-based LDDJ perovskites. The mechanism ruling the crystal rotation was investigated by comparing a series of active ammonium halides incorporated into the system. Our results reveal that the specific adsorption of NH4Cl to the (202) crystal plane, combined with its high volatility, promotes an out-of-plane crystal alignment during the film formation, further facilitated by the fast deprotonation of NH4+ induced by H2O. This growth mechanism, supported by density functional theory (DFT) calculations, results in 2D perovskites with enhanced crystallinity, increased carrier mobility and prolonged carrier lifetimes by orders of magnitude, thanks to the vertical orientation and a notable decrease in the density of trap states. As a representative, planar solar cells containing (PEA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 exhibited an efficiency as high as 17.03%, which is among the records reported for 2D (n ≤ 4) PSCs, and, more importantly, remarkable stability against moisture and temperature. Our strategy, named hereafter the vertically-rotated (VR) methodology, elucidates the mechanism behind crystal-aligning additives, providing new insights for their proper selection and universal guidelines to realize highly efficient and stable low-dimensional PSCs.

(PEA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 was used as a representative 2D perovskite in the current study since it has prominent stability due to the hydrophobic benzene ring. Five ammonium salts consisting of 12.5 mol% NH4I, NH4Br, NH4Cl, MACl, and PEACl were selected as additives to induce the VR-mechanism, based on the consideration that they can interact with the perovskite framework and easily escape from the film. The cells were prepared through a simple one-step solution process, that is, without any hot-casting or further steps like in the antisolvent method. Fig. 1a and Fig. S1 (ESI) present the cross-sectional and surface scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of these samples, respectively. Densely packed perovskite crystals are observed in all samples, and the layer thickness is around 360 nm, which allows well-balanced light absorption and charge transport. Large-size and even column-like (the NH4Cl and NH4Br samples) crystalline grains in the vertical direction were identified for the perovskite films containing additives, indicating fewer grain boundaries and recombination centers. In addition, all perovskite films exhibit very homogeneous and continuous surface coverage, except for those containing NH4I and PEACl additives, which show some cracks on the surface.

To gain insight into the crystal arrangement and orientation of the films, we performed X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements. The perovskite films exhibit two dominant peaks located at around 14.2° and 28.5° (Fig. 1b and c), corresponding to the (111) and (202) crystal planes of quasi-2D perovskites, respectively. Compared to the pristine material, the additives promote enhanced crystallinity, as suggested by the strengthening of the peak intensity by 10 to 20 times and the narrowing of the full width at half-maximum (FWHM) from ∼0.45° to ∼0.15° in the (111) crystal plane. Observing the results, an increased peak intensity and decreased FWHM are obtained for NH4+ compared to MA+ and PEA+, similarly to changing I− and Br− for Cl−. According to the Scherrer equation, the decreased FWHM suggests the increased grain size of the perovskite film with NH4Cl. These results suggest the formation of a large-size crystal grain and a highly-oriented crystal structure using NH4Cl. The absence of low-angle diffraction peaks corresponding to (0k0) planes, which are related to perovskite crystals (small n) grown parallel to the substrate, indicates a high possibility of vertically oriented 2D perovskite crystals. Therefore, NH4Cl could be a good option for the VR method, and could plausibly enhance the device performance of 2D perovskite systems.
To verify the applicability of these materials, we embodied the perovskites into planar p–i–n devices with the configuration of FTO/PEDOT:PSS/(PEA)2(MA)3Pb4I13/PC61BM/BCP/Ag. Fig. 1d shows the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics for the systems discussed above (see the ESI, Fig. S2 and Table S1). In particular, we highlight that the short-circuit current densities (JSC) are remarkably improved when the additives are incorporated. Because the differences in the absorption properties of the (PEA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 films after the addition of additives (see the ESI, Fig. S3) are very minor, the improvement in JSC may derive from an enhanced vertical orientation. Note that among all additives, the devices containing NH4Cl provide the best performance. We further optimized the concentration of the NH4Cl additive (x value in PEAI:MAI:PbI2:NH4Cl = 2:3:4:x) as depicted in Fig. 1e (see the ESI, Table S1), and the best efficiency was found for x = 0.5. An acceptable efficiency of 13.34% is realized (JSC of 14.49 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.17 V and fill factor (FF) of 78.66%), which is significantly higher than that obtained for the reference device, 0.59% (JSC = 0.94 mA cm−2, VOC = 1.01 V and FF = 62.27%), in agreement with previous reports.
To investigate the reason for the enhanced device performance, we analyzed the crystallographic structure by grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS). The GIWAXS images of the 2D and VR-2D (PEA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 films are shown in Fig. 1f and g. The main peaks which are indexed as the (111) and (202) crystal planes for 2D perovskites match the dominant peaks at ∼14.2° and ∼28.5° appearing in the normal XRD patterns. Note that the reflection of the (202) plane along qz is not fully recorded due to the detector limitation and more complete diffraction is identified in the 2D XRD image (Fig. 3e). The reference 2D perovskite film displays less orientation with combined features of Debye–Scherrer arcs and partial scattering spots, compared to the sharper and stronger Bragg spots with obvious features of discrete spots at the same q positions as the VR-2D film. By indexing the Bragg spots in Fig. 1h, we prove that the crystalline domains of the VR-2D perovskite are rotated with their (202) planes parallel to the substrate, which leads to the inorganic framework being perpendicularly aligned to it, contrary to the multidirectional crystallization in the reference film. These results demonstrate a higher degree of out-of-plane orientation promoted by NH4Cl, consistent with the XRD results. Such crystal rotation, induced by the additive, suppresses the energy barrier typically associated with the insulating organic cations, enabling efficient charge-transport to the electrodes along the inorganic planes.
To shed light on the crystallization mechanism, we performed DFT calculations in order to estimate the adsorption energies (Eads) (relative to those of PEA+) for NH4+ and MA+ on the exposed (111) and (202) crystal planes with both PbI2-terminated and MAI-terminated surfaces (Fig. 2a). Eads of NH4+ species is defined by Eads = Eslab+cationicmoleculeadsorbed − Eslab − Ecationicmolecule, where Eslab+cationicmoleculeadsorbed represents the total energy of the adsorbed cationic molecules with the slab, Eslab is the total energy of the bare slab, and Ecationicmolecule is the energy of the isolated cationic molecule in a large supercell. The adsorption energies were calculated considering the cationic molecules in the gas phase, so the absolute values are not to be considered but their relative values between different cations and different surfaces and terminations are meaningful. As shown in Table S2 (ESI), NH4+ always shows higher adsorption energy than MA+, irrespective of the surfaces and terminations, indicating preferential adsorption compared to MA+, which may account for the unique advantage of NH4+ in regulating the 2D perovskite orientation. The surface formation energy (SFE) also reveals that the MAI-terminated (202) surface is the most stable surface, which has the lowest SFE of 0.35 eV nm−2, and NH4+ adsorbs more strongly than MA+ on this surface, confirming a remarkable affinity of NH4+ to the MAI-terminated (202) surface. Note that the series of additives tested in this work could affect the crystallization differently according to the different sizes of cations and types of halogens involved, as well as other material properties like, for example, the equilibrium vapor pressure. Indeed, these additives exhibit very different boiling points, and this might be crucial for crystal formation and growth. By analyzing (i) the impact on the device performance and (ii) the boiling point values for each additive, combined with (iii) the DFT calculations, we speculate that the mechanism enabling NH4Cl to control the 2D crystal orientation must relate to its easy evaporation combined with the preferential adsorption on the (202) crystal plane. We rationalize the process as follows: different from the conventional perovskite formation (Fig. 2b), NH4Cl molecules will mostly interact with (PEA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 particles through the (202) crystal planes (Fig. 2c) at the initial stages of perovskite crystallization. With the subsequent annealing of the system, NH4Cl will gradually escape, leveling the (202) crystal plane on account of the normally-oriented evaporation. Meanwhile, PEA+ will spontaneously occupy the positions perpendicular to these planes and complete the perovskite crystallization. This process results in the longitudinal growth of the inorganic slabs, leading to a highly oriented perovskite film. Note that we additionally verified the film composition by depth profile X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and no presence of Cl after crystallization could be detected, neither in the perovskite bulk nor at the interface (see the ESI, Fig. S4). Because Cl has been previously associated with the formation of highly oriented crystals, we further replaced NH4+ by a less volatile K+ cation, in order to exclusively target the effect of Cl in our films. With that purpose we prepared films containing KCl in either the PEDOT:PSS/perovskite interface or within the perovskite bulk. The crystallographic characterization of these systems, shown in Fig. S5 (ESI), revealed no influence on the XRD patterns induced by the KCl interlayer, and a small contribution (very minor compared to that obtained for NH4Cl) of out-of-plane crystal growth for KCl added to the bulk, plausibly due to the promoted evaporation of partial MA+ in terms of MACl during film formation. Therefore, the preferential orientation which is exclusively induced by Cl is very limited, and does not directly regulate the crystallization/orientation in the VR method, but it rather promotes the evaporation of NH4+, inducing the out-of-plane orientation during film formation.
If the above mechanism were correct, some parameters affecting NH4Cl would have a strong impact on the crystal growth dynamics. For example, it is well known that H2O can easily deprotonate ammonium species, forming ammonia and hydrogen chloride in their gas phase according to the Grotthuss mechanism. Given that NH4+ evaporation rules the VR process, such deprotonation would promote the volatilization of the additive until its complete depletion, therefore enhancing the growth of the perovskite towards the 2D vertical planes. This synergic effect, previously reported in the literature for MAPbI3, could have paramount significance for the realization of high-efficiency 2D perovskite systems, paving the way towards stable and efficient devices. To verify this idea, we directly incorporated H2O into the perovskite precursor and deposited (PEA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite films. Interestingly, cross-sectional SEM images suggest obviously enhanced crystal growth in the vertical direction when H2O was introduced (see the ESI, Fig. S6a). Despite some pinholes appearing on the film surface for H2O exceeding 1 vol% (see the ESI, Fig. S6b), the films are compact with H2O contents below these values. This is also reflected in the device performance, which shows increasing JSC from 14.27 mA cm−2 to 18.16 mA cm−2 for 1 vol% H2O addition (see the ESI, Fig. S7 and Table S1), while a larger percent of H2O (between 1.5 and 2 vol%) causes degradation (JSC slightly declines, together with VOC and FF). As a result, the PCE only improves from 13.02% to 14.61% when H2O ≤ 1 vol%.
To soften such adverse effects, more moderate incorporation of H2O was introduced via tuning the environmental relative humidity (RH) from 10% to 50%. As expected from previous results, increasing the ambient moisture strengthens the longitudinal growth of the 2D perovskite with dense and large grains (Fig. 3a). Indeed, despite the fact that highly humid environments tend to induce the formation of pinholes (>40% RH, see the ESI, Fig. S8), better control of the perovskite morphology could be achieved for lower RH values. Consequently, enhanced morphology, preferred vertical orientation (see the ESI, Fig. S9a) and optimal device performance were achieved under 30% RH (Fig. 3b and see the ESI, Table S1). We further analyzed the composition of these perovskite films with the ion chromatography (IC) technique. The amounts of NH4+ residues remaining in the films were evaluated as presented in Fig. 3c, where the signal of Na+ comes from the solvent of the IC measurement. The results confirm that those films prepared in higher RH% contain less residual NH4+, suggesting the preferential deprotonation of NH4+ promoted by H2O.
To broaden the perspective of our observations and to demonstrate the universality of the VR strategy, five typical 2D perovskites were fabricated under 30% RH (Fig. 3d), including LDRP systems [(BA)2MA3Pb4I13, (PEA)2MA3Pb4I13 and (NMA)2MA3Pb4I13], as well as LDDJ systems [(BDA)MA3Pb4I13 and (PDA)MA3Pb4I13]. As observed in Fig. 3e, the strong and discrete Bragg spots in all grazing incidence 2D XRD images demonstrate the preferred vertical orientation for either the LDRP or LDDJ perovskites, independent of the cation type. The diffraction rings covering the whole detector are from the fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate (see the ESI, Fig. S9b). Additionally, significant improvements in PCEs were observed owing to a remarkably increased JSC (see the ESI, Fig. S10). Therefore, using the synergistic effect of NH4Cl and H2O is certified as an effective and universal approach to rotate the 2D perovskite orientation and enhance the photovoltaic performance of 2D PSCs.
Moreover, thanks to the VR method, the (PEA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite film exhibited brand new characteristics, especially for the charge transport properties. To investigate the impact on the mobility of photogenerated carriers, we analyzed the space-charge limited currents (SCLC) for VR-2D perovskite semiconductors. Electron-only and hole-only semiconductor devices were fabricated with the architecture FTO/TiO2/(PEA)2(MA)3Pb4I13/PC60BM/Ag and FTO/PEDOT:PSS/(PEA)2(MA)3Pb4I13/PTAA/Au, respectively. The dark J–V characteristics, shown in Fig. 4a and Fig. S11a (ESI), demonstrate that both the electron- and hole-mobilities (μe and μh, respectively) are remarkably improved by 2 to 3 orders of magnitude, as expected from more efficient charge-transport due to aligned crystallinity (Fig. 1h). The VR-2D perovskite exhibits increased carrier mobilities, especially the hole mobility, compared to other reported values (see the ESI, Table S3). The much closer μh and μe values also demonstrate almost balanced charge carrier transport (Table 1). In addition, we also quantified the trap densities of the 2D and VR-2D (PEA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 films. The three regions including the ohmic response, SCLC response and trap-filled limited response in Fig. 4b indicate that the trap density has been reduced by 1 order of magnitude (Table 1), attributed to the perfectly rotated crystal orientation.
Samples

μ
e (cm2 V−1 s−1)

μ
h (cm2 V−1 s−1)

μ
h/μe

R
S (Ω)

R
CT (Ω)

N
t (cm−3)

n


τ (ms)
2D
1.43 × 10−6
4.41 × 10−5
31
10.63
289.40
1.59 × 1016
1.99
0.41
VR-2D
3.56 × 10−3
7.20 × 10−3
2
7.20
131.06
3.73 × 1015
1.56
4.24
To further demonstrate this mechanism, we monitored the time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) and steady-state PL of the perovskites deposited on FTO/PEDOT:PSS substrates. The PL-decay for all samples is dominated by fast (τ1) and slow (τ2) decay components, corresponding to the quenching of free carriers at the perovskite/PEDOT:PSS interface and radiative decay, respectively (Table S4, ESI). Comparing both systems, we verify enhanced charge extraction and transfer for the VR method (Fig. 4c). In this case, τ1 is decreased while its weight fraction is increased, confirming more facilitated transfer of photogenerated free carriers, and a higher contribution to the decay process. Significant PL quenching was also observed for the vertically oriented film, related to more efficient hole transfer to the substrate (Fig. 4d). To gain insight into the film distribution on the micrometer scale, we analyzed the film homogeneity in 2D and VR-2D perovskites with micro-PL spectroscopy. Averaged over a diffraction-limited spot size of 0.16 μm2, this technique provides valuable information about local heterogeneities, intimately linked to crystal defects and charge extraction. Fig. 4e and f show the map of the PL peak intensity (from 675 to 825 nm) distributed over 10 × 10 μm2 areas. A more homogeneous PL distribution and a lower integrated intensity for the VR-2D films were detected. Overall, the results suggest suppressed defects, and facilitated charge extraction and carrier transport to the HTL layer, which is plausibly the reason for obtaining enhanced JSC and FF for these 2D PSCs.
Importantly, on applying the optimal conditions to the VR-2D (PEA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite (n = 4), a device efficiency as high as 17.03% was obtained (JSC of 18.47 mA cm−2, VOC of 1.17 V and FF of 79.13%), which also exhibited negligible photocurrent hysteresis (Fig. 5a). The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE), shown in Fig. 5b, demonstrates an integrated photocurrent closely matching the JSC value extracted from the J–V characteristic. As previously asserted, we attribute the high current density to the ideal vertical orientation induced by the synergistic effect of NH4Cl and H2O. To verify this, we analyzed the carrier transport and transfer by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements. Nyquist plots of the devices in Fig. S11b (ESI) were measured under dark conditions by applying a bias of 0.8 V. The fitted series resistance (RS) and charge transfer resistance (RCT) for the (PEA)2(MA)3Pb4I13-based device are 10.63 Ω and 289.40 Ω, respectively. A clear smaller RS of 7.20 Ω and RCT of 131.06 Ω are observed when the VR method is introduced, indicating enhanced carrier transport and better carrier extraction, consistent with the SCLC and TRPL results. Fig. 5c depicts the natural logarithmic relationship between light intensity and VOC, which can provide critical information on the recombination processes. The light-dependent VOC gives a slope of nkT/q, which defines the ideality factor. A slope of 2 kT/q predicts the occurrence of trap-assisted recombination, while a slope of kT/q denotes a trap-free condition. In perfect agreement, the slope of VOCversus light intensity decreases from 1.99 kT/q to 1.56 kT/q after using the VR method, confirming that trap-assisted charge recombination is effectively mitigated. We also evaluated the carrier recombination dynamics through the transient photovoltage decay (TPV) (Fig. 5d), which shows a 10-fold increase (4.24 ms) in the charge recombination lifetime for the VR-based device compared to 0.41 ms for the reference device. This behavior confirms that the charge recombination losses are significantly lowered.
Finally, the long-term stabilities of our VR-2D (PEA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 films and the typical 3D MAPbI3 were simultaneously investigated. We first tested the stability via XRD, by storing the samples under ambient air at 25 °C with a RH of ∼40%. As shown in Fig. S12a and b (ESI), the VR-2D systems do not show any PbI2 peak (∼12.6°) after 150 days, contrary to 3D MAPbI3 in which an obvious signal appears after ∼60 days. This remarkable improvement is attributed to the stronger tolerance of the 2D perovskite against moisture. Consequently, remarkable stability was obtained for non-encapsulated devices based on the 2D perovskite, as shown in Fig. 5e. Then, we further compared the thermal stability of the 2D and 3D perovskites under continuous heating at 85 °C. Fig. S12c and d (ESI) present the XRD patterns of both systems, evidencing the enhanced resistance of the 2D perovskites compared to the 3D. Similarly, non-encapsulated devices containing the 2D perovskite were also evaluated at 85 °C in an inert atmosphere, which maintained over 90% of the initial efficiency after 1600 h of aging (Fig. 5f). Such robust stability represents major progress in PSCs, as it allows improved environmental tolerance against moisture and heat for 2D PSCs, together with improved efficiency. More importantly, the PSC stability can be further enhanced by chemical approaches as well as nitrogen soaking, representing a bright for their future commercialization.

In summary, a VR strategy has been successfully established to universally improve the PCEs of 2D PSCs. The orientation control of 2D perovskites and the corresponding crystallization mechanism have been systematically investigated by employing a series of active additives and the assistance of DFT calculations. Enhanced crystallinity, improved charge transport, and extended carrier lifetime, as well as effectively subdued non-radiative carrier recombination and reduced trap densities, were obtained by the synergistic effect of the NH4Cl additive and H2O inducer. The excellent structural, crystallographic and optoelectrical properties yielded a dramatic improvement in the PCE from 0.59% to 17.03% as well as superb long-term environmental stability. Our findings indicate a promising future of efficient and stable low-dimensional PSCs by implementing the VR approach.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors acknowledge support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. U1705256, 51702096 and 51961165106), the 111 Project (No. B16016), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. 2017MS021), the PhD scholarship from China Scholarship Council (Grant No. 201506060156, 201906730051 and 201906730050) and the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No. 763977 of the PerTPV project. The authors appreciate the Beijing Synchrotron Radiation Facility for providing technical support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ee01833c
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020