 DOI: 10.1039/D0NJ03971C
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2021, 45, 2723-2733


Driss
Fadili
,

Si Mohamed
Bouzzine
 and 

Mohamed
Hamidi
*

Laboratoire Chimie-Physique, Matériaux et Environnement, Faculty of Science and Technology, University Moulay Ismaïl of Meknes, B.P. 509 Boutalamine, Errachidia, Morocco. E-mail: m.hamidi@fste.umi.ac.ma

Centre Régional des Métiers de l’Education et de la Formation, BP 8, Errachida, Morocco. E-mail: mbouzzine@yahoo.fr

Received
10th August 2020
, Accepted 28th December 2020
First published on 29th December 2020
Six conformers of benzothiadiazole (BTD) flanked by two thiophenes on each side (T4) and mono-functionalized by phosphonic acid (A) (T4-BTDA) have been investigated by Density Functional Theory (DFT). The performance of six different functionals, namely Becke's three-parameter Lee–Yang–Parr (B3LYP) and B3PW91 with (Perdew and Wang correlation), BHandH, M06-2X, Coulomb-attenuating-method-B3LYP (CAM-B3LYP), and Grimme's D2 dispersion model (ωB97XD) in combination with four different basis sets of Pople's 6-31G(d), 6-31+G(d), 6-311G(d), and 6-311+G(d) have been assessed for the prediction of Frontier Molecular Orbitals (FMOs) and the maximum of absorption spectra in comparison with available experimental data. Computed results reveal that the most stable conformer in the solvent is favored by the sulfur–nitrogen (S–N) non-covalent interaction and the orientation of thiophene. Besides, it has been revealed that the anchoring group stabilizes the conformer when sulfur and oxygen of the phosphoryl group (PO) are in transposition. Regarding the available electronics experimental data of the studied dye, calculations showed that the B3PW91/6-311G(d) method was the right choice to obtain FMO energies, while the TD-BHandH/6-311G(d) method was suitable for simulating the spectral absorption for the studied dye. Using BHandH functional and (6-311G(d), LANL2DZ) basis sets, the adsorption energy on titania anatase 101 with a (TiO2)9 slab and the photovoltaic performance of studied dyes have been reported. The calculated cell performance was very close to the experimental value. This indicates that the calculation schema is consistent.

The need for renewable and sustainable energy sources is crucial for modern societies. Among the most commonly investigated modern renewable energy sources is solar energy. It is one of the best alternative sources to replace the traditional energy from polluting fossil fuels. At present, many photovoltaic technologies have been developed to convert solar incident photons to electricity. Among these devices, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have received considerable attention thanks to their semi-transparent and flexible nature, ease for building integration, and tunable color properties. This type of cell is a promising low-cost alternative to conventional silicon solar cells. DSSCs are composed of a thin layer of titanium dioxide, a dye sensitizer submerged in an electrolyte solution (like I−/I3−), and a counter electrode. Among these components, the photosensitizer plays a particularly important role. Therefore, the efficiency of DSSC depends on the quality of sensitizing molecules adsorbed on the TiO2 surface to harvest light. The first DSSC was introduced by Grätzel and O’Regan in 1991 using metal–organic dyes, like N719, N3, and N749 based on the limited and expensive resource of metal ruthenium and zinc porphyrins. These dyes could achieve a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of up to 9–11.5% and high durability. However, these advantages have been outweighed by their high cost, complicated route of synthesis, and undesirable environmental impact. To find a cheaper, less affected and accessible synthesis, many free-metal–organic dyes have been rapidly developed in recent years thanks to their high molar extinction coefficient, tunable structures, and environment-friendly compatibility for large-scale applications, as well as high photoelectric conversion efficiency (PCE) of up to 10.0%.

Large-scale calculations, using density functional theory DFT and time-dependent density functional theory TD-DFT, represent a powerful and low-cost tool to provide accurate results and better reproduce the geometrical and optical properties of organic dyes. Moreover, the continual development of new DFT functionals gives us many possibilities to choose an adequate methodology to fit the experimental data of studied systems. Since the introduction of DFT in 1964, more than 200 non-empirical and semi-empirical functionals have been developed in the past years. This means that the calibration of the functional and basis set is crucial for further investigation and for manipulations based on these molecules.
The numerous functionals can be divided into five categories classified by their increasing chemical accuracy: the first category is based on the simplest exchange–correlation functional, known as the local spin-density approximation LSDA, which depends on electronic density only, like SPW92; in the second, the Generalized Gradient Approximation (GGA) can significantly improve upon the LSDA, by introducing the density gradient Δρ, like PW91, LYP, and B97-D by Grimme. The third category is the Meta-Generalized Gradient Approximation (meta-GGA) with its popular varieties B97M-V and M06-L. The fourth category is composed of the Global Hybrid Generalized Gradient Approximation (GH GGA) with the famous B3LYP and B3PW91, Global Hybrid Meta-Generalized Gradient Approximation (GH meta-GGA) like M06-2X, Range-Separated Hybrid Generalized Gradient Approximation (RSH GGA) with ωB97X-D, and Range-Separated Hybrid Meta-Generalized Gradient Approximation (RSH meta-GGA) with ωB97M-V. The last and the fifth category is composed of Double Hybrid Generalized Gradient Approximation (DH GGA), like ωB97X-2(LP), and Double Hybrid Meta-Generalized Gradient Approximation (DH MGGA) with PTPSS-D3. Therefore, a major difficulty in density functional development is that the density functionals are not systematically improvable. This means that there is no guarantee that a selected functional will lead to an improvement across all types of interactions.
Here, phosphonic acid-based dyes were chosen for this study because of their effectiveness in increasing the long-term heat stability of the DSSC. Also the combination of a strong acceptor and a phosphonic acid should produce robust and highly efficient dyes. A recent study employed B3LYP and PBEPBE as functionals in combination with the 6-31G(d) basis set to model the electronic structure of phosphonic acid-based dyes. Also, Novir et al. used the B3LYP functional for geometry optimization and CAM-B3LYP functional to calculate the excitation energies and oscillator strengths with the 6-311+G(d,p) basis set and reported that the CAM-B3LYP UV-vis spectra were blue-shifted on behalf of the B3LYP spectra and that CAM-B3LYP showed the highest value as a light-harvesting efficiency LHE.
The synthesis of T4-BTDA (Fig. 1), the five-ring oligomer thienylene oligomeric compound comprising a central BTD (BenzoThiaDiazole) unit flanked by two thiophene rings on each side and carrying a phosphonic acid, involved reacting 4,7-dibromo 2,1,3-benzothiadiazole with 2 equivalents of 2-(4-hexylthiophen-2-yl)-4,4,5,5-tetramethyl-1,3,2-dioxannolane under the same Suzuki coupling conditions. The oligothiophene D–A–π–A has a two-band absorption profile, up to 360, 504, and 525 nm (solid-state with TiO2). The HOMO and LUMO energies of T4-BTDA were measured at −5.50 and −3.55 eV, respectively. The optical gap was estimated at 2.04 eV. The overall T4-BTDA individual sensitizer conversion (IPCE) yields were 6.4%. This efficiency was improved by using the mixtures T4-BTDA + HSQ3 and T4-BTDA + HSQ4.
In this work, besides investigation of the stable conformation of T4-BTDA, we also aimed to find a suitable combination of a functional and basis set for the studied dye to reproduce its experimental data. So, we tested six functionals with different amounts of HF exchange and four large different basis sets. These functionals were classified as global hybrid functionals, such as B3LYP, B3PW91, and BHandH (50% of HF), the meta-hybrid functional M06-2X, and the range-separated hybrids functional CAM-B3LYP and ωB97XD. In this work, we assessed the geometrical, optoelectronic proprieties and driving force energies of the T4-BTDA dye.

All calculations were carried out using the Gaussian 09 (G09) program package. The conformation search was performed using the functional B3LYP by including the empirical dispersion parameter D3. The ground state geometry of the stable conformation was fully optimized without any symmetry constraint in the different functional approximations incorporating different amounts of HF exchange (0 to 100%). We used hybrid GGAs with the different exchange terms B3LYP and B3PW91 (Perdew and Wang correlation). Both functional exchanges contained 20% of the amount of HF exchange. We also used the functional BHandH (“half and half”), which includes a 50% HF exchange fraction, the functional meta-GGA M06-2X (54% HF), and the CAM-B3LYP (65% HF) of the long-range corrected GGA functional family, which varies the fraction of the exact exchange according to the inter-electronic distance, in addition to the ωB97XD, a meta-GGA that can capture short- and long-distance interactions with (22% short-range HF, 100% long-range HF), including a model that accounts for the double-scatter effects D2 body. The effects of these six different functionals on the geometric and electronic properties were discussed using four basis sets of atomic orbitals of Poples, 6-31G(d), 6-31+G(d), 6-311G(d), and 6-311+G(d). According to the available experimental results, the UV-vis absorption spectra were simulated in the chloroform solvent medium via the implicit CPCM model (conductor-like polarizable continuum model) for geometric optimizations and TD-DFT to understand also how the choice of the functional/basis set affects the accuracy of the spectral parameters obtained.

The adsorption energies of the studied dye on the titania cluster can be calculated using the following equation:
Eads = E[TiO2,Dye] − E[TiO2] − E[Dye]
(1)
The
Jsc is a key parameter for the DSSC devices, which can be estimated with the following equation:

(2)
where
ηinj is the electron-injection efficiency, ηcoll is the electron-collection efficiency, q is the unit charge, and Is(λ) is the corresponding photon flux of the solar radiation spectrum at a fixed wavelength. The ηinj and ηcoll are taken in our model to be equal to 1.

The estimation of the Voc is as follows:
(3)
where
ECB is the CB level of the semiconductor, ΔECB is the CB level shift of the semiconductor caused by the dye adsorption, NCB is the accessible state density in the CB, nc is the free electron density in the CB, Eredox is the redox potential of the electrolyte, kBT is the thermal energy, and e is the unit charge. According to the previous study, nc is about 1018–1019 cm−3 for typical DSSC devices under operating conditions, and the NCB is equal to 7.0 × 1021 cm−3. Then, these two values were used to calculate the Voc in our simulation. The ΔECB can be obtained by,

(4)
where
μnormal is the dipole moment of the individual dye perpendicular to the semiconductor surface, γ is the concentration of dyes adsorbed on the semiconductor surface, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, and ε is the dielectric permittivity of the solvent.

The fill factor is known by its abbreviation as FF, and is a parameter that determines the maximum power from the solar cell. FF can be calculated by the following approximate relationship:
(5)
where
νoc is the dimensionless voltage, which can be estimated with:

(6)
where
kB the Boltzmann constant, T the temperature, e the unit charge, and n is an ideality factor. According to the previous study, DSSCs typically have ideality factors in the range of 1.0–2.0. As is known, the overall PCE (η) is one of the most quantitative parameters that describe the DSSC performance, which is directly related to the open-circuit voltage, Voc; short-circuit current density, Jsc; and fill factor, FF. It can be expressed as follows:

(7)
where
Pmax is the maximum power of the DSSC device, and Pin (= 100 mW cm−2) is the incident solar power on the cell.


The molecular geometry presents an important key that might influence the molecular orbital distribution. Before assessing the effect of varying the functionals and basis sets on the geometrical and optoelectronic proprieties of a studied dye, we must find its stable conformation. As an approach to find the preferred conformation of the studied molecule, we performed calculations on the most stable conformers of T4-BTDA in the gas phase. According to previous studies, for inorganic compounds, the alkyl-branched chain has negligible influences on their electronic structures and optical properties. Hence, to reduce the computational cost, we replaced hexyl (–C6H13) with methyl (–CH3) in the molecular model of our experimentally synthesized dye T4-BTDA. Although the solvent can also affect the conformation of a molecule by effects like solvent–solute, hydrogen-bonding, dipole–dipole interactions, we carried out the calculation in chloroform solvent.

A previous study showed that the cis and trans orientations of thiophene-flanked benzothiadiazole can be realized because the two conformations are relatively stable. Nielsen et al. showed by 1H NMR studies that the thiophene flanks of BTD (unsubstituted Th-BTD-Th) can rotate freely even at low temperatures, which allows for cis–trans conversion. Taking into account the X-ray crystalline structures of dithienyl-benzothiadiazole, the authors concluded that about 71% of molecules adopt the cis–trans conformation and that the remaining molecules adopt cis–cis, while crystal DTF2BT or benzene, where the hydrogens are replaced with fluorines, show minor occupancies of the trans–trans (∼10%) and cis–cis (∼27%) conformations. The cis–trans conformation was observed in the crystal structures of the T4BT compound or thiophenes substituted by hexyls.
The conformational preference for the molecule depends on many parameters. Among these, the steric repulsion could impose effects on the structures of the molecule by inhibiting co-facial interactions. These repulsive forces result from the steric conflicts of two hydrogen atoms from the benzene part of the BTD and its flanks, or benzene from the BTD and alkyl substituent from the flanks. Although additional attractive interactions from the backbone structure may restrict the local conformations and thus act as “conformational locks”, they lead to a flatness or rigidity of the chains. In a sense, conformational locks by mean of non-covalent intramolecular interactions operate as additional chemical bonds between the aromatic units of the BTD block. Coulombic forces and donor–acceptor orbital interactions have been considered to lock the conformation. Particular attention has been given to these potential untied interactions, which have become one of the main elements of the design rules used for the precise control of local molecular structures in conjugate systems.
Raychev et al. reported that the N–S contact in cis-conformations of thiophene-flanked benzothiadiazole can be considered as a stabilizing, so-called locking interaction, promoting planarization of this conformational state. They also reported that all conformations tend to be flattened (Fig. 2) and the change of polarizable continuum does not have any sizeable effect on the conformation of the molecule.
In a previous study, it was found that two-bound thiophenes are stable when the two sulfurs have trans positions. Here, the addition of two thiophenes non-symmetrically on each side resulted in four conformers. Then, the phosphonic acid fragment had two positions (trans or cis) to the sulfur of the adjacent thiophene sulfur. We then performed optimization and frequency calculations for each remaining structure using the B3LYP+D3/6-31G(d) level of theory. The six most stable conformers were studied in the gas phase and in chloroform. We confirmed by vibrational analysis that all the equilibrium structures were true minima without any imaginary frequency. The most stable conformations are illustrated in Fig. 3.
The energy difference values of the six conformers are illustrated in Fig. 4. From the calculated data, we noticed that the orientation of the thiophenes on behalf of the BTD and the orientation of the hydroxyls attached to the phosphorus atom are responsible for the stability of the conformers. Also, the conformational preference of T4-BTDA depended on the phase environment, although the stable conformer in the gas phase differed from the conformer in chloroform. In the gas phase, the steric repulsion caused by the hydrogen of the BTD and its thiophene flankers plays an important role in favoring a stable conformer. Moreover, the orientation of sulfur in thiophene beside the anchoring group (PO) stabilizes the conformer when they are in the trans position (opposite). In chloroform, the energetic classification changes drastically, where the non-conventional interaction (S–N) stabilizes the conformer C1.
Since the hybrid functionals, such as B3LYP, do not take into account the long-range effects, the correction made by Grimme et al. showed that acceptor–donor natural orbital interactions are responsible for the conformational locks by offsetting the steric effects caused by the thiophene BTD block and thiophene's hydrogen by favoring this order C6 < C2 < C4 < C1 < C5 < C3 in the gas phase, whereas in chloroform, the conformers are ordered as C1 < C2 < C4 < C6 < C3 < C5, as shown in Fig. 4. Conformers C1 and C2 have the highest dipole value in the gas phase, whereby those conformers are favored in a polarizable environment, as we noticed in chloroform. Conformers C2 and C4 keep the same position in gas and in chloroform, which means that the substitution of the left thiophene by (–CH3) destabilizes the conformer.

After finding the geometry of the ground state of the studied dye, and to obtain more consistent results with the experimental values, we assessed the effect of the theoretical approach chosen on the conjugation character and the order of flatness between the different parts of the T4-BTDA dye. To this end, we opted for different exchange functional groups that contain different percentages of the amount of HF in the exchange in combination with basis sets of different sizes. The selected parameters of the carbon–carbon bond lengths (di, i = 1–4) and carbon phosphorus C–P (d5) bond and the dihedral angles (αi, i = 1–5) are illustrated in Fig. 5 along the π-conjugated backbone (donor, spacer, and acceptors), and ensure the process of electron transfer π between the electron donor and electron acceptor units.

The functionals used in the present study are classified as the global hybrid functionals, such as B3LYP and B3PW91, with 20% amount of HF in exchange and the BHandH (50% of HF), the meta-hybrid functional M06-2X (54% HF), and the range-separated hybrids functionals CAM-B3LYP (65% HF) and ωB97XD (22% short-range HF, 100% long-range HF) a functional that takes into account the contribution dispersion parameter of double scattering of two body D2. All the B3LYP, B3PW91, BHandH, M06-2X, CAM-B3LYP, and ωB97XD functionals in combination with the basis set 6-31G(d), 6-311G(d), and with a diffuse function for atoms other than hydrogen (+), 6-31G+(d) and 6-311+G(d) were used for the optimization of the selected geometrical parameters in chloroform. All the calculated parameters distance di using the selected functionals and basis sets are summarized in Table S1 (ESI) and plotted in Fig. 6. As noticed in Fig. 6, the calculated CC bond lengths (Fig. 5) connecting the thiophene rings and the BTD are in the range of 1.37–1.49 Å, which is between the values for single and double bonds (CC: 1.339 Å, C–C: 1.530 Å). This indicates that a resonance structure is constructed across the C–C binding chain, connecting the donor and the acceptor. Also, the bond lengths d1 and d4 that connect the thiophenes are slightly shorter compared to the lengths of the bonds d2 and d3 (the thiophene–benzene bonds of the BTD), which implies a strong resonance between the two thiophenes linked with the benzene of the BTD.
As shown in Fig. 6, the functional effects on the bond length were manifested by a shortening or lengthening of the studied bond. The maximum values for the bond length (di, i = 1–4) were registered by the ωB97XD/6-31+G(d) method and the bond length (d5) by the B3LYP/6-31G(d) method; whereas the minimum values were registered by the BHandH/6-31G(d) method for (di, i = 1–3) and the BHandH/6-311G(d) method for (d4) and (d5). The standard deviation, which represents the square root of the average of the squared deviations, from the mean of the length of the bonds (di, i = 1–5) were (0.008, 0.008, 0.008, 0.008, 0.010 Å), showing small values, which indicates that the used method is close to the mean value. Due to the Becke exchange effect that is introduced by BHandH functional (50% of HF exchange), the BHandH functional shortened the bond length C–C (di, i = 1–4) in comparison to the B3LYP and B3PW91 functionals, while the functionals M06-2X, CAM-B3LYP, and ωB97XD tended to lengthen those bonds. The Minnesota functional flavored meta-hybrid M06-2X tended to shorten the bond lengths in comparison to the separated range-used functionals CAM-B3LYP and ωB97XD. The values calculated by the functional ωB97XD were very large in comparison to all the other functionals; whereby the effect of D2 dispersion in the geometry of this system was bigger. Maybe this was due to the large size of the studied dye. As is known, the dispersion interactions are additive and increase with the system size, and mostly for systems within inter-atomic interactions. Regardless of these results, previous studies have shown that the inclusion of dispersion leads to the improvement of molecular geometries, a result that is more significant with larger systems and smaller basis sets. The augmentation of the size of the basis set resulted in a lengthening of the studied bond lengths for (di, i = 1–3), where it shortened the bond lengths (d4) and (d5).
The selected dihedral angles (αi, i = 1–5) along the backbone connecting the different units of the studied dyes were optimized by different selected functionals and basis sets, and their values are summarized in Table S1 (ESI) and shown in Fig. 7.
As shown in Fig. 7, the maximum values for the dihedral angles (αi, i = 1–4) were recorded by the ωB97XD/6-311+G(d) method and the value of (α5) by the BHandH/6-311+G(d) method; whereas the minimum values were registered by the methods BHandH/6-31G(d) for (αi, i = 1–3) BHandH/6-31+G(d) for α4 and M06-2X/6-311G(d) for (α5). The augmentation of the percentage of the HF exchange amount contribution in the functional flattened the structure of the studied dye for the angles (αi, i = 1–4) with 50% HF for the functional BHandH and the angle (α5) for the Minnesota functional M06-2X. The separated range functionals ωB97XD and CAM-B3LYP predicted the highest values of the dihedral angles (αi, i = 1–4), while the BHandH/6-311+G(d) method showed the largest value for the angle (α5). The dihedral angle (αi, i = 1–4) values presented by BHandH for all the selected basis sets were closer to those obtained by the B3LYP and B3PW91 functionals, which gave reasonable geometrical parameters bond lengths and angles within 0.02 Å and 2°, respectively. The standard deviation of the dihedral angles (αi, i = 1–5) were as follows: 10.0°, 8.5°, 9.3°, 14.6°, 2.1°. Such a large deviation means that the selected methods did not give the same accuracy toward the calculated angles. The use of the functional BHandH tended to flatten the studied molecule, whereas ωB97XD tended to roughen the studied dye. For the angle (α5), the M06-2X/6-311G(d) method showed the maximum values, whereas the minimum value was recorded by the BHandH/6-311+G(d) method. The augmentation of the basis sets tended to destroy the planar structure of the angles (αi, i = 1–4), whereas the basis set 6-311G(d) tended to flatten the angle (α5).

The energies of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO), calculated with different functionals and basis set for T4-BTDA dye, are presented, respectively, in (Tables S2 and S3, ESI) and (Fig. 8 and 9).

As shown in Fig. 8, the global hybrid functionals B3LYP and B3PW91 gave higher values for the HOMO energies than the experimental values (−5.50 eV). However, the functional BHandH presented lower values than the recorded experimental data. Also, we noted that the functionals B3LYP and B3PW91 gave the closest values to the experimental values. As we augmented the amount of HF in exchange for those functionals (20% for (B3PW91, B3LYP) and 50% for BHandH), more of the energies were overestimated. The meta-hybrid functional M06-2X revealed a lower value for the HOMO energy because of the high amount of HF exchange (54%). Besides, the range-separated hybrid functionals CAM-B3LYP and ωB97XD presented values that were lower than global hybrid and meta-hybrid functionals due to the difference in short-range HF percentage. When we increased the percentage of the contribution of HF exchange in the functional, it is expected that the HOMO would be more and more stabilized while the LUMO would be more and more destabilized, as reported in the previous study by Fahim et al. Then using functionals with 20% additional HF components would be enough to improve the prediction values of the HOMO energies.
The prediction of the LUMO has a huge impact on the accuracy of calculation of the bandgap energy and also on the ground state energy of the studied molecules. The LUMO value was acquired with the same functionals and basis sets utilized in the HOMO energy calculations illustrated in Fig. 8. All the predicted values of the functionals were higher than the experimental data (−3.55 eV). The functional hybrids B3PW91 and B3LYP, having an HF exchange of 20%, gave predictions closer to the experimental data; whereas the higher contribution of HF in the BHandH and M06-2X functionals gave less accurate values than the global hybrid functionals. Also, the addition of the short-range amount in the CAM-B3LYP and ωB97XD functionals led to less accuracy in predicting the LUMO energies.
From Fig. 10, we can see that all the predicted values of the bandgap are generally higher than the experimental values (1.95 eV). The accuracy of the values depends on the HF percentage contained in the utilized functionals; whereby functionals with 20% HF exchange presented smaller values for the bandgap. In addition, short-range treatment made the bandgap less accurate.
As shown in Fig. 8 and 9, the calculated HOMOs and LUMOs values could be stabilized by increasing the size of the basis set from the small double-ζ basis set 6-31G(d) to the triple-ζ basis set 6-311G(d) and could be more stabilized by introducing a diffuse function. Also, the HOMO and LUMO energies depended on the nature of the functional, which resulted in a small energy gap. When we increased the percentage of the HF exchange amount contribution in the functional, and by introducing dispersion effects, the HOMO could be increasingly stabilized while the LUMO was increasingly destabilized. This led to overestimating the energy gap. As illustrated in Fig. 10, a high gap was manifested by the blue-shifted UV-vis spectra. Fig. 8–10 show the errors in the HOMO, LUMO, and gap values. The errors in the HOMO values were small in comparison with the LUMO values for the functional hybrids. The basis set had no obvious impact on the error of the calculated values. The gap error was much larger for all functionals except for the hybrid functionals B3PW91 and B3LYP.

In this section, we present the values of the predicted wavelength λmax for each functional/basis set method, followed by the photo-absorption spectra of the studied dye. TD-DFT calculations were carried out to predict the photo-absorption spectra and the obtained results were compared with the experimental data of T4-BTDA in chloroform solvent (the solvent used to record the experimental maximum absorption value available for the T4-BTDA dye) using different functional groups with different basis sets. Both the theoretically and experimentally obtained spectra showed two absorption peaks. The values of the absorption spectra calculated with the different sets of functionals and basis sets are summarized in Table 1 and plotted in Fig. 11 and Fig. S1 (ESI). From Table 1, we can deduce that, except for BHandH, the global hybrid functionals B3LYP and B3PW91 performed poorly in predicting the first and second excitations and provided red-shifted results compared to the experimental values because they underestimated the excitation energy. The meta-hybrid functional M06-2X presented closer values to the experimental data than the separate ranged functionals (CAM-B3LYP and ωB97XD) due to the short-range contribution in those functionals, with both types of functionals giving blue-shifted results in comparison to the global hybrid functionals. The basis set effects on the absorption spectra follow two paths, where the first-hand augmentation of the basis set lowers the value of the wavelength of the studied molecule, while in the second path, the values are red-shifted when adding a diffuse function to the basis set. We noticed also that the augmentation of the basis set in combination with CAM-B3LYP, M06-2X, and ωB97XD showed blue-shifts of the calculated absorption spectra; although we found that the BHandH/6-311G(d) method presented closer values to the experimental data with 505.11 (504) nm for the first excitation and 364.33 (360) nm for the second excitation.

Transition
Basis set
B3LYP
B3PW91
BHandH
CAM-B3LYP
M06-2X
ωB97XD
Transition S0 → S1: 504 nm, transition S0 → S2: 360 nm.
S0–S1
6-31G(d)
644.54
659
509.36
475.36
478.61
437.01
6-31+G(d)
683.11
665.83
521.34
468.48
477.47
430.43
6-311G(d)
648.25
639.26
505.11
453.8
463.09
422.84
6-311+G(d)
663.41
651.55
517.48
455.34
469.58
423.79
S0–S2
6-31G(d)
483.33
479.89
360.24
343.12
351.54
320.76
6-31+G(d)
493.21
483.56
366.68
341.71
351.81
318.24
6-311G(d)
471.91
466.05
357.21
331
342.72
313.72
6-311+G(d)
481.4
473.85
364.33
334.9
348.31
314.79
The absorption spectra predicted by the global hybrid functionals B3LYP and B3PW91 presented the lowest strength force overall for the utilized functional. Also, BHandH had a larger strength force, while the meta-hybrid functional M06-2X had the second largest strength force. Besides, we noticed that the separated range functionals CAM-B3LYP and ωB97XD had the third and fourth strongest forces, respectively. The shape of the absorption spectra was the same for all the used basis sets.
In (Fig. 12), we present the error value of the predicted data in comparison with the available experimental data of T4-BTDA for the 1st and 2nd excitations. The hybrid functionals B3LYP and B3PW91 showed higher errors, while BHandH presented the lowest error values. M06-2X had a lower error compared with BHandH. While the separated range functionals CAM-B3LYP and ωB97XD showed larger errors compared to BHandH. M06-2X, CAM-B3LYP, and ωB97XD predicted more accurate values for the maximum absorption spectra than the hybrid functionals B3LYP and B3PW91.

The improvement of the photovoltaic proprieties of DSSCs is related to good knowledge of the molecular electronic proprieties in the excited state of the studied dye. It is known that the rate of electron injection and the rate of electron regeneration are good tools to judge the performance of a solar cell, where the rate of electron injection from the excited state of the dye molecule to the conduction band of the semiconductor is defined as:

(8)
where
 the oxidation of the excited dye and ECB is the conduction band of the TiO2. Also,

(9)
where
Edye is the redox potential of the ground state of the dye and E0–0 is the vertical transition energy associated with the λmax. The rate of electron regeneration ΔGreg from the shuttle electrolyte to the dye is defined as follows:

ΔGreg = E(I−/I3−) − Edye
(10)
where
E(I−/I3−) is the redox potential energy of (I−/I3−), where the rate of electron recombination ΔGrec is defined as:

ΔGrec = ECB − Edye
(11)
The calculated values of Δ
Ginj, ΔGreg, and ΔGrec with different functionals and basis sets are presented in the ESI (Tables S5–S7) and are illustrated in Fig. 13–15.

From Fig. 13, we notice that the functional hybrids (B3LYP, B3PW91, and BHandH) predicted the highest absolute values of the driving forces for the electron injection ΔGinj. Except for the functional ωB97XD, which showed a positive value, all the other predicted values of ΔGinj were negative, which means that the processes were thermodynamically favorable. The augmentation of the amount of HF in exchange diminished the values of ΔGinj. It should be noticed that the augmentation of the size of the basis sets lowered the values of ΔGinj, and also, adding a diffuse function lowered those values. The functionals B3LYP and B3PW91 in combination with the basis set 6-31G(d) showed only a small error in comparison with the experimental value (−0.96 eV). The error in the prediction of the excitation energy was compensated for by the good prediction of the HOMO energy value.
As shown in Fig. 14, the functionals hybrid (B3LYP, B3PW91, and BHandH) predicted the lowest absolute values of the driving forces for the electron injection ΔGreg. This is reasonable due to the larger value exhibited by M06-2X, CAM-B3LYP, and ωB97XD. All the predicted values of ΔGreg were negative, which means that the processes were thermodynamically favorable. The augmentation of the amount of HF in exchange raised the absolute values of ΔGreg. It should be noticed that the augmentation of the size of the basis sets raised the absolute values of ΔGreg, and also, adding a diffuse function raised these values even more. The functional B3PW91 in combination with the basis set 6-311+G(d) showed only a small error in comparison with the experimental value (−0.7 eV).
From Fig. 15, it is clear that the values of the driving forces for the recombination ΔGrec followed the same patterns as the driving forces for the regeneration ΔGreg. Both quantities depend on the energy value of the HOMO added to the constant values, such as the energy of the conduction band of the TiO2 and the redox potential energy (I−/I3−).
From the above, it is clear that the calculation of various parameters of the studied dye using the DFT methodology needs different functionals and basis sets for a better definition of the studied system.

The binding pattern of phosphonic acids on different metal oxides have been evaluated and described in several studies. Both esters (PO3R2) and acids (PO3H2) are good candidates for surface modifications in many organic solvents and water. Titania (TiO2) is widely used as an electron conductor in Grätzel-type photovoltaic DSSCs, due to its corrosion resistance, stability, nontoxicity, inexpensiveness, and biologically kind nature. The model adopted in this study was a slab representation of the anatase(101) surface, which represents a lower surface energy. Due to the presence of three oxygen atoms linked to the phosphorous atoms, the phosphonic acid has various binding modes with the metal oxide surfaces, such as mono-, bi-, tri-dentate, or chelation of a single metal with two or three oxygens, with hydrogen-bonding interactions originating from either the P–O–H or M–O–H hydrogen. To understand the interactions concerning the sensitizer and the surface of the TiO2, the adsorption of dyes on the (TiO2)9 cluster was studied using DFT calculations using Gaussian (09) code. Sanches et al. reported that the (TiO2)9 cluster is large enough to reproduce the electronic properties of the dye/TiO2 system. In this study, a bi-dentate dissociative mode was used to simulate the interaction of the dye with the TiO2 surface (Fig. 16). The calculation of the adsorption energy, λmax, EHOMO, and ELUMO energies, and dipole moment were performed using the BHandH functional and the basis set 6-311G(d) for light atoms and LANL2DZ for titanium atoms (Table 2).

Dye

λ
max (nm)

E
HOMO (eV)

E
LUMO (eV)
Dipole moment (debye)

E
ads (kcal mol−1)

T4-BTDA

505.11
−6.03
−2.04
6.72
−118.99

T4-BTDA@(TiO2)9
502.02
−6.11
−2.12
31.64
The adsorption energy of the studied dye on the titania cluster could be calculated using eqn (1). As shown in Table 2, the computed adsorption energy of T4-BTDA dye was strong, which means that the dye binds strongly to the titania surface. As a result, this offers long-term stability. In a previous study, a periodic calculation of oligothiophenes-based dyes with different anchor groups showed that the phosphonic acid-based dyes present an adsorption energy of −54 kcal mol−1, which is larger than carboxylic acid by 18 kcal mol−1. The energetic position of the HOMO of the studied dye after adsorption on the titania cluster is weakly more stabilized than the free form, which means that the molecular orbital weakly hybridizes with the band states. The position of the LUMO energy of the adsorbed dye is lower than the free dye LUMO energy. This reveals that the dye LUMO is still superior to the conduction band energy, as required for effective electron injection. The calculated λmax (nm) of the adsorbed dye was blue-shifted on behalf of the free dye by 3 nm. This can be attributed to the insufficiency of the chosen slab.
Calculations of the μnormal and the photovoltaic proprieties were carried out using the BHandH/6-311G(d)/LANL2DZ method and the results are summarized in Table 3, using eqn (2). The calculated Jscmax was very close to the experimental Jsc (13.40 mA cm−2), which means that the used method was consistent with using eqn (3), and Voc was found to be less than the experimental value. This can be attributed to the value of μnormal and the chosen slab for this simulation. Also, the FF value of the studied dye was larger than the experimental value. Finally, the predicted value of the performance of the molecule was very close to the experimental value, which means that the utilized method was consistent.
Dye

μ
normal (debye)

V
oc (V)

ν
oc

FF (%)

J
scmax (mA cm−2)
PCE (%)

a 
Ref. 24.


T4-BTDA

−22.3983
0.662
12.81
73.90
13.42
6.57
Exp.
0.700
68.00
13.40
6.40

In this work, we theoretically studied six conformers of the T4-BTDA phosphonic acid-based dye. The stability of the conformers changed from the unconstrained state to chloroform. Also, the dispersion effect influenced the stability order of the conformers. We noticed that the intramolecular interactions were responsible for conformational locks by offsetting the steric effects caused by the hydrogens of the thiophene and BTD block and the orientation of sulfur in thiophene. Besides, the anchoring group (PO) stabilized the conformer when sulfur and oxygen of (PO) were in trans positions. We used six functionals, whereby three were global hybrid functionals (B3LYP, B3PW91 and BHandH) with different amounts of HF exchange. We also used a meta-hybrid functional M06-2X and two separated range functionals CAM-B3LYP and ωB97XD in combination with four basis sets of Poples 6-31G(d), 6-31+G(d), 6-311G(d), and 6-311+G(d). We reported that all the functionals tended to overestimate the HOMO, LUMO, and bandgap energy values. Also, the absorption spectra predicted by the separated range functionals were blue-shifted in comparison with the experimental data. The functionals B3LYP and B3PW91 failed to predict the absorption spectra because they underestimated the excitation energy. As for the choice of the functional and the adequate basis set for reproducing the experimental data, we studied conformer C1 of the (T4-BTDA) conformation using six functionals and four atomic basis sets. B3PW91 with the Perdew and Wang correlation was the right choice for the energy calculation of the frontier molecular orbital, while BHandH was best for the calculation of the absorption UV-vis in combination with the basis set 6-311G(d). The BHandH functional and (6-311G(d), LANL2DZ) basis sets, the adsorption energy on titania anatase 101 with ((TiO2)9 slab), and the photovoltaic performances of the studied dyes were reported. The calculated cell performance was very close to the experimental value. This means that the calculation schema was reliable. These calculations schemas need to be used on a large set of dyes to test this validity.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors thank Mr Agusti Lledós who allowed us to do the calculations within their server and Mr Abderrahmane Babni, Assistant Professor, Polydisciplinary Faculty of Erra-chidia Moulay Ismail University-Meknes, a teacher of English, who helped us to correct grammatical and spelling mistakes.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0nj03971c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2021