 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA05989E
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18389-18394


Yunlong
Li
,

Senyun
Ye
,

Weihai
Sun
,

Weibo
Yan
,

Yu
Li
,

Zuqiang
Bian
*,

Zhiwei
Liu
*,

Shufeng
Wang
* and 

Chunhui
Huang


Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Rare Earth Materials Chemistry and Applications, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, P. R. China. E-mail: bianzq@pku.edu.cn; zwliu@pku.edu.cn

Institute of Modern Optics & State Key Laboratory for Artificial Microstructure and Mesoscopic Physics, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China. E-mail: wangsf@pku.edu.cn

Received
1st August 2015
, Accepted 12th August 2015
First published on 12th August 2015
In the present work, a hole-conductor-free inverted-structure planar perovskite solar cell was fabricated by a solution process. Remarkably, the device showed a power conversion efficiency (PCE) up to 16.0%, which is higher than those of reported hole-conductor-free perovskite solar cells, and even higher than that of devices using NiOx as the hole conductor. Furthermore, the hole-conductor-free device was also found to reveal a very good stability.

Emerging photovoltaic devices based on organic–inorganic hybrid metal halide perovskites have the fastest energy payback time compared to any PV technology and have attracted lots of attention in recent years. The most widely used methylammonium lead halide (MAPbX3, X = halogen) perovskite possesses a direct band gap, large absorption coefficient and high carrier mobility. The highest reported power conversion efficiency (PCE) of this kind of solar cell has been over 19%. However, perovskite solar cells with high efficiency usually need a hole transporting layer such as 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-p-dimethoxy-phenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD), an expensive and synthetically complicated material, which is costly and may limit the future development and application of this type of solar cell. Therefore, lots of work have been focused on seeking more suitable hole conductors to replace spiro-OMeTAD. Alternatively, several devices without the hole conductor layer (i.e. hole-conductor-free devices) have been developed. Although the performance of hole-conductor-free devices was generally poorer than those of devices using hole conductors, the simple device configuration exhibits a strong competence for reducing the fabrication cost. An inverted-structure is a good choice for avoiding the hole conductor spiro-OMeTAD. Compared with the regular structure, the inverted structure also avoids using mesoporous scaffolds (e.g. TiO2, Al2O3), and the metal electrode usually adopts silver other than expensive gold which has to be used in regular-structure hole-conductor-free devices, because silver could react with iodine in the perovskites. Recently, hole-conductor-free devices were also achieved with an inverted-structure, where the perovskite was fabricated by a new sequential-vapor-deposition method and solvent-washing technique. The highest efficiency reached 11.02% with the inverted-structure, which is still lower than the regular-structure.

In this work, we have successfully fabricated a hole-conductor-free perovskite solar cell with an inverted structure of ITO/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Ag, where the MAPbI3 film was prepared by a solution process and revealed a compact and uniform morphology. As a comparison, a reference device with a hole conductor of NiOx has been fabricated. Amazingly, the device without a hole conductor showed a better performance including PCE and stability than that of the device with NiOx as the hole conductor. The highest PCE reached 16.0%, which is, to the best of our knowledge, the most efficient hole-conductor-free perovskite solar cell. This discovery demonstrated that the inverted-structure perovskite solar cells could be fabricated with a simplified device configuration and a low cost solution process while maintaining excellent photovoltaic performance.

The device configuration of the perovskite solar cells without the hole conductor and with NiOx as the hole conductor is shown in Fig. 1a. The metal halide perovskite was directly deposited on an ITO or ITO/NiOx substrate by a fast deposition-crystallization (FDC) method. C60 was deposited on the perovskite film as an electron transport layer (ETL) and the 2,9-dimethyl-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline (BCP) layer was on C60 as a hole blocking layer (HBL). Finally, silver was deposited as the back contact. The energy level diagram of the devices is shown in Fig. 1b.

To understand the effect of ITO work function (WF) on device performance, the ITO glass was prepared by a four-step cleaning and with (treated-ITO) or without (untreated-ITO) a further UV-Ozone (UVO) treatment. The WF of the untreated-ITO is 4.8 eV while it is 5.2 eV for the treated-ITO (Fig. S1). Fig. S2 shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the devices based on the treated and untreated-ITO. Obviously, the performance parameters of the device based on the treated-ITO were all superior to those of the device using the untreated-ITO. The open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the device based on the untreated-ITO were 0.92 V, 19.7 mA cm−2, 64.6% and 11.7%, while those of the device based on the treated-ITO were 0.96 V, 21.6 mA cm−2, 73.3% and 15.2%, respectively. The higher Voc was ascribed to a higher WF of the treated-ITO, which resulted in a smaller energy barrier between the ITO and the perovskite layer hence improved the hole collection of the ITO. Furthermore, UVO treatment can effectively remove the residual organic species, which would benefit for depositing the perovskite layer. This could be reflected by the higher Jsc and lower series resistance of the device based on the treated-ITO. In a word, the positive influence of the high WF and hydrophilic properties made the treated-ITO more suitable for our inverted-structure perovskite solar cells.

Fig. 2a shows SEM images of the bare ITO and Fig. 2b shows the formed perovskite on the bare ITO, which showed a smooth film surface, a highly uniform crystalline structure (grain size of ∼300 nm) and full coverage on the ITO. The RMS of the ITO is 4.7 nm and that of the perovskite fabricated on the bare ITO is just 5.2 nm (Fig. 2c and d). To explore the effect of the hole conductor on the device performance, a series of samples based on NiOx were characterized by time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy and time-integrated PL spectroscopy. Fig. 3a shows the time resolved PL spectra of ITO/MAPbI3 and NiOx/MAPbI3 and Fig. 3b shows their time-integrated PL spectra. Data showed that a higher quenching degree for the perovskite was observed on the ITO substrate. Both samples had a significantly higher quenching degree after the electron acceptors C60 were deposited (Fig. 3c), demonstrating a good charge carrier extraction across the perovskite/C60 interface. That is, the PL decay lifetimes were substantially shortened from 10.3 and 23.1 ns to 2.1 and 3.5 ns, which meant that C60 possesses an excellent electron collection property. The devices with or without NiOx were further compared by impedance spectroscopy (Fig. 3d). The higher frequency feature could be ascribed to the contact impedance associated with the ITO/MAPbI3 and ITO/NiOx/MAPbI3 interface. It could be learned that the introduction of NiOx increased the interface resistance of the device, which could be employed to explain the significant difference in device performance.

Fig. 4 shows the J–V curves of the solar cells without a hole conductor and with NiOx as the hole conductor under simulated AM 1.5G solar irradiation at 100 mW cm−2. The detailed photovoltaic parameters of the corresponding devices are summarized in Table 1. Obviously, most performance parameters of the hole-conductor-free device were superior to those of the device using NiOx as the hole conductor. As shown in Fig. 4, the NiOx device exhibited a high shunt resistance and a high series resistance. In contrast, the hole-conductor-free perovskite solar cell exhibited a low series resistance and a high shunt resistance simultaneously. The high series resistance resulted in a low FF and Jsc in the NiOx based perovskite solar cell. Although the hole-conductor-free device showed a little lower Voc than the NiOx based device, the device possessed a much higher Jsc and FF and consequently a better performance in PCE. For comparison, the perovskite solar cells based on the NiOx hole conductor prepared by a similar method and bare ITO in the literature are also listed in Table 1.
Device
HTL

V
oc/mV

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF
PCE/%
Ref.

a Each parameter of solar cells is an average from 45 individual devices.

1
NiOx
994 ± 15
20.4 ± 0.7
0.669 ± 0.022
13.6 ± 0.6
This work
2
NiOx
1040
18.0
0.72
13.5

36

3
—
961 ± 14
21.7 ± 0.5
0.718 ± 0.015
15.0 ± 0.5
This work
4
—
1.01
15.69
0.70
11.02

39

To investigate the reproducibility of perovskite-based photovoltaic devices, 45 independent devices were fabricated using the aforementioned procedure and characterized. The histograms of Voc, Jsc, FF and PCEs for the 45 samples are presented in Fig. 5. The best hole-conductor-free solar cell showed PCEs of 16.0 and 14.7% by a reverse scan mode (1.5 V to −0.3 V) and forward scan mode (−0.3 V to 1.5 V), respectively (Fig. 6a). The incident-photo-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectrum of the best hole-conductor-free solar cell exhibited a strong absorption in a broad wavelength range (Fig. 6a, inset). The highest IPCE reaches 90.4%, which was obtained at 480 nm that is similar to those of perovskite solar cells processed by a one-step spin-coating method.Fig. 6b and c show the cross-sectional SEM images of the hole-conductor-free device, which demonstrated that the perovskite remains flat and had an average film thickness of approximately 300 nm. The average PCE of 45 independent hole-conductor-free solar cells reached 15.0% (Table 1, reverse scan mode). The J–V curves of one of these cells obtained at different scanning rates from 100 mV s−1 to 500 mV s−1 revealed almost identical efficiencies (Fig. S3a), suggesting that the solar cell reached an equilibrium state and its output should be very close to the real value. Furthermore, the steady photocurrent output curves under different bias potentials and continuous light illumination were examined (Fig. S3b). The equilibrium photocurrent densities generated at 0.750 and 0.770 V are 20.27 and 19.87 mA cm−2, respectively. Accordingly, the deduced PCEs were 15.2 and 15.3%, respectively.
The hole-conductor-free devices also showed excellent stability when they were stored in a glovebox, showing that all of the photovoltaic parameters were well maintained within about 1000 hours (Fig. S4). Moreover, the hole-conductor-free device showed superior stability to the device with NiOx as the hole conductor. Fig. S5 shows the stability study results of the two unpackaged devices in an air atmosphere. As shown in the figure, both the devices showed good stability with a PCE drop less than 20% in three days. However, the device with NiOx decayed more quickly than the hole-conductor-free device. The superior stability may arise from a simplified device structure which had fewer interfaces and consequently less possibility to be degraded in air. The perovskite fabricated on NiOx showed the roughest surface (Fig. 3) which may result in more defects in the interface. These defects would destroy the buffer layer between the perovskite and Ag, thus leading to the contact of perovskite and Ag. From our experimental results, the device based on the NiOx substrate showed that the Ag electrode damaged more quickly in air, which may be ascribed to the reaction between Ag and perovskite.

In conclusion, a hole-conductor-free planar solar cell with an inverted-structure and solution processed perovskite layer was successfully constructed in this work. The device showed a highest PCE up to 16.0% and the average PCE of the device also reached 15.0%. Moreover, a reference device with a typical hole conductor layer of NiOx has been fabricated and compared with the aforementioned device. Surprisingly, the hole-conductor-free device showed a better photovoltaic performance including efficiency and stability than that of the device with NiOx as the hole conductor. The excellent performance and simplified configuration make the hole-conductor-free device competitive in perovskite solar cells.


The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the National Basic Research Program (2011CB933303, 2013CB921904) and National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (21321001, 21371012, 11134001).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta05989e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015