 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA04366G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17324-17333


Meiyue
Liu
,

Ziming
Chen
,

Yongchao
Yang
,

Hin-Lap
Yip
* and 

Yong
Cao


State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, School of Materials Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, 381 Wushan Road, Guangzhou, 510640, P. R. China. E-mail: msangusyip@scut.edu.cn

Innovation Center for Printed Photovoltaics, South China Institute of Collaborative Innovation, Dongguan 523808, P. R. China

Received
26th April 2019
, Accepted 24th June 2019
First published on 24th June 2019
The development of low bandgap perovskite solar cells is important as the current best perovskite solar cells are not based on a light harvesting layer with an ideal bandgap, and low bandgap materials can also be used together with large bandgap materials to construct all-perovskite tandem cells with potentially higher power conversion efficiencies. However, low-bandgap perovskite solar cells based on mixed Pb and Sn generally suffer from inferior performance, hindering the further development of tandem perovskite solar cells. One of the main reasons is the relatively high open-circuit voltage loss in low-bandgap perovskite solar cells, which is generally attributed to the high trap density in perovskite films and energy-level mismatch between different functional layers in the device. In this study, we find another mechanism that can cause high open-circuit voltage loss and degrade device performance, which is silver diffusion towards the perovskite layer. Devices based on a typical inverted structure (indium tin oxide/PEDOT:PSS/FA0.5MA0.5Sn0.5Pb0.5I3/PCBM/Ag) suffered from severe silver diffusion that contaminated the whole perovskite layer during the thermal deposition process of the silver electrode. Such contamination increased the trap density and down-shifted the energy level of the FA0.5MA0.5Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 layer, resulting in high open-circuit voltage loss in the low-bandgap perovskite solar cells. Accordingly, we inserted a ZnO layer between the PCBM layer and silver electrode to significantly suppress silver diffusion, which dramatically improved the open-circuit voltage from 0.59 V to 0.79 V. Ultimately, a highly efficient low-bandgap Sn–Pb mixed perovskite solar cell with a power conversion efficiency of 18.1% and low open-circuit voltage loss of 0.40 V was achieved, which represents one of the state-of-the-art results in this field.

Because of the promising optoelectronic properties of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites, solar cell devices based on this class of materials have attracted significant attention and the certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the best perovskite solar cell (PVSC) has now reached 24.2%. Because the PCE is approaching the Shockley–Queisser limit of single-junction cells, the development speed of single-junction PVSCs has slowed down, and thus a new device structure is needed to promote further development of PVSCs in terms of device efficiencies. A tandem PVSC, which combines a large-bandgap front cell (bandgap of around 1.7–1.9 eV) and a low-bandgap back cell (bandgap of around 1.2 eV), is a device structure that has been proven to have the capacity to break through the Shockley–Queisser limit. A number of recent efforts have been made to develop large-bandgap PVSCs, and their PCEs have increased to around 18–19%, approaching their theoretical limits. However, low-bandgap PVSCs still suffer from relatively inferior device performance, which is probably caused by large open-circuit voltage (Voc) loss in the device (typically, Voc loss is defined as Eg/q–Voc, where Eg and q represent the optical bandgap of the perovskite layer and elementary charge, respectively). Generally, the high Voc loss has been attributed to two possible causes: first, the high trap density of the perovskite layer, which causes severe trap-assisted recombination; second, undesired energy-level mismatching between the different functional layers in the device. In recent years, several strategies have been developed to solve these issues, aiming to suppress Voc loss and improve device performance. For instance, in our previous work, a vacuum-assisted thermal annealing process was used to obtain a high-quality MASn0.5Pb0.5IxCl3−x (MA+ = CH3NH3+) film with low trap density, which facilitated a higher Voc in the device compared with one based on a higher-trap-density film (annealed in a nitrogen atmosphere). Furthermore, the incorporation of small molecules of N-(3-aminopropyl)-2-pyrrolidinone in this system can passivate the surface traps of perovskite crystals and stabilize the Sn2+ cations in the perovskite lattice, further yielding a smaller Voc loss of 0.48 V with excellent device stability. In addition, Tong and co-workers reported that the incorporation of guanidinium thiocyanate in a FA+/MA+ (FA+ = CH(NH2)2+) mixed low-bandgap perovskite system can passivate the grain boundaries and hence reduce trap-assisted recombination, resulting in an efficient PVSC with a PCE of over 20% and low Voc loss of 0.416 V. To the best of our knowledge, this result is the best one achieved for low-bandgap PVSCs to date. In addition, regarding the issue of mismatches in energy levels, interfacial engineering can be used to reduce Voc loss. Recently, Hayase and co-workers used a PCBM/C60 spike structure in low-bandgap PVSCs to reduce the interfacial recombination of charge carriers, leading to a reduced Voc loss of 0.45 V and a PCE of 17.6% in the device. Li and co-workers inserted an ultrathin organic bulk-heterojunction layer between the PEDOT:PSS and low-bandgap perovskite film to provide better energy-level matching on the anode side, which resulted in a low Voc loss of 0.39 V and a PCE of 18.03%.

Based on these reports, there is no doubt that the reduction of trap density in perovskite films and the establishment of ideal energy-level alignment at the interface can contribute to lower Voc loss for low-bandgap PVSCs. In addition to these two issues, we have identified another mechanism that governs Voc loss in a low-bandgap PVSC based on an inverted structure (indium tin oxide (ITO)/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly (styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)/perovskite/PCBM/silver (Ag)): Ag diffusion towards the perovskite layer. In our study, we observed that without proper interfacial modification, Ag could easily diffuse into the perovskite layer and contaminate the whole film, and therefore enhance the trap density and down-shift the energy level of the perovskite film. To circumvent this problem, we have inserted a thin but dense ZnO layer between the PCBM layer and Ag electrode to suppress Ag diffusion and hence minimized the negative effect of Ag contamination. With the help of this ZnO layer, we obtained a low-bandgap PVSC with a high PCE of 18.1% and low Voc loss of 0.40 V, which is one of the best results for low-bandgap PVSCs to date.

In the organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite family, the lowest-bandgap perovskite (∼1.2 eV) is composed of a stoichiometrically identical amount of Sn2+ and Pb2+ in a perovskite lattice (i.e. ASn0.5Pb0.5I3, where A represents a monovalent organic cation). In our study, the A-site cation is the mixed organic cation of FA+/MA+, obtained by mixing together identical molar ratios of FASnI3 and MAPbI3 precursor solutions (i.e. FA0.5MA0.5Sn0.5Pb0.5I3). SnF2 and Pb(SCN)2 were also added to the precursor solution to suppress the oxidation of Sn2+ and promote better film formation, respectively (details can be seen in the Experimental section). The absorption edge of the low-bandgap FA0.5MA0.5Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 film reached around 1040 nm, reflecting its optical bandgap of around 1.19 eV (see Fig. S1a). Fig. S1b shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the FA0.5MA0.5Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 film; the main peak was located at a 2θ of 14.06°, along with two small peaks at 24.55° and 28.33°, which can be attributed to diffractions from the (110), (202) and (220) planes in the tetragonal perovskite phase, respectively. The XRD pattern shows no peak associated with the precursor materials, indicating that the precursor materials were completely converted to the target perovskite. The morphology of the FA0.5MA0.5Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 film on top of the PEDOT:PSS layer was also studied using a scanning electron microscope (SEM), as shown in Fig. S1c. The polycrystalline perovskite film shows high coverage with crystal sizes of hundreds of nanometres. To characterize the photovoltaic properties of this FA0.5MA0.5Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 film, a PVSC based on an inverted structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/FA0.5MA0.5Sn0.5Pb0.5I3/PCBM/metal electrode was fabricated, as shown in Fig. 1a. Considering that noble metals like Ag, Cu and Au are beneficial to the stability of devices and the work functions of Ag (−4.26 eV), Cu (−4.65 eV) and Au (−5.10 eV) together, we herein selected Ag as the cathode electrode to provide a better energy-level alignment with PCBM. Fig. 1b shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of this PVSC, and the photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. The device achieved a Voc, short-circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor of 0.59 V, 28.8 mA cm−2 and 64.6%, respectively, resulting in a relatively low PCE of 11%.

ETL

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
PCBM
0.58 ± 0.01 (0.59)
28.3 ± 0.5 (28.8)
63.5 ± 1.1 (64.6)
10.7 ± 0.3 (11.0)
PCBM/ZnO
0.78 ± 0.01 (0.79)
28.5 ± 0.4 (28.9)
77.7 ± 1.6 (79.3)
17.7 ± 0.4 (18.1)

To investigate the reason for the inferior performance of PVSCs, a scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) and energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) were used to characterize the cross section and elemental distribution of the whole device. According to the cross section of the perovskite layer and Pb distribution shown in Fig. 1c, the FA0.5MA0.5Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 film was uniform with a thickness of over 500 nm, which suggests that the film was of high quality. In addition, the PCBM layer completely covered the FA0.5MA0.5Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 film and isolated the FA0.5MA0.5Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 layer from the Ag electrode. Unfortunately, a strong Ag signal appeared not only in the Ag electrode, but also in the perovskite layer, which suggests that severe Ag diffusion crossing the PCBM layer occurred during the Ag deposition process. A uniform Ag signal could be found in the whole perovskite layer, illustrating that the diffused Ag could migrate easily within the perovskite film. Such Ag diffusion could contaminate the whole perovskite layer and degrade the device properties. Therefore, strategies for suppressing Ag diffusion are needed to achieve better device performance. A similar Ag diffusion phenomenon was also found in other reports, in which PCBM or some other organic layer was used as the buffer layer, and the modification of the organic layer or formation of a two-dimensional perovskite interlayer could inhibit the Ag diffusion.

To further evaluate the blocking properties of the PCBM film, our first attempt is to modulate the thickness of the PCBM layer from 0 nm to 190 nm to evaluate its ability to prevent Ag diffusion. According to Table S1, the Voc of PVSCs increased with the increase of PCBM thickness, which suggests that a thicker PCBM layer indeed provided better suppression of Ag diffusion. However, even when the thickness of the PCBM layer reached 190 nm, which is the maximum thickness we can achieve in our process, there was a relatively high Voc loss of 0.5 V, which indicates that this thick PCBM layer is still not efficient enough to completely block Ag diffusion. In addition, the absorption competition between the thick PCBM layer and the perovskite absorber also resulted in a decreased Jsc in the device, which suggests that using a thick PCBM layer is not an ideal solution for achieving a highly efficient low-bandgap PVSC. However, this result strongly illustrates that the Voc loss of the PVSC is dominated by the Ag diffusion towards the perovskite layer, rather than the other factors like the trap states between the PCBM layer and the Ag electrode.
Therefore, our second attempt is to introduce a dense inorganic layer as the electron-transport layer (ETL) to provide better suppression of Ag diffusion. Among different inorganic ETLs, ZnO is a suitable candidate because of its high mobility, high transparency and desirable conduction band (CB) of −4.2 eV. Therefore, a 40 nm-thick ZnO layer was deposited on top of the PCBM layer from a ZnO nanoparticle solution to further protect the device from Ag diffusion during the thermal deposition of the Ag electrode. As shown in the EDS results in Fig. 1d, compared with that in the device with the bare PCBM ETL, the Ag signal in the device with the PCBM/ZnO ETL was concentrated in the Ag-electrode area, and the intensity of the Ag signal in the perovskite layer was dramatically reduced. This result strongly indicates that a thin ZnO layer can efficiently suppress Ag diffusion. Moreover, as Fig. 1b and Table 1 show, the device with the PCBM/ZnO ETL achieved a much higher Voc (0.79 V) compared with the device with the bare PCBM ETL, leading to a PCE improvement from 11.0% to 18.1% and Voc loss reduction from 0.6 V to 0.4 V. The overall photovoltaic properties of the devices are summarized in Fig. 2. Fig. 2a shows that PVSCs with both bare PCBM and PCBM/ZnO ETLs suffered from similar burn-in loss within the first 50 s. However, after that, an increased PCE was detected in the PVSC with the PCBM/ZnO ETL, showing a reversed trend compared with that in the PVSC with the bare PCBM ETL. We attribute this phenomenon to the mild light soaking effect of the ZnO layer. In addition, Fig. 2b shows that our device achieved adequate reproducibility, suggesting the reliability of our reported data. Fig. 2c shows the successful fabrication of low-bandgap PVSCs with an external quantum efficiency (EQE) edge up to over 1 μm. Moreover, Fig. 2d shows that the device with the PCBM/ZnO ETL retained 70% of its initial performance after being stored in an N2-filled glove box for 1 month, better than the stability of the device with the bare PCBM ETL, suggesting that besides degrading the device performance, the diffused Ag also becomes harmful to long-term device stability. In addition, to provide a better comparison between PVSCs with the PCBM/ZnO ETL and the typical PCBM/bathocuproine (BCP) ETL, we also fabricated the device architecture of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PCBM/BCP/Ag and the device performance is shown in Fig. S2. Compared with the device with the bare PCBM ETL, the device with the PCBM/BCP ETL had a better Voc and fill factor of 0.67 V and 71.8%, respectively, resulting in an improved PCE from 11.0% to 13.5%. We attribute this result to the fact that BCP reduced the work function of the Ag electrode, facilitating a smaller energy loss at the cathode side. However, the Voc and PCE of the device with the PCBM/BCP ETL were still lower than those of the device with the PCBM/ZnO ETL. We also measured the stability of the device with the PCBM/BCP ETL and it was similar to that of the device with the bare PCBM ETL (as shown in Fig. S2b). Therefore, we infer that a thin layer of BCP (around 7 nm) is not enough to efficiently suppress the Ag diffusion towards the perovskite layer. In a word, the dramatically reduced Voc loss for the device with the PCBM/ZnO ETL could be attributed to the insertion of the ZnO layer, which efficiently suppressed Ag diffusion towards the perovskite layer, as diffused Ag has a series of negative effects in low-bandgap PVSCs (discussed below).

To evaluate how the diffused Ag could affect the properties of the perovskite film, it is important to study the chemical state of Ag as it has been reported that Ag in the form of cations (Ag+) could potentially substitute the original monovalent cations (such as Cs+, MA+ or FA+) in the perovskite lattice and provide a surface passivation effect to improve the overall quality of the perovskite crystals. In contrast, Ag in the form of Ag0 could form Ag metal clusters and therefore act as an electronic quenching site for the perovskite. As the diffused Ag may have a positive effect on the perovskite layer, it is necessary to determine the chemical state of diffused Ag in our PVSCs. Therefore, we first fabricated complete devices with ETLs of bare PCBM and PCBM/ZnO, and subsequently dipped the devices into chlorobenzene to peel off the PCBM/Ag layer and PCBM/ZnO/Ag layer, respectively, in order to expose the perovskite film for surface analysis. In this case, we were able to compare these two films with a pristine perovskite film to study the impact of diffused Ag. Fig. 3a shows the atomic force microscope (AFM) images of the pristine perovskite film, the perovskite film with the PCBM/Ag layer peeled off (Film A) and the perovskite film with the PCBM/ZnO/Ag layer peeled off (Film B). It can be seen that small particles appeared in Film A, but no such particles appeared in the pristine perovskite film and Film B. These results combined with the EDS results shown in Fig. 1 indicate that the small particles are Ag particles. To further evaluate the chemical state of these Ag particles, XRD and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) studies were performed. Fig. 3b shows the XRD patterns of all the three different films and the peaks corresponding to their (110) planes were all located at a 2θ of 14.06°, which suggests that there was no lattice constant change of the perovskite phase in this case, and we therefore conclude that the diffused Ag was unlikely to incorporate into the perovskite lattice. XPS was used to further study the valence state of the diffused Ag. Fig. 3c shows that only one main peak of the Ag 3d5/2 signal was exhibited by Film A, and its location (368.2 eV) supports the existence of Ag metal (Ag0). In addition, we also measured the atomic ratio between Pb and Ag by XPS and the results are shown in Fig. S3. It is obvious that the Pb to Ag ratio in Film A was much smaller than that in Film B, well consistent with the EDS data in Fig. 1 and also suggesting severer Ag diffusion in Film A. Consequently, we can conclude that the diffused Ag was present in the form of Ag metal nanoparticles, which can diffuse through the grain boundaries between the perovskite crystals and eventually contaminate the whole perovskite film.


From our device results, the outcomes of the Ag diffusion are significant losses in both Voc and FF, which are strongly related to the trap density and energy level of the perovskite thin film. We therefore investigated whether the diffused Ag nanoparticles had an impact on these two electronic properties of the perovskite film. As shown in Fig. 4a to c, we first evaluated the trap densities of the pristine perovskite film, Film A and Film B with an electron-only device configuration using dark J–V curve measurements, and the extracted trap density values were 2.91 × 1016 cm−3, 4.42 × 1016 cm−3 and 3.27 × 1016 cm−3, respectively. This result illustrates that the Ag contamination in Film A could introduce more trap states in the perovskite film; however, Film B and the pristine perovskite film presented similar trap densities. Given that the work function of Ag metal (−4.26 eV) is deeper than the CB of FA0.5MA0.5Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 perovskite (−4.0 eV), electron transfer from perovskite to Ag nanoparticles is energetically favourable. This electron transfer results in electrons becoming trapped in the Ag nanoparticles, and thus these nanoparticles could act as electron traps. In addition, the overall energy levels of the perovskite films were also evaluated by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). The results are shown in Fig. S4 and summarized in Fig. 4d. The valence bands of the perovskite films became deeper and deeper from the pristine perovskite film to Film B to Film A, resulting in the down shift of the corresponding CBs from −4.01 eV to −4.06 eV to −4.17 eV, respectively. We attribute this result to the presence of Ag nanoparticles in the perovskite film, as high-concentration Ag nanoparticles might rearrange the overall CB of the whole perovskite film towards the work function of Ag metal. The down shift of the valence band of the overall perovskite film enlarged the energy offset between the PEDOT:PSS and perovskite layer, causing a larger energy loss at this interface. Therefore, both the enhanced trap density and down-shifted energy levels of the perovskite film after Ag contamination could cause increased Voc and FF loss for the whole device.


From the viewpoint of device properties, the presence of trap states will affect the recombination properties within the device, and therefore result in the losses of Voc and FF. As radiative recombination is inevitable, non-radiative recombination is the channel we should suppress for a high-performance PVSC. In a three-dimensional bulk perovskite, non-radiative recombination is dominated by trap-assisted recombination, and a faster extraction of photoexcited charge carriers to the electrodes can also help to suppress recombination within the device. As discussed earlier, the trap densities and energy levels of perovskite films changed after being contaminated with Ag nanoparticles, which probably influenced the charge recombination and extraction properties in the device. Therefore, transient photovoltage (TPV) measurements and transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements were conducted to study the charge recombination and extraction properties of the devices. TPV was used to measure charge recombination under the Voc condition, and the decay of Voc occurred as the recombination of the charge carriers progressed. Fig. 5a shows that the Voc of the device with the bare PCBM ETL suffered from a much faster decay compared with the device with the PCBM/ZnO ETL, which suggests that severer charge recombination occurred within the device with the bare PCBM ETL. In addition, interestingly, according to the TPC study shown in Fig. 5b, the devices with bare PCBM and PCBM/ZnO ETLs presented similar charge extraction properties, although the device with the PCBM/ZnO ETL still showed slightly faster charge extraction. This result correlates well with the slightly higher Jsc and EQE of the device with the PCBM/ZnO ETL. In terms of energy level alignment, in the device with the bare PCBM ETL, Ag diffusion caused a down shift of the CB of perovskite to −4.17 eV, which established a small barrier for electrons at the interface between the perovskite and PCBM layer (lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of −4.0 eV). Generally, such a barrier could hinder electron transfer from perovskite to PCBM, which obviously slows down charge extraction and reduces Jsc in the device. However, according to the TPC, Jsc and EQE measurements, this barrier had only a small impact on the charge extraction properties of the device. We believe this phenomenon resulted from the broad energy state distribution of the LUMO of the PCBM layer, which still allowed the easy transfer of electrons from the perovskite to PCBM layer through the LUMO tail of the PCBM.

To further confirm the dominant recombination process, light-intensity-dependent Voc and light-intensity-dependent Jsc measurements were conducted to investigate monomolecular and bimolecular recombination in the whole device. Typically, in light-intensity-dependent Voc studies, the slope of the curve becomes 1kbT/q (where kb and T represent the Boltzmann constant and temperature, respectively) if bimolecular recombination dominates total recombination, whereas the slope deviates from 1kbT/q and tends to be 2kbT/q if monomolecular recombination is involved. As Fig. 5c shows, the curve of the device with the bare PCBM ETL had a slope of 1.78kbT/q, which was larger than the slope of the curve of the device with the PCBM/ZnO ETL (1.51kbT/q). This result suggests that the device with the bare PCBM ETL suffered from severer monomolecular recombination than the device with the PCBM/ZnO ETL. We attribute this result to the higher trap density of Film A compared with that of Film B, as the Ag nanoparticles can serve as recombination centres for charge carriers. In addition, through a light-intensity-dependent Jsc study, we can judge the severity of the bimolecular recombination under the short-circuit condition, as less bimolecular recombination means that the slope of the curve tends to be 1. Therefore, we conclude that a smaller bimolecular recombination occurred in the device with the PCBM/ZnO ETL, compared with the device with the bare PCBM ETL, because as shown in Fig. 5d, the curve of the former had a smaller slope (0.998) than that of the latter device (0.987). Consequently, these results suggest that the device with the PCBM/ZnO ETL underwent less monomolecular and bimolecular recombination, resulting in a reduction of total recombination, slower Voc decay and ultimately smaller Voc and FF losses.

In this study, we observed the diffusion of Ag into the perovskite layer during the thermal deposition of an Ag electrode when using bare PCBM as the ETL in a PVSC based on an inverted structure. This diffused Ag was present in the form of Ag metal nanoparticles, and contaminated the perovskite layer with two main changes in the properties of the film: first, as the work function of Ag metal is deeper than the CB of perovskite, electron transfer from the CB of the perovskite to the Ag nanoparticles could occur, which means that the Ag nanoparticles could act as trap states and hence increase the overall trap density of the perovskite layer. Second, both the CB and valence band of the perovskite layer down-shifted after being contaminated with Ag nanoparticles. The down shift of the valence band of the perovskite layer could enlarge the energy offset between the perovskite and PEDOT:PSS layers, which resulted in a larger energy loss at this interface. Both of these changes cause large Voc and FF losses for the device, and thus the device with the bare PCBM ETL showed an inferior PCE of 11.0% and a Voc loss as high as 0.6 V. Interestingly, a thin layer of ZnO inserted between the PCBM layer and Ag electrode efficiently suppressed Ag diffusion towards the perovskite layer, and hence suppressed the negative impacts of Ag contamination. Finally, with the help of the ZnO layer, we successfully demonstrated a highly efficient low-bandgap FA0.5MA0.5Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 PVSC with a PCE of 18.1% and low Voc loss of 0.4 V, which represent one of the best results to date, as summarized in Table S2.


The FASnI3 precursor solution was prepared by dissolving 372 mg of SnI2 and 172 mg of formamidinium iodide with 10 mol% (15.6 mg) of SnF2 in 800 μL N,N-dimethylmethanamide (DMF) and 200 μL dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO). The MAPbI3 precursor solution was prepared by dissolving 461 mg PbI2 and 159 mg methylammonium iodide with 3.5 mol% (11.3 mg) Pb(SCN)2 in 630 μL DMF and 70 μL DMSO. The FA0.5MA0.5Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 precursor solution was obtained by mixing stoichiometrically identical amounts of FASnI3 and MAPbI3 precursor solutions, followed by one hour of stirring before spin-coating.


The patterned ITO-coated glass was cleaned by sonication in detergent, de-ionised water, acetone and isopropyl alcohol, and then dried at 80 °C in a baking oven, followed by a 4 min oxygen plasma treatment. A 40 nm-thick PEDOT:PSS layer (Clevios P VP AI 4083) was spun cast onto the ITO substrate and dried for 15 min at 150 °C. The FA0.5MA0.5Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 precursor solution was then spun cast onto the PEDOT:PSS layer at 5000 rpm for 60 s. An anti-solvent dripping process using chlorobenzene was used during the spin-coating process of the FA0.5MA0.5Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 film. Subsequently, the perovskite film was annealed at 100 °C for 10 min in an N2-filled glove box, followed by the deposition of a 70 nm-thick PCBM layer and a 40 nm-thick ZnO nanoparticle (purchased from Sigma-Aldrich) layer. Finally, a 100 nm-thick silver electrode was thermally evaporated onto the substrates through a shadow mask (0.04 cm2).


SEM images were obtained using a Zeiss EVO 18 scanning electron microscope. The crystalline structure of the perovskite films was investigated using an X-ray diffractometer (PANalytical X'pert PRO) equipped with a Cu-Kα X-ray tube. UPS spectra were collected on Thermo Fisher Scientific Escalab 250 Xi equipment with an applied bias of −5 V. A A He I ultraviolet radiation source (21.22 eV) was used. The pressure in the analysis chamber during measurement was about 5 × 10−10 mbar. The energy scale was based on the Fermi edge of gold (0 eV). XPS measurements were carried out using an ESCALAB 250Xi (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). The cross-sectional STEM image and EDS measurements were obtained with a FIB-TEM Helios Nanolab 450S. The sample of the pristine perovskite film was fabricated by spin-coating a FA0.5MA0.5Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 layer on top of ITO/PEDOT:PSS, and the samples of Film A and Film B were fabricated by dipping the PVSCs (with structures of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PCBM/Ag and ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PCBM/ZnO/Ag, respectively) into chlorobenzene to peel off the layers above the perovskite films.


The J–V characteristics for the devices were measured under 100 mW cm−2 air mass and 1.5 global (AM 1.5G) illumination using a solar simulator (Taiwan, Enlitech, SS-F5). The light intensity was calibrated using a National Renewable Energy Laboratory-calibrated silicon photodiode with a KG5 filter. Measurements of the EQE spectra were performed on a commercial quantum efficiency measurement system (QE-R3011, Enlitech). For TPV and TPC measurements, the device was serially connected to a digital oscilloscope (Tektronix TDS 3052C), and the oscilloscope's input impedance was set to 1 MΩ and 50 Ω, respectively, to form the open- and short-circuit conditions. The TPV was measured under 0.3 sun illumination. An attenuated laser pulse (0.54 μJ cm−2, 530 nm) was used as a small perturbation to the device's background illumination. The device's TPC was measured by applying 530 nm laser pulses with a pulse width of 120 fs and a low pulse fluence to the short-circuit devices in the dark. The laser pulses were generated from an optical parametric amplifier (TOPAS-Prime) pumped by a mode-locked Ti:sapphire oscillator seeded regenerative amplifier, with a pulse energy of 1.3 mJ at 800 nm and a repetition rate of 1 kHz (Spectra-Physics Spitfire Ace). The time resolution of the overall measurement was near 1 ns. Light-dependent Voc and Jsc measurements were performed using the J–V measurement system, and the light intensity was modulated from 0.1 sun to 1 sun.


The authors declare no competing interests.


This study was financially supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of the People's Republic of China (No. 2017YFA0206600), National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21761132001, 51573057 and 91733302) and China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No. 2019M650197).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta04366g
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019