 DOI: 10.1039/D0TA04680A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 19357-19366


Jie
Cao
,

Junke
Jiang
,

Nan
Li
,

Yifan
Dong
,

Yongheng
Jia
,

Shuxia
Tao
* and 

Ni
Zhao
*

Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong. E-mail: nzhao@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Center for Computational Energy Research, Department of Applied Physics, Eindhoven University of Technology, P.O. Box 513, 5600 MB, Eindhoven, The Netherlands. E-mail: S.X.Tao@tue.nl

Received
5th May 2020
, Accepted 11th August 2020
First published on 11th August 2020
Two-step sequential deposition has been shown to be an effective method to improve the quality of perovskite films and performance of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). In this work, we have developed a two-step sequential deposition method, incorporating an alkali cation (e.g., Cs+) and a benzylammonium (BA+) cation into formamidinium (FA+)-based perovskite thin films for highly efficient and stable PSCs. By combining experimental characterization and theoretical calculations, we demonstrate that not only the co-incorporation of alkali cations and BA+ significantly improves the crystallinity and orientational growth of perovskite films, but also Cs+ enhances the passivation effect of BA+ ions on the perovskite surface via strengthening bonding between BA+ and perovskites. In particular, inclusion of Cs+ in BA+-passivated perovskites promotes the preferred orientation of defect-free (1 0 0) facets. As a result, we observed remarkable improvements in both open-circuit voltage and fill factor of formamidinium-benzylammonium-cesium (FABACs)-based PSCs, achieving a champion efficiency of 22.5%. More importantly, the FABAC perovskite films demonstrated superior resistance to humidity and photo-thermal stress, and the perovskite-based devices (without encapsulation) retained over 95% of the initial efficiency after exposure to air for 2 months. Manipulating the perovskite composition by combining small alkali and large organic cations in two-step sequential deposition provides an efficient and facile approach to realize highly efficient and stable perovskite devices.

Organolead halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted tremendous attention in both academia and industry due to their rapid rise in efficiency from 3.8% (ref. 1) to 25.2% (ref. 2) as well as their relatively simple solution-based processing. Organolead halide perovskites are a class of materials with the general chemical formula of ABX3, where A is an organic cation (CH3NH3+, MA+ or HC(NH2)2+, FA+), an inorganic cation (Cs+) or a mixture of both; B is a metal cation (e.g., Pb2+, Sn2+ or a mixture of both); X is a halide anion (I−, Br−, Cl− or their mixture). Among the broad range of perovskite materials, FA-based compositional perovskites (i.e., FA+ as the major A-site cation) have attracted a great deal of research interest because of their good thermal stability and nearly ideal bandgap for photovoltaics. To date, the anti-solvent method has mostly been used to produce high-quality FA-based compositional perovskites. However, the reproducibility and scalability of the anti-solvent method are yet to be validated. By contrast, the two-step sequential deposition method involving a first step of depositing PbI2 on the substrate and a second step of converting PbI2 to perovskite by treating PbI2 films in organic salt solution showed promise to achieve scalable and efficient FA-based PSCs.

In addition to the rise in efficiency, the stability of PSCs has improved substantially in the past few years; nonetheless, further enhancement in long-term stability is still needed before commercialization of this technology. In the sequential deposition process, to improve the stability of FA-based PSCs, CsCl, CsI and CsF were used as additives in the first deposition step of PbI2 to enhance perovskite crystallization and stabilize the photoactive perovskite phase. Since the decomposition of a perovskite film usually starts from the film surface and grain boundaries, introducing molecular additives is another effective strategy to passivate surface defects. For example, phenylethylammonium iodide (PEAI) was used by Jiang et al. and Li et al. as an additive in the FAI solution through sequential deposition. The large PEA+ cations were found on both surface and grain boundaries of the perovskite films, passivating surface defects and thus improving both device efficiency and stability.
Inspired by the aforementioned strategies, in this work we have explored the possibility of combining alkali cations and molecular surface passivation in a sequential deposition process to achieve highly efficient and stable PSCs. We investigated the effect of alkali cations and benzylammonium (BA+) cations on the quality of perovskite films and corresponding solar cell devices. Our results highlighted the synergistic role of alkali cations and BA+ in fabricating high-quality perovskite films. The alkali cation enlarged the crystalline grain size and enhanced the BA+-passivation effect with increased surface binding strength between FA-based 3D perovskite and BA+. In particular, the co-incorporation of alkali cations and BA+ enhanced the oriented growth of the (1 0 0) facet, and weakened the growth along the (1 1 1) facet which could induce deep trap states in the PbI2-terminated surface according to the DFT calculations. The resulting perovskite showed remarkably improved optoelectronic properties, and the best performance of formamidinium-benzylammonium-cesium (FABACs)-based solar cells reached a champion efficiency of 22.5%. Simultaneously, the FABAC perovskite films demonstrated superior stability under photo-thermal stress, and the corresponding unencapsulated device retained over 95% of the initial efficiency after storage in air for 2 months.

Perovskite films were fabricated on SnO2-coated fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates through a two-step sequential deposition process, as shown in Scheme 1. 1.3 M PbI2 solution was spin-coated on the SnO2 coated FTO substrate and baked at 70 °C for 1 min. After cooling to room temperature, a commonly used organic mixture solution containing FAI, MABr and MACl (60 mg:6 mg:6 mg in 1 mL anhydrous 2-propanol) was spin-coated on the PbI2 film to fabricate the FA-based perovskite film. This process has been found to promote film crystallization during sequential deposition. Since FA+ is the major cation in the produced perovskite film, we will abbreviate the material as FA perovskite for simplicity. For incorporating BA+ cations, BAI was added to the organic mixture solution as an additive and the corresponding material will be abbreviated as FABA perovskite. Further incorporation of Cs+ was executed by introducing an alkali salt, such as CsI, into the PbI2 solution due to the low solubility of alkali salts in 2-propanol. The resulting perovskite will be abbreviated as FABAC perovskite.

We first examined the effect of BAI and CsI additives on the morphology and crystallinity of perovskite films. As illustrated in Fig. 1a, the FA perovskite film shows a compact morphology with the grain size around 200 nm, and the cross-sectional view of the film reveals visible grain boundaries (Fig. S1a). The BAI-treatment appears to result in a similar grain size in terms of the surface morphology (Fig. 1b) but reduced grain boundaries in the vertical direction (Fig. S1b). The predominant XRD peak of the (1 1 1) planes suggests a change of the preferred growth orientation after BAI treatment. Further incorporation of Cs+ results in large grains that grow through the entire film thickness and have a horizontal dimension reaching the micrometer-level, as shown in Fig. 1c and d and S1c. XRD patterns in Fig. 1e further reveal that with the co-incorporation of BA+ and Cs+, the perovskite film shows significantly enhanced crystallinity, in agreement with large grains shown in SEM images. Besides, we also observe variation of preferred crystal orientation with the introduction of Cs+. The growth along the (1 1 1) facet is apparently suppressed by further inclusion of Cs+, and the FABAC film shows preferred orientation along the (1 0 0) direction, indicating the cation-induced orientational growth of large perovskite crystals.
To understand the significantly enlarged crystal grains of FABAC perovskite compared with those of FABA perovskite, we further investigated the role of Cs+ or Rb+ in the sequential deposition process. The XRD patterns of the PbI2 films with and without inclusion of CsI or RbI during deposition were examined. As shown in Fig. S2, the PbI2 peak (12.7°) intensity is reduced as the CsI or RbI molar ratio in the PbI2 solution increases. This is a result of reactions between PbI2 and CsI/RbI. Indeed, the additional peaks ∼10° emerged and can be attributed to the yellow-phase CsPbI3 or RbPbI3. We speculate that the yellow phase CsPbI3 or RbPbI3 generated in the first deposition step may act as a growth template or an intermediate phase to modulate the diffusion and intercalation of organic cations and halide anions into the layered PbI2, which might facilitate the crystallization process and guide the orientational growth of the perovskite films due to the variations in interfacial energies. We also examined how incorporation of Cs+ and BA+ may affect the perovskite lattice. In FABA, we observe a negligible shift of the main diffraction peak (Fig. S3), indicating little BA+ incorporation in the perovskite lattice, i.e., the BA+ ions mainly bind to the perovskite lattice as surface passivation molecules. Upon addition of a small amount (5%) of Cs+, a small shift of the diffraction peak to a higher degree can be seen, which is associated with lattice contraction due to incorporation of the small-size Cs+ ions. When the Cs+ ratio is increased to 20%, a BA2PbI4 phase forms (Fig. S4a), and the peak shift might be induced by the formation of the quasi-2D perovskite phase.
To examine the generality of the synergistic effect of alkali cations and BA+, we replaced CsI with RbI in the two-step sequential deposition method. For simplicity, the fabricated perovskite was abbreviated as FABARb perovskite. Again we observe enhanced crystallinity and preferred crystal orientation of the (1 0 0) plane in FABARb, as well as the formation of the BA2PbI4 phase at higher Rb+ concentration (20% molar ratio) (Fig. S5). The results suggest that the co-incorporation of alkali cations and BA+ can generally induce high-quality perovskite films with orientational growth.
We further carried out first principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations to study the atomistic interactions at the interfaces between BA+ and FA perovskite with and without Cs+. We find negative interface formation energies (see structural models in Fig. S6 and S7) for all BA+-passivated perovskites: −317.95, −321.78 and −322.35 meV Å−2 for perovskites without and with the incorporation of 8.3% Cs+ and 16.7% Cs+, respectively (Table S1). Negative values indicate that the incorporation of BA+ leads to more stable perovskite interfaces. A closer comparison of the interface formation energies reveals, however, a decrease of about ∼4 meV Å−2 (more energetically favorable) when 8.3% Cs+ is present in FA perovskites (Fig. 2a and b). It should be noted that 4 meV Å−2 here is equivalent to about 0.16 eV per BA+ since one BA+ cation takes up an interface area of approximately 40 Å2. This provides evidence that Cs+ strengthens the interfacial interactions of the BA+ layer and 3D perovskite layer, enhancing the passivation effect of BA+ for the perovskites.
To understand the consequences of the change in the preferred crystallographic facets, we calculated the density of states (DOSs) of the three relevant crystallographic facets, using DFT calculations. Structural models and DOSs are shown in Fig. S8 and S9, respectively. We observe deep trap states in the (1 1 1) surface (with PbI2-termination), while no trap states are found in the (1 0 0) and (2 1 0) surfaces. The trap states found at the (1 1 1) surface are caused by under-coordinated Pb–I bonds. Fig. S10 highlights such bonds, where one I only forms one Pb–I bond, whereas two Pb–I bonds are typically formed in the bulk and other surfaces of perovskites. To show this more clearly, we plotted the PDOS of these Pb and I atoms to highlight the origin of the defect states (see Fig. S11). This indicates that the (1 0 0) orientation, promoted by the incorporation of Cs+ into FABA perovskite, is responsible for the improved film quality, via mitigating the undesired trap states of the (1 1 1) surfaces in the FA or FABA perovskites.
Subsequently, we fabricated solar cells with the compositional perovskites to disclose the effects of alkali cations and BA+ on device performances. The perovskite films were incorporated into a device with a structure of FTO/SnO2/perovskite/N2,N2,N2′,N2′,N7,N7,N7′,N7′-octakis(4-methoxyphenyl)-9,9′-spirobi[9H-fluorene]-2,2′,7,7′-tetramine (spiro-MeOTAD)/Au. Firstly, we examined the impact of BAI-treatment by varying the BAI concentration from 2 mg mL−1 to 10 mg mL−1. As shown in Table S2, the BAI treatment significantly improves the open-circuit voltage (Voc, average value increased from 1.06 V to 1.14 V), while slightly enhances the fill factor (FF) and short-circuit current density (Jsc) of derived devices. The optimal efficiency is obtained with a BAI concentration of 4 mg mL−1. Secondly, based on the optimal BAI concentration (4 mg mL−1), we further incorporated CsI into the PbI2 solution. The device parameters in Table 1 show that the best performing device is obtained with 5% Cs+-FABAC perovskite, as a result of further increased FF compared to the FABA perovskite. With a higher percentage of Cs+, the formation of the BA2PbI4 layer occurs and device performance decreases due to the insulating nature of such a 2D layer. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves and the statistic power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the optimized devices based on FA, FABA and FABACs perovskites are compared in Fig. 3a and b. The stabilized power output is promoted from 17.2% to 21.6% after incorporation of Cs+ and BA+ (Fig. 3c). As presented in Fig. 3d, a champion efficiency of 22.5% is achieved for FABAC (4 mg mL−1 BAI and 5% Cs+)-based PSCs. To strictly demonstrate the synergistic effect of BA+ and Cs+ on the improvement of the device performance, we embedded CsI into FA perovskite to investigate whether the incorporation of Cs+ alone could also lead to a similar efficiency gain of FA-based PSCs. However, incorporation of Cs+ only is not comparable to that of the incorporation of both BA+ and Cs+ (Table S3). We note that the FABAC-based devices exhibited significantly reduced hysteresis (Fig. S12). This could be attributed to the combined effects of enhanced crystallinity and preferred orientation of the perovskite films as well as enhanced BA+ surface passivation, both of which could reduce the formation of native defects and paths of defect diffusion and improve charge transport, alleviating the charge accumulation at the interfaces between the perovskite and charge transport layers. We note that even for the best performing cells there is still some hysteresis in the J–V scans, which has been previously found to be associated with inefficient electron transfer at the SnO2/perovskite interface. To further reduce the hysteresis behavior, one may enhance the transport property of the SnO2 layer and/or improve the energy level alignment and reduce the interfacial defect surface modification of SnO2. We also measured the incident-photon-to-current-efficiency (IPCE) of the devices (Fig. S13). The Jsc (22.26 mA cm−2) integrated from the IPCE values of the FABAC-based PSC is also higher than those of the FA-based (21.74 mA cm−2) and FABA-based (21.90 mA cm−2) PSCs. Note that the discrepancy between the current density estimated from IPCE and the one extracted from J–V curves may arise from the difference in the light intensity of the two measurements (the monochromatic light in the IPCE measurement has much lower intensity) and the nonlinearity in the charge recombination mechanism of the devices, as will be discussed later.

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
FA
1.060 ± 0.031
23.409 ± 0.827
66.559 ± 3.320
16.523 ± 1.326
FABA
1.140 ± 0.014
24.236 ± 0.516
69.324 ± 2.836
19.164 ± 1.129
FABACs (1%)
1.138 ± 0.010
24.122 ± 0.721
73.668 ± 1.682
20.300 ± 0.947
FABACs (5%)
1.145 ± 0.012
24.706 ± 0.433
74.601 ± 2.619
21.132 ± 0.750
FABACs (10%)
1.123 ± 0.013
23.434 ± 0.775
62.083 ± 4.477
12.771 ± 1.496
FABACs (20%)
0.573 ± 0.034
18.517 ± 1.581
39.723 ± 5.796
5.092 ± 1.930
To further understand how BA+ and Cs+ work together to improve the performance of FA-based PSCs, we recorded UV-vis light absorption spectra and photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the perovskite films, as well as conducting transient photovoltage (TPV), J–V and external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements of derived devices. As revealed by the UV-vis light absorption and PL measurements (Fig. S14 and S15), FA, FABA and FABAC films all show a bandgap around 1.56–1.57 eV, suggesting that the optical bandgap is not the main cause of the significantly improved Voc in FABAC-based devices. To further examine whether the alkali cations have a doping effect on the underneath SnO2 layers, we measured the conductivity of the SnO2 films before and after deposition of the perovskite layer. We first deposited a FAC or FABAC layer on SnO2 and then removed the perovskite with DMF. We compared the conductivity of the perovskite-treated SnO2 film with that of the fresh SnO2via a four-point probe measurement in the constant current mode. We find that the conductivity of the DMF washed SnO2 film is similar to that of the fresh SnO2 film (Table S4), confirming no significant doping of the alkali cations into the SnO2 films. Considering the invariable property of SnO2 films and similar band edges of the compositional perovskites in all the devices, we suggest that there is no significant effect on the energy level alignment of the SnO2/perovskite interface.
Since the Voc of a solar cell is related to the carrier lifetime, we further performed TPV characterization of FA, FABA and FABAC-based devices to probe the charge recombination dynamics.Fig. 4a plots the light intensity dependence of Voc, where the FABA- and FABAC-based devices both show a higher Voc than that of the FA-based device under each light intensity, in agreement with the increased Voc values presented in Table 1. The ideality factor (nid) of the perovskite solar cells, which is associated with the charge recombination mechanisms (i.e., free carrier recombination vs. trap-assisted recombination (Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination)), was also estimated from the slopes of fitting curves in Fig. 4a. Generally, an nid equal to 1 represents direct band-to-band free carrier recombination (ideal case), and a larger nid (normally in the range of 1–2) implies the presence of SRH recombination via mid-gap or deep traps. The neat FA-based device shows an nid of 1.7, suggesting a predominant SRH recombination process. On the other hand, a lower nid value of 1.5 is achieved after Cs+ and BA+ co-incorporation, implying reduction of SRH recombination in the modified films. We further measured the recombination rates Kr of the resulting devices in Fig. 4b, wherein the FABA- and FABAC-based devices show lower Kr than the FA-based device. The mostly reduced Kr of the FABAC-based device could be attributed to the enhanced crystallinity and oriented growth of perovskite crystals with reduced trap states or improved binding between the BA+ and the perovskite lattice. Currently we are not able to quantify the reduced amount of the deep trap states related to the (1 1 1) surface. A further study combining fine structural analysis and capacitance measurements may provide more insight on this issue. Finally, to find out the underlying mechanism of the improved FF, we extracted the series resistance (Rs) and shunt resistance (Rsh) of the PSCs from the J–V curves measured in the dark. As shown in Fig. 4c, the Rs of the FABAC-based PSCs is dramatically decreased relative to that of the FA-based and the FABA-based PSCs, which is likely due to the oriented growth of the large perovskite crystals, facilitating charge transport and charge extraction to adjacent charge transport layers. Moreover, the Rsh of the devices follows the trend of Rsh (FA) < Rsh (FABA) < Rsh (FABACs), consistent with the variation of Kr.
Finally, we examined the stability of FA, FABA and FABAC perovskite thin films and resulting devices. Under practical operation conditions, irradiation can lead to increased temperature in the solar panels. In this regard, we first studied the photo-thermal stability of perovskite films. An accelerated aging test was conducted by heating perovskite films at 100 °C as well as illuminating the samples under a white light emitting diode (LED) light source with an intensity of about 2000 W m−2. After a continuous 8 h aging test in the glovebox, both the FA and FABA films show color fading with a foggy surface while the FABAC sample retains the original dark black color and shining surface (Fig. S16). From the SEM images (Fig. 5a and b) we find grain coalescence in the FA and FABA perovskites and voids (marked with red dashed lines) at the grain boundaries of the FA perovskite film. The low quality of the FA and FABA films compared with the FABAC film (in Fig. 5) may explain faster degradation reactions in the former, responsible for the color-fading and surface roughening of the films. In particular, the morphological changes in the FA and FABA perovskites suggest that the degradation probably starts from the surfaces and the grain boundaries during the accelerated aging test. The degradation of the perovskite films was further supported by the XRD patterns in Fig. 5d, where the intensity of the PbI2 peak is increased in the FA and FABA perovskites after aging for 8 h; this phenomenon is much more pronounced in the FA perovskite. In contrast, the FABAC perovskite shows no visible changes in the film morphology and the intensity of the PbI2 peak (Fig. 5c and d). This demonstrates that the Cs+-enhanced BA+-passivation is most effective in preventing the decomposition of perovskites. We conducted the same aging test on the FAC perovskite, to investigate whether the incorporation of Cs+-only could also improve photo-thermal stability. As shown in Fig. S17, we can also observe the voids on the FAC perovskite surface and enhanced intensity of the FPbI2 peak after the aging test. The results suggest that only incorporating Cs+ can improve the perovskite photo-thermal stability to some extent, but is not as effective as the combination of BA+ and Cs+.
We also monitored the moisture stability of derived devices in air (humidity level: 60–65%). The FABAC-based PSCs maintain 95% of the initial efficiency after exposure to air for 2 months without any encapsulation. By contrast, the efficiency of the FA-based PSCs degrades by about 30% after 2 months (Fig. 5e and S18). The decomposition of perovskites under moisture stress can be efficiently suppressed facilitated by the improved crystallinity and enhanced surface passivation through multiple-cation engineering. We also note that, even for the optimized FABAC PSCs, there is still an initial efficiency loss of 5%. This loss could be related to the decomposition of the perovskite or the hygroscopic property of the Li-TFSI used to dope spiro-MeOTAD. Further study is desired to clarify the underlying degradation mechanisms.

To conclude, we have demonstrated a two-step sequential deposition procedure to incorporate alkali and large cations into FA-based perovskite thin films. The co-incorporation of the alkali (Cs+ or Rb+) and BA+ cations results in high-quality perovskite films with large and highly oriented grains. In particular, our combined experimental and DFT studies reveal that inclusion of Cs+ in the FABA perovskite promotes the formation of a desired defect-free (1 0 0) facet and suppresses the growth of the (1 1 1) facet with deep trap states. In addition, the presence of Cs+ ions also enhances the passivation effect of BA+ on the FA-based perovskite surfaces via strengthening bonding between BA+ and perovskites. Thanks to the synergistic effect of the Cs+ and BA+ cations, the FABAC perovskites exhibit excellent optoelectronic properties with remarkably reduced charge recombination and enhanced charge transport. By carefully optimizing the concentration of BA+ and Cs+, we obtain a champion device with PCE reaching 22.5%, which is among the top efficiency for this type of solar cells. Importantly, the FABAC perovskite films show superior stability against photo-thermal stress and moisture. The resulting devices maintained more than 95% of the initial efficiency after exposure to air (humidity of 60–65%) for 2 months without encapsulation. This study provides a well efficient method to fabricate highly efficient and stable perovskite devices by two-step sequential deposition.


NH2CHNH2I (FAI), CH3NH3Br (MABr), CH3NH3Cl (MACl) and benzylammonium iodide (BAI) were purchased from GreatCell Solar; SnCl2 was purchased from Aladdin; all other chemical materials were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received unless stated otherwise.


The SnO2 QD solution was prepared through a modified process reported in the previous work. In brief, 0.569 g SnCl2 and 0.19 g thiourea were added to 30 mL deionized water, forming a milky suspension. The suspension was stirred continuously for 24 h at room temperature to obtain a yellow and transparent aqueous solution containing SnO2 quantum dots.


All the perovskite layers were prepared in a glovebox through two-step sequential deposition. FA perovskite was prepared by a modified process reported in the previous work. In brief, 1.3 M PbI2 (dissolved in a mixture of anhydrous DMF/DMSO with the volume ratio of 95:5) was spin-coated on the substrate at 1500 rpm for 30 s and was then dried at 70 °C for 1 min. After PbI2 cooling to room temperature, a mixture solution of FAI:MABr:MACl (60 mg:6 mg:6 mg in 1 mL anhydrous 2-propanol) was spin-coated on PbI2 at 1500 rpm for 30 s, followed by annealing at 100 °C for 20 min. For preparing FABA perovskite, BAI in different quantities was added to the aforementioned mixture solution of FAI:MABr:MACl to get desired concentrations (BAI concentration by weight ranging from 2–10 mg mL−1), while all the other procedures were kept the same as that of preparing FA perovskite. For preparing FABACs, FABARb or FABAK perovskite, in the first step, a 1.5 M stock solution of CsI, RbI or KI in DMSO was added to a 1.3M PbI2 solution to get different molar ratios for CsI:PbI2, RbI:PbI2 or KI:PbI2 (its molar ratio ranging from 1% to 50%); in the second step, a mixture solution of FAI:MABr:MACl:BAI (60 mg:6 mg:6 mg:4 mg in 1 mL anhydrous 2-propanol) was spin-coated on the CsI incorporated PbI2 film. All the spin-coating and annealing procedures were kept the same as those of preparing FA and FABA perovskites.


FTO (DHS-FTO22-15N, HeptaChroma) substrates were cleaned through sonication with detergent, deionized water, acetone, and 2-propanol for 30 min, respectively. Before preparing the SnO2 electron transport layer, all cleaned FTO substrates were treated with an UV-ozone (PSD-UV8, NOVASCAN) machine for 15 min. Then, a compact SnO2 layer was deposited by spin-coating the SnO2 QD solution onto the FTO substrate with 3000 rpm for 30 s, followed by baking at 180 °C for 1 h on a hotplate. Before perovskite layer fabrication, all SnO2 layers were again exposed to an UV–ozone treatment for 15 min. Thereafter, all SnO2 coated FTO substrates were transferred to the glovebox for the fabrication of the perovskite layer and N2,N2,N2′,N2′,N7,N7,N7′,N7′-octakis(4-methoxyphenyl)-9,9′-spirobi[9H-fluorene]-2,2′,7,7′-tetramine (spiro-MeOTAD) hole transport layer. Perovskite films with different compositions were prepared as mentioned above. Spiro-MeOTAD solution was prepared by dissolving 72.3 mg spiro-MeOTAD, 28.8 μL 4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP) and 17.5 μL lithium-bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI) solution (520 mg Li-TFSI in 1 mL acetonitrile) in 1 mL chlorobenzene. The spiro-MeOTAD hole transport layer was prepared by spin-coating the spiro-MeOTAD solution on the perovskite layer at 4000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, an 80 nm-thick gold electrode was deposited via thermal evaporation.


The XRD patterns of the perovskite films were recorded using an X-ray diffraction system with a Rigaku RU-300 diffractometer using CuKα1 irradiation (λ = 1.5406 Å). The perovskite film morphologies were characterized using a high-resolution field emission scanning electron microscope (HR-FESEM, FEI, Quanta 400) and an atomic force microscope (AFM, Bruker Dimension Icon). The cross-sectional SEM images were taken using the Thermal Scios 2 with samples polished by the focused Ga+ ion beam (5 kV, 50 pA). A thin Pt layer was sputtered on the perovskite surface to keep the structure intact. The current density–voltage (J–V) measurements were conducted under simulated AM 1.5 sunlight (94011A-ES, ABB) with a scan rate of 0.1 V s−1 (Keithley, 2612 SourceMeter). The effective area of a cell was 0.05 cm2. Photoluminescence (PL) measurements were taken using a continuous-wave laser source with a wavelength of 405 nm and a power density of 38 mW cm−2. The conductivity was measured by the four-point probe method in the constant current mode. For transient photovoltage decay measurements, the background illumination was provided by a white light source (OSL 1-EC Fiber Illuminator, Thorlabs) and the light intensity was attenuated using a neutral density filter. The small-perturbation pulsed excitation was generated by a 635 nm-wavelength laser diode (LQD635-08C, Newport), and the intensity of the pulsed light was modulated using a continuously variable filter to keep voltage perturbation constant (10 mV). The anode and cathode of the device were connected to the 1 MΩ input of the oscilloscope (TDS-3014C, Tektronix). The external quantum efficiency was measured using a Keithley 2400 Source Meter under monochromatic illumination, which was generated by passing a light beam from a 250 W quartz tungsten halogen lamp into a monochromator (74215 Oriel Cornerstone, Newport). A calibrated silicon diode with a known spectral response was used as a reference.


Structural optimizations were performed using DFT as implemented in the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP). The Perdew, Burke and Ernzerhof (PBE) functional within the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) was used. The outermost I 5s, 5p; N and C 2s, 2p; H 1s; Pb 6s, 6p, 5d electrons were explicitly treated as valence electrons whose interactions with the remaining ions were modelled by pseudopotentials generated within the projector-augmented wave (PAW) method. The energy cutoff for the plane-wave basis set was set to be 500 eV by a convergence test (Fig. S19). A 4 × 4 × 1 k-point mesh generated by the Monkhorst–Pack scheme was used for relaxation and self-consistent calculations for BA+-passivated perovskite surfaces. A uniform grid of 2 × 2 × 1 k-mesh in the Brillouin zone was employed to optimize the crystal structures of a cubic-phase FAPbI3 model. For the electronic calculations, the Brillouin zone was sampled using an 8 × 8 × 1 k-mesh for FAPbI3 slabs with (1 0 0) and (1 1 1) surfaces, and the 8 × 4 × 1 k-mesh for FAPbI3 slabs with (2 1 0) surfaces. Energy and force convergence criteria were set as 0.01 meV and 10 meV Å−1, respectively. ‘The BA+-passivated perovskite surfaces were constructed from bulk FA perovskites without and with Cs+ and Rb+. The lattice parameters of Cs+ and Rb+ doped perovskites were determined by allowing everything to relax during the structural optimization. Subsequently, slabs with BA+ layers on the surface were constructed, where the three layers at the bottom of the slab were fixed, while the rest of the layers were fully relaxed. Dipole correction was applied for the self-consistent calculation to include the effect of surface dipoles. For the FAPbI3 surfaces, the volume and the cell shape were fixed, and the middle layers of the slabs (inside the blue rectangle region in Fig. S8) were fixed, while the top and the bottom layers were fully relaxed’.


To model the BA+-passivated perovskites, slab models were constructed by stacking a BA+ layer on top of the surface of the FAPbI3 perovskite along the (0 0 1) direction. This was done by replacing two FA+ on top of a  cubic FAPbI3 supercell slab with two BA+ (Fig. S6). The BA+-passivated FAPbI3 model consists of 24 C atoms, 22 N atoms, 70 H atoms, 10 Pb atoms, and 32 I atoms, respectively. The lattice parameter of bulk FAPbI3 (cubic lattice) was employed to build a periodic cell in the x–y plane. A vacuum space of 20 Å was included to avoid the interaction between adjacent slabs. To investigate the effect of alkali cations on the stability of the passivation layer, Cs+ and Rb+ were incorporated into the top layer of FAPbI3 perovskites (Fig. S7). The different percentages of Cs+ were modeled by substituting one FA+ for one Cs+ (8.3%) and two FA+ for 2 Cs+ (16.7%), respectively. For 8.3% Cs+, we considered two Cs+ positions; for 16.7% Cs+ four combinations of Cs+ positions. The most stable structures were chosen for in-depth interface bonding analysis. For the density of states calculations, we adopted 2 × 2 FAPbI3 slabs with (1 0 0), (1 1 1) and (2 1 0) surfaces terminated with FAI and PbI2, respectively.


The alkali cation partially substitutes A-site FA+ inside the 3D framework and BA+ replaces A-site FA+ on the top surface of the 3D perovskite lattice. The following formula was used to calculate the interface formation energy:
where
S is the area of the interface, and EBAFA, EBA and EFA are the total energies of the BA+-passivated perovskites, the BA+ layer and the component of perovskites without BA+ passivation, respectively. The more negative the ΔE, the stronger the bonding strength of the BA+ layer and components in the BA+-passivated perovskite.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors gratefully acknowledge the funding from the General Research Fund (RGC Ref No. 14210917) and Theme-based Research Scheme (Grant No. T23-407/13-N) from the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong. The authors thank Han Wang for the help with EQE measurements. S. Tao and J. Jiang acknowledge funding by the Computational Sciences for Energy Research (CSER) tenure track program of Shell and NWO (Project number 15CST04-2), the Netherlands. The authors thank Chidozie K. Onwudinanti for his help in improving the manuscript. Dr Peter Klaver is acknowledged for his technical support in the computational study in this work.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta04680a
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020