 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA09125C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2346-2354


Koen H.
Hendriks
,

Jacobus J.
van Franeker
,

Bardo J.
Bruijnaers
,

Juan A.
Anta
,

Martijn M.
Wienk
 and 

René A. J.
Janssen
*

Molecular Materials and Nanosystems, Institute for Complex Molecular Systems, Eindhoven University of Technology, P.O. Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands. E-mail: r.a.j.janssen@tue.nl

Dutch Polymer Institute (DPI), P.O. Box 902, 5600 AX Eindhoven, The Netherlands

Nanostructured Solar Cells Group, Physical Chemistry Section, University Pablo de Olavide, 141013 Sevilla, Spain

Dutch Institute for Fundamental Energy Research, De Zaale 20, 5612 AJ Eindhoven, The Netherlands

Received
20th October 2016
, Accepted 31st December 2016
First published on 3rd January 2017
Methylammonium lead halide perovskites used in photovoltaic devices are generally deposited from high boiling point solvents with low volatility such as N,N-dimethylformamide. The slow drying causes the formation of relatively large perovskite crystallites that enhance surface roughness and lead to pin holes between the crystallites. We show that the use of 2-methoxyethanol, which is a more volatile solvent, results in smaller crystals that still span the entire layer thickness. This improves the surface coverage of perovskite films, reduces the leakage current and increases the open-circuit voltage and fill factor of solar cells. P–I–N configuration solar cells, processed under ambient conditions from a triple anion (iodide, chloride, and acetate) lead precursor salt, provide an increase in the power conversion efficiency from 14.1% to 15.3% when N,N-dimethylformamide is replaced by 2-methoxyethanol as the solvent.

Perovskite solar cells based on methylammonium lead halides are a promising development in the field of renewable energy. In recent years, the research on this topic has produced solar cells with power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) exceeding 20%. In particular, the attractive features of these devices are the high absorption coefficient, the high open-circuit voltage compared to the optical bandgap, the near unit internal quantum efficiency, and the solution processability that enables large area roll-to-roll production. To date, many procedures such as processing from solution in a single or in sequential steps, by dipping methods and via thermal evaporation have been developed for the deposition of high quality perovskite active layers. In the single-step deposition technique, essentially, dissolved lead iodide and methylammonium iodide form the methylammonium lead triiodide perovskite during drying. To control the crystallization and quality of the perovskite, various solvents, lead sources, thermal annealing schemes, processing additives, and non-solvent treatments have recently been employed.

The formation of the perovskite active layer from a single precursor solution can typically be divided in the deposition and drying of the solution and a subsequent thermal annealing step. The precursor solution contains the lead precursor and the methylammonium salts that form a dispersion of lead complexes in the supporting solvent. An excess of ammonium salts can modify the crystallization of the precursors when the dispersion dries after deposition. When the layer is subsequently subjected to a thermal annealing step, the evaporation of the residual solvent and evaporation or sublimation of the excess ammonium salts afford the formation of the perovskite crystals. Important parameters for the first deposition step are the drying rate of the supporting solvent, which depends on the volatility of the solvent and temperature, and the ambient conditions. For the second step, annealing time and temperature are critical parameters.
Solvents used for the deposition of organic lead halide perovskites tend to be coordinative and polar in nature so as to disperse the lead complexes and solubilize the methylammonium salts.N,N-Dimethylformamide (DMF) is the most common solvent used, but γ-butyrolactone (GBL), N-methylpyrrolidone (NMP), dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) and N,N-dimethylacetamide (DMAc) are also frequently used for the fabrication of perovskite solar cells. However, all these solvents have a rather high boiling point and low vapour pressure, making them hard to evaporate during deposition which typically results in long drying times. Slow supersaturation of the solution limits the homogeneous nucleation rate which consequently leads to bigger crystals during the crystal growth. Increasing the homogeneous nucleation rate by, for instance, faster evaporation of the solvent will lead to a larger number of smaller crystals. Not only can bigger crystals result in a higher surface roughness, during the subsequent thermal annealing step formation of pinholes can also occur in the layer because of dewetting of the crystals on the surface. The size of these pinholes is, amongst other parameters, dependent on the initial crystal size, where smaller crystals can lead to the formation of smaller pinholes. Here we present the use of 2-methoxyethanol (2ME) as an alternative solvent for the deposition of these perovskite layers. The substantial higher volatility of 2ME compared to that of the traditional solvents allows for the rapid drying of perovskite precursor layers, leading to more compact layers of smaller crystals with less pinholes after annealing. In addition, 2ME is less polar than DMF and DMSO and solvates perovskite precursors less strongly, favouring nucleation in its early stages and, hence, more homogeneous during drying. We demonstrate that for both a single-anion dispersion (PbI2 + CH3NH3I) and a recently developed triple-anion precursor (Pb(OAc)2 + PbCl2 + CH3NH3I) the use of 2ME results in a significant improvement of the photovoltaic performance compared to DMF.

2-Methoxyethanol was selected as a solvent for perovskite deposition for its known ability to complex metals, high polarity and its frequent use in sol–gel formulations such as zinc oxide. The relatively low boiling point of 124 °C and the high vapour pressure of 823 Pa at 20 °C allow for fast drying, especially when compared to the more common solvents for perovskites (Table S1, ESI), which is beneficial for obtaining smooth and conformal layers. The solubility of lead iodide is very limited in 2ME (<1 mg mL−1) and it does not disperse into a colloidal solution as in DMF until methylammonium iodide is added. Although methylammonium iodide can enhance the solubility of lead iodide, we found this effect to be very strong in the case of 2ME, indicating that the interaction of lead iodide with 2ME is minimal and dispersion occurs mainly through interaction with the methylammonium salt. For the triple-anion precursor we observed that upon dissolution, the colour quickly turned yellow, indicating the in situ formation of lead iodide due to the ion exchange of lead acetate and lead chloride with the methylammonium iodide. We found that solutions with >20 mol% content of lead chloride or lead bromide compared to lead iodide do not disperse well in 2ME, resulting in hazy dispersions. Thus, iodide and acetate appear to be preferential anions to be used with 2ME.

To study layer formation, dispersions of the lead and methylammonium salts in DMF or 2ME were processed into active layers via a hot-casting technique, followed by thermal annealing, both under ambient conditions. We have found that these hot-casting processing conditions provide good and reproducible solar cell performance. A glass slide covered with indium tin oxide (ITO) and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) was used as the substrate. The procedure is described in detail in the Experimental section.
The single-anion precursor (PbI2 + CH3NH3I) forms the perovskite directly after drying of the solvent during spin coating and requires minimal subsequent thermal annealing to complete the perovskite formation process. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the surface (Fig. 1) show that hot-cast layers from DMF consist of large needle-shaped structures that result in a high surface roughness with many large voids in between the needles. AFM reveals a root-mean-squared surface roughness (Rq) of 148 nm (Fig. S1, ESI). For layers processed from 2ME (Fig. 1), the surface structures are smaller and more rounded, resulting in a higher surface coverage and a smoother film (Rq = 62 nm, Fig. S1, ESI). Under higher magnification it is evident that the large surface structures are composed of smaller crystallites which appear to be smaller for the layers coated from 2ME than for DMF. This sub-structure is very similar to that observed by Yan et al. and could originate from colloidal growth. The broad and low-intensity XRD signals (Fig. 2b) are consistent with the presence of small crystallites. The presence of multiple diffraction peaks indicates that the crystallites are randomly orientated.
Layers processed from the triple-anion precursor dispersions via hot spin coating and subsequent thermal annealing consist of large crystals covering the entire surface (Fig. 1). Smaller crystals (∼400 nm diameter) are obtained for 2ME compared to DMF (∼1 μm diameter). Hence, the more volatile 2ME results in a smaller crystal size and more compact layer with improved surface coverage and lower surface roughness (Rq = 10 nm) compared to the layer from DMF (Rq = 24 nm) as determined with an AFM (Fig. S1, ESI). Fig. 2 shows that both layers provide narrow and intense XRD signals at 14.1° (110) and 28.4° (220), which suggests the presence of highly oriented crystals.
Solar cell devices were fabricated in a planar P–I–N configuration on top of an ITO/PEDOT:PSS (40 nm) transparent bottom contact. The perovskite was deposited using a hot-casting method under ambient conditions. The device was completed by spin coating an 80 nm phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) electron transport layer and an evaporated LiF/Al top contact. The concentrations of the dispersions and spin rates used for deposition were tuned to obtain active layer thicknesses of 500 nm. For the triple-anion precursor, processing from DMF has previously been optimized in terms of the annealing time and temperature. Apart from the small adjustments in the concentration spin speed to ensure constant layer thickness, identical processing conditions were used for the layers from 2ME. For both solvents, the same annealing behaviour was found, with 10 minutes at 100 °C being optimal for the highest PCE (Table S2, ESI). To compare only the effect of the solvent, we used the same processing conditions for all precursor solutions.

Fig. 3 and Table 1 show slow sweep J–V curves and the characteristics of the best cells, including the average curves and a histogram of the maximum extractable power (Pmax) from fast J–V sweeps of all fabricated cells from the triple-anion precursors. The slow sweep protocol used is very similar to the method published by McGehee et al. and warrants hysteresis free J–V curves that best represent the solar cell's electrical behaviour at every voltage point under stabilized conditions. Additional fast J–V sweep data of all fabricated cells, statistics and maximum power point tracking are provided in the ESI, and demonstrate that the cells have almost no hysteresis (Fig. S2 and S3, ESI).
Precursor

V
oc (V)
FF

J
sc (mA cm−2)

J
sc,sr (mA cm−2)
PCE (%)

a The PCE has been calculated with the photocurrent determined from integrating the EQE spectrum with the AM1.5G spectrum (Jsc,sr).
b The averaged parameters and standard deviation of 9–11 devices from 6 to 8 individual runs are given in brackets. Fast sweep J–V data of all fabricated devices can be found in the ESI.

DMF single anion
0.084
0.270
5.82
5.96
0.14
2ME single anion
0.873
0.667
11.40
12.11
7.05
DMF triple anion
0.959 (0.953 ± 0.026)
0.767 (0.766 ± 0.023)
19.65 (17.69 ± 0.79)
19.10 (17.88 ± 0.61)
14.05 (13.03 ± 0.57)
2ME triple anion
0.972 (0.982 ± 0.012)
0.816 (0.795 ± 0.015)
18.90 (18.01 ± 0.56)
19.32 (18.52 ± 0.65)
15.32 (14.45 ± 0.53)
For the single-anion precursor, the cells show high leakage currents when processed from DMF. The high surface roughness and voids in the layer cause shunting across the film, resulting in a very low PCE of 0.1%. Because of this clear limitation, no further analysis was performed on this active layer, but we note that the overall low photovoltaic performance is mainly due to the fact that the hot-casting (70 °C) processing from DMF is not optimal for this system. In fact, it has previously been demonstrated that spin coating the single-anion precursor from DMF at room temperature in an inert atmosphere results in PCEs of 5–7% when using a similar P–I–N device architecture. In contrast, when the single-anion precursor was processed from 2ME, a solar cell with a PCE of 7.1% was obtained. Although the performance has improved using 2ME, the PCE is low because of a low short-circuit current density (Jsc) (Fig. 2a). These results demonstrate that the nature of the solvent strongly affects the crystallization of the perovskite in thin films and the resulting surface coverage.
For the triple-anion precursor, hot casting under ambient conditions provides a significantly higher Jsc, a good open-circuit voltage (Voc) and high fill factor (FF), and gives a highest PCE of 14.1% for the DMF processed cells and 15.3% for the 2ME processed cell. These PCEs are close to the state-of-the-art reported PCEs of ∼18% for devices using PEDOT:PSS and PCBM charge extraction layers. Also with respect to averaged PCEs, the 2ME cells outperform DMF cells with a 14.5% PCE compared to 13.0%. A closer look at the parameters shows that this difference mainly originates from an average 30 mV higher Voc and a FF that increases on average from 0.766 to 0.795 for the 2ME cells. The photocurrents are within the standard deviation of each other. The EQE spectra (Fig. 3) show a virtually identical response for the best cells processed from 2ME and DMF, indicating that the different morphologies (Fig. 1) observed for the two active layers do not influence the current generation significantly. The photocurrent losses that are still present can be attributed to optical losses and bimolecular, or recombination losses at the contacts (vide infra). Notable is the optical interference pattern between 500 and 750 nm indicating that the active layers are very smooth and highly specular. Photocurrents determined by the integration of the EQE spectra with the AM1.5G spectrum coincide within 6% of the photocurrents obtained from the solar simulator.
High quality lead halide perovskite films for photovoltaic applications typically have long photoluminescence lifetimes, when measured under low light intensity conditions. However, the photoluminescence characteristics of perovskites are complex and presently not fully understood. Photoluminescence of perovskites depends on the exciton density, duration of illumination, environment, preparation, morphology and on the presence of bulk and surface defects. Charge extraction layers such as PEDOT:PSS quench the photoluminescence via charge transfer. To study the photoluminescence behaviour on a non-quenching surface and minimize the effect of the nature of the surface on the morphology, we deposited perovskite layers on a thin layer of poly(4-styrenesulfonic acid) (PSSH) and on glass. PSSH is the main component in PEDOT:PSS and mimics the PEDOT:PSS surface better than glass. Therefore, the morphologies of perovskite layers deposited on PSSH resemble those on PEDOT:PSS better than on glass (Fig. S4, ESI). The photoluminescence intensity of perovskite films is higher for layers from the triple-anion precursor (Fig. 4). In addition, for the single-anion precursor, the signal is blue shifted by ∼10 nm, which may relate to the presence of small crystallites. Long photoluminescence lifetimes are found for the two layers processed from the triple-anion precursor. Confocal fluorescence microscopy has shown that the photoluminescence lifetime in these polycrystalline films can vary strongly between different grains and even within one grain. To accommodate for a distribution of local decay rates, the photoluminescence decay curves have been fitted to a stretched exponential, I(t) = I(0)e−(t/τc)β, in which τc is a characteristic lifetime and β is the distribution coefficient that provides a phenomenological description of the relaxation in disordered systems. The average lifetime 〈τ〉 is given by 〈τ〉 = (τc/β)Γ(β−1), with Γ the gamma function. For the perovskite layers processed from the triple-anion precursor on PSSH the data result in 〈τ〉 = 828 ns for DMF and 〈τ〉 = 202 ns for 2ME (Fig. 4b and Table S3, ESI). On glass substrates, the corresponding average lifetimes are 225 and 238 ns, respectively (Fig. S5 and Table S3, ESI). In contrast, the perovskite processed from the single-anion precursor in 2ME shows a very short average lifetime of around 4 ns for layers on both PSSH (Fig. 4) and glass (Fig. S5 and Table S3, ESI). As grain boundaries exhibit faster nonradiative decay, the fast decay is consistent with the small crystallites observed in SEM (Fig. 1).
Assuming a carrier diffusion coefficient of 0.03 cm2 s−1 as determined by Stranks et al. the 〈τ〉 values of 828 and 202 ns result in estimated charge diffusion lengths of ∼1570 and 770 nm for the DMF and 2ME triple anion samples, longer than the thickness of the layer (∼500 nm). As long as the crystals span the entire thickness of the active layer in the photovoltaic device, as is the case for both the 2ME and DMF triple anion layers (Fig. 3d), charge extraction can be efficient, circumventing fast nonradiative decay at the grain boundaries. This is consistent with the identical photocurrents that are obtained from the solar cells, irrespective of the crystal size.
To elucidate the recombination losses under operational conditions, we performed impedance measurements under open-circuit conditions at various light intensities for the solar cells made from the triple-anion precursors. Nyquist plots of the impedance data show a single arc that can be associated with a recombination process or shunt resistance (Fig. S6, ESI). No clear low-frequency feature is detected as it is typical of perovskite solar cells with a P–I–N configuration and organic contacts that show low hysteresis. The series resistance (Rs), the capacitance (C) and the recombination resistance (Rrec) have been extracted for each illumination intensity/Voc by fitting the mid-frequency part of the spectrum to a simple -Rs(RrecC)- equivalent circuit. On the other hand, Rs and C are fairly independent of the illumination intensity, and Rrec shows a clear exponential dependence on Voc (Fig. 5) as previously observed in perovskite solar cells.
The 2ME processed cells have a higher recombination resistance than the DMF-processed cells (Fig. 5). Therefore, for a given light intensity, the 2ME cells provide a higher Voc, which is in correspondence with the on average 30 mV higher Voc for the cells from 2ME compared to the cells from DMF. By fitting to the theoretical expression Rrec = R0exp(−qVoc/mkBT), ideality factors of around m ∼ 1.1 have been extracted for both devices. This ideality factor close to unity could originate from pure bimolecular recombination or from surface recombination at a doped interface, its relation to the photovoltaic parameters for the two devices is currently being investigated in greater detail. Next to recombination processes, Rrec is also influenced by physical shunts in the active layer. Since the ideality factors of both devices are very similar, it is likely that the difference in the recombination resistance between the solar cells is not due to a large difference in the recombination rate, but rather originates from an increased shunt resistance of the 2ME processed cell due to fewer pinholes.
We attribute the improved performance of the cells processed from 2ME compared to DMF, to a more homogeneous surface coverage of the perovskite film. This is clearly visible not only for the active layers from the single-anion precursors in Fig. 1, but also for the cells from the triple-anion precursors, smaller pinholes are visible for the cells from 2ME as for the cells processed from DMF. Additionally, the cross-sectional SEM image shows larger voids between the perovskite crystals of the cell from DMF when compared to the 2ME cell (Fig. 3d and S7, ESI). Extracting the dark currents at −0.5 V from the average dark J–V measurements in Fig. S8 (ESI) gives 6.5 μA cm−2 and 21 μA cm−2 for the 2ME and DMF cells, respectively, showing that a larger shunt resistance is present for the cells from 2ME, which corresponds to the larger Rrec determined from the impedance measurements. This combined evidence indicates that the perovskite layer processed from a triple-anion precursor in 2ME has a more compact morphology with reduced shunting pathways. This increases the fill factor and open-circuit voltage, and thus provides the higher performance.

Compared to the traditional solvents like DMF for deposition of thin-film perovskite layers, the higher volatility of 2-methoxyethanol (2ME) results in more compact films with less pinholes. For both single- and triple-anion precursors faster solvent evaporation results in an improved surface coverage. For the single-anion precursor, a PCE of 7.1% was obtained using hot-casting from 2ME under ambient conditions, while DMF did not provide a working cell under similar conditions due to a poor surface coverage with large voids. When a triple-anion precursor is used the crystal size increases significantly and efficient solar cells can be made using DMF and 2ME. The faster evaporation of the 2ME yields a more compact film compared to DMF, with somewhat smaller oriented crystals. Although the average photoluminescence lifetime of the 2ME films is somewhat shorter than that of DMF films, diffusion lengths are long enough not to affect the photocurrent. The effect of the improved surface coverage of 2ME compared to DMF outweighs the smaller crystal size and results in a higher open-circuit voltage and fill factor, which improves the PCE from 14.1% to 15.3%. 2-Methoxyethanol as a new solvent for the processing of perovskite active layers is a valuable addition for further development of high performance perovskite solar cells.


Methylammonium iodide (MAI) was synthesized by dropwise addition of hydriodic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, 57 wt% in water, 30 mL, 0.227 mol) to a solution of methylamine (TCI, 40 wt% in methanol, 27.8 mL, 0.273 mol) cooled to 0 °C. After stirring for one hour, the solvents were evaporated in vacuo and the residue was triturated with diethyl ether (3 × 200 mL). The white solid was then recrystallized from 100 mL of ethanol and dried in a vacuum oven at 70 °C to give methylammonium iodide as white crystals (19.5 g, 54% yield). The compound was stored in a nitrogen-filled glovebox until use. [60]PCBM (99%) was obtained from Solenne BV, and all other chemicals were obtained from Sigma Aldrich and used as received.

The photovoltaic devices were fabricated under ambient conditions (<50% RH, ∼22 °C) by spin coating PEDOT:PSS (Heraeus Clevios PVP Al 4083) onto pre-cleaned, patterned indium tin oxide (ITO) glass substrates (Naranjo Substrates) and dried at 140 °C for 10 minutes. The perovskite precursor dispersions were stirred at room temperature until all precursors were dissolved (∼5 min), and then the dispersions were heated to 70 °C for at least 10 minutes prior to deposition. Each substrate was preheated to 100 °C and quickly transferred to a specially designed spin-coating chuck that minimizes thermal contact between the substrate and the chuck. The hot perovskite precursor was coated on the substrate while spinning for 20 seconds. Different spin rates and concentrations were chosen to provide identical final film thicknesses to enable comparison of the device performance. The single anion dispersion from 2ME was coated at 5600 rpm and contained PbI2 (276.6 mg, 0.6 mmol, 99%), MAI (95.4 mg, 0.6 mmol) and 1.00 mL 2-methoxyethanol (anhydrous, 99.8%). The dispersion in DMF was coated at 5600 rpm and contained PbI2 (368.8 mg, 0.8 mmol), MAI (127.2 mg, 0.8 mmol) and 1.00 mL N,N-dimethylformamide (anhydrous, 99.8%). Triple anion dispersions from 2ME were coated at 4000 rpm and contained Pb(OAc)2·3H2O (182.1 mg, 0.48 mmol, 99.999% trace metal basis), PbCl2 (33.3 mg, 0.12 mmol, 98%), MAI (286.1 mg, 1.8 mmol) and 1.00 mL 2ME. The dispersion in DMF was coated at 5000–6000 rpm and contained Pb(OAc)2·3H2O (303.5 mg, 0.8 mmol), PbCl2 (55.6 mg, 0.2 mmol), MAI (476.8 mg, 3.0 mmol) and 1.00 mL DMF. The layer was immediately annealed at 100 °C for 10 minutes after coating, cooled down for 30 seconds and then coated with a [60]PCBM solution (20 mg mL−1 in a 1:1 vol. of chlorobenzene:chloroform) at 1000 rpm for 20 seconds. The substrate was directly transferred to a nitrogen-filled glovebox where LiF (1 nm) and Al (100 nm) back electrodes were deposited by evaporation under high vacuum (∼3 × 10−7 mbar). The thickness of the active layers was determined with a Veeco Dektak 150 profilometer.

J–V characteristics were measured in a nitrogen environment with a Keithley 2400 source meter under ∼100 mW cm−2 white light illumination from a tungsten-halogen lamp filtered with a Schott GG385 UV filter and a Hoya LB120 daylight filter. The cells were masked with a 0.0676 cm2 or 0.1296 cm2 aperture (the physical overlap of the contacts is 0.09 or 0.16 cm2). The slow sweep protocol used was defined by light soaking at Voc for 10 minutes, followed by a downward sweep (Voc + 0.04 V → −0.02 V) with a step size of 0.02 V. At each voltage the current density was recorded for 5 seconds and the final value was used for plotting the J–V curve. Fast upward and downward J–V sweeps were performed after the slow sweep measurement between −0.5 and 1.5 V with a scan speed of 0.25 V s−1. Short-circuit currents under AM 1.5G conditions were determined by integrating the spectral response with the solar spectrum. Spectral response measurements were conducted under 1 sun operating conditions by using a 530 nm high power LED (Thorlabs) for bias illumination. The device was kept in a nitrogen-filled box behind a quartz window and irradiated with modulated monochromatic light, from a 50 W tungsten-halogen lamp (Philips focusline) and monochromator (Oriel, Cornerstone 130) with the use of a mechanical chopper. The response was recorded as a voltage from a preamplifier (SR570) using a lock-in amplifier (SR830). A calibrated silicon cell was used as the reference.
Scanning electron microscopy was performed using a FEI Quanta 3D FEG scanning electron microscope, cross-sections were made by breaking the samples after immersion in liquid nitrogen. XRD measurements were performed on a Bruker 2D Phaser using Cu Kα radiation with a wavelength of 0.15406 nm between 2θ angles of 10 to 40° using increments of 0.05° and a 2 second integration time. Photoluminescence spectra and decay spectra were measured with a LifeSpec PS (Edinburgh Instruments) using a pulsed picosecond (60 ps, 40 kHz) laser at 405 nm at a fluence of <2 nJ cm2 per pulse (Picoquant LHD-P-C-405, 405 nm) as the excitation source. The perovskite samples were fabricated identical to the method described for the photovoltaic devices except that glass substrates were used, coated with a 40 nm PSSH (Mw ∼ 75000, 18 wt% in H2O) layer. Impedance measurements were performed with an Autolab PGSTAT30 equipped with a FRA module using a 20 mV sine wave voltage perturbation with a frequency ranging between 1 MHz and 1 Hz. The cell was illuminated through a mask using a 730 nm high power LED (Thorlabs) with a photon flux between 4 × 1015 and 3 × 1017 photons per cm2 per s. A compensating DC voltage was applied equivalent to the open-circuit voltage measured prior to performing the impedance measurement. The mid-frequency region of the spectrum was fitted to a single -Rs(RrecC)-. The Zview software (Scribner) was used to do the fittings.

We thank Fallon Colberts for recording the AFM data. The work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft under the Priority Programme SPP 1355 Elementary Processes of Organic Photovoltaics (JA 1563/1-3). The work of JJvF forms part of the research programme of the Dutch Polymer Institute (DPI), project #734. The research has further received funding from the European Research Council under the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme (FP/2007-2013)/ERC Grant Agreement No. 339031, forms part of the Solliance programme, and has received funding from the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science (Gravity program 024.001.035). JAA thanks the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitivity for funding via the “Salvador de Madariaga” programme and the MAT2013-47192-C3-3-R grant.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta09125c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017