 DOI: 10.1039/C6NR03021A
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 14432-14437


Meidan
Que
,

Wenxiu
Que
*,

Xingtian
Yin
,

Peng
Chen
,

Yawei
Yang
,

Jiaxing
Hu
,

Boyan
Yu
 and 

Yaping
Du


Electronic Materials Research Laboratory, International Center for Dielectric Research, Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education, School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China. E-mail: wxque@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Frontier Institute of Science and Technology jointly with College of Science, State Key Laboratory for Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710054, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China

Received
13th April 2016
, Accepted 28th June 2016
First published on 29th June 2016
Up-conversion β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+/NaYF4 core–shell nanoparticles (NYF NPs) with a high luminous intensity in the visible light region were synthesized by a hydrothermal reaction process. Photocurrent densities of the mesoscopic perovskite solar cells fabricated by incorporating up-conversion NYF NPs into the electron transporting layer are effectively enhanced. The effects of the thicknesses of the electron transporting layer and the weight ratio of up-conversion NYF NPs/TiO2 on the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the as-fabricated devices were also investigated. The results indicate that the PCE of the optimized device achieves 16.9%, which is 20% higher than that of the device without introducing NYF NPs, and the steady-state PCE of the as-fabricated devices is close to its transient-state PCE. The up-conversion effect of NYF NPs is conducive to higher device performance rather than the nanoparticles as scattering centers to increase possible light absorption of the perovskite film or the electronic effect of the NaYF4 shell surface. These results can be further confirmed by finite-difference time-domain simulation. Photoluminescence results suggest that the multiphonon-assistance can accelerate the nonradiative recombination process at a lower temperature. Incorporating NYF NPs into the electron transporting layer opens a new approach to a promising family of electron transporting materials for mesoscopic perovskite solar cells.

With the rapid development of the photovoltaic industry over the past few decades, there is a great need for advanced solar cells with innovative light-harvesting materials. Compared with conventional types of solar cells, organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have become considerable interest due to their excellent optical and electronic properties. PSCs usually work in two typical architectures, i.e., the mesoscopic structure and the planar p-(i)-n junction structure. Basically, both of them may have the same mechanism for charge/electron collection or separation, but for the planar structure the mechanism may be clearer due to the distinct configuration of TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3)/spiro-MeOTAD. Therefore, for perovskite solar cells, planar structures have been extensively studied and adopted. Edri et al. recently demonstrated that, in MAPbI3, the hole diffusion length is longer than the electron diffusion length, thus, causing I–V hysteresis. One important tentative solution of this problem is to compensate for the shorter electron diffusion length by introducing an extra electron transporting layer (ETL), so that the electrons extracted from the photo-generated excitons can be transported through not only the perovskite layer but also the ETL. It is noteworthy that the energy level of the ETL must be nicely matched to that of the perovskite film layer to simultaneously facilitate hole blocking and electron injection, which requires the electron mobility to be sufficiently high. With a conduction band minimum (CBM) (4.1 eV) (ref. 13) and a large band gap, the CBM of TiO2 is slightly lower than that of MAPbI3, which guarantees electron injection from the perovskite layer to the ETL via direct contact. Besides, the valence band maximum (VBM) of TiO2 is very low and TiO2 has outstanding hole blocking properties. The aforementioned factors have proved that TiO2 is a perfect electron transporting material (ETM) in mesoscopic solar cells (MSCs). In addition, the infiltration of the perovskite into the ETL depends strongly on the nanoparticle size of ETM. Actually, enlarging the contact area between the ETL and the perovskite layer can facilitate the collection of the photo-generated electrons. Hence, MSCs generally employ mesoporous TiO2 nanoparticles as the ETL, which is expected to promote perovskite crystallization with enhanced nucleation at the nanoparticle's surface.

An efficient solar cell should be able to absorb in a broad spectral range, for example, from the visible light region to the near infrared light region (NIR) (350 to 950 nm), and effectively convert the incident light into charges. Although the perovskite absorber can absorb the visible light part of sunlight effectively in well-operating solar cells, the NIR spectral parts of sunlight, which comprise almost half of the sunlight energy, have not been utilized by the perovskite absorber, that is, there exists a significant energy loss for the sub-bandgap photon transmission. Consequently, utilizing the NIR part of sunlight has become an important issue for increasing the energy conversion efficiency of PSCs. An effective approach is the utilization of up-conversion nanoparticles (UCNPs) to convert NIR light into visible light. The converted visible light can be absorbed by the perovskite absorber (radiatively or nonradiatively). Along this line, UCNPs have been coupled to a wide range of solar cells, including crystalline Si and amorphous Si thin-film solar cells, organic and dye-sensitized solar cells. However, few reports have discussed the implementation of the UCNP@TiO2 nanocomposite as the ETL in PSCs so far.
For better development of materials and understanding of devices, β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+, one of the effective up-conversion materials, was usually selected for the nano-heterojunction formation because its energy level is well-matched to the conductive band (CB) of TiO2. Herein, we reported a method to effectively enhance the conversion efficiency in the MSCs by incorporating up-conversion NYF NPs into the ETL. The results indicate that the light absorption, power conversion efficiency, and photocurrent density of the as-fabricated devices have significant improvement. Finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations further confirm that the improvement of the power conversion efficiency (PCE) is related to the enhancement of the near infrared (NIR) light absorption of the perovskite film due to the up-conversion effect of the NYF NPs. The photoluminescence (PL) results show that the emission intensities of the perovskite films with the TiO2-based and NYF@TiO2-based scaffolds increase as the environmental temperature decreases, implying that the nonradiative recombination process of the NYF NPs is largely influenced by the temperature.


Fig. 1 shows the cross-sectional SEM image and schematic representation of the MSC's structure. Firstly, a 30 nm-thick and compact anatase TiO2 layer was deposited on a conducting glass substrate to collect electrons. Then a layer of mesoporous-NYF@TiO2 of about 200 nm thickness was coated on the surface of the compact TiO2 layer as shown in Fig. S1. After that, the perovskite precursor solution was spin-coated onto and infiltrated into the mesoporous-NYF@TiO2 scaffold and dried at 100 °C for 30 min in a glovebox. This process enables the formation of the perovskite layer via self-assembly of the constituent ions. Thus, a capping layer of the perovskite film was coated on the top of the scaffold. This coating process was also reported in our previous work. Finally, to facilitate the selective p-type contact with the perovskite absorber, a layer of p-type organic hole-conductor spiro-OMeTAD was coated on the top by the spin-coating process, so as to transport the holes to the thermally evaporated silver cathode.

Prior to forming the final mesoporous scaffolds, the as-prepared NYF NPs were randomly mixed with TiO2 nanoparticles in a solution with ethylcellulose and terpineol, thus forming a paste. The paste was then spin-coated onto the compact TiO2 layer, so as to ensure that the continuation of the TiO2 matrix is available for the interfacial contact with the NYF NPs. The size of TiO2 NPs typically used is approximately 25 nm in diameter, while the average size of the NYF NPs is about 45–50 nm as can be seen in Fig. S2. The representative HRTEM images of the core–shell structure of β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+/NaYF4 nanoparticles are presented in Fig. S3. Thus, the NYF NPs can exhibit an efficient up-conversion emission because of the surface coating layer (core–shell structure). After the deposition, a sintering step was required to enhance the electronic connectivity of the film layer. It should be noted that, to prevent the phase transformation from the hexagonal phase to the cubic phase of up-conversion NYF NPs, the sintering temperature must be carefully controlled, since the emission intensity of the hexagonal-phase NaYF4 is about several times higher than that of its cubic counterpart. It was also noted that the emission intensities and the peak positions of the measured samples agree well with those of the calculated patterns for hexagonal NaYF4 crystals (Joint Committee for Powder Diffraction Standards, JCPDS no. 16-0334), and no impurities were detected even after being sintered at 450 °C in air for 1 h as shown in Fig. S4. Finally, the mesoporous layer was treated with an aqueous solution of TiCl4, as it is pivotal in the process of inhibiting an unwanted carrier back recombination pathway within the ETL/perovskite interface. In this paper, we term the MSCs incorporated with the NYF NPs “NYF@TiO2 devices”, and the MSCs employed with only TiO2 NPs is referred to as “TiO2 devices”.
The up-conversion emission spectra of the NYF NPs under an excitation of 980 nm are shown in Fig. 2a, the blue emission bands at about 452, 476, and 648 nm are clearly observed and they are ascribed to the 1D2–3F4, 1G4–3H6, and 1G4–3F4 transitions of the Tm3+ ion, respectively. The emitted visible light is readily absorbed by the perovskite thin film layer, which in turn produces photo-generated species, i.e. electrons and holes. The emission peak of the perovskite thin film located at 750–800 nm is in good agreement with the gap of MAPbI3 after an excitation at 470 nm.Fig. 2b shows the corresponding schematic of the up-conversion population and emission processes of the Tm3+ ion. The specific working mechanism of the mesoporous-NYF@TiO2 scaffold in MSCs is shown in Fig. 2c. When incident light illuminates the cell, NIR light is converted to visible light by NYF NPs due to the up-conversion effect, and the converted visible light and native visible light are then absorbed by the perovskite film. The photo-generated electrons transfer from the perovskite to TiO2 or the NYF NPs and are extracted by FTO glass eventually. It should be mentioned that since the emission level of NYF is slightly higher than the CB of TiO2, only a part of electrons can be injected from NYF to the CB of TiO2.
To study the effect of up-conversion nanoparticles on the device performance, the as-synthesized NYF NPs were added to TiO2 colloid solution at different concentrations as reported in the Experimental section. The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves of the as-fabricated devices are plotted in Fig. S5. The optimized photovoltaic characteristic values, including short circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and PCE, are summarized in Table S1. It can be seen that, when the NYF/TiO2 ratio is 0.25, the device has the highest Jsc, Voc, FF and PCE. Besides, the NYF@TiO2 mixture paste was coated to have different thicknesses. The J–V curves show that the Voc, Jsc, and PCE of “2NT device” and “4NT device” are all lower than those of the “3NT device” as can be seen in Fig. S6 and Table S2.Fig. 3 presents the average Voc and Jsc values of the NYF@TiO2-based device and TiO2-based device, indicating that the average Voc and Jsc values of the NYF@TiO2-based device are slightly higher than those of the TiO2-based device (20.8 mA cm−2vs. 20.1 mA cm−2 and 1.09 V vs. 1.08 V). In addition, the average FF value of the NYF@TiO2-based device is also higher than that of the TiO2-based device (66.4% vs. 65%). Thus, the average PCE of the NYF@TiO2-based device is also higher and its value is 15.1%, which is about 9% higher than that of the TiO2 device as presented in Table S3.Fig. 4a shows the J–V curves of the best devices based on the TiO2 and NYF@TiO2, whose ETL thickness is the same and their detail characteristic parameters are listed in Table S4. Besides, the NYF@TiO2-based device has a Jsc of 21.7 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.1 V, and a FF of 70.6%, resulting in a PCE of 16.9%. In comparison, the TiO2-based device only outputs a PCE of 14.1% due to the lower Jsc, Voc, and FF. Here, the voltage was scanned from Jsc to Voc at a scan rate of 0.1 V s−1. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the best device are shown in Fig. 4b, where integral current densities as a function of wavelength are also presented. Obviously, the EQE of the NYF@TiO2-based device is higher than that of the TiO2 based device in the whole visible region. The integral Jsc values obtained from the EQE spectra as shown in Table S4 are comparable with those obtained from the J–V curves. It should be mentioned here that it is difficult for us to give a reasonable explanation why the EQE result is not consistent with the PCE result. As reported in ref. 32 a steady-state PCE measured by prebiasing the device at its maximum power point is very useful for estimating the reliability of the J–V scan. Hence, the steady state PCEs of our best NYF@TiO2 and TiO2-based devices are shown in Fig. 4c, which are 16.8% and 13.9%, respectively. Furthermore, the NYF device and the NYF@TiO2 device without immersing TiCl4 aqueous solution were also fabricated under the similar conditions to that of the NYF@TiO2 devices. Their photocurrent–voltage curves show that the Voc, Jsc, and PCE are all inferior to those of the NYF@TiO2 device as shown in Fig. S7 and Table S5. To ensure accuracy, here, the measurement of standard deviation of the devices was carried out from 16 devices. Besides, as a proof of principle, the J–V characteristics of the NYF@TiO2 device and TiO2 device under 980 nm NIR laser light with a power of 500 mW are shown in Fig. S8. Under dark conditions, the TiO2 device exhibits scarcely any photovoltaic performance, but the J–V curve of the NYF@TiO2 device has a Voc of 0.629 V, a Jsc of 0.407 mA cm−2, a FF of 32.22%, and a PCE of 0.083%. Under AM 1.5G irradiation, an additional 980 nm NIR laser was simultaneously employed to illuminate the NYF@TiO2 device, the Jsc value of the device increases from 20.492 mA cm−2 to 20.666 mA cm−2 due to the incorporation into UCNPs, thus, resulting in an increase of PCE from 14.315% to 14.422%.
In order to better understand that the improvement of the device performance is from the up-conversion effect of the NYF NPs rather than the nanoparticles as scattering centers to increase the possible light absorption of the perovskite film or the electronic effect of the NaYF4 shell surface. FDTD simulation was carried out to show the field distribution from the NYF NPs. The simulation results can show the enhancement of the light absorption in the perovskite active layer induced by light scattering phenomena and an increase of the optical path length because of the light scattering by up-conversion nanoparticles. Fig. 5a shows the calculated absorption map of the perovskite film layer, it can be seen that the active layer presents an intense absorption under a plane light source at the wavelength of 980 nm, while weak or even invisible absorption in the active layer of the devices can be observed for the wavelength of 700 nm or 530 nm along the same direction as shown in Fig. 5b and c. The main reason is that NYF can transform NIR light into visible light due to the up-conversion effect, but it can't be excited by visible light. Although NaYF4 particles with the same diameter have a similar morphology to the NYF NP, they cannot absorb NIR light if no rare earth ions are doped. These results indicate that the up-conversion effect of the NYF NPs is helpful for the enhancement of the power conversion efficiency of the as-fabricated devices rather than any other effects from the NaYF4 shell or the scattering of the NYF NPs. Actually, the improvement of the light absorption in the active layer agrees well with the PCE results.
To unravel the electron transport and injection inside to the ETL, the steady state PL spectra of the perovskite films were investigated. Actually, it has been reported that the variation of the PL intensity in the perovskite films is suggestive of variation in the local nonradiative decay rate. As can be seen in Fig. 6, the PL intensity of the perovskite film with the NYF-based scaffold is much higher than that of the TiO2-based scaffold, suggesting that the nonradiative recombination of the perovskite film with the NYF-based scaffold is decreased. However, for the perovskite film with the NYF@TiO2-based scaffold, the PL intensity decreases more significantly than that of the TiO2-based scaffold. Hence, the FTO glass/NYF@TiO2-based ETL/MAPbI3 configuration shows the maximal nonradiative decay rate. In other words, this configuration increases electron collection, which indirectly demonstrates why the NYF@TiO2 devices can achieve better performance as compared with other configuration devices. Furthermore, the temperature-dependent PL spectra of the perovskite film with the NYF@TiO2-based ETL and the TiO2-based ETL are also shown in Fig. 7. For perovskite semiconductors, the red-shift and narrowing of the PL spectra can be seen in Fig. 7 as temperature decreases. It should be attributed to the electron–phonon interactions and lattice thermal expansion, respectively. The full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the two films is narrowed with the decrease of temperature. It can be rationally explained by using the Boltzmann distribution in the light of the following equations
(1)
(2)
where
W0 is the FWHM at the temperature of 0 °C, hw is the lattice vibration energy that has interactions with the electronic transition, k the Boltzmann constant (k = 8.629 × 10−5 eV), and S the Huang–Rhys–Pekar parameter. hw is assumed to be the same for the CB and VB of the perovskite. As the temperature decreases, the thermally activated recombination center weakens the interaction with the thermally active phonon. Thus, the population density of phonon is decreased, and the electron–phonon interaction is also decreased, which consequently narrows the FWHMs of the emission spectra. The thermal quenching behavior of PL was measured from 140 K to 300 K. The emission intensities of both films decrease with the increase of the temperature. As can be seen in Fig. 7c, at low temperatures, especially below 170 K, the droop rate of PL intensities in the perovskite film with the NYF@TiO2-based ETL is slower than that of the TiO2-based film, but the former decreases faster above 178 K. The possible reason is that the nonradiative decay process of both samples is not enhanced, but the multiphonon-assisted nonradiative decay of the perovskite film with the NYF@TiO2-based ETL is clearly faster than that of the latter as the temperature increases.


A new and facile method to incorporate β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+/NaYF4 core–shell nanoparticles into ETLs of the MSCs has been conducted for enhancing the NIR light harvest in perovskite solar cells. It has been revealed that when the thickness of the electron transport layer is about 200 nm and the weight ratio of NYF/TiO2 is about 0.25 and treated with TiCl4 aqueous solution, the corresponding device has the best photovoltaic parameter values, including a Voc of 1.10 V, a Jsc of 21.7 mA cm−2, a FF of 70.6%, and a PCE of 16.9%. The origin of the enhanced Jsc should be attributed to the up-conversion effect of the NYF NPs rather than any other effects from the NaYF4 shell surface or the scattering absorption of the NYF NPs, which can be confirmed by the FDTD simulation results. The PL results of the perovskite films show that the multiphonon-assistance may speed up the nonradiative decay rate at room temperature. The present work provides potential for exploiting the prospective ETM candidates for MSCs, where the near infrared photons can be harvested to enhance the photon-to-electricity conversion efficiency by widening the spectral response.


This work was funded by the Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education of China under Grant 20120201130004, the Science and Technology Developing Project of Shaanxi Province under Grant No. 2015KW-001, the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 51502239, the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation under Grant 2015M582659, and the 111 Project of China (B14040). The SEM work was done at the International Center for Dielectric Research, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, P. R. China.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6nr03021a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016