 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA04127F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16681-16688


Jun-Mo
Park
,

Dong Won
Kim
,

Hae Yeon
Chung
,

Ji Eon
Kwon
,

Seung Hwa
Hong
,

Tae-Lim
Choi
* and 

Soo Young
Park
*

Center for Supramolecular Optoelectronic Materials, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea. E-mail: parksy@snu.ac.kr

Department of Chemistry, Seoul National University, Seoul, 08826, Korea. E-mail: tlc@snu.ac.kr

Received
12th May 2017
, Accepted 11th July 2017
First published on 12th July 2017
A challenge in organic solar cell (OSC) research is the minimization of the photon energy loss (Eloss), which limits the power conversion efficiency (PCE). Here, we describe the development of a new stereoregular β-dicyanodistyrylbenzene (β-DCS)-based polymer (PBDCS), consisting of trans-isomeric β-DCS and two-dimensional benzodithiophene (2D-BDT), that has a deep HOMO of −5.59 eV and a low band gap of 1.75 eV. Interestingly, PBDCS exhibited 100% trans-stereoregularity and, because of its unique resonance structure and aggregation properties, no trans-to-cis photoisomerization on exposure to UV light. Subsequently, an OSC based on PBDCS:PC71BM was found to have a JSC of 15 mA cm−2 and a high VOC of 0.95 V, resulting in a relatively low Eloss of 0.80 eV with an EQEmax of 82.7%, and a PCE of 8.75%. Furthermore, the OSC based on PBDCS:ITIC exhibited a PCE of 7.81% with a remarkably high VOC of 1.08 V and a JSC of 15.9 mA cm−2. In addition, the OSC has an extremely small Eloss of 0.49 eV despite the high EQEmax of 74.2%. This Eloss is the smallest Eloss value in an efficient OSC. In addition, these results suggest that β-DCS is a suitable acceptor moiety for OSCs with small Eloss values.

Bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells (OSCs) have been extensively researched, because of their low-cost fabrication, lightweight, and mechanical flexibility. During the past two decades, there have been several attempts to increase their efficiencies, such as the development of low band gap donor polymers, control of the active layer morphology, use of fluorinated donor polymers, control of the aggregation properties of donor polymers, and development of non-fullerene OSCs; these efforts have resulted in power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) exceeding 10%. Despite this, to date, the most efficient OSCs have not achieved sufficiently high PCEs compared to inorganic and organic–inorganic hybrid solar cells.

A key issue for the further improvement of OSCs is the minimization of the photon energy loss (Eloss), which is defined as the potential energy difference between the absorbed photon and the released electron (Eoptg − eVOC), because OSCs typically have relatively large Eloss values of 0.7–1.0 eV compared with inorganic and perovskite solar cells (typically, Eloss = 0.4–0.55 eV). The large Eloss of OSCs originates from the fact that ΔEHOMO or ΔELUMO between the donor (D) and acceptor (A) should be 0.3 eV or greater; otherwise the external quantum efficiency (EQE) drops considerably, resulting in very low PCEs. Therefore, OSCs with small Eloss values exhibited low EQEs in general. However, recently, some OSCs have been developed that have high EQEs despite having small either ΔEHOMO or ΔELUMO (under 0.3 eV), resulting in very small Eloss values of up to 0.6 eV, which is the empirically obtained limit for OSCs. These small Eloss values have been achieved using a D–A system where the open-circuit voltage (VOC) is maximized: (i) Eg (D) < Eg (A) and a small ΔELUMO or (ii) Eg (D) > Eg (A) and a small ΔEHOMO, which maximizes the energy difference between the HOMO of the donor and the LUMO of the acceptor (ΔEH,D–L,A). The smallest Eloss was achieved using a PffBT4T-2DT:FBR system that yields a very small Eloss of 0.5 eV and an EQEmax of 57%, arising from the small ΔELUMO of 0.05 eV. In addition, PNOz4T:PC71BM and P3TEA:SF-PDI2 (ref. 26) systems also showed a high EQEmax value of 66% and Eloss values of 0.55 eV and 0.61 eV, respectively. Very recently, a very high EQEmax of 76.5% was achieved by a J71:3,9-bis(2-methylene-(3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-indanone))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:2,3-d]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b]dithiophene (ITIC) system despite the small Eloss of 0.65 eV, arising from the ΔEHOMO of 0.11 eV. Notwithstanding these examples, it is still very difficult to implement systems with small Eloss values and high EQEs, because of the scarcity of donor polymers with sufficiently deep FMOs to result in a small energy offset with the acceptor and consequently in maximized ΔEH,D–L,A.
In recent years, substitutions of electron-withdrawing atoms such as fluorine and sulfur atoms have been widely used to further stabilize the FMOs of donor polymers; however, this stabilization is not sufficient to minimize the energy offset. The cyano group is one of the strongest electron-withdrawing groups but has been received little attention because it often induces non-coplanarity in the conjugated backbone. In contrast, cyanostyrylbenzene (CS) molecules are highly attractive electron-accepting moieties owing to features such as strongly stabilized energy levels, strong intermolecular interactions arising from various secondary interactions, a coplanar structure in the solid state, high solubility caused by “twist elasticity” characteristics, and facile synthesis. Among CS molecules, β-dicyanodistyrylbenzene (β-DCS) is a promising electron-acceptor moiety. β-DCS is a strong electron-withdrawing group because of the presence of two cyano groups. In addition, β-DCS has a rigid structure, which arises from its unique resonance structure (Scheme 1, ESI). This structural rigidity allows for tight molecular stacking, facilitating efficient charge transport. In addition, the rigid structure is expected to suppress trans-to-cis photoisomerization, a major problem of CS molecules for charge transport applications because a cis isomer is unfavorable for π–π stacking. Recently, because of our efforts in developing β-DCS-based n-type semiconductors, we have achieved a high organic field-effect transistor electron mobility of 7.81 cm2 V−1 s−1 (ref. 37 and 41) and a high non-fullerene OSC efficiency of 7.64%. Moreover, we found that introduction of CS into conjugated polymers results in a narrow Eg, deep FMOs, and strong aggregation properties, which are characteristics of high-performance donor polymers for fullerene and non-fullerene OSCs. Despite such advantages, previously reported DCS-based polymers exhibited OSC efficiencies only up to 3.2% (ref. 47 and 48) because of the trans-to-cis photoisomerization, low polymer molecular weight, and inappropriate donating moieties that induce a large Eg and break the coplanarity of the conjugated backbone. For high-performance OSCs, it is far more important in polymers to prevent the photoisomerization than in small molecules because the separation of cis forms in the polymer chain is not possible.
Based on the above considerations, we designed a new DCS-based polymer (PBDCS) consisting of trans-isomeric β-DCS and two-dimensional benzodithiophene (2D-BDT). 2D-BDT is expected to provide enhanced transport properties that arise from the π-extended molecular framework. To minimize the generation of cis-DCS, we chose the rigid β-DCS structure and conducted polymerization in the dark. As a result, we obtained PBDCS that exhibits not only trans-stereoregularity but also 100% endurance to photoisomerization under UV light, unlike other CS-based polymers. PBDCS has a deep HOMO (−5.59 eV) with a low bandgap (1.75 eV), which is beneficial for high VOC and high short-circuit current (JSC) values. We fabricated fullerene-based OSC devices using PC71BM as an acceptor and non-fullerene OSCs using the ITIC acceptor that has a HOMO similar to that of PBDCS but a smaller Eg, which is believed to be able to minimize the Eloss by maximized ΔEH,D–L,A. In addition, we discuss the origin of unique photoisomeric stability of PBDCS.


Scheme 2 shows the synthetic route to PBDCS. To obtain a high molecular weight and trans-stereoregularity, we used a C–C cross-coupling reaction, the Stille reaction, using a trans-isomeric β-DCS monomer rather than the Knoevenagel reaction, which usually results in an isomeric mixture.

In addition, to prevent the trans-to-cis photoisomerization during the polymerization, we conducted the polymerization in the dark. Detailed descriptions of the synthetic steps for the monomers and polymer are provided in the ESI. The resulting polymer is readily soluble in chloroform, toluene, chlorobenzene, and dichlorobenzene at room temperature (10–30 °C). To determine the molecular weight, we used gel permeation chromatography (GPC) with 1,2-dichlorobenzene as the eluent. As shown in Fig. S1, the GPC trace changed from bimodal to unimodal as the temperature increased, with the high molecular weight peak in the bimodal peak disappearing. This change indicates that PBDCS forms aggregates in solution at room temperature even if the solution is dilute. Thus, we determined the exact number-average molecular weight (Mn) and weight-average molecular weight (Mw) at a temperature greater than 90 °C: 90 kDa and 197 kDa, respectively. The aggregates of PBDCS in solution were also identified using the 1H-NMR results. The chemical shift peaks changed from unclear, broad peaks to sharp peaks as the temperature increased (Fig. S2). From this NMR result, we found that PBDCS was 100% trans-stereoregular, despite photoisomerization being generally inevitable in CS molecules (Fig. S2 and S3). This result implies that PBDCS may be intolerant toward photoisomerization. To verify this, we monitored the NMR chemical shift changes of the PBDCS solution on exposure of the polymer to 365 nm light at room temperature (the wavelength for trans-to-cis photoisomerization). We found that photoisomerization did not occur (Fig. S3). The photoisomeric stability of PBDCS most likely originates from the unique resonance structure of β-DCS, as mentioned in the Introduction part, which was identified by a comparative analysis of other CS molecules (for example, a comparison of bond lengths, molecular rotational energies, photoluminescence in solution, and 1H-NMR chemical shifts.) detailed discussions are provided in the ESI. In addition, the formation of aggregates in solution is considered a key factor preventing photoisomerization because the reaction is more difficult in the tightly packed solid state. Finally, both the rigidity of β-DCS and the aggregation properties of PBDCS result in its complete endurance to photoisomerization under UV light. This photoisomeric stability is very important for the practical application of electronic devices, as well as efficient charge transport.
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) were performed to evaluate the thermal stability of the polymers. The polymer exhibited a high thermal decomposition temperature (5% weight loss) of 396.6 °C and no thermal transitions until 300 °C, indicating a sufficiently high thermal stability for their application in OSCs (Fig. S4).

Density functional theory (DFT) calculations at the B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level of theory were performed to analyze the optimized geometry, molecular orbital distributions, and electrostatic potential (ESP) surfaces. As shown in Fig. 1, while the HOMO of PBDCS is delocalized over the entire polymer backbone, the LUMO of PBDCS is localized on the acceptor unit, implying that PBDCS is appropriate for hole transport. In addition, the backbone of PBDCS has good coplanarity and a curved conformation, which are beneficial for OSC applications, because this curved backbone geometry provides a small crystalline size and good miscibility with PCBM (Fig. S5). The ESP map shown in Fig. 1 shows a similar potential along the backbone, except for a strongly negative nitrogen atom on the cyano group. A closer look reveals that β-DCS has the most positive potential (as shown by a dashed red rectangle in Fig. 1), explaining that β-DCS is an acceptor moiety. This interpretation is consistent with the explanation of the resonance structure of β-DCS.


Fig. 2b shows the absorption spectra of PBDCS in solution. A large absorption band and two small absorption bands are observed at approximately 600 nm (2.0 eV), 425 nm (2.9 eV), and 350 nm (3.5 eV), which can be ascribed to the S1, S2, and S3 absorption bands, respectively. At 10 °C, PBDCS exhibits clear absorbance of the 0–0 peak at 624 nm and the 0–1 peak at 588 nm on the S1 absorption band. However, as the temperature increased, the absorbance of the 0–0 peak decreased continuously, finally disappearing at 60 °C; afterwards the absorbance of the 0–1 peak became weak and blue-shifted gradually from 588 to 547 nm. However, the S2 and S3 absorption bands were invariant with temperature. From these results, we speculate that the S1 absorption band is related to the charge transfer state between the donor and acceptor units, which is affected by molecular rotations, and the S2 and S3 absorption bands are related to the locally excited states of the monomer units, which are not affected by molecular rotations. Therefore, the observed spectral changes of the S1 band indicate that PBDCS aggregates strongly at room temperature but these aggregates are broken down into individual chains by thermally activated vibrational and rotational motions of the conjugated backbone at high temperatures, which is in good agreement with the GPC and NMR results. The aggregation of PBDCS arises from the tight intermolecular stacking induced by β-DCS and the stereoregular structure, consistent with our previous report. The formation of aggregates in solution results in a small domain size and high domain purity, which play a significant role in determining the performance of OSCs; in particular, these factors are essential for high-performance non-fullerene OSCs.
We chose PC71BM and ITIC as acceptors. ITIC is known to be a non-fullerene acceptor with a low Eg and a shallower LUMO than that of PC71BM, resulting in higher JSC and VOC values.Fig. 2a shows the absorption spectrum of the PBDCS, PC71BM, and ITIC films. PBDCS has the maximum absorption wavelength (λmax) of 600 nm, which is complementary to those of PC71BM (λmax = 300–400 nm) and ITIC (λmax = 710 nm), indicating that PBDCS is a good donor pair for both PC71BM and ITIC in terms of solar energy absorption. PBDCS exhibited an optical band gap (Eoptg) of 1.75 eV, which is smaller than that of PC71BM (Eoptg = 2.0 eV) and larger than that of ITIC (Eoptg = 1.57 eV). Therefore, to achieve the maximized energy difference between the HOMO of PBDCS and the LUMO of the acceptors, PBDCS should have a small ΔELUMO with PC71BM (for Eg (D) < Eg (A) case) and a small ΔEHOMO with ITIC (for Eg (D) > Eg (A) case), as mentioned in the Introduction.
The HOMO of PBDCS was evaluated by the onset oxidation potential from the cyclic voltammetry result, and the LUMO was determined by Eoptg − HOMO. The HOMO and LUMO of PBDCS were calculated to be −5.59 eV and −3.84 eV, respectively (Fig. 2d). Such a deep HOMO value, which is the deepest value among those reported for BDT-containing donor polymers, is an encouraging characteristic for an OSC with a high VOC. However, in fullerene-based OSCs, FMOs of PBDCS are still not deep enough to achieve a low Eloss. The ΔEH,D–L,A between PBDCS and PC71BM is not maximized because ΔELUMO is still large (Fig. 2d). In contrast, ITIC, a non-fullerene acceptor with smaller Eg than that of PBDCS, is expected to show better performance in terms of the minimization of Eloss because the HOMO of ITIC is close to that of PBDCS. To confirm this, we measured the FMOs of ITIC and PBDCS at the same time. The results showed that ΔEHOMO between ITIC and PBDCS is 0.02 eV, a negligible value, and these energy levels satisfy the D–A system (Eg (D) > Eg (A) and a small ΔEHOMO) to achieve a minimal Eloss, as discussed in the Introduction part (Fig. S6).

BHJ OSC devices with a conventional architecture were fabricated to assess the photovoltaic performance of PBDCS. A mixed solution of PBDCS and PC71BM or ITIC in chlorobenzene was spin cast on a PEDOT:PSS layer to form the active layer. Ca or poly [(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] (PFN) was used as an efficient cathode interfacial layer and deposited on the active layer (Fig. 2c). The details of the device fabrication procedures are described in the ESI.Fig. 3a shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curves, and the detailed photovoltaic results are listed in Table 1. The PBDCS:PC71BM device showed a PCE of 8.75% with a high VOC of 0.94 V, a JSC of 14.28 mA cm2, and a fill factor (FF) of 65.1%. When PBDCS with a shorter side chain was used (see PBDCS in Table 1, footnote a), both VOC and JSC increased to 0.95 eV and 15.0 mA cm2, respectively, and this JSC value is one of the highest among those of fullerene-based OSCs with a high VOC of over 0.95 eV. The PBDCS:ITIC device showed a PCE of 7.55% with an especially high VOC of 1.08 V, a JSC of 13.6 mA cm2, and an FF of 51.4%. The VOC of 1.08 eV is the highest value among those of OSCs with ITIC as an acceptor, resulting from maximized ΔEH,D–L,A due to the negligibly small value of ΔEHOMO between ITIC and PBDCS. After thermal annealing at 110 °C for 10 min, the PCE improved further to 7.81% owing to a slight increase in JSC and FF; however, the FF is still relatively low compared to the PBDCS:PC71BM device due to imbalance of hole and electron mobility (Fig. S7, Table S1). Like the PBDCS:PC71BM device, when using PBDCS with a shorter side chain, the JSC of the PBDCS:ITIC device improved to 15.8 mA cm2, and the relationship between the side chain length and JSC is consistent with that reported previously. The OSC device results indicate that PBDCS is a promising moiety for the donor material to satisfy both a high JSC and VOC simultaneously, which is vital for further improvement in the PCE.

Polymer:acceptor

V
OC [V]

J
SC [mA cm−2]
FF
PCE [%]

E
loss [eV]

a 
PBDCS with a smaller side chain (R = 2-butyloctyl).
b Thermal annealing at 110 °C for 10 min.
c The values in parentheses are average efficiencies from 9 devices.


PBDCS:PC71BM
0.94
14.3
0.65
8.75(8.64)
0.81

PBDCS
:PC71BM
0.95
15.0
0.60
8.55(8.34)
0.80

PBDCS:ITIC
1.08
13.6
0.51
7.55(7.32)
0.49

PBDCS:ITIC
1.06
14.0
0.53
7.81(7.51)
0.51

PBDCS
:ITIC
1.03
15.8
0.45
7.28(7.09)
0.54
The EQE spectra of the OSCs are shown in Fig. 3b and c. The PBDCS:PC71BM device exhibits EQE values of about 80% (EQEmax = 82.7%) in a broad range from 400 to 700 nm. In the case of the PBDCS:ITIC device, the response range expanded to 800 nm because of the broad absorption of the ITIC acceptor, providing the possibility of a higher JSC than that of PBDCS:PC71BM. Note that an EQEmax of 74% was attained around 700 nm, where 700 nm is the maximum absorption range of ITIC and the absorption edge of PBDCS, illustrating the efficient hole transfer from ITIC to PBDCS despite the negligible ΔEHOMO value (∼0.02 eV). Moreover, an unexpectedly high EQE value (∼65%) was attained around 400 nm, although the absorbance of the PBDCS:ITIC blend film is very low near 400 nm. We believe that such a high EQE value with low absorbance can be explained by the unique hot exciton dynamics of PBDCS, which is a beneficial characteristic for a high-performance donor material. The calculated JSC values from the EQE spectra were 14 and 13.9 mA cm2 for the PBDCS:PC71BM and PBDCS:ITIC devices, respectively, which match well with the values obtained from the J–V curves.
As mentioned in the Introduction, the minimization of Eloss is key to further improving the PCE. An Eloss value of 0.6 eV has been referenced as the empirically obtained limit value for OSCs. The VOC values of the OSCs with PC71BM as the acceptor are 0.94–0.95 V, which are relatively large values for fullerene-based OSCs, corresponding to relatively small Eloss values of 0.80–0.81 eV. The VOC values of the OSCs with ITIC as the acceptor are 1.06–1.08 V, which are the largest among those of ITIC-based OSCs reported so far; hence, the Eloss is 0.49–0.51 eV, which is much smaller than the empirically low threshold of 0.6 eV and is the smallest in an OSC with a high EQE (>70%). Such surprisingly low Eloss values are attributed to the maximized VOC by the negligible ΔEHOMO (0.02 eV) between PBDCS and ITIC.

The active layer morphology has been studied using atomic force microscopy (AFM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). As shown in Fig. 4, the PBDCS:PC71BM and PBDCS:ITIC films have smooth surfaces with small root-mean-square roughness values of 0.7 and 1.2 nm, respectively, and small domain sizes (10–30 nm). This small domain size is close to the exciton diffusion length of conventional conjugated polymers, which contributes to the attainment of high JSC values. The TEM images show good mixing between the donor and acceptor in both films with very small fibrillar nanostructures, consistent with the AFM results (Fig. 4). Grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) experiments were performed to study the molecular packing and orientation of the polymer and blend films. As shown in Fig. S8, only a strong π–π stacking (010) peak of the PBDCS film was observed in the out-of-plane direction, indicating weak lamellar stacking and predominant face-on π–π stacking orientation. The (010) diffraction peak of the PBDCS film was observed at qZ ≈ 1.584 Å−1, corresponding to a π–π stacking distance of ∼3.97 Å. The coherence length of the π–π stacked structures was calculated using the Scherer equation and the full width at half-maximum (FWHM) of the diffraction peak. The FWHM of the (010) peak of the PBDCS film was 0.28 Å−1 with a corresponding coherence length of 2.2 nm (Fig. S9). In the case of the PBDCS:PC71BM blend film, the intensity of the π–π stacking peak was reduced and the FWHM of the (010) peak was increased to 0.33 Å−1, yielding a coherence length of 1.9 nm, which is similar to that of the PTB7:PC71BM blend film (Fig. S9). We believe that such small coherence length and the excellent mixing with the acceptor arise from the curved conformation of the conjugated backbone of PBDCS. Meanwhile, the ITIC film exhibits only a strong π–π stacking peak at qZ ≈ 1.421 Å−1, which is similar to that of a PBDCS film (Fig. S9). The (010) diffraction peak of the PBDCS:ITIC blend film seems to be located at one spot at qZ ≈ 1.582 Å−1, implying that the PBDCS:ITIC blend is a very well-mixed system (Fig. S9). Thus, the coherence lengths could not be evaluated because it is difficult to determine the peak indicative of PBDCS or ITIC. From the morphological analyses, we postulate that the small domain size and the nanocrystalline structure of PBDCS contribute to the high JSC despite the active layer being thin (∼90 nm).


In summary, we developed a new β-DCS-based polymer (PBDCS) that contains no cis isomers and is completely intolerant to the photoisomerization reaction, unlike other CS-based polymers. We have shown that the photoisomeric stability originates from the unique resonance structure of β-DCS and the aggregation properties of the polymer. PBDCS showed a deep HOMO (−5.59 eV) and a low band gap (1.75 eV), and it has a small domain size and a small nanocrystalline structure in the film. As a result, an OSC based on PBDCS:PC71BM attained a high VOC of 0.95 V and a high JSC of 15 mA cm−2 simultaneously, leading to a high PCE of 8.75%. Moreover, the OSC based on PBDCS:ITIC exhibited a high PCE of 7.81% with a remarkably high VOC of 1.08 V despite the small bandgap of 1.57 eV of the acceptor, resulting in an extremely small Eloss (0.49 eV), which is the smallest value in an efficient OSC and similar to those of inorganic solar cells and perovskite solar cells (Eloss = 0.4–0.55 eV). Notably, a high EQE (EQEmax = 74%) was attained despite the small Eloss. These results demonstrate the possibility of further improving the PCE of OSCs by achieving an Eloss of less than 0.5 eV with an EQE of over 70%. In addition, they suggest that β-DCS is a promising acceptor moiety integrated into the donor polymer backbone to realize a small Eloss.


This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) through a grant funded by the Korean Government (MSIP; No. 2009-0081571[RIAM0417-20150013]), the Global Frontier R&D Program on Center for Multiscale Energy System funded by the NRF under the MSIP, Korea (2012M3A6A7055540), and the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) and the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (MOTIE) of the Republic of Korea (No. 20173010012960).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details including synthesis, experimental procedure and supporting data (Fig. S1–S14 and Table S1). See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta04127f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017