 DOI: 10.1039/C2CE06552E
(Communication)
CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 3847-3850

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Qiwei
Tian
,

Xiaofeng
Xu
,

Linbo
Han
,

Minghua
Tang
,

Rujia
Zou
,

Zhigang
Chen
*,

Muhuo
Yu
,

Jianmao
Yang
 and 

Junqing
Hu
*

State Key Laboratory for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, China. E-mail: hu.junqing@dhu.edu.cn; zgchen@dhu.edu.cn; Fax: +86-21-6779-2947; Tel: +86-21-6779-2947

Department of Applied Physics, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, China

Research Center for Analysis and Measurement, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, China

Received
21st November 2011
, Accepted 31st January 2012
First published on 14th February 2012
Using Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) nanocrystal-based ink (via a solvothermal route) and roll-to-roll printing, CZTS films are prepared on a Mo-coated Al foil, and then flexible solar cells with a structure of Al foil/Mo/CZTS/ZnS/i-ZnO/ITO/Al–Ni and a power conversion efficiency of 1.94% are constructed, in which all the materials are low-cost and environmentally friendly.

Advances in semiconductor nanocrystal (NC) inks and roll-to-roll printing techniques have opened up new possible routes to fabricate flexible, low-cost and high-efficiency solar cells. Several solar cells based on inks of NCs, including PbSe, CuInS2, CuInSe2, Cu(In, Ga)Se2, Cu2ZnSnS4(CZTS) and so on, have been successfully fabricated. Among these various NCs, one of the most promising photoabsorbing materials is CZTS that contains earth-abundant nontoxic elements and has a near-optimum direct band-gap (∼1.5 eV) and a large absorption coefficient (>104 cm−1). Recently, CZTS NCs with oleylamine as capping ligands were synthesized by three different oleylamine-mediated organometallic routes. By spray-coating and drop-casting toluene dispersions (inks) of CZTS NCs on Au and Mo/glass, CZTS solar cells with CdS as a buffer layer were fabricated, and they exhibited power conversion efficiencies of 0.23% and 0.8%, respectively. By further tuning the composition of CZTS NCs, developing a robust film coating method and selenizing CZTS film, Cu2ZnSn(S, Se)4 (CZTSSe) solar cells with a conversion efficiency of up to 7.2% have been achieved. In addition, CZTSSe precursor ink was also prepared by dispersing the corresponding materials (Cu2S, SnSe, Zn, S, and Se) in hydrazine, and CZTSSe solar cells fabricated with the ink exhibited the conversion efficiency of up to 9.6%. These exciting results demonstrate great potentials of CZTS and CZTSSe for low-cost and high-efficiency thin-film solar cells.

However, it should be noted that these CZTS NCs capped with oleylamine are hydrophobic and they can only be dispersed in an organic solvent (such as toluene) that is environmentally unfriendly, while hydrazine as the solvent of CZTSSe precursor ink is a highly toxic and very unstable compound that requires extreme caution during handling and storage. Furthermore, the uses of glass substrate and CdS buffer layer in CZTS and CZTSSe solar cells can raise some problems such as inflexibility or environmental pollution. Therefore, it is desirable to develop environmentally friendly ink of CZTS-based NCs to fabricate flexible, low-cost and cadmium-free solar cells.
Very recently, some groups have reported the synthesis of hydrophilic NCs by a solvothermal approach, but solar cells based on hydrophilic CZTS NCs have not been fabricated. Herein, we report the synthesis of hydrophilic CZTS NCs by a modified solvothermal method and then develop a film-printing technique based on as-synthesized hydrophilic CZTS ink for fabricating flexible and environmentally friendly CZTS solar cells. In a typical synthesis of CZTS NCs with compositions (approximately Cu/(Zn + Sn) = 0.8 and Zn/Sn = 1.2) similar to those described for previous devices, SnCl2·2H2O (0.25 mmol), CuCl2·2H2O (0.45 mmol), and ZnSO4·7H2O (0.3 mmol) were added to an ethylene glycol (10 mL) solution containing PVP (0.4 g mL−1). Subsequently, another ethylene glycol solution (10 mL) containing Na2S·9H2O (1.2 mmol) was added to the above solution. The resulting mixture was then transferred to a 30 mL autoclave, sealed, and treated at 180 °C for 12 h. The black precipitate was collected via centrifugation and washed three times with distilled water and then re-dispersed in ethanol for later use.

Fig. 1a shows a representative transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of the as-prepared CZTS NC sample. CZTS particles have slightly irregular shape and an average diameter of 10 nm (ESI, Fig. S1). Furthermore, CZTS NCs are monodispersed and no obvious aggregation can be found, due to the presence of PVP ligands on their surfaces (confirmed by the Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrum mentioned below), which is an important feature of NC inks. A high-resolution TEM image (Fig. 1b) further shows a single-crystal with an interplanar d-spacing of ∼0.31 nm, corresponding to the (112) lattice fringes of a tetragonal phase of CZTS. The structure and composition of the CZTS sample were investigated by the powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern and energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy. The XRD pattern reveals that CZTS NCs have the kesterite structure (Fig. 1c), and no noticeable impurities can be observed. The lattice parameters, a = b = 5.43 Å, c = 10.88 Å, calculated from the pattern, are in good agreement with the literature values for tetragonal CZTS (JCPDS card, no. 26-0575). Since some binary (such as cubic ZnS from JCPDS card, no. 5-0566) and ternary (such as tetragonal Cu2SnS3 from JCPDS card, no. 1-089-4714) chalcogenides have very similar lattice parameters or analogous pattern features, so, here, the XRD pattern alone is insufficient to identify the phase purity of the as-synthesized product. Thus, elemental mappings of CZTS NCs were further performed, and the results confirm that elemental Cu, Zn, Sn and S are homogeneously distributed among the NCs, and that there is no noticeable compositional distribution among the NCs (Fig. S2). Furthermore, the elemental compositions of these CZTS NCs were determined by energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy (Fig. S3) to be Cu1.7Zn1.09SnS4.13, which is near to the component ratio of the reaction solution. Obviously, CZTS NCs are Zn-rich and Cu-poor, which is the preferable elemental composition to obtain highly efficient CZTS-based thin film solar cells according to the previous investigations. The capping ligands on the surface of CZTS NCs were identified by the FTIR spectrum (Fig. 1d). A broad band at ∼3450 cm−1 corresponds to O–H stretching vibration from the water molecule. The bands at 2921 and 2851 cm−1 are assigned to the asymmetric (νas) and symmetric (νs) stretching vibrations, respectively, of methylene (CH2) units inside the PVP. The band at 1634 cm−1 should be related to a strong CO adsorption from the lactam group in the side chains of PVP. In addition, a broad band near 1097 cm−1 corresponds to C–O stretching vibration coordinating to metal cations. So, it is concluded that there are PVP and/or ethylene glycol ligands on the surfaces of these CZTS NCs. The content of these ligands in the CZTS NC sample, which is confirmed by thermogravimetric analysis (Fig. S4), is ∼10.04 wt%.
As a result of the presence of the PVP and/or ethylene glycol ligands, the CZTS NCs are hydrophilic and can be readily dispersed in ethanol (the inset of Fig. 2) and water. Importantly, the ethanol dispersion of the CZTS NCs has a high stability, and it even can remain unchanged after being stored for one week. The ultraviolet-visible-near-infrared (UV-Vis-NIR) spectrum (Fig. 2) indicates that the CZTS NCs absorb through the entire visible into the near-IR region which results in black color of the material. For a direct band-gap material, the absorption coefficient satisfies the equation (αhν)2 = A(hν − Eg). The band gap (Eg) value of the CZTS NCs was obtained by extrapolation of the plots of (αhν)2vs. (hν) and is determined to be 1.55 eV (the inset of Fig. 2), which is close to the value (∼1.5 eV) of the bulk CZTS material.
A flexible and environmentally friendly CZTS solar cell was constructed, as demonstrated in Fig. 3a. Firstly, we have developed a roll-to-roll printing technique based on the ethanol dispersion (ink) of CZTS NCs for preparing a CZTS NC film with a thickness of ∼1.2 μm on a flexible Mo (∼1.5 μm) coated Al foil substrate. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image (Fig. 3b) reveals that the as-printed CZTS NC film is composed of large particles with a size of 200–500 nm. In fact, these large particles are aggregated from hydrophilic CZTS NCs with the ethanol solvent evaporating during the printing process, as further demonstrated by high-magnification SEM images (Fig. S5). Secondly, the CZTS NC film was subjected to annealing at 500 °C for 20 min under an elemental sulfur vapor, which results in the formation of the annealed film composed of large densely packed grains and some isolated voids (Fig. 3c). The cross-sectional SEM image (Fig. 3d) reveals that the grains in the annealed film are quite large in a film thickness level, which is desired for high-efficiency solar cells. Further processing refinement will probably reduce the void volume in the film and therefore improve the device performance. Thirdly, a ZnS layer (thickness of ∼50 nm) instead of the conventional CdS material as the buffer layer was deposited on the compact CZTS film by the classic chemical bath deposition (CBD) method. At last, the device was completed with 50 nm thick i-ZnO, 100 nm thick indium tin oxide (ITO), and Ni/Al as the front contact deposited by direct current (DC) magnetron sputtering. A cross-sectional SEM image of a device (Fig. 3e) clearly indicates a four-layer structure of the device, including a ZnS/ZnO/ITO layer, a CZTS layer, and Mo and Al foil layers. Importantly, the device can be easily curved due to the flexibility of the Al foil substrate, as demonstrated in Fig. 3f and g.
Photocurrent density–voltage characteristic of the flexible and cadmium-free CZTS solar cell was measured without the bending and with the bending at an angle of 45° under a standard AM 1.5 solar illumination with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. As shown in Fig. 4, without the bending, the cell exhibits an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.484 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 8.91 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.451, yielding a power conversion efficiency (η) of 1.94% (magenta line), while both the open-circuit voltage (Voc) and short-circuit current density (Jsc) drop a little bit for the flexible cell (blue line) with the bending at an angle of 45°. This efficiency is one of the highest values in all the reported Se-free CZTS NC solar cells, but it is low compared with the efficiencies of the CZTSSe solar cells, since the replacement of S by Se can reduce the band gap of CZTS and improve the cell performance (analogous to the cases of CuInGaS/CuInGaSe). In addition, it is well known that the ideal single-junction solar cells can give a power conversion efficiency of 32.2%. The low conversion efficiency of the as-fabricated cell is most likely because of high series, low shunt resistances, and unoptimized band gap of the CZTS film. In the present case, the high series resistance is partly attributed to the formation of the thick MoS2 layer after S vapor annealing; low shunt resistance may result from many factors, such as holes or cracks in the film. So, further improvement of the conversion efficiency can be expected by optimizing the film-printing technique, film thickness and annealing process, selenizing CZTS film in Se vapor, etc.
In summary, hydrophilic CZTS NCs were synthesized via a facile solvothermal route. Using the roll-to-roll printing technique based on hydrophilic CZTS ink, we have prepared CZTS film and then successfully fabricated a flexible low-cost environmentally friendly solar cell with the structure of Al foil/Mo/CZTS/ZnS/i-ZnO/ITO/Al–Ni and the conversion efficiency of 1.94%. Future studies should focus on the optimization of the whole fabrication process and the improvement of the power efficiency of the solar cell to best utilize the earth-abundant, environmentally friendly, and promising photovoltaic materials.
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 21171035, 50872020, and 50902021), the Program for New Century Excellent Talents of the University in China (grant no. NCET-08-0761), the Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai-based “Innovation Action Plan” Project (grant no. 10JC1400100), the “Pujiang” Program of Shanghai Education Commission in China (grant no. 09PJ1400500), the “Dawn” Program of Shanghai Education Commission in China (grant no. 08SG32), Specialized Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education (grant no. 20090075120014), Shanghai Rising-Star Program (grant no. 11QA1400100), Shanghai “Chen Guang” project (grant no. 09CG27), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities.
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI): Synthesis and characterization of the CZTS NCs; EDX spectrum, elemental mapping, and TGA curves; SEM images of the as-printed CZTS films and the CZTS solar cell. See DOI: 10.1039/c2ce06552e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012