 DOI: 10.1039/C3PY01598J
(Minireview)
Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 3298-3305


Ping
Deng
 and 

Qing
Zhang
*

Shanghai key lab of polymer and electrical insulation, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shanghai Jiaotong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai 200240, China. E-mail: qz14@sjtu.edu.cn

Received
14th November 2013
, Accepted 20th December 2013
First published on 2nd January 2014
Isoindigo has recently attracted considerable interest as an electron-deficient building block for conjugated polymers. Polymers based on isoindigo have demonstrated high performances in polymer solar cells (PSC) and in organic field-effect transistor (OFET) devices. The success of isoindigo as a building block results from the combination of several important characteristics such as low-lying frontier orbital energy levels, backbone planarity and extended conjugation, a large local dipole, good solubility after N-alkylation and ease of synthesis in large scale. This mini-review highlights the recent advances in the synthesis of isoindigo related polymers and their applications in PSC and OFET devices.
Ping Deng
Ping Deng is currently a Ph.D. candidate under the guidance of Prof. Qing Zhang at Shanghai Jiaotong University. He received his B.S. degree in chemistry at Three Gorges University in 2005, and obtained a M.S. degree in polymer chemistry and physics at Fujian Normal University in 2009. His current research is focused on the synthesis of organic/polymer conjugated materials for optoelectronic devices.
Qing Zhang
Qing (Tim) Zhang has been a Professor at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shanghai Jiaotong University since 2005. He received his Ph.D. degree in 1997 at the University of South Carolina (supervisor Prof. J. M. Tour). He took a post-doctoral fellowship with Prof. S. R. Marder at California Institute of Technology from 1997 to 1999 and then worked in industry. He returned to Marder's group at Georgia Institute of Technology at 2003, as a research scientist and then principal research scientist. His research has focused on synthesis of organic semiconducting polymers.

Conjugated polymers (CPs) are of great interest for applications in optoelectronic devices such as organic photovoltaics (OPVs) and organic field-effect transistors (OFETs). Among CPs, donor–acceptor (DA) polymers have been extensively studied in recent years because most high-performance materials for OPV and OFET applications are DA polymers. DA polymers are conjugated polymers which contain electron rich (D) and electron deficient (A) repeating units in the polymer main chains. The contemporary methods for synthesis of DA polymers are based on transition metal catalyzed cross-coupling reactions or direct heteroarylation reactions. The numbers of acceptor units with suitable energy levels, reactivity and solubility are still limited. Lactam containing dyes such as diketopyrrolopyrole, isoindigo and benzodipyrrolidone have been extensively studied as acceptor units for DA conjugated polymers in the past few years. Isoindigo (Fig. 1) has become one of the most important building blocks for DA polymers. Its versatility and utility is evident from many recent studies of high-performance materials for OPV and OFET applications.

Isoindigo (iI) is one of the indigoid natural organic dyes which can be obtained from various natural sources such as the leaves of Isatis tinctoria. It has previously been studied as a therapeutic agent. Isoindigo can be conveniently synthesized by acid catalyzed condensation reactions with high yield from commercially available oxindole and isatin. Unsubstituted iI shows low solubility in common organic solvents but solubility can be improved by placing various alkyl chains on the amide nitrogen atoms. These alkyl groups usually do not affect the planarity of the polymer main chain because they are placed far away from the conjugated backbone.
The single crystal X-ray diffraction studies on unsubstituted isoindigo and N,N′-dibutyl-isoindigo showed that the central carbon–carbon double bond had an E configuration and was conjugated with two oxindoles to form planar π-conjugated structures. However, a similar study on N,N′-dimethyl-isoindigo showed that the molecule in the crystal had a twisted configuration. Two oxindole rings rotated at an angle of 22.3° along the central double bond plane. The significant deviation from planar structure was rationalized in terms of intermolecular interactions in the crystals. The geometry optimization of N,N′-dimethylisoindigo at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) DFT level gave two stationary points: one was completely planar, while the other displayed a slight twist (∼15° angle) between the two oxindole rings along the central double bond. Both conformations showed favorable electronic communications between the phenyl and the ketopyrrole carbonyl π-electrons. iI is a relatively strong electron withdrawing unit, its LUMO level (−3.5 eV) is slightly deeper than that of diketopyrrolopyrole (DPP) (−3.4 eV) but higher than that of naphthalene diimide (−3.6 eV).
Isoindigos can be substituted at 6,6′ positions or at 5,5′ positions. The electronic effects of the substitution pattern (5,5′ vs. 6,6′) and substituent nature (phenyl vs. thienyl) have been studied in molecular compounds. The study showed that substitution patterns played significant roles in the photo-physical properties of molecular iI compounds. The 6,6′ substituted iI derivatives had more extended conjugation than the 5,5′ substituted iI derivatives because of the large contribution of the electronic transition dipole moment in the axis aligned with the 6,6′ carbons. So far, most of the polymers were synthesized from 6,6′-dibromo-iI. The 6,6′-dibromo-iI can undergo Miyaura borylation to give diborylated isoindigo. It can be used to copolymerize with other acceptors to make all acceptor based conjugated polymers. The 6,6′-dibromo-isoindigo can be further substituted at 5,5′ positions and 7,7′ positions with chlorine and fluorine, respectively. The halogen substitutions can be used for fine-tuning the electronic properties of polymers.
Reynolds first introduced isoindigo into organic semiconducting materials research in 2010. Significant progress has been made on the iI-based polymers for optoelectronic applications in a very short period of time. The iI-based polymers have achieved the highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 8.2% in polymeric solar cell (PSC) studies. The iI-based polymers have shown the best hole mobility of 3.6 cm2 V−1 s−1 in OFET devices and shown balanced ambipolar charge transport. The iI-based polymers also exhibited other interesting applications in electronics and optoelectronics such as electrochemical supercapacitors, a polymer memory device and an electrochromic device.
The advantages of iI as a building block for conjugated polymers arise from some important characteristics such as low-lying frontier orbital energy levels, backbone planarity and extended conjugation, large local dipole, good solubility after N-alkylation and ease of synthesis in large scale. Currently, design and synthesis of conjugated polymers is usually targeted for particular applications such as OPVs and OFETs. We will review progress in iI-based conjugated polymers for OPV and OFET applications in separate sections. The goal of this review is to give readers an up-to-date overview on polymers based on iI. For a comprehensive review, we refer readers to Reynolds' review on this subject which is just available online. There are also some other review papers which have sections on iI-based polymers.

Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) with many advantages such as low cost, lightweight construction and solution processability may become an important part of renewable energy in the future. Research on polymeric solar cells (PSCs) has intensified in recent years and the PCE of PSCs has exceeded 10%. However, substantial improvements in efficiency and device lifetime are still needed for possible commercialization. Photoactive semiconducting polymers play a key role in the processes of conversion of solar energy into electrical power. Bulk heterojunctions (BHJ) are based on a blend of electron-donating conjugated polymer and high-electron-affinity fullerene derivative. Power conversion efficiency is the product of the short-circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) divided by the incoming light power density. The design rules for donor polymers in fullerene based BHJ devices with PCBMs as acceptors are a low band gap and high extinction coefficient for maximizing solar photon harvest in the visible and near-IR part of the solar spectrum, thereby increasing Jsc; a low HOMO energy level for high open circuit voltage; balanced crystallinity and solubility for high hole mobility and for optimal morphology; and well-matched HOMO/LUMO energy levels between polymers and fullerenes for efficient charge separation.

An ideal polymer for BHJ PSC applications should have low band gap to maximize the photon harvesting and deep HOMO energy level for large Voc. Low bandgap conjugated polymers can be realized by two approaches. The first one is the incorporation of units whose valence bond descriptions have a contribution from a quinoid resonance form in the ground state. The second approach is incorporation of alternating electron-rich and electron-deficient moieties in the polymer main chains. The donor influences the energy levels of HOMOs and the acceptor dominates the LUMOs of the polymers. Intra-molecular charge transfers (ICTs) between the donor and acceptor units resulted in narrowing of the bandgap of the polymer. In the second approach, appropriate selection of electron rich and electron deficient units can also fine-tune the HOMO and LUMO levels of a D–A polymer. A “weak donor–strong acceptor” approach was usually applied to achieve low band gap at same time without significantly raising the HOMO level. So far, isoindigo is one of a few acceptors which are suitable for building D–A polymers for high performance PSC applications because iI-based conjugated polymers frequently show broad absorptions in the visible and near-IR region with high extinction coefficients, a relatively low HOMO energy level, and high charge separation efficiency due to large local dipoles. These are necessary material properties for achieving high performance in PSCs.
Reynolds reported a series of D–A–D and A–D–A oligomers with thiophene or bithiophene as donors and iIs as acceptors in 2010. The oligomers were strongly absorbing through most of the visible region and had deep HOMO energy levels. These were desired properties for solar cell applications. Molecular heterojunction solar cells were fabricated using the oligomers and exhibited a PSC up to 1.76% with a Voc of 0.74 V, a Jsc of 6.3 mA cm−2 and an FF of 0.38. The first report of iI-based polymers for OPV applications was three copolymers of isoindigo with thiophene, thienothiophene and benzodithiophene. These polymers displayed bandgaps from 1.54 to 1.58 eV and HOMO levels from −5.20 to −5.49 eV vs. vacuum. In many aspects, these polymers closely resembled the ideal low band gap polymers suggested by Scharber and Brabec in their design rules of polymers for organic solar cell applications. Some of the polymers showed a relatively high Voc (0.87 V) in PSC devices. However, overall PSC was below 2% limited by low FF and low Jsc. Other early work using fluorene and carbazole as donors also showed low PCEs due to low Jsc and FF.
Wang and Andersson synthesized a thiophene and isoindigo copolymer (PTI-1) (Fig. 2). They found that the low power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of PSC devices resulted from non-optimal morphology. After addition of processing additive (1,8-diiodooctane, 2.5% wt), the PCEs of the devices were increased from 1.7% to 3%. They also found that the PCEs of devices based on the polymer and PC61BM were 50% higher than those of devices based on the polymer and PC71BM. The performance difference was attributed to the better morphology of the PTI-1/PC61BM active layer due to better solubility and miscibility of PC61BM with the polymer.
Although PTI-1 showed a low bandgap of 1.6 eV, it exhibited low absorption intensity in the high-energy band (300 to 500 nm). To enhance the absorption intensity in the high-energy band, terthiophene was introduced as donor units for polymer P3TI (Fig. 2). It showed a slightly low bandgap compared with PTI-1. The P3TI displayed a broad absorption spectrum in the solid state due to aggregation or orderly π–π stacking. This was beneficial for improving the charge mobility of the films. This improvement led to enhanced performance in PSC devices. A PCE of 6.3%, a Jsc of 13.1 mA cm−2, an Voc of 0.70 V and a FF of 0.69 were achieved in PSC devices with PC71BM as acceptors after addition of DIO.
A copolymer of isoindigo and dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]silole (DST) was reported by Reynolds. The polymer P(iI-DTS) (Fig. 3) had an optical bandgap of 1.54 eV, and the HOMO and LUMO energy levels were at −5.55 and −3.95 eV, respectively. It showed a PCE of 2.62% in conventional PSC devices with PC71BM as the acceptor after addition of DIO. A PCE of 4.0% was achieved in inverted PSC devices with DIO. Isoindigo and cyclopentadithiophene (CPDT) based polymers with different side chains were reported by Su. The highest PCE of 4.0% was obtained from polymer PCele containing two branched side chains on the acceptor unit (Fig. 3). They found that the type of side chain attached to the acceptor unit was a dominant factor in the solar cell performance.
Polymers based on bis(alkoxy)-substituted benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (BDT), thiophene and iI were reported. It was shown that introduction of unsubstituted thiophene units between BDT and iI units could result in higher coplanarity of the backbones and was beneficial for π–π stacking and charge transfer. The PCE of 4.2% was achieved in polymer PBDT-TIT (Fig. 4). The bis(dialkylthienyl)-substituted benzo-dithiophene was copolymerized with iI (Fig. 4). The addition of conjugation in the second dimension resulted in a polymer (PBDTT-ID) with a low bandgap, low HOMO energy level and high extinction coefficient compared with bis(alkoxy)-substituted polymers. The devices based on the polymer achieved a PCE of 4.02% and a Voc of 0.94 V. It was also found in this study that addition of processing additive (DIO) had adverse effect on PSC device performance. Fluorine substituted iI was used as building block for OPV polymers. It was suggested that the introduction of F atoms in iI units could enhance the rigidity of the resulting polymers due to the presence of weak F–S interactions, Peng et al. reported a fluorinated iI and bis(dialkylthienyl)-benzodithiophene based polymer PBDTT-FID (Fig. 4). The PBDTT-FID showed a broad absorption, deep energy levels and high carrier mobility compared with non-fluorinated polymer. The PBDTT-FID/PC71BM based device showed PCEs of 5.52% and 7.04% in conventional and inverted PSC devices.
Conjugated copolymers based on isoindigo (iI) as acceptor and bis(3-methylthiophen-2-yl) BDTs as donors were also reported. The bis(alkoxy)-substituted polymer PBDTO-MIM (Fig. 5) was compared with bis(alkyl)-substituted polymer PBDTA-MIM (Fig. 5). The solar cell based on PBDTO-MIM achieved a PCE of 4.98% and the solar cell based on PBDTA-MIM achieved a PCE of 5.36% with PC71BM as acceptors and DIO as additives. Ong reported a series of thieno[3,2-b]thiophene and iI based polymers. The absorption properties and energy levels of the polymers were optimized via addition of thiophene bridge units. PSC devices based on P2 (Fig. 5) as the donor and PC61BM as the acceptor (with 2.5% DIO) exhibited a PCE of 4.69%.
Tan et al. reported a benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (BDT)/thiophene copolymer with isoindigo (iI) as a part of the conjugated side-chain (PBDT-TID) (Fig. 5). They found that the introduction of the iI side chains led to good film-forming properties and morphologies in the active layers. Although the polymer showed a large band gap (1.83 eV), BHJ PSCs fabricated from this polymer with PC61BM as acceptors showed PCEs of 5.25% and 6.51% with conventional and inverted device structures, respectively.
Polymers containing more than one kind of acceptor moiety were investigated by several groups recently (Fig. 6). Jo studied a series of random polymers based on thiophene and two different accepting units, diketopyrrolopyrole (DPP) and isoindigo (iI) for achieving panchromatic light absorption. Three random copolymers with different molar ratios of DPP to iI were synthesized and were compared with two “homopolymers” of DPP–thiophene and iI–thiophene. The absorption spectrum of PR2 (thiophene as the donor, 50/50 (mol mol−1) of DPP and iI as acceptors) was nearly equal to the sum of the absorption spectra of DPP–thiophene and iI–thiophene copolymers. The extended light absorption in PR2 resulted in a large JSC of 13.52 mA cm−2 and a high PCE of 6.04%. Polymers containing two electron-deficient moieties, iI and quinoxaline were also synthesized. Polymer PTQTI (Fig. 6) had an alternating structure of thiophene–quinoxaline–thiophene–iI and polymer PTQTI-R (Fig. 6) was a random copolymer of iI, quinoxaline and thiophene. The regioregular PTQTI exhibited a slightly broader spectrum in the solid state, which was rationalized in terms of better π–π stacking in the solid state. The PTQTI showed enhanced photocurrent compared with the random copolymer. The PCE of 5% was achieved with the alternating copolymer PTQTI. After further structural modification of quinoxaline units with two fluorine substituents, the alternating copolymer PTQTI-F (Fig. 6) showed a PEC of 6.3% in PSC devices.
Very recently, Xie and Geng reported dithienocarbazole and isoindigo based low bandgap polymers (Fig. 7). Both iI and fluorine substituted iI were used as acceptors. Although these polymers were amorphous, they were able to form finely featured phase separation with PC71BM. The solar cells based on non-fluorinated polymer P(IID-DTC) as the donor and PC71BM as the acceptor showed the best PCEs of 7.2% in conventional devices and 8.2% in inverted devices. The non-fluorinated polymer P(IID-DTC) showed a larger PCE and a higher Jsc than the fluorinated polymer P(IID1F-DTC) and P(IID2F-DTC) because non-fluorinated polymers were able to form high-quality interpenetrating nano-networks in blend films. This work reported the highest PCEs of PSC devices based on iI related polymers, so far.
Most iI-based polymers were used as donor materials and only a few of them have been studied as acceptors for replacing PCBMs. The homopolymer Poly(iI) (Fig. 8) can be synthesized via a Suzuki cross-coupling reaction between 6,6′-dibromo-isoindigo and 6,6′-bis(pinacolborane)-isoindigo. The LUMO of the polymer was −3.84 eV measured by differential pulse voltammetry (DPV). All-polymer solar cells were fabricated with P3HT as the donor and Poly(iI) as the acceptor. The performance of the all-polymer solar cells was limited by non-optimized morphologies. A PCE of 0.5% was achieved with a 1:1 blend of P3HT and Poly(iI).

Organic field-effect transistors (OFETs) have attracted much attention because of their potential applications in low-cost electronics such as flexible integrated circuits, electronic paper, and radio frequency identification tags. The advantages of an OFET over its inorganic counterpart are flexibility and solution-based processing. Both hole-transporting (p-type) and electron-transporting (n-type) organic semiconductors are required for achieving low-power complementary logic circuits. Currently, the best performances of the polymeric thin-film transistors (TFTs) can compete with or surpass that of amorphous silicon (α-Si) TFTs with hole mobilities of 0.5–12 cm2 V−1 s−1 and on/off current ratios of 106 to 108.

Carrier mobility, on/off current ratios and threshold voltage are some important parameters of OFETs. Mobilities of devices are influenced by many factors such as the material properties of semiconducting polymers and gate dielectrics, interface properties, processing conditions, device configurations and the testing environment. Significant effort has been spent on the correlation of the molecular structures of organic semiconductors and their arrangement in solid state to the macroscopic transport properties. Though comprehensive descriptions of such relationships are still unresolved issues, some meaningful insights for developing new semiconducting polymers have appeared. Usually, the larger the transfer integral and the smaller the reorganization energy, the higher the mobilities will be. Both the transfer integral and the reorganization energy are related to the length and degree of conjugation, molecular packing and intermolecular π-orbital overlap. Isoindigo has a planar structure with extended π-conjugation. The intermolecular overlap of the orbital is increased with expansion of the π-conjugated dimension. This results in a large transfer integral and low reorganization energy. The most recent reports on isoindigo based donor–acceptor polymers showed extremely high mobilities comparable with those of evaporated small molecules. Long range order and crystallinity are considered to be the causes of the high mobilities in evaporated small molecules. The high mobilities of isoindigo based donor–acceptor polymers were rationalized in terms of intramolecular D–A interactions, and local dipoles prompted intermolecular associations resulting in short contacts between polymer chains and large intermolecular overlap of orbitals The HOMO/LUMO levels of semiconducting polymers are important for charge injection and device environmental stability. Isoindigo has low-lying frontier orbital energy levels which are useful for adjusting the energy levels of polymers. So, energy level alignment with electrodes and device ambient stability can be achieved.
Pei reported an OFET device study on isoindigo/thiophene copolymer (IIDT) and isoindigo/bithiophene copolymer (IIDDT). Both polymers had the same branched 2-octyldodecane side chains, but the IIDDT showed a much higher molecular weight (Mn ∼ 87.9 kDa) than IIDT (Mn ∼ 19.8 kDa) did. The IIDT based device exhibited no field-effect behavior before annealing. After annealing at 150 °C for 20 min, it showed a mobility of 0.019 cm2 V−1 s−1. In contrast, IIDDT pristine film showed mobilities ranging from 0.1–0.2 cm2 V−1 s−1. After annealing at 150 °C for 20 min, the device showed mobility up to 0.79 cm2 V−1 s−1. These devices were all p-type devices and exhibited good ambient stability. The high performance of IIDDT was due to an edge-on lamellar packing of polymers in the thin-film and a high degree of crystallinity. A series of copolymers of isoindigo and different donor units were studied for materials structure and device performance relationship. It was found that polymers with centrosymmetric donor units exhibited better OFET device performances than polymers with axisymmetric donor units. The polymer symmetry and backbone curvature significantly affected the interchain packing of isoindigo-based polymers. Based on those results, authors proposed a “molecular docking” strategy for designing polymers for OFET applications.
Solubilizing side chains can affect molecular packing, thin-film morphology, and hence material performance in devices. Bao et al. introduced a siloxane-terminated solubilizing group and demonstrated its effectiveness in an isoindigo-based polymer, PII2T-Si (Fig. 9a). An average hole mobility of 2.00 cm2 V−1 s−1 was achieved in this polymer. In contrast, the reference polymer with a branched alkyl side chain gave an average hole mobility of 0.30 cm2 V−1 s−1. The high hole mobility for PII2T-Si-based OFETs was due to polymer packing. The polymer with a siloxane-terminated solubilizing group exhibited a π–π stacking distance of 3.58 Å, while the reference polymer showed a distance of 3.76 Å. Pei systematically studied the effect of the side chain branching points of polymers (Fig. 9a) on the OFET performance. They found that moving the branching point away from the conjugated backbone resulted in small π–π stacking distance and large inter-chain interaction. A hole mobility of 3.62 cm2 V−1 s−1 was obtained in the device based on IIDD-C3.
Choi et al. recently studied the effect of molecular weight and the size of the alkyl chains on the carrier mobility in OFET devices with iI-based polymers containing di(thienyl)ethylene units. Some iI-based new polymers were also reported recently as p-type materials with modest performances.
Ambipolar transport behaviors in iI-based conjugated polymers (Fig. 9b) were reported by Pei and coworkers. Fluorinated isoindigo-based polymer PFII2T (Fig. 9b) reduced both the bandgaps and the HOMO/LUMO levels. The OFET devices based on PFII2T as the active layer can be fabricated and tested in ambient conditions. The electron mobility was 0.43 cm2 V−1 s−1 and hole mobility was 1.85 cm2 V−1 s−1. Grazing incident X-ray diffraction (GIXD) and tapping-mode atomic force microscopy (AFM) results indicated that the introduction of fluorines in isoindigo led to strong interchain interactions and high crystallinity in the thin-film. Chlorinated iI-based conjugated polymers (PCII2T and PCII2Se in Fig. 9b) exhibited balanced ambipolar transport behavior in ambient conditions.
Polymers with all acceptor units for n-type OFETs applications were reported (Fig. 9c). However, iI-based polymers with high electron mobilities and good ambient stability remain underdeveloped. Some of the all acceptor polymers were synthesized by direct (hetero) arylation polymerization method which was a promising method for synthesis of conjugated polymers. It cuts down the number of synthetic steps and reduces toxic waste.

Isoindigo was initially synthesized for coloring textiles at the time when organic chemistry was still at its infancy. Our knowledge of both fundamental physics and synthetic techniques has been increased significantly in the past six decades. Rational design and synthetic modification of isoindigo related building blocks could result in materials with better performances. Some recent studies suggested that the structure of isoindigo was slightly twisted because of steric repulsion between the protons on the phenyl rings and the carbonyl oxygens of the oxindoles (Fig. 10). This twist could adversely affect conjugation length and inter-chain stacking. To avoid this steric repulsion, several groups synthesized thieno-isoindigo (Til) by replacing two phenyl rings with two thiophene rings (Fig. 10). The steric repulsion was relieved in the monomer. Also, the short oxygen–sulfur distance in the Til unit can result in favorable coulombic interactions between the carbonyl oxygens and sulfur atoms of thiophenes. The no-bonding interaction can enhance the planarity of the monomer. The conjugated polymers based on Til monomers have been synthesized and showed absorption expanded into the near infrared region. The balanced ambipolar transport characteristics were achieved in OFETs studied with hole and electron mobilities over 0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1. So far, most of the Til based conjugated polymers showed relatively narrow bandgaps and high HOMO energy levels. The high HOMO energy levels resulted in very low Voc (about 0.5 V) in the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) PSC device study. Very recently, Chen and Fréchet reported a systematic study on a series of isoindigo, thieno-isoindigo (Til) and thieno-benzo-isoindigo (TBil) based polymers (Fig. 10). The effects of thienyl replacements on the optoelectronic properties of isoindigo related polymers were investigated. Diminishing both the intra-acceptor twist and the intermonomer torsion correlated with increasing thiophene replacement in the indigoid acceptor. The polymers with more thienyl replacements displayed greater backbone coplanarity, red-shifted absorption profiles. However, the hole mobilities in the OFET study did not correlate with backbone coplanarity of polymers. The results were rationalized in terms of polymer packing in the solid state. Wu and Liu studied isoindigo like oligomers based on a 5,5′-divinyl-2,2′-bithiophene bridged bis-oxindole (IBTI) (Fig. 10). The steric repulsion between the protons on the phenyl rings and the carbonyl oxygens of the oxindoles can also be avoided. The short oxygen–sulfur distance in IBTI can result in favorable coulombic interactions between the partially negative carbonyl oxygens of oxindoles and partially positive sulfur atoms of thiophenes. Comparing with another popular electron deficient building block DPP, isoindigo has relatively lower frontier orbital energy levels and more potential for structural modification to achieve versatile materials.


Applying isoindigo (iI) as a building block for conjugated polymers has resulted in high performance materials for OPV and OFET applications in the past four years. The highest power conversion efficiency of iI based materials reported so far is 8.2%. The highest hole mobility of iI based materials in OFET devices is 3.6 cm2 V−1 s−1 with ambient stabilities. This progress is significant for organic electronic research and has happened in very short period of time. Rational design and synthetic modification of isoindigo related building blocks may result in new materials with even better performances in the future.


This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC Grant no. 21174084 and 21274087), and was supported by the Doctoral Fund of Ministry of Education of China (Grant no. 20120073110032).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014