 DOI: 10.1039/D1TC05351E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 1270-1275


Yiming
Chen
,

Shenghan
Wu
,

Xiaohui
Li
,

Meiyue
Liu
,

Zeng
Chen
,

Putao
Zhang
* and 

Shengjun
Li
*

Key Laboratory of Photovoltaic Materials, Henan University, Kaifeng, Henan 475004, China. E-mail: putaozhang@henu.edu.cn; lishengjun@henu.edu.cn

Received
5th November 2021
, Accepted 12th December 2021
First published on 13th December 2021
Carbon-based hole-transport-layer free perovskite solar cells (C-PSCs) have attracted much attention due to their low cost, simple preparation process and high stability. However, the efficiency of the C-PSCs is far behind the most advanced metal-based devices, which is mainly due to the carrier recombination at the interface of the carbon electrode and the perovskite layer. Herein, a poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) passivated carbon electrode was hot-pressed onto the perovskite to enhance the combination of the carbon electrode and the perovskite and improve the interface carrier transport. Through PEG passivation, the bending strength of the carbon electrode was improved obviously. Meanwhile, the EIS and TPV/TPC results show that the carrier recombination at the perovskite/carbon interface is inhibited. After passivation, the power conversion efficiency of the C-PSCs reached 11.52%, which was 25.6% higher than that of the non-passivated devices. The device can maintain 87% of its initial efficiency after being stored in a humid environment (RH ≈ 50–60%) for more than 50 days without packaging. This simple manufacturing process of PSCs paves the way for the commercialization of new photovoltaic technology.

In recent years, organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been widely investigated because of their simple preparation process and high photoelectric conversion efficiency. After more than ten years of development, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) has rapidly increased from 3.8% to 25.5% at present. They are considered to be the biggest potential competitor for silicon solar cells. However, there are three main reasons that hinder their commercialization. Firstly, the stability is poor. Good stability is a necessary condition for commercial applications. The stability of perovskite solar cells prepared in a laboratory is generally poor; especially in an air environment with a high humidity, the efficiency decay of the cells is very obvious. Secondly, the effective area of the device is small. At present, the reported effective area of a high-efficiency single cell is no more than 1 cm2, which is difficult to meet the commercial demand. Thirdly, the cost is high. The price of the metal-based electrode itself is very high, and high energy consumption vacuum evaporation is used in the preparation process to further increase the production cost.

The fundamental way to realize the commercial application of PSCs is to prepare devices with good stability, large area and low cost. Therefore, it is urgent to find more stable and cheaper electrode materials, and adopt an appropriate preparation process to prepare high-efficiency PSCs. Carbon materials have attracted much attention due to their excellent electrical properties. Carbon materials have many advantages, such as a suitable Fermi level (∼5.0 eV), good water resistance, good conductivity, excellent chemical stability, high mechanical strength, ultra-low cost and no vacuum preparation. Han and co-workers introduced carbon materials into PSCs for the first time. Using carbon black/graphite as the electrode, they constructed perovskite devices without a hole transport layer and achieved a PCE of 6.64%. Han and Yang used conductive carbon films and boron doped multi-walled carbon nanotubes as electrodes, and achieved PCEs of 15.6% and 15.23%, respectively. Since then, the application of carbon materials in PSCs has been widely studied. So far, the efficiency of the hole-transport layer-free carbon based perovskite solar cells (C-PSCs) has reached 16.37%, and the stability has been significantly improved. However, compared with metal-based PSCs, the stability of C-PSCs is improved, but the PCE is still far behind metal-based devices. Generally, the HTL free PSC has poor performance and serious hysteresis, which is mainly due to the serious non-radiative recombination caused by the carrier accumulation at the carbon/perovskite interface. The polymer interlayer is widely used to optimize interface properties in optoelectronic devices. In previous reports, the perovskite was treated with poly(ethylene oxide) to form a passivation layer at the perovskite/carbon interface, which not only adjusted the interface energy level, but also enhanced the overall performance of the cell.
In this work, we prepared poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) passivated porous carbon films by solvent-exchange. The carbon film has good electrical and mechanical properties. Solar cells based on the prepared carbon without the hole-transport-layer were prepared by hot-press technology; the maximum efficiency reached 11.52%, which was 25.6% higher than that of the control, and the hysteresis was obviously reduced. The stability test shows that the best device still maintains 87% of its initial efficiency after 50 days of storage at room temperature in the air. The effect of PEG on the interface charge transfer process was studied by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and transient photocurrent/photovoltage technology.


Fig. 1 shows the preparation process of carbon films. Firstly, commercial low-temperature carbon paste was coated onto a glass slide using the doctor-blade method, and subsequently the wet-films were soaked in ethanol solution. Ethanol enters into the carbon film skeleton and displaces the residual solvent in the commercial carbon paste, which effectively inhibits the over curing of the carbon film. After full immersion, the carbon films fall off spontaneously and form an independent wet carbon film. After drying at 100 °C for 5 min, the carbon electrode films were obtained and labeled as CRef. In the same way, the wet-films were soaked in PEG/ethanol and the PEG coated carbon was labeled as CPEG. In order to prove the effect of PEG on the carbon electrode, we carried out a Raman test. As shown in Fig. 2a and b, the blue curve in Fig. 2a shows the Raman spectrum of the carbon film without PEG. The D-mode and G-mode peaks appear at about 1342 and 1576 cm−1, respectively. Other Raman mode peaks appear at 2693 cm−1 (2D-mode) and 2987 cm−1 (D + G mode). When PEG was introduced into the carbon electrode, the G-mode peak blue shifted (red curve, from 1576 to 1569 cm−1), which further confirmed the existence of PEG on the carbon surface.

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used to analyze the morphology of the two kinds of carbon electrode films. The results are shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). The carbon paste used in this study is composed of uneven graphite and carbon black. The carbon electrode film shows a porous structure. The porous structure will lead to the increase of the resistivity of the film to some extent. The square resistances of the CRef and CPEG films measured using a four probe method were 370 and 483 Ω, respectively. The porous carbon films were compressed by an automatic hot-press, and the temperature and pressure were set at 80 °C and 0.5 MPa, respectively. The film square resistance change with extension of the hot pressing time was also tested. The results are shown in Fig. 2c; with the increase of the hot pressing time, the resistance of the films decreases rapidly. After 80 s of continuous hot pressing, the resistance hardly changes. The final square resistances of the CRef and CPEG films were reduced to 68 and 81 Ω, respectively. The slightly higher resistance of the CPEG film was due to the thin layer of PEG coated on the carbon surface. After hot pressing, the film becomes more dense from a fluffy state, with an improved conductivity and a lower thickness. The thicknesses of the carbon films observed by cross-sectional SEM were about 25–30 μm. PEG has little effect on the thickness of the film (Fig. S2, ESI). In addition, mechanical flexibility tests were carried out on both films. As shown in Fig. 3a and b, both films can droop naturally under gravity action, but the bending degree of the CPEG film is greater. This means that the CPEG film has better flexibility and shows potential application prospects in flexible devices.
We fabricated the device as shown in the inset of Fig. S3 (ESI) by hot pressing carbon films onto FTO/Spiro-OMeTAD, and observed the charge transfer characteristics between carbon and Spiro-OMeTAD under a bias range of −0.5 to 0.5 V. As shown in Fig. S3 (ESI), there is a linear relationship between the current and bias voltage, which indicates that the two carbon electrodes maintain a good ohmic contact with Spiro-OMeTAD. We can conclude that the charge transfer on the C/Spiro-OMeTAD interface is almost unimpeded, and the conductivity of the carbon electrode is almost unchanged after PEG coating, which further proves that the hot-pressing transfer process can make the porous carbon electrode more compact. The negative effect of very thin PEG on the conductivity of carbon can be ignored.
In order to complete the preparation of the cells, FTO/TiO2/perovskite half cells were prepared. Then the carbon films were directly adhered to the top surface of the perovskite using a hot pressing transfer method. The schematic illustration and energy level arrangement diagram of the PSCs with a structure of FTO/TiO2/perovskite/carbon are shown in Fig. 4a and b. A black mask with an area of 0.1 cm2 was used to limit the effective area of the cells. The PCE statistical histogram of 20 cells for each group is shown in Fig. S4 (ESI). The average PCE of CPEG-PSCs was 9.14%, which was higher than that of 8.01% of the CRef-based device. The PCE of the champion device based on the CRef electrode reached 9.17%, with an open circuit voltage (VOC), a short circuit current (JSC) and a fill factor (FF) of 0.95 V, 19.22 mA cm−2, and 50%, respectively. Meanwhile, the PCE, VOC, JSC and FF of the CPEG-based device are 11.52%, 0.98 V, 20.07 mA cm−2 and 58%, respectively (Fig. 4c). The forward and reverse scanning curves of the champion devices are shown in Fig. S5 (ESI), and the corresponding photoelectric parameters are listed in Table S1 (ESI). The hysteresis index (HI = (PCEreverse − PCEforward)/PCEreverse) was calculated according to a previous report. The calculated HI was 10.79% for the control, while this value decreased to 5.64% for the CPEG-based device. Therefore, with the introduction of PEG, there is an obvious reduction in the hysteresis, which should benefit from the efficient charge extraction at the perovskite/C interface. It can also be seen in the dark current curves (Fig. 4d) that the dark current of CPEG-PSCs is lower than that of the control, leading to a larger VOC of the CPEG solar cell.Fig. 4e shows the incident photon current efficiency spectra (IPCE) of the two kinds of cells. The integral currents of CRef and CPEG cells are 19.06 and 19.50 mA cm−2, respectively. The larger IPCE values imply better utilization of incident photons and charge carrier extraction, resulting in a higher photocurrent, which also correlates with a higher JSC obtained from the J–V measurement. This result can also be attributed to the improvement of carrier extraction at the perovskite/carbon interface due to the introduction of PEG. Fig. 4f shows the long-term stability test results of the cells. The stability test shows that the best device still maintains 87% of its initial efficiency after 50 days storage under dark air conditions (T ≈ 25 °C and RH ≈ 50%) (Fig. 4f). However, the control device only maintains 66% of its initial efficiency, which further indicates that the PEG modified layer can effectively improve the stability of the device, which is closely related to the blocking of polar groups on the carbon surface to avoid the destruction of the perovskite by polar groups. Previous work has confirmed that the carbon surface contains hydroxyl, carboxyl and other functional groups, and the direct contact of these polar functional groups with the perovskite will destroy its stability. Here, PEG acts as a barrier to prevent the perovskite from being destroyed by polar groups.
The charge transfer and recombination characteristics of the complete devices based on different electrodes are further compared by TPV and TPC measurements. We measured TPV under 600 mV conditions to characterize the solar cells and found that the charge-recombination lifetime of the CPEG-based device was substantially longer than that of the control (Fig. 5a). This indicates a lower defect concentration and hence superior electronic quality in the PEG modified device, consistent with the higher VOC of the corresponding devices. Meanwhile, the TPC measurement under the short-circuit condition was conducted to investigate the influence of PEG on the charge transfer in the devices. In Fig. 5b, CPEG-PSCs exhibited a faster decay than CRef-PSCs, indicating the better interfacial charge transfer capability of CPEG-PSCs. Therefore, it can be inferred that CPEG-PSCs have lower charge recombination than CRef-PSCs. It can be considered that the rapid interfacial charge transfer reduces the charge accumulation in the perovskite.
In order to further study the effect of PEG modification on the carrier behavior of the device, we further carried out an electrochemical impedance test. Fig. 5c shows the Nyquist plots of the device based on the CRef and CPEG electrodes in the dark with a bias voltage of 0.6 V in a frequency range of 10−1–105 Hz. By fitting the Nyquist plots with the equivalent circuit as shown in Fig. 5d, we can obtain the corresponding resistance of the device under given conditions. The equivalent circuit consists of the series resistance (Rs), and the recombination resistance (Rrec). In general, the low-frequency region corresponds to the recombination process, which can be described by the combined effect of the recombination resistance (Rrec). The fitting results are shown in Table S2 (ESI). The Rs of the CPEG-based device is 91 Ω, which is slightly lower than that of the control (103 Ω), while the Rrec fitting value is 594 Ω, which is significantly higher than that of the control group (285 Ω). This result confirms that the PEG modified cell has lower charge recombination characteristics, which is consistent with the TPV/TPC result. These results further prove that PEG can reduce interfacial carrier recombination, thus effectively separating/extracting carriers and improving the device performance.

In conclusion, PEG passivated carbon films were prepared using a solution exchange method. Due to the good interface contact and charge transfer between the carbon electrode and perovskite, the efficiency of the device based on PEG passivation is as high as 11.52%, which is 25.6% higher than that of the device without passivation. The improvement of the solar cell performance can be attributed to the PEG modification accelerating the carrier interface transport and reducing the accumulation and recombination of carriers at the interface. At the same time, the stability of the cells was significantly improved, and the CPCE-PSCs maintain above 87% of their initial PCE after 50 days in a humid environment.


The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Henan Province (No. 202300410073) and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2021M690907).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc05351e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022