 DOI: 10.1039/C8TC05670F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 1592-1596


Han
Xu
,

Zicheng
Ding
,

Lu
Zhang
,

Jun
Liu
*,

Junli
Hu
* and 

Yichun
Liu
*

Key Laboratory of UV-Emitting Materials and Technology (Northeast Normal University), Ministry of Education, Changchun, Jilin 130024, China. E-mail: hujl100@nenu.edu.cn; ycliu@nenu.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory of Polymer Physics and Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun 130022, P. R. China. E-mail: liujun@ciac.ac.cn

Received
11th November 2018
, Accepted 2nd January 2019
First published on 3rd January 2019
For polymer solar cells (PSCs), it remains challenging to develop an easily available cathode interlayer (CIL) with high transparency in the visible/near-infrared regions. Typical N-type conjugated polymeric/molecular backbones show strong light absorption, which interferes with the sunlight absorption of the photoactive layer and deteriorates the device efficiency. In this study, we report a functionalized biomass polymer material, cesium-functionalized pectin (PeCs), to serve as an efficient CIL for PSCs. PeCs can be readily prepared from pectin by a one-pot neutralization reaction. Due to the abundant hydrophilic groups, PeCs shows good solubility in water and limited solubility in CB or ODCB, which enables inverted PSC device fabrication. The cesium ions of PeCs form the desired interfacial dipole with the cathode, which decreases the work function and consequently improves electron extraction. The unconjugated structure yields high transparency in the visible/near-infrared regions (λabsmax = 282 nm), which benefits the light absorption of the photoactive layer. The high molecular weight of PeCs resulting from the pectin precursor ensures a film-forming capability. As a result, using a blend of poly[N-9-hepta-decanyl-2,7-carbazolealt-5,5-(4,7-di-thienyl-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (PCDTBT) and [6,6]-phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) as the active layer, an inverted PSC with PeCs as the CIL shows a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 7.14%, which is much higher than that of the PSCs with state-of-the-art ZnO as the CIL (PCE = 6.44%) or without a CIL (PCE = 3.65%). These results indicate that PeCs is a promising candidate as a cathode interlayer in low-cost and efficient polymer solar cells.

Over the past decade, polymer solar cells (PSCs) have received academic and industrial interests due to the advantages of solution processing, flexibility, low cost, and lightweight. The interface layers between the active layer and cathode/anode play an important role in improving the device efficiency and stability. Much effort has been devoted to the development of functional cathode interlayers (CILs) or anode interlayers (AILs). Efficient CILs can decrease the work function of the cathode to form Ohmic contacts with the active layer and improve electron collection. The widely used CILs are low work function metals (e.g. Ca, Ba), inorganic salts (e.g. LiF, Cs2CO3), metal oxides (e.g. ZnO, TiO2, doped ZnO), and conjugated polymers with polar functional groups (e.g. PFN, PDINO). However, low work function metals such as Ca require a vacuum evaporation procedure, while metal oxides such as ZnO suffer from poor interfacial contact owing to the intrinsic incompatibility of inorganic and organic materials, and conjugated polymers with functional groups such as PFN require complicated chemical steps to obtain the final product. Therefore, it remains challenging to develop CILs that are easily available, simple to process, and well-compatible with organic photoactive layers.

Biomass materials derived from plants, animals and microorganisms are important renewable bioresources. Generally, biomass materials are low-cost, non-toxic, sustainable, hydrophilic, biodegradable and biocompatible. Recently, biomass materials were successfully used in organic electronic devices. Pectin, a synonym for poly-D-galacturonic acid methyl ester, is a biomass polymer that is commonly used for medical research or as a food additive. Pectin can be extensively extracted from fruits or other plants using a low-cost process. Pectin is partially esterified and contains COOH groups that can be facilely functionalized. We previously reported that graphene oxide/grapheme quantum dots containing COOH groups can be neutralized with cesium carbonate to afford excellent CIL materials. In this manuscript, we report that Cs+-functionalized pectin can be used as a CIL for inverted PSC devices with excellent photovoltaic performance. Fig. 1 shows a schematic of the chemical structure of the Cs+-functionalized pectin (PeCs), which is prepared by neutralizing an aqueous pectin solution with cesium carbonate. PeCs is an excellent CIL material because of the following reasons. (i) PeCs can lower the work function of cathodes because the cesium ions can form a desirable interfacial dipole with the cathode. (ii) PeCs is a non-conjugated polymer with no absorption in the visible/NIR regions, which minimizes the optical loss by the CIL. (iii) PeCs can be solution-processed with excellent film-forming properties because of its solubility in water and its high molecular weight. As a result, with the blend of poly[N-9-hepta-decanyl-2,7-carbazolealt-5,5-(4,7-di-thienyl-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (PCDTBT) and [6,6]-phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) as the active layer, the inverted device with PeCs as CIL exhibits a PCE of 7.14%, which is higher than that of the state-of-the-art CIL, ZnO (PCE = 6.44%). These results indicate that functionalized biomass materials are a new type of CILs for organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs).


Scheme 1 shows the synthesis route for PeCs. Pectin extracted from apple was purchased from Sigma Aldrich. The pectin is about 50–75% esterified and the residual COOH groups can react with cesium carbonate (Cs2CO3) by neutralization. Fig. S1 (ESI) shows the dependence of the pH of the aqueous pectin solution on the amount of Cs2CO3 added during the titration. According to this curve, 15 wt% Cs2CO3 is adequate to functionalize all the COOH groups of pectin. Therefore, the preparation of PeCs was performed by stirring the aqueous solution of pectin and 15 wt% Cs2CO3 overnight. The solid was collected by centrifugation after the addition of a large amount of ethanol.

According to the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) survey spectrum (Fig. 2), the content of Cs in PeCs is 7.47 at% (Table 1). PeCs exhibits good solubility (>5 mg mL−1) in water and is insoluble in typical organic solvents, such as chlorobenzene and chloroform. These results indicate that PeCs can be solution-processed to fabricate multi-layer OPVs. Fig. S2 (ESI) shows the thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) curve of PeCs. PeCs shows good thermal stability with a thermal decomposition temperature (Td) of 229 °C at a 5% weight loss under a nitrogen atmosphere.
Materials
C (at%)
O (at%)
Cs (at%)
PeCs
61.65
30.88
7.47

PeCs exhibits excellent film-forming properties on indium tin oxide (ITO) surfaces. Fig. 3 shows the atomic force microscopy (AFM) height images of an ITO surface with and without a PeCs layer. With the spin-coated PeCs layer, the root mean square (RMS) roughness of the surface decreases from 4.30 nm to 3.86 nm, suggesting the excellent film-forming properties of PeCs. Fig. S3 (ESI) displays the optical microscope images of the spin-coated film of Cs2CO3 and PeCs. While the PeCs surface is smooth, the Cs2CO3 surface is very rough with large separated domains. These results indicate that the pectin scaffold of PeCs plays an important role in its film-forming capability.


Fig. 4a shows the UV-Vis absorption spectrum of PeCs in aqueous solution. PeCs exhibits an absorption peak at 282 nm with negligible absorbance in the visible and NIR range. As shown in the transmittance spectrum (Fig. 4b), the PeCs film does not affect the transparency of ITO. The good transparency of PeCs is very desirable for OPVs because it minimizes photon loss by the CIL and maximizes light absorption by the photoactive layer.
For CIL materials, the key requirement is the ability to decrease the cathode work function. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was employed to study the effect of PeCs on the work function of the ITO electrode. Fig. 5a shows the UPS spectra at around the secondary electron cutoff region of the PeCs-modified ITO substrates. The work function of the bare ITO substrate is 4.70 eV. The deposition of a PeCs layer on the ITO surface leads to a decreased work function of 4.10 eV, which allows the formation of an ohmic contact between the cathode and the active layer. This contact can be observed in the energy level diagram of the PSC devices shown in Fig. 5b. This result demonstrates that PeCs can be used as a CIL for PSCs. According to the reports on Cs2CO3 cathode interlayers in organic electronic devices, the decreased work function due to the PeCs layer may be attributed to the desired interfacial dipole with the formation of Cs–O–Sn bonds on the surface of the ITO electrode.

To investigate the suitability of PeCs as a CIL, we selected PCDTBT:PC71BM as the active layer and fabricated inverted PSC devices with a configuration of ITO/CIL/PCDTBT:PC71BM/MoO3/Al (see Fig. 1). The PeCs film was prepared by spin-coating the aqueous solution onto the ITO substrates. For comparison, we also fabricated the control devices without a CIL or with ZnO as a CIL. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the devices under AM 1.5G illumination are presented in Fig. 6a and the corresponding external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra are shown in Fig. 6b. The device parameters are summarized in Table 2.

CIL

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCEmax(PCEave) (%)

a The average PCE value is calculated from ten devices.

None
0.56
11.10
58.7
3.65(2.84)
PeCs
0.89
11.35
70.7
7.14(6.93)
ZnO
0.88
10.86
67.4
6.44(6.27)
The device with no CIL exhibits an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.56 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 11.10 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.587, corresponding to the PCE of 3.65%. With PeCs as the CIL at a thickness of 3 nm, the device shows a VOC of 0.89 V, JSC of 11.35 mA cm−2, and FF of 0.707, corresponding to the PCE of 7.14%. This performance is also better than that of the device with ZnO as the CIL, which gives a PCE of 6.44%. These results indicate that PeCs is an excellent CIL material for PSCs.
The excellent device performance of PeCs is primarily attributed to the decreased work function of the ITO cathode, which leads to Ohmic contact with PC71BM and enhances the built-in potential across the active layer. Fig. 7 shows the J–V curves in dark for the three devices. The PeCs-based device shows excellent diode characteristics with a very low leakage current and high rectification ratio. This result suggests that PeCs possesses a strong hole-blocking ability and improves charge selectivity at the cathode interface. Therefore, charge recombination at the cathode interface is effectively prevented, which leads to the improved FF and increased VOC. We also fabricated electron-only devices with different CILs on the ITO electrode to estimate the electron mobilities. The device structure has the configuration ITO/CILs/PCDTBT:PC71BM/Ca/Al. The electron mobilities, as shown in Fig. S4 (ESI), were obtained by fitting the data using the space charge-limited current (SCLC) model. The electron mobilities for the devices with no CIL and PeCs and ZnO as CILs are 8.81 × 10−5, 3.04 × 10−4 and 1.56 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. The high electron mobility of the PeCs-based device indicates that the PeCs layer facilitates electron transport from the active layer to the ITO electrode.

In conclusion, the cesium-functionalized pectin, a biomass material, was successfully used as a CIL for inverted PSCs. The work function of the ITO cathode decreased by 0.6 eV due to the formation of the desired interfacial dipole between the cesium ions of PeCs and ITO. PeCs shows excellent film-forming property and high transparency in the visible/NIR regions. The PSCs with PeCs as a CIL and PCDTBT:PC71BM as a photoactive layer exhibits a PCE of 7.14%, which is higher than that of the device without a CIL (PCE = 3.65%) or with ZnO as a CIL (PCE = 6.44%). These results demonstrate that PeCs is a promising cathode interlayer for high-performance PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51503027, 51732003, 51503198), the 111 project (No. B13013), Northeast Normal University (No. 130028724), Jilin Scientific and Technological Development Program (No. 20170519003JH).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details. See DOI: 10.1039/c8tc05670f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019