 DOI: 10.1039/D1FD00056J
(Paper)
Faraday Discuss., 2022, 239, 263-272


Giuk
Jeong
,

Seunghwan
Ji
,

Jiwoon
Choi
,

Jihun
Jung
 and 

Byungha
Shin
*

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, 34141, Republic of Korea. E-mail: byungha@kaist.ac.kr

Received
19th August 2021
, Accepted 28th September 2021
First published on 28th September 2021
Sb2Se3, a quasi-1D structured binary chalcogenide, has great potential as a solar cell light absorber owing to its anisotropic carrier transport and benign grain boundaries when the absorber layer is properly aligned along the [hk1] direction perpendicular to the substrate. A growth technique with a high deposition rate, such as vapor transport deposition, is preferred to form an [hk1]-oriented Sb2Se3 film. However, the possible decomposition of Sb2Se3 during cooling after the high-temperature deposition appears to result in Se deficiency, accompanied by the formation of deep-level donor-like defects, such as Se vacancies and Sb on Se antisite defects. Here, we present comprehensive passivation strategies for the rear interface of Sb2Se3 solar cells in a superstrate configuration, namely a post-deposition annealing treatment (PAT) under Se, and the introduction of an electron-blocking layer between Sb2Se3 and the rear metal contact. The PAT effectively passivated the defects associated with Se deficiency and greatly improved the open-circuit voltage and fill factor of Sb2Se3 solar cells. With the further introduction of a poly(N,N-bis(4-butylphenyl)–N,N-bis(phenyl)benzidine) electron-blocking layer, the Sb2Se3 solar cell achieved an efficiency of 7.0%.

Sb2Se3, a binary chalcogenide compound comprising naturally abundant and low-toxicity elements, has a unique crystal structure wherein Sb and Se atoms are bonded to form quasi-1D nanoribbons. If Sb2Se3 is grown along the [001] direction, there should be, in principle, no dangling bonds at the grain boundaries, which will significantly benefit solar cells based on Sb2Se3 absorbers. In addition, the absorption coefficient of Sb2Se3 is approximately 105 cm−1, which is in the visible wavelengths and its optical band gap is 1.1 eV, making it suitable for photovoltaic applications. Since the first report of a working Sb2Se3 solar cell demonstrating a power conversion efficiency of 3.21% in 2013, there have been numerous reports on Sb2Se3 solar cells fabricated by various deposition techniques. One of the primary strategies for improving the performance of Sb2Se3 solar cells, especially the short-circuit current (Jsc), involves the film orientation along [hk1], which is the direction for efficient charge extraction. However, thermodynamically, the [hk1] direction is not a preferred orientation because the (010) plane has the lowest surface energy, resulting in the growth of [010]-oriented Sb2Se3. Therefore, growth conditions away from the equilibrium, such as a high deposition rate that can kinetically suppress the [hk0] orientation and promote [hk1], have been widely used. Wen et al. reported an efficiency of 7.6% by controlling the parameters of vapor transport deposition (VTD) to improve crystallinity along the [hk1] direction. Shen et al. reported a highly textured film along the [101] direction using a closed space sublimation (CSS) method with an efficiency of 7.5%, and Guo et al. reported Sb2Se3 solar cells with an efficiency of 6.7% using rapid thermal evaporation (RTE). Additional strategies for controlling the orientation of the Sb2Se3 film include the epitaxial growth of Sb2Se3 films with controlled orientations. For example, two separate studies by Liu et al. and Wen et al. reported the growth of [001]- and [120]-oriented epitaxial Sb2Se3 films using mica substrates, respectively.

One drawback of the [hk1]-oriented Sb2Se3 prepared using deposition methods with high deposition rates, such as VTD, is the large surface roughness arising from kinetic roughening. In addition, the loss of Se from the grown Sb2Se3, owing to the decomposition of the film during cooling after deposition, can lead to the formation of Se vacancies (VSe) and antimony antisites (SbSe), which are deep-level donor-like defects. The concentration of these point defects is expected to be higher on the surface region of Sb2Se3, the rear interface in the superstrate configuration, where Se evaporation occurs.
An additional drawback in the rear interface of the superstrate Sb2Se3 solar cell is the necessity of promoting hole extraction to the rear contact (most commonly Au) and blocking (or reflecting) electrons away from the rear interface. Hence, various electron-blocking layers between the Sb2Se3 absorber layer and rear metal contact have been tested and proven to work. For example, Guo et al. reported an efficiency of 7.3% with a NiOx electron-blocking layer, Chen et al. used a PbS colloidal quantum dot film as the electron-blocking layer, while Han et al. reported an efficiency of 7.1% with a SbCl3/spiro-OMeTAD electron-blocking layer.
In this work, we applied a comprehensive approach for passivating the rear interface of Sb2Se3 solar cells in a superstrate configuration using post-deposition annealing treatment (PAT) under Se overpressure and adopting poly(N,N-bis(4-butylphenyl)–N,N-bis(phenyl)benzidine) (poly-TPD) as an electron-blocking layer. The PAT was found to reduce the density of deep-level defects in Sb2Se3, leading to improved power conversion efficiency (from 6.0% of a no-PAT reference to 6.5%). This improvement was mainly due to the larger open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF). With the introduction of a poly-TPD electron-blocking layer that possesses an appropriate band alignment with the Sb2Se3 absorber, a champion device with 7.0% efficiency was demonstrated.

Glass/ITO substrates were sonicated with MeOH, EtOH and deionized (DI) water for 5 min each. A 15 min long ultraviolet ozone (UVO) treatment followed the cleaning to make the surface hydrophilic. A CdS buffer layer was deposited on an ITO substrate via chemical bath deposition (CBD). The CBD solution, which consisted of 0.0015 M CdSO4, 0.05 M (NH2)CS (thiourea, and 1.5 M NH4OH, was kept in a temperature-controlled water bath. The deposition of CdS started at room temperature and lasted for 8.5 min, during which the bath temperature increased to 65 °C. After CBD, the CdS-coated substrate was ultrasonicated in DI water for 5 s.


Sb2Se3 films were deposited on an ITO/CdS substrate via VTD. A schematic of the proposed VTD setup is presented in Fig. S1a. Prior to the VTD of Sb2Se3, a solution of 20 mg ml−1 CdCl2 in MeOH/DI water was spin-coated at 4000 rpm for 30 s, followed by annealing under atmospheric conditions at 400 °C. Sb2Se3 films were deposited in a two-zone tube furnace using 0.6 g of Sb2Se3 and 5 mg of powdered Se. The temperatures of the substrate and source zone were maintained at 300 and 480 °C, respectively. After deposition, the tube was cooled naturally to room temperature. For the PAT, the tube was vented, and 20 mg of Se was reloaded. The PAT was conducted, keeping the substrate zone and source zone temperatures at 100 and 400 °C, respectively, as described in Fig. S1b. During the PAT, the tube pressure was increased from 3 to 150 mTorr via Se vaporization. After the PAT, patterned Au contacts were deposited using a thermal evaporator operating at a pressure of 5 × 10−6 Torr.


Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were collected under 1 sun illumination using an Oriel Sol3A Solar Simulator (Newport). The EQE spectra were measured using a QEX7 (PV measurement). The crystallinity of the films was investigated using an X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku) at the KAIST Analysis Center for Research Advancement (KARA). The defect chemistry was investigated using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (Sigma Probe), photoluminescence (HORIBA), and Raman spectroscopy (HORIBA) at KARA.



Fig. 1 presents the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the Sb2Se3 thin films before and after the PAT. Both the films exhibited only orthorhombic Sb2Se3 (JCPDS 15-0861) without any secondary phases and strongly preferred orientations along the [hk1] direction. After the PAT, however, the (120) peak intensified, while the intensity of the (211) peak decreased. The change in the relative peak intensities indicates the reorientation of grains during the post-deposition annealing step, even though the annealing temperature (100 °C) was far below the deposition temperature. This behavior indicates the instability of the (hk1) plane, whose formation must have been achieved by the growth kinetics limitation due to the high deposition rate of the VTD method. Considering that the surface energy of the (hk1) planes is higher than that of (hk0), the reorientation of the film toward the [hk0] direction is understandable. The XRD investigation, therefore, revealed that the PAT affected both the surface properties and bulk properties of the films.

XPS depth profiling was performed to investigate the bonding characteristics, especially near the rear surface region. Fig. 2(a) and (b) depict the Sb 3d peaks, while Fig. 2(c) and (d) show the Se 3d peaks before and after PAT, respectively. In the case of the as-grown Sb2Se3 thin film, a shift in the Sb 3d and Se 3d peaks toward higher binding energies occurs as they approach the surface. Considering that both peaks exhibited the same binding energy shift, the most reasonable interpretation is the presence of a downward band bending near the surface. This band bending is considered to originate from the deep-level donor-like point defects, such as VSe and SbSe, associated with the loss of Se during the cooling process after the high-temperature VTD process (the very low partial pressure of Se during cooling is considered to have caused Se vapor to condense in the colder parts of the tube instead of the substrate). These deep-level defects serve as non-radiative recombination centers, and the downward band bending impedes hole transport across the Sb2Se3/Au interface, thereby negatively impacting the device performance. After the PAT, the downward band bending disappeared, as confirmed by the negligible binding energy shift shown in Fig. 2(b) and (d). This suggests the effective passivation of donor-like defects by the PAT with Se. The fixing of the Se deficiency by the PAT was also confirmed by the high-resolution XPS Sb 3d spectra, shown in Fig. S2. The Sb 3d peak was deconvoluted into Sb–Se and Sb–O bonding at 529.6 and 530.9 eV, respectively. The formation of SbOX is expected to occur when a Se-deficient Sb2Se3 film is exposed to air and, therefore, the peak intensity of Sb–O bonding can indirectly indicate the degree of the Se deficiency of the film surface. The fact that the peak intensity of Sb–O decreased after the PAT suggests that the surface became less deficient in Se.
The chemical changes in the rear surface region of Sb2Se3 by the PAT were further studied by Raman spectroscopy using an excitation laser at 514 nm. Five Raman modes were identified, as shown in Fig. 3. The Raman peaks at 117, 151, 189 and 210 cm−1 are assigned to the orthorhombic Sb2Se3 phase with the A5ag, B12g, A2g and B11g vibration modes, respectively, while the peak at 253 cm−1 is assigned to the Sb2O3 phase with the Ag vibration mode. The Sb2O3 Raman peak intensity decreased after the PAT, while the other peaks associated with Sb2Se3 remained at similar intensities, which is consistent with the XPS results discussed earlier.
The effects of the PAT on the device performance are shown in Fig. 4. The structure of the Sb2Se3 solar cells consists of ITO/CdS/Sb2Se3/Au. As shown in Fig. 4a, the Voc and FF improved with the PAT, leading to a champion efficiency of 6.5%. The increase in the Voc after the PAT cannot be attributed to any change in the band gap, considering the almost identical EQE spectra, as shown in Fig. 4b. The reduction of non-radiative recombination by the passivation of the deep-level defects from Se deficiency, as confirmed using XPS (Fig. 2) and Raman spectroscopy (Fig. 3), with the PAT is considered to be responsible for the improved Voc. The beneficial effects of the PAT are statistically evident from the comparison of more than 50 cells for each condition (i.e., without PAT and with PAT), as shown in Fig. 4c.
To better understand the interface charge transfer in Sb2Se3 solar cells, impedance spectroscopy (IS) was performed for both devices with and without PAT at a bias of 0.3 V under dark conditions. The measured Nyquist plots were fitted with an equivalent circuit model, as shown in Fig. 4d. The impedance parameters of both the cells are summarized in Table 1. The series resistance of the devices (RS) can be estimated from the smaller (i.e., higher frequency region) intercept of the semicircle on the x-axis (real part) in the Nyquist plot, and the charge recombination resistance (RRec) from the diameter of the semicircle. After the PAT, the RS decreased and the RRec increased, which are consistent with the higher Voc and FF of the devices with the PAT. An increased shunt resistance, reflected by the resistance-capacitance time constant (τ = RRec × CPE), also reflects the suppressed charge recombination.
Sample

R
S (Ω)

R
Rec (Ω)
CPE (nF)

τ (μs)
Before PAT
18.89
143.1
18.01
2.57
After PAT
17.76
176.2
18.34
3.23
Although we confirmed that the PAT was capable of passivating deep-level donor-like defects and hence improving the Voc, a noticeable slope in the main portion of the EQE (from ∼600 to ∼850 nm) still remained. This signifies an imperfect charge collection, especially photo-generated carriers, near the rear surface by longer wavelength photons. To correct this, we introduced an electron-blocking layer between the Sb2Se3 and Au contacts. We tested various candidates for the electron-blocking layer that we identified as having suitable band positions in relation to Sb2Se3 based on the literature results (Fig. S3). As shown in Fig. S4, all the candidates except CuI improved the charge collection efficiency and therefore led to higher values of the long-wavelength EQE and larger current density (Jsc). In particular, poly-TPD worked the best, resulting in a fairly flat EQE response and an efficiency of 7.0% (Fig. 5 and Table 2).
Batch

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
Efficiency (%)
Fill factor (%)

R
sh (Ωcm2)

R
S (Ωcm2)
Ref.
0.372
29.4
6.1
55.7
198
3.0
PAT
0.387
28.9
6.5
58.5
225
2.6
PAT + poly-TPD
0.382
30.8
7.0
59.6
284
2.2

We investigated the effects of post-deposition Se annealing treatments under ambient Se on VTD-grown Sb2Se3 solar cells in a superstrate configuration. Spectroscopic characterizations, such as XPS and Raman spectroscopy, revealed Se deficiency in the as-grown Sb2Se3 films, which possibly occurred due to the cooling process in the VTD tube with insufficient Se partial pressure. Se deficiency is expected to cause the formation of deep-level donor-like point defects, such as VSe and SbSe, particularly near the surface region. The PAT with Se was demonstrated to effectively passivate these defects and greatly improve the Voc and FF of Sb2Se3 solar cells. With the further introduction of a poly-TPD electron-blocking layer, we achieved an Sb2Se3 solar cell with an efficiency of 7.0%.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korean government (MSIT) (no. NRF-2018R1A5A1025594) and the Nano Material Technology Development Program (Green Nano Technology Development Program) through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (no. 2018M3A7B4065662).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1fd00056j
‡ G. Jeong and S. Ji contributed equally to the work
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022