 DOI: 10.1039/D0TA09354H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 25208-25216


Mun Ho
Yang
,

Seo-Jin
Ko
,

Na Gyeong
An
,

Dong Ryeol
Whang
,

Seung-Hoon
Lee
,

Hyungju
Ahn
,

Jin Young
Kim
,

Doojin
Vak
*,

Sung Cheol
Yoon
* and 

Dong Wook
Chang
*

Department of Industrial Chemistry, Pukyong National University, Busan, 48513, Republic of Korea. E-mail: dwchang@pknu.ac.kr

Division of Advanced Materials, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), Daejeon, 34114, Republic of Korea. E-mail: yoonsch@krict.re.kr

Department of Energy Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, 44919, Republic of Korea

CSIRO Manufacturing, Bag 10, Clayton South, Victoria 3168, Australia. E-mail: doojin.vak@csiro.au

Department of Advanced Materials, Hannam University, Daejeon, 34054, Republic of Korea

Industrial Technology Convergence Center, Pohang Accelerator Laboratory (PAL), Pohang, 37673, Republic of Korea

Received
23rd September 2020
, Accepted 3rd November 2020
First published on 5th November 2020
In this article, two D–A-type quinoxaline-based polymers with multiple fluorine atoms, denoted by PB-QxF and PBF-QxF, were synthesized and tested for polymer solar cells (PSCs). Owing to the excellent optical, electrochemical, and charge transport properties of these polymers, impressive PCEs of 10.99 and 13.96% were achieved by the inverted-type lab-scale spin-coated devices based on PB-QxF and PBF-QxF, respectively, in the presence of a nonfullerene Y6 acceptor. In addition, to evaluate the feasibility of the process for mass production, a scalable roll-to-roll (R2R) slot-die coating process was attempted to fabricate PSCs on flexible substrates. Notably, the best PCE of 9.63% was obtained using an R2R processed additive-free PSC based on PBF-QxF, which is the highest value among all R2R processed PSCs. Moreover, the device with PBF-QxF exhibited good thickness tolerance to PCE up to 350 nm, which is one of the key requirements for R2R compatible materials.

As a promising clean and renewable energy-harvesting resource, polymer solar cells (PSCs) have attracted considerable interest owing to their advantages such as light weight, flexibility, low cost, and scalable roll-to-roll (R2R) processability. Moreover, the recent advent of nonfullerene acceptors (NFAs) has led to a noticeable increase in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of single-junction PSCs to over 17% as NFAs do not exhibit several limitations of fullerene-based acceptors, including poor light-absorption, less tunability of the electronic structure, and large phase separation. To obtain high-performance NFA-based PSCs, the optimized balance between polymeric donors and NFAs in bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) structures is of great importance, because the overall outputs of the PSC are predominantly governed by the intimate interplays between the two active components.

Numerous p-type conjugated polymers with alternating donor–acceptor (D–A) configurations have been developed and applied in NFA-based PSCs. In many state-of-the-art polymeric donors, the benzodithiophene (BDT) unit was considered as a representative promising electron-donating building block. However, several electron-deficient moieties, such as benzo[1,2-c:4,5-c′]dithiophene-4-8-dione (BDD), benzotriazole (BTA), and quinoxaline (Qx), have been competitively utilized to construct high performance D–A type polymers. For example, when BDT donors were combined with the appropriate BDD and BTA, high PCE values of 16.54 and 14.02%, respectively, were achieved by NFA-based PSCs. For Qx, although polymers with BDT donors and Qx acceptors exhibited relatively low PCEs of up to 13.10%, a remarkable PCE of 16.21% was achieved with a low-cost p-type polymer called PTQ10, which contains a simple thiophene donor and a difluorine-substituted Qx acceptor.
With two nitrogen atoms, Qx is regarded as a moderate electron-accepting building block and is widely used to construct D–A type conjugated polymers for photovoltaic applications. One of the main advantages of the Qx unit is its flexible structural versatility achieved through chemical modification. A number of functional moieties can be simply incorporated into the diverse positions of the Qx structure, which readily facilitates the modification of optical, electrochemical, and morphological characteristics of the resultant Qx-based polymer donors, thereby improving their photovoltaic properties. In particular, a strong electron-withdrawing fluorine substituent has often been incorporated into the structure of Qx, resulting in reduced energy levels of the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the polymers without serious alternation in the bandgap. Consequently, the low-lying HOMO energy level of polymeric donors can efficiently enhance the open-circuit voltage (VOC) and the PCE of the fabricated devices.
In addition to the discovery of photoactive materials with good potential, the development of a sustainable and scalable fabrication process has been continuously pursued to realize the commercial production of PSCs. In this regard, the solution-based R2R manufacturing technique has attracted considerable attention, owing to its unique advantages for large-scale production of PSCs, such as high throughput, low cost, and expandability to flexible substrates. Unfortunately, finding R2R friendly materials has been a great challenge, and only a small fraction of high-performance materials have been identified as suitable for the R2R process owing to its stringent requirements such as the thickness insensitivity and air stability. Although it is technically not impossible, it is not practical to produce, for example, 100 ± 5 nm thin film over hundreds of square meters by industrial methods. Even if this was achieved, such thin films would be prone to defect formation during the fabrication and handling processes. Therefore, materials exhibiting the best performance at >200 nm have been regarded as R2R-friendly. A material showing no performance variation in the 300 ± 100 nm thickness range would be ideal. Furthermore, films have to undergo heating cycles in air during the R2R process, and the material must be robust enough to survive such harsh conditions. In addition, any time-consuming process cannot be applied to a continuously moving substrate in a practical R2R system. Therefore, after two decades of intensive research, the record PCE of R2R processed PSCs was only 4.96%. Since then, a PCE of approximately 7% was reported for R2R processed PSCs, and more recently, we reported the highest PCE of 9.57%. However, this highest PCE of single-junction R2R processed PSCs was achieved using a ternary mixture with a 1,8-diiodooctane additive. The processing additive is known to be problematic for long-term stability of PSCs. Therefore, fabricating high-performance R2R processed PSCs without using additional additives is an important challenge to move the technology forward.
In this study, two Qx-based conjugated polymers with a typical D–A architecture were synthesized by the Stille coupling reaction. Two electron-donating BDT monomers with and without fluorine atoms at the 4-position of the thiophene side chains were linked to the electron-withdrawing fluorine-substituted Qx monomer via a thiophene bridge to generate the target polymers PB-QxF and PBF-QxF, respectively (Fig. 1a). In the structure of the Qx acceptor part, one fluorine atom was located at the 6-position of Qx, and two additional fluorine atoms were incorporated into the 4-position of two thiophene substituents on the 2,3-positions of Qx. These D–A-type polymers were adopted as the donor; furthermore, the emerging Y6, owing to its unique merits of high electron mobility and broad absorption range to longer wavelengths, was used as an NFA to fabricate a BHJ PSC (Fig. 1a). As shown in Fig. 1b, the absorption spectra of PB-QxF and PBF-QxF in the film state were located in the wavelength range of 350–700 nm, while Y6 exhibited a complementary absorption spectrum in the longer wavelength range of 600–900 nm in the film state. To comprehensively study the photovoltaic properties of the polymers, tests of both lab-scale spin-coated and scalable R2R processed PSCs were performed simultaneously. First, a lab-scale spin-coated inverted-type device with an indium tin oxide (ITO)/ZnO/polymer:Y6/MoO3/Ag configuration was fabricated on a rigid glass substrate (Fig. 1c). As shown in Fig. 1d, the electronic energy levels of all materials in the device were well matched for efficient charge separation and charge transport. Owing to the favorable contributions of the additional fluorine atoms on the thiophene side chains of the BDT donor, the device based on PBF-QxF exhibited a higher PCE (13.96%) than that based on PB-QxF (10.99%). Second, a similar inverted-type device based on PBF-QxF was fabricated on a flexible substrate by a scalable R2R slot-die coating process. Interestingly, the R2R device based on PBF-QxF exhibited a noticeable PCE of 9.63% with a VOC of 0.76 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 20.39 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.62, in addition to an excellent thickness tolerance of up to 350 nm. To the best of our knowledge, this is the highest PCE obtained using additive-free R2R processed flexible PSCs. These results clearly demonstrate the significant potential of PBF-QxF for the development of high-performance NFA-based PSCs using a commercialization-friendly R2R slot-die coating process.

The overall synthetic routes of the monomers and polymers are summarized in Scheme 1. To prepare high-performance conjugated polymers, the promising electron-donating and electron-withdrawing components of BDT and Qx derivatives, respectively, were selected as the basic building blocks of the target D–A-type polymers. Multiple fluorine atoms were carefully incorporated into the selective positions of BDT and Qx monomers to favorably modify the electronic structures of the polymers. In addition, the relatively longer 2-butyloctyl chains were located at the 4-position of the two thiophene substituents on the 2,3-positions of the Qx monomer with the expectation that they would improve the solubility and morphology of the polymers. Therefore, these synthetic strategies can improve the uniqueness of polymer structures and offer great potential for photovoltaic applications. Detailed synthetic procedures are also provided in the experimental section of the ESI. First, α-diketone of 1,2-bis(5-(2-butyloctyl)-4-fluorothiophen-2-yl)ethane-1,2-dione (7) was produced after performing multiple synthetic steps starting with the bromination reaction of 2-butyl-1-octanol. Second, the consecutive zinc-mediated reduction of 5-fluoro-4,7-di(thiophen-2-yl)benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole (8), and the condensation reaction of the diamine intermediate with 7 led to the formation of a Qx unit containing three fluorine atoms (9). Third, the dibrominated Qx monomer (10) was prepared by the bromination reaction of 9 in the presence of N-bromosuccinimide (NBS). Finally, polymerization took place between the appropriate BDT monomers of 11 and 12 and the dibrominated Qx monomer of 10 under the Stille conditions to generate the target polymers PB-QxF and PBF-QxF, respectively. All the polymers showed good solubility in common organic solvents such as chloroform, THF, and toluene because of the presence of the 2-ethylhexyl and 2-butyloctyl chains on the BDT and Qx units of the polymers, respectively. The number average molecular weight (Mn) values of PB-QxF and PBF-QxF measured by gel permeation chromatography were 52.39 and 58.92 kDa, respectively, with polydispersity indexes (PDI) of 1.98 and 2.16, respectively (Fig. S1, ESI). In addition, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) of all the polymers at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1, under a N2 atmosphere, exhibited good thermal stability, and the two polymers had a similar high onset of decomposition temperature at 5% weight loss (Td5%) of over 400 °C (Fig. S2, ESI).

The optical properties of the polymers were investigated by UV-Vis absorption spectroscopy. Similar to other D–A-type polymers, PB-QxF and PBF-QxF exhibited two broad absorption bands in the short (350–480 nm) and long (520–680 nm) wavelength regions in the film state (Fig. 1b). These peaks correspond to the localized π–π* transition and intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) between the D and A components of the polymer backbone, respectively. The optical bandgaps of PB-QxF and PBF-QxF obtained from the absorption edges were 1.63 and 1.66 eV, respectively. In addition, the complementary absorptions between the polymer donors at short wavelengths and the Y6 acceptor at long wavelengths can enhance the light-harvesting efficiency of BHJ PSCs. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were performed to investigate the electrochemical properties of the polymers. The LUMO and HOMO energy levels of the polymers were calculated from the onset of the reduction and oxidation potentials, respectively, in the CV curves (Fig. S3, ESI). The LUMO and HOMO energy levels of PB-QxF and PBF-QxF were −3.52 and −5.37 eV, and −3.54 and −5.42 eV, respectively. The lower HOMO energy level of PBF-QxF is attributed to the enhanced electron-withdrawing capability due to the addition of two fluorine atoms to the thiophene side chains on the BDT unit. Based on the HOMO and LUMO values, the electrochemical bandgaps of PB-QxF and PBF-QxF were calculated to be 1.85 and 1.88 eV, respectively. The optical and electrochemical properties of PB-QxF and PBF-QxF are summarized in Table S1 (ESI). In addition, the electronic structures and frontier molecular orbitals of the polymers were investigated by density functional theory (DFT) at the B3LYP/6-31G** level using the Gaussian 09 program. For simple data processing, all alkyl substituents in the polymer structure and in the long polymer backbone were contracted to a simple methyl group and a two-repeating unit, respectively. As shown in Fig. S4 (ESI), the wave function of the HOMO was delocalized along the polymer chain, while that of the LUMO was predominantly localized on the electron-accepting Qx unit. These results indicate the efficient formation of the ICT state along the main chains of the polymers. Moreover, the HOMO and LUMO energy levels estimated using the DFT method displayed a trend similar to those observed using CV measurements.
The photovoltaic properties of the polymers were first investigated using lab-scale spin-coated inverted-type PSCs with a configuration of ITO/ZnO/polymer:Y6/MoO3/Ag on a rigid glass substrate. The detailed fabrication processes of the lab-scale device are depicted in the experimental section (ESI). After screening the photovoltaic properties of the polymers under various conditions, the best device performance was achieved at a donor:acceptor blend ratio of 1:1.5 (w/w) with additional thermal annealing at 110 °C for 5 min and a 1% 1-chloronaphthalene (1-CN) additive (Table S2, ESI). Fig. 2a shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the PSCs under the optimum conditions. The device based on PB-QxF exhibits a PCE of 10.99% with a VOC of 0.78 V, a JSC of 24.43 mA cm−2, and FF of 0.58, while that based on PBF-QxF shows an improved PCE of 13.96% with a VOC of 0.83 V, a JSC of 24.14 mA cm−2, and FF of 0.69. Although similar JSC values were observed for both devices, the higher VOC and FF values of the device based on PBF-QxF than those of the device based on PB-QxF can be attributed to the significant enhancement in PCE. The higher VOC value of the PBF-QxF-based device agrees well with its deeper HOMO energy level. As shown in Fig. 2b, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves of both devices cover broad wavelengths ranging from 350 to 900 nm owing to the complementary solar light absorptions between the polymers and the Y6 acceptor. In addition, good photon responses with maximum EQE values of approximately 80% were observed for both devices, which led to the generation of high JSC values over 24 mA cm−2. All the photovoltaic parameters of the NFA-based devices with PB-QxF and PBF-QxF under optimized conditions are summarized in Table 1. Moreover, to elucidate the charge transport properties of the polymers in a vertical direction inside devices, hole-only (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polymers:Y6/Au) and electron-only (ITO/ZnO/polymers:Y6/Al) devices were fabricated and analyzed under the same optimized conditions of BHJ films. As shown in Fig. S5a (ESI), the hole mobilities (μhs) of PB-QxF and PBF-QxF in the presence of the Y6 acceptor were measured and calculated using the space-charge-limited current model, and the Mott–Gurney equation of JSCL = 9ε0εrμV2/(8L3) (ε0 = free-space permittivity; εr = dielectric constant of the semiconductor; μ = mobility; V = the applied voltage, and L = the thickness of the active layer). The μh values of PB-QxF and PBF-QxF were 6.7 × 10−4 and 1.1 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. Notably, the μh of PBF-QxF was found to be one of the highest values among those of recently developed polymers based on the Y6 acceptor (Table S3, ESI). The electron mobilities (μe) of the polymers were also measured, and the values for PB-QxF and PBF-QxF were 2.8 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 7.4 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively (Fig. S5b, ESI). Moreover, the μh/μe ratio of the device with PBF-QxF (1.49) was more balanced compared with that of the device with PB-QxF (2.39), which indicates better charge transport and extraction with little electron–hole recombination in the device with PBF-QxF. This may be one of the reasons why the device with PBF-QxF has a higher FF (0.69) than the device with PB-QxF (0.58).
Polymer

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
PCE (%)

μ
h
/μe

a 
μ
h: hole mobility of the device.
b 
μ
e: electron mobility of the device.

PB-QxF
24.43 (24.50 ± 0.75)
0.78 (0.79 ± 0.01)
0.58 (0.56 ± 0.02)
10.99 (10.70 ± 0.17)
2.39
PBF-QxF
24.14 (24.01 ± 0.40)
0.83 (0.83 ± 0.01)
0.69 (0.68 ± 0.01)
13.96 (13.60 ± 0.24)
1.49
To obtain further insights into the photovoltaic properties of the polymers, the charge dissociation behavior in the active layer of the device was examined by the relationship between photocurrent density (Jph) and effective voltage (Veff) under optimum conditions. As shown in Fig. 2c, the saturated Jsat values of the devices based on PB-QxF and PBF-QxF at high voltages are 26.12 and 25.18 mA cm−2, respectively. Therefore, the exciton dissociation probabilities, defined as Jph/Jsat, of the devices with PB-QxF and PBF-QxF are determined to be 93% and 96%, respectively, indicating good charge extraction behaviors in the devices with both polymers. In addition, the charge carrier recombination characteristics in the active layer of the PSCs were also investigated based on the relationship between JSC and the light intensity (Plight), which can be expressed in the form of JSC = (Plight)α. As shown in Fig. 2d, the α values of both devices reached a higher value of 0.96, in which undesirable bimolecular recombination was efficiently suppressed. Therefore, the higher value of Jph/Jsat combined with the low bimolecular recombination in the active layer can contribute to the higher FF of the device based on PBF-QxF compared to that with PB-QxF.
The molecular ordering structures of the active layer play important roles in determining the overall photovoltaic performance of PSCs. Therefore, grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurements were conducted to investigate the molar packing and orientation of the active layer under various conditions, i.e., when it comprised a neat polymer film, blend films of polymer and Y6, and blend films with additive and heat treatment (Fig. 3a–f). As shown in Fig. 3a and b, the neat polymer films exhibited a favored face-on orientation, which is advantageous for enhancing the charge transport properties of the films. The strong π–π stacking diffraction (010) peaks in the neat film of PB-QxF and PBF-QxF were located at 1.61 and 1.65 Å−1 (Fig. 3g), respectively, in the out-of-plane (OOP) direction, corresponding to the π–π stacking distance of 3.91 and 3.81 Å, respectively. While keeping the face-on orientation (Fig. 3c and d), the addition of the Y6 acceptor to the polymer films caused a change in the π–π stacking diffraction (010) peaks to 1.71 Å−1 with a distance of 3.68 Å. The strong face-on orientation of blended PB-QxF and PBF-QxF films with a 1-CN additive and heat treatment induced further changes in the π–π stacking diffraction (010) peaks to 1.72 and 1.77 Å−1, respectively, with reduced distances of 3.66 and 3.56 Å, respectively (Fig. 3e–g). These results indicate that the formation of active layers of PSCs with PB-QxF and PBF-QxF under the best conditions significantly decreases the π–π stacking distances in the OOP direction, leading to their good charge transport properties. In addition, the active layer based on PBF-QxF exhibited a smaller π–π stacking distance than that of the film with PB-QxF, resulting in a higher FF and PCE of the device under the optimized conditions. All the parameters in the GIWAXS measurement are summarized in Table S4 (ESI). The surface morphology of the active layer was further characterized by atomic force microscopy (AFM). As shown in Fig. S6 (ESI), both active layers based on PB-QxF and PBF-QxF exhibited uniform and smooth surfaces with root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 0.78 and 2.01 nm, respectively. The higher RMS roughness of the PBF-QxF-based film with more distinct phase separation and surface wrinkles could be due to the improved crystallization tendency in the solid state, leading to enhanced charge transport and charge collection properties of the device, with a higher FF than that of the PB-QxF-based film.
As discussed earlier, the development of scalable and low-cost manufacturing processes such as the solution-based R2R method is of great interest for the commercialization of PSCs. Materials need to have high thickness tolerance, thermal stability, and high performance, preferably without using high-boiling-point additives, to be used in R2R processing. To demonstrate the R2R compatibility of PBF-QxF on a flexible transparent conductive electrode (TCE), an inverted-type flexible PSC with a structure of flexible TCE/ZnO/polymer:Y6/MoO3/Ag was fabricated using an R2R apparatus equipped with a customized slot-die coating head (Fig. 4a). Based on our previous findings, the temperatures of both the solution and the substrate during slot-die coating were 90 and 130 °C, respectively, to improve device performance through morphological control. The optimized ratio of 1:1.5 (w/w) between PBF-QxF:Y6 determined in the spin-coated device was directly translated to the R2R processed device. The thickness of the active layer in R2R processed devices was changed by controlling the flow rate at a fixed coating speed. The thickness of the dried film should be proportional to the amount of deposited materials determined by the concentration, flow rate, coating speed, and width. Detailed fabrication methods are described in the experimental section of the ESI, and the relationship between the deposited materials per unit area and the active layer thickness is also shown in Fig. S7 (ESI). The active layer thicknesses of the devices were analyzed using a surface profiler. However, the thicknesses of the devices with lower deposited concentrations were predicted using the calculated allometric equation, owing to the easy crumpling of the films on the flexible substrate during measurement. The R2R processed devices showed relatively lower PCEs than those of spin-coated ones as shown in Fig. 4b and Table S5 (ESI). We attribute this performance reduction to (i) the inferior properties of flexible substrates compared to the ITO glass, and (ii) unavailability of the R2R-based techniques that can produce PSCs as efficient as their fully optimized spin-coated counterpart. However, the results are promising in comparison with R2R-based devices in the literature. The high PCE values of over 9.01% maintained a wide range of active layer concentrations from 25.6 to 44.9 μg cm−2, which is relevant to the active layer thickness from 202 to 299 nm. Moreover, the impressive PCE value of 8.49% was maintained in a very thick film with 57.7 μg cm−2 deposition, corresponding to a thickness of 354 nm. These results clearly indicate the outstanding thickness tolerance of PBF-QxF to PCE, which is one of the key requirements for R2R compatible materials. Other device parameters such as VOC, JSC, and FF of R2R processed PSCs with different thicknesses of the active layer are also shown in Fig. S8 (ESI). The values of VOC and JSC of R2R processed PSCs were relatively constant, while the FF of the device was inversely proportional to the thickness of the active layer. Therefore, even though it is not significant, the PCE drop of R2R processed PSCs with PBF-QxF is attributed to the gradual reduction in FF of the device with increasing active layer thickness. As previously reported, the decline in FF is caused by the diminishment of charge collection efficiencies with increasing film thickness. The J–V curve of the R2R PSC with PBF-QxF under optimized conditions, which is shown in Fig. 4c, reveals that the R2R PSC with PBF-QxF exhibits a maximum PCE of 9.63% with a VOC of 0.76 V, a JSC of 20.39 mA cm−2, and an FF of 0.62. To the best of our knowledge, this is the highest PCE value among all the R2R processed PSCs on flexible substrates (Table S6, ESI). AFM experiments were also performed to determine the morphology and phase separation of R2R processed active layers of the devices. As shown in Fig. 5, the AFM height and phase images suggest that R2R processed active layers form favorable nanoscale phase separation with homogeneous domain size, which is beneficial for charge separation and charge transport. It has also been found that the PCEs of the R2R processed devices are almost independent of the RMS values owing to their small variations. Furthermore, the nanoscale phase separation in the active layers of R2R processed devices was confirmed by the field-emission transmission electron microscopy images (Fig. S9, ESI). More meaningfully, all the R2R slot-die coated devices in this study were fabricated under atmospheric conditions without processing additives, due to which unimpaired stability of the devices can be expected.

In summary, two D–A type quinoxaline-based polymers with multiple fluorine atoms, namely PB-QxF and PBF-QxF, were designed and synthesized as an electron-donating component in NFA-based PSCs. After analyzing their structural, optical, and electrochemical properties, their photovoltaic properties were exhaustively investigated by fabricating simple lab-scale spin-coated PSCs along with their scalable R2R slot-die coated counterparts. Owing to the positive contributions of the two additional fluorine atoms on the BDT unit of the polymer structure, including lowering the HOMO energy level and enhancing charge mobilities with a more balanced μh/μe ratio, the lab-scale device based on PBF-QxF exhibited a higher PCE than that based on PB-QxF. Moreover, the scalable R2R processed device with PBF-QxF displayed not only the highest PCE of 9.63% among all other R2R processed PSCs on flexible substrates, but also a remarkable thickness tolerance to PCE of up to 350 nm. Therefore, this study offers meaningful insights into the development of high-performance polymeric donors, which are applicable for commercialization-friendly low-cost R2R fabrication processes.


The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


This research was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation (NRF) of the Republic of Korea (under program numbers 2018R1D1A1B07042822, 2020R1C1C1005609, 202016M1A2A2940914 and Nano/Material Technology Program – 2020M3H4A3081813 and 2020M3H4A1A02084909), and the Australian Centre for Advanced Photovoltaics (ACAP) program funded by the Australian Government through the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta09354h
‡ Mun Ho Yang and Seo-Jin Ko contributed equally to this research.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020