 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA00739B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3792-3797


J. G.
Tait
*,

S.
Manghooli
,

W.
Qiu
,

L.
Rakocevic
,

L.
Kootstra
,

M.
Jaysankar
,

C. A.
Masse de la Huerta
,

U. W.
Paetzold
,

R.
Gehlhaar
,

D.
Cheyns
,

P.
Heremans
 and 

J.
Poortmans


IMEC, Kapeldreef 75, Leuven, B-3001, Belgium. E-mail: tait@imec.be

Dept. Elect. Eng., KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium

Dept. Mat. Eng., Politecnico Di Milano, Italy

Dept. Mat. Eng., KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium

Dept. Appl. Sciences, TU Delft, Delft, The Netherlands

Institut National des Sciences Appliquées de Lyon, Lyon, France

Dept. Mat., Universiteit Hasselt, Hasselt, Belgium

Received
25th January 2016
, Accepted 4th February 2016
First published on 4th February 2016
Transitioning perovskite photovoltaics from the rapid progress in lab-scale devices to industrially viable large area modules is a key challenge for the economic breakthrough of the technology. In this work, we demonstrate ultrasonic spray coating as a scalable and versatile linear deposition technique for high efficiency perovskite photovoltaics. We show the versatility of concurrently pumped ultrasonic spray coating by rapidly and precisely optimizing precursor ratios based on PbCl2, Pb(CH3CO2)2·3H2O, PbBr2, CH3NH3Br, and CH3NH3I to achieve highly crystalline and pinhole-free layers. Initial power conversion efficiencies of 15.7% for small scale devices and 11.7% for 3.8 cm2 modules were achieved with current–voltage sweeps and tracked to 13.4% for devices and 10.4% for modules under continuous illumination and bias at the maximum power point. Process versatility is further demonstrated with the in situ bandgap control in CH3NH3PbIXBr3−X layers.

Now that perovskite solar cells have surpassed 20% in certified power conversion efficiency (η) and exhibit short energy payback times, linear deposition techniques need to be explored to enable large area production. Up-scalable linear coating techniques such as spray, slot die, flexographic, gravure, inkjet, screen, and blade coating offer the capability to coat photovoltaic thin films. Previous work on singly pumped spray coating of perovskite precursors has led to initial small-scale device efficiencies of up to 13% being reported. Unfortunately, these layers did not achieve full coverage of a crystalline layer, likely limiting the performance and stability of the device under maximum power point tracking conditions. Controlling the layer morphology and coverage is known to be essential to increasing both performance and yield.

Combinatorial processes for controlling morphology, screening materials, and optimizing device architecture have been reported for organic polymer and Cu(Inx,Ga1−x)Se2 layers with slot die, inkjet, and spray coating. Mixing independent inks in the ultrasonic spray nozzle prior to aerosolization enables combinatorial optimization of precursor ratios, layer thickness, morphology, and ink composition. Differential pumping rates in the single pass spraying regime facilitate identical coating and drying conditions for each precursor ink deposition.
Managing ratios and concentrations of perovskite precursors is essential for controlling the crystallinity and overall morphology of the current workhorse perovskite materials for photovoltaic development: methylammonium lead tri(iodide/bromide) (CH3NH3(IXBr1−X)3). Typically, CH3NH3(IXBr1−X)3 is formed from the conversion of Pb providing precursors PbI2, PbBr2, PbCl2, or Pb(CH3CO2)2·3H2O (PbAc2) in combination with CH3NH3I (MAI) and/or CH3NH3Br (MABr). The role and final location of spectator ions, chlorine and acetate, are under investigation, but their assistance in layer formation and the conversion process is known. Combining multiple spectator ions into the ink has recently been shown to further enhance film formation and device performance, opening yet another degree of freedom in the process.
In this work, we demonstrate the versatility of concurrently pumped ultrasonic spray coating (Fig. 1) for rapidly and precisely optimizing ratios of precursor materials for both single and multiple halide perovskite layers. First, we confirm complete conversion to uniform and pinhole-free perovskite layers with X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and photo-spectroscopy for perovskite layers prepared from spray coating solutions of different Pb-providing spectator precursors, PbAc2 and PbCl2, in combination with MAI. Next, we concurrently spray coat a controlled mixture of PbAc2/MAI and PbCl2/MAI to fabricate high performance n–i–p type devices (glass substrate/ITO/TiO2/CH3NH3(IXBr1−X)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au). The process is implemented to fabricate the first reported perovskite photovoltaic modules (aperture area of 3.8 cm2), demonstrating its applicability to scalability. Lastly, the technique is used to precisely control the bandgap in CH3NH3(IXBr1−X)3-based layers via concurrently spraying I- and Br-containing inks.

Perovskite layers spray coated from N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) based inks of PbCl2:MAI, PbAc2:MAI, and their concurrently pumped mixture convert to perovskite with full coverage and negligible pinhole density (Fig. 2). While similar features are found on the XRD of each layer, those based on mixed spectators show higher (110) and (220) peaks and less broadening than either layer from single spectator inks. This finding suggests higher uniformity in the crystal lattice for the mixed precursors over the single precursors, and may point to greater microstructural strain and defects in the single precursor layers. Note that the peaks here include a superposition of the (110)/(002) and (220)/(004) reflections, owing to the Bragg–Brentano technique used. To further analyze the crystal structure differences between the mixed and single precursor layers, further measurements outside the scope of this work must be done. The absorptance spectra of the layers reveal equal optical bandgaps of 1.55 eV for each material. These layers were ultrasonically sprayed on glass/ITO/TiO2 substrates in a N2 environment. The TiO2 was deposited at low temperature with electron beam evaporation. For full conversion, the PbCl2-based layer requires 60 minutes at 100 °C, while the PbAc2 and mixed layers require 10 minutes at 130 °C.

A substrate temperature range of 40–60 °C was found to be optimal for the single pass regime of spray coating for DMF. In this study, 40 °C was used for all layers. Lower temperatures result in dewetting, while at higher temperatures droplets dry before being able to coalesce and form a closed film. Spray coated films are macroscopically rougher than spin coated films, due to longer drying time (60 s) and the absence of assistive centripetal effects in spray coating.

Pumping two solutions at differential rates (varied rates of components, but constant net flow rate) of the inks enables equivalent drying dynamics for each layer, since solution volumes, thicknesses, and drying times are held constant. We apply this control to mixing inks of PbCl2:MAI and PbAc2:MAI. The total flow rate and solution concentrations were first optimized for uniform and full coverage, and then device performance (Fig. S1–S4). Concurrent pumping enables this combinatorial thickness/substrate temperature/flow rate/nozzle speed optimization. Note that precise thickness control is enabled by mixing a concentrated ink with neat DMF with a constant net flow rate. A total flow rate of 1 mL min−1 at a nozzle speed of 30 mm s−1, a substrate temperature of 40 °C, a spray width of 30 mm, and a total concentration (PbX2:MAI) of 0.8:2.4 M were used for all sprayed layers in this article. Layer thicknesses of ∼400 nm result from these parameters.

The optimum ratio for high J–V power conversion efficiency, ηJV, of devices is 75 mol% PbAc2 with PbCl2 (Fig. 3). This value was found by differential pumping of PbAc2:MAI and PbCl2:MAI inks from 0 to 100 mol% PbAc2. Note that all of the perovskite layers here were annealed at 130 °C for 10 minutes. The <30 mol% PbAc2 containing devices typically require lower temperatures and longer annealing times for optimal perovskite conversion and higher performance. The high temperatures may degrade layers with low PbAc2 loading. A more accurate optimization would include these two further degrees of freedom. In the scope of this manuscript, we show the capability of concurrently pumped spray coating to investigate the wide material parameter space.
The reported values in Fig. 3 are extracted from current density (J) vs. voltage (V) sweeps of the devices. The scan rate for these J–V measurements was 1 V s−1, with a delay of 10 ms, and from open circuit to short circuit. No pre-conditioning was done to the device. Hysteresis was observed in measurements of the opposite voltage sweep direction. To overcome the error this introduces to the measurement and to measure performance in a model closer to the real operating conditions, we implement maximum power point tracking under continuous illumination.
The fill factor (FF) remains constant at about 70% between 40–90 mol% PbAc2, but drops off at both extremes owing to higher defect density. These defects take the form of pinholes that provide shunt pathways, and stress-induced cracks at the grain boundaries (Fig. 2). The thickness is constant over this sweep in PbAc2 loading, due to the differential rate keeping the net molar concentration constant. This work agrees with the trends and optimum points found in spin coated devices. The short-circuit current density, JSC, peaks at 60–80 mol% PbAc2. This peak in JSC is attributable to several factors: the layers with lower PbAc2 loading may not be fully converted to perovskite, leading to reduced absorptance and greater defects/recombination centers in both high and low PbAc2 loading ranges. The open-circuit voltage, VOC, steadily increases with PbAc2 concentration. This increase may be a result of higher carrier densities in the layers, which result from lower recombination than that of the low PbAc2 loading layers. A decrease in stress-induced crack formation between grains in the mixed layers vs. the pure PbX2 layers, alongside negligible pinhole density, leads to an optimum value at 75 mol% PbAc2.
Maximum power point (MPP) tracking under constant AM1.5G illumination, details of which are described in the ESI, results in a ∼10% drop in power conversion efficiency from the initial J–V measurement over 5 minutes at MPP for each device (Fig. 4a). Note that tracking the MPP for 5 minutes does not indicate long-term “stability”, but provides a truer indication of initial operational performance than J–V measured values for devices that display transient effects. These are the first reported operational efficiencies for a spray coated perovskite photovoltaic device. The overall best device performance values for the most stable devices are summarized in Table 1, while the J–V plots are shown in Fig. S5. Note that the pure PbX2 annealing conditions were independently optimized for high device performance and complete conversion. The 75 mol% PbAc2 device retains the highest performance under operational conditions. This retention is credited to the densely packed crystals with low defect density (Fig. 2). This full coverage may reduce the ability of degradation products, such as those containing H+ or MAI−, to evaporate. These experiments clearly show the power of concurrently pumped spray coating for quickly optimizing perovskite layer formation in a scalable format.
Device

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

V
OC (V)

η

JV
 (%)

η
MPP (%)
PbCl2
21.6
72
0.86
13.4
11.6
75 mol% PbAc2
22.5
73
0.95
15.7
13.7
PbAc2
20.1
71
0.96
13.7
12.6
Module75 mol% PbAc2
20.4
70
0.83
11.7
10.4
Perovskite photovoltaic modules were fabricated with spray coated perovskite layers from an optimized mixture of 75 mol% PbAc2 with PbCl2:MAI (Fig. 4b). Monolithic fabrication of series connected modules reduces resistive performance losses from increases in the active area of individual photovoltaic cells. The ITO was patterned with laser scribing, while the photoactive layer and top electrode were mechanically scribed. The module had four cells in series and a total aperture area of 3.8 cm2 (Fig. S8). The highest performance module attained ηJV = 11.7%, ISC = 19.4 mA, VOC = 3.31 V, and FF = 70% (values equivalent to the individual cells are shown in Table 1). The initially measured J–V curves are shown in Fig. S9. While MPP tracking, the power conversion efficiency dropped to ηMPP = 10.4% after 5 minutes under illuminated operation. While these modules are relatively small compared to large modules in final applications, the principle of the module interconnection remains the same. Spray coating incurs no further requirements than other coating techniques for patterning. Spray coating can simply be scaled to larger width for linear deposition with an array of nozzles using minimal overlapping spray patterns.

Bandgap control in mixed halide systems (I:Br) was achieved with concurrent spray coating (Fig. 5). Solutions of PbCl2/MAI and PbBr2/MABr were differentially pumped, with a sweep of the I:Br ratio. Layer thickness and drying conditions were kept constant. We note that optimal layer thickness for device performance and for implementation in tandem structures changes depending on the bandgap and I:Br ratio. Perovskite layers with a bandgap of approximately 1.8 eV are of interest for their potential application in tandem architecture with Si. Precise bandgap control is necessary for a monolithic two-terminal design to maintain current matching, whereas a mechanically stacked four-terminal design allows for current mismatch at the cost of optical loss in the extra conducting layer.

Here, we demonstrate the ability of concurrently pumped spray coating to quickly probe the precursor ratios for bandgap control, by simply mixing two independent solutions in the ultrasonic nozzle. A near-linear correlation between the bandgap and the molar I:Br ratio confirms trends reported in the literature. The deposition parameters and precursor loading were optimized (Fig. S6 and S7) for 1.8 eV bandgap devices, achieving ηJV = 6.8%, JSC = 11 mA cm−2, VOC = 1.03 V, and FF = 60%. Under MPP for 5 minutes, the 1.8 eV bandgap device drops to ηMPP = 6.1%.
This process further reveals the versatility of differentially pumping separate solutions to mix in the nozzle of an ultrasonic spray coating system. At a lab scale, this single tool offers the ability to automatically and precisely coat layers of various inks, and to tackle complicated layer stacks implemented in multijunction architectures. At an industrial scale, most production will likely use a single ink, due to its simplicity, but processes similar to that in this manuscript afford the ability to modify processes on-the-fly and without retooling.

Ultrasonic spray coating of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite-based photovoltaics from combinations of Pb-containing precursors (PbAc2, PbI2, and PbCl2) with CH3NH3I achieved J–V measured power conversion efficiencies of 15.7% and dropped to 13.4% under maximum power point conditions for five minutes. Concurrently pumped ultrasonic spray coating with differential rates enabled the rapid optimization of thickness, precursor ratios, and resulting pinhole-free layer crystallinity. The process is scalable, demonstrated with 3.8 cm2 aperture area modules with 11.7% J–V measured power conversion efficiency. The power of concurrent spray coating is further demonstrated in precision bandgap control, by differentially pumping separate halide-containing inks. Overall, the demonstrated large area and linear deposition technique of concurrently pumped ultrasonic spray coating offers rapid and precise optimization of perovskite photovoltaics, reaching comparable performance to lab-scale techniques. With this work, the community presses onward another step toward commercial implementation of perovskite photovoltaics.


The patterned (for devices) 3 × 3 cm glass/ITO substrates were purchased from Colorado Concepts (sheet resistance = 16 Ω □−1). The CH3NH3I3 was purchased from Dyesol. PbAc2, PbI2, and PbCl2 were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. The spiro-OMeTAD was purchased from Lumtech. All solvents were purchased from Sigma Aldrich.


The substrates were cleaned with successive ultrasonic baths in detergent, deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol. Layers of TiO2 were electron beam evaporated to 20 nm thickness. Perovskite precursor inks were made by dissolving the materials in dimethylformamide in N2 immediately before deposition. The concurrently pumped spray coating was performed with a Sono-Tek Corp. 80 kHz Impact ultrasonic nozzle fixed to an ExactaCoat system. The nozzle to substrate distance (10 cm) and the N2 shroud pressure were adjusted to spray 30 mm strips at a speed of 30 mm s−1 onto a temperature controlled substrate. Layers of spiro-OMeTAD with bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide were spin coated in N2 and then oxygen doped before the Au electrode was thermally evaporated to 80 nm thickness.

Module substrates were patterned by laser scribing glass/ITO glass sheets from Colorado Concepts (sheet resistance = 20 Ω □−1). The ITO was patterned with laser scribing, while the photoactive layer and top electrode were mechanically scribed. The module had four cells in series and a total aperture area of 3.8 cm2.

Film thicknesses were measured by a Dektak D150 (Veeco Instruments) surface profilometer. The current density vs. voltage measurements were performed with a Keithley 2602A Source-Measure Unit and an Abet solar simulator producing 100 mW cm−2 AM1.5G illumination. The scan rate for these J–V measurements was 1 V s−1 and from open circuit to short circuit. No pre-conditioning was done to the device. To overcome the error that hysteresis introduces to the measurement and to measure performance in a model closer to the real operating conditions, we implemented maximum power point tracking under continuous illumination. Maximum power point tracking was done using a perturb and observe method under continuous AM1.5G illumination. The bias was kept constant while the current was measured every 50 power line cycles. Photospectroscopy was measured with coupled and monochromated Xe and quartz halogen lamps calibrated by a Si photodiode. X-ray diffraction was measured with a PANalytical X'Pert Pro Materials Research Diffractometer using the Cu Kα line from 2θ = 10° to 50°. The scanning electron microscope images were taken with a FEI Nova 200 scanning electron microscope.


All authors reviewed and contributed to the manuscript. J. G. Tait, S. Manghooli, W. Qiu, L. Rakocevic, L. Kootstra, M. Jaysankar, and C. A. Masse de la Huerta carried out the experiments. J. G. Tait wrote the manuscript. U. W. Paetzold, D. Cheyns, P. Heremans, and J. Poortmans were scientific advisors.


This work was supported in part by the Flemish Government: Department of Economics, Science and Innovation. The work of J. G. Tait was supported by the Natural Sciences Engineering and Research Council of Canada under CGSD3-454097-2014. The work of U. W. Paetzold was supported by the German Academic Exchange Service. The authors declare no competing financial interests.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta00739b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016