 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA04925C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21922-21929


Suolong
Yang
,

Pengxiang
Zhao
,

Xiaochong
Zhao
,

Liangti
Qu
 and 

Xinchun
Lai
*

Department of Chemistry, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China

Science and Technology on Surface Physics and Chemistry Laboratory, Mianyang 621907, China. E-mail: laixinchun@caep.cn

Received
2nd July 2015
, Accepted 16th September 2015
First published on 16th September 2015
Due to the ideal band gap and environmental friendliness, InP is a promising light-harvesting material in photovoltaic cells. However, “green” InP based quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) have been rarely reported. Herein, nearly monodispersed Sn doped InP (Sn:InP) quantum dots (QDs) were synthesized by the one-pot nucleation doping method, and used as the sensitizer in the construction of QDSSCs. High QD loadings on the TiO2 film electrodes were achieved by using the capping ligand-induced self-assembly (CLIS) sensitization technique. The resulting champion Sn:InP cell shows a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.54% under AM 1.5G (simulated 1 sun illumination), which is remarkably higher than that of un-doped InP QD based ones. This improvement is ascribed to the regulation role of the band gap by Sn dopant in the InP QDs. The Sn:InP QDSSCs exhibit moderate efficiency, good reproducibility and stability. These new findings may pave the way for the performance improvements of other QD photovoltaic devices.

Quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) have become one of the candidates for next generation solar cells, because of their unique properties, such as tunable light-harvesting range, low-cost, multiple-exciton effects, etc. So far, many QD materials have been used as sensitizers for QDSSCs including CdS, PbS, CdSe and CuInS2. Among all the QDSSCs, CdSe, CuInS2 (ref. 24) and CdSe/CdTe core/shell QDSSCs have shown a high power conversion efficiency (PEC) of 5.4%, 7.04% and 8.21%, respectively. Although there are a lot of reports on the applications of QDs in QDSSCs, it is still highly desirable to explore new “green” Cd-free QD materials such as InP QDs. InP QDs are considered as a “more environmentally friendly” near-infrared type of semiconductor material with high absorption coefficient (∼105 cm−1) and narrow bandgap (1.35 eV). Up to now, many reports have focused on the synthesis and fluorescence applications of InP QDs. The InP QDSSCs, however, were rarely reported. Zaban et al. proposed a method to prepare quantum dot solar cells using the InP quantum dots as the sensitizer. The photocurrent and PCE of the solar cells are relatively low, which may be resulted from the corrosive I−/I3− electrolyte and high electron recombination loss at the QD/electrolyte interface. Recent studies have reported some approaches to inhibit the charge loss at the interface. For examples, the short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), and PCE are significantly improved by coating with ZnS or ZnS/SiO2. The performance of II–VI QDSSCs was accordingly improved by the following treatments such as the capping ligand-induced self-assembly (CLIS) and ZnS-covering. These results inspired us toward the preparation of highly efficient InP QDSSCs.

We noticed that the low photocurrent of QDSSCs may be due to the insufficient loading of QDs and high electron loss at the QD/electrolyte interface. Therefore, it is important to prepare high-quality QD sensitized electrodes with enough loading and a broad absorption range. Although the CLIS sensitization technique has been well developed and the PCE of the resultant QDSSCs of up to 8% has been reported for II–VI, there has been few reports on III–V InP QDs. Moreover, broadening the light-harvesting range by increasing the size of QDs is very limited, but doping can be an effective method. For example, Cu doped InP QDs showed tunable absorption and NIR emission. The Sn dopants were introduced into the bulk InP semiconductor to tune the bandgaps. However, the Sn doped InP (Sn:InP) QDs and their photovoltaic applications have never been reported.
In this work, the Sn:InP QDs were synthesized and immobilized onto mesoporous TiO2 films using the CLIS sensitization technique, and then covered with ZnS passivation layers via the successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) approach. The as-prepared Sn:InP QD sensitized photoanodes were sintered and assembled into the QDSSC devices. As a result, the resultant Cd-free green Sn:InP solar cell exhibited a best PCE of 3.54% under AM 1.5G one full sun illumination. The present strategy was shown to have a significant enhancement in the photovoltaic performances of InP QDSSCs.

The following reagents were used in this study: indium acetate (In(Ac)3, 99.99%, Aldrich), stannous acetate (Sn(Ac)2, 99.99%, Aldrich), myristic acid (MA, >99%, Sigma), 1-octadecene (ODE, 90%, Aldrich), and tris(trimethylsilyl)phosphine (P(TMS)3, 98%, 10 wt% in hexane, Strem), and 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA, 98%, Aladdin).


UV-vis absorption spectra were obtained using a Shimadzu UV-1800 spectrophotometer. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high resolution TEM (HR-TEM) were performed on a FEI Titan S/TEM with an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained using a FEI Sirion-200 microscope, and the element mapping was carried out with an energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) equipped on the SEM. Inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES, IRIS Advantage ER/S) was used to identify the composition of the Sn:InP QDs. X-ray diffractions (XRD) were measured on a XPERT-PRO diffractometer system. The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves were recorded by using a Keithley 2000 source meter under illumination of an AM 1.5G solar simulator (Newport, Oriel class A, 94023A, equipped with a 150 W tungsten lamp). The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were collected by using a Keithley 2000 multimeter under the illumination of a 150 W tungsten lamp with a monochromator (DK240). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were carried out on an impedance analyzer (Zahner, Zennium), and the different bias voltages were carried out from 0 V to −0.6 V applying a 20 mV sinusoidal signal with the frequency between 0.1 Hz and 1.0 MHz.


The Sn:InP QDSSCs were obtained by the following procedures in sequence: synthesis of QDs, ligand exchange of QDs, fabrication of Sn:InP-sensitized photoanodes and assembly of solar cells.


The Sn:InP QDs were synthesized according to the modified method reported by Lucey et al. QDs with absorption peaks at 533 nm, 570 nm, 600 nm and 630 nm were denoted QD533, QD570, QD600 and QD630. Hereafter, QD600 was used as a representative to demonstrate the synthesis process: 0.4 mmol In(Ac)3, 0.04 mmol Sn(Ac)2, 1.2 mmol MA and 5 mL ODE were mixed in a three-neck flask, and the flask was evaluated at 110 °C for 2 h. The resulting solution was then heated to 280 °C under argon flow. Meanwhile 0.2 mmol P(TMS)3 was mixed with 1 mL ODE in a glove box, and the hexane was removed by pumping. The P(TMS)3–ODE mixture was quickly injected into the reaction flask. The reaction mixture was cooled to 270 °C by the addition of 2 mL ODE and held for 1 h. Finally, the solution was cooled to ambient temperature. The hexane and methanol/acetone (v/v, 1:4) were used to remove the excess ligands and byproducts. The QDs were deposited out by the addition of acetone and separated by centrifugation. The products were washed three times with the hexane/acetone (v/v, 1:3) and dispersed in 10 mL hexane.

The Sn:InP QDs with different dopant concentrations (Sn/In molar ratios) were obtained by tuning the molar ratios of Sn(Ac)2 and In(Ac)3. The Sn:InP (Sn/In = 0.1) QDs with different absorption peaks were synthesized by controlling the reaction parameters. Typically, the Sn:InP QDs of QD533 and QD570 were synthesized with an MA/In ratio of 3 at 250 °C and 260 °C, respectively. The QD600 and QD630 were synthesized with MA/In ratios of 3.5 and 4 at 270 °C, respectively.

The ligand exchange was carried out according to the reported method: (i) the MPA (17–340 μL) was dissolved in 1 mL methanol and the pH value was adjusted to 10–12 by using NaOH aqueous solution; (ii) the above basic MPA–methanol mixture was added into 4 mL Sn:InP QDs methylene dichloride solution under stirring for 2 h; (iii) 10 mL deionized water was injected into the above mixture and stirred for another 5 min; (iv) the mixture was centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 1 min to accelerate the separation of the methylene dichloride and aqueous phases; (v) the MPA-capped Sn:InP QDs were obtained by the precipitation and centrifugation procedure with use of acetone; (vi) the QDs were dissolved into 0.2 mL deionized water and the pH value was adjusted to 12.

The exchange efficiency was obtained according to the method reported by Tamang et al. The detailed calculation procedure is shown in the ESI.

At first, the photoanodes were sensitized by Sn:InP QDs according to the literature method. The loading of QDs on TiO2 films can be estimated according to the literature. After ZnS-covering and sintering, the Sn:InP QDSSCs were immediately assembled with a sandwich structure: photoanode/polysulfide electrolyte/Cu2S counter electrode. The active area of each cell is 0.22 cm2. Finally, the J–V curves and IPCE curves of the Sn:InP QDSSCs were measured. Six parallel samples were assembled and tested for each QDSSC.


To evaluate the photovoltaic performance of different QD sizes, four Sn:InP QDs (Sn/In = 0.1) with different sizes were successfully synthesized by using the one-pot nucleation doping approach. The optical properties and microstructure characteristics of Sn:InP QDs were characterized using UV-vis spectroscopy, HR-TEM and XRD. Fig. 1(a) shows the absorption spectra of Sn:InP QDs with different QD sizes. The absorption peak of Sn:InP QDs is gradually red-shifted and broadened as the QD size increases. Correspondingly, the bandgap decreases from 2.1 eV to 1.78 eV (Table 1), which indicates a convenient manipulation of the bandgaps by the quantum size effect. An exponential function between the QD size and the absorption peak has already been reported in the literature. The size of our Sn:InP QD600 sample matched with the exponential function very well. We also noticed that the absorption peak red-shifted as the reaction time went on (Fig. S1). Therefore, the reaction time was fixed for 1 h in this study to rule out the uncertainty induced by the reaction time.

Samples

λ
edge (nm)

E
g (eV)
QD533
590
2.10
QD570
630
1.97
QD600
675
1.84
QD630
695
1.78
The structure of Sn:InP QDs was analyzed by XRD as shown in Fig. 1(b). The XRD pattern of the resulting QDs matches well with a zinc-blende structure, and the (111), (220) and (311) diffraction peaks are nearly identical to that of undoped InP QDs. A diffraction peak at 20.9° is originated from the residual indium myristate in InP QDs. In addition, the XRD peaks are broadened due to the nanosize effect of the QDs. Fig. 1(c) shows a typical HR-TEM image of Sn:InP QDs. An average size of 3.22 ± 0.52 nm (standard percent deviation of 10.5%) is observed. The shape of Sn:InP QDs is nearly spherical, and the lattice spacing distance of Sn:InP (3.5 Å) is almost equal to that of InP QDs as shown in Fig. 1(d). Fig. S2 also illustrates the HR-TEM images of undoped InP QDs and Sn:InP QDs with uniform distribution of size.
Moreover, Sn:InP QDs with different Sn concentrations were obtained by changing the reaction parameters. The Sn/In ratios of Sn:InP QDs were determined by ICP-AES as shown in Table S1. With the variation of Sn/In ratio, a series of Sn:InP QDs with tunable bandgaps were obtained. As shown in Fig. S3, the UV-vis spectra of Sn:InP QDs with different Sn/In ratios have a red-shift feature with increasing Sn/In ratios, indicating that the bandgap of InP QDs can be tuned via Sn doping. The absorption range of Sn doped InP QDs is wider than that of the undoped ones under the same reaction conditions, which indicates a bandgap modification by Sn doping. To clarify this speculation, we carried out the bandgap calculation of the Sn doped InP semiconductor via the MS-CASTEP program. Our band structure and density of states (DOS) calculation results indirectly support the UV-vis spectra results, as shown in Fig. S4. For Sn doping, the Fermi level upshifts to the bottom of the conduction band of InP, resulting in the formation of n-type doped semiconductors. Meanwhile, the bandgap of Sn:InP is narrower than that of undoped InP. Although the calculated bandgap is underestimated than the result calculated from the absorption edge, the trend of the band structure leads to the fact that Sn doping results in n-type InP with a decrease of bandgap.

The phase transfer to water-soluble QDs using a ligand-exchange process is an important step for QDSSCs by using the CLIS sensitization technique. Achieving highly-efficient ligand exchange from the hydrophobic phase to the hydrophilic phase is critical for improving the loading of QDs on TiO2 films. Ligand exchange of Sn:InP QDs was accomplished by vigorously stirring a mixed solution of methylene dichloride and basic thiol-containing ligand in methanol. Special zwitterionic organic ligands, such as thioglycolic acid (TGA), MPA and 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid (MUA), have been used as the ligands to prevent the particle aggregation after ligand exchange at basic pH (typically 8–11). The MPA is a common bifunctional linking molecular reagent that has already been chosen to acquire highly-efficient ligand exchange with InP, CdS and CdSe QDs. Moreover MPA facilitates the high wettability and superior penetration capability into hydrophilic TiO2 films for photoanode sensitizing application. Here, ligand exchange of Sn:InP QDs using MPA was successfully carried out and a high exchange efficiency was obtained. In the exchange process, the ligand exchange efficiency was affected by the MPA/QDs molar ratio. It has been reported that high ligand to QD molar ratios (such as 105:1) are beneficial to the improvement of the exchange efficiency for the InP/ZnS QDs system. In order to obtain the optimal MPA/QDs ratio, the exchange efficiency was tested with various MPA/QDs ratios. When the ligand to QD ratios gradually increase from 104 to 1.7 × 105, the exchange efficiency first increases and then decreases as shown in Fig. 2. The optimal ratio value of ligand to QDs is 1.7 × 104. At that ratio, the highest exchange efficiency of 74.4% (InP) and 78.0% (Sn:InP) is obtained. Too high or too low MPA/QDs ratios cannot improve the exchange efficiency, and even lead to the low loading of QDs on TiO2 films.


High loading of QDs on TiO2 films is critical to improve the photovoltaic performance of QDSSC devices. In our work, the CLIS sensitization technique was used for the InP QD system. The Sn:InP QDs with hydrophilic MPA-capped are bound to TiO2 nanocrystals (∼20–40 nm) to form QDs sensitized photoanodes, as shown in Fig. 3(a). Dark-brown colored photoanodes were obtained, indicating high loading of QDs. The surface of larger TiO2 nanoparticles is covered by small size of dots with ∼3 nm size, indicating high loading of QDs on the TiO2 porous channel. The SEM image for the surface of photoanodes is shown in Fig. 3(b). It can be observed that the film shows the porous structure with a rough surface. The cross-sectional view in Fig. 3(c) shows that the thickness of the transparent layer TiO2 is 9 μm. According to the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) approach, the surface area of our TiO2 paste was 48.9 m2 g−1. The density of the TiO2 paste is 21.2 g m−2. The total surface area covered by Sn:InP QDs is about 209 cm2 and the total inner surface area of TiO2 films is about 1051 cm2/cm2. Hence, the maximum loading of Sn:InP QDs is about 20% for Sn:InP QDs. Because of the almost equal absorbance (Fig. S5), the molar extinction coefficient and diameter in the case of Sn:InP, the loading of InP QDs and Sn:InP QDs are approximately equal. It should be noted that the loading described above was not absolutely equal. To obtain the same loading, the same concentrations of the QD aqueous solution should be used if possible. In order to test the distribution of elements, the surface of photoanodes was characterized by the EDS element mapping. As shown in the inset of Fig. 3(b), the In and P elements are uniformly distributed in TiO2 films. The EDS spectrum of the photoanode surface is shown in Fig. S6. Because the strong signals of the In Lβ peaks (In Lα: 3.28 keV and In Lβ: 3.47 keV) tend to overwhelm the weak Sn Lα (3.44 keV) peak, no peaks from Sn are observed. Elemental analysis according to the quantitative analysis software named TEAM, as presented in Table S2, shows that the atomic concentrations of In, P and Sn elements are 5.46%, 5.01% and 0.38%, respectively. The Sn/In ratio is consistent with the ICP-AES results (Table S1).


In order to investigate the photovoltaic performances of the as-prepared Sn:InP-based QDSSCs, the J–V curves and IPCE curves were recorded. From the J–V curves in Fig. 4(a), our best Sn:InP QDSSC device shows a significantly high current density of 10.58 mA cm−2 and a PCE of 3.54%, which is the record efficiency of QDSSC based III–V QDs. IPCE measurements are used to verify the photocurrent of a solar-cell device. The IPCE value of the best InP and Sn:InP QDSSCs increased from 40% to 55%, as shown in Fig. 4(b). The integrated value of the IPCE spectrum of the best Sn:InP QDSSCs involves a short-circuit current density of 10.1 mA cm−2, which is in good agreement with the measured Jsc value of 10.6 mA cm−2. Moreover, the J–V and IPCE curves of the Sn:InP QDs with different absorption peaks were compared, as shown in Fig. 4(c) and (d). Sn:InP QDs with long absorption wavelength have higher short circuit current density than the QDs with short absorption wavelength. However, the QD630 shows lower current density than that of QD600, which could be caused by the broad size distribution of QD630. Nevertheless, the distribution of large Sn:InP QDs needs to be further controlled in our future work. The IPCE curves of Sn:InP with various absorption peaks are consistent with the J–V curves.

As shown in Table 2, the photocurrent of our InP QDSSCs is higher than the result reported previously. Some improvements were adopted in our InP QDSSC devices. Firstly, the ZnS-covering treatment was carried out by using the SILAR approach in our experiments. Fig. 5 shows that both Jsc and Voc are significantly improved in Sn:InP QDSSCs in the presence of ZnS passivation layer, indicating an effective inhibition of electron recombination loss at the QDs/electrolyte interface. Secondly, the counter electrodes of Pt and the polyiodide electrolyte were replaced by the Cu2S counter electrode and the polysulfide electrolyte, respectively.
Cells
Size (nm)

J
sc
 (mA cm−2)

V
oc
 (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
IPCE (%)

a The best values are given, followed by the averages and standard deviations from 6 devices.
b IPCE tested from the best cells.

InP
3.2
8.36 (8.20 ± 0.44)
0.56 (0.56 ± 0.01)
54.8 (56.0 ± 3.2)
2.57 (2.56 ± 0.03)
40
Sn:InP (QD600)
3.22
10.58 (10.33 ± 0.21)
0.59 (0.58 ± 0.01)
56.7 (56.6 ± 1.3)
3.54 (3.38 ± 0.08)
55
InP
6.5
0.24
0.56
68
<0.1
<2
Our results demonstrate that stable and high efficiency cell devices can be obtained. In addition, the scattering TiO2 layer was used to enhance the harvest of sunlight. Indeed, the previous work is the first demonstration of a QD sensitized cell using polyiodide as the electrolyte, which is known to be inappropriate for QD-based devices. Nowadays, it is well known that the iodide/triiodide electrolyte is strongly photocorrosive for QDs, leading to rapid decreases of photocurrent. Comparisons of photocurrents in CdS QDSSCs with iodide/triiodide and polysulfide electrolytes have already been reported by Tachibana et al. The iodide/triiodide electrolyte generated lower values of photocurrent and had a very short durability (100 s). Compared to the iodide/triiodide electrolyte, the polysulfide electrolyte [redox potential Ered: −0.45 V vs. normal hydrogen electrode (NHE)] generated more stable photocurrents and longer lifetime.
Moreover, a lower fill factor (FF < 50%) was obtained when using the Pt counter electrode at QDSSCs with polysulfide electrolytes. The Cu2S counter showed highly electrocatalytic activity and high FF for the polysulfide electrolyte compared to the Pt counter electrode. Hence, we assembled the Sn:InP QDSSCs employing the ZnS-passivated photoanode, polysulfide electrolyte and Cu2S counter electrode, which exhibited significant improvements compared to the previous work. Furthermore, the high loading of Sn:InP QDs and broad absorption range enhanced the short-circuit current density.
In addition, the dependences of photovoltaic performances on the TiO2 film thickness and Sn dopant concentration were also investigated systematically as shown in Fig. S7. An optimal thickness of 9 μm and a Sn/In ratio of 0.1 were obtained. The effects of over-high Sn/In ratios probably cause many defects with P dangling bonds. The best Sn/In ratio is 0.1 in our experiments, providing the highest PCE efficiency.
The stability properties of the Sn:InP QDSSCs were studied under continuous illumination as shown in Fig. S8. The photocurrent densities of cell devices were recorded once per minute under continuous illumination. The photocurrent remains steady at 10 mA cm−2 for 12 min and then quickly decreases to 8.6 mA cm−2. The PCE of the Sn:InP QDSSCs under continuous illumination shows the same trend and the PCE value remains steady at 3.3% for 12 min, indicating similar good stability to the CdSe QDSSCs with the same counter electrodes. Although the lifetime of the Sn:InP QDSSC device is not long enough, further investigation on the improvement of stability will give a new prospect for III–V InP QDSSCs.

In order to investigate the electron loss of Sn:InP QDSSCs, we measured the EIS under dark conditions at different applied bias voltages (Vappl) from 0 V to −0.6 V with frequencies between 0.1 Hz and 1 MHz, and the results are shown in Fig. 6. The dependences of the recombination resistance (Rrec), shunted chemical capacitance (Cμ) and dark current on the Vappl are illustrated in Fig. 6(a)–(c). Fig. 6(d) gives the Nyquist curves of the InP and Sn:InP cells at a forward bias near the Voc of the cells, and the extracted parameters are shown in Table 3. Rrec and Cμ are related to the charge recombination at the interface of QDs and TiO2 and the electrolyte. The value of Rrec of Sn:InP QDSSCs is about 1.4 times that of undoped InP, and eight times higher than that recorded for CdSe at the same bias voltage. The Cμ value of the InP-based device is lower than that of CdSe. As a result, the recombination electron lifetime (τn = Rrec × Cμ) value of 201.5 ms of the Sn:InP QDSSCs is 1.4 times higher than that of undoped InP. The lifetime is slightly higher than the recorded data for CdSe (185.5 ms), indicating the blockage of charge recombination and the recombination rate of electrons of the Sn:InP. The high recombination resistance and the long electron lifetime provide an enhancement of the photovoltaic performances. Approximate equal recombination resistances were observed from the Nyquist curves of Sn:InP QDSSCs with different absorption wavelengths (Fig. S9), indicating the weak correlation between the recombination resistances and the size of QDs. However, the ohmic serial resistance (Rs) of 18.5 Ω cm−2 of Sn:InP QDSSCs is several times higher than that of CdSe QDSSC, indicating a high electron transfer loss from Sn:InP QDs to TiO2. This high Rs value is mainly caused by the high transfer resistances of FTO/TiO2 and QD/TiO2 interfaces, and further investigation to improve the electron transfer need to be conducted in the future work.

Cells

R
s (Ω cm−2)

R
ce (Ω cm−2)

C
ce (μF cm−2)

R
rec (Ω cm−2)

C
μ (mF cm−2)

τ (ms)
InP
17.0
1.5
79.2
115.9
1.25
144.5
Sn:InP
18.5
5.0
49.2
165.2
1.22
201.5
CdSe
4.82
0.22
43.7
20.52
9.04
185.5

In conclusion, high quality InP based QDs with a tunable absorption range were synthesized and characterized. For the first time, the CLIS sensitization technique is adopted for the III–V QD system in the construction of QDSSCs. With the optimization of the ligand exchange process and the content of Sn dopant in the host InP QDs, a moderate PCE of 3.5% has been obtained. The high ligand-exchange efficiency, large loading of QDs and the ZnS passivation layer by using the CLIS sensitization technique provide high quality photoanodes. Combining the suitable polysulfide electrolyte and Cu2S counter electrodes, highly efficient InP QD based QDSSCs were obtained. The presence of Sn dopant obviously increased the photocurrent density and efficiency of InP QDSSCs because of the effective regulation of the absorption edge of InP QDs. This work provides an important step toward developing highly-efficient quantum dot photovoltaic devices. Continuous improvement of doped InP QD solar cells should produce higher PCE in the near future.


The authors acknowledge the assistance of Chun-Li Jiang, Qin-Ying Xu and Rong-Guang Zeng in SEM and HR-TEM sample characterization and data interpretation. The authors also thank Dr Xiao-Fang Wang and Rui-Zhu Yang for helpful discussion. This research was funded by the Special Research Found for development of key disciplinary areas program (ZDXKFZ201217).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Detailed calculation procedures of ligand exchange yield. Temporal evolution of absorption spectra of Sn:InP QDs. The HR-TEM images of the oil-soluble Sn:InP QDs. Absorption spectra of InP QDs with different Sn dopant concentrations. The Band-DOS curves of InP and Sn:InP semiconductors. EDS spectra of QD sensitized TiO2 films. The stability properties of the Sn:InP QDSSCs. Nyquist curves of Sn:InP QDSSCs with different absorption wavelengths. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta04925c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015