 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA04178H
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14447-14454


Zhen
Gao
,

Peng
Liu
,

Xuemei
Fu
,

Limin
Xu
,

Yong
Zuo
,

Bo
Zhang
,

Xuemei
Sun
 and 

Huisheng
Peng
*

State Key Laboratory of Molecular Engineering of Polymers, Department of Macromolecular Science, Laboratory of Advanced Materials, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China. E-mail: penghs@fudan.edu.cn

Received
22nd April 2019
, Accepted 21st May 2019
First published on 21st May 2019
Due to the increase in public daily usage of wearable electronics, many attempts have been made to develop self-powered textiles that are deformable, breathable, flexible and lightweight. However, desirable self-powered textiles have not been realized at an applicable size because it is challenging or even impossible to integrate energy-harvesting and energy-storing fibers with numerous small joints between the energy-harvesting and energy-storing parts. Herein, by bridging photoactive and electrochemically active fibers via warp yarns, we realized flexible self-powered textiles on a large scale using an industrial loom. This novel weaving method significantly enhanced the integration efficiency and enabled the production of self-powered textiles without any external electrical connection. The textiles showed high powering performances, e.g., the record power conversion efficiency among those of homologous photovoltaic devices. The self-powered textiles were thin, lightweight, flexible, and breathable, with properties similar to those of daily clothes.

The thriving wearable electronics industry has inspired the development of power sources that are lightweight, flexible and deformable. To this end, flexible energy storage devices have been explored such as fiber-shaped lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors, which are further woven into powered textiles to support various electronic devices. However, with the increasing public daily usage of wearable electronic products, frequent recharging has become a troublesome problem. Many attempts have been thus made to introduce energy harvesting and storing functions simultaneously in a single fiber device. Generally, to electrically integrate energy harvesting and storing parts in a fiber format, two kinds of device structures have been explored: the in-series connection (Fig. S1a), where the energy harvesting and storing parts are coated on the two sides of one conductive fiber, and the coaxial connection (Fig. S1b) with an inner energy-storing part and an outer energy-harvesting part. However, it is extremely difficult to weave these integrating fibers into self-powered textiles because it is almost impossible to differentiate and connect the large number of small joints between the energy harvesting and storing parts. The fabrication processes are very complex with low efficiency and high cost, which also make continuous production difficult. In the case of the in-series connection, it is only possible for the energy-harvesting part to be connected in parallel; thus, the adjustment of the voltage window of the energy-storing part is limited by the shared electrode. The desired self-powered textiles have yet to be realized.

Here, we realized a flexible self-powered textile by bridging photoactive and electrochemically active fibers using an industrial loom for continuous and large-scale production (Table S1). The self-powered textile could be divided into photoelectric conversion (PC) and energy storage (ES) modules (Fig. 1). For the PC module, the warp and weft yarns serve as the counter electrode and modified photoanode, respectively. For the ES module, the warp yarns of the PC module were used to connect the two modules electrically. Under illumination, excitons were generated in the active layer and dissociated into holes and electrons, followed by holes to the warp yarns and electrons to the weft yarns; then, the ES part was charged by the PC part. For the PC part, the number of modified photoanode fibers connected in series along the weft direction can be tuned to meet the voltage window of the ES part. Besides, the parallel connection of the modified photoanode fibers along the warp direction determined the self-powering speed by varying the photocharging current. Finally, the output voltage and current of the self-powered textile could be tuned to satisfy various electronic devices by controlling the numbers of PC and ES parts.
The flexible self-powered textile may be continuously fabricated on a large scale by a commercially available loom without any special modifications (Fig. 2a and b). The cotton threads and Ag-plated nylon yarns were first alternately fixed in the warp direction with certain widths. Next, the cotton threads, PC fibers and ES fibers were woven in the weft direction. The PC fibers were connected in series to match the voltage window of the ES part. The Ag-plated nylon yarns made close contact with the modified photoanode fibers of the PC part and the electrodes of the ES part fibers via an interlaced structure; the pitches of the Ag-plated nylon yarns were around 500 μm (Fig. 2c and d). The resulting self-powered textile was thin with thickness of ∼400 μm and lightweight with density of ∼16 mg cm−2.
For the PC part, the modified photoanode fibers were fabricated by growing titanium dioxide nanotube arrays on titanium wires with diameter of approximately 100 μm as electron-transport and dye-adsorption layers via an anodic oxidation method (Fig. S2a and b). After soaking in a dye solution, a layer of CuI was drop-coated onto the titanium dioxide nanotube arrays as the hole-transport layer. Fig. S2c presents a good contact of the CuI particles with titanium dioxide nanotubes. The size of the CuI particles was approximately 300 nm. Finally, the resulting photoanode fibers were woven with the Ag-plated nylon yarns acting as the counter electrode fibers using an industrial rapier loom to produce the PC part (Fig. 3a). The resulting self-powered textile was flexible and compatible with commercial clothing (Fig. 3b). Other chemical fibers such as insulating cotton threads could also be woven both in the warp and weft directions to prevent short circuits in the anodes and cathodes.
During the fabrication of the modified photoanode fibers, the hole-transport and electron-transport layers played critical roles and were further carefully investigated. It is very important for the CuI layer to collect holes and block electrons. CuI tended to form large crystallites (∼20 μm) when originally dissolved in an acetonitrile solution (Fig. 3c). The large CuI particles could not penetrate the voids of the titanium dioxide nanotube arrays, resulting in loose contact and high series resistance (RS). It was found that the sizes of the CuI particles greatly decreased after the incorporation of a small quantity of 1-methyl-3-ethylimidazolium thiocyanate (EMISCN) in the acetonitrile solution. Fig. 3c–h show CuI particles derived from EMISCN after increasing the concentrations of 0, 1.6, 4.8, 8, and 11.2 to 14.4 mM. Fig. 3i shows the various photovoltaic performances of the corresponding devices. The short-circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF) were significantly enhanced, but slight decrease in the open-circuit voltage (Voc) was observed on increasing the EMISCN concentration from 0 to 8 mM, leading to an increase in the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) by over two-fold. With the continuous increase in concentrations, Jsc decreased without any influence from Voc and FF, leading to reduced PCE. EMISCN has been reported to be a CuI crystal growth inhibitor, with the inhibitory action depending on the strong adsorption of SCN− on CuI. When the concentration of EMISCN was 8 mM in the CuI solution, the sizes of the CuI crystals decreased to the nanometer scale and they entered the voids of the titanium dioxide nanotube arrays, resulting in secure contact and low RS, which significantly increased both Jsc and FF. When the concentration exceeded 8 mM, the CuI film became sticky with different shapes of particles, and the contact decreased again, which caused reduction in PCE. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) data were further obtained under illumination by an AM1.5 solar simulator to investigate the electron transport process in the PC part. Here, 10 mV ac was applied at the top of the Voc of the PC part signal over a frequency range from 100000 to 0.05 Hz. The Nyquist plots of the impedance data and the equivalent electric circuits are shown in Fig. S3. The semicircle measured at a low frequency was associated with the resistance R2 and the capacitance of recombination resistance in the titanium dioxide nanotube arrays. The lowest recombination resistance was achieved when the content of EMISCN was 8 mM in the CuI solution, which also confirmed the above conclusion. Therefore, it was important to match the sizes of CuI crystallites and titanium dioxide nanotube arrays. Although the addition of EMISCN increased Jsc, low Voc remained a problem. In order to enhance the Voc values of our devices, a minute quantity of 4-tert-butylpyridine was added to the CuI solution, and the value of Voc increased to over 0.4 V (Fig. S4).
In addition to the CuI layer, many parameters in the anodic oxidation process were optimized to improve the photovoltaic performance of the PC part. Here, we changed the time and water bath temperature of anodic oxidation. The surface morphologies for different anodic oxidation times (1–3 h) with a constant water bath temperature of 40 °C have been compared in Fig. S5a–e, and 3j shows the photovoltaic performance of the PC part. At 2 h, a record PCE was obtained among the fiber-shaped solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells (Table S2). As the anodic oxidation time increased, we could obviously observe that the degree of surface roughness increased, resulting in more adsorption of the dye and enhancement in Jsc. When the time exceeded 2 h, the resistance of the titanium dioxide nanotube arrays significantly increased than the adsorption of dye, leading to higher RS. EIS data were also measured under illumination by an AM1.5 solar simulator to investigate the electron transport process in the PC part. The Nyquist plots of the impedance data and the equivalent electric circuits are shown in Fig. S6. The optimal recombination resistance in the titanium dioxide nanotube arrays was achieved at 2 h, verifying the above conclusion. The change in the water bath temperature with a constant anodic oxidation time of 2 h exhibited a similar behavior to that observed with time (Fig. S7a–e and S8). For the counter electrode, we studied Ag-plated nylon yarns with different diameters (Fig. S9), and the optimal performance was achieved when the diameter was 0.2 mm. Besides, counter electrodes with different intervals were also studied (Table S3). Very thick counter electrode fibers blocked the incident sunlight and very large intervals decreased the contact area of the two fiber electrodes.
In addition to the processing conditions, we produced modified photoanode fibers with lengths increasing from 1 to 10 cm. As shown in Fig. S10, the photocurrents increase, while the PCE values decrease on increasing the fiber length. This was associated with increased light harvesting areas but higher internal resistances. The PCE of the PC part based on the 10 cm-long photoanode fiber was almost 80% higher than that reported in a previous work, and it was thus used for the following experiments. The Isc value of the PC part increased linearly from 0.38 to 1.9 mA for five modified photoanode fibers connected in parallel (Fig. S11). The Voc value of the PC part increased linearly from 0.33 to 1.4 V for five modified photoanode fibers connected in series (Fig. S12). In conclusion, we can tune the output power of the PC part by varying the number of photoanode fibers connected in parallel or series. Besides, the PC part demonstrated high stability, and its PCE declined by less than 10% of its initial value after 15 d in air (Fig. S13).
The ES fibers were then woven with the Ag-plated nylon yarns by an industrial rapier loom to produce the ES part (Fig. 4a). A biscrolling method was used to incorporate LiMn2O4 (LMO) or LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP) into aligned multi-walled carbon nanotube (MWCNT) fibers, which served as the positive (Fig. 4b and c) and negative (Fig. 4d and e) electrodes of the lithium-ion battery fibers. LMO and LTP provided high energy storage capabilities, while MWCNTs provided high electrical conductivity. The two hybrid fibers were twisted with a separator between them, and they were then inserted into a poly-(tetrafluoroethylene) tube, followed by injecting an aqueous electrolyte. The ES part exhibited specific discharge capacity of 65 mA h g−1 and coulombic efficiency of 90% at current density of 1 A g−1 (Fig. 4f). The capacity may be further enhanced by increasing the amount of active materials or by replacing with other electrodes. The discharge curves were well maintained with the discharging plateau voltages increasing from 1.3 to 1.7 V and current densities decreasing from 4 to 0.25 A g−1; also, capacity of 80 mA h g−1 was achieved at the current density of 0.25 A g−1 (Fig. 4g). The service life of the ES part is essential for practical applications. As shown in Fig. 4h, the discharge capacity of the energy storage part can be maintained at 80% after 100 charging/discharging cycles at the current density of 1 A g−1.
The photocharging and discharging performance of the self-powered textile was then studied. The equivalent circuit of the photocharging process is shown in Fig. 5a, and a switch was incorporated between the PC and ES parts to realize the photocharging and discharging processes. The open-circuit voltage of the PC part was over 2 V and the short-circuit current was near 0.14 mA (Fig. 5b). As shown in Fig. 5c, under illumination, the switch is turned on and the ES part is charged by the PC part for more than 123 s. During the discharging process, the switch was turned off and the ES part began to discharge to the external circuit. The discharge time was measured by the galvanostatic method with a constant current and showed 358, 163 and 75 s at currents of 0.025, 0.05 and 0.1 mA, respectively.
The flexibility of the self-powered textiles was further carefully investigated. For the PC part, the PCE decreased by less than 15% after increasing the bending angles from 0° to 80° due to the loose contact between the modified photoanode and counter electrode fibers during bending, and it could be recovered after release (Fig. 5d). There was no obvious PCE degradation after 1000 cycles of bending (Fig. S14). For the ES part, the discharge capacity was rather stable even at a bending angle of 80° (Fig. 5e) and after over 1000 cycles of bending (Fig. S15). The waterproof performance of the self-powered textiles was also investigated. For the PC part, PCE was maintained by approximately 80% after washing 5 times in clear water (Fig. S16). The photocharging and discharging processes were effective with a slightly longer photocharging time after 5 times washing (Fig. S17).
In summary, we realized self-powered textiles with sizes in meters by an industrial loom. The highest PCE was achieved among the fiber-based solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells. The photocharge and discharge processes could be well controlled to satisfy a variety of electronic devices. These self-powered textiles are also flexible, lightweight, breathable and stable under deformation, which can provide a general and effective platform for the development of many emerging multidisciplinary fields such as portable and wearable electronics. This work also opens a new avenue to advance the development of thin integrating devices.

The modified photoanode fibers were prepared on Ti wires (diameter of 127 μm, Acros Organics). First, the Ti wire was sequentially sonicated by deionized water, acetone and isopropanol each for 5 min, followed by anodic oxidation in a water bath (the temperature of water bath was varied from 30 to 50 °C). Then, 0.3 wt% NH4F/ethylene glycol solution containing 8 wt% H2O was used as the electrolyte. The growth was operated in a two-electrode system with a Ti wire and a Pt plate as the anode and cathode, respectively, at 60 V for different periods varying from 1 to 3 h. The resulting Ti wire was washed and annealed at 500 °C for 60 min. Subsequently, the modified titanium wire was immersed into a 100 mM TiCl4 aqueous solution for 30 min at 70 °C and annealed again at 450 °C for 30 min. After the temperature decreased to 110 °C, the wires were immersed in an N719 solution (0.3 mM, mixture solvent of dehydrated acetonitrile and tert-butanol at an equal volume ratio) for 16 h. A layer of CuI was drop-coated onto the modified Ti wire at 110 °C in a glove box. CuI solution was prepared by dissolving 0.16 M cuprous iodide, 1-methyl-3-ethylimidazolium thiocyanate (EMISCN) and 0.2 mM 4-tert-butylpyridine in acetonitrile (the concentration of EMISCN was varied from 0 to 14.4 mM).


CNT arrays were synthesized via the chemical vapor deposition method. Fe (1.5 nm)/Al2O3 (5 nm) on a silica wafer was used as the catalyst. For the catalyst, Fe and Al2O3 were deposited on a silica substrate by electron-beam evaporation at densities of 0.5 and 2 Å s−1, respectively. Ethylene was used as the carbon precursor with a flow rate of 90 sccm. A mixture of hydrogen (30 sccm) and argon (400 sccm) was used as the carrier gas. The aligned CNT sheets were drawn out of the spinnable CNT array via a knife.


First, 20 mg of either LiMn2O4 (LMO) or LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP) was dispersed in 10 mL ethanol under sonication for 60 min to prepare LMO and LTP suspensions, followed by immersion of twenty stacked MWCNT sheets drawn from a spinnable CNT array. The modified hybrid sheet was scrolled into an LMO/CNT or LTP/CNT fiber. The two hybrid fibers were twisted with a separator between them and then inserted into a poly (tetra fluoroethylene) (PTFE) tube. After purging with argon gas for 2 h, an electrolyte-containing aqueous Li2SO4 solution (2 M) was injected into the tube, followed by sealing both ends.


The textile was made in plain weave on a rapier loom with width of 40 cm (Tong Yuan Textile Machinery Co., Ltd). The cotton threads and Ag-plated nylon yarns (Qingdao Hengtong X-Silver Speciality Textile Co., Ltd) were fixed in the warp direction alternately with certain widths. The cotton threads, modified photoanode fibers and lithium-ion battery fibers were then alternately woven in the weft direction. A piece of self-powered textile with a size of 21 × 27 cm2 was cut off as the sample.



J–V curves of the photovoltaic textiles were recorded by a Keithley 2400 Source Meter under the illumination (100 mW cm−2) of a simulated AM1.5 solar light from a solar simulator (Oriel-Sol3A 94023A equipped with a 450 W Xe lamp and an AM1.5 filter). The surface morphology was characterized using scanning electron microscopy (S-4800, Hitachi). Three-electrode cells were used to test the electrochemical properties of fiber electrodes. Either LMO/CNT fiber or LTP/CNT fiber was used as the working electrode, followed by using excessive activated carbon and saturated calomel electrodes as the counter and reference electrodes, respectively. All the electrochemical measurements were performed on an electrochemical workstation (CHI 660a).


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by MOST (2016YFA0203302), NSFC (21634003, 51573027, 51673043, 21604012, 21805044, 21875042), STCSM (16JC1400702, 17QA1400400, 18QA1400700, 18QA1400800), SHMEC (2017-01-07-00-07-E00062) and Yanchang Petroleum Group.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta04178h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019