 DOI: 10.1039/D1SE01892B
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2022, 6, 1950-1958


Zhong-En
Shi
,

Jian-Yu
Long
,

Chia-Wei
Li
,

Sheng-Yan
Hsieh
,

Yu-Sheng
Hsiao
,

Chih-Ping
Chen
* and 

Yuan-Hsiang
Yu
*

Department of Chemistry, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei City 24205, Taiwan. E-mail: 084916@mail.fju.edu.tw

Department of Materials Engineering, Ming Chi University of Technology, New Taipei City, Taiwan. E-mail: cpchen@mail.mcut.edu.tw

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, No. 43, Sec. 4, Keelung Road, Da-an District, Taipei, 10607, Taiwan

Received
26th November 2021
, Accepted 12th February 2022
First published on 14th February 2022
In this paper, we report commercially available 6,6′-dithiodinicotinic acid (dtdn), a multifunctional ligand, as an additive for application in efficient perovskite solar cells (PSCs). The functional reactive sites of dtdn—carboxylic acid groups, sulfur atoms, and pyridyl nitrogen atoms—interacted with the perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) components through hydrogen bonding and Lewis acid/base interactions, thereby minimizing non-radiative recombination and passivating the defects of the perovskite. We fabricated p–i–n PSC devices having the structure glass/indium tin oxide (ITO)/NiOx/CH3NH3PbI3 (with or without an additive)/PC61BM/BCP/Ag. The dtdn-passivated perovskite exhibited enhanced carrier transport and lifetimes, thereby realizing high-performance PSCs. Furthermore, we introduced urea as an additional additive to vary the grain sizes in the perovskite film. Using this approach, we obtained an air-stable PSC with improved power conversion efficiency from 16.76 to 20.64%, relative to that of the control device.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are receiving considerable attention as promising photovoltaic devices displaying superior optoelectrical properties, resulting from the high absorption coefficients, low exciton binding energies, and tunable band gaps of perovskite materials. In recent certified reports, the efficiency has exceeded 25%. If PSCs are to achieve commercialization, they will need to be fabricated inexpensively on a large scale. Wet-coating methods, including spin-coating and dip-coating with fast crystallization, have been studied widely but defects arising from the crystallization process—vacancies of the perovskite constituents, grain boundaries, and uncoordinated ions—can result in non-radiative recombination centers, which act as the main sources of voltage loss for PSCs, thereby negatively affecting the performance and stability of the devices. Accordingly, a variety of attempts—using, for example, solvent engineering, post-treatment, and interfacial/additive passivation—have been made to obtain high-quality perovskite films by passivating the defects on the grain boundaries and surfaces. Passivation through the use of functional additives can be an efficient and feasible methodology for enhancing the performance and ambient stability of PSCs. Three common ways have been developed to introduce a passivating agent into PSCs: forming interlayers, using an anti-solvent, and directly incorporating it into the precursor solution. Many types of functional additive, including organic halide salts and multifunctional organic compounds, have been introduced as passivating agents in the anti-solvent or at the interface between the perovskite layer and the transporting layer in an attempt to suppress the surface defects of the perovskite film and thereby obtain efficient and long-term-stable devices. Noel et al. were the first to demonstrate that surface treatment of metal halide perovskite films with molecules possessing lone pairs of electrons on either nitrogen or sulfur atoms could result in a significant decrease in the recombination rate through passivation of under-coordinated Pb2+ ions within the crystal. Additives capable of undergoing Lewis acid/base interactions have also been incorporated into perovskite films to decrease the defect density, boost the device stability, and minimize defect-induced carrier recombination. For example, Choi et al. reported that incorporation of 2-hydroxyethyl acrylate (HEA), possessing both CO and O–H functional groups, improved the crystallinity and quality of perovskite films. Koo et al. prepared operationally stable inverted PSCs after introducing a rod-shaped n-type small organic molecule (Y-TH2), which formed Lewis acid/base interactions with the Pb2+ ions, thereby retarding the crystallization rate of the perovskite and thus improving the operational moisture and thermal stability of the device. Recently, Cao et al. employed a star-shaped polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane-poly(trifluoroethyl methacrylate)-b-polymethacrylate polymer (PPP) as an additive to vary the rate of perovskite crystallization and passivate defects. Yuan et al. investigated the steric effects of Lewis adducts in perovskites and concluded that Lewis acids and bases having suitable steric configurations and sizes could optimize the growth of perovskite grains and the passivation of trap states. These strategies for passivation through chemical interactions can have many advantages, including minimizing defect-induced recombination, modifying the dimensions of perovskite crystals, and improving the stability of the resulting devices.

This study added the flexible multifunctional ligand 6,6′-dithiodinicotinic acid (dtdn) into the perovskite precursor solution (Fig. 1) to passivate defects in the resulting perovskite films and thereby improve the device performance. The ligand dtdn has been used widely in crystal engineering of coordination polymers (e.g., metal–organic frameworks) because it can bend or rotate through its flexible linker when coordinated to metal ions. It features several functionalities—carboxylic acid groups, sulfur atoms, and pyridyl nitrogen atoms—that can interact with organic compounds through Lewis acid/base interactions. We suspected that the functional groups of flexible dtdn might interact with the metal ions, organic cations, and halogen anions in the perovskite, thereby modifying the rate of perovskite crystallization, passivating the defects in perovskite films, and, ultimately, improving the performance of the resulting PSCs. Previous studies have demonstrated that urea, a Lewis base, can be used as an additive to enhance the grain sizes and tailor the optoelectronic properties of perovskites. In combination, we found in this present study that the two additives (urea/dtdn) had a synergistic effect, increasing the performance from 16.76 to 20.64%. More importantly, the stability of the organic/inorganic halide was improved when using this simple approach to additive engineering, with the unencapsulated PSC prepared with urea/dtdn exhibiting excellent environmental stability, retaining 94% of its original efficiency after 720 h of exposure to an ambient atmosphere [40% relative humidity (RH), 25 °C]. The stability and performance of this methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) PSC are among the highest reported in the literature (Table S1). Thus, our study demonstrates that a simple additive engineering strategy can simultaneously improve the stability and performance of PSC devices through grain mediation and defect passivation.

All chemical reagents were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received (unless noted otherwise). Details of the fabrication of the PSCs are provided in the ESI.


We incorporated the flexible multifunctional ligand dtdn into the perovskite MAPbI3 and fabricated inverted PSCs having the structure indium tin oxide (ITO)/NiOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag (Fig. 1). First, we evaluated the dtdn-containing perovskite film formed by adding a solution of dtdn [0.05 M in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF)] into the perovskite precursor solution; the ESI provides the details of the process. To probe the interactions between dtdn and the organic cations of the perovskite, we measured the 1H NMR spectra of methylammonium iodide (MAI) solution in the absence and presence of dtdn in deuterated DMF (DMSO-d6). As shown in Fig. S1, the NMR spectrum of the pristine MAI featured a single peak at 7.485 ppm representing the NH3+ unit of the MA cation. After adding dtdn, the peak at 7.498 ppm broadened and underwent a slight downfield chemical shift (Δδ = 0.013 ppm), suggesting the formation of N+–H⋯N (pyridyl) and N+–H⋯O (carbonyl) hydrogen bonds between dtdn and MAI. On the other hand, as shown in Fig. S1, the NMR spectrum of MAI shows a chemical shift in the presence of urea, indicating the efficient coordination of the urea and MAI in the DMSO solution. The SEM, NMR and XPS analyses reveal that urea shows a very strong Lewis acid/base effect in the precursor solution, which retards the crystallization process of the perovskite, leading to a larger grain size perovskite. In addition, the dtdn efficiently passivated the traps/defects within the grain boundaries of the perovskite and further increased the performance of PSCs.

To confirm the existence of interactions between dtdn and the perovskite in the thin film state, we used X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) (Fig. S2a) to determine whether any changes occurred in the electronic states of the perovskite. Carbon element with the binding energy of C 1s (284.4 eV) was used as a standard to correct the XPS data. Fig. 2 reveals shifts in the Pb 4f, N 1s, and I 3d XPS spectra of the dtdn-embedded perovskite relative to those of the control perovskite. We attribute these changes to interactions between the perovskite and dtdn, suggesting that the surface and grain boundaries of the perovskite might have been electrostatically passivated by the presence of dtdn. The presence of a signal for oxygen atoms in the XPS spectrum of the control perovskite arose from the inevitable absorption of oxygen and moisture (Fig. 2d). We observed a shift and increase in the intensity of the O 1s peak of the dtdn-treated perovskite, confirming the presence of dtdn in this film. Moreover, the enlarged grain size of the perovskite is responsible for the improvement of the performance of urea-derived PSCs. As revealed in Fig. 2a, shifts in the Pb 4f XPS signal of the urea and urea/dtdn-embedded perovskite relative to the pristine one indicate the defect passivation caused by the additives. We observed the signals (shoulders) of the Pb 4f (corresponding to metallic Pb) at 135.6/140.5 eV and 136.1/140.9 eV for the urea and urea/dtdn derived perovskites, respectively. In contrast, the metallic Pb signal was not observed for the dtdn derived perovskite. We speculated that dtdn interacts with and mediates the coordination of PbI2, thus inhibiting the formation of metallic Pb. We suspect that the PbI2–urea complex exists in our fabrication process, and the residual Pb2+ will reduce to metallic Pb and thus be detected by XPS. The trace amount of metallic Pb shows little impact on device performance and cannot be observed in our XRD analysis. These observations suggested that dtdn was present in the perovskite film and could interact with Pb2+ cations, I− anions, and NH3+ cations on the surface of the perovskite film, stabilized through Lewis acid/base interactions. On the other hand, we also investigated the XPS data for sulphur atoms, as shown in ESI Fig. S2. The signal of S 2p located at 162.4 eV was observed for the dtdn derived perovskite, confirming the existence of dtdn in this film. The NMR and XPS spectral data implied that noncovalent interactions occurred between the additive and the perovskite, as displayed in Fig. 1, with dtdn interacting with the MA+ and iodide ions through hydrogen bonding and with the Pb2+ cations through Lewis acid/base interactions.
To investigate whether the loading of dtdn affected the morphology of the perovskite films, we recorded top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the perovskite films prepared in the presence of 1, 3, and 5 vol% dtdn (Fig. 3a–d). Compared with the pristine perovskite film, the dtdn-derived perovskite films possessed slightly larger grains (Fig. S3) and compact, pinhole-free structures. The increase in the grain size of the dtdn-containing perovskite indicates the ability of dtdn to passivate defects and thereby favor the growth of the perovskite. The cross-sectional SEM image of the pristine perovskite film revealed a thickness of approximately 615 nm; the thicknesses of the perovskite films prepared with dtdn were approximately 650 nm (Fig. S4). The thickness of the 3 vol% dtdn-derived perovskite was slightly greater than those of the other films (without dtdn). We performed elemental mapping with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) to identify the distribution of dtdn in the perovskite films (Fig. S5a); the chemical element compositions of dtdn and perovskite are quite similar, so we detected sulfur element to confirm the incorporation of dtdn, which shows the existence and good distribution of dtdn in the perovskite structure.

Fig. 4a shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the perovskites. The characteristic peaks at values of 2θ of 14.0, 19.8, 23.4, 24.4, 28.3, and 31.8° correspond to the (1 1 0), (1 1 2), (2 1 1), (0 2 2), (2 2 0), and (3 1 0) planes of the perovskite, respectively. The peak observed at a value of 2θ of 34.8° corresponds to the ITO substrate. All the peaks in the results correspond to the perovskite and substrates. We observed a narrower full width at half maximum (FWHM) and a higher intensity for the peak of the (1 1 0) plane of the 3 vol% dtdn-derived perovskite (Fig. 4b and Table S2). This narrower FWHM implied the formation of more uniform and higher quality perovskite crystals; in other words, the presence of dtdn enhanced the crystallization of the perovskite, leading to a slightly thicker layer, compared with that of the control sample, when prepared under otherwise identical deposition conditions. A further increase in the loading of dtdn to 5 vol% led to a decrease in the crystallinity of the perovskite thin film. Fig. 4c displays UV-Vis spectra of the various perovskite films. The spectra were similar, implying that the embedding of dtdn did not alter the absorption of the perovskite. We recorded the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the perovskites deposited on glass (Fig. 4d). The PL intensity of the perovskite film prepared with dtdn was enhanced and slightly blue-shifted relative to that of the control film. The greater PL intensity and the slight blue-shift suggested fewer defects within the perovskite.Fig. 4e and Table S3 display the time-resolved (TR) PL spectra of the perovskites. The fast (τ1) and slow (τ2) decay times represent quenching by defects and recombination in bulk, respectively. The values of τ1 and τ2 (fractions in parentheses) for the normal perovskite film were 5.18 ns (27.1%) and 46.25 ns (72.9%), respectively; the average lifetime (τav) was 35.13 ns. For the film prepared with dtdn, the value of τav increased to 35.92 ns, with values of τ1 and τ2 (fractions in parentheses) of 4.76 ns (26.4%) and 47.10 ns (73.6%), respectively. Thus, relative to the pristine perovskite, a decrease in the value of τ1 occurred for perovskites prepared with dtdn, reflecting a lower content of grain boundary defects. In addition, the value of τ2 increased for the perovskite prepared with dtdn, indicating an improvement in charge transfer within the bulk. These results suggested that the Lewis acid/base interactions between dtdn and the perovskite promoted the growth of the perovskite to give larger grains, greater crystallinity, and a long carrier lifetime.
We used a p–i–n inverted architecture to evaluate, under AM 1.5 G (100 mW cm−2) conditions, the photovoltaic performance of PSCs incorporating the various perovskite films, in terms of the short-circuit current density (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE). Fig. 5 and Table 1 present the current density–voltage (J–V) curves, statistical box charts, and photovoltaic parameters of the PSCs with respect to the dtdn volume ratio. We calculated the average performance from at least 10 devices; the respective PSCs displayed high reproducibility. Fig. S6 displays the J–V curves of the optimized control and dtdn-derived PSCs. The highest PCE of the normal device was 16.76%, with a value of VOC of 1.09 V, a value of JSC of 18.75 mA cm−2, and an FF of 81.2%. The PCEs of the PSCs followed the order 3% dtdn > 5% dtdn > 1% dtdn > control PSC. The optimized 3%-dtdn PSCs displayed PCEs of 17.82 ± 0.36% with values of VOC of 1.10 ± 0.02 V, values of JSC of 20.00 ± 0.44 mA cm−2, and FFs of 81.1 ± 0.8%. We observed an enhancement in performance of approximately 9.4% for the 3%-dtdn PSCs, in comparison with that of the control devices. The significant increase in the value of JSC of the 3%-dtdn PSCs arose from the superior quality of their perovskite crystals (Fig. 5a). The greater value of VOC of the 3%-dtdn PSCs confirmed the efficient defect passivation of their perovskite (Fig. 5b). Compared with the 3%-dtdn devices; we attribute the lower values of JSC, FF, and PCE for the 5%-dtdn PSCs to the decrease in the quality of the perovskite crystals in these devices.
Sample (additives)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
Efficiency (%)
Normal (w/o)
17.68 ± 1.03 (18.75)
1.08 ± 0.02 (1.09)
81.22 ± 1.11 (82.1)
15.45 ± 0.78 (16.76)
1% dtdn
18.80 ± 0.50 (18.76)
1.05 ± 0.01 (1.08)
81.30 ± 0.92 (82.6)
16.09 ± 0.59 (16.69)
3% dtdn
20.00 ± 0.44 (20.38)
1.10 ± 0.02 (1.11)
81.16 ± 0.87 (81.0)
17.82 ± 0.36 (18.34)
5% dtdn
19.91 ± 0.37 (20.50)
1.09 ± 0.01 (1.10)
79.02 ± 0.49 (78.7)
17.11 ± 0.43 (17.70)
Urea
21.36 ± 0.46 (21.63)
1.08 ± 0.01 (1.09)
80.40 ± 1.01 (80.0)
18.56 ± 0.33 (18.82)
Urea/dtdn
22.29 ± 0.27 (22.78)
1.10 ± 0.01 (1.11)
81.07 ± 0.52 (81.9)
19.87 ± 0.31 (20.64)
To evaluate the role of dtdn in the performance of these PSCs, we used electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) to investigate the recombination and transport resistances of all of the devices (in the dark at room temperature) and recorded their Nyquist plots.Fig. 6a displays the equivalent circuit model which includes the series resistance (Rs), recombination resistance (Rrec), and capacitance (Crec); Table S4 summarizes the fitting parameters. The values of Rs/Rrec of the pristine device and the device incorporating the perovskite film modified with dtdn were 17.15/2229 and 6.24/4448 Ω, respectively. The lowest value of Rs was that of the device prepared with dtdn, implying that carrier transport within its perovskite layer was more efficient than that within the pristine device. The value of Rrec was also higher when incorporating dtdn into the PSC, indicating a decrease in current loss through recombination. These measurements of charge dynamics suggested that the dtdn-modified PSCs featured more positive pathways for carrier movement, leading to their higher values of JSC (20 mA cm−2) and VOC (1.1 V), as presented in Table 1.
In previous studies, urea has been demonstrated to effectively mediate the formation of perovskite grains with larger sizes and improved crystallinity. Therefore, we examined the effect of combining the two additives—urea to improve the crystal size and dtdn to passivate the defects—and then explored the synergetic effects of urea and dtdn. In the above studies and description, we confirmed that the 3% dtdn-derived PSC exhibited better performance. Therefore, we incorporated 3% dtdn into a urea-based perovskite precursor. The results of changes in efficiency based on the amount of dtdn added to the urea-derived PSCs are also provided in the ESI (Table S5). Tables S5 and 1 display the PCEs of PSCs prepared with various dtdn concentrations (1, 3, 5, and 7%) in 1% urea containing perovskite precursor solution. The PCEs of 1%, 5% and 7% dtdn derived PSCs are 18.37, 17.66 and 16.56%, respectively. We found that the 3% dtdn-derived PSC exhibited the best performance with an average PCE of 19.87 ± 0.31%. The 1% dtdn derived urea PSC shows similar performance in comparison with the urea PSC (18.56%). In comparison, the efficiency for PSCs with a higher amount of dtdn (5% and 7%) was decreased, mainly due to the relatively lower value of FF and JSC (Table S5). Fig. 6b displays the J–V curves providing the best PCEs of the respective PSCs; Table 1 lists the corresponding photovoltaic parameters. The device incorporating the perovskite film prepared with urea/dtdn achieved an impressive PCE of 20.64%, with a value of JSC of 22.78 mA cm−2, a value of VOC of 1.11 V, and an FF of 81.9%. In comparison, devices incorporating perovskite films prepared with urea provided PCEs of 18.56 ± 0.33%, with the best PCE of 18.82%, and those incorporating perovskite films prepared with dtdn provided PCEs of 17.82 ± 0.36%, with the best PCE of 18.34%. Thus, the presence of dtdn enhanced the device performance as a result of higher values of JSC, and dtdn combined with urea synergistically to further boost the PCEs of the devices. The integrated values of JSC obtained from the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra (Fig. 6c) agreed well with the values measured from the J–V curves. Fig. 5 presents the statistical box charts of the devices. The validity of the J–V data of the urea/dtdn-incorporated devices was confirmed from measurements (Fig. 6d) of the stabilized photocurrent and steady-state (stabilized) power output (SPO); the results agree with those from the J–V curves and EQE spectra. The hysteresis index (HI = (PCEreverse − PCEforward)/PCEreverse) was used to evaluate the hysteresis degree of J–V measurements. As illustrated in Fig. S7, it was noticed that the hysteresis was effectively reduced in the PSC with urea/dtdn (HI = 0.6%), compared with the pristine one (HI = 2.8%), suggesting that the carrier transport was more efficient in the optimized device.

We recorded top-view and cross-sectional SEM images to explore the effects of urea and dtdn on the morphology and quality of the perovskite films (Fig. 3 and S4). As mentioned above, the grain sizes of the perovskite crystals increased slightly when incorporating dtdn into the solution of the perovskite precursor, but the effect was less obvious than that for the perovskite prepared with the addition of urea, where the grain size increased significantly (Fig. S3). Furthermore, the films of the pristine perovskite and the perovskite prepared with dtdn as the sole additive featured disordered structures and manifest grain boundaries, while the perovskite films prepared with urea and urea/dtdn were arranged along the regular direction with no grain boundaries evident in the cross-sectional images (Fig. 3 and S4). Thus, the presence of dtdn improved the perovskite crystallization slightly, but urea was the dominant additive, significantly enhancing the quality of the perovskite crystals and enlarging their grain sizes. From EDS mapping of the cross-sectional SEM images (Fig. S5b and c), we found that the sulfur atoms were well dispersed in the perovskite layer and also covered the entire surface of the perovskite film, indicative of the excellent distribution of dtdn in the perovskite structure. The XRD patterns in Fig. 4a reveal the increased crystallinity of the perovskite films prepared with both dtdn and urea. Nevertheless, there were no obvious shifts in the strong diffraction peaks located at values of 2θ of 14, 28, and 32°, suggesting that the typical crystal planes of the MAPbI3-based perovskite were not disrupted by the presence of dtdn and/or urea. The FWHM of the (1 0 0) peak of the urea/dtdn-modified perovskite film was narrower and its intensity higher than those of the dtdn- and urea-modified counterparts, suggesting enhanced crystallinity (Table S2). Interestingly, although the perovskite films prepared with urea, dtdn, and urea/dtdn had approximately the same thickness, the grains of the perovskite prepared with dtdn as the sole additive were small, suggesting that the improvement in the performance of the dtdn-containing devices could not be attributed to an increase in grain size. The absorption of the urea/dtdn perovskite was slightly greater than that of the pristine perovskite film (Fig. 4c), presumably because of an improvement in quality of the perovskite, consistent with the increase in the value of JSC. We used the TRPL spectra (Fig. 4e) and fitting parameters (Table S3) of those perovskites to investigate the synergetic effects of urea and dtdn as additives on the carrier dynamics. The urea-containing perovskite film provided a value of τav of 43.73 ns; for the perovskite film prepared with urea/dtdn, this value was larger (49.74 ns). In addition, the values of τ2 were greater for perovskites prepared with urea and dtdn; the highest value of τ2 was that for the perovskite prepared with both urea and dtdn, indicating an improvement in charge transfer within the bulk. Fig. 4d reveals that the high PL intensity of the urea-containing perovskites was associated with their larger crystal size. The PL peak of the urea/dtdn-containing perovskite had undergone a slight blue shift. These observations provided strong evidence that the dtdn molecules could effectively decrease the trap density and act to passivate defects. EIS spectra and their fitting parameters (Fig. 6a and Table S4) revealed that the value of Rs of the urea-containing device was greater than that of the dtdn-containing device, leading to greater hindrance of carrier transfer, presumably due to the presence of defects. This drawback was overcome after the incorporation of dtdn, suggesting that the presence of dtdn efficiently passivated the defects in the perovskite film. Moreover, the value of Rrec increased notably for the devices prepared with urea/dtdn, suggesting less carrier loss through recombination, arising from passivation of the traps after the addition of dtdn, leading to the highest value of JSC of approximately 22 mA cm−2 and an efficiency greater than 20% (Table 1).

Finally, in terms of the potential commercialization of PSCs, we evaluated the shelf-lifetimes of our devices, following the protocols established by Krebs and co-workers [ISOS-D-1 (shelf lifetime): in the dark, at room temperature (ca. 25 °C), in the air (40% RH)]. When we stored the devices in the air in a humidity-controlled box without encapsulation, the normalized and averaged PCEs of the devices that had been stored for 720 h were stable, at approximately 94% of their original values (Fig. 7). These results suggested high air stability in ambient environments, attributable to the greater defect passivation and enlarged grains of the respective perovskites. A comparison of the ambient stability of our present inverted PSCs with those of other devices reported recently (Table S1) reveals that our devices are comparable with other highly stable MAPbI3 PSCs.

The commercially available ligand dtdn functions as a passivating agent in PSCs by passivating the defects in MAPbI3. Passivation occurred through the formation of Lewis acid/base pairs between the nitrogen and sulfur atoms of dtdn and the uncoordinated Pb2+ cations in the perovskite or through hydrogen bonding between the pyridyl groups and CH3NH3+ cations in the perovskite. The embedding of dtdn decreased the density of defects and also the rate of non-radiative recombination, thereby ensuring efficient carrier transport. As a result, the PCE of the PSCs incorporating perovskite films prepared with dtdn increased from 15.45 ± 0.78% (pristine) to 17.82 ± 0.36%, with improvements in the values of JSC (from 17.68 ± 1.03 to 20.00 ± 0.44 mA cm−2) and VOC (from 1.08 to 1.10 V). Furthermore, we explored the synergetic effects of urea and dtdn as additives for the PSCs. We obtained PCEs as high as 19.87 ± 0.31% for the urea/dtdn-containing devices, with the champion device exhibiting a PCE of 20.64%. More importantly, the urea/dtdn-containing PSCs displayed extremely high ambient stability (40% RH, 25 °C, without encapsulation). This approach using a multifunctional heteroatom additive appears to be an efficient additive-engineering strategy for improving the stability and performance of PSCs through grain mediation and defect passivation.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We thank the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan (MOST 110-2113-M-030-010 and MOST 110-2113-M-030-011) for financial support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details of the fabrication of the PSCs. See DOI: 10.1039/d1se01892b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022