 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA07954D
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19934-19940


Jianqiu
Wang
,

Shenkun
Xie
,

Dongyang
Zhang
,

Rong
Wang
,

Zhong
Zheng
,

Huiqiong
Zhou
 and 

Yuan
Zhang
*

School of Chemistry, Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Biomedical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, P. R. China. E-mail: yuanzhang@buaa.edu.cn

CAS Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierachical Fabrication, CAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, P. R. China

Received
16th August 2018
, Accepted 28th September 2018
First published on 28th September 2018
Organic solar cells (OSCs) with ultra-narrow band gaps (UN-BGs) often suffer from higher energy losses and resulting inferior power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) compared to mid-bandgap systems. Benefiting from an optimal balance between the photocurrent and energy losses, OSCs based on the bulk heterojunction PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F with an effective bandgap of 1.03 eV can produce an impressive PCE of greater than 11%, which is on a par with that found in mid-gap non-fullerene devices with an 3,9-bis(4-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-3-methylene-2-oxo-cyclopenta[b]thiophen)-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-dithieno[2,3-d′:2,3-d′]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]-dithiophene (ITCC) acceptor. The supreme solar harvesting observed in the IEICO-4F device can be correlated to a reduced bi-molecular recombination rate constant alongside low voltage losses (<0.4 V). On the other hand, the poor fill factor observed when using an IEICO-4F acceptor seems to be connected to a stronger field-dependence on the charge extraction and an enlarged energetic disorder. To this end, further improvements in the PCE of OSCs using UN-BG acceptors could be prompted by improving the charge sweepout, which could be enabled by increasing the charge transport properties with optimized nanomorphology.

Organic bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells (OSCs) with non-fullerene acceptors (NFA) possess a particular ability to capture larger numbers of photons due to the improved absorption overlap with respect to the solar spectrum. Owing to the intrinsic trade-off between the short-circuit current (Jsc) and the open-circuit voltage (Voc), the effective band gap, or Eg(eff) (which from here is defined as the energy offset between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) in the donor and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) in the acceptor) is ranged between 1.5–1.6 eV in representative high efficiency OSCs that have power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) greater than 12%. In comparison to these mid-bandgap bulk heterojunctions (BHJs), OSCs based on acceptors with an ultra-narrow bandgap (UN-BG) generally suffer from higher energy losses, resulting in poor PCEs. Very recently, an interesting UN-BG acceptor adopting the A–D–A structure (abbreviated as IEICO-4F) has been demonstrated, which upon blending with the narrow bandgap PTB7-Th donor can produce PCEs of over 10%. The fluorination of IEICO-4F leads to the HOMO and LUMO energies being pushed down to 5.45 eV and 4.2 eV, respectively, effectively reducing the Eg(eff) but leaving a sufficient HOMO–HOMO offset to allow a hole transfer. Coupling this molecular strategy to a interfacial modification with doping, we recently showed that the power conversion efficiency (PCE) in PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F solar cells can be further boosted to more than 12% with an impressive Jsc exceeding 26 mA cm−2.

From a fundamental standpoint, while the reduction in Eg(eff) helps to extend the absorption onset to the lower energy regime with potential gains in the absorbed photon density, it is a prerequisite that the generated excitons should be effectively dissociated into mobile carriers, and eventually extracted via the electrodes to render a photocurrent. In OSCs, the fate of carriers is subject to the competing results of the charge extraction and recombination. The general relationship of the recombination rate B is described by the following equation, B = βnp, in which β is the recombination rate constant and np are the densities of the electron and hole, respectively. For UN-BG devices, the enlarged densities of excitons and resultant photo-carriers could be a concern, namely because np may give rise to an elevation of the bi-molecular recombination. In fullerene based OSCs, understanding the non-geminate bi-molecular recombination has enabled researchers to obtain insights into the losses of photo-carriers and eventual PCEs, as well as the factors limiting the fill factor (FF). Owing to the high photocurrent in IEICO-4F based OSCs, the ultimate PCE tends to be mainly limited to the two parameters of Voc and FF. In previous studies, both the Voc and FF have been correlated to the recombination dynamics in OSCs with PCBM acceptors. In this context, it will be of interest to probe non-geminate recombination and the impact on the photovoltaic performance in non-fullerene UN-BG systems. Owing to a range of NFAs with different LUMO energies, a systematic variation on Eg(opt) is enabled, which prompted us to investigate the correlations between non-geminate (bi-molecular) recombination, carrier transport and extraction, and ultimately photovoltaic performance recombination.
As a testbed for this study, we chose UN-BG solar cells based on PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F blends and two mid-gap BHJs comprising of PBDB-T:ITCC and PTB7-Th:PC71BM blends. The chemical structure and energy diagram for the utilized compounds are provided in Fig. 1 and 2a, respectively, using HOMO and LUMO values taken from the literature. Based on these energetic values, the Eg(eff) values were roughly estimated to be 1.03, 1.57, and 1.12 eV for PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F, PBDB-T:ITCC, and PTB7-Th:PC71BM, respectively. As will be seen, the variation of Eg(eff) by more than half an eV enables the extension of the absorption onset to almost an infrared regime (∼1000 nm) for PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F. This allows the photo-carrier density to increase by almost one order of magnitude when compared to the other solar cells. Fig. 2b displays the normalized thin film absorption of the three blend films, the absorption of the neat donor and acceptor films are provided in Fig. S1 in the ESI. It should be noted that the absorption of PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F allows a large portion of the solar spectrum to be captured, which is beneficial for Jsc. It is also noteworthy that for the ITCC acceptor, we chose PBTB-T as the donor instead of PTB7-Th. This is because PTB7-Th:ITCC tends to be associated with more severe geminate recombination losses, this is probably due to the low LUMO–LUMO offset or morphological reasons, which complicate our recombination analysis.
Next, we examined the photovoltaic performance of these BHJ films with different Eg(eff). The donor/acceptor (D/A) ratios were optimized at 1:1.5, 1:1, and 1:1.5 for the IEICO, ITCC and PC71BM devices, respectively. More details of the device optimization can be found in the ESI.Fig. 2c shows the solar cell J–V characteristics measured at standard AM 1.5G solar illumination (100 mW cm−2). The extracted photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. As shown, the Voc decreases with reduced Eg(eff) and the largest Voc was found for the PBDB-T:ITCC device, owing to the shallower electron affinity in the ITCC. As expected, we observed a reverse dependence for the Jsc on the Eg(eff), with the PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F cell producing the highest Jsc of 25.5 mA cm−2, this result was in agreement with the previously reported results. These observations are in line with the general tendencies found for OSCs. As for the FF, all of the concerned devices exhibited fill factors exceeding 60%. In addition, an interesting tendency was noted that the FF appears to be inversely proportional to the Eg(eff), that is, a higher FF of 71.3% is found for an ITCC with a larger Eg(eff). We attained comparable PCEs in the PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F (11.13%) and PBDB-T:ITCC (11.285%) devices, which primarily result from the increased Jsc when using IEICO-4F and Voc with a mid-gap ITCC. Fig. 2d displays the incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the solar cells. The maximal IPCE for the two non-fullerene cells both exceed 80%, in particularly for the IEICO-4F cells showing high values of between 75–80% in a wide spectral range (600–850 nm). This can be indicative of efficient photon-harvesting.
BHJ

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

E
g(eff) (eV)
PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F
0.72
25.16
61.45
11.13
1.03
PBDB-T:ITCC
0.98
16.14
71.32
11.28
1.57
PTB7-Th:PC71BM
0.80
17.44
69.03
9.63
1.12
To better understand the results of the IPCE, in Fig. 3a–c the illumination dependent photocurrent (defined as Jphoto = Jlight − Jdark) against the effective bias Veff (defined here as being Veff = V0 − Vapp, in which V0 is the voltage corresponding to Jphoto = 0, as described for the flat band condition) was plotted. At different light intensities, we could not observe any visible square root dependence on Jphoto, which helped to rule out the space-charge effect. Based on the Jphotoversus Veff characteristics, the charge dissociation probability (Pdiss) can be extracted by normalizing Jphoto with respect to Jsat, according to the relationship of Pdiss = Jphoto/Jsat, in which Jsat is the saturated photocurrent at a large reverse bias. In Fig. 3d, we plotted the determined Pdiss at a short-circuit condition. Near 1 sun, the Pdiss in all of the three devices is more than 90%, which to some degree can be correlated to the high external quantum efficiency (EQE). At lower light intensities, the Pdiss becomes smaller, probably suggesting a carrier density dependent charge dissociation process. Another likely explanation for the reduced Pdiss at low irradiation may be due to the charge-density dependent mobility in the concerned BHJ films that tends to change the recombination at different carrier densities. We observed similar Pdiss in the two non-fullerene cells, both of which were superior to the PC71BM device. This more efficient charge dissociation may enable potential application of non-fullerene OSCs at low irradiation conditions (see plots of PCE and solar parameters against light intensity in Fig. S2d, ESI).
As charge recombination strongly depends on the transport properties in the BHJ, we examined the steady-state carrier mobility in these solar cells. Fig. 4a and b display the dark J–V characteristics of the hole-only (see device sketch in the inset of Fig. 4a) and the electron-only (see inset in Fig. 4b) devices based on the same set of BHJ films used for the solar cells. The hole and electron mobilities (denoted as μh and μe respectively) were extracted based on the Mott–Gurney law in the space charge limited current (SCLC) regime and the results are shown in Fig. 4c. It is surprising to note that PTB7-Th:PC71BM possesses the largest mobilities among the three blends, with the μh being 2.03 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and the μe being 5.7 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. We observed slightly reduced mobilities in the order of 10−4 cm2 in the two non-fullerene BHJs. Given the small thickness of the active layer around 100 nm, the mobility in the range of 10−3–10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 could be sufficient for a charge sweepout. As seen from Fig. 4c, which shows the ratios of the hole mobility to that of the electrons, the differences between μh to μe are less than an order. The balanced transport in these BHJs could minimize the space-charge effects in solar cells under illumination, which is in agreement with the results shown in Fig. 3c–e. In our previous investigations, we showed that an increase in the mobility imbalance in OSCs tends to be associated with a stronger reduction factor, γ, with respect to the Langevin recombination rate, eventually leading to a smaller recombination rate constant. In the BHJs, the deviation from classical Langevin theory could be related to the imbalanced transport and phase separation and such a phenomenon can be described by the dimensionless parameter y, defined by the ratio of krec to kL. Using this knowledge, we determined the value of γ based on an analytical model proposed by Blom et al., (see detailed method and mobility of double carrier devices (solar cells) in Fig. S3 and ESI). Fig. 4d shows the extracted γ in the BHJ blends and the extracted recombination rate constants in all cases obviously deviate from the calculated Langevin rate, with the γ falling in the 10−2–10−1 range. We observed the strongest reduction (with the lowest γ of 0.027) in the IEICO-4F based device, followed by a value of γ = 0.06 in the PC71BM device, and the largest γ of 0.68 was found in the ITIC cell. The weakest reduction in the ITCC device seems to be correlated to the smaller μh (with respect to μe), whereas the other two BHJs possess a larger μh. Irrespective of the microscopic origins, a smaller γ benefits the reduction of the bimolecular recombination rate constant. We further determined the actual rate constant according to krec = γkL, in which kL is the Langevin rate constant described by the following equation:
(1)
For all of the compared solar cells, the extracted
krec falls in the order of 10−10 cm−3 s−1 with the smallest krec of 1.46 × 10−10 cm−3 s−1 being found in the IEICO-4F cell, followed by that of the ITCC (1.9 × 10−10 cm−3 s−1). The krec of PC71BM solar cell showed the highest value of 3.99 × 10−10 cm−3 s−1. It should be noted that the krec seems to be in accordance with the Jsc and IPCE. This correlation may suggest the importance of the reduced krec for mitigating carrier losses via bi-molecular recombination.

Having obtained insights into the photo-carrier losses through steady-state transport analysis, next we explored the recombination kinetics to understand the impact on the FF. In fullerene based OSCs, the FF has been correlated to the interplaying processes of charge transport, recombination and extraction which all occur in a BHJ film with a phase-segregated and inter-percolated nanomorphology. As the FF basically describes how the photocurrent evolves with varied voltages, it is informative to probe the process of a carrier sweepout at various biases. Fig. 4a comparatively shows the normalized transient photocurrents (TPCs). If the recombination is unchanged, one would expect an overlap in these decay traces. Notable differences were observed at early decay times or decay tails, as shown in the inset of Fig. 5a, which can indicate distinct recombination kinetics in these solar cells. By performing the transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements at various biases (see results in Fig. S4, ESI), we obtained information related to the dependence of the electrical field on the charge sweepout process. The decay time reflected in the TPC measurements contains both contributions from the charge extraction and recombination. While in the short-circuit condition, the latter tends to be less significant. Based on a mono-exponential decay model, the extracted lifetime for TPC (τtpc) was plotted against the applied bias in Fig. 5b. In all devices, the τtpc becomes longer with an increase in the forward bias and in contrast a weaker field-dependent τtpc is noted under the reverse bias. This trend could be mainly due to a suppressed recombination at higher internal fields. Among these solar cells, the ITCC device exhibits a faster extraction at all biases. The slower τtpc in the PC71BM cell may be correlated to the larger bimolecular recombination rate constant. For the UN-BG cells with IEICO-4F, we observed the notable feature that the τtpc displays a more significant field-dependence in the forward bias regime with a τtpc exceeding 100 ns near the flat-band condition. This result seems to suggest that charge extraction is impeded at reduced electrical fields in the UN-BG device. As a result, those (non-extracted) carriers tend to accumulate inside the active layer, raising the recombination close to the Voc. It should be mentioned that the slower charge extraction in the IEICO-4F device only occurs at lower electrical fields, that is near Voc, while in the near short-circuit condition the charge sweepout is still efficient, given the considerably reduced τtpc, which is consistent with the high Jsc with a lower recombination rate constant. Based on the results of the TPC, the dependence of the τtpc on the bias can be correlated to the FF in the solar cells and the impeded sweepout at low electrical fields is seemingly one of the limiting factors for the FF in UN-BG solar cells with IEICO-4F. Currently, there is not a full explanation for the more efficient charge sweepout in the ITCC device. It could be related to an optimal balance between the charge recombination and transport or a higher crystallinity in the ITIC acceptor. In our TPC measurements, a pulsed laser (488 nm) was used for photo-excitation and the resulting exciton density may differ from the situation in operational solar cells under solar irradiation. Further studies using TPC with continuous white light bias may be needed to elaborate the exact mechanism for these observations.
To allow for a more straightforward assessment of the recombination kinetics, we determined the carrier lifetime (τcarr) and charge carrier density, n(p) in operational solar cells with irradiation (Plight) dependent impedance spectroscopy (IS) at open-circuit conditions (Nyquist plots of impedance spectra at different Plight are provided in Fig. S5a, ESI). The carrier density was determined by integrating the chemical capacitance (Cn) over the voltage from dark to Voc based on the relationship described as follows:
(2)
In which
A and d are the effective device area and BHJ film thickness, respectively. The τcarr was approximated by the determined Cn and recombination resistance (Rrec), according to τcarr = RrecCn. As seen from the result shown in Fig. S5g (ESI) the τcarr of all devices exhibits approximately a power law dependence on the Plight. Of interest, the τcarr reduces when the Eg(eff) is reduced. We further determined the carrier density in the solar cells as a function of Plight (see results in Fig. S5h, ESI). With a reduced Eg(eff), the IEICO-4F solar cell possesses the highest n(p) at different Plight compared to the other two devices and larger differences in the n(p) are observed at higher Plight.

In Fig. 5c, we plotted the determined τcarr against the n(p) at different Plight. Based on the general relationship, dn/dτcarr = krecnp, the dependence of krec on n(p) or the recombination order (RO) can be directly assessed. In all devices, a non-linearity is observed, indicating that the RO is not a constant, but varies with Plight. In the compared devices, the RO for all of them is beyond 2, which is suggestive of other recombination channels on top of the bi-molecular recombination. A similar phenomenon has been observed in fullerene devices, which can be ascribed to a couple of reasons, including the effects of trapping and release, morphological traps or spatial inhomogeneity for the distribution of photo-carriers. Given the insignificant traps indicated by the irradiation dependent Voc (Fig. S5e), the large RO near 1 sun does not appear to be caused by charge trapping, otherwise severe drops in the FF would occur. To this end, the higher RO could be linked to the spatially non-uniform carrier distribution in our BHJ films.
Lastly, we probed the Voc losses (ΔVoc) in these solar cells. In previous studies, the ΔVoc has been correlated to the energy of the charge transfer states (Ect) formed between neighbouring donor and acceptor molecules, following ΔVoc = (1/q)Ect − Voc. To determine Ect, we performed Fourier transform spectroscopy (FTPS) and the results are shown in Fig. 5d. As can be seen, a wide range of spectral responses was observed with the EQE onset agreeing with the Eg(eff) in the concerned solar cells. The broad shoulder-like features in the low energy regimes can be attributed to the CTS absorption. By means of fittings with the Marcus equation, which is expressed as:
(3)
In which
Ect, λ, and f are the three fitting parameters, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the absolute temperature, the Ect can be determined as a fitting parameter from the low energy part of the FTPS measurements (see obtained fitting parameters in Table 2). In our devices, the Ect is larger than the corresponding Eg(eff) and the difference between the two parameters appears to be system-dependent. Based on the determined Ect, we estimated ΔVoc and the results are summarized in Table 2. The ΔVoc of the ITCC and PC71BM solar cells is in line with the empirical relationship qVoc = Ect −0.6, established for a variety of fullerene based devices. Despite the large LUMO–LUMO offset in the UN-BH OSC that constitutes a significant portion of the energy losses, we attained a very low ΔVoc of 0.36 V with respect to the Ect in the IEICO-4F based cell. In a previous study, it has been shown that a rise in the Ect tends to be associated with the reduction of the non-radiative recombination losses of Voc (ΔVnon-rad). To this end, it appears that the portion of ΔVoc,non-rad in the total voltage loss may increase when using IEICO-4F. Thus, to further reduce these losses and increase the Voc, efforts may be dedicated to increasing the emission at CTS, described by EQEEL, according to the relationship ΔVnon-rad = −(kT/q)ln(EQEEL).

BHJ

E
ct (eV)

λ (eV)

f

ΔVoc (V)
PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F
1.08
0.296
0.00104
0.36
PBDB-T:ITCC
1.645
0.16
0.0195
0.665
PTB7-Th:PC71BM
1.48
0.16
0.0131
0.68
In addition to the Ect, the FTPS measurements enabled us to assess the Gaussian width of the density states for the CTS, described by the parameter of λ. The origins of λ have been related to the structural relaxation and energetic disorder at the D/A interface. A smaller λ is generally benign for the delocalization of charge wave functions and the resultant charge dissociations at the D/A interface. The impact of λ becomes more important when the driving force for the exciton dissociation reduces. In our case, the λ (0.296 eV) of IEICO-4F is larger than that with a wider Eg(eff), despite a high Jsc. It should be noted that a large LUMO–LUMO offset of 0.55 eV is present in the UN-BG BHJ, with which a geminate recombination is likely insensitive to λ. The higher λ can also be correlated to the morphological features. As shown by the images from the atomic force microscopy (AFM) and the grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) analysis in Fig. S6, we observed a stronger face-on π–π stacking with a seemingly enhanced molecular ordering in the ITCC-containing BHJ film. This profile, to some degree, agrees with the more efficient charge extraction probed by TPC. While in the PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F blend, a preferential edge-on population appears, which was assigned to lamellar stacking. This somewhat unfavourable morphology may impede the charge extraction at a low electrical field. At this stage, we do not have any evidence for the negative impact of λ on the charge separation in the compared BHJs, at least in geminate processes. In our previous study, we found that the reorganization energy parameter λ can be correlated to the energetic disorder in charge transport. This property is reflected by the Gaussian width of the HOMO (or LUMO) states and can play a role in the ultimate ΔVoc. From this perspective, improving the degree of molecular arrangement in the BHJ film relevant to the charge transport direction may further mitigate voltage losses and increase the efficiency in non-fullerene solar cells.

To summarize, we have presented an investigation with the aim of understanding the properties of charge transport, extraction, and recombination in UN-BG PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F solar cells that produce an impressive photocurrent with low voltage losses. By comparing the IEICO-4F device to those with mid-gap ITCC and PC71BM acceptors, we found the strongest reduction for the bi-molecular charge recombination in the UN-BG device. This feature can be correlated to the large Jsc corresponding to high incident photon-to-current efficiencies within a wide spectral range. Based on bias-dependent TPC measurements, the IEICO-4F device exhibits an efficient charge sweepout at short-circuit conditions, while this process is impeded by reduced electrical fields. This feature, to some degree, is correlated to a poor FF. From the FTPS measurements, we observed surprisingly low Voc losses of less than 0.4 V in the solar cell with IEICO-4F, compared to the commonly observed ΔVoc amounting to ∼0.6 V. We found that with a sufficient energetic offset between the D/A, the reorganization energy λ tends not to be a major limitation for the charge separation. The combination of our analyses highlights several possibilities to further boost the PCE of UN-BG OSCs, for example, by improving the overall charge sweepout efficiency and reducing the bimolecular recombination at low electrical through optimization of the phase segregation and purity in BHJ films. This work enriches our fundamental understanding of the key factors governing photovoltaic behaviours in OSCs based on emerging narrow bandgap electron accepting materials.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21674006, No. 21773045). Y. Z. thanks the 111 Project (B14009). H. Zhou thanks the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2017YFA0206600) and the Chinese Academy of Science (100 Top Young Scientists Program and QYZDB-SSW-SLH033).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental methods, supporting figures and notes. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta07954d
‡ The authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018