 DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01906F
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4473-4495

Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical Terms


Natalia
Martsinovich
* and 

Alessandro
Troisi
*

Department of Chemistry and Centre for Scientific Computing, University of Warwick, UK. E-mail: N.Martsinovich@warwick.ac.uk; A.Troisi@warwick.ac.uk

Received
7th June 2011
, Accepted 15th August 2011
First published on 21st September 2011
A full understanding of the elementary processes taking place in dye-sensitised solar cells requires an accurate description of the electronic structure of the dyes, the semiconductor surface, the electrolyte and their interactions. This review describes how electronic structure calculations have contributed to the field since its first steps and what methodologies have been adopted to study the charge transfer processes at the interface. Not all properties are equally predictable with electronic structure methods, and this work highlights the main success areas (e.g. the rationalization of the optical properties of the dyes), the recent developments (e.g. the improved description of the dye–semiconductor interaction) and the key challenges for the future (e.g. the calculation of charge recombination rate).
Natalia Martsinovich
Natalia Martsinovich graduated in Chemistry from the Belarusian State University in 2000 and obtained her PhD in Theoretical Chemistry from the University of Sussex in 2004. She worked as a postdoctoral researcher at King's College London and, since 2008, at the University of Warwick. Her research interests include density-functional theory modelling of organic–inorganic interfaces, materials for solar cells and molecular self-assembly.
Alessandro Troisi
Alessandro Troisi received his PhD in Bologna (Italy) in 2002 working on charge transport in DNA. After postdoctoral work at Northwestern University (USA) and Bologna in 2005 he joined the faculty of the University of Warwick where, since 2010, he is professor of physical chemistry. His interests include charge transport in organic materials (polymeric and molecular), electron transport through single molecules, microscopic modeling of solar cells and theory of self-assembly. He is the recipient of the Marlow Medal of the Royal Society in 2007 and the ERC-Starting investigator award in 2009.

Computational chemistry has emerged in the past 20 years as one of the most powerful tools for generating highly accurate models of molecular systems and materials. The development of dye sensitized solar cells has been accompanied by computational chemistry studies that helped rationalise the relationship between the chemical structure and device performance. In particular, electronic and optical absorption properties of dye molecules, both isolated and adsorbed on the semiconductor (TiO2) surfaces, have been extensively studied using density-functional theory (DFT) and time-dependent DFT, in order to help identify dyes with broad adsorption spectra and favourable electron transfer from the photoexcited dye to the semiconductor. More recently, these studies have been performed in conjunction with quantum dynamics simulations of the elementary electron transfer processes taking place at the semiconductor–dye interface. This work reviews the contributions of computational chemistry and quantum dynamics to the fundamental understanding of dye sensitized solar cells.


In this paper we will provide an overview of the contributions given by computational chemistry and physics to the understanding of dye-sensitised solar cells (DSSCs). Since their invention by Grätzel and O'Regan in 1991, their solar-to-electrical power conversion efficiencies (PCE) have reached 11–12%, still below the 32% thermodynamic limit of efficiency (the Shockley–Queisser limit) and approximately half of what is expected to be realistically achievable as predicted using theoretical thermodynamic and kinetic models. Greater efficiencies are likely to be achieved by carefully optimising materials used in solar cells. Furthermore, it is possible to go beyond the Shockley–Queisser limit by using more complex cell architectures, e.g. stacking of multiple DSSCs with different band gaps or tandem cells (with the predicted limit of 43% for the latter), and using dyes capable of generating multiple electrons per absorbed photon by singlet fission. The realistic possibility that DSSCs could replace the more costly silicon solar cells attracted to this research field a large number of scientists from diverse backgrounds (electrochemistry, surface science, synthetic chemistry and photochemistry), all aiming to understand the fundamental processes occurring in DSSC and improve their efficiency.

DSSCs rely on semiconductor nanoparticles (the most widely studied n-type cells, discussed in this review, typically use TiO2, although ZnO is used increasingly often, as well as other oxides, e.g. SnO2, In2O3, SrTiO3; more rare p-type cells, which are based on hole transfer, use NiO) covered with metal–organic or organic dyes (chromophores). The dyes act as a sensitiser, i.e. after absorbing solar light they inject an electron into the semiconductor, where an excess electron density is generated. The injected electrons flow through the semiconductor to the electrode (photoanode); the oxidised dye is restored by a redox pair in electrolyte solution, usually the iodide/triiodide mixture; the redox pair is regenerated at the counter-electrode. The injected electron can be lost by recombination (or back transfer) with the oxidised dye or with the redox couple; another important loss process is the decay of the dye's excited state before injection. A schematic of a DSSC and electron transfer processes involved are presented in Fig. 1. We also refer the reader to a diagram in ref. 18 showing schematically all chemical species found in a DSSC.
Experimental research has considered many possible dyes, semiconductor morphologies, and, to a smaller extent, the solid-state alternatives to electrolyte solutions, the redox pair and the electrode materials. Several reviews have been published, which mainly focussed on the experimental studies of materials for DSSCs and on electron transfer processes in DSSCs. Recent reviews by Hagfeldt et al. and Clifford et al. give an in-depth overview of the current status of the DSSC research and of the role of the dye sensitiser structures.
Since the very first steps of DSSC research, the experimental work has been accompanied by theoretical modelling. An important body of theoretical work has been devoted to the study of electrical characteristics of the solar cells on the basis of kinetic models, which included as parameters the elementary rates of charge transfer, de-excitation, charge recombination, together with electron and mass transport within the cell. Kinetic modelling of the full device in operating conditions is still an active area of investigation in DSSC, and being able to correlate the rates of the elementary processes with the device characteristics is one of the main theoretical goals. A separate and equally important set of theoretical models deals with the correlation between the electronic structure of the cell components (semiconductor, dye, electrolyte and their interfaces) and the elementary processes taking place in the solar cell. This latter class of models was developed within the broad areas of computational chemistry, computational surface science and theoretical chemical dynamics and constitutes the main focus of this review. Electronic structure models, offering a detailed microscopic view on the DSSC function, can be used to determine the elementary mechanisms and/or to discover the structure–property relation in systems with different chemistry. Ideally, this microscopic modelling may enable experimentalists to choose materials based on the predicted properties, rather than by trial and error.
Not all properties are equally well predictable with electronic structure methods, and the main scope of this review is to highlight the main success areas, the recent developments and the key challenges. Theoretical studies of DSSC materials are addressing such issues as structure, electronic and absorption properties of the dyes, adsorption of the dyes on semiconductor surfaces and alignment of the electronic energy levels of the dyes and semiconductor crystals, the effect of additives on the position of the semiconductor's conduction band. There is also considerable research into dynamical properties of DSSC materials, e.g. mechanism and rates of ultrafast electron transfer at the semiconductor–dye interface.
Some of these directions of studies, by now, can be considered mature research fields. For example, calculations of dyes' electronic and geometric structures can now be successfully performed using standard computational techniques. Recent developments in quantum chemistry (time-dependent density-functional theory, long-range corrected functionals) also enable theoreticians to perform reliable calculations of optical spectra of molecules, as discussed in Section 2 of this work.
Other tasks are more challenging: for example, determination of the preferred adsorption mode of a dye on a TiO2 (or any other semiconductor oxide) surface is often difficult because of the large size of the system, conformational flexibility of many of the dye molecules, the presence of several anchoring groups, the effect of surface termination and defects. The situation is further complicated by the inherent inaccuracy of density-functional theory (DFT) in describing virtual orbitals and charge transfer excited states, as we detail in Section 3, where we review the studies of dye adsorption. The dye–electrolyte interaction, a problem that is only apparently simple, has also been subject of several theoretical investigations that are discussed in Section 4.
The dynamics of ultrafast electron transfer has been tackled through different theoretical methodologies, reviewed in Section 5, that aim to provide a reliable account of the charge injection mechanism. On the other hand, processes with long time scales (recombination, regeneration of the dye) have not been widely addressed. The final section of this paper discusses the main causes for the lack of predictive theories for charge recombination, together with the other issues that theoreticians and computational scientists have to address in order to provide a complete realistic model of the elementary processes in DSSCs.

The main requirements for an efficient dye for DSSCs are: (i) strong absorption of solar light in the visible region (i.e. wavelength of light in the 400–750 nm range, equivalent to photon energies between 3.11 and 1.65 eV), (ii) favourable electron transfer from the dye's excited state to the semiconductor—manifested as the energy of the dye's lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) being above the conduction band edge of the semiconductor, (iii) strong anchoring of the dye to the semiconductor (important for stable adsorption), and (iv) strong dye–semiconductor electronic coupling. Theoretical studies of isolated dyes are able to provide information on the structure, electronic and optical properties of these dyes, i.e. on the first two requirements for the efficient dye listed above.


Thanks to the broad experience in the electronic structure calculations of isolated molecules, the computational chemistry community has reached a consensus on a relatively well-defined range of computational methods suitable for studying electronic and optical properties of dyes used in DSSC. For this reason, calculations by different groups are often comparable in terms of accuracy and expected discrepancy from experiment. Time-dependent density functional theory (TD-DFT) is the most successful and most commonly used method for simulations of dyes' electronic and optical properties; it combines good accuracy and computational efficiency. In practice, geometry optimisation is performed using DFT, and then TD-DFT is used to describe the excited states and optical properties of the optimised molecules.

In most DFT implementations, the calculations provide occupied and virtual (unoccupied) one-electron states (orbitals). Although optical transitions and charge transfer reactions occur between all-electron wavefunctions (i.e. we are dealing with the transitions between the ground and excited many-electron states), many characteristics can be understood simply by considering single-electron transitions between orbitals, e.g. from the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) to the LUMO (or other unoccupied orbitals). For this reason, many of the studies presented here discuss energy alignment of orbital levels instead of all-electron states. It is generally understood that, while the HOMO–LUMO transition energy is often used as a measure of the excitation energy, this is not always correct. In fact, the lowest energy excited state is not always dominated by the HOMO → LUMO transition and, analogously, the charge injection from the excited state of the dye into the semiconductor cannot be always described as a simple transfer from the LUMO of the dye into the semicondoctor's conduction band.
Standard Gaussian medium-sized basis sets, such as 6-31G*, already provide a sufficient level of accuracy and can be systematically improved if necessary. When transition metals are present, another popular choice of basis set is Los Alamos National Laboratory's LANL basis sets and effective core potentials (or pseudopotentials). Pseudopotentials allow us to ignore core electrons and explicitly include only the valence electrons, thus making calculations faster, usually without loss of accuracy. The limitation is that core electrons may interact with valence electrons; to avoid this, non-linear core corrections or small-core pseudopotentials should be used. The choice of pseudopotentials for DFT and TDDFT calculations, especially for d and f elements, is an active area of research, with numerous studies showing that small core relativistic pseudopotentials provide consistently better results than large-core potentials. The reader is referred to specialized reviews in this area.
The choice of the exchange-correlation functional is important for an accurate description of the HOMO–LUMO gap, and therefore for the excited state energy. Pure DFT functionals, such as PBE or PW91, underestimate the energy gap. Hybrid functionals, which incorporate a fraction of non-local Hartree–Fock (HF) exchange (e.g. B3LYP, PBE0) give a better description of the electronic structure, although they still do not give an accurate representation of charge-transfer excited states. The description of charge-transfer states is improved by using long-range corrected functionals, where the fraction of the HF exchange increases as the electron–electron separation increases (e.g. CAM-B3LYP). Benchmarking studies of organic molecules, including DSSC dyes, using pure DFT functionals, hybrid and long-range corrected functionals, compared the calculated excitation energies and absorption wavelengths with experiment and reported several hybrid functionals, such as MPW1K, PBE0, X3LYP, and long-range corrected functionals, such as CAM-B3LYP, LC-ωPBE(20) and ω97X, to give the best results. These functionals also noticeably outperformed the commonly used B3LYP functional. Thus, there are several exchange-correlation functionals that were found to give a good description of molecules' excited states; however, there is still no clear winner among them, and further development and benchmarking studies are needed.
Finally, the solvent environment is usually taken into account via polarised continuum models (PCM) and conductor-like PCM (C-PCM). Solvation is essential for accurate representation of molecules' excitation energies in the realistic environment. For more detailed information on implicit solvation models and their use in quantum mechanical calculations, the reader is referred to specialized reviews.

Metal–organic dyes with a ruthenium metal centre were the first successful sensitisers for DSSC. The highest power conversion efficiencies, almost 12%, have been achieved using these dyes. For example, the N3 dye, cis-Ru(dcbpyH2)2(NCS)2 (dcbpy = 4,4′-dicarboxy-2,2′-bipyridine), Fig. 2a, is the benchmark often used to compare the performance of new dyes, and its doubly deprotonated analogue, N719, has been named the “dye to beat”. A large amount of computational work focused on one or more of these aspects: (i) description of the excited state, (ii) effect of the solvent and pH, (iii) effect of the ligands and their functionalization, (iv) effect of different metals or multi-metal dyes. A review of theoretical studies of ruthenium dyes for DSSC has recently been published.

Studies of N3 and related dyes showed that the highest-lying occupied molecular orbitals (collectively referred to as HOMOs) are localised on the metal and on the isothiocyanate ligand, NCS−, while the LUMO and higher orbitals are mainly localised on the bipyridine ligands, with a strong contribution from carboxylic groups. Similarly, in the so-called black dye, Fig. 2b, which contains three rather than two isothiocyanate groups and a 4,4′,4′′-tricarboxy-2,2′:6′,2′-terpyridine (tctpy) group instead of two dicarboxybipyridine groups, occupied molecular orbitals are localised on the metal and the NCS ligand, the unoccupied orbitals being localised almost entirely on the tctpy ligand.
The lowest-energy excitations in these dyes therefore have a mixed metal-to-ligand charge transfer (MLCT) and ligand-to-ligand charge transfer (LLCT) character, while higher-energy excitations are intraligand π–π* transitions localised on bipyridine or terpyridine groups. For example, for the N3 dye, the lowest-energy excitation involves transitions from the four highest-lying occupied molecular orbitals (all mainly localised on the NCS− ligand) to the three lowest unoccupied orbitals (all mainly localised on the bipyridine groups). Thus, the excited state of this dye (as well as some other ruthenium dyes) is composed not just by the LUMO but also by the higher-lying orbitals.
The nature of the lowest-energy excitations has a significant effect on the feasibility of electron transfer from the photoexcited dye to the semiconductor in DSSCs. In fact, the MLCT/LLCT nature of the lowest-energy excitations facilitates electron transfer, because the highest excited state is localised on the bi- or terpyridine ligands, which are anchored to the semiconductor; also, back transfer of the electron to the dye is hindered, because the positive charge in the dye cation is localised on the metal and the isothiocyanate ligands, relatively far from the adsorption site.
Numerous studies showed the important role of solvation for accurate description of absorption spectra. Absorption spectra obtained by simulations of dyes in vacuum differ from experimental spectra both in energies and intensities, while taking solvent into account via polarized continuum models leads to much better agreement with experiment (positions of peaks in the absorption spectra within ∼0.3 eV from experimental positions, and distances between peaks within ∼0.1 eV from experimental peak separations). The main effect of the solvent environment is to increase the HOMO–LUMO gap and therefore the excitation energy, resulting in a blue shift of the calculated spectra. The dipole moments of these dye molecules are smaller in the excited state than in the ground state; therefore the interaction with the polar solvent destabilises the excited state with respect to the ground state (hence the increase in the HOMO–LUMO gap). As a result of the solution environment, the dye's electron density is rearranged to increase the dipole moment of the molecule in the excited state; thus the solvent effectively increases charge separation of the dye's excited state. Furthermore, blue shift was observed when going from ethanol to water, i.e. to a more polar solvent favouring stronger charge separation, in agreement with experiments.
Another environmental effect present in protic solvents is the change in the protonation state of dye molecules containing carboxylic acid groups (or other acidic or basic groups). The presence of charged functional groups strongly modifies the energetics of the system, especially in the presence of states with charge transfer character. For example, it was found that deprotonation (at high pH) causes blue shift in the N3 dye absorption spectra. The reason is that orbitals centred on the carboxylate appear among HOMOs, between binding and non-binding ruthenium-based HOMOs, and this destabilises the LUMO. A combined experimental and theoretical study showed that protonation of carboxylic groups in N3 and a related N621 dye has a significant effect on the positions of the electronic energy levels and on the absorption spectrum: fully protonated dyes had the smallest HOMO–LUMO gap (and the best overlap of their absorption spectra with the visible spectrum), while fully deprotonated dyes had the largest gap and the worst optical absorption characteristics. As a result, mono- and dianion forms were suggested to be optimal in terms of combination of their light absorption properties and their LUMO positions with respect to the TiO2 conduction band. Li et al. also addressed the effect of deprotonation and different solvents and showed that absorption spectra of fully deprotonated dyes were red-shifted in ethanol and water compared to the gas phase, while the spectra of fully or partially protonated dyes were blue-shifted.
If the NCS− ligands are replaced with Cl− or CN−, a larger fraction of the occupied orbitals is localised on the metal and the lowest-energy transitions have a stronger MLCT character. Dyes with the Cl− or CN− ligands are less efficient as visible light absorbers, because of the smaller overlap of these dyes' absorption spectra with the visible spectrum. Replacing NCS− with Cl− causes a red shift in absorption (in agreement with experiment), because the NCS− ligand stabilises the HOMO more than the Cl− ligand. Similarly, the HOMO–LUMO energy gap is reduced when NCS− is replaced with CN− or dcbpy, causing a change in the absorption spectrum. The study confirms that the N3 dye with the NCS− ligands has a broader absorption spectrum than its analogues with Cl− and dcbpy ligands. This change of ligand has little effect on the composition of the LUMO, but it changes the LUMO energy (lower in case of CN− and dcbpy ligands), which is likely to reduce electron injection efficiency. In addition to replacing the NCS− ligand, several studies looked at functionalisation of the bipyridyl ligands, also with the aim of improving the optical absorption properties of the dyes.
The effect of the number and positions of carboxylic groups in the ruthenium dyes' organic ligands (bipyridine, bis-(N-pyrazolyl)-pyridine, and phenantroline ligands) on the electronic and absorption properties of these dyes has also been studied. The ligands containing the carboxylic groups were shown to make the strongest contribution to the LUMO; the lowest-energy excitations are characterised by charge transfer to the ligand containing the carboxylic group. Moreover, dyes containing larger numbers of carboxylic groups had absorption spectra extending further into the red region—a desirable property for DSSC chromophores.
The effect of the metal atom on electronic and absorption properties of metal–organic dyes has also been studied, with the aim to replace Ru with cheaper, less toxic and more abundant metal centres. Considering group 8 transition metals, experimentally observed red shift in the absorption spectra of metal–bipyridyl dyes going from Fe to Ru to Os has been confirmed theoretically and attributed to destabilisation of metal d-orbitals in the sequence Fe–Ru–Os. However, these dyes did not become widespread because of very short-lived excited states of dyes based on first-row transition metals, such as Fe. Complexes of Cu(I), which display longer excited-state lifetimes, have been investigated recently, both experimentally and theoretically. Calculated absorption spectra of Cu(I) bipyridyl complexes were similar to those of ruthenium dyes, e.g. N3. Absorption of Cu-based dyes was tuned by changing the nature of the bipyridyl ligand by adding various substituents, so that the best dyes showed even broader absorption than N3, especially in the challenging red part of the spectrum.
One more development is the use of dinuclear complexes, containing, for example, Ru(II) and Cu(II) or two Ru(II) centres. For example, a combined theoretical and experimental study of the electronic structure and optical absorption of a dinuclear complex containing a Ru(II)-bipyridyl and a Cu(II)(exoO2-cyclam) fragments showed that the HOMO (localised on the ruthenium centre) is only slightly (0.07 eV) above the HOMO − 1, which is significantly delocalised over the Cu(exoO2-cyclam) fragment; the unpaired electron density is located mainly on the Cu atom (which is confirmed also by electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) results). Because of the negligible HOMO - HOMO - 1 energy difference, the dye cation hole may be significantly delocalised over the molecule. A theoretical study of a prototype catalyst–chromophore complex [(bpy)(H2O)Ru(tpy-tpy)Ru(tpy)]4+ investigated various possible ligand substituents and structures of the bridging group between the two Ru centres, identifying the structures with the LUMO strongly localised on the terminal ligand that could lead to efficient electron injection.
This overview of the literature on the theoretical studies of transition metal dyes confirms the excellent level reached by computational chemistry in the description of the ground and excited electronic states of transition metal complexes. On the other hand, computational studies are usually presented in conjunction with experimental results or to explain past experimental results, and not many examples have been presented so far of theory being used independently to direct the synthesis of new dyes.

Another important class of DSSC chromophores is organic (metal-free) dyes. A great number of organic dye sensitisers for DSSC have been proposed, for example, coumarin, indoline, triphenylamine, xanthene, polyene, hemicyanine-based dyes (see e.g. reviews). The efficiencies of DSSC devices based on these dyes have been continuously growing over the past few years, with top performances greater than 9% (9.0%, D149 dye; 9.5%, D205 dye; 9.8%, C217 dye; 10.0–10.3%, C219 dye), not far behind those of ruthenium-based DSSCs. Organic dyes are an attractive alternative to ruthenium dyes, because they are cheap, do not contain toxic and costly metal atoms, have high molar extinction coefficients, and because the variety of possible dye structures allows tuning their electronic properties more easily. The limitations of organic dyes include narrow absorption bands (especially inefficient absorption in the red part of the spectrum), aggregation in solution, and poor photostability.

Many of the organic dye sensitisers have the donor–bridge–acceptor (D–B–A) structure and contain three parts: (i) electron donor (D), e.g. a triphenylamine or indoline group; (ii) electron acceptor (A), e.g. rhodamine or cyanoacrylic group, which also acts as an anchoring group for binding to the semiconductor; and (iii) bridge (B)—often a π-conjugated fragment (e.g. ethylene, benzene, fluorene or thiophene units)—whose role is to control the absorption properties and, possibly, enhance the molar extinction coefficient. The HOMO is mainly localised on the donor part, and LUMO on the acceptor. The lowest-energy excitation in organic dyes has the π–π* character. As a result of photoexcitation, charge transfer takes place from the donor to the acceptor part of the molecule. The photoexcited dye can be denoted as (D+–B–A−)*. The advantages of such a structure are: (i) electron injection into the semiconductor is faster, because the LUMO is localised near the semiconductor surface, and (ii) the donor part, which is far from the semiconductor, confines the positive charge of the dye cation away from the semiconductor and inhibits recombination.
Theoretical studies of indoline, xanthene, coumarin, squaraine, porphyrin dyes have investigated the geometry of the dyes, the HOMO and LUMO energies, excitation energies and absorption spectra, mainly using TD-DFT calculations. Although TD-DFT generally gives correct predictions of excitation energies and reproduces well electronic and optical properties of ruthenium dyes, it tends to underestimate excitation energies when excitations have a significant charge-transfer character, especially when the most popular B3LYP functional is used. Several studies compared the performance of TD-DFT and high-level wavefunction-based methods, such as configuration interaction single (CIS), coupled cluster singles and doubles (CC2), multireference perturbation theory (MRPT), and concluded that TD-DFT gives a reliable description of the dyes' electronic structures, comparable to the higher-level calculations. The results of TD-DFT calculations were strongly dependent on the functional used (both on the percentage of the HF exchange and on the correlation part): the hybrid MPW1K functional and the long-range corrected CAM-B3LYP were found to give the most accurate excitation energies, in good agreement with higher-level calculations and with experiment. By comparison, wavefunction-based methods are prohibitively expensive, and the results are not always reliable either: for example, CIS calculations strongly overestimated excitation energies and gave an inaccurate description of the symmetry of the excited state and solvatochromic effects in fluorescence of some coumarin dyes.
Similar to studies of ruthenium dyes, solvation (usually simulated using the implicit PCM method) is important for the correct description of absorption spectra. Contrary to the case of ruthenium dyes, solvent usually reduces the calculated excitation energies and introduces red shift in the absorption spectra. Notably, even the geometry of the molecules' excited state (planar or non-planar) can be different in the gas or solution environment. pH-controlled deprotonation was found to introduce blue shift to the absorption spectra.A more subtle solvent effect is hydrogen bonding between dyes' carboxylic groups and protic solvents, such as water or methanol, which cannot be described by implicit solvent. Explicit solvation (i.e. adding few solvent molecules to the model system) was found to reproduce experimentally observed subtle solvatochromic effects for triphenylamine L0 and D5 dyes.
Another environment effect that should be taken into account (but is omitted in simulations of isolated dyes) is the dye's interaction with the semiconductor surface: for example, even the interaction of the eosin Y dye with a single Zn2+ ion (used to mimic the ZnO surface) changes the absorption spectrum of the dye and introduces a red shift. However, a single metal atom makes a rather crude approximation to the real extended metal oxide surface: for example, although absorption spectra of the alizarin molecule attached to a hydrated Ti4+ ion and a TiO2 surface were similar, electron transfer properties were found to be different.
To exemplify the role that computational chemistry has played in the studies of organic dye sensitisers, we will overview the studies of indoline dyes, which are currently among the most successful and widely studied organic dyes for DSSCs, having reached the power conversion efficiency of 9%. The most commonly studied indoline dyes are labelled D102, D131 and D149 (Fig. 3). Their donor groups contain a substituted indoline ring, while the acceptor groups are either cyanoacrylic acid (in D131) or one or two rhodanine rings attached to a carboxylic group (in D102 and D149, respectively). Theoretical studies of these dyes showed that, for all three dyes, the HOMO is quite delocalised over the whole molecule, with a larger weight on the donor part, while the LUMO is mainly centred on the acceptor unit; the lowest-energy absorption corresponds to the π–π* intramolecular transition. The LUMO energies are estimated to be above the TiO2 conduction band minimum, with D131 having the highest LUMO energy, followed by D102 and D149. The effect of the length of the π-conjugated bridge fragment in D149 derivatives was also studied: increase in the conjugation length resulted in lower (more negative) LUMO energies, a red shift in the absorption spectrum and broader absorption; replacing a phenyl group in the donor fragment with dimethylfluorene also led to higher absorption intensity.
Jose et al. found a direct correlation between the experimental short circuit photocurrent density (JSC) and PCE of DSSCs and the calculated weight of LUMO on the carboxylic group: D131-based DSSCs showed JSC and PCE values similar to those of the “gold standard” N3 dye and better than D102 and D149. They attributed the good performance of D131 to its efficient electron injection through the carboxylic group. However, Le Bahers et al. reviewed experimental efficiencies for these dyes reported by different groups and found that the order of the efficiencies varied, with D149 often being the best dye. Thus, more factors should be taken into account when discussing the DSSC efficiency, such as the likely electron transfer mechanisms. If the substrate has only a few localised states for the electron to hop into, then the injection mechanism is adiabatic, while a non-adiabatic mechanism is found if the injected electron will occupy delocalised states in the substrate. Moreover, D149 has the broadest absorption spectrum, and lower planarity of the excited state of D149 inhibits recombination from the excited to the ground state.

In addition to these conventional n-type DSSCs, few studies have been devoted to p-type DSSCs, where dye sensitisation of the photocathode (rather than photoanode in conventional DSSCs) occurs by hole injection from a photosensitised dye to the semiconductor. A schematic of the electronic energy levels in a p-type cell is shown in Fig. 4. These DSSCs use metal–organic (e.g. with Ru or Co metal centre) or organic (e.g. coumarin or triphenylamine) dye sensitisers.

The electronic structure for dyes used in p-type cells should ensure that a hole is injected from the dye's excited state into the valence band of the semiconductor. This requires that the relevant occupied orbital of the dye (i.e. the HOMO and lower-lying orbitals) extends across the dye and includes the anchoring group, to achieve strong coupling with the semiconductor. Thus, unlike dyes for conventional n-type cells, where the anchoring group is attached to the acceptor part of the dye, here the anchoring group is bonded to the donor group of the molecule. At the same time, to prevent charge recombination, the electron on the reduced dye should lie far from the hole on the semiconductor: in the single-orbital picture, the LUMO should be far from the anchoring site.
There have been very few theoretical studies of dyes for p-type cells, always done in conjunction with experimental studies. For example, Pellegrin et al. studied four ruthenium trisbipyridine complexes with different anchoring groups: carboxylic (COOH), biscarbodithiolic (CS2H) and methylphosphonic acids (PO3H2), and cathechol. The calculated LUMO energies qualitatively agreed with their electrochemical measurements of reduction potentials. These calculations showed that there is more than one significant transition in the visible absorption spectrum, and more orbitals need to be considered, in addition to the HOMO and the LUMO. The highest-occupied orbitals in all these dyes were centred on ruthenium, except the catechol-anchored dye, where the HOMO was relatively delocalised to the catechol group (favourable for hole injection). The LUMO and two higher orbitals in the carboxylic acid and biscarbodithiolic acid-containing dyes are mainly localised on bipyridines bonded to the anchoring group (which promotes undesirable charge recombination), while for the methylphosphonic acid and cathechol-containing molecules, these orbitals are largely localised on other bipyridines, so that the captured electron will be located away from the surface. Thus, although none of the dyes was concluded to be ideal, the catechol-containing dye was considered the best candidate for p-type DSSCs.
Qin et al. designed and studied both experimentally and theoretically a series of organic dyes with a triphenylamine donor group connected to the carboxylic acid anchoring group. The calculated absorption spectrum was in good agreement with experiment and showed that the visible spectrum is dominated by the HOMO–LUMO transition. The HOMO was delocalised over the whole molecule, while the LUMO and LUMO + 1 were mainly on the acceptor part. Thus, the electron density (in the nearly degenerate LUMO and LUMO + 1) was shifted away from the donor-anchor moiety, making these dyes suitable for p-type sensitisers.

In summary, the predictive capabilities of computational chemistry have proven to offer an excellent starting point for the understanding of the isolated molecules' photochemistry. On the other hand, as indicated by a large number of experiments, we cannot expect that the differences in device characteristics are all attributable to the isolated dyes' electronic structure. To understand to what extent the properties of the dye are affected by its adsorption on the semiconductor, one has to include the role of the semiconductor surface explicitly, at least in a few selected cases.


Semiconductor–dye interactions are crucial in determining the DSSC characteristics for a number of reasons. The strength of dye adsorption is one of the factors that determine the stability of the solar cells. The chemisorption on the semiconductor surface shifts the positions of the dye's LUMO and the semiconductor's conduction band (CB) and therefore affects the driving force for electron injection (due to the LUMO energy—CB edge difference) and the open-circuit voltage (due to the CB position relative to the redox couple level). The dye's LUMO orbital density may also be different in the adsorbed dye than in the isolated dye, so that any mechanistic description of the charge transfer reactions at the interface must involve an accurate evaluation of the electronic structure of this interface.

However, computing the adsorption of dyes is challenging because of the large size of dyes (which, in its turn, requires a large semiconductor surface area), dyes' flexibility, and the fact that the choice of the computational technique often affects the calculated electronic structure. Crucially, the main results of these studies (e.g. the adsorption mode of the dye on the surface) are difficult to verify experimentally. This limitation does not diminish the role of theory. In contrast, in the absence of direct experimental information, computational modelling becomes the only way to gain an understanding of the system and, in the broader field of surface science, it is now generally considered a key component of the system characterization.

While isolated dyes are studied by the quantum chemistry community, TiO2–dye interfaces have traditionally been studied by the surface science community. The difference in the language and methodology of the two communities creates some difficulties when the results on related systems have to be compared. Moreover, unlike isolated dyes, for which a reliable computational approach (DFT and TD-DFT with hybrid functionals and implicit solvent) has been identified and is universally used by all groups working in this field, several alternative approaches to modelling dye–semiconductor interfaces are in use. The typical simulation parameters (basis sets, pseudopotentials, density functionals, boundary conditions) vary much more broadly in studies of surfaces and molecular adsorbates. Because of this variability and the limited experimental information on the structure of the interface, computational results tend to be less unanimous and their accuracy is more difficult to assess.

The choice of the exchange-correlation functional has a strong effect on the calculated electronic structure (similar to what was found for isolated dyes, see previous section): pure DFT functionals, such as PBE and PW91, underestimate band gaps of materials; they also tend to artificially delocalise electron density, so that the description of some defect states may be incorrect, for example, the oxygen vacancy in TiO2. Hybrid functionals, such as B3LYP and PBE0, correct this tendency to delocalise electrons and improve (or overestimate) band gaps. In practice, both pure DFT and hybrid functionals are used: the latter provide a better description of transition metal oxides' electronic structure, but the former lead to much faster calculations. Another approach to improve the description of the electronic structure of metal oxides is the DFT + U method, which corrects for the self-interaction error (which appears because conventional DFT cannot accurately describe exchange and Coulomb energy terms for strongly localised electrons, such as d and f electrons in metals). In this approach, the DFT exchange and correlation interactions for a subset of orbitals (usually, d and f orbitals) are augmented with Hartree–Fock-like interactions. DFT + U corrects for the tendency of pure DFT to delocalise electron density. But the transferability of the U parameter is not determined, and optimal values of U in simulations of TiO2 vary between functionals and implementations. It should also be noted that calculations using hybrid functionals are significantly slower than using pure DFT functionals, and range-separated functionals successfully used for isolated dyes are, at present, not yet implemented for periodic systems. Implicit solvation, which has proved essential for calculations of absorption spectra of isolated dyes, is also not yet widely available in software for periodic calculations (with few exceptions), while explicit solvation is extremely expensive in standard DFT calculations and has only been used in a few cases.
There are two ways of modelling solids: using large clusters of atoms or periodic boundary conditions (PBC). In cluster calculations, a finite chunk of the solid is used; cluster surfaces expose dangling bonds or are passivated, e.g. by adsorption of hydrogen atoms or water molecules; the effect of the surrounding bulk material can also be included by embedding the cluster in a “sea” of point charges (e.g.ref. 131 and 132). The advantage of cluster calculations is lower computational cost. But they have several drawbacks: embedding induces a non-physical polarization of anions, making the results very dependent on an appropriate choice of the embedding technique; clusters' band gaps tend to be larger than those of TiO2 bulk or slabs and vary with cluster size; a recent TD-DFT study of alizarin on TiO2 also showed that the position of the adsorbate's LUMO below or inside the “conduction band” of the cluster varies depending on the cluster size. The advantage is that such features as TD-DFT and implicit solvation are usually available in quantum-chemistry software that deals with finite systems, but only recently are they being implemented in solid-state codes used for studying periodic materials.
Multiscale methods, such as quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM), where the region of particular chemical interest is described using accurate quantum-mechanical methods, and the surrounding structure is described using molecular mechanics, can potentially be useful in studies of dyes adsorbed on surfaces. QM/MM has been widely used to study biomolecules. We are not aware of QM/MM studies of DSSC materials, but this method has been used to study organic adsorbates on metal surfaces and can be used to simulate dyes adsorbed on large-area slabs and in solution.
In PBC calculations, the cell is periodically repeated in chosen directions. The advantage of this approach is that the description of the electronic structure can be systematically improved by increasing the (non-periodic) slab thickness, until the properties converge to bulk values. The drawback is that large cells need to be used in studies of adsorption of large molecules, to ensure sufficient space between image adsorbates. Another drawback of the PBC approach arises when charged adsorbates are studied: charges in periodically repeated unit cells will interact with each other and cause divergence of energy. A homogeneous neutralising background of the opposite sign can be added to balance the charge, and interaction between periodically repeated point charges in different cells and with the neutralising background is accounted for using the Madelung sum; however, most often calculations simply use a counter-ion adsorbed together with a charged ion to keep the cell neutral. PBC offers a good model of large (infinite) crystals, as well as of 10–30 nm-size TiO2 nanoparticles used in DSSCs.
Besides this, either plane wave or localised basis sets can be used. The former can provide greater accuracy, but the latter are quicker. This adds an additional source of difference between the various computational approaches, considering that it is relatively uncommon to validate the results of a calculation through comparison using radically different computational approaches. Ultimately, the choices on the use of pure DFT or hybrid functionals, and cluster or PBC approaches, depend on computational feasibility (system size) and on the desired accuracy of the electronic structure description.

A correct prediction of the adsorption geometry of the dye is an essential prerequisite for the theoretical description of the interface electronic structure and the charge transfer characteristics. Most of the theoretical studies of dyes' adsorption have considered adsorption on TiO2 surfaces, especially the most stable anatase (101) and rutile (110) surface (although minority surfaces, such as rutile (011) and (100), have been studied too); few studies have also dealt with adsorption on ZnO surfaces.

The first step in studying dye–surface interactions is to consider adsorption of the dyes' anchoring groups (primarily carboxylic, but also phosphonic and hydroxyl groups). Adsorption of small molecules on TiO2 was studied theoretically for over 10 years, initially not in connection with DSSCs but to investigate the surface science of titanium dioxide. Thus, it has been found that carboxylic acids adsorb on rutile (110) in the dissociative bridging-bidentate configuration, while two stable adsorption configurations exist on the anatase (101) surface: molecular (non-dissociative) monodentate adsorption is 0.3 eV more stable than dissociative bridging-bidentate (these adsorption configurations are shown in Fig. 5a–c). The same configurations were stable for several small carboxylic acid molecules on TiO2: formic, acetic, benzoic acid, amino acid glycine. Oxalic acid, which consists of two carboxylic groups, offers a greater variety of adsorption configurations. Biisonicotinic acid (the dicarboxybipyridine ligand in ruthenium dyes), which consists of two linked carboxypyridyl fragments, also has several possible adsorption configurations; the configurations where both carboxylic groups were adsorbed in the bridging bidentate mode were the most stable on both rutile (110) and anatase (101) surfaces. Several other carboxyl and carbonyl-based anchoring groups have been studied recently: acetylacetonate, isophthalic acid, hydroxamate, which provide binding comparable or stronger than single carboxylic acid groups.
A large number of possible configurations were studied for phosphonic (and alkylphosphonic) acids on TiO2: four on rutile (110) and eight on anatase (101), including both bidentate and monodentate, with and without the acidic proton transferred to the surface. The lowest-energy adsorption configurations of phosphonic acid on rutile (110) and anatase (101) are shown in Fig. 5d–f. The bidentate configuration was identified as the most stable one on rutile (110) slabs. On anatase (101) slabs, DFT B3LYP calculations favoured the monodentate configuration, while studies using the density-functional tight-binding (DFTB) method favoured the bidentate configuration (however, the differences between the best monodentate and bidentate structures in these two studies were no more than 0.2 eV, of the order of the accuracy of DFT calculations).
Catechol, which consists of a benzene ring with two hydroxyl groups, was modelled as an example of the hydroxyl anchoring group. Dehydrogenation of one or both OH groups was considered. The most stable adsorbed structure on rutile (110) at low coverages (1/4 monolayer (ML)) has both OH groups dissociated (bidentate adsorption), while at higher coverages (1/2 ML) one of the OH groups dissociates, and the other OH forms a hydrogen bond to a neighbouring catechol.
These studies of anchoring group adsorption paved the way to studies of adsorption of complete dyes. Organic dyes often contain only one anchoring group, and their adsorption properties are generally similar to those of their anchoring groups: for example, adsorption of perylene-carboxylic and perylene-phosphonic acids is similar to formic and phosphonic acids, respectively. Note however, that bidentate adsorption was found to be favourable over monodentate for organic dyes (e.g. perylene molecules) with the carboxylic acid anchoring group on anatase (101) clusters: the carboxylic proton was transferred to the surface. This result may differ from the earlier results on formic acid because of small clusters being used instead of periodic slabs; alternatively, this may be due to stronger acidity of the dye molecules, or may suggest that both adsorption modes are almost isoenergetic and will co-exist.
The situation is more complicated for ruthenium dyes, which contain several carboxylic acid (or carboxylate) anchoring groups. Theoretical studies considered adsorption of the N3 and N719 dyes on the anatase (101) surface (modelled either as a periodic slab or cluster) either via two carboxylic groups belonging to the same bipyridine ligand, similar to the adsorption mode of biisonicotinic acid, or via different bipyridine ligands. These calculations showed that the preferred adsorption mode is bidentate dissociative, rather than monodentate as for smaller carboxylic acids. Adsorption modes of the N719 dye via two carboxylic groups belonging to the same or different bipyridine ligands were compared, with carboxylic protons either transferred to the surface or retained on dye. The configuration where two protons were transferred from the COOH groups to the surface (Fig. 6b) was more strongly bound than if the dye was adsorbed via the deprotonated COO− groups and carboxylic protons were retained on the dye (Fig. 6a). A later study of this dye and related YE05 ruthenium dye by the same group, using Car–Parrinello molecular dynamics (CPMD) (a method that allows sampling a large variety of configurations), showed that adsorption via three anchoring groups (Fig. 6c) is also possible and energetically favourable; this adsorption mode was shown to modify the spatial distribution of the lowest unoccupied states in the TiO2 CB and was suggested to be responsible for the high open-circuit voltages provided by these dyes in DSSCs.
A study of N3, N719 and N712 (which has all four carboxylic groups deprotonated) dyes on anatase (101) periodic slabs in acetonitrile solution, using linear-scaling DFT calculations, identified many possible adsorption configurations; adsorption via only one carboxylic group was less strong than via two or three carboxylic groups; all the configurations were either bridging bidentate or monodentate. Binding via two carboxylic groups is consistent with experiment; however, this still leaves 11 possible adsorption configurations on the clean (no extra protons) surface: either double bridge-bidentate (most stable), mixed monodentate and bidentate (majority of the structures) or double monodentate (least stable) binding. On a protonated surface, relative stabilities of these configurations changed, and monodentate configurations became more stable. This suggests that these configurations can interconvert between each other (as confirmed also by MD simulations), and the dye–TiO2 system is in a pH-dependent equilibrium.
These studies show that the situation regarding dye adsorption is more complicated than previously thought and the view of a single dye–TiO2 adsorption mode is likely not true for metal–organic dyes. There may be different absorption modes coexisting, each with different charge transfer characteristics. These calculations also indicate that it is not straightforward to “guess” the adsorption geometry for a newly synthesized dye. It should be pointed out that these calculations require long computational times, and while in-depth studies of selected dyes are feasible, these approaches are still unsuitable for screening a large number of compounds.

Theoretical studies typically consider dyes adsorbed far apart from each other and usually ignore intermolecular interactions. However, dye aggregation is an important process in DSSC, which may cause desorption and reduce the efficiency of DSSC devices. The study of the effect of inter-dye interaction seems to be an ideal topic for theoretical investigation, as it should be possible to model aggregates of different sizes and with different interaction strength (e.g. relative orientation and distance). However, the most interesting dyes are already relatively large and, so far, because of computational limitations, the few studies of dye aggregation have been mostly limited to investigation of interactions between two dyes.

For example, Pastore and De Angelis, using TiO2 cluster computations, considered aggregation of D102 and D149 adsorbed on anatase (101) surfaces and found stronger dimerisation for D102, leading to a red shift in this dye's absorption spectrum, while dimerisation of D149 was considerably weaker and had almost no effect on its absorption spectrum (both results are in agreement with experiment). The red shift observed for D102 was attributed to the splitting of the HOMOs and LUMOs of the monomers forming the dimer; notably, due to strong coupling, intermolecular charge transfer (from the HOMO on one molecule to the LUMO + 1, located on the other molecule in the dimer) was found to dominate over the intramolecular charge transfer.
Schiffmann et al., using linear-scaling DFT and the periodic slab model, considered the interplay of dye aggregation and adsorption and discussed the experimentally observed partial desorption of the N3 dye when treated with ammonia. Their results suggest that N3 can adsorb in dense monolayers and forms H-bonded multimers, which become unfavourable upon deprotonation (and N3 anion formation) due to addition of ammonia and may therefore desorb. The N712 dye, which has no acidic protons, cannot form such H-bonded chains; as a result, it cannot achieve as dense packing as N3, but will not be destabilised by ammonia.
Considering their computational cost, accurate quantum chemical calculations may not be the right tool to study the effect of aggregation of more than two dyes. For this particular problem, linear-scaling implementations of DFT can offer a solution, as well as more approximate methods that are better able to deal with larger numbers of atoms, e.g. approximate quantum chemical methods, such as density-functional tight-binding, or classical simulations.

The effect of adsorption on the electronic structure, especially the positions of the dye's LUMO and the conduction band (CB) of TiO2, are of the greatest relevance for the physics of DSSC devices, because the energies of these levels affect injection rates (and therefore the short-circuit current JSC) and the open-circuit voltage VOC, and thus the efficiency of the solar cell. Unfortunately, at the currently feasible levels of theory, it is very difficult to obtain reliable values of these energies, both the absolute values and relative positions of the dyes' LUMOs with respect to the TiO2 CB edge.

It has been shown that the position of the adsorbed dyes' LUMO with respect to the TiO2 CB varies depending on the adsorption mode; this is likely to affect the rates and possibly even the mechanism of electron transfer from the dye to TiO2. The exact position of the LUMO level is less crucial if the LUMO is fairly high above the CB edge (e.g. for perylene dyes). Often, however, the LUMO level is close to the CB edge, as for example for the N719 dye, whose LUMO was calculated to be either slightly below or slightly above the CB edge of TiO2 clusters, depending on the basis set used; by comparison, the position of the N3 dye's LUMO was calculated to be 0.8 eV above the TiO2 CB edge in the accurate calculations using anatase (101) slab. The position of the dye's LUMO above or below the CB edge determines the mechanism of electron injection (adiabatic or non-adiabatic). For example, stronger mixing of TiO2 and dye states at the bottom of the CB was observed for the adsorption mode involving carboxylic proton transfer to the surface, compared to adsorption of the same N719 dye without proton transfer; ultrafast electron injection from this dye was conjectured to be due to this mixing of states.
At the moment, calculations can make qualitative predictions of the effect of dyes' adsorption on the positions of the dyes' and TiO2 energy levels. For example, it is known from experiments that dye adsorption shifts the CB of the semiconductor downwards, with the magnitude of the shift depending on the dipole moment of the adsorbed molecule. Theoretical studies confirmed the correlation between the direction and magnitude of the dye's dipole moment (dependent on the dye's chemical structure and adsorption mode) and the magnitude of the DSSC open-circuit voltage (controlled by the position of the TiO2 CB). For example, calculations showed that if protons are transferred from the dye (N719 in that study) to the surface, the CB downshift is greater. Moreover, heteroleptic adsorption (via two carboxylic groups of the same dicarboxybipyridine) shifts the CB more strongly than homoleptic adsorption (via two equivalent bipyridyl ligands), which explains the experimentally observed lower VOC for heteroleptic dyes.

Additive molecules, usually nitrogen containing heterocycles such as 4-tert-butyl pyridine (4TBP), are often used to improve the DSSC efficiency. The improvement of the DSSC performance has been attributed to additive-induced TiO2 CB upwards shift (and resulting higher VOC) and to the increase of electron lifetime by preventing the recombination of electrons in TiO2 with iodide (by blocking adsorption sites and preventing triiodide adsorption in TiO2 or by complexation of the additive with iodine). Several theoretical studies have been dedicated to investigating additive-TiO2 and additive-redox couple interactions and elucidating the mechanism of the band shift.

An early study by Kusama et al. considered DSSCs containing 10 different nitrogen heterocycle additives and used semiempirical calculations to model these heterocycle molecules. They found that larger (negative) partial charges on nitrogen atoms correlated with larger measured open-circuit voltage VOC, fill factor and power conversion efficiencies and with smaller short-circuit current JSC in DSSCs; similarly, small ionisation potentials correlated with large VOC. Less obvious correlation was reported between the dyes' calculated dipole moments and VOC and JSC values. Negative charges on N atoms indicate the atoms' electron-donating ability and suggest that molecules with large negative charges will adsorb on TiO2 more readily. The authors suggested, based on these results and their literature survey, that adsorption of these additive molecules raised the flatband potential of TiO2 and therefore raised VOC and caused upward shift of the TiO2 CB edge, which reduced injection rate and therefore JSC. Additionally, due to their electron-donor abilities, the additives may form charge-transfer complexes with I3− and release I−, thus improving hole collection by I−.
The same authors later modelled nitrogen heterocycles' adsorption on TiO2 anatase slabs using DFT and found that all heterocycle molecules adsorbed via their nitrogen atom on the five-coordinated Ti atom (Ti5c), and their adsorption caused a negative (upward) shift of the TiO2 Fermi level and all TiO2 energy levels by 0.14–0.62 eV, depending on the molecule (0.51 eV for the most popular 4TBP additive, in agreement with the experimental estimate of 0.3 eV). The values of the energy shift did not correlate with adsorption energies, but they did correlate with the magnitudes of the molecules' dipole moments in the direction perpendicular to the surface (μz), in agreement with earlier experimental and theoretical results. Moreover, the calculated Fermi level shift correlated with experimentally measured VOC values. Similar behaviour was observed by Asaduzzaman and Schreckenbach in DFT simulations of nitrogen heterocycles on the rutile (110) surface: additive molecules adsorbed via the nitrogen atom on the Ti5c surface atom and caused Fermi level shifts of 0.20–0.55 eV, which correlated with adsorbates' μz.
A combined experimental and theoretical (DFT) study of 4TBP on the rutile (110) surface showed that adsorption of 4TBP on four-coordinated Ti atoms at oxygen vacancy sites is preferred to adsorption on five-coordinated Ti atoms. 4TBP adsorption on oxygen vacancies caused surface band bending by 0.2 eV upward (towards lower binding energies). This is in agreement with the experimental results in the same publication, which showed that the 0.2 ML coverage was sufficient to provide the CB shift and further 4TBP adsorption left the CB position unchanged. The change in band bending due to 4TBP adsorbed at oxygen vacancy sites was attributed to charge transfer from TiO2 to 4TBP and resulting “healing” of the vacancy states.
Computational studies of methylpyridine (mimicking 4TBP) and Li+ ions co-adsorbed with the organic P1 dye on the ZnO (100) surface showed that these additives shift the CB edge upwards and downwards, respectively, and this has the effect of reducing (in the case of methylpyridine) or increasing (in the case of Li+) the predicted electron injection times, in agreement with experimental results in the same work. Adsorption of solvent molecules (nitromethane, acetonitrile, dimethylformamide) on ZnO (100) was also calculated to cause upward band shift, and the magnitude of the shift correlated with VOC values measured in these solvents. Adsorption of iodide ions with alkali metal counterions (Na+, K+, Rb, Sc+) on rutile (110) slabs was also found to cause upward band energy shift (the magnitude depended on the nature of the cation and varied from 0.59 eV for Na+I− to 0.69 eV for Cs+I−). In a study of I− and I3− on different-size anatase clusters, large upward shifts of the TiO2 clusters' HOMO and LUMO were calculated for the systems in the gas phase, but the shift was much smaller in the implicit acetonitrile solvent: encouragingly, the HOMO shifts were 0.63–0.81 eV, similar to the rutile (110) slab results (although the cluster LUMO shift was even in the opposite direction in the case of I3− adsorption). Thus, all components of the electrolyte have an effect on the TiO2 CB and the Fermi level position, and more studies are needed to properly understand the alignment of the electronic energy levels of the different components of the DSSC.

In summary, at present, computational studies can provide information on adsorption modes and electronic structure of dye molecules on TiO2 surfaces. A multitude of adsorption configurations may exist and co-exist, especially for metal–organic dyes with several anchoring groups. The description of the electronic energy level alignment between the dyes and the substrate can be obtained on the qualitative level. While accurate calculated positions of TiO2 levels and TiO2–dye energy level alignments have been reported, it should be also noted that the inaccuracy of DFT's virtual orbital energies is a serious problem under investigation by the DFT community which impedes quantitative prediction of the levels' alignment. Moreover, the experimental conduction band edge can be modified by up to 0.4 eV by interface dipoles due to solvent and electrolytes that are very often not included in the models.

Some other issues are still not accessible to theoretical calculations: for example, the dynamics of dye adsorption, desorption and aggregation is inaccessible to quantum chemical calculations because of the long timescales and large computational costs involved. For the same reason, adsorption of the dyes in the explicit solvent environment is not considered (with few exceptions). Molecular mechanics methods can offer a solution to this problem: molecular mechanics and molecular dynamics calculations have been very successful in describing organic and biomolecules and, separately, oxide materials, but there are very few force fields that describe organic–inorganic interfaces and very little work so far on DSSC related problems.

The interaction of dyes with the redox mediator, I−, controls the process of regeneration (reduction) of the oxidised dye. Several models of the regeneration process have been put forward, based on the experimental kinetics measurements. Several dye regeneration mechanisms have been discussed in a recent review. Clifford et al. proposed a two-step model:

Dye+ + I− → [Dye+I−]
(1)
[Dye+I−] + I− → [DyeI2−] → Dye0 + I2˙−
(2)
2I2˙− → I− + I3−
(3)
The first step (eqn (1)) is fast and the second step (addition of the second iodide to the [Dye+I−] complex, first part of eqn (2)) is the rate-limiting step. A modified version of this scheme, where a free iodine atom is formed as a result of dye reduction step (1) and then reacts with an iodide ion to form I2˙− as a second step, has been proposed by Gardner et al. to account for their observation of iodine atoms formed as intermediates in the dye reduction process:
Dye*+ + I− → Dye0 + I˙
(4)
I˙ + I− + I2˙−
(5)
Anderson et al., noting that there is no “one and only” mechanism, recently proposed a similar mechanism, which does not require a second iodide ion reacting with the dye:
Dye+ + I− → [Dye+I−] → Dye0 + I˙
(6)
I˙ + I− → I2˙−
(7)
Of course, it cannot be excluded that the mechanism is different for different dyes, depending on their structure.
The elucidation of reaction mechanisms is traditionally one of the main applications of quantum chemistry, and several theoretical studies attempted to identify dye–iodide binding configurations and atomic-scale details of the regeneration process. A clarification of this aspect is not only of interest for redox chemistry, but it may prove beneficial for the development of design rules for efficient dyes which, ideally, should be neutralized as rapidly as possible by the redox mediator. Privalov et al. used DFT calculations in the gas-phase (i.e. without solvation) to study several possible modes of iodide binding to the N3 dye cation: (i) an outer-sphere complex with I− bonded to the S atom of the NCS− ligand (shown in Fig. 7a): regeneration of the dye (reduction of Ru(III) to Ru(II)) is complete in the first I− addition step, but a second step is needed to form I2˙−; (ii) an outer-sphere complex where I− is coordinated to the bipyridyl ligand via anion-π interactions (some iodine–sulfur interaction is also present), so that a charge-transfer complex is formed (Fig. 7b); a second iodide is then added to obtain the same [Dye–I2]− final structure as in pathway (i); an argument in favour of this structure is that I3− and I5− ions bind to bipyridine in this way, as shown by crystallographic structures; (iii) inner-sphere complexes, where I− exchanges with NCS−, or I− replaces a cleaved Ru–N bond: unlike mechanisms (i) and (ii), Ru(III) is not reduced in the first step but only after the addition of the second I−. The authors do not conclude which of these pathways they consider to be the best match to the experimental observations, but point out that mechanism (i) is not quite a two-step process (in contradiction to the mechanism of Clifford et al.), because reduction is completed in the first step and the second step is needed only to produce I2˙−; mechanism (iii) involving ligand exchange is likely to result in degradation of the dye. Unfortunately, no data on the energies of these complexes were reported. Reaction barriers were not investigated either; therefore it is not possible to conclude which of the pathways will be favoured on either thermodynamic or kinetic grounds.
Hu et al. carried out a similar study (using DFT with the hybrid B3LYP functional and implicit solvation) but were more concerned with the thermodynamics of the complexes. They considered a different set of dye–X− (where X = Br, I, At) and dye–X2− complexes for the N3 dye and its chlorinated analogue: X− and X2− in the outer sphere interacting with COOH groups either cis or trans to the SCN− (or Cl−) ligand (Fig. 7c and d), and X− interacting with the aromatic rings, which is similar to Privalov's pathway (ii). Seven-coordinated inner-sphere complexes, where the halogen additionally coordinates to Ru rather than replaces an existing ligand, were found unstable. Free energies of the stable complexes were analysed. For almost all X− and X2− ions, structures based on halogen–aromatic ring interaction were the most stable ones in the gas phase, but the least stable (and often having a positive free energy of Dye+ + X− → [Dye+ X−] and [Dye+ X−] → [Dye X2−] reactions) in the solvated form. The second reaction usually had a more positive (or less negative) free energy, which is in agreement with the model by Clifford et al. where the second step is the rate-limiting one. The third step, dissociation of [Dye X2−] into the free dye and X2−, always had a negative free energy. According to the free energies data, the regeneration of the dye is most favourable with At−, followed by I− and then Br−. It is not possible to use At in DSSCs because of the short half-life of this isotope, but the study demonstrates a trend in the periodic table and confirms iodine as the best reducing agent among group-VIII elements. A subsequent study by the same group presented transition state structures and barriers for the mechanism of ref. 203 as well as free energies of the various reactions involved in the regeneration process of the N3 dye (using DFT calculations with the PBE functional, implicit solvent, spin-orbit correction and dispersion contribution). Step (2) was confirmed as the rate-determining step in this mechanism, and the overall dye regeneration was an exothermic process.
Later, Schiffmann et al. considered the outer-sphere complexes proposed in ref. 206 in explicit acetonitrile solvent and found that only the sulfur-bound iodide was stable in acetonitrile, while the bipyridyl-bound complex dissociated without electron transfer to the dye.
Kusama and co-workers followed the study by Privalov et al. with a series of gas-phase DFT studies of simultaneous interaction of dyes (N3, N719 and black dye) or dye cations with iodide and with nitrogen-containing heterocycle additives or with counter-cations. They considered only the structure where the iodide interacts with the sulfur atom of the SCN− ligand. Nitrogen heterocycles were found to interact with the carboxylic group of N3 by forming two hydrogen bonds and reducing the positive charge on the S atoms of the NCS− groups, so that I− binding was weaker in the presence of the heterocycle than if no heterocycle was present. Similarly, I− binding to N719 weakened in a series of counter-cations in the order H+ > Li+ > 1,2-dimethyl-3-propylimidazolium (DMPI+) > tetrabutylammonium (TBA+); the charge on I− in the complex was less negative in the more strongly bound complexes. The weakened dye–I− binding is likely to hinder dye regeneration. Indeed, the calculated strength of I− binding correlated with lower JSC in DSSC devices. A potential limitation of these studies is that solvation, even implicit, was not used, and standard DFT is not very well suited to describing weak van der Waals interactions that are likely to be essential for this system.
Privalov's group also considered the interaction of iodide with a series of organic triphenylamine-based dyes and provided a theoretical model for an alternative 1-step regeneration process. Finally, Schiffmann et al. proposed, on the basis of their theoretical calculations, a new mechanism of regeneration of the N3 dye by I−, where one I− ion reduces two oxidised dye molecules. The key steps were a barrier-free complex formation of an oxidised dye with I− or I2−, followed by facile dissociation of I2− or I3− from the reduced dye:
(8)
Thus, several models of the dye regeneration process have been proposed, based on experimental and theoretical results. Calculations can help interpret the details of the processes, but it is still not possible to unambiguously determine which mechanism takes place, or whether a combination of mechanisms is in operation for different dyes. Further work, certainly necessary in this area, is the actual calculation of the reaction rate for the rate determining step. Charge transfer reactions, in fact, can proceed via a non-adiabatic mechanism where the rate is determined by the electronic coupling between electron donor and acceptor and not only by the lowest-energy reaction path. It is therefore possible that thermodynamically stable complexes do not lead to fast electron transfer reaction and vice versa.

While the computation of the optical properties of the dyes and the geometric and electronic structures of the dye on the semiconductor surface are undoubtedly essential for the rationalization of the DSSC operation, the ultimate goal of atomistic modelling is the description of the charge transfer processes at the interface. Such description, which may involve either the TiO2–dye or the TiO2–electrolyte pair, requires two ingredients: (i) an accurate calculation of the electronic structure, and (ii) a viable numerical theory for the evaluation of the charge transfer process. The two components are formally independent but, in practice, the choice of the theoretical model used to study the charge transfer imposes important restrictions on how accurately one can describe the interface electronic structure. Moreover, considering the complexity of the charge transfer process, very simplified semiempirical methods or model Hamiltonians are often used instead of first principles calculations.

A charge transfer process is a non-adiabatic process, i.e. it cannot be described as a reaction in a single potential energy surface (PES) but it involves several excited PESs (e.g. the initial and final states of an electron transfer process belong to different PESs). This is a core problem of chemical physics that can be tackled with two different sets of theoretical methods, developed in parallel to deal with different experimental problems. The first approach, originating in the field of gas phase chemical dynamics, is to study the system semiclassically, i.e. treating the nuclei as classical particles moving in one of the Born–Oppenheimer potential energy surfaces. The probability of hopping between potential energy surfaces is proportional to the square of the derivative coupling between Born–Oppenheimer wavefunctions, essentially a measure of how ‘approximate’ the Born–Oppenheimer wavefunctions are. Sophisticated algorithms for the evolution of the electronic wavefunction (or the density matrix) and the nuclear positions have been developed over the past decades, as well as increasingly accurate methods to evaluate the potential energy and the derivative coupling. These methods, collectively known as non-adiabatic molecular dynamics (NAMD) methods, have been extensively used for the modelling of DSSC electron transfer (ET) processes, as discussed below. NAMD methods provide a very detailed description of the system evolution with very few restrictions, apart from the computational limitations, on the number of nuclear modes to be included and their nature. The computational cost of NAMD methods is high and increases linearly with the length of the simulated trajectory, so that they are practically usable to study sufficiently fast processes (e.g. the charge injection), namely up to ∼10 ps for a TiO2/dye complex.
An alternative methodology to deal with similar problems originates from the field of non-radiative transitions and charge transfer reactions. Here the electronic states are not the Born–Oppenheimer states but so-called diabatic states that are coupled by an electronic coupling term. For example, the wavefunctions of a semiconductor and dye computed neglecting their interaction form a set of diabatic wavefunctions, and the electronic coupling quantifies the interaction between them. When diabatic states are used, it is possible to derive an expression for the charge transfer rates, after making additional assumptions on the nature of the PESs (normally it is assumed that the PESs are harmonic). The diabatic description is therefore less detailed, unable to deal with ‘unexpected’ deformation of the system outside its main potential energy minimum, but is able to describe rates of processes for all relevant timescales at the same computational cost. It is also possible to study ultrafast time-dependent evolution of the wavefunction using a diabatic approach. Both classes of methods have given and are expected to give important contributions to different aspects of DSSC physics.
We begin our survey by discussing the NAMD approach, extensively explored for DSSC by the Prezhdo group, who studied ET from isonicotinic acid and alizarin to TiO2 (modelled as a periodically repeated slab) on a tens-of-femtoseconds timescale. The electronic structure and adiabatic dynamics are simulated using ab initio molecular dynamics, and non-adiabatic effects are incorporated by quantum-classical mean-field approach. ET rate is computed as the change in electron density on the dye (ρdye):
(9)
The first term (changes in coefficients ci(t) of Kohn–Sham orbitals ϕi) describes the nonadiabatic ET, and the second term (changes in localisations of orbitals) describes the adiabatic ET. This formalism made it possible to estimate ET rates and distinguish between adiabatic and nonadiabatic contributions to ET. For example, for isonicotinic acid on the rutile (100) surface at 50 K, both nonadiabatic and adiabatic pathways operated; the former dominated at shorter timescales, while the latter became more efficient on a slower timescale. Overall, the calculated timescale of injection in this system was ∼30 fs. Time evolution of the ET coordinate in these simulations is illustrated in Fig. 8a. For an isonicotinic acid derivative (containing additionally an Ag–C≡N group mimicking the ruthenium centre in metal–organic dyes) at 350 K, adiabatic ET (which is thermally driven) was the dominant mechanism: the rate of adiabatic ET increased significantly compared to 50 K, while the nonadiabatic ET remained almost unchanged.
In the case of alizarin dye on rutile (100), the energy of the dye's photoexcited state is at the edge of the semiconductor's CB. However, electron injection takes place with a fast rate (calculated as 8 fs). Simulations revealed the crucial role of thermal fluctuations of the nuclear positions in this process: due to these fluctuations, the energy of the photoexcited state can be above or below the CB edge (see Fig. 8b). ET takes place mainly according to the adiabatic mechanism: when the energy of the photoexcited state is above the CB edge, this state can strongly couple with the semiconductor states—a necessary requirement for the adiabatic ET. Non-adiabatic ET is less significant, because there are few semiconductor states available for coupling with the molecule's photoexcited state at these energies. Note that the calculated mechanism of electron injection was found to be very different for alizarin interacting with the TiO2 slab or with a single hydroxylated Ti4+ ion: predominantly adiabatic and nonadiabatic, respectively, due to the difference in acceptor states between TiO2 and Ti4+. This result shows that a sufficiently large TiO2 model is needed for a reliable description of ET in DSSC.
Later, Prezhdo's group rationalised the experimentally observed temperature-independence of ET rates in DSSC. According to the theoretical studies, the rates of both adiabatic and nonadiabatic ET only slightly increase with temperature. The rate of the adiabatic process increases with temperature, because fluctuations towards the transition state became more likely. However, the height of the barrier corresponds to T ≈ 50 K, thus this process is essentially barrierless above 100 K. As for nonadiabatic ET (the less significant mechanism, at least for dyes studied in ref. 223–226 and 228), elevated temperature increases coupling and helps to put the photoexcited dye's state deeper into the semiconductor's CB, corresponding to higher semiconductor's DOS, but the rate increases only by a factor of 2 between 50 and 350 K. Such small changes in ET rate are likely to be smaller than the resolution of experimental measurements.
Li et al. used the same NAMD method and studied the effect of surface termination and vacancy defects on electron injection. Some hydrogen and hydroxyl terminations of the TiO2 rutile (100) surface lead to partial breaking of bonds between TiO2 and adsorbed alizarin dye and resulted in very slow ET, as compared to the structure where two TiO2–alizarin bonds were present. Oxygen vacancies (a very common defect in TiO2) led to stronger adsorption of the dye and promoted charge transfer, but reduced the open-circuit voltage by raising the dye's HOMO. On the other hand, titanium vacancies did not offer favourable adsorption and ET was inefficient.
The Batista group used ab initio molecular dynamics (within DFT) to obtain nuclear configurations; then, for representative nuclear configurations, they employed a model Hamiltonian derived using the semiempirical extended Hückel approach to describe the excited states and propagate the wavefunction in time. The survival probability was tracked, defined as the probability that the electron is still on the adsorbate molecule at time t after excitation. Ultrafast ET in the catechol–anatase (101) system was considered from LUMO and LUMO + 1 states (an alternative to the direct ET from the catechol HOMO to the TiO2 CB, observed experimentally and modelled theoretically for catechol). At the temperature of 0 K (modelled by keeping the nuclei frozen), fast charge injection from the LUMO (6 fs) was followed by slow delocalisation, which was highly anisotropic in anatase and much slower along the [01] direction than [101] and [010]. At room temperature (when the nuclei positions were propagated classically), ET was a fast monoexponential process: fast charge injection (characteristic time ∼2.5 fs) and fast delocalisation in TiO2. This study demonstrated that nuclear motion not only caused broadening of the electronic states, but also induced additional nonadiabatic transitions between states localised on Ti atoms near the adsorbate and delocalised states in TiO2 bulk. Notably, the mechanism of injection from the LUMO + 1 was different from injection involving the LUMO state: charge injection was faster than from the LUMO (also ∼2.5 fs) and was followed first by charge diffusion along the [010] direction on the surface, and then by slower charge diffusion into the bulk. Unlike injection from the LUMO, this mechanism was not strongly affected by thermal motions.
Combined ab initio molecular dynamics and extended Hückel Hamiltonian simulations were also used to model ultrafast electron injection (<10 fs) from aluminium tris-(8-hydroxy-quinoline), Alq3, to anatase (101) surfaces. DFT modelling of TiO2–anchoring group systems combined with extended Hückel Hamiltonian simulations of ET were applied to Mn(II)-terpyridyl complexes with catechol and acetylacetonate anchoring groups. The calculated timescales for electron injection were 50–100 fs, in agreement with the experimental upper limit of ∼300 fs.
Sensitisers with the phosphonic acid anchoring group have also been considered by the Batista group: pyridine-4-phosphonic acid and ruthenium pyridyl complexes with the phosphonate anchoring group on anatase (101). The calculated ET time from pyridine-4-phosphonic acid in the bidentate adsorption mode (60 fs) was faster than for the monodentate adsorption mode (460 fs), but both were significantly slower than earlier theoretical predictions made with different techniques: using the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the dye's LUMO state as a measure of injection time (32–35 fs) and using model Hamiltonian calculations (11 fs). The discrepancies were attributed to the different level of theory (extended Hückel method in ref. 234 or DFT B3LYP calculations) and small size of the TiO2 cluster used in ref. 166 and 168. According to ref. 234, electron transfer from the ruthenium complex was even slower (attributed to a much lower LUMO orbital density on the phosphonic acid linker): 1 ps or 10 ps, depending on the symmetry of the excited state. These ET times are almost two orders of magnitude faster than FWHM-based predictions (in the same work). Unfortunately, no experimental data with sufficient resolution are available to verify these predictions. Note that the electron injection times for phosphonate-containing dyes predicted using the extended Hückel Hamiltonian are much slower than injection times for most dyes considered so far (in partial disagreement with recent experiments on related dyes).
Finally, Meng and Kaxiras considered thin TiO2 anatase nanowires (less than 1 nm in diameter, i.e. much smaller than those used in experiments, and periodically repeated along the nanowire axis) and adsorption of organic dyes on these nanowires, using DFT to model the adsorption geometries and their electronic structure, and TDDFT to model electron-ion dynamics in real time. For the cyanidin dye, the LUMO was 0.1–0.3 eV (depending on the adsorption mode) below the TiO2 nanowire conduction band. However, ET from the dye to the nanowire took place at the ∼50 fs timescale. Fluctuation of the LUMO energy due to thermal motion enabled this electron transfer process, similar to the results of Prezhdo's group on alizarin. Charge delocalisation perpendicular to the nanowire axis took place on a tens of femtoseconds timescale, while delocalisation parallel to the nanowire axis was slower (beginning to appear only near the end of the 50 fs long simulation).
The same authors studied electronic and electron transfer properties of a series of three organic dyes with aminophenyl donor group and cyanoacrylic acceptor-anchoring group on TiO2 nanowires. The positions of the dyes' energy levels with respect to the TiO2 states depended on the adsorption mode (dissociated or molecular). Electron injection was faster for dissociatively adsorbed dyes (130–150 fs until injection is complete) than for molecularly adsorbed dyes (140–180 fs), attributed to higher LUMO positions for dissociated dyes because of the lower dipole moment of the dissociated adsorption configurations. Hole injection from the dye cation into TiO2 was also monitored and was found to start only after electron injection was largely complete; thus, the electron has time to delocalise into TiO2 and electron–hole pairs at the interface are likely to split before hole injection (leading to charge recombination with the dye) becomes significant. Finally, oxygen vacancies provided stronger adsorbate binding energies and faster injection (practically complete within 100 fs), in agreement with Li et al., but shorter recombination times.
The methods described above are well suited to understanding the mechanism of electron injection in DSSCs, but the associated large computational expense means that they are unlikely to be used for screening large numbers of candidate chromophores, one of the desirable applications of theoretical modelling. So far, these approaches have been applied only to relatively small dyes and short electron dynamics times, sufficient to model ultrafast electron injection but only rarely capable of modelling slower processes like charge recombination, which would also require the inclusion of solvent effects. It is also possible to explore the time dependent evolution of the quantum system on longer timescales at the cost of using a simplified Hamiltonian model, as was done for example in ref. 242 to study proton-coupled electron transfer at the dye–TiO2 interface.
The second class of models evaluates the charge transfer rate from the lifetime of the excited state, which is proportional to the width of the excited state (broadened due to the interaction with the acceptor states). In the simplest approach, the width of the excited state can be extracted from density of states plots for semiconductor substrate-adsorbate systems (as done for example in ref. 134,148,164,169 and 171). Alternatively, several models attempt to do a direct evaluation of the charge transfer rate using a diabatic representation of the Hamiltonian. These models are typically based on a fairly standard definition of a model Hamiltonian whose parameters can be determined by first-principles electronic structure calculations. Following, for example, Kondov and Thoss, the Hamiltonian is represented in a basis of localised donor and acceptor states:
(10)
where |
ϕg〉 corresponds to the ground state, |ϕd〉 to the donor state of the ET process, |ϕk〉 to the (quasi)continuum of acceptor states (with energies εk); Vg, Vd and Va correspond to the potential energy of the ground state, the donor state and the acceptor states, respectively, T is the kinetic energy of the nuclei, Vdk are the coupling matrix elements, which determine the energy-dependent decay width ℏΓ(E) of the donor state, proportional to its lifetime Γ(E):

(11)

Γ(E) is essentially the injection time at frozen nuclear coordinates. This model was applied to the coumarin C343 dye. Mutual influence of electron injection dynamics and nuclear motion was revealed. Electron injection was found to be an ultrafast process on the time scale of ∼20 fs, but the coupling to the nuclear degrees of freedom resulted in overall slower injection dynamics. Besides this effect of vibrational motion on the electron dynamics, ultrafast ET was found to induce vibrational motion for low-frequency modes. The study of alizarin on TiO2 anatase clusters also predicted ultrafast injection on the timescale of 10 fs, and ET in this system was described by a two-step mechanism, involving an intermediate state localised at the dye–semiconductor interface. This approach was also used to calculate electron injection times for a series of pyridine and perylene molecules attached via carboxylic and phosphonic anchoring groups to the TiO2 surface modelled either as a cluster or as a periodic slab. The calculated injection times were between 2 and 44 fs, in the same range as available experimental values. Injection was slower for perylenes than for pyridines, and for phosphates than for carboxylic acid-anchored molecules. Note that the injection times for phosphate-anchored molecules are significantly faster than those obtained in a study of similar molecules by Batista's group (reviewed above), showing that there is not always good agreement between descriptions of ET provided by different models, and more research into the accuracy and applicability of different approaches is needed.

Another model by May et al. uses a similar diabatic separation of the whole system into molecular and semiconductor states and considers the ground and first excited state for the dye together with a large number of states in the conduction band of the semiconductor. The parameters of the Hamiltonian in this phenomenological model are fitted to measured spectra. This method has been applied to predict ET rates for perylene dyes on rutile and anatase. This model is very useful for determining how injection varies with the density of acceptor states. However, the empirical parameterisation means that the method cannot be used to predict ET rates for new chromophores in the absence of experimental data to fit, unless the parameters of the Hamiltonian can be derived from first-principles calculations.
In the same spirit as the models above, our group used a model based on partitioning the TiO2–dye system into three subsystems: surface, surface–dye interface, and isolated dye components (see Fig. 9). The injection rate was computed in a similar way, although the method was formulated in the language used in single molecule electronics, where the injection rate Γ(E) coincides with the imaginary part of the self-energy of the injecting state divided by ℏ. It was shown that the injection rate can be obtained from a set of parameters that are accessible from computational chemistry methods: (i) the coupling between the semiconductor's and dye's atomic orbitals, Vmk, (ii) the semiconductor's energy-dependent density matrix ρkk′(E), (iii) and the dye's lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) coefficients cm, cn:
(12)
This factorized expression for the injection rate provides a convenient means to accelerate the evaluation of injection rate for many different dyes. In fact, ρkk′(E) depends only on the semiconductor, and the matrix element Vmk are approximately the same for all dyes which share the same adsorption mode on the surface. For new dyes with the same attachment chemistry to TiO2, it therefore is possible to evaluate the rate Γ(E) only by computing their LUMO coefficients and energy. This model is suitable for fast evaluation of injection times, as it does not require a time-consuming simulation of a complete semiconductor–chromophore system and does not rely on experimental data. It was applied to study injection times in a series of organic dyes, including perylene derivatives, isonicotinic and biisonicotinic acid and coumarin. The calculated injection times were in good agreement with experimentally measured injection times (where available) and power conversion efficiencies of DSSCs based on these dyes. The importance of the LUMO having a significant weight on the anchoring group was demonstrated also within this approach.
We have shown that current theoretical modelling offers a choice between highly detailed description, suitable for benchmark studies, and more approximate but still quantitatively predictive methods for high-throughput screening of sufficiently regular systems. We have not mentioned, however, a major limitation of both methodologies. When they are used to model realistic systems in conjunction with DFT methods, a key parameter is the relative alignment of the orbital levels on the molecule with the orbital levels on the semiconductor. It is known, in particular, that the virtual levels in DFT calculations are highly sensitive to the details of the calculation (especially the exchange-correlation functional used), and there is no guarantee that these errors affect the dye and the semiconductor in a similar way. The studies of the charge injection rates described above should be therefore accompanied by an estimate on how sensitive the results are to the relative alignment of molecular and semiconductor levels. For example, in ref. 261 the sensitivity of calculated injection times to the accuracy of the LUMO energy was investigated: although the energy of the dyes' excited states is not accurately predicted by DFT, the variation of the injection energy by ±0.5 eV compared to the DFT calculated value did not qualitatively change the calculated injection rates. The alignment problem is not alleviated much if one uses electronic states instead of one-electron orbitals to describe the charge transfer process because, as we have mentioned in Section 2, charge-separated states suffer from large errors when studied with standard and hybrid DFT (or TDDFT).

In the previous sections we have identified the key success areas, where computational chemistry and surface science models have given the greatest contribution to the understanding of DSSC properties. The ability to predict and rationalize the optical and electronic spectra of isolated dyes is now fully satisfactory; with some additional uncertainty, it is possible to predict the adsorption mode of medium sized dyes on different semiconductor surfaces, providing a picture of the adsorption that may help the design of new dyes. Also, the calculation of injection rates has been achieved with several methods which have the ability to identify poor or good electron injection properties in large families of molecules or to detail the evolution of the wavefunction for hundreds of femtoseconds after the initial excitation. There are, however, a few key limitations in most DSSC atomistic models and we wish to conclude our survey outlining the challenges for the years to come in two key areas: (i) description of a realistic rather than an idealized interface, and (ii) computation of the charge recombination rate.

The model of the interface obtained by cutting the bulk semiconductor, depositing a dye and relaxing the structure is only an initial idealization of the real surface. The role of some defects, such as oxygen vacancies or termination defects, has received considerable theoretical attention, but a number of effects seem to be difficult to incorporate within the current modelling protocols. In the absence of a suitable model for the solvent it is very hard to incorporate in the model the effects of adsorbed electrolyte on the surface of the semiconductor that may shift the conduction band edge. Similarly, it is difficult to account accurately for the effect of surface dipoles induced by the adsorbed dye when the dielectric properties of the solution phase are not included in the model. The possible importance of these effects is highlighted by accurate studies of TiO2/water interface, where a positive shift of 0.2 eV in the CB edge of TiO2 in the presence of water was computed with first-principles methods, including the effect of water autoionization.
In realistic DSSC, several additives are found to improve the power conversion efficiency and their role has not been fully understood. Accurate surface calculations by Yu et al. indicate an important band bending effect of TiO2 (the CB edge bends to positive energies by 0.2 eV) when the additive 4-tert-butyl pyridine is adsorbed on the surface, but it remains hard to estimate the resulting effect in the presence of both the dye and the additive. Experimental and theoretical data indicate therefore that the polarization of the interface may create a shift in the CB edge of the order of few tenths of eV, which is similar to the error expected from DFT calculations. For this reason, while current DFT calculations are able to explain the origin and the magnitude of the surface polarization effect, they do not appear accurate enough to provide the correct energy level alignment. In this situation, it may become unavoidable to empirically adjust the energy levels using experimentally available data when the charge transfer rates are to be computed.
One area where the correct energy alignment is of paramount importance is the calculation of the charge recombination rates. If for the charge injection process, where the electron is transferred between degenerate levels, an incorrect energy level alignment between semiconductor and dye may cause error in the rates of up to an order of magnitude, for the charge recombination rate a shift in the CB edge by 0.5 eV may cause a change in the computed charge recombination rate of several orders of magnitude, according to simple estimates based on the Marcus theory. This may be one of the reasons why, although the fundamental theory of charge recombination is known, there are not many authors who propose the computation of the charge recombination rates. Charge recombination is, of course, a second order process whose rate depends on the excess electron density at the TiO2–dye interface. Since the latter is hard to evaluate, a pseudo-first order rate constant or lifetime is often quoted in experimental literature. Experimental charge recombination time for dyes on nanocrystalline TiO2 film varies broadly within the millisecond–microsecond range,i.e. is definitely too slow to be accessible via semiclassical wavefunction propagator methods (these methods can be used to model the much faster charge recombination in colloidal nanoparticles experiments).
Another important difficulty for the calculation of the charge recombination rates is the lack of clear information on the electron density at the TiO2–dye interface. If the injected electron is trapped for a short time in an excitonic state at the TiO2–dye interface or in a trap state close to the interface, the computed recombination rate may be very high (because of the strong electron–hole coupling), while the rate can be vanishingly small in the opposite limit of electrons so mobile in the TiO2 phase that the charge recombination is only provided by the intrinsic electrons in the conduction band. The realistic situation, certainly intermediate between these two limits, is in fact determined by the electron mobility in bulk TiO2, between TiO2 nanocrystals, and the concentration of electron traps in TiO2, i.e. it falls outside the scope of a self-contained computational chemistry model.
The combined lack of accurate knowledge of the charge recombination energy and the nature of the electron wavefunction and electron density on the surface of TiO2 create a major difficulty for the rationalization of the measured charge recombination rates. This seems to be the single major deficiency of the current atomistic modelling of DSSC, and it can be easily identified as the main problem to address in the following years. While it is difficult to forecast a solution that is not yet available, it seems likely that it will be derived from a closer collaboration between experimental and theoretical scientists on the problem of DSSC modelling, as additional experimental data seem crucial for addressing some of the computational problems outlined in this last section. This joint effort will certainly bring major benefits to the field of DSSC, since modelling its elementary processes ultimately coincides with understanding them.

We are grateful to Emanuele Maggio and Francesco Ambrosio for critically reading this manuscript. This work has been funded by EPSRC and the European Research Council.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011