 DOI: 10.1039/C3RA46702C
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 6646-6651

Zhenhua Lin,
Jingjing Chang,
Changyun Jiang*,
Jie Zhang,
Jishan Wu and 
Chunxiang Zhu*

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, 10 Kent Ridge Crescent, Singapore 119260, Singapore. E-mail: elezhucx@nus.edu.sg

Department of Chemistry, National University of Singapore, 3 Science Drive 3, Singapore 117543, Singapore

Institute of Materials Research and Engineering, A*STAR, 3 Research Link, Singapore 117602, Singapore. E-mail: jiangc@imre.a-star.edu.sg

Received
15th November 2013
, Accepted 20th December 2013
First published on 2nd January 2014
The effects of post-treatments (150 °C-thermal, humidity, and vacuum) on the cathode buffer layer of aqueous-solution-processed zinc oxide (ZnO) films on the performance of the inverted organic solar cells (OSCs) are investigated, based on poly(3-hexylthiophene)/[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT/PC61BM) as the active layers. The devices with the ZnO buffer layers that underwent thermal and vacuum post-treatments exhibited 17% and 15% increments in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) as compared to that of the cell without post-treatment on the ZnO layer, mainly due to the increases of the short circuit current (Jsc). It was found that the thermal and vacuum post-treatments reduced the defects and increased the electron mobility in the ZnO buffer layers, improving the electron extractions in the inverted OSCs. Both the 150 °C-thermal and vacuum post-treatments are compatible with plastic substrates, showing a potential way to further improve the film properties of the low-temperature processed ZnO buffer layers.

Recently, inverted organic solar cells (OSCs) have attracted much attention due to the improved stability and compatibility with roll-to-roll fabrication processes as compared with the conventional OSCs. In most conventional OSCs, an acidic poly(3,4-ethylenedioxithiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) hole transport layer is coated on ITO as the anode, and a low-work-function metal such as aluminum (Al) or calcium (Ca) is used as the cathode. However, the low-work-function metal can be easily oxidized in air conditions, and the PEDOT:PSS, since it is acidic in nature, can cause the etching of ITO and indium diffusion into the active layer, resulting in interface instability. In the inverted structure, the low-work-function metal and the interface of ITO/PEDOT:PSS can be avoided by using an n-type metal oxide film as the electron selective layer (ESL) on ITO for the cathode and an air-stable high-work-function metal, such as Ag or Au, as the top anode, resulting in better air stability of the devices.

ESL is crucial for achieving efficient inverted OSCs, because the nature of the electrical contact between the active layer and ITO cathode has significant effects on the device performance, while the ESL is used for tuning this electrical contact properties. Several metal oxides used for the ESL have been studied, such as zinc oxide (ZnO), titanium oxide (TiOx), and aluminum oxide (Al2O3). ZnO film has been considered as a good candidate due to its high electron mobility and high transparency in the visible wavelength range which allow it to be an effective electrons transporter and excellent wave guide for light. Meanwhile, ZnO is a cheap and environmentally friendly material which can be synthesized with high purity at low temperature, and ZnO films can be easily processed via low-temperature solution method which makes it compatible with roll-to-roll fabrication onto plastic substrate.
Solution processed ZnO is mainly obtained by sol–gel, nano-crytalline ZnO colloid (Nc-ZnO) or aqueous solution route. Sol–gel based ZnO films usually require high annealing temperature (≥200 °C) to remove carbon impurities, which is not compatible with flexible substrates. The Nc-ZnO colloid processed films possess large surface area, which results in an environmentally very sensitive electrical-performance of the film. However, the method of aqueous solution with ammine–hydroxo zinc complex could obtain dense ZnO thin films by low temperature annealing. Previously, ZnO ESL films deposited with aqueous solutions of ammine–hydroxo zinc complex have been investigated. Kim et al. has reported the effects of ZnO-layer annealing temperature on the inverted OSC performance. However, studies on the effects of various low-temperature post-treatments on ZnO ESL film have not been reported. Such low-temperature processes may be important for realizing high efficient OSC on plastic substrates.
In this paper, we investigated the effects of thermal (150 °C), humidity, and vacuum post-treatments on the aqueous-solution-processed ZnO ESL films on the film properties and inverted-OSC performance. It was found that thermal and vacuum post-treatments reduced the defects and increased the electron mobility in the ZnO film (up to 0.36 cm2 V−1 s−1). Enhanced photovoltaic performances were achieved from the inverted OSC based on the thermal and vacuum post-treated ZnO buffer layers, as the results of improved electrons extractions in the devices.

The inverted OSC has a layer structure of Glass/ITO/ZnO/active-layer/MoO3/Ag. ITO-coated glass substrates were cleaned by a routine solvent ultrasonic cleaning, sequentially with detergent, de-ionized water, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol (IPA) in an ultrasonic bath for 15 minutes each. For the ZnO films preparation, firstly, ZnO nanopowders (Sigma Aldrich) were directly dissolved in ammonia solution (0.1 M). The solution was stirred overnight to yield a homogenous, clear, and transparent solution. After the ZnO particles totally dissolved, the ZnO solution was spin-coated on top of ITO substrates at 3000 rpm for 30 s. Then, the as-spun ZnO films were directly thermally annealed at 150 °C for 10 min. The resulted ZnO films are referred to as ZnO-ref (without post treatment). Other three kinds of ZnO films are that the films were firstly prepared similar as ZnO-ref and then underwent further post-treatments by thermal (at 150 °C in an oven for 12 h) (ZnO-therm), humidity (in RH 80% air for 12 h) (ZnO-humi) and vacuum (in 1 × 10−6 torr high vacuum chamber for 12 h) (ZnO-vac).

To fabricate inverted OSCs, an active layer was deposited on top of the ZnO layer by spin-coating a solution of the P3HT and PC61BM blend with a weight ratio of 1:1 in 1,2-dichlorobenzene (40 mg ml−1) at 500 rpm for 130 s in N2 glove box (∼180 nm thickness), and the active layers were dried for 2 hours and then pre-annealed at 140 °C for 10 minutes. For fabrication of the cell with poly[[4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2[(2 ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl]] (PTB7) and [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) blend as the active layer, the solution of the PTB7:PC71BM blend with weight ratio of 1:1.5 in 1,2-dichlorobenzene (25 mg ml−1 with 3% 1,8-diiodooctane) was spin coated on top of the ZnO layer at 1000 rpm for 100 s (∼70 nm thickness), and the active layer was dried for 2 hours. Finally, a MoO3 layer (6 nm) and an Ag layer (100 nm) were deposited on the active layers by using vacuum thermal evaporation. The device area is defined as 9 mm2 by using a shadow mask. For each condition, four devices on one substrate were prepared to give an average value. The current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics of the devices were measured using a Keithley 2400 parameter analyzer in the dark and under a simulated light (AM 1.5G) with intensity of 100 mW cm−2 calibrated via a silicon reference cell. IPCE measurements were performed under short-circuit conditions with a lock-in amplifier (SR510, Stanford Research System) at a chopping frequency of 280 Hz during illumination with a monochromatic light from a Xe arc lamp.

To evaluate the charge transport properties of ZnO films, ZnO thin-film transistors (TFT) with bottom-gate top-contact structure were employed. For the device fabrication, a heavily doped p-type Si wafer (purchased from Silicon Quest International, Inc.) was served as the gate electrode and 200 nm of thermally grown SiO2 was used as the dielectric layer. Prior to spin coating ZnO precursors, the Si/SiO2 substrates were firstly cleaned with acetone, IPA, and de-ionized water, and then treated with Ar plasma to facilitate the thin film formation. After that, ZnO films of ZnO-ref, ZnO-therm, ZnO-humi and ZnO-vac were fabricated on top of the Si/SiO2 substrates. Finally, Al layers, as the source and drain electrodes (W = 1000 μm, L = 100 μm), were deposited on the ZnO thin film with a shadow mask. The transistors were characterized with Keithley 4200 parameter analyzer in the N2-filled glove box. The field-effect mobility of the fabricated transistor was extracted using the following equation in the saturation region from the gate sweep: ID = W/(2L)Ciμ(VG − VT)2, where ID is the drain current in the saturation region, μ is the field-effect mobility, Ci is the capacitance per unit area of the gate dielectric layer (SiO2, 200 nm, Ci = 17 nF cm−2), VG and VT are gate voltage and threshold voltage, and W and L are channel width and length, respectively.


Surface properties of the ZnO film were characterized by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) (VG ESCALAB-220i XL). Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) experiments which were carried out at the Escalab 220i, and He I (21.2 eV) as the excitation sources. The transmittance spectra of the ZnO films deposited onto quartz were characterized using an UV-3600 Shimadzu UV-VIS-NIR Spectro photometer. The surface morphology and roughness of the ZnO films deposited on ITO substrate were measured by tapping-mode Atomic Force Microscopy (TM-AFM) which was performed on a Bruker ICON-PKG atomic force microscopy (AFM). The photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the ZnO films were excited with a He–Cd laser (λ = 320 nm) using LS 55 fluorescence spectrometer (PerkinElmer).


The J–V characteristics of the P3HT:PC61BM devices incorporating ESL films of ZnO-ref (A), ZnO-therm (B), ZnO-humi (C) and ZnO-vac (D) are shown in Fig. 1a, and the extracted device performance parameters of open-circuit voltage (Voc), short circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) are summarized in Table 1. Compared to the reference device A, the ZnO-therm and ZnO-vac based cells (B and D) show slight increases in Voc and large increases in Jsc. The Jsc increased from 8.93 mA cm−2 (cell A) to 10.29 mA cm−2 upon thermal treatment on ZnO (cell B), and 9.92 mA cm−2 upon vacuum treatment (cell D). The resulting PCEs of cell B and D are 3.58% and 3.51%, exhibiting 17% and 15% increments, respectively, as compared to the reference cell A (3.05%). The performance of ZnO-humi based cell (C) has almost no improvement as compared to cell A. Incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of these four cells are shown in Fig. 1b. The IPCEs of cell B and D show higher values as compared to that of cell A in the wavelength range from 350 to 620 nm, and a maximum value of 71% (cell B) is obtained at the wavelength of 550 nm. The devices were tested again after stored in nitrogen-filled glove box for about half a year. The PCEs of the devices were noted to retain more than 85% of their original values (Fig. S1 in ESI), and it was found that the devices with post-treated ZnO have better stability than the ZnO-ref device, indicating that the interfacial stability was improved by the post-treatments.

Device
ESL film characteristics
Device characteristics
ESL
Eg (eV)
Wϕ
μe (cm2 V−1 s−1)
Jsc (mA cm−2)
Voc (V)
FF
η (%)
A
ZnO-ref
3.418
3.83
0.225
8.93
0.56
0.61
3.05 ± 0.04
B
ZnO-therm
3.354
3.78
0.360
10.29
0.58
0.60
3.58 ± 0.02
C
ZnO-humi
3.406
3.86
0.183
9.01
0.56
0.61
3.07 ± 0.06
D
ZnO-vac
3.398
3.80
0.311
9.92
0.58
0.61
3.51 ± 0.02
E
ZnO-ref
13.76
0.73
0.68
6.83 ± 0.06
F
ZnO-therm
14.34
0.74
0.67
7.10 ± 0.10
Inverted OSCs based on PTB7/PC71BM system incorporating with a ZnO-ref film (cell E) and a ZnO-therm film (cell F) as the ESL have also been fabricated and characterized. The J–V characteristics and photovoltaic parameters of these two devices are shown in Fig. 1c and Table 1. A high PCE of 7.1% was obtained from the ZnO-therm based cell (F) with Voc of 0.74 V, Jsc of 14.34 mA cm−2 and FF of 0.67. The Jsc is slightly higher than that of the ZnO-ref based cell E (13.76 mA cm−2). The IPCE spectra of these two devices (see Fig. 1d) also show clearly increased IPCE from the cell F as compared to the cell E, which is in consistent with the measured Jsc.

The surface morphologies of all the ZnO films (on ITO coated glass substrates) without and with different post-treatments were closely similar, with the root mean square (RMS) roughness values at 2.36–2.58 nm as measured by AFM, as shown in Fig. 2. This means less likely that there are morphology changes either at the interfaces or in the active layers of the devices affecting the photocurrent.

Fig. 3a shows the optical transmittance spectra of ZnO films coated on quartz substrates. It shows that all the ZnO thin films show similarly high transmittance (>99%) over the visible wavelength range. To obtain the optical band gap (Eg) of each ZnO film, the absorption coefficient as a function of photon energy has been plotted in Fig. 3b according to the transmittance spectra. The absorption coefficient α can be calculated using T = Aexp(−αd), where T is the transmittance of the ZnO film, A is a constant and approximately unity, and d is the film thickness. The value of optical band gap can be calculated using the Tauc model and the Davis Mott model in the high absorbance region: αhυ = D (hυ − Eg)n, where hυ is the photon energy, Eg is the optical band gap, D is a constant, and n equals to 1/2. In Fig. 3b, the relationship between (αhυ)2 and hυ is plotted. The Eg value can be obtained by extrapolating the linear portion to the photon energy axis. The optical band gap values obtained are summarized in Table 1. It can be seen that the band gaps of the ZnO films decreased after post-treatments, from 3.418 eV (ZnO-ref) to 3.354 eV (ZnO-therm), 3.406 eV (ZnO-humi), and 3.398 eV(ZnO-vac). The narrowing band gap should be due to increased crystallinity caused by the post-treatments, especially of the thermal and vacuum treatments. Similar band-gap decrease and crystallinity increase were also observed when increase the thermal annealing temperatures. The changes of the band-gap and crystallinity in the ZnO films may influence the electric properties at the ZnO/active-layer interfaces, such as the energy band alignments, surface defects/recombination or electron transport resistance.
Fig. 4 shows the UPS measurements of the valence band and secondary electron cut-offs of ZnO films with different post-treatments. The work function values determined from the electron cutoffs of the UPS spectra are 3.83, 3.78, 3.86, and 3.80 eV for ZnO-ref, ZnO-therm, ZnO-humi and ZnO-vac, respectively. Such low work functions make the ZnO films suitable for being used as ESL for efficient electron extractions. The valence band maximum (VBM) relative to Fermi level (EF) determined from the valence band region for all the ZnO films are around 3.3 eV, and the conduction band minimum (CBM) of the ZnO films is estimated to be located near the EF and LUMO of PCBM based on the values of Eg and VBM. The work function and CBM data show very small differences among all these ZnO films, thus it is not likely that the work function causes the changes of electron-extraction rate of the devices.
The defect conditions in the ZnO film will influence the charge carrier mobility and the interface recombination rates. Room temperature PL spectra were firstly measured for the ZnO films to exam the defects levels in the films. Fig. 5 shows the PL spectra of the ZnO films without (ZnO-ref) and with post-treatments (ZnO-therm, ZnO-humi, ZnO-vac). Strong emission at ∼370 nm was observed for all the samples, which corresponds to the near band-edge emission. This band is usually assigned to radiative recombination from free excitons or unspecified localized states. Usually, a broad green emission peak is also presented in the ZnO PL spectrum, which is commonly referred to as a deep-level trap-state emission. The green emission has been attributed to the singly ionized oxygen vacancy in ZnO film resulting in radiative recombination of a photogenerated hole with an electron occupying the oxygen vacancy. Here, the green emission peaks of all the samples are very weak, indicating a low level defects contents in each of the ZnO films.
In order to further understand the differences of the defects in the ZnO films, XPS measurements were carried out to study the components structures on the film surfaces. All atomic spectra were calibrated by taking hydrocarbon C 1s peak at 284.6 eV as a reference. Fig. 6 shows core level XPS spectra of O 1s for the ZnO films with different post-treatments. The O 1s XPS spectra exhibit asymmetric line shapes as shown in Fig. 6 (black color curves). The main peak with lower binding energy (529.8 eV) corresponds to oxygen lattice in ZnO matrix, while another two peaks (at 531.1 eV and 531.9 eV) correspond to the lattice oxygen in oxygen-deficient regions (oxygen vacancy) and zinc hydroxide (Zn(OH)2), respectively. By fitting the three peaks of the XPS spectra, the percentage of each single peak component to the whole spectrum was calculated as shown in Fig. 6. The percentage value of the 531.9 eV-peak component (refer to the blue fitting curves) decreased from 13.0% (ZnO-ref) to 9.5%, 10.0%, and 9.7% for ZnO-therm, ZnO-humi and ZnO-vac films, respectively, which infers that the zinc hydroxide component decreased with post-treatments due to conversion from metal hydroxide to oxides. The 531.1 eV-peak component (refer to the green fitting curves), representing the contributions from oxygen vacancy, shows also clearly a decreased intensity in the ZnO-therm and ZnO-vac films, as compared to ZnO-ref film. The decreased metal hydroxide component and oxygen vacancy in the ZnO-therm and ZnO-vac films indicates more completed conversion from zinc hydroxide into ZnO, and reduced defect sites in the film.

The charge transport properties of the ZnO films under various post-treatments were studied using thin film transistors with structure as shown in Fig. 7a. The measured ID–VG characteristics of four TFT devices based on films of ZnO-ref, ZnO-therm, ZnO-humi and ZnO-vac, respectively, are shown in Fig. 7b, and the calculated electron mobilities (μe) of these ZnO films are also summarized in Table 1. It shows that all the films underwent different post-treatments showed good transistor characteristics. The ZnO-therm and ZnO-vac films, with thermal and vacuum post-treatment, have μe of 0.36 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 0.311 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, which are substantially higher than that of the ZnO-ref film (0.225 cm2 V−1 s−1). The increase in charge mobility is most possibly the results of reduced impurity (zinc hydroxide) defects and increased crystallinity in the ZnO-therm and ZnO-vac films as discussed above. The increased electron mobility in the ESL films is favorable for the electron extraction in inverted OSC, which may account mainly for the increase of Jsc in the ZnO-therm and ZnO-vac based OSCs.


In summary, both the thermal and vacuum post-treatments on the ZnO buffer layers improved the Jsc and PCE considerably in the inverted OSCs. The increase in Jsc was mainly the result of increased electron mobility and reduced recombination centers (defects) in the ZnO-ESL buffer layers with thermal and vacuum post-treatments, which increase the electron-extraction efficiency in the inverted OSCs. The results indicated that 150 °C-thermal post treatment showed the most effective way to improve the ZnO buffer layer, while vacuum treatment is also useful since it can improve the film properties at room temperature.


This work was financially supported by IMRE Core Funding (IMRE/12-1P0902), IMRE Core Funding (IMRE/10-1P0508) and A*STAR SERC TSRP Grant (Grant #102 170 0137).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The stability of the devices. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ra46702c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014