 DOI: 10.1039/D0DT01191F
(Paper)
Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 9035-9047


Yuan-Hsiang
Yu
*,

Wun-Shiuan
Wang
,

Yu-Chung
Hu
,

Xiao-Yuan
Lin
,

Chih-Hung
Tsai
,

Chun-Jyun
Shih
,

Wei-Chih
Huang
,

Shie-Ming
Peng
 and 

Gene-Hsiang
Lee


Department of Chemistry, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei City 24205, Taiwan. E-mail: 084916@mail.fju.edu.tw

Department of Opto-Electronic Engineering, National Dong Hwa University, Hualien 97401, Taiwan

Department of Chemistry, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan

Received
31st March 2020
, Accepted 10th June 2020
First published on 11th June 2020
This paper proposes a novel μ-hydroxo-bridged dinuclear macrocyclic zinc complex, {[Zn(C10H20N8)]2(OH)}(BF4)3. The structure was determined by X-ray crystallography: Monoclinic, C2/c, a = 25.4632(6), b = 10.9818(3), c = 15.7522(4) Å, Z = 8, R1 = 0.0233, wR2 = 0.0557, based on reflections I > 2σ(I). The complex was successfully reacted with graphene oxide to form a μ-hydroxo-bridged dinuclear macrocyclic Zn complex/reduced graphene oxide composite. To evenly disperse the Zn- and N-rich complex onto the surface of the reduced graphene oxide, and to enhance the electrocatalytic property of the graphene composites, a soluble molecular grafting method was used here. The graphene-based composites were applied as the counter electrodes (CEs) of dye-sensitized solar cells. Current density–voltage measurements revealed that the conversion efficiency of the GO/Zn (1:10) sample was 7.78%, which was better than that of Pt CE (7.49%). GO/Zn (1:10) CE exhibited the lowest impedance (RCE = 9.90 Ω), which was better than that of Pt CE (RCE = 66.1 Ω), showing that GO/Zn CEs can reduce the impedance at the CE/electrolyte interface. The proposed method is simple, and the composite materials can potentially replace conventional Pt, optimizing efficiency and reducing production cost.

Energy shortages and environmental pollution are the major problems and challenges confronting humanity today. Although the quality of life is improving amidst the rapid development of science and technology, the demand for energy is also growing. Renewable energy refers to inexhaustible natural resources that do not produce pollutants during consumption. Solar energy is infinite, has no geographical restrictions, and does not cause environmental pollution; therefore, it is considered one of the most advantageous forms of renewable energy. In 1991, a team of researchers led by Grätzel developed a highly efficient, low-cost dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC). The DSSC is a type of cheap thin-film solar cell that is easy to make. Recently, many research teams have focused their work on DSSCs. DSSCs primarily comprise a working electrode of titanium oxide (TiO2), dyes, electrolytes, and a counter electrode (CE) of platinum (Pt). Pt is currently the available material in producing CEs for DSSCs. However, Pt is relatively expensive, prompting many scientists to search for potential alternatives, and improving the efficiency of DSSCs.

Carbon materials have been a popular topic of discussion in studies on potential CE materials. Carbon is a favorable conductor of heat and electricity, and it can also produce unique physical and chemical properties when its microstructures are altered. Graphene is a material with a single layer of sp2 hybridized carbon atoms in a two-dimensional hexagonal lattice. Graphene displays excellent thermal conductivity, mechanical strength, remarkable electron mobility, and high conductivity. Recently, several research teams have used graphene in the preparation of DSSC CEs. Many studies have been conducted on the application of graphene composites in the development of dye-sensitized CEs, revealing that graphene composites have the potential to replace the expensive Pt as electrode material. Notably, various heteroatom doped graphene-based materials have been developed as highly efficient CEs, having possibilities as alternative CEs for DSSCs. In addition to their affordability, graphene composites possess high electric conductivity, high specific surface area, high flexibility (can be applied to flexible components), and material diversity. Studies have also been reported on the preparation of CE material using N-doped graphene. Their findings indicated that N-rich graphene possessed increased conductivity and catalytic activity. Therefore, grafting nitrogen-containing functional groups onto the surface of graphene is an effective means of enhancing the properties of DSSC CE materials.
On the other hand, early transition metal doped graphene-based composites were applied for preparing cost-effective Pt-free CEs of DSSCs with comparable device efficiency with Pt CE. For example, inorganic compounds based on Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu were used for the preparation of graphene-based nanocomposites for the CEs of DSSCs. The early transition nanometals and their inorganic compounds have advantages for exploring the CEs of DSSCs due to their relatively low cost, abundant resources, good electrical conductivity, various redox states for the electrocatalytic reaction, and highly efficient electrocatalytic activity. Nevertheless, these early transition nanometals and their inorganic compounds have a relatively low electrical conductivity and are more unstable than Pt because of numerous defects or grain boundaries in their nano structure. Therefore, the application of DSSC based on early transition metals makes it challenging to obtain high-performance CEs. The most efficient strategy is to hybridize the nanostructured metals or their compounds with the highly conductive graphene matrix. Nanometal/graphene-based composite materials can be developed as a type of Pt-free material for CEs because graphene has functions such as outstanding electric conductivity, high specific surface area, high stability, and enhanced contact surface roughness with electrolytes. Therefore, the surface of graphene could provide the supporting matrix and form the conducting networks for preparing well-distributed and high density catalytic sites (i.e., nanometals) on itself. The synergic effects afforded by the hybridization of electrocatalytic metal centers and the conductive graphene matrix could increase the stability of nanometals, provide increased electrocatalytic sites for I3− reduction, and promote the charge transfer capability between CEs and electrolytes.
In most cases, Zn compounds were applied as photoanodes in DSSCs. Zn compounds such as zinc sulfide (ZnS) and zinc oxide (ZnO) have been widely investigated in the field of energy conversion because of their relatively appropriate bandgap and high catalytic performance. For example, ZnS-coated TiO2 nanoparticles could accumulate excited electrons in the conduction band of the photoanode and lower the recombination in DSSCs. ZnO has advantages that include higher electron diffusivity than TiO2, high electron mobility, low cost, and photo-corrosion stability. Therefore, ZnO is the closest semiconductor material with TiO2 in DSSCs. Despite the high catalytic performance of Zn compound, rare reports are found in the literature about the CEs of DSSCs based on Zn-based composites. For instance, Zn3N2/PEDOT:PSS, ZnO/PEDOT:PSS, ZnS/PEDOT:PSS, and ZnSe/PEDOT:PSS composites were investigated for the CEs of DSSCs. ZnS quantum dots deposited on N-doped multiwall carbon nanotubes and incorporated with reduced graphene oxide (RGO) were reported as CE materials of DSSCs. A nanodiamond/Zn nanocomposite was reported for the CE of a flexible DSSC device. In this study, Zn metal-doped graphene-based composites were developed for obtaining cost-effective Pt-free CEs. To the best of our knowledge, there have been no reports on the molecular grafting method using a Zn complex hybrid with RGO for the CEs of DSSCs. A strategy of using a soluble novel nitrogen-rich zinc-organic framework grafting on the surface of RGO was developed for the fabrication of a highly efficient electrocatalytic electrode.
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are hybrid nanomaterials composed of coordinative organic building ligands to inorganic metal ions. Recently, MOFs have attracted enormous attention from researchers owing to their superior physicochemical properties. MOF-carbon based counter electrodes would have the potential to be assembled onto electrocatalytic materials for the CEs of DSSCs. The advantages afforded by MOFs applied to DSSCs include: first, the structure of MOFs can be optimized to allow for various catalytic metal centers. Second, the organic framework might be designed for grafting on electroactive supporting materials. Third, the highly ordered structures allow for the fabrication of a high surface area for thin-film electrodes. However, the polymeric rigid MOF scaffold is relatively insoluble, which restricts their compatibility with organic polymers or prevents their effective deposition on graphene. Controllable nano-sized or molecular level repeating units would be a solution for the preparation of well-dispersed MOF-based hybrid materials. In this study, a simple μ-hydroxo-bridged ligand is linked with two independent groups of an octa-aza Zn complex. An X-ray single-crystal diffractometer validated the crystal structure. The complex is similar to a MOF structure, wherein the molecule contains 16 nitrogen atoms and dinuclear Zn2+, which is a nitrogen/metal-rich complex that could have the potential to effectively distribute particles onto the surface of graphene, and have the possibility of being fabricated as an electrocatalytic CE of DSSCs. GO was reacted with the μ-hydroxo-bridged dinuclear macrocyclic zinc complex, and the complex was uniformly distributed on the surface of graphene. The GO was transformed to RGO. Some of the functional groups such as epoxide, carboxyl, and hydroxyl groups on the surface of GO could be removed by adding different proportions of the μ-hydroxo-bridged dinuclear Zn macrocyclic system, reducing GO to RGO and effectively doping Zn and N onto RGO, thereby synthesizing a composite graphene material doped with Zn particles and N on its surface. The proposed composite materials demonstrated excellent electrical conductivity and electrocatalysis, and can thus be used for preparing DSSC CEs, optimizing the conversion efficiency of the dye-sensitized components and replacing Pt to reduce production costs. The purpose of this study was twofold. First, to analyze the surface morphology and structural characterization of the proposed composite thin films prepared using different material ratios. Second, to examine the effects of DSSC CEs fabricated using the submitted materials on a component by cyclic voltammetry, external quantum efficiency measurement, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, and power conversion efficiency.

Graphite (Nano Graphene Platelets, Angstron Materials, Inc., N008-100-P-10), phosphoric acid (J.T. Baker), sulfuric acid (Sigma-Aldrich), potassium permanganate (J.T. Baker), hydrochloric acid (37%, Sigma-Aldrich), hydrogen peroxide (30%, Sigma-Aldrich), 2,3-butanedione (Acros), formaldehyde (36.5%, Riedel-de Haën), zinc tetrafluoroborate hydrate (Alfa Aesar), hydrazine hydrate (Fisher chemical), acetonitrile (J.T. Baker), anhydrous ethanol (J.T. Baker), and diethyl ether (J.T. Baker) were all of reagent grade and used as commercially received without further purification.


The crystal structure of the μ-hydroxo-bridged dinuclear macrocyclic zinc complex was identified using X-ray single-crystal diffraction. A Bruker Kappa 4CCD diffractometer with monochromatic Mo Kα radiation (λ = 0.71073 Å) was employed. The operating temperature was maintained at 150 K by using an Oxford Cryosystems Cryostream Cooler. Data reduction was carried out by the multi-scan method using the HKL SCALEPACK. Crystallographic data have been deposited to the Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre as supplementary publication no. CCDC-1960539. The energy level of the graphene-based composite CE was obtained by using a photoelectron spectrometer of Riken Keiki, model AC-2. A transmission electron microscope (TEM) of the model JEOL JEM-2100F was used to observe the morphologies of the composite samples. Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy with an FITR spectrometer model of PerkinElmer Spectrum 100 was performed to assess the functional groups of the electrode materials. Raman spectroscopy was performed to analyze the material characteristics using a Micro Raman Identify (MRI) spectrometer. An X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS) was employed to analyze the element and chemical compositions on the surface of the graphene-based composites. XPS was measured using a ULVAC-PHI spectroscope with a PHI 5000 Versa Probe and scanning ESCA microprobe. A field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) with the JEOL JSM-7600F model was used to analyze the surface morphology of the electrodes and determine the differences on the surface of the thin films when different amounts of the μ-hydroxo-bridged dinuclear Zn macrocyclic complex were applied. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed to observe the crystalline structure of the graphene-based composites using an X-ray diffractometer with the model Bruker D2 phaser, operating at 30 kV, 10 mA, and with a scanning range from 2° to 80°. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) using a CHI Instruments Model 600 D were performed to evaluate the electrocatalytic behavior of the electrodes and impedance performance of the DSSCs.


A modified version of the Hummers’ method was adopted for the preparation of GO. The preparation steps were as follows: H2SO4 (360 mL) and H3PO4 (40 mL) were mixed homogeneously in a beaker. Then, KMnO4 (18 g) was slowly added into the solution and stirred for 1 h. Graphite (3 g) was added to the solution and stirred until it evenly dispersed and then heated at 50 °C and stirred for 24 h. The dispersed suspension was first cooled to r.t. and then in an ice bath. Another beaker of H2O2 (3 mL) was diluted by 400 mL of distilled water. The diluent H2O2 was cooled and added under stirring to the dispersed suspension. Then, the product was separated in a centrifuge at 8500 rpm and washed several times using distilled water until the solution was neutralized. The product was separated from the centrifuge and then freeze-dried to obtain GO.


The macrocyclic complex was synthesized through a template condensation reaction by introducing Zn2+ ions to induce the cyclic condensation between 2,3-butanedihydrazone and formaldehyde. The synthetic method of 2,3-butanedihydrazone followed the literature report by Busch and Bailar. The procedures for synthesizing the macrocyclic complex {[Zn(C10H20N8)]2(OH)}(BF4)3 were as follows: first, 36.5% aqueous formaldehyde solution (1.68 g, 20 mmole) and Zn(BF4)2·xH2O (2.38 g, 10 mmol) were placed into a reaction flask containing a mixed solvent of distilled water (20 mL) and acetonitrile (10 mL). Next, the solution was stirred at r.t., and 2,3-butanedihydrazone (2.28 g, 20 mmol) was added. The color turned light-yellow immediately. Then, the solution was further stirred at r.t. for 24 h. Diethyl ether was poured into the light-yellow solution and stored in a freezer at 0 °C. Once crystal sediments were observable in the sample, the ether was decanted, and the precipitate was collected and then dried under a vacuum oven to obtain the product. This yellow product was dissolved in acetonitrile, and the single crystals of the compound were cultivated through ether diffusion. The single crystals were analyzed using an X-ray single-crystal diffractometer to validate that the structure was indeed a μ-hydroxo-bridged dinuclear Zn complex {[Zn(C10H20N8)]2(OH)}(BF4)3.


First, the μ-hydroxo-bridged dinuclear macrocyclic Zn complex {[Zn(C10H20N8)]2(OH)}(BF4)3 (0.2 g) was dissolved in 30 mL of distilled water, and a sonicator was used to disperse GO (0.2 g) in 20 mL of distilled water. Second, the solution of the Zn complex was added dropwise into the GO solution and stirred at r.t. for 4 h. A high-speed centrifuge machine was used to precipitate the graphene-based composite from the liquid, and the composite was repeatedly washed using distilled water followed by a round of separation until the liquid phase was clear. The graphene-based composite was collected and dried using a freeze-drying method to obtain a RGO/μ-hydroxo-bridged dinuclear macrocyclic Zn complex composite with a GO/Zn weight ratio of 1:1. Several samples with different weight ratios were also prepared using the aforementioned procedures. By adding different amounts of the GO and dinuclear macrocyclic Zn complex, samples with GO/Zn ratios of 1:3 and 1:10 were also prepared.


Two 1 mm holes were drilled into a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) conductive glass substrate. The distance between the holes was roughly 0.9 mm. Subsequently, the substrate was submerged in deionized water and then washed using an ultrasonic cleaning tool for 10 min. This process was repeated for two more times, but with acetone and anhydrous ethanol replacing deionized water. Afterward, the substrate was dried by spraying nitrogen gas along its edges using a nitrogen gun, and a 3 M tape was immediately adhered to the substrate to form a membrane area roughly 4.5 cm2 in size and circular shape. Then, a micropipette was used to collect 10 μL of the GO/Zn composite material [incl., GO/Zn (1:1), GO/Zn (1:3), and GO/Zn (1:10)]. Droplet coating was performed by dripping the solution onto the substrate until the entire membrane area was coated. The substrate was heated on a hot plate at 100 °C and annealed for 5 min to evaporate the solvent of the coating. Then, the sample was calcined at 500 °C under nitrogen in a tube furnace. Calcination was continued for 30 min to obtain CEs with different GO/Zn ratios (1:1, 1:3, and 1:10).


The fabricating processes for the working electrodes were as follows: an FTO conductive glass substrate was cleaned before fabrication. Then, a 3 M tape with a 4 mm hole was adhered to the substrate to form a coating area for the component with approximately 0.126 cm2. TiO2 paste (i.e., a diameter of 25 nm) was coated in the area by using a doctor-blade. The coated substrate was heated at 150 °C for 10 min and then cooled to r.t. The coating thickness of the TiO2 working electrode was approximately 12 μm. Subsequently, a diffusion layer was coated using TiO2 paste (i.e., a diameter of 200 nm) by the doctor-blade coating method. The TiO2 electrode was then sintered at 500 °C for 30 min in a furnace. After cooling to 80 °C, the TiO2 electrode was submerged in a prepared dye solution for 24 h. The dye solution consisted of 0.5 mM N719 dye and 0.5 mM chenodeoxycholic acid as a co-adsorbent in a solvent pair of acetonitrile and tert-butyl alcohol with a volume ratio of 1:1. For the packaging of the working electrode and the CE, a 2.5 × 2.5 cm2 square packaging film (i.e., 60 μm in thickness) was cut, with a 0.8 × 0.8 cm2 area cut out from the middle. The packaging condition was carried out at 130 °C and 3 kg cm−2 for 3 min using a heat pressure machine to encapsulate the upper and lower electrodes. After cooling, an approximate 5 μL of the electrolyte solution was injected into the cell of the device by a micropipette. The electrolyte solution contained 0.6 M 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide, 0.05 M LiI, 0.03 M I2, 0.5 M 4-tert-butyloyridine, and 0.1 M guanidine thiocyanate in a solvent pair of acetonitrile and valeronitrile with a volume ratio of 5:1. Subsequently, a packaging film (i.e., 0.8 × 0.8 cm2) and a glass plate were used to seal the hole of the CE at130 °C and 3 kg cm−2 for preventing the leaking and evaporating of the electrolytes. The DSSC component was wiped with alcohol to clean the surface and complete the device. The characteristics of the DSSC components were evaluated by current density–voltage (JV), incident photo-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE), and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurement techniques.


The crystal structure of {[Zn(C10H20N8)]2(OH)}(BF4)3 is illustrated in Fig. 1, and the crystal parameters are tabulated in Table 1S. The structure was determined by X-ray crystallography: monoclinic, C2/c, a = 25.4632(6), b = 10.9818(3), c = 15.7522(4) Å, Z = 8, R1 = 0.0233, wR2 = 0.0557, based on reflections I > 2σ(I). In this structure, OH− serves as the bridged ligand, and together with the two [Zn(C10H20N8)]2+ macrocyclic systems, forms the dinuclear zinc complex. The coordination geometry of Zn2+ is a square pyramid, in which Zn2+ protrudes from the coordinated N atoms of the macrocyclic ligand. Due to [Ar]3d10 Zn2+, ion radii are relatively large in the coordination core of the 14-membered macrocyclic system, and favorably form a five-coordinate geometric structure, thus creating a bridged dimer through the OH− bridged ligand. The individual [Zn(C10H20N8)]2+ unit forms a saddle-shaped configuration, and the entire molecule contains three tetrafluoroborate anions. It is interesting that the reaction for the synthesis of the dinuclear complex without being incorporated with any reagent of hydroxide, the OH− bridged ligand, seems to have generated from the starting material of zinc tetrafluoroborate hydrate. Selected bond lengths and angles of {[Zn(C10H20N8)]2(OH)}(BF4)3 are listed in Table 2S.

Moreover, the proposed complex contains a total of 16 N atoms, 8 of which are involved in the coordination of the center metal ions. The remaining 8 N atoms are a part of secondary amines, which are located in regions that may react with the functional groups of GO, i.e., carboxyl and epoxide groups, leading to a uniform distribution of the dinuclear compound on the surface of GO. Therefore, it is an effective intercalation agent for the exfoliation of layered GO. The dinuclear zinc complex that reacts with GO should facilitate the doping of nitrogen and zinc elements onto the surface of RGO. Therefore, we believed that the proposed new dinuclear macrocyclic complex could be graphed to the surface of GO at the molecular level to produce excellent molecular hybrid materials. CEs fabricated using the composite material would possess graphene surfaces rich in metal- and nitrogen-doped active sites, which would enhance the electrocatalytic performance of the DSSC. As shown in Fig. 2, the schematic representation for the preparation of the RGO/μ-hydroxo-bridged dinuclear Zn macrocyclic complex hybrid composite and RGO/Zn counter electrode, and the comparable relative energy levels of materials in DSSC are illustrated.
The TEM results of the various GO/Zn composites are given in Fig. 3. The samples were observed at a magnification of 50000×, 100000×, and 200000×, respectively, to examine the sizes of the nanoparticles and their distribution. The TEM images reveal rare nanoparticle structures on the broad RGO of the GO/Zn (1:1) sample. By contrast, clusters of nanoparticles can be observed on the GO/Zn (1:3) sample in Fig. 3(b), and evenly distributed nanoparticles can be found on the GO/Zn (1:10) sample in Fig. 3(c). The TEM results suggested that the number of nanoparticles grafted on RGO changed with the doping ratio of the dinuclear macrocyclic Zn complex, whereby the number of nanoparticles grafted increased with the amount added.
The FTIR results of the various GO/Zn electrodes are given in Fig. 4(a). These results indicated that the characteristic peaks of GO appeared at 3010 and 3680 cm−1 for –OH stretching, 1732 cm−1 for –CO stretching, 1627 cm−1 for –CC stretching, 1220 cm−1 for –C(O)–OH bending, and 1045 cm−1 for –C–O–C stretching, validating the presence of hydroxyl, carboxyl, and epoxide groups. Characteristic peaks of the dinuclear macrocyclic Zn complex appeared at 3175 cm−1 for N–H stretching, 2920 cm−1 for –CH3 stretching, 1590 cm−1 for –CN stretching, and 1360 cm−1 for –C–N stretching. The disappearance of peaks at 1732 cm−1 for –CO stretching of the carboxyl group and 1045 cm−1 for the epoxide group validated the grafting of the macrocyclic complex on RGO. Subsequently, the peak intensity at 1686 cm−1 for allylic CC–C-stretching, 1590 cm−1 for –CN stretching, and 1360 cm−1 for –C–N stretching increased concurrently with the proportion of the macrocyclic complex in the GO/Zn material. The intensity of the BF4 characteristic peak at 1050 cm−1 increased simultaneously with the GO/Zn ratio. A unique N–H bending peak can be observed at 809 cm−1 in the FTIR of {[Zn(C10H20N8)]2(OH)}(BF4)3. This peak disappeared after the nanoparticles were grafted onto RGO. The characteristic peak signal of the dinuclear macrocyclic Zn complex intensified, and the typical peaks of the oxygen-containing functional groups of the GO weakened as the dinuclear macrocyclic Zn complex ratio increased. These results proved that the dinuclear macrocyclic Zn complex was successfully grafted onto the surface of GO to form hybrid nanocomposites.
The Raman results of the various GO/Zn composites are given in Fig. 4(b) and Table 1. Graphite contains sp2 carbon bonds arranged into a hexagonal lattice. The vibration of the carbon atoms produces a G band at 1566 cm−1 for the characteristic peak of graphite. After the graphite oxidized, –C–O–C–, –COOH and –OH functional groups were grafted onto the surface of GO. The original sp2 hybrid carbon was converted into sp3 hybrid carbon bonds or forming defects. After the structural change, 2D bands disappeared, and a D band formed at 1359 cm−1. The peak value of the G band for GO was at 1570.3 cm−1. After GO was reacted with the μ-hydroxo-bridged dinuclear Zn macrocyclic complex, the redox reaction occurred, resulting in a reduction of GO, especially in a higher ratio of the GO/Zn composite. The data in Table 1 reveal that the ID/IG ratio decreased with an increase in the GO/Zn ratio of the composites, suggesting that, under the reduction by the macrocyclic complex, GO was reduced to RGO.
Compound code
Raman measurements
XPS measurements
D band (cm−1)
G band (cm−1)

I
D/IG
C
O
N
Zn
C/O
GO
1359.0
1570.3
0.91
66.9
33.1
—
—
2.02
GO/Zn (1:1)
1360.5
1602.0
0.91
68.2
23.8
7.5
0.4
2.87
GO/Zn (1:3)
1355.0
1602.0
0.89
69.6
21.0
8.8
0.7
3.31
GO/Zn (1:10)
1356.4
1593.8
0.88
68.2
16.4
15.0
0.4
4.16
The XPS overall spectra of the various GO/Zn composite materials are illustrated in Fig. 4(c). The binding energy (BE) of the elements for C 1s, N 1s, O 1s, and Zn 2p3 signaled at approximately 285, 399, 532, and 1020 eV, respectively. The content percentage of the various atoms, C/O ratio, and N ratio were deduced from the signal intensities illustrated in Table 1. The appearance of the Zn 2p3 characteristic peaks suggests that the dinuclear macrocyclic Zn complex was successfully grafted onto GO. The graphite was converted to GO through acidification and oxidation, resulting in a C/O ratio of 2.02. Thereafter, GO underwent redox reactions with the dinuclear macrocyclic Zn complex to form the GO/Zn composite. The grafting of the dinuclear macrocyclic Zn complex on GO would reduce the number of functional groups on GO; thus, the C/O ratio on the GO/Zn composite was higher than that on GO. Consequently, the N content increased concurrently with the number of dinuclear macrocyclic Zn complexes.
The C 1s XPS deconvolution results of the various GO/Zn composites are given in Fig. 5. Deconvolution analysis of the GO spectrogram, as shown in Fig. 5(a), revealed two absorption peaks. The C 1s BE values of CC/C–C, C–O, and –COOH were 284.5, 286.2, and 288.2 eV, respectively. The presence of C–O and –COOH in the GO spectrogram proves that the graphite successfully formed GO. A decomposition analysis of the GO/Zn (1:1) C1s spectrogram, illustrated in Fig. 5(b), revealed that the location of the characteristic peak almost wholly overlapped with that of GO. The bands of C–O and –COOH remained at 286.2 eV and 288.2 eV, respectively; the integral area of C–O and –COOH significantly reduced, suggesting that the macrocyclic zinc complex of the GO/Zn (1:1) sample exhibited a reduced state of RGO; however, it did not completely react with GO, resulting in the majority of GO retaining its functional groups. Deconvolution analysis of the GO/Zn (1:3) and GO/Zn (1:10) C 1s spectrograms illustrated in Fig. 5(c and d) revealed that the BE values were 284.5, 285.7, and 288.2 eV, respectively, presented as CC/C–C, C–N, and –COOH. Compared with the analysis in Fig. 5(a), GO underwent a reduction reaction that resulted in a loss of C–O bonds and –COOH bonds in the carboxyl group. Consequently, C–O disappeared at 286.2 eV, and the –COOH peak at 288.2 eV is significantly reduced. Besides, the presence of C–C and C–N bonds denoted the presence of the Zn macrocyclic complex, indicating that the Zn macrocyclic complex was successfully grafted on RGO.
The SEM results of the various GO/Zn electrodes are given in Fig. 6 at a magnification of 50000×, 100000×, and 200000×, respectively. The results revealed that the Zn nanoparticles were well-deposited onto the surface of the CEs; the concentration of the Zn nanoparticles dispersed on the RGO surface increased concurrently with the number of Zn macrocyclic complexes. This situation was attributed to the RGO layer providing a high specific surface area and functional groups, thereby facilitating the even distribution of the nanoparticle material. The SEM results suggested that the GO/Zn (1:10) sample achieved the optimal particle distribution and a more folded layer structure. Therefore, we predicted that the application of this sample in the fabrication of CEs would produce optimal efficiency.
XRD analysis results of the various GO/Zn electrodes are given in Fig. 7. The results revealed that the diffraction peaks of GO/Zn (1:1), GO/Zn (1:3), and GO/Zn (1:10) appeared at 10.8°, 10.0°, and 9.0°, respectively, suggesting that the layer spacing of GO increased concurrently with the number of dinuclear macrocyclic Zn complexes added. Thereafter, the signal intensity of the diffraction peaks decreased simultaneously with the increase in GO/Zn. This is attributable to the increased steric effect of the molecules after the macrocyclic complex was grafted onto GO and intercalated into the layered structures of GO, effectively delaminating the graphene. An XRD diagram of the GO/Zn composite sintered under nitrogen at 500 °C for 30 min is illustrated in Fig. 7(b). High-temperature sintering disintegrated the organic functional groups on GO (–OH, –COC–, and –COOH) and the dinuclear macrocyclic Zn complex, resulting in the absence of the GO characteristic peak from the figure. After sintering, the macrocyclic structures in GO/Zn disintegrated, forming a diffraction peak at 25.9°. The location of the characteristic peak was like graphite, proving that GO was reduced to RGO.

The CV analysis results of the various GO/Zn electrodes are given in Fig. 8(a), revealing that the oxidation peaks of iodide and triiodide using the GO/Zn (1:1) electrode were between 0.6 and 1.0 V and 1.0 and 1.4 V, respectively, and there was a small reduction peak approximately from 1.1 to 0.8 V. For the GO/Zn (1:3) electrode, the oxidation peaks of iodide and triiodide were between 0.5 and 0.9 V and 0.9 and 1.3 V, respectively; the reduction peaks of iodide and triiodide were between 0.6 and 0.1 V and 1.0 and 0.7 V, respectively. For the GO/Zn (1:10) electrode, the couples between 0.5 and 0.9 V and 1.0 and 1.4 V were the oxidation peaks of iodide and triiodide, and 0.7 and 0.0 V and 1.0 and 0.7 V were the reduction peaks. GO/Zn (1:10) exhibited the strongest redox current density and the lowest reduction potentials of the triiodide ion. A high redox activity and a more reversible redox of the GO/Zn (1:10) electrode are correlated to the electrocatalytic behavior for improving the redox capability of I−/I3−. These characteristics are attributable to the effective dispersion of Zn and N on RGO, consequently increasing the number of catalytic sites and effectively enhancing the electrocatalytic capability of GO/Zn (1:10) CE.

In this study, several DSSC CEs were fabricated using different GO/Zn ratios to analyze the effects that different GO/Zn ratios had on device short-circuit current (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), and conversion efficiency (Eff). The JV curves of the DSSC devices are illustrated in Fig. 8(b), and the JV data of the DSSC devices are tabulated in Table 2. The performance reproducibility of the DSSCs based on various CEs was investigated. For each condition, four DSSC devices were fabricated and analyzed. The values shown in Table 2 are the averaged values and standard deviations of four devices made under identical conditions. The control device of Pt CE exhibited JSC = 16.67 mA cm−2, VOC = 0.74 V, FF = 0.61, and Eff = 7.49%. Using a similar fabrication process as the control device, the JSC, VOC, and FF of the GO/Zn (1:1) sample were 18.28 mA cm−2, 0.73 V, and 0.43, respectively. Although the JSC of the GO/Zn (1:1) sample was the highest among all the samples, it had the lowest FF, resulting in a conversion efficiency of only 5.74%. The JSC, VOC, and FF of the GO/Zn (1:3) sample were 17.76 mA cm−2, 0.75 V, and 0.56, respectively. Although the JSC and VOC of the GO/Zn (1:3) sample were higher than those of the control device, its FF was lower than that of the control device, resulting in a conversion efficiency similar to that of Pt CE (7.46% vs. 7.49%). The JSC, VOC, and FF of the GO/Zn (1:10) sample were 17.23 mA cm−2, 0.74 V, and 0.61, respectively. Although the JSC and VOC of the GO/Zn (1:10) sample were not the highest among the samples, with a JSC only slightly higher than that of the control device, the FF of 0.61 was similar to that of Pt CE. Therefore, the conversion efficiency of the GO/Zn (1:10) sample was 7.78%, outperforming that of Pt. In summary, the GO/Zn (1:10) sample demonstrated the highest conversion efficiency among all the GO/Zn samples. FE-SEM and CV measurement results revealed denser clusters of particles on the thin film surface of GO/Zn (1:10) CE, meaning that the GO/Zn (1:10) sample had the most favorable electrocatalytic and redox effects as well as the highest conversion efficiency among the samples.
Counter electrode
Device characteristic data
EIS curve fitting data

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
Eff (%)

R
CE (Ω)

R
CT (Ω)

R
D (Ω)
Pt
16.67 ± 0.07
0.74 ± 0.01
0.61
7.49 ± 0.17
66.1
69.90
25.9
GO/Zn(1:1)
18.28 ± 0.08
0.73 ± 0.02
0.43
5.74 ± 0.18
29.2
594.0
59.4
GO/Zn(1:3)
17.76 ± 0.08
0.75 ± 0.01
0.56
7.46 ± 0.13
20.9
104.8
17.2
GO/Zn(1:10)
17.23 ± 0.08
0.74 ± 0.01
0.61
7.78 ± 0.14
9.90
107.4
13.2
The IPCE analysis results of the DSSC devices are given in Fig. 8(c). All the DSSC devices were fabricated with N719 dye. Thus, the absorption wavelength ranges of the devices were identical; only the external quantum efficiencies of the devices were different. The IPCE diagram showed that the GO/Zn (1:1) sample had the highest IPCE peak value (91.2%) at a 530 nm wavelength, followed by the GO/Zn (1:3) sample (89.7%). The IPCE peak value of the control device (Pt) was 83.5%, and that of the GO/Zn (1:10) sample was 86.4%. The measured trends coincided with the short-circuit current density trends, whereby short-circuit current intensity decreased as the GO/Zn ratio increased.
The EIS results of the DSSC devices are given in Fig. 8(d). The EIS curve fitting data are listed and compared in Table 2. Three regions are generally distinguished for the EIS results of DSSC in the frequency range of 0.1 Hz–1 MHz, including a smaller semicircle in the high-frequency range (>1 kHz), a larger semicircle in the middle frequency range (1 Hz–1 kHz), and a small semicircle in the low-frequency range (0.1 Hz–1 Hz). The small semicircle presents in the high-frequency region of the impedance spectrogram representing the impedance value of the charge–transfer processes at the CE/electrolyte interface, i.e., RCE. The results revealed that the impedance value (RCE = 9.90 Ω) of the GO/Zn (1:10) sample was the lowest of all the GO/Zn samples. All of the GO/Zn CEs exhibited lower values of RCE than that of Pt CE (RCE = 66.1 Ω), showing that GO/Zn CEs can reduce the impedance between the electrode and electrolyte. The medium-frequency region represents the impedance value of the charge transfer through the titanium oxide/dye/electrolyte interface, i.e., RCT. GO/Zn (1:3) had the lowest medium-frequency impedance value (RCT = 104.8 Ω); however, its high-frequency impedance value (RCE = 20.9 Ω) was relatively high. Therefore, the overall impedance of the GO/Zn (1:3) device was higher than that of the GO/Zn (1:10) device. In the low-frequency region, the third semicircle represents the impedance value of ion diffusion in the electrolyte of DSSC, i.e., RD. The GO/Zn (1:1) sample exhibited a high impedance value in the second and third semicircles (i.e., RCT = 594.0 Ω, RD = 59.4 Ω), suggesting that impedance interfered with charge diffusion in the electrolyte, resulting in the semicircle being displayed over scale than the other samples in Fig. 8(d). The impedance spectrogram highlights that power conversion efficiency increased as the impedance values of the devices decreased. The low impedance value of the GO/Zn (1:10) sample agreed with its favorable conversion efficiency. This study further compared the stability of the DSSC devices fabricated with Pt and various GO/Zn CEs. Fig. 9 shows that after 720 hours (30 days), the DSSCs fabricated with Pt and various GO/Zn CEs all retained ∼85% of their original efficiency. These results show that the stability of DSSCs fabricated with various GO/Zn CEs is similar to that of DSSCs fabricated with Pt CE.

This study first synthesized a new μ-hydroxo-bridged dinuclear macrocyclic Zn complex. This complex was successfully reacted with GO to form a dinuclear macrocyclic Zn complex/graphene-based composite. Several CEs were fabricated using different GO/Zn complex weight ratios, including 1:1, 1:3, and 1:10. The surface morphology of the thin films was then analyzed. TEM and SEM results revealed that particle density and distribution uniformity increased concurrently with the proportion of the μ-hydroxo-bridged dinuclear Zn macrocyclic complex. FTIR results indicated that the dinuclear macrocyclic Zn complex was grafted onto RGO, and Raman results showed that the μ-hydroxo-bridged dinuclear macrocyclic Zn complex partially reduced GO, and therefore, the ID/IG ratio in GO/Zn decreased concurrently with the increase of the Zn complex. XPS results indicated that the oxygen-containing bonds in GO were transformed to RGO after undergoing the reaction with the dinuclear macrocyclic Zn complex. Therefore, the GO/Zn (1:10) sample had the lowest O content and the highest C/O ratio. Subsequently, the N-doping rate increased concurrently with the amount of the dinuclear macrocyclic Zn complex added. After applying the RGO/dinuclear macrocyclic Zn complex composites to the fabrication of DSSC CEs, the GO/Zn (1:3) sample achieved a similar efficiency to the control component (Pt), and the GO/Zn (1:10) samples outperformed the control component. JV measurement results indicated that the conversion efficiency of the GO/Zn (1:10) sample was the highest (7.78%). These results suggested that the improvement in conversion efficiency began to stagnate once the Zn complex reached a specific level. The short-circuit current intensity decreased as the Zn complex increased, and the fill factor increased concurrently with the Zn complex. The EIS impedance spectrogram showed that the GO/Zn (1:10) sample achieved the most favorable internal electron transmission, the lowest interface impedance, and the lowest internal impedance. The IPCE results indicated that the GO/Zn (1:1) sample achieved the highest external quantum efficiency, which agreed with short-circuit current performance. Among the GO/Zn samples fabricated in this study, the GO/Zn (1:10) sample optimizes component efficiency when applied to the fabrication of CEs. The findings of this study prove that the RGO/dinuclear macrocyclic Zn complex composites can replace the conventional Pt in the fabrication of DSSC CEs.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


The authors are grateful for the financial support provided by the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) of Taiwan under grant number MOST 108-2113-M-030-003 and MOST 108-2221-E-259-011.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. CCDC 1960539. For ESI and crystallographic data in CIF or other electronic format see DOI: 10.1039/D0DT01191F
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020