 DOI: 10.1039/C0JM04559D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6848-6853

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Qidong
Tai
,

Jinhua
Li
,

Zhike
Liu
,

Zhenhua
Sun
,

Xingzhong
Zhao
 and 

Feng
Yan
*

Department of Applied Physics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China. E-mail: apafyan@polyu.edu.hk

Key Laboratory of Artificial Micro- and Nano-structures of Ministry of Education and School of Physics and Technology, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, China

Received
28th December 2010
, Accepted 10th March 2011
First published on 4th April 2011
A fullerene end-capped polyethylene glycol has been synthesized and used as an additive in organic solar cells based on poly(3-hexylthiophene) and phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM). It was found that an appropriate amount of the additive can dramatically improve both the photovoltaic performance and the lifetime of the devices, which have been attributed to the successful morphological control of PCBM by the additive. Under transmission electron microscopy, uniformly distributed and stable PCBM crystallites with an average size of only several nanometres in the active layer were observed. We speculate that the immobile fullerenes bonded to polyethylene glycol chains act as nucleation centers for PCBM crystallites and thus result in a stable and uniform PCBM distribution in the active layer, which is essential for high performance organic solar cells. Since PCBM is used as a universal acceptor in polymer solar cells, these results suggest that such an additive can be used in many other different polymer solar cells to control the morphology of PCBM and improve the device performance.

Organic solar cells have been under intensive research in the past years for their advantages over conventional inorganic solar cells, such as low-cost, lightweight, flexibility and roll-to-roll fabrication. Poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) based solution processable bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells are the most important and extensively studied organic solar cells. In such BHJ solar cells, the phase-separation morphology of the intermixed photoactive layer of the two components governs the dissociation of photogenerated excitons and the transportation of charge carriers and thus plays an decisive role on the photovoltaic performance of the device. Considering the short exciton diffusion length in the polymer semiconductor P3HT, which is typically in the range of ∼10 nm, the ideal morphology of the photoactive layer should be a bicontinuous network with homogeneous phase segregation at a length scale within 10 nm.

However, in most cases, it's very difficult to achieve such an ideal morphology in P3HT/PCBM solar cells. Controlling the morphology of the active layer is somewhat tricky and complicated. One should take into account a series of factors very carefully, including the ratio of the two materials, selection of solvents, as well as the processing conditions, such as thermal annealing,solvent annealing and the use of additives to get a more desirable morphology. It is worth noting that, in the cases of thermal and solvent annealing, the improvements in performance of the solar cells mainly come from the enhanced light harvesting and hole mobility due to the increased crystallinity of P3HT. However, the distribution and the size of PCBM crystallites which are crucial for efficient charge separation and charge collection are quite uncontrollable in above situations.
On the other hand, the initially optimized morphology of the composite films could not stay unchanged over a long period of time especially under elevated temperatures due to the thermodynamical instability of PCBM crystallites, which will result in an obvious degradation of the device performance. Several methods have been proposed to improve the thermal stability of the active layer to extend the lifetime of the organic solar cells. Remarkable enhancement of thermal stability of the BHJ devices has been reported by using photocrosslinkable polythiophene or less regioregular P3HT. Meanwhile, functionalized fullerene derivatives were also used to promote the morphological stability, such as introducing a crosslinkable unit into the PCBM molecule to form a crosslinked and stabilized fullerene network, or replacing the planar phenylene ring of PCBM with bulky groups like triphenylamine or 9,9-dimethylfluorene to suppress the crystallization of the resulting products. In addition, an amphiphilic diblock copolymer incorporating both P3HT and fullerene units was employed in the BHJ film as an compatibilizer to get a better stability of the BHJ film by lowering the interfacial energy between the two components.
Compared to the modifications of the polythiophene, direct tailoring of the morphology by fullerene will be a more efficient way for improving the morphological stability of the active layer. However, in the cases of the methods mentioned above, it usually takes several steps to synthesize the functionalized fullerene derivatives which will complicate the device fabrication and limit their use in real application. Besides, all the above approaches do not necessarily lead to any improvements of the photovoltaic performance, in spite of their significant successes in stabilizing the morphology of the BHJ film.
Here, we report a fullerene end-capped polyethylene glycol (referred as PCBPEG hereafter) synthesized by a one step transesterification reaction between PEG and PCBM (see Fig. 1a), which is used as an additive to control the microstructure of the P3HT/PCBM active layers in organic solar cells. Interestingly the PCBPEG can dramatically increase not only the long-term stability but also the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the organic solar cells, which can be attributed to successful morphological control of PCBM crystallites in the nanoscale.

All materials for the fabrication of P3HT:PCBM solar cells were used as received. P3HT (4002-EE, regioregularity: 90–93%) and PCBM were purchased from Rieke Metals and Nano-C, respectively. Poly(3,4- ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonic acid (PEDOT:PSS) was bought from Baytron P, Bayer AG. PEG-4000 (molecular weight: ∼4000) was purchased from International Laboratory, USA. The sheet resistance of indium tin oxide (ITO) coated glass substrate is 15 Ω/□.



Fig. 1a shows the synthesis of PCBPEG. PEG-4000 and PCBM were first dissolved in chlorobenzene with the same molar concentration then refluxed at 140 °C for 12 h in the presence of titanium isoproxide. After that, the resulting solution was extracted using deionized (DI) water and then dried. If two fullerenes bonded on both ends of the PEG chain, it becomes insoluble and cannot be extracted by DI water. A diluted water-extracted PCBPEG solution was used for UV-Vis measurements (Shimadzu UV-2550). The Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrum of the PCBPEG powder was obtained using the KBr pellet method by Nicolet Magna 760 spectrometer.


In a comparative study, three types of devices, including a standard P3HT/PCBM solar cell (control sample), a PCBPEG-modified solar cell, and a pure PEG-modified solar cell, were fabricated. All the devices were prepared as reported elsewhere. First, a ca. 40 nm PEDOT:PSS layer was deposited on the well-cleaned ITO glass and annealed at 140 °C for 10 min. Then the active layer was spin-coated on the top of it from the P3HT/PCBM solution in chlorobenzene (1/0.8, w/w, 20 mg ml−1 and 16 mg ml−1 for P3HT and PCBM, respectively.) at 800 rpm for 20 s, followed by slow drying process. For the modified ones, a specific amount of PCBPEG and the same amount of pure PEG were added directly into the same P3HT/PCBM solution and coated onto the PEDOT:PSS layers under the same conditions. Then a 100 nm thick Al electrode was deposited by thermal evaporation followed by post-treatment of the completed devices at 120 °C for 10 min. The active area of each device was 0.2 cm2.

The J–V characteristics were recorded on a Keithley 2400 source meter under 100 mW cm−2 simulated AM 1.5G illumination (Oriel 91160, 300 W), the light intensity was calibrated with Oriel PV reference cell system (91150 V). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) values were measured with an EQE system equipped with a xenon lamp (Oriel 66902, 300 W), a monochrometor (Newport 66902), a Si detector (Oriel 76175_71580) and a dual channel power meter (Newport 2931_C).
The samples for absorbance measurements were prepared by the same procedure as the fabrication of solar cell before the deposition of Al electrode. TEM samples were prepared by coating the composite films on PEDOT:PSS/glass substrates under the same conditions used for solar cells. Then the BHJ films were lifted off by water, collected on a copper TEM grid and observed under TEM (JEOL JEM 2010).


Fullerene is known for its insolubility in water or other polar solvents and so is PCBM. However, when it is mounted onto the hydrophilic PEG chain, it becomes very soluble in water as shown in Fig. 1b. PCBPEG in water exhibits similar UV-Vis absorbance to pure PCBM in chlorobenzene (see Fig. 1c). Therefore PCBPEG was successfully synthesized. In addition, FTIR was used to monitor the molecular change of PEG and fullerene derivatives, as presented in Fig. 1d. Pure PEG shows a dominant peak around 1100 cm−1 due to the vibration of the periodical C–O–C bond. The peaks at 843 cm−1, 955 cm−1, 1282 cm−1 originate from the crystalline PEG regions. For PCBM, the strong and sharp peak at 1736 cm−1 is assigned to stretching of the carboxyl group. The peak around 1620 cm−1 and the wide band around the 1400 cm−1 are attributed to the vibration of CC and the aromatic ring. The two peaks at 1147 cm−1 and 1182 cm−1 are assigned to the symmetric and asymmetric vibration of the C–O–C bond, respectively, and the strong peak at 528 cm−1 is the fingerprint of fullerene. Unlike the mixture of PEG and PCBM whose FTIR spectrum is just a superposition of the two individual spectra, the following changes in the FTIR spectrum of PCBPEG can be found. The peaks at 1736 cm−1 and 1620 cm−1 are broadened and, more importantly, the relative intensity of the three peaks at 843 cm−1, 955 cm−1, 1282 cm−1 are obviously reduced, which means there is a decreased crystallinity of PEG because of the degradation of the regularity of the PEG chains when fullerene is bonded to it. The structure of PCBPEG was further identified by 1HNMR (Fig. S1).

Then PCBPEG was used as an additive in P3HT/PCBM organic solar cells. The influence of adding different amounts of PCBPEG (weight percent of P3HT) on the solar cells' performance was carefully studied. For comparison, the effects of pure PEG were also characterized. Fig. 2 shows the photovoltaic performance of the organic solar cells with and without additives in the active layer. Compared to the control sample without any additives, the performance of the device is improved in the presence of small amount of PCBPEG and 5% PCBPEG is found to give the best result while further increase in the amount of PCBPEG decreases the device performance dramatically. On the contrary, the addition of pure PEG decreases the PCE monotonically and deteriorates the device performance drastically when the amount of PEG is over 10%.

Fig. 3a shows the J–V characteristics of the control device and ones modified with 5% PCBPEG and 5% PEG. The control device gives an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 589.8 mV, short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 10.18 mA cm−2, fill factor (FF) of 0.542 and therefore an overall PCE of 3.25%. After being modified with 5% PCBPEG the Voc, Jsc, and FF are improved to 602.3 mV, 11.44 mA cm−2 and 0.60, respectively, which result in a remarkable increase of the PCE to 4.15%. For the 5% PEG modified device, the PCE is reduced to 2.88% with a decreased Voc of 576.5 mV, Jsc of 9.31 mA cm−2 and FF of 0.534. The external quantum efficiencies (EQE) of the three devices are shown in Fig. 3b. All of the three devices exhibit similar shape and, unsurprisingly, the 5% PCBPEG-modified sample gives the highest EQE over the whole spectrum with its value approaching 80% over a wide range from 440 nm to 570 nm. The integral values of the EQE of the control, PCBPEG-modified and PEG-modified devices are 10.20 mA cm−2, 11.58 mA cm−2, 9.24 mA cm−2, respectively, which agree very well with the measured Jsc. The photovoltaic parameters of all of the devices are summarized in Table 1.
Amount of PCBPEG/PEG

V
oc (mV)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

FF

PCE (%)
Control
589.8
10.18
0.542
3.25(±0.15)
3% PCBPEG
596.7
10.68
0.571
3.64(±0.10)
5% PCBPEG
602.3
11.44
0.602
4.15(±0.12)
7% PCBPEG
596.7
9.79
0.519
3.03(±0.16)
10% PCBPEG
554.7
8.86
0.475
2.34(±0.21)
15% PCBPEG
534.9
5.85
0.369
1.16(±0.14)
2% PEG
586.7
9.67
0.537
3.05(±0.11)
5% PEG
576.5
9.31
0.534
2.87(±0.15)
10% PEG
545.8
7.28
0.448
1.78(±0.20)
20% PEG
356.2
0.989
0.168
0.0592(±0.03)
The influence of the additives (PCBPEG and PEG) on the microstructure of P3HT/PCBM films are observed under TEM. The control, PCBPEG- and PEG-modified samples are annealed at extreme conditions, i.e. 150 °C for 2 h and 12 h, to better understand both the nanoscale morphology and the stability of the composite films. The control and PCBPEG-modified samples show smooth and homogeneous topologies prior to thermal annealing (see supporting information, Fig. S2a–d). The dark regions in the TEM picture represent the PCBM crystallites as confirmed by a high resolution image (see supporting information, Fig. S3). As shown in Fig. 4, upon annealing at 150 °C for 2 h, PCBM crystallites in the pure PCBM/P3HT blend film grow to sizes ranging from several nanometres to larger than 10 nm and aggregate to form larger clusters in some places, which is similar to the TEM picture reported in our previous paper. Similarly, PCBM crystallites aggregate in the PEG-modified film annealed at the same condition (see supporting information, Fig. S1e). In comparison, PCBM crystallites are distributed uniformly in the PCBPEG-modified film and have similar sizes of around 3 nm. This kind of morphology is beneficial to the performance of the solar cell since the interface area of P3HT/PCBM in this device is much bigger than that in the control sample, which is the main reason for the improved PCE of the PCBPEG-modified device.
We consider that the homogeneous distribution of PCBM crystallites in the PCBPEG-modified film is driven by the self-assembling process associated with PCBPEG molecules. The fullerenes that are bonded to the PEG chains may become the nucleation centers for PCBM crystallites. On the other hand, the PCBM molecules cannot aggregate to a greater extent because of the uniformly distributed high density nucleation centers. However, this is not the case for the pure PEG-modified samples since PCBM does not interact with the PEG molecules. On the other hand, the insulating property of PEG may hinder the charge transportation and induce higher serial resistance of the device and consequently lower photocurrent and FF. Therefore the addition of PCBPEG can greatly optimize the microstructure of P3HT/PCBM films and dramatically improve the photovoltaic performance of organic solar cells.
As shown in Fig. 4c and d, when the annealing time is prolonged to 12 h, PCBM crystallites in the control film become even bigger and inhomogeneous. Some large aggregates bigger than 50 nm are formed. However, PCBM crystallites in the PCBPEG-modified film are still distributed uniformly with no sign of forming any PCBM aggregates, but the average size of PCBM crystallites is doubled. The suppressed crystallization kinetics can be attributed to the immobile nucleation centers, i.e.PCBPEG molecules, because of the existence of the long polymer chain. This result is extremely important for the thermal stability and lifetime of the organic solar cells, which will be studied in following part of this article.
The thermal stability of the devices in this work is examined by an accelerated aging test at 60 °C in dark in a nitrogen-filled glove box. The inert atmosphere is used to exclude the interference of humidity and oxygen due to the susceptibility of organics to them and allows us to focus on the influence of morphological change on the device performance under elevated temperature. Fig. 5 shows the variation of the performances of the three types of devices with the aging time. Both the control and the PEG-modified devices show rapid degradations especially during the first 100 h, where their PCEs are decreased to less than 50%, and after being aged for 300 h, only 15% remains. Meanwhile, the degradation process is significantly retarded for the PCBPEG-modified device, which still maintains 50% of the PCE after being heated for 300 h. In all cases, the degradations of the PCEs are ascribed to the decay of Jsc and FF, whereas, the Voc shows negligible degradation over the whole test time.

Fig. 6 shows the optical images of the active layer of the three types of devices before and after the aging test observed under a microscope. All of the devices present homogeneous blend films without large PCBM crystals before thermal treatment at 60 °C. However, after being heated for 300 h, many large PCBM crystals appear over the whole regions in both control and PEG-modified samples. This kind of large-scale macro-phase separation is the main reason for the deterioration of the devices’ performance. While, the formation of large PCBM crystals is greatly suppressed in PCBPEG-modified blend film, which accounts for the enhanced thermal stability of the device.

In summary, the fullerene end-capped polyethylene glycol can be used as an additive in P3HT/PCBM based polymer solar cells to facilitate the uniform distribution of PCBM crystallites with the size of several nanometres in the P3HT matrix and stabilize the morphology of the blend film by suppressing the formation of larger PCBM crystals even at elevated temperatures. As a result, both the PCE and the thermal stability of the device are significantly improved by adding an appropriate amount of this material into the blend film. It is notable that, as the fullerene is used as a universal acceptor in polymer solar cells regardless of the donor materials, the fullerene-oriented method proposed in this work can also be applied in other types of polymer solar cells.


This work is financially supported by the Research Grants Council (RGC) of Hong Kong, China (project number: B-Q10T) and the Hong Kong Polytechnic University (project number: J-BB9S and A-SA54).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c0jm04559d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011