 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA12817B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14524-14531


Jing
Xu
,

Hongwei
Wu
,

Xinru
Jia
*,

Hany
Kafafy
 and 

Dechun
Zou
*

Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Key Laboratory of Polymer Chemistry and Physics of the Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. E-mail: xrjia@pku.edu.cn; Fax: +86-10-62751708; Tel: +86-10-62752102

Received
21st July 2013
, Accepted 24th September 2013
First published on 26th September 2013
Three dendritic molecules EG0, EG1 and EG2 were synthesized and separately used as co-adsorbents in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) to explore their effect on controlling interfacial charge recombination. It was found that the resulting device with EG2 as the co-adsorbent (device EG2) displayed superior open-circuit voltage (VOC), improved short-circuit current density (JSC) and a higher power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 7.50%, as compared to the control device (N719) and the devices with EG0 or EG1 as the co-adsorbent (devices EG0 and EG1). Such improved performance is ascribed to the increase of the interfacial distance upon the introduction of EG2, and the formation of a more compact monolayer of the dye N719 and co-adsorbent EG2 at the interface, which shields the acceptors in the electrolyte from contacting the TiO2 surface, hence reducing the back current and increasing the VOC. On the other hand, the aggregation of dye molecules is restrained due to the competitive adsorption between dye N719 and co-adsorbent EG2, thus leading to the minimization of energy loss and the enhancement of JSC. As a co-adsorbent, EG2 was also introduced to DSSCs using either the iodide electrolyte without the additive 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) or the cobalt electrolyte. The results showed that EG2 also displayed effective capability of suppressing interfacial charge recombination and reducing intermolecular energy transfer.

Photovoltaic technology brings hope for the solution of current energy shortage and global warming. As a prospective photovoltaic system, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have drawn ever increasing research interest from both the academic and industrial communities in the past decades, but still remain a challenge. As is well known, a major drawback limiting the advancement of DSSCs is the uncontrolled charge recombination at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface. In particular, the undesirable charge transfer between electrons in the conduction band of TiO2 and acceptors in the electrolyte impacts the open-circuit voltage (VOC) and power conversion efficiency (PCE). Tremendous efforts have been invested in the retardation of charge recombination to achieve record photovoltaic performance. The incorporation of co-adsorbents, such as chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA), 1-decylphosphonic acid (DPA), and w-guanidinoalkyl acids, on the TiO2 surface has been reported as an efficient way to restrain the recombination process and improve the photovoltaic performance. The possible mechanisms are thought to be that the adsorption of co-adsorbents and dyes together can fabricate a more compact and insulating barrier on the TiO2 surface than that of dyes alone, thus minimizing electron recombination with acceptors in the electrolyte. Additionally, the presence of co-adsorbents may change the conduction band level of TiO2 in some cases, leading to devices with improved VOC or short-circuit current density (JSC). Moreover, the introduction of co-adsorbents prevents the aggregation of dye molecules because of the competitive anchoring process, which restrains the intermolecular energy transfer and enhances the JSC.

As reported, dendritic molecules could afford devices with superior conversion efficiency when employed in DSSCs, mainly owing to their highly branched three-dimensional structures and their interaction with redox couples in the electrolyte. However, due to the limited reports, the exact relationship between the backbone structure of dendrons and photovoltaic performance is still not very clear. Thus, further exploration of the effect of dendrons constructed from other repeating units on DSSCs is urgently required. Previously, we discovered that amidoamine dendrons could show extremely rich self-assembly structures due to hydrogen interactions via the amide groups in the repeating units. These results lead us to envision its potential for the fabrication of a highly compact layer at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface to reduce the back current in DSSCs. With this in mind, we recently reported a ruthenium dye RG1 modified by amidoamine dendrons. It was found that RG1 retarded the electron recombination effectively and shifted the VOC to higher values due to its bulky structure and the formation of packed barrier at the interface via hydrogen interactions in the dendrons. However, the amount of dye adsorption on the TiO2 electrode was reduced because of the large size of RG1, leading to a device RG1 with a lower JSC value. Therefore, we have been trying to explore a way to realize the enhancement of both VOC and JSC. Inspired by the reported merits of co-adsorbents, we herein employed the modified amidoamine dendrons as co-adsorbents in DSSCs to control the interfacial electron recombination and restrain the dye aggregation, by which we expect to create a device with improved VOC, JSC and PCE.
In this contribution, we report a series of novel amidoamine dendron-based co-adsorbents, named EG0, EG1 and EG2, and examine the performances of the corresponding devices. The optimal concentrations and generation of the incorporated dendrons were examined and selected. The influence of the dendritic co-adsorbents on JSC was analyzed by measuring the amount of dye adsorption in the TiO2 film and the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the DSSCs. The electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were tested to gain a deeper understanding of the effect of the dendrons on retarding the back current and improving the VOC. In addition, the devices with the dendritic co-adsorbent were explored in other electrolytes including the iodide electrolyte without the additive 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) and the cobalt electrolyte, and compared with the devices employing the common co-adsorbent chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) to further confirm the ability of the dendritic co-adsorbent in reducing the interfacial charge recombination.

Chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA), iodine (I2) and acetonitrile (AN) were purchased from TCI (Shanghai), Beijing Chemical Reagent Company and Siyou Inc., Tianjin, China, respectively. Lithium perchlorate (LiClO4, 99%), 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) and ethylene carbonate (EC) were obtained from Aldrich. FTO glasses, TiO2 paste (DHS-TPP3, diameter: 20 nm), ionic liquid 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide (BMII), dye N719 (RuL2(NCS)2:2TBA, L: 2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid, TBA: tetrabutylammonium) and N3 (RuL2(NCS)2, L: 2,2′-bipyridine-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid) were purchased from Heptachroma Inc., Dalian, China. The redox couples in the cobalt electrolyte, Co(phen)3(PF6)2 and Co(phen)3(PF6)3, were prepared based on the literature.

Succinic anhydride, n-butyric anhydride and trifluoroacetic acid were purchased from Alfa Aesar and used as received. Triethylamine (Et3N) was purchased from Beijing Chemical Reagent Company and distilled before use. The dendritic molecules, EG0, EG1, and EG2 used as co-adsorbents in this contribution were synthesized starting from the dendrons G0-NH2, G1-NH2 and G2-NH2 according to the previous literature, and the detailed synthetic procedures are described in the ESI (Scheme S1).

TiO2 (DHS-TPP3, diameter: 20 nm) was placed on the FTO glasses by screen printing. The obtained FTO glasses were sintered in a muffle furnace at 150 °C for 15 min and then at 450 °C for 30 min sequentially. The thickness of the TiO2 film was approximately 3.5 μm after one round of screen printing. After repeating the above steps three times, the TiO2 film was 10.5 μm thick. After the last heating process, the TiO2 electrodes were cooled down to 100 °C and then immersed into the dye bath solutions. After 24 h, the sensitized TiO2 photoanodes were taken out of the solutions and eluted with methanol to remove excess dye.

The cathodes with Pt film (thickness: ∼50 nm) on the FTO glasses were prepared by magnetic sputtering. The obtained dye-adsorbed photoanodes (test area: ca. 0.25 cm2) and the Pt counter cathodes were assembled to form DSSCs and isolated with a 25 μm thick hot-melt ionomer film (Surlyn, Dupont). Then the electrolytes were injected into the solar cells through pores in the counter cathodes. Finally, the devices were sealed by Surlyn film to maintain the stability of the DSSCs.

Three types of N719 dye bath solutions were prepared. The first one as a control was the dye N719 (0.3 mM) in methanol solution. The second type was dye N719 (0.3 mM) in methanol solutions containing a series of different concentrations of dendritic co-adsorbents (0.15, 0.6, 2.4, or 9.6 mM for EG0, and 0.0375, 0.15, 0.6, or 2.4 mM for both EG1 and EG2). On the basis of the generation of dendritic co-adsorbents, twelve solutions were prepared and used for sensitization. The third type was dye N719 (0.3 mM) in methanol solution with CDCA (0.15 mM) as the co-adsorbent. Moreover, N3 (0.3 mM) bath solutions with and without the addition of the co-adsorbent EG2 (0.15 mM) were also prepared.


Three kinds of electrolyte were employed in this work. The first electrolyte was an iodide electrolyte, which included 0.03 M iodine, 0.6 M 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide (BMII), 0.05 M lithium perchlorate (LiClO4) and 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) dissolved in a mixed solvent of acetonitrile (AN) and ethylene carbonate (EC) (6:4). The second iodide electrolyte contained the same components but without TBP. The third electrolyte was the cobalt redox system composed of 0.2 M Co(phen)3(PF6)2, 0.2 M Co(phen)3(PF6)3, 0.05 M LiClO4 and 0.5 M TBP in acetonitrile (AN) solution.



1H NMR and 13C NMR measurements were performed at room temperature on 400 MHz and 100 MHz spectrometers (Bruker) respectively, using DMSO-d6, CDCl3, or D2O as the solvens. Electrospray ionization mass spectra (ESI-MS) were recorded on an APEX IV Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometer (Bruker). UV-vis absorption spectra were recorded using a Lambda 35 UV/Vis Spectrometer (Perkin Elmer). The optimized structures of the dendritic co-adsorbents were obtained using the Universal Force Field as implemented in the Forcite Code of the Materials Studio software.

The photovoltaic performance of the devices was measured under AM 1.5 simulated sunlight illumination with a light intensity of 100 mW cm2. The simulated sunlight source was a YSS-50A (Yamashita DESO). The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) was measured from 300 nm to 800 nm using a SolarCellScan100 (Beijing ZOLIX Corp.). The electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were measured using an Autolab (frequency range: 100 kHz to 10 mHz). The parameters of chemical capacitance (Cμ) and charge recombination resistance (Rrec) were obtained by fitting the EIS with Z-View software, according to the transmitting line mode.

The dendritic molecules EG0, EG1 and EG2 studied in this contribution were synthesized based on previously reported methods. The structures of the dendrons, with a carboxyl group at the focal point for anchoring onto the TiO2 surface, are shown in Fig. 1. The detailed synthetic procedures and structural characterization are described in the ESI (Scheme S1). In our case, the simultaneous adsorption of dyes and co-adsorbents was employed for the passivation of the TiO2 surface. The sintered TiO2 electrodes were immersed in dye N719 (0.3 mM) solutions containing EG0, EG1 or EG2 with a series of different concentrations (0.15, 0.6, 2.4, or 9.6 mM for EG0, and 0.0375, 0.15, 0.6, or 2.4 mM for both EG1 and EG2). By comparing the corresponding device performances (Fig. S1(a)–(c)), the optimum concentration of each dendron as the co-absorbent for sensitization was selected as 2.4 mM for EG0 and 0.15 mM for both EG1 and EG2. In the following section, for comparison, we will only discuss the devices modified by the dendrons at the optimal concentration.

For evaluating the effect of the dendritic co-adsorbents on photovoltaic performance, a control device sensitized by N719 dye alone (device N719) and three devices respectively co-sensitized by N719 dye and each dendron at the optimal concentration (devices EG0, EG1 and EG2) were constructed using the iodide electrolyte containing the additive 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP). Accordingly, the electrodes were recorded as electrode N719, EG0, EG1, and EG2, respectively. The J–V plots of the designed devices were measured under AM 1.5 simulated sunlight illumination, and are shown in Fig. 2(a). The resulting photovoltaic parameters, including the open-circuit voltage (VOC), short-circuit current density (JSC), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) are listed in Table 1. It was found that, compared to the control device N719, the introduction of EG0 showed almost no effect on the device performance, with only a slightly enhanced JSC value (13.34 mA cm−2) and almost unchanged VOC (734 mV) observed, while the incorporation of EG1 and EG2 caused different behaviour. In particular, the device EG2 showed a higher PCE of 7.50% due to the significant enhancement of VOC (786 mV) and JSC (14.17 mA cm−2). These results indicate that the photovoltaic performance is generation dependent in the order EG2 > EG1 > EG0 > N719, and the second generation dendritic co-adsorbent EG2 is superior to the others in terms of improving the performance of DSSCs. The J–V curves of the corresponding devices under dark conditions (Fig. 2(b)) were also measured to estimate the degree of interfacial charge recombination loss. It could be seen that the device EG2 gave the lowest dark current value, demonstrating that the use of EG2 as the co-adsorbent suppressed the dark current more effectively, hence evidently improving the VOC and PCE.
Device

V
OC (mV)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)

a I3−/I− as the electrolyte with TBP.


N719


735
13.06
0.678
6.51

EG0


734
13.34
0.690
6.75

EG1


766
13.92
0.674
7.19

EG2


786
14.17
0.673
7.50
We also introduced the co-adsorbent EG2 at the optimal concentration into N3-sensitized solar cells. As shown in Fig. S2, the device with EG2 as co-adsorbent displayed higher JSC and VOC than device N3, demonstrating that the co-adsorbent EG2 could enhance the device performance effectively in the system with either N719 or N3 as the dye sensitizer.

UV-vis measurements were performed to analyze the adsorption amount of the dye N719 in the TiO2 electrodes. N719 dye was desorbed from the TiO2 film by immersing the sensitized electrodes into 0.1 M KOH aqueous solutions. Fig. 3 shows the absorption intensity of dye N719 in the desorption solutions. The relative adsorption amount of dye loaded in the TiO2 film was 73.0% for electrode EG0, 77.2% for electrode EG1 and 76.7% for electrode EG2 compared to the electrode sensitized by N719 alone, indicating that the presence of dendritic co-adsorbents decreased the coverage of dye N719 on the photoanodes. This is attributed to the competition of the dendrons with dye N719 for the limited sites on the TiO2 surface in the co-adsorption process. This competitive adsorption retards the rate of dye adsorption, reduces the amount of weakly bonded dye and prevents the aggregation of dye molecules on the TiO2 surface.

The measurement of the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) at monochromatic wavelength was carried out to gain insight into the increased JSC of the devices with the dendritic co-adsorbents. As shown in Fig. 4, increased IPCE performance was observed for the systems with dendrons as a co-adsorbent. Particularly, the device EG2 showed the highest quantum efficiency, with a maximum IPCE of 70.2%, compared to 64.6% for the device N719. The increased quantum yield is ascribed to the inhibited dye aggregation in the presence of dendrons, which minimizes the intermolecular energy transfer and increases the electron injection efficiency. As a result, it compensates for the loss of light harvesting caused by the lower dye coverage in the TiO2 photoanodes with dendrons as a co-adsorbent, and leads to the enhancement of JSC.

In order to further analyze and understand the superior VOC of the devices with dendritic co-adsorbents, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed to gain valuable information about the interfacial carrier transfer processes. As reported, in Nyquist plots, the semicircle in the medium frequency region is regarded as the charge recombination impedance between electrons in TiO2 and acceptors in the electrolyte. The increased size of the semicircular radius in this region reflects increased electron recombination impedance and a retarded dark reaction rate at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface. The Nyquist plots of DSSCs based on the TiO2 photoanodes modified with EG0, EG1 or EG2 were measured under dark conditions with the reverse bias of 0.64 V (Fig. 5). The radius size increased stepwise in the order EG0 < N719 < EG1 < EG2, which fitted well with the trend in VOC. This result clearly states that EG2 as a co-adsorbent in DSSCs exhibits a stronger ability to suppress the back electron transfer than the other dendrons. This property can be attributed to the following: (1) the larger steric structure of EG2 (Fig. S3) results in a longer distance between the electrons in the TiO2 and I3− in the iodide electrolyte; (2) the more H-bonding interactions via amide groups in EG2 facilitates the assembly of dye and co-adsorbent molecules into a more compact layer at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface. Consequently, the migration of I3− to the TiO2 surface is prevented, thus slowing down the interfacial electron recombination rate and increasing the VOC.


V
OC is determined by the difference between the quasi Fermi level (EF,n) of TiO2 and the redox potential (Eredox) of the electrolyte. Supposing Eredox to be constant, VOC will be controlled by the EF,n of TiO2. EF,n is generally expressed by eqn (1):
EF,n = ECB + kBTln(n/NCB)
(1)
where
ECB is the conduction band edge of TiO2, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, NCB is the effective density of states, and n is the number of electrons in TiO2 related to the carrier transfer processes, including electron injection and recombination. Based on eqn (1), EF,n can be elevated either by the movement of the ECB towards the vacuum level, or by increased electron population in TiO2, eventually causing an enhancement in VOC. To further understand the mechanisms of the increase of VOC in our case, EIS with different reverse bias under dark conditions were measured. By fitting the EIS with the transmission line model, two parameters, charge recombination resistance (Rrec) and chemical capacitance (Cμ) at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface, were obtained.Fig. 6(a) shows the Rrec curves as a function of reverse bias. It was found that from 0.54 to 0.73 V, the device with EG2 as the co-adsorbent provided the maximum Rrec as compared to the devices N719, EG0 and EG1 at the same reverse bias, again confirming the function of EG2 on increasing the interfacial electron recombination resistance and controlling the back current. This function inhibits the reduction of electron number in TiO2, leading to an increase of VOC.

Chemical capacitance (Cμ) is an important parameter for assessing the position of the conduction band of TiO2, and can be calculated using eqn (2):
(2)
where
e is the elementary charge, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, α is a constant indicating the distribution of electronic states below the conduction band, and V is the reverse bias in the impedance measurement. Given that Eredox is a constant, the position of the ECB can be estimated by analyzing the value of Cμ at a certain reverse bias.Fig. 6(b) shows the Cμ plots of the devices with and without dendritic co-adsorbents under different reverse bias. The devices with dendrons as the co-adsorbent showed almost identical chemical capacitance at any specific bias as the control device N719. In terms of the relationship between Cμ and ECB, it reveals that the incorporation of dendritic molecules has no effect on the TiO2 conduction band level, indicating that the superior VOC of the device EG2 is due to the retardation of the interfacial electron recombination, but not the shift of the conduction band of TiO2.

Electron lifetime (τ), another significant parameter to evaluate the charge recombination rate in DSSCs, is usually calculated from Rrec and Cμ using eqn (3):
τ = RrecCμ
(3)

Fig. 6(c) shows the electron lifetime curves as a function of reverse bias. Compared to the other devices, the device EG2 showed the most prolonged electron lifetime at any specific bias, demonstrating that the slowest charge recombination occurred in DSSCs with EG2 as the co-adsorbent.

TBP is one of the most commonly used additives in electrolytes, and can improve the VOC of DSSCs by retarding the interfacial charge recombination and up-shifting the ECB of TiO2. In order to understand the effect of EG2 as a co-absorbent on DSSCs more clearly, we also extended our studies to the devices based on the iodide electrolyte without TBP (Fig. 7(a)). The detailed device parameters are summarized in Table 2. It can be seen that when EG2 was co-grafted with N719, higher VOC (594 mV) and JSC (16.01 mA cm−2) values were achieved for the device EG2 (N), with the PCE increasing to 6.10% as compared to 4.36% of the control device N719 (N). This result demonstrates that EG2 as the co-adsorbent also significantly increased the performance of DSSCs using the electrolyte without TBP. For comparison, chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA), as a widely used co-adsorbent, was also introduced in this system under the same conditions as EG2 (0.15 mM). The performance of the device with the co-adsorbent CDCA (device CDCA (N)) was tested and is recorded in Fig. 7(a). The device performance showed almost no change while inserting CDCA on the TiO2 surface, which was inconsistent previous reports, possibly due to the absence of TBP in the iodide electrolyte.

Device

V
OC (mV)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)

a I3−/I− as the electrolyte without TBP.
b Co3+/Co2+ as the electrolyte with TBP.


N719 (N)


484
14.87
0.605
4.36

CDCA (N)


489
14.87
0.580
4.24

EG2 (N)


594
16.01
0.640
6.10

N719 (Co)


350
1.87
0.403
0.26

CDCA (Co)


455
2.04
0.450
0.42

EG2 (Co)


713
4.24
0.450
1.37
The electrochemical impedance spectra of DSSCs using the iodide electrolyte without TBP were also measured and are shown in Fig. 7(b). The larger radius size of the curve of device EG2 (N) in the medium frequency region revealed the slower charge recombination occurring at the interface, demonstrating that EG2 retarded the interfacial back current efficiently even without TBP in the electrolyte. On the other hand, EG2 plays a role in preventing the dye aggregation as described above, which minimizes the energy quenching and increases the JSC. These dual effects of EG2 as a co-adsorbent endow the device with clearly enhanced performance even without TBP in this system.

Cobalt electrolyte, another type of redox couple, can afford a superior theoretical value of VOC in DSSCs than the iodide electrolyte due to its higher reduction potential. However, the fatal weaknesses of the one-electron cobalt redox couples used in DSSCs are the more severe electron recombination and the shorter electron lifetime. In order to investigate the function of EG2 as a co-adsorbent in DSSCs with more serious recombination, the J–V plots of devices using the cobalt electrolyte were measured. The obtained device parameters are listed in Table 2. As shown in Fig. 8(a), compared to the control device N719 (Co) with the PCE of 0.26%, the device EG2 (Co) exhibited a significant increase in PCE (1.37%) with higher VOC (∼360 mV higher) and JSC (approximately one-fold higher). Additionally, the device with co-adsorbent CDCA (device CDCA (Co)) was also prepared under the same conditions as the device EG2 (Co). It was found that the addition of CDCA resulted in a device with higher JSC and VOC as compared to the control device N719 (Co), but was still inferior to the device with EG2.


Fig. 8(b) shows the impedance spectra of the devices with and without EG2 using the Co3+/Co2+ couple as the electrolyte. It is clear that the device EG2 (Co) displayed increased dark reaction impedance, indicating that the incorporation of EG2 effectively retarded the interfacial back electron transfer, though more serious recombination usually occurs in this system. Moreover, the effect of reducing the dye aggregation by using EG2 as the co-adsorbent gave the device a superior JSC. These behaviors together maintain the ability of EG2 to improve the performance of DSSCs, even using the cobalt electrolyte.

In summary, three dendritic molecules EG0, EG1 and EG2 were synthesized and used as co-adsorbents in DSSCs. It was found that the introduction of the second generation dendritic co-adsorbent EG2 in DSSCs endowed the device with superior VOC, JSC and PCE values. We attribute this performance to the bulky structure of EG2 and the H-bonding interactions of the amide groups in EG2, which widen the spatial separation between the TiO2 surface and the redox couple in the electrolyte, and facilitate the assembly of dyes and co-adsorbents together to fabricate a more closely-packed structure on the TiO2 surface, thus preventing the redox couples from accessing the TiO2 surface, minimizing the charge recombination loss and shifting the VOC to higher values. Furthermore, the competitive anchoring process of EG2 and N719 on the TiO2 surface effectively diminishes the aggregation of dye molecules, which minimizes the intermolecular energy transfer, increases the electron injection efficiency and leads to the enhancement of JSC. EG2 also showed effective capability of suppressing the interfacial back current and reducing the intermolecular energy quenching when used with different electrolytes, including the iodide electrolyte without TBP and the cobalt electrolyte. Meanwhile, it is worth noting that the effect of EG2 was superior to that of the commonly used co-adsorbent CDCA under the same conditions. As a co-adsorbent, the dendritic molecule EG2 provides an alternative pathway for further retarding electron recombination and enhancing the performance of DSSCs.


This work was financially supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (no. 2011CB933300) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21174005).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Synthetic procedures and the characterization of EG0, EG1 and EG2, and supporting figures. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta12817b
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013