 DOI: 10.1039/D0SE00598C
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 3115-3128


In-Gon
Bae
 and 

Byoungchoo
Park
*

Department of Electrophysics, Kwangwoon University, Wolgye-Dong, Seoul 01897, Korea. E-mail: bcpark@kw.ac.kr

Received
17th April 2020
, Accepted 20th April 2020
First published on 20th April 2020
We herein report several characteristics of semitransparent perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) composed of functional layers fabricated by means of a solution-coating process of self-metered horizontal dip- (H-dip-) coating. The perovskite precursor solution used here was prepared by mixing PbI2 and CH3NH3I in anhydrous GBL and DMSO. To enhance the film-forming capabilities of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite PV layer, a small amount of a surfactant additive of poly(oxyethylene tridecyl ether) (PTE) was mixed with the perovskite precursor solution. Using the H-dip-coating process with PTE additives dramatically reduces the formation of film defects such as grain-boundary defects and nano-pinholes in the perovskite layers, resulting in uniform and homogeneous PV layers with smooth surface morphologies, even in ambient air. The use of H-dip-coated perovskite and other functional layers, including electron/hole collecting layers, and transparent silver nanowire electrodes resulted in good performance of the semitransparent device, with a transmittance level of 23% between 400 and 800 nm and a corresponding power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 10.2%. Furthermore, we demonstrated the feasibility of fabricating over a large area 8.5 × 8.5 cm2 in size with a high PCE of 5.6% for all-solution-processed semitransparent PVSCs even in ambient air. Our study indicates that H-dip-coated functional layers can be used to yield transparent, efficient, and large-area, solution-processable semitransparent PVSCs, thus creating a new pathway toward transparent solar cells with high photovoltaic efficiencies.

Semitransparent solar cells are attractive energy conversion devices owing to their various applications in power-generating smart-windows, such as building- and/or vehicle-integrated photovoltaics. To date, semitransparent solar cells have been developed on the basis of organic photovoltaics, dye-sensitised solar cells, perovskite solar cells (PVSCs), and c-Si solar cells. In these solar cells, many of the materials used are prepared by thin-film deposition processes, with these fabricated thin films therefore semitransparent in the visible and near-infrared wavelength regions. Further, they can exhibit specific colours as a result of their characteristic absorption spectrum cutoffs in the visible light wavelength range depending on the photovoltaic (PV) materials used. However, most semitransparent solar cells developed to date have several limitations due to their low optical transparency (<30%) and low power conversion efficiencies (PCEs < 10%) together with their relatively small active areas as well as complex fabrication processes. To resolve these issues, a new approach is required to develop semitransparent solar cells by means of a simple and easy thin-film deposition process.

Among the semitransparent solar cells developed thus far, the semitransparent PVSC is a strong potential candidate given its high transmittance, efficiency and easy fabrication process. Conventional organic–inorganic hybrid halide PVSCs have been developed rapidly with certified efficiencies exceeding 25% due to their advantages of a suitable band gap, high carrier mobility, long carrier diffusion length, high absorption coefficient, and versatile solution-processibility. However, conventional PVSCs, such as methylammonium lead halide (CH3NH3PbI3, MAPbI3) PVSCs, are unable to transmit light in the visible light wavelength range owing to the materials used to create their highly reflective metal electrodes, such as gold, silver, or aluminium (Al), which are commonly used in device structures requiring high PCEs. Given the increasing demand for semitransparent photovoltaics, the need for semitransparent PVSCs is also increasing significantly.
Thus far, several researchers have developed semitransparent PVSCs with transparent electrodes to replace the conventional reflective metal electrodes. For the fabrication of semitransparent PVSCs, various transparent electrode materials such as conducting polymers, metallic nanowires, graphenes, and carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have been investigated. These transparent electrode materials are likely suitable for solution deposition processes of the types used to fabricate devices. Recently developed solution processes include spin-coating, bar-coating, spray-coating, and lamination. Among them, spray-coating of nanomaterials has been widely investigated as a means by which to develop semitransparent devices due to its simple process. For example, using transparent electrodes of spray-coated silver nanowires (AgNWs), CNTs, and/or composites of these materials, small (<0.25 cm2) fully solution-processed semitransparent PVSCs with efficiencies of 8–14% were successfully fabricated. Nevertheless, the spray-coating technique when used with AgNW or CNT transparent electrodes has notable disadvantages, such as numerous surface defects, overspray, high material costs, difficulty in controlling the coating thickness, and low transfer efficiency, among others. Further, despite the use of spray-coated AgNW or CNT electrodes in semitransparent PVSCs, nearly all perovskite PV layers are still fabricated by spin-coating, a low-throughput process that critically limits the cell size to less than 1 cm2 and that must be done under an inert gas in a glove box via an anti-solvent treatment or under an ambient air environment with a gas-assisted process, the most common process in laboratories. Thus, wider applications are quite limited with regard to large-area deposition or high-throughput production, and the cost of the materials used in the semitransparent PVSCs is also relatively high due to the high loss of the spin/spray-coating solutions and the complexity of the fabrication process. These issues are the major motivations behind the search for an alternative solution deposition technique capable of creating all of the functional layers in semitransparent PVSCs, including the electrodes as well as the perovskite PV layer and other functional layers, such as electron/hole collecting layers.
Novel scalable coating techniques for perovskite PV layers have been developed over the past few years, such as spray-coating, doctor-blade coating, slot-die coating, and bar-coating. In addition to these methods, an advanced coating method known as horizontal-dip- (H-dip-) coating operating in the Landau–Levich mode can serve as an alternative solution deposition technique feasible for the creation of all functional layers in semitransparent PVSCs. The H-dip-coating method is a continuous fabrication process compatible with roll-to-roll fabrication that it also one of the most successful methods due to its simplicity and versatility. The versatility and effectiveness of the H-dip-coating technique has been demonstrated for coatings of organic, polymeric, inorganic semiconducting, and AgNW layers for organic light-emitting devices, polymer solar cells, organic thin-film transistors, and liquid crystal cells. Recently, a doctor-blade coating technique operating in the Landau–Levich mode, similar to the H-dip-coating technique, was used to produce highly efficient PVSCs with PCEs of ∼20.0% in air by using a small amount of a surfactant additive of L-α-phosphatidylcholine (LP) to form a uniform perovskite layer together with thermally evaporated reflective metal electrodes. Thus, with the simple and easy H-dip-coating of functional solutions/inks for PVSCs, it is possible to obtain high-performance, large-area semitransparent PVSCs without any additional processes.
Here, we demonstrate an alternative approach to constructing a semitransparent fully solution-processed PVSC using a simple and fast self-metered H-dip-coating technique that works even in air without an inert gas environment and with any additional process, such as an anti-solvent treatment, vacuum drying, and/or gas quenching. We successfully fabricated uniform and homogeneous functional layers, including transparent AgNW electrodes as well as other functional layers, in this case perovskite and hole/electron collecting layers, by using the H-dip-coating technique. Systematic control of the uniformity and thickness of the perovskite layer was then accomplished with solvent volatilization and a surfactant pinning effect by adjusting the Landau–Levich meniscus of the coating solution and using a new surfactant additive, poly(oxyethylene tridecyl ether) (PTE), consisting of an alkyl chain at the end and a hydroxyl chain at the other end, to produce a large grain size with fewer grain boundary defects. With the H-dip-coated functional layers, we demonstrate a fully air-processed MAPbI3 perovskite layer with improved performance and stability that enables the realisation of semitransparent PVSCs (average visible transmittance: ∼23%) with a high PCE of 10.2%, corresponding to a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 20.7 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.03 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 46.9%. Moreover, enhanced stability of the PVSCs was obtained due to the reduced number of defects of the grains and related boundaries in the H-dip-coated perovskite layers. Further, as a typical application, large-area semitransparent PVSCs over an area of 8.5 × 8.5 cm2 were also successfully fabricated using the H-dip-coated functional layers in air, with these samples showing an average PCE of 5.6%.


Fig. 1a shows a photograph of the Marangoni meniscus of a perovskite precursor solution during the self-metered H-dip-coating process for the deposition of thin and homogeneous MAPbI3 perovskite films. The H-dip-coating technique, shown in the figure, is a well-known solution-process by which thin and homogeneous films can easily be fabricated over wide areas on various substrates using the meniscus of the coating solutions. Notably, the thickness (h) of the H-dip-coated film can be precisely controlled by adjusting the capillary number (Ca = μU/σ) of the coating solution. Here, μ and σ represent the viscosity and surface tension of the solution, respectively, and U is the coating speed. The thickness (h) of the H-dip-coated film can be described in terms of Ca (or U) for the associated drag-out problem proposed by Landau and Levich; h = kCa2/3Rd, for Ca ≪ 1, where Rd is the radius of the associated downstream meniscus and k is the constant of proportionality. It was noted that the H-dip-coating method is quite similar to the blade-coating method operating under the Landau–Levich mode in terms of the control of the downstream meniscus of the coating bead on the surface.

In the H-dip-coating process used in this study to fabricate homogeneous and uniform perovskite films, approximately 20 μl of the perovskite precursor solution of 1 M MAPbI3, prepared with mixed solvents of γ-butyrolactone (GBL) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (7:3 vol) for good wettability, was injected into the gap (h0 = ∼0.3 mm) between the coating head and the pre-heated substrate at a temperature of 120 °C (for details see the ESI). Pre-heating of the substrates can suppress the formation of inhomogeneous structures such as needle-like defects in perovskite films, even at high speeds used during the H-dip-coating process, as the rapid evaporation of the solvent can convert the ink directly into a perovskite structure because the inhomogeneous intermediate phase is skipped. The coating head was then moved linearly at a constant coating speed U to spread and coat the precursor solution uniformly on the heated substrate. As solvent evaporates from the coated precursor solution, the perovskite precursor material crystallises into a black solid perovskite film.
For the fabrication of the MAPbI3 layers in this study, the new surfactant additive of PTE was also introduced into the precursor solution at a concentration of 10 ppm in an effort to study the surfactant-induced effects on the fabrication of the H-dip-coated MAPbI3 layer in air, i.e., the H-dip-coated MAPbI3 layer with PTE in air (hereafter H-MAPbI3-PTE, see the ESI). For a comparison, a comparative MAPbI3 layer was fabricated using the H-dip-coating method with the precursor solution without an additive in air, i.e., an H-dip-coated MAPbI3 layer without PTE in air (hereafter H-MAPbI3). For an additional comparison, two reference MAPbI3 layers were also fabricated using the conventional single-step spin-coating method together with an anti-solvent treatment process using the precursor solution in N2 or air, i.e., a conventional spin-coated MAPbI3 layer in N2 (hereafter R1-MAPbI3) or a spin-coated MAPbI3 layer in air (hereafter R2-MAPbI3).
First, we investigated optical images of the four fabricated MAPbI3 layers (∼220 nm thick) on 1.5 × 3.0 cm2 glass substrates with the naked eye under normal room lighting, as shown in Fig. 1b. The photographic images in the figure clearly show that among the fabricated MAPbI3 layers, H-MAPbI3-PTE exhibits a very smooth, uniform, and fully covered film over the substrate without any significant film defects, similar to R1-MAPbI3. In contrast, for both R2-MAPbI3 and H-MAPbI3 fabricated in air, inhomogeneous and hazy surfaces on the coated layers were observed over the nearly the entire surface areas of the coated layers, likely due to the Bernoulli effect and/or a microscale solution flow. It is thus clear that when 10 ppm of PTE was added in the perovskite precursor solution, the flow of the microscale solution was suppressed by a ‘Marangoni flow’ driven by a surfactant-induced surface tension gradient, resulting in a homogeneous MAPbI3 layer (H-MAPbI3-PTE), even in air circumstances, as shown in Fig. 1b. The introduction of the optimum concentration of the PTE surfactant is therefore important to obtain homogenous and continuous films over a large area when using the self-metered H-dip-coating process, similar to an earlier result with a LP surfactant in the precursor solution (also see Fig. S1).
Subsequently, we investigated the film thickness h of the H-MAPbI3-PTE sample as a function of the coating speed U for three gap heights h0 using the perovskite precursor solution (Fig. 1c). As shown in Fig. 1c, the thicknesses h of H-MAPbI3-PTE increase continuously as the coating speed U increases in the observed region for a given gap height. Moreover, when the gap height h0 is increased, the thickness of H-MAPbI3-PTE also increases for a given coating speed U. These results can be explained in terms of the associated drag-out problem (Landau–Levich mode) described above. The curve-fitted results based on the Landau–Levich equation are also shown as dotted curves in the figure. The observed data show good agreement with the theoretical values predicted by the equation. It is therefore evident that the thickness of the smooth and homogeneous H-dip-coated MAPbI3 layers can easily be controlled by adjusting the coating speed and gap height.
Next, we investigated the optical absorption characteristics of 250 nm-thick fabricated MAPbI3 layers on glass substrates (Fig. 2a). As illustrated in the figure, the UV-visible (UV-vis) optical absorption spectra of the perovskite layers show strong absorption in the visible wavelength range (450–700 nm), and the H-dip-coated perovskite layers (H-MAPbI3-PTE and H-MAPbI3) exhibit slightly higher absorptions than those of the spin-coated perovskite layers (R1-MAPbI3 and R2-MAPbI3). It is important to note that the introduction of the PTE additives induces a negligible difference in the optical absorption spectra of the H-dip-coated perovskite layer. The photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the fabricated perovskite layers were also observed using 532 nm excitation wavelength, as also shown in Fig. 2b. The figure also indicates, in contrast, that the PL spectra of the H-dip-coated perovskite films show lower peak intensities than the spin-coated perovskite layers. Moreover, H-MAPbI3-PTE exhibits the lowest PL peak intensities among the fabricated perovskite layers. These optical results imply that the PTE additives can reduce recombination loss in the perovskite layers and may induce more effective charge separation in the perovskite MAPbI3 PV layer.
Next, the X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra of the fabricated MAPbI3 perovskite layers were observed to analyse the crystallinity of the layers (Fig. 2c). As shown in the figure, the XRD spectra of the fabricated MAPbI3 layers clearly depend on the fabrication method used as well as the fabrication circumstances. The MAPbI3 layer of R1-MAPbI3 shows typical peaks at 14.04°, 23.46°, and 28.34°, correspond to Miller indices (110), (211), and (220) of the tetragonal perovskite phase. The peak at 28.34° also becomes visible, corresponding to (004). There are also unidentified peaks at 30.04° and 45.70°, for instance, that appear in all cases; these may be due to the underlying indium-tin-oxide (ITO) substrate. While for R2-MAPbI3, the peak at approximately 14.00° corresponding to the (110) plane has the highest intensity, the major peak at 28.36° corresponding to the (222) plane has the highest intensity for H-MAPbI3. Meanwhile, when the PTE surfactant was introduced into the H-dip-coated perovskite layer (H-MAPbI3-PTE), the relative intensity of the (110) peak becomes comparable to that of the (222) peak, which is quite similar to that of the spin-coated perovskite layer of R1-MAPbI3. This XRD result strongly indicates that PTE molecules may induce a crystal lattice in the H-dip-coated perovskite layer, even under ambient air, similar to that in R1-MAPbI3. Notably, such MAPbI3 layers with (110) as the dominant orientation usually exhibit enhanced light absorption, a smooth morphology, and efficient charge carrier transport properties, all of which are desirable in PV devices.
Next, in order to study the surface characteristics of the four perovskite layers fabricated on cleaned substrates, we monitored the fabricated layers using an atomic force microscope (AFM) in non-contact mode and a scanning electron microscope (SEM), as shown in Fig. 3. The left panel of Fig. 3a presents an AFM topography image (5 μm × 5 μm) of the reference layer of R1-MAPbI3 on the substrate. The AFM image of R1-MAPbI3 shows a fairly flat surface with a RMS (root mean square) roughness of about 5.5 nm, a value lower than those in earlier work. For comparison purposes, high-magnification (×10000) and low-magnification (×500) top-view SEM images of the layer were also observed, as shown in the middle and right panels of Fig. 3a, respectively. As indicated by these SEM observations, a fairly flat and smooth surface of the reference layer of R1-MAPbI3 was clearly confirmed over a relatively wide area (150 μm × 150 μm). In contrast, the AFM and SEM images (Fig. 3b) of R2-MAPbI3 prepared by the spin-coating method in air exhibit very rough surface morphologies with a RMS roughness of 71.1 nm due to the formation of needle-like defects, also similar to the findings in previous reports. Meanwhile, as shown in Fig. 3c, the AFM topography and SEM images of H-MAPbI3 show clearly different aspects from those of R2-MAPbI3 (Fig. 3b). Despite the fact that H-MAPbI3 was fabricated in an air atmosphere, it shows a relatively smooth surface morphology with a RMS surface roughness value of 18.6 nm due to the formation of large-sized grains with fewer defects. The growth of such large grains may be affected by nucleation and crystal dynamics during the H-dip-coating process in the ambient condition. More interestingly, as shown in Fig. 3d, the AFM topography and top-view SEM images of H-MAPbI3-PTE show highly smooth surface morphologies with a RMS surface roughness value of 11.9 nm, lower than that of H-MAPbI3. It was also found that H-MAPbI3-PTE shows special features of the grain or domain structure; the size of the crystal domain is much larger (>∼150 μm) with fewer defects compared to H-MAPbI3. In addition, H-MAPbI3-PTE shows narrower grain boundary regions of approximately 3 μm and fewer boundary defects between the larger crystal grains compared to those (∼9 μm) of H-MAPbI3. These results clearly indicate that the introduction of a small amount of the PTE surfactant enhances the affinity of the perovskite precursor solution to the underlying layers due to solvent volatilization and the surfactant pinning effect (consistent with the effect of the LP surfactant reported in the literature). Thus, clearly, not only the spin-coated MAPbI3 perovskite layer fabricated with N2 (R1-MAPbI3) but also the H-dip-coated MAPbI3 perovskite layer with PTE (H-MAPbI3-PTE) are fairly homogeneous over the coated area with good film coverage and few surface defects in spite of the use of the air fabrication process. This analysis of the surface characteristics of the four perovskite layers studied here is also supported by cross-sectional SEM images of the layers, as shown in Fig. S2.
Next, in order to investigate the energy-level characteristics of the fabricated perovskite layers, we monitored the surface potentials of the perovskite layers using a Kelvin probe force microscope (KPFM) (Fig. S3). Using the surface potentials, we could determine the Fermi levels of the fabricated perovskite layers and these are summarised in Table 1. As shown in Table 1, the Fermi levels of the perovskite layers studied here were in the approximate range of 4.9–5.2 eV, nearly identical to the Fermi level range (∼4.8–5.0 eV) of a typical MAPbI3 perovskite layer reported previously. This result indicates that the H-dip-coated MAPbI3 perovskite layer with PTE exhibits energy-level characteristics nearly identical to those of the spin-coated MAPbI3 perovskite layer fabricated with N2 despite the different fabrication processes and environmental conditions.
PV layers
Fermi level (eV)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a All PV data were averaged for four pixels.

R1: reference (spin, N2)
4.97
1.03 ± 0.01
19.11 ± 0.43
67.37 ± 2.34
13.25 ± 0.16
R2: reference (spin, air)
5.23
1.02 ± 0.02
19.90 ± 0.26
63.66 ± 2.64
12.87 ± 0.23
H1: H-dip w/o PTE
5.09
1.07 ± 0.00
21.56 ± 0.33
60.91 ± 1.95
14.05 ± 0.18
H2: H-dip w PTE
4.94
1.06 ± 0.01
22.35 ± 0.24
65.03 ± 1.66
15.46 ± 0.14

Similarly, we investigated the fabrication process of functional layers of NiO, PCBM, and ZnO nanoparticles (ZnO NPs, N-10) using the H-dip-coating technique. The H-dip-coating conditions for these functional layers are as follows: for the hole-collecting NiO layer, a NiO precursor solution of approximately 18 μl was H-dip-coated onto the substrate at 60 °C to form a uniform film. After coating, the H-dip-coated NiO precursor layer was annealed 300 °C for one hour. For the electron-collecting layer, a PCBM solution (∼25 μl) was H-dip-coated onto substrates at 60 °C, and for the transporting layer, a suspension of ZnO NPs (∼15 μl) was H-dip-coated onto substrates at room temperature.

We then measured the film thickness (h) of the H-dip-coated NiO, PCBM, and ZnO NP layers as a function of the coating speed U for the three gap heights with the Landau–Levich menisci of their suspensions (Fig. S4a). It is clear from the figure that for a given h0, the thickness of the all H-dip-coated layers of NiO, PCBM, and ZnO NPs showed continuous increases with an increase in U. These results were in good agreement with the associated drag-out problem, as shown in the figures.

Fig. 4a shows the surface morphologies of the H-dip-coated functional layers as measured by AFM. For comparison, Fig. 4a also shows the surface morphologies of the spin-coated functional layers. For the H-dip-coated NiO layer (25 nm thick), the AFM surface morphology shows a RMS surface roughness value of 0.5 nm, nearly identical at different positions on the investigated layers. Similarly, the AFM surface morphology of the 25 nm-thick spin-coated NiO layer shows a RMS surface roughness of 0.4 nm. For the 50 nm-thick H-dip-coated PCBM layer, the AFM surface morphology shows a RMS surface roughness value of 0.1 nm, again nearly identical at different positions of the layers. For the spin-coated PCBM layer, the observed RMS surface roughness was 0.2 nm. Similar to the H-dip-coated NiO and PCBM layers described above, the 20 nm-thick H-dip-coated ZnO NP layer shows a homogeneous and flat surface morphology with a RMS surface morphology of 1.5 nm, which is also nearly identical at different positions. However, the spin-coated ZnO NP layer exhibits an inhomogeneous and rough surface morphology with a high RMS surface roughness value of 26.1 nm. Therefore, it is clear that the H-dip-coating method provides relatively homogeneous and smooth functional layers of NiO, PCBM, and ZnO NPs.
Next, regarding the NiO hole-collecting layers, PCBM electron-collecting layers, and ZnO electron-collecting layers, we also observed the surface potentials to estimate the Fermi levels of these layers (Fig. 4b). From the surface potentials, the obtained Fermi level of the H-dip-coated NiO layer was close to 4.82 eV, a value nearly identical to that (4.91 eV) of the spin-coated NiO layer. These values are quite similar to the value (∼5.0 eV) of the Fermi level for a previously reported NiO layer. For the H-dip-coated PCBM layer, the estimated Fermi level from the surface potentials was found to be about 5.13 eV, nearly identical to that (4.98 eV) of the spin-coated PCBM layer. These values are also close to the reported value (∼4.6 eV) of the PCBM layer. For the ZnO layers, the estimated Fermi levels of the spin-coated and H-dip-coated layers were approximately 4.39 and 4.54 eV, respectively, also similar to the value (∼4.3–4.4 eV) of the Fermi level of a previously reported ZnO layer. Thus, all of the H-dip-coated functional layers show Fermi levels nearly identical to those of the spin-coated layers, clearly indicating that the energy levels of the H-dip-coated layers studied here are virtually equivalent to those of conventional spin-coated layers, regardless of the solution-coating process used. It was thus noted that the energy-level diagram (Fig. 5a) is supported by the obtained work functions or Fermi levels of the perovskite layers and other functional layers.

Subsequently, we investigated the PV performance outcomes of perovskite solar cells with solution-processed functional layers, specifically MAPbI3 layers, the device architectures and energy diagrams of which are illustrated in Fig. 5a. The J–V characteristics of the perovskite solar cells were measured under a dark state (dark current) and under AM1.5G illumination (photocurrent).

In the dark, as shown in the upper panel of Fig. 5b, the reference PV cell with the spin-coated functional layers, including R1-MAPbI3 in N2 (R1), clearly revealed good diodic behaviour with a rectification ratio of 127 at 1.2 V. This ratio is nearly identical to that (∼145) of a reference PV cell with the spin-coated functional layers, in this case the R2-MAPbI3 cell fabricated in air (R2). It is also comparable to a rectification ratio (∼145) reported in earlier work. Similarly, the PV cell with all H-dip-coated functional layers including H-MAPbI3 in air (H1) exhibited similar but slightly different current flows with a rectification ratio of 204. In contrast, the PV cell with all H-dip-coated functional layers with PTE (10 ppm) including H-MAPbI3-PTE in air (H2) exhibited slightly different current flows with a reasonable rectification ratio of 274, possibly due to differences in the internal resistance and variations in the interfacial potential barriers at the interfaces between the PV and the other functional layers.
The photo J–V characteristics of the PV cells were also investigated using 1.5G illumination; these results are shown in the lower panel of Fig. 5b and the corresponding performances are summarised in Table 1. The R1 device showed fairly good device performance, exhibiting an average PCE of 13.25% with a JSC value of 19.11 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.03 V, and an FF of 67.37%, comparable to PCE values (ca. 13%) reported previously. However, the R2 PV cell with R2-MAPbI3 fabricated in air showed lower performance due to the poor coverage area and rough surface of R2-MAPbI3 compared to that of R1-MAPbI3 fabricated in N2; here, the PCE is 12.87% with a JSC value of 19.90 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.02 V, and an FF of 63.66%. In contrast, the H1 PV cell with H-MAPbI3 fabricated in air showed higher performance than the R1 PV cell even with fabrication in air; the PCE is 14.05% and the JSC is 21.56 mA cm−2. In addition, the VOC value is 1.07 V, and FF is 60.91%. More interestingly, the H2 PV cell with H-MAPbI3-PTE fabricated in air shows the highest device performance among the devices tested here, showing an average PCE of 15.46% with a JSC of 22.35 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.06 V, and an FF of 65.03%. It was also found that when the concentration of PTE changes from 10 ppm, the PCE of the H2 PV cell begins to decrease (Fig. S1 and Table S1). These PV results clearly indicate that the H-dip-coating technique can induce the formation of large perovskite grains (Fig. 3d), thus contributing to the improved generation of charge carriers in the PV layer.
For another comparison, we also investigated the external quantum efficiency (EQE) and internal quantum efficiency (IQE) of the perovskite solar cells studied here, as shown in the upper and lower panels of Fig. 5c, respectively. It is clear from these figures that the H-MAPbI3-PTE sample showed the highest EQE and IQE characteristics among the perovskite solar cells, consistent with the JSC characteristics (Fig. 5c). It was noted that the optical absorption spectra of the perovskite PV layers (Fig. 2a) appears to be responsible for the characteristic shapes of the IQE spectra (Fig. 5c). It is also important to note that when the layer thickness of H-MAPbI3-PTE changes from 250 nm, the PCE value of the H2 PV cell begins to decrease (Fig. S5 and Table S2). These PV characteristics can be attributed to the fact that the PTE surfactant can contribute not only to better charge transport between the perovskite layers and the hole- or electron-collecting layers of NiO or PCBM, respectively, due to the reduced number of bimolecular recombinations, but also to the formation of fewer defects with reduced surface roughness of the perovskite films.

Considering the outcomes thus far, we investigated the changes in the device performance capabilities of four devices with a simple encapsulation technique using epoxy resin as a function of the storage time under constant humidity of 35–40% (T = 24 °C). Fig. 6 shows the changes in the normalised key performances of PCE, JSC, VOC, and FF of the four MAPbI3 solar cells studied here, following the International Summit on Organic PV Stability (ISOS) protocol (ISOS-D-1) for dark-storage studies to provide information about the tolerance of the PVSCs in air. In terms of the PCE (Fig. 6a), all four devices show significant decrements of the PCEs as the storage time increases. Generally, such characteristic decrements of the PCEs of devices can be analysed by means of the stretched-exponential decay function, i.e., exp[−(t/τ)β], where the characteristic time τ and exponent β can be determined by the nonlinear least squares method, indicated by the dotted curves in Fig. 6a. For example, the PCE of the spin-coated reference R1 device with N2 maintained nearly 50% of its original value after 29 h, likely related to the relatively uniform and homogeneous R1-MAPbI3. The estimated parameter values of the R1 device are τ = 48.3 h and β = 0.64. However, the PCE of the R2 PV cell decreased dramatically to nearly 0% after 5 h. The τ and β values of the R2 device are estimated to be 1.7 h and 0.67, respectively. This significant degradation with a small τ value for the spin-coated R2 device in air may be due to the needle-like defects in the MAPbI3 PV layer with high roughness, which can induce the decomposition of the MAPbI3 layer via the easy permeation of H2O or O2 into the layer. Meanwhile, the PCE of the H1 PV cell remained at approximately 50% of the original PCE after 15 h, likely related to the more uniform and homogeneous H-MAPbI3 compared to the spin-coated layer of R2-MAPbI3. The estimated parameter values of the H1 device are τ = 22.5 h and β = 0.92. However, the H1 PV cell is also less stable than the spin-coated reference R1 device with N2 (τ = 48.3 h and β = 0.64), as shown in the figures. In contrast, notably, the device stability of the H2 device with PTE is much better than that of the reference R1 device and the other devices fabricated in air; the PCE performance of the H2 device shows marginal degradation of 10% after 5 h, and this level is retained for more than 50 h, although the functional layers of the NiO, PCBM, and ZnO NPs in this sample are identical to those of the H1 device without PTE fabricated in air, apart from for introduction of PTE in the perovskite layer. The estimated parameter values of the H2 device are τ = 106.9 h and β = 0.72.

From an analysis of the characteristic times τ, it was found that the PTE surfactant significantly promotes temporal stability of the H2 device with a 2.2-fold increase in the characteristic time τ with respect to that (48.3 h) of the conventional spin-coated reference R1 device. Thus, it was clear that the PTE surfactant in the MAPbI3 layer can improve not only the PV performance (117%) but also the device stability (2.2 times). This improved stability of the H2 device appears to stem from the reduction of the number of defects in the perovskite film together with the better passivation effect due to the PTE surfactant in the perovskite layer.
In order to understand the stability improvement of the H2 device, we also measured the contact angles of the perovskite layers to check the passivation effect against humidity (Fig. S6). As shown in the figure, the PTE surfactant in the MAPbI3 layer leads to a decrease in hydrophobicity of the layer surface, in contrast to the increased hydrophobicity in the conventional surfactant case, improving the device stability by preventing the permeation of H2O into the perovskite layer. This PTE-induced decrease in the hydrophobicity of the perovskite layer is somewhat unusual. Thus, at this stage, the cause of the improved device stability of the H2 device is not yet clear and should be investigated further.

Next, based on the results of the H2 sample device fabricated using the H-dip-coating technique as described above, we fabricated semitransparent perovskite PV cells with the introduction of an AgNW cathode, exhibiting high conductivity, transparency, and solution-processability, instead of the aforementioned vacuum-evaporated Al cathode. Here, the transparent AgNW cathode was also coated using the H-dip-coating technique; i.e., all functional layers of the perovskite PV cell on the ITO anode were prepared using the H-dip-coating process.

Regarding the electrical properties of the H-dip-coated AgNW transparent electrodes, the sheet resistance levels of the AgNW layers were also investigated as a function of the film thickness for three gap heights (Fig. 7a). As shown in the figure, the AgNW layers with thicknesses exceeding 60 nm reveal excellent sheet resistance of less than 10 ohm per square. It is also shown that the sheet resistance of the AgNW layer decreases continuously as the thickness of the layer increases, possibly due to the increased number of interconnections among the AgNWs in the thick layers. Moreover, for a given AgNW layer thickness, the layer created with a low gap height (h0) exhibits lower sheet resistance than other layers created with high values of h0, indicating that the interconnections among AgNWs may increase as h0 decreases.

Fig. 7b shows typical examples of the optical transmission spectra of the H-dip-coated AgNW electrodes with different thicknesses. The transmittance clearly shows the prominent characteristics of the AgNW electrodes: the transmittance in the visible wavelength region is very high for the thin AgNW electrode and begins to decrease as the layer thickness increases. Here, the low transmittances at 350 nm are mainly attributable to the transverse surface plasmon resonance (SPR) absorption of the AgNWs, while the low signals in the long-wavelength region over 1000 nm (peak at around 3100 nm, not shown) are attributable to the longitudinal SPRs absorption of the AgNWs.

Fig. 7c shows examples of the AFM surface morphologies of the AgNW electrodes with a layer thickness of approximately 100 nm (∼20 ohm per square) on glass substrates. Interestingly, the H-dip-coated AgNWs are homogeneously well distributed over nearly the entire substrate surface with few defects, in contrast to the inhomogeneously assembled AgNWs formed on the surface by spin-coating. The values of the RMS surface roughness for the 40, 60, and 100 nm-thick H-dip-coated AgNW electrodes are 12.8, 18.4, and 29.1 nm, respectively, nearly identical at different positions on the investigated layers, while the RMS surface roughness observed for the 100 nm-thick spin-coated AgNWs was close to 36.3 nm. It was also noted that during the H-dip-coating process, the capillary fluid in the Landau–Levich meniscus near the substrate induces shear stress, particularly where the suspension passes under the coating barrier. Subsequently, the AgNWs in the suspension gradually sink to the solid substrate, after which the homogeneous AgNWs remain on the substrate after the solvent evaporates.
Thus, it is clear that the H-dip-coated AgNWs is quite homogeneous over the coated area, in contrast to other coating techniques, such as spin-coating or spreading with an evaporation step. We also investigated the surface contact potential differences (VCPDs) of the H-dip-coated AgNW electrodes by means of KPFM (Fig. S7). From the measured value of VCPD, the work function of the AgNW electrode was estimated. The obtained work function of the H-dip-coated AgNW electrode is close to 4.64 eV, slightly higher than the work function (∼4.5 eV) of the Al cathodes used in the devices described above. Thus, the work function of the AgNW in this case may result in somewhat decreased PV performance of the perovskite PV cell utilizing the AgNW cathode.
We subsequently fabricated semitransparent MAPbI3 PV cells with the H-dip-coated AgNW cathodes; i.e., all of the stacked functional layers in the device were fully fabricated in air. The device structure of the semitransparent perovskite PV cell is [ITO anode/NiO hole-collecting layer/MAPbI3 perovskite with PTE/PCBM electron-collecting layer/ZnO NP electron-transporting layer/SnO2 NP electron-transporting layer/AgNW cathode/ZnO NP cover layer]. Here, the SnO2 NP electron-transporting layer (15 nm, Fig. S8) and an additional ZnO NP cover layer (20 nm) were adopted for better energy level matching between the ZnO and AgNWs and to improve the interconnections in the AgNW network. All of these stacked functional layers were fabricated by the H-dip-coating method on ITO glass substrates in air at appropriate temperatures with optimised thicknesses as investigated above.
The inset of Fig. 8a shows a photographic image of the fabricated device with a 100 nm-thick AgNW cathode, which exhibits clear semitransparency. The transparency of the fully H-dip-coated H-MAPbI3-PTE-AgNW PV cells was confirmed by an examination of the UV-vis optical transmittance spectra of the device (Fig. 8a). For comparison, the optical transmittance spectra of the cell without the AgNW cathode (ITO/NiO/MAPbI3 perovskite with PTE/PCBM/ZnO NPs/SnO2 NPs) are also shown in the figure. As shown in the figure, the average transmissions in the visible light region (400–800 nm) and the near-infrared light region (800–1100 nm) for the H-MAPbI3-PTE-AgNW device with the AgNW cathode were 23.1% and 62.6%, respectively, while those of the device without the AgNW cathode were 29.8% and 94.5%, respectively. Thus, our semitransparent PV cells are clearly much more transparent than the conventional fully solution-processable semitransparent perovskite PV cells (visible light region: 8–14%) reported previously.
Next, we investigated the photo J–V characteristics of the semitransparent H-MAPbI3-PTE-AgNW PV cell (Fig. 8b). For this measurement, we observed both the photo J–V characteristics under top (glass side) and bottom (AgNW side) illumination conditions, as shown in the figure. When tested under top illumination, the H-MAPbI3-PTE-AgNW PV cell achieved an average PCE of 10.04%, with a JSC of 19.87 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.07 V, and an FF of 47.28%, while when tested under bottom illumination, the cell showed an average PCE of 6.42%, with a JSC of 13.78 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.07 V, and an FF of 43.74%. It was also noted that the measured PCE values under bottom and top illumination are much higher than PCEs of the H-dip-coated PV cell with the spin-coated AgNW cathode; our H-dip-coated PV cell with the spin-coated AgNW cathode achieved a PCE of 6.07% under top illumination, while the cell achieved a PCE of 2.60% under bottom illumination (Fig. S9), outcomes comparable to those (∼8.0%) of a recently reported spin-coated PV cell with an AgNW cathode. Thus, the sum of the PCEs under top and bottom illumination (16.46%) for the semitransparent PVSC is comparable to the PCE of 15.46% for the opaque PVSC with the Al cathode (Table 1). Thus, there is a very small difference in the PCEs between the opaque and the semitransparent devices, although the work function (∼4.6–4.7 eV) of the AgNW electrode is somewhat higher than that (∼4.2 eV) of the Al electrode (Fig. 5 and S7). The measured PV characteristics of the semitransparent H-MAPbI3-PTE-AgNW cell are summarised in Table 2.
PV layer/illumination

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a All data were averaged for four pixels.

H1 w/o PTE
Glass side
1.11 ± 0.01
17.35 ± 0.24
43.27 ± 0.84
9.19 ± 0.16
AgNW side
1.04 ± 0.03
12.34 ± 0.16
48.24 ± 3.21
6.38 ± 0.03
H2 w PTE
Glass side
1.07 ± 0.03
19.87 ± 0.95
47.28 ± 2.74
10.04 ± 0.13
AgNW side
1.07 ± 0.02
13.78 ± 0.42
43.74 ± 1.16
6.42 ± 0.24
It is also noteworthy that the JSC behaviours of the semitransparent H-MAPbI3-PTE-AgNW PV cell are consistent with their EQE and IQE spectra (Fig. 8c); the optical absorption spectra of the MAPbI3 layer (Fig. 1d) are mainly responsible for the EQE and IQE spectral shapes under bottom illumination, while both the absorption spectra of the PV layer (Fig. 2a) and the transmission spectra of the AgNW cathode (Fig. 8a) are responsible for the spectral shapes under top illumination. The foregoing results clearly show that the H-MAPbI3-PTE-AgNW PV cell acted as a semitransparent perovskite PV cell, providing clear evidence of highly efficient and transparent PV activities and making the cell applicable to many applications, such as power-generating smart windows and tandem solar cells. We also infer that further improvements to the PV performance can be expected if using recently developed perovskite PV layers with methylammonium chloride or formamidinium chloride introduced into the perovskite layer; in relation to this, a more detailed investigation will be presented elsewhere.
In addition, it is noteworthy that there may be stability problems of devices due to reactions between the AgNW top electrode and the transport layers, and with the halide perovskite. Such stability problems are most likely induced by chemical reactions between the sublimed I− and Ag+ with the formation of insulating AgI, which may increase the series resistance of the devices as well as the sheet resistance of the AgNW electrode, thereby impairing the charge extraction of the device. However, it is also expected that a significant enhancement of device stability can be achieved by adopting an iodine-inactive interfacial layer to isolate the top AgNWs from the transport layers and from the halide perovskite PV layer. A typical example is an inactive thin Au interfacial layer coated onto the AgNWs (Au-coated AgNWs), which can be a promising candidate as a transparent top electrode for solution-processed semitransparent perovskite devices with good long-term stability.

Finally, encouraged by the impressive results obtained from the semitransparent perovskite PV cells fabricated using the fully H-dip-coated functional layers on the ITO anode, we assembled large-area perovskite PV cells (active area: 8.5 cm × 8.5 cm with four stripes) on 13.0 cm × 13.0 cm ITO-patterned glass substrates using the H-dip-coating method in order to assess the processability of these perovskite semiconducting devices. A photographic image of the PV cell is shown in Fig. 9. Seven stacked functional layers were coated on the patterned ITO glass substrates using the H-dip-coating method in air at appropriate temperatures with optimised thicknesses of the functional layers investigated above. The structure of the PV cell is ITO/NiO/MAPbI3 perovskite with PTE/PCBM/ZnO NPs/SnO2 NPs/AgNW/ZnO NPs. Despite the fact that the seven functional layers in the PV cells were fully fabricated in air, Fig. 9 clearly shows that all surfaces of the PV cells exhibit uniform semitransparency and that the PV cells generate fairly high voltage outputs directly under natural sunlight. For the semitransparent PV cells, the PV performances collected under bottom and top illumination resemble those shown in Fig. 8b (Fig. S10). Moreover, the low variation in the PV performance of the PV cells implies low variability with the thickness of the H-dip-coated functional layers.


Tables 3 and S5 summarise the recent progress in the device structures of semitransparent PVSCs and other solar cells, respectively, with their impact on optical transparency and device performance outcomes. As shown in these tables, although there are significant improvements in both the optical transparency and device performance of semitransparent solar cells, only a few types of semitransparent solar cells have been employed in solution-processed methods without any complex vacuum-based fabrication processes. In particular, no report, except for the present report, has shown a large-area as well as all-ambient air-processable solar cell which attains a desired efficiency exceeding 5% with an active area larger than 25 cm2, making previous semitransparent solar cells far from practically applicable. Therefore, it is clear that our simple H-dip-coating method amenable with an ambient air environment for the fabrication of functional layers in PVSCs can facilitate the development of large-area semitransparent PVSCs possessing both high transparency and efficiency.
Major fabrication process
Device structure [bottom electrode]/[PV layer (method)]/[top electrode]
Tr [%] (λ, nm)
PCE [%] (active area [cm2])
Small
Large

a Anodized aluminium oxide scaffold.
b Chemical vapour deposition.
c Cyclopenta [2,1-b;3,4-b′] dithiophene.
d Polystyrene colloidal monolayer.
e Honeycomb.
f Octadecylsilane.
g Thermally cross-linked N4,N4-di(naphthalen-1-yl)-N4,N4′-bis(4-vinylphenyl)biphenyl-4,4′-diamine.
h Inorganic copper thiocyanate.

Vacuum processing
[ITO]/SnO2/[MAPbI3 (spin in air)]/[MoO3/Ag/WO3] (ref. 6)
15 (400–800)
15 (0.09)
—
[FTO]/c-TiO2/[AAO/MAPbI3 (spin with vacuum-assist)]/spiro-OMeTAD/[MoOx/ITO] (ref. 9)
30.2 (400–800)
—
9 (40.8)
[CVD-graphene]/NiOx/[MAPbI3 (CVD)]/PCBM/[AZO/Ag/AZO] (ref. 28)
26 (at 700)
14.2 (1)
—
[FTO]/c-TiO2/[MAPbI3 (spin in N2)]/CT/[MoOx/ITO] (ref. 29)
Unknown
16.4 (0.16)
15 (11.7)
[FTO]/c-TiO2/PS CM/SiO2 HC/[MAPbI3 (spin in air)]/spiro-OMeTAD/[Ag] (ref. 30)
38 (400–750)
10.3 (0.1)
—
[FTO]/TiO2/[MAPbI3−xClx (spin in air)]/OTS/spiro-OMeTAD/[Ni grid] (ref. 31)
38 (400–780)
6.1 (0.71)
—
[FTO]/TiO2/[MAPbI3 (spin with gas-assist)]/spiro-OMeTAD/[MoO3/Au/MoO3] (ref. 32)
7 (370–740)
13.6 (0.16)
—
[FTO]/SnO2/C60-SAM/[Cs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 (spin in N2)]/spiro-OMeTAD/VNPB/[MoO3/Au/MoO3] (ref. 33)
10.1 (400–800)
16.7 (0.04)
—
[FTO]/TiO2/[Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 (spin in N2)]/CuSCN/[ITO] (ref. 34)
14 (at 700)
12.9 (0.16)
—
[ITO]/PTAA/[Cs0.05FA0.8MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45]/C60/SnOx/Zn-SnOx/[IZO] (ref. 35)
13.6 (400–750)
18.6 (0.15)
—
Inert gas processing (N2 or Ar)
[ITO]/TiO2/[CH3NH3PbI3−xClx (spin in N2)]/spiro-OMeTAD/[PEDOT:PSS] (ref. 17)
8.2 (400–750)
15.1 (0.04)
—
[ITO/AgNW/ITO]/ZnO/[Al2O3 + MAPbI3 (spin in N2)]/spiro-OMeTAD/[Au] (ref. 18)
Unknown
8.4 (0.06)
—
[ITO]/NiOx/[FA0.81MA0.15Pb(I0.836Br0.15)3]/PCBM/[spin-AgNW] (ref. 19)
7.3 (at 700)
11 (0.09)
—
[ITO]/PEDOT:PSS/[MAPbI3−xClx (spin in N2)]/PC60BM/PEI/[spray-AgNW/ZnO] (ref. 21)
23.3 (400–800)
8.2 (1)
—
[FTO]/TiO2/[MAPbI3−xClx (spin in N2)]/spiro-OMeTAD/PEDOT:PSS/[2L-graphene] (ref. 25)
22.5 (at 700)
12.4 (0.24)
—
Ambient air processing
[FTO]/TiO2/Al2O3/carbon black:graphite/[5-AVA-MAPbI3 (spin in air)]/[spray-MWCNT] (ref. 7)
24 (400–800)
8.2 (0.2)
—
[FTO]/TiO2/[MAPbI3 (spin in air)]/spiro-OMeTAD/[spray-coated AgNW/back cover AgNW] (ref. 22)
35 (at 800)
8 (0.15)
—
[FTO]/SnO2/[KCsFAMA (spin in air)]/spiro-OMeTAD/[spray-rGO/AgNW/rGO] (ref. 23)
20.1 (400–800)
14.6 (0.16)
—
[ITO]/NiO/[MAPbI3 (H-dip in air)]/PCBM/ZnO/SnO/[AgNW/ZnO] (this work)
23 (400–800)
10.2 (0.06)
5.6 (72.2)
39 (at 700)
67.6 (at 800)
All of the results described above clearly demonstrate that the H-dip-coated multiple-stacked functional layers fabricated in air show considerable promise as a potential alternative to conventional spin/spray-coated layers processed with an anti-solvent treatment in N2 for highly efficient, stable, and semitransparent perovskite PV cells. The advances presented here can facilitate the simple and rapid processing of high-performance semitransparent perovskite PV cells with reduced consumption of coating solutions. Furthermore, due to the simple realisation of the desired multi-stacked functional layers, the solution-process approach realised via H-dip-coating is more convenient and easier to upscale to larger sizes in an air environment compared to other more complicated conventional deposition methods for large-area semitransparent perovskite PV cells using high-throughput manufacturing methods such as roll-to-roll production. We also note that the formation of multi-stacked functional layers by the H-dip-coating process can be applied to the design of new perovskite opto-electronic devices.

In summary, we have reported the successful fabrication of highly efficient, stable, large-area, and semitransparent solution-processed perovskite PV cells created by incorporating PTE as a surfactant into a MAPbI3 perovskite PV layer. Homogeneous, smooth, and thin multi-stacked functional layers with controllable thicknesses can be successfully deposited from solutions onto an ITO electrode using the H-dip-coating technique. We have shown that the device performance of the H-dip-coated perovskite PV cell including the PTE-doped MAPbI3 layer fabricated in air is much better than those of conventional solution-coated PV cells. We ascribe this improvement to its good film-forming ability, efficient reduction of the recombination losses of the active PV layers, the good hole/electron collecting properties of adjacent functional layers, and to the improved durability. Moreover, large-area and semitransparent perovskite PV cells on 13.0 cm × 13.0 cm substrates with high uniformity were successfully fabricated using H-dip-coated silver nanowire cathodes. These results clearly demonstrate that the use of homogeneous and smooth MAPbI3 perovskite layers fabricated by means of H-dip-coating provides a solid foundation for the further development of high-performance, efficient, stable, semitransparent, and large-area solution-processable perovskite PV cells. Furthermore, these innovative H-dip-coated perovskite PV layers with the PTE surfactant can be used in the future for the mass production of highly efficient PV devices and can find use in various photovoltaics and/or optoelectronic applications as well.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This research was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Foundation of Korea (NRF), funded by the Korea Government (MEST) (2017R1A2A1A17069729). B. P. acknowledges the research grant from Kwangwoon University in 2020.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0se00598c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020