 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA01094G
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10246-10255


Sawanta S.
Mali
,

Jyoti V.
Patil
 and 

Chang Kook
Hong
*

Polymer Energy Materials Laboratory, School of Advanced Chemical Engineering, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, S. Korea 61186. E-mail: sawantasolar@gmail.com; hongck@chonnam.ac.kr

Received
28th January 2019
, Accepted 2nd April 2019
First published on 2nd April 2019
A long-term thermally stable, inexpensively produced, inorganic-hole extraction layer (i-HEL) is the best choice for the commercialization of air-thermo-stable, low-cost, highly-efficient perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Low-cost, thermally-stable inorganic copper(I) thiocyanate (CuSCN) i-HEL is the best choice. However, it has unique solubility in polar diethyl sulfide solvent and the conventional spin-coating method damages the perovskite layer, hampering large-area fabrication. In the present investigation we have developed a novel, simple smart-bottle-humidifier-assisted (SBHA) method for p-type CuSCN i-HEL deposition towards air-thermally stable low-cost PSCs. The developed method is very simple, ambient-air processed, cheap and could be suitable for large-area deposition. The best efficiency based on CuSCN i-HEL devices exhibited was 18.78% with >95% and >85% thermal stability over 1000 hours, respectively at 65 ± 1 and 85 ± 1 °C. Interestingly, CuSCN i-HEL-based devices show >2000 hours of air-stability and are much more stable than conventional expensive additive-doped spiro-MeOTAD-based PSCs. We also explored this technique for large-area (∼1.04 cm2) fabrication and it exhibited 18.34% PCE with >85% thermal stability at 85 ± 1 °C over 1000 hours, revealing that the developed method is also suitable for large-area perovskite fabrication.

Now perovskite solar cells (PSCs) with a breakthrough power conversion efficiency (PCE) > 23.2% have been developed, through different compositions of MAPbX/FAPbX (where MAPbX stands for methylammonium lead halide and FA stands for formamidinium lead halide), mixed with a variety of cations such as RbI, CsI and using different hole extraction layers (herein HTMs, HTLs or HELs), but they still suffer from poor air-thermal stability. So far, the breakthrough-certified efficiency has been demonstrated only for expensive and additive-doped [2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,Npdimethoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene] (spiro-MeOTAD) and poly [bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA) HTLs. Recently Jeon et al. fluorene-terminated HTM and demonstrated 23.2% efficiency with 120 hours of stability at 70 °C. The developed (N2,N2,N7,N7-tetrakis(9,9-dimethyl-9H-fluoren-2-yl)-N2,N2′,N7,N7′-tetrakis(4-methoxyphenyl)-9,9′-spirobi[fluorene]-2,2′,7,7′-tetraamine) (known as DM) showed >23.2% with 120 hours of stability at 85 °C, but precise doping with 4-tertbutylpyridine (TBP), bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt (LiTFSI), and FK 209 Co(III) – TFSI salt (FK209) is still needed in order to tune the efficiency. Although the PTAA-based perovskite devices demonstrated several hours of air-stability in PSCs, the cost of these HTLs (PTAA = 3000 USD gm−1 and spiro-MeOTAD = 500 USD gm−1), their thermal stability and preparation methods are still causing problems. The uniform deposition of these HTMs requires a spin-coating technique which suffers from high wastage of chemicals (>90%) which hampers a low-cost production technique. Although carbon-based PSCs (C-PSCs) are the best choice for air-stable PSCs, they still show limited efficiency (up to 15%) via most controlled parameters. Also they show a major hysteresis issue. Therefore, non-conventional, low-cost, inorganic i-HELs, such as CuI, pristine and doped NiOx, Cu2O, CuSCN, CsSnI3, and CuGaO2, have been employed for regular (n–i–p)-type PSCs.

Although all-metal oxide-based PSCs showed good efficiency with air-stability, their thermal stability has not yet been tested. Recently, Seo et al. used a Cs0.05MA0.95PbI3 perovskite absorber sandwiched between inorganic metal oxides for both HTL and ETL in an inverted p–i–n architecture and demonstrated 18.45% PCE with 86.7% retention after 500 hours at 85 °C thermal stress. The thermal stability was improved by using atomic layer deposited (ALD) Al:ZnO (AZO) and NiOx. It is well known that the stability of unstable methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) (1.58 eV) can be improved by incorporating methylammonium lead bromide (MAPbBr3) (2.26 eV). However, the relatively low-band gap of black-phase formamidinium (FA)-based perovskite FAPbI3 (1.48 eV) with a unique composition of (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 (1.54 eV) was stable at 100 °C and pushed the PCE to 20.8% with a circuit voltage (VOC) up to 1.16 V and current density (JSC) of 24.6 mA cm−2. The stability of the MA-cation is poorer than that of the FA-cation. Therefore, implementing triple/quadrupole (CsI and/or RbI) cations in the above perovskite (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 composition pushed VOC up to 1.24 V with a 1.63 eV band gap resulting in 21.6% PCE with better stability via PTAA HTM. Jung et al. used butylammonium (BA) and phenethylammonium (PEA) cation modified MAPbI3 perovskite and demonstrated 20.1% PCE with >760 hours stability at 80 °C. However, PTAA HTM is very expensive and LiTFSI and TBP doping is also needed. Fu et al. reviewed the long-term stability of perovskite solar cells based on different aspects and suggested that in-depth study of the current strategies for 2D/3D perovskite solar cells is needed for further achievements.
Recently, an MA-free perovskite absorber, Rb5Cs10FAPbI3, demonstrated 18.16% PCE after 1000 hours at 85 °C. However, the preparation of Al:ZnO (AZO) and NiOx by atomic layer deposition (ALD) is expensive. Besides, the preparation of n-type metal oxides, such as ZnO or heavily doped Ti(Nb)Ox, or additive-doped spiro-MeOTAD or PTAA HTMs, is complicated. Therefore, employing a thermally stable inorganic HEL is the best choice for low-cost, highly efficient PSCs. The thermal stability of CuSCN HEL is much higher than that of any other conventional HEL. Due to its extremely low cost, high thermal stability and simple additive-free preparation method, CuSCN is a promising i-HEL for stable PSCs with operational stability. So far, a thermally stable CuSCN HEL has been deposited by various methods, such as doctor-blading, spin-coating, spray-coating and electrodeposition with moderate PCE. Recently, a dynamic spin-coating method has been used for CuSCN deposition with an rGO or Al2O3 interfacial layer in order to surpass 20% efficiency with good thermal stability. Sepalage et al. developed a chlorobenzene interfacial layer and demonstrated 9.6% PCE. Wijeyasinghe et al. developed a novel alternative to diethyl sulfide solvent by using aqueous ammonia based precursor solutions to process CuSCN HTL and demonstrated 17.2% PCE. However, to the best of our knowledge, the polar diethyl sulfide solvent is the main cause of degradation of the perovskite layer. It should also be noted that, the diethyl sulfide solvent is not a recommended solvent in glove-box perovskite fabrication. Besides, deposition of the Al2O3 interfacial spacer layer via atomic layer deposition (ALD) is complicated and expensive. Until now, highly efficient PSCs based on CuSCN have been reported only for a dynamic spin-coating technique. Thinking out-of-the box, a simpler approach is needed in order to coat CuSCN i-HEL onto a perovskite absorber without perovskite degradation and compromising efficiency during deposition. It is well known that the reproducibility of an (n–i–p)-type architecture is much higher than that of a (p–i–n)-type architecture. Therefore, we focused on regular (n–i–p)-type PSCs. Based on the above discussion and previous literature, we strongly believe that the present study shows much higher stability. A limited literature survey has been provided in Table S4. Importantly, we have developed a very simple and cost-effective “Smart-Bottle Humidifier-Assisted (SBHA)” method for the deposition of CuSCN HTM.

We developed a simple and cost-effective technique for CuSCN i-HEL deposition for mesoscopic regular (n–i–p) architecture of PSCs, known as a smart-bottle-humidifier-assisted (SBHA) technique towards producing highly efficient, thermally-stable PSCs (Fig. S1). The experimental arrangement and parameters are discussed in Fig. S2. Degradation of the perovskite-HEL interface due to polar diethyl sulfide solvent could be prevented by using this newly developed air-processing method. This method facilitates the highly uniform deposition of a CuSCN layer without degradation of the perovskite layer from polar diethyl solvent, since we used a temperature of ∼95 °C during deposition. The developed method is simple and different from previous methods. The SBHA technique for highly uniform CuSCN coating is shown in Fig. 1A. Initially, different concentrations of CuSCN solution were deposited onto a glass substrate by the SBHA technique in order to check their uniformity and thickness (Fig. 1B and C). Our SBHA revealed that a sample prepared from 2 ml of solution of 10 mg ml−1 concentration showed highly uniform pinhole-free deposition of ∼100 nm thickness. This is due to the formation of ultrafine CuSCN droplets produced by a smart-bottle humidifier similar to an ultrasonic spray.

Finally, after successful optimization of the pinhole-free CuSCN coating at 95 °C via the SBHA method, we applied this method to a solvent-engineering-processed CsI-cation-based triple-cation (Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbI2.55Br0.45) perovskite layer (Fig. 2A). In order to protect gold diffusion, reduced graphene oxide (rGO) as an active interfacial layer was deposited by the SBHA method (Fig. 2B). Finally, an 80 nm gold layer was thermally evaporated onto the CuSCN i-HEL to fabricate the full device. In order to check the thickness of each layer, i.e. the perovskite capping layer and the CuSCN i-HEL, a cross-sectional SEM micrograph of the fabricated device was recorded (Fig. 2C) and the device architecture is represented in Fig. 2D. Nearly 550 nm of defect-free perovskite capping layer was fully covered onto ∼180 nm thin mp-TiO2. In addition, an ∼100 nm thin uniform CuSCN layer was formed when 2 ml of CuSCN (10 mg ml−1) solution was deposited onto the perovskite layer by the SBHA method (Fig. 2C). The thickness of CuSCN with respect to different concentrations shows a directly proportional behavior (Fig. 2E). The perovskite devices fabricated from 5 mg ml−1 CuSCN HEL exhibited an average 14.08% power conversion efficiency (PCE) with a short circuit current (JSC) of 21.28 mA cm−2, open circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.991 V and a fill factor (FF) of 66.76%. This might be due to the irregular deposition and formation of CuSCN islands on the perovskite layer (Fig. S3) On the other hand, the devices fabricated with 10 mg ml−1 exhibited a drastic increase in JSC as well as in VOC. The champion cell fabricated using CuSCN HEL via the SBHA method exhibited a JSC of 23.17 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.074 V and an FF of 75.56%, resulting in a PCE of 18.78%. A perovskite thin film deposited through higher deposition revealed a lower photocurrent density. It should also be noted that, if we use the conventional doctor-blade technique for CuSCN deposition, it shows an 8.59% PCE with a JSC of 18.65 mA cm−2 (Fig. 2F) which is much lower than for SBHA-processed perovskite devices (Table S1). The VOC for 10 mg ml−1 based showed a VOC of 1.074 V which is much higher than for 5 mg ml−1 due to the perfect isolation of the perovskite and gold contact. In addition, the JSC of the 10 mg ml−1 device improved to 23.17 mA cm−2, stemming from effective hole extraction. For comparison, we also fabricated conventional spiro-MeOTAD-based devices and recorded their J–V performance. The PV parameters extracted from spiro-MeOTAD HTM-based J–V curves revealed a JSC of 23.18 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.112 V and an FF of 75.15%, yielding 19.37% PCE (Fig. 2G).

In the present investigation, we used a mesoscopic-planar bilayer device architecture for spiro-MeOTAD-based as well as CuSCN-based i-HELs. A high-quality (Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbI2.55Br0.45) perovskite layer was deposited by an anti-solvent engineering process onto spin-coated mp-TiO2 film, followed by annealing at 100 °C for 90 min. The highly crystalline nature of the perovskite layer and the β-CuSCN phase was determined by X-ray diffraction analysis (Fig. S4 and S5). The highly uniform perovskite layer coated film was then transferred to a fume hood containing a hot-plate to deposit the CuSCN layer. The film was kept on the hot-plate for a few seconds and 2 ml of CuSCN/diethyl sulfide (10 mg ml−1) solution was poured into a smart-bottle humidifier neck (Fig. S1) and coated on top of the perovskite layer. The bottle-neck to substrate distance was kept at ten centimeters. To remove diethyl sulfide solvent residue, the deposited substrates were kept on the same hot-plate for the next 5 min at 95 °C. The surface topography of the perovskite layer before and after CuSCN coating was analyzed by SEM micrographs, which revealed that highly textured large perovskite grains (500–800 nm) were fully covered by a highly uniform pinhole-free CuSCN (Fig. 3A and C) layer, which revealed that the developed SBHA method is convenient for uniform deposition. However, the cross-sectional SEM micrographs of conventional spiro-MeOTAD-based devices showed that they contain pinholes, arising from air-trapping, which hamper their performance as well as their stability (Fig. S6). The surface roughness of the CuSCN layer was further confirmed by atomic force microscopy (AFM) root means square (RMS) analysis (Fig. 3B). Our results indicate that large-sized perovskite grains are formed on mp-TiO2, which provided a root mean square (RMS) surface roughness of 17.398 nm (Fig. 3B). The large grains (500–900 nm) of the (Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbI2.55Br0.45) perovskite layer were completely covered when coated with 10 mg ml−1 CuSCN solution. The 2D and 3D AFM topography images are very consistent with the SEM micrographs. The highly uniform pinhole-free CuSCN i-HEL exhibited a surface roughness of 9.466 nm, revealing the compactness of CuSCN i-HEL (Fig. 3D). The charge-extraction behavior from the perovskite layer with respect to i-HELs was investigated by photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectroscopy (Fig. 3E). The strong luminescence peak at nearly 775 nm of the pristine perovskite film was suppressed in the presence of spiro-MeOTAD as well as CuSCN HELs. This PL quenching reveals efficient hole extraction from the perovskite layer to the HEL. However, the PL quenching in CuSCN HEL is much stronger than in spiro-MeOTAD, indicating that the implementation of CuSCN i-HEL results in better charge extraction ability from the perovskite film than the conventional method. The comparative PL spectrum of spiro-MeOTAD/perovskite was more intense. By fitting TRPL data with eqn (S1) and (S2), the TRPL plots are shown in Fig. 3F and we calculated the electron lifetime. The calculated average lifetime 〈τavg〉 for perovskite in contact with the mp-TiO2 interface was 〈τ〉=125 ns which suddenly reduced to 〈τ〉spiro-MeOTAD = 44 ns and 〈τ〉CuSCN = 30 ns for HTMs after deposition (Table S2). This shortest lifetime for CuSCN suggests more effective hole extraction ability from the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the perovskite layer than the electron extraction ability by the n-type TiO2 ETL. Our obtained TRPL lifetime revealed that the perovskite/CuSCN interface fabricated by the SBHA method is much more effective than a conventional perovskite/spiro-MeOTAD interface.


The reproducibility of the developed method has been analyzed from the J–V curves of 25 independent perovskite solar cell devices fabricated using CuSCN and spiro-MeOTAD HTMs. It should be noted that the reproducibility of a CuSCN-based HEL is very similar to that of a conventional spiro-MeOTAD-based HEL. For the CuSCN devices we observed an average Jsc of 22.5 ± 0.50 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.05 ± 0.03 V, and an FF of 72.55 ± 2%, yielding an average 18.2 ± 0.50% efficiency. On the other hand, for conventional spiro-MeOTAD-based devices it revealed a JSC of 22.6 ± 0.55 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.110 ± 0.01 V, and an FF of 73.65 ± 2%, yielding an average 18.85 ± 0.50% efficiency (Fig. 4A). Furthermore, we recorded the hysteresis analysis of the champion-cell-based CuSCN HEL. The hysteresis behavior of the fabricated devices was carried out with a 50 ms scanning delay. The champion CuSCN device exhibits PCE values of 18.74 and 17.79% for the reverse and forward scans, respectively indicating negligible hysteresis (Fig. 4B). In contrast, the champion-spiro-MeOTAD based-device exhibited PCE values of 19.37 and 18.52% for the reverse and forward scans, respectively, also indicating negligible hysteresis (Fig. S7). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) revealed that the CuSCN-based device achieved very similar results to those of the spiro-MeOTAD-based device. Integration of the EQE spectra of over solar emission yields AM 1.5 photocurrents of 22.52 and 22.72 mA cm−2, respectively (Fig. 4C), in excellent agreement with the measured JSC values, indicating that the spectral mismatch between our simulator and true AM 1.5 solar emission is negligibly small. In order to measure the constant efficiency, we recorded the steady-state photocurrent density of the champion devices under full-sun illumination (Fig. S8). From these data, it is clear that both champion PSCs exhibited a dramatic increase in the initial few seconds and reached up to ∼23.1 and 22.85 mA cm−2 for spiro-MeOTAD-based and CuSCN-based HTMs corresponding to ∼18.9 and 18.3% PCE, respectively. The obtained results revealed that the fabricated CuSCN-based perovskite device shows a steady-state output for as long as 50 s. Note that these calculated PCE values and current–density values recorded from J–V measurements are very close to each other. Interestingly, the photocurrent stability results show negligible variation, indicating the stability and reproducibility of our developed method. To find out the reason behind this, we calculated the hole-mobility of the HTMs by reordering the dark-current current–voltage data to the space-charge limited current (SCLC) model. The mobility of CuSCN (0.02634 cm2 V−1 s−1) is much higher than that of spiro-OMeTAD (2.44 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) (Fig. S9). It should also be noted that both values were consistent with previous reports.

It is well known that the thermal stability of any developed photovoltaic technology is the key parameter in commercializing photovoltaics. Therefore, these champion devices were further studied for their long-term thermal stability. The thermal stability of the fabricated devices under a set of identical experimental conditions (at least 20 devices of each type) using different HELs tested before and after 1000 h at 65 ± 1 °C (Fig. 4D and E) and 85 ± 1 °C (Fig. S10) revealed that the CuSCN-based PSCs have much higher stability. Note that the un-encapsulated spiro-MeOTAD-based devices do not show long-term thermal stability. Therefore, we did not monitor the thermal stability of un-sealed spiro-MeOTAD-based devices. Fig. 4D shows a typical stability study for an un-sealed spiro-MeOTAD-based perovskite device. Even when we stored spiro-MeOTAD based devices in a nitrogen glove box, they showed fast degradation and almost zero efficiency after 600 hours. This may be due to Li doping or evaporation of their additives. In contrast, additive-free CuSCN HTMs retain >95% of their original efficiency even after 1000 hours. These results revealed excellent thermal stability even after 1000 hours at 65 ± 1 °C due to the unique SBHA technique that can decompose a polar-solvent before it reaches the perovskite layer. For spiro-MeOTA-based devices, initially all the devices were sealed with Amisol sealant and their thermal stability was studied at 65 °C, as shown in Fig. 4E. The sealed spiro-MeOTAD-based devices show an average thermal stability and retain nearly 60% of thermal stability after 1000 hours. For the sealed CuSCN-based devices, instead of a sealant, we used PMMA encapsulation. All devices were covered with poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA). Interestingly, CuSCN-based HELs showed >1000 hours of stable performance and a small decrease afterwards. In order to check the thermal stability under harsher conditions, we monitored the thermal stability of devices with and without an rGO interfacial layer at a higher temperature (85 ± 1 °C) in a vacuum oven (Fig. S10) under a normal vacuum of −0.01 mPa (it was necessary to close the door to avoid moisture). When our devices were maintained at 85 ± 1 °C, pristine CuSCN-based PSCs retained ∼75% PCE after 1000 hours, which is much higher than in previous reports. This is a good indication that our developed method could be suitable for protecting the perovskite layer from a polar DES solvent. In order to improve the stability further, we used an rGO interfacial layer and the devices retained >90% after 1000 hours at 85 ± 1 °C of their initial efficiency, due to blocking of the gold metal contacts, similar to Cr. Furthermore, we also checked their long-term stability (up to 2000 hours) in air at 85 °C (Fig. S11 and S12). Our results demonstrated that CuSCN/rGO-based PSCs retain >80% air-thermal stability even after 2000 hours at 85 ± 1 °C, which is much higher than previous results. The small decrease in stability may be due to degradation of the MA-cation.

In order to demonstrate the real commercialization application of our developed SBHA method for large areas, we fabricated a large-area device with an active area of ∼1.04 cm2 and analyzed its hysteresis-thermal stability (Fig. 5). The solar cell performance of the optimized large area is shown in Fig. 5A. The forward scan exhibited a VOC of 1.060 V, a JSC of 22.75 mA cm−2, and an FF of 0.698, yielding a PCE 16.83%, whereas the reverse scan exhibited a VOC of 1.070 V, a JSC of 23.01 mA cm−2, and an FF of 0.745, yielding a PCE of 18.34%. To the best of our knowledge, this efficiency is the state-of-the-art for an active device of this area. These results demonstrated the feasibility of our developed method towards large-area device fabrication. This method may be expandable to other materials. For the device stability and its reliable and accurate photocurrent measurements, we recorded the steady-state photocurrent at the maximum power point (−0.90 V). The steady-state photocurrent output (Fig. 5B) of our champion devices exhibited a dramatic increase in the initial few seconds and reached ∼23.0 mA cm−2, corresponding to 18.30% PCE for a large-area device. These results demonstrated a stable photocurrent output for as long as 50 s. The constant photocurrent measurements exhibited a faster stabilizing rate, which is consistent with the fabricated CuSCN film containing a negligible density of trap sites.

Furthermore, we monitored the thermal stability of large-area fabricated devices at 65 ± 1 °C and 85 ± 1 °C (Fig. 5C). For stability we fabricated 25 large-area devices (∼1.04 cm2 active area) for each condition. Interestingly, both devices retained >95% and >85% stability at 65 °C and 85 °C, respectively, after 1000 hours, which is consistent with the stability data of our small-area devices. These interesting results can be explained as follows. The achieved higher efficiency of the large-area devices stems mainly from the uniform deposition of the CuSCN layer through the smart-bottle humidifier-assisted technique. Therefore, the DES solvent can easily evaporate during deposition and that protects the perovskite layer from the polar solvent. In order to confirm the presence of unwanted diethyl sulfide in the perovskite device after CuSCN deposition, we recorded FT-IR spectra of the fabricated device (without gold metal contacts) and compared them with a standard diethyl sulfide solution (Fig. S13). The commercial diethyl sulfide sample exhibited strong peaks at 2928 and 2982 cm−1, while there was a strong peak at 2172 cm−1 for the CuSCN/DES solution due to SCN vibration in β-CuSCN, which is absent in the bare diethyl sulfide sample. However, our fresh and old perovskite devices showed an absence of diethyl sulfide solvent. This confirms the absence of diethyl sulfide in the device after CuSCN deposition. We also monitored the stability of an encapsulated large-area device under continuous illumination (Fig. 5D). Interestingly, it showed >85% stability even after 200 hours under continuous illumination. This a good indication that our developed smart-bottle humidifier-assisted deposition technique for CuSCN coating will be beneficial for the development of thermally stable, large-area, low-cost fabrication.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated that a simple SBHA approach for CuSCN deposition with pinhole-free and controlled thickness could provide a promising hole extraction layer with comparable efficiency (>18.78% in reverse scan) to that of conventional, expensive, unstable, additive-doped HTMs. A large-area device also exhibited 18.34% PCE (in a reverse scan), demonstrating that the developed method is suitable for large-area perovskite fabrication. The gold metal diffusion has been terminated by an rGO interfacial layer, which facilitates a further extension of the thermal stability. The developed method is simple and feasible for large-area fabrication and can protect the perovskite layer from polar solvents during CuSCN deposition and retains >95% and >85% PCE of the initial efficiency after 1000 hours at 65 °C and 85 °C thermal stress, respectively. We also observed that the photovoltaic parameters are also stable for small-area as well as large-area devices after 1000 hours. The fabrication of an ultra-large area using the SBHA method is underway in our laboratory.


S. S. M. & C. K. H. contributed to the conception and design of the experiments, analysis of the data and writing the paper. S. S. M. carried out all experiments and wrote the paper. S. S. M. and J. V. P. performed EQE measurements. All authors discussed the results and reviewed the manuscript.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the Korea Research Fellowship Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning (2016H1D3A1909289) for an outstanding overseas young researcher. This research is also supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) (NRF-2017R1A2B4008117). This work was also supported by the Priority Research Centers Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (2018R1A6A1A03024334). This work was also supported by a National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (2018R1C1B6008218).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, characterization, twelve figures (Fig. S1–S13) and three tables (Tables S1–S4). See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta01094g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019