 DOI: 10.1039/B714138F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 654-659

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Jang
Jo
,

Doojin
Vak
,

Yong-Young
Noh
,

Seok-Soon
Kim
,

Bogyu
Lim
 and 

Dong-Yu
Kim
*

Heeger Center for Advanced Materials, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, 1 Oryong-Dong, Buk-Gu, Gwangju, 500-712, Republic of Korea. E-mail: kimdy@gist.ac.kr; Fax: +82-62-970-2304; Tel: +82-62-970-2319

Bio21 Institute (Holmes Lab.), University of Melbourne, Building 102 (Level 4), 30 Flemington Road, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia

IT convergence & components Laboratory, Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI), 161 Gajeong-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-350, Republic of Korea

Received
13th September 2007
, Accepted 29th November 2007
First published on 14th December 2007
This work proposes a new fluorene-based copolymer containing a spiroanthracenefluorene unit, poly[10,10-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-10H-spiro(anthracene-9,9′-fluorene)-2′,7′-diyl-co-bithiophene] (SFT2), for hole transporting materials in photovoltaic (PV) cells consisting of conjugated polymers and nanocrystalline TiO2. This polymer was synthesized to avoid photo- and thermo-oxidative degradation of poly[9,9′-dioctyl-fluorene-co-bithiophene] (F8T2) used in hybrid PV cells. The occurrence of oxidative degradation after irradiation with simulated sunlight or severe heating over the glass transition temperature in air on F8T2 and SFT2 films was confirmed by an increase of low energy emission at 600 nm in the photoluminescence emission spectra—originating from the generation of a keto defect site in the C-9 position of the fluorene units. In conclusion, we found that the defects play a vital role in degradation of the device performance of PV cells, especially in the decline of short-circuit current density (Jsc), consisting of fluorene-based polymers.

Over the last decades, photovoltaic (PV) cells based on organic semiconducting materials have been actively investigated for low-cost alternatives to conventional inorganic PV cells. Conjugated polymers, especially, have tremendous potential for future PV cells because they can be easily processed and tailored to all needs due to the infinite variability of organic materials. The bulk heterojunction PV cells based on conjugated polymer/fullerene blends as electron donor/acceptor have made power conversion efficiency (ηe) possible exceeding 5%. Although this system is now the best polymer-based PV cell in terms of device efficiency, hybrid PV cells consisting of semiconducting polymers and nanocrystalline metal oxides have gained attention as promising alternatives for future PV cells. A typical hybrid device consists of conjugated polymer as an electron donor and a nanostructured metal oxide particle such as TiO2 or ZnO as an electron acceptor. TiO2 and ZnO have some advantages in that they can be easily patterned into a continuous 3-D network for electronic conduction as well as having good mechanical and chemical stability.

In most polymer-based PV cells, hole mobility of conjugated polymers is a limiting processes to achieve high efficiency due to the imbalance of charge transport. Some years ago, efficient photo-induced charge transfer was reported in PV cells consisting of a fluorene-based copolymer and nanocrystalline TiO2 by Ravirajan et al. The polymer used in this system, poly[9,9′-dioctyl-fluorene-co-bithiophene] (F8T2), showed good hole transporting properties based on thermotropic liquid crystallinity, which allows better chain packing viaself-assembly, as known in many studies of organic field-effect transistors (OFETs). Therefore, this appears to be one of the most promising candidates among conjugated polymers for high efficiency polymerPV cells. However, most optoelectronic devices with fluorene-based polymers or oligomers suffer from photo- and thermo-oxidative degradationvia the formation of oxidative defects on the C-9 position of the fluorene unit, especially under UV illumination in air. It is expected that this effect in PV cells, which are subject to intense sunlight exposure, will be more prominent than it is in other organic electronic devices such as organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) or OFETs. In addition, in most cases proper heat treatment of TiO2 nanoporous structures in contact with the polymer film is needed for filling the polymer into nanopores of less than 20 nm in diameter; thus allowing excitons generated in the organic materials to diffuse before recombining. This process in air can play the role of an oxidative degradation source.
In this paper, a new fluorene-based copolymer is proposed which contains a spiroanthracenefluorene unit to suppress photo- and thermo-oxidative degradation, poly[10,10-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-10H-spiro(anthracene-9,9′-fluorene)-2′,7′-diyl-co-bithiophene] (SFT2), for hole transporting materials in hybrid PV cells consisting of the conjugated polymer and nanocrystalline TiO2. The SFT2 polymer showed improved stability compared with F8T2. In the present study, we also describe the effect of oxidative degradations in the fluorene unit on the performance of organic PV cells.

The chemical structures of F8T2 and SFT2, and the device structure of PV cells made with these polymers and TiO2nanoparticles are shown in Fig. 1. All monomers, for synthesizing the polymers, were prepared following our previous report.Fluorene-thiophene copolymers, F8T2 and SFT2, were synthesized using the Suzuki coupling reaction.4-Bromobenzene (5 mol%) as an end-capping agent was used for control of molecular weights in each polymerization. The weight-average molecular weights (Mw) of F8T2 and SFT2, as determined by gel permeation chromatography (GPC) from THF solution using a polystyrene standard, were 64000 g mol−1 and 25000 g mol−1, respectively. The details of polymerization and device fabrication are described in the Experimental section.


Fig. 2 shows the normalized UV-vis absorption and photoluminescence (PL) emission spectra of F8T2 and SFT2 solutions in chloroform and films on a glass substrate. The two polymers had similar absorption spectra with the absorption maximum around 455 nm. Both polymers showed a similar optical band gap of 2.4 eV, which was measured from the onset of the absorption spectrum. PL emission peaks of SFT2 coincided with those of F8T2, indicating that the introduction of the spiro structure did not hinder the conjugation of the polymer main chain. Both polymers in the film state showed an emission maximum at 548 nm with a vibronic feature at 515 and 580 nm. In PL spectra of both solutions, vibronic bands at 515 nm of the polymers were not observed and the maximum peaks were slightly blue-shifted, which might be due to reduced molecular interactions compared with the film state.
To confirm whether or not F8T2 and SFT2 with a fluorene moiety would show oxidative degradation under intense sunlight, PL spectra were measured with polymer films illuminated at an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 from a solar simulator through an AM 1.5G filter. Fig. 3a and b show the normalized PL emission spectra of F8T2 and SFT2, respectively, after irradiation of the samples for various times. The long wavelength emission band around 600 nm of F8T2 gradually increased as the exposure time increased. After 8 h of irradiation, the emission spectrum ultimately showed the maximum peak at 600 nm. On the other hand, an increase in the long wavelength emission band of SFT2 was not apparent during illumination under the same conditions, although a slight increase appeared after 8 h. This change of the PL emission band following irradiation can be explained by a Förster-type energy transfer by photo-generation of fluorenone. Therefore, as demonstrated in our previous study, these results indicate that spiroanthracene structures effectively reduce the oxidation of the C-9 position of fluorene in SFT2 as well. SFT2 generates a much smaller fluorenone defect site and has a more photo-stable structure than F8T2 when exposed to the same intense sunlight for an extended period.
The photo-generation of fluorenone or keto sites can be identified by FTIR experimentation of samples following irradiation with intense light, as shown in Fig. 4a (F8T2) and b (SFT2). When both films on the SiO2/Si substrate were exposed to illumination by simulated sunlight for 1, 3, and 6 h, the carbonyl stretching peak gradually increased at 1721 cm−1 as evidence of photo-oxidation, while pristine samples did not show this peak. In Fig. 4, we can see that carbonyl stretching peaks were detected in the SFT2 films as well as in the F8T2 films after illumination. Considering the PL results in Fig. 3, it was expected that the 1721 cm−1 peaks of the SFT2 films could originate from the keto site of the anthracene—which, however, does not affect the conjugation of the polymer chains—rather than the C-9 position of fluorene. In general, the change in the PL emission spectrum is related to a defect site directly connected to the conjugation of a polymer chain, such as fluorenone, which can also be detected by FTIR measurement. In contrast, oxidation of the anthracene unit in SFT2 occurred at a distance from the electronic conjugation of the polymer main chain. Therefore, it is reasonable to suggest that oxidative degradation of SFT2 is unlikely to affect its optoelectronic properties, because the remote oxidation site does not alter the conjugation of the polymer backbone, as confirmed by the very small changes in the PL measurements. Furthermore, most of the FTIR transmission peaks in the SFT2 samples are stronger than in F8T2 when comparing Fig. 4a with b at 1460, 1600, and 1721 cm−1. This coincides with results of our previous report, which examined the dependence of film thickness on IR detection, since SFT2 films spin-coated on a Si/SiO2 substrate using a solution with the same concentration were thicker than F8T2. Although carbonyl stretching peaks of SFT2 are shown to be more prominent than F8T2 peaks after illumination for 6 h, the relative peak intensity is weaker in SFT2 than in F8T2 when checking the ratio with other peaks, such as those at 1450 or 1600 cm−1.
In addition to defect formation by light irradiation, oxidative degradation of polymers exposed to high temperature in air should be considered for the application of PV cells because a heating process is necessary for polymers in order to infiltrate them into a nanoporous TiO2 layer for construction of a bulk heterojunction structure.Fig. 5a and b show the normalized PL spectra of F8T2 and SFT2 on a glass substrate after baking at 200 °C in air for different durations. The SFT2 film did not show the low energy emission after heating for 4 h. However, the emission band of 600 nm in F8T2 strongly increased as the baking time increased from 0 to 4 h with a corresponding decrease in the 550 nm emission. This result means that SFT2 has a thermally stable structure due to the bulky and rigid spiro-anthracene moiety, which effectively protects the C-9 position in the fluorene units. In addition, increase of the low energy PL emission by energy transfer to the defect site is attributed to high crystallinity of the polymers. SFT2 has a relatively lower crystallinity and reduced π-stacking of conjugated polymer backbones than F8T2, due to the introduction of the bulky structure. Fig. 5c and d show the changes of the PL emission when the samples of F8T2 and SFT2 are exposed to a temperature of 200 °C in a nitrogen atmosphere for different durations. The PL emissions of both polymers were little changed as the baking time increased. This result is consistent with the fact that thermo-oxidation or thermal treatment-induced keto defects are formed by oxygen in air, and induce the long wavelength PL emission band in a way similar to that of photo-induced oxidative degradation.
The efficient photo-induced charge generation in photovoltaic devices consisting of a conjugated polymer and nanocrystalline TiO2 strongly depends on the degree of infiltration of polymers into the nanopores.Fig. 6a shows the schematic diagram of the procedure for making a polymer/TiO2 composite. A nanoporous TiO2 film was formed by spin-coating on a glass substrate with TiO2 particles of 13 nm in diameter. The pore size of this layer was in the range of 15–20 nm into which the polymer should have infiltrated for efficient charge generation, because excitons generated in the conjugated polymer are separated into electrons and holes only near the polymer/TiO2 interface through diffusion of a distance of less than 20 nm. After spin-coating the polymer film onto the TiO2 layer, infiltration of F8T2 or SFT2 into the nanopores can be conducted by thermal treatment around the melting point of the polymers, i.e., melt infiltration process. Typically, the amount of polymer embedded in the nanoporous layer positively depends on the temperature and time used in the melt infiltration process.
For studying the effectiveness of charge generation or exciton dissociation in donor/acceptor composite materials for the application of PV devices, it is necessary to examine the degree of PL quenching. In the present study, our group expected significant quenching in samples having large amounts of polymer embedded in the TiO2 nanopores. Fig. 6b–e show the changes of PL intensity in the TiO2 layer incorporated with F8T2 and SFT2 as the temperature and time interval of the melt infiltration process in the N2-filled glove box varied. A dramatic decrease of PL emission was not detected in F8T2 as the temperature increased from 80 to 250 °C, though it showed a slight decrease indicating that PL quenching was only due to the photo-induced charge generation of the polymer. Remarkably, the degree of PL quenching increased when the sample was heated for a long time at 150 °C, as shown in Fig. 6d. However, it is apparent that PL quenching of SFT2 was more significant than F8T2, comparing b with c, and d with e, in Fig. 6. For example, comparing the maximum peaks of PL emissions in Fig. 6b and c, SFT2 shows approximately 70% quenching efficiency of the initial value when it is heated to 250 °C for 1 h. In contrast, F8T2 is quenched only by 10% under the same conditions.
When we compared the change of quenching efficiency at the same temperature as the infiltration time vary, as shown in Fig. 4d and e, the lowering of the PL emission maximum peak in SFT2 was faster than in F8T2, and the ultimate amount of PL quenching after 4 h for SFT2 was also larger than that of F8T2. This difference of PL quenching efficiency is considered as a result of the difference in molecular weights between F8T2 and SFT2. As measured by GPC, SFT2 (Mw = 25000 g mol−1) had a relatively lower molecular weight than F8T2 (Mw = 64000 g mol−1). It was expected that a polymer with a small molecular weight that had been spin-coated onto the nanoporous TiO2 layer would be better incorporated into the small pores of TiO2 than would a high molecular weight polymer.
Hybrid PV cells were fabricated using the polymers (either F8T2 or SFT2) and nanocrystalline TiO2 as electron donor/acceptor pair. The open-circuit voltage (Voc) and short-circuit current density (Jsc) of the F8T2 device were 0.86 V and 0.18 mA cm−2, respectively. The fill factor (FF) was 0.27, and ηe was calculated as 0.05% from the equation (ηe = JscVocFF/Pin, where Pin is the intensity of incident solar radiation). Meanwhile, Voc of the SFT2 device was 0.27 V, which is a relatively lower value than that of F8T2. Typically, Voc is limited by the difference between the HOMO of the donor and the LUMO of the acceptor. However, it was confirmed from cyclic voltammetry results (not shown here) and the onset of the UV-vis spectrum (Fig. 2) that the HOMO level and bandgap of the polymers are identical. Therefore, the low Voc value of SFT2 devices is regarded as an effect of the large shunt due to a structural defect in active layer morphology. Jsc, FF, and ηe were 0.16 mA cm−2, 0.23, and 0.01%, respectively. Although ηe of the two devices were slightly lower than that previously reported by Ravirajan et al., it did not cause any trouble in the examination of the effect of oxidative degradation on the device performance. For studying the effect of oxidative degradation on efficiency parameters of the photovoltaic cell with the fluorene-based polymer, it is necessary to compare them with and without the defect. Fig. 7a and b show the variation of Voc and Jsc in F8T2 and SFT2 devices of the PV cells with polymers (either F8T2 or SFT2) and nanocrystalline TiO2 under AM 1.5G illumination with intensity of 100 mW cm−2 in air, respectively. Voc showed a stable value under illumination in both F8T2 and SFT2 devices (Fig. 7a). However, as shown in Fig. 7b, Jsc of the F8T2 device rapidly decreased as the illumination time of simulated sunlight increased. This result would be expected because generation of photo-oxidation affects the flow of charge carriers separated from excitons generated in conjugated polymers. The reduction in transport of charges in the conjugated polymer can be attributed to the trapping of charges at the fluorenone defect site generated by photo-oxidation. Also, this is consistent with degradations in the FET performance using a fluorene-based conjugated oligomer by photo-oxidative degradation of the C-9 position in the fluorene moiety, which we previously studied. On the other hand, SFT2 devices showed a relatively stable Jsc value under the same illumination conditions. This stability can be easily understood because of its improved photo-stability against oxidation compared to F8T2, as shown in the PL emission data of Fig. 3.
It is clear that reducing the formation of the oxidative degradation site in fluorene-based conjugated oligomers or polymers is quite necessary to insure that PV cells—once exposed to intense sunlight—will preserve their device stability for an extended time in air. The stable Jsc value of SFT2 devices shows that it is possible to reduce the formation of a fluorenone or keto defect via photo-oxidative degradation through protection of the C-9 position in the fluorene units. In addition, it is believed that SFT2 with thermo-oxidative stability has an advantage when using a high temperature process to incorporate polymer into the nanoporous TiO2 layer, as well as removing the solvent remaining from the polymer. As shown in Fig. 5, SFT2 rarely underwent thermo-oxidative degradation after heating to 200 °C for 4 h—even when exposed to the air.

In conclusion, we synthesized a new polyfluorene-based polymer (SFT2), to effectively reduce the generation of fluorenone defects by photo- and thermo-oxidation processes. Increase of low energy PL emission in F8T2 after exposure to simulated sunlight and a high temperature process indicates generation of the fluorenone defect sites of the samples, while SFT2 did not show the generation of the defects. The formation of the keto defect was also confirmed by the increase of a carbonyl stretching peak in the FTIR spectra as illumination time increased. In addition, efficiency of PL quenching was measured to evaluate the effectiveness of charge generation in the polymer/TiO2 interface, and both polymers showed significant PL quenching when they were infiltrated. When the device performance of the polymer/nanostructured TiO2 hybrid PV cell was investigated, Jsc of the F8T2 device rapidly decreased as the illumination time with simulated sunlight increased because the trapping of charges at the fluorenone defect site brought about a reduction in the transport of charges in the conjugated polymer. On the other hand, the SFT2 devices had a stable Jsc value under illumination, owing to its stable structure against oxidation. These results showed that a desirable long-term stability of PV cells using fluorene-based conjugated polymer can be improved by effectively reducing the formation of keto defects via the oxidative process by properly protecting the C-9 position in the fluorene units.


F8T2 was prepared according to the general procedure for a palladium-catalyzed coupling reaction, Suzuki coupling. 9,9-Dioctylfluorene-2,7-bis(trimethyleneborate) (0.32 g) and 5,5-dibromo-2,2-bithiophene (0.56 g) were dissolved in 120 ml of THF with 30 ml of 2 M potassium carbonate solution and a catalytic amount of tetrakis(triphenylphosphine)palladium. The reaction mixture was stirred vigorously and refluxed under nitrogen. The solution was extracted with chloroform, and then dried over MgSO4. The solvent was removed by evaporation. The polymer was isolated by slowly dropping the solution into methanol and obtained in the form of a yellow powder after being dried under vacuum. SFT2 was synthesized using the same method as that of F8T2 with 0.40 g of 10,10-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-10H-spiro[anthracene-9,9-(2,7-bis(4,4,5,5-tetramethyl-[1,3,2]dioxaborolane)fluorene)] and 0.16 g of 5,5-dibromo-2,2-bithiophene. The polymer was obtained as a yellow-orange powder after being dried under vacuum at room temperature.

For measuring absorption and emission properties of polymer films, samples were fabricated on a glass substrate. The polymers were applied by spin-coating a solution of 10 mg ml−1 in toluene at 2000 rpm. The UV-vis absorption spectra were measured using a Varian Cary 1 UV-VIS Spectrophotometer. Photoluminescence (PL) spectra were obtained using an Acton spectrometer connected to a charge-coupled device detector (Princeton Instruments, SPEC-10) with a monochromator (Acton Research Co. SpectraPro-300i), and a xenon lamp with a monochromator (Acton Research Co. SpectraPro-150i) as an excitation source. FTIR transmission spectra were measured with polymer films on a SiO2/Si substrate, and recorded with a Perkin Elmer system 2000 FTIR series. The thickness of all polymer films (∼130 nm) was measured using a surface profiler (Kosaka ET-3000i). For the photo-oxidation experiment, the spin-coated polymer films on glass or SiO2/Si substrates were illuminated by a xenon lamp solar simulator (1 kW, Oriel) with an AM 1.5G filter and an intensity of 100 mW cm−2.

PV
cells were fabricated on ITO-coated glass substrates which were first cleaned by ultrasonication in organic solvents and dried in a nitrogen flow. Fig. 1b shows the device structure of a PV cell with nanocrystalline TiO2 and polymer. The cells were composed of four layers, which are the hole blocking layer (HBL), the porous TiO2 layer with embedded polymer, the polymer overlayer, and the Au electrode. The HBL was a dense TiO2 layer of about 40 nm thickness, which was spin-coated with TiO2 precursor solution (0.1 ml Ti(Oi-Pr)4 and 0.015 ml HCl in 3 ml isopropanol). A porous TiO2 layer (∼800 nm) was deposited by using spin-coating of TiO2 paste (Ti-Nanoxide T, Solaronix) with a diameter of 13 nm onto the dense TiO2 layer. This film was subsequently calcined at 450 °C for 30 min to crystallize TiO2 particles. After the TiO2 layer was calcined, an overlying film of polymers was spin-coated and heated on a hot plate to allow infiltration of the polymers. The temperature range used in this experiment relating to the infiltration of polymers was from 80 °C to 250 °C and the time range was from 30 min to 4 h. The 50 nm thick polymer film was then over-coated on the polymer-embedded TiO2 layer. The Au electrode was deposited on the polymer layer by a thermal evaporation method in vacuum (<10−6 Torr), and this area defined the active area of the device as 4 mm2. The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves were measured with an Autolab PGSTAT30 Potentiostat/Galvanostat. The PV cell devices were illuminated at 100 mW cm−2 from a 1 kW Oriel solar simulator with an AM 1.5G filter in air. For accurate measurement, light intensity was calibrated by a radiant power meter and a reference silicon solar cell certificated from National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL).

This work was financially supported by the Ministry of Education of Korea through the Brain Korea 21 (BK21) program, the National Research Laboratory (NRL) Program of the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF) funded by the Korean government (MOST) (M10500000077-06J0000-07710), MOCIE (Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Energy of the Korean Government) (10022811), and the Heeger Center for Advanced Materials (HCAM).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2008