 DOI: 10.1039/C1CC12139A
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7872-7874

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Hao-Wu
Lin
*,

Li-Yen
Lin
,

Yi-Hong
Chen
,

Chang-Wen
Chen
,

Yu-Ting
Lin
,

Shi-Wen
Chiu
 and 

Ken-Tsung
Wong
*

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsin Chu 30013, Taiwan. E-mail: hwlin@mx.nthu.edu.tw

Department of Chemistry, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan. E-mail: kenwong@ntu.edu.tw

Received
14th April 2011
, Accepted 16th May 2011
First published on 31st May 2011
A new D–π–A molecule (TPDCDTS) adopting coplanar diphenyl-substituted dithienosilole as a central π-bridge of triphenylamine (donor) and dicyanovinylene (acceptor) has been synthesized as donor material for small molecule organic solar cells (SMOSC) incorporating C70 as an acceptor showed an appreciable power conversion efficiency of 3.82%.

Organic thin-film photovoltaics (OPVs) have received much attention as the next-generation solar cells due to their potential mechanical flexibility and low cost. Since the pioneering work on bilayer heterojunction solar cells, the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of solution-processed polymer solar cells have reached over 7%. On the other hand, small molecule organic solar cells (SMOSC) fabricated by solution and vacuum processes reach PCEs of up to 4.4% and 5.2%, respectively. Although the state-of-the-art polymer solar cells show higher efficiencies than low-molecular-weight counterparts, an increasing number of studies have been devoted to developing SMOSCs. The main reasons are because of several unique advantages of small molecules over polymeric materials such as well-defined molecular structures, better batch-to-batch reproducibility, and possibilities of purification by sublimation. Moreover, vacuum-deposited SMOSCs show remarkable promise due to the advantages of easy fabrication of multilayer tandem architectures. For instance, Heliatek GmbH released a certified PCE of 8.3% for a tandem device prepared by the combination of two bulk heterojunction devices, rendering SMOSCs competitive to contemporary solar energy technologies.

With regard to the molecular architectures of donor materials for SMOSCs fabricated by vacuum-evaporation processes, donor–(π-bridge)–acceptor (D–π–A) systems are emerging as good candidates due to their prominent merits, such as (i) the absorption spectrum of the D–π–A molecules can be extended toward longer wavelength by effective intramolecular charge-transfer (ICT) between donor and acceptor moieties; (ii) the energy level can be readily tuned by incorporating different electron-donating and/or -accepting groups and even the π-bridges; (iii) the intermolecular π–π interaction can be manipulated by the judicious selection of central π-bridges. Triphenylamine (TPA) has been widely utilized as optoelectronic materials owing to its good electron-donating nature and high hole-transporting capabilities. Furthermore, the three-dimensional structural features of TPA-based molecules usually lead to amorphous materials with isotropic optical and hole-transporting characteristics. In this aspect, it has been reported that vacuum-deposited SMOSCs utilizing TPA-based materials, in which TPA behaves as a core and electron-donating unit, exhibit PCEs of up to 2.2%. On the other hand, various electron-withdrawing groups, such as nitro,dimesitylboryl,dicyanovinyl,trifluoroacetyl,benzothiadiazole, and thiadiazolopyridine have been introduced as electron-accepting subunits, giving the resulting donor molecules low-lying HOMO energy levels and thus consequently rendering cells with large Voc values.
In this communication, we report a new organic donor material TPDCDTS (Scheme 1) that contains triphenylamine as an electron-donating moiety and dicyanovinylene as an electron-withdrawing moiety separated by a coplanar diphenyl-substituted dithienosilole (DTS) π-conjugated spacer. The adoption of this D–π–A structure with a coplanar bridge facilitates the electronic coupling between the donor and acceptor blocks, ensuring an extension of the spectral response to the red portion of the solar spectrum. In addition, the introduction of the diphenyl-substituted DTS as a central bridge possesses several key advantages required for SMOSCs: (i) the HOMO–LUMO gap of DTS is smaller than that of 2,2′-bithiophene and cyclopentadithiophene due to its lower lying LUMO (σ*–π* conjugation). The smaller band gap of DTS is favorable for harvesting sunlight; (ii) the HOMO of DTS is lower than that of cyclopentadithiophene, which is critical for increasing the Voc; (iii) it was reported that DTS-containing polymers show higher hole mobility (3-fold higher) than that of cyclopentadithiophene-containing polymers. In addition, the Csp2–Si bond of DTS is significantly longer than the Csp2–Csp3 bond of cyclopentadithiophene, allowing more efficient π–π stacking of conjugated backbones due to the reduced steric hindrance between the pendant groups and thiophene rings; (iv) the tetrahedral silicon center of diphenyl-substituted DTS does not distort the coplanarity of the π-conjugated system. Instead, the rigid and bulky substituents lead to strongly anisotropic molecular geometries (e.g. rod-like shapes) and the molecules can be assembled into oriented configurations in thin films. Usually, this kind of rod-like molecules tend to align their molecular axes and π–π* transition dipole moments along the substrate surface upon vacuum deposition, resulting in higher in-plane extinction coefficients, which is also beneficial for light absorption.
The synthetic route for the compound TPDCDTS is shown in Scheme 1. 5-[N,N-bis(phenylamino)phenyl]-5′-formyl-3,3′-diphenylsilylene-2,2′-bithiophene (1) was condensed with malononitrile to give the target compound TPDCDTS in 72% yield via the Knöevenagel reaction in the presence of basic Al2O3.
The UV-vis absorption spectra of TPDCDTS in thin-film and solution (in CH2Cl2) are shown in Fig. 1. The absorption spectrum in solution shows a maximum (λmax) centered at 537 nm (ε = 45800 M−1 cm−1) with a full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) at 106 nm, while the thin-film absorption exhibits λmax peaked at 542 nm with a FWHM at 140 nm. The red-shifted and broadened absorption spectrum in the thin-film is presumably due to intermolecular π–π stacking in the solid state. The cut-off absorption wavelength is extended from ∼600 nm (in solution) to ∼650 nm (in thin-film), which may benefit for harvesting more photons.
Variable-angle spectroscopic ellipsometry (VASE) was used to study the optical constants and molecular orientation of TPDCDTS thin films. As shown in Fig. 2, vacuum-deposited films of TPDCDTS exhibit significant uniaxial anisotropy with the optical axis along the surface normal in both the refractive index and absorption. The results indicate that TPDCDTS molecules are prone to align their molecular axes along the substrate surface. As a result, the thin-film shows high in-plane extinction coefficients up to 0.75 at the peak of the absorption. Since in common photovoltaic applications, the incident light is in normal direction; the high in-plane extinction coefficients directly contribute to higher absorption of horizontally polarized incident light. Moreover, a very high in-plane refractive index (>2.0) in the wavelength of 570–700 nm improves the constructive interferences in the active layers, which reinforces the optical field and thus results in higher photon harvest in the relatively weak absorption wavelength region. In addition to preferable optical effects, such anisotropic molecular orientation may also lead to more efficient vertical carrier transport and hence a higher carrier extraction efficiency.
The electrochemical characteristics of TPDCDTS were probed by cyclic voltammetry (CV) in CH2Cl2 with Bu4NPF6 as a supporting electrolyte. TPDCDTS exhibits two quasi-reversible oxidation potentials at 0.43 and 0.84 V (vs. Fc/Fc+), respectively, as shown in Fig. S1 of ESI. The first oxidation wave at lower potential can be attributed to the oxidation of the triphenylamine donor, whereas the second oxidation can be assigned to the DTS core according to the previous reports on electrochemical behaviours of DTS derivatives.
The potential utilization of TPDCDTS in vacuum-deposited SMOSCs was then explored. Planar-mixed heterojunction (PMHJ) TPDCDTS:fullerenes solar cells were fabricated with a configuration of ITO/hole transport layer (HTL)/TPDCDTS (3 nm)/TPDCDTS:C60 or C70 (1:1, 35 nm)/C60 or C70 (10–20 nm)/BCP (10 nm)/Ag (120 nm), in which BCP is adopted as an exciton blocking layer. For initial characterization, several hole-transport materials including PEDOT:PSS (poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) :poly(styrenesulfonate)), HAT(CN)6 (hexaazatriphenylenehexacarbonitrile), PEDOT:PSS/HAT(CN)6, PEDOT:PSS/MoO3, and MoO3 were tested to optimize the cell performances (See Table S1 in ESI). It is found that devices with MoO3 as HTL exhibit superior performances to other HTLs. Accordingly, MoO3 was chosen as hole transport material for further device fabrication. Note that the device structures and fabrication conditions in this study are comparatively simple without complicated conductive doping in transporting layers and thermal annealing treatments.

Fig. 3(a) shows the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of TPDCDTS:fullerene PMHJ solar cells with MoO3 (30 nm) as HTL. The TPDCDTS:C60 PMHJ device gave an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.88 V, a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 6.56 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.46, yielding a PCE of 2.69% under AM 1.5 G, 1 sun (100 mW cm−2) simulated solar illumination. Furthermore, the TPDCDTS:C70 PMHJ device delivered a higher performance with Voc of 0.83 V, Jsc of 9.53 mA cm−2, FF of 0.48, and PCE of 3.82%. The HOMO level of TPDCDTS thin film is as low as −5.4 eV determined by photoelectron spectroscopy. The low-lying HOMO results in a large energy difference relative to the LUMO of fullerenes (see Fig. S2 in ESI), leading to the relatively large Voc values. Interestingly, the FF values of TPDCDTS:C60 and TPDCDTS:C70 PMHJ devices were close to each other, suggesting similar blend layer morphologies and charge carrier percolation networks in both devices.
The difference in Jsc between two cells can be explained by the wider absorption range of C70 relative to that of C60, which is also reflected in the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra shown in Fig. 3(b). Both cells show a high and broad range of EQE around 500–650 nm closely corresponding to the absorption spectrum of TPDCDTS. However, due to the supplementary absorption of the C70 in the range of 380–500 nm, which complementarily covers the spectral range where the contribution of TPDCDTS thin films is less efficient. Thus, the EQE spectrum of TPDCDTS:C70 PMHJ device can effectively cover the entire visible region. The matching of absorption spectrum range of TPDCDTS and C70 leads to a broader and higher EQE range, resulting in a higher Jsc value. In addition, a very smooth surface morphology was observed in TPDCDTS and TPDCDTS:C70 thin film with root-mean-square roughness of 0.95 and 1.04 nm, respectively (see Fig. S4 in ESI). A smooth morphology of the organic film may result in more stable device performance.
In conclusion, we have synthesized a new small-molecule TPDCDTS as donor material for efficient SMOSC. Due to its intrinsic structural features, thin films of TPDCDTS show intriguing physical properties such as low-lying HOMO, broad and red-shifted absorption in the visible region, and uniaxial optical anisotropy along the surface normal. These promising physical characteristics of TPDCDTS in conjunction with the complementary absorption of the C70 acceptor in the range of 380–500 nm give appreciable SMOSCs performances with a PCE up to 3.82%. Further improvement of the device performance could be achieved by optimizing the donor/acceptor ratio in the mixed layer, incorporating conductive doped buffer layers as well as fine-tuning of processing conditions such as post-annealing and/or substrate heating. These results will be disclosed in due course.
The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from National Science Council of Taiwan (NSC 98-2112-M-007-028-MY3, 98-2119-M-002-007-MY3).
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Synthesis, characterization, cyclic voltammogram of TPDCDTS, energy levels alignments of active layers, AFM surface morphology analysis, copies of 1H and 13C NMR spectra, devices and measurements. See DOI: 10.1039/c1cc12139a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011