 DOI: 10.1039/C2RA22770C
(Review Article)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 6188-6225

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Ayse
Turak
*

Department of Engineering Physics, McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada. E-mail: turaka@mcmaster.ca; Fax: +1905527-8409; Tel: +1905525-9140x23348

Received
5th November 2012
, Accepted 17th December 2012
First published on 18th December 2012
After efficiency, lifetime is the second most important parameter for organic devices. Interfaces play a major role in that lifetime. This article reviews the current state of the art with regards to interfacial stability and control of electrode/active layer interfaces to understand the performance of organic optoelectronic devices. From examples relating to interfacial chemical reactions, interfacial morphological changes, and interfacial electronic level modification, a comprehensive picture of the role of the organic–electrode interfaces in device stability can be formed. The review begins with a brief overview of degradation in organic devices, including definitions and measurement approaches. It is then broken into two sections. The first focuses on the bottom contact (substrate) interface, specifically chemical reactions and dewetting, as the two main mechanisms of device degradation. The second section examines the top contact interface, which is prone to oxidation, interdiffusion, blistering and delamination, and inhomogeneous loss of performance (dark spots). For both sections, various approaches to overcoming device instabilities are given, with special attention to the various interlayers that have been introduced into devices for improved stability. Each section also includes examples where the main degradation mechanism is used advantageously to produce novel device architectures and surprising solutions to device degradation.
Ayse Turak
Dr Turak is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Engineering Physics at McMaster University. She was a Marie Curie Fellow at the Max-Planck-Institute for Metals Research (2008–2010), as project leader on organic solar cells, before taking up a visiting professor position at Sabanci University in Istanbul, Turkey to lecture on organic electronics (2011) with a European Reintegration Grant. She received her doctorate from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at the University of Toronto, where she was a Canada Graduate Scholar working on organic light emitting diodes. Her research is focused on interfacial chemical and structural engineering for improved device performance in organic optoelectronic devices, and order–disorder transitions in granular media.

Heterojunctions are inherent in and essential to all molecular optoelectronic devices. In organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs), the interfacial region between the organic active layers and the inorganic contacts plays a primary role in device performance, through the control of effective carrier injection and long-term device reliability. In organic solar cells (OPVs), heterojunctions play a defining role in all of the major processes: charge separation relies on effective organic/organic interfaces; charge transport is critically determined by the structure of the thin film, controlled by the organic/inorganic interfaces with substrates; and charge extraction can only occur at high quality inorganic/organic interfaces at the electrodes. Studies of various organic/inorganic interfaces have indicated that a wide range of interfacial types are possible in organic optoelectronic devices. To foster the next generation of devices, it is critical to understand the connections between heterojunction structure/morphology, and device performance. This connection is especially important with regard to the stability and lifetime in organic optoelectronic devices. Controlling the complex interactions and the microstructure at the electrode–organic interfaces allows the optimization of performance and leads to enhanced lifetimes.

Unlike their inorganic counterparts, all organic devices are to some extent unstable and their performance degrades over time. After efficiency, lifetime is the second most important parameter for organic devices. While inorganic semiconductors are for the most part intrinsically chemically stable, insensitive to the ambient environment and to light, for organic devices, the polymer or small molecule active layers themselves, the inorganic electrodes, and the interfaces between them are all potential locations for degradation. Consequently, degradation for organic electronics is highly complex and cannot be described by a single mechanism.
In this contribution, the aim is to review the current state of the art with regards to interfacial stability and control of electrode/active layer interfaces to understand the performance of organic optoelectronic devices. From examples of our own research and others relating to interfacial chemical reactions, interfacial morphological changes, and interfacial electronic level modification, a comprehensive picture of the role of the organic-electrode interfaces in device stability can be made. As many of the issues related to degradation at interfaces are common for both OPV and OLEDS, and for polymer and small molecule active layers, all types will be discussed within this review.

Degradation in OLEDs and OPVs is a continuous process, occurring both during operation and storage (called shelf life or dark stability). The three physical mechanisms that degradation can undergo are the loss of conjugation and irreversible deterioration of the active organic layers; degradation of the interface conductive properties; and mechanical disintegration of device (dewetting, phase segregation, crystallization), all of which manifest themselves as a change in the electrical properties of the device. The basic lifetime requirement of a light emitting or solar cell technology is the ability to provide adequate device performance over the intended time of use for the application. Stability for short term displays, such as cell phone monitors, requires different criteria than long term high performance solid state lighting. For solar cells, the requirements are different again with exposure to external environments that are not even a consideration for OLEDs, aggravated by the fact that many organic molecules undergo serious degradation in electrical properties upon exposure to light. The desire for flexible substrates for both technologies brings yet another set of challenges. These requirements have stimulated much research in the thirty years since the first devices were produced.


Efforts are underway to establish standardized protocols for OLED and OPV characterization; however, official qualification procedures have not yet been established for lifetime testing. Stability testing protocols were proposed for OPVs by consensus among 21 international research groups in May 2011 to improve the reliability of reported values, and are still in the process of being adopted by other researchers. Device lifetime is greatly affected by the driving voltage, number of duty cycles, length of rest cycles, initial luminance or power conversion efficiency, deposition conditions, and exposed environment. This makes it difficult to compare reported lifetime values between different groups. Although it is possible to use acceleration factors for both OLEDs and OPVs to estimate values for standardized test conditions, in general it is more instructive to look at the relative improvement in the device lifetime with interfacial modifications, which is how it will be discussed here.

The performance of organic devices can vary in a number of ways over time depending on its own properties and on external circumstances – there can be a smooth linear or exponential decrease from the beginning; there can be a sudden increase for a short period (sometimes referred to as the forming period) or a sudden decrease for short periods (sometimes called the burn-in period), followed by a monotonic decay; or there can be some catastrophic loss at any point in time. In any discussion of device degradation, therefore, it is important to clarify the terms of reference. The most common description of lifetime for OLEDs is the illumination half-life (t50) – the time it takes for the luminance to decrease to half of its initial value. In OPVs, a similar standard has been used with t50 defined as the time for the power conversion efficiency (PCE) to decrease to half of its initial value. More recently, it has become more common to report the t80, the time when the device has decayed to 80% of its initial performance. As decay curves can follow a variety of shapes, five time constants have been adopted to fully describe decay curves, as described in Table 1. In this review, t50 and t80 will be the adopted lifetime values for OLEDs and OPVs respectively, unless otherwise stated.

t
0

initial measurement time immediately after device fabrication

t
50

time for performance to decay to 50% of initial measured value (half-life)

t
80

time for performance to decay to 80% of initial measured value

t
s

second testing measurement time defined arbitrarily by user: used mainly for OPVs, generally taken as onset of linear or 2nd exponential behavior after initial rapid decay

t
s80

time for performance to decay to 80% of measured value at t = ts
In addition to the t50/t80 taken from the decay curve, the degradation can be described by degradation constants, obtained by fitting a suitable function to the decay curve (OPVs, OLEDs). The most common shape of the decay curves for both OLED and OPVs is a rapid initial drop in performance followed by monotonic decay over longer time periods, as shown in Fig. 1, described by two exponentials. 
(1)
where
a and b are constants, and kint and kdeg are the degradation rate constants for the initial and monotonic decay terms, respectively.

The two different stages of degradation observed in typical decay curves are important to consider independently, as they are believed to arise from different conditions: the initial decay is attributed to interfacial degradation, often driven by extrinsic factors (such as moisture) and the longer time scale decay to intrinsic or oxidation driven degradation of the bulk active layers. Although two exponentials are widely used, it is also common for researchers to ignore the initial degradation, and only fit the monotonic decay. They usually then relate the intrinsic losses to changes in the bulk electrical properties of the active layers (quenching, trap formation, annihilation centres, etc). Fery et al. were able to use a stretched exponential function to describe the whole behaviour, using the annihilation of emissive centres as the phenomenological basis.
Decay curves, as in Fig. 1, which give a global overview of the loss of device properties, are generally not sufficient to fully describe the degradation processes occurring in organic devices. Visual inspection of the device, with microscopy and photocurrent, electroluminescence or photoluminescence mapping have shown that devices operate in non-homogeneous ways. This is especially true for degradation related to the interfacial structure.

As seen in eqn (1) above, for OLEDs, the critical parameter is the normalized luminance intensity at a fixed voltage over time. Increases in voltage at constant current are sometimes also tracked, and changes in emission colour have been noted. The common benchmark value defined for OLEDs is the lifetime for an initial luminance of 100 cd m−2. As t50 generally decreases as a function of applied voltage, accelerated lifetime testing can be performed for higher initial luminance, with an acceleration factor n, assuming

L0nt50 = const
(2)
For OPVs, the PCE is tracked, but it is the normalized short circuit current (Jsc) that is used to determine rate constants. The open circuit voltage (Voc) typically does not change over time, although sometimes degradation of the fill factor (FF) has been observed. It has been assumed that OPV degradation follows an Arrhenius process, so activation energies can be calculated. However, few people calculate or report it. It is more often applied to accelerated testing methods, where the acceleration factor K is the ratio between the constants at two temperatures, assuming a common activation energy (Ea): 
(3)
However, acceleration testing has not been well studied by the OPV community, and is controversial, as constant illumination at high temperatures does not adequately represent typical operational conditions. Hauch et al., for example, observed very little photobleaching of polymer solar cells under outdoor conditions, whereas this was a major degradation feature during indoor accelerated tests. As solar cells also tend to recover their performance somewhat when kept in dark conditions, which occurs naturally during normal operation, a high degree of caution should be used for any accelerated results. Additionally, acceleration factors cannot be considered general as they are only really applicable for a given device architecture: changing one constituent or layer can nullify calculated acceleration factors. Reese et al. emphatically state that accelerated testing cannot be referred to as a standardized procedure for device stability characterization. If acceleration factors are reported, researchers should also give exact experimental details for adequate reproducibility and comparison.

Device performance can decrease in three ways – inhomogeneous loss of performance (“dark spots”), sudden catastrophic electrical shorting, and gradual loss without change in device appearance.

Many mechanisms have been proposed to describe the device degradation. These mechanisms may act simultaneously or at different times in the device life cycle, they may enhance each other or act at cross purposes, they may occur at a fixed time or apply continuously throughout the lifetime. Known degradation mechanisms include diffusion of molecular oxygen and water, crystallization or oxidation of organic layers, interlayer and electrode diffusion, electrode reaction with the organic materials, electrode oxidation, phase segregation or intermixing, dewetting from the substrate, delamination of any layer, and the formation of particles, bubbles, and cracks. As interfacial degradation is the focus of this review, degradation of the bulk active layers will only be mentioned briefly. Interested readers are directed to recent topical reviews specifically focussed on polymer photovoltaics, and on OLEDs for more comprehensive treatments. There are four major decay mechanisms related to the bulk active layers: oxidation, crystallization, charge carrier/exciton damage, and photobleaching.

One of the major mechanisms for degradation during dark storage, crystallization of the active layers is considered to be problematic because it lowers the ionization potential, fundamentally changing the electrical characteristics and exciton formation/dissociation ability. Mainly observed for small molecule based devices, crystallization of electron acceptors, such as 8-tris(hydroxylquinoline) aluminum (Alq3), bathocuproine (BCP), 2-(4-biphenyly)-5-butylphenyl-1,3,4-oxadiazole (PBD); and electron donors, N,N′-di(naphthalene-1-yl)-N,N′-diphenyl-benzidene (NPB),N,N′-diphenyl-N,N′-bis(3-methylphenyl)1,1′-biphenyl-4,4′diamine (TPD), and copper phthalocyanine (CuPc), have all been linked to device failures. Generally it has been found that the higher the glass transition temperature (Tg), the lower the likelihood of crystallization, and the higher the lifetime. In most devices, the material with the lowest Tg in the device is the most likely candidate to initiate device failure. Especially for the layers adjacent to the electrodes, the interface can have a major impact on the crystallization behavior of the organic layers, and as such some crystallization can also be related to interfacial degradation (see section 3.2).

Although crystallization is less of a concern for polymer based systems, and for OPVs, morphological instability of the active layers can also lead to undesirable intermixing or phase segregation. However, the general success of the bulk-heterojunction concept (the co-deposition of donor and acceptor phases that spontaneously self-assemble into an optimally separated phase segregated film), even for OLEDs, suggests that degradation in these cases is not due to crystallization or interdiffusion, but to changes in electronic behavior due to metastability. Optimal performance in organic devices is often the result of a complex balance of charge carrier flow and emission/absorption locations. Changes to the device over time can throw off this balance and lead to diminished device properties.

The gradual decrease in brightness of OLEDs without obvious change in device appearance has been attributed to the degradation of the active layers with the passage of charge carriers. This effect is most commonly seen in Alq3 based devices, where Aziz and co-workers elucidated that hole current caused the irreversible ionization of Alq3 to an Alq++ moiety. As the anion is not luminescent, a slow fade of luminance occurs during operation. Similar defect states have also been observed for the passage of electrons through OC1C10 (a poly(p-phenylenevinylene) derivative). and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene-sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) Even if the polaron itself does not result in irreversible ion formation, the internal polarization field developed by the passage of mobile ions does eventually lead to electrochemical decomposition of the molecules for both OLEDs and OPVs.

For many conjugated molecules, hydrocarbons appear to initiate and undergo dehydrogenation reactions, following the electronic excitation caused by exciton–polaron annihilation. The semi-reversible oxidation/reduction reactions of the molecules for exciton formation and charge recombination eventually lead to charge traps and excited state quenching defects. Once formed, these defects often dominate the photoelectrical properties, overwhelming the intrinsic carrier density, inhibiting transport of both excitons and charge carriers. Liang et al. recently showed that chemically treating electrically charged defects in poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) can lead to more stable electrical performance. Hermenau et al. found that what appeared to be a light induced degradation of poly(3-hexylthiophene):(6,6)-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT:PCBM) was actually due to the presence of excitons. They observed that the decay curves scale with light intensity, but if they are normalized with respect to the number of extracted charge carriers, all intensities fall on the same curve.

When organic materials are exposed to light, they are subject to photochemical reactions, i.e., intramolecular, intermolecular, or reactions between the active layers and oxygen and/or water, which leads to a slow decay of the electrical properties. Although this effect is most evident in OPVs, photodegradation also affects OLEDs. In OLEDs, external ambient light, as well as the light the device produces internally, are sources of degradation.

Manceau et al. recently performed a comprehensive study of the photochemical stability of electroactive polymers. The general rules developed from that study indicate that side chains, vinyl units, and ketones are highly susceptible to breakdown. Exocyclic double bonds in the main backbone (PPV derivatives), quaternary sites on moieties, and readily cleavable bonds anywhere in the molecule are all typically unstable. Aromatic polycyclic units (such as thiophenes), on the other hand, offer good stability. Side chains play a key role, as they increase solubility, but are highly unstable; therefore, if they can be cleaved off after deposition, stability improves greatly (thermoclevable polymers were developed specifically for high stability).
Although many photon driven reactions require external oxygen (PPV, MEH-PPV, MDMO-PPV, P3HT:PCBM, pentacene (PEN), PEDOT:PSS), some materials, such as C60, are also susceptible to photo-induced phase transformation, photopolymerization, or photoinduced diffusion of molecular oxygen. Sullivan and Jones observed purely photo-induced degradation, leading to a kink in the current–voltage curve with positive bias, that occurs regardless of the presence of oxygen in a PEN/C60 planar heterojunction OPV. When exposed to light, traps in C60 form, leading to the formation of space-charges within the active layers. The electric field that develops decreases the exciton dissociation efficiency. Typically, however, due to the lack of bulk side groups and readily cleavable bonds, small molecules appear to be less susceptible to photodegradation. Franke et al. observed that ZnPc:C60 tandem cells are stable under illumination, and the photobleaching of all colour small molecule OLEDs is completely recoverable.
Photodegradation seems antithetical to the use of organic molecules for solar applications. However, recovery of performance has been observed when the device is stored in the dark for some time. Outdoor testing of solar cells under natural light, with dark and light cycles, shows almost no photobleaching. Additionally, organic materials appear most susceptible to UV light, which can be filtered for higher stability. Although photodegradation has been considered a hurdle for commercialization, it does not appear to be a significant factor in future applications.

All organic layers will react with molecular oxygen and water to varying degrees causing degradation. Charge transfer complexes (CT) between oxygen and polymers (P3HT, PPV) act as exciton quenching sites due to their strong electron affinity i.e. electrons can hop to the next segment through the CT but holes cannot, due to the decrease in energy of both ground and excited states. The triplet exciton state in electroluminescence (which can also result from interchain crossing from a singlet after photoexcitation) leads to the formation of singlet oxygen. This highly reactive oxygen state attacks the molecule, causing cleavage of polymer chains or substitution on vinyl groups. The composite layer in bulk heterojunction polymer devices aids device stability: the fullerene, by dissociating singlet excitons before interchain crossing to the triplet state can occur, also prevents the formation of the reactive singlet oxygen. Although it is most damaging to polymers, singlet oxygen has also been seen to affect small molecules such as pentacene. Both of these effects result in decreased conjugation length and local charged defects.

Due to this change in conjugation length and the formation of chemical defects, oxidation generally leads to a longer tail of energetic trap states. This results in a higher trap density and higher saturation of traps (seen with transient absorption kinetics). In a fresh sample, charge carriers are in shallow traps; in a degraded sample, carriers lie in deeper traps, therefore charge emission from traps is curtailed, and with a higher density of traps, current flow is slowed. For most materials, the mobility is lowered and a shift to dispersive transport is observed.
Oxygen incorporation without reaction is also detrimental to device performance as oxygen itself quenches excitons, preventing electroluminescence in OLEDs and dissociation in OPVs. The diffusion of oxygen into polymers and oligomers is quite rapid, but recovery of device performance is often possible with thermal annealing or nitrogen flushing to drive off the oxygen.
The direct impact of ambient oxygen or moisture on the device stability through organic layer oxidation has been observed for a wide variety of both donor and acceptor molecules including PPV, P3HT, PEN, ZnPc, C60, NPD, Alq3, BCP, PEDOT:PSS, among many others. Deliberate doping of NPD with water at the NPD/emitting layer interface, for example, decreases t80 by 82%. C60 is particularly susceptible to oxidation. C60 becomes heavily p-doped by oxygen or develops charge transfer complexes or oxides. The oxygen impurity state in C60 lies 0.3 eV below the excited triplet state. It acts as a deep trap with energy not far from the mid-gap, quenching charge flow.
There has been much effort to produce electrically air-stable materials, especially acceptors, which are particularly sensitive to oxygen incorporation. Interested readers are directed to topical reviews by Usta et al. and Takimiya et al. for further details.

Though OLEDs and OPVs were introduced at approximately the same time, OLEDs were the first technology to mature. Much of the early degradation research focused on rigid encapsulation methods, with great success in improving lifetimes to the point where commercial products were possible. The current standard for OLEDs is for a t50 of at least 10000 h at an initial brightness of 100 cd m−2. For OPVs, prior to 2005 very little research was done on stability, as the focus was on increasing efficiencies to the point where organic devices might be viable. Most researchers, due to the high synergy between the two technologies, rely on OLED solutions being directly transferrable to OPVs. Although there has been some cross-over, the unique challenges of OPVs has lead to an increase in research on stability within the past 5 years, which has also spurred research in OLED stability. There is a general assumption that 1000–10000 h (∼1–10 years) is sufficient stability for most OPV applications. To enter the solar cell market, the produced operational hours multiplied by the energy costs must match the production costs of the device. Under the assumption that the dollars per Watt-peak ($/Wp) costs of organic solar cells will be less than 1/4 of inorganic solar cells, lifetimes on the order of at least five years are required for organic solar cells to enter the market as a “low cost alternative”. The National Solar Technology roadmap for the US in 2007 has set a goal of degradation of < 2% per 1000 h. For OPVs to be economically viable, they must surpass the 10–10 targets (10% PCE, 10 years stability).

In the beginning of organic device research, lifetimes were very short – for PPV based PLEDs, operation in air, at V = 25 V, led to total failure (t10) in 15 mins; under vacuum, that was extended to 20 h. The original Tang cell had t50 of 100 h in dry Ar, but at a relative humidity of 75% and under applied bias, a complete device failure is observed within a couple of hours. By the late 1990's, the average lifetime was around 5000 h, although some groups, with accelerated testing, gave projected 100 cd m−2 values as high as 70000 h. Uniax, CDT, and Philips in 2000 reported lifetimes of several tens of thousands of hours. By 2008, projected t50 were as high as 330000 h for green emission. Dupont announced in 2010 that OLED TVs could be expected to have a lifetime of 15 years, with 8 h a day viewing, from pixels with t50 of 29000 h for red, 110000 h for green and 34000 h for blue at typical television brightness levels.
As mentioned, there has been much less work on OPVs, but typical lifetimes for OPV without encapsulation are reported at ∼1 day, although devices with unstable layers (such as BCP) can have a shelf-life as low as ∼20 mins. With glass encapsulation, solar cells typically have a shelf-life of ∼1 year. The operational stability has reached thousands of hours under laboratory conditions and up to a year under outdoor conditions. Incorporating more stable polymers, e.g. PCDTBT:PC70BM devices are projected to have an operational t80 of 7 years.

The interface at the high work function bottom contact electrode is especially influential in device stability as it forms the substrate upon which subsequent layers are deposited. The electrical, chemical, and morphological features of the electrode surface play a significant role for both OLEDs and OPVs as the quality of the interface and of the hole transporting (electron donating) (HTL) film deposited on it is often the limiting feature of the device, both for performance and stability.

For a high quality device, the HTL needs to fulfil a number of criteria including high hole mobility, good energy level matching with anodes and other active layers, good thermal properties, high optical transparency to visible light, and a smooth, often amorphous morphology with good film forming properties. In small molecule OLEDs, excellent examples, and the first HTL materials, are triphenylamines such as TPD and NPB; in polymer OLEDS and OPVs, this function is often fulfilled by PEDOT:PSS.
An indium tin oxide (ITO) thin film on a glass substrate could be considered an archetypical bottom electrode for both OLEDs and OPVs due to its high transparency over the visible region, high electrical conductivity, and high work function necessary for a low barrier to hole transport. Although ITO use is almost ubiquitous and implicit as the transparent conducting electrode in almost all organic optoelectronic devices, there are a number of drawbacks to its use, including variations in the surface properties depending on preparation method, poor energetic compatibility with active organics, and instability with a wide variety of hole transporting materials.
Instability at the ITO/active layer interface covers all aspects of the interface structure: morphological, chemical and electronic. There are four major criteria that lead to an unstable interface: surface energy mismatch, low Tg materials, surface reactivity with organics, and work function instability.

The ITO surface is highly reactive with many organic materials, especially under electrical stress.Fig. 2 shows optically visible craters on the ITO surface after OLED device operation at high voltages. These damaged areas have significantly increased electrical resistance. DI transient measurements have shown that electrical stress can change the ITO/PEDOT:PSS interface from Ohmic to blocking, with barriers as high as 0.8 eV formed. A likely explanation for these results is the decomposition of the ITO, where local electrical shorting leads to sufficiently high current to decompose the ITO surface from Joule heating.

Even in the absence of electrical stress, the interaction of ITO with various organic materials, especially polymers, leads to significant oxidation and diffusion of metal ions into the active layers. Water is especially active at the ITO surface, and its hydrolysis is particularly damaging to any organic films in contact. Depending on the organic molecule in contact, the In reacts with oxidizers in the organic layer (i.e. S in PSS, Cl in PPV) to form In compounds. The reaction to form In ions has been attributed to the acidity of the organic layer (mostly with PEDOT:PSS) or the oxidation of the organic layer by dangling O at the ITO surface. Diffusion of various In compounds into the active layers has been observed by X-ray reflectivity, photoelectron spectroscopy, Auger electron spectroscopy, secondary ion mass spectroscopy, Rutherford backscattering spectroscopy, and ion scattering spectroscopies.
The ITO/active layer interaction is often so great that immediately upon deposition, high concentrations of In and In compounds can be found throughout the device structure. The diffusion extends through all of the active layers, ending up at the low work function electrode interface. Note that although In is the most reported diffusing ion, Sn is also likely to diffuse into the active layers and has been overlooked due to the lower solubility of Sn oxides. Modification of the ITO surface can affect the metal diffusion, with both interfacial water and deliberate surface modification with tetrafluoromethane or plasma etching, significantly increasing the In concentration in the active layers.
The effect of metal diffusion from ITO on the device performance is somewhat controversial, given that it occurs immediately upon initial deposition, although many researchers assume that it is undesirable. Lee et al. showed that high concentrations of In have little effect on the device performance in OLEDs if limited to the hole transport or injection layers (NPB and CuPc respectively); on the other hand, if found in the emitting layer (Alq3), In is severely detrimental to light emission. Both OLEDs and OPVs that use PEDOT:PSS are especially affected by the interaction with ITO. Jo et al. have shown a correlation between In contamination in PEDOT:PSS and decreased device performance in PFO PLEDs; however, a PEDOT:PSS layer in a PPV PLED, which blocks the diffusion of In into PPV, lead to improved performance. Sharma et al. recently observed that In diffusion causes a 0.31 eV shift in the high energy cutoff by UPS and a shift of 0.14 eV in the HOMO position, suggesting dipole formation at the ITO/PEDOT:PSS interface. The difference in the magnitude of peak shifting observed by Sharma suggests a change in the ionization energy of the PEDOT:PSS. Skraba et al. also observed a significant (0.3 eV) shift in the HOMO leading edge for PEDOT:PSS on ITO compared to a similar film on SiO2, suggesting the formation of a new interface state near the HOMO as a result of In doping. Both effects suggest a significant alteration of the band level alignment with the other layers in a device. Additionally, Schlatmann et al. observed new features in the electroluminescence spectrum due to the presence of In in the emitting layer, again pointing to a modification of the electronic properties.
As high concentrations of doping exist in the device at t0, it is unclear if the In contamination plays a significant role in the stability of devices, aside from the formation of dark spots as described below. However, it is possible to increase the In concentration by exposure to humidity, by annealing or by illumination which then corresponds to decreased device performance for PLEDs and the development of an s-shape in the illuminated diode curve for solar cells, as shown in Fig. 3. This suggests that continued diffusion of In compounds can lead to degrading device performance over time. However, this effect may also be solely due to the oxidation or de-doping of the PEDOT:PSS layer. Oxidation of PEDOT:PSS from the ITO surface or from external sources (see section 2.3.4) has been linked to significant degradation. Replacement of the PEDOT:PSS with another material, such as MoOx which does not oxidize over time, also does not show the performance degradation typically associated with In doping (see section 3.1.2).

The most significant effect of In diffusion into the active layers for OLEDs is the formation of dark spots (non-emissive regions) in the opaque low work function counter electrode. One of the earliest observed failure modes in OLEDs, the development of dark/dead regions has a number of proposed mechanisms including oxidation through pinholes in the counterelectrode (see section 4.3), organic layer crystallization, surface roughness and shorting across the organic layer where metal diffusion leads to the formation of leakage paths for charge carriers.

Although shorting has been observed with metal migration from the back side contact (see section 4.2), there has been only indirect evidence of In diffusion causing shorting in diodes. Dark spots often occur above surface imperfections, such as In-rich spikes, where a higher electric field exists due to the thinner active layer. This increased electrical load causes significant local heating which is thought to be high enough to decompose the ITO. Gardonio et al. observed In 2p by XPS on the outside of the Al electrode at the location of a dark spot arising from the rupturing and delamination of the Al layer.
Dark spots were also observed to linearly increase in size, not in number, during operation in moisture/air, with the rate heavily affected by the applied voltage. Chao et al. observed that delaminated areas in the counter-electrode had a direct relation to the heavily damaged areas on the ITO surface, as seen in Fig. 2 above. Liew et al. showed that some pinholes which develop into dark spots remain in the top electrode, even if the electrode is peeled off and redeposited. These studies all support the concept that in the absence of a specific surface imperfection in the ITO layer or a pin-hole in the counter electrode, In diffusion to the back side contact can cause dark spot formation.
The detailed process of the growth of dark spots from In in OLEDs can be described in four steps as follows:
i. The regional high electric field leads to decomposition of ITO, resulting in the production of oxygen gas and indium metal.
ii. The indium atoms (or ions) diffuse through the organic layer towards the cathode, artificially creating In rich spikes. The formation of these microscopic conduction paths through the organic layer similar to those produced by initial roughness results in a large leakage current and high electric fields.
iii. The temperature rise in the defect site as a result of the Joule heating effect enhances the decomposition of ITO and accelerates the electromigration of indium towards the cathode
iv. The electrical short circuit and the Joule heating effect combined result in the catastrophic failure of the OLED.

The chemical reactivity of the ITO surface was an early problem for organic electronics and a variety of approaches have been adopted to prevent the breakdown of the electrode/organic interface. These approaches were geared toward modifying the surface of ITO to limit reactivity or to place a physical barrier at the interface. However, the choice of interlayer or treatment is very important: generally approaches that increase the acidity of the surface (desired for high performance) lead to greater reactivity, whereas increasing the basicity of ITO increases the stability but limits the performance.

Various surface treatments, therefore, have had varying degrees of success in actually stabilizing the surface. Treatment with phosphonic acid (H3PO4) makes the interface more reactive with NPB and TPD; on the other hand, an HCl acid etch followed by UV ozone treatment was seen to increase the stability of OPVs by 3.9× compared to a PEDOT:PSS layer.
Plasma treatments have also been seen to both improve and degrade interfacial stability: O2 or UV ozone plasma treatments were seen to increase lifetime by 20× with PVK, 4.7× with α-NPD, and 2× with PEDOT:PSS and prevent chemical reactions while tetrafluoromethane plasma increases In diffusion into PEDOT:PSS. Annealing appears to have some success in preventing corrosion of ITO and decreasing In diffusion, most likely due to the elimination of surface moisture which hydrolyses at the surface. Modifications to ITO during growth, such as Zn doping, have also been successful in decreasing In diffusion. Ni et al. observed 10× less In diffusion into PEDOT:PSS with ZITO produced by MOCVD.
The second approach, stabilizing by introducing a buffer layer, was the earliest applied method, especially for MEH:PPV PLEDs. As described further in section 3.2.1, these buffer layers served many purposes (eliminate problems from mechanical weakness, electrical inhomogeneities from roughness, or unbalanced h+ injection) and most are used for their improvements in electrical performance. Layers, summarized in Table 2, specifically introduced to block oxidation or In diffusion include CFx, polyaniline (PAni), DBI, polyimide, Si3N4, SiOxNy, ZnO, Pr2O3,and LiF. Functionalization with self assembled monolayers (SAMs) is an especially popular approach to chemically stabilize ITO against hydrolysis and attack by acidic overlayers. As it also allows control of the surface work function and adhesion, as described in section 3.2, a wide variety of SAMs have been deposited on ITO surfaces, and incorporated into organic devices. Fig. 4 shows the general strategies adopted to block chemical reactions by covalently anchoring the SAMs to the dangling surface bonds. However, as with surface treatments, the acidity of the SAM surface can heavily affect the performance. Nuesch et al. showed that acidic SAMs (electron accepting) promote dissociation of water to form hydroxide groups, which can then attack the organic layers but reduces barrier to charge flow; if basic (electron donating), the SAM blocks the reaction but also blocks injection. They were able to take advantage of these properties to pattern ITO electrodes for high contrast OLEDs using different SAMs.
Interlayer

t
50/t80
HTL
Ref.

a Modified using data from ref. 244.


OPVs

MoO3 (high RH)
100×
P3HT:PCBM

203

MoO3 (low RH)
∼4×
P3HT:PCBM

203

evap. MoO3
18×
P3HT:PCBM

238

sol–gel MoO3
30×
P3HT:PCBM

238

s-MoOx (high RH)
23×
P3HT:PCBM

239

s-MoOx (low RH)
38×
P3HT:PCBM

239

sMoOx
6×
P3HT:PCBM

240

MoOx
∼20×
PCDTBT:PC70BM

241

GO
13×
PTB7:PC71BM

242


OLEDs

MoO3
5.9× (t90)
α-NPD

39

polyimide
10×
MEH:PPV

228


OTCs
2.3×
MEH:PPV

236


FOTCs
6.5×
MEH:PPV

236


PAni
∼6 × (t30)
MEH:PPV

189


DBI
8.5−10×
LUMATION 1300 Green polymer

237

CF3/CFx
1.2×
NPB

231,243


LiF
1.6× (t90)
PEDOT:PSS

214

parylene
3×
PEDOT:PSS

216


t-ac (3 nm)
3×
PEDOT:PSS

217

PEDOT:PSS is an interesting case with regards to interfacial reactivity. It was originally introduced to block the diffusion of In into MEH:PPV but its high reactivity with ITO and unstable oxidation meant that it became a primary source of degradation in both OLEDs and OPVs. Unencapsulated P3HT:PCBM solar cell devices with PEDOT:PSS show rapid decay of the short circuit current, with t80 essentially equal with or without ITO. To continue use of PEDOT:PSS for its electrical advantages, researchers either introduced another buffer layer beneath PEDOT, treated PEDOT:PSS post deposition, or replaced PEDOT:PSS with a more stable interlayer. As described in Table 2, stability improvements compared to PEDOT:PSS vary. Most interlayers are designed to block In diffusion into PEDOT:PSS, which is quite severe. Wong et al. using short chain alkylsiloxanes, including ethyltriethoxysilane, arlyltriethoxysilane, and 3-(trimethoxysilyl)-1-propanethiol saw a drop of indium concentration by a factor of 28–42. The aryltriethoxysilane had the most abrupt interface, attributed to cross-linking that blocked mass transport through the SAM. Other buffers include diamond-like carbon, tetrahedral amorphous carbon, Au, and parylene, and typically show a 3× improvement in the device lifetime. Ti has recently also been introduced to prevent reactions between PEDOT:PSS and other electrode materials such as Ag. These interlayers generally have the side benefit of further preventing the formation of dark spots by smoothing the surface and often improving the device performance.
Another approach has been to treat the PEDOT:PSS after deposition to prevent or reverse adverse reactions. Although post-deposition annealing generally increases In diffusion, Nguyen was able to decrease the In content in the PEDOT:PSS films after an acid treatment with 10% HCl. Recently, the group of Karl Leo in Dresden introduced an anethylene glycol soaking treatment that improves solar cell lifetime by a factor of 1.3, by removing the insulating and hygroscopic PSS components in the layer. The PSS depleted samples minimize residual water and decrease acidity, minimizing migration and corrosion. As these PSS components can also react with the other polymer layers, eliminating excess PSS leads to greatly increased lifetimes.
Most recently there has been a move to replace PEDOT:PSS with transition metal oxides, the most successful of which is MoO3 for both OLEDs and OPVs. Although the reactivity of PEDOT:PSS is often cited as the reason to explore new hole injection layers in organic devices, researchers rarely examine the chemical stability of the new materials (e.g. V2O5, tetrasulfonic CuPc, TFB:TPDSi2, PTFE, among many, many others).
Vorshazi et al., Jasieniak et al., Zilberberg et al., and Girotto et al. all reported significant improvements in stability with MoOx interlayers, whether from vacuum or solution deposition approaches (see Table 2). The prevention of humidity trapping and oxidation in the interlayer, as occurs for PEDOT:PSS, leads to significant improvements in high humidity environments: up to 100× improvement have been observed. However, the shift to new materials systems means new unexplored interfaces exists and new sites of instability are possible: Jasiniak has reported that an unstable interface possibly exists between MoO3 and P3HT:PCBM, resulting in the appearance of an s-shape in the J–V characteristics. Graphene oxide is also a new promising PEDOT:PSS replacement. Murray et al. found a 13× improvement in t80 in a high humidity environment for PTB7:PCBM solar cells using a GO interlayer in place of PEDOT:PSS with almost identical PCE of ∼7.5%. The success of these interlayers, in both performance and stability enhancements, suggests that PEDOT:PSS will not be a significant part of the next generation devices.

It is the interplay between molecule–molecule self-interaction and substrate–molecule interactions that determines the morphological stability on a given surface. ITO has a highly variable surface electronic structure resulting from the many dangling O bonds on the surface (from the strong (222) crystallographic texture see Fig. 5). The typically hydrophilic surface is very susceptible to moisture and light irradiation. As such, the substrate–molecule interactions can change over time, leading to a highly metastable environment for organic films deposited on the surface. Dewetting, or even poor adhesion during growth, can be significant driving forces behind device degradation.

Regardless of the mechanism, dewetting begins with a nucleation event leading to the formation of a hollow which proceeds to grow by the transport of material away from the nucleation site to a retreating rim surrounding the hole. These holes eventually intersect, leading to the formation of ribbons of material along the contact line.
Dewetting in organic thin films is strongly related to the crystalline structure of the material, and thus is quite different from the wetting–dewetting problems of an isotropic liquid. The situation is further complicated by the fact that many organic molecular crystals exhibit several distinct crystal structures, which are energetically very similar and may coexist. The amorphous films often used in devices do not have the benefit of lateral crystalline organization to stabilize against dewetting, and are even more susceptible to extreme morphological instabilities.
Surface energy plays a critical role in stability at organic/ITO interfaces. For some electron donor organic materials, control of the surface polarity of the oxide surface will control the microstructure in the adjacent layer, and any subsequent heterojunction films. Advancing aqueous contact angles on hydrophilic ITO surfaces range from ∼0 to 30°. In contrast, many electron donors are hydrophobic. Two widely used HTLs for small molecule OLEDs, TPD and NPB, have advancing contact angles of 80°, and 90° respectively. This large mismatch in surface energy makes it difficult to even grow continuous films necessary for devices.
Thermally evaporated oligomers, such as NPB and TPD as well as many others, show a strong tendency to island (Volmer–Weber) growth on ITO (see Fig. 6a) because of the energy mismatch, with highly active surface diffusion to step edges and defects. Often, the initially formed islands can ripen laterally with continued deposition to form what appear to be continuous films. For molecules deposited from solution, the surface energy mismatch can also lead to inhomogeneous deposition, as seen in Fig. 6b for PEDOT:PSS.
Even when continuous films are able to form, the relatively low Tg for many small molecule hole transporting materials (NPB 96 °C, TPD 65 °C), can lead to dewetting under mild thermal treatments or even with storage over time at ambient temperatures. Diindenoperylene, a novel material of interest due to its well defined ordering, interesting growth behaviour, promising electron transport properties, favourable electronic structure, and long exciton diffusion lengths, has recently been shown to have tuneable behaviour in solar cells based on its morphology. As seen from Fig. 7, films of DIP form islands on ITO with a high degree of order upon initial deposition. After storage under vacuum at room temperature for one month, very strong dewetting into columnar structures was observed.
Although sometimes observed under high temperature treatments, dewetting is not as significant a problem for polymer systems, due to the generally higher Tg of polymer materials. However, in polymer-based solar cells, device performance is heavily influenced by the morphology, Optimal performance in organic devices is often the result of a complex balance of charge carrier flow and emission/absorption locations. Bulk heterojunction devices require the spontaneous phase segregation of the donor and acceptor polymers during co-deposition. As such, the interpenetrating morphology is also highly metastable, and driven by the substrate surface energy mismatch. Builliard et al. found a direct correlation between the PCE and substrate surface energy, through the optimization of the BHJ morphology in P3HT:PCBM solar cells. Changes to the device morphology over time can throw off this delicate balance and lead to diminished device properties.
Metastability of the active layers, therefore, can be a significant driving force for degradation, as the organic layers are subjected to thermal stress at a number of points in the device lifetime. During normal device operation, low mobility in the organic films can lead to high electric fields and local Joule heating. Any local failures due to morphological inhomogeneities on the ITO surface (In spikes, thinner organic regions, etc, see section 3.1.1), where the high local electric field would already encourage Joule heating, would also tend to both accelerate and be accelerated by dewetting.
Zhou et al. observed that the surface temperature for TPD based OLEDs can reach as high as 86 °C, suggesting that the temperature inside the actual devices could be higher than 200 °C. Tessler et al. saw temperature variation during operation as high as 60 °C in the recombination zone. As semiconducting organic molecules tend to show poor natural heat dissipation, such large temperature variations cannot be handled by the poor heat sink at the glass surface. Choi et al. were able to find an inverse correlation between the OLED device lifetime and the internal device temperature, as measured by scanning thermal microscopy.
OPVs have the additional burden of illumination induced heating and cooling cycles, which can cause the internal temperatures to reach well beyond the Tg when coupled with the already high burden of Joule heating. Sullivan and Jones observed that UV induced heating (through UV absorption by the glass substrate) lead to a structural reorganization of pentacene, decoupling it from the ITO surface, causing kinks to form in the J–V curves for PEN:C60 solar cells. Paci et al. observed that the metastable morphology of P3HT:PCBM solar cells was modified in a similar way under illumination as by deliberate thermal annealing.
Heating above the Tg of one of the components has been linked irreversible device failure in small molecule OLEDs and OPVs. For many devices, the weakest link in the device lifetime is the intrinsic low Tg of the active layers immediately adjacent to the ITO. In contrast, many electron accepting and transporting materials have a relatively high Tg. Fenter et al. proposed that device failure was a result of significant expansion of the least thermally stable material, TPD, leading to delamination from the ITO surface. Do et al. for MEH-PPV and Choi et al. for PFO, in fact observed film buckling where the polymer layer completely detached from the ITO, resulting in dead areas that eventually covered the whole surface. It is likely that such interfacial instability which compromises the integrity of the hole transport layer would lead to inefficient hole injection and modification of the other layers deposited atop the dewetted surface.
Tokito et al. observed a direct correlation between the glass transition temperature of the HTL and device degradation as a function of temperature; this was disputed by Adachi et al., however, who saw no correlation specifically with the Tg, relating the stability more to the interfacial barrier to injection (and hence to Joule heating).
This correlation, also observed by others can be explained by the fact that dewetting and the instability of the surface work function of ITO are accelerated by humidity  or light irradiation. The same mechanism is at work in both cases – the modification of the hydroxyl termination on the ITO surface, which leads to a change in the surface energy.
Even without dewetting induced failures, metastability can have catastrophic consequences for the devices in operation. especially for systems where the morphology is finely tuned for optimal performance, like bulk hereojunction polymer–fullerene solar cells. Over-annealing or elevated temperature storage over long time scales can lead to significant phase-segregation beyond the exciton diffusion length, which ultimately decreases the performance over time. Even oligomer TPD undergoes significant structural changes well below its glass transition temperature: at ∼60 °C, changes have been observed in its thickness and density by XRR and even serious dewetting has been observed by AFM.

There has been much research into methods of counter-acting dewetting from the ITO surface. Incorporation of the unstable film into a device, with a mutli-layer film stack, already significantly suppresses the dewetting of single films. Deliberate use of a stable inorganic capping layer, such as Al2O3 or an electrode metal such as Ag or Au, within the device can also greatly improve the stability of the underlying organic phases. Utilizing a rough substrate can also encourage wetting and stability, but that can lead to undesirable morphologies in the original deposition. In order to improve the stability of the active layers with respect to the ITO surface, there have been two general approaches: increasing the glass transition temperature of the organic, or introducing stabilizing interlayers.


There has been much work over the past 30 years focused on finding new molecules that have high morphological stability, as recently reviewed by Shirota and Kageyama. General strategies for designing morphologically stable molecules have been developed by Shirota, Wirth, and Naito and Muira – the underlying philosophy is to decrease the degrees of freedom and increase the rigidity of the molecules, through replacement/augmentation of the core; linear or branch linkages; or long substituents leading to starbust-type molecules.

The first attempt to increase stability with higher Tg materials was the replacement of the original triphenyldiamine used in the Tang OLED (TPD) with a benzedine derivative, NPB. NPB had excellent hole transporting and film forming properties in addition to a slightly higher Tg (∼96 °C) and was widely adopted in OLEDs; unfortunately, it also had a tendency to crystallize and dewet during operation. The original family of triphenyl-diamines were very successful in most other aspects as a hole transporting layer; this prompted the development of various derivatives, including triphenyl amines, biphenyl amines, binaphlathene diamines, asymmetric triaryldiamines (TPD derivatives), triphenylamine-based starburst molecules, and recently star-shaped oligotriarylamines.
Other approaches include using a fluorene core to increase the rigidity of biphenyl HTLs, carbazole derivatives, vinyl-type polynorborenes with ethyl ester linked triarylamines, thermoclevable densified polymers, defect reduced polymers, among many others. Although new materials are synthesized regularly with significantly higher glass transition temperatures than the classically utilized molecules, the correct combination of high hole mobility, good energetic compatibility with electron-accepting materials, and good optical absorbance has proven elusive, and many of these materials currently do not see widespread use in devices.

Due to the difficulties in finding complete replacements to traditional hole transport/electron donating layers, much research has gone into introducing thin adhesion-promoting buffer layers between the active material and the ITO anode. The ideal interlayer should exhibit strong adhesion to both the anode and the HTL, via physical adhesion or chemical bonds. Other desirable criteria for an effective buffer should include (1) high hole transport mobility; (2) easy deposition onto anode surfaces via straightforward methods such as spin-coating, vapor-deposition, or self-assembly; (3) good conformal matching to the substrate; (4) excellent thickness control; and (4) a well-defined microstructure free of pinhole defects.

In addition to promoting adhesion and stabilizing against dewetting, buffer layers often have a number of added benefits for the device, including enhancing initial device performance, encouraging better charge balance (often by preventing hole injection), preventing chemical reactions between the active layer and ITO and blocking In and Sn diffusion (see section 3.1.2), increasing mechanical strength, and smoothing the ITO surface (preventing electric field inhomogeneities that are potentially responsible for dark spot formation – see section 3.1.1).
There are two broad classes of interlayers that have been used to suppress dewetting: modifications of HTLs (covalently bound or polymerized versions of traditional hole transport layers; HTL materials doped with or into a stabilizing material); and any organic, metal or oxide buffer that is not also used as the HTL.

The most widely explored class is that of generic buffer layers. These run the gamut from vapor or solution deposited organic layers, self-assembled monolayers, dielectrics, conducting oxides, insulating oxides, to metals. Virtually every element in the periodic table has been incorporated into the device with the aim of increasing the device lifetime. A wide variety of interlayers have also been introduced with no interest in their stabilizing properties, although film stability often also results as a side effect. These interlayers include metal doped ITO; other oxides including Y2O3, Tb4O7, TiO2, ZnO, Nb2O3, Ga2O3, SnO2, CuOx, Fe2O3, SiO2, VOx, RuOx, IrO3,  AZO, Al2O3, NiO; ultrathin metal layers such as Ni, Au, Sn, Pb; oligomers (e.g. F16CuPc); conducting polymers; and a wide variety of self-assembled monolayers. While this is not an exhaustive list, it demonstrates that a wide variety of buffer layers have been attempted by researchers. The focus for the rest of this section will be on interlayers that are specifically shown to influence the stability of the organic layers deposited on the surface. The reported improvements in device lifetime for a variety of interlayers are summarized in Table 3.

Interlayer

t
50/t80
HTL

a Modified using data from ref. 363.
b Modified using data from ref. 331.
c Modified using data from ref. 244.


OLEDs

CuPc
1.8×
NPB

363

CuPc
5.3×
NPB

88

CuPc
2.6×
α-NPD

329

PEDOT:PSS
1.7×
TPD

244

PEDOT:PSS
6.7×
TDAPB

364

MoOx
3×
NPB

258


sc-MTDATA
4.7×
NPB

210


MTDATA
1.75×
TPD

331

O2 plasma PEDOT:PSS (3 min)
2.2×
TPD

221,244

O2 plasma PEDOT:PSS (5 min)
5.8×
TPD

244

O2 plasma PEDOT:PSS (8 min)
16×
TPD

244

UV ozone
4.7×
α-NPD

365

Mg
∼60× (t90)
NPB:F4TCNQ

88

CF3/CFx
2×
NPB

231,243

OTCs
4×
MEHPPV

236

TMTPD+SbF-6:PC-TPB-DEGL
2700×
NPB

230

PVTPA2:TBPAH
6.6×
α-NPD

329

FOTCs
11×
MEH:PPV

236

C60
8×
NPB

366

NTCDI-OCF3
1.2×
NPB

338

Pr2O3
∼7×
CuPc/TPD

235

Alq3
4.2× (t80)
NPB

367

ta-C
orders of mag
PEDOT

217

Pani
∼10× (t30)
MEH:PPV

189

NaCl:NPB
2.3×
NPB

363

metal free Pc:CuPc
3.4×
TPTE

368


BHJ NPB:Alq
5.4×
NPB

83


gradient HJ NPB:Alq
3.15×
NPB
DSA_Ph:NPB
1.3×
NPB

369

F4TCNQ (5%-20%):NPB
40×
NPB

88

F4TCNQ (30%):NPB
14×
NPB

88

F4TCNQ (2%):NPB
2.5×
NPB

88

MADN:NPB
2.7×
NPB

370

PFI (3%):PEDOT:PSS
9.4×
PFO

371


PFI (6%):PEDOT:PSS
8×
PFO

371


heat treatment 35 °C
3.5×
MEH-PPV LB

211

heat treatment 65 °C
5.5×
MEH-PPV LB

211

heat treatment 110 °C
9.4×
polyfluorene

372


heat treatment 150 °C
167.5×
polyfluorene

372



OPVs

ZnPc
∼3.5×
ZnPc:C60

105

MoO3
∼4×
H2TPP

247

MoO3
∼24×
α-NPD

247

One of the first, and still most widely used, buffer layers for small molecule OLEDs is copper phthalocyanine (CuPc). Although an interesting semiconducting material in its own right, with current widespread use in solar cells as an electron donating material, it was first introduced as a stabilizing buffer layer for NPB. The use of CuPc prevents the ambient dewetting observed for NPB directly deposited on ITO, providing a metastable equilibrium structure for devices at room temperature. CuPc was also seen to increase the crystallization temperature of NPB significantly, to above 160 °C. This stabilization effect allows for longer lifetimes: Aziz et al. observed more than a 5× increase in the luminance t50 using CuPc as a buffer (see Table 3). Although the effect varies, many researchers have seen significant improvements in stability using CuPc under ambient conditions. However, poor device performance has been observed if the devices are used at even mildly elevated temperature. It has been established that moderate heating as low as 60 °C leads to CuPc crystallization (see Fig. 8), intermixing with NPB and TPD, and dewetting. Ultimately, CuPc-buffered ITO does not prevent HTL crystallization and decohesion upon heating. Additionally, the use of CuPc leads to significant increase in the driving voltage for OLEDs. It is highly susceptible to chemical reaction with the ITO surface itself, introducing another unstable interface (see section 3.1). To overcome some of these difficulties, researchers have used another buffer layer under the CuPc layer, such as Pr2O3 or LiF. In spite of these limitations, CuPc has been extensively employed as an anode HTL buffer layer, mostly due to its ability to enhance OLED performance, good energetic level matching, high thermal stability, and low cost as a result of its use as a blue dye. Other phthalocyanines have also been employed as buffer layers below the active layers; the recent use of ZnPc, for example, improved the stability of ZnPc:C60 bulk heterojunction solar cells by ∼3.5× (see Table 3).
The second most commonly used interlayer material is PEDOT:PSS. Due to its high hole mobility, PEDOT:PSS is often actually classified as a conductor and referred to as a polymeric anode, rather than a buffer layer. Considered an essential component of most polymer based devices, both PLEDs and OPVs, it is used in almost all polymer solar cells to improve device performance rather than for stability. However, it was initially introduced into PLEDs as a stabilizing layer and many researchers saw substantial improvement in device lifetimes with its use (e.g. ∼7× improvement in luminance t50 in ref. 364). The introduction of PEDOT:PSS into PLEDs allowed the device lifetime to go from a few days to hundreds or even thousands of hours, essential making organic devices into a viable technological alternative. Fig. 9 shows DIP deposited on PEDOT after storage under vacuum for one month. Unlike on bare ITO, where severe dewetting was observed (Fig. 7), the DIP film is completely stabilized with a PEDOT buffer layer. XRD (Fig. 9c) confirms that the crystal structure is also preserved during storage. Further improvements (up to 9×) in the device lifetime can be made with an O2 plasma treatment of the PEDOT:PSS. Introducing surface roughness (∼20 nm islands) improves the adhesion of overlying TPD layers, leading to substantial gains in luminance t50.
Although, PEDOT:PSS is widely used, as discussed in section 3.1.2, its extremely high reactivity with ITO and hygroscopic nature are major disadvantages, leading to its likely replacement in the next generation devices.
As a third approach, plasma or ozone treatment of the ITO surface is widely used to modify the work function and surface energy prior to deposition of the active layers. Although not technically an interlayer, the modifications are limited to a small region immediately adjacent to the active layer, resulting in effects similar to that of a buffer layer. The treatment of the ITO surface with plasma or UV ozone has a profound effect on the surface energy and hence the stability of the active layers deposited on the surface. The aqueous contact angle increases with plasma treatment, correlated to the coverage of the surface with hydroxyl terminated O. As this saturation also controls the surface work function, and wetting behavior has recently been shown to correlate to the surface work function, the hydroxylated surface should encourage improved adhesion of the active layers and lead to better performance. Wu et al. saw almost two orders of magnitude improvements in t50 with plasma treatments. Not all plasma treatments lead to the same response, however. The study by Huang et al. showed that the wettability of NPB is increased by H2, CF4 and O2 plasmas, but decreases with Ar plasma. They suggested that decontamination of the surface without hydroxylation leads to a dipole field on the surface that is stronger than the grain boundary and defect effects, promoting NPB nucleation. On the other hand, CF4 and O2 strongly encourage layer-by-layer growth, smoothing and passivating the surface against defects that can lead to inhomogeneous electric fields. As an interesting aside, the results for UV-ozone treatment of the ITO surface by Fukushi et al. contradict the above. They saw ∼5–6× improvement in t50 with a treatment that decreased the aqueous contact angle to 4°. They speculate that stronger adhesion of the HTL was possible, which contradicts thermodynamic wetting theory, as the surface energy mismatch would have been incredibly large. This underscores the likelihood that, as with many aspects of organic semiconductors, more than one mechanism is responsible for lifetime improvements in devices.
Silane and phosphane based SAMs, such as tetraaryldiamine (TAA), epoxysilane functionalized triphenylamine (TPA-silane), dodecyltrichlorosilane (DDTS), phenyltriethoxysilane (PTES), 3-aminopropyl-methyl-diethoxysilane (APMDS), alkylsiloxane, alkytrichlorosilanes (OTCS and FOTCS) and ω-(thiophen-3-yl) alkyl phosphonic acids use a Si–O or P–O bond to anchor on the ITO surface, providing a robust interface with substantially higher surface energy. Chong et al. observed that the sticking and dewetting of NPB on various SAMs shows an inverse correlation with the measured aqueous contact angle, but Choi et al. saw substantially longer lifetimes (×11 increase in t50 with 105° contact angle on FOTCS). The improved adhesion of the active layer when it was observed was attributed to interfacial reconstruction and interpenetration with the SAM. A recent study of quaterrylene molecules on SAM buffered surfaces showed a significant release of interfacial strain when the buffer was present. As strain release is another mechanism that drives dewetting, better pseudo-epitaxial conformation with the surface for buffered films could be a mechanism for the observed improvement in performance. Phosphonic acid modification in general has been found to reduce the surface energy of ITO, making it more wettable by non-polar organic layers.
A wide variety of other organic molecular interlayers have also been used, with varying success in improving the lifetime, as summarized in Table 3. These include small molecules such as Alq3, 4,4′,4′′-(3-methylphenyl-phenylamino)triphenylamine (MTDATA), parylene, cross-linked perylenediimide (PDMI),N,N-bis(4-trifluoromethoxybenzyl)-1,4,5,8-naphthalene-tetracarboxylic diimide (NTCDI-OCF3), or fullerene (C60). Most of these interlayers are thought to improve the active layer film formation on the surface, by smoothing. The high Tg of MTDATA and NTCDI-OCF3 are also thought to contribute to preventing crystallization of the HTL overlayer. Polymer approaches include PAni, fluoropolymer (FC-227), polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE),  plasma polymerized fluorocarbons, tetrahedral amorphous carbon, PI or radical ion salt doped amine polymer, which are thought to prevent oxidation or block hole injection, in addition to stabilizing the surface against dewetting.
Metals such as Pt, Au and Mg have also been used as interlayers, and although both show improvements, the mechanisms are almost completely opposed. High work function Pt and Au enhances wetting of TPD and CuPc, respectively, on ITO surfaces, while low work function materials such as Mg, Ca and Al give many orders of magnitude improvement in the luminance stability, correlated to the work function of the metal, by preventing the injection of holes into the Alq layer in OLEDs (intrinsic degradation).

There are three modifications that have been made to the hole transporting/electron donating layer adjacent to the ITO surface to improve its wetting properties: doping, polymerization, and functionalization to allow for covalent bonding to the surface. Although many of the layers discussed in this section have also been tried as the HTL for a given device structure, they have found more success for high device performance coupled with stability when they are used as an ultra-thin buffer layer beneath the unmodified version of the molecule acting as the HTL.

Doping the HTL with other molecules, often referred to as alloying or more recently as a bulk heterojunction, has been very successful in suppressing crystallization and dewetting. Mori et al. used metal-free Pc to disrupt the crystallization of CuPc, showing ∼2× improvement in lifetimes for operation above 85 °C. Chu et al. and Lee et al. used higher Tg molecules NTCDI (diimide) and PFI (perfluorinatedionomer) to stabilize NPB and PEDOT:PSS, respectively. The incorporation of PCBM into various polymers, including P3HT, PPV, MDMO:PPV, also stabilizes the morphology against heat treatment, and improves long-term stability. Addition of a diblock co-polymer of P3HT-C60 to a P3HT:PCBM composite has been seen to promote even greater stabilization against phase desegregation. In some cases, the hole transport molecule was doped into a more stable matrix, such as TPD into high Tg polymers or MgF2, which significantly suppressed the crystallization. Ruberene:TPD, MADN:NPB, F4TCNQ:NPB, and DSA-Ph:NPB combinations have all been employed with various levels of doping, leading in most cases to ∼2× improvement in luminance t80 in small molecule OLEDs (see Table 3). One very successful method of improving device stability has been doping of the Alq3 layer in small molecule OLEDs with other molecules including TPD, NPB, NPD, quadricone, styrlamine, DMQA, rubrene, DNP, Bphen, perylene, among many others. This approach, however, is focused on combating the intrinsic degradation of Alq3 by holes (see section 2.3.2). This mechanism, hole blocking, was also suggested as an additional mechanism for a few of the doped hole transport layers (MADN:NPB, F4TCNQ:NPB, DSA-Ph:NPB, Ir(piq)3:NPD). As the focus of this section is on the stabilization at the ITO surface, the summary in Table 3 has been limited to doping in the HTL.
Doping with nanoparticles (LiF, C60, NaCl, Au) has also been very successful in stabilizing hole transport layers, although there is sometimes a trade-off between stability and performance for such systems. As particulates in the layer can act as nucleation centres for crystallization, care must be taken when selecting doping parameters. The concentration and layer thickness must be chosen such that the electrical performance is not adversely affected by the presence of the doped layer. There is a long history of nanoparticle inclusions for stabilization in non-conducting polymers. Interparticle or surface forces strongly influence suspension behaviour of nanoparticles; therefore, not every nanofiller works with every organic. Grozea et al. observed that LiF greatly enhanced the stability of NPB at 120 °C, while having no impact on the crystallization of CuPc. Luo and Gersappe suggest that a combination of factors are responsible for the stabilization effects, such as the mobility of nanofillers, their size, interaction with the organic, and additional pinning effects at contact lines. Fillers work best if they are immobile; therefore, diffusion to and pinning at the substrate interface is one suggested stabilization mechanism. Chu et al. did see similar stabilization with a C60 layer deposited at the interface below NPB as Yuan et al. saw with C60 doping into NPB, supporting such a mechanism; Barnes et al., however, saw greatly enhanced dewetting with C60 at the Si surface for polystyrene thin films, refuting it. Additionally, there are a number of cases where diffusion to the substrate is unlikely, as no phase separation was observed. Mukherjee et al. recently observed a concentration dependence of the stabilization, where dewetting droplets form a core–shell structure, rather than leaving behind nanoparticles as the polymer layer retreats as would be expected for substrate segregation. In such cases, strong electrostatic or charge–transfer interactions between the particle and the organic layer leading to a cross-linked network are the most likely route to highly stable films. Other possible mechanisms for stabilization include changing the Tg with high volume/surface area ratio (effectively modifying the film rheology), preventing heterogeneous nucleation, and relief of residual stress in the film through de-segregation.
Another approach to stabilization, spearheaded by Marks' group at Northwestern University, focuses on functionalizing traditional hole transport materials with siloxane groups. This allows the molecules to covalently bond to the ITO surface through the formation of Si–O bonds (see Fig. 10). Covalent bonds ensure strong adhesion and directly eliminate surface energy mismatch. As the interlayer is the same molecule as the HTL, deposition continues in a self-epitaxial fashion, yielding uniform films as large as 25 μm without cracks or pinholes. Aqueous contact angles of 90° compared to 110° for the active layer ensures good wetting and physical cohesion in MDMO-PPV:PCBM bulk heterojunction solar cells with dewetting prevention above 60 °C. Typical examples include TPD-Si2, NPB-Si2 PABT-Si2, penta(organo)-fullerenes (which use phosphonic acid linkages rather than silane), and fluorinated triphenyldiamine (FTPD). An additional step of thermal curing leads to a cross-linked siloxane network, resulting in a thin layer with HTL characteristics covalently anchored on the surface.
The final widely used method of increasing the stability of the active layer on the ITO surface requires a crosslinked polymer or highly crystallized version of a traditional HTL as an interlayer. This approach has been most commonly applied to TPD, where significant stabilization was observed above 80 °C with polymerization. Bellman et al. also observed that the voltage increase with time for small molecule OLEDs was slower compared to those without the crosslinked interlayer, suggesting increased stability. Sato et al. were able to increase luminance t50 by 6.6× using polymerized vinyletriphenylamines (based on TPD-like monomers). In situ polymerization/crystallization, by heat treatment or high temperature deposition (NPB) or by UV irradiation (TPD), led to significant increases in the shelf life (>2 months for NPB), fewer dark spots, and operational stability at high temperatures. This approach has also been applied to polymers, where the most common approach is to use a heat-treatment (already widely used in solar cells to improve efficiency), with as much as 25× or two orders of magnitude improvement in lifetime. Some success has also be observed for doping and irradiation induced polymerization, mainly with PEDOT:PSS.

Although dewetting of the active layer is generally undesirable and implicated as a main failure mechanism, some groups have harnessed the effect to produce novel device architectures. As many films are metastable, they have a natural tendency to dewet into a stable equilibrium form, which can then be used as the starting point for device fabrication. Developing methods of tuning film morphology and rate of dewetting through total coverage, surface templating and temperature control are of significant interest in forming controlled organic nanostructures.

Recently, Turak et al. used the strong island growth and dewetting tendency of DIP on ITO to produce columnar structures necessary for an interdigitated ideal bulk heterojunction solar cell. Four orders of magnitude improvement in the device efficiency was possible by tuning of the nanopillar width. Ryu et al. used the energy difference between PEDOT and PFO to form nanoscale dewetted islands of PEDOT at the internal interface in tandem polymer OLEDs. Wang et al. produced sub-micrometer channel OFETs (field effect transistors) using SAM patterned SiO2 to force PEDOT:PSS dewetting. A submicrometer channel of F8T2 polymer was formed between the dewetted PEDOT:PSS acting as the source and drain electrodes. Benor et al. were able to produce resist patterns of PMMA or PEDOT using selective wetting on hydrophobic and hydrophilic SAM patterns. Deposition on these patterned substrates led to the formation of mesoscale patterns for radio frequency ID tags or thin film transistor electrodes.
Chen et al. used a similar patterning motif with SAMs that were selectively wet by the two components to encourage phase separation of P3HT:PCBM into an interdigitated columnar structure. More recently, Harirchian-Saei et al. used the phase separation of PS and PMMA on OTS striped patterns to deliver a periodic array of CdS nanoparticles. By dissolving the nanoparticle into only one polymer and taking advantage of selective wetting, a templated nanoparticle array was produced.

Degradation at the top or back contact electrode interface is also critical for lifetime of both OLEDs and OPVs, as it typically proceeds more rapidly than any other failure process. Low work function materials are generally preferred as the top contact to both improve the orbital line-up with the organic lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and to increase the built-in electric field due to the difference in work function compared to the substrate electrode. However, low work function metals also tend to be highly reactive with the environment and the active layers. Degradation at this interface is intimately related to the instability of the electrode and to instability of the organic material, leading to chemical and morphological changes in the interface. These changes include electrode or near-interface oxidation, formation of dark spots, delamination of the electrode, and metal diffusion into the active layers. Although top contact degradation occurs during both storage or operation, changes in the metal electrode or electrode/organic interface are considered to be a primary cause of shelf life degradation.

Historically, investigations into the effect of various cathodes on device performance were approached in the context of accepted models of inorganic semiconductor interfaces. With limited knowledge of the nature of organic/metal interfaces in these systems, the route to forming Ohmic contacts was presumed to be as simple as matching the LUMO of the organic molecule and the work function of the metal cathode as closely as possible. In the twenty-five years since the first viable OLED and OPV devices were introduced by Tang et al. using a Mg:Ag alloy as the back electrode, a wide variety of materials, covering most of the periodic table, have been employed as electrodes.Table 4 lists the common classes of electrodes that have been attempted for organic devices.
Class
Types
Archetypal electrode
Metal cathodes
Group I, IIA, IIIB, VIIIA, lanthanides, Ge
Mg
Alloys/composite electrodes: co-evaporation for improved stability
Reactive:stable (Al, Ag)
Mg:Ag, Li:Al
Bi-layer metal electrodes: sequential deposition for improved stability
Reactive/stable (Al, Ag)
Mg/Ag, Mg:Ag/Ag, Ca/Al
Bi-layer/tri-layer electrodes: dielectric interlayer for improved performance and stability
XF/Al, Mg:Ag and X-acetates/Al (X = group I, II)
LiF/Al

The oxidation of the low work function electrode is considered to be the main efficiency limiting mechanism in both OLEDs and OPVs. Although oxidation can be accelerated, during device operation or with illumination, the device is most vulnerable to oxidative attack during storage. The electrode, as the final layer in the device, generally undergoes preferential oxidation compared to the organic active layers. Wang et al. observed that P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/ITO solar cells exposed to air for 2 days before deposition of the electrode have the same performance as a fresh device prepared without air exposure. Even devices that have degraded can show partial or complete recovery of performance by removal and redeposition of the electrode or even just cleaning of the electrode surface with an etchant. This preferential oxidation occurs partially because the electrode acts as a physical barrier, but also because it tends to consist of highly reactive, low work function metals.

Low work function, compared to ITO, is generally preferred for the back contact in organic devices for high efficiency. These low work function electrodes, due to the ease of electron stripping necessary for high carrier injection/extraction efficiency, are unfortunately also highly unstable. An Alq3 based OLED with a pure Mg cathode, for example, can be operated in air for only a few seconds before the onset of irreversible degradation. The initial rationale for the use of Al, a relatively high work function material, as a counter electrode was its resistance to continuous oxidation through the formation of a self-passivating oxide. Unfortunately, Al itself is very porous to oxygen and moisture. After a couple of days storage, MEH-PPV OLED devices could not be operated due to Al oxidation. By storage in dry nitrogen environments, shelf life for a small molecule CuPc/C60/Alq device up to 3 months, and as much as a 67.5× improvement in t80 lifetime for P3HT:PCBM solar cells have been observed. Even just decreasing the water content can lead to substantial improvement in storage time, with an 8× improvement in t50 if relative humidity is decreased from 65% to 33%, with the same partial pressure of oxygen.
In OLEDs, the loss of luminance is the main attribute associated with electrode oxidation; in OPVs, however, the effects of oxidation manifest in a variety of changes to the device properties, including increased series resistance, fill factor changes, and kinking in the current voltage curves (see Fig. 3) in addition to the rapid decay of PCE. Glatthaar et al. were able to model the kink by assuming poor injection efficiency developed as a result of the Al electrode oxidation. Similarly, increased series resistance can be explained as resulting from severely hindered charge extraction in the oxidized regions. Lloyd et al. observed a polarity reversal in OPVs with Ag electrodes exposed to ambient conditions for 11 days, suggesting that the Ag work function increased with oxidation beyond that of ITO. Generally, for both OLEDs and OPVs, changes in the barrier height at the electrode interface, due to oxidation, is considered a main influence on device degradation.
A wide variety of techniques have shown evidence of oxidation at the electrode, including time-of flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy (TOF-SIMS), X-ray reflectivity (XRR), photoluminescence PL)/electroluminescence (EL), fluorescence microscopy, Auger electron spectroscopy (AES), energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX), interferometry, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), impedance spectroscopy, and infrared spectroscopy. Using a delamination technique to remove the electrode, a number of groups have examined both the top-side and internal interface of the electrode, showing evidence of oxidation at both surfaces.
Although oxygen incorporation at the electrode/organic interface has been observed for a variety of active materials (including C60, Alq, Bathophenanthroline (Bphen), MDMO-PPV:PCBM, fluoropolymer and P3HT:PCBM), oxidation appears to be inhomogeneous, as observed by TOF-SIMS, PL/EL or photocurrent mapping of the device (see Fig. 11). A typical chemical profile through the electrode (e.g. a 3D TOF-SIMS profile of Al in a PLED) shows a layer of Al oxidation on the top side, metal Al, and finally islands of Al oxidation at the buried internal interface with the polymer. As a general rule, the smaller the active device area, the faster the degradation, suggesting that some of the oxidation is controlled by the lateral diffusion of water and oxygen from the device edges. This can be observed directly as a dark front from the edges in PL from the OLED surface or in the OPV photocurrent, as shown in Fig. 11. Voroshazi et al. observed that the presence of PEDOT:PSS greatly accelerated electrode oxidation due to its hygroscopic nature, promoting the infiltration of humidity from the device edges. Using this oxidation premise, they were able to establish an exponential relation between the device lifetime and increasing humidity levels.
In addition to this encroaching dark front, the electrode surface is typically also covered with circular oxidation areas (see Fig. 11b), sometimes called dark spots (see section 4.3 below). Probing the chemical structure of these dark spot regions, typically only metal oxides or increased O with no evidence of the organic are observed. Outside of the dark spots, only a thin passivation layer of metal oxides are visible, combined with strong signal from the organic layers. Cross-sectional TEM of a Ca/Al bilayer electrode shows voids, which grow in size during storage; XPS of those void regions indicates oxidation of the Ca. By deliberately introducing defects in Ca electrodes using polystyrene balls, Lim and co-workers were able to correlate a linear increase in dark spot diameter with the oxidation of the electrode. Through a detailed series of isotope tracer experiments, the group of Krebs in Denmark were able to establish that O2 diffuses vertically through pinholes in Al and expands in all lateral directions, reacting with the underlying organic, but H2O diffuses rapidly through grain boundaries causing uniform oxidation of the entire electrode surface.
Although most of the oxidation of the electrodes in both solar cells and OLEDs appears to be due to the presence of pinholes or defects in the electrode allowing the ingress of oxygen and water from external sources, there are two other sources of oxidation that can control the device stability: reaction with the organic layer or during electrode deposition.
A wide variety of polymers and oligomers have been found to be reactive with potential electrode materials, leading to device instability, including Mg with Alq3, Ag with P3HT, Ca with P3HT:PCBM, Ca with Alq3, Al with Alq3, Al with PPV, and Al with C60. When XPS is used to probe the buried metal interface structures with Alq3, different chemical interactions are observed as a function the reactivity of electrode metal, as shown in Fig. 12. Typical low work function metals, such as Mg, showed significant reaction/diffusion with destruction of the organic molecule, as seen in Fig. 12. Although some of this oxidation occurs immediately upon metal deposition, the reaction can continue during storage and even device operation. Under a high electric field, AC impedance measured resistance and dc Ohmic measurements of PPV OLEDs indicated significant electrode dissolution. In those studies, it was found that the device acts as an electrochemical cell with the PPV as an electrolyte. When the PPV was replaced by water, extremely fast dissolution of the metal was observed, with Mg dissolving faster than Al.
A final oxidation mechanism is oxidation during deposition, from high residual partial pressure of O2 and H2O in the vacuum. As shown in Fig. 13, for in situ XPS measurements, Al deposited on C60 oxidizes very readily during vacuum evaporation, with almost complete oxidation for thicknesses less than 3 nm even under 10−6 mbar vacuum. Below a threshold deposition rate of 0.1 nm s−1, Ogundimu observed 10× less metallic Al during deposition on organic surfaces. Angle resolved XPS measurements shows almost no change in the relative Almetal/Aloxide ratio, indicating that the oxide extended through the whole thickness of the evaporated Al. This implies that some of the metal was already oxidized as it impacted the organic layer. Similar in situ oxidation has also been observed for Ca and Mg.

Even when there is no reaction between the electrode and the active layer, the interface at the top metal contact can be unstable. During metal deposition, especially if there is no chemical interaction, the interface can be diffuse, with penetration of the metal deep into the organic layers.Fig. 14 is a TEM cross-section of Au on DIP showing major penetration of the metal. The rate of diffusion is strongly correlated with the reactivity of the metals with the organic active layers, with less reactive metals diffusing much faster in polymer and organic materials. Ag and Au typically show the largest diffusion depths, although significant metal penetration has also been observed for typical low work function electrode materials, such as Al and Ca. Janssen et al. were able to determine diffusion coefficients of ∼3 × 10−23 m2 s−1 and ∼0.35 × 10−23 m2 s−1 for Ca and Ba into PPV, respectively, closely related to the reactivity of those two metals with PPV. Huang et al. determined that Al penetrated into Alq3 at a rate of 10−18 cm s−1. The depth of penetration is also heavily dependent on the deposition rate, where slower deposition yields greater diffusion. It is thought that the grain boundaries act as significant routes for metal penetration.

Although most diffusion occurs immediately on deposition, significant electromigration of the metal is also possible under applied fields, destabilizing the interface even further. Fig. 15 shows a schematic diagram of a possible route for electromigration due to defects. In defect areas, where the electric field is particularly high, as electrons rush to the short circuit region, metal atoms from the electrode are also carried along by the electron momentum. This leads to a metal atom pile-up in the centre of a short circuit region, which is aggravated by high current and high temperature. Cumpston and Jensen described the expected metal drift velocity as 
(4)
where
ν is the drift velocity in the metal due to electric current, eZ* the effective charge of the metal ions, ρ the metal resistivity, j the electric current density, E the activation energy for electromigration in the metal, and D0 the pre-exponential diffusion constant.

The penetration of the metal into the organic layers is typically considered detrimental to the device performance and lifetime. Although doping can sometimes have the beneficial effect of increasing injection, or acting as an exciton blocking layer near the interface, the continued diffusion of metal atoms, even at room temperature, can severely limit the device lifetime. The most obvious effect of diffusion is the development of electrical shorts when metal atoms penetrate across the organic film thickness. Penetration to the substrate surface can also lead to secondary reactions, such as Al replacement of thiol bonds (i.e. SAMs on Au) or direct reaction with the carbonyls or hydroxides on the ITO surface, further limiting device performance.
Janssen et al. made a direct correlation between OLED performance and metal penetration, with greater penetration leading to up to 50% lower light output. Deposition of Al at high substrate temp (>100 °C) was seen to lead to complete OLED failure due to metal diffusion. Even without full penetration, diffusion of metals into the active layer has also been correlated with photoluminescence quenching, with Ca seen to modify the EL spectra of PPV and the PL spectra of 4 PV, and Al affecting the PL spectra for both Alq3 and C60. Similarly, deliberate doping of C60 with Al, in a planar heterojunction solar cell, leads to almost complete suppression of the photocurrent. As it diffuses into the organic layer, Al catalyzes the reaction between O2 and C60 with illumination, leading to significant device degradation. Ca diffusion into P3HT:PCBM leads to the formation of organocalcium compounds that yield anion radicals that can act as recombination centers. Although Hermeneau et al. saw no impact on the t80 of solar cells with Al diffusion into C60 for planar heterojunction solar cell, Cao et al. determined that the diffusivity of the metal species has greater impact on the EL decay of polymer OLEDs than the ionization potential. They observed that the lifetime scales with mass of atom/diffusivity, such that t50 for Ca < Sr < Ba, suggesting a diffusion controlled lifetime rather than one related to the electrode work function. To confuse the issue even further, Omrane et al. recently found that In diffusion from the top contact leads to long term stability for polymer solar cells (in contrast to In doping from the bottom contact, see section 3.1). Although the role of metal dopants from the electrode is controversial, it does appear that some degradation can be attributed to metal migration through the active layers, as the application of a reverse bias to OLEDs has been seen to reverse degradation in the short term – metal migration back and forth has been observed as a function of the applied field direction. Due to this mobility of the metal atoms in the organic matrix, shorting and healing cycles are sometimes also seen, with performance fluctuating until the eventual formation of visible dark spots in the electrode.
The primary mechanism for the loss of performance for metal diffusion is the formation of metal-induced gap states (MIGS) near the interface. Although generally considered necessary for charge exchange across the interface, they can also lead to trap states throughout the film thickness. These states trap electrons or quench radiation, reducing the mobility by up to 2 orders of magnitude (e.g. Ag in BCP). Al in particular interacts with a variety of organic materials, leading to charge transfer states in C60 due to diffusion, and the formation of dipoles at interface, with up to 6 electrons transferred to C60 from Al. Similarly, up to 4 electrons were transferred to OH terminated SAMs after Al reaction with OH groups and 3 for HC3O-SAMs. These charge transfer states lead to significant modification of the conductivity of the doped layer.

Generally, the operation of an organic device leads to significant heating at the electrode interface due to the high electric fields. The relatively low mobility of charge carriers through the active organic layers and poor heat dissipation leads to significant Joule heating of the organic layers as bias is applied. Under high electrical stress, dome-like protrusions and dynamic delamination of the top contact have been observed by many groups. Some examples are highlighted in Fig. 16. These so-called electrode bubbles have been observed with diameters up to 800 μm, but typically tend to be around 20 μm. The delamination of the top side contact, as can be seen in Fig. 17, can be so severe that roughened buckling protrusions 10× the thickness of the electrode (up to 5 μm) have been observed, and can even lead to complete delamination of the entire device from the bottom ITO surface.

As melting and rupture occurs even under He and Ar atmospheres, bubble formation is considered to result mainly from Joule heating. Liao et al. and Savvateev et al. have seen similar bubble formation with thermal annealing around the glass transition temperatures of the active layers. For systems with poorly functioning electrodes, such as Mg/LiF for Alq3 and C60 based OLEDs, significant bubbling and device failure under mild electrical stress (∼6 V) has been observed, as a result of high Joule heating from the high barrier to charge injection. The bubbles typically contain O2 and H2 (observed by electrochemical mass spectrometry) from absorbed moisture and decomposition products of the active layers or ITO. The presence of gases inside the bubbles has lead some groups to suggest a secondary galvanic corrosion mechanism. Due to the thermal mismatch between the organic layers and the top contact, swelling of the active layers with Joule heating can also lead to bubble formation through delamination.
The typical degradation steps related to bubble formation are:
1. Inhomogeneous electrical fields cause localized melting in the electrode.
2. Gases are formed by Joule heating related chemical reactions (ITO decomposition, active layer degradation, metal electrode oxidation).
3. An overpressure develops at the weakest part of the device, the top-electrode/ETL interface, causing the electrode to protrude.
4. Injected current is significantly higher at the perimeter of the bubble due to amplification of the electric field at the bubble edges, leading to more heating and growth of bubble diameter.
5. Local current density becomes catastrophic, leading to carbonization of active layers. Short-term healing of the IV characteristics is sometimes observed with the overall current increasing as charge carriers begin to flow through other parts of the device.
6. As more and more bubbles form and coalesce, device fails catastrophically.
While many groups suggest that overpressure can result from decomposition of the active layers, IR spectra after bubbling shows no sign of organic breakdown and removal of the cathode leaves no trace of perturbed areas on the organic surface. This suggests that the bubble formation is almost completely related to the top side contact, where Gardonio et al. observed Al oxidation at the site of ruptured bubbles. Liao et al. observed that the thickness of the electrode layer affects the appearance, density and size of bubbles: thinner layers typically formed smaller bubbles, as evolved gases were able to escape through the grain boundaries and pinholes in the electrode, rather than accumulating at the electrode interface.

One of the first observed failure modes for OLEDs was the gradual decay of luminance due to the formation of non-emissive regions, so called “dark spots”. These dark spots, for both OLEDs and OPVs, are typically described by changes in local electrical properties (EL, PL, or photocurrent) as observed by a 2D map of the electrode surface. The inhomogeneities in the electrode tend to be circular, and are seen to grow continuously during both storage  or operation, eventually coalescing (seen in both small molecule and polymer devices), until the whole device is non-emissive. Although black spots have not been given much attention in solar cells, the general expectation of inhomogeneous electrical field distributions for OLEDs has lead some groups to perform 2D mapping of photocurrent in solar cells. In such experiments, inhomogeneities/“hot spots” have been observed in the photocurrent map. As these inhomogeneities are typically round spots ∼50–100 μm in diameter with < 50% efficiency or of higher current density compared to their surroundings, they can be considered as analogous to dark spots. PL mapping of solar cells have confirmed that these regions are in fact non-emissive. Therefore, the formation and growth of dark spots is a primary failure mechanism for both OLED and OPVs.

Typically, the same number of dark spots are observed for stressed and unstressed devices grown under the same conditions at same time. The number of dark spots increases as a function of storage time, not applied bias. Generally, if dark spots develop during storage, they are unrelated to changes in the HTL or destruction of the ITO (see section 3.1.1 and 4.2), although they may be attributed to crystallization of the ETL. Often, if the devices are not exposed to large bias or are unbiased non-emissive regions under EL are still active under PL, or with removal and re-deposition of the electrode. This indicates a loss of carrier injection due to changes in the interface, not quenching of emission in the active layers.
Dark spots, therefore, occur mainly due to inhomogeneities in the top contact electrode, that develop during electrode deposition. With removal and redeposition of the electrode, often a different distribution of dark spots can be observed. Phatak et al. observed that high substrate temperatures during deposition of Mg:Ag electrodes decreases the formation of dark spots and increases ambient stability due to a minimization of defects in the cathode. However, too high a temperature during deposition (∼Tg) can lead to greater dark spot formation. Jeong et al. used ion beam assisted deposition to produce dense Al films, which showed fewer dark spots and increased lifetime. Post deposition annealing treatment also decreases the formation of dark spots, presumably through the elimination of defects. These electrode defects can take the form of pinholes, grain clusters, protrusions/contamination from underlying layers, or roughening leading to local field strength variations.
The initial defect grows in diameter as a function of storage time,, and applied bias.Fig. 18 shows a schematic of the development of the black spot diameter over time with ingress of O2 and H2O. The growth rate is directly related to changes in the electrode/organic interface, through either electrode delamination, complete destruction of the interface (oxidation or decomposition), or electrode fusion.
Phatak et al. observed a correlation between dark spot formation and interfacial adhesion, suggesting that the primary mechanism is the delamination of the electrode at regions where adhesion is poor. As the inhomogeneity at delaminated dark spots would lead to an increase in the built-in potential, causing Joule heating, it is not uncommon to have both delamination and carbonization of the organic material simultaneously. Cross-sectional SEM by Crewz et al. of MEH-PPV diodes with an LiF/Al electrode shows direct evidence of both delamination and carbonization after devices were worked to total failure (see Fig. 17). XPS indicates no organic molecules in these sections, although drumstick shaped deposits are observed at the center of dark spots. The evolution of dark spots due to storage time is more commonly associated only with cathode delamination.
In almost all cases, the electrode defect is thought to act as a local avenue for ingress of the ambient air and moisture suggesting that dark spot formation is as a result of local oxidation of the interface. Schaer et al. suggested that the change in volume associated with the formation of oxides at the interface can act as a mechanism for the electrode delamination (see Fig. 18). The rate of linear increase in the dark spot diameter with time is an indication of oxidation of the electrode materials. The growth rate is also related to the initial size of pinhole defects in the cathode surfacei.e. the amount of water/oxygen ingress and oxidation is directly related to the initial pinhole size.
By deliberately introducing defects of varying sizes, Lim et al. were able to estimate that a defect feature size < 2 tcathode would not lead to pinholes due to shadowing. It has also been possible to directly correlate the dark spots to pinholes and oxidation by 2D chemical mapping (by TOF-SIMS or SEM), as in Fig. 19. Bulle-Lieuwma et al. also observed a 1:1 correspondence between dark spots and pinholes using SEM. All of the deliberately induced pinhole defects by Lim et al., developed into uniformly sized dark spots. In regions without initially visible pinholes, the formation of a dark spot is preceded by the appearance of a small hole (∼10 μm), due to local heating by intense electric fields. The application of bias or illumination tends to accelerate the oxidation process, regardless of whether an initial defect existed or not. AFM and SEM measurements indicate a burnout crater section (dark with EL) with an optically transparent centre (bright in optical micrographs) due to Al2O3. The interfacial oxidation at dark spots has been observed morphologically (upon removal of electrode), chemically (formation of hydroxides), and electrically (EL shows bright spots in areas that were previously dark spots upon re-deposition of cathode).
Although the formation and coalescence of dark spots eventually leads to total device failure, the formation of dark spots can actually lead to a short term healing of the J–V characteristics. Dark spots regions can start out as bright spots in EL measurements, suggesting shorting through high current areas. Local shorting leads to an overall loss in current, but once dark spot forms, overall current increases as charge carriers begin to flow through other parts of the device. If a local failure is deliberately isolated, a similar recovery response is observed.

As the majority of the instabilities at the top contact are related to oxidation due to exposure to the ambient air, the most common approach is to prevent oxygen and moisture from reaching the device through encapsulation. Encapsulation, however, is a kinetic approach that slows down degradation, but does not prevent nucleation of defects. For successful long term stability, barrier materials must have water vapour transmission rates on the order of 10−6 gm−2 day−1 for small molecule OLEDs and 10−3 gm−2 day−1 for polymer OPVs.

With such strict requirements, the first and still most common approach for OLEDs and OPVs is to use a rigid glass lid sealed by a UV cured epoxy, often with a desiccant. Although this does a good job of slowing down dark spot formation, rigid glass encapsulation greatly increase the size and complexity of devices, without completely eliminating degradation (penetration through the epoxy, or saturation of the desiccant still lead to catastrophic device failure). Additionally, it is totally inapplicable for flexible devices, which is one of the driving forces behind the development of organic electronics. Therefore, an encapsulation solution is required that is thin, defect-free, light weight, easy to process, without significant thermal expansion mismatch with the electrode, and applied without damage to the electrode. A comprehensive examination of encapsulation techniques is beyond the scope of this paper; interested readers are directed to excellent reviews by Lewis and Weaver, Park et al., and Krebs.Fig. 20 is a schematic diagram of the three main types of encapsulation approaches: traditional glass, laminated flexible barriers, and monolithic thin films. Table 5 gives lifetime improvements for a few representative encapsulation methods.
Encapsulant

t
50/t80
electrode
ETL
Ref.

OLEDs

glass + epoxy
100×
Mg:Ag/Ag
Alq3

21

tape
5×
Al
MEH-PPV

211

tape
10×
Al/LiF
MEH-PPV

211

UV glue
3.75×
Al/LiF
Alq3

502

UV + LiF
15 − 25×
Al/LiF
Alq3

502

LiF
4.5× (80 nm) 8.3× (100 nm) 11× (120 nm)
Al/LiF
Alq3

502

SiNx
2.24× (150 nm) 1.68× (70 nm)
Al/LiF
Alq3

501

Barix
4.2×
Al/LiF
Alq3

505

CF3
2.8×
Mg:Ag
Alq3

450


OPVs

glass + epoxy
9×
Ca/Al
P3HT:PCBM

4

kapton tape
4×
Ca/Al
P3HT:PCBM

4

SiOx
16×
Ca/Al
P3HT:PCBM

4


As the susceptibility of electrode materials to oxidation and reaction is related to the low work function, an obvious approach is to use a higher work function, less reactive material. The initial rationale for the use of Al as a counter electrode was its resistance to continuous oxidation through the formation of a self-passivating oxide. Although Al is relatively stable, degradation in the form of dark spots are widely prevalent with Al electrodes, due to the large number of pin holes and grain boundaries that provide access for moisture. Ag in place of Al, which produces a smoother, denser film with less ingress sites for oxygen/water, show substantially longer lifetimes for small molecule solar cells. There are, however, limits to the use of high work function materials – replacement of Al with Au in conventional and inverted geometries increases lifetime, but typically sacrifices performance. Ag with polymer OPVs showed both lower efficiencies and lower stability. To take advantage of both high stability and high performance, two approaches were adopted: alloying and multilayer electrodes.

To improve the stability, as described in Table 4, low work function cathodes were coupled with more stable, higher work function metals such as Al or Ag, either through co-evaporation or sequential deposition. Small amounts of alloying constituents were found improve the device lifetime by orders of magnitude. The first viable device lasting more than a few hours, shown by Tang and Van Slyke in 1987, was in fact a bi-layer device with an Alq3 emitting layer and a Mg:Ag alloy cathode.Table 6 lists the relative performance of a few metal cathodes for Alq3 based OLEDs, showing the superiority of the alloy cathodes over elemental ones. Both alloys show orders of magnitude longer lifetimes than the pure metal Mg and Li cathodes (see Table 6), which degraded in a matter of seconds or hours. Alloying two high work function cathodes also showed some promise, such as the Al:Cu electrode of Chen et al. which can withstand high thermal stress during operation with good resistance to corrosion. Alloy electrodes are more commonly used for OLEDs, with Mg:Ag still the most widely used. Reese et al. also were successful in employing Mg:Ag electrodes for P3HT:PCBM solar cells in their comprehensive 2008 examination of the optimal top contact materials, although they did not show the highest performance or stability. Various other alloy cathodes have been attempted for both OLED and OPVs, with varying improvement in device lifetime including Mg:Ag, Li:Al, Mg:Al, Ca:Al, Ni:Al, Ga:In, Ga:Sn, Bi:In:Pb:Sn, Mg:In, Ca:Ag, and Yb:Ag.
Al
Au
Mg
Li
Mg:Ag
Li:Al

a Estimated from Kwon et al.
b Estimated from Mason et al.
c Estimated from Aziz et al.
d Estimated from Haskal et al.
e Estimated from Kim et al.
f Estimated from Wakimoto et al.
g Estimated from OPV data with Alq3 interlayer.
h Estimated from Kiy et al.
i Measured by Turak

Turn-on voltage (V)
4.5
7
2.9
6
3
3.5
Current efficiency at 7 V (Cd/A)
1.25
0.0165
2
—
3.62
2.7
Lifetime
1×
∼280×
0.1×
0.001×
60×
10.8×
However, as these alloy cathodes are produced by co-evaporation, reproducibility of the correct ratio for optimal device performance is difficult, leading to uneven device performance and low device yields. Another approach is to deposit the layers by sequential evaporation; a similarly wide array of bilayer materials have been attempted. The most widely used is the Ca/Al bilayer, which has superior lifetime and performance over most other electrodes for OPVs. Reese et al., in their study of six different electrodes for OPVs, found that Ca/Al and Ba/Al had both the best performance and highest stability, where the Al acts as a blocking layer, protecting Ca and Ba from oxidative attack. With Ag in place of Al, typically long lifetimes, but less oxidation protection are observed, leading Jin et al. to speculate that the bilayer deposition leads to alloying. There is also some impact on the electrical performance, as the fill factor is affected by the use of Ag/Ca electrodes. Ag has also been used to protect Yb and Mg:Ag electrodes. Kiy et al. took the novel approach of placing Ag beneath Mg to prevent diffusion and reaction with the active organic. Such an approach allowed a device with the Mg exposed to operate in air for more than 5 h (∼20× improvement). Similarly, Li et al. placed Sn beneath Al to prevent diffusion, leading to longer lifetimes. Although it is more common to place the less reactive material as the final layer, improved lifetimes have also been observed using a sacrificial material, such as Ni on Al  or Ca on Mg:Ag, which retard the growth of black spots by acting as a getter for oxygen and moisture before it can penetrate the device.
The electrodes described in this section do not constitute an exhaustive list of the metal combinations attempted in OLED and OPVs, as most of the monovalent metals have been proposed as potential candidates, but are those where improving stability was a key design concern.

A simple method of preventing top contact oxidation is to eliminate the need for a low work function metal entirely, which is accomplished in an inverted device architecture, as shown schematically in Fig. 21. In such a configuration, the ITO substrate is typically covered by an n-type nanoporous metal oxide, such as ZnO, TiOx, CrOx, or Cs2O. The top contact, a high work function material, is typically Ag. Using this configuration, Krebs  was able to produce OPVs that can be stored, unencapsulated, in the dark for up to 6 months. Inverted cells are also stable under irradiation, compared to conventional structures where the efficiency drops to 0 after 20 h irradiation. As Ag can also be applied as a paste, this approach has the additional benefit of eliminating vacuum evaporation, a labour intensive and expensive step in organic device production. A final benefit to this approach is that the oxidation of the top contact, in this case Ag, actually improves both performance and lifetime, as Ag oxide is also a p-type semiconductor with a high work function. Interested readers are directed to a 2010 review by Hau et al. on inverted polymer OPVs.


The final approach to improving the stability of devices is to introduce a buffer layer at the top contact interface, similar to the ITO buffers described in section 3.2.1.2. On the top contact side, the buffer layer needs to block oxygen and moisture ingress through the electrode, prevent metal diffusion, enhance adhesion, and inhibit the reaction between the active organic and the electrode.

To achieve these goals, a wide variety of interlayer materials have been used including organic molecules, wide band gap inorganic dielectrics, and composites of organics with inorganic dopants, as summarized in Table 7. There is typically an added benefit of increased performance with the introduction of such interlayers, which can either act as a dedicated electron transporting layer (PBD, oxadiazole, triazole, quinoxaline, triazine containing molecules, F-PCBM, Al doped:Alq3) or an exciton blocking layer. An exciton blocking layer is one that allows the transport of one charge carrier (typically the electron), but prevents the other from reaching the electrode and quenching charge injection. To accomplish this, it is typical to use a wide band gap insulator.
Interlayer

t
50/t80
electrode
ETL
ref.

a Modified using data from ref. 69.


OLEDs

LiF
2×
Al
MEH-PPV

211

LiF
16×
Al
Alq3

534

LiF
8×
Al
Alq3

453

CH3COOLi
23×
Al
Alq3
C6H5COOLi
29×
Al
Alq3
CsCl
6×
Al
Alq3
PBD
100×
Ca
PPV
Alq:NPB + LiF composite
1.3×
Al/LiF
Alq3:NPB
TiO2
10×
Al
polymer
Cs:OXD
2.9×
Al/LiF
Alq3
Cs:BCP
1.65×
Al/LiF
Alq3

OPVs

Alq3
0.08×
Cu
C60
Alq3
43×
Al
C60
Alq/Au
∼280×
Al
C60
Alq:BCP
19×
Al
C60
BCP
0.3×
Cu
C60
BCP
0.3× (t60)
Al
C60
Bphen/SnCl2Pc
1.6×
Al
C60
TPBI
25.7×
Al
C60
BPhen
0.71×
Cu
C60
Bphen
0.95×
Ag
C60
DMPTI
1.4×
Al
CuPc

31

BBIP
1.8×
Al
CuPc

31

CuPc
1.7×
Cu
C60

102

C60:LiF composite/Al
6.2×
Al
P3HT:PCBM

537

C60/LiF/Al
> 3.3× (t90)
Al
P3HT:PCBM

425

LiF/Cu
1.5×
Cu
C60

102

LiF/Al
1.2×
Al
MDMO-PPV:PCBM

435

LiF/Al
1.3×
Al
P3HT:PCBM

307

LiF/Al
2.7× (t90)
Al
P3HT:PCBM

425

LiF/Al
2.5×
Al
P3HT:PCBM

436

CdSe/Ca/Ag
3.2×
Ca/Ag
P3HT:PCBM

180

CrOx
28×
Al
P3HT:PCBM

538

C2O
175×
Al
P3HT:PCBM

436

LiF/C2O/Al
55×
Al
P3HT:PCBM

436

C2O/LiF/Al
150×
Al
P3HT:PCBM

436

TiO2 (thin)
3.3×
Al
CuPc

31

TiO2 (thick)
3.6×
Al
CuPc

31

TiO2(thin)
2.7×
Al
CuPc/DMPTI

31

TiO2 (thick)
1.7×
Al
CuPc/DMPTI

31

TiO2 (thin)
0.9×
Al
CuPc/BBIP

31

TiO2 (thick)
1×
Al
CuPc/BBIP

31

TiO2
11×
Al
polymer

536

TiOx (polymeric)
1.5×
Al
P3HT:PCBM

539

TiOx (other route)
0.125×
Al
P3HT:PCBM

539

C60-PEG
2.25×
Al
P3HT:PCBM

533

C60-PEG
1.6×
Au
P3HT:PCBM

533

Organic buffers, such as Alq3, BCP, BPhen, CuPc, TPBI, PBD, OXD, self-organized PEG, C60 (in OPVs) or PCBM (in OLEDs), and Li carboxylates were all found to increase lifetime, decrease dark spot formation, prevent metal diffusion into the active layer, prevent deposition induced damage, block reactions between the active layer and metal, and prevent interfacial oxidation.
Hong et al. also saw a forming period with a variety of interlayers where the PCE increases over the initial 12 h (similar to that observed in OLEDs). Chemically stable and high Tg amphiphilic interlayer of sodium stearate (NaSt) was seen to improve the adhesion of the top electrode, by bonding to both Alq3 and to Al. BCP, the original exciton blocking layer introduced by the Forrest group, initially improves performance but leads to long term instability, as it tends to crystallize over time.
The stability of these interlayers towards crystallization during storage is an important aspect of the device lifetime. Strukelj et al. saw a correlation between stability and buffer Tg, similar to that observed for HTL interlayers, where higher Tg equals higher lifetime. Buffers such as Alq3, PBD, and CuPc, with higher Tg than BCP have a high PCE for small molecule OPVs, similar to BCP, with better stability, especially CuPc. Another aspect of the instability of BCP, and to a smaller extent BPhen, stems from the fact that the mechanism for the improvement of the performance in the short term is due to the metal-induced-gap-states (MIGS) or metal deposition induced damage and interdiffusion. Other buffer layers, not based on MIGS induced charge transport, typically show lower performance initially, but higher stability over the long run.
More widely used are very thin inorganic interlayers, originally introduced in OLEDs to increase performance. Among the many combinations attempted, those that were seen to have an impact on the stability of devices include CdSe, CsCl, CsF (with Yb  or Al), MgF2, CaF2, NaF, Na3AlF6, AlF3, ZnF2, CrOx, Al2O3, Cu2O, TiOx, ZnO, and LiF (see section 4.5.4.1). 5 nm of CdSe was sufficient to enhance shelf-life, while preventing the development of a kink in the J–V curve. CrOx was observed to block the formation of interfacial oxides, and prevent Al diffusion during deposition. ZnO as an interlayer below Ag allowed one month of continuous operation of a small molecule OPV device. CsCl prevents the direct reaction of Alq3 with Al. CsF with Yb shows very long lifetimes (500 h t80 @ 500 cd m−1). TiO2, a promising interlayer that the Heeger group used to produce polymer OPVs with nearly 100% IQE, has a very interesting impact on the stability. It is seen to initially increase performance, but it also introduces a new degradation mechanism if produced from vacuum sublimation: a reaction at the interface between TiO2 and the organic layer or with Al, or both simultaneously has been observed. Heeger using a sol–gel process and Wang et al. using a solution based process to form polymeric TiOx both saw substantial retardation of the degradation observed by vacuum evaporation, suggesting that oxygen doping leads to the loss of properties in the short term. Hayakawa et al. saw a great improvement in stability over the first 100 h with a vacuum evaporated TiOx layer when the device was not exposed to air or moisture. The Heeger group saw substantial oxygen blocking abilities with TiOx, which they attributed to a desiccant effect. TiOx layer acts as an oxygen scavenger, preventing O2 penetration into the organic layer which results in an 11× improvement in shelf life. The polymeric TiOx, produced using a different precursor, appears to eliminate the reaction at the interface, although the mechanism still remains unclear. The effects of TiOx and BCP, as well as CuPc and PEDOT:PSS described in previous sections, introduces an important caveat in the use of interlayers to improve performance – the additional complexity with new layers can sometimes lead to new degradation mechanisms that were not observed without it (e.g. BCP and PBD crystallize; TiO2 undergoes an interfacial reaction). This underlines the importance of stability testing as a part of device design.

Although many different materials have been used as interlayers in both OLEDs and OPVs, it has proven difficult to completely replace the most commonly used interlayer, LiF, due to its extremely high performance in both OLEDs and OPVs. As a result of these unique properties, it has also become common to use a multilayer electrode, with LiF and another material as interlayers. The role of LiF in device stability has been widely studied. For Al electrodes, LiF improves both performance and stability for OLEDs and OPVs. Lattante et al. observed that the series resistance in OPV was stable with exposure to air. Turak et al., using XPS, showed that sub-monolayers of LiF slow down oxidation at Al surfaces, as shown in Fig. 22. Paci et al. observed a similar effect with XRR. Ganzorig et al. saw that dark spot formation was decelerated in bilayer electrodes with LiF. Kawano et al. showed that a C60/LiF multilayer stack lead to better stability due to surface roughening and a decrease of the barrier at the interface. LiF doping into C60 and Alq3 buffers for bulk heterojunction devices also improved the device stability. However, this improvement is not universal; some metal cathodes, such as Mg, show significant degradation of device properties with the introduction of a LiF interlayer.

While the effect of LiF is well documented, the underlying working principle is still poorly understood. It is common to attribute affects of LiF on the performance to dissociation and doping, but the presence of Li radicals inside the organic layer would not be an effective block to the oxidation of the electrode, and in fact have been proven to be detrimental to device stability. It is unclear, therefore, by what mechanism LiF would improve device stability if it were controlled by dissociation. One possible explanation for these disparate effects can be related to the differing nature of interfacial oxidation for different cathodes.
To further understand the role of LiF, we have examined in detail both Al/LiF and Mg/LiF interfaces in devices. To isolate the effect of the interlayer, our initial studies focused on electrode/C60/electrode diodes. The device fabrication was as described in detail elsewhere. As C60 is highly susceptible to oxidation, the devices decay quickly, with t10 < 10 mins for Al electrodes. As seen from the inset to Fig. 23a, 0.5 nm LiF is sufficient to increase t80 to 60 min. However, such a small amount of LiF, which forms islands on the organic surface, cannot protect the device completely, and the current is decreased to 85% of its initial value after 1 day of ambient exposure. It is possible to control the current decay by increasing the thickness of LiF, as shown in Fig. 23, which shows the shelf life decay curves for LiF interlayer thicknesses between 0.5 and 3 nm. In all cases, the current decreases rapidly after the first day, then appears to decay exponentially. As the exponential decay for all cases has the same rate, it is most likely due to the continued degradation of the C60 layer with oxygen doping.
Complete recovery of tunnel diode characteristics for the 0.5 nm LiF layer was observed by annealing diodes for 24 h in vacuum, as shown in Fig. 23c, which supports this O2 doping related degradation mechanism. The initial decay, on the other hand, is most likely related to the oxidation of the interface. As the LiF layer thickness increases, the initial percentage decay in the current decreases, and using t10 as device failure, the shelf life improves. As the initial decay has the largest effect on the decay behaviour, the shelf lifetime dependence is mostly a reflection of the protection provided by the LiF layer. The initial loss of luminance during degradation for OLEDs with LiF/Ca cathodes has similarly been shown to be related to the thickness of LiF layer. A 0.5 nm LiF provides very poor protection for the Al cathode, as was also observed for coated Al surfaces, and the device does not last more than one day. A slightly thicker layer improves the shelf time by nearly a factor of three, reflective of the noticeable passivation of the Al surface with 1 nm of LiF. Above 2 nm, the shelf time becomes independent of the LiF thickness, suggesting that complete coverage of the interface with LiF has occurred. With encapsulation, the Krebs group observed no impact on C60 based solar cell decay parameters with LiF incorporation, confirming that oxidation from ambient environment is the driving force for the decay in the device. As the LiF layer thickness increases further, it becomes better at blocking oxygen penetration into devices, as demonstrated by Turak et al. and Grozea et al. (see Fig. 24).
Although 20 nm of LiF are sufficient to completely block oxygen penetration to the organic layer, thinner layers show evidence of chemisorbed O and Al throughout the interlayer thickness (Fig. 24a). Ultrathin layers of LiF are nanoporous, being made up of an agglomeration of evaporated LiF nanoparticles. During deposition, as Al diffuses into the interlayer, the ions encounter laterally diffusing oxygen atoms, and trap them away from the injection zone. This has the additional benefit of consuming some oxygen that could act as bulk conduction traps within the C60 layer itself. Therefore, the LiF interlayer encourages conduction by both scavenging oxygen within the LiF layer and preventing oxidation at the critical injection region. This effect was taken advantage of by Gao et al., who saw t50 of 2300 h with a C60:LiF composite buffer layer for P3HT:PCBM OPVs.
The Mg/LiF electrode, however, behaved completely differently in the device. As noted in section 4.3, significant bubbling and device failure was seen under mild electrical stress (∼6 V), as a result of high Joule heating, from the high barrier to charge injection. Examination of the buried interface indicates that the LiF enhances the molecular breakdown of Alq3 at the interface, and leads to the formation of bulky carbonates that enhance electrode oxidation. Given that LiF on Mg surfaces activates oxidation rather than suppressing it, it is clear that the different effects for LiF in device stability are related the oxidation behaviour of the metal/LiF combination. A similar effect has also been observed by Ghorashi et al. for Cu/LiF interfaces in C60 based OPVs, where the LiF/Cu combination had the best stability only with exposure under ambient conditions allowing the formation of copper oxides.

Although oxidation and instability at the top contact interface is generally responsible for degradation in device performance, some groups have been able to take advantage of oxidation to improve the device performance and lifetime. The earliest, and most wide-spread, is the so-called “dirty” cathode approach for OLEDs. Early in the 1990's, a variety of groups observed that the performance of devices with Ca and Mg electrodes that had been deposited under low vacuum or with deliberate oxygen contamination performed better than devices kept pristine in an ultrahigh vacuum. It was speculated that the dirty cathodes developed a naturally occurring wide band gap interlayer, similar to those deliberately introduced for high performance (see section 4.5.4). Although Al does not typically show such dirty cathode behaviour, the introduction of a TiOx interlayer does allow low vacuum deposition of Al. Yoon et al. observed that the reaction between Al and TiOx leads to better adhesion of the electrode on the active organic surface at lower pressures, improving performance. Xi et al. also saw an initial increase in performance with ambient exposure, followed by a decline in device properties, for Al electrodes in planar heterojunction small molecule cells with C60. Gorashi et al. and Wang et al. both saw improvements in OPV performance with oxidation of Cu electrodes (either through exposure to ambient conditions before encapsulation or with low vacuum evaporation), as did Lu et al. for organic field effect transistors based on pentacene. In those cases, however, the improvement was thought to be the result of the formation of Cu2O, an n-type semiconductor. Similarly, the incorporation of Ti and Cr in inverted OPVs lead to high efficiency devices, as Ti and Cr form n-type semiconductor oxides close to the LUMO of PCBM, reducing the charge extraction barrier.

Inverted solar cells in particular can take advantage of electrode oxidation, as oxidation increases the work function of Ag, improving its performance as a high work function electrode. Kim et al., Lloyd et al., and Krebs  have all observed that exposure of P3HT:PCBM solar cells to oxygen results in a non-functioning device in the regular configuration; devices in the inverted configuration with TiOx or ZnO counterelectrodes perform very well, or even better than initially in a high oxygen environment. Zimmerman et al. observed an initial decrease in OPV performance with exposure to ambient, which then recovers under illumination as oxide forms at both electrodes.
Another example is the beneficial oxidation of diffusing metals from the top contact, such as K, Cs or In. In both OLEDs with K and Cs electrodes, and in an OPV with In, an initial quenching of device performance is seen due to metal diffusion (see section 4.2). However, over longer time periods the performance is seen to stabilize or even recover to almost the initial values, due to sacrificial oxidation of the metal dopants in the organic layer. TiOx, and other salts, also act as oxygen scavengers, preventing penetration of O into the organic layer (as observed by XPS); Lee et al. saw an 11× improvement in shelf life through this effect.

This review represents a comprehensive summary of the state of the art with regards to interfacial stability in organic light emitting diodes and organic photovoltaics. Although the challenges are slightly different, both types of optoelectronic devices are heavily influenced by the stability of the interfaces with the bottom and top side contacts. As has been described, instability can take the form of chemical reactions, with the ambient environment or with the active layers; morphological changes, such as dewetting and phase segregation; and electronic modifications, in the barrier height, over time. As organic optoelectronic technologies mature, the metastability of interfaces becomes more and more significant in the quest for greater performance.


The author would like to acknowledge collaborators at the University of Toronto, specifically Dr ZH Lu and members of his group (T. Ogundimu, Dr D. Grozea, Dr C. Huang) and at the Max-Planck-Institute for Metals Research, specifically Prof. Dr H. Dosch and students supervised by the author (F. Maye, J. Heidkamp) who have all contributed some experimental results to this review.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013