 DOI: 10.1039/C3RA42537A
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 22412-22420
G. D. Sharma*, D. Daphnomili, K. S. V. Gupta, T. Gayathri, S. P. Singh, P. A. Angaridis, T. N. Kitsopoulos, D. Tasis and A. G. Coutsolelos*
R & D Center for Engineering and Science, JEC Group of Colleges, Jaipur Engineering College Campus, Kukas, Jaipur 303101, India. E-mail: gdsharma273@gmail.com
Department of Chemistry, University of Crete, Laboratory of Bioinorganic Chemistry, Voutes Campus, P.O. Box 2208, 71003 Heraklion, Crete, Greece. E-mail: coutsole@chemistry.uoc.gr
Inorganic and Physical Chemistry Division, CSIR – Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Uppal Road, Tarnaka, Hyderabad, 500607, India
Department of Chemistry University of Crete and IESL-FORTH, P.O. Box 1527, 71110 Iraklion-Crete, Greece
Institute of Chemical Engineering Sciences, Foundation for Research & Technology, Hellas, Stadiou Str. Platani, Patras, 26504, Greece
Received 22nd May 2013, Accepted 4th September 2013
First published on 6th September 2013
A combination of a meso substituted zinc-porphyrin with two pyridyl groups and two benzoate groups at cis positions to each other (POR) with a mononuclear ruthenium(II) complex containing a 2,6-bis(1-methylbenzimidazol-2-yl)pyridine ligand and a carboxylic acid functionalized terpyridine ligand (SPS-G3) has been used as co-sensitizing system for the fabrication of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). The POR/SPS-G3 co-sensitized solar cell with a TiO2 photoanode displays enhanced short circuit current, open circuit voltage, and fill factor values (Jsc = 16.18 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.64 V, FF = 0.71, respectively), resulting in an overall power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 7.35%, which is superior to that for the DSSCs based on the individual dyes POR and SPS-G3. This is attributed to the improved light harvesting efficiency of the POR/SPS-G3 co-sensitizing system, which is evidenced by the incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectrum of the co-sensitized solar cell. Further improvement of the PCE value of the co-sensitized solar cell (up to 8.15%) has been achieved by using a graphene modified TiO2 (G-TiO2) photoanode, instead of a pure TiO2 photoanode. Based on dark current measurements and electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS), the increased PCE value of the solar cell with the G-TiO2 photoanode can be attributed to suppression of charge recombination at the photoanode/dye/electrolyte interface and enhancement of electron transport in the photoanode. These results are in accordance with the longer electron lifetime exhibited by the G-TiO2 photoanode.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), since their first report by Grätzel and O'Regan in 1991, have been attracting considerable attention, due to their low-cost and facile fabrication, and are regarded as a promising alternative to the conventional silicon-based solar cells. A typical DSSC consists of a transparent conducting oxide (TCO) electrode with a dye-sensitized nano-crystalline TiO2 film (anode), a platinum counter electrode (cathode) and an electrolyte containing a redox couple, usually I−/I3−. Upon light absorption, excited electrons from the LUMO level of the sensitizer are injected into the TiO2 conduction band (CB), transported to the TCO electrode and finally to the platinum counter electrode. The oxidized sensitizer is regenerated by I− of the electrolyte, while I− is recovered by reduction of I3− on the platinum counter electrode.

Among the various factors that affect the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of a DSSC, the type of sensitizer (chromophore) is of great importance. In this aspect, ruthenium(II)-pyridyl complexes and zinc-porphyrins have been proved very effective, resulting in PCE values as high as ∼12% under AM1.5 illumination. Principally, the photovoltaic performance of a DSSC depends on its light harvesting efficiency, which is related to the absorption profile of the sensitizer. Unfortunately, most dyes either exhibit narrow absorbing ranges or have weak light harvesting ability in particular regions of solar spectrum, resulting in poor DSSC overall performance. For example, DSSCs based on ruthenium(II) dyes, despite their high efficiency, exhibit a strong dip in the 400–420 nm region in their incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra, due to the competitive light absorption of I3− and the ruthenium(II) dyes. In order to have DSSCs with high PCE values, it is necessary to use sensitizers with high light harvesting ability in the near-infrared region as well as over the whole visible region. In other words, it is necessary that the sensitizer exhibits panchromatic light absorbance, while it maintains its sufficient thermodynamic driving force for the electron injection and dye regeneration processes.
An effective approach for extending the light harvesting efficiency of DSSCs is the molecular design and synthesis of chromophores that absorb over a wide spectral range. A second approach involves the co-sensitization of the TiO2 electrode with two or more chromophores that have strong and complementary absorption profiles, which result in an extended overall light harvesting efficiency. Generally, for effective co-sensitization, the co-sensitizing chromophores should meet certain conditions. For example, for a solar cell sensitized by a ruthenium(II) dye, the ideal candidate dye for co-sensitization should have the following characteristics:
(i) it should have a high molar absorption coefficient in both the near infrared and the 400–420 nm region, in order to recover the dip in the IPCE spectra induced by I3−;
(ii) it should have a molecular structure that avoids competitive adsorption among the dyes on the TiO2 surface, while effectively suppresses dye aggregation;
(iii) it should reduce the recombination of the injected electrons into the TiO2 conduction band with I3− and other acceptor species, through formation of a compact molecular mono layer that effectively covers the TiO2 film.
A variety of combinations of dyes have been used for DSSCs co-sensitization, resulting in enhanced photovoltaic performance relative to the individual single dye systems. Such systems include ruthenium(II) complexes with organic dyes and metal free organic dyes, phthalocyanines with organic dyes, and dye co-sensitization in separate layers. Generally, the use of strongly absorbing dyes allows for construction of thinner devices (as less material is needed for a TiO2 film with a given thickness), giving the opportunity for better filling of the remaining pores by other dyes with complementary absorption spectra.
Porphyrins, owing to their strong absorption in the 410–420 nm region and moderate absorptions in the 550–700 nm region, are ideal candidates for photovoltaic performance improvement via co-sensitization. Lee and Hupp reported a zinc-porphyrin that is covalently linked with a boron dipyrromethane unit (belonging to the BODIPY family, with an absorption maximum at 530 nm), which acts as additional complementary light harvester, compensating for the porphyrin absorption loss. A BODIPY unit attached to a zinc-porphyrin through a metallosupramolecular axial interaction has also been used by Odobel and co-workers, as a complementary antenna for the construction of a DSSC, resulting in an increase of the PCE value by 30% relative to the zinc-porphyrin sensitized solar cell. Co-adsorbtion on TiO2 of a benzoic acid functionalized BODIPY dye together with a porphyrin derivative resulted in complete filling of the gap in the IPCE spectrum for the DSSC based on the porphyrin dye alone, leading to a significant improvement of the PCE value of the co-sensitized solar cell. Very efficient co-sensitization based on combination of complementary absorbing “push–pull” porphyrins and metal-free organic dyes was first reported by Grätzel, Diau and co-workers. In a particular case, Diau and co-workers used a combination of a “push–pull” porphyrin with a spirally configured organic dye resulting in panchromatic spectral features and enhancement of the overall PCE value of the solar cell to ∼9%. The same research group developed a method of molecular engineering for co-sensitization of TiO2 films by a cocktail solution of a porphyrin and two or more organic dyes, reaching PCE values higher than 10%. Recently, Hardin, Snaith and McGehee suggested that by extending the absorption of a dye system to 830 nm might further increase the PCE of a porphyrin dye based DSSC to 13.8%. Moreover, the same group proposed that by using a Co2+/Co3+ electrolyte, if the absorption of the dye system can be further extended up to 920 nm, the total loss in the voltage can be decreased, leading to an ultimate device performance of ∼19%.
Continuing our studies on DSSCs based on porphyrin and ruthenium-based dyes, we herein report the use of a zinc-porphyrin (POR) in combination with a ruthenium(II)-benzimidazolepyridine-terpyridine complex (SPS-G3) as co-sensitizers for the construction of DSSCs. By immersing the TiO2 photoanode successively in solutions of the POR and SPS-G3 dyes, the PCE value of the resulting POR/SPS-G3 co-sensitized solar cell was improved (from 5.65% for the SPS-G3-sensitized solar cell and 3.88% for the POR-sensitized solar cell) to 7.35%. Remarkably, the PCE value of the co-sensitized solar cell was further improved to 8.15%, by using a graphene modified TiO2 (G-TiO2) photoanode.

All chemicals and solvents were purchased from usual commercial sources and used as received, unless otherwise stated.

Zinc-porphyrin (POR), namely 5,10-[bis(4-pyridyl)]-15,20-[bis(4-methylbenzoate)] zinc(II) porphyrin, and the ruthenium(II)-benzimidazolepyridine-terpyridine complex (SPS-G3) were synthesized as described in our earlier reports.

For the preparation of the pure TiO2 photoanode, TiO2 paste was obtained by mixing 3.000 g TiO2 powder (P25 Degussa and particle size of 20 nm), 0.2 mL CH3COOH and 1 mL H2O, as reported in earlier communication. For the preparation of the G-TiO2 photoanode, composite material was obtained by mixing TiO2 powder with graphene oxide (GO). Solid state GO with different weights was dispersed into 30 mL of ethylene glycol and the resulting solution was sonicated for 4 h until it became clear. The GO containing solution was mixed with TiO2 paste and stirred for 4 h until the formation of a clear paste. The G-TiO2 composite material was obtained as a white to slightly brownish slurry.

The electrodes of the DSSCs were based on fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass substrates, which were pre-cleaned with de-ionized H2O, acetone and EtOH and then dried in air. For the working electrode, the FTO coated substrate was immersed into 40 mM TiCl4(aq) at 60 °C, forming a compact layer, and then it was washed with H2O and EtOH. After drying, the FTO substrate was coated by the doctor blade technique with a layer of either pure TiO2 paste or G-TiO2 material, dried at ambient atmosphere and then sintered at 450 °C for 30 min, followed by cooling to room temperature. Prior annealing, pure TiO2 films were white colored, while G-TiO2 films were white-brownish colored. However, after thermal annealing, the G-TiO2 films also become white colored, confirming the GO transfer to graphene and the G-TiO2 composite formation. For the post treatment of the TiO2 surfaces, the sintered electrodes were immersed in 40 mM TiCl4(aq), washed with distilled H2O and EtOH, sintered at 450 °C for 30 min and cooled to room temperature. The thickness of the TiO2 and G-TiO2 films was 12–14 μm.
For the preparation of the POR sensitized TiO2 working electrode, the TiO2 film was immersed in a POR solution 0.5 mM in CHCl3/MeOH = 2/5 for 12 h. The SPS-G3 sensitized working electrode was prepared in an analogous way by using a SPS-G3 solution 0.5 mM in CH3CN/tBuOH = 1/1. The co-sensitized POR/SPS-G3 electrode was prepared by first immersing the TiO2 (or the G-TiO2 films correspondingly) in a POR solution 0.5 mM in CHCl3/MeOH = 2/5 for 4 h, rinsing with EtOH and drying for 30 min, and then immersing in a SPS-G3 solution 0.5 mM CH3CN/tBuOH = 1/1 for 4 h. The platinum counter electrode was prepared by spin coating drops of 10 mM H2PtCl6 solution in EtOH onto the pre-cleaned FTO coated glass substrate and sintering at 350 °C for 20 min in air.
The dye-adsorbed TiO2 electrode (or the dye-adsorbed G-TiO2 electrode, correspondingly) and the platinum coated FTO counter electrode were assembled into a sealed sandwiched type cell by heating at 80 °C, using a hot melt film (25 μm spacer Surlyn). A drop of electrolyte solution, consisting of LiI 0.05 M, I2 0.5 M, dimethyl-propyl-benzimidazole iodide (DPMII) 0.6 M, and 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) 0.5 M in CH3CN, was introduced through a drilled hole in the counter electrode. Finally, additional hot melted Surlyn was used to seal the hole. The active area of the devices was 0.25 cm2.

The current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the solar cells were measured using a digital source meter (Keithley model) under standard air mass (AM1.5) with a xenon lamp coupled with optical filter, at illumination intensity 100 mW cm−2. The IPCE spectra of the DSSCs were measured as a function of wavelength using a system consisting of a monochromator and xenon lamp, while the short circuit photocurrent (Jsc) and open circuit voltage (Voc) values were measured by a Keithley electrometer. The electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) of DSSCs, both in the dark and under illumination, were recorded by applying a bias equivalent to the open circuit voltage (Voc) of the device and recording over a frequency of 1 mHz to 105 Hz with an ac amplitude of 10 mV, under illumination. The measurements were carried out using a potentiostat (PGSTAT 30 Autolab, Eco-Chemie) equipped with FRA.


The synthesis and characterization of the POR and SPS-G3 dyes were reported earlier, while their chemical structures are presented in Fig. 1. POR is a meso substituted zinc-porphyrin with two pyridyl groups and two benzoate groups at cis positions to each other. SPS-G3 is a thiocyanate-free mononuclear ruthenium(II) complex containing a 2,6-bis(1-methylbenzimidazol-2-yl)pyridine ligand and a carboxylic acid functionalized terpyridine ligand. Both compounds contain functional groups (either benzoate or carboxylic acid groups) are suitable to act as anchoring groups to TiO2.

For the co-sensitization of DSSCs by two or more complementary absorbing dyes, two basic processes have been developed:

(i) the cocktail process, in which the TiO2 film is immersed into a solution of all dyes, and
(ii) the step-by-step process, in which the TiO2 film is successively immersed in different dye solutions.
For the co-sensitized solar cells presented herein, since SPS-G3 and POR are soluble in different solvents, the cocktail process was not feasible; therefore, a step-by-step co-sensitization was followed.
Particularly, the co-sensitized TiO2 photoanode was prepared by first immersing the TiO2 film in the POR solution and then in the SPS-G3 solution. In this way, the PCE value of the POR/SPS-G3 co-sensitized solar cell was found to be significantly improved, compared to the PCE values of the solar cells sensitized by the single dyes. Following the reverse order, i.e. by immersing the TiO2 film first in the SPS-G3 solution and then in the POR solution, the PCE value of the resulting POR/SPS-G3 co-sensitized solar cell did not increase and it was found to be even lower than the PCE value of the POR sensitized DSSC. This difference may be attributed to weak electronic coupling after the co-sensitization. The abovementioned procedure was followed for the fabrication of the POR/SPS-G3 co-sensitized G-TiO2 photoanode described in the following paragraphs.

In Fig. 2 are depicted the normalized UV-vis absorption spectra of the POR, SPS-G3 and POR/SPS-G3 dyes adsorbed onto TiO2 thin films. The UV-vis absorption spectrum of the POR/TiO2 film exhibits an intense Soret band in the 400–450 nm range and moderate Q bands in the 550–620 nm range. In case of the SPS-G3/TiO2 film, there is an absorption band at 350 nm, which is attributed to intra-ligand π–π* transitions of the tricarboxylic acid-2,2′-bipyridine and the other ancillary pyridine ligand, and an absorption band with a peak maximum at 505 nm, which is a metal-to-ligand-charge-transfer (MLCT) band. The UV-vis absorption spectrum of the POR/SPS-G3 adsorbed on TiO2 shows a broad absorption throughout the 300–700 nm region, with absorption bands that correspond to both SPS-G3 and POR dyes.

The current–voltage (J–V) characteristics under illumination (AM1.5, 100 mW cm−2) of the DSSCs based on the SPS-G3 and POR dyes, along with those of the POR/SPS-G3 co-sensitized DSSC, using a TiO2 photoanode, are shown in Fig. 3a, while their corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. The SPS-G3 and POR individually sensitized solar cells exhibit PCE values of 5.64% and 3.88%, respectively, while the POR/SPS-G3 co-sensitized solar cell shows a PCE value of 7.35%. This is a result of the enhanced short circuit current (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), and fill factor (FF) values of the latter. The increased Jsc value of 16.18 mA cm−2 is attributed to an enhancement of the IPCE response of the co-sensitized solar cell, while the increased Voc value of 0.64 V is due to an increased electron life time in its TiO2 CB.
Dye
Jsc/mA cm−2
Voc/V
FF
PCE/%
POR
10.44
0.62
0.60
3.88
SG3
15.36
0.54
0.68
5.64
POR/SPS-G3 with TiO2 anode
16.18
0.64
0.71
7.35
POR/SPS-G3 with G-TiO2 anode
16.69
0.66
0.74
8.15
The IPCE response of the DSSCs was analyzed. IPCE values were calculated according to the equation
where
Jsc is the photocurrent density generated by monochromatic light with wavelength λ and power of incident light per unit area Pin. The IPCE spectrum of the POR/SPS-G3 based DSSC closely matches with the absorption spectrum of POR/SPS-G3 co-adsorbed onto TiO2 film, indicating that the co-sensitized DSSC harvests photons more effectively that the DSSC sensitized with individual dyes, resulting in higher IPCE and Jsc values. The IPCE spectrum of the POR individually sensitized DSSC (Fig. 3b, red color) shows a response in the 350–660 nm wavelength region, with a maximum IPCE value at 420 nm (55%), that corresponds to the Soret band of POR, and a second IPCE maximum near 615 nm (44%), that corresponds to a Q-band of POR. In case of the SPS-G3 individually sensitized DSSC (Fig. 3b, black color), the IPCE spectrum shows a broad band ranging from 300 to 700 nm, with a strong dip in the 400 nm region, which is due to competitive absorption between SPS-G3 and I3− in the electrolyte (I3− has a higher molar extinction coefficient than SPS-G3). The POR/SPS-G3 co-sensitized DSSC exhibits an improved IPCE response in the broader range of 300–700 nm (Fig. 3b, blue color), with the highest IPCE value of 78% at ∼515 nm. Moreover, the dip in the ∼400 nm region, observed in the IPCE spectrum of the SPS-G3 based DSSC, is recovered, due to the strong Soret band absorption of POR in this wavelength region. The broadness of the IPCE spectrum of the co-sensitized solar cell leads to an enhancement of its short circuit current (Jsc). This implies that the SPS-G3 and POR co-sensitization of the TiO2 surface has a synergistic effect on light harvesting.

In order to investigate the electron injection feasibility from the Lowest Unoccupied Molecular Orbital (LUMO) energy level of the sensitizers into the TiO2 CB of the solar cells, the LUMO and HOMO (Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital) energy levels of both SPS-G3 and POR dyes were determined by cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements. For POR, the LUMO and HOMO energy levels of were found to be −3.57 and −5.43 eV, respectively, while for SPS-G3 they were found to be −3.35 and −5.30 eV, respectively. For both SPS-G3 and POR the LUMO energy levels are sufficient higher than the TiO2 CB (−4.2 eV), and hence the electron injection from the excited states of both dyes is favorable. Moreover, the HOMO energy level of both SPS-G3 and POR is lower than the redox potential of the I3−/I− redox couple (−4.8 eV), suggesting that there is sufficient driving force for the regeneration of both oxidized dyes. As a result, both SPS-G3 and POR dyes are contributing to the observed photocurrent.
The open circuit voltage (Voc) of a DSSC is related to the difference between the redox potential of the electrolyte (Eredox/q) and the quasi Fermi level of the electrons (EF/q) in TiO2. Assuming that the electrolyte redox potential is constant, the open circuit voltage (Voc) of the solar cell is determined by the position of TiO2 CB and its electron density. The quasi Fermi level of the electrons depends on the number on electrons in the TiO2 CB. Therefore, the increase in the open circuit voltage (Voc) for the co-sensitized DSSC might be attributed to the electron density of the TiO2 CB which is influenced by the electron injection efficiency form the LUMO level of dyes into the TiO2 CB. Since in the co-sensitized DSSC the electrons are injected from the LUMOs of both dyes, an increase of the electron density shifts the quasi Fermi level upwards and hence increases the open circuit voltage (Voc) of the solar cell. Moreover, during the sensitization process of the co-sensitized DSSC, a compact layer may be formed on the TiO2 surface, which may suppress the recombination of injected electrons in the TiO2 with the I3− ions in the electrolyte, resulting in an improvement of the open circuit voltage (Voc) of the solar cell.

Another factor that affects the PCE value of a DSSC is the type of photoanode, which influences the electron transfer process in the TiO2 film (as well as the electron injection and dye loading). Electron transfer is a dynamic process of charge separation and charge recombination; so, in order to be favorable, the photoanode should exhibit high conductivity. Composite films based on TiO2 and carbon nano-materials have been widely used in the past for the enhancement of charge separation. Carbon nano-tubes (CNTs) have provided limited enhancement, due to the poor CNT/TiO2 contact. However, graphene, a two dimensional nano-carbon material that provides good electron mobility, good optical transparency and large specific area, appears to be a very promising candidate for application in DSSCs photoanodes. The first application of graphene in DSSCs was reported by Mullen et al., who employed graphene as transparent electrode substrate replacing indium tin oxide. Recently, graphene was also incorporated into TiO2 photoanodes of DSSCs and quantum dot sensitized solar cells for enhancement of their PCE values.

Along these lines, in order to further improve the performance of the POR/SPS-G3 co-sensitized DSSC, a solar cell with a graphene modified TiO2 (G-TiO2) photoanode was also fabricated. The current–voltage (J–V) characteristics under illumination (AM1.5, 100 mW cm−2) of this cell are shown in Fig. 4a. The presence of graphene into the TiO2 film effectively increases the short circuit current (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), and fill factor (FF) values of the DSSC. The increased Jsc value of 16.69 mA cm−2 (Table 1) is mainly attributed to the high specific area and the chemical defects of the ultra thin graphene sheets, which allow for high dispersion of the TiO2 particles and enhancement of the dye adsorption. As a result, the PCE value of this new solar cell is enhanced up to 8.15%, compared to 7.35% of the solar cell with the un-modified TiO2 photoanode. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 4b, the IPCE response of the POR/SPS-G3 sensitized solar cell based on the G-TiO2 photoanode is stronger than the IPCE response of the DSSC with the pure TiO2 photoanode, throughout the entire wavelength region.
The enhanced performance of the DSSC is related to the energy level structure of the G-TiO2 photoanode. The energy levels of FTO, graphene, TiO2 and POR/SPS-G3 dye are depicted in Fig. 5. The graphene Fermi level is approximately at −4.5 eV (vs. vacuum), which is lower than the TiO2 CB (−4.2 eV) and very close to the FTO work function (−4.6 eV). Such energy level differences favor electron transfer from the TiO2 CB to FTO via graphene bridges. In case of the DSSC with the unmodified TiO2 photoanode, photogenerated electrons from the LUMO energy level of the dyes are injected into the TiO2 CB, and they either travel through an external circuit towards the collecting electrode generating photocurrent, or they back transfer to the dyes giving charge recombination or to the electrolyte giving a back electron transfer reaction. However, in case of DSSC with the G-TiO2 modified photoanode, due to the fact that graphene acts as electron transfer medium in the TiO2 film, the photogenerated electrons are scavenged by the graphene sheets and quickly transferred to the collecting FTO electrode, decreasing in this way the charge recombination and back transfer reaction rates, and resulting in enhancement of the Jsc value.
For the fabrication of the G-TiO2 photoanode, when an excess amount of graphene (more than 0.6% wt) is used, the PCE value of the resulting DSSC deteriorates. This can be attributed to a variety of reasons:
(i) when TiO2 is mixed with a larger amount of graphene, the dye loading on the TiO2 surface might be decreased;
(ii) graphene can also absorb part of the incident visible light; in case of a larger amount of graphene, light harvesting competition between the dyes and graphene might happen;
(iii) a larger amount of graphene might provide recombination centers instead of new electron pathways.
The Jsc and PCE values of a DSSC are influenced by the dark current of the DSSC, which results from the recombination of electrons in the TiO2 CB and I3− ions in the electrolyte that reduces the photocurrent. In order to confirm the abovementioned graphene functionality, dark current measurements of the POR/SPS-G3 co-sensitized DSSC based on the unmodified TiO2 and G-TiO2 photoanodes were carried out and the results are shown in Fig. 6. At the same potential above 0.58 V, the dark current values of the DSSC with the G-TiO2 photoanode are lower than those of the DSSC based on the unmodified TiO2 photoanode. In addition, for the solar cell with the G-TiO2 photoanode the onset of dark current shifts to a higher potential. On the basis of these observations, it can be concluded that the incorporation of graphene in the TiO2 film suppresses the recombination of the photogenerated electrons with the I3− ions in the electrolyte. The abovementioned fast electron separation and electron transfer achieved through the graphene sheets result in further reduction of the dark current and increase of the short circuit current (Jsc). Furthermore, from Fig. 6 it can also be seen that the onset voltage of the solar cell with the G-TiO2 photoanode shifts to a higher value, indicating that the TiO2 CB is shifted slightly upwards, resulting in a slight increase of the open circuit voltage (Voc).
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) has been proven to be a very useful technique for the study of charge transfer properties, such as electron transfer and charge recombination at the photoanode/dye/electrolyte interface, in DSSCs. Nyquist plots for the POR/SPS-G3 co-sensitize DSSCs with unmodified TiO2 and G-TiO2 photoanodes, under illumination at a bias voltage equivalent to the Voc of the corresponding device, are illustrated in Fig. 7a. The three semicircles usually observed in such plots (from left-to-right corresponding to high-to-low frequencies) represent the impedances of the charge transfer at the counter platinum electrode, charge transport resistance (Rtr) at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface and electrolyte diffusion, respectively. The semicircle in the middle frequency region is the result of contributions from the electron transport resistance and interfacial capacitance at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface. The fitted value of electron transport resistance (Rtr) for the DSSC with G-TiO2 photoanode was found ∼23 Ω, while the corresponding value for the DSSC with pure TiO2 photoanode was found ∼45 Ω. The lower Rtr value for the DSSC based on G-TiO2 photoanode than that for the DSSC based on unmodified TiO2 photoanode clearly indicates that graphene in the TiO2 film enhances electron transfer between the G-TiO2 film and the collecting electrode. The incorporation of graphene in the TiO2 film not only favours the electron transfer, but also reduces the recombination of electrons with dye or back transfer reaction.
Electron lifetime (τn) is another important parameter for the efficiency of DSSCs. Electron lifetime values for the POR/SPS-G3 co-sensitized DSSCs with unmodified TiO2 and G-TiO2 photoanode were calculated from Bode plots (Fig. 7b) and were found 25.3 ms and 36 ms, respectively. The longer electron lifetime for the latter is an indication of more effective suppression of back reaction between the electrons in the TiO2 CB with ions in the electrolyte. The increased electron lifetime observed for the POR/SPS-G3 sensitized solar cell with G-TiO2 photoanode might be one of the reasons for its higher Jsc and PCE values.
The porosity of the photoanode of a DSSC also affects electron percolation in the TiO2 film and thereby the photovoltaic performance. We have measured the porosity of the unmodified TiO2 and G-TiO2 films by CV measurements. From a series of CV data with varying scan rate, we obtained the value of Imax at scan rate of 400 mV s−1 and 50 mV s−1 and calculated the porosity (P) of photo-anodes using following expression
where
Imax is current at the forward oxidation peak. The porosities of the unmodified TiO2 and G-TiO2 films were estimated to be 0.61 and 0.48, respectively. The smaller pore size of the G-TiO2 photoanode increases the light harvesting and charge collection efficiency of the DSSC, resulting in an increase in PCE value.


In summary, we used a meso tetra-aryl substituted zinc-porphyrin (bearing two pyridyl groups at cis positions to each other) (POR) in combination with a thiocyanate-free ruthenium(II) complex with 2,6-bis(1-methylbenzimidazol-2-yl)pyridine an carboxylic acid functionalized terpyridine ligands (SPS-G3) as co-sensitizing system for the fabrication of DSSCs. The POR/SPS-G3 co-sensitized device exhibits a significantly improved overall PCE value of 7.35%, compared to the DSSCs based on the individual dyes SPS-G3 and POR. The increased short circuit current (Jsc) of the co-sensitized solar cell is in agreement with its enhanced IPCE response, which can be attributed to the improved light harvesting efficiency of the POR/SPS-G3 system, compared to the individual dyes. The PCE value of the POR/SPS-G3 co-sensitized DSSC has been further improved up to 8.15%, when a graphene modified (G-TiO2) photoanode was used, instead of pure TiO2 photoanode. As evidenced by dark current measurements and EI spectra of the solar cells, the G-TiO2 photoanode suppresses the recombination of the photogenerated electrons and exhibits a lower electron charge transport resistance. The incorporation of graphene in the TiO2 film enhances the electron transfer between G-TiO2 photoanode and the collecting electrode and results in longer electron lifetime.


Greek national funding through the Operational Program “Education and Lifelong Learning” of the National Strategic Reference Framework (NSRF) – Research Program, has financed this research: Thales K.A. 70/3/11676. Also, the European Commission funded this research by FP7-REGPOT-2008-1, Project BIOSOLENUTI no. 229927, Heraklitos grant from Ministry of Education, Special Research Account University of Crete, and GSRT. SPS thanks the DST for Fast Track Young Scientist Project (CS-83/2012).

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013