 DOI: 10.1039/C3TC32235A
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3172-3184


D.
Bozyigit
 and 

V.
Wood
*

Laboratory for Nanoelectronics, ETH Zurich, Switzerland. E-mail: denizb@ethz.ch; vwood@ethz.ch

Received
14th November 2013
, Accepted 11th February 2014
First published on 11th February 2014
Here we provide a primer for correctly selecting and implementing optoelectronic characterization techniques on semiconductor nanocrystal solids and choosing the appropriate models with which to interpret the data. We discuss the two most fundamental device architectures incorporating a solid composed of solution-processed semiconductor nanocrystals: the metal–semiconductor–metal diode and the heterojunction diode, and the broad classes of techniques that can be used to analyse them including quasi-static (e.g. current–voltage), harmonic (e.g. admittance spectroscopy), and transient measurements. We then separately address the models that are commonly applied to understand the semiconductor behaviour including the Shockley diode equation and capacitance-based analyses such as Mott–Schottky and Shockley–Read–Hall models and potential pitfalls in their application. We additionally highlight methods to extract the density and position of trap states, located in the band gap of these semiconductors and which play an important role in device performance. Due to its interest as an absorptive material for third generation solar cells, we discuss the techniques and analysis in the context of PbS nanocrystal solids and provide reference values for this material throughout the text.
D. Bozyigit
Deniz Bozyigit is a PhD student in the research group of Vanessa Wood in the Department of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering at ETH Zürich where he investigates performance limitations to nanocrystal-based devices. His interest lays in the development and application of electronic and optical characterization techniques to study charge transport and electronic trapping physics. In 2011, he received a MSc in Electrical Engineering at ETH Zürich with distinction, working on superconducting microwave circuits as building blocks for quantum computing.
V. Wood
Vanessa Wood is an assistant professor in the Department of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering at ETH Zürich where she heads the Laboratory for Nanoelectronics. In 2010, she received her PhD in Electrical Engineering from MIT during which she worked on the development of quantum dot LEDs. Prior to joining ETH, she was a postdoctoral researcher in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at MIT, working on novel lithium-ion flow batteries. In 2012, she was a recipient of an Intel Early Career Faculty Honor Award.

The impressive advances in colloidal chemistry in the past twenty years have enabled the advent of solution-processed semiconductors assembled from preformed nanocrystals (NCs). These semiconductors not only offer the possibility for low cost manufacturing and processing on flexible substrates, but also enable the integration of quantum-confined materials with their unique electronic and optical properties into large-area devices. These features make nanocrystal-based solids particularly attractive for optoelectronic applications, such as LEDs, photodetectors, and solar cells.

However, NC-based semiconductors present challenges for electric characterization. The disordered nature of the nanocrystal solid, the large surface area of the nanocrystals, and their hybrid nature with inorganic cores and organic ligands, introduce large numbers of electronic trap states, a broad window of characteristic times scales for charge carrier dynamics, and often a mix of localized and band-like transport. Nonetheless, many of the characterization techniques and models developed over the past fifty years to understand transport in crystalline and polycrystalline materials can be applied to understanding the electronic properties of nanocrystal solids. This must be done carefully, with a clear understanding of the limitations of the measurement techniques and the assumptions behind the models.
Here we aim to provide a compact description of optoelectronic measurement techniques and common pitfalls facing their application to nanocrystal solids. In particular, we emphasize the importance of distinguishing between the physical measurement and the application of models to interpret the measurement results.

While a variety of different architectures have been conceived for nanocrystal-based solar cells, here we focus on the two most fundamental: the metal–semiconductor–metal (MSM) diode and the heterojunction (HJ) diode.

The simplest device to characterize the photovoltaic and electronic properties of a semiconductor is the metal–semiconductor–metal (MSM) diode. As depicted in Fig. 1a, in this device architecture, a metal with high workfunction (ϕp) is used to extract holes while a metal with a low work function (ϕn) is used to extract electrons. Like all solar cells, the MSM diode derives its photovoltaic effect from the carrier-type selectivity of these contacts. This selectivity is primarily provided by the built-in field, which stems from the difference in workfunction between the two contacts: ϕp − ϕn.
Due to the presence of the metal–semiconductor interfaces, NC-based MSM diodes are often referred to as “Schottky-diodes” in reference to the applicability of the Schottky-model to crystalline semiconductor-based MSM-diodes. However, it is unclear if the charge transport physics in the NC-based MSM-diode is related to the majority-carrier Schottky-model.
NC-based MSM-diodes are advantageous over record-performing NC-based devices for characterizing the physical properties of a NC-solid due to their ease of fabrication and the fact that they only contain one semiconducting material. However, a disadvantage is that the low-workfunction metals that are used as electrodes, such as Al, Mg, Ca, are easily oxidized and hydrolized, and the metal–semiconductor interface is sensitive to this degradation.
It has been shown that the properties of the metal electrodes can be improved by introducing thin metal-oxide or salt layers. For the hole-extracting electrode, transition metal oxide layers, such as MoO3 and VaOx, ∼10 nm in thickness, have improved performance. On the electron-extracting electrode, LiF (∼1.0 nm) is used to improve the open-circuit voltage and the stability under ambient conditions. In the bulk, MoO3 and LiF are wide band gap insulators and would be expected to impede charge transport. As thin layers, it is suspected that they pin the Fermi-energy at the semiconductor–metal interface at an advantageous position that increases the carrier selectivity of the electrode, while allowing charge extraction through trap state mediated transport. Additionally, the metal-oxide interlayers can act as charge carrier blocking layers and physical buffer layers, further enhancing solar cell performance. An excellent review on this topic was recently published by Greiner and Lu.
The current record power conversion efficiency for a MSM solar cell with a PbS NC-solid is 5.2% and 4.6% for a PbSe NC-solid. The efficiency of this architecture is limited by short charge carrier diffusion lengths, which restrict the maximum film thickness to 100–200 nm. Although some reports claim that the MSM-diode has intrinsically low open-circuit voltages and fill factors, there exist several reports with open-circuit voltages and fill factors on par with record performing devices.
As shown in Fig. 1a, the heterojunction (HJ) diode consists of an n-type semiconductor and a p-type semiconductor, which are ohmically contacted to a low-workfunction and a high-workfunction metal respectively. The advantage of the HJ over the MSM is the improved spatial separation of charge carriers, which reduces recombination losses. This comes at the cost of increased complexity in device fabrication and characterization.
In a typical HJ diode, an n-type metal oxide (TiO2 or ZnO) is used to extract electrons, and the NC-solid is used as a p-type layer to extract hole carriers. Light absorption takes place predominantly in the PbS NC-solid. Variations to the HJ structure have been reported, including planar HJs and nano-structured bulk-heterojunctions (BHJs). The currently certified maximum power conversion efficiency of such devices is at 7.0%. In a second variety of HJs, the n-type layer is provided by an n-type NC-solid. Again, planar and BHJ geometries have been reported. Currently, 4.9% is the highest reported power conversion efficiency in this category.

As shown in Fig. 1c, for complete physical characterization of a device, a measurement setup must offer: reliable electrical contacts, optical access, accurate temperature control and measurement, and environmental control.

Environmental control is desirable as NC-based semiconductors are highly sensitive to atmospheric oxygen and water vapour. Temperature dependent measurements on diodes are used to determine various activation energies in the system. This requires that the electrical contacting mechanism be robust to temperature change.
Regardless of the means for electrical contact, a source-measure-unit (SMU) is needed. This device (or a collection of devices) has four terminals. The Generator terminal is connected to a voltage source, which supplies a voltage (VD) to the device. The second terminal (Lo) is connected to a device that measures the current coming back from the diode. In this review, we consistently refer to the current density (JD), where the current is normalized by the characteristic device area to facilitate comparison between different device geometries. The remaining two terminals (Vhi, Vlo) are connected to a high impedance (≫1 MOhm) voltage measurement device to measure VD.

In this section, we describe optoelectronic measurement techniques that are most relevant for NC-based solar cells and the specifics (e.g. instrumentation) of how these measurements are implemented. For a more complete overview, we recommend Electrical Characterization of Organic Electronic Materials and Devices by Peter Stallinga or Advanced Characterization Techniques for Thin Film Solar Cells by Abou-Ras, Kirchartz and Rau.

To facilitate discussion, we classify the techniques in three different groups that depend on their temporal requirements for the SMU: (1) quasi-static, (2) harmonic, and (3) transient.
To extract physical parameters from these measurements, the data has to be interpreted in the context of specific models of the device physics, which we describe separately in Section IV. This is done to emphasize the importance of reporting the raw data from these characterization techniques prior to analysis of the data through application of a specific model, which is often borrowed from classical or organic electronics and has not to date been validated for nanocrystal-based devices.

The most common and straightforward optoelectronic characterization techniques are quasi-static measurements, in which a constant VD is applied and JD is measured, yielding a current–voltage (I–V) curve. These measurements can be performed with a SMU such as the Keithley 2400. Representative data for a MSM diode with a benzenedithiol (BDT)-treated PbS NC-based semiconductor layer are provided in the inset in Fig. 2a.

Measuring the I–V curve under illumination with a standardized solar spectrum is used to determine the performance parameters of the solar cell: the open-circuit voltage (Voc), the short-circuit current-density, (Jsc), and the power conversion efficiency (η). Due to the interest in assessing the uniformity of the solution-processed semiconductor layer in the different devices on the same substrate or across several different substrates, it is helpful to report uncertainties obtained from a statistically relevant number of devices. Measurement of Voc and Jsc for different illumination intensities (Fig. 2b), and temperatures (Fig. 2c) are performed to obtain information on the charge transport in the diode. In Section IV, we discuss the physical parameters that can be obtained from such measurements by application of the Shockley diode equation.

The second class of optoelectronic characterization involves application of a frequency dependent voltage or illumination and measurement of the system response.


When the diode is biased at a certain level VD,0 with an additional harmonic signal of frequency f = ω/2π, such that VD(ω) = VD,0 + δDsinω, the response to this excitation is measured as

JD(ω) = JD,0 + δĴXsinω + δĴYcosω
(1.1)
where δ
ĴX and δĴY are the in-phase and out-of-phase components of the current.

In most cases, an impedance analyser is used to perform such measurements. However, an impedance analyser simply consists of a harmonic voltage source and a lock-in amplifier, and harmonic measurements can also be carried out using an arbitrary waveform generator (AWG) in combination with a lock-in amplifier to measure the in-phase and out-of-phase components.
From these values the complex admittance can be calculated:
Y(ω) = Y′(ω) + iY′′(ω) = δĴX/δD + iδĴY/δD
where
Y′ and Y′′ are the real and imaginary parts of the admittance and i is the imaginary number. The admittance can be transformed into other equivalent representations, such as the complex capacitance, which is often the most useful in the context of semiconductor diodes:

(1.2)
where
C′ is the real part and C′′ the imaginary part of the capacitance. In well behaved systems, C′ and C′′ are coupled by the Kramers–Kronig relations, which means that C′ and C′′ contain essentially the same information. It is therefore sufficient for most practical purposes of diode characterization to only investigate C′.

Some authors discuss capacitance measurements in terms of the absolute value of the capacitance, given by . While this is not incorrect per se, one must keep in mind that physical models, such as the Mott–Schottky model, which are developed for C′, cannot be applied to |C| (see Section IV).

Fig. 3a and b provide examples of common types of capacitive measurements that have been performed on PbS NC-solids. Capacitance versus frequency measurements at different temperatures (Fig. 3a), also known as thermal admittance spectroscopy (TAS), can be used to obtain information on trap states using the Shockley–Read–Hall trapping model. Capacitance versus voltage measurements, as shown in Fig. 3b, and are used to determine the built-in voltage of the diode and the doping density of the semiconductor using the Mott–Schottky model of the depletion region.

A second group of harmonic techniques is known as photocurrent spectroscopy. Here, the illumination is modulated ID(ω) = ID,0 + δÎDsinω using a chopper and the current response is recorded using a lock-in amplifier. The diode is usually reverse biased (VD ≤ 0 V) to facilitate extraction of photo-excited charge carriers. In contrast to admittance measurements, the photocurrent is most practically discussed in terms of its magnitude (|JD,ph(ω)|) and phase (φD,ph(ω)):

(1.3)
The most common variation of photocurrent spectroscopy is the measurement to determine the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of a device, as shown in Fig. 3c. Here, a fixed chopping frequency in the range of 10–1000 Hz is set and the wavelength λ of a monochromatic light source is tuned from the UV to the NIR while the photocurrent is recorded. To obtain the EQE, the same measurement is performed on a calibrated reference device with a known EQE.
This technique can be extended to the mid and far-infrared region using a Fourier transform infrared spectrometer (FTIR), which is known as Fourier transform infrared photocurrent spectroscopy (FTPS). This technique was recently applied to PbS NC-diodes and revealed a discrete optical transition within the bandgap indicative of a trap state (see Fig. 3d).
Alternatively, changing frequency of the light modulation is known as intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS), which was recently applied by Erslev et al. to investigate the Urbach tail in PbS NC solids (see Fig. 3e).

In the third class of optoelectronic characterization techniques, an electrical or optical pulse form is applied to the device, and the voltage or current response is recorded as a function of time.

Most commonly, a voltage signal, VD(t), with the form of a ramp or pulse, is applied to the diode using an AWG. The time dependent current JD(t) is measured, typically by a combination of a broad-band transimpedance amplifier and a digitizer, or with the low-impedance input of an oscilloscope, if the sensitivity of the latter is sufficient.
Example VD(t) profiles and JD(t) measurement traces are shown in Fig. 4. The linear voltage ramp in Fig. 4a is a Charge Extraction by Linearly Increasing Voltage (CELIV) measurement. CELIV was designed to determine charge carrier mobilities in organic semiconductors, and has been applied to PbS NC-solids to determine the majority carrier mobility and the dielectric constant. The rectangular pulse in Fig. 4b is for charge (Q)-based Deep Level Transient Spectroscopy (Q-DLTS) measurements, which can be used to determine trap activation energies and trap densities based on the Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) model.
In photovoltage transient techniques, the sample is illuminated by a constant light source superimposed with a short laser pulse, such that the measured Voc(t) shows a small transient (Fig. 3c, left). Such transient open-circuit voltage measurements rely on the use of a high impedance voltage measurement device. A regular oscilloscope input with Rin = 1 MOhm can be too low and will limit the longest recombination time that can be measured to RinC ≈ 1 ms, where C is the high frequency capacitance of the diode. Instead, broadband voltage amplifiers with up to 1 TOhm input impedance are preferable.
Photovoltage transient measurements are often accompanied by measurement of the photocurrent transient, Jsc(t). This is done with a broadband transimpedance amplifier and is used to determine the amount of charge introduced by the light pulse and the charge extraction time. A typical photocurrent transient is shown in Fig. 3c (right).

To interpret the quasistatic, harmonic, and transient measurements described above, various models are applied. Here we discuss the key models for extracting parameters of relevance to solar cell performance, the underlying physical assumptions of these models, and the considerations that must be taken in applying them to NC-based solids.


The most fundamental characteristic of a diode is its I–V curve, which is generally analysed using the Shockley diode equation. Here we use the notation in the review by Lunt et al.:

(1.4)
where
Rp is the shunt resistance, Rs the series resistance, VD the voltage across the device, Jsc the short circuit current, nV the ideality factor related to the voltage, k the Boltzmann constant, and J0 the reverse saturation current. The Shockley diode equation is phenomenological so its parameters are not unambiguously linked to specific physical processes.

The low-forward bias region between 0.1 and 1 V, where the current increases exponentially, is the most important for solar cell performance. The exponential current increase in the dark is described by the reverse saturation current (J0) and the ideality factor related to voltage (nV). Typical values of (J0) for PbS nanocrystal diodes at room temperature range from 10−4 to 10−7 mA cm−2. (J0) derives its name from the fact that ideal diodes saturate to this current in the reverse region. In the context of solution processed semiconductor based devices, the name reverse saturation current is rather misleading, as this current is hardly ever observed due to the presence of larger leakage currents that dominate in reverse bias.
In all common physical diode models, J0 is associated with a thermal activation energy EJA and is given by:
(1.5)
where
nE is the ideality factor related to the activation energy. We distinguish between the ideality factors nV and nE to facilitate the discussion of existing literature below.

For a semiconductor with a band gap Eg, EJA, and nE assume different values depending on the dominant mode of charge conduction. In the case of:
• Band-to-band recombination in an ideal diode, EJA = Eg and nE = nV = 1.
• Trap-assisted band-to-band recombination, EJA = Eg and nE = nV = 2.
• Ideal thermionic-emission or diffusion of majority carriers over a Schottky-barrier with height ϕB, EJA = ϕB and nE = nV = 1.
A mixture of direct band-to-band recombination (nE = nV = 1) and trap-assisted band-to-band recombination (nE = nV = 2) can lead to ideality factors in the range of 1 to 2. While it was proposed that space charge effects can increase the ideality factor in organic semiconductors, in light of the high dielectric constant of PbS NC-solids, we expect that space charge limited conduction is improbable and that trap assisted recombination would be the source of increased ideality factors, in agreement with the findings in ref. 23.

Eqn (1.5) shows that any assumption made about nE, directly affects the determination of the activation energy, EJA. This has resulted in a range of different values of EJA reported in literature. Using three distinct data sets – temperature dependent I–V characteristics, temperature-dependent open circuit voltage measurements, and optical absorption – reported by Szendrei et al. – we show how the relevant parameters nV, J00, and EJA can be determined self-consistently.
First, we take the model used for thin-film photovoltaics, where nE = nV. Now, the open-circuit voltage can be calculated from eqn (1.4) and (1.5) to be:
(1.6)
We fit
eqn (1.4) to the I–V characteristics in the dark at room temperature and determine nV = 1.6 (Fig. 5a). Setting nE = nV = 1.6, we then fit eqn (1.5) to J0 determined at different temperatures and find EJA = 0.91 eV and J00 = 1.7 × 105 mA cm−2 (Fig. 5b). Alternatively, in Fig. 5c, we plot the temperature-dependent open-circuit voltage data with a fit of eqn (1.6) and find EJA = 0.92 eV. Finally, we fit the optical absorption tail of the NCs according to a direct semiconductor model and obtain a band gap of Eg = 0.93 eV. The agreement of the energies determined using three separate data sets convinces us that nE = nV is a valid assumption for NC-solids.

Furthermore, the strong agreement between the extracted parameters demonstrates the importance of distinguishing between the optical absorption exciton energy (Eexc) and the charge transport bandgap (Eg). As explained above, we find from the data in ref. 44 that EJA = Eg = 0.92 eV is the effective bandgap for charge transport while Eexc = 1.1 eV. A recent report shows that J0 scales with the exciton energy according to EJA = Eexc with nE = 1.92 and nV = 1.7–2.4. However, if the 15% discrepancy between Eg and Eexc is accounted for, an ideality factor of nE = 1.6 is obtained for the data in ref. 24. Thus the data in ref. 24 and 44 are actually in very good agreement.
For the case of ITO/PbS/LiF/Al MSM diodes, we thus conclude that the:
• forward current has an activation energy, which is the effective bandgap for charge transport EJA = Eg, which can be ∼15% smaller then the absorption-exciton energy (Eexc).
• ideality factors (nE = nV) are in the range of 1.6–2.0, indicating a mixture of direct recombination and trap-assisted recombination.

The performance of a semiconductor can be highly influenced by the presence of states within the band gap such as dopants or trap states. These states are fundamentally related to the capacitance of the semiconductor, and most models that are used to determine the number, density, and properties of midgap states are therefore based on different measurements of the capacitance.

A semiconductor diode has two major capacitance contributions: the electrostatic capacitance of the depletion region (CD) and the chemical capacitance (CT) of the electronic states of the semiconductor material, as shown in Fig. 6a.
The electrostatic capacitance can be understood as a plate capacitor over the depletion region, where no or few free charge carriers are present, and is given by
(1.7)
where
εs is the dielectric constant of the semiconductor and WD is the width of the depletion region. The dielectric constant of a NC-solid can be calculated by the Maxwell–Garnett effective medium theory if the volume filling fraction (δ) of NCs is known:

(1.8)
where
εh and εnc are the bulk dielectric constants of the host matrix material and the NC material. For a matrix of organic ligands (εh = 2.2) and PbS (εnc,PbS = 169) in a close packed configuration (δ = 0.74), we obtain an upper limit of the dielectric constant of PbS NC-solids of εs = 18.5, in good agreement with reported measurements.

If the NC-film is thin enough we can assume that the depletion region extends through the whole film, i.e. WD = d. This approximation is helpful since WD is often times unknown. This approximation can also be used to calculate the smallest possible value for the electrostatic capacitance: CD > CD,0 = εsε0/d. For a typical 200 nm thick PbS NC-solid, this lower bound on the electrostatic capacitance is between 62 nF cm−2 and 82 nF cm−2 assuming εs = 14–18.5.
To understand what defines the width of the depletion region (WD) we introduce the dielectric relaxation time of free charge carriers (τrel), which is given by
(1.9)
where
σ is the conductivity and n and p are the density of free electrons and holes with respective mobilities μn and μp. When τrel exceeds the characteristic timescale of the measurement, which, for a harmonic capacitance measurement, is ω−1, the charge carriers cannot follow and the material behaves like a electrostatic capacitor. As shown in Fig. 6a, τrel varies over the semiconductor thickness depending on the local density of electrons and holes. The edge of the depletion region can now be defined as the point where τrel(x) = ω−1.

In traditional semiconductor theory, it is often assumed that the mobility is high (μn ≫ 10 cm2 V−1 s−1) such that τrel in the bulk is in the range of ns to ps. These time scales are significantly shorter than the time scales of most capacitance measurement instrumentation (typically below 100 MHz). However, in low mobility semiconductors such as PbS NC-solids, a typical relaxation time of τrel = 0.7 μs can be estimated assuming μp = 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and p = 1016 cm−3. Thus τrel is in the range of most capacitance meters. Therefore to measure the depletion region, we cannot safely neglect the relaxation of free charge carriers and must carefully choose the measurement frequency. Further complicating the measurement of the depletion width is the second major contribution to the diode capacitance, the chemical capacitance.
The chemical capacitance, or equivalently the differential capacitance, is related to the occupation of electronic states in the semiconductor. The occupation of a discrete electron state “A” at an energy EA in the Boltzmann approximation is:
(1.10)
where
EF,n is the quasi-Fermi energy of the electrons. If EF,n is changed, the occupation changes, requiring an addition or removal of electrons. This effect is conveniently described by the chemical capacitance

(1.11)
which is a function of the
EF,n. Considering all electrons (n) in conduction band (CB) and trap states in a structure with a density of states NT(E), the chemical capacitance is given by

(1.12)
where
f′ is the first derivative of the Fermi–Dirac distribution. The fact that the chemical capacitance is proportional to the density of states clarifies why capacitance can be used to characterize trap state density.

The absence of the dielectric constant in eqn (1.12) highlights that the chemical capacitance is not of electrostatic origin and can therefore not be understood as a plate capacitor. Furthermore, the chemical capacitance has a unit of capacitance per volume (F cm−3), so, to obtain the total chemical capacitance, eqn (1.12) must be integrated along the film thickness. Assuming that the dominant contribution of the chemical capacitance comes from a region of width WT, the total capacitance is given by:
CT = e2NT(EF,n)WT,
(1.13)
which has the unit of capacitance per area (F cm
−2). If we assume WT is on the order of the film thickness, we find a typical value of 32 nF cm−2 for a PbS NC-solid of thickness of 200 nm with a midgap state density of 1016 cm−3 eV−1.

The total capacitance of a diode is thus given by a combination of CD and CT where both capacitance contributions are comparable and on the order of 10–100 nF cm−2. This complicates the interpretation of measurement data, as most models are based on the assumption that only CD or CT is measured.
Qualitatively, we expect that the capacitance of a PbS NC-diode in the dark and open circuit condition, where only a low density of mobile charge carriers is available, will be dominated by the CD. CT will be comparatively low, reflecting the density of states in the middle of the band gap. Under increasing illumination or forward bias, more free charge carriers will be available. CD will first increase and then disappear as τrel becomes faster than the timescale of the measurement. CT will be significantly larger, as the quasi-Fermi energies for electrons and holes move towards the band edges, where the density of states increases.

To interpret capacitance–voltage (CV) measurements, many authors apply the Mott–Schottky model. In this model, it is assumed that the capacitance, C′, measured at a given frequency, ω, is dominated by the electrostatic capacitance of the depletion region and is given by:

(1.14)
where
NA is the doping density and Vbi the built-in voltage. Eqn (1.14) can be used to determine NA and Vbi by plotting C′−2vs. VD (Fig. 3b). If a straight line can be fitted to this so-called Mott–Schottky plot, the x-axis intercept is taken as Vbi and the slope is related to NA. Using this model, typical values for NA are 1–5 × 1016 cm−3 and Vbi is around 0.55 V, corresponding to a depletion width at 0 V of WD = 200–250 nm.

Perhaps due to its seeming simplicity, the Mott–Schottky model is at times incorrectly applied to NC-based solids. For example, one common mistake found in literature is the use of the absolute value of the capacitance  instead of the real part of the capacitance C′. In the forward region of a diode, large dc-currents pass through the diode and |C| will approach C′′, since C′′ ∝ ∂JD/∂VD. Plotting |C|−2 = 1/(C′2 + C′′2) versus VD leads to a plot with the typical Mott–Schottky shape, but the linear slope is simply a measure of the slope of the I–V curve and cannot be used to extract NA and Vbi.
Furthermore, it has not even been established that the Mott–Schottky analysis is applicable to NC-solids in general. To show this, it would be necessary to demonstrate that the measured capacitance is only weakly dependent on frequency and temperature in the region where the Mott–Schottky model is applied. If this is not the case, the capacitance is most probably dominated by the chemical capacitance of trap states instead of the electrostatic capacitance of the depletion region.
Unfortunately, confirming the validity of the Mott–Schottky analysis as applied in existing literature is difficult as very few articles report the raw capacitance spectrum prior to applying the inverse-square operation. In fact, the few studies, which report raw capacitance data, show features, such as negative capacitances and increased bias dependence for thinner films, which are not consistent with the Mott–Schottky model. We note that raw capacitance spectra could provide additional insights into the physics of NC-solids. For example, the appearance of negative capacitances – which are reported but not commented upon in ref. 31 and 50 – are in fact found in a large variety of electronic systems, including metal–semiconductor interfaces, Quantum-Well devices, and general low-mobility semiconductors.

The trapping and detrapping of charge carriers plays a central role in the device operation of diodes and solar cells, in particular in materials with a high density of trap states, such as NC-solids. The kinetics of charge carrier trapping is usually described in the context of the Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) model. In this model, the capture of electrons in a trap state located at an energy, ET, below the conduction band is described by a capture coefficient (βn) (see Fig. 5a). The emission rate of an electron from the trap state to the conduction band at energy EC is thus found to be:

(1.15)
where
NC is the density of states of the conduction band. Coupling to the valence band follows the same formalism.

The pre-exponential factor in eqn (1.15) is known as the attempt-to-escape frequency (or attempt-frequency) ν0 = βnNC. The temperature dependence of the ν0 can be obtained within the effective mass approximation as
ν0 = βnNC = ν00T2 = σTΓnT2
(1.16)
where
ν00 is the reduced attempt frequency in units of s−1 K−2, σT the trap capture cross section, and Γn a material dependent parameter for electrons given by:

Γn = 2 × 31/2(2π/h2)3/2k2m*n,
(1.17)
where
m*n is the effective mass of the electron. For bulk PbS, Γn = 3.256 × 1020 K−2 cm−2 s−1.

Because the quadratic dependence of the attempt frequency on temperature is weak compared to its exponential dependence (eqn (1.15)), this quadratic term is sometimes neglected. We have therefore evaluated how both cases are related to each other: First we generate datasets for different values of ET based on eqn (1.15) where the pre-exponential factor of the emission rate is given by ν00T2. We then fit these datasets with the same equation with a temperature-independent pre-exponential factor ν0. We find that by neglecting T2 dependence, the activation energy is consistently overestimated by 39 meV and that ν0 = 4.0 × 105 K2ν00, for any given activation energy.

Of particular interest in the optimization of NC-solids for solar cell performance is the reduction of trap states. Here, we summarize several approaches to quantify the energy and density of trap states in NC-solids from a variety of measurement data. These approaches invoke the models described above.


With the SRH model, it is possible to extract information about traps from the capacitance spectrum. As shown in Fig. 3a, a discrete trap state introduces a step in the capacitance spectrum at a frequency, which is given by the SRH model as

(1.18)
To determine the activation energy (ΔET) and the attempt-frequency (ν0) of a trap state, the capacitance spectrum is recorded versus temperature. This is known as Thermal Admittance Spectroscopy (TAS). The trap state density in a diode can be reconstructed from the real part of the capacitance C′ by:
(1.19)
where
EF,n,∞ is the bulk Fermi-energy with respect to the conduction band as defined in ref. 70. Using TAS, we have recently shown the presence of a discrete trap state in PbS:EDT NC-solids with a density of 1.8 × 1017 cm−3 and an activation energy of ET1 = 0.36 eV. The reduced attempt frequency for the T1 trap state was found to be ν00 = 1.2 × 105 s−1 K−2 which corresponds to ν0 = 4.8 × 1010 s−1 according to the relation given above.

While TAS is a powerful and simple tool to detect trap states, trap states can be invisible to this technique. A given trap state only contributes to the capacitance if the Fermi-energy crosses the trap level at some point in the device. If this is not the case, the trap state will be invisible to TAS and can only be detected using complementary techniques.

Also based on the SRH model, intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) measurements can be used to determine the number density of trap states. The frequency dependent photocurrent (eqn (1.3)) is used to reconstruct the trap state density:

(1.20)
IMPS measurements on PbS:EDT NC-solids by Erslev et al. indicate that the band edge of the material has an exponential trap distribution of only 15 meV, comparable with polycrystalline semiconductors and significantly lower than for amorphous silicon (see Fig. 6c). Additionally, they identify a discrete trap state with an activation energy of ET = 0.25 eV and an attempt frequency of ν0 = 5.0 × 105 s−1.

A more direct approach to detect the emission of trapped charge carriers (eqn (1.15)) is deep level transient spectroscopy (DLTS), which is based on a large signal transient measurement. In the original DLTS method, the diode is first excited by a voltage pulse, after which the transient of C′ is recorded. C′ is typically measured at 1 MHz using a capacitance bridge (e.g. Boonton 7200). This method is based on the assumptions that:

(1) At the chosen measurement frequency, the chemical capacitance of the trap states is negligible in comparison to the electrostatic capacitance.
(2) The dielectric relaxation time of free charge carriers τrel = εs/σ is much shorter than the inverse measurement frequency (i.e. free charge carriers can move instantaneously at the chosen measurement frequency).
We recently showed that trap states contribute significantly to the capacitance of PbS NC-diodes up to a frequency of at 20 kHz room temperature. The dielectric relaxation time of free carriers in PbS NC-solids can be estimated to be on the order of 1 μs, restricting the measurement frequency to ≪160 kHz. Since the trap response frequency and the dielectric relaxation frequency differ by less than an order of magnitude, we conclude that transient capacitance measurements cannot be interpreted within the standard theory of DLTS. Previous capacitance based DLTS measurements on NC-diodes were therefore not conclusive.
An alternative DLTS method for high-trap density low-mobility semiconductors is given by Q-DLTS, which is based on the measurement of current transients. The current transient resulting from the carrier emission of a single discrete trap is given by:
(1.21)
where the emission time constant is given by
τE = en−1.

In the presence of multiple trap states or a distribution of trap states, the measured current transient (JD(t)) will be the sum of the individual contributions and become multi-exponential. The measured current transients can be processed by the box-car correlation method, parameterized by two times t1 and t2, which are typically chosen with a fixed ratio t2/t1 = 2. The DLTS signal (ΔQ) is then given by
(1.22)
where
τQ is the detector time constant. Intuitively, one can think of ΔQ(τQ) as an approximation of the distribution of time-constants present in the decay of JD(t).

A typical trace for ΔQ(τQ) is shown in Fig. 6d, where the large peak indicates a single emission time constant. The number of traps can be determined from the peak value (ΔQmax):
(1.23)
We have applied Q-DLTS to PbS:EDT NC-diodes and have reported the measurement of a trap state with an activation energy of ΔET = 0.36 eV and density of ∼2 × 1017 cm−3 in agreement with TAS measurements.

A second technique based on transient current measurements is known as charge extraction by linearly increasing voltage (CELIV). As shown in Fig. 4a, a linear voltage ramp with speed dVD/dt = s is applied and the current is measured. A flat plateau of the current is interpreted as the displacement current of the electrostatic capacitance and is used to estimate the dielectric constant

(1.24)
CELIV was applied to PbS NC-diodes to find εs = 17 ± 2 and εs = 18, which is in line with effective medium theory. In the report by Johnston et al. CELIV is also used to determine the majority carrier (hole) mobility to 1.5 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1.

Transient open-circuit voltage measurements, also known as differential capacitance measurements, are another approach to determine the chemical capacitance of trap states. These techniques have been used extensively in the field of dye-sensitized solar cells, organic solar cells, and have recently been applied to PbS NC-solids.

To carry out these measurements, the diode is biased by constant illumination intensity (Iph) and a short laser pulse introduces a small perturbation. The open-circuit voltage is measured versus time Voc(t) as shown in Fig. 4c. For different Iph this trace is measured and three parameters are extracted: the open circuit voltage baseline (Voc,0), the differential open circuit voltage increase (ΔVoc), and the small signal recombination time (τrec).
In a second experiment, the differential charge Δq is measured, which is the charge that is transported by the laser pulse from the valence to the conduction band. The same laser pulse as in the transient open-circuit voltage measurement is used to excite the diode without background illumination (i.e. Iph = 0). The short circuit current (Fig. 4c) is measured vs. time Jsc(t), and Δq is found by the integration of the peak in Jsc(t).
The differential capacitance (CDC) is then calculated using Δq and the obtained pairs of values (ΔVoc, Voc,0):
It is typically assumed that the differential capacitance represents the chemical capacitance of the trap states and that one of the quasi-Fermi energies (e.g. EF,p) is fixed and independent of the illumination. In this case, the quasi-Fermi energy of the other charge carrier can be expressed in terms of the open-circuit voltage: EF,n = Voc,0 − EF,p and the density of states can now be obtained by using eqn (1.13):
(1.25)
This technique has been applied to PbS NC-diodes to measure the midgap trap density (Fig. 6e). Organically passivated PbS NC films were found to have a broad exponential distribution of trap states on the order of 1016 to 1017 cm−3 eV−1, some of which could be passivated with a hybrid approach using thiol-based and halide ligands.
For materials with a high dielectric constant, such as PbS NC-solids, the differential capacitance can be strongly influenced by the electrostatic capacitance of the depletion region, which introduces a baseline given by εs/(eWD)2. If the electrostatic capacitance is not subtracted from the differential capacitance, it will add a significant baseline to the obtained trap state density (e.g. 7.7 × 1016 cm−3 eV−1 for a 100 nm film PbS NC film) and present a lower detection limit for trap states.
In addition to measuring the midgap trap density, transient open-circuit measurements enable investigation of the recombination dynamics that limit the open circuit voltage and have been used to assess different passivation schemes for PbS-based heterojunction devices. However, a detailed analysis of the recombination dynamics and its relation to trap states has not yet been carried out for PbS NC-materials.

In summary, a number of standard electrical characterization techniques can be applied successfully to NC-solids. However, the applicability of different models to interpret the data must be verified. This is particularly challenging in NC-solids because distinct processes occur on comparable time scales with similar magnitudes.

For example, we show that NC-solids have both electrostatic and chemical capacitance of comparable magnitude. However, the Mott–Schottky model considers only the electrostatic capacitance while the SRH-based models take only the chemical capacitance into account. Thus, the regimes of the applicability of these models to NC-solids must be carefully considered.
To emphasise the importance of carefully selecting models of the device physics, we show for example that seemingly different current–voltage data in literature reports are in agreement, if the diode model used for thin-film photovoltaics is consistently applied.
Presentation of quasi-static, harmonic, or transient data prior to analysis can greatly assist the community in achieving a deeper understanding the strengths and limitations of existing models and permit the eventual development of more comprehensive models, specifically aimed at NC solids.

The authors acknowledge funding support from Nano-Tera. D.B. is supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation through a research grant and the National Centre Competence in Research Quantum Sciences and Technology.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014