 DOI: 10.1039/D1TC01284C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 7726-7733


Weihai
Sun
,

Mingjing
Zhang
,

Shibo
Wang
,

Fengxian
Cao
,

Jinjun
Zou
,

Yitian
Du
,

Zhang
Lan
 and 

Jihuai
Wu
*

Engineering Research Center of Environment-Friendly Functional Materials, Ministry of Education, Fujian Engineering Research Center of Green Functional Materials, Institute of Materials Physical Chemistry, Huaqiao University, Xiamen 361021, China. E-mail: jhwu@hqu.edu.cn

Received
19th March 2021
, Accepted 17th May 2021
First published on 18th May 2021
Spiro-OMeTAD has been widely employed as one of the most frequently used hole transport materials (HTMs) for high-performance perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Nevertheless, raw spiro-OMeTAD suffers from inferior electronic properties. To date, doping has been considered to be a promising strategy to address this dilemma. In this work, we successfully introduce K3[Fe(CN)6], a cheap and effective inorganic oxidant, into spiro-OMeTAD together with lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI) and 4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP) for highly efficient PSCs. The addition of the dopant K3[Fe(CN)6] could not only promote the oxidation of spiro-OMeTAD to generate a higher hole density, but also adjust its highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) to pursue an appropriate energy level alignment with the perovskite active layer, resulting in a high conductivity and hole extraction ability of spiro-OMeTAD. As a consequence, the PSC incorporated with K3[Fe(CN)6] achieves a champion efficiency of 20.84%, which is higher than that of the undoped device (18.09%). Furthermore, the K3[Fe(CN)6]-doped devices demonstrate an enhanced reproducibility and alleviated hysteresis. Our results indicate that K3[Fe(CN)6] is an efficient and facile dopant of spiro-OMeTAD for highly efficient and stable PSCs.

Organic–inorganic hybrid lead halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been regarded as the next-generation photovoltaic technology with features of high photovoltaic performance, low cost and facile solution-processability. Persistent efforts have been made for the realization of highly efficient and stable PSCs, including the rational design of the device structure, the precise control of perovskite film crystallization process, the deliberate manipulation of chemical composition for the perovskite and defect engineering both in the bulk and on the surface of the perovskite, which endows the certified world with record power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 25% now. In a typical structure of PSC, charge carrier (electron and hole) transport layers play a critical role in charge extraction, transport and the ultimate photovoltaic performance.

2,2′,7,7′-Tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenlamine)-9,9′-spiro-bifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) is the most frequently used hole transport material (HTM) in conventional n–i–p structure PSCs owing to its appropriate glass transition temperature, suitable highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy level and high solubility. Nonetheless, the undoped spiro-OMeTAD hole transport layer (HTL) with an unsatisfactory intrinsic nature of low conductivity and hole mobility could increase the series resistance of PSCs. The chemical p-type doping strategy has been proved to be a prerequisite for improving the charge transport ability of spiro-OMeTAD. Lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI) is reported as the most common additive of spiro-OMeTAD to enhance its conductivity and modulate the Fermi level toward a lower value. It is well known that Li-TFSI is hardly soluble in chlorobenzene (CB), which is extensively used as a common solvent for dissolving spiro-OMeTAD. In addressing this issue, Li-TFSI should be first dissolved in acetonitrile and later mixed into the CB solution containing spiro-OMeTAD. Meanwhile, another additive 4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP) is added together with Li-TFSI into the HTM solution in order to adjust the solubility of Li-TFSI and obtain a homogeneous distribution of Li-TFSI in HTLs. However, the Li-TFSI and tBP could not immediately oxidize spiro-OMeTAD without the existence of oxygen due to the fact that they are redox inactive species. The oxidation of spiro-OMeTAD needs to be carried out in an atmospheric environment for a long time, which may result in the poor reproducibility and instability of devices. To resolve this problem, plenty of p-type dopants such as benzoyl peroxide, coordination complexes and ionic liquid, have been employed into spiro-OMeTAD/Li-TFSI:tBP system to improve the conductivity of HTLs. Unfortunately, it is quite difficult to implement these chemical dopants into commercial PSCs due to their elaborate synthesis procedure, expensive price and high reactivity. Accordingly, searching for another economical, reliable and powerful p-type dopant for HTMs is indispensable for achieving highly efficient and stable PSCs.
Potassium ferricyanide (K3[Fe(CN)6]), as a type of potent oxidant, has been generally used as a redox active electrolyte in aqueous solution owing to its excellent reversible redox properties. In this work, we demonstrate the usage of K3[Fe(CN)6] as an efficient and cheap p-type dopant for spiro-OMeTAD in PSCs. The influence of the K3[Fe(CN)6] dopant on the spiro-OMeTAD HTL is systematically investigated by UV-vis absorption spectroscopy, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS), photoluminescence (PL), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and current–voltage (J–V) characteristics. The results indicate that the incorporation of K3[Fe(CN)6] into the HTM solution could not only promote the oxidation process of spiro-OMeTAD, but also lower its highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO). Eventually, a maximum PCE of 20.83% with a short-circuit current (JSC) of 23.03 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.16 V and a fill factor (FF) of 0.78 was obtained from the device based on the K3[Fe(CN)6] dopant, which is enhanced by 15% in contrast to that of the pristine device. Equally important is that the PSCs with K3[Fe(CN)6]-doped HTL showed a suppressed hysteresis and good reproducibility, which reveals that K3[Fe(CN)6] is a promising p-type dopant for spiro-OMeTAD in photovoltaic devices.

The fluorine-doped tin oxide-coated (FTO) glass substrates (15 Ω sq−1) were obtained from Wuhan Geao Chemical Technology Co., Ltd. Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), dimethyl formamide (DMF), chlorobenzene (CB), tBP, Li-TFSI, acetonitrile and potassium ferricyanide (K3[Fe(CN)6]) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Lead iodide (PbI2), cesium iodide (CsI) and lead bromide (PbBr2) were brought from TCI. Methylammonium bromide (MABr) and formamidinium iodide (FAI) were obtained from Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Corp. Spiro-OMeTAD was purchased from Luminescence Technology Corp. (Lumtec). In addition, other chemical reagents involved in our experiment were of analytical grade and were acquired from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd without further purification.


The PSCs with a typical structure (FTO/TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au) were fabricated, and for the cleaning procedure for FTO substrates, the deposition of TiO2 and perovskite layers refer to our previous literature. To prepare the standard HTM solution, 75.0 mg spiro-OMeTAD, 28.6 μL tBP and 17.5 μL Li-TFSI solution (520 mg Li-TFSI dissolved in 1 mL acetonitrile) were added together into 1 mL chlorobenzene. In particular, 0.6 mg, 0.8 mg and 1.0 mg K3[Fe(CN)6] were introduced into 1 mL standard HTM solution, respectively. All of the HTM solutions were stirred for about 12 hours. Prior to HTL deposition, the HTM solutions were filtered using 0.45 μm PTFE filters. The various HTM solutions were spin-coated onto the perovskite film at 4000 rpm for 30 s. Afterwards, the substrates were transferred to a desiccator for at least 19 h. Eventually, the gold electrode with a thickness of 80 nm was formed by thermal evaporation.


The cross-sectional images of scanning electron microscopy (SEM) were collected via an S-8000 field-emission instrument (Hitachi, Japan). Atomic force microscopy (AFM, Bruker Multimode-8J, German) was carried out to observe the morphologies of HTLs. The optical properties of HTM solutions were analyzed using a Shimadzu UV-2550 spectrophotometer. The Fourier-transform infrared spectra (FT-IR) were recorded on a Nicolet iN10 FT-IR spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA) using a Nicolet iZ10 module. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS, ESCALAB 250Xi, Thermo Scientific, USA) was used to investigate the energy level of HTLs, which is measured under an ultrahigh vacuum using HeI (hν = 21.22 eV) excitation source performed on a Thermo Fisher Scientific XPS spectrometer (ESCALAB 250Xi). The composition and valence of the elements in HTLs were probed using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, ESCALAB 250Xi, Thermo Scientific, USA). The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy, time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectroscopy, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristic measurements were the same as mentioned in ref. 27.


The molecular structures of spiro-OMeTAD and three dopants including Li-TFSI, tBP and K3[Fe(CN)6] are displayed in Fig. 1a. To explicate the doping mechanism of K3[Fe(CN)6], three kinds of HTM solutions were prepared including spiro-OMeTAD + K3[Fe(CN)6], spiro-OMeTAD + Li-TFSI + tBP and spiro-OMeTAD + K3[Fe(CN)6] + Li-TFSI + tBP, and the doping procedures are displayed in Fig. 1b. As shown in Fig. 1c, when Li-TFSI and tBP are introduced into the spiro-OMeTAD chlorobenzene solution, the solution is transparent and light yellowish-green. However, if the dopant is only K3[Fe(CN)6], precipitates are generated due to the insolubility of K3[Fe(CN)6] in solvents with low polarity, and the color of the solution is not changed. In particular, the precipitates disappear and the color becomes dark purple gradually after the Li-TFSI and tBP are further added, which suggests that Li-TFSI and tBP play a critical role in the accelerated oxidation of spiro-OMeTAD using K3[Fe(CN)6]. In order to further figure out which component could help K3[Fe(CN)6] dissolve in the spiro-OMeTAD solution containing Li-TFSI and tBP, we performed a series of K3[Fe(CN)6]-doped spiro-OMeTAD chlorobenzene solutions with acetonitrile and tBP (Fig. S1, ESI), respectively. Clearly, it is found that the K3[Fe(CN)6] is insoluble in spiro-OMeTAD solutions containing either acetonitrile or tBP, when Li-TFSI is further added, the insoluble substance vanishes, corroborating that adding Li-TFSI is beneficial for dissolving the K3[Fe(CN)6] in spiro-OMeTAD solution. Fig. 1d shows the UV-vis absorption spectroscopy of spiro-OMeTAD solutions doped with and without K3[Fe(CN)6] in the presence of both Li-TFSI and tBP. An obvious absorption band between 450 nm and 550 nm and a noticeable absorption peak at about 523 nm are observed, indicative of the generation of mono-cation radical spiro-OMeTAD, implying that the oxidation progress could be promoted by the inorganic dopant K3[Fe(CN)6]. In addition, the UV-vis spectrum of spiro-OMeTAD solution with only K3[Fe(CN)6] is displayed in Fig. S2 (ESI). We could not observe the distinguishable band near 520 nm in the sample of HTM solution with K3[Fe(CN)6]. Furthermore, we compared the UV-vis absorption spectra of spiro-OMeTAD solutions doped with and without K3[Fe(CN)6] in the presence of Li-TFSI and tBP, which were stored under the ambient atmosphere with different oxidation times. As depicted in Fig. S3 (ESI), the spiro-OMeTAD solution without K3[Fe(CN)6] exhibits a minor increase in the absorption band at 520 nm as the increment of oxidation time. As expected, a substantially improved absorbance intensity of the peak around 520 nm of K3[Fe(CN)6]-doped HTM solution is detected, revealing that more oxidized spiro-OMeTAD cations are formed with the increased oxidation time. The optical results hint that K3[Fe(CN)6] cannot oxidize spiro-OMeTAD alone, but could be dissolved in chlorobenzene solution and speed up the oxidation of spiro-OMeTAD with the assistance of Li-TFSI.

In order to validate the existence of K3[Fe(CN)6] within the spiro-OMeTAD film, Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectra are carried out (Fig. 2a). A series of conspicuous peaks at 1248 cm−1, 1466 cm−1, 1498 cm−1 and 1602 cm−1 can be observed in both samples, assigned to the methoxy phenyl of the spiro-OMeTAD molecule. It is noted that both of the films containing Li-TFSI possess an intensive peak at around 3600 cm−1 corresponding to the stretching vibrations of O–H for water molecules, due to the hygroscopicity of Li-TFSI. In particular, the characteristic water peak in the sample doped with only Li-TFSI is more significant than that of sample treated with Li-TFSI and K3[Fe(CN)6]. Additionally, there is no noticeable water peak could be detected in only the K3[Fe(CN)6]-doped HTL, meaning that adding K3[Fe(CN)6] into the spiro-OMeTAD may increase the resistance to humidity. Fig. 2b depicts a zoom-in of the FTIR spectra from 1800 cm−1 to 2200 cm−1, which shows a small band at about 2120 cm−1 associated with CN stretching vibration mode for both samples involved with K3[Fe(CN)6], revealing [Fe(CN)6]3− is successfully incorporated into HTLs. Interestingly, the emergence of two additional bands at approximately 2048 cm−1 and 2078 cm−1 are belonging to the vibrations of CN in [Fe(CN)6]4− and free cyanide ion, respectively. The presence of [Fe(CN)6]4− indicates the redox reaction between [Fe(CN)6]3− and spiro-OMeTAD may occur after the introduction of Li-TFSI. However, these peaks are absent in the sample including K3[Fe(CN)6] but not Li-TFSI, confirming an indispensable role that Li-TFSI plays in the oxidation of HTMs by K3[Fe(CN)6].
X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is another surface characterization technique for the investigation of the chemical composition of elements in the different HTLs. The survey spectra of the HTM doped with various additives are given in Fig. S4 (ESI). As shown in Fig. 2c, all samples have a strong N 1s peak near 440 eV assigned to the amine C–N in spiro-OMeTAD. Apparently, a non-negligible peak appears at around 398 eV which is ascribed to CN in the films modified with K3[Fe(CN)6], suggesting that cyanide ion exists in the latter two HTLs. Besides, the K 2p spectra (Fig. 2d) and Fe 2p spectra (Fig. 2e) prove the existence of K and Fe in the K3[Fe(CN)6]-doped spiro-OMeTAD HTLs. More importantly, for the two samples based on K3[Fe(CN)6], the binding energies of Fe 2p1/2 and Fe 2p3/2 shift to lower values after doping with Li-TFSI, implying that Fe2+ in [Fe(CN)6]4− is formed, which is in accordance with the results of FTIR. With regard to the above experimental results and combined with the oxidation procedure reported earlier, we propose a possible mechanism for the oxidation process of spiro-OMeTAD as follows:
Spiro-OMeTAD + [Fe(CN)6]3− + Li-TFSI → Spiro-OMeTAD+TFSI− + [Fe(CN)6]4− + Li+
In general, a high-quality and homogeneous HTL is essential for achieving highly efficient PSCs. We examined the morphology of spiro-OMeTAD films doped with and without K
3[Fe(CN)6] by atomic force microscopy (AFM), as presented in Fig. S5 (ESI). Clearly, the reference film (spiro-OMeTAD + Li-TFSI + tBP) exhibits a textured and wrinkled appearance. By contrast, after adding K3[Fe(CN)6] into the spiro-OMeTAD, a relative flat and smooth surface is observed, even though it is accompanied by a few bright spots which could be speculated to be due to the agglomeration of Li-TFSI. To get insight into the electric behaviors of HTLs, the Tafel curves of devices with a structure of FTO/HTLs with and without K3[Fe(CN)6]/Au are recorded and displayed in Fig. 3a. Compared with the undoped device, we have found a striking increase of the current density in the devices doped with K3[Fe(CN)6], indicative of the enhanced conductivity of the HTL ascribed to the generation of more oxidized spiro-OMeTAD cations. Furthermore, we performed the conductivity measurements using the four probe method for spiro-OMeTAD films with and without K3[Fe(CN)6] and the results are summarized in Table S1 (ESI). The conductivity of the pristine spiro-OMeTAD film without any additives is comparable to that of spiro-OMeTAD with only K3[Fe(CN)6], which proves again that the sole K3[Fe(CN)6] could not oxidize spiro-OMeTAD efficiently. Expectedly, with the incorporation of Li-TFSI and tBP into the spiro-OMeTAD solutions without and with K3[Fe(CN)6], the conductivities of corresponding HTLs are increased to 7.66 × 10−4 S cm−1 and further improved to 1.09 × 10−3 S cm−1, which is consistent with the results derived from the Tafel curves.

In addition, the ultraviolet photoelectron spectra (UPS) are used to scrutinize the electronic structures of HTLs. Fig. 3b and Fig. S6 (ESI) show the onset and cutoff regions of UPS for the K3[Fe(CN)6]-doped HTL and pristine HTL. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of K3[Fe(CN)6]-doped and undoped HTLs could be deduced to be −5.16 and −5.02 eV according to the formula of EHOMO = (Ecutoff − Eonset) − 21.22 eV. Combining the bandgap of the HTM derived from UV-visible Tauc plots (Fig. S7, ESI), we plotted the energy level diagram for the whole structure of the device (Fig. 3c). After incorporating the inorganic dopant, the HOMO level of the HTM is down-shifted to a more negative value, thus narrowing the band energy offset at the perovskite/HTL. The favorable energy level alignment would be beneficial to the extraction and collection of holes and ultimately responsible for the enhancement of VOC in the actual devices.
To estimate the effect of K3[Fe(CN)6] on photovoltaic performance, we fabricated n–i–p structured PSCs (Fig. 4a) consisting of FTO/compact TiO2/Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/HTM/Au. The cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of devices modified with and without K3[Fe(CN)6] are presented in Fig. 4b and Fig. S8 (ESI). It is apparent that each functional layer and boundaries can be distinguished easily. The thickness of the HTL and perovskite film are about 180 nm and 450 nm, respectively. There is no evident difference in HTLs between the two samples. Fig. 4c depicts the optimal current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of PSCs based on HTLs with different concentrations of K3[Fe(CN)6], and their related performance parameters are summarized in Table S2 (ESI). It can be seen that the reference device delivers a poor PCE of 18.09% with a VOC of 1.10 V, a JSC of 22.22 mA cm−2 and an FF of 0.74. As expected, the PCE of device is gradually improved by increasing the content of K3[Fe(CN)6] at first. The maximum PCE of 20.84% (VOC = 1.16 V, JSC = 23.03 mA cm−2 and FF = 0.78) for the PSC is obtained when the concentration is increased to 0.8 mg mL−1. It is worth noting that the improvement of PCE is mainly a result of the enhanced conductivity of HTLs and the suitable energy-level alignment between the absorber material and the HTM, as evidenced by the aforementioned results of film characterizations. However, a moderate decrease of FF in the device with 1.0 mg mL−1 dopant is noticed, probably due to the deep trap states induced by the excessive K3[Fe(CN)6] which would aggravate the charge recombination, thus deteriorating the final efficiency of device. Additionally, the hysteresis effects have been assessed by measuring the J–V curves of PSCs with both reverse and forward scans (Fig. 4d and Fig. S9, ESI), and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are given in Table S3 (ESI). Generally, the hysteresis index (HI) is used to gauge the degree of hysteresis, defined by the formula of HI = (PCEbackward − PCEforward)/PCEbackward. In comparison, the HI is reduced from 0.157 for the pristine device to 0.072 for the K3[Fe(CN)6]-doped device. Such a small hysteresis in the modified device may be stemmed from the decreased defect density in the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD interface. Previous literature reported that the K+ ions doped perovskite films exhibit a fewer defects at the interfaces between the charge transport layer and perovskite film, thereby improving the device performance. To verify this hypothesis, the XPS measurement was performed to investigate whether the K+ ions could exist at the surface of the perovskite film (Fig. S10, ESI). Clearly, no signal peak of K 2p could be detected in the sample where the perovskite film is firstly covered with K3[Fe(CN)6]-doped HTL and then washed by chlorobenzene. Nonetheless, it is still uncertain whether the K+ ions could migrate from the HTL to the surface of the perovskite film due to the detection limit of XPS. Furthermore, the steady state photo-current densities and the corresponding PCE output of the PSCs by the maximum power point tracking (MPPT) technique are shown in Fig. 4e and f. Obviously, the stabilized JSC and PCE of the reference device are 19.32 mA cm−2 and 17.77%, respectively, which are improved to 20.85 mA cm−2 and 19.81% when doping with K3[Fe(CN)6]. These results match well with those obtained from J–V characteristics, supporting the validity of our data. Moreover, we compared the photovoltaic performances of PSCs with and without K3[Fe(CN)6] which were measured without waiting for the overnight pre-oxidation, and the corresponding J–V plots and data are displayed in Fig. S11 and Table S4 (ESI). It is noted that PCEs for both of solar cells fabricated without an extra oxidation are lower than those of the device after being stored for another 19 hours in a desiccator, revealing that the pre-oxidation for the device is crucial to achieving the high-performance PSCs. Nevertheless, the K3[Fe(CN)6]-doped cell generates a relatively higher efficiency (16.80%) in comparison with the cell without K3[Fe(CN)6] (12.23%), indicative of the improvement for the PCE of the device by the addition of K3[Fe(CN)6] into HTLs.
To demonstrate the repeatability of our PSCs, we fabricated and tested 30 individual pristine devices and K3[Fe(CN)6]-treated devices. Fig. 5a and Fig. S12 (ESI) displays the statistics of device parameters. As can be seen, the devices with K3[Fe(CN)6] show higher average values of four parameters with narrow-range distribution compared to those of device without K3[Fe(CN)6], implying that a high quality of HTLs with excellent reproducibility could be fabricated by our simple doping preparation method. Accordingly, K3[Fe(CN)6] is a highly effective and cheap inorganic dopant of HTLs for enhancing the photovoltaic performance of PSCs.
The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements were performed to investigate the hole extraction ability of HTLs. As shown in Fig. 5b, a strong PL peak at 760 nm is observed, which corresponds to the characteristic emission peak of triple cation perovskite film. The intense PL intensity suggests that a homogenous perovskite film with a low density of trap states was prepared. After being covered with the HTL, a substantially decreased PL intensity for the sample based on an HTM without K3[Fe(CN)6], indicating photon-generated carrier could be extracted from the perovskite layer to the HTL. It is remarkable that the PL intensity is consistently dropping when the K3[Fe(CN)6] is added into the HTL, owing to the better hole extraction ability of HTL. Meanwhile, a similar trend has been found in the TRPL spectra (Fig. 5c), which is fitted by a bi-exponential function. The calculated results (Table S4, ESI) show the average PL decay lifetime of sample has reduced significantly from 52.06 ns to 17.45 ns by depositing the HTL onto the surface of the perovskite layer, and then to 8.21 ns for the sample based on HTL doping with K3[Fe(CN)6]. A shorter PL decay lifetime reveals that a faster carrier-extraction and hole transport efficiency, contributing remarkably to the increased VOC and JSC for the K3[Fe(CN)6]-doped device. The consequences of PL and TRPL illustrate that the K3[Fe(CN)6] can oxidize the HTM effectively and thus enhance the hole concentration in the HTL, leading to a higher hole transport capacity and hole extraction ability, which is in line with the results provided by UV, Tafel and UPS analysis.
Moreover, the carrier trap density values of perovskite films covered by spiro-OMeTAD without and with the inorganic dopant K3[Fe(CN)6] has been gauged using the space charge limited current (SCLC) strategy, which is conducted on a single charge device of FTO/PEDOT:PSS/triple cation perovskite/HTLs/Au. Fig. 5d and e show the dark curves of J–V for the devices, which can be divided into three parts including the ohmic, trap-filled limit (TFL) and Child regions from low voltage to high voltage, successively. Generally, the trap-filling limit voltage (VTFL) locates at the intersection of ohmic and TFL regions, and hence the defect density could be estimated by the following formula: Ntraps = 2εrε0VTFL/eL2, where εr is the relative permittivity of perovskite, Ntraps represents the trap density, e is an elementary charge, ε0 is the free space permittivity and L is the thickness of the perovskite layer. The values of VTFL are 0.608 V and 0.514 V for the reference and doping devices, respectively. Consequently, the extracted Ntraps decreases from 1.21 × 1015 cm−3 for the pristine device to 1.01 × 1015 cm−3 for the doped one, meaning that the surface of the perovskite layer treated with the K3[Fe(CN)6]-doped HTL exhibits a suppressed trap density, which is responsible for the high VOC and mitigated hysteresis discussed earlier.
Finally, the charge transfer and recombination behaviors in PSCs are investigated by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) under full light illumination with a bias voltage of 0.9 V. The simulated curves of EIS and equivalent circuit diagram are given in Fig. 5f. Typically, Nyquist plots consist of two arcs in two different frequency regions including high-frequency and low-frequency ranges. On the one hand, a small semicircle at high-frequency region is associated with charge-transfer resistance (Rct). On the other hand, an incomplete large semicircle is related to the charge recombination resistance (Rrec) which dominates at the low-frequency response. It is obvious that the cell based on a HTL with K3[Fe(CN)6] delivers a smaller Rct and bigger Rrec than the device without K3[Fe(CN)6], hinting at the more effective charge extraction and collection as well as the reduced carrier recombination, which is in accordance with PL plots described above. More importantly, the long-term stability of unencapsulated PSCs based on HTLs with different additives was recorded at an ambient environment with a relative humidity of 30–40%. As depicted in Fig. S13 (ESI), the device with the K3[Fe(CN)6]-doped HTL maintained 65.6% of its initial PCE after 16 days of storage, whereas the efficiency of PSC without K3[Fe(CN)6] declined to only 16.4% of the original value. The enhanced stability of PSCs based on a K3[Fe(CN)6]-doped HTL presumably profit from the more moisture-resistant spiro-OMeTAD film doped with K3[Fe(CN)6] and the reduced trap states in the device modified with an inorganic dopant, as proved by the analysis of FTIR and SCLC measurements mentioned earlier.

In conclusion, we revealed a novel type of inorganic p-type dopant of K3[Fe(CN)6] for HTM to improve the repeatability and performance of planar PSCs. The validity of oxidizing properties of K3[Fe(CN)6] for spiro-OMeTAD in the presence of Li-TFSI was proved by the UV-vis absorption spectra, FTIR and XPS measurements. Moreover, PL, TRPL, Tafel, UPS and EIS analysis confirmed the enhanced electrical conductivity of HTL, the reduced trap density and charge recombination loss, and appropriate energy-level alignment in the solar cells with K3[Fe(CN)6]-doped HTM. Consequently, the optimal PSC based on HTLs doped with K3[Fe(CN)6] generated an efficiency of 20.83% with a VOC of 1.16 V and an FF of 0.78, higher than that of reference device (18.09%). Besides, the devices employing K3[Fe(CN)6]-doped HTLs displayed excellent repeatability and mitigated hysteresis, revealing that K3[Fe(CN)6] is an ideal dopant for oxidizing spiro-OMeTAD HTLs in PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors acknowledge the financial support of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61804058, U1705256, 21771066, 51972123) and the Promotion Program for Young and Middle-aged Teacher in Science and Technology Research of Huaqiao University (ZQN-706).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc01284c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021