 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM30726J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9161-9165

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Haotong
Wei
,

Haizhu
Sun
,

Hao
Zhang
,

Weili
Yu
,

Fei
Zhai
,

Zhanxi
Fan
,

Wenjing
Tian
 and 

Bai
Yang
*

State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials, College of Chemistry, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, People's Republic of China. E-mail: byangchem@jlu.edu.cn.; Fax: +86-431-85193423; Tel: +86-431-85168478

College of Chemistry, Northeast Normal University, Changchun 130024, People's Republic of China

Received
7th February 2012
, Accepted 8th March 2012
First published on 9th March 2012
On the basis of the surface modification of CdHgTe nanocrystals (NCs), a bilayer photovoltaic device composed of poly(p-phenylene-vinylene) (PPV) and CdHgTe NC heterojunction is prepared. The energy bands bend to the vacuum level through tuning the dipole moment of the CdHgTe NCs at the heterojunction interface and 0.3 eV energy band shifting is detected by the ultraviolet photoelectron spectrometer (UPS) measurement. As a result, open-circuit voltage (Voc) of the photodiode can reach 1.4 V under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).

Organic–inorganic hybrid heterojunction (HHJ) photovoltaic cells have been paid much attention as a source of new, clean, and reproducible energy due to the high charge carrier mobility of inorganic semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs) and the low cost of the polymer materials. Lots of high quality NCs have been prepared and used for solar cell application due to the unique and tunable photoelectric properties. For example, the P3HT-CdSe bulk heterojunction was first prepared and achieved a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1.7% by Alivisatos and coworkers, which was a satisfactory result, though one that is still lower than that of the polymer solar cells. As we know, the organic molecules covered on the surface of NCs often hinder the charge separation due to obstruction of the electron motion due to the lack of the free electron and high resistance. Normally, the ligand exchange is used to solve this problem. However, whether the long alkyl chain molecules covered on the NCs surface have some different effects on the PCE is still unknown. The PCE is determined by the open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF), where the Voc is an important parameter. However, it is always below 1 V and hence limits the improvement of the PCE. So, how to enhance the Voc is a significant question to obtain high efficiency devices. In organic solar cells, Voc is found to be linearly dependent on the difference of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of the donor and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of the acceptor. Therefore, a new donor polymer with low HOMO level is designed to increase the energy gap difference in order to improve the Voc. Another way to increase the Voc is to fabricate the tandem solar cell with two kinds of polymers covering different absorbing wavelengths. Though the process is very complex, the Voc has been successfully improved to 1.58 V. In fact, Voc is also affected by the interface properties of the devices. Especially in the HHJ solar cells, the interface heterogeneity limits the charge separation which often results in a low Voc. McGehee's group found that the interface modification of the P3HT-TiO2 heterojunction could effectively manipulate the Voc. Many works are focused on the interfacial modification with organic dyes or other small molecules, such as ruthenium dye (N719), organic dye (D102), and substituted benzoic acids etc. However, most of these molecules are designed to modify the electron-rich oxide, such as TiO2 and ZnO, and there are rarely reports about the enhanced Voc in polymer/NC solar cells. In this paper, through the electrostatic assembling process, the CdHgTe NCs were covered with small organic molecules to improve the energy band structure of the HHJ interface. In order to achieve the high Voc, we focus on the bilayer solar cell because the contact interface is clear which simplifies the system. Though the bulk heterojunction is more effective than the bilayer planar heterojunction (PHJ) structure in promoting the charge separation due to the large interfacial contact area as well as the charge separation points, the bilayer PHJ is more favorable with respect to the charge carrier transport process for the unobstructed path with a minimized recombination possibility, which would contribute to the high Voc of the organic–inorganic heterojunction.


Tellurium powder (200 mesh, 99.8%), R,R0-dichloro-p-xylene (98%), tetrahydrothiophene (99%), dodecyltrimethylammonium bromide (DTAB) and 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) were all purchased from Aldrich Chemical Corp. CdCl2 (>99%) and HgCl2 (>99%) were commercially available. All of the solvents were analytical grade and used as received.


The CdHgTe NCs with a Cd/Hg ratio of 3:1 were prepared according to our previous method. Freshly prepared NaHTe solution was added to a N2-saturated aqueous solution of CdCl2 and HgCl2 at pH 9 in the presence of MPA as a stabilizing agent. The ratio of metal ions:MPA:HTe− was 1:2.9:0.5 and the concentration of metal ion was 3.75 × 10−3 M. The solution was then placed in an oven at 40 °C for 30 min. The NCs were further purified by centrifugating the mixture solution of the NCs and isopropanol with a volume ratio of 1:1, then the NCs were dried in vacuum and redissolved in deionized water with a concentration of 33 mg mL−1.


In order to improve the interface properties of the HHJ and manipulate the energy band structure, we modified the surface of the NCs with DTAB through the electrostatic assembly which was similar to our previous method. Briefly, 33 mg mL−1 NCs was added to the 30 mg mL−1 DTAB chloroform solution with the same volume, then the NCs were transferred from water to chloroform after a few minutes. Finally, the NC chloroform solution was diluted to 15 mg mL−1, which could be used for device preparation.


The synthesis method of the PPV precursor could be found elsewhere. Briefly, 0.4 M NaOH 10 mL was added to 10 mL of 0.4 M p-xylylenebis(tetrahydrothiophenium chloride) methanol solution. This solution was cooled to 0–5 °C in an ice bath. The reaction proceeded for 1 h, and was then terminated by the addition of 0.4 M HCl aqueous solution to neutralize the reaction solution. The PPV precursor aqueous solution was dialyzed against deionized water for one week.


UV-vis spectra were acquired on a Shimadzu 3600 UV-vis-NIR spectrophotometer. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were recorded on a JEOL-2010 electron microscope operating at 200 kV. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) micrographs were taken with a JEOL FESEM 6700F electron microscope with primary electron energy of 3 kV. The samples were sputtered with a thin layer of Pt prior to imaging. The energy band values were measured in an integrated ultrahigh vacuum system equipped with multitechnique surface analysis system (VG ESCALAB MK II spectrometer) ultraviolet photoelectron spectrometer (UPS). The UPS were measured with the He(I) (21.2 eV) line using a negative bias voltage applied to the samples in order to shift the spectra from the spectrometer threshold. The film thicknesses were measured on an Ambios Tech. XP-2 profilometer. The current–voltage (I–V) characterization of PV devices in the dark and under white-light illumination from an SCIENCETECH 500-W solar simulator (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) were measured on computer-controlled Keithley 2400 Source Meter measurement system in a glove box filled with nitrogen. All the other measurements were performed under ambient atmosphere at room temperature.


The bilayer photovoltaic device with structure shown in Fig. 1(a) has the design indium tin oxide (ITO)/poly(3,4-ethylene dioxylene thiophene):poly(styrene sulfonic acid) (PEDOT:PSS, 45 nm)/PPV (30 nm)/CdHgTe (70 nm)/TiOx (∼10 nm)/Al. One of the most important problems for the bilayer devices is the post-fabrication diffusion as the first layer is easily dissolved by the second layer. In our system, however, PPV has a strong adhesive force to the PEDOT:PSS due to the in situ polymerization, which avoids this problem. The corresponding SEM image is given in Fig. 1(b). As shown in the SEM image, no post-fabrication diffusion is found, and there is a clear interface between the PPV layer and CdHgTe NCs layer. After the PPV precursor was spin coated on the ITO to form a homogenous film, it was followed by a process of in situ polymerization during the heating. Therefore, the PPV film has a strong adhesive force to the ITO-coated glass and is resistant to common organic solvents. In order to modify the interface of the PHJ, CdHgTe NCs are capped with DTAB before use and the assembly process is shown in Fig. 1(c). Before capping, CdHgTe NCs were stabilized by the negatively charged MPA at pH = 9. Through the electrostatic force interaction, positively charged DTAB could be easily assembled onto the CdHgTe NC surface. At the same time, the dipole moment was changed. Due to the long alkyl chain of DTAB, CdHgTe NCs were transferred from water to chloroform. Considering the bandgap shifting, we selected DTAB as the coating agent, which ensured the dipole moment was directed from inside to outside due to the electrostatic interaction. The dipole moment change makes the electron transfer from inside to outside easier and verifies the energy structure. The TEM image of the CdHgTe/DTAB NCs is shown in Fig. 2(a), which presents a uniform size distribution around 3 nm as displayed in Fig. 2(b). The energy gaps of the PPV and CdHgTe calculated by the absorption are 2.3 eV and 1.3 eV, respectively, which are presented in Fig. 2(c) and the absorption of the CdHgTe NCs is also a good complement to that of PPV. The HOMO value of the PPV (−5.1 eV) is calculated from the UPS measurements by subtracting the secondary electron onset position of the He(I) UPS spectra from the excitation energy (21.2 eV) shown in Fig. 3 and similarly the valence band (VB) of CdHgTe (−5.3 eV) could be detected from UPS measurements presented in Fig. 4(b) and 4(c), respectively. Therefore, the LUMO level of the PPV is −2.8 eV and the conduction band (CB) of the NCs is −4.0 eV. In order to improve the single PHJ, PEDOT:PSS (Clevios PVP. Al 4083, H. C. Starck Inc) was used as electron blocking layer to solve the leakage current, and TiOx was used as hole blocking layer to increase the electrical conductivity and protect the active layer from being destroyed by Al. The energy band structure described in Fig. 4(a) illustrates that the energy band alignment of the donor–acceptor pair presents a staggered structure, and electrons and holes can effectively separate at the PHJ interface.

The presence of dipoles on the molecules’ surface, which depends on the electron withdrawing and donating nature of the atoms across the molecules structure, often determines the work function, the minimum energy required for an electron to escape into vacuum from the Fermi level of the material. The change of work function due to dipole moment is often in the form of band bending. The electrical potential difference between the surface and the electrically neutral semiconductor bulk, often called the built-in potential, is expressed in the band diagram by bending the CB and VB. After the modification of NCs with DTAB, the verified dipole moment results in the change of the energy band structure at the PHJ interface and the energy band bending is illustrated in Fig. 4(d) which is measured by the UPS data in Fig. 4(b) and Fig. 4(c). The apparent energy band shift of the VB of CdHgTe is found as −5.3 eV, while for CdHgTe/DTAB it is −5.0 eV. The 0.3 eV shift to the vacuum level at the PHJ makes the hole transfer from CdHgTe to PPV easier and the available Voc is also increased to the maximum.
Devices were fabricated by the following processes: 1. ITO-coated glasses were cleaned in an ultrasonic bath consequently in chloroform, acetone, isopropyl, then rinsed by deionized water before drying in N2 flow, followed by oxygen plasma treatment for 5 min; 2. spin-coating of the PEDOT:PSS layer (45 nm) at 3000 rpm for 60 s followed by baking at 150 °C for 10 min; 3. spin-coating of the PPV precursor layer at 4000 rpm for 60 s, and annealing at 300 °C for 60 min in a glove box filled with nitrogen (<1 ppm H2O and <1 ppm O2) to convert the precursor to the PPV and increase the adhesive force; 4. spin-coating of the CdHgTe NCs layer (70 nm) at 1000 rpm for 60 s; 5. spin-coating of the TiOx (prepared according to the literature) layer (10 nm) at 3000 rpm for 60 s, then annealing at 200 °C for 10 min in a glove box to promote NC growth, and remove the redundant solvent as well as some of the small molecules covering the NC surface; 6. deposition of the Al layer (100 nm) by thermal evaporation. The performance of the devices is Jsc = 0.2 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.4 V, FF = 0.2, PCE = 0.06% according to Fig. 5(a). The grey circuit line is the J–V curve of the photovoltaic device measured under the AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) while the black circuit line is measured in the dark. The high Voc is brought about by the effective energy band alignment of the PHJ and the surface modification of the NCs which improve the dipole moment of the interface and the transferability of the electron. However, the Voc of the PHJ device without the DTAB modification is only 0.8 V (black and solid line). The bottleneck of the PHJ is the low charge carrier mobility of the polymer materials. Therefore, controlling the thickness and balancing the light absorption and the transfer distance of the charge carrier in PPV film is a key factor. As Fig. 5(b) describes, the Voc of the devices is stably higher than 1 V as the thickness of the PPV film changes. When the PPV film thickness is ∼30 nm, the Voc reaches a maximum of 1.46 V. If the film thickness of the PPV is more or less than 30 nm, the Voc is only 1.2 V on average. When the film thickness of the PPV exceeds 30 nm, the charge carrier mobility limit of the organic material results in the increased possibility of the recombination of the charge carrier, while when the film thickness of the PPV is less than 30 nm, there may exist the leak current at the interface, which reduces the shunt resistance and Voc. The essential reason for the low Jsc is the obstruction of the charge separation for the small interface contact area, and the large series resistance resulting from the low charge carrier mobility. The Jsc can be enhanced as the thickness of the NCs is increased due to the high charge carrier mobility of the inorganic materials. Since the ligands covered on the surface of NCs would hinder the charge separation, the ligands between the NCs should be discarded. The heating process causes the growth and aggregation of the NCs (Fig. 6), during which ligands between the NCs are removed and small NCs begin to form large NCs and the roughness increases from 0.624 to 1.813. Another reason for the low Jsc can be assigned to the aggregation of the NCs on the PPV film. As the sizes of the NCs grow, the intervals between the NCs become bigger, which results in a small contact area and high leak current. However, the close contact NCs make the charge transport to the interface fast and effective. Therefore the NC film could be thicker to absorb more light, which favors the Jsc, though the thicker NCs would decrease the Voc.

In conclusion, we propose a simple and effective method to increase the Voc of the polymer/NC hybrid solar cell, which is important to the increase of the PCE. Through the modification of the HHJ interface the performance of the bilayer photovoltaic devices is effectively enhanced and a high Voc of 1.4 V is achieved. Though the Jsc is low, the polymer/NC HHJ still has a potential application in solar cells due to its greater energy absorption and high electron transport properties.


This project was supported by the National Basic Research Development Program of China (2012CB933802), the NSFC (50973039, 20921003, 91123031 and 20804008), and granted special grade of China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (201003534).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012