 DOI: 10.1039/C9TC02526J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 9270-9277


Shaoxi
Wang
*,

Bingjuan
Zhang
,

Dan
Feng
,

Zhenhua
Lin
*,

Jincheng
Zhang
,

Yue
Hao
,

Xiaoya
Fan
 and 

Jingjing
Chang
*

School of Microelectronics, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, 710072, China. E-mail: shxwang@nwpu.edu.cn

State Key Discipline Laboratory of Wide Band Gap Semiconductor Technology, Shaanxi Joint Key Laboratory of Graphene, Advanced Interdisciplinary Research Center for Flexible Electronics, School of Microelectronics, Xidian University, 2 South Taibai Road, Xi’an, 710071, China. E-mail: zhlin@xidian.edu.cn; jjingchang@xidian.edu.cn

Advanced Interdisciplinary Research Center for Flexible Electronics, Xidian University, 2 South Taibai Road, Xi’an, 710071, China

Received
13th May 2019
, Accepted 26th June 2019
First published on 28th June 2019
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have become an impressive research focus due to their unique properties, where their interface transport layers are important for an enhancement in efficiency and stability. In this study, we demonstrate that a lithium (Li) and cobalt (Co) co-doped NiOx hole transport layer can greatly enhance the device performance of inverted planar heterojunction PSCs. Compared to the pristine NiOx films and Li doped NiOx HTLs, co-doping with a certain amount of Li and Co further increased the electrical conductivity and hole mobility of the NiOx film. Consequently, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the PSCs greatly improved from 17.4% to 20.1% when they were co-doped with 10% Li and 5% Co. Moreover, the short-circuit current density (Jsc) increased from 22.7 mA cm−2 to 23.8 mA cm−2, the open-circuit voltage (Voc) was enhanced from 1.05 V to 1.09 V, and the fill factor (FF) was enhanced from 0.73 to 0.78 for the PSCs. These results demonstrate that the co-doping of Li and Co can be an effective strategy improving the performance of PSCs.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted increasing attention owing to their advantages of simple manufacturing process, low-cost and rapidly increasing efficiency. So far, the highest published device power conversion efficiency (PCE) has already achieved up to 24.2%. Nowadays, mesoporous structure and planar heterojunction are acceptable by researchers, where, the inverted planar heterojunction structure, with the basic structure of ITO/HTL/perovskite/ETL/electrode, has the characteristics of low processing temperature, simple manufacturing process and low hysteresis. The hole transport layer (HTL), which is located in the cathode and optical absorption layer of perovskite solar cells, is used to generate a great amount of photogenerated carriers in inverted planar PSCs. Hence, it has the dual function of transporting holes and blocking electrons. HTL materials mainly include organic small-molecule semiconductors, such as 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) and its derivatives, organic polymers, such as P3HT and PTAA, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) and its derivatives, and inorganic semiconductors, such as CuSCN and NiO. However, compared to inorganic p-type semiconductors, these organic materials have lower hole carrier mobilities and worse chemical stability. Therefore, increasing researchers use inorganic p-type semiconductors as the HTL. In contrast to other inorganic semiconductors, NiO has a wider band gap, higher transmittance and better chemical stability. Besides, in the case of energy level, NiO is more suitable to the perovskite layer, which is unhindered for hole collection and electron blocking. Meanwhile, perovskite layers with NiO also show better stability compared with PEDOT:PSS, PTAA and p-type doped spiro-OMeTAD HTLs.

However, further improvement of NiO-based devices is limited due to the low intrinsic electrical conductivity of pristine NiO. To solve this problem, several approaches, such as metal ion doping and surface treatment, have been developed to improve the film quality of NiO. Among them, metal ion doping has been proven to be a powerful strategy to tune the electrical properties of semiconductor films. For example, to improve the film conductivity of NiO, several types of metal dopants, such as Cu, Co, Cs, and Li, have been used. Among them, Li has been regarded as a promising dopant for metal oxide and has been used as an NiO HTL, which achieved a good performance and stability. Meanwhile, co-doping with lithium and metal ions, such as Cu and Mg, has been proven to have a synergistic effect on the properties of NiO and corresponding PSC performance.
In this study, we first investigated NiOx co-doped with Li and Co as an effective hole transport layer. It was found that the hole mobility could be effectively improved by Li and Co co-doping, resulting in enhanced charge transfer and extraction. Meanwhile, Li and Co enhanced the perovskite film crystallinity and film quality. Finally, significant improvements in the open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and PCE of PSCs were observed. Moreover, the device stability was also improved. Most importantly, the doped films were prepared via a simple solution-based method, which is highly reproducible and cheap, and hence, is compatible with large area production.

All materials, including nickel nitrate (Ni(NO3)2·6H2O), methylammonium iodide (MAI, 99.9%, Dyesol), formamidinium iodide (FAI, 99.9%, Dyesol), lead(II) iodide (PbI2, 99.999%, Alfa), lead(II) chloride (PbCl2, 99.999%, Alfa), tris[2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tert-butylpyridine] cobalt(III) tris[bis-(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide] (Dyesol), LiNO3 (Sigma), FK 209 Co(II) TFSI salt, acetonitrile, phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM, 98%, nano-c), chlorobenzenes (99.8%, Sigma), isopropanol (99.5%, Sigma), and bathocuproine (96%, Alfa), were used as received and without further purification. Li–NiOx and Li:Co–NiOx were prepared by adding different molar ratios of LiNO3 and FK 209 Co(II) TFSI salt to an NiOx precursor solution.


The modified device was fabricated according to a previously reported method. Inverted planar PSCs were fabricated on pre-patterned ITO glass substrates (around 2 × 2.5 cm2 in size, 10 Ω per square). The patterned ITO glass substrates were sequentially ultrasonically cleaned with detergent, de-ionized water, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol at 50 °C for 20 min. Then, the ITO substrates were dried using a nitrogen gun and treated in a UV ozone oven for 15 min before a thin layer of NiOx or doped NiOx was spin-coated on them at 3000 rpm for 42 s and annealed at 250 °C for 40 min according to our previously reported results. Subsequently, the substrates were transferred to a nitrogen-filled glovebox. The perovskite layer was prepared via a two-step method, as we reported previously. 1.36 M PbI2 and 0.24 M PbCl2 were dissolved in 1 mL DMF, and stirred for 2 h at 75 °C. 70 mg MAI and 30 mg FAI were dissolved in 1 mL IPA with an additional 10 μL DMF. Subsequently, a PbX2 precursor solution was spin-coated at 3000 rpm for 45 s, and then the solution of MAI and FAI was spin-coated on top of the PbX2 substrates at 3000 rpm for 45 s. The samples were annealed at 100 °C for 10 min on a hotplate. Next, a layer of PCBM (20 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene) was spin-coated on the top of the perovskite layer at 2000 rpm for 40 s. Subsequently, a thin layer of BCP (0.5 mg mL−1 in IPA) was spin-coated on the top of the PCBM layer. The devices were finished by thermally evaporated 100 nm Ag under high vacuum (≤5 × 10−4 Pa) through a shadow mask. All the devices had an area of 7.5 mm2. Photovoltaic performances were measured using a Keithley 2400 source meter under simulated sunlight from an XES-70S1 solar simulator, matching the AM 1.5G standard with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The system was calibrated against an NREL-certified silicon reference solar cell. The incident photo-to-current conversion efficiencies (IPCEs) of the PSCs were measured using a solar cell quantum efficiency measurement system (SCS10-X150, Zolix Instrument Co. Ltd). All measurements for the solar cells were performed under ambient atmosphere at room temperature without encapsulation.


The morphology of the perovskite layers was determined using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (JSM-7800F). X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed on a Bruker D8 Advance XRD. UV-visible absorption spectra were recorded using an UV-visible spectrophotometer (PerkinElmer Lambda 950). Time-resolved photoluminescence (TR-PL) spectra were measured using an EDINBURGH INSTRUMENT FLS 980 with a 450 nm picosecond pulsed laser (EPL-450). Transient photocurrent (TPC) measurement was performed with a system excited by a 532 nm (1000 Hz, 3.2 ns) pulse laser. Transient photovoltage (TPV) measurement was performed with the same system excited by a 405 nm (50 Hz, 20 ms) pulse laser. A digital oscilloscope (Tektronix, D4105) was used to record the photocurrent or photovoltage decay process with a sampling resistor of 50 Ω or 1 MΩ, respectively.


The device configuration of the inverted PSC was ITO/HTLs/perovskite/PC61BM/BCP/Ag, as schematically displayed in Fig. 1a. The cross-sectional SEM image in Fig. 1b shows the device structure of glass/ITO/NiOx/MA1−yFAyPbI3−xClx/PCBM/BCP/Ag from the bottom to the top. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurements were performed to determine the electronic structure and energy levels of NiOx and doped NiOx (Fig. 1c). It is clear that all the NiOx films exhibited a p-type nature and a valence band maximum (VBM) value of around 0.56 eV. For the secondary cutoff region, the Fermi level (EF) was around 4.84 eV for pristine NiOx, while it slightly decreased to 4.78 eV for Li-doped NiOx. After Li and Co co-doping, the EF increased to 5.27 eV. The increased energy level of Li and Co co-doped NiOx could enable more favorable band alignment between NiOx and perovskites. The detail energy levels of the electronic materials are shown in Fig. 1d. It can be seen that the energy levels of NiOx are close to that of MA1−yFAyPbI3−xClx, and the holes can be easily transported/extracted from perovskite to NiOx, and collected by the ITO electrode. The optimized doping amount of Li ion dopant was around 10 mol% in our preliminary experiment and reported study. In this study, the Co dopant amount was optimized from 1.0 mol% to 10 mol%. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed to analyze the chemical states of NiOx and doped NiOx. As shown in Fig. S1 (ESI), the Li peak and Co peak can be clearly observed in the Li and Co co-doped NiOx, and Co is present in the trivalent state in the doped film. For the Ni 2p3/2 peak, the mixed state of divalent and trivalent Ni ions can be observed in the films, where the peak at 854.3 eV is assigned to Ni2+ in cubic NiOx rock salt, and the peak at 856 eV is ascribed to Ni2+ vacancy-induced Ni3+ ions. The ratio of Ni3+/Ni2+ was found to slightly increase, which may lead to an increase in the hole conductivity.

The X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra of the pristine NiOx and doped NiOx powder are shown in Fig. S2 (ESI). It can be observed that all the NiOx samples have the same main diffraction peaks, which include three diffraction situated at 36.9°, 43.0°, and 62.6°, corresponding to the (111), (200), and (220) planes of the NiOx films. The shape and location of the diffraction peaks did not change since light doping cannot distort the crystal structure of NiOx. However, after doping, the NiOx films became more ordered compared to the pristine NiOx, as indicated by the increased diffraction intensity. In order to investigate the morphology of the NiOx interlayer before and after the doping process, which greatly decides whether the perovskite films are smooth and have less holes and eventually decides the effect of the HTL to transfer holes and block electrons, atomic force microscopy (AFM) was performed, and the AFM images of the different NiOx films are exhibited in Fig. 2. The NiOx nanocrystal films have a smooth surface, with their grains gathered densely together. The root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of NiOx, Li-doped NiOx, and Li:Co co-doped NiOx are 2.45 nm, 2.72 nm, and 3.04 nm, respectively. Thus, it can be concluded from the XRD and AFM results that the difference in doped NiOx can result in a change in surface energy and crystallinity of the NiOx HTL, which may affect the crystal growth and morphology of the perovskite film on NiOx HTLs.
The electrical properties of NiOx are important for charge extraction and collection as well as the final PSC performance. Hence, the electrical properties of NiOx were investigated via electric diode measurements. The electrical current of the doped NiOx significantly increased, which indicates that the metal ion doping obviously improved the conductivity of the NiOx films (Fig. S3, ESI). Meanwhile, the space charge-limited current (SCLC) method was used to further check the hole charge carrier mobilities of NiOx and the doped NiOx. The Mott–Gurney equation:J = 9ε0εrμV2/8L3, was applied to calculate the hole mobility by fitting the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the hole-only devices, where J is the current density, μ is the hole mobility, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, εr is the dielectric permittivity of NiOx, L is the thickness of the pristine NiOx or doped NiOx films and V is the applied voltage in the devices. The hole mobilities calculated from the J–V fitting are around 1.23 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1, 2.04 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1, and 2.28 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 for NiOx, Li-doped NiOx, and Li:Co co-doped NiOx, respectively (Fig. 2d). Obviously, after doping, the hole mobility increased significantly.
The perovskite film quality is important for the final performance of PSCs, while the morphology of perovskite films is the main indicator. Thus, to understand the effect of the underlayer pristine NiOx and doped NiOx on the morphology and grain size of the perovskite film, we analyzed the field-emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the perovskite films fabricated via a two-step spin-coating method. In Fig. 3(a–c), the perovskite films exhibit smooth and dense polycrystalline grains. The perovskite grain size is homogeneous with that in the pristine or doped NiOx hole-transport layers. Meanwhile, compared to the pristine NiOx-based perovskite film, the doped NiOx-based perovskite films exhibited a slightly larger grain size. The large size of the crystalline perovskite grain shows that the perovskite film morphology can be influenced by NiOx with Li and Co co-doping. The crystallinity of the perovskite films on different HTLs was investigated via the XRD technique. As shown in Fig. 3(d), the obvious XRD diffraction peaks observed at around 14.1°, 28.3°, and 31.7° correspond to the (110), (220), and (310) reflection planes of the perovskite tetragonal phase, respectively, as previously reported. The perovskite films deposited on doped NiOx exhibited slightly enhanced film crystallinity, which was confirmed by the SEM results. The perovskite film absorption on pristine NiOx and doped NiOx was determined using UV-Vis absorption spectroscopy (Fig. 3e). From UV to the near infrared wavelength range, the light absorption for all the thin films was strong. Nevertheless, the doped NiOx-based perovskite films exhibited a slightly higher absorption intensity compared to the films deposited on pristine NiOx due to the increased film crystallinity, which is in good agreement with the XRD results.
To study the Li and Co co-doping effect on the charge transfer and extraction efficiency at the NiOx/perovskite interface, steady-state photoluminescence (PL) measurements were performed. The PL measurements were used to study the extraction efficiency of photogenerated carriers from the perovskite layer to the NiOx layer. In Fig. 4, it can be obviously observed that the PL quenching of MA1−yFAyPbIxCl3−x changed with Li and/or Co doping in the NiOx HTLs. Moreover, the PL intensity decreased with 10% Li doping and more obviously with Li and Co co-doping. This indicates that the element doping can decrease the recombination of photogenerated carriers and accelerate the charge transfer rate from the photoactive layer to transport layer. The time-resolved PL spectra exhibited a similar phenomenon with the steady-state PL spectra (Fig. 4b). The curves were fitted by a bi-exponential function and listed in Table S2 in the ESI. In general, a fast decay lifetime is related to non-radiative recombination by defects, and a slow decay lifetime is related to the radiative recombination from bulk perovskite. As shown in the table, compared to perovskite/NiOx with an average lifetime of 67.46 ns, the average PL lifetime of perovskite/Li–NiOx (57.96 ns) and perovskite/Li:Co–NiOx (41.71 ns) was significantly reduced. The enhanced charge transfer and extraction efficiency based on perovskite/Li:Co–NiOx is related to the enhanced film conductivity, and improved interface contact.

Fig. 5 shows the J–V curves of the NiOx-based perovskite solar cells with different doping sources under an AM 1.5G solar simulator (100 mW cm−2). The photovoltaic parameters of the devices with different doping conditions, including Jsc, Voc, FF and PCE, are listed in Table 1 and Table S1 (ESI). It can be clearly seen from Table 1 that the PCE of the devices with pristine NiOx is 17.4% with a Voc of 1.05 V, Jsc of 22.7 mA cm−2 and FF of 0.73. 10% Li-doped NiOx improved the performance of the PSCs, resulting in PCE = 18.8%, Jsc = 23.2 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.07 V, and FF = 0.76. It should be noted that the device performance was significantly enhanced using co-doped NiOx as the HTL. For instance, 10% Li, and 5% Co co-doped NiOx obviously increased the PCE to 20.1% with a Jsc of 23.8 mA cm−2, Voc of 1.09 V, and FF of 0.78. The NiOx co-doped with 10% Li and 5% Co-based device achieved the best PCE, which was as high as 20.8% (Voc: 1.10 V, Jsc: 23.8 mA cm−2, and FF: 0.79). However, with a further increase in the Co doping ratio, the performance of the devices declined (Table S1, ESI). Compared to that of the pristine NiOx-based devices, the Voc, Jsc, and FF of the Li and Co co-doped NiOx-based devices all showed a significant enhancement. The increased Voc value (from 1.05 V to 1.09 V) should be ascribed to the increased valence band, which could increase the built-in field potential and induce a more favorable energy alignment between the perovskite and NiOx ETL, as discussed for the UPS spectra, and hence, the voltage loss was reduced. The increased Jsc and FF may be ascribed to the enhanced electrical properties of the Li-doped or Li and Co co-doped NiOx films and improved perovskite crystal quality, which is beneficial for effective hole extraction/transport and reduced charge recombination at the perovskite/NiOx interface. Fig. 5b exhibits the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the PSC devices with different conditions. Although there was a broad spectral response for the PSCs with or without doping from the visible to near-infrared (300–800 nm) region, the absorption strength showed an enhancement after doping, and particularly had a great increase with the concentration of 10% Li and 5% Co co-dopant. The Jsc values integrated from the EQE spectra are 22.4 mA cm−2, 22.7 mA cm−2, and 23.1 mA cm−2 (Fig. S4, ESI), respectively, which are in good agreement with the results extracted from the J–V curves (within 3% error).
Condition

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)
Pristine
22.7 ± 0.8
1.05 ± 0.02
0.73 ± 0.03
17.4 ± 0.7
10% Li
23.2 ± 0.6
1.07 ± 0.02
0.76 ± 0.02
18.8 ± 0.5
10% Li + 5% Co
23.8 ± 0.5
1.09 ± 0.01
0.78 ± 0.02
20.1 ± 0.3
The hysteresis behaviors from the J–V measurements with different scan directions are shown in Fig. 5c and Fig. S5 (ESI). As shown in the figure, there was negligible hysteresis for the PSCs with pristine or doped NiOx HTLs, which demonstrates that NiOx is a suitable and stable HTL for PSCs, and the doping source does not have an impact on the hysteresis behavior of the devices. As shown in Fig. 5d, the steady-state output of the current density and PCE values at maximum power point were measured to prove the device reliability. At a voltage bias of 0.93 V, the steady-state PCE for the device based on the Li:Co co-doped NiOx HTL was measured to be around 20.1%, which is close to the value measured from the J–V curves, indicating the J–V scan reliability.
To gain deeper insight into the performance enhancement, TPC and TPV measurements were performed to investigate the charge transfer and charge recombination behaviors (Fig. 6). Since transient photocurrent measurements can provide the charge transfer lifetime under short-circuit condition, the charge transfer lifetime was 1.28 μs, 0.87 μs, and 0.67 μs for the pristine NiOx, Li–NiOx and Li and Co co-doped NiOx, respectively. The shorter carrier lifetime of the doped NiOx-based devices indicates the efficient hole transfer/collection from the perovskite layer to NiOx. The transient photovoltage can provide information on the charge recombination lifetime under open-circuit conditions. As shown in Fig. 6b, the fitted recombination lifetime was 3.63 ms, 4.31 ms and 5.24 ms for the pristine NiOx, Li–NiOx and Li and Co co-doped NiOx, respectively. Hence, the enhanced charge recombination lifetime for the perovskite devices based on doped NiOx suggests the reduced charge carrier recombination in the devices.
The device stability of the different conditions was evaluated by measuring the unencapsulated device under ambient conditions with a relative humidity (RH%) of 30–40% without excluding the room light. Fig. 7 shows the recorded device performance as a function of storage time for 30 days. Compared to pristine NiOx-based devices, the stability of the devices based on the doped NiOx was significantly improved. For example, after 30 days, the pristine NiOx-based devices only retained 87% of their initial PCE value. However, the devices based on Li:Co co-doped NiOx still retained 94% of their initial values during the same period. This improved long-term air stability can be attributed to the better NiOx/perovskite interface contact, enhanced film crystallinity and quality of the perovskite.

In summary, we studied the influence of Li and Co co-doped NiOx HTLs on the photovoltaic performance of PSCs. It was found that at a proper doping ratio of Li and Co, the NiOx films exhibited improved film conductivity, hole mobilities, and better energy level alignment with the perovskite films. Finally, enhanced charge transfer/extraction and suppressed recombination were achieved based on the doped NiOx HTLs. The device performance was significantly enhanced from 17.4% to 20.1% with a simultaneously enhanced Jsc, Voc, and FF. Meanwhile, the device stability was also improved. This study suggests that Li and Co co-doped NiOx can be an efficient way to improve the photovoltaic performance and stability of PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially support by National Natural Science Foundation of China (61604119, 61704131, and 61804111), and Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship Program by CAST (2016QNRC001).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc02526j
‡ These authors contribute equally to this study.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019