 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA00457A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 10825-10834


He
Zhao
,

Shirong
Wang
*,

Mengna
Sun
,

Fei
Zhang
,

Xianggao
Li
* and 

Yin
Xiao


School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300354, China. E-mail: wangshirong@tju.edu.cn; lixianggao@tju.edu.cn

Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), Tianjin 300072, China

Received
15th January 2018
, Accepted 9th May 2018
First published on 14th May 2018
The insufficient stability of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has considerably restrained their development and applications. Herein, we demonstrate an approach to prepare PSCs with high stability and efficiency by adding n-octyltrimethylammonium bromide (OTAB) to the precursor solution. In the resultant films, the charge trap density exhibits a significant reduction, and the long-term stability shows a remarkable enhancement. Upon adding 0.5 mg mL−1 OTAB, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs reaches 18.32% under simulated AM 1.5G solar illumination, which represents an increase of 16% compared to the pristine devices. Moreover, the OTAB-modified devices demonstrate excellent performances both in high-temperature (70 °C, 40 ± 5% relative humidity) and high-humidity (25 °C, 75 ± 5% relative humidity) environments. These results indicate a very promising approach to improve the comprehensive performance of PSCs.

Organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) mostly based on methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) have attracted widespread attention in the field of photovoltaic generation in recent years. Owing to the strong light absorption in a wide range of infrared-visible spectral regions, high carrier mobility, and low exciton recombination rate of the perovskite materials, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has rapidly increased, exceeding 22% in 2016. Although the PCE of PSCs is already close to that of silicon solar cells, the critical problem of low ambient stability severely impedes their industrial production and commercial application. Thus, various methods have been explored to extend the service life of PSCs, including device encapsulation, new perovskite material development, crystallization control, and interface modification. However, packaging the solar cells is not a fundamental solution to the problem of low ambient stability. In addition, the efficiencies of new solar cells such as all-inorganic perovskite solar cells and 2D or 3D/2D perovskite bilayer heterojunction solar cells are generally lower than 15% despite the improved stability. Thus, additive modification remains a better strategy for optimizing the device performance.

Huang et al. classified the additives into several categories based on their functionalities: polymer, fullerene, inorganic acids, organic halide salts, etc. Some additives can passivate surface defects, some can manipulate the film morphology, whereas others can form protective layers. All the above approaches are propitious to improve the device efficiency and long-term stability. Moreover, by simulating the degradation process of MAPbI3, Azpiroz et al. have found that MAI-terminated surfaces are easily subjected to solvation due to the nucleophilic substitution of dangling iodide ions on the surface by H2O and that the PbI2-terminated surfaces with vacancy defects are also prone to degradation reactions. Therefore, fabricating a hydrophobic layer and reducing the surface defects seem to be crucial to stabilize the perovskite films, which was verified by a large number of studies. For instance, Tripathi et al. have reported a neutral surfactant polymer poly[9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamino)-propyl-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] (PFN-P1) as modifier to improve the performance of solar cells by passivating the trap states and forming a hydrophobic layer, where the PCE was increased from 12.3% to 13.2%, and the encapsulated devices only slightly decayed after 6 months in ambient air. Phenylethylammonium iodide (PEAI) as an organic halide salt was applied to self-assemble at the lattice surface and grain boundaries of perovskite grains. Consequently, a high-stability FAPbI3 solar cell with PCE of 17.7% was developed. Moreover, choline chloride, PC61BM, PMMA,etc. have been doped into perovskite films to improve the device performance. However, it is still a huge challenge to select an additive with combined functions such as film morphology optimization, defect passivation, hydrophobicity improvement, and perovskite decomposition inhibition to build high-efficiency solar cells, especially MAPbI3-based solar cells, with long-term stabilities in temperature and humidity conditions. To date, this kind of PSC with over 18% PCE and excellent hygrothermal stability has rarely been reported.
Herein, we report the use of a quaternary ammonium halide additive n-octyltrimethylammonium bromide (OTAB) to enhance the stability and performance of PSCs. As a cationic surface-active agent, the OTAB molecule has a relatively long alkyl chain, and it can bind with MAPbI3 on grain surfaces to form a hydrophobic film, which can resist water molecule invasion and hinder the decomposition products of MAPbI3 from diffusing to the environment. Compared to conventional amine halide treatments, this strategy can also modulate the film morphology, efficiently passivate charged defects, and significantly improve the PSC performance. As a result, the PCE of OTAB-modified devices is significantly improved to 18.32%, whereas that of the non-additive device is only 15.80%. Furthermore, the OTAB-modified devices without encapsulation demonstrate both excellent performance in high-temperature environments (70 °C, 40 ± 5% relative humidity) and high-humidity environments (25 °C, 75 ± 5% relative humidity).

All chemicals were used as received without any other refinement unless otherwise specified. FTO-coated glass (<15 Ω per square) was purchased from Nippon Sheet Glass Corporation. Titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) was obtained from Energy Chemical Corporation. Methylamine solution (40% in methanol), HI (57 wt% in water), and n-butanol were purchased from Aladdin. PbI2 and spiro-OMeTAD were received from Luminescence Technology Corporation. Dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO), N,N′-dimethylformamide (DMF), and n-octyltrimethylammonium bromide (OTAB) were acquired from J & K Chemical Corporation. CH3NH3I (MAI) was prepared according to a reported procedure.


The single fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrates were sequentially washed by detergent, toluene, acetone, and ethanol. After the substrates were completely dried in air, a compact layer of TiO2 (c-TiO2) was deposited on the cleaned FTO by spin-coating a precursor solution of titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) in n-butanol (v:v = 1:16) at 2000 rpm for 30 s and calcining at 500 °C for 30 min in air. A mesoporous TiO2 layer was coated on the c-TiO2/FTO substrate by spin-coating a 30 nm TiO2 particle paste diluted in ethanol (w:w = 1:6) at 4500 rpm for 20 s and then sintering at 500 °C for 30 min. The perovskite precursor solution was prepared from 1.55 M Pb2+ with different concentrations of OTAB in a mixture of DMF and DMSO (v:v = 9:1), and the perovskite film was obtained by depositing the precursor solution by a two-step spin-coating process at 1000 and 6000 rpm for 10 and 30 s, respectively. During the second step, 20 s before the end of the procedure, 100 μL chlorobenzene (CB) was dripped onto the substrate. Thereafter, the substrate was heated at 100 °C for 1 h on a hot plate. After cooling to room temperature, the hole transport material (HTM) was spin-coated on the top of perovskite film at 4000 rpm for 20 s. The HTM solution was prepared by dissolving 72.3 mg spiro-OMeTAD in 1 mL chlorobenzene with the addition of 17.5 μL of 520 mg mL−1 lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl)imide acetonitrile solution and 29 μL 4-tert-butylpyridine. Finally, under high vacuum, 80 nm of gold was deposited on the HTM layer by thermal evaporation using a shadow mask to pattern the electrodes.


The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) of the perovskite films was carried out on a PHI 5000 VersaProbe XPS system using monochromatized Al Kα X-ray photons. The surface morphologies of the perovskite films and the cross-section images were acquired on a scanning electron microscope (SEM, SUPRA 55VP, ZEISS). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) data was recorded with an X-ray diffractometer (Mini Flex 600, Rigaku) in the 2θ = 10–60° range with Cu Kα1 radiation. Ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) absorption spectra were obtained with a Thermo Evolution 300 UV/Visible spectrometer. Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra were measured by exciting the perovskite films deposited on the FTO substrate at 485 nm on Edinburgh Instruments (FLS 980, UK). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed with an electrochemical workstation (Vertex. One. EIS, Ivium) with alternating current amplitude of 10 mV. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the perovskite solar cells were measured with a Keithley 2400 source meter using a solar simulator (Solarbeam-2, Crowntech) at 100 mW cm−2 illumination (AM 1.5G), and a mask of 0.06 cm2 was applied to all devices. The incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) was recorded by the IPCE testing system (E0201a, Chinese Academy of Science).


The structure of the perovskite solar cells based on FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au is shown in Fig. 1a. The perovskite layers were fabricated by spin-coating of precursor solutions containing equivalent amounts of MAI and PbI2 with OTAB as an additive in different concentrations of 0, 0.1 mg mL−1, 0.5 mg mL−1, 1 mg mL−1 and 3 mg mL−1 on to mesoporous TiO2. As a quaternary ammonium cation, OTAB cannot form 3D perovskite crystals owing to its excessive ionic radius. However, via coulombic interactions, the additive could graft onto the surface of MAPbI3 crystals to form a protective layer (Fig. 1c), which was validated with X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy of the perovskite film (Fig. 2a). Compared to the results for the pristine film, the I 3d3/2 peak of the OTAB-modified sample shifted from 629.6 eV to 628.8 eV, and the I 3d5/2 peak shifted from 618.2 eV to 617.4 eV. This peak shifting was caused by the increase in the electron cloud density of I− ions interacting with OTA+ ions, which indicated the chemisorption of OTA+ onto the crystal surface. (The radius of the alkyl group in OTA+ is larger than that of H in CH3NH3+, which tends to weaken the interaction between the quaternary ammonium cation and the I− ion, leading to a higher electron cloud density of the interacting I− ions.) Moreover, the N 1s peak shifting (Fig. S1) and the significant increase in the number of C atoms on the OTAB-modified film surface (Table S1) also indicated an increase in OTA+ ions on the grain surface.


Fig. 2b shows the X-ray diffraction spectra of the perovskite films prepared with different amounts of OTAB. All XRD patterns show main diffraction peaks at ∼14.8°, 28.9°, and 32.3° assigned to the (110), (220), and (310) crystal planes of the perovskite structure, respectively, indicating that the addition of OTAB does not destroy the intrinsic crystal structure of the pristine material as the additive only replaces the methyl amine cation on the surface of the MAPbI3 crystal. However, when the OTAB content is higher than 1 mg mL−1, the peak intensities decrease rapidly, which is mainly due to the dispersive action of OTAB. As a type of surface-active agent, alkyl amine cations with long chains can bind to the uncoordinated I atoms on the surface of the crystal to reduce the surface energy. Therefore, the MAPbI3 grain size and crystallinity can be decreased by adding a sufficient amount of OTAB, which results in the reduction of the diffraction peak.
To further investigate whether the OTAB-modified crystal films are compact and uniform, the MAPbI3 thin film was analyzed by SEM (Fig. 3a–e). Some pinholes could be clearly observed in the perovskite thin films without OTAB, whereas the films prepared with 0.1–0.5 mg mL−1 OTAB solution showed compact arrangements, increased coverage, and more uniform crystallites than the pristine thin film. A similar effect has been observed after the addition of other low surface energy additive molecules to MAPbI3 precursor solutions, which promotes the crystallization and surface coverage of perovskite films. However, when the additive concentration is over 1 mg mL−1, the perovskite grain size decreases and the film becomes less compact, which is consistent with the results of XRD spectra mentioned above. These phenomena are mainly due to the presence of OTAB, which can influence the film-forming process.
According to the classical nucleation theory, the film formation is a four-step process; it begins with the formation of stable crystal nuclei, which in turn develop into an island structure, a network structure, and a continuous layer. In the first step, both the homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation rates of MAPbI3 exponentially decrease with the ΔGHom and ΔGHet nucleation barriers, respectively. ΔGHom can be further expressed by
(1)
where
rk is the critical nucleus radius, n is the number of critical nuclei per unit volume, ΔGV is the change in free energy between the nuclei and solution per unit volume, and γSL is the particle surface energy. Moreover, the heterogeneous nucleation barrier ΔGHet is given by

ΔGHet = ΔGHomf(θ) < ΔGHom
(2)
where
θ is the contact angle and 0 < f(θ) < 1. Thus, low particle surface energy relates to high nucleation rate, which means that the OTAB additive can increase the nucleating rate and prevent the formation of coarse grains. Nevertheless, in the ensuing course of crystal growth, the low particle surface energy may have contributed to the fabrication of a high-quality film with a dense structure. It can be supposed that the grain size increases with the interfacial energy in the network structure development stage. In addition, based on the classical film-formation theory, secondary nucleation processes generated in the channels or pinholes are promoted by reducing the interfacial energy and then, a continuous film can be achieved. Thus, an appropriate amount of OTAB additive is conducive to depositing high-quality perovskite films.


Fig. 3f shows the UV-Vis absorption spectra of the MAPbI3 thin films deposited on the FTO glass. As can be seen, with the increase in OTAB content, the UV-Vis absorption intensity first increases and then decreases. A maximum value can be attained at a concentration of 0.5 mg mL−1 of the precursor solution, probably due to the improvement in the surface coverage and crystal morphology revealed in Fig. 3c.
The hydrophobicity of perovskite was confirmed by contact angle tests between the MAPbI3 film and water, which revealed the stability of the film in humid air. As shown in Fig. S2, the contact angle (θ) of the control sample was 47.6° and after adding 0.1 mg mL−1 OTAB, the value of θ increased to 54.8°. However, with the additions of 0.5 mg mL−1, 1 mg mL−1, and 3 mg mL−1 OTAB, the contact angles of the samples were all approximately 58°. On one hand, this result demonstrated that using OTAB can remarkably increase the hydrophobicity; on the other hand, it illustrated the similar distribution of 0.5–3 mg mL−1 OTAB in perovskite thin films.
To validate the influence of OTAB on environment stability, XRD measurements were conducted as well. In Fig. 4, the ratio of the peak intensities located at 13.4° and corresponding to the (001) face of PbI2 and the (110) face of the perovskite represented the extent of MAPbI3 decomposition. After aging for 120 days at 70 °C and in 40 ± 5% relative humidity, the peak intensity ratio of the non-additive film increased to 20.4%, whereas that of the additive-modified films barely increased. Also, in high-humidity environments, the OTAB-modified films showed excellent stability after aging for 120 days. We found that the non-additive film completely degraded into PbI2. No diffraction peaks of perovskite could be observed, and the color of the film turned to yellow (Fig. S3). In contrast, the peak intensity ratio of the OTAB-modified films only increased to 12.3%. These results indicated that OTAB can significantly improve the stability, which is conducive to prolonging cell lifetime.
The MAPbI3 films with and without OTAB were placed in a nearly 100% relative humidity environment; then, the evolution of the perovskite microstructure with the increasing aging time was tracked by SEM, as shown in Fig. 5. We observed that decomposition preferentially started from the pinholes and the boundaries between the small and larger grains. This was mainly due to the secondary grain growth of the perovskite films, which can widen the boundary gaps. However, upon adding OTAB, hydrophobic molecules covered the MAPbI3 grain surface and significantly delayed crystal degradation. Moreover, because of the high uniformity and compactness of the additive-modified films, there were only few spaces for H2O molecules to invade in the perovskite films. Even after aging for 240 min, the undecomposed sections of the OTAB-modified film presented relatively higher quality than those of the control films (Fig. 5f and l).
To study the surface and interfacial defects of the perovskite film, steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) were measured, as shown in Fig. 6a and b. Compared to the intensity of the control film, upon adding 0.5 mg mL−1 OTAB, the intensity of the steady-state PL spectrum of the perovskite thin film displayed significant enhancement, which suggested fewer surface defects and higher crystallinity of the perovskite thin film. The TRPL decay measurements of the MAPbI3 films with and without OTAB on FTO glass were performed to assess the trap state density in the perovskite layer, and the results are shown in Fig. 6b. The curves could be fitted with the bi-exponential decay function:
Y = A1exp(−t/τ1) + A2exp(−t/τ2) + y0
(3)
here,
A1 and A2 are the relative amplitudes, and τ1 and τ2 are the lifetimes of the fast and slow recombinations, respectively. In perovskite films, the slow recombination primarily due to trap-assisted recombination causes most of the photoluminescence decay. The film with OTAB showed a longer fluorescence lifetime (τ = τ1 + τ2) of τ = 183.9 ns, whereas the film without OTAB only exhibited a lifetime of τ = 81.5 ns. This result was ascribed to the protective and passivation effects of OTAB. In accordance with previous theory and experiments, the atom vacancies at the grain surface such as I− and MA+ vacancies are the main sources of defect states. The OTAB molecules are expected to adsorb onto the perovskite surface, thus inhibiting the loss of MA+ and I− by evaporation during the thermal annealing process. Moreover, the OTA+ cation can passivate the MA+ vacancies by occupying lattice sites to recompense for the MA+ loss on the film surface, leading to lower defect density and superior electronic quality of the OTAB-modified films.

The space-charge limited current (SCLC) under different bias voltages could be used to quantitatively assess the defect density of MAPbI3 films. For this measurement, one charge injection contact and one injection-blocking contact are required. Therefore, we fabricated sandwich-structured devices with MAPbI3 films placed between indium tin oxide (ITO) and Au to obtain the J–V curves (Fig. 6c and d). In the low voltage range, the current density linearly increased with the bias voltage, indicating an ohmic response. Then, the curves presented a sharp highly non-linear rise, indicating the trap-filled limit (TFL). The trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL) can be defined as the voltage between the ohmic contact and the trap-filled region. Consequently the defect density is calculated by the following equation:
(4)
here,
ε0 is the dielectric constant of vacuum permittivity, ε is the relative dielectric constant of MAPbI3, e is the elementary charge, and L is the thickness of the MAPbI3 film. The values of VTFL for the perovskite films without and with OTAB were 0.622 V and 0.181 V, and they were assigned to the electron trap densities of 2.52 × 1016 cm−3 and 7.33 × 1015 cm−3, respectively. The defect density of the OTAB-modified film was much lower than that of the contrast film, which corresponded to the steady-state PL and TRPL.

Fig. S4 exhibits the cross-sectional SEM image of a perovskite solar cell with 0.5 mg mL−1 OTAB. Fig. 7a shows the EIS measurement in the dark to assess the ability of preventing charge recombination in devices. The recombination resistance (Rrec) in the simplified equivalent circuit (inset of Fig. 7a) reflects the charge recombination at the TiO2/MAPbI3 and MAPbI3/HTM interfaces. Under 0.8 V bias voltage, the Rrec values of PSCs without and with OTAB are 1002 Ω and 2335 Ω, respectively. A higher value of Rrec implies a lower recombination rate due to the high quality of the MAPbI3 films, indicating the higher open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) in PSCs with OTAB. Furthermore, the EIS characterization under 1 sunlight illumination is also performed to understand the effective charge-transfer dynamics (Fig. 7b). Because of the larger photocurrent compared to the dark current, the recombination resistance becomes unapparent. Under this circumstance, the charge transfer resistance (Rct) of the OTAB-modified device is lower than that of the non-modified device, whereas the series resistance (Rs) is slightly higher than that of the pristine one, which can contribute to the improvement in the MAPbI3 film morphology and the insulation of the OTAB molecular layer. Other EIS tests under different bias voltages are shown in Fig. S5 and S6.
In accordance with the optimization experiments, the devices with and without 0.5 mg mL−1 additive were fabricated to obtain J–V curves under AM 1.5G illumination with a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. To control device, the short-circuit current density (Jsc) was 21.53 mA cm−2, the open-circuit voltage (Voc) was 0.97 V, the fill factor (FF) was 0.75 and thus, the PCE was 15.80%. By comparison, the OTAB-modified device exhibited remarkable enhancements of 22.50 mA cm−2, 1.04 V, and 0.78 for Jsc, Voc, and FF, respectively. Hence, the cells with 0.5 mg mL−1 additive treatment presented an excellent PCE of 18.32%. We attributed the performance enhancement to the improvement in carrier transport and reduction in defect density in the OTAB-modified perovskite layer. Moreover, upon modification, the hysteresis effect of PSCs can be significantly reduced owing to the passivation effect of the OTAB molecules.
Sample
Direction

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)
MAPbI3 without OTAB
Reverse
21.53
0.97
0.75
15.80
Forward
20.94
0.96
0.71
14.29
MAPbI3 with OTAB
Reverse
22.50
1.04
0.78
18.32
Forward
22.34
1.04
0.75
17.43
As presented in Fig. S7, the stabilized current density and PCE were monitored at the maximum power point. The OTAB-modified devices displayed not only a stable power output for 1300 s, but also a fast photovoltaic response to light. The IPCE spectra of the two devices are illustrated in Fig. 7d. By integrating the IPCE spectra, the Jsc values of cells with and without OTAB were found to be 21.91 mA cm−2 and 20.69 mA cm−2, respectively, which were close to the Jsc values obtained from the J–V curves. The statistics of the performance parameter distribution were also tested by characterizing approximately 8 cells for each OTAB concentration. As shown in Fig. 8, the cells with 0.5 mg mL−1 additive exhibited excellent reproducibility, as indicated by the narrow photovoltaic parameter distribution.
The long-term stability of PSCs, which is dependant on temperature and humidity, is a challenging issue. Therefore, we executed stability tests on PSCs without encapsulation under high temperature and high humidity environments (Fig. 9 and S8, respectively). After aging at 70 °C and 40 ± 5% relative humidity for 60 days, the devices with 0.5 mg mL−1 OTAB still maintained 92% of the initial PCE value, whereas the PCE of the control devices decreased to 26% under the same conditions. After aging at 25 °C and 75 ± 5% relative humidity for 30 days, the PCE of the OTAB-modified devices decreased to 18% of the initial value. However, there was almost no photoelectric response for the non-additive devices. This significant improvement in the OTAB-modified devices was mainly ascribed to the hydrophobicity enhancement and defect passivation at the MAPbI3 film surface. Additionally, the OTAB protective layer may hinder the decomposition products of MAPbI3, such as MAI and HI, from diffusing to the environment, which can regenerate the perovskite phase by a reaction with PbI2 in the film. A similar phenomenon has been observed while fabricating long-chain molecular layers on perovskite films.

In summary, we have demonstrated a new quaternary ammonium halide additive (OTAB) on MAPbI3 films to enhance the device performance and the environmental stability of PSC. Upon adding 0.5 mg mL−1 OTAB, a prominent increase in the PCE of the devices from 15.80% to 18.32% was achieved by improving the morphology of the MAPbI3 thin films and reducing the defect density of the perovskite surface. Moreover, the thermal and humidity stabilities of the OTAB-modified devices were significantly better than those of the control devices. These results may provide a simple and efficient method to enhance the performance and stability of PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This study was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2016YFB0401303), the National Nature Science Foundation of China (21676188), the Key Projects in National Science Foundation of Tianjin (16JCZDJC37100).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta00457a
‡ Current address: Chemistry and Nanoscience Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado 80401, USA.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018