 DOI: 10.1039/C1JM13474D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18308-18316

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Mirko
Seri
*,

Emiliano
Rossi
,

Tommaso
Carofiglio
,

Sabrina
Antonello
,

Giampiero
Ruani
,

Michele
Maggini
* and 

Michele
Muccini
*

Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Istituto per lo Studio dei Materiali Nanostrutturati, CNR-ISMN, Via P. Gobetti 101, 40129, Bologna, Italy. E-mail: m.seri@bo.ismn.cnr.it, m.muccini@bo.ismn.cnr.it; Fax: +39 051 6398540; Tel: +39 051 6398521m.muccini@bo.ismn.cnr.it

University of Padova, Department of Chemical Sciences, Via Marzolo 1, 35131, Padova, Italy. E-mail: michele.maggini@unipd.it; Fax: +39 049 8275829; Tel: +39 049 8275662

Received
21st July 2011
, Accepted 14th September 2011
First published on 14th October 2011
We report on the implementation of a modified methanofullerene PCBtB ([6,6]-phenyl-C61 butyric acid tert-butylester) as electron acceptor for solution-processable bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells based on P3HT (poly(3-hexylthiophene)). The results demonstrate how a small modification of the steric hindrance of the benchmark molecule PCBM, leaving the electronic structure unchanged, significantly influences the main properties of the BHJ active layer. In particular, we investigate the effect of the replacement of the PC61BM methyl end-group with a tert-butyl substituent on the optical properties, OPV parameters, nanoscale morphology, D:A phase segregation, and charge carrier mobility in bulk-heterojunction with P3HT. We find that the PCBtB-based blends present a finer self-organization, higher D:A phase segregation and good charge carrier mobility, affording interesting photovoltaic responses and highlighting a marked potential of PCBtB to tailor the active BHJ layer. The best BHJ solar cells based on as-cast P3HT:PCBtB blend films exhibit power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of ∼3.1%, under a simulated AM1.5G illumination of 100 mW cm−2, which are greater than the analogous as-cast P3HT:PCBM based devices.

The approach of making thin film photovoltaic devices from organic semiconducting materials has attracted increasing attention over the last few years. Advances in bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells offer the prospects of low manufacturing costs (i.e., casting or printing technologies using solution-processable materials), large area coverage, and compatibility with flexible and light-weight substrates. In particular, the great potential of organic semiconductors is the tunability of their physical and chemical properties by rational sequential structural modification, which justify the tremendous increase in OPV power conversion efficiencies (PCEs), now surpassing 8%.

The active layer of BHJ solar cells consists of an interpenetrating network, at nanoscale level, of bicontinuous electron-donor (D) and electron-acceptor (A) domains, which are formed during the deposition–drying process. The donor and acceptor phases should self-organize to form nanodomains with dimension comparable to the exciton diffusion length (10–20 nm) to ensure that all excitons are harvested at the interface. Once the exciton is dissociated, the electron and hole must drift separately to the electrodes through the bicontinuous pathways for an efficient charge collection. Nevertheless, creating an optimal BHJ is a delicate balancing act: having the components blended too well limits the formation of separate polymer and fullerene networks, but too much phase segregation leads to the formation of unconnected islands that can act as carrier traps. Thus, one key to improving BHJ device performance is controlling the nanometre-scale morphology of the interpenetrating organic networks.
Several groups have focused the attention on the control of nanomorphology of active BHJ layer based on P3HT (poly(3-hexylthiophene)) and PCBM ([6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester). PCEs up to ∼5% have been achieved by macroscopic device-processing conditions (i.e. thermal treatments, mixture of solvents, additives, and vapour annealing) which could promote the molecular re-organization by controlling the kinetics of segregation and crystallization of the components.
An alternative way to induce an optimal self-assembling of the semiconducting components is based on a molecular approach. It is known that the morphology is largely affected by the chemical/structural nature of the donor and acceptor materials, in particular by their solubility and mutual affinity or intermolecular interaction, so the molecular design could play a crucial role in controlling the nanoscale self-organization as well as the intrinsic properties of the single material.
For instance, replacing conventional fullerene electron acceptors (PCBMs) with other functionalized analogues has been reported to affect the processability, HOMO and LUMO energy levels, and self-assembly/phase segregation capability in active BHJ layer. To date, PCBMs (PC61BM or PC71BM) remain one of the best performing soluble fullerene derivatives. However, a wide variety of new soluble fullerene derivatives have been synthesized and tested in P3HT-based BHJ solar cells, although only a few novel materials afford better OPV performance with respect to the reference P3HT:PCBM system. Recent studies, that were focused on fullerene-based acceptors, demonstrate that fine structural modifications and changes in the correlated physical parameters, such as solubility, super-saturation thermodynamics, precipitation kinetics and miscibility with donor material, strongly affect the nanomorphology and the resulting OPV response.
In this contribution, we report on the investigation of methanofullerene PCBtB ([6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid tert-butylester) as acceptor material in P3HT-based BHJ solar cells (Fig. 1). PCBtB synthesis, first reported in 1995, was recently implemented under continuous-flow conditions in a microstructured reactor, which makes it attractive for future upscaling. The simple molecular design of PCBtB, in particular the replacement of the PC61BM methyl end-group with a tert-butyl substituent, aims at achieving efficient electron transport, good solubility in the common organic solvents, and enhanced molecular hindrance able to influence the weak intermolecular interactions. These parameters are crucial for controlling the molecular ordering and phase segregation during the deposition–drying process. In addition, the presence of the tert-butyl substituent does not alter the fundamental electronic properties of the fullerene and in particular the HOMO and LUMO energy levels, if compared to the reference PCBM molecule, as confirmed by cyclic voltammetry experiment (CV, Fig. S1). The ability to separate the morphological effects from the electronic properties of the acceptor material is of particular interest for this study.
Solution-processable BHJ solar cells were fabricated, optimized, and characterized. The electrical, optical, photophysical, and morphological properties are reported and discussed to explore and elucidate the relationship between the acceptor molecular modification, nanomorphology, and OPVs performance for this semiconductor class blended with P3HT as donor material.
It must be noted that preliminary results of the first P3HT:PCBtB-based devices were mentioned in a previous work. Here, a more systematic and accurate characterization of the P3HT:PCBtB BHJ solar cells provides the statistically assessed efficiency values.

All reagents, PEDOT:PSS (poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(4-styrenesulfonate), Clevios P VP A1 4083, H.C. Starck), P3HT (poly(3-hexylthiophene), Rieke Metals), PCBM ([6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester, American Dye Source) and various anhydrous solvents (Sigma-Aldrich) were purchased from commercial sources and used without further purification.

The redox behavior of PCBtB was studied by cyclic voltammetry that was carried out in o-dichlorobenzene (ODCB)/acetonitrile (1:4) solution in the presence of Bu4NPF6 as supporting electrolyte on a glassy carbon electrode. The voltammetries reported in Fig. S1 reveal the presence of four reversible peaks in the available potential range. The measured E1/2 values are as follows: −1.101, −1.490, −1.996, −2.433 V vs. Fc. Comparing the behavior in the same conditions of PCBM, whose first peak has a E1/2 value of −1.076 V vs. Fc, we observed for PCBtB a 25 mV negative shift of the first reduction event, as a result of the small structural difference with respect to PCBM. Further technical details are reported in the ESI.

The photovoltaic cells consisted of a thin film of a polymer blend P3HT with PCBtB (or PCBM), sandwiched in-between a transparent anode (Indium Tin-Oxide, ITO, Rs 10 Ω/) and a metal cathode (LiF/Al). Before device fabrication, the glass substrates coated with ITO were accurately cleaned, dried with N2 stream from a blow gun and placed in an oxygen plasma chamber for 10 min. A thin layer (∼30 nm) of PEDOT:PSS was then spin-coated on the anode to modify the ITO surface, followed by baking at 150 °C for 15 min. The P3HT:PCBtB (constant concentration of PCBtB: 17 mg mL−1) and P3HT:PCBM (18:18 mg mL−1) solutions were prepared in dry ODCB, which is a good solvent also for PCBtB. Note that the concentration of PCBtB was kept constant at the optimal value of 17 mg mL−1 (in ODCB), since higher concentrations determine inhomogeneities and/or visible aggregates during the deposition process. The D:A (w/w) ratios were controlled only by varying the P3HT amount, thus obtaining mixture solutions with slightly different total concentrations (Table 1). The mixture solutions were sonicated, and then spin-coated inside the glove box (<0.1 ppm of O2 and H2O), on top of the ITO/PEDOT:PSS surface. The wet active layers were then slowly dried in covered glass Petri dishes to undergo the solvent annealing process (or slow growth). Before cathode deposition, the thin films were thermally annealed by varying the temperature and the time of the process (Tables 1 and S1). To complete the device fabrication, LiF/Al cathodes (∼0.6 nm/∼100 nm) were next deposited sequentially without breaking vacuum (∼10−6 Torr) using a thermal evaporator directly connected to the glove box. The current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of completed OPV devices were recorded by a Keithley 236 source-measure unit under simulated AM1.5G illumination of 100 mW cm−2 (Abet Technologies Sun 2000 Solar Simulator). The light intensity was determined by a standard silicon photodiode fitted with a KG5 color glass filter to bring spectral mismatch to unity. The active area of the device was exactly 6 mm2. During testing, the individual devices were accurately isolated, by a calibrated mask, to avoid an excess photocurrent generated from the parasitic device regions outside the overlapped electrode area. All solar cells were tested, inside the glove box with oxygen and moisture free environment.

Active layer D:A ratio (w/w)
Total conc./mg mL−1

T
ann/°C

V
OC/mV

J
SC/mA cm−2
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a 
Annealing time: 10 min.
b 
d = 205 nm.
c 
d = 165 nm.
d 
d = 160 nm.
e 
d = 120 nm.
f 
d = 95 nm.
g 
d = 200 nm.


P3HT:PCBtB (1.2:1)
37.0
—
572
5.98
50
1.73

P3HT:PCBtB (1.2:1)
37.0
110
432
2.89
48
0.60

P3HT:PCBtB (1:1)
34.0
—
586
7.47
61
2.66

P3HT:PCBtB (1:1)
34.0
110
479
5.44
55
1.43

P3HT:PCBtB (0.88:1)
32.0
—
603
7.64
66
3.03

P3HT:PCBtB (0.88:1)
32.0
110
441
4.19
51
1.00

P3HT:PCBtB (0.75:1)
29.8
—
547
6.94
62
2.35

P3HT:PCBtB (0.75:1)
29.8
110
361
5.60
50
1.00

P3HT:PCBtB (0.67:1)
28.4
—
538
5.03
63
1.71

P3HT:PCBtB (0.67:1)
28.4
110
476
4.31
41
0.84

P3HT:PCBM (1:1)
36.0
—
575
7.70
63
2.80

P3HT:PCBM (1:1)
36.0
110
588
8.85
67
3.48

The single-carrier diodes are based on the use of electrodes that suppress the injection of either electrons or holes, resulting in hole- or electron-only devices. The hole-only devices, used to investigate the hole transport in the active layers, were fabricated following the same procedure presented above except for the top electrode, which was replaced with Au (50 nm) (glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/Blend/Au). Electron-only devices were fabricated by spin-coating the active blend solution on top of glass/Al (∼50 nm) followed by a second evaporation of Al (∼70 nm). The device configuration is glass/Al/Blend/Al. The charge mobilities were extracted by fitting the current density–voltage curves, recorded in dark conditions, to the Mott–Gurney equation (Space Charge Limited Current, SCLC model).


All thin-film characterizations were performed in air. Thin film optical absorption spectra were recorded on a JASCO V-550 spectrophotometer. Luminescence spectra in the NIR range between 0.75 and 1.4 eV were measured by using a modified FT interferometer (Bruker RFT 100) equipped with a liquid nitrogen cooled Ge detector, the same set-up was used for measuring Raman scattering exciting at 1.16 eV (1064 nm) with cw Nd–Yag laser. Measurements were performed by exciting with 488 nm Ar+ laser lines. The thickness of the various films was measured by a profilometer (KLA Tencor, P-6). All active films were characterized on glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS substrates and subsequently corrected for the background signal, in order to reproduce the effective condition and the real nanomorphology of the active layer. Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) images were taken with a Solver Pro (NT-934 MDT) scanning probe microscope in tapping mode. The AFM images were recorded directly on the tested devices.


The potential of PCBtB as acceptor material (A) in OPV devices was investigated in bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells using P3HT as the electron donor (D) counterpart. For comparison, BHJ solar cells based on P3HT and commercial PCBM were also fabricated. The device structure employed (glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:Acceptor/LiF/Al) is illustrated in Fig. 1. Details of the device fabrication and characterization are given in the Experimental section. Tables 1 and S1 summarize photovoltaic response data including VOC, JSC, FF, and PCEs. Representative OPV current density–voltage (J–V) plots under standard illumination AM1.5G are shown in Fig. 2 and S2.

As shown in Fig. 2 and Table 1 the main difference between OPV devices based on P3HT:PCBtB and P3HT:PCBM films is represented by the short-circuit current density (JSC) values, which reflects the gap in the overall PCEs. The JSC of the most efficient PCBtB-based solar cells, at different D:A ratios, ranges from 5.03 to 7.64 mA cm−2 with a maximum PCE of 3.03%, while for the reference PCBM-based devices, the JSC ranges from 7.70 to 8.85 mA cm−2 with a maximum PCE of 3.48%. It is worth noting that the most efficient PCBtB-based devices, at different D:A ratios, are obtained without thermal treatments.
The OPV performance of P3HT:PCBtB-based solar cells is strongly dependent on the blend composition, since the tuning of the D:A blend ratio is pivotal to reach the best compromise between the light harvesting, charge carrier transport as well as ideal morphology in the bulk heterojunction, thus minimizing the loss mechanisms.
For instance, an increase of the donor content (1.2:1 w/w) in the P3HT:PCBtB active blend leads to a significant reduction of the short circuit current density (5.98 mA cm−2) as well as in FF (50%), affording a PCE of 1.73%. Diversely, OPV performance of PCBtB-based solar cells improves upon reduction of the P3HT amount. Using the same D:A w/w ratio (1:1) of the reference P3HT:PCBM blend, the optimized as-cast P3HT:PCBtB-based device exhibits VOC, JSC, FF and PCE of 586 mV, 7.47 mA cm−2, 61% and 2.66%, respectively. The greatest OPV performance was achieved with the device based on 0.88:1 (w/w) blend ratio. The resulting as-cast solar cell yields a PCE of 3.03% with VOC, JSC, and FF of 603 mV, 7.64 mA cm−2 and 66%, respectively. It is worth noting that these values are greater than those obtained for 1:1 (w/w) as-cast PCBM-based devices, highlighting the potential of PCBtB as new acceptor material able to induce an optimal nanomorphology of the active layer during the deposition–drying process. Moreover, optimal charge transport properties in the organic network are confirmed by good FF and charge mobility values (Tables 1 and 2, and Fig. 2 and 6), without the need of additional thermal treatments.
Active layer D:A ratio (w/w)
Hole mobilityμh/cm2 V−1s−1
Electron mobilityμe/cm2 V−1s−1
Mobility ratio μe/μh

a The mobilities were estimated by space charge limited current (SCLC) model.
b Not annealed.
c Annealed at 110 °C for 10 minutes.


P3HT:PCBtB (1.2:1)
1.1 × 10−4
2.1 × 10−4
1.9

P3HT:PCBtB (1:1)
1.2 × 10−4
7.0 × 10−4
5.8

P3HT:PCBtB (0.88:1)
2.1 × 10−4
7.2 × 10−4
3.4

P3HT:PCBtB (0.67:1)
7.1 × 10−5
1.1 × 10−3
15.5

P3HT:PCBM (1:1)
3.0 × 10−4
7.0 × 10−4
2.3
Further increasing the PCBtB content in the active blend (0.75:1, and 0.67:1 w/w ratio) the JSC, FF, and PCEs linearly decrease as shown in Table 1 and Fig. 2.
For comparison, analogous PCBM-based solar cells, using the same experimental conditions of the above-mentioned P3HT:PCBtB films, have been fabricated and tested (Table S1 and Fig. S2).
Open-circuit voltages of as-cast PCBtB-based devices show a narrow distribution with respect to the P3HT:PCBM films, which correlates well with the identical HOMO/LUMO energy levels of PCBtB and PCBM. The observed discrepancy, at different D:A compositions, can be ascribed to different morphological features which is known to influence the VOC.
Several efforts to optimize the thin-film nanomorphology of PCBtB-based devices were carried out, but no significant improvements were achieved. Different solvents (e.g.chlorobenzene and toluene, Table S1) were used to spin-cast the blends, but poor quality films were obtained as a consequence of the low PCBtB solubility. The most continuous and most electrically uniform films were obtained from ODCB solutions, resulting in the best OPV performance.
Since thermal annealing frequently improves the efficiency of P3HT-based BHJ solar cells, we annealed our PCBtB-based devices under conditions similar to those used to improve the efficiency of P3HT:PCBM blend (Table 1).Annealing over the range 80–150 °C, for different times, before and after device completion, invariably resulted in unusual film degradation, limiting VOC (<500 mV), FF, and consequently the overall device performance (see Table S1). It is known that annealing increases the crystallinity of P3HT, but the effects on the fullerene network are less clear. Probably, the thermal treatments could promote undesirable phase segregation on the PCBtB network (see the morphological section) which adversely affects the VOC and FF values.Degradation of PCBtB during the annealing process at 110 °C has been ruled out on the basis of thermogravimetric analysis (TGA, Fig. S3) that shows a first weight loss above 200 °C. It is reasonable to assume that at the annealing temperature only morphological rearrangements take place, as discussed below.

Thin film absorption spectra of pristine PCBtB and PCBM, and optimized blends with P3HT, were recorded and compared as shown in Fig. 3.

As expected, the absorption spectra of pristine PCBM and PCBtB films (Fig. 3A) confirm that the tert-butyl substituent does not affect the electronic structure of the molecule. Indeed, the shape of the normalized curves is nearly identical with the typical peak at 336 nm and the same absorption onset in the longer wavelength region (∼710 nm).
Thin-film absorption profiles of optimized P3HT:PCBtB (or PCBM) active blends, compared with pristine P3HT, are displayed in Fig. 3B. The curves have been normalized for the film thickness and the total concentration of each mixture solution (Table 1), in order to evaluate solely the effect of the D:A (w/w) composition on the absorption spectrum.
The absorption spectra of P3HT:PCBtB and P3HT:PCBM films largely coincide with the spectrum of P3HT in agreement with the low absorption cross-section of PCBtB and PCBM compared to P3HT. Reducing the P3HT content in the active layer, from 1.2:1 to 0.67:1 D:A w/w ratio, the absorption intensities at wavelength longer than 400 nm are gradually suppressed, while the absorptions in the blue region are almost unchanged. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that all P3HT:PCBtB absorption profiles, despite the difference in the absorption intensity, exhibit a nearly identical shape compared to that of P3HT:PCBM film (grey line), with three typical features: the peak at 336 nm (characteristic of PCBM), the “double-peak” at 512 nm and 554 (P3HT π–π* transitions), and a shoulder at 604 nm (P3HT inter-chain interactions).
These results suggest that P3HT:PCBtB-based films do not show significant changes in the optical absorption properties compared to P3HT:PCBM films. Therefore, PCBtB plays a crucial role at the molecular level affecting other parameters such as nanoscale self-organization and charge carrier transport, investigated and discussed in the following sections.

It is known that the nanomorphology of the photoactive layer plays an important role in determining the OPV performance. In order to gain an understanding of how PCBtB affects the solar cell output parameters, we investigated the morphological differences of P3HT:PCBtB (or PCBM) blend films by tapping-mode AFM.


Fig. 4 shows topographic images of representative optimized P3HT:PCBtB active blends, having different w/w ratios (1.2:1, 1:1, 0.88:1, and 0.67:1), in comparison with the benchmark P3HT:PCBM films (1:1 w/w, annealed and not annealed). In addition, we also investigated the effect of thermal annealing on the surface structure of P3HT:PCBtB films made with the best performing blend ratios (1:1 and 0.88:1 w/w).

Fig. 4A–D show AFM images of P3HT:PCBtB films as a function of the D:A w/w composition. Comparing the morphologies, it is evident that the scale segregation of the film surface depends on the P3HT:PCBtB w/w blend ratio, despite the relatively narrow variation. Higher concentration of P3HT (1.2:1 w/w ratio, Fig. 4A) generates larger domains which are gradually reduced in terms of size by decreasing the D:A composition, 1:1, 0.88:1 and 0.67:1 w/w ratio (Fig. 4B, C and D, respectively). A similar trend was observed for the surface roughness. The corresponding root mean square (RMS) roughness (reported in the legend of Fig. 4) decreases from ∼27 to ∼4 nm by reducing the P3HT:PCBtB w/w ratio (from 1.2:1 to 0.67:1). The observed reduction of the average domain size and RMS values on the thin film surface, by increasing the relative amount of PCBtB in the active layer, might be attributed to the progressive intercalation between the components producing finer nano-structured films which correlate well with the trend observed for the OPV performance (Table 1), NIR-PL measurements (Fig. 5) and charge transport mobilities (Table 2 and Fig. 6).
The AFM image of 1.2:1 w/w P3HT:PCBtB film (Fig. 4A) exhibits large-scale segregation and high RMS roughness (27 nm). Probably, the excess of P3HT promotes self-aggregation determining large crystal-like features which could hinder the acceptor segregation producing undesirable unconnected structures or islands within the PCBtB network, thus reducing drastically the electron mobility (Table 2 and Fig. 6) and subsequently the device performance (Table 1). Moreover, the rough surface may also induce poor contact and high series resistance between the active layer and cathode, which might contribute to the reduction of the fill factor (FF).
On the other hand, increasing the relative PCBtB content in the active blends, 1:1 and 0.88:1 w/w blend ratios (Fig. 4B and C, respectively), the size of the domains is slightly reduced resulting in smoother and more textured surfaces (RMS = 16 and 13 nm for Fig. 4B and C, respectively) with a higher interfacial area between the grains, as supposed by AFM images and confirmed by NIR-PL spectroscopy. Moreover, the relatively high and balanced hole and electron mobilities measured on these films (Table 2 and Fig. 6) suggest the formation of bicontinuous and well-organized percolation paths in the entire photoactive layer, confirming the good thin film quality at these D:A compositions, in agreement with the higher OPV responses.
The AFM image of 0.67:1 w/w P3HT:PCBtB film (Fig. 4D) exhibits a smooth (RMS = 4 nm) and almost featureless surface, probably due to the low concentration of P3HT which limits the crystallization of the polymer.
Thermal annealing, at 110 °C for 10 minutes, of 1:1 and 0.88:1 w/w P3HT:PCBtB films (Fig. 4E and F, respectively), results in roughening of the film surface with more structured and confined motifs compared to the analogous as-cast films (Fig. 4B and C). This is likely due to the enhanced aggregation tendency of the P3HT, which determines the formation of more defined domains with dimensions strictly dependent on the P3HT content. Nevertheless, the molecular reorganization induced by thermal annealing seems to generate unconnected oval or fiber-like domains, or islands (Fig. 4E and F, respectively) that might suggest a lower D:A phase segregation, which could hinder the formation of continuous percolation pathways, thus limiting the charge transport processes and FF values of the active blend. This hypothesis correlates well with the drastic reduction of the resulting OPV responses (Table 1 and S1).
Finally, to better understand the effect of PCBtB on the morphology of P3HT-based films, we compare the AFM images of as-cast and annealed 1:1 (w/w) P3HT:PCBtB and P3HT:PCBM blends (Fig. 4B, E, G and H, respectively). Except for the slight difference in total concentration of the solutions (34 and 36 mg mL−1 for PCBtB and PCBM-based mixture, respectively), the procedure for the active layer deposition was identical, thus the morphological variations on the film surfaces should be ascribed solely to the acceptor material. Comparing the film morphologies it is evident the relationship between the acceptor material, grain size and surface roughness. Indeed, both for as-cast and annealed films, the average domain size of P3HT:PCBM-based blend increases up to hundreds of nanometres (Fig. 4G and H; RMS = 19 and 22 nm, respectively), while smaller and more textured domains were obtained in PCBtB-based blends (Fig. 4B and E; RMS = 16 and 18 nm, respectively).
Finally, we can consider that the physical and structural properties (e.g. lower solubility and higher steric hindrance due to the tert-butyl substituent) of PCBtB are likely to be responsible for the different self-organization of the active layer, in which the typical larger domains of P3HT:PCBM-based films are effectively replaced by finer and well-organized nanostructured motifs, affording optimal electrical, morphological, and charge transport properties, with resulting OPV efficiency greater than 3%, without the need for thermal and/or additional treatments.

In this section we investigate the features of the thin-film morphology of P3HT:PCBtB (or PCBM) films by evaluating the interfacial recombination processes via charge transfer exciton (CTE) determination. We based our results on near-infrared (NIR-PL) spectroscopy.

CTEs are the result of interfacial electronic interactions occurring at the heterojunction between organic semiconductors. CTEs can be considered as hybrid states, described by a hole localized on the HOMO(Polymer) and an electron on the LUMO(Fullerene), which represent a potential radiative recombination channel proportional to the interfacial area between the heterojunction components.
In agreement with the literature, we assigned to CTEs the emission of the P3HT-based blends at ∼1 eV. There are small differences in spectral shape that become evident when enlarging the scale on the red tail of the spectrum. Fig. 5 exhibits the NIR-PL profiles of the most representative and optimized P3HT-based films as a function of the PCBtB content in comparison with the most efficient 1:1 (w/w) P3HT:PCBM blend. The plots have been normalized for the P3HT concentration of each film, in order to evaluate solely the effect of the blend composition as well as the thin film nanomorphology on the NIR-PL spectrum.
To evaluate exactly the amount of P3HT, at the same point of the sample from where the PL was collected, we performed Raman measurements by exciting in the same set-up at 1.16 eV. We used the intensity of the P3HT Raman peak associated with the CC symmetric stretching (at 1442 cm−1) to normalize the PL intensity.
In general, the observation of weak CTE emissions, as in Fig. 5, is symptomatic of a reduced recombination through CTE and correlates well with the trend observed in JSC, PCEs, and thin film morphologies reported for these material combinations. As expected, the 1:1 (w/w) P3HT:PCBM annealed film (grey line) does not show the CTE emission peak, in agreement with the large domain size (AFM image, Fig. 4G), large phase segregation, low interfacial area and well organized interpenetrating network able to optimize the charge generation and transport toward the electrodes.
On the other hand, the PL profile of P3HT:PCBtB-based films exhibits CTE emissions, at ∼0.9 eV, which raise in intensity upon increasing the acceptor content in the blend, 1.2:1, 1:1, 0.88:1, and 0.67:1 (w/w) (black, red, blue, and orange lines, respectively), suggesting a progressive intermixing between the materials with lower phase segregation, in agreement with the smaller grain size observed by AFM (Fig. 4A, B, C and D, respectively).
However, the role of CTEs in controlling the OPV device parameters comes not only from the amount of interfaces but also from the continuity of the interpenetrating pathways within the organic network. For instance, despite the relatively low emission profile of 1.2:1 (w/w) P3HT:PCBtB film (black line), which suggests a limited recombination process, the poor OPV performance highlights that, despite the lower interfacial area with good phase segregation, the continuity of the percolation paths could be one of the critical factors. Indeed, by looking at the morphology of 1.2:1 (w/w) P3HT:PCBtB (Fig. 4A), we have argued the formation of unconnected islands of PCBtB, which would not affect the interfacial area and consequently the CTE emission, but could hinder significantly the charge transport toward the electrodes, thus the resulting JSC and FF values. This hypothesis is also supported by the drop of the electron mobility of this film, as shown and discussed in the next section (see Table 2 and Fig. 6).
By increasing the PCBtB content in the film (1:1, 0.88:1 and 0.67:1 w/w ratios) the CTE emission slightly improves, probably due to an increase of the recombination processes in the active blend, as a consequence of the larger amount of interfaces. Despite the slight increase of the CTE emission, the 1:1 and 0.88:1 (w/w) P3HT:PCBtB film exhibits a nearly identical PL profile affording PCEs up to ∼3%, suggesting that these D:A ratios might be the right compromise between the recombination processes and the formation of bicontinuous and well-organized pathways. However, an excess of acceptor (0.67:1 w/w) does not affect significantly the PL intensity, but the reduction of the OPV performance suggests again the possible formation of inhomogeneous and undesirable structures in the polymer network, which limit the charge transport properties as confirmed by the measured hole mobilities (Table 2 and Fig. 6).
In addition, we have investigated the CTE emission of the 0.88:1 (w/w) P3HT:PCBtB film annealed at 110 °C for 10 minutes. While the annealing leads to evident modifications in morphology (Fig. 4C and F, respectively) and OPV response (Table 1), with respect to the as-cast analogues, no significant differences in the CTE emission have been observed. We conclude that in P3HT:PCBtB blend the thermal annealing plays a limited role in governing geminate carrier recombination through CTE, this appears to be more influenced by other factors such as blend composition and molecular structure.

A key parameter for high efficiency BHJ solar cells is the mobility of electrons and holes, and their balanced values. It is known that unbalanced charge carriers mobilities, extremely low or extremely high, can contribute to losses in power conversion efficiency by a variety of mechanisms.

To quantify charge carrier mobilities of PCBtB (or PCBM)-based devices, current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of single-carrier diodes were measured for pure and blended films with P3HT. Details for the device fabrication and characterization are given in the Experimental section.
The hole (μh) and electron (μe) mobilities were estimated using the space-charge limited current (SCLC) model. This method involves fitting the experimental dark J–V curves of single-carrier devices to the Mott–Gurney equation:
where
J is the current density, μ is the mobility, εr is the relative permittivity of the blend, ε0 is the permittivity of vacuum, d is the thickness of the active layer, and V is the voltage. The applied voltage was corrected for the built-in voltage (Vbi) and the voltage drop (VRS) arising from the substrate's series resistance. The resulting curves are plotted as J1/2vs. V, as shown in Fig. S4, S5 and S6.

According to the Mott–Gurney equation, the electron mobilities in pristine PCBtB and PCBM films were found to be ∼2.1 × 10−3 and ∼2.5 × 10−3 cm2 V−1s−1, respectively, which is in agreement with PCBM literature values and points to the fact that the presence of the tert-butyl substituent leaves the charge transport in the solid state essentially unchanged. Table 2 and Fig. 6 summarize the average charge carrier mobilities of as-cast P3HT:PCBtB blends, which yield the best photovoltaic performance as a function of the D:A (w/w) composition. For comparison, the electron and hole mobilities of the annealed P3HT:PCBM blend have been measured.
The average hole mobilities of P3HT:PCBtB 1.2:1, 1:1, and 0.88:1 w/w blend films slightly improve (1.1, 1.2 and 2.1 × 10−3 cm2 V−1s−1, respectively) by reducing the D:A (w/w) composition. However, further increasing the relative PCBtB content (0.67:1 w/w) of the active layer, the hole mobility decreases by one order of magnitude (∼10−5 cm2 V−1s−1), in agreement with the poor OPV performance, and the almost amorphous surface observed by AFM investigation (Fig. 4D).
The electron mobilities of P3HT:PCBtB films were found to increase significantly with higher acceptor concentration from 2.1 × 10−4 to 1.1 × 10−3 cm2 V−1s−1 for the 1.2:1, and 0.67:1 (w/w) blend ratios, respectively. Note that an excess of P3HT (1.2:1 w/w ratio) drastically reduces the electron mobility, which can be ascribed to the poorly formed percolation pathways at low PCBtB concentration. On the other hand, an excess of PCBtB (0.67:1 w/w ratio) leads to higher electron mobility (1.1 × 10−3 cm2 V−1s−1), comparable to the value of the pristine PCBtB film, probably due to the formation of a continuous network of pure PCBtB. These PCBtB-rich phases reduce drastically the P3HT segregation, which could explain the resulting low hole mobility (∼10−5 cm2 V−1s−1).
The electron mobilities obtained for the most efficient 1:1 and 0.88:1 w/w as-cast P3HT:PCBtB films are nearly identical to the optimal values calculated for the analogous optimized PCBM-based blend, highlighting the capability of the PCBtB to induce morphological changes on the donor material network, maintaining optimal charge transport, electrical, and morphological properties.

Fig. 6 shows how enhanced and balanced charge mobilities of P3HT:PCBtB (or PCBM) films correlate well with the good OPV performance. Considering an optimal μe and μh gap (dashed lines in Fig. 6), in which the P3HT:PCBM-based solar cell yields the best OPV performance, it is evident that the PCEs of P3HT:PCBtB-based devices are proportional to the dispersion of μe and μh around this optimal gap. As expected, too low or unbalanced mobilities (1.2:1 and 0.67:1 w/w ratios, respectively), distant from the optimal range, suppress the overall PCEs, while more balanced μh−e values, 1:1 and 0.88:1 w/w ratio, contribute to optimal device performance, greater than 3% for the latter case.
Despite the balanced μh−e values, the slightly lower performance of the best P3HT:PCBtB devices (1:1 and 0.88:1 w/w ratio) over annealed PCBM-based solar cell can be attributed to the lower hole mobility within P3HT domains. In fact, in agreement with the previously mentioned morphological and photophysical features, the PCBtB molecules seem to partially limit the phase segregation hindering the formation of optimal large P3HT crystalline regions, and leading to finer and more textured domains. Nevertheless, P3HT:PCBtB-based solar cells afford charge carrier mobilities, short-circuit current densities (JSC), and PCEs nearly equal to the benchmark P3HT:PCBM blend.

Solution-processable BHJ OPV solar cells using PCBtB as acceptor and P3HT as donor material were fabricated, optimized, characterized and benchmarked against P3HT:PCBM. We find that the simple design strategy of PCBtB, in particular the presence of the tert-butyl substituent, does not affect the electronic structure of the molecule, while influences the solubility and the molecular hindrance, which produce evident changes in terms of domain size and phase segregation between the heterojunction components. The properties of P3HT:PCBtB films are highly sensitive to the acceptor content. In fact, even within a relatively narrow range of D:A composition (from 1.2:1 to 0.67:1 (w/w) ratios), we found that the tert-butyl substituent determines a significant effect on the morphological, photophysical and electrical properties. This highlights a marked potential of PCBtB to tailor the active BHJ layer. Investigation of charge carrier mobility demonstrates that pristine or blended as-cast PCBtB-based devices exhibit great electron and hole mobilities, nearly identical to the reference PCBM-based film. As-cast P3HT:PCBtB-based solar cells afford PCEs of ∼3.1%, which are greater than the analogous as-cast P3HT:PCBM based devices. This study indicates the potential of PCBtB as a novel solution for use in combination with new donor polymers, e.g., having higher aggregation tendency, in which it could be useful to optimize the phase segregation and the interpenetrating networks by reducing the domain size and/or disrupting possible large aggregates or clusters, without the need of “processing additives” or additional treatments.


This work was supported by CNR through project EFOR, by EC through projects PHOTO-FET (GA 248052), and SUNFLOWER (GA 287594), by the Italian MISE through program industria2015 EE01_00003 (ALADIN), by Consorzio MIST-ER through project FESR-tecnopolo AMBIMAT, by Italian MIUR through PRIN 2008, grant no. 20085M27SS and University of Padova through HELIOS, grant no. STPD08RCX5. E.R. thanks Regione Veneto for a PhD grant through FSE project 2008.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: General remarks, Table S1, and Fig. S1–S6. See DOI: 10.1039/c1jm13474d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011