 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA04490B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17361-17370


Lei
Wen
,

Fangliang
Gao
,

Yuefeng
Yu
,

Zhenzhu
Xu
,

Zhikun
Liu
,

Peng
Gao
,

Shuguang
Zhang
* and 

Guoqiang
Li
*

State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510641, China. E-mail: msgli@scut.edu.cn; mssgzhang@scut.edu.cn; Tel: +86 20 87112957

Engineering Research Center on Solid-State Lighting and its Informationisation of Guangdong Province, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510641, China

Department of Electronic Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China

School of Electronic and Information Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China

Tianjin Institute of Power Sources, Tianjin 300384, China

Received
14th May 2018
, Accepted 25th July 2018
First published on 26th July 2018
In this work, we demonstrate the fabrication of highly-efficient GaAs/graphene Schottky junction solar cells by modifying the interface of the device with a self-assembled alkyl thiol monolayer (SAM). This modification not only suppresses the oxidation of GaAs during the wet transfer process of graphene but also illustrates a special case of metal-insulator-semiconductor structured solar cell, according to X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and transient photovoltage decay measurements. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the GaAs/graphene solar cells increased with increasing chain length of the SAMs. The PCE is improved from 7.7% to 11.1% by utilizing 1-octadecanethiol as the fundamental building unit for the self-assembled monolayer. This PCE value is a new record for GaAs/graphene solar cells without applying doping and anti-reflection coatings (ARCs). The chain length dependent efficiency improvement can be well-explained by considering the tunneling and recombination of carriers at the interface. By studying the device area dependent performance of devices with and without interfacial modification, thiol modified devices show great potential for large-scale fabrication of GaAs/graphene solar cells. After chemical doping and applying an ARC, the PCE of the devices can be further improved to 15.9%.

Graphene opens a new vista in materials science and condensed-matter physics. It is the first real two-dimensional (2D) material that can be isolated in nature. This fascinating 2D semi-metal material has great potential for the next generation of high performance opto-electronic devices based on its supreme optical, electronic and thermal properties. For example, the optical transmittance of single layer graphene is 97.7% (ref. 7) within a broad spectrum range, and the work function of graphene can be easily tuned by a charge transfer doping process, which together make it a good candidate for transparent electrodes in solar cells. Especially, graphene can be used as the top electrode for Schottky junction solar cells due to its semi-metal nature and the advantages mentioned above. Up to now, most work is focused on Si/graphene Schottky junction solar cells. Compared to Si, GaAs has a direct band gap of 1.42 eV, which is in the optimum energy range for solar energy absorption. The above advantages make GaAs a better candidate to achieve high performance solar cells. However, the costly and complicated growth and fabrication processes of GaAs p–n junction solar cells limit the wide application of this high performance solar cell.

As mentioned above, graphene can form Schottky junctions with GaAs, which is an alternative route for the efficient extraction of light-generated carriers and thus avoids the high cost growth and fabrication processes of GaAs solar cells. In fact, as a cost-effective candidate for high performance solar cells, GaAs/graphene Schottky junction solar cells have been attracting intensive interest in past years. By employing a series of techniques and strategies, such as charge transfer doping, electrical grating, and surface plasmon polariton, the photovoltaic performance of GaAs/graphene solar cells has been greatly improved during the past 5 years.
However, the PCE of GaAs/graphene solar cells is still lower than commercially available GaAs thin film solar cells. This can be attributed to at least two aspects. In one aspect, the reverse saturation current of the two kinds of device is different. The reverse saturation current of the GaAs/graphene junction is caused by the thermal emission of the majority carriers and is proportional to exp(−Φb/kT), where Φb is the Schottky barrier height of the GaAs/graphene junction. The reverse saturation current of the GaAs p–n junction is caused by the diffusion of the minority carriers and is proportional to exp(−Eg/kT), where Eg is the band gap of GaAs. Since the barrier height of the GaAs/graphene Schottky junction is ∼0.7 to 0.8 eV, which is lower than the band gap of GaAs, the reverse current of the GaAs/graphene junction solar cell is higher than that of the GaAs p–n junction solar cell. Higher reverse current will further lead to a lower open-circuit voltage for the solar cells. On the other hand, unpassivated GaAs is easily oxidized when exposed to air or moisture. Unlike Si, oxidized GaAs will lead to a high velocity of surface carrier recombination which deteriorates the device performance. Moreover, the commonly used wet transfer process of graphene to GaAs, interfacial oxidation or hydroxylation may happen during the fabrication of GaAs/graphene solar cells. Therefore, it is obvious that the interface between GaAs and graphene plays a key role in the photovoltaic performance of GaAs/graphene Schottky junction solar cells. Suitable interface modification which both increases the barrier height of the GaAs/graphene junction and suppresses the oxidation of GaAs will improve the performance of the GaAs/graphene solar cell.
In this work, a SAM is sandwiched between GaAs and graphene to enhance the photovoltaic performance of GaAs/graphene Schottky junction solar cells. Due to the insulating nature of this thin organic layer, a metal-molecular-semiconductor (MMS) or metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) junction is formed. As a result, most of the majority carriers can be blocked and this leads to a decreased reverse saturation current and an improved open circuit voltage. Moreover, SAM modification not only forms stable As–S or Ga–S bonds but also makes the GaAs surface highly hydrophobic, which together provide excellent interfacial passivation for GaAs. Through the optimization of chain length and passivation time for the SAM, the PCE of GaAs/graphene solar cells is greatly improved from 7.7% to 11.1%, which demonstrates a great PCE enhancement of 42%. By doping the graphene and depositing anti-reflection coatings (ARC), the device PCE is further boosted to 15.9%, which is comparable to the state-of-the-art PCE of GaAs/graphene solar cells without applying additional electrical gating. Note also that the optoelectronic performance of devices with MMS structure is seldom reported since the metal electrode commonly contains toxic metals like Hg to prevent direct contact between the metal electrode and the semiconductor. These results not only support the importance of interfacial modification on the performance of GaAs/graphene solar cells, but also provide guidance for the fabrication of optoelectronic devices with MMS structures.

Single layer and few layer graphene films were purchased from Vigon Materials (grown on copper foil and covered by polymethyl methacrylate). The GaAs film was epitaxially grown on a 4 inch epi-ready n-type GaAs substrate (American Xtal Technology Co., Ltd., the doping concentration was ∼2.5 × 1018 cm−3) by metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD). The epitaxial film was composed of a 1 μm-thick GaAs buffer layer, a 100 nm-thick In0.5Ga0.5P back surface field (BSF) layer, and a 2.5 μm-thick GaAs base layer. These three layers were all n-type doped, and the doping concentration for the buffer layer, the BSF layer and the base layer was 1 × 1018, 1 × 1018 and 1 × 1017 cm−3, respectively. A 200 nm-thick rear Au contact was deposited on the back of the GaAs substrate by electron beam evaporation (DSZ-500, SKY Technology Development Co., Ltd.). The 200 nm-thick SiNx dielectric layer was deposited on top of the GaAs epitaxial film using plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD, Plasmalab System 100, Oxford Instruments Co., Ltd.). After deposition of the dielectric layer, an open window was defined by lithography and reactive ion etching (RIE, 903e, Tegal Co., Ltd.). Prior to transferring the graphene film, the bare GaAs surface was cleaned with acetone, isopropanol, and ultra-pure water (with a resistivity of 18.25 MΩ) in sequence, followed by a 5 minute dipping in 10 wt% HCl solution. The GaAs film was then rinsed with ethyl alcohol and immersed in alkyl thiol solution (10 mM in ethyl alcohol). This solution was transferred to a nitrogen filled box and kept for durations ranging from 1 to 48 hours. After adsorption of the thiol solution, the GaAs film was taken out and rinsed with ethyl alcohol and ultra-pure water. The graphene film was transferred onto GaAs after etching the copper foil. Since the passivated GaAs substrate is highly hydrophobic, care should be taken when transferring graphene. For comparison, graphene was also transferred onto GaAs substrates without passivation. Then, PMMA on top of the graphene film was removed by an acetone bath. After that, conductive silver adhesive was pasted onto the graphene above the SiNx coated area. The top Ag electrode was formed after post annealing at 80 °C for 5 minutes. p-Type doping of graphene was realized by spin coating bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl) amide (TFSA, 10 mM in nitromethane). An ARC layer composed of 5 nm-thick MoO3−x and 60 nm-thick ZrxOy was prepared by electron beam evaporation.

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed on a Thermal Scientific ESCALAB 250 Xi instrument, using a monochromatized Al Kα (1486.6 eV) source. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurements were conducted on a Ulvac PHI 5000 Versaprobe instrument, applying He I (21.22 eV) excitation. Transient photovoltage decay (TPVD) of the GaAs/graphene solar cells was measured when the devices were held under open circuit conditions. The TPVD curves were collected by a Tektronix 2024B oscilloscope under steady state conditions controlled by a continuous white light bias and a 532 nm pulsed laser (Quantel Q-smart 100). Current voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured under AM 1.5 conditions using an Oriel 3A solar simulator with a radiation power of 100 mW cm−2. The simulator was calibrated with a standard Si solar cell (calibration cert. # 2893.01), and the measured data was collected by a Keithley 2400 digital source meter. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the devices was measured on a PV Measurements QEXL system.

The effect of interfacial H2O molecules on the surface oxidation of GaAs was investigated by XPS, as displayed in Fig. 1. Samples with thiol SAM passivation and without passivation were prepared. The Ga 2p spectrum of the samples was chosen to understand the interfacial hydroxylation and oxidation of GaAs, due to its high surface/interface sensitivity. Compared with the standard Ga 2p peak, the peaks of the samples are all shifted to higher binding energies, together with the broadening of the peaks, which indicates that the samples are oxidized by the interfacial H2O during the wet transfer process of graphene. AGaO/(AGaO + AGaAs) was used to evaluate the oxidation of the GaAs surface, where AGaAs and AGaO represent the area of the GaAs peak and the GaO peak, respectively. The oxidation proportion varies with variation in the carbon chain length of the SAM, as shown in Fig. S1. The oxidation proportion of GaAs without passivation is 45%. When GaAs is passivated with the 1-octanethiol SAM (C8SAM), the oxidation proportion is decreased to 32%. The oxidation proportion is further decreased to 17% and 7% after 1-dodecanethiol SAM (C12SAM) and 1-octadecanethiol SAM (C18SAM) passivation. As a result, SAMs with a longer chain length will lead to a lower oxidation proportion of GaAs, which can be attributed to the coverage of different SAMs. The surface morphology of GaAs with C8, C12, C18SAMs and without SAMs is shown in Fig. S2. It is obvious that with the increasing chain length of the thiol molecules, the coverage of the monolayer is increased, which is in accordance with the fact that a longer chain forms a denser monolayer and provides better protection to GaAs. Generally, gallium oxides act as deep level recombination centers of GaAs. According to previous studies, defect states at the interface deteriorate the quality of the semiconductor/graphene Schottky diodes. Therefore, it is deducible that interfacial passivation by SAMs will improve the carrier lifetime. Transient photovoltage decay (TPVD) measurements were used to show how interfacial passivation improves the photovoltaic performance of the devices.


Fig. 2(a) displays the schematic structure of the GaAs/SAM/graphene solar cell, which consists of a GaAs substrate, graphene and silver electrodes. SiNx with a thickness of ∼200 nm is sandwiched between graphene and GaAs as the dielectric insulating layer, and the active illuminated area of the device is defined by reactive ion etching (RIE). Trilayer graphene was chosen for the fabrication of the devices, and the performance of the devices with 1 to 7 layer graphene is shown in Fig. S3. As we have discussed above, the insertion of a SAM will suppress the formation of Ga–O bonds. It is interesting to see whether interfacial passivation will improve the carrier transport of the devices. Photovoltage decay curves of the devices with and without SAMs are shown in Fig. 2(b). The decay of photovoltage can be attributed to consumption of photo-generated carriers via the following mechanisms: charging of the junction capacitance, capturing by traps, and recombination in the bulk and the interface between graphene and GaAs. Since a bias light is applied during the measurements, most of the traps in the devices can be filled. Therefore, the photovoltage decay curves can be well-fitted by a double exponential model:
(1)
where Δ
Vt is the normalized photovoltage at time t, VC is the photovoltage of junction capacitance which is charged by the transient photocarrier, VR is the photovoltage originating from the recombination of photo-generated carriers, and τC and τR are time constants of the above photovoltage components. The time constants for the different devices are listed in Table 1. It can be seen in Table 1 that both τC and τR increase with an increase in the carbon chain length of the SAMs in the devices. The increased τC can be attributed to carrier accumulation at the interface by increasing the chain length of the SAMs. The increased τR reveals a decreased possibility of recombination of photo-generated carriers. Generally, the recombination process of the carriers consists of bulk recombination and surface/interface recombination. Since the devices are fabricated from GaAs sliced from the same wafer, the bulk recombination of the different devices is similar. Therefore, the difference in τR is mainly due to the different interfacial recombination rates of the different devices. The fact that devices with longer SAM chains have lower interfacial recombination rates is in accordance with the XPS measurements, where the monolayers assembled by thiols with longer chains will passivate GaAs better. Based on the above discussion, it is inferred that the chain length of the SAMs will influence the photovoltaic performance of the GaAs/graphene solar cells.

Pristine
With C8SAM
With C12SAM
With C18SAM

τ
C (μs)
1.43
1.68
1.70
1.79

τ
R (μs)
0.12
0.16
0.21
0.25

V
oc (V)
0.68
0.72
0.74
0.77

J
sc (mA cm−2)
19.1
19.4
19.4
19.3
FF (%)
59.3
62.8
66.7
74.5
PCE (%)
7.7
8.8
9.6
11.1

R
s (Ω)
66
137
102
83

ϕ
eff (eV)
0.76
0.82
0.86
0.88

η

1.93
1.74
1.56
1.39

Fig. 2(c) shows the photovoltaic performance of the devices with and without SAM passivation. The photovoltaic parameters for the devices are listed in Table 1. It can be seen that with increasing SAM chain length, the photovoltaic efficiency is consistently improved from 7.7% to 11.1%. Note that this PCE value is a new record for GaAs/graphene solar cells without doping and an ARC, as shown in Table 2. This performance enhancement is mainly due to the improvement in both open circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) for the devices. In previous studies, the thermionic emission (TE) model is generally applied to investigate the effects of interfacial modification on device performance enhancement. However, this model is not suitable in this work, because the SAMs applied in this work are insulators. If the TE model is applied, the insertion of a poor conductor will hinder the interfacial carrier transport and deteriorate the performance of the device. In previous studies, tunneling dominated carrier transport is observed in the metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) diodes, e.g. Au/SiO2/Si, Hg/SAM/Si and Hg/SAM/GaAs, which are very similar to the GaAs/SAM-graphene diode in this work.
Device structure
PCE (%)
Reference
GaAs/graphene
1.95

20

GaAs/P3HT/graphene
6.84

11

GaAs/h-BN/graphene
7.10

19

GaAs/graphene
8.80

12

GaAs/graphene
9.20

10

GaAs/SAM/graphene
11.1
This work
A carrier transport model for a graphene–SiO2–Si MIS solar cell is reported in Kong’s work by considering the tunneling effects, as shown in Fig. 3. Due to energy band bending and the wide band gap of the SAMs (>5 eV), a barrier is formed at the conduction band (CB), and most of the majority carriers (electrons) are blocked by this barrier. Holes accumulate at the interface between GaAs and graphene, waiting to tunnel the SAMs. In a solar cell, Voc is given by Voc ∝ (kT/q)ln(Jsc/J0 + 1), where Jsc and J0 represent the short circuit current and the reverse saturation current, respectively. J0 is given by:
Js = A*T2exp(−qΦeff/kT)
(2)
where
Js is the current density, A* is the Richardson coefficient, q is the electron charge, Φeff is the effective barrier height for the electron on the conduction band, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, and n is the ideality factor of the junction. By fitting the dark J–V curves with the equation below, Φeff and the idea factor, η, can be obtained and the values are listed in Table 1:

J = Js[exp(qV/ηkT) − 1]
(3)
It is shown that devices with longer SAM chains have higher barrier height and thus lower reverse saturation current. This point can be understood by considering the tunneling barrier caused by the SAM and the effect of the surface dipole induced by the organic chains. At low bias, the effective barrier height can be regarded as the combination of a Schottky barrier and a tunneling barrier given by:
Φeff = Φb + kTβd/q
(4)
where
Φb is the Schottky barrier between GaAs and graphene, β is the attenuation factor and d is the tunneling distance. On the one hand, Φb is influenced by the introduction of the surface dipole. When the alkyl thiol is adsorbed on the GaAs surface, a dipole is formed due to the electronegativity difference between the S and C atoms. As a result, the work function of GaAs is reduced by the surface dipole, as shown in Fig. S4. The reduction in the work function of GaAs will lead to an increase in Φb. On the other hand, the tunneling barrier is increased with increasing tunneling distance or thickness of the SAMs. The thickness of the SAMs with 8, 12 and 18 carbon atoms is 6 ± 3, 9 ± 3 and 15 ± 3 Å, respectively, according to the ellipsometer measurements. The measured thickness is in agreement with previous work. By considering the points above, the increasing chain length of the SAMs will result in a decrease in reverse saturation current density and thus lead to an increase in Voc.

As aforementioned, the FFs for the devices with SAMs are also improved. The FF is a parameter highly related to the series and the shunt resistance (Rs and Rsh) of the devices. For the devices with SAMs, Rs is decreased with increasing alkyl chain length. This is different from observations in MIS solar cells, where the Rs of devices with insulating layers of different thickness is nearly constant. We mainly attribute this point to the void formed in the SAMs with short alkyl chains, which will increase the Rs of the devices. Whereas, the Rs of the devices without SAMs is the lowest among the four kinds of device, and the FF of this device is also the lowest. This can be attributed to the low Rsh (shown in Table 1) caused by the high-level interfacial recombination. Rsh is a parameter highly related to current leakage or the reverse current in the devices. In our case, the current leakage is a combination of the leaked current caused by surface impurities and the recombination current induced by the interfacial recombination centers. On the one hand, it is reported that the leaked current can be decreased by coating the surface of the semiconductor with thicker organic layers. It is predictable that the formation of denser and thicker SAMs on the GaAs surface can suppress the leaked current. On the other hand, in the carrier transport model of MIS solar cells, holes will be piled up at the interface, waiting to transport to graphene. If a large number of holes accumulate at the interface, recombination between the holes and the electrons increases. The recombination rate at the interface can be expressed by the well-known Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination model:
(5)
where
ns and ps represent the density of electrons and holes at interface, respectively, ni is the intrinsic carrier density, n0 = NCexp[(Et − Ec)/kT] and p0 = NVexp[(Ev − Et)/kT], where Et is the energy level of the trap states. If we make a rough approximation that the lifetime, τ, for the carriers (both the electrons and the holes) is equal, and Et is around the middle of the GaAs band gap, eqn (4) can be approximated as follows:

(6)
From this equation we can see that recombination will take place when nsps > ni2. Under AM 1.5 one sun illumination conditions, nsps ≫ ni2. The recombination current is given by:
(7)
When the illumination conditions are unchanged, for the graphene–SAM–GaAs solar cell, the density of photo-generated carriers is constant, and the recombination current is reversely proportional to the carrier lifetime. According to the TPVD measurements, devices with longer SAM chains have a longer carrier lifetime, and thus a lower recombination current. By considering the two points discussed above, the reverse current can be greatly decreased with an increase in the SAM chain length.
We also prepared GaAs/C18SAM–graphene solar cells with different passivation times. Fig. 4 plots the photovoltaic performance of the devices with various SAM passivation times, and the passivation time dependent photovoltaic parameters are shown in Table S1. When the passivation time increases from 0.5 to 4 hours, the photovoltaic efficiency is slightly increased from 8.5 to 8.6%, which is mainly due to the consistent increase in Voc and the slow decrease in FF. The decrease in FF can be explained by the increase in Rs when the passivation time increases from 0.5 to 4 hours, which will be discussed later. When the passivation time further increases from 4 to 24 hours, the photovoltaic efficiency is continuously increased from 8.6 to 11.1%, which is attributed to the increase in both Voc and FF. When the passivation time is increased finally from 24 to 48 hours, the photovoltaic performance of the devices is stabilized at ∼11%. A passivation time as long as ≥72 hours is not advocated, since previous studies have shown that a long passivation time will result in the degradation of the SAM ordering. It is interesting to see the time-dependent variation in Rs, which is highly related to the assembly processing of the SAM on the GaAs surface. The formation of the SAM with a long alkyl chain (with carbon atoms >14) can be roughly divided into 3 steps. The first step is a quick step of physical adsorption of the thiol molecules, followed by a transition from physical adsorption to chemical adsorption by forming As–S or Ga–S bonds, and finally the last step is the long-time ordering of the monolayer together with increasing the SAM coverage. In step 1 and step 2, when the passivation time increases, the coverage of thiol molecules is gradually increased, which indicates that the possibility of direct contact between GaAs and graphene is decreased. At this point, Rs will increase with increasing passivation time for the first few hours. At the end of this stage the thiol molecules are adsorbed on GaAs in a disordered way, and some molecules even lay laterally on the substrate. The number of adsorbed thiol molecules at this stage is still far below the maximum, where a perfect ordered monolayer is formed by the formation of As–S (or Ga–S) bonds at every As (or Ga) atomic site on the GaAs surface. At the beginning of step 3, ordering of the monolayer is observed, and some of the As (or Ga) atomic sites are again exposed to the thiol molecules. If the immersed substrate is taken out of the thiol solution before the occupation of these re-exposed sites, a void is formed on the sites. According to the carrier transport model discussed above, the higher the proportion of voids, the higher the Rs value. It is then deduced that with an increase in the ordering and coverage of the thiol molecules, Rs is then decreased, which results in improvements in the photovoltaic performance. In the final stage, the adsorption of thiol molecules reaches the maximum for the given conditions and the maximum value is maintained when the passivation time increases from 24 to 48 hours.
In previous work, an area dependent photovoltaic performance droop is observed in a Si/graphene solar cell. With an increase in active area, the efficiency of the device degrades rapidly. This droop effect is highly related to the defects and impurities on the Si surface, which act as short circuit channels and lead to current leakage. When the active area of the device is increased, the efficiency droop is more evident. As we have shown above, the insertion of the SAM will passivate the interfacial recombination centers and further improve the photovoltaic performance of the devices. It is therefore of great interest to see whether the insertion of the SAM can alleviate the area dependent performance droop in GaAs/graphene solar cells. The photovoltaic performance of devices with various active areas, ranging from 4 to 49 mm2, was evaluated, and for comparison, both the GaAs/C18SAM/graphene and GaAs/graphene solar cells were adopted in this study, as shown in Fig. 5 and Table 3. From Table 3, the performance degradation can be mainly attributed to the decrease in Voc and FF when the device area is increased. As aforementioned, this performance degradation is attributed to the current leakage and carrier recombination associated with the increasing device area. However, the performance degradation for the devices with and without SAM passivation is not identical. For the devices with SAM passivation, the PCE decreases from 11.1% at 4 mm2 to 8.0% at 49 mm2, which indicates a ∼30% decrease in PCE. Whereas, the PCE degradation for devices without SAM passivation is ∼43% when the device area is increased from 4 to 49 mm2. In comparison to the devices without the SAM, the devices with SAMs can effectively prevent the formation of interfacial defects and cover the impurities, which is conducive to suppressing carrier recombination and current leakage. Therefore, the devices with the interfacial SAM show superior photovoltaic performance with a larger device area.
Device type
Device area (mm2)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
GaAs/SAM/graphene
4
19.4
0.77
74.5
11.1
9
19.2
0.75
68.4
9.8
25
18.9
0.73
62.4
8.6
49
18.7
0.72
59.5
8.0
GaAs/graphene
4
19.2
0.68
59.3
7.7
9
18.8
0.65
51.2
6.3
25
18.3
0.61
44.7
5.0
49
18.0
0.59
42.3
4.5
The performance stability of the devices with and without the integration of the SAM was evaluated, as shown in Fig. 6. Note that the devices were prepared without applying doping and an ARC. Fig. 6(a) shows the evolution of the performance of the devices under continuous illumination. During 80 hours illumination, the PCE degradation for both types of device is within 5%. For the devices with SAMs, the PCE degradation is as low as 2.8%, while the PCE degradation for the devices without SAMs is ∼4.7%. This degradation process is caused by the oxidation of the substrate. Therefore, the superior stability of the devices with SAMs can also be attributed to the suppression of interfacial oxidation by the introduction of SAMs as we have discussed above. It is also interesting to understand whether the integration of the SAM plays a role in enhancing the long-term stability of the GaAs/graphene solar cells. As shown in Fig. 6(b), both types of device show fast performance degradation in the first 4 weeks. This degradation can also be ascribed to the interfacial oxidation as mentioned above. As the storage time increases, the PCE of the devices tends to be stabilized at a fixed value. It is interesting to see that with the integration of the SAM, the performance degradation ratio of the devices is ∼16% after 24 weeks, which is smaller than that of the devices without SAM interfacial modification (∼27%). It is clear that the performance stability of the devices is enhanced after the integration of the interfacial SAM. This superior performance stability can be attributed to the suppression of the oxidation of the GaAs surface by the integration of the SAM, as aforementioned. Although the performance stability of the GaAs/graphene solar cells can be improved by the SAM, the degradation ratio is still high compared with Si/graphene solar cells. It is reported that the performance degradation of Si/graphene solar cells is as low as 7% within 17 weeks. Therefore, further effort is still needed to overcome this in our future work.
The performance of the GaAs/SAM/graphene solar cell can be further improved by applying TSAF doping and an ARC, as shown in Fig. 7. Doping the graphene will lead to a reduction in Rs and an increase in the work function of graphene, which together enhance the PCE to 12.2%, as shown in Fig. 7(a). After doping, the photovoltaic performance can be further improved by an ARC that is different to the previously reported AlxOy (ref. 10 and 12) and TiO2 colloidal film. The ARC consists of a 5 nm thick MoO3−x and a 50 nm-thick ZrxOy layer. By coating the device with the MoO3−x/ZrxOy ARC, the Jsc is improved to 26.8 mA cm−2, the Voc stays at 0.80 V, and the FF is slightly decreased to 74.0%, finally enhancing the PCE to 15.9%. According to the EQE data shown in Fig. 7(b), the Jsc for both devices can be calculated by integrating the photo-generated current at each wavelength:
(8)
where
λ is the wavelength, P1.5(λ) is the photon number of the AM 1.5 solar spectrum at wavelength λ, and EQE(λ) is the measured EQE value at wavelength λ. The calculated Jsc values are 26.0 and 18.6 mA cm−2 for the devices with and without doping and an ARC, respectively, which is in accordance with the values measured by the J–V curves under illumination. Note that the insertion of the 5 nm thick MoO3−x layer plays a key role in the efficiency enhancement of the devices. Without this buffer layer, an obvious efficiency droop is observed rather than the enhancement. The performance of the devices both with and without the MoO3−x layer is shown in Fig. S5. According to some preliminary work, it is assumed that the MoO3−x layer not only protects the fragile graphene film from the bombardment of evaporated ZrxOy clusters, but also acts as a p-type dopant for graphene. The detailed mechanism of efficiency enhancement by the insertion of the MoO3−x layer is beyond the scope of this work and is still under investigation.


In summary, the photovoltaic performance of GaAs/graphene Schottky junction solar cells is enhanced by modifying the interface with self-assembled alkyl thiol monolayers. By forming a dense and highly hydrophobic SAM on the GaAs surface, oxidation induced by interfacial water molecules is greatly suppressed. Due to the insulating nature of the SAM and the improved interfacial property, the reverse saturation current and carrier recombination rate are decreased thus leading to an increase in both Voc and FF. The PCE is improved from 7.7% to 11.1% by utilizing 1-octadecanethiol as the fundamental building unit for the self-assembled monolayer. This PCE value is a new record for GaAs/graphene solar cells without applying doping and an ARC. By considering the tunneling of the carriers, a modified thermal emission model was applied to state the interfacial carrier transport and explain the photovoltaic performance enhancement by the insertion of SAMs. In addition, the passivation time of the alkyl thiol is optimized for the fabrication of the GaAs/graphene solar cells. By modifying the GaAs/graphene interface with the SAM, the device shows a PCE of ∼8% at a large device area of 49 mm2, which is also superior to the device without interfacial modification. Moreover, the stability of the GaAs/graphene solar cells is also improved by the integration of the interfacial SAM. A PCE of 15.9% can be achieved after chemical doping of graphene and deposition of the ARC. Although the efficiency of the GaAs/SAM/graphene solar cells reaches 15.9%, this value is still lower than most of the commercial solar cells, e.g. GaAs p–n junction solar cells, Si and perovskite solar cells. However, the GaAs/SAM/graphene solar cells reported in this work are still promising candidates for practical application. On the one hand, the GaAs/SAM/graphene solar cells are cost-effective when compared with commercial GaAs and Si solar cells based on p–n junctions. On the other hand, although perovskite solar cells reach a higher PCE, our GaAs/SAM/graphene solar cells show superior stability in air. In the near future, we will further enhance the performance of the GaAs/SAM/graphene solar cells, in order to promote the practical application of this new kind of solar cell.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work is supported by the National Science Fund for Excellent Young Scholars of China (No. 51422203), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51572091, 51002052 and 51372001), the Opened Fund of the State Key Laboratory on Integrated Optoelectronics (No. IOSKL2016KF17), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2017MS012), the Distinguished Young Scientist Foundation of Guangdong Scientific Committee (No. S2013050013882), the Key Project in Science and Technology of Guangdong Province (No. 2014B010119001), and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2017M610522).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta04490b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018