 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA05350E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17464-17472


Jingjing
Chang
*,

Juanxiu
Xiao
,

Zhenhua
Lin
,

Hai
Zhu
,

Qing-Hua
Xu
,

Kaiyang
Zeng
,

Yue
Hao
 and 

Jianyong
Ouyang
*

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore. E-mail: mseoj@nus.edu.sg

State Key Laboratory of Wide Band Gap Semiconductor Technology, School of Microelectronics, Xidian University, 2 South Taibai Road, Xi'an, China 710071. E-mail: jjingchang@xidian.edu.cn

Department of Mechanical Engineering, National University of Singapore, 9 Engineering Drive 1, Singapore 117576

Department of Chemistry, National University of Singapore, 3 Science Drive 3, Singapore 117543

Received
25th June 2016
, Accepted 9th October 2016
First published on 10th October 2016
Perovskite solar cells have attracted much attention due to their high power conversion efficiency and low fabrication cost. The efficiency of the devices depends on the charge transport and charge extraction at the interface between the perovskite and electron or hole transport material. In this study, we use Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) to investigate the charge carrier generation, transport, and extraction mechanism of several different structures with/without the hole/electron interlayers. It was found that the perovskite films exhibited unbalanced charge-carrier transport and extraction in the p-i-n type structure. Meanwhile, the leakage current under bias conditions can be suppressed by using a [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) capping layer. The time-resolved photoluminescence (TR-PL) results reveal that the electrons have a longer lifetime and longer diffusion length than the holes in the perovskite layer. These results suggest that the electron extraction is more efficient than the hole extraction in the planar heterojunction devices of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS)/perovskite/PCBM. These findings are beneficial for further optimizing the perovskite solar cells.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have received much attention due to their low fabrication cost, high light absorption coefficient, high charge carrier mobility, long charge diffusion length, tunable band gap and high power conversion efficiency. The power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of perovskite solar cells have achieved 15–21% by using the two-step sequential deposition or one step deposition with solvent engineering and wisely selecting the appropriate materials in the PSCs. These efficiencies have exceeded the commercialization threshold. Moreover, the PCE could be further improved through composition engineering or device engineering. To date, great progress has been made on the devices with a planar structure that have advantages of a simple structure and device fabrication process, and good performance reproducibility.

Although there are similarities between PSCs and organic solar cells, the differences between them are significant. For highly efficient organic solar cells, excitons are formed first in the active layer and they have a high exciton binding energy of about 500 meV. The excitons separate to free charge carriers at the donor/acceptor heterojunction interface. However, the exciton binding energy in perovskite materials is only 30–50 meV, much lower than that in organic solar cells. The thermal energy is thus sufficient for the separation of electrons and holes in perovskites. After the charge separation, the charge carriers will flow selectively to the respective electrodes. Usually, in order to reduce the charge recombination, electron and hole transport interlayers are used between the perovskite layer and the electrodes. The efficient charge transport and extraction depend on the charge carrier dynamics at the interfaces. In perovskite solar cells, the perovskite could form a p/n or an n/n junction with n-type TiO2 (or PCBM) and p-type spiro (or PEDOT:PSS). Regardless of the structure, the perovskite materials could act as both hole and electron transport materials due to their ambipolar nature.
Understanding the device physics is important for the development of high-performance devices. Various characterizations have been carried out to study the charge generation and charge transport of PSCs. Edri et al. used electron beam-induced current (EBIC) measurements to study the variations of charge separation inside the device. The EBIC measurements are based on the local excitation and extraction of charge carriers by an electron beam. The experimental results showed that there is a p-i-n type junction in PSCs and the electrons are extracted more efficiently than holes. However, the physics of EBIC is not exactly the same as that of the real devices since the current is induced by an electron beam rather than generated by light absorption and charge separation. In addition, the charge carriers studied in their work are electron beam-excited free electrons and holes. But in real devices excitons are formed prior to the generation of free electrons and holes. Furthermore, the driving force for the transport of the charge carriers is unclear in their study using EBIC measurements. The driving force might be diffusion-dominated or drifting by an electric field. As Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) can be used to nondestructively decide the surface potential by detecting the electrostatic force between materials and the probe, cross-sectional KPFM has been adopted to investigate the charge separation and transport in lead halide PSCs. However, the cross-section part of the devices was prepared through a mechanical process in those studies. The mechanical process can significantly change the surface of perovskite materials, and it thus causes artificial results due to the unstable nature of the perovskite materials. In addition, to monitor the potential of the cross-section of a device, a DC poling process was performed before the KPFM characterization. The authors proposed that the increase or decrease of the surface potential through the cross-section surface might be due to the carrier separation and transport. However, the dynamic change of the surface potential can be more complicated. It might consist of permanent polarization and screened charges due to injected free charges or adsorptions from ambient air if the materials are ferroelectrics. In addition, it was reported that the ferroelectric behavior was observed in PSCs through the investigation with an external electric field. There is also an argument that there is no resembling ferroelectric property in the centrosymmetric tetragonal perovskite films. Weak polarization switching while no hysteresis switching was observed by piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) imaging at room temperature. In order to verify whether there is a ferroelectric dipole that can contribute to the surface potential, PFM was performed on PSCs. In addition, KPFM, PFM and time-resolved photoluminescence (TR-PL) spectroscopy were used to study the charge carrier dynamics within different device structures, including hole transport layer (HTL)/methylammonium lead triiodide (MAPbI3), MAPbI3/electron transport layer (ETL), and HTL/MAPbI3/ETL on an ITO coated glass substrate, in this work.

High-quality perovskite films are important for the photovoltaic performance of PSCs. The MAPbI3 films were firstly examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Fig. S1 and S2). There are strong XRD diffraction patterns at 14.2°, 28.5°, and 31.9°, which can be assigned to (110), (220), and (310) crystal planes of the tetragonal perovskite phase, respectively. The strong diffraction intensity indicates a highly crystalline perovskite film with the (110) plane preferentially oriented. The perovskite thin films deposited on an ITO or PEDOT:PSS substrate exhibited similar crystallinity with comparable full width half maximum (FWHM) values for the (110) peak (Fig. S1). As shown in Fig. S2, the MAPbI3 film is compact and uniform. It has a crystalline structure and fully covers the substrate. The grain size is up to about 400 nm without any voids observed, which indicates good uniformity of the perovskite thin films (Fig. S2). Furthermore, the surface morphology of perovskite films deposited on the ITO or PEDOT:PSS substrate showed similar crystal size which is similar to previously reported results. These results indicate that the underlayers have a minimal effect on the KPFM measurements in this study. The energy levels of MAPbI3 were investigated by UV-Vis spectroscopy and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). As shown in Fig. S3, the thin film has strong absorption from the visible range down to the near-infrared wavelength range. The absorption onset at ca. 780–785 nm suggests an optical band gap of 1.58 eV. According to the UPS result, the Fermi level and valence band maximum (VBM) of MAPbI3 are around 4.3 and 5.7 eV, respectively. Thus, the conduction band minimum (CBM) of MAPbI3 is around 4.1 eV. This indicates an n-type nature of MAPbI3, which is similar to that reported in the literature. Therefore, the energy levels of MAPbI3 align well with the PEDOT:PSS that has a work-function of 5.1 eV for the hole extraction and PCBM (LUMO: 4.2 eV) for the electron collection.

The accumulation of charge carriers in the perovskite thin film could occur due to different charge carrier mobilities and different charge extraction rates at the two interfaces. The KPFM measurement of MAPbI3 under illumination can provide information on the dynamic physics of charge transport, charge extraction and recombination at interfaces and charge trapping. We measured different structures after the same poling process in the dark and under light illumination. The experimental setup for the KPFM measurements is shown in Fig. S4. The KPFM measurements were conducted in the alternating contact mode. All of the KPFM images were acquired by applying an AC voltage of 3 V with a delta height of 40 nm. Both the topography and surface potential images were simultaneously obtained on a 256 × 256 array. Biases were applied through the scanning probe microscope (SPM) tips, and the samples were grounded through the ITO bottom electrode. First, a series of DC voltages (−2 V → −1 V → 0 V → +1 V → +2 V) were applied to the middle area of 5 × 5 μm2 (each step is 5 × 1 μm2) in the dark (light off). Subsequently, the KPFM measurement was performed at the same area (light off). To study the illumination intensity effects, the same DC poling process was conducted under light illumination of 250 W m−2 (light on). The surface potential of the same DC poled area was then investigated under light by KPFM. To avoid the effect by the surface screened charges due to the charge absorption from ambient air, the surface potential values of the unbiased region were reset to 0 V and used as a reference for other biased regions so that the surface potential from different biased regions can be compared quantitatively. In the surface potential images, the increased surface potential is due to the presence of positive charges, whereas the decreased surface potential arises from negative charges.
The first study was performed on the structure of a layer of MAPbI3 on ITO (ITO/MAPbI3) without PEDOT:PSS and PCBM. Since the work function (φ) of the Pt coated tip is 5.27 eV, the interface between MAPbI3 and the Pt-coated tip should be a Schottky contact (Fig. 1a and d). When the structure is in the dark, there are no photo-generated holes and electrons. It is assumed that there is the formation of an n-i-p or a p-i-n structure as a result of the drifting of positively charged vacancies or negatively charged ions to the perovskite film surface during the negative or positive poling process of the ITO/MAPbI3/Pt. When the voltage of a negative poling process is higher than the threshold voltage, the conduction band of the perovskite will bend upward and the depletion width will increase at the interface between the MAPbI3 layer and the Pt-coated tip (Fig. 1b). The electrons will be injected from the tip into the sample surface and/or positively charged vacancies  of iodide will migrate to the film surface. Similarly, holes will be injected from the tip into the sample surface and/or negatively charged ions  will migrate to the sample surface during a positive poling process (Fig. 1c). When the perovskite film is exposed to light of 250 W m−2, both holes and electrons will be generated in the MAPbI3 film. Most of the photo-generated electrons and holes will recombine owing to the absence of a hole transport layer and an electron transport layer in this structure. During the poling processes of the perovskite film, only a small part of the photo-generated holes and electrons will be extracted because of the poor charge extraction by the tip and ITO. Charge injection and/or ion migration similar to the ones in the dark can take place.

Fig. 2(a) and (b) show the topography and surface potential of ITO/MAPbI3 in the dark. The surface potential of the region poled by a negative bias and a positive bias is the same as that of the rest area. It indicates that the charges are compensated by the charge injection and/or ion migration in the poled areas. In addition, we observed the sample breakdown when a voltage of −2 V was applied (Fig. S5). Fig. 2(c) and (d) show the topography and surface potential of ITO/MAPbI3 exposed to light illumination of 250 W m−2. The surface potential of the poled areas is slightly higher than that of the rest area, which can be attributed to the extraction of a small part of the photo-generated holes to the sample surface. In addition, the current leakage in the area poled by negative bias also has an influence on the adjacent areas and results in an increase in the potential surface.
Further study was carried out on the stacked structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3 without PCBM (Fig. 3). The PEDOT:PSS layer is used for the hole collection. The surface potential decreases in the region poled with a −0.5 V bias when the structure is in the dark. There is no remarkable difference for the area poled with a +0.5 V voltage. In contrast, when the structure is exposed to the illumination of 250 W m−2, the surface potential increases for the region poled by a +0.5 V bias, while there is no remarkable change in the surface potential for the region poled with a −0.5 V bias. We observed that the sample broke down or decomposed under a bias of +0.5 V or −0.5 V. The break down in the dark was triggered by a negative bias, whereas the leakage current was triggered by a positive bias under illumination. Compared with the measurement results from the structure of ITO/MAPbI3/Pt (Fig. 1 and 2), it is concluded that the breakdown occurs more easily for the structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3.
KPFM experiments were then performed on a structure of ITO/MAPbI3/PCBM without the hole transport layer (Fig. 4). The barrier height and the depletion width of MAPbI3/PCBM/Pt are the same as those of MAPbI3/Pt. The barrier height at the interface of MAPbI3/PCBM is much lower than that at the interface of MAPbI3/Pt because the Fermi level of PCBM is higher than that of Pt (Fig. 1a and 4a). In addition, the schematic energy band diagram and the barrier height for the ITO/MAPbI3/PCBM/Pt-coated tip structure under different biased conditions are shown in Fig. 4c and d. From the KPFM result (Fig. 5b), there is no obvious effect of the negative bias poling on the surface potential in the dark. Thus, the negative bias poling does not induce any negative charges. When the structure is poled by a negative voltage, the injected electrons are compensated by the migrated positively charged  at the interface of MAPbI3/PCBM. But the contact surface potential increases in these areas after the positive poling process. It indicates the presence of additional positive charges due to hole injection from the tip to the sample surface over the concentration of the migrated negatively charged ions . Under illumination, similar changes in the surface potential were observed (Fig. 5d). Holes and electrons are generated in the MAPbI3 layer under light. The generated electrons transport to the interface of MAPbI3/PCBM and the holes transport to the interface of ITO/MAPbI3. During the negative voltage poling, apart from the positively charged  that can migrate and be compensated by the injected electrons at the MAPbI3/PCBM interface, recombination with the generated electrons can take place as well. There is no surface potential change in these areas. The increase in the surface potential under the positive biased area is due to the presence of additional positive charge carriers in this region, in which the negatively charged ions  can drift to the sample surface, and the holes can also be injected from the tip to the sample. Therefore, it suggests that the hole concentration by injection is larger than the concentration of the migrated negatively charged ions and extracted electrons. Moreover, under 1 V DC bias, the increase in contact surface potential is not obvious. This can be ascribed to the compensation of the injected holes by the migrated negatively charged ions. In addition, the top PCBM layer in this device could act as the capping layer to protect the perovskite materials from exposure to air and avoid the possible shunt leakage or decomposition and make it more stable towards the DC bias in the air.
KPFM experiments were further performed on the structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM (Fig. 6). The schematic energy band diagram and the Schottky barrier for the structure are shown in Fig. 6. Compared with the ITO/MAPbI3/PCBM structure, the barrier height at the interface of MAPbI3/PCBM should be the same, and the barrier height will increase at the interface of PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3 within the negative/positive bias, i.e., the conduction band of the PEDOT:PSS will bend downward/upward more within the negative/positive bias (Fig. 6b and c). The stacked structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM with both hole and electron transport interlayers is more stable towards the DC bias and there is no significant change in the topography in the dark or under illumination (Fig. 7a and c). In the dark, the surface potential also increases under a positive bias corresponding to the presence of additional positive charge carriers due to the hole injection over the migration of negatively charged ions , while no obvious negative charge carriers could be observed under the negative bias indicating that the migration of positively charged  was compensated by the injected electrons (Fig. 7b). When the structure is exposed to light, the surface potential increase is more obvious probably due to increased film conductivity and changed Schottky barrier at the junction (Fig. 7d and e). This contact surface potential value becomes larger when increasing the DC bias voltage (Fig. 7f). It is similar to the results observed in the device without the hole transport layer, although the surface potential value decreased because of the existence of better hole extraction at the PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3 interface. In addition, this indicates that the electron extraction via PCBM ETL is more efficient than the hole extraction via PEDOT:PSS HTL. Thus, the charge transport is unbalanced in the device. This indicates that using a more efficient HTL or reducing the PEDOT:PSS layer thickness will help to increase the Jsc and PCE of the perovskite solar cells.
PFM measurements were also performed on the device with an ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM structure with both hole and electron transport interlayers (Fig. S7). There is no phase change from the PFM phase image and phase loops, indicating that there is no photoferroelectric property in this device. Hence, this demonstrates that the surface potential change is due to charge generation, charge extraction, and recombination at interfaces and traps.
These results are consistent with the photoluminescence (PL) results. To investigate the photoconversion processes in the perovskite thin films, steady-state PL and time-resolved PL were carried out on MAPbI3 thin films. The steady-state PL spectra were measured for the films on quartz (Fig. S8). The PL intensity significantly decreases when a PEDOT:PSS layer is placed under the MAPbI3 layer. This is attributed to the transport of holes from MAPbI3 to PEDOT:PSS. The PL quenching is more significant when a PCBM layer is added to the MAPBI3 layer. This can be ascribed to the more efficient electron transport from MAPbI3 to PCBM. These results are consistent with the results by THz measurements in the literature, which reported an electron mobility of 12.5 cm2 (V−1 s−1) and hole mobility of 7.5 cm2 (V−1 s−1). Moreover, the Hall effect measurements suggest that the electron mobility could even reach up to 66 cm2 (V−1 s−1).
Time-resolved PL study was performed on this structure to understand the photophysics. Detailed information about the thin films measurement, and fitting methodology can be found in the experimental part. The time-resolved PL measurement was performed under a low energy density (0.2 μJ cm−2). The PL decay and mono-exponentially fitted curves of the thin films are shown in Fig. 8. The average PL lifetime for the MAPbI3 film is 132.8 ns. The long lifetime suggests that MAPbI3 has a high electron transport rate and a low carrier recombination rate. When depositing an electron extracting layer (PCBM) or a hole extracting layer (PEDOT:PSS) adjacent to the perovskite thin films, the charge carrier lifetime significantly reduced, indicating good extraction of the charge carriers and quenching effect of the interlayers.
Femtosecond pump–probe measurement was also performed, and differential transmission spectra at different time delays are shown in Fig. S9a. The bleaching dynamics probed at 760 nm is displayed in Fig. S9b. The dynamics was fitted by a double-exponential decay function, with decay constants of 14.3 ps (26%) and 370.5 ps (74%). These two decay components could be attributed to a convolution of nonradiative recombination and radiative recombination, respectively.
Moreover, we fabricated both hole transport layer-free and electron transport layer-free devices. As shown in Fig. 9a and Table 1, the device with both interlayers exhibited an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.00 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 21.0 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.77. This yields a high PCE of 15.8%, which is comparable with values reported in the literature. In the absence of the PEDOT:PSS layer, the device can still have a PCE of 13.4% with a Voc of 0.99 V, Jsc of 20.1 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.70. This result further proves that the device has a comparable hole extraction ability to the ITO electrode and less efficient hole extraction compared with PEDOT:PSS. However, for the device in the absence of the PCBM ETL, the PCE dramatically decreases to 5.6% with a Voc of 0.91 V, Jsc of 14.5 mA cm−2, and FF of 0.45. The reduced PCE is related to not only the reduced electron extraction but also the passivation role of the PCBM layer. The internal photo-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurements are shown in Fig. S10,  and decreased IPCE values were observed for devices without hole or electron interlayers. This is consistent with the Jsc measured in J–V curves.
Device

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/LiF/Al
21.0 ± 0.5
1.00 ± 0.02
0.77 ± 0.02
15.8 ± 0.4
ITO/MAPbI3/PCBM/LiF/Al
20.1 ± 0.6
0.99 ± 0.02
0.70 ± 0.02
13.4 ± 0.5
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/LiF/Al
14.5 ± 1.2
0.91 ± 0.08
0.45 ± 0.10
5.6 ± 1.3
The hysteresis in the J–V curves of the perovskite solar cell devices with and without hole or electron interlayers was also studied. It has been reported that the hysteresis behavior could be introduced by trapping/detrapping of charge carriers, ferroelectricity, ion migration and so on. As shown in Fig. 9b–d, the J–V curves of the forward and reverse scans of the cells do not show significant hysteresis for the device with both interlayers. However, for the device without the hole interlayer, slight hysteresis behavior could be observed, while for the device without the PCBM interlayer, poor I–V characteristics were observed which may be due to the charge trapping/detrapping mechanism and lack of passivation.
Our results suggest that the electron collection is more efficient than hole collection for PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PCBM in the whole wavelength of the incident light. Shahzada et al. made a similar finding. We also notice that internal quantum efficiency of 100% was reported at a certain wavelength of light for perovskite solar cells. Probably, the charge transport and recombination are related to the wavelength of the light that induces the charge generation.

Patterned indium tin oxide (ITO) glass substrates (10 ohm □−1) were supplied by the NSG group. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS, Clevios P VP Al 4083) was purchased from Heraeus Holding GmbH. Methylammonium iodide (MAI) and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) were obtained from Dyesol Ltd and Nano-C Inc., respectively. Other chemicals, including lead(II) iodide (PbI2, 99.999% purity), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, anhydrous, ≥99.9% purity), γ-butyrolactone (GBL, ≥99% purity), LiF (≥99% purity), chlorobenzene (anhydrous, 99.8% purity) and toluene (anhydrous, 99.5% purity), were supplied by Sigma-Aldrich. All materials were used without further purification.


ITO glass substrates were cleaned sequentially in detergent, deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol by sonication for 20 min. After drying under a N2 stream, substrates were further treated with UV-ozone for 15 min. PEDOT:PSS was filtered with a 0.45 μm filter. The PEDOT:PSS layer with a thickness of ∼40 nm was prepared by spin-coating at 6000 rpm for 40 s and subsequently annealed at 140 °C for 15 min in air. The ITO substrates coated with PEDOT:PSS were then transferred into a N2-filled glove box. The perovskite layer was coated from a precursor solution containing 1.4 M PbI2 and 1.4 M MAI in a co-solvent of DMSO:GBL (3:7 vol ratio) at 1000 rpm for 20 s. Anhydrous toluene was dripped after 20 s at 5000 rpm. The perovskite films were annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. The thickness of the perovskite thin films was around 260 nm. The PCBM layer (PCBM) was then deposited by spin coating a chlorobenzene solution of 20 mg mL−1 PCBM at 2000 rpm for 1 min. LiF (0.5 nm thick) and Al (100 nm thick) were thermally deposited in a vacuum of <1 × 10−6 Torr through a shadow mask. Each device had an area of 0.11 cm2.

All J–V curves of the perovskite solar cells were recorded using a Keithley 2400 sourcemeter. The device photocurrent was measured for a device exposed to AM1.5 illumination (100 mW cm−2), which was accurately calibrated with a standard Si photodiode detector. The induced photo-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra were acquired with a xenon lamp (Oriel, 300 W) as the light source, a Cornerstone 260 Oriel 74125 monochromator, and a lock-in amplifier (SR830, Stanford Research Corp.). The light intensity was calibrated with a Si-based diode (J115711–1-Si detector).

X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were acquired using a Bruker D8 Advance XRD instrument. UV-visible absorption spectra were recorded with a Shimadzu UV-1800 spectrophotometer. Scanning electron microscopic (SEM) images were obtained with a Zeiss Supra-40 SEM. Film thicknesses were determined by a surface profilometer (KLA Tencor, Alpha-Step IQ). Photoluminescence spectra were performed using an LS 55 fluorescence spectrometer (PerkinElmer) with an excitation wavelength of 410 nm. The excitation source of the time-resolved photoluminescence setup was a diode laser (NanoLED) working at a repetition rate of 10 MHz. The wavelength was 438 nm, and the pulse duration was ∼260 ps. The scattering of excitation light was eliminated using two 600 nm long pass filters. Photoluminescence was collected and detected using an avalanche photodiode (Micro Photon Devices, PicoQuant) attached to a time-correlated single photon counting card (TCSPC PicoHarp 300, PicoQuant). Femtosecond pump–probe measurement was performed on a Spectral Physics Ti:sapphire oscillator seeded amplifier laser system, which pumped an optical parametric amplifier. An optical parametric generation centered at 500 nm acted as the pump beam. The original 800 nm from the amplifier was focused onto a sapphire plate to produce white light continuum, which acted as the probe beam. Both pump and probe beams were focused onto the MAPbI3 thin films with diameters of 300 and 200 μm, respectively. The time delay between pump and probe pulses was adjusted by a translational stage (ESP300, Newport). The TAS displays the behaviors of the photoexcited charges in a time window of 1 ns, with a temporal resolution of 0.1 ps.

A MFP-3D SPM system by Asylum Research in USA was used for the surface potential distribution characterization. The system was equipped with Asylum Research SPM control software (version 13.09.91) on an IGOR PRO 6.34A software platform. The experimental set-up of KPFM is shown in Fig. S1. The KPFM measurement was conducted in the alternating contact mode (similar to the tapping mode in other SPM systems). All of the KPFM images were acquired by applying an AC voltage of 3 V with delta height and start delta height of 40 nm. By this technique, topography and surface potential images were simultaneously obtained on a 256 × 256 array. Biases were applied through the SPM tips, and the samples were grounded through the ITO bottom electrode (Fig. S1). First, a series of DC voltages (−2 V → −1 V → 0 V → +1 V → +2 V) were applied to the middle area 5 × 5 μm2 (each step is 5 × 1 μm2) in the dark (light off). Subsequently, the KPFM measurement was performed at the same area (light off). To study the illumination intensity effects, the same DC poling process was conducted under an increased illumination condition of 250 W m−2 (light on). Afterward under the same illumination condition, the surface potential of the DC poled area was also investigated by the KPFM technique. To exclude interaction between the tip and surface and artificial results caused by absorption under ambient conditions, the surface potential values of the unbiased region were reset to 0 V to better compare the results across the different samples.
To reveal whether there is photoferroelectric property, PFM characterization was also conducted after the KPFM measurements. The drive voltage was AC voltage with an amplitude of 1 V. To get the phase loops and amplitude loops, PFM was operated in the spectroscopy mode. The triangle-square waveform was employed, which has a frequency of 200 mHz. The scan rate was 1 Hz for the SPM measurements. Commercial Pt-coated Si tips (AC240TM, Olympus, Japan) were used. These tips have an average tip radius of 15 nm, average spring constant of 2 N m−1, average inverse optic lever sensitivity of 100 nm V−1 and average resonance frequency of 65 kHz.

In conclusion, we have shown the charge carrier dynamics in the perovskite layer and between the interlayers. The electron extraction and transport are more efficient than those of holes determined by KPFM measurements. TR-PL measurement showed that the perovskite film has a longer electron diffusion length. This study demonstrated that using more efficient HTL or reducing the PEDOT:PSS layer thickness will help to increase the Jsc and PCE of the perovskite solar cells due to the unbalanced charge transport nature in the device.


This work was supported by a research grant from the Ministry of Education in Singapore (R-284-000-147-112) and Young Talent fund of University Association for Science and Technology in Shaanxi, China.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: All the experimental procedures, device fabrication, characterization, PFM. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta05350e
‡ Dr J. Chang and J. Xiao contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016