 DOI: 10.1039/C8TC01345D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 5733-5737


Peng
Zhou
,

Tongle
Bu
,

Shengwei
Shi
,

Lingfeng
Li
,

Yulong
Zhang
,

Zhiliang
Ku
,

Yong
Peng
,

Jie
Zhong
*,

Yi-Bing
Cheng
 and 

Fuzhi
Huang
*

State Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan 430070, P. R. China. E-mail: fuzhi.huang@whut.edu.cn; jie.zhong@whut.edu.cn

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University, VIC 3800, Australia

Received
20th March 2018
, Accepted 6th May 2018
First published on 9th May 2018
Inorganic–organic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have drawn great attention in the past several years. As the stability of PSCs has been a major obstacle for their commercialization, a lot of work has been focused on improving the long-term stability. Here, we reported a meso-structured mixed PSC employing poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) as a hole transport layer (HTL) showing a stable performance even after one year of exposure to air. The impact of different HTL thicknesses on the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the PSCs has been investigated. The performance of the PSCs was further improved by doping Li-salt/4-tert-butylpyridine into the P3HT HTL. A maximum PCE of 17.55% was achieved, superior to the 14.30% PCE of the pristine P3HT-based devices. The effect of the dopants on the stability of the devices has also been studied.

In the past few years, metal–halide hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have drawn great attention because of their rapid increase in power conversion efficiency (PCE). Perovskites have a common formula of ABX3, where A, B and X represent organic cations (CH3NH3+, MA or NH = CHNH3+, FA) or Cs+, metal cations (Sn2+ and Pb2+) and halide anions (I−, Br− and Cl−), respectively. The efficiency of PSCs has been improved from 3.8% to 22.7% since 2009, as perovskites have excellent mobility of charge carriers (>10 cm2 V−1 s−1), long electron–hole diffusion length (>1 μm) and low exciton binding energy (<10 meV). PSCs have shown the promising prospect of commercialization, but there are still several problems to be addressed. For example, scaling up from the lab-scale devices is one of the challenges for the community. Another key problem for commercialization is their stability. It has been reported that the degradation of the perovskite was influenced by four key factors: UV light, solution processing, thermal effects and the moisture in the air. The moisture effect could be eliminated by a proper sealing method, while addressing the other factors requires the optimization of the materials, such as the perovskite materials, electron transport materials, and hole transport materials (HTMs). Jeon and co-workers utilized CH3NH3Pb(I1−xBrx)3 as a perovskite material and showed a great resistance in the atmospheric environment. The Br− additive is considered to improve the stability. Similarly, Noh and co-workers demonstrated that CH3NH3PbI2.4Br0.6 and CH3NH3PbI2.13Br0.87 presented great stability at a humidity of 55% RH. Later, mixed Cs+, Rb+, Br− and FA+ in MAPbI3 have been proved to enhance the stability and efficiency of PSCs. Besides the perovskite materials, the HTMs also affect the stability of the devices. Spiro-OMeTAD is one of the most common HTMs in PSCs. Unfortunately, the pristine Spiro-OMeTAD possesses an inherent low hole mobility (≈10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) and poor conductivity due to its triangular pyramid configuration and large intermolecular distance. Therefore, normally some dopants are added into Spiro-OMeTAD to improve the hole mobility, such as lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI) and cobaltic complexes. However, the ionic salts added are usually hygroscopic and thus would decompose the perovskite film which is sensitive to moisture. 4-tert-Butylpyridine (TBP), another dopant commonly used in Spiro-OMeTAD, can also react with perovskite and decompose it into PbI2. There is a tendency to develop a dopant-free HTM in consideration of the stability of devices.

P3HT is a commonly used HTM in organic solar cells with a relatively high hole mobility and great stability. This polymer is also a dopant-free HTM and thus could be a suitable choice for stable PSCs. The PCE of P3HT based PSCs first reported by Cahen and co-workers was only 0.52% combined with MAPbBr3. Giacomo and co-workers demonstrated a P3HT based PSC with CH3NH3PbI3−xClx as a light absorber and reached a PCE of 9.3%. Abbas et al. reported a planar heterojunction PSC with a PCE of 13.7% using a vacuum deposited perovskite film. Xiao and co-workers used a π-conjugated carbon material, graphdiyne (GD), as a dopant to P3HT to increase the light absorption in the long wavelength range, achieving a light-to-electricity efficiency of 14.58%. The efficiencies of the devices remained 90% of their initial values in a desiccator after 15 weeks. Habisreutinger et al. developed an elegant approach to mitigate the thermal degradation by embedding polymer-functionalized single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) in an insulating polymer matrix of P3HT and PMMA. The composite showed better ability to resist high temperature (more than 80 °C) and water compared with pristine P3HT. They achieved the best PCE of 15.3% with an average efficiency of 10 ± 2%. Recently, Nia et al. uncovered the effects of the molecular weight of P3HT and the thickness of mesostructured TiO2 (m-TiO2) on the performance of devices and achieved an average efficiency of 16.2% using MAPbI3 and undoped P3HT.
The FAPbI3/MAPbBr3 mixed perovskite has shown much higher stability than the traditional MAPbI3. Thus by combining the mixed perovskite with P3HT, it may open a way to address the stability issue of PSCs. Here, we prepared a meso-structured device with a pristine P3HT and FAPbI3/MAPbBr3 mixed perovskite that showed a good stability in ambient atmosphere even for one year. Instead of toxic chlorobenzene, ethyl acetate (EA) was used as an anti-solvent to form a more compact perovskite film with large crystals. The electron transport layer (ETL) consisted of a compact TiO2 (c-TiO2) layer and a meso-porous TiO2 (m-TiO2) layer. The aperture and abundant interface between m-TiO2 and perovskite can commendably protect the perovskite films. A PCE of 14.30% was achieved in the pristine P3HT devices and then a small amount of Li-TFSI was added into the HTM to improve the carrier density of the HTM and achieved a relatively high PCE of 17.55%. The devices were stored in a dark environment at 25 °C, and 25% RH to evaluate the long-term stability.

Typically, the PSCs are in a configuration of FTO/compact TiO2/m-TiO2/perovskite/P3HT/Au, as depicted in Fig. 1a. The mixed perovskite (FA0.85MA0.15Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3) was prepared via a modified anti-solvent process. Ethyl acetate was used as an anti-solvent, and the prepared mixed perovskite film was quite dense with large grains (Fig. 1b). The XRD pattern of the perovskite (Fig. 1c) clearly shows the formation of the black phase of the perovskite. The P3HT layer was spin-coated onto the perovskite film. The coated P3HT is found in the amorphous phase, the same as the one coated on the FTO substrate, confirmed by the XRD patterns (Fig. 1c). An amorphous film is normally much denser and of better quality. To obtain a high performance, the thickness of the P3HT layer was first optimized through adjusting the solution concentration. The corresponding relations between photovoltaic parameters and concentrations are shown in Fig. 2. It is interesting to find that the performance of PSCs with P3HT keeps increasing during the first week of storage. To reveal the cause of the increase, several undoped P3HT-PSC devices were stored in three closed containers. The first one was filled with nitrogen, the second one was filled with oxygen and the third one was filled with nitrogen with trace moisture. Devices of the first two groups kept almost the same performance after one week of storage, while the PCEs of the third group grew a lot as shown in Fig. S1a (ESI). Thus, it can be concluded that moisture plays an important role in the performance increase during the storage. It is possible that the moisture settles down at the interface. To figure out which interface, the m-TiO2/perovskite/spiro device was compared with the P3HT one. It is found that the spiro device did not exhibit a similar phenomenon, as the PCE did not increase during the storage (Fig. S1b, ESI). Thus, the change happens at the interface of the perovskite/P3HT. In addition, we found that the planar SnO2/perovskite/P3HT also showed an increase after storage (Fig. S1b, ESI), which further confirms the origin from the interface of perovskite/P3HT. The Li-TFSI doped devices show the same long time stabilization effect. After the several days of storage, we found that the hysteresis became smaller due to the improved interface by the moisture (Fig. S2, ESI). Despite the decreasing current density, the voltage and fill factor of these devices were continuously increasing in the first few days, thus leading to the increase of the PCE until they were stable. A champion PCE of 14.30% with a 104 nm thick P3HT film (30 mg mL−1) was achieved with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.024 V, a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 20.56 mA cm−2, and a fill factor of 0.679. With an increase in the thickness of the hole transport layer (HTL), the fill factor and current density of the devices decreased obviously, as well as the PCE. A thinner film would induce charge recombination, causing current leaking, while a thicker film would increase the series resistance. Thus 30 mg mL−1 was selected as the optimal concentration of P3HT solution.

In order to further improve the performance of the devices, Li-TFSI was added as a dopant to enhance the electrical conductivity of P3HT. The compared J–V curves of the devices with different volume ratios between solvent (chlorobenzene) and Li salt are given in Fig. 3. Li-TFSI makes a great contribution to the fill factor and the open-circuit voltage of the devices and thus enhances the PCE. It is found that 1.5% is an optimal ratio for the Li salt as a dopant, as shown in Fig. 3. Although increasing the Li salt content can enhance the voltage and fill factor of the devices, it would decrease the quality of the P3HT film. As Li-TFSI could not be uniformly dispersed in the P3HT solution, it resulted in a bad quality of the P3HT film with radial traces on the film as shown in Fig. S3 (ESI). The films of pristine P3HT and Li-doped P3HT are represented by H1 and H2, respectively. The PCE of the H2 device reached 17.55% after 7 days, with a Voc of 1.072 V, Jsc of 21.20 mA cm−2 and FF of 0.772, while the reference H1 device has a Voc of 1.024 V, Jsc of 20.56 mA cm−2, FF of 0.679 and PCE of 14.30%.
The external quantum efficiency spectra of the devices are shown in Fig. 3c. It is found that the integrated Jsc of the device is relatively low, compared with that of the SnO2-based device that has roughly the same current density (Fig. 3c). Thus the current densities of H2 under different intensities of sunlight were measured (Fig. 3d) and showed a nonlinear relation under weak light conditions. It was verified that this phenomenon did not exist in the TiO2-spiro devices by the lighting passivation of the interface defects between TiO2 and the perovskite film. This issue might be due to the unbalanced charge transport between m-TiO2 and P3HT. The relationship between the Voc and the intensities of the H2 device is shown in Fig. S4 (ESI), from which an ideality factor is calculated as 1.53. This means that there are still lots of defects in the devices.
The UV-vis absorption spectra of the P3HT films with/without dopants (Fig. S5, ESI) were measured, and did not show any significant change with only slightly higher values of the doped sample. This is mainly because of the strong reflection of the undoped P3HT film (Fig. S3, ESI). This clearly indicates that the dopants did not alter the band structure of the P3HT. The PL measurements (Fig. 4a) of the perovskite films coated with/without the P3HT layer were performed to further study the effect of different P3HT films on charge collection efficiency. From the spectra, it was found that the PL peak of the mixed perovskite was at 770 nm and almost completely quenched by P3HT or Li-TFSI doped P3HT. The photoluminescence spectra indicate that the P3HT film with/without Li-TFSI dopant both can effectively extract holes.
The Nyquist plots (Fig. 4b) were measured in the dark at an applied bias voltage of 1.0 V, which is similar to the Voc of the devices. The curves were fitted with an equivalent circuit model consisting of a series resistor Rs, a charge transfer resistance (Rct) and a constant phase element (CPE) at the interface between TiO2 and the perovskite layer. The fitting results of Rs and Rct are presented in Table 1. The Rct is related to the interface charge transport. The values of Rct in H1 and H2 are 157.8 and 125.7, respectively, indicating that the dopant has the ability to decrease the charge transfer resistance, resulting in a better performance.
Device

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
ct (Ω cm2)
H1
1.024
20.56
0.679
14.30
14.8
157.8
H2
1.072
21.20
0.772
17.55
13.5
125.7

Fig. 4c shows the FTIR spectra of the pristine P3HT and doped P3HT films where two increased peaks are obviously observed at 1150 cm−1 and 1200 cm−1 when Li-TFSI was added. These peaks are known to represent the C–C stretching vibration in the hexyl of P3HT polymer, indicating that the side chains are more ordered after doping. The electrical conductivity of the P3HT film (Fig. 3d) doped with different ratios of Li-TFSI was measured. An increased electrical conductivity related to the Li content is observed, which could be explained by the ordered side chains.
To evaluate the stability of the devices, typical devices were stored in a dark environment at 25 °C, and 25% RH for one year. As is shown in Fig. 5, the device with the pristine P3HT obviously shows a better stability. The PCE of the device using the pristine P3HT decreased to about 80% of the best value after 700 hours and then remained relatively stable within 1 year. Due to the hygroscopicity of Li-TFSI, the efficiencies of the H2 device decreased apparently in the long-term storage. Nevertheless, as is mentioned above, the FAPbI3/MAPbBr3 mixed perovskite possesses resistance to moisture, thereby reducing the influence of Li-TFSI. The final PCE of H2 decreased to nearly 0 after 160 days. A comparison device fabricated with MAPbI3 and Li-doped P3HT degraded completely after only 3 days. The hydrophobic P3HT on the perovskite film can well protect it and thus keep a long-term stability. To further improve the performance of the devices and preserve their excellent stability, a harmless dopant without hygroscopicity and corrosivity should be employed in future.

P3HT has been optimized to be used as an effective HTL for mixed PSCs. According to the 1 year observation of these devices, we proved the outstanding stability of the structure: dense TiO2/m-TiO2/(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15/P3HT. After a slow decay process in the first 28 days, the performance of the devices with pristine P3HT maintained a relatively stable level and could be retained for more than 1 year. Li-TFSI can improve the performance of the devices but impair the stability. Thus, it is necessary to develop proper dopants for P3HT in order to improve both the stability and the PCE of the PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC 51672202 and 51402115) and the Technological Innovation Key Project of Hubei Province (2016AAA041). J. Z. is thankful for the support of the “Chutian Scholar Program” of Hubei Province, China. The Analytical and Testing Center of Wuhan University of Technology and the Hubei Key Laboratory of Low Dimensional Optoelectronic Materials and Devices are also acknowledged for the characterization support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental section and UV-vis absorption spectra. See DOI: 10.1039/c8tc01345d
‡ Equal contribution.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018