 DOI: 10.1039/C0JM04419A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7730-7735

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Jin Ju
Kim
,

Ki Seok
Kim
 and 

Gun Young
Jung
*

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST), 261 Cheomdan-gwagiro, Buk-gu, Gwangju, 500-712, South Korea. E-mail: gyjung@gist.ac.kr; Fax: +82-62-715-2304; Tel: +82-62-715-2324

Received
16th December 2010
, Accepted 3rd March 2011
First published on 8th April 2011
Flexible dye-sensitised solar cells (DSSCs) with photoanodes composed of periodically aligned ZnO NRs were fabricated. The Zn metal dot array as seed spots for ZnO growth was defined on an ITO/PET flexible substrate by a non-aqueous direct metal transfer method. A low-temperature hydrothermal method produced periodically aligned single crystalline vertical ZnO NRs, which expedited electron transport and released bending strain efficiently. The power conversion efficiency was 3.15%, and the device performance was well maintained after 500 bending cycles. A DSSC with photoanodes of non-aligned ZnO NRs was also prepared, and the photoelectric properties were directly compared with those of a DSSC with well-aligned ZnO NRs.

Flexible devices have recently attracted considerable attention due to their bendable, lightweight, unbreakable, roll-to-roll manufacturing, and large-area feasible characteristics, which provide access to a variety of fields of flexible organic devices: memory devices, displays, light emitting diodes and solar cells. Among these, the study of flexible dye solar cells is a new and emerging research field that converts renewable energy from the sun into power for portable and bendable electronic devices.ZnO is often utilised as a photoanode material in dye-sensitised solar cells (DSSCs) due to its attractive properties. ZnO has a wide direct band gap (3.27 eV) equivalent to that of TiO2, which is generally used in organic solar cells. ZnO is also highly transparent, which allows for greater light penetration. Finally, 1-D single crystal structure formation is possible with ZnO, enabling a higher surface-to-volume ratio for greater dye loading.

Aiming to enhance efficiency, researchers have studied photoanode materials with various structures; ordered meso-structured materials and one-dimensional structured materials, such as nanorods, nanowires and nanotubes, result in improved electron transport. Generally, flexible DSSCs have been constructed using a mesoporous photoanode film based on a few-micrometres thick TiO2 nanoparticles on an indium tin oxide (ITO)-deposited plastic substrate; the cells are fabricated by low-temperature processes suitable for plastic substrates, such as film transfer, mechanical compression and doctor blade coating. The excitons generated within the dye molecules by light absorption split at the dye/nanoparticle interface, injecting electrons into the nanoparticle film. The electrons then travel through the nanoparticle film by a slow mechanism of trap-limited diffusion, which allows recombination to be more competitive and eventually lowers the charge collection efficiency. Furthermore, the nanoparticle film can easily crack and peel from the substrate while being bent.
Therefore, innovative attempts to replace the nanoparticle film with single-crystalline nanorods (NRs) have been made to utilise their larger electron transport speed along single crystalline rods, which act as a direct electrical pathway to the electrodes. Until now, single crystalline ZnO NRs have been applied as photoanodes in DSSCs by currently available synthetic methods, as the crystal structure of TiO2 (either anatase or rutile) makes it difficult to grow oriented single-crystalline NRs on a transparent conductive substrate. In the case of DSSCs that use a bush-like ZnO nanowire array, power conversion efficiencies of 1.5–2.4% (at best) were reported under illumination with 100 mW cm−2, equivalent to a sun air mass of 1.5 (AM 1.5).
However, if the ZnO NRs are not spatially separated, they are likely to be broken when being bent, as shown in Fig. 1. Additionally, the bush-like ZnO NRs can cause dye aggregation at their surfaces, decreasing the efficiency of electron injections because the injected electrons in the ZnO NRs have a greater chance to recombine with dyes and oxidised electrolytes at the larger interfacial area while moving, rather than reaching the ITO anode. Short pump-probe transient time measurements with the closely packed ZnO NRs indicate that the photo-generated electrons decay rapidly while hopping to neighbouring rods and that they interact with surfaces/interfaces where most impurity sites exist and electron trapping and recombination take place, thereby, decreasing the number of mobile electrons.
To overcome this challenge, periodically aligned vertical ZnO NRs, which prevent interruption between ZnO rods, are required; this feature could potentially increase electron transport along the one-dimensional rods. Furthermore, the spatially separated ZnO NRs are advantageous for releasing the bending strain and for improving optical transmittance through the gaps. Therefore, in this study, periodically aligned vertical ZnO NRs were formed and utilised as charge collectors for the flexible DSSCs. Their properties were compared to those of DSSCs having non-aligned ZnO NRs.

Metal foils and plastics are typical substrates for flexible DSSCs. The metal foils and their supplementary metal meshes have low electrical resistance and high-temperature endurance. Meanwhile, the polymer substrates are advantageous due to their high transparency, low cost and anti-corrosion properties. Despite these advantages, plastic substrates cannot withstand high temperatures. Indium tin oxide (ITO)-deposited polyethylene terephthalate (PET) film is mostly used as a flexible conductive substrate.

First, spatially separated seeds for the nanoscale ZnO growth should be defined on the ITO/PET film. A method called “direct metal transfer (DMT)” was performed at a low temperature and in a non-aqueous atmosphere, which are appropriate conditions for the polymer based substrate. The innovative DMT utilises the difference in surface energies at the interface, the details of which can be found in our previous report. Prior to the DMT, a silicon stamp with pillars 100 nm in diameter at a 400 nm pitch size was produced by laser interference lithography. The stamp surface was coated with a monolayer of releasing material, CF3(CF2)5(CH2)2SiCl3 (tridecafluoro-1,1,2,2-tetrahydrooctyltrichloro-silane) in the vapour phase, and a 20 nm thick Zn metal was subsequently deposited by sputtering. The releasing monolayer helped the sputtered Zn metal film detach easily from the top surface of the protruding pillars and transfer to the plastic substrate.
The stamp with the Zn metal film was then pressed on the ITO/PET substrate (45 Ω □−1, Aldrich) at 100 °C and 100 bar for 20 min, allowing for the Zn metal transfer to the substrate. The transferred Zn metal dots on the ITO/PET substrate were then oxidised to ZnO at room temperature via submersion in 80 mL of a 20 mM solution of zinc nitrate hexahydrate mixed with 2 mL of 28 wt% ammonia in water.

The formed ZnO seed array was dipped into a 500 mL solution containing zinc nitrate hexahydrate (3.7 g, 25 mM, Zn(NO3)2·6H2O, 98% purity, Aldrich), hexamethylenetetramine (1.75 g, 25 mM, C6H12N4, 99%, Aldrich) and polyethylenimine (1.8 g, 6 mM, PEI, Aldrich) at 80 °C for 4 h. Note that the reagents were used as received without further purification. For comparison, the non-aligned ZnO NRs were grown on a ZnO seed film, which was oxidised from a Zn metal film (20 nm thickness) sputtered onto the ITO/PET film. All of the experimental conditions used up to the ZnO NR growth were the same as the conditions used for the well-aligned NRs except for the Zn metal patterning.


After growing the vertically aligned ZnO NRs, the samples were dipped into a 0.5 mM ethanolic solution of ruthenium dye, Ru[dcbpy(TBA)2]2(NCS)2 (N719), for 24 h at room temperature. The dye-absorbed ZnO nanorod/ITO electrode and the 40 nm thick platinum (Pt) counter-electrode deposited on the ITO/PET film were assembled with a 30 µm gap using a Surlyn spacer (Dupont). The gel type redox electrolyte solution consisted of 0.6 M 1-hexyl-2,3-dimethyl imidazolium iodide (C6DMI), 0.2 M lithium iodide (LiI), 0.04 M iodine (I2), gelatine silica powder and 0.5 M tert-butyl pyridine (TBP) in 3-methoxy propionitrile (MPN)/acetonitrile (ACN) (1:1 v/v). This solution was dropped at the edge of the cell to allow capillary spreading over the entire active area between the two substrates. The active area of the cell was approximately 0.5 cm2. Consecutive bending experiments were performed at a 5 mm radius of curvature with a customised bending setup.


The morphology of the grown ZnO NRs was studied using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, JEOL JSM-6500F). The oxidisation of the Zn metal into the ZnO seed layer was examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku Miniflex II). Field emission transmission electron microscope (FE-TEM) measurements were performed on a Philips (TECNAI F20) microscope at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. UV-Vis absorption spectra and transmittance were measured by a Perkin Elmer Lambda 7 spectrophotometer and a Lambda 950 spectrophotometer with an attached integrating sphere, respectively.

The photocurrent–voltage (I–V) was measured with a Keithley 2400 source meter. A small-area solar simulator with an AM 1.5 filter (SANEI, Class A) was used as a light source. The light was homogeneous over the 0.5 cm2 chip and a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 was calibrated with a standard single crystal silicon cell confirmed by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). The spectral response of incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) was measured using a 150 W xenon lamp (SANEI) fitted with a monochromator (Cornerstone 260). The illumination spot size was chosen to be slightly smaller than the active area (0.5 cm2) of the DSSC cells. The IPCE photocurrents were recorded under short-circuit conditions. The monochromatic photon flux was quantified by means of a calibrated silicon photodiode (Peccell Technologies).


Fig. 2a shows the scheme of the DMT process. After DMT, only the Zn metal film deposited at the surface of stamp protrusions was detached and adhered to the energetically unstable ITO/PET film surface, which had a higher surface energy relative to the silicon stamp surface with the releasing monolayer. SEM images revealed that an array of 100 nm diameter Zn metal dots at a 400 nm pitch was reliably formed on the ITO/PET substrate.

In the following oxidation step, the colour of the Zn metal dot array changed from dark to transparent after 5 min in the oxidation solution, indicating that the oxidation of the Zn metal had occurred. Fig. 2b shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra of the bare substrate, the transferred Zn metal dot array, and the oxidised ZnO dot array. The peak at 34.4° was newly observed in the ZnO, which corresponds to the ZnO (002) crystal plane (JCPDS 65-3411). Meanwhile, the XRD peaks corresponding to the Zn metal disappeared. The ZnO dots were then used as seeds for the ZnO NR growth in the following low-temperature hydrothermal ZnO growth method.

Fig. 3a and b show SEM images of as-made ZnO NRs grown from the defined ZnO seed dots and the ZnO film, respectively. A periodically aligned vertical ZnO NR array was faithfully produced. A bundle of 700 nm tall ZnO NRs were grown from the ZnO seed dots, as shown in the tilted and top view of SEM images, Fig. 3a. However, on the ZnO film, bush-like ZnO NRs were produced with no preferable growth direction (Fig. 3b).

Fig. 4a–c show the TEM images of a hydrothermally grown ZnO nanorod. High-resolution TEM (HRTEM), shown in Fig. 4c, shows clear lattice fringes, confirming single crystallinity. The spacing of 2.48 ± 0.05 Å between adjacent lattice planes corresponds to the distance between the two (002) crystal planes, indicating that [0001] is the growth direction of the ZnO nanorod. Additionally, the selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern, Fig. 4d, shows [0002] diffraction patterns, confirming single crystalline growth to the c-axis direction. The one-dimensional single crystalline structure offers a direct carrier pathway to electrodes, resulting in a longer electron diffusion length, which is favourable for high efficiency DSSCs.
For high efficiency DSSCs, both light penetration through the photoanode and the quantity of dye adsorption play an important role. Fig. 5a shows the transmittance of the two samples with reference to that of bare ITO/PET film in the 300–800 nm range. The well-aligned ZnO NRs have spaces between them, which induce a much higher transmittance than the sample with non-aligned ZnO NRs, as shown in Fig. 5a. This property provides more light to the dyes, which affects the productivity of the photocurrent.

Fig. 5b displays the dye absorption spectra of the two samples after dye loading. Both samples show the typical absorption spectrum of the N719 dye with two peaks at 375 and 503 nm. The dye absorption peaks from the well-aligned ZnO NRs are smaller than those from the non-aligned ZnO NRs; this is mainly a result of the smaller total ZnO surface area for dye loading.
We produced a flexible DSSC with the periodically aligned vertical ZnO NRs; the inset of Fig. 6a demonstrates light scattering at the active area owing to the embedded periodic features within the cell. In comparison, the cell based on the non-aligned ZnO rods was initially milky and did not reflect light.

Fig. 6b shows the comparison of the I–V curves from the pristine DSSCs (planar and being bent) with the well-aligned ZnO rods and the non-aligned ZnO rods (planar) under AM 1.5 at 100 mW cm−2. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the DSSC with well-aligned ZnO NRs is 3.15%, which is much larger than that of the DSSC with non-aligned features (1.72%); this result is especially interesting considering that more dye molecules were adsorbed to the photoanode with non-aligned NRs, as shown in Fig. 5b. The effect of a higher dye loading to the non-aligned ZnO NRs can be negated by transparency deficiency, dye aggregation and greater chances of injected charges recombining with dyes or the oxidised electrolytes at the larger interfacial area, inducing a smaller short circuit current compared to that of the DSSC with the well-aligned ZnO NRs. Furthermore, the larger surface area of the photoanode is also a main reason for the observed lower Voc of the DSSC with non-aligned NRs because it leads to more dark leakage currents, resulting in a lower fill factor overall.
The fact that the Jsc of the bent DSSC is higher than that of the planar DSSC could be ascribed to more light being trapped inside the system. The non-planar substrate provides the scattering centre or diffuse reflection of the incident light; more incident light can be dispersed through the entire substrate, and accordingly, more photons can be captured within the solar cell, leading to a temporary enhancement of Jsc in the bent DSSC.

Fig. 6c and d show the I–V characteristics of the DSSC with well-aligned and non-aligned ZnO NRs, respectively, at certain bending cycles measured after releasing the bending strain. In the case of the DSSC with well-aligned ZnO NRs, during 500 bending cycles, the PCE was well maintained and ranged from 3.15% to 2.56%, which illustrates that the periodically aligned vertical ZnO NR array electrode is able to release the bending strain efficiently and maintain the morphology without breakage. In comparison, the DSSC with non-aligned ZnO NRs degraded rapidly with the bending cycles and malfunctioned after 50 bending cycles, which can be ascribed to rod breakage during the consecutive bending.

Table 1 summarises the device characteristics at certain bending cycles—open circuit voltage (Voc), short circuit current (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE)—from the corresponding curves in Fig. 6c and d. Note that a series of experiments with the two different photoanodes demonstrated the same tendencies in the device characteristics.
Photoanode
Bending cycle

V
OC/V

J
SC/mA cm−2
FF [%]
PCE [%]

a Well-aligned ZnO NRs.
b Non-aligned ZnO NRs.


WAZ


Pristine

0.56
10.75
53
3.15
1
0.56
9.85
52.5
2.91
10
0.55
9.86
51.89
2.79
50
0.55
9.54
52.36
2.75
100
0.55
9.11
52.92
2.64
300
0.56
9.32
53.30
2.79
500
0.55
8.85
52.23
2.56

NAZ


Pristine

0.49
7.13
44.87
1.57
1
0.46
7.04
42.70
1.39
10
0.43
5.30
20.37
0.46
50+
Malfunction
The total power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the DSSC with well-aligned ZnO NRs is twice that of the DSSC with non-aligned ZnO NRs. This result was supported by the measurement of monochromatic incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) of the two devices in the 300–800 nm range, demonstrating half-efficiencies in all wavelengths from the DSSC with non-aligned ZnO NRs (Fig. 7). The shape of the IPCE spectrum coincides with the absorption spectrum of N719, with local peaks at 375 and 503 nm, except for the relative peak values; the highest efficiency of 66.63% is located at 525 nm rather than 380 nm. The lower efficiency at 380 nm can be ascribed to a lower transmittance, as shown in Fig. 5a. Interestingly, the IPCE spectrum of the DSSC with well-aligned ZnO NRs is well maintained after 500 bending cycles, proving the stability of the well-aligned ZnO NRs. On the contrary, the DSSC with non-aligned ZnO NRs revealed nearly zero efficiency in all wavelengths after 50 bending cycles, meaning that most ZnO NRs were broken and electrically disconnected to the electrode.
To verify the stability of the vertically aligned ZnO NRs against bending strain, the photoanode was prepared and subjected to 500 bending cycles without cell assembly. The SEM image (Fig. 8a) of the well-aligned ZnO NR array after 500 bending cycles illustrates the maintenance of its initial morphology. However, in the case of the non-aligned ZnO NRs, most NRs were broken when bent, according to the SEM image of Fig. 8b, which was taken after 10 bending cycles. This result was expected because each nanorod was not spatially separated, causing physical abrasion with other nanorods during the bending cycles.

Periodically aligned, single-crystalline vertical ZnO NRs were grown using a hydrothermal method at 80 °C from periodic ZnO dot seeds, which were pre-patterned on an ITO/PET flexible substrate by the innovative non-aqueous process of direct metal transfer. The ZnO NR array was utilised as a photoanode for flexible DSSCs and showed better device performance when compared to the cells having non-aligned ZnO NRs due to higher electron transport and better optical transmittance. Moreover, the DSSC with the well-aligned ZnO NR array released the bending strain efficiently, and therefore maintained device performance after 500 bending cycles. These superior properties could enable future portable and bendable photovoltaic devices using the renewable energy of the sun. Further improvement of dye-loading into the well-aligned ZnO NRs is expected to enhance photovoltaic performance dramatically.


This work was supported by a Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF) grant (No. R15-2008-006-03002-0, CLEA, NCRC), the SystemIC2010 project of the Korean Ministry of Knowledge Economy, a National Research Foundation (NRF) of Korea grant (No. 2007–0053001) and the Program for Integrated Molecular System at GIST.


† These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011