 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA09000H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6980-6988


Wen-Chi
Tsai
,

Stuart R.
Thomas
,

Cheng-Hung
Hsu
,

Yu-Chen
Huang
,

Jiun-Yi
Tseng
,

Tsung-Ta
Wu
,

Chia-ho
Chang
,

Zhiming M.
Wang
,

Jia-Min
Shieh
*,

Chang-Hong
Shen
* and 

Yu-Lun
Chueh
*

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, 30013, Taiwan, Republic of China. E-mail: ylchueh@mx.nthu.edu.tw

Institute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, People's Republic of China

National Nano Device Laboratories, No. 26, Prosperity Road 1, Hsinchu 30078, Taiwan, Republic of China

Received
7th November 2015
, Accepted 4th January 2016
First published on 6th January 2016
We report on the fabrication of a robust and flexible transparent electrode to replace costly and fragile indium tin oxide (ITO) used in flexible Cu(In,Ga)Se2 solar cells, composed of an aluminum doped zinc oxide (AZO)/Ag-nanowires/aluminum doped zinc oxide (AZO) (AAA herein) sandwich structure. The Ag-NWs networks form low-resistance, long-range pathways throughout the electrode that are able to maintain efficient charge carrier collection and extraction after strenuous mechanical bending. The improved durability of the AAA electrode enables our CIGS solar cells to maintain ∼95% of their initial power conversion efficiency, following 1000 bending cycles. In comparison, devices fabricated using AZO and ITO electrodes are only able to maintain ∼57 and ∼5%, respectively, due to crack formation and delamination of the films. This AAA sandwich structure electrode could therefore serve as a high-performance electrode for numerous flexible optoelectronic applications.

Transparent conducting oxides (TCOs) are now abundant in a wide range of optoelectronic technologies, including solar cells (SC), flat panel displays (FPD) and organic light emitting diodes (OLED). At present, there is an increasing drive toward the integration of these technologies into flexible formats/applications. Therefore, it is crucial to develop TCOs with suitable mechanical and electronic properties. Likewise, as world energy consumption continues to increase, it is imperative that we replace finite carbon based energy sources with sustainable and clean energy production. Thin-film solar cells are likely our best resource in this respect and copper indium gallium selenide, Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGS), based solar cells are one of the most promising candidates in terms of mainstream thin-film photovoltaic (PV) technologies. CIGS has a very high absorption coefficient (∼104 cm−1), therefore, only a thin absorber layer is required (∼1 μm), making it well suited to flexible applications. Its direct bandgap can be tuned (∼1.0 eV to ∼1.7 eV) through control of its chemical compositions. To date, the highest efficiency for a lab based CIGS solar cell is ∼21.7%, demonstrated by ZSW in Germany. However, their use in flexible applications (building specific shapes, curved screens and robust mobile applications) has received relatively little attention to date as one of the key bottlenecks towards developing such applications is a lack of suitably durable TCO electrodes.

Indium tin oxide (ITO) is the most commonly used TCO electrode material as it combines two key properties of high optical transmittance and low resistivity. Unfortunately, the recent surge in liquid crystal display sales has led to indium becoming a costly commodity, but more importantly for flexible electronics applications, ITO is fragile and unable to maintain its low resistivity following repeated bending cycles. As a result, a number of alternative materials and composites have been investigated. Aluminum doped zinc oxide (AZO) and also stacked layers of ITO/AZO have been utilized in solar cell applications previously, however AZO suffers from relatively high resistivity values, whilst stacked ITO/AZO electrodes still suffer from flexibility constraints. Further investigations into sandwich-like structures where ultrathin metal layers are deposited between TCOs have shown promising results in terms of low resistivity values. For example, using a MoO3/Cu/MoO3 structure with a Cu thickness of 16 nm, resistivity as low as 1.6 × 10−3 Ω cm has been achieved, although maximum transmittance values of ∼65% (at 600 nm) are unacceptable for solar call applications. Metals such as Ag with the lower resistivity have been assessed as a way of reducing the metal thickness, although deposition of continuous layers of ultrathin Ag (<7 nm) is a non-trivial task due to aggregation, leading to exponentially increasing sheet resistance with decreasing thickness. Metal nanowire (NW) network transparent electrodes offer a potential solution to some of these issues, and have already been demonstrated in CIGS based solar cells. They are however, not without their drawbacks, as oxidation, poor surface adhesion and high surface roughness can pose problems during device fabrication.
Here, we present a new approach for the fabrication of high performance transparent electrodes suitable for flexible CIGS solar cell applications, utilising a stacked AZO/Ag-NWs/AZO sandwich structure (AAA) that avoids the use of costly ITO. In our approach, the AZO performs as a broad area charge carrier collector, whilst also providing a protective encapsulant for our Ag nanowires, reducing their susceptibility to oxidation/contamination. Also, Ag-NWs were encapsulated by AZO layers and no longer suffer de-wetting/adhesion related issues that can hinder the following device fabrication steps. The Ag-NWs serve as low resistance and long range pathways that aid in the extraction of charge carriers, but more importantly, it serves to maintain our films low resistivity, following repeated bending. As might be expected, repeatedly bending AZO (much like ITO) will generate cracks and lead to an increase in resistivity, however, our Ag-NWs allow us to effectively bridge these cracks and ensure that charge carriers collected by the AZO can still be efficiently transported through the film for extraction by the Al contact. As a result, we have been able to fabricate flexible CIGS based solar cells utilising our stacked electrode structure that are able to maintain ∼95% of their conversion efficiency, following 1000 bending cycles at significant bending angles of 70°. In comparison, cells fabricated using an equivalent thickness ITO electrode where it only able to maintain 57% conversion efficiency, following the same number of bending cycles.
Our devices utilize a conventional CIGS solar cell structure deposited on a flexible stainless steel (SS) substrate comprised of a SS/Mo/TaN/CIGS/CdS/i-ZnO film stack, followed by the deposition of a transparent electrode (ITO, AZO or AAA) then a top Al contact. The fabrication process for the complete solar cell is discussed in detail in the Experimental section. As shown in Fig. 1(a)–(c), the fabrication of the AAA electrode utilizes a three stage process, beginning with the deposition of AZO by DC sputtering at 100 °C. We then deposit our Ag-NWs network via spin coating, followed by a final AZO top layer. Different thicknesses of AZO layers and densities of the Ag-NWs networks were investigated. The Ag-NWs have an average length and diameter of 60 μm and 160 nm, respectively. The Ag-NWs solutions were initially prepared to a concentration of 2 mg ml−1 in ethanol, and then further adjusted (via dilution or increased number of spin coating cycles) in order to control the density of the final Ag-NWs networks; herein referred to as 0.1c, 0.3c, 0.5c, 1.0c, 3.0c and 5.0c. Increasing values refer to an effective increase in the deposited Ag-NWs network density. Full details of how this was achieved, along with the Ag-NWs fabrication, solution perpetration and deposition were discussed in detail in the Experimental section. CIGS solar cells require a top electrode that remains both transparent across a wide spectral range, whilst having a low sheet resistance to ensure optimum charge carrier generation, collection and transport. AZO and ITO are typically reported to have work functions within a similar range (∼4 to ∼5 eV), which are also highly dependent on doping level, surface conditions and deposition methods. Both are suitable for application as cathodic top electrodes as used in this work. As we are also focusing on the suitability of our devices for flexible applications, it is critical that we asses any influence imposed by repeated strenuous bending cycles.

Fig. 1(d)–(f) show top view SEM images of the 0.1c, 0.3c and 0.5c Ag-NWs networks, respectively, deposited by spin coating. It can clearly be observed that the increasing concentrations of Ag-NWs lead to more densely formed films. The higher magnification images (inset) show no aggregation with well dispersed networks, and the covered area ratio (CAR) assessed using image processing software show a clear increase in the percentage of surface coverage (details in Experimental section). However, the higher density films (1.0c–5.0c) as shown in Fig. S1(a) and (b) were not used for device fabrication for reasons discussed later. In an attempt to reduce the surface roughness, we adjusted the relative positions of the Ag-NWs networks by changing the top and bottom thicknesses of AZO layers whilst maintaining the total film thickness of 690 nm. Fig. 2(a) and (b) show cross sectional SEM and AFM images of the AAA film stack, respectively, using approximately equal thickness of AZO layers for top and bottom layers and Fig. 2(c) and (d) show the corresponding cross sectional SEM and AFM images of the AAA film stacks, utilising a bottom AZO layer thickness of 90 nm and top AZO layer thickness of 600 nm. From the AFM images, we can observe a clear reduction in the film surface RMS roughness from ∼157 nm to ∼110 nm when utilising the thicker top layer from ∼300 to ∼600 nm. During the initial stages of the second AZO layer deposition, there appears to be some shadowing effect generated by Ag-NWs, creating a non-uniform thickness coating. This is illustrated in Fig. S2 where we deposited a thinner 90 nm-thick AZO layer on top of Ag-NWs. This initially leads to a relative increase in the surface height directly above the Ag-NWs network and in turn greater surface roughness. However, as the thickness of the top AZO layer is increased, the influence of the shadowing is lessened, leading to smoother films. As a result, we choose to utilize the structure shown in Fig. 2(c) with the thicker top AZO layer (600 nm) for device fabrication.
The optical transmission and sheet resistance properties of our 690 nm AAA electrodes with different densities of Ag-NWs are shown in Fig. 3(a)–(d). Transmission measurements were measured between 350 and 1300 nm, which are absorption ranges of interest for CIGS (Fig. 3(a)). We have also included equivalent thickness of pure AZO and ITO films (690 nm) for reference. The AZO electrode shows an average 79% transmittance, whilst the increasing Ag-NWs density electrodes, 0.1c to 0.5c, show values between 74 and 60%, respectively. Electrodes fabricated with densities of Ag-NWs between 1.0c and 5.0c showed significantly reduced transmittance across the same range, making them unsuitable for application in solar cells, with average values between 49 and 25%, respectively (Fig. S3(a)). The observed decrease in transmission with increasing Ag-NWs concentration (Ag-NWs density) is attributed to an increase in scattering and reflection behaviors from the Ag-NWs. This is further confirmed by reflectance measurements (Fig. 3(b)) where the 0.5c Ag-NWs density electrode appears to be the transition point between low and high reflectance. Fig. 3(c) illustrates sheet resistance values (Rs) obtained using a four point probe system. A significant reduction in Rs can be observed as we increase the Ag-NWs density, with the best average value of ∼15 Ω □−1 for the 0.3c Ag-NWs film. In particular, it should be noted that these values are very close to those obtained from an equivalent thickness ITO electrode (∼10 Ω □−1), whilst being significantly lower than values achieved by the AZO electrode (∼63 Ω □−1). The Rs values obtained from the higher Ag-NWs concentration films are shown in Fig. S3(b). Although, the values are very low, these films are unsuitable for solar cell fabrication due to their low transparency, below 50% (Fig. S3(a)). To assist in choosing the most suitable AAA electrode for solar cell application, we calculated a figure of merit (FOM [Φ]) value using eqn (1):
Φ = T10/Rs
(1)
for each film where
T is the transmittance and Rs is the sheet resistance of the film, respectively. The results are shown in Fig. 3(d). The highest value Φ for our AAA electrode was observed for the 0.1c Ag-NWs density electrode with a value of 3.9 × 10−3 Ω−1 calculated from the average transmission across the 600 to 800 nm range (strongest absorption range of CIGS solar cell) and 2.6 × 10−3 Ω−1 calculated across the 500 to 1200 nm range. The Φ value for AZO alone is reduced due to its low Rs, whilst increasing Ag-NWs concentrations show a slow decline in Φ.

An initial assessment of our AAA electrode performance was obtained using devices fabricated on stainless steel substrates before being submitted to any bending stresses. As a result, we concluded our AAA film using a 0.1c Ag-NWs density as optimum for device fabrication. Fig. 4(a) illustrates typical J–V characteristics for devices fabricated using our AAA electrode along with AZO and ITO electrodes for reference with the total thickness of 690 nm. Inset in Fig. 4(a) shows a basic schematic of the solar cell structure with full details of the device fabrication given in the Experimental section. The extracted values for cell efficiency (ƞ), fill factor (FF), short circuit current (JSC), open circuit voltage (VOC) and series resistance (RSR) are shown in Table 1. Our AAA electrode based devices show a significant improvement in cell efficiency over devices using the AZO electrode with cell efficiency increasing from 4.46% to 6.04%. The external quantum efficiencies (EQE) for the cells shown in Fig. 4(b) show better performance from our AAA based devices over AZO across all but the lowest wavelength (<550 nm) spectral range. Since our cell structure and the interface between the i-ZnO and the AZO/AAA electrodes will be the same for both types of devices, we can rule out any work function or contact resistance related influence. Almost identical VOC values for the both AZO and AAA based devices suggests no change in the recombination characteristics resulting from electrode choice. We also know from our optical measurements that the pristine AZO electrode has moderately improved optical properties in terms of both higher transmittance and lower reflectance. Therefore, we believe the gains we observe for the AAA electrode in terms of both cell efficiency and EQE are due to the improved charge carrier collection and transport of the AAA electrode. This is further confirmed by a significant reduction in the estimated RSR and also the sheet resistance measurements discussed previously (Table 1).
Electrode

ƞ (%)
FF (%)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)

R
SR (Ω cm−2)
ITO
6.89
60.30
30.28
0.38
1.76
AZO
4.46
46.80
26.46
0.36
3.69
AAA
6.04
59.20
28.54
0.35
0.47
We propose that the inclusion of the Ag-NWs network into the AZO electrode reduces the total path resistance that a charge carrier must overcome when being transported from the AZO/i-ZnO interface to the aluminum top electrode. This can be considered to be both in comparison to the bulk AZO resistivity, and also as a more favorable charge carrier transport path across grain boundaries. The optical image in Fig. 4(b) demonstrates the 10 × 10 cm2 large area solar cells fabricated on flexible stainless steel substrates. Three fingered front aluminum electrodes for each cell can be observed where the finger spacing is ∼1 mm. If we assume a best case scenario of straight line charge transport, we can estimate the longest charge carrier path length through the bulk AZO electrode based device to be ∼500 μm (just over half the distance between the Al electrode fingers if we also consider the comparatively negligible vertical transport required). In comparison, if we consider our AAA electrode with its Ag-NWs network shown in Fig. 1(d), we can see charge carriers need only traverse somewhere on the order of 2 μm through the bulk AZO before reaching the high conductivity Ag-NWs network. The device characteristics for the pristine ITO electrode based solar cell shows a small improvement in outright efficiency at 6.89%. The moderately higher VOC suggests that the ITO may provide better surface passivation, reducing surface recombination centers. EQE measurements also show significant gains until ∼1000 nm likely due to the favorable optical properties of the ITO. On balance, the combination of these results and an increase in the estimated RSR for ITO based devices lead us to conclude that the devices are comparable in performance prior to any bending analysis.
To assess the impact of repeated mechanical stress on the quality of the transparent electrode, we initially deposited three electrodes, including ITO, AZO and AAA on PET. The films were held in the test fixture shown in Fig. 5(a) where a screw winding mechanism was used to bring the opposing ends of the substrate together (Fig. 5(b)). To characterize the degree of bending, we measured the angle developed vertically from the initial resting position of the substrate. An angle of 70° was chosen as the transition point, as at higher angles solar cells using the ITO and AZO electrodes begin to degrade severely (this is discussed further later). Each sample was placed surface down to induce compressive strain and subjected to a total of 1000 bending cycles with sheet resistance measurements taken periodically. The normalized sheet resistance values are shown in Fig. 5(c) and we can observe that all electrodes suffer from an initial sharp degradation in resistance until reaching ∼100 bending cycles from where the degradation rate lessens. Importantly, we observe for the AAA electrode, the initial degradation is comparatively lower than the ITO electrode and is further reduced after reaching 1000 cycles.
In order to determine the cause of this degradation, SEM images for each of the electrodes following 100 and 1000 bending cycles were recorded as shown in Fig. 6(a)–(f), respectively. After 100 bending cycles, each of the electrodes develop small cracks approximately 30 nm in width (Fig. 6(a)–(c)), which is the primary cause of the initial degradation in performance. However, for the AAA electrode, the Ag-NWs maintain a bridge across the cracked AZO film as shown in inset of Fig. 6(c). This leads to the comparatively lower reduction in performance following the initial 100 bending cycles. After 1000 bending cycles are completed, there is a significant increase in the crack width observed for all electrodes as shown in Fig. 6(d)–(f). For the ITO based electrode, crack widths increase to ∼100 nm and also suffer from tunneled delamination (inset in Fig. 6(d)) where under compressive strain, the film buckles before cracking. In the case of the AZO electrode, the crack widths increase significantly, approaching to 700 nm in the worst case, although we observe no delamination of the electrode. The AAA electrode also sees an increase in crack width similar to that observed in the AZO electrode; however the Ag-NWs maintain a connection across the separated films as observed in inset of Fig. 6(d) which we believe to be the main contributing factor that allows the AAA electrode to maintain such a low sheet resistance after prolonged bending cycles.
The suitability of the AAA electrode for flexible solar cell applications was examined by fabricating CIGS based devices utilising stainless steel (SS) as a substrate, followed by bending tests performed using the same methods discussed previously. SS was chosen as it is able to withstand the high temperature (∼550 °C) selenization process required to form a high quality a CIGS absorber layer. As iron diffusion from the SS substrate into the CIGS layer can lead to a decay in device performance, a commonly employed 500 nm tantalum nitride (TaN) barrier layer was deposited before the CIGS film deposition. Initially, we characterized a set of devices whilst progressively increasing the applied bending angle. At each angle, we applied ten bending cycles, followed by J–V measurements, and then repeated this procedure at an increased bending angle. Device performance was assessed at angles between 0° and 90° incrementing 10° per measurement, with a final assessment at 120° where the substrate is bent to its maximum capacity as shown in Fig. 7(a1) and (a2). In Fig. 7(b)–(e), we can see that devices utilizing ITO and AZO electrodes exhibit a gradual reduction in all performance metrics as the bending angle is increased. Notably, there is a large drop in JSC once bending angles between 70° and 80° are reached. The low JSC and significantly reduced values for FF and ƞ we expect are due to the drop in electrode performance beyond this critical bending angle. Conversely, devices fabricated using the AAA electrode show no loss in performance across all bending angles. We believe this remarkable result illustrates the effectiveness of the integrated Ag-NWs network in maintaining charge carrier collection and transport following excessive mechanical stress.
As the bending angle from 70° to 80° had been determined as the transition point, at which severe degradation in performance for the ITO and AZO electrode based solar cells occurs, we set the maximum bending angle to 70° and again performed 1000 bending cycles as shown in Fig. 8(a) for a new set of devices using each type of electrode, whilst periodically measuring device performance. Fig. 8(b) show the device power conversion efficiency results, and similarly to the bending test results shown in Fig. 5(c) we observe a sharp reduction in the performance of ITO and AZO electrode-based devices as we pass ∼100 bending cycles (VOC, JSC and FF values shown in Fig. S4). However, the AAA electrode based device performance remains largely unaffected throughout the entire test, maintaining ∼95% of their initial conversion efficiency even after being subjected to 1000 bending cycles. Conversely, ITO and AZO electrode based devices are only able to maintain ∼57% and ∼5%, respectively, following the same number of bending cycles. We expect the large reduction in the ITO and AZO based devices performance result from the formation of large cracks and possibly delamination from both the underlying TaN and overlying CIGS absorber layer, similar to the results observed when deposited on polyimide films (Fig. 6(a)–(f)). As a result, charge carriers become isolated and are unable to be collected by the Al contact, leading to a reduction in almost all characterisation metrics. Conversely, we believe the remarkable lack of degradation in the performance of devices fabricated using the AAA electrode is due to the incorporation of the Ag-NWs networks that bridge cracks developed during repeated bending cycles. These, in turn, maintain highly conductive pathways that allow charge carriers to be effectively collected and transported to the Al contact. These results suggest that the AAA electrode makes a significantly better choice when fabricating flexible solar cells that are required to offer high performance, flexibility and robustness.

In summary, a highly robust transparent conducting electrode based on an AZO/Ag-NWs/AZO (AAA) sandwich structure was developed that is suitable for application in high performance flexible CIGS based solar cells, in turn eliminating the need for costly ITO electrodes. The density, roughness, transparency and sheet resistance of the sandwich structure was determined via several methods of analysis, and optimization of the process was applied accordingly. The performance of the optimised AAA electrode was then compared to more commonly used ITO and AZO electrodes by incorporation into CIGS based flexible solar cells fabricated on stainless steel substrate. Our results indicate the inclusion of Ag-NWs networks into the sandwich structure; result in charge carrier pathways throughout the electrode that can maintain connectivity across cracks typically formed in transparent oxide conductors, allowing strenuous bending/mechanical stress. This allows the efficient collection of charge carriers from the electrode/p-type interface in the AAA electrode based devices which might otherwise be isolated when using an ITO/AZO electrode, in our case enabling our solar cells to maintain ∼95% of their initial conversion efficiency (∼5.8%) after being subjected to 1000 bending cycles. In comparison, ITO and AZO electrode-based devices were only able to maintain ∼57 and ∼5%, respectively. Importantly, the AAA transparent flexible electrode could potentially applied in numerous emerging applications such as organic/inorganic photovoltaics, light emitting diodes, energy efficient and transparent flexible electronics.


The AZO and ITO films were prepared by DC sputter at different powers at 500 W with different growth temperatures from 100 to 200 °C. Note that thickness of both ITO/AZO is fixed at 690 nm as a final deposition thickness. For the preparation of the ultra-long Ag-NWs, a modified CuCl2 mediated polyol process was used, involving adding of 0.26 g polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP), following by 0.6 mg Cu(NO3)2 to a flask filled with 80 ml of ethylene glycol. The solution was stirred moderately (80 rpm) for 10 min before being heated to 180 °C for one hour then left to cool to room temperature. Following cooling, 0.24 g of AgNO3 powder was added to the solution and stirred vigorously (500 rpm) for ∼10 min to ensure that the powder was fully dissolved. The solution was then placed in an oven for 7 h at 145 °C, facilitating the formation of the Ag-NWs. The final product was washed thoroughly with acetone and ethanol and stored in ethanol. Our final solution consisted of 2 mg ml−1 of Ag-NWs with an average length of 60 μm and diameter of 160 nm. In order to form Ag-NWs films with different densities, we adjust both concentrations of solution and the number of spin coating cycles. For Ag-NWs films designated as 0.1c, 0.3c and 0.5c, we diluted the 2 mg ml−1 Ag-NWs solution by the corresponding ratio (0.1, 0.3, and 0.5) in ethanol followed by a single spin coating process for each film. For the Ag-NW films designated as 1c, 3c, and 5c we took the same 2 mg ml−1 Ag-NWs solution and deposited it directly using one, three and five spin coating cycles, respectively.


The surface area of the stainless steel substrate and resulting solar cell panel is approximately 100 cm2, with individually patterned devices having an area of 0.5 cm2. To block any Fe diffusion from the stainless steel substrate into the CIGS absorber, a 500 nm layer of TaN was first deposited by sputtering. This was followed by 400 nm of Mo for the back contact deposited using a two stage sputtering process. To form the CIGS absorber layer, we sequentially deposited Cu/In/Ga metal precursor layers followed by selenization at 610 °C leading to a final CIGS thickness of 1.2 μm. We then applied a 10 wt% KCN wash followed by the deposition of a 70 nm-thick CdS buffer layer by chemical bath deposition. A 70 nm intrinsic ZnO widow layer was deposited by sputtering followed by the AAA or AZO/ITO transparent electrodes. Finally, an Al electrode was deposited by thermal evaporation through a mask.


The surface morphologies and cross-section structure of the films and devices were examined using a Hitachi S-8010 field-emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM), and Veeco Dimension 5000 scanning probe microscope (D5000). The covered area ratio (CAR) percentages for the Ag-NWs networks were calculated from the SEM top view images using ImageJ image processing software, based on contrast disparity processing. Optical transmission and reflectance was measured using a Hitachi U-4100 UV-visible-NIR spectrometer. X-ray diffraction (XRD) experiments were performed using a Shimadzu XRD-6000 with Cu Kα radiation (0.154 nm). The sheet resistance, current–voltage characteristics and were measured using a Keithley 4200-SCS parameter analyzer and a Hong-Ming Tech MFS-PV-Basic class AAA AM 1.5 G solar simulator at a constant temperature of 25 °C.


The research is supported by Ministry of Science and Technology through Grant through grants no, 104-2628-M-007-004-MY3, 104-2221-E-007-048-MY3, 104-2633-M-007-001, 104-2622-M-007-002-CC2 and the National Tsing Hua University through Grant no. 104N2022E1, and the Institute of Nuclear Energy Research through Grant no. 1042001iner011. Y. L. Chueh greatly appreciates the use of facility at CNMM, National Tsing Hua University through Grant no. 104N2744E1.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta09000h
‡ Authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016