 DOI: 10.1039/C4TC01747A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 10282-10290


Lin
Hu
,

Lie
Chen
*,

Xiaotian
Hu
 and 

Yiwang
Chen


College of Chemistry/Institute of Polymers, Nanchang University, 999 Xuefu Avenue, Nanchang 330031, China. E-mail: chenlienc@163.com; Fax: +86 791 83969561; Tel: +86 791 83969562

Jiangxi Provincial Key Laboratory of New Energy Chemistry, Nanchang University, 999 Xuefu Avenue, Nanchang 330031, China

Received
7th August 2014
, Accepted 6th October 2014
First published on 8th October 2014
A novel polymerizable fullerene derivative, 2-(2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethoxy)ethyl undec-10-enyl malonate C60 (EEMC), functionalized with ethenyl and tri-(ethylene oxide) (TEO), has been rationally designed and synthesized. The functionalized fullerene can easily self-assemble on the surface of ZnO to form an immobilized and robust fullerene/ZnO electron-transporting layer (ETL) for the inverted solar cells. Additionally, the solution processed and assembled fullerene/ZnO ETL can be further stabilized by a polymerized network resulting from ethenyl groups undergoing subsequent thermal annealing. The oxygen groups of TEO anchoring on ZnO effectively passivate the surface traps of ZnO and induce a smoother and more hydrophobic surface. Moreover, the polymerized EEMC (PEEMC) also promotes a better matched energy level and more intimate interfacial contact and improves active layer morphology compared to the bare ZnO. As a result, the performance of the inverted solar cell device is improved by incorporation of such novel ETL. Furthermore, methanol treatment on the PEEMC (MT-PEEMC) is found to better optimize the device performance. The device based on a blend of a low band-gap polymer thieno[3,4-b]thiophene/benzodithiophene (PTB7) with [6,6]-phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) delivers a high efficiency of 7.5%. Note that a solution-processed solar cell with MT-PEEMC as ETL and a sol–gel derived VOx as holes transfer layer (HTL) achieves a PCE of 7.3%. In addition, the self-assembled and polymerized interlayer also improves the durability of device lifetime.

Polymeric solar cells (PSCs) have attracted a great deal of attention in the past decade due to their low-cost, large area, easy solution-based fabrication with mechanical flexibility and the general applicability of organic materials. Recently, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) in excess of 10% has been reported by several groups and constitutes a significant breakthrough in the field of PSCs. Usually, there are two main types of device architectures: the conventional and the inverted structure. The PSCs with conventional structure always suffer from the rapidly reduced stability and performance of the devices due to the easily oxidized low work function metal and etching of ITO by the acidic poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonic acid) (PEDOT:PSS) hole-transporting layer (HTL). To ameliorate these problems, an inverted device structure is fabricated by reversing the polarity of charge collection in a conventional structure. In this architecture, a high work function metal (Ag) is used as the anode, while an n-type metal oxide (ZnO or TiOx) is coated onto ITO as the cathode; as a result, the device stability has been found to be improved greatly.

However, most inverted PSCs, especially based on poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT):(6,6)-phenyl-C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM), show inferior performance to the conventional ones due to unfavorable morphology of the active layer and incompatible chemical interfaces. Moreover, surface hydroxyl groups on metal oxide are known to act as charge traps, which will restrict the mobility of the unbound electrons and facilitate the carriers to recombine, ultimately resulting in an inferior current. In order to further improve the performance of the inverted PSCs, an additional n-type fullerene derivative as the electron transport layer (ETL) is commonly incorporated between the inorganic metal oxide and the organic active layer to modulation of the energy levels and interfacial contact. Previously, a variety of fullerene-based self-assembled monolayers (SAMs), bearing hydroxyl, carboxylic acid or tri-(ethylene oxide) (TEO), have been developed and worked well in improving the device performance. With these anchoring groups interacting with the hydroxyl on the metal oxide, subsequently they can form an immobilized SAM, which can passivate the electron traps and suppress the carriers to recombine effectively. However, the SAM formation insufficiently fully filled and covered the surface of metal oxides at the molecular scale, and it can cause easy desorption of the molecules during wet processing, leading to localized defects in this interlayer.
An effective strategy to overcome the deficiency of SAM is to introduce a cross-linkable or polymerizable fullerene derivative to produce a robust and solvent resistant thin film on the ZnO surface. The interlayer of fullerene derivative allows a subsequent active layer to be successfully deposited on top of this SAM without causing interfacial erosion and achieves an inverted device by all-solution processing. These fullerene derivatives can also form a firm interlayer through polymerization or cross-linking reaction which can avoid a direct contact between the ZnO and active layer. Hsu group reported an inverted solar cell device based on a cross-linkable PCBSD as an interlayer obtaining an improved PCE of 4.4% in comparison to a reference device (PCE = 3.5%) without this interlayer.
Combination of the advantages of the polymerization approaches with the self-assembly property, a novel solution processed fullerene derivative attached with the TEO group and polymerizable ethenyl group has been developed as an ETL for PSCs. The design and synthesis routes of 2-(2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethoxy)ethyl undec-10-enyl malonate C60 (EEMC) is shown in Scheme 1. Due to the strong hydrogen bond interaction between EEMC and the metal oxide, the functionalized fullerene can easily self-assemble on the surface of ZnO and passivate the surface defects of ZnO. More importantly, ethenyl groups undergoing subsequently thermal annealing can generate polymerized EEMC (PEEMC) with a dense network to further stabilize the assembled fullerene/ZnO ETL. With this PEEMC/ZnO interlayer applied in an inverted architecture, it promotes a matched energy level, intimate interfacial contact and well-defined active layer morphology. Besides, methanol treatment on the assembled fullerene/ZnO before polymerization is more favorable. As a result, incorporation of this self-assembled and polymerized fullerene/ZnO into the inverted solar cells based on P3HT:PC61BM as an interlayer have achieved a PCE of 3.8% with 36% enhancement and remarkable long-term stability in air in comparison to the control device without this interlayer. The novel interlayer also shows good universality in the device based on a blend of a low band-gap polymer PTB7 with PC71BM, which delivers a high efficiency of 7.5% with good stability. This noteworthy efficiency can be well maintained in a solution processed device with sol–gel derived VOx to replace the evaporated MoO3 as holes transfer the layer, which is beneficial for large-scale and high-throughput production of the polymer solar cell.

The synthesis of the EEMC is shown in Scheme 2. The malonyl chloride 1 was added dropwise to the mixed solution of 10-undecen-1-ol 2 and triethylene glycol monomethyl ether 3 and reacted with them simultaneously to afford compound 4. Under basic conditions, the Bingel reaction of compound 4 with C60 in the presence of iodine was carried out to obtain the compound EEMC. The synthetic details and the 1H NMR spectra of compound 4 and EEMC are shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). The EEMC is thermal and air stable and soluble in common solvents such as chloroform, chlorobenzene, and toluene.

In this report, ZnO is used to act as the hole-blocking and electron-selective layer in the inverted solar cells due to its high electron mobility and suitable energy levels. The ZnO nanoparticles with a thickness of 30 nm were firstly prepared on the ITO substrate according to the literature. Self-assembled and polymerizable electron transport layer PEEMC with a thickness of 12 nm was prepared from a solution of EEMC spun-cast on top of the surface of ZnO and then polymerized at 150 °C for half an hour. Inspired by the recent work on polar solvent treatment to improve the device performance, a methanol treated (MT) polymerized film (MT-PEEMC) was adopted by spin coating pure methanol on the film surface before thermal polymerization (details in the ESI). The thermal polymerization of the PEEMC film is confirmed by the almost unchanged UV-Vis absorption spectra of the samples before and after rinsing with o-dichlorobenzene (Fig. 1). Notably, UV-Vis absorption bands of the unpolymerized EEMC almost disappeared after rinsing with o-dichlorobenzene. Thus a robust and dense polymerized network with considerable organic solvent resistance can ensure the PEEMC layer is not washed away during the deposition of the active layer. Surface contact angle measurement was used to monitor the surface alteration (Fig. S2, ESI). As seen from the images, the bare ZnO surface exhibits a contact angle of ca. 49°. After an ultra thin layer of polymerized PEEMC spin-coated on the ZnO interface, the wetting angle to deionized water of ZnO/PEEMC increases to ca. 78°. The increased wetting angle indicates that the hydrophilic ZnO surface modified by the PEEMC can generate a more hydrophobic surface, which would potentially facilitate the deposition of the active layer. When the EEMC film is treated with methanol before thermal polymerization, the contact angle of the MT-PEEMC slightly increases to 82°, probably owing to the denser film developed by methanol treatment, which will reduce the defects and traps in the ETL for more efficient charge extraction and collection. The contact angle of PEEMC is still smaller than that of C60 (Fig. S2), again confirming the successful modification on the fullerene by TEO.
To investigate the molecular interactions between the fullerene-based layer and the ZnO, the surfaces were characterized by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Fig. 2a shows the survey XPS spectra of novel ETLs. Bare ZnO, ZnO/PEEMC and ZnO/MT-PEEMC all exhibit Zn 2p peaks and O 1s peaks. Through the high-resolution XPS spectra (Fig. 2b), it is obvious that the pristine ZnO surface exhibits a Zn 2p1/2 peak centered at 1044.7 eV and a Zn 2p3/2 centered at 1021.5 eV, whereas the two peaks in the spectrum of ZnO/PEEMC are displayed at 1044.2 eV and 1021.1 eV, respectively. The shift to the lower binding energy of ZnO/PEEMC is ascribed to the higher negative charge density on Zn. Similarly, as the high-resolution XPS spectra of O 1s, the peak corresponding to O atoms in a ZnO nanoparticle also moves to the higher binding energy. It indicates the reduced negative charge density O, which is ascribed to the hydrogen bond interaction between the fullerene and ZnO. The shifts in peaks of the Zn 2p and O 1s give evidence that the PEEMC has successfully assembled on the surface of ZnO via the strong molecular interactions between –OH of ZnO nanoparticles and –O– in the terminal TEO of PEEMC, which is beneficial for reducing the traps and defects by filling the voids with the C-EEMC on the uneven ZnO surface. Moreover, after methanol treatment, the peaks of the Zn 2p and O 1s further shift to the lower and higher binding energy, respectively, suggesting that the polar solvent treatment can make the TEO functionality of PEEMC more intimate with the ZnO surface. To further investigate whether the EEMC can passivate the surface traps and defects of ZnO, the photoluminescence (PL) measurement of ZnO modified by EEMC with different concentrations were carried out, as demonstrated in Fig. S3 (ESI). Compared with the pristine ZnO with a strong defect emission at 400–550 nm, the EEMC modified ZnO exhibits a considerably restrained defect emission indicative of the effectively passivated surface of ZnO. The reduced surface traps on ZnO can suppress the trap-assisted interfacial charge recombination and promote the charge transport in the PSC.
It's believed that an electron transport layer with proper LUMO level can presumably yield a better energy-level alignment and ohmic contact at the cathode/PCBM interface to promote the electronic extraction and transportation. However, the LUMO level of the bare ZnO ETL does not match well with the LUMO of PCBM. Therefore, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was performed to study the shifting of the surface energy levels of the PEEMC and MT-PEEMC on the top of ITO/ZnO. As shown in Fig. 3a, the high binding energy cutoff from a spectrum is Ecutoff, which is estimated by linear extrapolation to zero at the yield of secondary electrons.Eonset is the HOMO energy onset, referred to as the binding energy onset, which is shown in Fig. 3b. From Table 1, the Ecutoff of ZnO, ZnO/PEEMC and ZnO/MT-PEEMC are 14.25, 14.32 and 14.40 eV, respectively, and the corresponding Eonset are 0.81, 0.77 and 0.70 eV. As the incident photon energy hν is 21.22 eV, the HOMO energies are determined according to the followed equation:
−EHOMO = hν − (Ecutoff − Eonset)
ETL

E
cutoff (eV)

E
onset (eV)
HOMO (eV)
LUMO (eV)
ZnO
14.25
0.81
−7.78
−4.40
ZnO/PEEMC
14.32
0.77
−7.67
−4.29
ZnO/MT-PEEMC
14.40
0.70
−7.53
−4.15
Consequently, the calculated HOMO energies for ZnO, ZnO/PEEMC and ZnO/MT-PEEMC are −7.78, −7.67, −7.52 eV, respectively. In light of these HOMO energies and the optical gaps (3.38 eV) obtained from the UV-Vis absorption spectra, the estimated LUMO energy levels are −4.50 eV for bare ZnO, −4.39 eV for ZnO/PEEMC and −4.25 eV for ZnO/MT-PEEMC, respectively. An energy-level diagram is constructed to illustrate the shift of the energy levels distinctly in Fig. 3c. The shifts in LUMO energy levels indicate that the LUMO energy levels of ZnO are fine-tuned by coating a thin layer of functionalized fullerenes. With respect to the ZnO/PEEMC, the ZnO/MT-PEEMC seems to promote a better energy alignment for electronic extraction and collection, due to the stronger interaction between the ZnO and MT-PEEMC induced by the methanol treatment. In Fig. 3d, the P3HT absorbed light to emit photoluminescence (PL) intensity around 640 nm. When P3HT was blended with the EEMC, the PL intensity was substantially quenched with the increase of the EEMC concentration. Such PL quenching is indicative of the efficient charge transfer between EEMC and P3HT. As a result, the suitable LUMO level also enables fullerene-based interlayer to act as an acceptor to provide an extra excitation separation center for charge carrier generation.
The surface morphology of the self-assembled and polymerized interlayer on ITO/ZnO was also investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Fig. 4 compares the images acquired from SEM on ZnO/PEEMC and ZnO/MT-PEEMC with bare ZnO. The SEM image shows that the bare ZnO surface is relatively smooth and dense (Fig. 4a), implying uniformly covered ZnO nanoparticles on the ITO substrate. When the ZnO surface is modified with PEEMC, the morphology of ETLs has been greatly changed. The PEEMC tends to self-assemble into wormlike wrinkles on the ZnO surface because of intermolecular interactions between TEO functionality of EEMC and ZnO, as revealed in Fig. 4b. As expected, these wormlike wrinkles become more obvious and homogeneous in the image of MT-PEEMC film undergoing methanol treatment (Fig. 4c). These wormlike wrinkles with micrometer-scale fiber could favor intimate contact and enlarge the interfacial area between the ETL and active layer for charge extraction and transportation. Since a fullerene-based interlayer can also act as an additional acceptor for charge separation, the assembled wormlike wrinkles may provide a desirable electron transport pathway for electron transport to the cathode.
As mentioned above, the self-assembled and polymerized fullerene interlayer causes a great change on the interface morphology and substantially alters the wettability of ZnO. The atomic force microscopy (AFM) images were thus examined to elucidate the effect of the PEEMC interlayer on the morphology of the upper active layer. Fig. 5 shows AFM tapping mode topography images of P3HT:PC61BM films on top of ITO/ZnO, ITO/ZnO/PEEMC and ITO/ZnO/MT-PEEMC. All samples were prepared following the same condition as that conducted for device fabrication, without deposition of the MoO3 layer and the top metal electrode. From these AFM images, we can observe that the P3HT:PC61BM film deposited on ITO/ZnO shows a coarse surface roughness of 2.4 nm with larger red and green areas reflecting extended phase separation. This pronounced phase separation between donor and acceptor domains will result in unfavorable conditions for charge separation and transport, as well as poor contact between the active layer and the electrode. However, after incorporation of the polymerized EEMC between the ZnO/active layer interface, the AFM images of the P3HT:PC61BM film display obvious variation in contrast and reflect a rather uniform and smooth morphology with reduced surface roughness (1.5 nm). Moreover, the methanol treatment further promotes a better developed morphology of P3HT:PC61BM active layer. In Fig. 5, the AFM image of active layer deposition on ITO/ZnO/MT-PEEMC shows homogenous and well-dispersed nanostructures with surface roughness of 1.2 nm. It should be noted that compared with the P3HT:PC61BM casting on the ZnO/PEEMC without methanol treatment, the deposition on MT-PEEMC reveals a larger number of nano-scale interconnected domains. A smoother surface results in intimate contact with the upper layer, which is very desirable for high performance OPV, and thus an improved Jsc and FF from the inverted structure with these fullerene modified ETLs are anticipated.
To verify the superiority of this self-assembled and polymerized fullerene modified ZnO as ETL in PSCs, a multilayer inverted device structure was fabricated with a configuration of ITO/ZnO/SAM/P3HT:PC61BM (1:1, w/w)/e-MoO3/Ag. After depositing a layer of the functionalized fullerene on ZnO, thermal annealing at 150 °C is performed in order to generate the polymerized network of the PEEMC. A thin layer of evaporated MoO3 (e-MoO3) is used here as the hole transport layer (HTL). Under the same condition (Details in the ESI), a series of different concentration ratios of EEMC as ETL were tested to find an optimum for the device fabrication. The illuminated current–voltage (J–V) curves of these devices based on different concentration ratios of EEMC are shown in Fig. S4 and 6, and the corresponding device parameters are summarized in Table S1 and 2. From this table we can see that, the control device (ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PC61BM (1:1, w/w)/e-MoO3/Ag, defined as Device A) shows a PCE of 2.7%, with a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 8.59 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.60 V and a fill factor (FF) of 51.7%. The device's performance was relative with the concentration ratios of EEMC. It is found that when the concentration of the EEMC is 4 mg ml−1, the device based on the inverted structure (ITO/ZnO/PEEMC/P3HT:PC61BM (1:1, w/w)/e-MoO3/Ag, defined as Device B) with ZnO/PEEMC ETL performs best and shows 29% improvement of PCE over the control. The improved PCE should be ascribed to the overall enhanced device parameters, especially Jsc and FF. The slightly improved Voc is related to the better energy alignment caused by incorporation of the PEEMC, which is in good agreement with the UPS observation. The enhancement in Jsc and FF is owed to the effective charge carrier extraction, transportation and collection. It probably results from the favorable morphology of the active layer, improved interfacial wettability and efficient hole blocking caused by the novel ETL.
Devices

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a Key: Device A, ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PC61BM (1:1, w/w)/e-MoO3/Ag; Device B, ITO/ZnO/PEEMC (4 mg ml−1)/P3HT:PC61BM (1:1, w/w)/e-MoO3/Ag; Device C, ITO/ZnO/MT-PEEMC (4 mg ml−1)/P3HT:PC61BM (1:1, w/w)/e-MoO3/Ag. Device D, ITO/ZnO/PTB7:PC71BM (1:1.5, w/w)/e-MoO3/Ag; Device E, ITO/ZnO/MT-PEEMC/PTB7:PC71BM (1:1.5, w/w)/e-MoO3/Ag; Device F, ITO/ZnO/MT-PEEMC/PTB7:PC71BM (1:1.5, w/w)/s-VOx/Ag.

Device A
8.70
0.603
53.6
2.8
Device B
10.48
0.608
54.3
3.5
Device C
10.89
0.609
57.2
3.8
Device D
16.60
0.71
56.0
6.6
Device E
17.56
0.72
58.5
7.5
Device F
17.57
0.73
57.6
7.3
Further optimization on the device introduces a polar solvent methanol to infiltrate the EEMC before thermal polymerization. Delightfully, the PCE is enhanced from 3.5% for Device B to 3.8% for Device C (ITO/ZnO/MT-PEEMC/P3HT:PC61BM (1:1, w/w)/e-MoO3/Ag), revealing a 35.7% improvement in comparison to the control. The better matched energy level, fewer ZnO defects, more intimate interfacial contact and improved active layer morphology induced by MT-PEEMC should be responsible for the improved device performance. The enhanced current and PCE of the devices are consistent with the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the devices, as shown in Fig. 6. The difference between the tested and EQE calculated Jsc value is within the experimental error.
Successful application of the PEEMC interlayer in the P3HT:PC61BM-based inverted solar cell inspired us to employ it into other types of devices to investigate its universal validity. A narrow band gap polymer PTB7 blended with PC71BM was incorporated as the active layer in an inverted device. The J–V curves and the characteristics of the device with and without the MT-PEEMC interlayer as the electron transport layer are shown in Fig. 7 and Table 2. The control device (Device D) only with bare ZnO ETL gives a Voc of 0.71 V, a Jsc of 16.60 mA cm−2, a FF of 56.0%, and a PCE of 6.6%, whereas the Device E with the ZnO/MT-PEEMC interlayer delivers a Voc of 0.72 V, a Jsc of 17.56 mA cm−2, a FF of 58.5%, and a PCE of 7.5%, which represents a 13.6% enhancement in PCE. Similarly, the improvement in the PCE results from the overall improved Voc, Jsc and FF. To meet with large-scale and high-throughput production of polymer solar cell, a sol–gel derived VOx (s-VOx) is introduced to replace the evaporated MoO3 (e-MoO3) as the hole transfer layer to fabricate Device F. Intriguingly, the Device F with solution processed VOx HTL (ITO/ZnO/MT-PEEMC/PTB7:PC71BM (1:1.5, w/w)/s-VOx/Ag) shows a comparable efficiency of 7.3% to the device with evaporated MoO3 (Fig. 7 and Table 2). It should be noted that this efficiency is obtained from the all solution processed device except for the electrode. The corresponding EQE spectra of the devices are also shown in Fig. S4. Thus, it can be seen that this self-assembled and polymerized interlayer shows great potential for solution processed OPVs.
To investigate the effect of polymerized interlayer on the device stability, the air-stability of the unencapsulated inverted devices with or without the polymerized EEMC interlayer were periodically measured for 30 days (humidity, ∼55%; ∼25 °C) without any encapsulation barrier (Fig. 8). Because the oxygen and moisture at the surface of ZnO may reduce the electron extracted, the Device A and D without functionalized fullerene interlayer retain only 30% and 24% of their original PCE after being exposed to ambient conditions (Fig. 8a). However, the devices with polymerized EEMC modified ZnO exhibit much better long-term stability, especially for the one with the MT-PEEMC interlayer, retaining about 70% of the initial efficiency for Device C and 65% for Device E, together with well-maintained Voc, Jsc and FF (Fig. 8b, c and d). Therefore, the polymerized network and strong hydrogen bond interaction can stabilize the interfacial layer to achieve an oxygen-resistant ZnO, leading to the improved stability of the devices. Further, the denser polymerized network and more intimate interfacial contact induced by methanol treatment might passivate the hot spots generated in the ZnO to suppress the leakage current and prevent the gradual mutual penetration between the ZnO and the active layer as the operational time increases, consequently enhancing the durability of the device lifetime.

In conclusion, we have successfully designed and synthesized a novel C60-based n-type material EEMC, functionalized with tri(ethylene oxide) (TEO) and polymerizable ethenyl groups, as the self-assembled and polymerized electron transport layer (ETL) to fabricate high-performance and long-term stable inverted solar cells. The EEMC is capable of self-assembly on the ZnO surface to form an adhesive monolayer with intimate contact and subsequently undergoes polymerization to produce a robust thin film with good solvent resistance. This interlayer not only passivates the electron-traps and modulates the energy-level alignment at the PCBM-ZnO interface effectively but also contributes to a desirable nanostructure of the active layer. Additionally, the methanol treatment on the polymerized EEMC can boost these advantages of this novel interlayer. An inverted solar cell device based on P3HT:PC61BM with MT-PEEMC exhibits a 35.7% improvement of PCE in comparison to the control device. A further improved PCE of 7.5% has been achieved in the device based on PTB7:PC71BM as the active layer. This noteworthy efficiency can be well maintained in a solution processed device with sol–gel derived VOx to replace the evaporated MoO3 as the hole transfer layer. In addition, incorporation of this polymerized fullerene interlayer endows the devices with improved air stability in ambient conditions. Therefore, integration of the advantages of self-assembly and polymerization in a single fullerene-based material, provides a simple and promising method for all solution-processed, air-stable and high-performance polymer solar cells.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51273088, 51263016 and 51473075) and Doctoral Programs Foundation of Ministry of Education of China (Grants 20133601110004).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4tc01747a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014