 DOI: 10.1039/D3TA02266H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 15553-15560


Zhiliang
Zhang
,

Jingnan
Wu
,

Ji
Lin
,

Rui
Zhang
,

Junfang
Lv
,

Linfeng
Yu
,

Xia
Guo
* and 

Maojie
Zhang
*

Laboratory of Advanced Optoelectronic Materials, Suzhou Key Laboratory of Novel Semiconductor-optoelectronics Materials and Devices, College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China. E-mail: mjzhang@sdu.edu.cn

National Engineering Research Center for Colloidal Materials, School of Chemistry & Chemical Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250100, China. E-mail: guoxia0610@sdu.edu.cn

Department of Physics, Chemistry and Biology (IFM), Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden

Department of Chemistry and Bioscience, Aalborg University, DK-9220 Aalborg, Denmark

Received
15th April 2023
, Accepted 7th June 2023
First published on 8th June 2023
In recent years, the ternary strategy has been proven to be an effective way to improve the performance of organic solar cells (OSCs). Herein, an asymmetric medium-band gap non-fullerene acceptor (AFIC) is synthesized and added as the third component into the PM6:BTP-eC9 binary blend for a highly efficient ternary OSC. AFIC exhibits a well-complementary absorption spectrum with the host binary blend, which benefits light harvesting of the active layer. Furthermore, AFIC shows a large dipole moment and good miscibility with BTP-eC9, which facilitates the formation of a stable well-mixed phase and enhances molecular packing in the blend, leading to improved charge transport and suppressed charge recombination in ternary devices. As a result, the ternary OSC based on PM6:BTP-eC9:AFIC demonstrates a significantly improved power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 18.7% while the binary OSC based on PM6:BTP-eC9 shows a PCE of 17.5%, which is attributed to the synergistic enhancement of the open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), and fill factor (FF).

In recent years, organic solar cells (OSCs) have become an energy conversion technology with broad prospects owing to their unique superiorities of high throughput, low cost, solution processing and mechanical flexibility. Benefiting from the innovations of photovoltaic materials and device engineering, the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of single-junction and tandem OSCs have exceeded 19% and 20%, respectively. Nevertheless, the active layer (AL) in OSCs is typically composed of a single electron donor (D) and acceptor (A) material pair, leading to insufficient light absorption across the solar spectrum. Additionally, the limited exciton lifetime and low charge carrier mobility also pose significant challenges. These factors impede further improvement in OSC efficiency. As one of the most effective solutions to the issues mentioned above, the ternary strategy has been widely adopted by researchers. For efficient binary systems, such as PM6:BTP-eC9, to enhance sunlight harvesting, the third component needs to compensate for the insufficient absorption of the binary system in the range of 600–800 nm. Besides, in ternary blends, the use of compatible dual donors (D1:D2) or acceptors (A1:A2) can also lead to the formation of a well-mixed phase, which can optimize the morphology and reduce charge recombination. Therefore, the selection of the third component is crucial. At present, various non-fullerene small molecular acceptors (SMAs) have been extensively explored and introduced into binary OSCs via the ternary strategy, resulting in an efficiency of over 19%. Among them, asymmetric SMAs have gradually gained the attention of researchers due to their unique superiorities in improving device performance (Table S1).

The use of an asymmetric strategy preserves the benefits of symmetric structures, such as diverse chemical structures and adjustable photoelectrical properties, while also generating a strong dipole moment, promoting molecular packing and facilitating efficient charge transfer. For example, Min et al. developed an efficient ternary OSC based on PM1:L8-BO:BTP-F3Cl. The introduction of the asymmetric acceptor BTP-F3Cl resulted in tighter π–π stacking and improved electron mobility, yielding an efficiency of 19.1%. Recently, Zhang et al. designed and synthesized a novel non-fullerene acceptor AITC with an asymmetric structure. The large dipole moment of AITC (4.72 Debye) reinforced molecular packing and promoted charge transport while suppressing charge recombination, resulting in a PCE of 18.8% for the ternary device based on PM6:BTP-eC9:AITC. Despite the positive impact, the overlap of absorption spectra of AITC and PM6 hinders further advancements in the short-circuit current density (Jsc). Therefore, finding an appropriate third component for the AL with comprehensive complementary absorption remains a challenge in creating efficient devices.
In this contribution, an asymmetric non-fullerene SMA, named AFIC, was designed and introduced into the PM6:BTP-eC9 host system. AFIC possesses stronger light absorption ability in the wavelength range of 550–750 nm compared to the pristine film of PM6 and BTP-eC9, favoring the boost of Jsc. Meanwhile, AFIC shows a higher lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level than BTP-eC9, which facilitates an increased open–circuit voltage (Voc) in the ternary device. In addition, AFIC with a large dipole moment of 4.16 Debye has good compatibility with BTP-eC9, contributing to the formation of a well-distributed mixed phase and the optimization of the morphology, thereby simultaneously improving the Jsc and fill factor (FF) of the ternary device. Ultimately, the optimal ternary device showed an exceptional efficiency of 18.7% with an increased Voc of 0.854 V, a high Jsc of 27.7 mA cm−2 and an improved FF of 79.0%, while the corresponding binary device based on PM6:BTP-eC9 gained an efficiency of 17.5% with a Voc of 0.845 V, Jsc of 26.8 mA cm−2, and FF of 77.6%. This study highlights the significance of the third component and proves that asymmetric non-fullerene SMAs have enormous potential for constructing high-efficiency ternary OSCs.

The chemical structures of polymer donor PM6, symmetric acceptor BTP-eC9, and asymmetric acceptor AFIC are presented in Fig. 1a. Detailed synthetic routes of AFIC can be found in the ESI (Scheme S1). The characterization data of the target acceptor AFIC are presented in Fig. S1–S3. The UV-vis absorption spectra of PM6, BTP-eC9 and AFIC were measured in pristine films. As shown in Fig. 1b, the AFIC thin film displays a significant blue-shifted absorption and higher absorption coefficient than BTP-eC9. The maximum absorption peak of the AFIC thin film with a medium optical bandgap of 1.62 eV is located at 707 nm, which lies between that of PM6 (571 nm) and BTP-eC9 (824 nm). Better complementary absorption greatly enhances photon harvesting in ternary organic solar cells (OSCs), which can be clearly seen in Fig. S4. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels of AFIC were determined by cyclic voltammetry (CV), which were −5.75 and −4.02 eV, respectively (Fig. S5 and Fig. 1c). The higher LUMO energy level of AFIC compared to that of BTP-eC9 helps ternary OSCs obtain a high open–circuit voltage (Voc).

The molecular geometry of AFIC was explored by density functional theory (DFT) calculations. As presented in Fig. S6a, AFIC has a large dipole moment even though it has an almost planar geometry, which is mainly due to its asymmetry. Such an inherent large dipole moment might be expected to form strong positive and negative charge centers within the molecule, which is beneficial for enhancing intermolecular interactions and charge transport. Moreover, the connection between fundamental optical–electronic properties and molecular structures was explored by calculating the electrostatic potential (ESP) distribution of AFIC. As shown in Fig. S6b, most conjugated regions of AFIC reveal a positive ESP distribution. The high ESP value of AFIC suggests its strong electron-deficient characteristics and excellent electron-accepting capacity.
To explore the compatibility of the third component with host materials, the contact angles of water and diiodomethane on PM6, BTP-eC9, and AFIC neat films were determined (Fig. S7). According to the contact angle data, we used Wu's model to calculate the surface energy (γ) of PM6, BTP-eC9 and AFIC, which was found to be 27.19, 41.12 and 41.96 mN m−1, respectively. Good compatibility between the two acceptors suggested by their similar surface energies can be expected. Thus, the Flory–Huggins interaction parameter χ was calculated by using the equation  (κ is a positive constant) to further judge the degree of molecular miscibility. The relevant data can be seen in Fig. 1d and Table S2. Obviously, the χ value between BTP-eC9 and AFIC (χBTP-eC9,AFIC = 0.004κ) is significantly lower than that between PM6 and AFIC (χPM6,AFIC = 1.60κ) and between PM6 and BTP-eC9 (χPM6,BTP-eC9 = 1.44κ), which means that a well-mixed acceptor phase between BTP-eC9 and AFIC is prone to be formed. We then carried out differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements to verify this inference. As shown in Fig. 1e, during the heating process, the melting points of BTP-eC9 and AFIC appear at 299.3 °C and 284.7 °C, respectively. For the BTP-eC9:AFIC binary blend, a new single melting point of 290.6 °C is detected, which is between the melting points of the two pure acceptors. The melting point of the blend is between that of the two neat films, which further supports the conclusions of excellent miscibility between BTP-eC9 and AFIC and the formation of a stable mixed phase in ternary blends.
To explore the energy dynamics between BTP-eC9 and AFIC, the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of AFIC:BTP-eC9 blend films were studied. The PL of AFIC and the absorption of BTP-eC9 have a large spectral overlap (Fig. 1f), which is favorable for fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) between them. We thus further studied the PL spectra of BTP-eC9:AFIC blend films with different weight ratios of AFIC. As shown in Fig. 1g, the characteristic emission intensities of AFIC and BTP-eC9 are located at 772 nm and 913 nm. As the ratio of AFIC gradually increases, the emission peak of AFIC at 772 nm tends to disappear while the emission signal of BTP-eC9 is continuously enhanced, illustrating that efficient energy transfer does exist between them, which can well explain the increase in short–circuit current density (Jsc) in ternary OSCs.
To explore the influence of AFIC on various photovoltaic parameters of the device, ternary OSCs with different AFIC ratios were prepared using a normal device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer (AL)/PFN-Br/Al. Relevant devices were prepared in chloroform solution with 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) as a solvent additive (0.5% by volume). More detailed preparation steps are presented in the ESI. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the optimal OSCs were measured under AM 1.5G illumination with 100 mW cm−2 light intensity (Fig. 2a). The relevant photovoltaic parameters of the devices are listed in Table 1. The binary device based on PM6:BTP-eC9 delivers a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 17.5%, with a Voc of 0.845 V, a Jsc of 26.8 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 77.6%. However, for the binary device based on PM6:AFIC, a PCE of 12.4% with a high Voc of 0.902 V, a low Jsc of 18.1 mA cm−2 and an FF of 76.0% is achieved. The low PCE of the PM6:AFIC binary system is mainly limited by its relatively narrow absorption spectra, but the high Voc and FF indicate that AFIC is probably an effective third component. Based on this point, we fabricated ternary devices by adding different contents of AFIC into the PM6:BTP-eC9 binary system. The corresponding J–V curves and device parameters are presented in Fig. S8 and Table S3. With the increasing content of AFIC, the Voc of ternary devices gradually increases (Fig. S9), which is consistent with the result of the formation of a well-mixed phase obtained above. The highest PCE of 18.7% is obtained by adding 10 wt% AFIC into the PM6:BTP-eC9 host blend, while Voc, Jsc, and FF simultaneously increase to 0.854 V, 27.7 mA cm−2, and 79.0%, respectively. The result is among the best values for ternary OSCs based on the PM6:BTP-eC9 host system (Table S4).
Active layer

V
oc (V)

J
sc/Jcal (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a The calculated integrated current densities from the EQE curves.
b The obtained average values with standard deviation from 20 cells.

PM6:BTP-eC9
0.845 (0.835 ± 0.01)
26.8/26.2 (26.6 ± 0.2)
77.6 (76.2 ± 1.4)
17.5 (17.3 ± 0.2)
PM6:BTP-eC9:AFIC
0.854 (0.844 ± 0.01)
27.7/26.9 (27.5 ± 0.2)
79.0 (78.0 ± 1.0)
18.7 (18.5 ± 0.2)
PM6:AFIC
0.902 (0.892 ± 0.01)
18.1/17.6 (17.9 ± 0.2)
76.0 (75.5 ± 0.5)
12.4 (12.1 ± 0.3)
The improved Jsc can be confirmed by external quantum efficiency (EQE) tests. As shown in Fig. 2b, the EQE response of the optimal ternary device in the wavelength region of 600–800 nm is significantly higher than that of the binary device, which mainly benefits from the extra absorption of AFIC. The Jsc values of PM6:BTP-eC9, PM6:BTP-eC9:AFIC and PM6:AFIC calculated from the EQE spectra are 26.2, 26.9 and 17.6 mA cm−2, respectively, matching well with the measured values from the J–V curves (within the 3% error range). Fig. 2c exhibits the statistical distributions of the efficiency for 20 binary or ternary devices measured independently. It can be clearly observed that the ternary system is significantly superior to the binary counterparts in terms of device efficiency. Furthermore, we also compared the photostability of the optimal devices based on PM6:BTP-eC9 and PM6:BTP-eC9:AFIC with continuous illumination (white LED, 100 mW cm−2) for 200 h. As shown in Fig. S10, the PCE of the PM6:BTP-eC9 binary device obviously decreases under continuous illumination condition and reaches approximately 80% of its initial PCE after 74 h. In contrast, the ternary device based on PM6:BTP-eC9:AFIC exhibits better photostability and still retains approximately 80% of its initial PCE after 130 h of continuous illumination. Table S5 summarizes the PCE and photostability of some efficient ternary OSCs in recent years. It can be seen that the ternary device based on PM6:BTP-eC9:AFIC is comparable to these high-performance devices in terms of efficiency and stability. The improved stability of the ternary device might be attributed to the large dipole moment of AFIC increasing the intermolecular forces and optimizing the morphology of the AL.
To explore the exciton dissociation and charge collection characteristics, the photocurrent (Jph) versus effective voltage (Veff) of optimal binary and ternary devices was investigated, as exhibited in Fig. 3a. The Jph is defined as JL–JD and the Veff is defined as V0–V. Here, JL and JD represent the current density under illumination and dark conditions, respectively while V0 and V are the voltage when the Jph is zero and the applied voltage, respectively. Jsat is the saturation current density, which is equal to the Jsc when Veff ≥ 2.0 V. Pdiss and Pcoll can be roughly expressed by using Jph1/Jsat and Jph2/Jsat (Jph1 and Jph2 are the Jph under short circuit and maximal power conditions, respectively), which are commonly used in the estimation of exciton dissociation probability and charge collection probability, respectively. As summarized in Table S6, the Pdiss and Pcoll of the optimized ternary OSC are 99.1% and 91.3%, respectively, obviously higher than that of the corresponding binary OSCs. These results strongly indicate that the incorporation of AFIC improves the exciton dissociation and charge collection properties, which is conducive to the enhancement of Jsc and FF. Meanwhile, the PL spectra of the neat and blended thin films were measured to further evaluate the charge generation and separation properties. As shown in Fig. S11, the ternary blend with 10 wt% AFIC presents the highest PL quenching efficiency, indicating efficient charge transport in ternary blends.
To investigate the charge recombination kinetics, we analysed the impact of light intensities (Plight) on Voc and Jsc. Through the dependence of Voc on Plight (Voc ∝ n(kT/q)ln(Plight), where k, T, and q are Boltzmann's constant, the absolute temperature, and the elementary charge), we can identify the bimolecular recombination and trap-assisted recombination of devices. As shown in Fig. 3b, the measured slope of the optimized ternary OSC is 1.05 kT/q, while the same values of PM6:BTP-eC9 and PM6:AFIC binary OSCs are 1.14 kT/q and 1.24 kT/q, respectively. The slopes of all three systems are close to 1 kT/q, indicating that trap-assisted recombination is inhibited and bimolecular recombination has a dominant status in these systems. Moreover, we can identify the bimolecular recombination behaviour of related devices through the dependence of Jsc on Plight (Jsc ∝ (Plight)) α, where α is an exponential factor that is related to bimolecular charge recombination. When the α value is close to 1, it indicates that devices possess minimal bimolecular recombination. Hence, the bimolecular charge recombination in the optimal ternary OSC can be negligible due to the high α value (0.99) (Fig. 3c). Consequently, the introduction of AFIC can suppress both bimolecular recombination and trap-assisted recombination, thereby resulting in increased Jsc and FF.
To further analyze the charge recombination characteristics, the transient photovoltage (TPV) was measured. As shown in Fig. 3d, the carrier lifetime value of the OSC based on PM6:BTP-eC9:AFIC is 2.36 μs, much higher than that of OSCs based on PM6:BTP-eC9 (1.97 μs) and PM6:AFIC (1.42 μs). The prolonged carrier lifetime further manifests the effectiveness of AFIC in restraining charge recombination. Furthermore, the transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements were carried out to evaluate the process of charge extraction in these systems. As shown in Fig. 3e, the photocurrent decay times of devices based on PM6:AFIC, PM6:BTP-eC9, and PM6:BTP-eC9:AFIC are 0.35 μs, 0.23 μs, and 0.19 μs, respectively. A shorter extraction lifetime in the ternary device implies more efficient extraction of photogenerated carriers, which contributes to an improvement of FF.
To investigate the charge transport behaviour of these binary and ternary systems, the space charge-limited current (SCLC) measurement was performed. The testing of charge carrier mobilities mainly includes two aspects: hole mobilities (μh) and electron mobilities (μe). The device structure of the former is ITO/PEDOT:PSS/AL/MoO3/Al, while that of the latter is ITO/ZnO/AL/PFN-Br/Al. As shown in Fig. 3f and Table S7, the μh and μe of the three systems are 3.94 × 10−4 and 4.90 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 for PM6:AFIC, 6.72 × 10−4 and 7.18 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 for PM6:BTP-eC9, and 1.24 × 10−3 and 1.26 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 for PM6:BTP-eC9:AFIC, respectively, and the corresponding ratios of μh to μe are 0.80, 0.94, and 0.98, respectively. Compared with the binary system, the ternary device with 10 wt% AFIC attains higher μh and μe, as well as more balanced carrier mobility. The results demonstrate that the addition of AFIC will be conducive to charge transport in ternary OSCs, which is consistent with the test data of TPC.
To gain a deep insight into the effect of AFIC on the molecular stacking of ternary ALs, grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurements were employed. As shown in Fig. S12, the AFIC neat film possesses mixed face-on and edge-on orientations with the (100) lamellar peaks and (010) π–π stacking peaks appearing in both the in-plane (IP) and out-of-plane (OOP) directions. Such mixed orientations contribute to the establishment of three-dimensional charge pathways.Fig. 4a–d show the 2D GIWAXS patterns of the three films and the corresponding cut–line profiles in the IP and OOP directions. The calculated parameters are listed in Tables S8 and S9. All blend films adopt a face-on dominant orientation, as evidenced by the strong OOP π–π stacking peaks between 1.73 Å−1 and 1.77 Å−1. After adding 10% wt AFIC to the PM6:BTP-eC9 blend film, the OOP π–π characteristic peak shifts from 1.73 Å−1 to 1.75 Å−1, and the corresponding d-spacing value decreases from 3.63 Å−1 to 3.59 Å−1. Moreover, the crystallite coherent length (CCL) values of the three blends were calculated according to the Scherrer equation. In both the OOP and IP directions, the optimized ternary blend shows higher CCL values than the PM6:BTP-eC9 binary blend. These results imply that the presence of AFIC with a larger dipole moment enhances the intermolecular forces and induces a higher degree of molecular packing of the blend film, thus contributing to effective charge transport. Such findings agree well with the testing results of SCLC and explain the synchronously improved Jsc and FF in ternary devices.
We further carried out atomic force microscopy (AFM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurements to probe into the morphological evolution in the binary and ternary blends.Fig. 5a and b demonstrate the AFM height images and phase images of the binary and ternary blend films, respectively. It is clear that the root-mean-square (RMS) roughness value of the ternary blend film with 10 wt% AFIC (1.63 nm) is higher than that of the PM6:BTP-eC9 blend film (1.57 nm), which could be ascribed to the morphology change induced by AFIC. Meanwhile, the corresponding phase images (Fig. 5b) obviously reveal that the PM6:BTP-eC9:AFIC blend exhibits more obvious uniform fibrillar structures, indicating that the existence of the third component effectively regulates the phase-separated network in the ternary blend. The above phenomena can further be confirmed using the TEM images. As shown in Fig. 5c, PM6:BTP-eC9 binary blends display a uniform phase separation and nanofibrous network. After the addition of AFIC, the fibrillar structure becomes more obvious and phase separation is slightly improved. The optimized phase separation, well-formed nanofibrous structure and bicontinuous interpenetrating networks favor exciton dissociation and charge transport, contributing to the enhanced Jsc and FF in the optimized ternary device.

In summary, we have successfully fabricated high-performing ternary OSCs by incorporating the asymmetric non-fullerene acceptor AFIC into the PM6:BTP-eC9 host system. AFIC exhibits a complementary absorption spectrum with the host blend system and demonstrates excellent compatibility with BTP-eC9, contributing to the formation of a homogeneously mixed phase that improves the FF and Jsc in ternary OSCs. Furthermore, the substantial dipole moment of AFIC strengthens the intermolecular interactions and enhances the molecular packing, leading to an improvement in charge transfer and carrier diffusion within the ternary OSCs. Consequently, the optimal ternary OSC attains a remarkable power conversion efficiency of 18.7%, owing to the enhanced charge transport, reduced charge recombination, prolonged carrier lifetime, and optimized morphology in the active layer. Our results demonstrate that the asymmetric approach is an effective method for designing the third component in ternary OSCs.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (No. 51973146), Shandong Provincial Natural Science Foundation (ZR2022JQ09), and Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science & Technology. R. Z. acknowledges the BL11-NCD-SWEET beamline at ALBA for the GIWAXS experiments. R. Z. acknowledges Julian A. Steele and Eduardo Solano for fruitful discussion and analysis. J. W. thanks to the China Scholarship Council.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ta02266h
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023