 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA02242E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16834-16842


Jaehoon
Ryu
,

Jong Woo
Lee
,

Haejun
Yu
,

Juyoung
Yun
,

Kisu
Lee
,

Jungsup
Lee
,

Doyk
Hwang
,

Jooyoun
Kang
,

Seong Keun
Kim
 and 

Jyongsik
Jang
*

School of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Seoul National University, 599 Gwanangno, Gwanakgu, Seoul 151-742, Korea. E-mail: jsjang@plaza.snu.ac.kr; Fax: +82 2 880 1604; Tel: +82 2 880 7069

Department of Biophysics and Chemical Biology, Department of Chemistry, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea

Received
14th March 2017
, Accepted 13th July 2017
First published on 13th July 2017
Research on the addition of suitable materials into perovskite solar cells (PSCs) for improved performance is as important as the fabrication of efficient perovskite films themselves. An attempt to enhance the performance of planar-type perovskite solar cells was performed by introducing graphene quantum dots (GQDs) onto a blocking TiO2 layer via O2 plasma treatment. Furthermore, the bandgap of the GQDs was tuned through their size control and the effects of the GQD size on cell performance were explored. The GQDs can induce fast electron extraction and the formation of the improved perovskite quality. The devices with appropriately sized-GQDs showed an average of 10% enhancement compared with those of cells without GQDs and achieved 19.11% as the best power conversion efficiency (PCE). Furthermore, GQDs contributed to the reduction in the extent of current–voltage hysteresis, which was attributed to the planar structure.

Interest in perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has increased in recent years due to their high performance and simple manufacturing process. Perovskite materials are suitable for use as wide-range absorbers because they possess properties such as a high light absorption coefficient, small exciton binding energy, long charge diffusion length, and high charge mobility. To take advantage of these properties without any energetic losses, many reports have focused on the fabrication methods of perovskite films, such as solvent engineering, gas-assisted crystallization, and solvent annealing. These methods not only promote growth of the perovskite grain size, but also increase the density and uniformity of the perovskite film. A dense perovskite layer with a large grain size structure prevents electrons from being trapped and recombined, contributing to the high power conversion efficiency of PSCs.

Research on additives or suitable materials for addition into PSCs for improved performance is as important as the fabrication of efficient perovskite films themselves. There have been many reports on the addition of new materials into PSCs. In particular, carbon nanomaterials, such as graphene, carbon nanotubes, graphene quantum dots (GQDs), and fullerenes, have attracted interest as PSC addition materials due to their unique properties, including high conductivity, transparency, flexibility, and low cost. The addition of carbon materials into PSCs resulted in the enhancement of cell performance through rapid charge extraction and reduced interfacial resistance. Furthermore, the non-polar properties of carbon enable PSCs to be more stable in a humid atmosphere.
Among the various carbon nanomaterials, GQDs are used as nanomaterials for other diverse photovoltaic device types, such as organic photovoltaics, polymer solar cells, and silicon solar cells as well as PSCs. GQDs, layers of tiny graphene, provide tunable band gaps and good chemical stability. Furthermore, GQDs are excellent electron acceptors and donors when they are photo-excited. These unique properties of GQDs have improved cell performances through various ways. Despite the outstanding characteristics of GQDs in optoelectronic devices, it is difficult to treat GQDs as nanomaterials; therefore, the characterization of GQDs remains difficult. Moreover, there have been few reports on the application of GQDs into PSCs, unlike graphene applications. Therefore, it is important to explore GQDs in PSCs through their facile introduction approaches.
Herein, we report the effects of GQDs in planar-type perovskite solar cells. GQDs were easily introduced onto the TiO2 blocking layer by an O2 plasma and spin-coating method. Furthermore, the effects of the GQD size on cell performance were explored by applying various sizes of GQDs in PSCs. In particular, introduction of the GQDs into the PSCs enhanced the short-circuit current density (Jsc) due to the rapid electron extraction to TiO2 and better crystallization of perovskite. The GQDs also contributed to the unexpected improvement of the open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) of the device by reducing the contact resistance of the perovskite/TiO2 interface and efficient electron transfer. The GQD-applied devices achieved an average power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 17.80%, which is a ca. 10% enhancement compared with that of reference cells (=16.21%). Moreover, our results showed that GQDs reduced the extent of current–voltage hysteresis.

GQDs were fabricated based on chemical oxidation and cut from carbon fibers; the size of the GQDs was tailored based on the oxidation temperature. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution (HR)-TEM images in Fig. 1a–c show well-defined GQDs synthesized at various temperatures (80, 100, and 120 °C), and the sizes of the GQDs were verified around 14, 10, and 7 nm, referred to hereafter as 14GQDs, 10GQDs, and 7GQDs, respectively. It was evident that the size of the GQDs decreased with increasing reaction temperature. GQD fabrication at 70 °C was attempted, but not successful. This indicated that the minimum temperature for complete GQD fabrication was around 80 °C (Fig. S15). The ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorbance spectra of GQDs synthesized at various temperatures are shown in Fig. 1d. The absorbance in the long wavelength region was enhanced with the increasing size of the GQDs. Fig. 1e shows the emission spectra of the prepared GQDs excited at 300 nm, demonstrating that 14GQDs, 10GQDs, and 7GQDs showed specific emission peaks near 500 nm, 450 nm, and 420 nm, respectively. In addition, the optical images of the 14GQDs, 10GQDs, and 7GQDs under a 364 nm UV lamp revealed different colors, which were yellow, green, and blue, respectively (inset of Fig. 1e). The photoluminescence excitation (PLE) and PL spectrum of the prepared GQDs at their specific emissions and excitations are shown in Fig. S1. These absorption and emission spectra of the three prepared GQDs represented a blue shift with increasing reaction temperatures. In other words, the band gap energy of the GQDs was successfully tuned by controlling their sizes. The PL properties of GQDs depended on their size, zigzag structure, and defects. Specifically, the size of the GQDs, which was related to the quantum confinement effect, mainly influenced their band gap energy. The corresponding lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels of the prepared GQDs were predicted through the cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurement as shown in Fig. S2. It was difficult to determine the specific LUMO level of the GQDs since there were uncertainties about estimating the LUMO level from the CV measurement; determination of the value used for the absolute potentials of standard electrodes was ambiguous. The inaccuracies involved in the use of the ferrocenium/ferrocene (Fc+/Fc) redox couple were due to sensitivity to environmental effects. In addition, an estimation of the GQD's LUMO level using the method could increase their inaccuracy. Therefore, the LUMO levels of the GQDs were indirectly assessed through the CV measurements of TiO2 and the GQDs and other analysis results (fast decay (τ1) of time-resolved photoluminescence, Table 1). The onset potential (Ered) was determined from the potentials at −0.02 mA cm−2, and internally calibrated using the ferrocene/ferrocenium redox couple (Fc/Fc+), as shown in Fig. S3. The Ered of all GQDs had a lower value than that of TiO2, indicating that the LUMO levels of all GQDs were higher than those of TiO2. Furthermore, the Ered of the GQDs was shifted negatively with an increasing synthesis temperature, indicating that their LUMO levels increased with the decreasing GQD size. The τ1 value might be related to the rate of electron transfer from the perovskite to the electron transport layer. The τ1 values of 14GQDs and 10GQDs were smaller, whereas the τ1 value of 7GQDs was larger, compared with that of the reference. It indicated that 14GQDs and 10GQDs enabled efficient electron transfer from the perovskite to the ETL, but 7GQDs interrupted electron transfer. Thus, it could be assumed that the LUMO levels of 14GQDs and 10GQDs were located between the LUMO levels of TiO2 and perovskite, and the LUMO levels of 7GQDs were higher than those of perovskite.

Sample

A
1


τ
1 [ns]

A
2


τ
2 [ns]

τ
avg
 [ns]

a 
.

Ref.
0.29
4.7
0.71
31.7
30.2
14GQDs
0.53
3.4
0.47
21.4
18.7
10GQDs
0.37
4.0
0.63
22.2
20.5
7GQDs
0.38
4.9
0.62
29.3
27.0

Fig. 2a and b show the schematic layout of the GQD-inserted planar-type perovskite solar cell and the energy band diagram of cells, respectively. The GQDs were thinly coated on the TiO2 blocking layer via O2 plasma treatment and a spin-coating method. O2 plasma treatment improved the hydrophilicity of the TiO2 layer and enabled the water-based GQD solution to uniformly coat the TiO2 layer. It was difficult to examine the GQDs on the TiO2 layer through the top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the TiO2 blocking layer with the tiny thickness (sub-2 nm) GQDs (Fig. S4). However, dispersion of the GQDs on the TiO2 layer was confirmed through energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) elemental data, as shown in Fig. S5. The carbon (C) elemental mapping image, which signified the GQDs, showed uniform modification of GQDs on the TiO2 layer via O2 plasma and heat treatment. In addition, the GQD quantity on the TiO2 blocking layer was controlled by the number of spin coatings using the GQD aqueous solution (3 mg mL−1) and confirmed through the C/Ti atomic% ratio value (summarized in Table S2). The best cell performance was observed under a C/Ti ratio of 5.51, which corresponded to three GQD solution spin coatings, the optimal conditions of the GQD quantity in respect of the TiO2 film (Fig. S6). A carboxylate linker, chemical bonding between the GQD and TiO2, enables fast electron extraction from GQDs to TiO2, while physically adsorbed-GQD on the TiO2 surface reveals slower extraction. The chemical bonds saturate with spin-coating GQD solution more than 3 times, which leads to the formation of more physisorbed-GQDs on the TiO2 film and thus reduction of performance. According to the cell performance as the function of the number of GQD solution spin coatings, three GQD solution spin coatings were chosen as optimal conditions for further characterization of the devices. A cross-sectional SEM image of the prepared PSCs containing GQDs is shown in Fig. 2c; thicknesses of the GQDs/TiO2, perovskite, hole transport material (HTM), and Au layers were 50 nm, 300 nm, 220 nm, and 60 nm, respectively.
To investigate the O2 plasma treatment effect on the introduction of GQDs, FTIR analysis of the GQD-modified TiO2 layer with and without O2 plasma treatment before the GQD solution spin-coating was conducted as shown in Fig. S12. Both spectra displayed a strong absorption band at 820 cm−1, corresponding to the Ti–O–Ti bond. However, the GQD-modified TiO2 layer with O2 plasma treatment showed absorption bands at 1070 cm−1 and 1640 cm−1, which were assigned to the –COOTi vibrations. It indicates that O2 plasma treatment on the TiO2 layer leads to more carboxylate bonding between GQD and TiO2 in a short space of time, which enables fast electron extraction from GQDs to TiO2. Addition of oxygen functionalities derived from O2 plasma improved the hydrophilicity of the TiO2 layer, thus leading to an increased approach of the functional group of GQDs to TiO2 for chemical bonding. Fig. S13 presents the photovoltaic performance evaluation of the devices based on the GQD/TiO2 layer with and without O2 plasma treatment. The average PCE of the devices with and without the plasma treatment showed 17.80% (s.d. = 0.65) and 16.48 (s.d. = 0.98), respectively, indicating that the O2 plasma treatment on the TiO2 layer before the GQD solution spin coating improved reproducibility as well as performance. O2 plasma treatment induces chemical bonding between GQDs and TiO2 as discussed above. However, GQD introduction without O2 plasma treatment could dominate the formation of physically adsorbed-GQDs onto TiO2 rather than chemical bonds, and the coated amounts of GQD varies largely with every trial for the TiO2 layer not treated with O2 plasma.
Atomic-force microscopy (AFM) analysis was used to confirm the surface morphologies of the TiO2 layer and the GQD/TiO2 layer (Fig. 3). Three different-sized GQDs were used for the AFM investigation of the GQD/TiO2 layer. The height profile of the TiO2 layer revealed a somewhat smooth diagram compared with that of the all GQD modified-TiO2 layer, which exhibited some rough points throughout the entire layer. The height of the rough points was 0.5–2 nm, corresponding to the GQD thicknesses. Interestingly, despite the rough surface of the GQD/TiO2 layer due to the modification of the GQDs on the TiO2 layer, the area root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of the GQD/TiO2 layer was lower than that of the TiO2-only layer (=8.00 nm). It was clear that the GQDs efficiently infiltrated and covered the pore (or crack) of the formed TiO2 layer, resulting in the surface of the layer forming more homogeneously and densely. The RMS of the GQD/TiO2 layer decreased with a decreasing GQD size; smaller GQDs facilitate pore (or crack) infiltration and the uniformity of the TiO2 layer. The more homogeneous and smooth GQD modified-TiO2 layer than the TiO2-only layer led to superior contact with the perovskite layer and helped inhibition of the direct contact of FTO with the perovskite; these contribute to a decrease in the resistance and an increase in the shunt resistance of the device.
X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of perovskite films have been taken to investigate the effect of GQD modification on perovskite qualities. The qualities of perovskite films depend on their crystallinities. Fig. 4a presents the strong peaks at 14° and 28.3°, corresponding to the (110) and (220) reflections of the tetragonal perovskite lattice, respectively. Importantly, these peaks increased in intensity in the perovskite films on all GQD-modified TiO2 layers. It implies that GQDs have an influence on the crystallinity of perovskite films. This could be found from the functional group of GQDs, which is the amine group. All GQDs reflected a strong absorption band at 1093 cm−1 (C–C stretch) and relatively weak absorption bands at 830 cm−1 (–NH2 vibration), 1430 cm−1 (–COOH combination) and 3450 cm−1 (–OH and –NH2 stretch) in the FTIR spectra of the GQDs (Fig. 4b). Quite a small number of functional groups, compared to that of carbon, should be positioned predominantly at their edges. Most functional groups of the prepared GQDs could be developed at edges formed by the oxidative cleavage of carbon fibers since it is the most unstable part of the energy level. In addition, intensities of the functional group absorption bands increased on decreasing their GQD sizes (Fig. S7). In other words, the ratio of the functional group to carbon contents increases with decreasing GQD sizes. It is attributable to more edge sites in the smaller GQD size. There have been reports that amine groups on the surface of the substrate improve the crystalline property of the perovskite layer. Amine groups of the substrate work as an anchor for perovskite and determine the direction of crystal growth, especially in the vertical direction. It could be confirmed by the enhanced (110)/(220) XRD peak intensity ratio of the perovskite films on all GQD-modified TiO2 layers, compared with that of the perovskite film on the pristine TiO2 layer. It indicates that the perovskite structure on the GQD-modified TiO2 layer is the (110) preferential crystal orientation, which is along the direction perpendicular to the substrate. The direction of the perovskite growth is associated with the better charge collection. Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) of perovskite films has also been conducted to confirm the morphology of the perovskite layer (Fig. S8). However, we observed no remarkable change of the perovskite morphology between the pristine TiO2 layer and the GQD-modified TiO2 layer. We treated O2 plasma onto the TiO2 layer to modify GQDs. In addition, the pristine TiO2 layer was also treated with O2 plasma for the same amount of time to match the same conditions with the GQD-modified TiO2 layer. This O2 plasma treatment led two TiO2 layers to have similar hydrophilicity, which affects the nucleus density and dragging force on the substrate, forming a similar perovskite morphology.
UV/vis absorbance spectra of perovskite films with and without GQDs were measured to investigate the influence of the GQDs on the light absorption of the perovskite film (Fig. S9). The absorbance intensities of all samples were similar, but the perovskite on the GQD/TiO2 layer exhibited slightly increased band-edge absorption at 750 nm, which should be attributed to the improved crystallinity of the perovskite by GQD modification.
Photoluminescence (PL) analysis of the perovskite films was performed to confirm the photo-excited electron transfer behavior. Fig. 4c shows the steady-state PL spectra of TiO2/perovskite films with various inserted GQDs excited at 500 nm: strong emission peaks at ∼780 nm. All GQD introduction led to PL quenching, indicating efficient carrier transfer by the improved quality of perovskite films derived from GQDs. Particularly, the 14GQD- and 10GQD-modified TiO2/perovskite films showed remarkable quenched emission intensities, indicative of fast electron transfer. This could explain why the photo-excited electrons transferred rapidly from the perovskite to the TiO2 layer, which passed through the GQDs due to the proper LUMO levels of the 14GQDs and 10GQDs between the perovskite and TiO2. It also encouraged rapid charge transfer by ultrafast hot-electron extraction from GQD to TiO2. The 14GQD modification showed a larger quenching intensity compared with the 10GQD modification. The deeper LUMO levels of the 14GQDs may be attributed to an improved driving force for charge injection from the perovskite to the GQDs. However, the difference between the driving force of the 14GQD and the 10GQD from the GQDs to TiO2 may be negligible based on femtosecond-scale rapid electron extraction. For the 7GQD modification, the PL intensity reflected a minor decrease compared with the pristine films. This was attributable to the inefficient charge transfer and an increased chance of radiative recombination due to the higher LUMO levels of 7GQDs than the conduction band of the perovskite. This PL intensity tendency was also confirmed based on time-resolved PL (TRPL) excited at 405 nm, which measured luminescence more than 750 nm (750 nm long pass filter) (Fig. 4d). The TRPL spectra of each sample were fitted with a bi-exponential decay function as following eqn (1) and the corresponding parameters are summarized in Table 1.
yfit = y0 + A1exp(−t/τ1) + A2exp(−t/τ2)
(1)
The fast decay τ1 might be related to the transportation of photogenerated carriers from the perovskite to the electron transport layer as mentioned above. The faster τ1 values of the 14GQD- (=3.4 ns) and 10GQD-modified (=4.0 ns) TiO2/perovskite films than those of TiO2/perovskite films were attributed to fast and efficient electron extraction from the perovskite by GQDs. On the other hand, in the case of 7GQD modification, the slowest τ1 value originated from the disturbance of charge transfer due to higher LUMO levels of 7GQDs than the conduction band of perovskite. However, the amplitude average decay time (τavg) was faster for the 7GQDs than the pristine. Despite the disturbance of charge transfer, the improved perovskite crystallinity derived from 7GQDs led to more efficient overall charge transfer to the TiO2 layer compared with the pristine sample.

Fig. 5a shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of PSCs prepared with GQDs of various sizes under simulated one sun AM 1.5G illumination and the corresponding photovoltaic properties are summarized in Table 2 and Fig. S9. The Jsc values of 14GQDs (=22.47 mA cm−2) and 10GQDs (=21.92 mA cm−2) showed a remarkable increase, whereas that of 7GQDs (=21.45 mA cm−2) increased slightly compared with that of the pristine cells (=21.20 mA cm−2). This was consistent with our PL analysis as discussed above. This Jsc variation was also confirmed based on the incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) data shown in Fig. 5b. The devices with GQDs represented higher quantum efficiency over the entire wavelength range compared with the reference cells. The integrated photocurrent values from the IPCE spectra of the reference, 14GQDs, 10GQDs, and 7GQDs were 20.57, 22.18, 21.4, and 20.95 mA cm−2, respectively, which were similar to the Jsc values extracted from the J–V curves. The increases of Voc were observed in the GQD-incorporated devices regardless of their size. The Voc value in the PSCs originated from the potential difference based on the difference between the electron quasi-Fermi level of the n-type semiconductor and the hole quasi-Fermi level of the p-type HTM under illumination. For this reason, the high LUMO level of the electron-extracting layer generally led to an increase in the Voc value in the case of the 7GQDs. However, there were unexpected Voc increases in the 14GQDs and 10GQDs. There were other factors derived from the GQDs, such as an increase in the recombination resistance (will be discussed in Fig. 6a). The FF also showed enhancement for devices with all sizes of GQDs compared with the reference cells. The FF in the PSCs was strongly influenced by their series resistance (Rs). In fact, the TiO2 blocking layer had an impact on the increase in the series resistance. The Rs values for all of the prepared devices were calculated from the inverse slope of the J–V curves of the devices in Fig. S11. All devices with GQDs showed significant Rs decreases compared with the reference, which could be explained by a reduced roughness factor due to the GQDs as a defect-surpassing agent as indicated by the AFM analysis. Furthermore, it was also ascribed to a reduced contact resistance at the perovskite/n-type layer interface due to the graphene-like properties of GQDs. Graphene lowered the contact resistance with organic materials, which include CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite. Ultimately, the introduction of GQDs, particularly 14GQDs, resulted in increases in all photovoltaic parameters, thus leading to an average PCE enhancement of 10% compared with the reference cells.
Sample

J
sc [mA cm−2]

V
oc [V]
FF
PCEbest [%]
PCEavg [%]

a A typical active area of a cell was 0.105 cm2 as defined by a shadow mask and the performance was measured at a scan rate of 0.5 V s−1.
b Average characteristics calculated from 22 devices for each.

Ref.
21.20
1.11
0.73
17.27
16.21 ± 0.68
14GQDs
22.47
1.12
0.76
19.11
17.80 ± 0.65
10GQDs
21.92
1.12
0.75
18.41
17.01 ± 0.79
7GQDs
21.45
1.13
0.75
18.07
16.67 ± 0.82
PSCs generally have J–V hysteresis in terms of the scan direction due to charge accumulation or dielectric polarization by ferroelectric properties. In addition, there was a larger J–V hysteresis in the planar-type structure. One effective method to reduce J–V hysteresis is by preventing unbalanced charges from recombining or trapping at the trap sites by balancing the electron flux (Je) with the hole flux (Jh) in the device. The n–i–p-type PSCs improved the Je by enhancing the electron injection and transfer of electron conductors. In addition, reduction of the J–V hysteresis in n–i–p-type PSCs was an indirect demonstration of efficient electron injection and transfer from perovskite to the electron conductors. There were reductions in Voc and FF hysteresis for 14GQDs compared with those of the reference, especially in the FF, leading to a reduction in the PCE hysteresis of 14GQDs as shown in Fig. 6c. The reduction ratio of PCE at the forward scan to that at the reverse scan (=(PCErev − PCEfor)/(PCErev)) of 14GQDs was 18.63%, which was a lower value compared with that of reference cells (=27.13%). To further confirm the hysteresis of the device, the steady-state photocurrent output at the maximum power voltage of the devices was measured for 100 s (Fig. 6b and d). The reference cells showed an unstable photocurrent output during the test, whereas the 14GQD cell obtained a stabilized current density of 17.56 mA cm−2 and a calculated PCE value of 15.80%. These also ensured efficient and rapid electron extraction after the introduction of GQDs. Improved electron extraction and transfer increased the Je of the electron-extracting layer, thus contributing to balancing the Je with the Jh.
To further understand the unexpected increases in the Voc of PSCs with 14GQDs, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements of the device were performed. Fig. 7 shows Nyquist plots of the devices with and without 14GQDs, and an equivalent circuit for modeling the plots. The Nyquist plots were measured at an applied bias of 0.9 V under dark conditions. Typically, Nyquist plots displayed two distinct arcs at low and high frequencies under dark conditions; nevertheless, only one arc was obtained. According to the simplified transmission line model, the first arc at higher frequencies could be indistinguishable in the case of PSCs. The resistance values from the equivalent circuit were calculated using the fitted line and are summarized in Table S3. HTM resistance (RHTM) was related to HTM transport and extraction in the Au electrode. The main arc in our Nyquist plot highlighted the chemical capacitance (Cμ) and recombination resistance (Rrec), which were inversely correlated with the recombination rate. The series resistance (Rs) of the 14GQDs was lower than that of the pristine device. The Rs values from the EIS analysis could differ from the Rs values extracted from J–V curves (Fig. S11), in terms of estimation values from curves. The RHTM values for two samples were found to be similar due to the same HTM conditions. Most recombination in PSC devices occurs at the perovskite/TiO2 interface where electrons recombine with holes in the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of the HTM. The Nyquist plots reflect a 1.62 times higher Rrec value after the 14GQD implementation. This indicates that 14GQDs facilitate rapid and efficient electron transfer from the perovskite to the TiO2 layer and act as a defect-surpassing agent, thus retarding electron recombination at the perovskite/TiO2 interface. Introduction of 14GQDs, which have a suitable LUMO level for electron transfer from the perovskite, provided not only improved electron extraction, but also reduced the series resistance and recombination rate.
The long-term stability of our cell over one week is also presented in Fig. S14. The devices without any encapsulation were kept under ambient conditions (20–25 °C, 20–30% humidity) and the performance was measured without a UV-blocking filter. The 14GQD cell showed better durability from sunlight and moisture than the reference cell due to GQD modification onto the TiO2 layer. It is known that the TiO2 layer degraded MAPbI3 at its interface by trap-charge driven degradation and an UV light-induced photocatalytic effect. Considering the negative effect of the TiO2 layer, the coated GQDs onto the TiO2 layer blocked the direct contact of the perovskite with the TiO2 layer and prevented from degradation of the perovskite.

We synthesized three different-sized GQDs and applied them in a planar-type CH3NH3PbI3 PSCs via O2 plasma and spin-coating methods. O2 plasma treatment on the surface of the blocking TiO2 layer enabled the water-based GQD solution to uniformly coat the layer, and resulted in the layer forming more homogeneously and densely. The GQDs induced the formation of the improved perovskite quality, and boosted the Jsc by their ultra-fast hot electron extraction to the TiO2 layer. Moreover, the GQDs reduced the series resistance and improved the recombination resistance of the device by reducing the contact resistance of the perovskite/TiO2 interface and efficient electron transfer, and contributed to the enhancement of the Voc and FF. In other words, the GQDs augmented all of the photovoltaic parameters and achieved a best PCE of 19.11%. Furthermore, our results demonstrated that the GQDs helped to reduce J–V hysteresis. This report on GQD introduction into perovskite solar cells may offer an opportunity for further investigation of GQD-inserted photovoltaic devices and have the potential to advance the application of GQDs to photovoltaic devices for enhanced performance.


Unless otherwise stated, all materials were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used without further purification. Methylamine (40% in methanol) was obtained from Junsei Chemical. Spiro-MeOTAD was purchased from Merck KGaA. Carbon fibers were purchased from Toray Co.


Carbon fibers (0.3 g) were added into a mixture of 95% H2SO4 (60 mL) and 60% HNO3 (20 mL). The solution was sonicated for two hours and stirred for 24 hours at different temperatures of 80, 100, and 120 °C, respectively. The mixture was cooled and diluted with deionized (DI) water (800 mL). The pH was adjusted to 8 with 20 wt% NaOH aqueous solution. The final product solution was further dialyzed in a dialysis bag (retained molecular weight: 2000 Da for 3 days).


A 30 mL HI solution (57 wt% in water, Aldrich) was stirred with 27.86 mL of methylamine (40 wt% in methanol, Junsei Chemical) in a 250 mL round bottom flask at 0 °C for 2 h. A rotary evaporator was used to obtain a precipitate. The precipitate was washed several times using diethyl ether and dried in a vacuum oven for 24 h. 40 wt% CH3NH3PbI3 solution was prepared by mixing the MAI power and PbI2 (1:1 molar ratio) in mixed DMSO:DMF (1:8.8, v/v) at 60 °C for 30 min.


Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates were cleaned sequentially in DI water, acetone, and 2-propanol for 60 min. A compact TiO2 layer was deposited by spin coating a colloidal solution of highly crystalline anatase TiO2 nanoparticles and titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) (TiAcAc) for 20 s at 5000 rpm with a ramp of 5000 rpm s−1 and calcination at 500 °C for 30 min in ambient air. The compact TiO2 layer was treated with O2 atmospheric plasma for 10 s. The as-prepared GQD aqueous solution (3 mg mL−1) was spin-coated onto the TiO2 layer for 60 s at 2000 rpm with a ramp of 2000 rpm s−1 and dried sequentially at 80 °C for 10 min and at 100 °C for 5 min. The perovskite precursor solution was cast onto the substrate, spin coated in a two-step process for 10 s at 1000 rpm with a ramp of 500 rpm s−1 and 30 s at 4000 rpm with a ramp of 2000 rpm s−1, respectively. During the second step, 200 μL of diethyl ether was poured on the spinning substrate. After the whole spin-coating process, the substrate was annealed at room temperature for 3 min, at 60 °C for 5 min and 100 °C for 1 hour to obtain a highly crystalline perovskite film. The hole-transporting material (HTM) was spin coated from a 1 mL chlorobenzene solution including 72 mg Spiro-MeOTAD, 28.8 μL tert-butylpyridine, and 17.5 mL of 1 mL acetonitrile solution containing 520 mg lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl) imide salt for 30 s at 3000 rpm with a ramp of 3000 rpm s−1. A 60 nm-thick gold electrode on the HTM was thermally deposited. The active areas of the devices were controlled by a shadow mask in the thermal evaporator.


The images of transmission electron microscopy (TEM) were obtained with a JEOL JEM-200CX, which is installed at the National Center for Inter-university Research Facilities (NCIRF) at the Seoul National University. The FE-SEM images were obtained from JSM-6700; JEOL (Tokyo, Japan). The photocurrent–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the assembled PSCs were evaluated in ambient air using a I–V tracer (MP-160, Eko Instruments) under standard AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) illumination from a 500 W Xenon lamp, calibrated with a KG5-filtered Si reference cell (K801, McScience Inc.). A typical active area of a cell was 0.105 cm2 as defined by a shadow mask. The IPCE (PV Measurements, Inc., Boulder, CO) was measured without bias light. The Jsc values were calculated from the EQE using the equation,
where
ϕsun(λ) is the spectral photon flux. The total photocurrent density (Jsc) from the EQE was obtained by summing the Jsc(λ) values measured for the wavelength of every 15 nm in the range of 370–870 nm. The equivalent circuit simulations were conducted using the Z-view analyst software (ZMAN). The atomic force microscopy (AFM) images were acquired with an Innova SPM (Vecco, USA) and analyzed using the SPMLabAnalysis software. The CV traces were measured using a WBCS 3000 potentiostat (WonA Tech) with platinum wire (counter electrode) and an Ag/AgCl (3 M NaCl) electrode (reference electrode). The time-resolved photoluminescence spectra were characterized by using a 405 nm pulse laser (PicoQuant). EIS analysis and the stabilized power output of the devices were measured using an electrochemical workstation (Zahner Elektrik IM6).


This work was supported by the Global Frontier R&D Program on Center for Multiscale Energy System funded by the National Research Foundation under the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, Korea (Grants 2011-0031573 and NRF-2012M3A6A7054855).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: PL spectra, CV traces, SEM images, EDS elemental mappings, UV/vis absorbance, and long-term stability tests. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta02242e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017