 DOI: 10.1039/C2EE21569A
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8377-8383

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Francesco
Malara
,

Michele
Manca
*,

Maurizio
Lanza
,

Christof
Hübner
,

Elpida
Piperopoulos
 and 

Giuseppe
Gigli


National Nanotechnology Laboratory of CNR, Nanosciences Institute, Distretto Tecnologico, via per Arnesano 16, 73100, Lecce, Italy

Center for Biomolecular Nanotechnologies, Italian Institute of Technology, via Barsanti, 73010, Arnesano, Lecce, Italy. E-mail: michele.manca@iit.it

Institute for Chemical Physical Processes of CNR, Messina Section, Viale Ferdinando Stagno d'Alcontres 37, 98158, Messina, Italy

Fraunhofer-Institut für Chemische Technologie ICT, Polymer Engineering, Joseph-von-Fraunhofer-Str. 7, 76327, Pfinztal, Germany

Department of Industrial Chemistry and Materials Engineering, University of Messina, Contrada di Dio, 98166, Messina, Italy

Received
7th March 2012
, Accepted 25th May 2012
First published on 30th May 2012
A novel free-standing and flexible counter electrode for dye solar cells has been developed by conveniently transferring a vertically aligned carbon nanotube forest onto an oxygen-plasma-treated flexible, free-standing and conductive nanocomposite foil. Vertically aligned carbon nanotubes were first grown onto an aluminium foil by chemical vapour deposition and then transferred to the nanocomposite surface by hot pressing. The most meaningful electrochemical parameters have been quantitatively analyzed by means of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and cyclic voltammetry in order to elucidate how the implementation of the anisotropic carbon nanotube top layer impacts the ultimate catalytic performances of the plate. Such an engineered counter electrode is able to guarantee a fast and effective reduction of the iodide-based electrolyte as well as to provide a solar conversion efficiency that is comparable with a typical Pt/TCO-coated rigid counter electrode. A photocurrent density higher than 13.36 mA cm−2 along with a solar conversion efficiency of 7.26% have been reported for the dye solar cell mounting a counter-electrode based on vertically aligned carbon nanotubes implanted onto a conductive nanocomposite plate.

Research aimed at tailoring materials at the nanoscale has paved the way towards new challenges, in particular in the domain of photoelectrochemistry with the development of third-generation photovoltaic devices, such as dye-sensitized solar cells which, in principle, mimic the natural photosynthesis in the leaf. From this perspective the implementation of suitable low-cost materials is a pivotal issue. To date, the standard catalyst mostly used on the counter electrode is platinum, because of the high catalytic activity and high corrosion stability against iodine in the electrolyte. Moreover, as a precious metal, Pt may be subject to considerable price variations. In the future, large solar conversion systems producing electric power on the terawatt scale will prefer materials that are abundantly available. Consequently, developing an alternative counter-electrode capable of guaranteeing high catalytic activity, low electrical resistance and, at the same time, low production cost is still an attractive and open issue. Among them, carbon nanotubes hold considerable appeal in this framework because of their electrochemical catalytic activities: they are unique nanoscale objects which simultaneously combine large surface area, high electrical conductivity and excellent chemical stability.


Recent advances in the field of photoelectrochemistry have produced technologies for liquid-junction solar cells that could potentially compete with solid-state semiconductor photovoltaic technologies. Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have in fact attracted both academic and industrial interest worldwide due to their advantages in solar energy conversion: these devices are in fact low cost, easily produced, environmentally friendly and are characterized by a relatively high energy conversion efficiency. A DSSC consists of a monolayer of a photosensitizing dye adsorbed on a mesoporous film of a nano-crystalline oxide semiconductor, typically anatase titanium dioxide. The dye molecules are chemisorbed through functional anchoring groups on the surface of the semiconductor, while the pores of the film are generally filled with an iodide/tri-iodide electrolyte. When an incident photon excites the dye, an electron is injected into the conduction band of the semiconductor. Positively charged dyes are then reduced by the iodide species I− and the electrical circuit is completed by the reduction of I3− at the platinum counter electrode. Usually, Pt is used as the catalytic material and Indium-Tin Oxide (ITO) glass as the substrate for the counter-electrode. Although Pt exhibits excellent catalytic activity for tri-iodide reduction and good electric conductivity, it presents a chemical instability with some electrolyte solvents and, consequently, a reduction of efficiency as a function of the cell's age. Among the basic components of a DSSC system, the conductive glass substrates account indeed for approximately 50% of the total DSSC cost. This is mainly due to the cost for the ITO (or FTO) deposition under high vacuum conditions used to prepare the conductive glass plates. A strategy to reduce production costs while maintaining an acceptable cell efficiency could be the replacement of platinum layer and conductive glass by cheaper materials, implementable through easily reliable production technologies.

Besides this, for the fabrication of dye solar cells on plastic substrates, indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated polymeric plates (mainly polyethylene-naphthalate and polyethylene-terephthalate) are generally used. But ITO's rigid inorganic crystal structure develops hairline fractures upon bending and detaches from the polymer substrate thus detracting from the overall electrical performance of the device. Consequently, developing an alternative counter-electrode capable of guaranteeing flexibility, lightness, high catalytic activity, low electrical resistance and, at the same time, low production costs is still an attractive and feasible possibility.
So far, several kinds of non-Pt materials have been proposed as counter electrodes (CEs) in DSSC, such as carbon materials, conductive organic polymers and inorganic materials. Carbon materials, including activated carbon, carbon black, carbon nanotubes and nanocarbons, attracted much attention due to their high electrochemical catalytic activity, low cost and excellent corrosion resistance against the redox couple.
The best achievements have been however reported by means of a convenient utilization of carbon nanotube (CNT)-based coatings (both single wall and multi-wall), thanks to their excellent catalytic properties and extremely high electrical conductivity (105 to 108 S m−1) (ref. 27) that are combined with large surface area and high chemical stability.
In most of the cases, the carbonaceous materials are mixed with suitable binders and fillers to prepare electro-catalytic carbon-based paste or inks: several different CEs have been so far realized by depositing specifically prepared CNT-containing inks or sols onto FTO-coated glass, onto metallic support or onto flexible graphite. A high value of solar energy conversion efficiency of 10% has been recently reported by the usage of a chemical-vapour-deposited film of vertically aligned CNTs onto a soda-lime glass. However, in all the previously published works, when CNTs have been implemented in the form of conductive cover layers onto bare glass or polymeric substrates (that is without FTO or ITO underlying coating), drawbacks such as lower DSSC efficiency values and/or poor adhesion have been reported.
Considering these remarks we have been focusing on a twofold target that consists of replacing both the platinum and the underlying TCO-coated glass with low-cost and highly stable carbonaceous materials as well as producing a flexible CE whose surface electric and catalytic properties can be adequately preserved even when subjected to vigorous bending conditions. With this aim, we recently developed a general approach to realize a CNT/polypropylene nanocomposite plate that was conveniently implemented to produce flexible and free-standing CEs for dye solar cells. Although these nanocomposites possess good electric conductivity, the catalytic activity of the plate is partially limited by the overall surface area of the protruding CNTs and, hence, by their concentration as well as the oxygen plasma etching conditions.
In this paper we indeed propose an engineered architecture which makes it possible to overcome the aforesaid limitations and to further extend the reliability of these CEs. With this aim, a film of vertically aligned multi-walled carbon nanotubes (VACNTs) has been properly embedded onto the surface of a CNT-based nanocomposite flexible and conductive (NC) plate, thus allowing a dramatic enhancement of the catalytic surface area available for the tri-iodide reduction and, at the same time, a preservation of the advantageous prerogatives inherent to the use of a free-standing counter electrode. To the best of our knowledge this work constitutes to date the first demonstration of a free-standing counter electrode based on carbonaceous materials which is capable of ensuring a power conversion efficiency superior to 90% with respect to a Pt-sputtered substrate used as the reference.

VACNT forests have been synthesized by catalytic chemical vapor deposition onto an iron/cobalt coated aluminium foil, by using acetylene as the carbon source (see ESI). They were then transferred onto NC plates through a properly set up hot-pressing process. The top surface of the NC plate was previously subjected to an oxygen plasma etching treatment for 5 min, with the aim of effectively removing the insulating polymeric cover layer and allowing the randomly oriented CNTs to partially protrude from the top surface of the NC plate. The transfer process was executed at a temperature of 150 °C while a constant pressure of about 50 MPa was applied for one minute. The underlying aluminum foil was subsequently removed by peel-off and consequently the VACNT film was stably embedded onto the flexible nanocomposite plate. A schematic representation of the transfer method of VACNTs on NC is reported in Fig. 1.

A cross-sectional view of the VACNT/NC electrode (VANC) foil at different magnifications is reported in Fig. 2. A 10 μm thick VACNT forest film is layered homogeneously on the top of the NC foil (Fig. 2a), as a result of an optimal transfer on the NC surface. Due to the high density of the CVD-grown film, the vertical orientation of the transferred CNTs was adequately preserved after the hot-pressing process (Fig. 2d) and an optimum conformal contact was revealed at the VACNT/NC interface (Fig. 2c). The intimate chemical continuity was even incentivized by performing a preventive oxygen plasma treatment of the NC surface. In Fig. 2d, a lateral view of the top VACNT layer is highlighted. A certain defectiveness of the carbon nanostructure can be noticed.
Filaments are indeed twisted and bent as a consequence of the high growth rate. In the light of recent assessments on CNTs grown, it is well known that carbon atoms adsorbed on the free catalyst surface diffuse either through the metal nanoparticles or through the growing nanotube walls, thus promoting the formation of graphitic monolayers via island nucleation and coalescence. As the C/metal solid solution becomes supersaturated, it extrudes off the catalyst in the shape of nanotubes. But in the case of quickly reached supersaturation, graphitic islands are prevented from relaxing and organize in ordered clusters before being extruded off. This is why rapidly growing nanotubes, as the ones used in this work, show the tendency to self-organize within an uneven or twisted arrangement, but they still maintain a well distinguishable vertical orientation.
An exhaustive electrochemical analysis was carried out to elucidate the catalytic properties of the VANC plate in comparison with a bare NC plate and a conventional Pt electrode. Fig. 3a shows the cyclic voltammograms of the iodide species of three test cells, respectively assembled in Pt/EL/Pt, Pt/EL/NC and Pt/EL/VANC sandwich configurations. As noticeable, the implantation of the VACNT film onto the NC plate led to an abrupt change of the electrical behaviour at the interface with the electrolyte: the potential barrier observed for the NC plate, attributable to the residual presence of a polymer capping layer onto single CNTs as well as to the relatively low surface area of CNTs exposed to the electrolyte, disappeared in the case of VANC plate thus turning into an ohmic interface, even if still characterized by a slightly higher value of the series resistance with respect to the one observed at the Pt/electrolyte interface.
Beside this, due to the beneficial effect of the higher surface area of the VANC top layer, the resulting reduction peak shifted at a significantly lower voltage: from −0.8 V of the bare NC down to −0.35 V of the VANC.
In Fig. 3b we report the Nyquist plots as detected from EIS measurements at 0 V in the range from 100 kHz to 10 mHz. Each arc observable in these diagrams reveals the existence of defined electrochemical interfaces which are characterized by different time constants.
As expected, only two semicircles are detectable for the Pt/EL/Pt cell: the first one (at high frequencies) concerns the Pt/electrolyte and the second one (at low frequencies) refers to the contribution due to the Nernst diffusion impedance into the electrolyte.
Charge transfer resistance of the naked NC plate at 0 V was four orders of magnitude higher than that of its Pt counterpart and two arcs were not distinguishable in the Nyquist plot. This is consistent with the presence of an energy barrier in the range between 0 and 0.5 V that has to be overcome in order to activate an effective charge transfer at the electrolyte/NC interface as shown in the cyclic voltammetry diagram. Such a non-linear behaviour has been previously demonstrated to be ascribed to the persistence of a polymeric capping layer still surrounding a conspicuous part of the protruding CNT surfaces after the etching process and its value strongly depends on the CNT surface density.
A third arc in the middle frequency range (1.5 kHz–1 Hz) has been instead revealed from the EIS spectrum of the Pt/EL/VANC cell, which can be clearly attributed to the VANC/EL interface.
It is of the same order of magnitude as the Pt/EL interface, although the charge transfer resistance results almost tripled.
The beneficial effect of the oxygen plasma treatment on the surface of the VANC plate has also been highlighted in Fig. 4a. It allows in fact removal of the residual sooty layer on the top of the transferred CNT forest and promotes the generation of a great number of edge-plane-like defect sites which are directly exposed to the liquid electrolyte: they in turn ensure a significant improvement of the electron injection as already demonstrated in several published studies. This turns into a substantial modification of the slope in the second part of the graph that indicates a faster reduction of the oxidized species, as well as an enhancement of the cathodic current limit value. Thus, as highlighted in the EIS spectra reported in Fig. 4b, a fourth arc (lying in the range between 131.8 and 1542.4 Hz) becomes visible in the Nyquist plot of the oxygen plasma treated VANC electrode as a consequence of the boosted number of edge-plane like surface sites. In accordance with their relatively faster response times, they are indeed responsible for much of the electrochemical activity of the CNTs compared to the smooth basal-plane-like regions along the CNT surface.
This finding can be further attested from the observation of the phase Bode plot that is shown in Fig. 5a. At 0 V up to four different frequency response peaks can be detected. The high frequency peak corresponds to the Pt/EL interface that lies in the range between 9 and 19 kHz. The low frequency peak is instead due to the electrolyte and lies at around 0.23 Hz.
Eventually, in the middle frequency range two different peaks can be distinguished and both are attributed to the VANC plate: the first (in the range between 131 and 187 Hz) is attributable to the edge-plane/electrolyte interface and the second is related to the basal plane/electrolyte interface. At higher bias voltages the inflection point corresponding to the charge transfer at the first interface becomes undetectable since the peak frequency of the basal planes shifts towards higher values (from 5.2 Hz at 0 V to 65.3 Hz at −0.3 V) and its charge transfer resistance drops off. So at −0.3 V contributions of the edge-like defects and basal planes yet become not clearly identifiable. Besides, the intensity of the phase shift decreases as the bias voltage increases and at −0.3 V it is yet lower with respect to the Pt electrode: at −0.6 V it has practically disappeared. As a consequence, a remarkable reduction of the overall charge transfer resistance of the VANC electrode occurs as the applied potentials increase. This can be presumably related to a further extension of the electrolyte-exposed surface area of the VACNTs due to the oxygen plasma etching and to the consequent enhancement of the overall number of oxidized molecules at the interface with respect to the case of the non-etched film. This turns into an increment of the free carrier density resulting from electron filling of specific energy states as the Fermi level is shifted.
Such a decreasing trend is indeed undetectable; neither for the Pt/EL interface nor for the NC/EL interface. In the case of Pt, a fair increase of the Rct as a function of the applied voltage has been observed. It can be even qualitatively explained by the faster electrode kinetics at higher overvoltage, as expressed by the Butler–Volmer equation when considering the effect of mass transfer.
We finally implemented the nanocomposite plate presented here as a free-standing CE in DSSCs. Values of power conversion efficiency (η), fill factor (FF), open circuit voltage (VOC) and short-circuit current density (JSC) measured for these DSSCs are reported in Table 1, while the J–V (current density–voltage) curves are shown in Fig. 6. VANC-based cells exhibited a 7.26% energy conversion efficiency, with short-circuit current density (JSC) around 13.36 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage (VOC) over 0.80 V, and fill factor (FF) of 68.0%, respectively.
CE
FF

V
OC [V]

J
SC [mA cm−2]

η [%]
Pt coating
0.71
0.81
13.92
8.00
NC-etched
0.49
0.84
13.02
5.36
VANC-etched
0.68
0.80
13.36
7.26
Such values are comparable with those detected from the reference cell mounting a Pt-coated CE, which showed JSC of 13.92 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.81 V, FF of 71%, and efficiency of 8.00%. On the other hand, the sensitively higher efficiency gap exhibited by the NC CEs is due, as mentioned above, to the presence of an energy barrier at the interface with the electrolyte and hence to its non-linear electrical behaviour, which turns into an insufficient FF value. It is also to be underlined that the slight decrease of the photocurrent density observed in the carbon nanotube-based devices arises from their blackish and opaque appearance, which cannot induce an as intense light reflection effect as in the case of the Pt-coated TCO substrate.

We recently developed a general method to produce a CNT/polypropylene nanocomposite plate that can be conveniently implemented as a flexible and free-standing counter-electrode for dye solar cells. In this paper we present a novel approach which makes it possible to further extend the reliability of such a free-standing counter-electrode. With this aim, a film of vertically aligned multi-walled carbon nanotubes was properly embedded onto the surface of a CNT-based nanocomposite flexible and conductive plate, thus allowing a dramatic enhancement of the catalytic surface area available for the tri-iodide reduction.

The implementation of such an engineered flexible foil of the catalyst may represent an extremely valid solution to the problems related to the weak substrate adhesion strength attributed to the coating-based approaches (especially in the case of plastic substrates) as well as the ones related to the extreme volatility of CNTs deposited by conventional spray-coating or ink-jet printing techniques.

An aluminum foil was sonicated in ethanol for 30 s in order to remove organic contaminations from its surface. A fresh solution of Fe(NO3)3·9H2O (Fluka, >98%), Co(NO3)3·9H2O (Carlo Erba Reagents, >98%) and Al(NO3)3·9H2O (Carlo Erba Reagents, ≥99%) was prepared with a concentration respectively of 0.05 M for both salts of Fe and Co and 0.1 M for the aluminum salt, using anhydrous ethanol (Fluka, 99.8%). The drop coating technique was performed for loading the catalyst on the foil; the volume of the catalyst solution was ∼12 μl cm−2. After drop-coating one side of the foil, it was dried at room temperature and introduced into a horizontal quartz-tube CVD reactor with an internal diameter of 50 mm. The reactor was flooded with helium (200 sccm) and hydrogen (45 sccm) up to 645 °C in 2 h (heating rate: 5 °C min−1). After reaching the reaction temperature, acetylene (12 sccm) as the carbon source was added to the gas stream and the supply was continued for 20 minutes. After the reaction time, the hydrocarbon supply was interrupted and the reactor was allowed to cool down to room temperature under the He/H2 flow. The so-deposited aluminum foil was taken out from the reactor and characterized. The multi-wall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) have a diameter of 8–10 nm and a length of 35 ± 3 μm.


Polypropylene (PP) (PP 352-08R) with an MFI of 8 was bought from Dow Chemicals. Baytubes C150P used as multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) were purchased from Bayer Material Science AG. These tubes had a carbon purity of 95%, bulk density of 140–160 kg m−3, outer and inner mean diameters of 13–16 nm and 4 nm respectively and 3–15 walls. All these materials were used as-received. The composites were processed by twin screw extrusion on a Leistritz ZSK 27 HP twin screw extruder with an L/D ratio of 52. The master batch produced contained 15 wt% MWCNTs in PP. The processing methodology was carried out at an extruder barrel temperature of 220 °C, a processing speed of 1000 rpm and a throughput of 10 kg h−1. The material was extruded to strands which were subsequently pelletized for further use. Nanocomposite pellets were then modelled by compression moulding (temperature: 210 °C, pressure: 50 MPa for 10 min) into a thin plate with a thickness of about 360 μm.


Both the nanocomposite surfaces were subjected to an oxygen plasma treatment with the aim to remove the polymer sheath and to allow catalytic carbonaceous fillers to merge on top of the surface. The same treatment was also performed on the VANC surface. Plasma exposure was performed in an IONVAC inductively coupled plasma (ICP) reactor (PGF 600 RF HUTTER): the samples were placed into the chamber, followed by evacuation to 30 mTorr; O2 gas was introduced at a flow rate of 20 sccm (standard cubic centimetre per minute) and the glow discharge was ignited at 50 W and 25 W: the first, on both sides of the NC (5 minutes) and the second directly on the VACNTs once they were transferred on top of the NC (15 minutes).


FTO-coated glass samples were bathed in a detergent solution with an ultrasonic bath for 15 min, and then washed with water and ethanol. Afterwards, a screen-printable paste containing 30 nm sized TiO2 colloids was prepared according to a procedure reported and deposited onto the conducting glass by screen-printing (screen characteristic: material, polyester; mesh count, 120 mesh per cm) through a 0.28 cm2 large mask and dried at 160 °C for 6 minutes; this procedure was repeated several times in order to obtain 14 μm thick photo-electrodes. The film thickness and the dimensions of the active area were measured using a KLA-TENCOR profilometer. The FTO-glass samples coated with the TiO2 pastes were gradually heated with an air flow at 160 °C for 20 min, 325 °C for 5 min, at 375 °C for 5 min, at 450 °C for 15 min, and at 500 °C for 15 min. After cooling to 80 °C, the TiO2 electrodes were immersed into a solution of 0.5 mM bis(tetrabutylammonium)-cis-di(thiocyanato)-N,N′-bis(4-carboxylato-4′-carboxylic acid-2,2-bipyridine) ruthenium(II) (N719) in a mixture of acetonitrile and tert-butyl alcohol (v/v, 1:1), and kept at room temperature for 14 h.

The solar cells were assembled by placing a nanocomposite plate (counter electrode) on the N719 dye-sensitized photo-electrode (working electrode). The two electrodes were then further assembled into a sandwich type cell and sealed with a 100 μm thick Parafilm hot-melt gasket. The redox electrolyte was introduced into the space of inter-electrodes through a hole pre-drilled on the photo-electrode. The holes were sealed up using Surlyn hot-melt film and a cover glass. The redox electrolyte used was 0.1 M LiI, 0.05 M I2, 0.6 M 1-methyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide, and 0.5 M tert-butylpyridine in dried acetonitrile.
Electrical connection to the counter electrode was realized on the back-side of the plate.

SEM characterization of both bare and etched surfaces was performed with a RAITH-150 EBL instrument. Both electrical resistivity and photocurrent–voltage measurements were performed using a Keithley unit (Model 2400 Source Meter). Disk-shaped samples (5 mm in diameter and 360 μm in thickness) were prepared for testing the electrical properties. The DC conductivity was measured using the four-point probe method. A Newport AM 1.5 Solar Simulator (Model 91160A equipped with a 300W Xenon Arc Lamp) served as a light source and its light intensity (or radiant power) was calibrated to 100 mW cm−2 using as reference a Si solar cell. Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) and Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) spectra have been measured by using an AUTOLAB PGSTAT 100 potentiostat operating in two-electrode mode. Frequency range: 100 kHz to 10 mHz for dummy cells; AC voltage: 10 mV.


This work was supported by the Italian projects Rete Nazionale di Ricerca sulle Nanoscienze ItalNanoNet (FIRB reference number RBPR05JH2P) and EFOR—Energia da FOnti Rinnovabili (Iniziativa CNR per il Mezzogiorno L. 191/2009 art. 2 comma 44). The authors would like to thank Paola Pareo for the morphological characterization, Carola La Tegola for the mechanical characterization, Luisa De Marco, Alessandro Cannavale, Shyam Sathyanarayana and Patrick Weiss for technical support. Thanks to Professor Candida Milone for the helpful discussions and partnership.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2ee21569a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012