 DOI: 10.1039/B916181C
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 240-243

Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical Terms


Hannah
Bürckstümmer
,

Nils Michael
Kronenberg
,

Marcel
Gsänger
,

Matthias
Stolte
,

Klaus
Meerholz
* and 

Frank
Würthner
*

Institut für Organische Chemie, Universität Würzburg, Am Hubland, 97074, Würzburg, Germany. E-mail: wuerthner@chemie.uni-wuerzburg.de

Department of Chemistry, Universität zu Köln, Luxemburger Str. 116, 50939, Köln, Germany. E-mail: klaus.meerholz@uni-koeln.de

Received
6th August 2009
, Accepted 8th October 2009
First published on
16th October 2009

A solution-cast photovoltaic film of a newly designed merocyanine chromophore blended with PCBM exhibited an appreciably high power conversion efficiency of 2.59%.

Conversion of solar energy into electricity provides a sustainable approach to satisfy the rapidly increasing energy demand worldwide. Photovoltaic devices based on organic semiconductors bear the potential for large-scale and cost-effective power generation. Due to their ease of processing, mechanical flexibility and substantially low material consumption, organic solar cells have evolved as a promising alternative to silicon solar cells. Starting with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1% for a planar heterojunction solar cell in 1986, the introduction of the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) concept in the nineties led to a boost in efficiency. The key component in BHJ solar cells is the photoactive layer composed of an interpenetrating network of an electron donor and an electron acceptor. Upon irradiation of such photoactive layers with sunlight, strongly bound electron-hole pairs (excitons) are generated, which diffuse across the blend. The highly enlarged donor–acceptor interface of the bulk heterojunction is very advantageous since efficient charge separation takes place at the interface. Typically used donor materials for BHJ solar cells are conjugated polymers like poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), while soluble fullerene derivatives such as [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric-acid methyl ester (PCBM) are widely applied as electron acceptor materials. With these materials, PCEs up to 6%, external quantum efficiencies (EQE) exceeding 80% and internal quantum efficiencies (IQE) close to 100% have been achieved. Besides the spherical fullerene derivatives, new materials like carbon nanotubes are emerging as candidates for photovoltaic devices.

Most of the photovoltaic p-type semiconducting polymers exhibit good charge carrier mobilities and favourable solution processability. However, they are afflicted with low absorption coefficients and difficult purification procedures. Moreover, their optical and electronic properties and, consequently, the photovoltaic performance depend strongly on specific characteristics such as molecular weight, regioregularity or chain length distribution, which are not easily adjustable. By contrast, small organic molecules are structurally well-defined, monodisperse and easy to purify. Thus, in recent years small-molecule-based BHJ solar cells have emerged, and considerable photovoltaic efficiencies have been achieved by the groups of Zhu with x-shaped oligothiphenes (0.8%), Malliaras with anthradithiophenes (1%), Marks with squaraine dyes (1.24%), Bäuerle with dendritic oligothiophenes (1.65%), Roncali with BODIPY dyes (1.70%) and, most recently Nguyen with a diketopyrrolopyrrole chromophore (4.4%).
Merocyanine (MC) dyes possess high absorption coefficients, dipole moments and polarizabilities, and they were employed in nonlinear optics and as photorefractive materials. Furthermore, such dyes with easily tunable absorption properties have attracted much attention as substitutes for ruthenium dyes applied in dye-sensitized solar cells.
Recently, we have for the first time successfully applied MC dyes in solution-processed BHJ solar cells with PCEs of up to 1.74% for blends of MC dyes and fullerene derivative PCBM. Here we report a substantially improved solar cell performance of 2.59% for a newly designed MC dye containing a rigid donor unit and optimized morphology.
In our previous study, we have identified the chromophore MD376 possessing an indolenine donor with a flexible alkyl chain and a 2-(3-oxo-indan-1-ylidene)-malononitrile acceptor, as a highly promising electron-donor component for PCBM-based BHJ solar cells. After analysis of the photovoltaic characteristics of devices based on MD376:PCBM blends and the structural features of dye MD376, we have modified this push-pull dye to achieve more efficient photovoltaic small molecules by bridging the indolenine donor with an ethylene group in HB193 and a propylene group in HB194 to diminish the flexibility of the donor unit and to ensure a more planar geometry. The rigidification of the chromophore should decrease the vibronic degree of freedom and control the packing of the dyes in the active layer, and, consequently, modify the morphology of the BHJ solar cell to afford improved PCE.
The rationally designed MC dyes HB193 and HB194 were synthesized according to the route outlined in Scheme 1. The details are described in ESI. In a multistep reaction, including a Fischer indole synthesis, the commercially available precursors 1a,b were converted to the tetrafluoroborate salts 2a,b. The following acid–base reaction resulted in compounds 3a,b with fairly good yields. These precursors were subsequently coupled in a three-component condensation reaction with triethyl orthoformate and the acceptor component 4 to afford the magenta colored MC dyes HB193 and HB194 with yields of 19% and 60%, respectively. The synthesis of MD376 was described in our earlier publication.
Bulk heterojunction solar cell devices were fabricated with the typical architecture ITO/PEDOT:PSS(40 nm)/MC:PCBM/Al(120 nm). Thorough studies regarding the layer thickness and donor-to-acceptor ratio resulted in optimized device parameters for each of the MC dyes. The characteristics of the solar cells based on MC dyes and PCBM, along with the significant physical properties of these chromophores, are given in Table 1. In accordance with our previous results, the highest short circuit currents (JSC) and, consequently, the highest power conversion efficiencies (η) were achieved for solar cells with an active layer thickness of 50–60 nm.
MC dye

λ
max [nm]

E
HOMO [eV]

E
LUMO [eV]

T
m [°C]
ΔHm [J g−1]

µ
h
dye [cm2 V−1 s−1]

µ
h
blend [cm2 V−1 s−1]
PCBM wt%

V
OC [V]

J
SC [mA cm−2]
FF

η [%]

a The layer thickness of the samples was determined as 50–60 nm.
b UV/Vis measurements in CH2Cl2.
c Based on CV measurements (E1/2ox) in CH2Cl2 calibrated against the ferrocene/ferrocenium couple (Fc/Fc+, −5.15 eV) as internal standard.
d 
E
LUMO = EHOMO − (hc/λmax).
e DSC measurements were performed with a heating/cooling rate of 10 °C min−1 in a nitrogen atmosphere.
f 
µ
h values were determined in OFETs using the pristine MC dye and MC:PCBM blends, respectively.


MD376

576
−5.80
−3.65
173
23.2
1 × 10−5
9 × 10−7
75
0.90
5.30
0.32
1.54

HB193

586
−5.71
−3.59
277
97.8
3 × 10−6
1 × 10−6
65
0.78
6.25
0.29
1.43

HB194

578
−5.75
−3.60
291
95.3
5 × 10−5
2 × 10−5
55
0.94
8.24
0.34
2.59
The best solar cell devices employing MD376 with the flexible alkyl substituent reach power conversion efficiencies of 1.54% at an optimized PCBM content of 75%. By introducing the propylene bridging unit in HB194, a substantial enhancement of PCE is observed. The maximum device performance is achieved at a PCBM content of 55%, resulting in a significantly increased power conversion efficiency of 2.59%, which originates from an improved JSC from 5.30 mA cm−2 for MD376 to 8.24 mA cm−2 in the case of HB194 (Fig. 1).
This improvement in JSC of HB194 may be attributed to the significantly enhanced absorbance in the visible region due to higher dye content in the solar cell (Fig. 2). The quite high dye content in the best HB194:PCBM photovoltaic devices compared to other small-molecule-based BHJ solar cells is indeed striking. Notably, the hole carrier mobility of HB194 is the highest among this MC dye series and does not significantly decrease upon blending with PCBM (Table 1). Both the substantial photocurrent and the high hole mobility are indicative of well-separated donor and acceptor phases consisting of densely packed MC dyes and PCBM. In contrast, for MD376 a drop of mobility by more than one order of magnitude is observed for a PCBM blend compared to that of the pristine dye, pointing at a deficient formation of percolation pathways (Table 1).
Although the investigated MC dyes showed similar molecular HOMO and LUMO energies as well as band gaps, the open circuit voltages (VOC) varied from 0.78 V for HB193 to 0.94 V for HB194 (Table 1). This is probably due to the difference between the HOMO of the dye determined from solution measurements and the actual value of the dye in the blend. It is an advantageous property of these MC dyes that they possess low-lying HOMO levels despite their absorbance at rather low energy (up to 700 nm). The LUMO energies of −3.6 eV and the according donor–acceptor junction provides sufficient driving force to surmount the exciton binding energy. The relatively low fill factors (FF) of ∼0.3 could be ascribed to the low charge carrier mobility of the present MC dyes (Table 1) compared to the electron mobility of 2 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 of PCBM. The difference of more than two orders of magnitude between the hole and electron mobilities results in the build-up of space charge, which in turn limits the performance of the devices.
In order to analyze the morphology of the active layers in the optimized solar cells, we have carried out Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM, Fig. S4, see ESI). Domains of 10–30 nm dimensions either with a lower work function (dark color), which are attributed to PCBM, or a higher work function (light color), corresponding to the MC dye, are observed, along with larger mixed phases, indicating intermixed donor–acceptor blends. Furthermore, drop-cast MC:PCBM films were studied by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and compared with the pristine dyes and PCBM, respectively. In the case of HB194 (45 wt%):PCBM (55 wt%), we observed the presence of crystalline material and could assign each reflection to a corresponding one from the single components of the blend (Fig. 3). The DSC measurements (Fig. S6) confirmed the presence of crystalline material but showed a lower melting point of 254 °C compared to that of pristine HB194 (Table 1). Such a decrease of melting point is indicative of only small-sized crystalline domains and/or contamination of these domains by PCBM.
In the case of the other two dyes MD376 and HB193, a lower degree of crystallinity was found by XRD and DSC analyses for blends with PCBM (Fig. S5, S7 and S8). Accordingly, the higher charge carrier mobility and photocurrent of dye HB194 (Table 1) can be explained by a distinctly higher degree of crystallinity of this dye in BHJ blends. The improved crystallinity of HB194 in blends with PCBM and the formation of efficient bulk heterojunctions at almost equal amounts of HB194 and PCBM may also be related to the high melting point Tm of 291 °C and melting enthalpy ΔHm of 95.3 J g−1 of this dye (Table 1). Such a high melting enthalpy can be taken as an indication of strong cohesive forces between these highly dipolar dyes in the solid state.
To shed light onto the packing features in the crystalline phases, we have performed single crystal X-ray analysis of HB194.Fig. 4a shows a layered arrangement in the b–c plane of the unit cell. Along the a-axis two types of π–π stacking arrangements are recognized (Fig. 4b,c). In one case, the dyes are stacked as strongly displaced antiparallel dimers with close van der Waals contacts between the indolenine donor units (Fig. 4b). In the other case, a nearly perpendicular (88.1°) arrangement between neighbouring dyes is observed, where the contact is provided between the acceptor units (Fig. 4c). This packing motif is rather distinct and might explain the high VOC value observed for HB194. Thus, whilst donor and acceptor parts of neighbouring molecules are in π–π contact for the very common antiparallel stacking motif of merocyanine dyes, here donor–donor and acceptor–acceptor contacts prevail. A modulation of the energy levels by charge transfer contribution might reduce VOC in the case of donor–acceptor contacts, but should be absent, or strongly reduced for the π-stacking motif shown in Fig. 4 for HB194.
The chromophore of HB194 is nearly planar, showing a distortion angle between the donor and acceptor planes of 3.5°. Furthermore, almost no C–C bond length alternation in the methine bridge is observed, pointing at a π-conjugated system close to the cyanine limit. The cyanine limit provides the highest possible tinctorial strength (absorbance) and longest wavelength absorption band, both are desired properties for photovoltaics. On the other hand, a very high dipolarity is given for such MC dyes in the cyanine limit owing to substantial charge transfer from the indolenine electron donor to the electron-accepting dicyanovinyl unit of the molecules. For HB194 a ground state dipole moment µg of 6.7 D was determined by electrooptical absorption spectroscopy (Fig. S2 and Table S1). Such high dipole moments are expected to have a negative impact on the charge carrier mobility of an organic semiconductor due to a broadening of the density-of-states (DOS) function. However, this model was developed for randomly oriented dipoles, whereas the HB194 chromophore arrange in an antiparallel fashion and exhibit a high degree of crystallinity. Thereby, the overall dipole moment is canceled out and enables a sufficiently high hole carrier mobility (Table 1) for application in thin BHJ photovoltaic films.
In conclusion, we have introduced a merocyanine chromophore with tailored structural, optical and electronic properties for organic BHJ photovoltaic cells. Blending of the new chromophore with PCBM resulted in a remarkably high power conversion efficiency of 2.59%, which nearly approaches the highest values reported to date for solution-processed small-molecule-based BHJ cells. The unexpected suitability of this class of strongly dipolar chromophores as p-type semiconductors for photovoltaics could be rationalized on the basis of strong attraction between these dyes, which leads to efficient phase separation from PCBM and a favourable antiparallel arrangement of the dyes with vanished dipolarity on the supramolecular level.

We gratefully acknowledge the funding by the German Ministry of Science and Education (BMBF) through the OPEG project and thank Roman Fritsch and Dr Vladimir Stepanenko (both Universität Würzburg) for their help in Kelvin probe force microscopy measurements.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, UV-vis, CV, electro-optical absorption measurements, powder X-ray diffractograms and DSC data, and KPFM measurements of HB194. CCDC reference number 740220. For ESI and crystallographic data in CIF or other electronic format see DOI: 10.1039/b916181c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010