 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA05300E
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19263-19267


Dandan
Zhao
,

Qingwen
Tian
,

Zhengji
Zhou
*,

Gang
Wang
,

Yuena
Meng
,

Dongxing
Kou
,

Wenhui
Zhou
,

Daocheng
Pan
* and 

Sixin
Wu
*

The Key Laboratory for Special Functional Materials of MOE, Henan University, Kaifeng, 475004, China. E-mail: zzj@henu.edu.cn; wusixin@henu.edu.cn

Collaborative Innovation Center of Nano Functional Materials and Applications, Henan University, Kaifeng 475004, Henan Province, China

State Key Laboratory of Rare Earth Resource Utilization, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 5625 Renmin Street, Changchun, Jilin 130022, China. E-mail: pan@ciac.ac.cn

Received
14th July 2015
, Accepted 19th August 2015
First published on 19th August 2015
A novel, robust and low-toxicity solution route to deposit CIGSe thin films for solar cell applications is proposed. The solvent mixture of 1,2-ethanedithiol and 1,2-ethylenediamine is employed for the first time to simultaneously dissolve elemental Cu, In, Ga, and Se, forming the CIGSe precursor solution. With this solution-processed CIGSe thin film solar cell, a power conversion efficiency of 9.5% has been achieved.

Inorganic thin film solar cells, such as GaAs, CdTe, Cu(In,Ga)(S,Se)2 (CIGSSe), Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4(CZTSSe), etc., as one of the most promising ways to use renewable energy sources, have gained significant attention due to the increasing demand for energy in modern society. Recently, quaternary semiconductor Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGSe), the highest performance thin-film photovoltaic (PV) material with a record power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 21.7%, has been studied intensively not only in the lab but also in the commercial community, for its high optical absorption coefficients in the visible to near-IR spectral range, direct and tunable energy bandgaps, high tolerance to defects and impurities and long-term stability. At present, most of the high-efficiency CIGS devices are fabricated by vacuum deposition techniques, which pose cost and technological barriers to large-scale industrial production. Solution-based deposition of the CIGS layer offers an alternative robust route for fabrication of photovoltaic devices, which is appealing due to lower-cost production techniques and large-area coverage, as well as better compatibility with flexible substrates.

To date, the highest efficiency solution-processed CIGS thin film solar cell was fabricated by Mitzi and co-workers in IBM Watson Research Center, by dissolving chalcogenides (Cu2S, In2Se3, Ga2Se3, and Se) in hydrazine solution. By optimizing the chemical composition and crystallization of the CIGSSe thin film, a remarkable efficiency of 15.2% has been achieved. However, hydrazine is highly toxic and explosive, which is not suitable for large-scale production. A few non-hydrazine solution-processed approaches have been employed to deposit CIGS thin films in the last few years. In 2012, Pan and co-workers dissolved Cu2O, In(OH)3, and Ga(acac)3 in a mixture of CS2 and 1-butylamine, fabricating the CIGSSe solar cell with a power conversion efficiency of 8.8%. Using thioacetic acid as an effective solvent and a suitable sulfur source, Huang and co-workers obtained a solar cell efficiency of 8.6% with the same metal compound precursors in 2014. In all these solution-based methods, in general, CIGS precursor films are first formed after spin coating and subsequent preheating treatment. Following, for adjusting the bandgap and improving the device performance, a post-selenization process was performed to change the S/Se ratio of the final CIGSSe absorbing layer, which inevitably resulted in poor reproducibility of the CIGSSe thin film and solar cell efficiency because of the difficulty to finely control the S/Se ratio arising from the different volatilities of sulfur and selenium during selenization. As a result, for better batch-to-batch reproducibility, it is preferable to develop a solution-proceeded approach for fabricating pure selenide CIGSe solar cells. However, all the pure selenide CIGSe solar cells reported so far were fabricated by vacuum-based technology; solution-based deposition of pure selenide CIGSe solar cells has not been reported yet.
For pure selenide CIGSe solar cells, the precisely controlled elemental composition of the GIGSe thin film is crucial for high-performance solar cells. From this point of view, the desirable precursor should be prepared using elemental Cu, In, Ga, and Se as starting materials rather than metal compounds, which will introduce unnecessary elements in the final CIGS thin film, for instance, O, C, Cl, etc., leading to decreasing PCEs. Moreover, elementary metal powders are rather cheaper and more available than metal salts, which is favourable for practical applications and massive production. Nevertheless, it was usually difficult to seek out a suitable solvent that can be readily used to effectively disperse and dissolve the four elements Cu, In, Ga, and Se simultaneously and form a stable homogeneous precursor solution.
In 2013, Richard L. Brutchey and co-workers reported that 1,2-ethanedithiol and 1,2-ethylenediamine mixed solvent could remarkably dissolve a series of nine bulk V2VI3 chalcogenides (V = As, Sb, and Bi; VI = S, Se, and Te) at room temperature and atmospheric pressure. Very recently, they further found that the binary solvent was capable of dissolving hexagonal grey selenium and tellurium at room temperature and ambient pressure, and ten inexpensive bulk oxides (Cu2O, ZnO, GeO2, As2O3, Ag2O, CdO, SnO, Sb2O3, PbO, and Bi2O3) under ambient conditions as well. In addition, the dissolved oxides can be converted to the corresponding sulfides, selenides and tellurides with thiol as the sulfur source or a stoichiometric amount of dissolved selenium or tellurium. Almost at the same time, Xiangfeng Duan and co-workers demonstrated that the amine and thiol solvent mixture could be used to dissolve a large number of inorganic semiconductors including Cu2S, Cu2Se, In2S3, In2Se3, CdS, SnSe, etc. In our experiment, we tried to use the 1,2-ethanedithiol and 1,2-ethylenediamine mixture to disperse elemental Cu, In, Ga, and Se. To everyone's surprise, the mixed solvent readily dissolved the four metals together without adding other solvents. The as-obtained precursor solution was used to fabricate pure phase CIGSe thin film solar cells and a power conversion efficiency of 9.5% was achieved, which is comparable with that of hydrazine-processed solar cells (η = 10.3%) without Sb doping.

Many properties of solvents, such as polarity, surface tension, reactivity, toxicity and cost, should be taken into account for solution fabrication and deposition of inorganic semiconductor thin films. Table S1 compares the main parameters of hydrazine and 1,2-ethylenediamine which determine the final quality of the deposited films. From the listed data in Table S1, we can see that both 1,2-ethylenediamine and hydrazine possess similar boiling point, vapor pressure and surface tension, which are all key issues for processing thin films. Considering that it is significantly less toxic and safer, 1,2-ethylenediamine is a more promising solvent to fabricate thin film photovoltaic devices offering comparable performance with hydrazine-based ones.

Our studies demonstrate that 1,2-ethylenediamine itself could not dissolve elemental Cu, In, Ga and Se. However, the binary thiol–amine solvent mixture, 1,2-ethanedithiol and 1,2-ethylenediamine can quickly dissolve the four kinds of elemental powders together at 60 °C. Moreover, the as-prepared CIGSe precursor solution remains clear and homogeneous under ambient conditions, which is feasible for following spin-coating deposition of the CIGSe film. In order to better understand the dissolution process, elemental Cu, In and Ga were dissolved individually into the mixed solvent. We observed that elemental Cu and In disappeared in the solvent mixture after about 20 min at 60–70 °C (Fig. S1). But the chunk Ga was ineffectively dispersed and dissolved by the solvent in the absence of Se, which indicated that elemental Se could promote the dissolution of Ga. What's more, the presence of Se in the precursor film would improve the crystallinity of the CIGSe film in the subsequent selenization, which is more favorable for highly efficient CIGSe thin film solar cells.

Fig. 1 presents the TGA curve of the CIGSe precursor film, which was scraped from the glass substrate after drop-casting and drying of the precursor solution at 100 °C in an argon atmosphere. The curve shows that the precursor film mainly decomposed from 50 °C to 350 °C and it was nearly completely decomposed at 350 °C, so the annealing temperature during film deposition was set at 350 °C.
The fabrication process of the CIGSe absorber layer is shown in Fig. S2. Elemental Cu, In, Ga and Se were dissolved in the mixture solvent of 1,2-ethylenediamine and 1,2-ethanedithiol to form the truly molecule-based precursor solution. Then the desired thickness of the CIGSe absorber layer was obtained by spin coating the precursor solution several times by annealing at 350 °C between each layer. Finally, the as-prepared CIGSe film was annealed at 550 °C in a Se/Ar atmosphere before it was fabricated into a typical glass/Mo/CIGSe/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO/Al photovoltaic device (see the detailed experiments in the ESI).
As can be seen in Fig. 2(a) and (c), a smooth and continuous CIGSe nanocrystal thin film with a thickness of 1 μm was obtained after nine spin-coating/sintering cycles. However, it was obvious that there were a few shallow cracks and voids in the surface and profile of the as-prepared CIGSe film, which is harmful to the final device performance. For CIGSe thin film solar cells, densely packed and large grained absorber layers are always highly desirable. It is well known that post-selenization is an effective way to promote the crystal growth of the CIGSe thin film. Therefore, in order to eliminate cracks and induce nanocrystal growth, the as-prepared CIGSe nanocrystal film was selenized at 550 °C in a graphite box in a tubular furnace under flowing Ar. Fig. 2(b) shows that a CIGSe thin film composed of close-packed large grains was obtained after selenization. It was observed that the shallow cracks and inner voids are effectively shrunk after selenization, which is attributed to the grain expansion. The composition of Cu, In, and Ga remains almost unchanged before and after the selenization process, and it corresponded well with the precursor solution (Table S2). Fig. 2(d) presents the cross-sectional SEM image of a completed CIGSe solar cell device, which distinctly demonstrates that the selenized CIGSe thin film exhibits a bilayer structure, i.e. a large-grained top layer and a fine-grained bottom layer, the thickness of both layers is about 600 nm. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS, Fig. S3) characterization demonstrated that there are traces of carbon residual in the fine-grained layer, which restricted the growth of nanoparticles to form large grains.

Fig. 3 displays the XRD patterns of the as-prepared CIGSe thin film and the selenized CIGSe thin film. Three broad and weak XRD peaks were observed for the as-prepared CIGSe thin film, which are consistent with those of the standard chalcopyrite CIGSe, implying that the CIGSe nanoparticle film was formed after a simple precursor solution deposition and low-temperature annealing process. After selenization, it was obviously observed that the XRD peaks of CIGSe thin films became much stronger and sharper. The increased intensity of the diffraction peaks indicates the improvement of crystallinity and the increase of grain size, which are beneficial for the high performance of CIGSe thin film solar cells. The major diffraction peaks at 26.89°, 44.70°, and 52.90° can be assigned to the (112), (204)/(220), and (312)/(116) planes of chalcopyrite CIGSe, which are in good agreement with those of previously reported chalcopyrite CIGSe thin films, and the peak at 2θ ≈ 40.4° corresponds to the metal molybdenum substrate. In addition, the diffraction peaks of MoSe2 can be observed at 2θ ≈ 31.4° and 55.8°, indicating that the MoSe2 layer was formed between the Mo substrate and CIGSe layer, which is helpful for forming an Ohmic contact between the CIGS absorber and Mo back electrode in highly efficient solar cells.
The investigation of photovoltaic performance of the CIGSe thin film solar cell prepared using the aforementioned precursor route was carried out and the detailed parameters are shown in Table S3. The current density-voltage (J–V) curves measured under standard AM1.5 illumination and in the dark are shown in Fig. 4(a). The champion solar cell yielded a power conversion efficiency of 9.5% with a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 26.64 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 528 mV, and a fill factor (FF) of 67.48%. The active area of devices is 0.19 cm2, which was defined by mechanically scribing the completed device for separating the upper layers from the remaining substrate. For further studying the device performance, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) response was measured. Fig. 4(b) shows the EQE spectrum of the corresponding CIGSe solar cell device. The quantum efficiency dropped off quickly in the near-IR range, mainly because of the fine-grained bottom layer resulting in incomplete collection of carriers generated in the absorber layer. The calculated Jsc from the EQE curve is 26.85 mA cm−2, which is very close to the measured value from the J–V curve under illumination. The bandgap of the CIGSe absorber is revealed in the inset of Fig. 4(b), which is extracted from the EQE data by plotting [E × ln(1 − EQE)]2vs. E. The value is determined to be 1.17 eV, almost the same as the bandgap (Eg = 1.16 eV) of the hydrazine-based CIGS thin film.
In comparison, the photovoltaic parameters of devices fabricated by our strategy and using hydrazine-processed absorber layers are provided in Table 1. Solar cells fabricated using the binary thiol–amine solvent mixture in our experiment exhibit higher Jsc and FF, but the Voc and the final PCE are a little inferior to those of hydrazine-based devices. It should be noted that the CIGSe absorber used for final devices here consists of a large-grain layer and a fine-grain layer, and the thickness of the large-grain layer is just 0.6 μm. However, the hydrazine-based processing films were made up of all large-grain layer with a thickness of 1.4 μm or even 1.9 μm. As is known to all, larger grains will reduce the chance of electron and hole recombination and improve the performance of the CIGS solar cell. Therefore, we believe that higher PCEs would be achievable by reducing or even eliminating the small-grained bottom layer of the CIGSe absorber.
Absorber
Process
PCE [%]

V
oc [mV]

J
sc [mA cm−2]
FF [%]

a Values are determined from the data in ref. 5.

CIGSe
Non-hydrazine solution
9.50%
528
26.64
67.48%
CIGSSe
Hydrazine solution
10.30%
605
25.7
66.00%

In summary, we demonstrated a novel, simple and low-toxicity solution route to deposit pure selenized CIGSe thin films for solar cell applications. The solvent mixture of 1,2-ethanedithiol and 1,2-ethylenediamine was employed for the first time to simultaneously dissolve elemental Cu, In, Ga, and Se, forming the truly molecular CIGSe precursor solution. After the spin coating deposition and annealing processes, the chalcopyrite CIGSe nanoparticle films were obtained, which can be further converted to dense and compact CIGSe films with high crystallinity during the post-selenization process. With this solution-processed CIGSe thin film solar cell, a power conversion efficiency of 9.5% has been achieved, which is comparable with the highest efficiency hydrazine-solution solar cell (η = 10.3%) without Sb doping. By increasing the thickness of the large grain absorbing layer, the efficiency is expected to be further enhanced. This work offers a safe and reliable pathway for the solution-based processing of high-efficiency CIGSe solar cells and other metal chalcogenide semiconductor devices.


This project is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21203053, 21271064 and 61306016), the Joint Talent Cultivation Funds of NSFC-HN (U1204214), the Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team in University (PCS IRT1126) of Henan University.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, physical and chemical properties of solvents, photographs of the precursor solution, schematic diagram for preparing CIGSe absorber layers, chemical composition of CIGSe films, EDS spectra of the fine-grained bottom layer, and detailed photovoltaic parameters for 9 solar cells. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta05300e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015