 DOI: 10.1039/D1TC02335G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 10406-10413


Maimur
Hossain
,

Rabindranath
Garai
,

Ritesh Kant
Gupta
,

Rahul Narasimhan
Arunagirinathan
 and 

Parameswar Krishnan
Iyer
*

Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati-781039, Assam, India. E-mail: pki@iitg.ac.in; Fax: +91 361 258 2349

Center for Nanotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati-781039, Assam, India

Received
20th May 2021
, Accepted 12th July 2021
First published on 12th July 2021
Hybrid perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) are extremely susceptible to moisture and heat, which restricts their commercial viability. Herein, three multifunctional fluoroaromatic amine additives i.e. 4-fluoroaniline (FA), 2,4,6-trifluoroaniline (TFA) and 2,3,4,5,6-pentafluoroaniline (PFA) are utilized as passivating additives to enhance the stability of the perovskite films, thereby improving the efficiency of PVSCs. Among these fluorinated aromatic amines, PFA most proficiently improved the efficiency along with the moisture and thermo-stability of MAPbI3 based PVSCs. PFA significantly passivated the defects and assisted better charge transport in the devices. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) was enhanced beyond 20% for the PFA passivated device, compared to the 15.08% of the pristine device without any passivation. Moreover, the PFA passivated device retained up to 87% PCE, compared to 26% for the pristine device when exposed to relative humidity ∼50% for 1000 h. The fluorine atoms attached to the passivation additives were able to provide protection to the PVSCs against moisture induced erosion. Moreover, only 10% efficiency was maintained by the pristine device in comparison to 82% for the PFA based device after 20 h of heating at 100 °C inside a glovebox. Thus this work presented a generic approach to improve the overall stability and performances of PVSCs, thereby widening the possibility towards practical applications.

Rapid progress in perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) in the past decade has brought about new hope among renewable technologies due to their incredibly high efficiency compared to their inorganic counterparts. The high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PVSCs is due to their unique opto-electronic properties like broader absorption, band gap tunability, higher crystallinity and longer diffusion length of excitons. Moreover, multifold PCE growth through easy solution processing in the last decade has stimulated worldwide intensive research on PVSCs. However, the instability of perovskite crystals under heat and moisture hampers their further progress towards commercialization. The stoichiometric compositional imbalance during perovskite crystal formation and non-coordinated ions (I−, MA+, Pb2+etc.) could create defects on the surface and the grain boundaries of the perovskite. These non-coordinated free ions can also interact with the metal electrode, which can generate more defects in the perovskite lattice, resulting in higher non-radiative recombination. As a result, defect containing regions of the perovskite films are more prone to degrade in the presence of moisture under ambient conditions. The thermal instability of PVSCs can be attributed to the crystal lattice expansion during heating, which stimulates moisture and oxygen penetration into the perovskite layer. Numerous techniques are utilized to counter the notorious instability of PVSCs, such as compositional tuning of the photoactive layer, encapsulation of the device, device engineering and molecular passivation. Among all these techniques, the passivation of the perovskite layer using a Lewis base is one of the most explored ones. Lewis bases as passivating agents in PVSCs can significantly suppress the impact of under-coordinated Pb2+ through the formation of Lewis base–Lewis acid adducts with Pb2+. Several aliphatic and aromatic amines were incorporated as passivation additives in PVSCs to minimize the defects of the perovskite surface. Furthermore, to enhance the ambient stability, fluorine containing passivating additives were also employed to increase the hydrophobicity of the surface, which can restrict moisture penetration into the perovskite layer. Fluorine containing molecules also have the ability to reduce heat induced instability of PVSCs by restricting ion migration through the formation of hydrogen bonds with organic ions like MA+ or FA+. This kind of non-covalent interactions can provide a certain degree of structural rigidity to the perovskite crystal lattice. Although many techniques have been implemented for the defect passivation of PVSCs, the selection of suitable passivation additives remains crucial to modulate the perovskite crystallization and efficacious suppression of diverse kinds of defects. Molecules with multiple functional groups have also been utilized as passivating additives because they can suppress the diverse defects in perovskites and provide higher stability. To enhance the long term durability of PVSCs and satisfy the prerequisite criteria for real life applications, the utilization of multifunctional additives is required which can efficiently minimize the defect density. Herein, to suppress the wide range of defects in PVSCs, multifunctional passivation additives are utilized which contain a varied number of fluorine atoms along with an amine group. Three multifunctional passivating additives i.e., 4-fluoroaniline (FA), 2,4,6-trifluoroaniline (TFA) and 2,3,4,5,6-pentafluoroaniline (PFA) were utilized to understand the combined influence of fluorine and amine groups. Among these fluorinated aromatic amines (FAAs), the PFA based PVSCs exhibited a superior hydrophobic property compared to the other two amines. PFA passivation improved the stability (ambient and thermal) of MAPBI3 based films significantly by restricting the interaction of moisture with the perovskite. This proficient strategy has contributed in improving the short circuit current (JSC), open circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF) simultaneously, which collectively enhanced the PCE beyond 20%. Due to the presence of amine and fluorine substituents on the PFA molecule, trap states and ion migration were reduced simultaneously, which also contributed in a significant enhancement of the moisture and thermo-stability of the PVSCs compared to the pristine ones.


To analyze the impact of the FAAs, thin layers of these amines were incorporated in PVSCs using the spin coating method. In Fig. 1a, the steps involved in sequential spin-coating of perovskite films and passivation additives are displayed. Firstly, the precursor solution of methylammonium iodide (MAI) and PbI2 was deposited on a NiOx coated FTO substrate by the well-known anti-solvent dripping method and after annealing instantly a MAPBI3 film was formed. Subsequently, thin films of passivation additives were coated above the MAPBI3 film. The details of the thin film coating for the perovskite and other successive layers are included in the ESI. Firstly, contact angle analysis was performed to understand the variation of hydrophobicity in the pristine and FAA passivated perovskite surface (Fig. 1b). The pristine perovskite surface showed a contact angle of 37.4°. The FA and TFA coated perovskite surfaces showed moderate contact angles of 48.8° and 56.3°, respectively. However, the PFA coated surface showed the highest extent of moisture resistivity with a contact angle of 73.4° as it had the highest number of fluorine atoms compared to the other analogous additives. Further, density functional theory (DFT) was utilized to understand the molecular orientation and charge distribution on the molecular structure (Fig. 1c). Although the three FAAs have an almost planar structure, the electrostatic potential (ESP) profile depicted that PFA has better uniformity in the distribution of electron density over the aromatic ring. Moreover, the fluorine and amine groups can interact simultaneously with under-coordinated perovskite ions to stabilize the lattice structure. Consequently, to analyze the impact of the additives on the crystallinity of the perovskite films, a varied concentration of PFA was coated on the perovskite film and XRD study was performed (Fig. S1a, ESI). Three major intense peaks of the (1 1 0), (2 2 0) and (3 1 0) perovskite planes were observed at 14.1°, 28.4° and 31.8°, respectively, in both the pristine and PFA modified MAPBI3 film. The intensity of these peaks was enhanced gradually as the concentration of PFA was increased up to 2 mg ml−1; however, when the concentration reached beyond that level, the peak intensity slightly decreased. The intensity enhancement of these characteristic peaks can be attributed to the improvement in crystallinity of the perovskite film. Subsequently, to analyze the comparative long term durability of the passivated perovskite film in ambient conditions, an XRD study was also performed on the FA, TFA and PFA based passivated films where 2 mg ml−1 was considered as a standard concentration for all the additives (Fig. S1b, ESI). All the films were exposed to an environment with a relative humidity of 45 ± 5% for a period of 1000 h (Fig. 1d). The pristine film showed an indication of structural degradation and an intense peak at 12.7° was observed due to the PbI2 phase in the film. Contrarily, the films passivated by PFA displayed much improved ambient stability compared to the other analogous additives. Though both the FA and TFA based films lowered the rate of degradation compared to the pristine film, a very small peak of PbI2 was also present for the FA and TFA based films after exposure of 1000 h in humid conditions. The rate of degradation of these films can be directly correlated with the hydrophobicity of their surface. PFA displayed superior passivation capability over the other two FAAs, which can also significantly influence the photo-physical and opto-electronic properties of the perovskite layer. To further investigate the impact of PFA, UV-visible spectra of thin films passivated with a varied concentration of PFA were analyzed (Fig. 2a).

The gradual increase in concentration from 0 mg ml−1 to 2 mg ml−1 of PFA enhanced the intensity of the absorption peak significantly but an increase in concentration beyond 2 mg ml−1 reduced the absorption intensity marginally. The initial enhancement of the absorption intensity can be correlated with the uniformity and higher crystallinity of the passivated perovskite films, which can substantially improve the photon harvesting capability. To get better insight about the functional group interaction between the perovskite and PFA, Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy was analyzed (Fig. 2b). Two sharp peaks for N–H stretching of the primary amine group were visible at 3413 cm−1 and 3511 cm−1 for only PFA, but when PFA was incorporated with the perovskite layer the N–H stretching peak patterns were changed and shifted towards lower wavenumber at 3411 cm−1 and 3502 cm−1. This indicates that there is an adequate interaction between the amine group and perovskite layer which can effectively suppress the defects on the surface of the perovskite. To analyze the influence of passivation in tuning the grain orientation and overall morphology in thin films, field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) was employed for perovskite films which are passivated with a varied concentration of PFA. The FESEM images displayed that the morphology of the pristine films has a lack of uniformity in the grain distribution, size and compactness (Fig. 2c). Contrarily, the passivated surfaces showed significant improvement in grain size and compactness with an increase of the PFA concentration up to 2 mg ml−1, which can contribute in diminishing the trap states in the perovskite film. The multiple types of interactions between the PFA solution and perovskite top layer assisted the better orderly growth of perovskite grains. However, beyond a 2 mg ml−1 concentration, aggregated particles of PFA were visible on the surface, which can adversely impact the movement of charge carriers due to the poor conductive property of the passivation additive. The increase in grain size was also observed in the atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of the passivated compared to the pristine perovskite films (Fig. S2, ESI). A lower root mean square (rms) roughness of 10.67 nm was observed for the PFA passivated film, compared to the pristine surface with an rms roughness of 14.27 nm. After the successive DFT, spectroscopic and morphological analysis of the PFA based perovskite films, it was evident that PFA is a suitable additive for passivation with an optimum concentration of 2 mg ml−1, which can significantly influence the photovoltaic properties.
Subsequently, we fabricated photovoltaic devices using an inverted architecture of FTO/NiOx/MAPBI3/PC61BM/rhodamine 101/silver (Fig. 3a). Fig. 3b displays the current density versus voltage (J–V) plot of pristine and passivated perovskite films with a varied concentration of PFA. The summary of the PVSC parameters is included in Table 1. The pristine devices achieved a PCE of 15.08% with a JSC of 21.30 mA cm−2, VOC of 1.006 V and FF of 70.4%. A gradual increase in concentration up to 2 mg ml−1 of PFA improved the device parameters, which collectively enhanced the PCE up to 20.05% with a Jsc of 23.99 mA cm−2, VOC of 1.09 V and FF of 76.7%. However, as the concentration of PFA was raised above 2 mg ml−1, the efficiency decreased significantly due to the uncontrolled aggregation of PFA on the perovskite surface, which was evident in the FESEM image also. Due to the poor conductive nature of PFA, its overcrowding impacted the device parameters (JSC, VOC and FF) adversely and reduced the efficiency of the devices. In Fig. 3c, a histogram (of 15 devices) for the PCE of PFA based devices is shown displaying improved efficiency with better reproducibility than the pristine devices. Subsequently, to present the concentration dependent reproducibility of the photovoltaic parameters of the PFA passivated devices, statistical data of 15 devices are displayed in Fig. 4a–d. The 2 mg ml−1 PFA based devices showed an enhanced PCE with a higher degree of reproducibility for all photovoltaic parameters, compared to the other devices. The higher reproducibility of the PFA passivated devices indicates the impact of passivation, which successfully minimized the defects of the perovskite lattice. A comparative analysis of the device efficiency of FA, TFA and PFA is also presented in the J–V characteristic plot in Fig. S3 (ESI) where a 2 mg ml−1 concentration was considered as the standard for all the additives. Photovoltaic data for different additives are summarized in Table S1 (ESI). The statistical photovoltaic data of 15 devices are also included in the box chart for different additives presenting the reproducibility of all the device parameters (Fig. S4, ESI). PFA displayed the highest efficiency compared to the other FAAs due to its superior capability to suppress the defects in the perovskite. Fig. 3d displays J–V curves for the forward and reverse scan of the PFA passivated and pristine device (corresponding data presented in Table S2, ESI). To estimate the magnitude of hysteresis, the hysteresis index (HI) was calculated using previously reported eqn (1).
(1)
Device

J
SC, mA cm−2

Voc, V
FF, %
PCE (average), %

a Average of 15 devices.

Pristine
21.30
1.006
70.4
15.08 (14.33 ± 0.52)
1 mg ml−1
23.38
1.045
73.5
17.97 (17.20 ± 0.70)
2 mg ml−1
23.99
1.090
76.7
20.05 (19.45 ± 0.38)
3 mg ml−1
22.50
1.081
76.1
18.50 (17.64 ± 0.49)
The PFA passivated devices had almost identical J–V characteristic curves for the scans in both directions, exhibiting lower hysteresis compared to the pristine ones. The PFA passivated device exhibited a very low HI of 0.89%, compared to 9.08% of the pristine device. This sharp improvement of the hysteresis profile can be attributed to suppression of trap states through passivation, which reduces the charge accumulation at the interface. When the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the passivated device was analyzed, the passivated device exhibited a better EQE than the pristine one (Fig. 3e). The integrated JSC values were found to be well comparable to the values obtained using J–V analysis for both the pristine and PFA based devices. To further validate the J–V characteristic, steady-state current measurements were investigated at the maximum power point for passivated and pristine films (Fig. 3f). Both the passivated and pristine devices demonstrated a steady photo response over 500 sec and the PFA based devices exhibited a higher PCE of 19.40%, compared to 14.72% of the pristine device. To further analyze the mechanism of trap passivation, a few opto-electronic studies were done for the pristine and PFA based films. Firstly, the absorption band edge of the perovskite layer was used to estimate the Urbach energy (Eu). Eu can be associated with defects in the band edge region and was determined using the following eqn (2),
(2)
where
α is the absorption coefficient, α0 represents a constant and E (= hv) is the energy associated with a photon. Fig. 5a displays a ln(α) vs. photon energy plot, from which the slope of the graph Eu was determined to be 53.7 meV for the pristine devices, which reduces to 44.4 meV for the passivated device. This decrease in Eu for the passivated devices indicates the mitigation of defect states and energetic disorder in the band edge region of the photoactive layer. Passivation significantly lowered the trap assisted recombination, which resulted in elevation of VOC of the passivated devices. To further illustrate the trap passivation mechanism, steady state photoluminescence (PL) was studied for the pristine and passivated films, Fig. 5b. The intensity of PL was enhanced significantly for the PFA based film, compared to the pristine film. The peak maximum at 766 nm for the passivated film was blue shifted by 4 nm in comparison to the peak maximum of the pristine film at 770 nm. This suggests that passivation resulted in a substantial reduction in the traps, which also minimized the non-radiative recombination in the photoactive layer. The recombination properties and interfacial charge carrier kinetics of PVSCs can be analyzed by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). The Nyquist plots of the pristine and PFA based devices were estimated at a bias of 0.75 V under dark conditions. The series resistance (RS), recombination resistance (Rrec) and capacitance (C) can be determined for the pristine and PFA based devices from the fitted graph (using the equivalent circuit in the inset) as shown in Fig. 5c. The magnitude of Rs was reduced for the passivated device compared to the pristine device, which signifies that PFA has considerably decreased the contact resistance at the interface. Also, Rrec was observed for the PFA passivated devices to be higher than the pristine devices, which signifies a lower rate of recombination, hence assisting smooth charge carrier movement in the passivated device. Moreover, C signifies the extent of charge storage at the defects of the perovskite layer. The lower value of C for the passivated device compared to the pristine one revalidated the superior capability of PFA as an additive to suppress defects in the perovskite film. EIS measurements were also conducted at different voltages (0.65–0.90 V). The linearly fitted curve of Rrec with a varied applied voltage is presented in Fig. 5d for pristine and PFA passivated devices, which is displaying an inversely proportional relation between Rrec and the applied voltage. Rrec of the passivated device is significantly higher in comparison to the pristine device at all applied voltages, which signifies that the effective passivation of traps reduced the charge carrier recombination substantially. Devices with lower charge recombination facilitate smooth transport of charge carriers and this resulted in improved JSC and VOC for the PFA passivated devices. Linearly fitted semi log curves of capacitance C with a varied voltage are also presented for both the pristine and passivated device in Fig. 5e. The magnitude of C is lesser for the PFA passivated device than the pristine device, which signifies that PFA passivation mitigated the charge accumulation at traps. Further, the trap density of states (t-DOS) was assessed from the C versus applied voltage graph and the passivated device displayed a significantly lower value of t-DOS than the pristine one, which indicates the lesser extent of charge carrier recombination in the passivated devices (Fig. 5f). The impact of trap passivation in the PFA based devices is very evident and the charge recombination was reduced significantly, which assisted smoother transport of charge carriers towards the respective electrodes. To further investigate the impact of passivation on the long term durability of PVSCs, we have exposed the PFA passivated and pristine devices to ambient conditions with RH 45 ± 5%. For the pristine devices a steep decline was observed across all photovoltaic parameters (JSC, VOC and FF), which collectively reduced the PCE in ambient conditions, and after 1000 h of ambient exposure they were able to retain a PCE of only 26% of the initial efficiency (Fig. 6a). In contrast, the PFA passivated device showed high moisture resistivity and was able to maintain a higher magnitude in all photovoltaic parameters, which is reflected in the overall retained PCE of 87%. The hydrophobic nature and passivation capability of PFA immensely contributed in achieving higher ambient stability. The decline of efficiency in the pristine devices can be correlated with gradual degradation of the crystal structure under humid conditions, which was evident from the presence of the PbI2 phase in the XRD data in Fig. 1d after exposure to moisture for 1000 h. Thermal instability of the perovskite material is another major hurdle for PVSCs for their wider applicability. To further understand the impact of PFA passivation on the perovskite layer, a thermal stability test was executed at 100 °C inside a glove box for both the pristine and PFA passivated devices. Fig. 6b displays the normalized PCE vs time plot for the PVSCs, where the pristine device retained only 10% of its initial PCE after 18 h of heating at 100 °C. Contrarily, the passivated device showed much improved heat stability and maintained 82% of its initial PCE even after 20 h of heating at 100 °C. The heat induced degradation of the pristine and PFA passivated devices can be further correlated using XRD data (Fig. S5, ESI), which implies that the rate of degradation is minimized substantially due to the incorporation of PFA on the perovskite surface and hence the growth rate of the PbI2 phase in the passivated device is much lower. A comparison of this work with recent literature is tabulated in Table S3 (ESI), highlighting the PVSC performance and stability. Moreover, it can be concluded that passivation by PFA has significantly improved the stability (moisture and thermal) and led the PCE to beyond 20%, which can elevate its possibility for commercial applications.


In summary, we have demonstrated here that 2,3,4,5,6-pentafluoroaniline incorporation on the perovskite layer tunes the photo-physical properties and morphology as well as suppresses the defects in the perovskite crystal lattice. For the passivated device, the PCE was substantially improved up to 20.05% (JSC of 23.99 mA cm−2, VOC of 1.090 V and FF of 76.7%) in comparison to 15.08% of the pristine device. Moreover, the ambient and thermal stability have been enhanced considerably by the introduction of the hydrophobic PFA molecule. The passivated device displayed great ability to maintain its high efficiency for longer periods, compared to the pristine device. Moreover, the trap states were mitigated due to the PFA passivation, which facilitates smooth charge transport in PVSCs. This unique approach can assist in developing highly efficient PVSCs with longer durability that can be sustained in harsh environment conditions.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors acknowledge the financial assistance from Department of Science and Technology (DST), New Delhi, India, through the projects DST/TSG/PT/2012/125-G, DST/TSG/PT/2009/23, DST/SB/S1/PC-020/2014, and IGSTC/MPG/PG(PKI)/2011A/48. We are also grateful to Central Instruments Facility, Department of Chemistry, and Centre for Nanotechnology, IIT Guwahati, for providing various instrument facilities.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, fabrication procedures, characterization data and device characteristics. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc02335g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021