 DOI: 10.1039/D0TA10242C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 2394-2403


Zhiliang
Liu
,

Qingcheng
Li
,

Kun
Chen
,

Yuying
Cui
,

Jeremy J.
Intemann
,

Shifeng
Leng
,

Minghuan
Cui
,

Chaochao
Qin
,

Linfeng
Fei
,

Kai
Yao
* and 

Haitao
Huang


Institute of Photovoltaics/Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China. E-mail: yaokai@ncu.edu.cn

Tongwei Solar (Chengdu) Limited Company, Chengdu, Sichuan 610059, China

Department of Natural and Applied Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Green Bay, Wisconsin 54311, USA

Henan Key Laboratory of Infrared Materials & Spectrum Measures and Applications, Henan Normal University, Xinxiang 453007, China

Department of Applied Physics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China

Received
20th October 2020
, Accepted 14th December 2020
First published on 15th December 2020
Compared to extremely high efficiencies achieved by their normal mesoscopic counterparts, significant improvement in those of inverted mesoporous perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has yet to be made. The incorporation of plasmonic nanostructures into mesoporous films has been reported to improve their optoelectronic properties through plasmon resonance effects. Herein, gold nanoparticles coated with a thin layer of a semiconductor (NiOx) are introduced into a mesoporous NiOx layer. Using illumination-dependent characterization, we identify a plasmon-assisted metal-to-semiconductor charge transfer (PACT) mechanism. The hole injection from the Au core into the NiOx shell is not only achieved in the dark due to the ohmic contact nature at the Au@NiOx heterostructure, but also facilitated under illumination due to the plasmon-induced interfacial processes. The charge transfer is observed to substantially downshift the valence band edge and enhance the photoconductivity, as well as favor trap filling of the mesoporous NiOx film, which can lower the effective energy barrier and facilitate hole extraction in PSCs. Consequently, embedding Au@NiOx into the mesoporous layer elevates all of the device parameters simultaneously, with a power conversion efficiency of 20.6% in inverted mesostructured PSCs. These results advance our physical understanding of metal–semiconductor heterostructures and offer additional strategies for manipulating the carrier dynamics of PSCs.

Recent studies have witnessed unprecedented advances in organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) with power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) leaping from the earliest 3.8% to the current 25.2%. Researchers have turned their interest toward their long-term operational stability, which has been recognized as one of the critical obstacles before approaching practical applications. The degradation of PSCs mainly originates from the structural instability of both perovskite layers and charge transporting layers (CTLs) under external stresses. For one thing, developing a Cs/formamidinium (FA) mixed perovskite without volatile methylammonium (MA) can meet the requirement of the tolerance factor toward structurally/thermally stable regions. For another thing, replacing ion doped hole transport materials and photounstable TiO2 in inverted (p–i–n) devices has contributed to recent advances in device operational stability. However, compared to their normal (n–i–p) counterparts with the achieved high certified efficiencies, inverted mesoscopic PSCs currently possess inferior PCEs, mainly owing to the lack of suitable p-type semiconductors for preparing mesoporous hole transport layers (HTLs).

Among p-type inorganic materials, nickel oxide exhibits great potential due to its wide band gap for light penetration, appropriate valence band edge, and superior thermal and chemical stabilities, which brings about a longer device lifetime. Although the excess of oxygen in the nonstoichiometric state of nickel oxide, denoted as NiOx, usually results in the self-doping effect with Ni vacancies in the lattices, the hole conductivity of a NiOx (10−4 S cm−1) thin film is still poor due to its relatively low carrier concentration. It was revealed that the low conductivity of NiOx results in inefficient hole transfer with pinning at the surface, thus leading to back recombination and dragging down the device performance. The problem becomes more severe when the thickness of the NiOx layer is increased or it is processed into a mesoporous layer. Among all the available methods to fix this problem, doping is the most commonly used for improving the conductivity of NiOx films and decreasing the carrier recombination at the interface. However, chemical doping is usually accompanied by phase segregation, defect formation, and declined transmittance, thus sacrificing the transport properties and the light utilization. Therefore, alternative solutions are highly desired to optimize NiOx films without such problems as mentioned above.
Embedding plasmonic nanoparticles (NPs) into CTLs can effectively trigger localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effects, initially with the aim of enhancing light absorption Beyond light absorption enhancements, the presence of metal NPs brings about extra benefits to device electrical characteristics, such as increased conductivity of CTLs and engineering of their carrier dynamics (i.e., promoting carrier transport and collection). Unfortunately, direct contact between bare metallic NPs and a perovskite absorber could cause a charge recombination problem. A potential approach to prohibit unwanted loss pathways is to coat metal NPs with a thin dielectric layer (mostly SiO2). However, the charge transfer process would easily be blocked by the insulating shell unless the SiO2 thickness is less than its tunneling barrier height (∼2 nm). Alternatively, coating of thin oxide semiconductors on these metal NPs is preferred for the transfer of the resonance energy from the metal to the surrounding medium. Notably, previous studies have demonstrated that the electronic properties of TiO2 can be significantly improved by embedding Au@TiO2 NPs within a TiO2 mesoporous layer. The photogenerated hot electrons from Au NPs can readily inject into TiO2 through plasmon-induced hot electron transfer and occupy the trap states of TiO2, leading to an enhanced carrier extraction (Scheme 1). To date, however, nearly all studies of plasmonic enhancement mechanisms of core–shell NPs have focused on tailoring of charge carrier dynamics within n-type semiconductors, while there are comparatively fewer studies on the improvement of p-type semiconductors. An improved understanding of the hole dynamics in plasmon-driven systems is therefore needed to expand our knowledge for controlling the optoelectronics in inverted mesoscopic PSCs.
Here, we identify the effects of plasmon resonance on the carrier dynamics of inverted PSCs by incorporating core–shell Au@NiOx NPs into a mesoporous NiOx (mp-NiOx) layer. It has been found that the implementation of a metal–semiconductor (Au@NiOx) nanoarchitecture yields an efficient PCE of 20.6%, which is much higher than that of the pristine device (18.2%) and the metal–insulator (Au@SiO2) device (18.5%). Instead of light absorption, the improvement of electrical properties is demonstrated to be the main reason for the simultaneous enhancements of the VOC, JSC, FF, and PCE in the MA-free PSCs. In-depth analyses of the energy alignment of the mp-NiOx layer reveal a PACT mechanism at the Au/NiOx heterostructures, leading to efficient hole injection from Au NPs into the valence band of NiOx. The plasmon-driven charge transfer process is observed to substantially increase the hole concentration of mp-NiOx films by an order of magnitude and downshift the valance band maximum from −5.00 eV to −5.08 eV. In addition, the carrier injection achieves trap filling in the mp-NiOx layer, therefore greatly reducing interfacial recombination and facilitating hole extraction. This study highlights the potential for manipulating the electronic properties at the perovskite/CTL interface via rational design and placement of metal–semiconductor plasmonic nanostructures.

Unless specified otherwise, all materials were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. PbI2 was purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industry Co., Ltd. (TCI) and formamidinium iodide (FAI) was purchased from Dyesol.


The Au@SiO2 NPs were prepared by a three-step synthesis described elsewhere. Au@NiOx NPs were synthesized by a method developed in a previous report. First, monodisperse 3 nm diameter Au particles were formed by combining 100 mg HAuCl4·3H2O with 10 mL tetralin and 10 mL oleylamine in a round bottom flask. In a separate vial, 43.5 mg tert-butylamine borane was combined with 1 mL oleylamine and 1 mL tetralin and sonicated until dissolved. This solution was then quickly injected into the round-bottom flask under vigorous stirring at room temperature in air to nucleate the gold NPs. After reacting for one hour, the particles were collected by centrifuging with ethanol and stored in hexane. Then, 0.02 mmol of gold NPs (in hexane solution) were combined with 0.1 mmol of nickel(II) acetylacetonate, 0.02 mmol of triphenylphosphine, 500 μL oleylamine, and 2 mL 1-octadecene in a 25 mL three neck round bottom flask. Under argon and vigorous stirring, the mixture was heated to 80 °C for 20 minutes before being slowly heated (1–2 °C min) to 190 °C and reacted for 40 minutes. The particles were separated by centrifugation with ethanol and isopropyl alcohol and stored in ethanol.


A pristine NiOx mesoporous film (∼150 nm) was fabricated on cleaned FTO by spin coating NiOx slurry at 5000 rpm for 60 s, followed by sintering at 400 °C for 30 min under atmospheric conditions. The NiOx slurry was prepared by following the protocols reported in our previous publications. For the modified mp-NiOx films, Au@NiOx (or Au@SiO2) solution was mixed with pre-dispersed NiOx nanoparticles at different concentrations (from 0 to 10 wt% of Au/NiOx) in the stage of NiOx slurry preparation and other fabrication conditions were similar to those of pristine films. The CsFA perovskite was prepared by dissolving FAI, CsI, PbI2 and PbBr2 in DMF:DMSO (3:1) to obtain a composition of (Cs0.17FA0.83)Pb(I0.8Br0.2)3 with 5% excess of PbI2. After stirring for 12 h, 100 μL of the precursor solution was spin-coated on mp-NiOx at 4000 rpm with a 2 s acceleration for a total of 60 s. 300 μL of ethyl acetate were dropped rapidly as the anti-solvent with 45 seconds remaining in the spin cycle. Subsequently, the samples were annealed for 30 min at 100 °C. For the surface passivation, the bFPI dissolved in isopropanol/chlorobenzene (1:1) at a concentration of 0.5 mg mL−1 was spun at 4000 rpm for 30 s. Then, a solution of PC61BM in chlorobenzene (25 mg mL−1) was spin-coated on top of the films at a rotation speed of 1500 rpm for 40 s. The substrate was then heated at 90 °C for 60 min. Finally, the samples were transferred to an evaporation chamber (Angstrom) and BCP (8 nm) and Ag (120 nm) were deposited under vacuum.



J–V characteristics were measured from different scanning directions by using a Keithley 2400 source meter under AM 1.5 G illumination from an Enli Technology solar simulator. The output intensity was calibrated by using a standard silicon solar cell. The active area was defined using a shade mask (0.108 cm2). External quantum efficiencies were obtained from an EQE system (Enli Technology Co., Ltd.). Impedance spectroscopy and capacitance–voltage measurements were carried out with an Autolab potentiostat (PGSTAT30). SEM was conducted on a JSM 6701F field-emission scanning electron microscope. The morphologies of the nanomaterials were studied by using a field emission TEM (JEOL-JEM F200) at 200 kV. The absorption spectra were recorded on a UV/Vis spectrophotometer (Lambda 750). PL tests were performed by using a Horiba Fluorolog system. The UPS measurements were performed on a Kratos Ultra Spectrometer (AXIS–ULTRA DLD–600W) using a monochromatized HeI (21.22 eV for UPS) discharge lamp. The TRPL decay lifetimes were collected using a 520 nm pump laser, generated by a monochromator spectrograph (Omni-λ300, Zolix) with an oscilloscope (GDS-3354, GWINSTEK). The laser pulses were the same as those used in the femtosecond TA measurements. The TRPL decay lifetimes were collected using a 532 nm pump laser, generated by a monochromator/spectrograph (Omni-λ300, Zolix) with an oscilloscope (GDS-3354, GWINSTEK). The laser pulses were the same as those used in the femtosecond TA measurements. TPV data were obtained by measuring the voltage drop at the resistor and the decay curve was recorded using an oscilloscope after small laser pulses (532 nm) and in a continuous white LED background. The LED light power equivalent to 1 Sun was maintained by matching the device short circuit current density achieved from a solar simulator. The light intensity was tuned by inserting a neutral density filter.


In the present work, initially oleylamine stabilized Au nanospheres were used as cores to prepare Au@NiOx NPs for simplicity. The wet-chemical method provides flexibility in synthesizing core–shell NPs with a tailored shell thickness and morphology (Fig. S1, ESI). To balance the need for near-field enhancement and charge-recombination suppression, we precisely controlled the shell thickness in the range of 2–5 nm. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image in Fig. 1a shows uniform core–shell metal NPs with spherical structures, in which the core size is around 25 nm. In contrast, the cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) stabilized Au nanospheres were used as cores to prepare Au@SiO2 NPs. Similarly, we are able to encapsulate the Au core with silica shell thicknesses of 2–5 nm. An absorption peak of the bare Au NPs was found at a wavelength of ∼528 nm. The thin NiOx-coated and SiO2-coated Au NPs give rise to a slightly red-shifted extinction peak at 536 nm (Fig. 1b) and 543 nm (Fig. S2, ESI), respectively. These shifts are due to the changes in the local refractive index of the shell structures, compared to bare Au NPs.

To incorporate metal nanoparticles into the mp-NiOx layer, the core–shell Au@NiOx and Au@SiO2 NP solutions were added into the NiOx slurry at different weight ratios of up to 10 wt% prior to mp-NiOx deposition. The pristine and modified mp-NiOx films were prepared in a way similar to those of our previous reports, and deposited on a blocking (bl)-NiOx layer. The EDX mapping (Fig. S3, ESI) result shows that “Au” elements are homogeneously distributed in the mp-NiOx layer and the ratio value (3.7 wt%) of Au is close to the feed ratio of Au@NiOx (5.0 wt%). This result also indicates that the thermally stable core–shell nanostructures render them compatible with our relatively high temperature processing route for the mesoporous films. The optical and electrical characteristics of the pristine and modified mp-NiOx films were then examined. From the optical transmittance spectra shown in Fig. 1c, it can be seen that the mesoporous films deposited on quartz substrates have a high transmission (>85%) in the whole visible region and the optical transmittance slightly decreases with the incorporation of metal NPs (5 wt%). In particular, we readily identified the color change (Fig. S4, ESI) when we incorporated a higher concentration (10 wt%) of Au@NiOx into the mp-NiOx film.
We further investigated the perovskite film morphology deposited on the mp-NiOx layer. Here, a double-cation perovskite with a chemical formula of (Cs0.17FA0.83)Pb(I0.8Br0.2)3 (termed CsFA) in precursors was employed in this study. Previous studies have demonstrated that CsFA perovskites exhibit much greater thermal stability than MA-based single/double/triple-cation perovskites. As shown in the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images in Fig. 1d, e and S5 (ESI), the CsFA films on modified mp-NiOx films show similar grain sizes to the perovskite film on pristine mp-NiOx, indicating that the modification of the mp-NiOx film hardly affects the above perovskite grain size. The cross-sectional SEM image (Fig. 1f) also shows a dense perovskite film with a grain size around 200 nm without pinholes on the NiOx pores. In addition, the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of CsFA perovskite films on mp-NiOx layers, both with and without Au@NiOx, shows the same characteristic reflections with similar intensities (Fig. S6, ESI).

Given that the incorporation of core–shell NPs at moderate concentration posed a negligible influence on the morphology and crystallinity of the upper perovskite layer, inverted mesoporous PSCs were designed and characterized to investigate the impact of plasmonic NPs. In particular, the device had a typical stacking sequence of FTO/bl-NiOx/mp-NiOx/CsFA/PC61BM/BCP/Ag (Fig. 2a), while the modified devices included Au@NiOx (Au@SiO2) NPs as dopants (5 wt%) in the mp-NiOx layer. The inverted mesoporous PSCs without modification delivered a reasonable PCE of 17.76% (Fig. S7, ESI). We further passivated the surface of the perovskite film by using previously reported bis-fulleropyrrolidium iodide (bFPI).Fig. 2b shows the typical current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics for the pristine and plasmonic devices in the reverse scan direction. After surface treatment, the pristine devices showed an improved PCE of 18.21% with a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 20.4 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.12 V and a fill factor (FF) of 79.7%. The PCE of the Au@SiO2-modified devices slightly improved to 18.5%. The slightly enhanced PCE was attributed to the improvement in the photocurrent (20.9 mA cm−2), whereas the VOC and FF remained nearly constant. By contrast, the champion devices with Au@NiOx NPs exhibited an improved PCE of 20.6% with a JSC of 21.8 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.15 V and an FF of 82.4%. The full list of device parameters is reported in Table S1 (ESI). The Au@NiOx-modified device exhibited a steady-state power output of 20.1% (Fig. S8, ESI), which is one of the best-reported performances for MA-free inverted mesoporous PSCs compared with those in reports to date (shown in Table S2, ESI). Further increasing the Au@NiOx concentration within the mesoporous layer substantially reduced the photocurrent, in turn diminishing the overall device efficiency (Fig. S9, ESI).

As summarized in Fig. 2c, all the parameters (JSC, VOC and FF) for devices with the incorporation of Au@NiOx NPs are markedly increased when compared to those of the pristine device. The statistical results of the device performance parameters demonstrated the reproducibility of the performance enhancement associated with the modification of the mp-NiOx layer. More impressively, the device based on Au@NiOx-modified mp-NiOx exhibited more reduction in photocurrent hysteresis (Fig. S10, ESI). In addition, the integrated photocurrent from external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves was in good agreement with the JSC measured from the J–V scans (Fig. 2d). To confirm the advantage of the core–shell nanostructure of Au@NiOx in the device performance, we performed a control experiment by incorporating bare Au NPs into the mp-NiOx paste. As expected, embedding the bare Au NPs within the mp-NiOx layer reduced the device performance with the decreased VOC and FF (Fig. S11, ESI). This can be ascribed to the direct contact between the Au NPs and CsFA perovskite, acting as recombination centers for photo-generated charge carriers.
To discover the mechanism of performance enhancement in Au@NiOx-modified PSCs, the optical effect of the core–shell NPs on device performance was investigated. As shown in Fig. S12 (ESI), the UV-vis absorption spectra of the CsFA perovskite film deposited on mp-NiOx with Au@NiOx NPs only show a very marginal improvement at the LSPR band, compared to that grown on pristine mp-NiOx. Interestingly, it is clear that the maximal EQE enhancement matches well with the absorption peak of Au@NiOx NPs, yet the enhancement of EQE is more significant and broadband via the introduction of plasmonic NPs (Fig. 2e). Combining the results that embedding Au@NiOx into mp-NiOx layer poses a negligible change in the perovskite morphology and crystallinity, the JSC enhancement cannot be attributed entirely to the optical effect of plasmonic Au@NiOx NPs. This implies that the increasing VOC and FF as well as JSC may derive from the enhanced electronic characteristic within the plasmonic devices. To verify this hypothesis, we plotted the relationship of VOC as a function of the logarithmic irradiation light intensity in Fig. S13 (ESI). The ideality factor of the PSC prepared with the Au@NiOx incorporation (n = 1.19) was much lower compared to that of the pristine device (n = 1.42), which indicates suppressed charge recombination in the plasmonic devices.

To clarify the mechanism of the enhanced voltage of the device based on modified mp-NiOx, we first studied the interfacial energy level alignment at the HTL. A suitable energy-level alignment at the HTL/perovskite interface is essential for decreasing the energy loss. As shown in Fig. 3a, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was carried out to reveal the energy alignment of the pristine and modified NiOx mesoporous films. The pristine mp-NiOx films showed a Fermi level (Ef) of 4.68 eV and a valence band maximum (EVBM) energy of 5.00 eV, consistent with a previous report. Interestingly, the incorporation of Au@NiOx (5 wt%) shifted the Ef and EVBM of the mesoporous layer down to 4.89 and 5.08 eV, respectively. The gap between EVBM and Ef decreased from the pristine to the Au@NiOx-modified mp-NiOx film, further suggesting the increased hole concentration. However, we observed that there was subtle discrepancy in the EVBM and the Fermi level between pristine mp-NiOx and Au@SiO2 modified films.

A complete picture of the energy-shifts in the mp-NiOx layer induced by the incorporation of Au@NiOx NPs was presented from the contact potential difference (CPD) of the films in the dark and under illumination by employing Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM). As shown in Fig. 3b, the change in the CPD values reflects the difference of the work functions between the FTO substrate and mp-NiOx/bl-NiOx bilayer. Under both the dark and illumination conditions, the absolute surface work function difference was calculated to be about ∼130 mV for the pristine mesoporous film, in agreement with the value difference between FTO (∼4.6 eV) and NiOx (∼4.7 eV). For the Au@NiOx-modified film, there was a larger surface potential difference (210 mV) in the dark. Moreover, illumination treatment further lowered the average CPD on the surface of the mp-NiOx at ∼60 mV. This downward band bending indicates that the incorporation of Au@NiOx accelerates hole transfer from Au NPs to the valence band maximum of NiOx under plasmonic illumination.
Hall effect measurement directly confirmed the increase in hole concentration from 3.9 × 1017 cm−3 in the mp-NiOx film to 4.6 × 1018 cm−3 in the Au@NiOx-modified film. The conductivity of the modified mp-NiOx films, determined by the four-probe measurement, was also significantly improved compared to that of the pristine films (shown in Table S3, ESI). In contrast, embedding Au@SiO2 within mp-NiOx films caused a slight change in their electronic properties. We believe that limited charge carriers can transport through the insulating SiO2 shell with a relatively large thickness and undergo Fermi level equilibration. In order to better understand the advantages of plasmon resonance induced by Au@NiOx NPs, linear current–voltage (J–V) measurement was conducted for the study of the conductivity difference under the dark and illumination conditions. Here, a structure of FTO/bl-NiOx/mp-NiOx (presence or absence of Au@NiOx NPs)/bl-NiOx/Ag was constructed, in which the upper bl-NiOx layer was used to fill in the mesoporous structures. In the dark, the addition of Au@NiOx NPs into the mp-NiOx film resulted in an increased conductivity compared to the pristine NiOx film (Fig. 3c). Under 1 sun illumination (Fig. S14, ESI), the conductivity of the Au@NiOx-doped films showed a substantial increase in the yield of ∼100% compared to that of the pristine film, and was much higher than the Au@SiO2 one (∼30%).
Overall, we proposed a PACT mechanism in Fig. 3d and e to depict the charge equilibration at the heterojunction between mp-NiOx and core–shell nanostructures under dark and illumination conditions, respectively. In the dark, the charge transfer process can spontaneously happen due to the ohmic contact between Au and NiOx, since the Fermi level (Ef) of gold (∼5.1 eV) is below the valence band maximum of pristine NiOx (∼5.0 eV). The ohmic contact intentionally increases the hole concentration in the NiOx layer. Under illumination, the presence of the LSPR effect can enhance the rate of the charge transfer process. In addition, plasmonic-induced carrier (hot-hole) injection in Au/NiOx heterostructures may occur in a similar transfer process to previously reported hot-electron injection at Au/TiO2 heterostructures, leading to further increase in the hole concentration and lowering of the energy level of mp-NiOx. The lower Fermi level implies an enhanced built-in potential that is consistent with the results measured from the Mott–Schottky plot (Fig. S15, ESI). The derived built-in potentials of the pristine device and the modified device were found to be 0.86 V and 0.95 V, respectively. The increased built-in potentials and down-shifted energy-level alignment suggest improved hole transport and extraction at the interface.

Having determined the cause of the charge equilibration at the heterojunction within mp-NiOx, we then set out to probe the influence of the PACT process on the HTL/perovskite interface. We investigated the dynamics of photoexcited carriers in the perovskite film deposited on a mp-NiOx/bl-NiOx bilayer HTL using femtosecond transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy. Fig. 4a and b exhibit the TA 2D color maps of the CsFA/HTL without and with NPs within mp-NiOx, respectively, when excited at 532 nm. The invariance of the photobleaching (PB) peak position indicated similar properties of the above CsFA perovskite films. The sample based on Au@NiOx-modified mp-NiOx presented a faster decay of the bleach signal compared to the pristine sample. For a better comparison, the PB kinetics at 745 nm was analyzed. As shown in Fig. 4c, the decay kinetics are much faster and the half-lifetime for the Au@NiOx modified sample is at least 3 times shorter than that of the pristine sample.

Moreover, we found that time-resolved PL (TRPL) analysis was in excellent agreement with the TA kinetics (Fig. 4d and e). With an excitation wavelength of 532 nm, the incorporation of Au@NiOx resulted in an enhanced PL quenching rate (Fig. S16, ESI). As listed in Table S4 (ESI†), the bi-exponential fits give a lifetime of τ1 = 6.5 ns and τ2 = 95.6 ns for the CsFA film on pristine mp-NiOx, and shorter values of τ1 = 4.1 ns and τ2 = 34.8 ns for the CsFA film on modified mp-NiOx. This suggests that free carriers generated within the perovskite are more efficiently transferred to the modified mp-NiOx film. The quenched PL spectra in the modified samples further confirm that the existence of Au@NiOx in the mp-NiOx films facilitates the charge transfer/separation at the interface. We also noted that the PL quenching was wavelength-dependent and a relatively smaller charge-transfer enhancement was observed at an excitation wavelength of 650 nm, far from the LSPR absorption region (Fig. 4f). These findings further support the claim that the plasmonic resonances play a pivotal role in enhancing the electronic properties of the mp-NiOx film.
The distinct improvement in the interfacial charge dynamics of modified films motivated us to uncover the role of plasmonic NPs in the electrical properties of the whole device. Thermal admittance spectroscopy (TAS) analysis was conducted to study the trap density of state (tDOS) profile in response to plasmonic excitations. As shown in Fig. 5a, the trap-states below 0.3 eV are generally ascribed to the shallow trap region, while the trap-states above 0.30 eV are related to the deep trap region. It has been widely regarded that the deep trap states, serving as major recombination centers, stem from the grain boundary of the perovskite layer and the interfaces. Under dark conditions, the incorporation of Au@NiOx within mp-NiOx caused a slight drop in defect density (Nt). The slightly decreased tDOS in the dark state was consistent with the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) measurement, in which the densities of trap states for pristine and Au@NiOx-modified devices were calculated to be 1.1 × 1016 and 9.2 × 1015 cm−3, respectively (Fig. S17, ESI). Under illumination, we observed that the peak intensity of the tDOS decreased from 1.2 × 1017 in the pristine cell to 2.8 × 1016 cm−3 in the device with Au@NiOx (Fig. 5b). Due to the similar perovskite crystallinity, the large difference in the density of deep traps should mainly arise from the change in the HTL/perovskite interface.
A comparison of the carrier recombination for PSCs with and without Au@NiOx was further evaluated by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Fig. 5c and d present the Nyquist plots of EIS data under both dark and illumination conditions at a 1.0 V applied bias, respectively. As shown in the inset image, the equivalent electrical circuit model consists of a single parallel connection of recombination resistance (Rrec) and a chemical capacitance (Cj) connected to a contact resistance Rs, in which the value of Rrec equals to the diameter of the semicircle. Under illumination, we observed a clear increase in the Rrec of the modified devices compared to the pristine devices, whereas in the dark we only observed a relatively smaller increase of Rrec. The apparent discrepancy of Rrec for the device before and after illumination confirms that the plasmon resonance effects on carrier dynamics at the HTL/perovskite interface are responsible for the decreased resistance and charge recombination.
To further quantify the charge recombination at the perovskite/HTL interface, we performed transient photovoltage (TPV) decay measurements. The small voltage perturbations were induced by using an ns-pulsed green (532 nm) laser to amplify the plasmonic resonance. As shown in Fig. 5e, the interfacial charge recombination lifetime (τn) in a device with the pristine mp-NiOx film was 3.6 μs (one sun), which was much shorter than that observed in the Au@NiOx-modified device (9.2 μs). We also investigated the influence of light intensity on photogenerated carrier dynamics and summarized the TPV-determined lifetime (τn) as a function of white light intensity. For all light intensities, the device modified with plasmonic nanostructures had longer recombination lifetimes compared to the reference device (Fig. 5f). However, the enhancement factor decreased with decreasing light intensity (Fig. S18, ESI). This can be explained by the fact that carrier recombination is spatially dominated by bimolecular recombination at the interface with increasing light intensity. A longer recombination lifetime reflects a decreased charge recombination probability and longer hole diffusion length. Thus, the lower energy loss and charge recombination, together with the facilitated charge extraction, give insight into the obvious improvement of the Voc and FF. As described in the inset of Fig. 5e, the passivation of deep traps should be ascribed to that plasmonic-derived charge injection from the Au core to NiOx favors trap filling in NiOx. At high carrier density, enough holes are driven into trap-filling in the mp-NiOx layer, resulting in suppression of the unwanted carrier recombination losses. However, under our experimental conditions, we are not able to achieve a deeper understanding of microscopic interfacial processes, which underpin plasmonic coupling and potential hot-hole dynamics. Therefore, future studies need complementary measurements of hot-carrier kinetics for an improved understanding of the PACT process.

Finally, we performed long-term environmental stability tests to determine whether the plasmonic NPs may have an additional influence on the stability. Damp heat stability (85 °C, 50–70% RH) of the unencapsulated PSCs is tested by collecting J–V curves at various times under ambient conditions. As shown in Fig. S19 (ESI), the performances of pristine devices decay obviously to 77% of their initial values over 500 h, while the devices with the addition of Au@NiOx NPs are significantly more stable and retain 89% of their initial performance. Furthermore, we further achieved an improved stability in encapsulated Au@NiOx devices that retained over 97% of peak performance after long-term thermal aging, due to a reduction of the moisture-induced degradation pathway. In addition, the modified devices without encapsulation maintained >90% of their initial performance under continuous operation for 500 h. The thermally resistant MA-free perovskite and the environmentally stable mesoscopic scaffold with favoured trap filling therefore made great contributions to the excellent operational and thermal stability.


In summary, we have proposed and demonstrated the enhanced electronic properties in the p-type contact of inverted MA-free PSCs by introducing core–shell metal/semiconductor (Au@NiOx) NPs into a mesoporous NiOx layer. In comparison with the metal/insulator (Au@SiO2) modifier, the incorporation of Au@NiOx NPs into mp-NiOx not only increases the photocurrent significantly, but also improves the open-circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF) of the perovskite devices. In-depth analyses of the electronic properties of the mesoporous NiOx layer reveal that the Au@NiOx heterostructure with ohmic contact nature allows hole transfer from Au NPs into the valence band of NiOx, and more importantly, the plasmon resonance effects further promote the charge transfer process. The incorporation of Au@NiOx NPs therefore significantly increases the hole concentration in the mp-NiOx layer, which results in downshifted valence band edges and increased charge conductivity. In addition, the carrier injection process can fill the trap states in mp-NiOx and suppress charge recombination at the interface. As a result, the addition of Au@NiOx enables the fabrication of reproducible, hysteresis-free and high-performance PSCs with a PCE of 20.6%. Further understanding of the ultrafast carrier dynamics in metal–semiconductor heterostructures will open up new possibilities for designing efficient plasmonic perovskite devices.


K. Y. conceived the idea, designed the experiment, supervised the project, and co-wrote the manuscript. H. H. and J. J. I. participated in the interpretation of the results and revised the manuscript. Z. L., Y. C. and S. L. prepared the NPs and analysed film properties. Q. L. and Z. L. performed the device fabrication and testing. L. F. performed morphology measurements. M. C. and C. Q. performed the ultrafast spectroscopy characterization. All the authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors gratefully acknowledge funding support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants 51863013 and 61874052). K. Y. thanks the financial support from Excellent Young Talent Foundation of Jiangxi Province (Grant 20192BCB23009).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta10242c
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021