 DOI: 10.1039/D0SE00479K
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 4249-4256


Jieqiong
Liu
,

Miao
Lei
,

Wei
Zhang
 and 

Guiqiang
Wang
*

School of New Energy, Bohai University, 121007 Jinzhou, China. E-mail: wgqiang@bhu.edu.cn

Received
27th March 2020
, Accepted 5th June 2020
First published on 8th June 2020
Carbon electrode-based all-inorganic perovskite solar cells (PSCs) without hole-transport materials are attracting extensive interest due to their low cost, simple fabrication process, and high stability. Nevertheless, the conversion efficiency of carbon electrode-based PSCs is far from satisfactory owing to serious charge recombination at the inorganic perovskite/carbon interface, which mainly derives from the mismatched energy level between the inorganic perovskite film and carbon layer. Herein, a hydrophobic CuSCN film is introduced into carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 all-inorganic PSCs as a multifunctional interlayer between the CsPbIBr2 perovskite film and carbon electrode to form a favorable interfacial energy level alignment and protect the CsPbIBr2 perovskite from ambient moisture. It is found that introducing a CuSCN interlayer can not only enhance the hole extraction and suppress the charge recombination in carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 all-inorganic PSCs, but also improve the stability of the cell. Moreover, the very strong interaction between SCN−1 and Pb2+ remarkably reduces the surface defects of the CsPbIBr2 perovskite film. Consequently, the device with the CuSCN interlayer displays an improved power conversion efficiency of 7.30% in comparison with 5.19% for the device without the CuSCN interlayer and an excellent long-term stability under the ambient conditions.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted ever-increasing research interest and are considered one of the most promising candidates for low-cost, new-generation photovoltaic technology due to their advantages of booming efficiency and a simple solution-processing technique. However, the intrinsic instability of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite materials under ambient stresses severely impedes the large-scale commercial application of hybrid PSCs. In addition, state-of-the-art hybrid PSCs usually utilize expensive organic hole-transport materials and noble metal back electrodes to achieve fast hole extraction and transport. This inevitably imposes a serious financial worry on the practical application of hybrid PSCs. Therefore, it is highly desirable to develop highly stable PSCs using low-cost materials and facile fabrication processes. This urgent requirement promotes the development of carbon electrode-based all-inorganic PSCs owing to their high cost-effectiveness, simple fabrication process, and excellent stability.

Among all-inorganic perovskite materials that are suitable for solar cell application, the cubic phase CsPbI3 perovskite with a bandgap of 1.73 eV is considered the best choice for PSCs from the point of view of light harvesting. Unfortunately, the cubic phase CsPbI3 perovskite is unstable and easily transforms into a non-perovskite phase with poor photovoltaic properties under ambient conditions. By contrast, the CsPbBr3 perovskite displays a superior phase stability, but it has a wide bandgap of 2.3 eV, which certainly reduces the light absorption edge and limits the photocurrent density of the corresponding device. CsPbIBr2, a mixed halide perovskite, shows a narrower bandgap than CsPbBr3 and a higher stability than CsPbI3. Thus, CsPbIBr2 becomes a good choice for all-inorganic PSCs in view of its well-balanced bandgap and phase stability features. In recent years, carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 all-inorganic PSCs with the architecture of FTO/TiO2/CsPbIBr2/carbon have been attracting wide-spread attention. In 2018, Zhu et al. reported an aged perovskite-precursor-solution strategy to fabricate carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 all-inorganic PSCs and achieved a conversion efficiency of 6.55%. Zhang et al. demonstrated a light-processing method to prepare high-quality CsPbIBr2 perovskite films. The assembled carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 all-inorganic PSCs displayed a power conversion efficiency of 8.60% with a high open-circuit voltage of 1.283 V. Recently, Zhu et al. improved the power conversion efficiency of a carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 all-inorganic PSC over 9% through an intermolecular exchange strategy.
In the carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 all-inorganic PSCs, the carbon electrode functions as both the hole-transport material (HTM) and the back electrode, and thus the holes are directly extracted by the carbon layer from the perovskite film. Unfortunately, the energy level mismatch at the CsPbIBr2 perovskite (EVB = −5.72 eV)/carbon (WF = −5.0 eV) interface greatly limits the charge separation and hole extraction. In addition, the direct contact of the CsPbIBr2 perovskite film with the carbon layer usually leads to the energetically favorable electron transfer from the perovskite film to the carbon layer. All this results in serious charge recombination and largely limits the photovoltaic performance of carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 all-inorganic PSCs. To insert an inorganic interlayer with a suitable energy level matching both the valence band of the perovskite and the work function of carbon at the perovskite/carbon interface is a workable strategy to address the above problems without compromising device stability.
CuSCN is an inorganic p-type semiconductor material with appealing properties of high hole mobility and excellent stability and has been investigated as the HTM for organic–inorganic hybrid PSCs. CuSCN possesses a wide bandgap with a valence band of −5.3 eV, which remarkably matches the energy level of the CsPbIBr2 perovskite and carbon. Moreover, the CuSCN thin film can be obtained via a solution-processing route at low temperature. These favorable features make CuSCN ideal for interfacial interlayer application in carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 all-inorganic PSCs. Herein, the CuSCN interlayer prepared by a solution-processing method was inserted at the CsPbIBr2 perovskite/carbon interface for fabricating high-efficiency carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 all-inorganic PSCs. The presence of the CuSCN interlayer forms a favorable energy level alignment for enhancing hole extraction and blocking electron transfer at the CsPbIBr2 perovskite/carbon interface, which remarkably suppresses the charge recombination in carbon-based CsPbIBr2 PSCs. Moreover, introducing the CuSCN interlayer could also protect the CsPbIBr2 perovskite from ambient moisture and enhance the stability of carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 all-inorganic PSCs due to the hydrophobicity of CuSCN. Consequently, the carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 all-inorganic PSC with the CuSCN interlayer displays an improved power conversion efficiency of 7.30% in comparison with 5.19% for the device without the CuSCN interlayer and an excellent long-term stability under the ambient conditions.

It is known that CuSCN is only soluble in polar solvents. These polar solvents in which CuSCN displays high solubility tend to damage the perovskite film. In order to deposit a CuSCN thin film on the CsPbIBr2 perovskite layer without degrading the quality of the perovskite film, a spin-coating method with a high spin rate (5000 rpm), which can greatly reduce the contact time between the polar solvent and perovskite film, was employed in our case. Fig. 1a and b exhibit the top-view SEM images of the CsPbIBr2 perovskite layer deposited on the TiO2 layer and the CuSCN film deposited on the CsPbIBr2 perovskite layer. The CsPbIBr2 perovskite film consists of crystal grains with the size ranging from 300–800 nm and possesses features of free voids and good coverage on the TiO2 layer. Fig. 1b reveals the smooth and compact CuSCN film with homogeneous coverage on CsPbIBr2 perovskite layer. In addition, the CsPbIBr2 grains can be seen from the CuSCN layer, indicating that the thickness of the as-deposited CuSCN film is very small. The energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) elemental mapping of the CuSCN film reveals that Cu and S elements are distributed homogeneously across the surface of the perovskite layer, confirming the good coverage of the CuSCN film on the CsPbIBr2 perovskite layer, which is favorable for improving the hole extraction and suppressing the charge recombination. The cross-sectional SEM image shown in Fig. S1 demonstrates that the as-deposited CuSCN film is too thin to be exactly identified at this scale.


Fig. 2a displays the XRD patterns of the CsPbIBr2 perovskite film without and with the CuSCN overlayer. The pristine CsPbIBr2 perovskite film shows four distinct diffraction peaks at 15.02°, 21.27°, 30.15° and 37.87°, corresponding to the (100), (110), (200) and (211) planes of the α-phase CsPbIBr2 perovskite, respectively. After deposition of the CuSCN layer, the XRD pattern of CsPbIBr2/CuSCN is identical to that of the pristine CsPbIBr2 perovskite film in terms of the number, position and intensity of the diffraction peaks. This suggests that the deposition of the CuSCN layer does not damage the quality of CsPbIBr2 perovskite. However, no obvious diffraction peak corresponding to CuSCN is observed in Fig. 2a, which may be attributed to that the CuSCN layer is too thin to be detected by XRD. Fig. 2b shows the UV-vis absorption spectra of the CsPbIBr2 perovskite film without and with the CuSCN overlayer. The pristine CsPbIBr2 perovskite film and the CsPbIBr2/CuSCN film exhibit the same absorption intensity and cut-off wavelength of about 600 nm, indicating that the deposition of the CuSCN layer does not degrade the light harvesting of CsPbIBr2 perovskite film.
The valence band maximum (VBM) and conduction band minimum (CBM) of CuSCN are −5.3 and −1.5 eV, respectively. As schematically illustrated in Fig. S2, introducing the CuSCN interlayer into the interface between the CsPbIBr2 perovskite film and carbon layer forms a favorable cascade energy level alignment, which greatly enhances the hole extraction from the CsPbIBr2 perovskite film. In addition, the CuSCN interlayer prevents the direct contact between the CsPbIBr2 perovskite and carbon layer and creates an energy barrier to effectively impede the photogenerated electron flowing from the conduction band of the CsPbIBr2 perovskite to carbon. This can remarkably reduce the charge recombination and improve the photovoltaic performance of the device.
The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) measurements are carried out to investigate the hole extraction behavior with and without the CuSCN interlayer. Fig. 3 shows the PL spectra of CsPbIBr2, CsPbIBr2/carbon, CsPbIBr2/CuSCN, and CsPbIBr2/CuSCN/carbon films coated on bare glass. The CsPbIBr2 film displays a high-intensity PL emission at about 605 nm. When the carbon layer is coated on the CsPbIBr2 film, the PL emission is quenched greatly due to the decrease of charge recombination in the CsPbIBr2 perovskite film derived from hole extraction by the carbon layer. This PL quenching is remarkably enhanced by introduction of the CuSCN interlayer. Fig. 3 demonstrates that the CsPbIBr2/CuSCN/carbon film shows the weakest PL emission. This result indicates that introducing the CuSCN interlayer can result in more efficient hole extraction from the CsPbIBr2 perovskite film.
Carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 all-inorganic PSCs with a structure of FTO/TiO2/CsPbIBr2/CuSCN/carbon are fabricated by sequentially depositing the TiO2 layer, CsPbIBr2 film, CuSCN interlayer, and carbon layer on FTO glass as illustrated in Fig. 4a. Fig. 4b shows the cross-sectional SEM image of the carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 PSC with the CuSCN interlayer, from which a well-defined layer-by-layer structure is observed. The thickness of the TiO2 layer and CsPbIBr2 film is 100 and 450 nm, respectively. The CuSCN interlayer is sandwiched between the CsPbIBr2 film and carbon layer, and is therefore hardly identified owing to its very small thickness. For comparison, the cells without the CuSCN interlayer are also fabricated. The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves of carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 all-inorganic PSCs with and without the CuSCN interlayer recorded under one sun illumination in the reverse scan direction are displayed in Fig. 4c. The photovoltaic parameters determined from the J–V curves are listed in Table 1. The carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 all-inorganic PSC without the CuSCN interlayer shows a poor photovoltaic performance, the open-circuit voltage (Voc) being 1.06 V, the short-circuit current density (Jsc) being 10.01 mA cm−2, the fill factor (FF) being 0.49, and the power conversion efficiency (PCE) being 5.19%. This low photovoltaic performance can be ascribed to the sluggish hole extraction derived from the mismatched energy level at the interface between the CsPbIBr2 perovskite and carbon electrode, which leads to increased charge recombination and limits the photovoltaic performance. When the CuSCN interlayer is introduced, the assembled device shows an obviously improved photovoltaic performance with a higher PCE of 7.30% (a Voc of 1.13 V, a Jsc of 10.43 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.62). This improved performance can be attributed to the enhanced hole extraction and the suppressed charge recombination stemming from the formation of the well matched energy level alignment at the CsPbIBr2 perovskite/carbon electrode interface when introducing the CuSCN interlayer. Moreover, SCN− is a pseudohalide ion and has a strong interaction with Pb2+. Therefore, introducing SCN− can passivate the defects at the surface of the CsPbIBr2 perovskite derived from undercoordinated Pb2+. This can also enhance the hole extraction and suppress the charge recombination in the device. The statistical histograms of the PCE of the cells with and without the CuSCN interlayer are shown in Fig. S3, and an average PCE of 6.68% and 4.26% is obtained, respectively. This indicates a good reproducibility of the CuSCN interlayer-based device.
Devices

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF

η (%)
PSC with CuSCN
1.13
10.43
0.62
7.30
PSC without CuSCN
1.06
10.01
0.49
5.19
EIS tests are performed to investigate the charge recombination behavior of the devices. Fig. 4d displays the Nyquist plots of the carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 PSCs with and without the CuSCN interlayer recorded at a bias of 0.9 V under dark conditions. The equivalent circuit shown in the inset of Fig. 4d is used to fit Nyquist plots. Generally, the main semicircle of the Nyquist plot corresponds to the charge recombination process combining the recombination resistance (Rrec) and the chemical capacitance (Crec). According to the equivalent circuit, the value of Rrec can be determined from the diameter of the main semicircle of the Nyquist plot. Clearly, the Rrec of the carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 all-inorganic PSC with the CuSCN interlayer is much larger than that of the cell without the CuSCN interlayer, demonstrating that introducing the CuSCN interlayer can efficiently suppress the charge recombination and enhance the charge extraction. This contributes to the improvement of the photovoltaic parameters, especially the FF. Fig. 4e shows the EQE spectra of the carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 all-inorganic PSCs with and without the CuSCN interlayer. Obviously, the measured Jsc values in the J–V curves are in good agreement with the integrated photocurrent density from the EQE spectra.
The influence of the CuSCN interlayer thickness on the photovoltaic performance of the carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 all-inorganic PSCs is also discussed. The thickness of the CuSCN interlayer was tuned by controlling the concentration of the CuSCN solution in the deposition process. Fig. S4 displays the top-view SEM images of the CuSCN layer deposited on the CsPbIBr2 perovskite film formed at concentrations of 10, 20, and 30 mg mL−1. Clearly, the CuSCN layer formed at a concentration of 10 mg mL−1 is discontinuous and the CsPbIBr2 perovskite film is only partially covered (Fig. S4b). With the increase of the concentration of the CuSCN solution, the surface coverage of the CuSCN layer is greatly improved. When the concentration of the CuSCN solution increases to 20 mg mL−1, the uniform CuSCN layer with a full coverage and smooth surface is obtained. However, a further increase in the concentration to 30 mg mL−1 leads to a rather rough and thick CuSCN layer. The J–V curves of the carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 PSCs with CuSCN interlayers formed at different concentrations are exhibited in Fig. 5. The corresponding photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table S1. The PCE of the PSC with the CuSCN interlayer formed at a CuSCN concentration of 10 mg mL−1 is comparable to that of the pristine cell. This result can be ascribed to the low coverage of the CuSCN interlayer, which does not work effectively. The device with the CuSCN interlayer formed at a concentration of 20 mg mL−1 displays the highest PCE of 7.30%, which is much higher than that of the pristine cell. Further increase in the CuSCN concentration results in the decrease of the PCE. The PCE of the device with the CuSCN interlayer formed at a concentration of 30 mg mL−1 decreases to 6.41%. This can be attributed to that the rough CuSCN interlayer will result in serious interfacial recombination. From the above discussion, it is concluded that the optimal concentration of the CuSCN solution is 20 mg mL−1. Moreover, the box chart shown in Fig. S5 indicates that the PCE of the device with the CuSCN interlayer formed at a concentration of 20 mg mL−1 shows a relatively narrow distribution, suggesting a high reproducibility. Therefore, a thin CuSCN interlayer with a smooth surface and good coverage can effectively improve the photovoltaic performance of carbon electrode-based all-inorganic PSCs.
Although rarely discussed in detail, carbon electrode-based inorganic PSCs usually exhibit an obvious hysteresis effect in the J–V plot due to the unbalanced charge extraction at the electron-transport layer/perovskite interface and the perovskite/carbon interface, which derives from the sluggish hole extraction at the perovskite/carbon interface. Therefore, it is expected that introduction of the CuSCN interlayer can effectively reduce the hysteresis effect in the carbon electrode-based inorganic PSCs. Fig. 6a displays the J–V plots of the carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 all-inorganic PSCs with and without the CuSCN interlayer in forward and reverse scan directions. The hysteresis behavior of the PSCs can be described by the hysteresis index (HI), which can be calculated using eqn (1).
(1)
According to Fig. 6a and the photovoltaic parameters listed in Table S2, the values of the HI for the devices with and without the CuSCN interlayer are determined to be 0.116 and 0.427, respectively. Clearly, introducing the CuSCN interlayer effectively reduces the hysteresis effect of carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 all-inorganic PSCs. This result can be ascribed to the enhanced hole extraction from the CsPbIBr2 perovskite film in the device with the CuSCN interlayer, which leads to the relatively balanced charge extraction in the cell. The stabilized power output of the cell with the CuSCN interlayer is also examined at the maximum power output point (bias voltage of 0.85 V) under one sun illumination. Fig. 6b shows the current density and PCE as functions of time for the carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 all-inorganic PSC with the CuSCN interlayer. The cell with the CuSCN interlayer exhibits a stabilized photocurrent density of 7.95 mA cm−2 for over 350 s, yielding a steady PCE of 6.76%, indicating that this cell is very stable and the J–V result is reliable.
The long-term stability of the carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 all-inorganic PSC with the CuSCN interlayer is evaluated by monitoring the variation of J–V characteristics with the storage time. The cells are stored under ambient conditions with a relative humidity of about 35% without any encapsulation. The J–V characteristics are measured once per day. Fig. 6c displays the variation of normalized PCEs with the storage time for the carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 all-inorganic PSCs with and without the CuSCN interlayer. After storage for 1100 h under ambient conditions, the PCE of the cell without the CuSCN interlayer decreases by 25%. In contrast, the cell with the CuSCN interlayer maintains 94% of initial conversion efficiency under the same experimental conditions, indicating an excellent long-term stability. This enhanced stability derived from introducing the CuSCN interlayer can be attributed to the protective effect and the surface defect passivation of the full-coverage and hydrophobic CuSCN layer.

In summary, the hydrophobic CuSCN interlayer has been utilized as the multifunctional interlayer between the CsPbIBr2 perovskite film and carbon electrode for boosting the efficiency and stability of carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 all-inorganic PSCs. The introduction of the CuSCN interlayer between the CsPbIBr2 perovskite film and carbon electrode promotes the hole extraction from the perovskite, suppresses charge recombination, and protects the CsPbIBr2 perovskite film from ambient moisture simultaneously. Consequently, the carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 all-inorganic PSC with the CuSCN interlayer achieves a gratifying PCE of 7.30% and a superior long-term stability under ambient conditions. This work provides a facile and promising strategy to improve the efficiency and stability of carbon electrode-based all-inorganic PSCs.


CsI (ultra-dry, 99.8%), PbBr2 (ultra-dry, 99.9%), and DMSO (99.9+%, ACS reagent) were purchased from Alfa Aesar. CuSCN (99%) and diethyl sulfide (98%) were purchased from J&K. FTO glass was supplied by Xian P-OLED company. Titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) was purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Carbon paste was purchased from Shanghai New Materials Co. Ltd. All of them were used as received without further purification.


FTO substrates were cleaned by sequential sonication treatments in deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol according to the procedures described in our previous studies. A compact TiO2 layer was deposited on the pre-cleaned FTO substrate by spin coating 0.15 M ethanol solution of titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) at 4500 rpm for 45 s and sintered at 450 °C for 30 min. Then, a mesoporous TiO2 layer was deposited onto the compact TiO2 layer by spin coating commercial TiO2 paste (Dyesol18NR-T) diluted in ethanol with a weight ratio of 15:1 at 4000 rpm for 30 s and subsequently heat-treated at 450 °C for 30 min.

The CsPbIBr2 precursor solution was prepared by fully dissolving 260 mg CsI and 370 mg PbBr2 in 1 mL DMSO at 70 °C under magnetic stirring. Then, the CsPbIBr2 precursor solution was spin-coated on the FTO/TiO2 substrate at 1000 rpm for 5 s and then 3500 rpm for 30 s. The obtained samples were annealed at 250 °C for 10 min. The diethyl sulfide solution of CuSCN with a concentration of 20 mg mL−1 was spin-coated on the CsPbIBr2 perovskite film at 5000 rpm for 30 s. After annealing at 50 °C for 10 min, the carbon electrode was coated by the doctor-blade method. For comparison, carbon electrode-based CsPbIBr2 all-inorganic PSCs without the CuSCN interlayer were also fabricated.

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi S-4800) was used to characterize the morphological characteristics of the samples. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded by using a Rigaku SmartLab X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. The absorption spectra were measured by using a UV-Vis spectrophotometer (UV-3000). The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) measurements were performed on an F900 fluorescence spectrophotometer with an excitation wavelength of 400 nm. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were carried out on a Solartron 1287/1255 system in the frequency range from 106 to 1 Hz under an open circuit. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the cells were measured using a Keithley 2400 source meter under standard AM 1.5 illumination. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum was measured by employing a 150 W xenon lamp (Oriel) equipped with a monochromator as the monochromatic light source. All the fabrication and measurement processes were carried out under the ambient conditions.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


This work was supported by Education Department of Liaoning Province (LZ2019003).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0se00479k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020