 DOI: 10.1039/C4CP03303E
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 21513-21523


Jesús
Idigoras
,

Ramón
Tena-Zaera
 and 

Juan A.
Anta
*

Área de Química Física, Departamento de Sistemas Físicos, Químicos y Naturales, Universidad Pablo de Olavide, E-41013, Sevilla, Spain. E-mail: anta@upo.es

Energy Division, Ik4-Cidetec, Parque Tecnológico de San Sebastián, Paseo Miramón 196, Donostia-San Sebastián 20009, Spain

Received
24th July 2014
, Accepted 18th August 2014
First published on 18th August 2014
Recombination in Dye-sensitized Solar Cells (DSCs) is an electron transfer process critical for high efficiency. The chemical nature of the electron acceptor is known to have an important impact on recombination and, hence, limits the choice of hole conductors in DSCs and related solar cells. In this respect, Room Temperature Ionic liquids (RTILs) have been recognized as an alternative to volatile organic solvents due to their negligible vapor pressure, which offers the chance for long-term stability. However, RTIL-based electrolytes lead to lower performance, a feature that has been attributed to the high viscosity of ionic liquids and the mass-transport limitation associated with it. In this work we show that the origin of the lower performance is also related to an increase in the recombination loss due to the polar nature of the RTIL and the influence of the reorganization energy of the electron acceptor in a polar environment. To investigate this chemical effect, different mixing ratios of RTILs and an organic solvent (acetonitrile) have been considered. The fabricated devices have been characterized by small-perturbation techniques (Impedance Electrochemical Spectroscopy and Intensity-Modulated Photovoltage and Photocurrent Spectroscopies) and Open-Circuit Voltage Decay measurements, which have been used to extract electron lifetimes at different applied voltages. Two different ruthenium dyes (hydrophilic N719 and hydrophobic Z907) and two different cations in the RTIL (imidazolium- and pyrrolidinium-based) have been considered. The results obtained show that for pure ionic liquids the lifetime–voltage curve is exponential, which is a signature of large reorganization energies for electron transfer. In contrast, pure acetonitrile exhibits a non-exponential behavior, which is consistent with relatively low reorganization energy. Interestingly, and as a general rule, we find that recombination is faster in systems with higher reorganization energies. This is interpreted as a consequence of the availability of more acceptor states for electron transfer. In addition, it is found that mixing RTILs and acetonitrile is an interesting strategy to increase the stability of DSCs without significant recombination losses, provided that the right dye and RTIL, in particular, a pyrrolidinium component, are used.

Dye-Sensitized Solar cells (DSCs) have been recognized as an interesting alternative to the conventional silicon photovoltaic cells. Their low manufacturing cost and high-energy conversion efficiency made them one of the most promising energy sources. Furthermore, they represent the concept from which the very recent and promising technology of perovskite solar cells has emerged. In a DSC sunlight is converted to electricity through light absorption by a dye molecule anchored to semiconductor metal oxide nanostructured films. After photoexcitation of the dye, electron injection from the dye to the semiconductor takes place. By electron diffusion, the injected electron travels through nanoparticles and is collected in an external circuit. At the same time, the dye has to be regenerated by the reduced form of the redox pair in the electrolyte, which generates a hole that migrates to and is reduced at the counter-electrode. This pathway completes the electron cycle. However, several reactions such as internal conversion in the excited dye and electron recombination from the semiconductor to the oxidized dye or to the redox couple in the electrolyte bring about an efficiency loss. It is important to mention that all these processes are determined by the semiconductor/dye/electrolyte interface, which plays a critical role in the functioning of DSCs and related devices.

An energy conversion efficiency of 13% has been reported, thanks to a novel dye–electrolyte combination that minimizes recombination. However, the use of volatile solvents endangers long-life devices as a consequence of losses by leakage and evaporation. Due to concerns about the long-term stability of DSCs, there has been great interest in finding a substitute for volatile electrolytes based on organic solvents. During the last decade, Room Temperature Ionic Liquids (RTILs) have been investigated as alternative solvents in DSCs due to their appealing properties for DSC applications, that is, a wide electrochemical window, thermal stability, extremely low volatility or negligible vapor pressure, high ionic conductivity and ability to dissolve organic and inorganic compounds. However, the viscosity of a typical RTIL is about 100 times higher than the viscosity of acetonitrile, a fact that has been used to explain the lower performance of RTIL-based DSCs. However, high recombination rates have systematically been reported for these electrolytes. In spite of that, conversion efficiencies of around 9% have been reported for ionic liquid-based DSCs. Indeed, the recent 300 m2 solar façade of the Swiss Tech Convention Center (Lausanne, Switzerland), which can be considered as the first real architectural integration of this technology, is based on a RTIL-based DSC, demonstrating its potential in Building Integrated Photovoltaics (BIPV) applications. The origin of the high recombination rate and a systematic study of the fundamental impact of the chemical nature of the electrolyte on the electron transfer reaction in DSCs are still lacking. In this respect, a recent report by us pointed out the importance of the ligand (inner) and solvent (outer) interactions and the polarity of the solvent in the recombination rate.
The electron recombination rate (Un) is determined by the energetics of electrons in the semiconductor, mediated by the distribution of localized states, and the energetics of electron acceptors, which depends on the chemical composition of the electrolyte. To describe these losses, the following equation for the recombination rate can be solved
Un = d∫g(E)f(E − EF)PR(E)dE
(1)
where
d is the film thickness, g(E) is the density of localized (donor) states (usually an exponential function), f(E − EF) is the occupation probability in the semiconductor at a certain position of the electron quasi-Fermi level EF (Fermi–Dirac distribution), and PR(E) is the probability of recombination at a given value of the energy (density of acceptor states). For one-electron outer sphere redox couples, PR(E) can formally be described by the Marcus–Gerischer model. This factor depends on the concentration of oxidized species in the electrolyte, the redox potential of the electrolyte (Eredox) and the reorganization energy λ. The reorganization energy is a strong function of the chemical environment, as it depends on the interactions between charged species and the surroundings, composed of solvent and dye molecules. For instance, it is known that for polar solvents the reorganization energy is larger, due to the strong polar interaction between ions and solvent molecules. As a matter of fact, it is found that when λ ≫ EF− Eredox, eqn (1) leads to an exponential dependence of the lifetime with respect to voltage. In contrast, a relatively low value of the reorganization energy leads to a departure from the exponential law, and the appearance of a minimum due to the depletion of acceptor states as the Fermi level is raised.

On the other hand, in the search for new RTILs, it has to be taken into account that their physical and chemical properties depend on the interactions between the cations (imidazolium, pyridinium, alkylammonium or pyrrolidinium) and the anions (dicyanamide, thiocyanate or tetracyanoborate, among others). Imidazolium has been the most used component of solvent-free electrolytes in DSCs. However, several investigations revealed the significant influence of the RTIL composition upon processes relevant to the overall dynamics of DSCs, such as electron injection yield, electron lifetimes and the rate of regeneration of the oxidized dye. Additionally, the nature of the RTIL can also affect the electron diffusion coefficient in the photoanodes due to the electrical coupling with counterion charges in the electrolyte.
The aim of this work is two-fold. On the one hand (1), we intend to cast some light on the mechanism of electron recombination in DSCs taking into account the polar nature of the RTIL, which can be tuned by mixing with an organic solvent such as acetonitrile. In this respect, we intend to gain a deeper insight into the findings of a previous work by us, where the exponential and non-exponential lifetimes were found to be depending on the composition of the electrolyte. On the other hand (2), we have investigated the capability of hybrid electrolytes composed of mixtures of RTILs with a low-viscosity and low-polarity solvent such as acetonitrile to achieve good performing cells with non-volatile solvents and small mass-transport limitations. It has already been shown by Yu and coworkers that “incompletely solvated ionic liquid mixtures” are very stable under light soaking conditions. In this work we show that the RTIL–organic solvent combination, for small quantities of organic solvent, is not only beneficial in terms of stability, but also in terms of reduced recombination.
Along these lines, two different dyes (hydrophilic N719 and hydrophobic Z907) and two RTILs with two different cations (imidazolium and pyrrolidinium) have been used as components in the polar/apolar mixed DSC electrolytes (Fig. 1). The influence of the RTIL/acetonitrile mixing ratio on photovoltaic performance and the recombination kinetics has been investigated by voltammetry, Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS), Intensity-Modulated Photovoltage/Photocurrent Spectroscopy (IMVS/IMPS) and Open-Circuit Voltage Decay measurements (OCVD).


Fig. 2 shows current–voltage characteristics of cells employing the N719 dye as a sensitizer for the studied electrolytes. To test the reproducibility of the results, four cells were fabricated for each composition, and no significant deviations were found between them. The photovoltaic parameters (short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor and power conversion efficiency (η)) for each configuration are given in Table 1.

Electrolyte

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)
Fill factor
Efficiency (η)
Acn
12.1
745
74
6.6
Imid25
11.5
728
74
6.0
Imid50
10.6
712
73
5.6
Imid75
9.7
690
69
4.7
Imid
6.8
650
60
2.8
Pyr25
11.8
735
73
6.2
Pyr50
11.0
727
72
5.8
Pyr75
10.2
702
68
4.9
Pyr
5.3
655
57
2.0
The maximum efficiency (6.6%) was found for the pure acetonitrile-based electrolyte. This good efficiency is achieved by an appropriate combination of additives, which maximize the open-circuit photovoltage (745 mV), fill factor (74%) and photocurrent (12.1 mA cm−2). The electrolyte composition used is very similar to the best-performing electrolyte employed in ref. 12. To compensate for the high viscosity of the ionic liquids a higher concentration of iodine (0.1 M) was used. The increase of the concentration of I3− can lead to a lower performance of the cell. It must be borne in mind that iodine absorbs light, which produces a diminution of the photocurrent. In addition, an increase in the iodine concentration can accelerate the recombination since more tri-iodide ions are available for accepting electrons. Nevertheless, efficiencies of 2.8% and 2.0% were obtained for pure Imid and Pyr, respectively. Importantly, efficiencies around 5% are obtained for the mixtures where the RTIL is the major component. This efficiency is comparable to that reported by Yu et al. for a similar composition. The relatively high viscosities of Imid and Pyr (35.55 cP and 85.33 cP at 298 K, respectively), which are about several orders of magnitude higher than the viscosity of acetonitrile (0.34 cP at 298 K), appear to limit their efficiency due to severe mass-transport limitations related to their ionic diffusion coefficients. This has been confirmed by measuring cyclic voltammograms in blank cells (Fig. 3). Consequently, the efficiency of regeneration of the oxidized dye by the reduced form of the redox couple is limited. These limitations, which are primarily reflected in the Jsc and in the fill factor, are reduced as more acetonitrile is added to the RTIL. Therefore, the photovoltaic parameters are improved. However, it is noteworthy that adding just a 25% volume of acetonitrile doubles the short-circuit photocurrent and the efficiency. This effect is more pronounced for Pyr-based electrolytes than for Imid-based electrolytes (see ESI, Fig. S1). Hence, the addition of acetonitrile (25% in volume) into Imid and Pyr produces an increase in the Jsc of 42% and 92% respectively. In order to be sure that the observed effect does not depend on the used dye, another ruthenium sensitizer, Z907, was employed, which yielded similar results to those obtained with the N719 dye (see ESI, Fig. S2).
It is very important to point out that the benefit of using Pyr versus Imid has nothing to do with a lower transport limitation, as the limiting currents of Pyr/Acn and Imid/Acn electrolytes with the same mixing ratio are very similar (Fig. 3), in spite of Pyr being even slightly more viscous. Furthermore, the overall improvement in performance as more acetonitrile is added is not only observed in short-circuit photocurrents and fill factors, but also at the open-circuit voltage, when no current is running through the device. This observation indicates that the origin of the lower performance of RTIL electrolytes is not due to transport limitations only. This issue is further investigated in the following sections.

EIS Nyquist plots at the OC photovoltage are presented in Fig. 4 for all Pyr-based N719 DSCs. The spectra show the characteristic three semicircles typically observed in DSCs. The high-frequency one is related to charge transfer at the platinum counter-electrode, the one at mid frequencies arises from electronic processes at the oxide/electrolyte interface and the semicircle appearing at low frequencies reflects the diffusion of redox species in the electrolyte. This semicircle appears only in the most viscous electrolytes (high RTIL/Acn mixing ratio) due to the mass-transport limitation in the electrolyte.

The EIS results can be well fitted to the diffusion–recombination model of Bisquert and coworkers (see ESI, Fig. S3). However, it has to be noted that it was not possible to fit to the simple diffusion–recombination equivalent circuit for cells with pure RTILs, possibly due to the short electron diffusion length, as discussed below. Furthermore, this equivalent circuit was not found suitable at low potentials either (<0.55 V). As it is in this regime where direct electron transfer between the FTO substrate and the electrolyte becomes significant, we attribute this problem to the lack of additional circuit elements, as indicated in ref. 30. However, as said, the diffusion–recombination model works well at moderate and high potentials, which is the region of interest for cell operation. The region of low potentials is better explored by the OCVD technique, although with limitations, as explained below.
The fittings allow extracting the electron lifetime via
τn = RrecCμ
(2)
where
Rrec and Cμ refer to the recombination resistance and the chemical capacitance in the oxide/electrolyte interface, respectively. These two parameters have in a typical DSC, and under conditions in which trapping is dominant, a voltage dependence given by

(3)
(4)
where
kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, β is a dimensionless parameter which can be related to the reaction order of the recombination reaction with respect to free electrons and α is a dimensionless parameter related to the mean energy of the exponential distribution of localized states in the oxide g(E). In eqn (3) and (4), the voltage difference acting in the device (assuming no voltage drop in the substrate/oxide and in the electrolyte/counter-electrode interfaces) corresponds to the difference in the Fermi level in the oxide and in the electrolyte, i.e. V = EF− E0F. As a general observation, electron recombination resistance and capacitance data for the studied cells fit quite well to eqn (3) and (4), although small departures from the exponential law are detected for Cμ at lower voltages. In Fig. S4 in the ESI, the chemical capacitance extracted from EIS analysis at different potentials is shown. The EIS results show that the capacitance is not altered by the RTIL/Acn mixing ratio, which indicates that, probably as a consequence of using the same additives in all electrolytes, no significant shifts of the conduction band are occurring. Therefore, taking into account eqn (2), the electron lifetime is mainly determined by the electron recombination resistance at the TiO2/electrolyte interface. In Fig. 5, electron recombination resistances and electron lifetimes using both RTILs are shown for all the RTIL/Acn mixing ratios considered in this work.


Fig. 5A and B respectively, show a systematic increase of the recombination resistance and the electron lifetime when the RTIL/Acn mixing ratio is reduced, which explains the improvement of the photovoltage with respect to pure RTILs. Consequently, cells with pure acetonitrile in the electrolyte show the highest Voc. Furthermore, it is important to stress that the results obtained point to a more intense blocking of electron recombination with tri-iodide ions by pyrrolidinium cations than by imidazolium ones. Similar results were obtained in Z907-cells (see ESI, Fig. S5). In conclusion, the cells with Pyr-based electrolytes show better performance than those with Imid-based electrolytes in spite of being a slightly more viscous ionic liquid. However, solar cells containing Pyr show, systematically, lower fill factors. This difference can be related to its viscosity and/or a higher charge transfer resistance at the counter-electrode for cells with Pyr-based electrolytes. As can be observed in Fig. S6 in the ESI, the semicircle at high frequencies, related to charge transfer at the platinum counter-electrode, features a higher resistance for Pyr than for Imid-based electrolytes.

The OCVD data provide a simple and ready means of probing the recombination process. An appropriate interpretation of OCVD data involves the extraction of the lifetime viaeqn (5), which is actually related to the time derivative of the voltage decay.

(5)
In Fig. 6 a comparison of electron lifetimes extracted from OCVD and EIS is presented. In general, good agreement between both techniques is accomplished for the studied electrolytes. However, it must be borne in mind that OCVD is a dark technique, whereas the EIS lifetimes are obtained under illumination, which may produce small deviations. Electron lifetimes at high voltages from EIS and OCVD exhibit the same behavior and very similar values for all studied electrolytes. At potentials lower than 0.5–0.55 eV, it was not possible to obtain EIS data, as explained above.
In Fig. 7 OCVD lifetimes for different mixing ratios and different dyes (N719 and Z907) are shown. Two main observations can be derived from the results shown in Fig. 6 and 7. First, as discussed in the previous section, the addition of acetonitrile reduces the recombination rate, leading to longer lifetimes. Second, we find that all solar cells with acetonitrile in a major or minor proportion exhibit a non-exponential behavior in the lifetime–voltage curve. However, solar cells with a pure RTIL yield exponential lifetimes (straight lines in the semilogarithmic plot). This observation suggests that a substantially different recombination mechanism is taking place in the two cases, probably produced by the change in the polarity. The origin of this feature is discussed below.
It is known that OCVD can be affected by charge transfer through the FTO/TiO2 interface at low potentials. This artifact is commonly prevented by depositing a blocking layer between the FTO and the TiO2 film. To make sure that the departure from the exponential behavior and the appearance of a minimum for some electrolytes are not due to this artifact we have compared cells with and without blocking layers. The results are presented in the ESI (see Fig. S7), where it is shown that cells with and without blocking layers, although with slightly smaller lifetimes for the latter, especially in the region of low potentials, exhibit the same features described above. A transition from exponential to non-exponential behavior in the OCVD data for cells with blocking layers has already been reported in ref. 12 and 18, hence excluding any key influence of the presence of the BL in the shape of the lifetime–voltage plot.
It is known that the addition of a non-volatile component into acetonitrile is appealing in terms of stability. Thus, under light soaking for 1000 h, a deterioration of 50% and 80% in efficiency has been reported in DSC containing electrolytes based on pure acetonitrile and mixed solvents (Acn/RTIL, 2:1 v/v), respectively. However, we have demonstrated that recombination is enhanced in the presence of RTILs. The combination of both facts suggest that and an optimized mixture of acetonitrile and RTIL can be interesting for working devices in terms of both stability and low recombination.
As mentioned in the Introduction, the total recombination rate for a DSC device can be quantified using the following formula
Un = d∫g(E)f(E − EF)PR(E)dE
(1)
where
d, g(E), and f(E − EF) are defined above and PR(E) is the probability of recombination at a given value of the energy (density of acceptor states). For one-electron outer-sphere redox couples, this probability can be calculated using the Marcus–Gerischer model

(6)
where
λ is the reorganization energy, Eredox is the redox potential of the redox couple, and kr is a prefactor that depends on the concentration of oxidized species in the electrolyte, the temperature and the reorganization energy. The small-perturbation electron lifetime can be obtained from eqn (1) according to its definition

(7)
The small-perturbation lifetime is hence defined as the variation of the recombination rate for small variations of the total density. It can be shown that for an exponential distribution of localized states g(E), in the zero-temperature limit of the Fermi–Dirac distribution f(E) and assuming that λ ≫ (V = Ef− Eredox), the recombination resistance is given by eqn (3) and the lifetime, accordingly, by
(8)
Hence, an exponential behavior is expected for large reorganization energies. In contrast, a relatively small value of λ implies from eqn (6) that the probability of electron recombination is reduced if the starting energy E of electrons is larger than Eredox + λ (inverted regime), so that a curvature in the lifetime–voltage plot appears. The observed behavior of the lifetime strongly suggests that the reorganization energy is large for pure and high concentrations of RTIL, whereas for acetonitrile the reorganization energy is smaller. However, the iodide–tri-iodide system is not a one-electron redox couple and the use of the Marcus model to describe electron transfer from TiO2 is not straightforward. Nevertheless, it has been demonstrated that the dye regeneration process takes place by one-electron transfer. The real electron acceptor has not been clearly identified, although spectroscopic studies suggest that it is a tri-iodide. In any case, the recombination reaction necessarily implies the existence of a first step of electron transfer to a species in the electrolyte. This should involve reorganization energy, associated with the interaction with solvent molecules of this species, whatever it is. A quite different polarity of the surrounding medium will critically determine the value of this reorganization term. Furthermore, it is well-known that λ is larger for polar solvents than for non-polar ones. The observed behavior of the electron lifetime is then consistent with this interpretation. Recent reports have shown that the dielectric constant of the RTIL studied in this work do not have, contrary to what is commonly believed, very high dielectric constants. This would indicate that polarity by itself is not the cause of the effect observed in the present study. However, not only the dielectric constant affects the reorganization energy (outer sphere or solvent component) but also the direct chemical interaction between ligands or solvent molecules with the electrochemically active species. In this regard, the ionic nature of the RTIL makes them strongly solvating agents which explains the huge impact on the lifetime–voltage behaviour.
Apart from the different shape in the lifetime–voltage plot, as already pointed out, the increase in the polarity of the solvent is accompanied by an enhancement of the recombination loss. This indicates that a larger value of λ accelerates electron recombination. Assuming that the probability of recombination is determined by the Marcus model, i.e., eqn (6), a more rapid recombination is explained by the larger availability of acceptor states at higher energies, provided that electrons recombine from high energies as well. The fact that electron recombination takes place from the conduction band has been considered to explain the behavior of electron lifetimes and diffusion lengths with respect to illumination and addition of Li+ ions to the electrolyte. However, a recombination mechanism exclusively via the conduction band does not explain the non-linear features of the recombination rate, i.e., a β coefficient smaller than one as observed in the present experiments. To account for both non-linear features and the effect of the composition, we proposed in previous studies that recombination can take place via: (1) direct electron transfer from localized states in the band-gap, and (2) from quasi-free electrons, which get transferred to the electrolyte from high energy levels (Fig. 8). According to this interpretation, a larger value of the reorganization energy leads to an enhancement of process (2) added to process (1), hence explaining the change in shape in the lifetime–voltage plot and the shortening of the lifetime.
To further confirm this interpretation, the model of ref. 17 has been used to obtain normalized lifetimes for different values of the reorganization energy. The Random Walk Numerical Simulations (RWNS) were performed at room temperature using a simulation box 20 × 20 × 20 nm3 and an exponential distribution of trap energies g(E) = Ntα/kBT exp(−α(E − Ec)/kBT) with α = 0.43 and a total density of traps of Nt = 1021 cm3. A multiple-trapping mechanism of transport was assumed for electrons and a probability of electron recombination described by eqn (6) was considered. Here, we took Eredox− Ec = 0.95 eV, where Ec is the position of the TiO2 conduction band. As discussed above, two mechanisms were implemented for electron recombination: (1) direct recombination for electrons immobilized in traps and (2) recombination for electrons that get detrapped and mobile and can recombine from shallow traps (Fig. 8). The relative weight of these two mechanisms is crucial to reproduce the change of behavior observed in the lifetime. For instance, if process (1) is too slow with respect to (2), the increase in the reorganization energy is not accompanied by a reduction of the lifetime, as observed in the experiments. In accordance with this, a ratio of kr (1)/kr (2) = 104 has been considered between the prefactors kr in eqn (6) for both types of recombination processes. The calculations were arranged to simulate an open-circuit voltage experiment. Hence, 300 electrons were placed at random at t = 0, and then they are allowed to move between traps and recombine. The total population of electrons is then found to decrease with time. From eqn (7) a lifetime can be extracted. Further numerical details can be found in ref. 17.
Results regarding the lifetime–voltage plots for various values of the reorganization energy are presented in Fig. 9. The simulation predicts the change of regime from an exponential trend at large values of λ to a weaker dependence with respect to voltage at low λs. Note that in contrast to the simple model of ref. 18, the simulation does not predict a minimum at Ef= λ. The fact that recombination takes place simultaneously from an ensemble of surface states implies that there is no clearly defined minimum when Ef= λ. What is clearly seen is that, the increase of the reorganization energy is accompanied by a shortening of the lifetime. For instance, changing λ from 0.4 to 0.6 eV reduces the lifetime by more than one order of magnitude, which is quite similar to the changes observed in the experiment. Hence, the numerical model reproduces qualitatively the experimental behavior of the lifetime when the polarity of the solvent is changed.
It has to be mentioned that a different interpretation for the observed trends can be envisioned. As established above, electron recombination is likely to occur with tri-iodide electrons. However, this species is at equilibrium with iodine
I3− ↔ I2 + I−
The presence of a non-polar solvent will displace this equilibrium to (I2 + I−), hence reducing the effective concentration of tri-iodide and then the recombination rate. However, we do not believe that this is the most likely interpretation, as a displacement of the equilibrium will modify the redox potential of the couple. In fact, a positive redox potential shift has been reported for water with respect to methoxypropionitrile. A displacement of the redox potential would produce a shift in the measured chemical capacitances (see ESI, Fig. S4). However, as already discussed, no shift is observed in the capacitance as the RTIL/Acn mixing ratio is varied. Therefore, we infer that the change in both the shape and the absolute value of the lifetime–voltage plots is due to pure kinetic effects rather than to thermodynamic contributions.
To ascertain the origin of the better short-circuit photocurrent for Pyr-based electrolytes, electron diffusion lengths were estimated. This is defined as the average distance that electrons can travel in the photoanode before recombination, hence providing information about charge collection. For small perturbation of the Fermi level, a small-perturbation diffusion length (Ln) can be defined and determined by combining IMVS and IMPS data via the following equation
Ln = (τn·Dn)1/2
(9)
where
τn is the lifetime obtained by IMVS and Dn is the diffusion coefficient obtained by IMPS. The pairs of τn and Dn used to obtain Ln must be determined at the same value of the quasi-Fermi level with respect to the conduction band. However, at the same light intensity the position of the quasi-Fermi level is different as in IMVS measurements, which are carried out at open-circuit, and in IMPS measurements, performed at short-circuit. To estimate the shift, a determination of the so-called short-circuit voltage, Vsc, is required. We obtained values of Ln ≈ 30–35 μm and 40–50 μm for Imid75 and Pyr75, respectively, (see ESI, Fig. S8). The difference between these values is a consequence of the more effective blocking of recombination for Pyr, evidenced by the higher electron recombination resistance and electron lifetime. In contrast, the electron transport is similar in both cases. The diffusion coefficients increase exponentially with the Fermi level, as usually observed in DSCs in accordance with the multiple-trapping or hopping models in the range between 10−5 and 10−3 cm2 s−1, characteristic of nanocrystalline TiO2. However, the values of Ln ≈ 3d and 4d for Imid75 and Pyr75, respectively, (where d is the thickness of the film) suggest that the collection efficiency cannot be considered as exactly 100% under short-circuit conditions. Hence, the larger value of Ln for Pyr-based electrolytes points to a higher collection efficiency and therefore to a higher photocurrent at short-circuit.

As with the two RTILs, we have also noticed a different behavior for the two ruthenium dyes N719 and Z907 used to fabricate the solar cells. When the I−/I3− redox couple is present in the electrolyte lower performances are reported in Z907-cells with respect to N719 as a consequence of higher recombination losses (see ESI, Fig. S9). The electron lifetimes in N719-cells show a more pronounced departure from the exponential behavior with the appearance of a minimum, whereas in Z907-cells the curves are flatter. According to the interpretation discussed above, higher reorganization energies are expected for Z907-cells, which could explain the higher recombination losses. (It has to be mentioned that in Z907-cells with the cobalt complex as a redox couple, these faster recombination kinetics are compensated by the standard redox potential, which is 210 mV more positive in the case of [Co(byp)3]3+/2+ than I−/I3−). A possible explanation for the different reorganization energies of both dyes is the presence of two hydrocarbon chains in the Z907 sensitizer. These bulky and apolar groups can modify the local chemical environment of the electron acceptors in the vicinity of the TiO2 surface by pushing away acetonitrile molecules, hence increasing the reorganization energy.

In this work we have carried out a comprehensive study of the photovoltaic performance of acetonitrile–Room-Temperature-Ionic-Liquid (RTIL) mixtures in Dye-sensitized Solar Cells. We have compared two ionic liquids that differ by the nature of the cations that enter their composition (imidazolium- and pyrrolidinium-based) and two ruthenium dyes (N719 and Z907). The electron recombination resistance, chemical capacitance and electron lifetime have been determined as a function of the Fermi level position by Impedance Spectroscopy and Open-Circuit Voltage Decay measurements, finding good correspondence between data from both techniques.

The electron lifetime shows two types of behavior: one exhibiting a minimum in the lifetime–voltage plot (acetonitrile), and the other characterized by a pure exponential behavior (RTIL). A progressive transition between both kinds of shapes in the lifetime–voltage plot is observed as the acetonitrile/RTIL mixing ratio is modified. According to previous experimental and theoretical reports, as well as exploratory Random Walk Numerical Simulations carried out here, this behavior of the electron lifetime can be explained by an increase in the value of the reorganization energy for electron recombination as we move from a less polar environment (acetonitrile) to a more polar one. Assuming this interpretation, we reach the important conclusion that systems with large reorganization energies have higher recombination losses, as it is the case in electrolytes based on ionic liquids. We relate these observations with the existence of two-electron recombination routes, one produced from deep traps and the other mediated by shallow traps, in such a way that a large reorganization energy allows for a larger contribution of this second route, hence reducing the lifetime.
Interestingly, the change of behavior in the lifetime–voltage plot for pure ionic liquids is produced by solvation with only a minor fraction of acetonitrile. Hence, ionic liquids solvated with relatively small amounts of organic solvents are not only an interesting electrolyte formulation in DSCs due to diminution of the mass-transport limitation, but also due to the decrease of the electron recombination rate (as a result of the reduction of reorganization energy). Furthermore, according to the results presented here, we have also found that the reorganization energy is not only determined by polarity of the solvents, but also by the dye used.
Finally, it is important to point out that the nature of the cation of the RTIL is also critical when it comes to reduction of the electron recombination. In this respect pyrrolidinium cations show a much better performance than the more commonly used imidazolium. As a consequence of the blocking of recombination, not only an increase in Voc is observed, but also an enhancement of Jsc (consequence of a not too long diffusion length). This finding may open opportunities for the application of pyrrolidinium-based RTILs, largely used in batteries, in the DSC field.

For optimized cell efficiencies, devices were made using 12 μm thick films consisting of a layer of 8 μm of 20 nm TiO2 nanoparticles (Dyesol© paste) and a layer of 4 μm of 400 nm TiO2 particles (scattering layer). Prior to the deposition of the TiO2 paste the conducting glass substrates (Hartford Glass Inc. with 15 Ω cm−2 resistance) were immersed in a solution of TiCl4 (40 mM) for 30 minutes at 70 °C and then dried. For some of the devices (control cells), to prevent recombination of electrons from the glass substrates with the oxidized species in the electrolyte a thin insulating layer (called a blocking layer) was placed between the mesoporous oxide and the substrate. This thin film was prepared by spin coating from the following solution: 20 ml of MilliQ H2O + 2.2 ml of titanium(IV) isopropoxide+1.5 ml of acetylacetone. After deposition, the substrate was heated to 500 °C. The TiO2 nanoparticle paste was deposited onto a conducting glass substrate using the screen printing technique. The DSC active area was 0.16 cm2. The TiO2 electrodes were gradually heated under air flow at 325 °C for 5 min, 375 °C for 5 min, 450 °C for 15 min and 500 °C for 15 min. The heated TiO2 electrodes were immersed again in a solution of TiCl4 (40 mM) at 70 °C for 30 min and then washed with water and ethanol. Finally, the electrodes were heated again at 500 °C for 30 min and cooled before dye adsorption.

The counter-electrode was made by spreading a 10 mM solution of H2PtCl6 in ethanol onto a conducting glass substrate with a small hole to allow the introduction of the liquid electrolyte using vacuum, followed by heating at 390 °C for 15 minutes.
The electrodes were immersed overnight in a solution containing ruthenium dyes coded N719 (cis-diisothiocyanato-bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato) ruthenium(II) bis (tetrabutylammonium) and Z907 (cis-diisothiocyanato-(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid)-(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dinonyl) ruthenium(II))). These solutions were composed of 0.3 mM dye and 0.3 mM chenodeoxycholic acid in ethanol. The sensitized electrodes were washed with ethanol and dried in air. Finally, the working- and counter-electrodes were sandwiched together using a thin thermoplastic frame (Surlyn, Solaronix) that melts at 100 °C. The cells were filled with the electrolyte through a hole previously made in the back of a platinized counter electrode. Then, the hole was sealed using a thermoplastic polymer and a cover slide glass.
The composition of the electrolytes studied in this work is shown in Table 2. Only the solvent composition is varied, and both redox pair and additives are kept the same for all studied devices.
Electrolyte
Solvent (v/v) (%)
Solutes
I2: iodine (99.5%, Fluka), LiI: lithium iodide (99%, Aldrich), BMiI: 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide (99%, Aldrich), TBP: 4-tert-butylpyridine (96%, Aldrich), GuSCN: guanidine thiocyanate (99%, Aldrich), Acn: acetonitrile (99.9%, Panreac), Imid: 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (99.9%, Solvionic), Pyr: 1-butyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (99.9%, Solvionic).
Acn
100% Acetonitrile
0.1 M I2 + 1 M BMII + 0.05 M LiI + 0.5 M TBP + 0.1 M GuSCN
Imid25/Pyr25
75% Acn + 25% RTIL
Imid50/Pyr50
50% Acn + 50% RTIL
Imid75/Pyr75
25% Acn + 75% RTIL
Imid/Pyr
100% RTIL

The devices were characterized using a solar simulator with an AM 1.5G filter (ABET). The light intensity was calibrated to the standard value of 1 sun (100 mW cm−2) using a reference solar cell with temperature output (Oriel, 91150). The current–voltage characteristics were determined by applying an external potential bias to the cell and measuring the photocurrent using an Autolab/PGSTAT302N potentiostat. Open-Circuit Voltage Decay measurements (OCVD) were made by keeping the solar cell at open-circuit at 1-sun and registering the voltage transient after interrupting the illumination.

Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS), Intensity Modulated Photovoltage Spectroscopy (IMVS), Intensity Modulated Photocurrent Spectroscopy (IMPS) and Open-Circuit Voltage Decay measurements (OCVD) were utilized to study the electron transport, recombination, chemical capacitance and to extract electron lifetimes. The illumination for the small perturbation (frequency response) techniques was provided by a 540 nm light emitting diode (LUXEON). A response analyzer module (PGSTAT302N/FRA2, Autolab) was utilized to analyze the frequency response of the devices. EIS measurements were carried out under a varying bias potential and a fixed illumination (related to the open-circuit voltage) provided by the light emitting diode. The bias potential was corrected for voltage drop due to series resistance. A 10 mV perturbation in the 105 to 10−2 Hz range was utilized to obtain the spectra. IMVS and IMPS measurements were carried out by coupling the PGSTAT302N/FRA2 module to the light emitting diode. This makes it possible to probe the devices at different positions of the Fermi level in the semiconductor. In all cases the samples were illuminated from the dye-coated TiO2 electrode side. IMVS measurements were performed at open circuit in the 104 to 10−1 Hz range and IMPS measurements at short-circuit in the 104 to 10−3 Hz range with a light perturbation corresponding to 10% of the DC background illumination intensity. The NOVA 1.7 software was used to generate and treat the IMVS data. The Zview equivalent circuit modeling software (Scribner) was used to fit the EIS spectra, including the distributed element DX11 (transmission line model). To obtain the Fermi level shift between open-circuit and short-circuit conditions, short-circuit voltage (Vsc) measurements were performed. For this purpose, the solar cell was first illuminated under short-circuit conditions at various light intensities. The diode was then turned off and the cell was switched to open circuit simultaneously. The voltage evolution was finally monitored using the potentiostat.
For “blank” cells containing just the different electrolytes sandwiched between two platinized FTOs, cyclic voltammograms (CV) were recorded at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1. These measurements were utilized to obtain limited currents and ionic diffusion coefficients.

We thank the Ministerio de Educación, Cultura y Deporte for a FPU fellowship and Abengoa Research for support via a framework collaboration agreement.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: S1: Jsc and Voc for all electrolytes normalized in N719-cells, S2: current–voltage curves and Jsc and Voc for all electrolytes normalized in Z907-cells, S3: an equivalent circuit utilized to fit impedance data, S4: chemical capacitance data as extracted from EIS measurements for N719-cells and Z907-cells, S5: electron recombination resistance and electron lifetime data are extracted from EIS measurements for Z907-cells, S6: EIS Nyquist plots for cells with Imid and Pyr-based electrolytes in N719-cells, S7: electron lifetime data extracted by OCVD for Z907-cells with and without blocking layers, S8: electron length diffusion obtained from IMVS and IMPS for Imid75 and Pyr75 in N719-cells, S9: electron recombination resistance for N719 and Z907-cells. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cp03303e
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014