 DOI: 10.1039/D0DT00839G
(Paper)
Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 5336-5351


T.
Saravanakumar
,

T.
Selvaraju
*,

K. B.
Bhojanaa
,

M.
Ramesh
,

A.
Pandikumar
,

R.
Akilan
,

R.
Shankar
 and 

S. J.
Sardhar Basha
*

Department of Nanoscience and Technology, Anna University Regional Campus, Coimbatore-641046, India

Department of Chemistry, Bharathiar University, Coimbatore-641046, India. E-mail: veluselvaraju@gmail.com; Fax: +91-422-2425706; Tel: +91-422-2428315

Electro Organic and Materials Electrochemistry (EME) Division, CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi-630003 & Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad-201002, India

Department of Physics, Bharathiar University, Coimbatore-641046, India

Received
5th March 2020
, Accepted 13th March 2020
First published on 13th March 2020
Trifunctional nickel tin sulfide (NixSn2xS4x) with a thiospinel-like structure composited with multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) (M–NixSn2xS4x) was synthesized by a facile method. The unit cell arrangement of the prepared composite was studied by density functional theory, and the theoretical interpretation satisfactorily inferred the presence of a synergistic effect between the thiospinel and MWCNTs. The high metallic conductivity and superior electrocatalytic activity of the M–NixSn2xS4x composite endow it with diverse applications. The composite shows promise as a counter electrode for dye-sensitized solar cells (efficiency of 4.67% for fluorine-doped indium tin oxide compared to 5.23% for platinum); an efficient catalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction with good cycling stability and a low overpotential of −41 mV at a cathode current density of 10 mA cm2 and a Tafel slope of 43 mV dec−1 on a graphite sheet electrode; and an impressive capacitance material on a graphite sheet electrode alternative to expensive current collectors such as Ni foam, with a specific capacitance value of 1200 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 and a long life span of 92.6% that is retained for up to 15000 cycles.

The harvest and storage of energy present crucial challenges and great demand in an era of fast growth. Researchers have looked to develop smart materials to perform multiple tasks ranging from energy harvesting to storage. Transition metal-based composites composed of Mn, Fe, Ni, Co, and Ru have made huge impacts on various electrochemical applications. Among them, Ru-based composites exhibit good performance, including the existence of different valence states, high electrical conductivity, and rapid redox behavior. However, these composites are limited by the high cost and scarcity of Ru. Eventhough, Co-based materials resembled Ru-based composites but it is rare and less conductive in nature. Hence, it is necessary to move towards readily available and better-performing metals. For example, Sn can be used as an alternative to Ru or Co in metal composites due to its multiple valence states, high conductivity, low cost, and abundance in nature. Ni-based composites have been demonstrated as highly efficient electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and as a counter electrode (CE) for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). Moreover, sulfur-based composites have been established as high-energy and high-power-density capacitor materials. Compared to metal spinel oxides, spinel sulfides show more efficacy in energy applications. For example, NiCo2S4 possesses better efficiency than NiCo2O4 in supercapacitor-based electrochemical applications. This can be ascribed to the low electronegativity of sulfur compared to oxygen, and the fact that the atomic layer of sulfur instantaneously allows free electron mobility owing to its space, making different forms of transportation, such as electrical, electronic or ionic conductivity easier. Its metallic conductivity has played a major role in the domains of pseudocapacitors, catalysis, and DSSCs. Its tremendous properties are primarily due to its spinel structure and polycrystalline nature. Accordingly, the present study explored a new way to enhance metallic conductivity by replacing a highly magnetic transition metal such as Co with highly conductive Sn. As a consequence, the proposed NixSn2xS4x composites have thiospinel structures in which NiS and Sn2S3 occupy the tetrahedral and octahedral sites of the lattice, respectively. Usually, in a spinel structure, two major sites (tetrahedral and octahedral) are retained in the crystal lattice.

Recently, a template-assisted Ni3S2 composite exhibited a good capacitance value of 1077 F g−1. However, a combination of mesoporous Ni3S2 and reduced graphene oxide coated on nickel foam showed an enhanced capacitance value of 1886 F g−1. Similarly, the introduction of carbon allotropes have improved the cyclic efficiency and durability of indium- or fluorine-doped tin oxide CEs in solar cells. A recent study inferred that a carbon allotrope, when used as a base material upon which metal oxides or sulfides were composited in a definite ratio, exhibited a mixed response, exhibiting electrical double layer as well as pseudocapacitive behavior. This indicates that the introduction of a carbon allotrope increases the cycling stability and performance of metal sulfides. Therefore, the intent of this study was to explore a highly conductive tin sulfide lattice incorporated with a NiS lattice as a thiospinel composited with multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs), which is an allotrope of carbon with good physical, chemical, mechanical, and optical properties. The prepared composite was investigated for the first time in the domain of DSSCs, as a catalyst for the HER to match the efficiency of Pt, and as a hybrid supercapacitor material.
DSSCs are extensively studied devices that have attracted attention in recent years due to their high power conversion efficiency, low cost, and easy fabrication. Conventionally, DSSCs are fabricated using a photoanode, current collector CE, and an electrolyte based on I− and I3−, where Pt is generally used as a CE on a transparent conductive oxide. Recently, the expensive noble metal Pt has been replaced by low-cost metal chalcogenides such as nickel and tin sulfides with conductive polymers or carbon allotropes. For instance, Pt, NiS/CNTs and SnSx in DSSCs have produced efficiencies of 5.13%, 2.57%, and 6.56%, respectively, whereas MWCNT/PEDOT:PSS and Pt have delivered efficiencies of 6.5% and 8.5%, respectively. Similarly, Ni foam-based electrodes have exhibited good HER activity such as that of Pt. For instance, MoS2 and WS2(1−x)Se2x on NiSe2 foam showed good performance in the HER with Tafel slopes of 53–65 and 46.8 mV dec−1, respectively. These findings clearly reveal that Ni- or Sn-based sulfides can exhibit good performance in DSSCs and in HER.
The ultimate goal of this study was to improve the electrochemical efficiency of existing Ni-based composites using highly conductive Sn sulfides. Similar state-of-the-art materials prepared on Ni foam have played a major role as current collectors in energy storage applications. Ni foam possess high surface area, good durability and conductivity to use as catalyst in fuel cell applications whereas it is less affordable and tedious to fabricate. Alternatively, stainless steel or graphite sheets are the next choice for current collectors as they enable good current flow. The uniqueness of this work is to synthesize a NixSn2xS4x composite that is a good electrical conductor, while the graphite sheet current collector provides good flow and increases the storage efficiency. Thus, in this investigation, expensive Ni foams were replaced by graphite sheets as a suitable current collector with high capacity retention.

All chemicals were purchased as ACS grade from Merck, India and used without further purification. Nickel chloride hexahydrate (NiCl2·6H2O) and tin chloride dehydrate (SnCl2·2H2O) were used as precursors. Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) was used as a structure-directing agent, and thiourea was used as the sulfur source. NixSn2xS4x was synthesized via a one-pot hydrothermal method. Initially, 2 g of SDS was completely dissolved in 100 ml of double-distilled water. To this solution, 1 mmol of NiCl2·6H2O, 2 mmol of SnCl2·2H2O, and 4 mmol of thiourea were consecutively added, followed by stirring for 30 min and transferred to a Teflon-lined autoclave, which was maintained at a temperature of 140 °C for 24 h. Similarly, NixSn2xS4x was synthesized and maintained in a Teflon-lined autoclave at two different temperatures, 160 and 180 °C for 24 h. To remove chloride ions, the synthesized nanocomposites were washed several times with ethanol followed by double-distilled water and dried in a vacuum oven at 60 °C overnight. The one-pot hydrothermal method was repeated in the presence of MWCNTs (20% w/w; Quantum Materials Corporation, Q Tubes®-250, USA). After 2 g of SDS was dissolved in double-distilled water, the desired proportion of MWCNTs was added, and the same procedure was repeated to obtain M–NixSn2xS4x nanocomposites by maintaining the solution into a Teflon-lined autoclave at 180 °C for 24 h. For comparison, NixSn2xS4x thiospinel was also synthesized by co-precipitation using identical ratios of precursors added consecutively and stirred at 160 °C for 6 h. The precipitate was then washed sequentially with ethanol and water and dried in a vacuum oven at 60 °C for 3 h.


Initially, 300 mg of TiO2 with PEO and PEG was ground in a mortar using pestle for 5 min, and 1–2 ml of water was added to form a paste. To this, 150 μl of acetylacetone and a drop of Triton X-100 (data sheet in Table S1) were added, and the mixture was stirred overnight. Finally, the TiO2 paste was coated on the conducting side of fluorine-doped indium tin oxide (FTO) using the doctor blade technique with the aid of polyimide tape. To obtain a stable photoanode, the film was dried at room temperature, sintered at 500 °C for 30 min in a muffle furnace, and allowed to cool naturally to room temperature. Subsequently, the film was subjected to TiCl4 treatment and sintered again at 500 °C for 30 min. The prepared photoanodes were immersed in an ethanolic solution of 0.3 mM N719 (Ruthenizer 535-bisTBA) dye (data sheet in Table S2) for 24 h at room temperature in the dark and then cleaned using ethanol. The CEs were prepared by uniformly coating of different NixSn2xS4x thiospinels (‘a’, ‘b’ and ‘c’) on the conducting side of FTO using a spin coater (1000 rpm, 30 s). The dye-coated photoanode was placed over the CE with a drop of gel electrolyte (the preparation of the gel electrolyte is described in the ESI) and firmly clamped to examine the DSSC efficiency. The electron lifetime, exchange current density, limiting current density, and overall power conversion efficiency were calculated using the equations provided in the ESI.


The catalyst for the electrochemical HER was prepared by adding 2.5 ml of ethanol, 0.5 ml (5%) of Nafion and 30 mg of M–NixSn2xS4x composite to a vial, which was ultrasonicated for 20 min. Afterwards, 5 μl of the catalyst was coated uniformly on the surface of a graphite sheet substrate and dried at 60 °C in a vacuum oven for 6 h. For comparison, Pt/C (20 wt%) composite was used in place of the M–NixSn2xS4x composite. The electrochemical studies were carried out on a CHI 660D electrochemical workstation (CH Instruments, USA) in a three-electrode cell setup using 0.5 M H2SO4 as an aqueous supporting electrolyte. A graphite sheet with a size of 1 × 1 cm2 was used as the working electrode (V One Enterprises, India), Pt wire as the CE, and Ag/AgCl saturated with KCl as the reference electrode. Prior to the electrochemical studies, the working electrode and graphite sheet were sequentially cleaned using 0.3 M HCl and ethanol.


The electrochemical performance was studied on a CHI 660D electrochemical workstation (CH Instruments, USA) in a three-electrode cell set up using 6 M KOH as the aq. supporting electrolyte, platinum wire as the CE, Ag/AgCl saturated with KCl as the reference electrode and a 2 × 2 cm2 graphite sheet as the working electrode (V one enterprises, India). The M–NixSn2xS4x composite coating was prepared using the drop-coating method. Briefly, the composites and the polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) binder were taken in a ratio of 9.5:0.5 and used to make a slurry with ethanol as the solvent by sonicating for 10 min. Finally, the slurry was drop-casted on the graphite electrode surface and dried under vacuum at 80 °C for 4 h to use it as a working electrode.


X-ray diffracted patterns were obtained by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD; Shimadzu XRD-6000, Japan) with Cu Kα (1.5416 Å) radiation in the scanning range of 2θ = 10° to 90° at a scanning speed of 10° min−1. The surface morphologies of the nanocomposite material were analyzed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM; JEOL-6390, Japan), field-emission SEM (FE-SEM; FEI quanta 250-FESEM, Bruker, Germany), and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) with selected-area electron diffraction (SAED; JEOL JEM 2100, Japan). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed using an ESCALAB 250XI instrument (Germany). The composite samples were dispersed on carbon tape for composition analysis using energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDX; Bruker, Germany).


The structure-directing agent, SDS, is an anionic surfactant with a negatively charged head and hydrophilic nature. SDS is attracted by positively charged Sn2+ and Ni2+ ions. The tail group of SDS is hydrophobic in nature and tends to slow down the growth process. However, the growth of NixSn2xS4x thiospinel is stabilized by increasing the temperature of the autoclave, which resulted in the formation of a marigold flower-like morphology, as shown in Fig. 1. The temperature variation and corresponding NixSn2xS4x thiospinel formation were monitored by SEM and XRD. The SEM images indicate a unique feature (Fig. 2) in which NixSn2xS4x thiospinel formed at 140 °C shows uneven shapes with sheets-like morphologies. Upon increasing the temperature to 160 °C, the sheets combined together to form joined sheets in which small sheets grew slowly inside. Further increasing the temperature to 180 °C resulted in the formation of marigold flower-shaped structures with petal-like morphologies. The morphological rearrangements with respect to temperature during NixSn2xS4x thiospinel formation are clearly shown by the SEM images.

Fig. S1A–C show FE-SEM images of NixSn2xS4x thiospinel synthesized at 180 °C under different magnifications. The images clearly depict the formation of flower-like morphologies with excellent clarity. EDX is a primary tool for the identification elemental composition; EDX mapping analysis was used to evaluate the elemental compositions at various locations in the flower-like structure. The composite structure consisted of a uniform distribution of Ni, Sn, and S atoms. Fig. S1D, and E show the EDX maps confirming the distribution of Ni, Sn, and S elements. HR-TEM analysis confirmed the formation of sheet/pedal-like morphologies (Fig. S1F and G). Fig. S1H shows the diffraction pattern, which demonstrates the polycrystalline nature of hybrid flower-like NixSn2xS4x. Fig. S1I confirms that the crystal fringes of NixSn2xS4x were in the range of 0.33 nm. Similarly, the surface morphologies of the MWCNT-loaded NixSn2xS4x nanocomposites were studied. Due to the existence of the MWCNTs, an additional carbon signal was observed without any marginal changes in the NixSn2xS4x nanocomposites. Thus, the NixSn2xS4x nanocomposites retained the marigold flower-like morphology, and the MWCNTs are invisible in the SEM images. Fig. 3 shows the surface morphological changes of the M–NixSn2xS4x thiospinel nanocomposites. The FE-SEM images in Fig. 3A–C show identical arrangements of flower-like morphologies, where MWCNTs are found in the nanoregime. The EDX maps in Fig. 3D and E confirm the distributions of Ni, Sn, S, and C in the flower-like nanocomposite material. Fig. 3F and G show the corresponding HR-TEM images of the M–NixSn2xS4x nanocomposites. The MWCNTs are present inside the nanocomposite and tend to enhance the connectivity among different flower-like nanocomposites, which is expected to increase its efficiency. The diffraction pattern in Fig. 3H demonstrates the polycrystalline nature of M–NixSn2xS4x. Fig. 3I shows the fringe distance on the MWCNTs and indicates that the distance between carbon layers was 0.36 nm.
The crystalline nature of the NixSn2xS4x thiospinels synthesized at 140 °C, 160 °C, and 180 °C along with M–NixSn2xS4x thiospinel synthesized at 180 °C were investigated by powder XRD (Fig. 4A). Different synthetic temperatures of NixSn2xS4x thiospinel affected the surface morphology but not the crystallinity, which remained unaltered. Under identical conditions, XRD was used to confirm the reproducibility of crystallinity in the nanocomposite materials prepared at different temperatures. Meanwhile, there is no previous report we can use to correlate the identification of the synthesized thiospinel composite with similar kinds of materials. XRD analysis revealed lattice changes in the crystal system based on the combination of Ni and Sn sulfides. Due to polyphase mixing, the synthesized thiospinel is denoted by subscript x, and the polyphase was confirmed by SAED. The lattice of NixSn2xS4x emerged from the combination of the γ-Sn2S3 and NiS crystal phases. This type of transition has been observed elsewhere. Noticeably, a marginal variation in the material properties were observed by lattice phase transformation at Sn by doping vanadium oxide or indium antimony telluride. Similarly, in the present investigation, the diffraction pattern of γ-Sn2S3 was restricted to the gamma phase by the lattice phase transformation between Sn and Ni sulfides. The diffraction patterns of NixSn2xS4x thiospinel synthesized at different temperatures are similar to that of M–NixSn2xS4x thiospinel, although the patterns of NixSn2xS4x do not exactly coincide with each other. The shift is due to the coexistence of NiS (JCPDS no. 750613) and orthorhombic Sn2S3 (JCPDS no. 720031) along with γ-Sn2S3 (JCPDS no. 301379). The high-intensity major diffraction patterns at 26.03°, 38.9°, 44.5°, 48.7°, 53.1°, 64.0°, and 66.3° correspond to the indexes of the (101), (301), (350), (440), (202), (541), and (560) planes, respectively, and are attributed to γ-Sn2S3 either in the absence or presence of MWCNTs. The existence of NiS2 (JCPDS no. 893058) was also observed in the composites. As a result, the major diffraction patterns observed at 33.7° and 30.2° correspond to the (100) and (002) planes of NiS, respectively, those at 27.1°, 31.4°, and 38.8° correspond to the (111), (200), and (271) planes of NiS2, respectively, and the sharp satellite peaks observed at 51.4° and 56.6° belong to the (122) and (142) planes of the orthorhombic phase of Sn2S3 with a minor shift. The γ-Sn2S3 synthesized at 140 °C shows less intense XRD peaks compared to that synthesized at 180 °C. The doping statute in spinel system was satisfactorily explained using γ-Al2O3 as a dopant atom. As a consequence, a phase transition occurred from α to γ and permitted defects, making the material more reactive. Similar behavior was observed in the present investigation for the γ-Sn2S3 lattice bonded with nickel sulfide in the NixSn2xS4x thiospinel arrangement. Accordingly, the thiospinel arrangement of NixSn2xS4x coincides with the theoretical XRD interpretation with respect to NiS, Sn2S3, and γ-Sn2S3 (Fig. S2). Hence, the loading of MWCNTs did not alter the crystalline nature of NixSn2xS4x. In addition, new diffraction patterns were observed corresponding to carbon and oxygen, indicating the existence of MWCNTs in the thiospinel nanocomposites. The patterns observed at 26° and 42° correspond to the (002) and (100) planes, respectively, and confirm the existence of MWCNTs in the nanocomposite. Further, XPS was used to reveal the chemical valence and elemental composition in the thiospinel nanocomposites. Fig. 4B shows the XPS spectra of the NixSn2xS4x and M–NixSn2xS4x nanocomposites. In agreement with the fitting results for S element in both systems, the major 2p3/2 binding energy is located at 162.3 eV (Fig. 4D), which is due to the existence of S2− species. In addition, Sn element in both systems shows major Sn 3d3/2 and Sn 3d5/2 binding energies (Fig. 4E) at 494.4 and 485.7 eV, respectively, which can be attributed to the combination of Sn4+ and Sn2+ species. The deconvoluted XPS peak area in both systems indicates the predominance of Sn2+ compared to Sn4+ owing to the auger electronic effect of Sn2S3. This is probably indicative of the composition where Sn4+ ions adopt center positions with octahedral coordination to S, while Sn2+ ions adopt periphery trigonal pyramidal arrangements. Thus, the coordination preferences of the Sn4+ and Sn2+ oxidation states are concurrently fulfilled. Regarding Ni element, the main Ni 2p3/2 peaks at 853.2, 855.8, and 861.1 eV and the Ni 2p1/2 peak at 873.5 eV (Fig. 4C) are due to the existence of Ni2+ and Ni3+ species, likely as NiS and NiS2 in NixSn2xS4x, either in the absence or presence of MWCNTs. On the other hand, the Sn 3d3/2 spectrum of NixSn2xS4x shows a blue shift of ca. 0.2 eV compared to that of the pristine sample. This can be explain based on the Pauling scale. The electronegativity of Sn is 1.96, slightly higher than that of Ni (1.91). As a result, after NixSn2xS4x formation, the electrons might transfer from NiS or NiS2 to γ-Sn2S3, leading to the formation of a heterojunction, where Ni–S–Sn bonds at the interfaces are expected. Fig. 4F shows a new peak corresponding to C 1s at 285.1 eV, which is due to the definite proportion of MWCNTs loaded in the nanocomposites.Fig. 4G shows the Raman spectra of NixSn2xS4x and M–NixSn2xS4x nanocomposites. Raman spectra were thoroughly investigated based on the Raman energy excitation for the existence of the thiospinel structure. The stretching of S atom with Ni at the tetrahedral site in S–Nitetra–S bonds generates the A1g (373 cm−1) and Eg (239 cm−1) modes, and two peaks corresponding to the asymmetric bending of S–Ni–S are observed at 301 and 342 cm−1. The Sn geometry was demonstrated to be octahedral by XPS (vide supra) analysis. Sn2S3 is the combination of the Sn2+ and Sn4+ oxidation states with an orthotropic Pnma crystal structure. Here, the lattice is arranged in a six-coordinate system as Sn4+S6, where octahedral Sn4+ is surrounded by tetrahedral Sn2+, and one of the coordinates is occupied by the lone pair, as in SnS. The combination of two valences could reduce the dimension of Sn2S3. The first Ag mode (291 cm−1) and second Ag mode (300 cm−1) were observed, as has been reported elsewhere for Sn2S3. The peaks at 210 and 252 cm−1 are attributed to the existence of Sn2S3. Hence, it is concluded that the polyphase mixing in the composite contains tetrahedral Ni and Sn is coordinated with octahedral S, which confirms the synthesized NixSn2xS4x either in the absence or presence of MWCNTs as a thiospinel structure. Additionally, the M–NixSn2xS4x nanocomposites show the presence of MWCNTs with a defective and graphitic band intensity ratio of 0.8, which infers that there are few defects in the MWCNTs. the surface area and pore size of a nanocomposites play important roles in catalysis and
affect the capacity to store energy in the form of charge in high-energy-density supercapacitor applications.Fig. 4(H) and Table S3 show the BET analysis results for the NixSn2xS4x and M–NixSn2xS4x nanocomposites. The surface area, pore diameter, and pore volume were hardly altered by the incorporation of MWCNTs into NixSn2xS4x thiospinel. Hence, the high active surface area with definite pore diameter and volume of NixSn2xS4x thiospinel can be utilized to explore its catalytic and electrochemical applications.

Cyclic voltammetry (CV) is an excellent analytical tool to study ionic diffusivity, catalytic activity, and redox reaction kinetics at the interface of the redox electrolyte in DSSCs.Fig. 5A shows the CV curves of different NixSn2xS4x-loaded CEs: (a) hydrothermally synthesized NixSn2xS4x, (b) 20% MWCNTs composited with NixSn2xS4x (M–NixSn2xS4x), and (c) chemically synthesized NixSn2xS4x. The CV curves were recorded using the I−/I3− electrolyte system at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 from −1.0 to 1.0 V. The dye-coated photoanode with the M–NixSn2xS4x-modified CE (Fig. 5A(b)) showed the maximum current density among the samples. In the CV curves, the forward and reverse sets are due to 3I2 → 2I3− + 2e− and the reduction of I3− ions as I3− + 2e− → 3I−, respectively. The cathodic peak current density (Ipc) corresponds to the reaction rate of the catalyst. The higher Ipc can be attributed to the electrocatalytic efficiency of the sample loaded at the CE.Fig. 5A indicates that the M–NixSn2xS4x-loaded CE (b) showed an enhanced Ipc and decreased peak-to-peak separation (Epp) compared to other two CEs. This is due to the enhancement in the number of active sites, which facilitate tri-iodide reduction to improve the electrocatalytic performance of the M–NixSn2xS4x-modified CE. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is an excellent tool for analyzing interfacial charge transfer and electrocatalytic activity in DSSCs. Fig. 5B shows the EIS results for different CEs in the form of Nyquist plots and the corresponding parameters are listed in Table 1. During the measurements, the DSSC cell was irradiated under a constant illumination of 100 mW cm−2 under standard AM 1.5 G. In the Nyquist plot, the first and second semicircles correspond to the charge-transfer process at the CE/electrolyte interface and TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface, respectively. The third curve represents the Warburg diffusion process of I−/I3− in the electrolyte. As a result, the Rct values for CEs (a) and (b) were 47.83 and 43.81 Ω, respectively, whereas that of the M–NixSn2xS4x-loaded CE (b) was decreased to 38.36 Ω, which reflects its higher conductivity and larger surface area. This is due to the existence of a definite proportion of MWCNTs along with NixSn2xS4x in the thiospinel composites.

Sl. no
CE

R
s (Ω)

R
ct (Ω)

Z
w (Ω)
|IPC| (mA cm−2)
|EPP| (V)
EIS spectra were recorded in the frequency range of 200 kHz to 100 mHz; Rs, total series resistance; Rct, charge-transfer resistance at the interface of the photoanode and electrolyte.
1
Sample a
25.81
43.80
52.85
1.42
1.16
2
Sample b
28.12
38.36
367.30
1.53
0.58
3
Sample c
29.72
43.83
242.00
1.40
0.82

Fig. 5C shows the Bode phase plots obtained for the DSSCs fabricated using CEs modified with hydrothermally synthesized NixSn2xS4x, 20% MWCNT-composited NixSn2xS4x, and chemically synthesized NixSn2xS4x. The characteristic peaks in the Bode phase plots for DSSC based on the 20% MWCNT-composited NixSn2xS4x-modified CE shifted toward high frequency (b; 12853 Hz) compared to those for the DSSCs based on the hydrothermally synthesized NixSn2xS4x-modified CE (a; 5879 Hz) and chemically synthesized NixSn2xS4x-modified CE (c; 5879 Hz). The characteristic peak in the high-frequency region in the Bode phase plots corresponds to the low Rct of the CE/electrolyte interface and causes the rapid conversion of I3− to I−. The difference in frequency indicates faster electron transfer behavior at the MWCNT–NixSn2xS4x/electrolyte interface. In addition, the peak positions for hydrothermally synthesized NixSn2xS4x (27°) and chemically synthesized NixSn2xS4x (23°) are greater than that for 20% MWCNT-composited NixSn2xS4x (14°). These results are reflected in the Rct values tabulated in Table 1.
To further confirm the electrocatalytic activities of the different modified NixSn2xS4x CEs, Tafel polarization measurements were performed in symmetrical dummy cells similar to the one used in the EIS measurements. Fig. 5D shows the Tafel curves, which are the logarithm of current density (logJ) as a function of voltage (V) for the oxidation/reduction of I3− to I− for CEs (a), (b), and (c). Among the Tafel plots, the cathodic and anodic branches of the plot of sample (b) have larger slopes than those of (a) and (c). Thus, the M–NixSn2xS4x thiospinel composite (b) possessed the largest exchange current density (J0) and highest limiting current density (Jlim), indicating the highest electrocatalytic activity for I3− reduction compared to the other CEs. Since J0 varies inversely with Rct, the obtained values J0 and Jlim agree with the EIS results.

The photocurrent signals (J–V curves) for different types of CEs were measured with a gel electrolyte using a Science Tech (SS 1.6 K, AAA) solar simulator under light illumination of 100 mW cm−2 with an AM 1.5 G optical filter (USA) attached to a source meter (Keithley Instruments Model No. 2400). The obtained photovoltaic parameters are tabulated in Table 2. Based on the J–V curves (Fig. 6), the Jsc values for CEs (a), (b), and (c) were 5.140, 10.844, and 3.451 mA cm−2, respectively. The Jsc for the M–NixSn2xS4x thiospinel composite CE (b) was marginally higher than those of samples (a) and (c). This is due to the rapid interfacial charge transfer at the electrolyte/counter electrode interface in the CE based on sample (b). Thus, the enhanced catalytic activity of the M–NixSn2xS4x thiospinel composite-loaded DSSC can be attributed to the existence of MWCNTs in the NixSn2xS4x composites, which stimulates the redox reaction of the iodide couple. The results are compared with those of similar state-of-the-art materials in Table S4.

Sl. no
CE

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

P
max (mW cm−2)
Fill factor
Efficiency, η (%)

J
sc, short-circuit current density; Voc, open-circuit voltage; Pmax, maximum power; η, power conversion efficiency.
1
Pt
0.702
11.656
5.22
0.638
5.23
2
Sample a
0.705
5.1401
2.38
0.657
2.38
3
Sample b
0.713
10.845
4.67
0.604
4.67
4
Sample c
0.688
3.451
1.58
0.667
1.58

A series of electrochemical studies were performed with graphite sheet electrodes loaded with a definite proportions of NixSn2xS4x active catalytic materials to study HER using 0.5 M H2SO4. Initially, polarization studies were carried out by linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) in a three-electrode system; the measured potentials were converted into the reversible hydrogen electrode. Fig. 7A shows the LSV curves for HER with a geometric current density of 10 mA cm−2 for the NixSn2xS4x-loaded graphite sheet electrode, M–NixSn2xS4x-loaded graphite sheet electrode, and Pt/C (20%)-loaded graphite sheet electrode in 0.5 M H2SO4. The LSV polarization curves were measured at room temperature for different electrodes at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. For comparison, the electrochemical performance of a bare graphite sheet electrode was also evaluated as a control. The bare graphite sheet electrode in the absence of active catalytic materials produced a high overpotential of −331 mV for HER, indicating low electrocatalytic performance. The Pt/C (20%)-loaded graphite sheet electrode clearly showed a lower overpotential (−40 mV) for HER at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 7A). Meanwhile, the M–NixSn2xS4x-loaded graphite sheet showed a similar overpotential of −43 mV for the HER. Based on these results, the overpotentials achieved by the commercial catalyst and M–NixSn2xS4x composite were not significantly different. On the other hand, the NixSn2xS4x-loaded graphite sheet electrode without MWCNTs showed a comparatively higher overpotential of −52 mV for HER.

Importantly, the active catalytic M–NixSn2xS4x composite-loaded electrode exhibited a several-fold enhancement in current density compared to our recently reported Cu2SnS3 composites. Although the overpotential remained the same, the electrocatalytic HER performance of the M–NixSn2xS4x-loaded graphite sheet electrode was comparable to that of the Pt/C substrate due to its high metallic conductivity and active surface area.
In general, the Tafel slope indicates the basic HER activity of the electrode material; a lower the Tafel slope indicates a faster HER rate and decreased overpotential. The Tafel slope is derived by fitting the Tafel equation η = blogj + a, where j is the current density, and b is the Tafel slope in the polarization curve. Fig. 7B shows a Tafel slope of 57 mV dec−1 for the M–NixSn2xS4x-loaded graphite sheet electrode, indicating a Heyrovsky or Tafel mechanism. In contrast, the Pt/C (20%)-loaded graphite sheet electrode exhibited a slightly lower Tafel slope of 53 mV dec−1. The lower Tafel slope indicates the evolution of molecular hydrogen as the rate-determining step. In contrast, in the absence of MWCNTs, the NixSn2xS4x-loaded graphite sheet electrode exhibited a larger Tafel slope of 83 mV dec−1, clearly revealing a decrease in conductivity of the active catalytic material in the absence of MWCNTs. The Tafel slope and HER overpotential studies at the current density of 10 mA cm−2 for the M–NixSn2xS4x-loaded electrode revealed an enhanced activity compared to reported sulfides or selenide materials, as shown in Table S5. Based on the SEM image (Fig. 2), the flower-like morphology provides a lot of sharp edges (i.e., active edges) compared to blunt sites. Thus, reaction at the edge sites allowed more accumulation via the electrostatic mechanism, making the loaded catalyst efficient for the HER. The stability of the catalyst is the distinct feature in HER; the durability of the catalytic material has to be accounted for in long-term applications. In this investigation, the stability (Fig. 7C) of the catalytic material-loaded electrode was studied at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. The results revealed that the polarization performance of the M–NixSn2xS4x-loaded catalyst had good stability between the 1st and 2000th cycles. Even after 2000 cycles, there was only a minor decay in the current density, indicating the durability of the electrocatalyst. It attributes that the addition of MWCNTs is to hold the active nanocomposite tightly and enhanced the efficiency of the ternary catalytic material towards HER.
Further, CV was performed to identify the electrochemically active surface area (Fig. 8A and B). First, the double-layer capacitance (Cdl) or non-faradaic charging current was studied based on the CV curves between 2 and 10 mV s−1. Accordingly, Cdl was calculated as 144.9 and 157.6 mF cm−2 for the NixSn2xS4x- and M–NixSn2xS4x-loaded graphite sheet electrodes, respectively (Fig. 8D) using the calculated electrochemical active surface areas of 0.24 and 0.26 cm2, respectively. In addition, the exchange current densities were calculated as 7.01 and 5.90 μA cm−2 for the M–NixSn2xS4x- and NixSn2xS4x-loaded electrodes, respectively, demonstrating the higher active surface area and enhanced catalytic activity of the NixSn2xS4x composite with MWCNTs. To obtain a better understanding in the electrocatalytic or electrokinetic mechanism, EIS measurements were carried out on the M–NixSn2xS4x-loaded graphite sheet electrode. As expected, the M–NixSn2xS4x-loaded graphite sheet electrode showed a lower Rct value of 6.21 Ω in the Nyquist plot (Fig. 8C) compared to the electrode without MWCNTs. The graphite sheet electrode tends to show a series resistance of 1–2 Ω, meaning that an effective electrical integration is ensured for effective HER.


Fig. 9A or B show the CV curves of the NixSn2xS4x and M–NixSn2xS4x thiospinel nanocomposite-loaded electrodes in 6 M KOH solution recorded at scan rates from 5 to 100 mV s−1. Interestingly, a well-defined quasi-reversible redox behavior was observed at the low scan rate of 5 mV s−1 for the NixSn2xS4x-loaded electrode, whereas the quasi-reversible redox behavior was partly restricted in the M–NixSn2xS4x nanocomposite-loaded electrode. Subsequently, upon increasing the scan rate to 50 mV s−1, the non-faradaic capacitance current slowly increased for the NixSn2xS4x-loaded electrode, both in the presence and absence of MWCNTs. Further increasing the scan rate to 100 mV s−1 resulted in a high capacitance current for the M–NixSn2xS4x nanocomposite-loaded electrode. The same trend was not observed in the absence of MWCNTs for the NixSn2xS4x-loaded electrode. It seems that the existence of MWCNTs in the NixSn2xS4x nanocomposite-loaded electrode had a strong influence that greatly enhanced the capacitance current. Fig. 9C and D show the galvanostatic charge/discharge (GCDs) curves of the NixSn2xS4x and M–NixSn2xS4x nanocomposite-loaded electrodes in 6 M KOH. The results suggest that the NixSn2xS4x thiospinel-loaded electrode exhibited a characteristic specific capacitance of 1018 F g−1 at 1 A g−1; in contrast, the M–NixSn2xS4x nanocomposite-loaded electrode showed a higher capacitance of 1200 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, which can be ascribed to the sustainment of charges on the surfaces of the MWCNTs and reduction in the ionic migration rate of the nanocomposite. The Nyquist plot (Fig. 9E) revealed that the synthesized nanocomposite possessed low electrode resistance on the graphite electrode. It started near zero owing to the crystalline structure of the graphite electrode with sp2 hybridization. Ni and Sn atoms permit high metallic conductivity due to their metallic bonding properties. The loop indicates a minimum electrolytic resistance or charge-transfer resistance; thus, the hump is very small. The combination of electrode resistance, charge-transfer resistance, and electrolytic resistance are collectively called internal resistance, which is minimal for the synthesized thiospinel nanocomposites. Also, the obtained Warburg impedance value suggests a capacitive nature due to diffusion layer resistance, where diffusion is the electrochemical process that a exhibits straight line followed by the hump. As a result, pseudocapacitance behavior was observed for the NixSn2xS4x-loaded electrode. On the other hand, electrical double-layer capacitance was observed due to the slight incline in the slope, which reflects high surface diffusion in the M–NixSn2xS4x-loaded electrode.Fig. 9F compares the current densities and corresponding specific capacitances for the NixSn2xS4x- and M–NixSn2xS4x-loaded graphite electrodes. Fig. 9G shows the cyclic performances or cyclic stabilities of the proposed nanocomposite materials at 10 A g−1. The M–NixSn2xS4x nanocomposite-loaded electrode showed an enhanced specific capacitance retention of 92.6% (i.e., high cyclic stability even after 15000 cycles) compared to the NixSn2xS4x nanocomposite-loaded electrode, which showed a specific capacitance retention of 92.9% for up to 8000 cycles. The supercapacitor efficacy is compared with those of similar state-of-the-art materials in Table S6. The enhancement in cyclic stability is due to the incorporation of NixSn2xS4x thiospinel on the MWCNT surfaces, and sp2-hybridized carbon restricted the mobility of ions in the nanocomposite system. Accordingly, cyclic stability and high specific capacitance were retained in the M–NixSn2xS4x nanocomposite-loaded electrode.


Periodic plane-wave density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed to investigate the geometrical and electrical properties of the NixSn2xS4x thiospinel structure. All DFT calculations were carried out using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP). The projector-augmented wave (PAW) method was used in the calculations to represent ion–electron interactions. To improve the description of electronic properties in the calculations, the screened hybrid Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof functional (HSE06) was used with the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) implemented in the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) functional. The HSE06 hybrid functional has PBE exchange correlation mixed with 25% of Hartree–Fock (HF) exchange, and the screened potential replaces the columbic potential to define the difference between long- and short-range components of the HF exchange. Further, the semi-empirical Grimme (D2) long-range dispersion correction was included in the calculations to understand the interactions of sulphides with carbon nanotubes. The Kohan–Sham valence states were extended in the plane-wave basis set with a kinetic energy cutoff of 600 eV. This high cutoff energy was used to avoid Pulay stress, which generally occurs in the cell relaxation process. Initially, the structure of NixSn2xS4x was optimized using Monkhorst–Pack grids with 3 × 3 × 3 K-points. The optimization continued until the Feynman forces of each atom were below 0.02 eV Å−1. Density of states calculations were carried out using the tetrahedral method with Bloch corrections to improve the convergence of Brillouin-zone integration. Atomic charges of all systems were predicted using the Bader partition methodology, which was implemented in the studies of Henkelman et al.

The rhombohedra unit cell of the NixSn2xS4x structure belongs to the Oh7 = Fd3m space group with the lattice parameter of 5.68 Å. The Ni cations are at tetrahedral sites, and the Sn cations are in octahedral interstices, as shown in Fig. 10A. Each of the four Sn cations is in a trigonal-field axis along the 111 direction. The Ni–S and Sn–S bond lengths are 2.09 and 2.48 Å, respectively. Haider et al. reported the bond lengths of Ni and Sn in thiospinel structures as 2.1 Å, consistent with the obtained results. The S–Ni–S, Ni–S–Sn, and S–Sn–S angles are 109°, 126°, and 90°, respectively, as shown in Fig. 10B. The powder XRD pattern of NixSn2xS4x synthesized at 180 °C was compared with the patterns of NiS (JCPDS no. 750613), Sn2S3 (JCPDS no. 720031), and γ-Sn2S3 (JCPDS no. 301379). The powder XRD pattern of NixSn2xS4x matched with the JCPDS patterns of NiS, Sn2S3, and γ-Sn2S3, as shown in Fig. S2. In addition, the theoretically predicted powder XRD pattern of NixSn2xS4x was compared with the experimental data (not shown). The small observed shift in the XRD pattern may due to the vacancies and defects in the synthesised materials. The total density of states (TDOS) and partial density of states (PDOS) are plotted for the NixSn2xS4x structure in Fig. 11A and B, respectively. The TDOS plot shows a narrow bandgap near the Fermi level, which confirms that the structure is semi-conducting in nature. The PDOS diagram shows a strong influence of S atoms near the Fermi level. Both the p and d orbitals of S atoms create an energy level at the valence band (acceptor level), indicating that the synthesized thiospinel is a p-type semiconductor.

The optimized structures of NixSn2xS4x and MWCNT were interfaced together to understand the nature of the interaction between the two components. The combined structure was optimized with 2 × 2 × 2 grid points, and the optimized structures are illustrated in Fig. 12A and B. The bond distance between the nearest MWCNT and NixSn2xS4x systems is 2.54 Å, where there is no covalent bond formation between C and S atoms. To confirm the nature of interaction between the two systems, the electron localization function is plotted in Fig. 12C. No localized electrons are observed at the interface between the two systems, confirming that the interaction is weak in nature. The TDOS and PDOS of the interface are shown in Fig. 12D, showing overlap between the p-orbitals of the S and C atoms near the Fermi level. The overlapping of the p-orbitals confirms the significant contribution of delocalized p-orbitals in the weak interaction. Thus, the unique properties of the systems are generated by the formation of a nanoheterostructure between NixSn2xS4x and MWCNTs, which is denoted as a synergic effect. Here, the synergic effect is induced by the presence of dangling bonds at the interface between MWCNTs and NixSn2xS4x, which includes delocalized states for enhanced electron transfer in DSSC, HER, and supercapacitor applications.


In summary, hierarchical M–NixSn2xS4x nanocomposites with thiospinel structures were successfully synthesized and confirmed by both experimental and theoretical interpretations. The M–NixSn2xS4x nanocomposite with flower petal-like morphology exhibited a high active surface area with definite pore diameter and volume. This distinctive design results in numerous electroactive sites and sufficient electrode–electrolyte contact area for better utilization of thiospinel nanocomposites. The M–NixSn2xS4x nanocomposite shows mutual influences from Ni and Sn sulfides, generating high electrochemical activity. As a result, the thiospinel nanocomposite exhibited excellent efficiency in terms of CE performance in DSSCs, low overpotential and high HER activity, superior energy storage performance in terms of specific capacity, and outstanding overall cycling stability. In addition, the high specific energy and specific power performance make the M–NixSn2xS4x nanocomposite an excellent electrode material for wide electrochemical applications. The theoretical results satisfactorily revealed the energy-minimized electronic band structure and the nature of interaction between the MWCNTs and NixSn2xS4x. Accordingly, the theoretical results validated the outcome of various electrochemical applications with broad perspectives.


The corresponding author and co-authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.


Financial support from DST–SERB, New Delhi (File No. EMR/2015/001893) is gratefully acknowledged.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0dt00839g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020