 DOI: 10.1039/D2CE00794K
(Highlight)
CrystEngComm, 2022, 24, 7008-7023


Ilya V.
Kuchurov
,

Mikhail N.
Zharkov
 and 

Sergei G.
Zlotin
*

I. N. Nazarov Laboratory of Fine Organic Synthesis, N. D. Zelinsky Institute of Organic Chemistry Russian Academy of Sciences, Leninsky Prospect, 47, Moscow, Russian Federation. E-mail: zlotion@ioc.ac.ru

Received
8th June 2022
, Accepted 15th September 2022
First published on 16th September 2022
In this highlight article, supercritical carbon dioxide-based strategies for “green” preparation of uniform fine particles (crystals) of advanced functional materials for energy production and storage are briefly overviewed. In particular, the CO2-facilitated processes for obtaining high-performance cathode or anode materials for rechargeable lithium, sodium, or potassium ion batteries, advanced electrodes for dye-sensitized solar cells, and prospective energetic materials which accumulate energy in the form of high-energy chemical bonds are summarized with a focus on original reports published over the past decade. Some of the processes are attractive for industrial applications due to the superior performance of produced products and significant reduction of toxic wastes.

Today, the issues of improving the quality of the human habitat are becoming increasingly important resulting in the development of alternative technological processes with a minimized negative environmental footprint that are characterized by reduced energy consumption, less waste, efficient processing of byproducts and higher quality and better safety of final products. The chemical industry consumes millions of tons of organic solvents that determine much of the environmental performance of any process. Meanwhile a number of hazards are inherent to organic solvents, with some of them being highly flammable, explosive, toxic or persistent. In this context, supercritical fluids (SCFs) are considered alternative media to replace toxic organic solvents and obtain conceptually new materials with tunable properties. The advantages of SCFs over conventional solvents originate from their unique physicochemical properties, in particular gas-like viscosity and diffusivity along with liquid-like density and solvating ability. Importantly, these properties can be readily adjusted by simple temperature and pressure change. Although SCFs were discovered by Charles Cagniard de la Tour 200 years ago, in 1822, they have found an active use only in recent decades. Useful applications of SCFs comprise chemical and biochemical reactions, syntheses of new materials such as aerogels, chromatography and extraction processes. Furthermore, SCFs are considered as promising media for the preparation of finely dispersed materials for efficient energy production and storage. However, research efforts in this area have been mainly focused on the usage of supercritical water or alcohols. Herein, we highlight the studies aimed at the development of materials for rechargeable batteries, solar cells, and preparation of energetic compounds that accumulate and store energy in chemical bonds in supercritical (sc) or liquid (liq) CO2 media. Carbon dioxide is a relevant “green” solvent due to its minimal environmental, health, and safety concerns, as well as minimal emissions; also, it is abundant in the environment or renewably sourced. Supercritical CO2 features extremely low viscosity, gas-like diffusivity, and excellent mass transfer properties. The near-zero surface tension of CO2 allows excellent permeation between nanoparticles and facile transport of reaction precursors throughout a sample. The physicochemical properties of scCO2, such as density, viscosity, and dielectric constant, can be tuned via changing temperature and pressure. Moreover, scCO2 is stable, nonflammable, nontoxic, and inexpensive. The readily attainable critical point parameters (31.1 °C, 7.38 MPa) along with aforementioned benefits make scCO2 especially attractive for advanced material synthesis in both laboratory and commercial scales.


Since the early 1990s, lithium ion batteries (LIBs) have been widely used in portable electronic devices. Recently, their potential for electrical energy storage and as power sources for electric vehicles, hybrid electric vehicles, aerospace applications, and autonomous electric devices has also been recognized due to their high voltage, light weight, high power density, lack of memory effect, and environmental friendliness. Such a high LIB performance was achieved thanks to the rapid development of materials science methods for obtaining nanocomposite cathodes and anodes, including the use of SCF-based techniques.


Graphene nanosheets (GNS), two-dimensional (2D) materials with one-atom thickness and strongly bonded carbon networks, have caused a wide interest in battery design due to their specific capacity which is much larger than that of graphite. Single and few-layer graphene sheets can be obtained with graphite exfoliation under scCO2 conditions. Supercritical CO2 can diffuse in between the interlayers of graphite due to its low viscosity, high diffusivity, and small molecule size. When high-speed shear stress was applied to CO2 fluid, graphite powder was expanded and delaminated effectively into graphene sheets (Fig. 1). The additional use of the high pressure ultrasound technique allowed the number of graphene layers and their lateral sizes to be controlled and the production to be scaled up. The exfoliated graphene sheets improved the electrochemical performance of LiFePO4 cathode materials, demonstrating a remarkable electrical conductivity. The specific capacity of the LiFePO4/graphene composite cathode reached 160 mA h g−1 which is 94.7% of the theoretical capacity.

The unique properties of CO2 have proven to be useful for obtaining advanced porous hard carbon materials for alkali metal-ion batteries using low-cost polymers such as polyacrylonitrile (PAN) and polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA). Supercritical CO2 can lower the glass transition temperature of the polymer, and being homogenously mixed with the polymer matrix near the molecular level, increases the nucleation density. Subsequent rapid pressure release or temperature rise forces scCO2 to nucleate and grow in the polymer due to its supersaturation thus producing the polymer foam. Supercritical CO2 foaming technology allows the porous structure of anode materials to be controlled by adjusting the composition of the polymer matrix system and the process parameters such as saturation temperature, saturation pressure, saturation time, and pressure relief rate. Ensuring the optimal pore size is especially important for sodium- and potassium-ion batteries (SIBs and PIBs), since the larger ionic radii of Na+ and K+ (1.02 Å and 1.38 Å compared to 0.76 Å of the lithium ion) cause a sluggish intercalation of ions into electrodes and enormous volume expansion of electrodes during cycling, thus leading to lower reversible capacity and severe capacity fading of batteries. Supercritical CO2-based foaming technology was successfully applied by the Zhao group to fabricate a free-standing nitrogen-doped 3D hierarchically porous carbon monolith (3DHPCM) anode for SIBs. The starting materials were saturated with scCO2 at 140 °C and 31.09 MPa for 1.5 h. After that, the pressure was rapidly released affording the foam, which was carbonized at 800 °C. Benefiting from the synergistic effect of the hierarchical porous structure and ion/electron transport dynamics superiority, the 3DHPCM anode shows a high reversible specific capacity (281 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles at 50 mA g−1 with a capacity retention of 98.3%), superior rate performance (67 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1), and excellent long-term cycling stability (175 mA h g−1 after 3000 cycles at 500 mA g−1 with a capacity retention of 90.9%). Later on, Gong et al. similarly obtained phosphorus/nitrogen co-functionalized porous carbon monolith (PN-PCM), nitrogen-doped carbon nanofoams (N-CNFs) and nitrogen/oxygen co-doped bi-continuous nanoporous carbon scaffold (BNCS) anode materials for PIBs. The fabricated composites exhibited a high reversible specific capacity: PN-PCM (396 mA h g−1, 100 mA g−1, 300 cycles), N-CNFs (332 mA h g−1, 100 mA g−1, 100 cycles) and BNCS (325 mA h g−1, 100 mA g−1, 300 cycles). The efficiency of the porous carbon composites obtained in scCO2 is similar or even better in long-term cycling performance than the data reported for carbon anodes for SIBs including B-, P-, and S-doped HC materials obtained by conventional procedures.
Supercritical carbon dioxide was applied by Xie et al. to post-treatment of hydrothermally synthesized LiFePO4 to entirely alter the particle size and morphology. Initial LiFePO4 (Fig. 2a) had the morphology of platelets (20–30 μm) aggregated in one direction and was contaminated with Fe2PO5. After the treatment with scCO2 (10.0 MPa, 100 °C, 24 h), the impurity phase was removed, and the aggregated platelets were broken into smaller separate rhombus plates (3–5 μm) and flowerlike balls (10–20 μm) (Fig. 2b and c). Therefore, it became possible to precisely control the particle size and morphology of LiFePO4 by optimizing the experimental parameters in both the hydrothermal synthesis and supercritical carbon dioxide processing.
Ji et al. found that a facile surface modification of the lithium-rich Li1.2Mn0.56Ni0.16Co0.08O2 cathode material can be attained via scCO2-facilitated generation of oxygen vacancies on the surface of material particles. The surface-modified material exhibited higher initial coulombic efficiency (ICE) and better rate capability than the pristine samples in the electrochemical experiments. ICE was improved from 75.97% for the pristine cathode to 82.24% for the scCO2-modified cathode at the current density of 12.5 mA g−1. This improvement can be attributed to an increase of trivalent manganese and reversible oxygen contents caused by pre-activation of the Li2MnO3 component. The existence of oxygen vacancies, expanded unit cell volume and a larger amount of trivalent manganese accelerate conductive lithium ion migration, which results in a better rate performance.

Carbon materials have a long history of being used as electrodes in battery technology due to their excellent chemical stability, good electrical conductivity, large specific surface area and unique porosity. However, they are inferior to alloy anode materials in electrochemical performance. This limitation can be overcome by modifying carbon anodes with active additives with a large capacity, e.g. nanosized metal oxides. Supercritical CO2 has significant advantages over liquids in the deposition of metals and metal oxides onto porous substrates, i.e. lower viscosity, higher diffusivity and almost zero surface tension, which could largely mitigate the mass transfer limitations and facilitate the infiltration of precursors into complex geometries.

Tin oxide (SnO2) modified multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT), graphene nanosheets (GNSs) and carbon nanotubes (CNTs) were synthesized via oxidation of SnCl2·2H2O in a scCO2/alcohol mixture. Patra et al. prepared in SCF-medium 1 nm scaled SnO2 particles uniformly dispersed and tightly anchored on GNSs and CNTs (Fig. 3b and c), while the conventional scCO2-free process afforded aggregated SnO2 clusters with dimensions of up to the sub-micron scale (Fig. 3a). The lithium-ion batteries with SnO2/MWCNT anode materials exhibited a much higher Li+ storage capacity than the capacities of graphite (300 mA h g−1) and the pristine SnO2 (645 mA h g−1) along with a remarkably improved recyclability. The reversible capacities of the SnO2/GNSs electrode were 787 and 475 mA h g−1 at 100 and 6000 mA h g−1, respectively. Moreover, 93% of the initial capacity was retained after 100 lithiation/de-lithiation cycles.
Huang et al. synthesized a nanocrystalline SnS@tremella-like porous carbon composite (SnS@TPC) in one-step via the scCO2 method at 35 °C. Thioacetamide (TAA) and SnCl2 dissolved in the CO2–ethylene glycol (EG) mixture diffuse well into the interior of TPC and form SnS particles anchored onto TPC through a solvothermal reaction. The composite retained the porous structure and a uniform dispersion of SnS nanocrystals. It exhibited an impressive cycling stability (457 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles with a capacity retention of 90.5% at 0.2 A g−1, 397 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles with a capacity retention of 93% at 1 A g−1) and a great rate performance.
Ming et al. showed that the fabrication of nanostructured materials from hydrous inorganic metal salt in scCO2 expanded liquids has unexpected advantages. The carbonate ions evolved from CO2 and H2O can generate amorphous intermediates Mx(OH)y(NO3)z(CO3)m·nH2O (M = Ni, Fe, Co, Cr, etc.) within the nucleation process, which slow down the crystal growth and result in smaller nanoparticles. Accordingly, Hu et al. developed a scCO2-assisted one-step strategy for anchoring Fe3O4 nanoparticles with a narrow distribution (11 ± 4 nm in diameter) on graphene foam (GF). As a result, the composites delivered a high capacity of about 1200 mA h g−1 over up to 500 cycles at 1 C (924 mA h g−1) and about 300 mA h g−1 at 20 C, which reached a record among Fe3O4 based anode materials for LIBs.
The NiCo2O4 nanoparticles were uniformly embedded by the Zhao group into the porous three-dimensional hierarchical porous carbon (3DHPC) matrix via a scCO2-expanded ethanol solution-assisted deposition method combined with a subsequent heat-treatment process (400 °C). The NiCo2O4/3DHPC composite exhibited a much higher reversible capacity and a significantly improved rate capability. More importantly, it could render a reversible capacity of 660 mA h g−1, with 92.3% capacity retention for up to 500 cycles at a current density of 1 A g−1, highlighting its enormous potential in energy management.
Carbon nanotubes (CNT)/cobalt oxide (Co3O4) nanocomposites were synthesized by the Shim group via the solvothermal decomposition of Co(NO3)2 in a scCO2/ethanol solvent system at 150 °C. The scanning electron microscopy and transmission electron microscopy analyses revealed the surface of the CNT to be coated evenly with Co3O4 nanoparticles with a mean size of ca. 5 nm (Fig. 4). The electrode modified with CNT/Co3O4 composites exhibited a high specific capacity of 950 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1, as well as excellent cycling stability (94.6% capacity retention after 2000 cycles). A similar method but supplemented with thermal treatment of the sample at 450 °C was utilized by Yuan et al. for the fabrication of the cobalt monoxide/graphene (CoO/G) nanocomposite with a specific capacity (961 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1), excellent cyclic stability and rate capability (617 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles at 1000 mA g−1).
The scCO2-assisted two-step process including the deposition of CeO2 nanoparticles from Ce(NO3)3·6H2O and subsequent impregnation of sulfur on a new corn flour originating porous carbon material (NSPC) was developed by Ye et al. to synthesize the C/CeO2/S cathode material for high performance lithium–sulfur (Li–S) batteries. The Li–S batteries are considered promising candidates for next-generation electrochemical power sources. Under the proposed conditions, the impregnated sulfur was amorphous and highly dispersed, and the deposited catalytically active and chemically adsorptive CeO2/S nanoparticles are in intimate contact with carbon. As a result, the shuttle effect (forward/backward polysulfide diffusion between the anode and cathode) of the assembled Li–S batteries was greatly suppressed with the electrochemical performance being significantly improved. The C/CeO2/S composite exhibited a higher discharge capacity (1538 mA h g−1) than the two-component C/S analogue in the first cycle of the Li–S battery and delivered a capacity of 729 mA h g−1 with approximately 70% capacity retention after 300 cycles at 0.5 C.
Supercritical CO2 was used by Li et al. as a green component for eco-efficient synthesis of the CoCO3/GNS nanocomposite. Highly porous CoCO3 particles (D ∼ 20 nm) obtained from the Co(CH3COO)2 precursor and CO2 were homogeneously distributed between GNSs. The CoCO3/GNS anode exhibited excellent high-rate performance (ca. 745 mA h g−1 capacity at 6000 mA g−1) and great cycling stability (>98% retention after 200 cycles) for Li+ storage.
Carbon nanocages with a nanographene shell have been prepared by Wang et al. via catalytic decomposition of p-xylene over a Co/Mo catalyst in scCO2 at 10.34 MPa and 650–750 °C. The nanomaterials prepared at 750 °C exhibited better electrochemical performance due to the highly graphitized carbon shells and ensured faster electron transportation through the well-graphitized carbon nanocages, efficient electrolyte penetration in the porous network, and shortened Li diffusion in the thin carbon shells.
A scCO2 fluid-assisted strategy was proposed by Yu et al. for the synthesis of reduced graphene oxide (RGO)/TiO2 nanowires (TiO2-NWs) and RGO/TiO2 nanowires with quantum dots (TiO2-QDs) composites by the hydrothermal treatment with a tetrabutyl titanate (TBOT)/GO mixture. The diameter of the ultrafine TiO2-NWs was well controlled at about 4.2 nm. The reversible capacity of the RGO/TiO2-NWs composite as an anode material for LIBs remained 666 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles at 0.1 A g−1 and 460 mA h g−1 after 2000 cycles at 2 A g−1, which is nearly twice that of the composite synthesized without scCO2 treatment. When cycled against Na, the reversible capacity (113 mA h g−1 with 81.8% retention even at 5 A g−1 after 5000 cycles) was superior to those of other RGO/TiO2 composites reported so far. The RGO/TiO2-QDs nanocomposite has a porous structure with a tight union of TiO2-QDs (∼3.7 nm) and RGO supports which offers numerous fast electron and ion transmission routes and high mechanical stability. The prepared electrode showed excellent reversible capacity (241 mA h g−1 at 0.05 A g−1) with only 18.5% capacity loss after 300 cycles. Even after increasing the current density up to 5 A g−1, a decent capacity of 108 mA h g−1 can still be achieved with a low capacity loss of 11.5% over 5000 cycles.

Liquid or supercritical carbon dioxide is a promising medium not only for material synthesis, but also for their modification by coating or impregnation. The extremely low surface tension in liquid (0.00195 N m−1 at 15 °C (ref. 50)) and the zero one in the supercritical state make CO2 an excellent wetting agent and facilitate the penetration of carbon precursors into small pores between particle agglomerates. Furthermore, the low surface tension and excellent capability to decouple the coating and solvent by easy depressurization can alleviate other non-uniformities caused by high surface tension during common solvent drying. Hong et al. prepared uniform ultrathin carbon coating on lithium iron phosphate (LiFePO4) particles using high-pressure free-meniscus coating (hFMC) with liquid CO2 (liq-CO2) as the coating solvent and sucrose octaacetate (SOA) as a carbon precursor. After calcination under a H2/Ar flow at 600 °C, the carbon-coated LiFePO4 (carbon content of 1.9 wt% with a thickness of 3.3 nm) exhibited a discharge capacity of 169 mA h g−1 at 0.1 C and 71 mA h g−1 at 30 C. For comparison, the discharge capacity of the LiFePO4/carbon composite (optimized carbon content of 6.0 wt%) prepared by conventional aqueous-based coating was only 146 mA h g−1 at 0.1 C and 17 mA h g−1 at 30 C.

A similar hFMC liq-CO2 based approach was used by Hwang et al. to coat hierarchical porous MoO2 microspheres, olivine-structured LiFePO4 (ref. 53) and Na2Ti3O7/tunnel Na2Ti6O13 hybrids with a carbon layer obtained by SOA thermal treatment. The prepared carbon-coated composite materials demonstrated a promising efficiency in energy storage devices. Thus, carbon coated porous MoO2 with a carbon content of 6.6 wt% delivered a reversible discharge capacity of 451.5 mA h g−1 at 83.8 mA g−1 after 100 cycles. The LiFePO4-based electrode exhibited a reversible capacity of 168 mA h g−1 at 0.1 C, high energy and power density (109 W h kg−1 and 3.3 kW kg−1 at 30 C, respectively) along with excellent long-term recyclability (84% cycle retention at 10 C after 1000 cycles). The Na2Ti3O7/tunnel Na2Ti6O13 hybrid showed an excellent high-rate performance and a cycling stability as an anode in SIBs because the Na+ ions could be partly inserted/de-inserted into the carbon layer, and the structural integrity of the whole hybrid was maintained by the presence of Na2Ti6O13. The hybrid could deliver 44 mA h g−1 with a flat voltage plateau at 0.7 V and a high current density of 1 A g−1 during the charge process.
Supercritical fluids, just like liq-CO2, are very promising coating media for energy storage materials. Lee et al. found that scCO2 may serve as a cost-saving and scalable medium to intercalate polyaniline (PANi)-modified silicon (Si) nanoparticles into graphene nanosheets. The π–π interaction was crucial for this process affording a well-dispersed Si@PANi/graphene composite for highly stable LIBs quickly (30 min) under mild conditions (14 MPa of scCO2, 60 °C). The composite exhibited high cycle performance (1.789 mA h g−1 after 250 cycles) and rate capability (1.690 mA h g−1 at a current density of 4000 mA h g−1).
Supercritical CO2 was recently applied by the Chang group to create a SiOx/carbon multi-layer coating on Si particles. The SiOx shell surface oxidation was attained by treating Si particles with scCO2 fluid. Then, external carbon shells were obtained from glucose, sucrose, and citric acid via calcination at 850 °C under Ar atmosphere for 5 h. The composite prepared with the glucose precursor showed the highest tap density, the lowest charge transfer resistance, and the best Li+ transport kinetics among the electrodes, resulting in a high specific capacity of 918 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1. After 300 charge–discharge cycles, the electrode retained its integrity and did not accumulate the solid electrolyte interphase.
Zhang et al. obtained silicon oxycarbide (SiOC), a promising anodic material with high specific capacity for advanced LIBs, from microalgae (Nannochloropsis) and tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) with the assistance of scCO2 fluid. This fluid served as a superior solvent to guarantee efficient mass transfer and uniform dispersion of TEOS precursors in the biological template due to its high penetrating, diffusive and dissolving capacity. The process was completed by calcination at 500 °C for 4 h under Ar atmosphere. The obtained SiOC exhibited a high reversible specific capacity of 450 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 over 200 cycles, excellent rate cycling stability and high coulombic efficiency (100%) as an anodic material for LIBs. Furthermore, the Zhang group constructed a unique 3D porous SiOC/Se cathode with a high Se loading (8 mg cm−2) for advanced Li–Se batteries using a facile biotemplating scCO2-based technique. The SiOC/Se composite exhibited superior cycling stability (4.1 mA h cm−2 after 200 cycles) and rate capability (2.0 mA h cm−2 at 1 C), which demonstrated huge potential in advanced Se cathodes.
The capability of scCO2 to mediate incorporation of sulfur into the activated carbon matrix (AC@S) producing prospective cathode materials for high performance Li–S batteries was demonstrated by groups of Ye and Zhang. The obtained AC@S cathode exhibited high specific capacity (905 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1), prolonged cycling life (817 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles) and remarkable coulombic efficiency (>99%).
The scCO2-based sulfur impregnation strategy was applied by Xia et al. to synthesize Ni(OH)2@porous yeast carbon/sulfur composites (Ni(OH)2@PYC/S) for advanced Li–S batteries. Natural yeasts were employed as both biological templates and renewable carbon sources to fabricate high conductivity porous carbon matrices for sulfur encapsulation. After the scCO2 treatment, sulfur was successfully impregnated into porous carbon matrices to afford sulfur/carbon composites (Fig. 5c). Meanwhile, Ni(OH)2 nanoparticles served as surface modifiers to enhance chemisorption of polysulfides and suppress migration of sulfur. The elaborately designed Ni(OH)2@PYC/S composite cathode (Fig. 5d) exhibited high reversible discharge capacity (1335 mA h g−1 at 0.1 C), remarkable cyclic stability (602 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at 0.2 C) and superior rate capability, much better than the nickel-free PYC/S counterpart. These results clearly demonstrated that the advanced porous carbon with a good conductivity and the polar Ni(OH)2 coating layer with a strong trapping ability towards polysulfides are responsible for the enhanced electrochemical performance.
The Li–O2/CO2 battery developed by Takechi et al. with a capacity higher than that of the Li–O2 battery may significantly contribute to the progress in efficient green energy sources. Ionogels composed of ionic liquids ([bmim][Tf2N], [bmim][PF6] or [bmim][I]), and poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) were applied by Kunanusont and Shimoyama as binders of carbon particles on the cathode of the Li–O2/CO2 battery. This porous carbon cathode with an ionogel binder was fabricated by drying and impregnation techniques in scCO2 at 40 °C and 20.0 MPa and further tested in Li–O2/CO2 batteries. The discharge capacity of the battery enhanced with an increased amount of ionic liquid in the gel binder, attaining the maximum of 15.07 mA h cm−2 for the PVDF–[bmim][Tf2N] ionogel cathode. The capacity enhancement may be attributed to the reduction of the interfacial area between the electrolyte and cathode and to an improvement of the reaction gas solubility in the ionogel binder on the porous carbon cathode.
Hong et al. proposed a complex approach to the preparation of multi-layered carbon modified lithium titanium oxide (Li4Ti5O12) particles based on the application of different supercritical solvents throughout the modification process. The primary carbon layer was formed by sintering scMeOH coverage on the Li4Ti5O12 surface under a 5% H2/Ar2 atmosphere. Modification of the Li4Ti5O12 particles with oleyl amine in scMeOH followed by calcination under inert atmosphere afforded the second carbon layer with irregular carbon distribution (Fig. 6a and b). The final uniform carbon layer of 1.2 nm thickness was successfully produced on the entire surface of Li4Ti5O12 particles in scCO2/PEG-400 medium (Fig. 6c and d). The modified Li4Ti5O12 coated with carbon (5.3 wt%) exhibited a discharge capacity of 175 mA h g−1 at 0.1 C and 83 mA h g−1 at 50 C which approached the theoretical value.

Supercritical CO2 appeared a prospective reaction medium for green preparation of electrodes for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). The DSSCs are expected to become a regenerative low-cost alternative to conventional solid-state p–n junction solar cells. Although many semiconducting oxides have been tested, the titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanoparticle-based electron transport layer proved to be the most efficient photoelectrode in the DSSC system. A further improvement of the photovoltaic properties may be attained by modifying the electrode TiO2 films with surface coatings or light scattering particles/layers.


Wei et al. first applied a supercritical fluid process for the preparation of DSSC electrodes composed of mesoporous TiO2 and nanosized TiO2 (P25 Degussa, Germany, particle size 25 nm) films. The authors treated the TiO2 films with a small volume of titanium tetraisopropoxide (TIP) solution in scCO2 at 34.5–58.6 MPa and 60–100 °C. The obtained material after calcination at 400 °C (film thickness = 1.87 μm) exhibited an efficiency of 5.14% under standard air mass (AM 1.5) irradiation (100 mW cm−2).

Collis et al. reported that perylene anhydride-type dyes DOP and DOFP can be deposited on commercially available pre-sintered TiO2 photoanodes using scCO2 (Fig. 7). The scCO2-based process (14 MPa, 50 °C) allowed significant reduction of the dye deposition time compared with conventional organic solvents (from 15 h to 2 h). Furthermore, the energy-consuming high-temperature reactivation step (450 °C) was eliminated in the scCO2 process. Moreover, the approach eliminates the use of hazardous organic solvents and does not produce waste solvents. The solid unreacted dye could be easily recovered after completing the deposition by venting CO2.
Liao et al. applied roselle and red phoenix derived natural dyes as sensitizers for the counter electrode of nanocrystalline TiO2. The dyes were extracted from natural dyestuff with scCO2 and introduced into the photoelectric cell under optimal conditions (206 MPa/3000 psi, 50 °C, 30 min). The modification of the porous scattering layer with polyethylene glycol (PEG) further improved the sunlight capturing ability of the electrode (Fig. 8). The photoelectric conversion efficiency of the TiO2(P25)/TiO2(rutile-type)/PEG scattering layer became 30% higher than that of a single compact TiO2 layer.
Liu et al. used graphene sheets produced by exfoliation of graphite with scCO2 (ref. 24) to improve the photovoltaic performance of the CdS QDSSCs. The incorporation of graphene into zinc–titanium mixed metal oxide (Zn–Ti MMO) increased the surface-absorbed amount of CdS QDs and decreased the charge transfer resistance at the graphene-modified MMO/CdS/electrolyte interface. A 37.5% enhancement in the power conversion efficiency was achieved with 0.2 wt% content of graphene compared to the DSSC containing plain Zn–Ti MMO.
In some cases, liquid CO2 may serve as a useful coating solvent in the preparation of advanced materials for solar cell applications. Jang et al. designed a convenient procedure for uniform deposition of CuS, PbS, or CdS quantum dots (QDs) with 2.5–4.5 nm in diameter onto mesoporous TiO2 films by means of liq-CO2. The TiO2 films (8–15 μm) on FTO glass were treated with hexafluoroacetylacetonate of copper (Cu(hfac)2·H2O), lead (Pb(hfac)2), or cadmium (Cd(hfac)2) in liq-CO2 and afterwards with argon gas containing H2S (2000 ppm). Owing to the low surface tension and low viscosity of liq-CO2, QDs were deposited not only at the top surfaces but also in the inner pores of the TiO2 film without pore blocking.
A more detailed study of the factors that affected the liq-CO2-promoted deposition of CdS on mesoporous TiO2 films and photovoltaic performance of corresponding solar cells revealed that the size and coverage of CdS QDs over the TiO2 surface depended on the coating cycle number. The energy conversion efficiency of a CdS QD-sensitized solar cell (QDSSC) increased up to 1.33% over six coating cycles under standard conditions (1.5 AM, 100 mW cm−2). However, the further increase in the number of coating cycles resulted in deteriorating cell performance, which may be attributed to hindrances created by CdS particles for electrolyte infiltration into the mesoporous TiO2 electrode.
Owing to the excellent wetting properties of liq-CO2, copper and indium precursors readily penetrate the small pores of a mesoporous TiO2 film and a pre-fabricated porous copper indium gallium oxide (CIGO) film affording nanocomposites for thin-film solar cell applications. To ensure sulfurization of the deposited Cu and In precursors and to enhance the crystallinity of resulting particles, a two-step thermal annealing process, consisting of air-annealing (350 °C) and sulfurization (500 °C, H2S (10000 ppm)/N2), was developed. The XRD study revealed that the CuInS2 peak intensity (Fig. 9) increased with increasing number of coating cycles, indicating that multiple coating improved the crystallinity of the CuInS2 particles.

Supercritical fluids have the unique ability to transit from a high-density liquid-like solvent in the supercritical phase directly into the gas phase without crossing a phase boundary. This effect is widely used in practice for safe removal of solvents from solid materials while maintaining their structure.

Sung et al. coated fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass with a mesoporous titania aerogel film using a supercritical drying method. After scCO2 treatment, the film had an anatase structure with an average porosity of 76%. The mechanical strength of the film was improved by heat treatment at over 400 °C for 2 h, after which its structure was preserved but the porosity decreased to 68%. DSSCs containing the film exhibited the highest photo conversion efficiency of 3.71% at the film thickness of ca. 1 μm.
Farhangi et al. prepared a TiO2 nanowire/graphene composite via a scCO2-mediated sol–gel route using acetic acid (AcOH) as the polycondensation agent. The scCO2 pressure and temperature as well as AcOH/TIP and functionalized graphene sheets (FGSs)/TIP weight ratios exerted a significant impact on the process. The composite prepared in scCO2 media (34.5 MPa, 60 °C) from the wire of 10–20 nm in diameter and micron-range length at AcOH/TIP = 4:1 and (FGSs)/TIP = 1:20 ratios exhibited a 5-fold enhanced photo-efficiency compared to bare TiO2 nanowires.
Iwai et al. fabricated a DSSC from TiO2 aerogel which was obtained from titanium(IV) butoxide and AcOH by the sol–gel method. Then, the solvents were replaced with acetone which in turn was removed via drying with scCO2 at 40–50 °C and 7.8–15.5 MPa. The DSSC containing the film electrode made at 313 K and 15.5 MPa showed the best power performance (short-circuit current Jsc = 7.30 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage Voc = 772 mV, conversion efficiency η = 3.28%).
A perovskite solar cell (PSC) is a type of solar cell which includes a perovskite-structured compound, most commonly a hybrid organic–inorganic lead or tin halide-based material, as the light-harvesting active layer. The Tepper group recently reported that post treatment annealing of perovskite films in scCO2 increased the crystallinity and average grain size of the obtained CH3NH3PbI3 films. The CH3NH3PbI3 precursor was synthesized by mixing methyl ammonium iodide (CH3NH3I) and lead iodide (PbI2) in an equivalent molar ratio in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) or N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF). The precursor solution was spin coated onto the fluorine–tin-oxide glass slide at 6000 rpm for 25 s. The thin film was then placed in scCO2 media at 35–100 °C and 8.27–13.79 MPa to safely remove the solvent residue and accelerate the solid-state reaction to enhance crystallization.
The same group showed that the scCO2-based process enabled complete perovskite conversion affording the composite with an average crystal grain size of 408 nm at 45 °C, whereas thermal annealing alone resulted in incomplete formation of crystals with an average grain size of 175 nm. Additional grain growth was observed in scCO2 with an increase of treatment time and temperature. Organic co-solvents, e.g., ethanol (up to 2%), can also influence the perovskite film morphology and crystal structure via selective interactions with one or both perovskite precursors (Fig. 10). The products may be obtained as uniform films containing large grains or cubic/hexagonal crystals depending on the reaction conditions. Importantly, the scCO2 treatment resulted in a power conversion efficiency increase from 9.17% to 17.22%. Moreover, according to X-ray diffraction analysis, optical absorption, and device photoconversion efficiency data, the films processed in scCO2 were superior to the films annealed at the same temperature without scCO2 in terms of the initial quality and resistance to humidity degradation and provided a lower rate of performance degradation.

Xiao et al. proposed “green” scCO2 extraction of undesirable organic impurities from Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe) precursor films in order to reduce carbonaceous residues in the final solar cells. The CZTSSe solar cells have received considerable attention in recent years, owing to their low cost and toxicity as well as a high abundance of their constituent elements. The solar cell fabricated from a selenized CZTSSe precursor film via scCO2 treatment under optimal conditions (7.5 MPa, 120 °C, 20 min) showed the best conversion efficiency of 11.23% (Voc = 0.456 V, Jsc = 36.6 mA cm−2, fill factor (FF) = 67.1%).

The scCO2 treatment can also improve the CZTSSe solar cell efficiency via selenium composition regulation. The observed effect may be attributed to extraction of surplus Se-clusters from the gaps between adjacent CZTSSe under the supercritical conditions. Importantly, the scCO2 did not change significantly the morphology of CZTSSe absorber layers: a lot of elongated-shape crystals were observed in the layers upon treatment with scCO2 for 30 min and 60 min (Fig. 11b and c). According to enlarged SEM images (Fig. 11d and e), the prismatic elongated-shape crystals (50–100 nm), derived probably from low-active Se-clusters, were mainly distributed in the fine-grain layer along with the junction of the large-grain one.

Another important class of energetic materials that can be favorably produced or modified via scCO2 technologies are high energy materials (HEMs) widely used for civil and military applications. The bulk properties of HEMs strongly depend on the morphology of the particles they consist of, and the recrystallization processes using compressed inflammable gases as antisolvents or adjustable solvents allow desirable fine uniform crystals to be safely obtained. The solubility of the energetic substrate in SCF plays a crucial role in these processes. The most popular fluid utilized in these processes is the readily available and resistant to oxidizers CO2 serving as the antisolvent in micronization of HMX, CL-20, nitrocellulose, etc. and playing a dual role in the case of RDX partially soluble in scCO2 at higher temperature and pressure (Fig. 12).

An important R&D on RDX micronization by rapid expansion of the supercritical solution (RESS) process was performed by Stepanov et al., where the HEM was dissolved in scCO2 and then recrystallized via rapid expansion of the solution after spraying through a nozzle (Fig. 13). Being developed by this group earlier, the process was successfully adapted for the pilot-scale production (up to 1.5 kg over 5 h) of uniform RDX spherical particles of 200 or 500 nm in size depending on the discharge pressure regime (1 or 50 bar correspondingly). The obtained particles exhibited lower impact and shock sensitivity than reference samples (the milled 4 um, class-1 and class-5 from BAE Systems) in both pure and wax-coated states. Interestingly, the 500 nm RDX demonstrated a lower mechanical sensitivity than the 200 nm sample due to a change in the initiation mechanism. Optimal conditions for pilot-scale production of nano-sized RDX via the RESS process utilizing recirculating scCO2 (closed loop) have been found.
Such fine particles tend to agglomerate due to a higher surface energy, which is unfavorable for further operations and could be dangerous during transportation. Therefore, a modified RESS process was proposed by Essel et al. RDX solution in scCO2 was injected to aqueous medium at low pressure. Relatively stable non-agglomerated particles with a median size of 30 nm formed in experiments conducted at pH ∼ 7 with NH4OH as an additive. In the presence of surfactants (e.g., polyvinylpyrrolidone or polyethylenimine), long-term stable suspensions of RDX particles were produced, and they could be safely stored, transported, or processed into thin films.
Despite the generous amount of research papers on micronization of RDX via the RESS method, it has not been implemented in a large-scale production for a few reasons. The major drawback of all RESS processes utilizing scCO2 is the low solubility of HEMs demanding harsh extraction parameters (temperature and pressure) and resulting in a high consumption of the solvent. The insolubility problem makes the RESS method completely incompatible for most HEMs' micronization, e.g., HMX, one of the most demanded nitramines. At the same time, such HEMs can be easily dissolved in polar solvents and then precipitated from the solutions under the action of scCO2 in the solvent–antisolvent method. This principle underlies the whole family of supercritical antisolvent processes, namely GAS or SAS. The major difference between these processes is the order of mixing scCO2 with the solution of HEM in organic solvent (see Fig. 14). Unlike the RESS, the antisolvent methods offer significantly more variables to fine tune the produced microparticles, including their crystal structure alteration.
Lee et al. compared GAS and SAS methods of HMX micronization from various organic solvents (acetone, dimethylformamide, cyclohexanone, etc.). It has been shown that β-HMX can be achieved only using the GAS method. In their next paper the authors focused on the GAS process selectively and stated that γ-butyrolactone (GBL) is the most promising solvent for the reliable production of β-HMX crystals. In this case, lower values of the CO2 feeding rate, temperature and HMX concentration in GBL favored ultra-fine particle formation.
The SAS appeared applicable for semi-continuous micronization of HEMs that do not exhibit polymorphism. RDX microparticles efficiently formed from saturated dimethylformamide solution via the SAS procedure. The finest particles could be obtained in the reactor equipped with a nozzle of a smaller diameter resulting in a higher pressure drop. In some cases, even a narrow capillary created a sufficient pressure drop and could be used instead of a nozzle to produce RDX particles of 6–7 um (Fig. 15). A lot of variables inherent in the SAS procedure make its optimization more time and material consuming. A promising solution can be offered by statistical methods or mathematical modeling. Bayat et al. evaluated the effect of six major parameters on the size of HMX particles prepared via the SAS process by the Taguchi robust design method and found that 3% HMX solution in cyclohexanone with 3.5 ml min−1 flow rate and 70 ml min−1 CO2 flow rate was optimal for the preparation of uniform HMX particles of 54 nm in size. Unfortunately, crystal modification of the produced HMX was not specified in the paper; therefore, the proposed approach demands further refinement, especially considering the results presented by Lee et al. Later, Bayat and co-workers applied the Taguchi robust design to optimize SAS micronization of CL-20, the most powerful large-scale produced nitramine. Under the statistically optimized conditions, 37 nm particles of CL-20 were produced with no attempt to determine their crystal phase.
Seo et al. optimized the RDX SAS micronization procedure using computational methods based on the Hansen solubility parameter. The authors highlighted the issue of growing particles' agglomeration and demonstrated the strong dependence of this process on the acetone/CO2 ratio, RDX concentration, pressure and temperature in the precipitation chamber. Combining the calculated and experimental data, the authors succeeded in producing ultrafine RDX powder.
Yang et al. significantly modified the SAS experimental setup based on the simulation of fluid movement in the precipitation chamber. A prominent area of high-speed eddy currents at the top of the chamber aside of the nozzle was revealed (see Fig. 16a), where the ‘RDX solution/scCO2’ ratio increases creating the concentration gradient, which results in a wider particle size distribution (PSD). To maintain the uniform direct flow, the authors changed the shape of the hanging basket for the particle collection from cylindrical to conic (see Fig. 16b). Moreover, the authors elaborated the improved coaxial nozzle comprising inner mixing zone, which resulted in a more efficient jet-break. After a brief optimization of process parameters, the ultra-fine RDX particles were obtained that were in situ coated with the fluororubber layer due to the different solubility of RDX and the polymer in the acetone/scCO2 system. The continuity of the coating was proven by TEM and XPS analyses. The produced encapsulated RDX particles exhibited better PSD (mean diameter – 287 nm) and lower mechanical sensitivity.
An even more complicated approach to modeling the GAS micronization of HMX by scCO2 from the acetone solution was developed by the Lee group. Optimal conditions for the production of ultrafine HMX crystals of 18.36 ± 3.50 nm in size were identified by the simulation of the recrystallization process based on a mathematical model including population balance, mass balance, and thermodynamic equations. The prediction of PSD also allowed the authors to propose a suitable fabric filter for the maximum recovery of the HMX particles. Economical evaluations of CO2 and/or acetone regeneration in the GAS micronization of HMX proved that despite the greater capital expenditure the recirculation of exhausted solvent and antisolvent is significantly profitable in a long-term strategy.
Later, Lee with co-authors simulated GAS micronization of HMX from GBL using batch-wise nonlinear model predictive control (BNMPC). A thorough refinement of the model and correlation with experimental data led to the conclusion that the CO2 feed rate at ambient temperature (below 25 °C) and the initial seed PSD in a batch are crucial for obtaining fine HMX crystals of 25 um size. Though crystal modification of the obtained HMX was not experimentally determined, the formation of β-HMX could be expected.
Regarding the polymorphism of HEMs, the most challenging object for recrystallization is CL-20. Recently, Zharkov et al. developed a method for obtaining ε-CL-20 microparticles using already recognized scCO2 technologies. After the series of experiments on SAS and GAS micronization of CL-20 under various conditions the authors declared that this HEM cannot be recrystallized in the presence of CO2 since it forms the stable solvate α-CL-20·0.25CO2 regardless of the processing parameters. Therefore, the authors proposed to apply 1,1,1,2-tetrafluoroethane (TFE) as the alternative antisolvent inert to CL-20. Varying the GAS micronization conditions, the authors attained the selective formation of either β- or ε-CL-20 particles depending on the initial concentration of the CL-20 solution in ethyl acetate, TFE addition rate and temperature. The obtained microcrystals had narrow PSD with a mean diameter of 12 um. Raw CL-20 of any crystal phase, including aqueous α-CL-20, can be used as the starting substrate under the proposed conditions. Importantly, TFE was utilized repeatedly in the closed loop multiple times making the process sustainable and economically attractive.
Nitrocellulose (NC), a key component of powders and pyrotechnics, was micronized by the SAS method (see Fig. 14b) from its acetone solution to roundish particles with an average diameter of 190 nm (Fig. 17). The authors also managed to obtain NC-based composites with burning rate catalysts (Fe2O3 and/or carbon nanotubes) by the developed method. The micronized samples produced by the SAS process exhibited a substantial improvement in the performance compared to corresponding mechanical mixtures.
Composite materials containing NC as the energetic binder can be also obtained by the sol–gel method comprising the scCO2 drying stage. Jin et al. developed the method of the triple (NC/RDX/AP) nano-composite production where the addition of scCO2 to the gel resulted in deposition of NC and nano-sized RDX crystals from acetone inside the gel matrix. The scCO2 drying technique allowed safe and complete removal of the residual acetone from the NC/RDX/AP gel, preserving the uniform porous structure of the nanocomposite. The obtained energetic composite had greater heat of explosion and lower impact sensitivity than the corresponding mechanical mixtures.
Drying with scCO2 was successfully applied for micronization of HMX. Liu et al. studied the influence of the process parameters, particularly, the solvent type, and proposed an efficient scCO2-based method for nano-sized HMX production. To compensate for a considerable expense of CO2, the proposed setup was equipped with a closed-loop recycling system. Furthermore, the authors compared different micronization techniques and found that the scCO2 drying afforded the best quality product.

In summary, supercritical CO2 based methods are widely used to produce materials for high energy density applications, for rechargeable batteries and solar cells or energetic compounds. The useful properties of scCO2 such as gas-like diffusivity, liquid-like density, quasi-zero surface tension, and tunable solvent power give researchers a tool to get exactly their unique energetic device or material without a negative impact on the environment. High-quality particles for cathode or anode active materials of rechargeable lithium, sodium, or potassium ion batteries, such as single and few-layered graphene sheets, porous carbon materials, and metal oxides with a carbon layer coating were successfully produced in this “green” solvent. Supercritical CO2 appeared a prospective reaction medium for the preparation of advanced electrodes for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) with considerable photoelectric conversion efficiency by the addition of modifying agent nanosized particles (CdS quantum dots, graphene, etc.) to TiO2 composites. Post treatment annealing of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite films layer and subsequent scCO2 extraction of undesirable organic impurities from CZTSSe films resulted in increased crystallinity and average grain size with no solvent residue left. Moreover, scCO2 is applicable for obtaining not only functional materials that convert external energy to electric power, but also materials which accumulate energy in chemical bonds (high energetic materials, HEMs). Micro- and nanostructured crystals of HEMs with improved performance and/or advanced operating characteristics can be efficiently prepared in scCO2 media. Owing to the obvious environmental and engineering advantages of SCF-based technologies, we currently reap the benefits of their implementations in energy production and energetic material manufacturing, as well as in other state-of-the-art applications.


Conceptualization – I. V. K. Funding acquisition – S. G. Z. Writing – original draft – I. V. K. and M. N. Z. Writing – review & editing – all the authors.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors thank The Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Russian Federation (Agreement with Zelinsky Institute of Organic Chemistry RAS No. 075-15-2020-803) for financial support. The authors are grateful to Dr. Lyubov N. Mitireva for the thorough English language editing.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022