 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA03796D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17780-17787


Toshinori
Matsushima
*,

Takashi
Fujihara
,

Chuanjiang
Qin
,

Shinobu
Terakawa
,

Yu
Esaki
,

Sunbin
Hwang
,

Atula S. D.
Sandanayaka
,

William J.
Potscavage
Jr.
 and 

Chihaya
Adachi
*

Center for Organic Photonics and Electronics Research (OPERA), Kyushu University, 744 Motooka, Nishi, Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan. E-mail: adachi@cstf.kyushu-u.ac.jp; tmatusim@opera.kyushu-u.ac.jp

JST, ERATO, Adachi Molecular Exciton Engineering Project, c/o Center for Organic Photonics and Electronics (OPERA), Kyushu University, 744 Motooka, Nishi, Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan

Innovative Organic Device Laboratory, Institute of Systems, Information Technologies and Nano-technologies (ISIT), 744 Motooka, Nishi, Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan

International Institute for Carbon Neutral Energy Research (WPI-I2CNER), Kyushu University, 744 Motooka, Nishi, Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan

Received
26th May 2015
, Accepted 22nd July 2015
First published on 24th July 2015
Morphological control of organic–inorganic perovskite layers is crucial for efficient planar solar cells. In this study, we show that hot isostatic pressing (HIP) of perovskite layers using a pressure of 200 MPa in 90 °C water is very effective for improving the perovskite film morphology. After HIP treatment, undesirable pin holes and spatial gaps between crystals in the perovskite layers were significantly reduced. Improved crystallinity and enhanced diffusion lengths for both electrons and holes were also confirmed in the HIP-treated perovskite layers. Solar cells containing the perovskite layers as light absorbers were fabricated and characterized under simulated solar light (AM1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). The HIP treatment induced a marked enhancement of short-circuit current density, open-circuit voltage, fill factor, and power conversion efficiency because of the improved morphology and crystallinity and enhanced carrier diffusion. The HIP-treated solar cells achieved efficiencies of 10.6 ± 0.7%, which are about 1.5 times higher than those of the untreated solar cells (7.20 ± 0.59%).

Organic–inorganic perovskites with an ABX3 structure, where A is an organic cation, B is a metal cation, and X is a halide anion (see Fig. 1a), have attracted considerable attention as light absorbers in solar cells because they possess excellent light harvesting ability over a broad spectral range from ultraviolet (UV) to visible (VIS) and near infrared (NIR) wavelengths, weak exciton binding energies, long carrier diffusion lengths, high carrier mobilities, and few serious defect states while also being solution processable, enabling cost-effective high-efficiency solar power conversion. In 2009, the perovskites CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbBr3 were first employed as sensitizers in dye-sensitized solar cells containing a liquid electrolyte and a mesoporous TiO2 layer, resulting in a power conversion efficiency (η) of 3–4%. However, the solar cell performance rapidly degraded because of dissolution of the perovskites in the electrolyte. The dissolution-induced degradation was effectively suppressed by replacing the electrolyte with a solid-state hole-transport layer such as 2′-7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD).

The first solid-state perovskite solar cells fabricated using a single-step coating method by direct infiltration of mesoporous TiO2 with CH3NH3PbI3 from a precursor solution achieved η = 9.7%. However, the single-step coating method led to poor reproducibility because of difficulty in controlling the perovskite morphology. The use of a two-step sequential deposition method, where mesoporous TiO2 is infiltrated with PbI2 and subsequent conversion to CH3NH3PbI3 takes place by soaking the layer in a CH3NH3I solution, further increased the efficiency to η = 15% with high reproducibility. Since then, new efficiency records have been frequently attained in a short period of time, and systematic optimization of materials and fabrication processes has recently resulted in η close to 20% (ref. 19 and 20) and a highest certified efficiency of η = 20.1%, which surpasses the efficiencies of established thin-film solar cell technologies.
One challenge for the fabrication of perovskite layers is that agglomeration occurs upon heating because of thermodynamic instability, which is a serious problem especially for planar perovskite solar cells containing p-i-n heterojunctions without a mesoporous layer. The agglomeration results in the formation of pin holes and incomplete coverage of the substrate, resulting in low-resistance shunting paths and lost absorption of light that passes through the pin holes. Eperon et al. demonstrated the formation of uniform perovskite layers with full coverage by optimizing the conditions of a single-step coating process. Many other methods have been reported thus far for obtaining uniform perovskite layers, which include vapor deposition, vapor-assisted two-step reaction, compositional control, interdiffusion, solvent annealing, solvent-induced fast crystallization, and hot uniaxial pressing.
Cold isostatic pressing (CIP) and hot isostatic pressing (HIP) have been widely used to compress and mold metal, ceramic, plastic, and composite powders into a desired form and offer an alternative route for altering the film morphology. By applying CIP to organic semiconductor layers, an improvement in mechanical characteristics and a 2000 times increase in hole mobility were achieved in vacuum-deposited metal-free phthalocyanine (H2PC) layers. Furthermore, CIP-treated H2PC layers exhibited smoother surfaces with compressed spatial gaps between H2PC grains. Therefore, CIP and HIP treatments are also expected to have strong potential for improving the morphology of perovskite layers.
In this study, we demonstrate that HIP treatment is very effective for improving the perovskite morphology and crystallinity, resulting in a 50% increase in solar cell efficiency, while CIP treatment is unfortunately less effective. Moreover, we confirm that both electron and hole diffusion lengths are enhanced by the HIP treatment, which also contributes to the improved efficiency. We stress that our HIP treatment is applied after the perovskite layer fabrication while the aforementioned methods for improving the layer uniformity are performed during the perovskite layer fabrication. Therefore, our HIP treatment is a versatile method that can be applied to improve the quality of a wide variety of perovskite layers fabricated by different methods for further enhancement of solar cell performance.

The chemical structures of the organic molecules used in this study are shown in Fig. 1b. Glass substrates coated with a 150 nm-thick indium tin oxide (ITO) layer (Atsugi Micro) were cleaned by conventional ultrasonication and ultraviolet-ozone treatment before use. A 25 nm-thick layer of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) was spin-coated on the cleaned substrate at 3000 rpm for 60 s and heated on a hot plate at 200 °C for 10 min in ambient air. To form the perovskite layer, PbCl2 and CH3NH3I (1:3 by mol) were dissolved in N,N-dimethylformamide (super dehydrated, Wako Pure Chemical) at 370 mg ml−1 in a nitrogen-filled glovebox (H2O concentration < 0.01 ppm; O2 concentration < 5 ppm). A precursor layer was spin-coated from the solution at 4000 rpm for 30 s in the glovebox. This precursor layer was then heated on a hot plate at 60 °C for 30 min in the glovebox and subsequently at 100 °C for 90 min, resulting in successful conversion from yellow precursor to maroon perovskite with a chemical formula of CH3NH3PbI3-xClx. Using this method, Cl/(Cl + I) has been reported to be as small as 2.2% because of evaporation of unnecessary CH3NH3+ and Cl− upon heating. PEDOT:PSS and PbCl2 were purchased from HERAEUS (Clevios™ P VP. AI 4083) and Wako Pure Chemical, respectively, and used as received while CH3NH3I was synthesized by chemical reaction of CH3NH2 with HI (both purchased from Wako Pure Chemical), followed by recrystallization from toluene blended with ethanol.


We prepared four kinds of perovskite samples: untreated, CIP-treated, HIP-treated, and annealed perovskite layers. The perovskite layers fabricated using the conditions described in 2.1 without further treatment are termed untreated layers. On some perovskite layers, either CIP or HIP was performed as follows (Fig. 2). In the glovebox, the perovskite layer was placed into a thin flexible polymer bag (nylon-based multilayer sheets with a total thickness of ∼30 μm), which was then vacuum sealed. The bag was next immersed in a metal vessel filled with water, and a pressure of 200 MPa was applied to the vacuum-sealed sample for 60 min through the water medium by pushing a metal piston into the vessel with an external pressure source (CPP35-200, Sansho Industry). The water temperature was room temperature (about 20 °C) for CIP and 90 °C for HIP. For HIP, the water temperature was maintained at 90 °C during the pressurization using a silicon rubber heater. After returning the vessel internal pressure and temperature to the starting pressure and temperature, the CIP-treated or HIP-treated perovskite layer was taken out of the bag. For comparison, annealing on a hot plate at 90 °C for 60 min in a glovebox without applying pressure was performed on other perovskite layers, which are referred to as annealed perovskite layers. A flowchart showing the perovskite layer fabrication and treatment processes is shown in Fig. S1 (ESI).


Surfaces of the untreated, CIP-treated, HIP-treated, and annealed perovskite layers were evaluated with a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (JCM-5700, JOEM) and an atomic force microscope (AFM) (JSPM-5400, JEOL) in AC mode. The thicknesses of the perovskite layers were measured using a surface profilometer (DektakXT, Bruker). Structural properties were analysed with an X-ray diffractometer (XRD) using a 2θ/θ technique [λ = 1.54 Å (CuKα)] (Ultima IV, Rigaku).


A steady-state photoluminescence (PL) quenching technique was used to estimate the carrier diffusion length. Perovskite layers of different thicknesses were prepared on cleaned fused silica substrates by spin coating using different substrate rotation speeds (3000, 5000, or 8000 rpm) and solution concentrations (295 or 481 mg ml−1). On some of the samples, a 10 nm-thick [6,6]-phenyl C71 butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) layer was spin-coated on the perovskite layer at 2000 rpm for 30 s in a glovebox from a 10 mg ml−1 solution of PC71BM (Frontier Carbon) in chlorobenzene and then heated on a hot plate at 90 °C for 15 min. On other samples, a 20 nm-thick spiro-OMeTAD layer was spin-coated on the perovskite layer at 2000 rpm for 30 s in a glovebox from a 0.02 M solution of spiro-OMeTAD (MERCK) in chlorobenzene and then left in air overnight. The PC71BM and spiro-OMeTAD layers acted as electron and hole quenchers, respectively. Steady-state PL spectra of the perovskite layers in the presence and absence of the quenching layers were measured with a spectrofluorometer (FP-6500, JSACO) under illumination of 650 nm excitation light from the substrate side.


The solar cell structure fabricated in this study is shown in Fig. 6a. After washing the perovskite layers by spin coating with about 5 ml of chlorobenzene, a 10 nm-thick PC71BM layer was prepared on the perovskite layer in the same manner as for the carrier diffusion length experiments. The sample was then directly transferred into a vacuum evaporator connected to a glovebox for deposition of organic layers and the metal cathode. Under a base pressure of 10−4 Pa, a 10 nm-thick C60 layer, a 10 nm-thick 2,9-dimethyl-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline (BCP) layer, and a 200 nm-thick Ag layer were subsequently vacuum-deposited on top of the PC71BM layer. The vacuum deposition rate was 0.1 nm s−1 for C60 and BCP and 0.5 nm s−1 for Ag. The active area was defined to be 4 mm2 by the overlap of the patterned ITO and Ag electrodes. Simulated solar light (AM1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) from a solar simulator (XIL-05B100KP, SELIC) was irradiated to the active area only through a contact shadow mask with a square opening of 4 mm2, and solar cell characteristics and current density–voltage (J–V) curves were measured using a measurement system (OSA-11, System Engineers) equipped with a sourcemeter (2400, Keithley). C60 (MTR Ltd) and Ag (Nilaco) were used without purification, and BCP (Tokyo Chemical Industry) was purified twice by vacuum train sublimation before use.


In our previous study on the CIP treatment of H2PC layers, the H2PC thickness was found to decrease with a strong dependence on the applied pressure and treatment time. The H2PC thickness linearly decreased as the applied pressure increased for a constant treatment time of 60 min because of the compression of the spatial gaps between H2PC grains. Although our equipment is limited to a maximum pressure of 200 MPa, application of higher pressures to the H2PC layers is expected to result in a further decrease in the H2PC thickness. As the treatment time was increased with a constant pressure (200 MPa), the thickness decreased up to 60 min and remained constant after 60 min. Therefore, we chose CIP treatment conditions of 200 MPa and 60 min for the perovskite layers. Moreover, our equipment is limited to a maximum water temperature of 90 °C, so this temperature was used for the HIP treatment.

The SEM and AFM images of the untreated, CIP-treated, HIP-treated, and annealed perovskite layers, which were spin-coated on glass substrates coated with ITO and PEDOT:PSS, are shown in Fig. 3. Many pin holes around 1 μm in diameter and a large Ra (the arithmetic average of absolute values of the roughness profile) of 5.6 nm were observed in the untreated layers (Fig. 3a). Depth profiles of other AFM images revealed that the bottoms of the pin holes likely reach the PEDOT:PSS surface. The CIP-treated layer showed a similar morphology containing many pin holes and a similar Ra (5.2 nm) (Fig. 3b). On the other hand, HIP treatment resulted in a large reduction of pin-hole area and Ra (4.1 nm) although tiny pin holes were still visible (Fig. 3c). In contrast, the pin-hole area increased and the Ra became larger (7.1 nm) upon annealing without applying pressure (Fig. 3d), indicating that agglomeration occurred in the annealed layer.
The substrate coverage by the perovskite was quantified by using Adobe Photoshop to calculate the fraction of dark areas in the SEM images (see Table 1), and a coverage of 93.7% was calculated for the untreated layer with the remaining 6.3% being the total pin-hole area. A similar coverage was also found for the CIP-treated layer (93.4%). However, HIP treatment of the perovskite layer significantly increased the coverage to 98.1% while annealing resulted in a decrease in coverage to 86.5%. The changes in film thickness, summarized in Table 1, followed the same trend as for the pin-hole area with thickness being similar for the untreated and CIP-treated layers, decreasing for the HIP-treated layer, and increasing for the annealed layer.
Sample
Coverage (%)
Thickness (nm)
Volume (mm3)
Untreated layer
93.7
151 ± 17
5.66 × 10−4
CIP-treated layer
93.4
149 ± 14
5.57 × 10−4
HIP-treated layer
98.1
137 ± 12
5.38 × 10−4
Annealed layer
86.5
171 ± 15
5.92 × 10−4
The volumes (V) of the perovskite layers in the active area (4 mm2) can be calculated using the equation
V = C × d × A,
(1)
where
C is the coverage, d is the thickness, and A is the active area, and the volumes calculated using eqn (1) are summarized in Table 1. Although the volumes thus calculated for all of the layers might be expected to be the same, the volumes of the CIP- and HIP-treated layers are found to be smaller by about 2% and 5%, respectively, than that of the untreated layer. The observed reduction in volume can be ascribed to spatial gaps that exist between perovskite crystals in addition to the pin holes in the untreated layer being crushed by the external pressure during the CIP and HIP treatments. Such gaps impede carrier diffusion by forcing carriers to move through inefficient routes that avoid the gaps. Thus, the compression of these gaps is expected to lead to an improvement in carrier diffusion. In contrast, the increased volume in the annealed layer indicates that the agglomeration induces expansion of the gaps.

As the optical band gap of the perovskite was reported to be 1.55 eV, corresponding to 800 nm, the baseline in the absorption spectra should be ideally zero at wavelengths over 800 nm. However, light scattering caused by the rough surface of the untreated layer made the baseline rise to 0.161 at 850 nm in measurements of the UV-Vis-NIR absorption spectra (ESI Fig. S2). The HIP treatment reduced the baseline at 850 nm to 0.080 and improved the transparency of the films, from cloudy to optically clear when viewed with the unaided eye, because of reduced surface roughness.
The XRD profiles of the perovskite layers are shown in Fig. 4. Two diffraction peaks at around 14.1° and 28.4° were obtained in each perovskite layer and are assigned to the (110) and (220) planes of the tetragonal perovskite structure, respectively, with lattice parameters of a = 8.855 Å and c = 12.659 Å, similar to previous reports. A similar tetragonal phase was observed above 900 °C in barium titanate nanocrystallites synthesized by using a hydrothermal technique. No observation of diffraction peaks other than those from the (110) and (220) planes is a proof that the conversion from the precursor to perovskite is complete and that the perovskite structure is highly oriented along the c-axis normal to the substrate plane. While untreated and CIP-treated layers showed the smallest diffraction peaks, the diffraction peaks increased in intensity by about 2.5 times and the full width at half maximum of the peaks reduced by about 16% for the HIP and annealing treatments, indicating the formation of a well-developed perovskite structure with long-range crystalline domains (improved crystallinity), which can also contribute to efficient carrier diffusion. These results indicate that heating of the perovskite layers after the perovskite layer fabrication is important for improving the crystallinity.
The detailed mechanisms causing the morphological changes induced by HIP treatment but not by CIP are still not clear. However, our present interpretation is that the perovskite layer softens at 90 °C and the application of the external pressure to the soft perovskite layer leads to the reduction of the pin-hole area and the compression of gaps. On the other hand, annealing at 90 °C without the applied pressure just accelerates the agglomeration.

Excitons formed in the perovskite under light illumination are dissociated into free electrons and holes because of the very low exciton binding energy in perovskite of 37–50 meV, which is comparable to the thermal energy at room temperature (kBT ≈ 26 meV, where kB is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature). This indicates that excitons and free carriers coexist in the perovskite layers under illumination. Therefore, it is difficult to identify whether the diffusion length estimated in this study corresponds to the diffusion of the excitons or free carriers, but in either case, the diffusion length provides important information for understanding the fraction of carriers that can be extracted from the perovskite layers before carrier recombination.

To estimate the diffusion length, we used a model based on the quenching of PL in the layer being measured. While free electrons and holes in the perovskite can meet through diffusion and radiatively recombine to emit light, inclusion of a layer on the perovskite film that quenches the carriers and excitons will significantly reduce the PL intensity. When one interface of a perovskite layer of thickness (d) is completely quenching and the other is completely non-quenching, the carrier diffusion length (L) can be expressed by the equation
(2)
where
IA and IP are the PL intensity in the absence and presence of the quenching interface, respectively. By experimentally measuring IP/IA as a function of d, the value of L can be estimated by fitting eqn (2) to a plot of IP/IAvs. d.

As quenchers, PC71BM with its lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (EL) of −4.3 eV (ref. 44) and spiro-OMeTAD with its highest occupied molecular orbital (EH) of −5.22 eV (ref. 5) were chosen based on the valence band edge (EV) and conduction band edge (EC) of the perovskite being −5.43 and −3.93 eV, respectively. Because the EL of PC71BM lies below the EC of the perovskite, the electrons and excitons that reach the perovskite/PC71BM interface are quenched by electron transfer from the perovskite to PC71BM. Similarly, hole and exciton quenching takes place at the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD interface by hole transfer between them because the EH of spiro-OMeTAD lies above the EV of the perovskite. In fact, the fabrication of PC71BM and spiro-OMeTAD layers on top of perovskite layers resulted in a significant reduction in PL intensity, indicating that PC71BM and spiro-OMeTAD do act as quenchers.
For eqn (2) to be valid, only the carriers and excitons that diffuse into the donor/acceptor interface should be quenched. Quenching of excitons that are not at the interface via long-distance energy transfer (Főrster type or Dexter type) from a donor to an acceptor results in overestimation of the diffusion length measured using this technique. In both energy transfer processes, spectral overlap between the donor PL spectrum and the acceptor absorption spectrum is required for efficient energy transfer. However, the perovskite/PC71BM and perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD systems have no spectral overlap (ESI Fig. S3), indicating that energy transfer should not influence the diffusion length estimated using this method. The PL spectra of all of the measured perovskite layers had the same shape with a maximum peak wavelength of around 770 nm (ESI Fig. S2), which is located near the absorption band edge (800 nm) with very small Stokes-shift and in good agreement with a previous report. Furthermore, PL was not detected from PC71BM and spiro-OMeTAD at 770 nm.
The IP/IAvs. d plots of the untreated and HIP-treated layers with PC71BM as a quencher are shown in Fig. 5a. The smaller IP/IA observed in the HIP-treated layers than in the untreated layers indicates that a larger number of electrons reach the quenching interface after HIP treatment because of an enhancement in the electron diffusion length (Le). Fitting the experimental IP/IA plots (symbols) with eqn (2) (solid curves) yields Le = 142 ± 21 nm for the untreated layers, Le = 142 ± 10 nm for the CIP-treated layers, Le = 167 ± 13 nm for the HIP-treated layers, and Le = 365 ± 71 nm for the annealed layers (see Table 2).
Sample

L
e (nm)

L
h (nm)
Untreated layer
142 ± 21
120 ± 13
CIP-treated layer
142 ± 10
128 ± 6
HIP-treated layer
167 ± 13
171 ± 33
Annealed layer
365 ± 71
512 ± 87
Using the same PL-quenching technique with spin-coated spiro-OMeTAD as a hole quencher, the hole diffusion lengths (Lh) are estimated to be Lh = 120 ± 13 nm for the untreated layers, Lh = 128 ± 6 nm for the CIP-treated layers, Lh = 171 ± 33 nm for the HIP-treated layers, and Lh = 512 ± 87 nm for the annealed layers by fitting Fig. 5b with eqn (2). We also measured the hole diffusion length of the perovskite layers using vacuum-deposited copper(II) phthalocyanine (CuPC) as a hole quencher, resulting in Lh = 154 ± 21 nm for the untreated layers and Lh = 182 ± 13 nm for the HIP-treated layers (ESI Fig. S4), which are similar to the values and trend measured using spiro-OMeTAD.
The extraordinarily large Le and Lh measured for the annealed layers are likely the result of overestimation caused by penetration of the solutions of PC71BM and spiro-OMeTAD into the perovskite layers through pin holes and gaps when they are spin coated. The penetrating PC71BM and spiro-OMeTAD can strongly quench charge carriers and excitons, resulting in overestimation of Le and Lh. Because the annealed layers by far contain the most pin holes and gaps (Fig. 3d and Table 1), the effect of penetration is expected to be the most significant for the annealed layers, leading to a large overestimation.
The carrier diffusion lengths measured here are much smaller than those of CH3NH3PbI3-xClx (Le = 1069 nm and Lh = 1213 nm), but are close to those of CH3NH3PbI3 (Le = 129 nm and Lh = 105 nm) reported previously. The photoluminescence lifetimes of perovskite layers have been reported to strongly increase as crystallite sizes increase, suggesting that carrier diffusion lengths are longer for perovskite layers containing larger crystallites. The reason for the shorter diffusion lengths here might be because of smaller perovskite crystallites in our samples. Nonetheless, the results here clearly show that both electron and hole diffusion lengths are enhanced by the HIP treatment, which is probably because of the reduction of gaps and improved crystallinity. Moreover, the electron and hole diffusion lengths are found to be well balanced.

We fabricated solar cells containing the untreated, CIP-treated, HIP-treated, and annealed perovskite layers using the cell structure in Fig. 6a. The PC71BM and C60 layers on top of the perovskite layers were used to enhance solar cell performance while BCP was inserted between C60 and Ag as an exciton blocking layer to suppress exciton quenching by Ag. Silver was chosen as the back electrode for its very high light reflection in the VIS region, which effectively reflects light back into the perovskite layer for absorption on a second pass.

To optimize the fabrication conditions for solar cells with untreated perovskite, we varied solution concentrations and substrate rotation speeds during perovskite spin coating (ESI Fig. S5). The best η was obtained using the present conditions of 370 mg ml−1 and 4000 rpm, which were subsequently used for the comparison of perovskite layer treatments. When using these spin coating conditions, the perovskite thickness was around 150 nm, which is about half of the value used in a previous report (around 300 nm) but agrees well with our carrier diffusion lengths, indicating that the perovskite thickness is probably limited by the carrier diffusion lengths.
Representative J–V curves of the untreated, CIP-treated, HIP-treated, and annealed perovskite solar cells under simulated solar illumination (AM1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) are shown in Fig. 6b. Our solar cells exhibited strong hysteresis when consecutive forward and reverse J–V scans were performed using a scan rate of 200 mV s−1 with the η measured for the reverse scans about 10% higher than those measured for the forward scans. A similar hysteresis has been frequently observed in perovskite solar cells. To avoid the overestimation of η, the J–V curves shown in Fig. 6b were measured under a forward scan. Table 3 summarizes the average values and standard deviations for short-circuit current density (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), η, series resistance (RS), and shunt resistance (RSH) measured by forward scans over at least three different batches of the devices fabricated under identical conditions. The RS and RSH values were calculated from the reciprocal of the J–V slopes near the VOC and JSC points, respectively.
Sample

J
SC (mA cm2)

V
OC (V)
FF

η (%)

R
S (Ω cm2)

R
SH (Ω cm2)
Untreated cell
17.45 ± 0.83
0.72 ± 0.04
0.57 ± 0.05
7.20 ± 0.59
7.84 ± 1.68
359 ± 95.2
CIP-treated cell
17.48 ± 0.70
0.70 ± 0.03
0.61 ± 0.01
7.43 ± 0.45
6.90 ± 0.54
347 ± 47.5
HIP-treated cell
18.56 ± 0.50
0.89 ± 0.02
0.64 ± 0.03
10.6 ± 0.7
4.83 ± 1.19
188 ± 60.3
Annealed cell
12.81 ± 0.50
0.60 ± 0.04
0.54 ± 0.05
4.14 ± 0.44
7.73 ± 1.38
302 ± 117
Best-performing cell
18.90
0.93
0.67
11.8
4.96
208
The untreated cells had JSC = 17.45 ± 0.83 mA cm−2, VOC = 0.72 ± 0.04 V, FF = 0.57 ± 0.05, η = 7.20 ± 0.59%, RS = 7.84 ± 1.68 Ω cm2, and RSH = 359 ± 95.2 Ω cm2. The CIP-treated cells exhibited JSC, VOC, FF, η, RS, and RSH similar to those for the untreated cells, indicating that the CIP treatment has little overall effect on the perovskite layers despite the slightly compressed gaps. The HIP treatment induced a marked improvement of JSC, VOC, FF, and RS, yielding an overall η of 10.6 ± 0.7%, which is about 1.5 times higher than that of the untreated cells. The best-performing cell among the HIP-treated cells achieved η = 11.8% (bottom row of Table 3). On the other hand, the annealed cells performed the worst with η of only 4.14 ± 0.44%.
Although the J–V curves in the 0–0.4 V region are fairly straight for most of the cells, a clear bend can be seen for the HIP-treated device (see Fig. 6b). One possible source of this difference is impurities from the polymer bag left on the perovskite surface after HIP treatment. Both the CIP- and HIP-treated perovskite layers were washed by spin coating chlorobenzene before fabricating the solar cells to remove such impurities, resulting in the nearly complete straightening of the J–V curves at low bias for CIP-treated cells while those of the HIP-treated cells retained a slight bend as shown in Fig. 6b (ESI Fig. S6). We think that the residual bend is due to incomplete removal of the impurities from the HIP-treated perovskite surfaces even after chlorobenzene washing because the elevated temperature of HIP produces a larger amount of impurities from the bag. The complete removal of the impurities is likely to result in a further increase of FF. The reduced pin-hole area of the HIP-treated layer should lead to an increase in RSH by suppressing low-resistance shunting paths. However, the measured RSH of the HIP-treated cells is the lowest, probably because of the influence of the bend in the J–V curves near the JSC point.
A similar performance of the solar cells with untreated and CIP-treated perovskite layers would be expected based on their similar coverage and crystallinity, as mentioned earlier. The significantly reduced pin-hole area of the HIP-treated perovskite layer can contribute to the improved performance by suppressing lost light absorption in the solar cells. Moreover, as suggested by the PL quenching measurements, the HIP-treated perovskite layer possesses enhanced and balanced diffusion lengths for electrons and holes, which are probably the result of compressed gaps and improved crystallinity and can improve efficiency by reducing the recombination of carriers before they are extracted from the perovskite layer. The compressed gaps and improved crystallinity also reduce RS because of efficient carrier movement. Annealing after the perovskite layer fabrication is less advantageous because agglomeration proceeds through crystallization and dewetting, which ultimately reduces solar cell performance. Therefore, we conclude that the HIP treatment, in which compression is combined with heating, is very effective for obtaining high-quality perovskite layers producing higher solar cell performance.

Morphological problems, such as pin holes and incomplete substrate coverage by the perovskite layer, are a serious issue in planar perovskite solar cells. Many methods have been developed for improving the morphology during perovskite layer fabrication. In this study, we have shown that HIP treatment (200 MPa at 90 °C) of the perovskite layer is an effective method that simultaneously reduces the pin-hole area, compresses the gaps between perovskite crystals, improves crystallinity, and enhances carrier diffusion. Through these changes, the power conversion efficiency of perovskite solar cells was increased about 1.5 times by HIP treatment. Further optimization of the HIP treatment conditions to completely remove the remaining tiny pin holes (Fig. 3c) could further enhance solar cell performance. An unprecedented advantage of our method is that HIP treatment can be performed after the perovskite layer fabrication, making this method applicable to a wide variety of perovskite layers fabricated by different methods.


This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 15K14149.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: A flowchart showing perovskite layer fabrication and treatment processes, UV-Vis-NIR absorption and PL spectra, PL quenching results when using CuPC, results of optimization of spin coating conditions, and J–V curves of solar cells with and without chlorobenzene washing. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta03796d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015