 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA10387K
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5487-5491

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Hyunbong
Choi
,

Masaru
Kuno
,

Gregory V.
Hartland
 and 

Prashant V.
Kamat
*

Radiation Laboratory, Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry and Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA. E-mail: pkamat@nd.edu

Received
25th January 2013
, Accepted 22nd March 2013
First published on 22nd March 2013
Carbazole molecules containing thiol functional groups, when attached to CdSe nanowires (NWs), facilitate hole transport across semiconductor interfaces. The improved hole transfer rate is evidenced by increased electron lifetimes and better photovoltaic performance. Nanowire solar cells (NWSCs) with carbazole treatment delivered a power conversion efficiency of 0.46%, which is an order of magnitude improvement over untreated films. The illumination of the sample during the electrophoretic deposition of nanowires also had a profound effect in obtaining stable and higher photocurrents.

The increasing interest in designing next generation solar cells has drawn the attention to semiconductor nanostructure based solar cells. The majority of recent efforts have focused on the development of quantum dot solar cells. Our recent work on Mn2+ doped CdSe quantum dots showed the ability to develop solar cells with 5.4% efficiency. Relatively less progress has been made to utilize semiconductor nanowires in photovoltaic and photocatalytic applications. The one-dimensional semiconductor nanostructures such as CdSe nanowires (NWs) offer interesting photophysical properties because of their direct bandgap (∼1.74 eV at 300 K), strong absorptivity in the visible region, and good electron mobility. The ability to tune the effective bandgap and optoelectronic properties by varying the NW radius offers some unique opportunities to develop solar cells.

Efficient operation of nanowire solar cells (NWSCs) relies upon the minimization of the interfacial charge recombination losses. The main benefits of CdSe NWs for the solar cell applications is that the CdSe NWs can act both as sensitizer and carrier transport scaffold, thus minimizing the recombination losses during charge transport that is commonly experienced in the interconnected network of mesoscopic semiconductor films. Despite many recent efforts to synthesise CdSe NWSCs, the photoconversion efficiency of nanowire or nanorod based solar cells has remained quite low. A major limiting factor in the efficient collection of charge carriers is the poor hole transfer across CdSe NW interfaces.
One approach to maximize the hole transfer rate is to couple strong electron donors to the CdSe NWs. Carbazole and its derivatives have been extensively used as hole transporting layers in OLEDs and in bulk heterojunction photovoltaics. In addition to the hole scavenging aspect, carbazole based molecules possess many other desirable properties. These include transparency in the visible region so as to not overlap with sensitizer absorption and electrochemical stability. Recently, Advincula et al. employed a carbazole dendron to link to CdSe nanoparticles and observed energy transfer properties from the donor carbazole peripheral groups to the acceptor CdSe nanoparticles. Such a close interaction between carbazole and CdSe opens up new ways to improve CdSe NW-based solar cells. In this paper, we describe electrophoretically assembled CdSe NW solar cells and the role of carbazole in improving the photovoltaic performance (Scheme 1).
CdSe nanowires were synthesized using simple bismuth salt (BiCl3) to catalyze NW growth. The details of the synthetic procedure were adopted from an earlier report. To fabricate the photoanode of the solar cell, a ZnO compact layer was first deposited on a FTO (fluorine doped tin oxide) glass substrate by spin coating with 0.1 M zinc acetate and 0.1 M MEA (ethanolamine) in methanol. The ZnO compact layer was used as the blocking layer to avoid direct contact of the FTO layer with the electrolyte and thus minimize shunting effects in the cell. Electrophoretic deposition (EPD) was employed to deposit films of CdSe NWs using a method similar to the one employed earlier. In the present study CdSe NWs were directly deposited as films from nanowires dispersed in an acetonitrile/toluene (1:2) mixed solvent by applying a 60 V cm−1 DC field for 120 s. For deposition under visible light irradiation, the EPD cell was continuously irradiated with light from a 12 W tungsten-halogen lamp (snake-light). The light intensity at the cell position was 4 mW cm−2. The surface modification of the CdSe NW film with carbazole was made by immersing the electrode (after EPD deposition) in 10 mM carbazole thiol solution of THF/EtOH (1/1) overnight. The CdSe NWs deposited on FTO and modified with carbazole was used as the anode for the construction of nanowire solar cells (NWSCs). The counter electrode was prepared by doctor blading Cu2S and reduced graphene oxide (RGO) composite on FTO glass. 0.1 M sodium sulfide and 0.1 M sulfur dissolved in water were used as the electrolyte.
UV-Vis absorption measurements were performed to estimate the absorption properties of the CdSe NWs with different thicknesses on the FTO conducting glass substrate (Fig. 1). Different thicknesses of the film were achieved by varying the duration of EPD. The film thickness was determined from the cross-sectional SEM images. The absorption spectra of CdSe NWs deposited on the FTO glass electrode shows an absorption onset around 720 nm. This absorption onset corresponds to a bandgap of ∼1.7 eV and is in accordance with the bandgap absorption reported for CdSe NWs. Increased absorption with increasing thickness (Fig. 1) shows the versatility of the EPD technique in achieving controlled deposition cycles.
The high and low resolution transmission electron microscopy images are presented in the inset of Fig. 1. The TEM images of the as-synthesized CdSe NWs showed that the wires were relatively uniform with diameters of 10–15 nm (Fig. 1, inset A) and lengths of 1–2 μm (Fig. 1, inset B).

Fig. 2A and B show the SEM images of CdSe NWs with carbazole deposited by EPD (A) without and (B) with visible light irradiation under the same deposition conditions. Although no distinct difference in the deposited nanowires could be visualized in these images, the close network of nanowires achieved during the EPD is likely to dictate the performance of the photoanode. The role of illumination on the immobilization of nanowires on electrode surfaces has been shown to facilitate close networking of nanowires. This effect is likely to arise from asymmetric charging of wires during illumination, thus facilitating deposition of film on the FTO electrode.

Fig. 3 shows the dependence of the solar cell parameters (short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), and overall conversion efficiency (η)) on the thickness of CdSe NWs of the photoanode prepared using CdSe NWs without carbazole and light. These experiments were conducted to optimize the photoactive layer in NWSCs. Photovoltaic device efficiencies increased with increasing thickness of the photoactive layer up to 500 nm. Increasing the photoactive layer thickness greater than 500 nm resulted in the decrease of Jsc and Voc and hence the overall power conversion efficiency. Since the amount of CdSe NWs present in the film increases with photoactive layer thickness, we observe an increase in photocurrent. However, at greater thicknesses (>500 nm) the absorption of light across the film depth becomes nonuniform thus causing a decrease in photocurrent. In addition, as the thickness of the films increases Voc also decreases.
We further evaluated the role of carbazole-thiol in improving the performance of CdSe NWSCs. The CdSe NWs were treated with carbazole-thiol before depositing them as films by electrophoretic deposition. The presence of a thiol group facilitates direct interaction of carbazole with the CdSe surface. Given that the HOMO level of carbazole (−5.4 eV) is less positive than the valence band energy level of bulk-like CdSe NWs (−5.6 eV) we expect scavenging of holes from the CdSe NWs (see the ESI for the cyclic voltammogram of carbazole thiol).
The J–V characteristics of the NWSCs employing different CdSe NW electrodes are presented in Fig. 4 and the cell parameters are summarized in Table 1. The short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (ff) and overall conversion efficiency (η) of unmodified CdSe NWSCs are 0.18 mA cm−2, 200 mV, 0.29, and 0.01%, respectively. For CdSe NWs deposited with light irradiation, the photovoltaic parameters showed a moderate improvement. The significant improvement in NWSCs performance could be seen with CdSe NWs pretreated with carbazole. The short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (ff) and overall conversion efficiency (η) are 1.81 mA cm−2, 237 mV, 0.49, and 0.211%, respectively. If the carbazole pretreated CdSe NWs were deposited under visible light irradiation we observe further improvement in the cell performance. Notably, the photocurrent of the NWSCs employing carbazole treated CdSe NWs under visible irradiation exhibited a power conversion efficiency of 0.46%. An order of magnitude enhancement in photocurrent and power conversion efficiency obtained with carbazole treatment reflects the improved hole transfer kinetics at the interface. It should be noted that a Cu2S/RGO counter electrode performs better than Pt or other metal electrodes in the sulfide electrolyte.
Sample

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF

η (%)

a Performances of NWSCs were measured with a 0.22 cm2 working area. Electrolyte: 0.1 M Na2S and 0.1 M S in H2O. The thickness of CdSe NWs is ∼500 nm.

CdSe NWs
0.18
0.20
0.29
0.01
CdSe NWs + hν
0.54
0.286
0.29
0.045
CdSe NWs + carbazole
1.81
0.237
0.49
0.211
CdSe NWs + hν + carbazole
2.32
0.34
0.58
0.46
Incident photon-to-carrier conversion efficiencies (IPCEs) recorded at different incident light wavelengths for NWSCs that employ CdSe NWs with and without carbazole treatment are shown in Fig. 5. The onset of photocurrent for these two electrodes matches the absorption onset seen in Fig. 1. The maximum IPCE for the solar cell employing untreated CdSe NWs corresponds to about 10%. On the other hand, the CdSe NWs with carbazole treatment exhibit the maximum IPCE of ∼45% in the visible region. This increased photoresponse is attributed to the electron donating properties of carbazole. Quick scavenging of holes by the carbazole is expected to suppress the charge recombination process. It should be noted that the absorbance of CdSe NWs and CdSe NWs + carbazole was maintained similarly for the two electrodes so that the fractions of absorbed photons in the two solar cells were matched. The observed increase in IPCE of CdSe NWs + carbazole reaffirms the improved cell performance evaluated from the J–V characteristics shown in Fig. 4.
We measured the effective carrier lifetime of NWSCs using open-circuit voltage-decay (OCVD) measurements. The OCVD decay time directly reflects the disappearance of accumulated electrons as they undergo charge recombination at the electrolyte interface. Fig. 6 shows the comparison of OCVD traces recorded after stopping the illumination of solar cells employing CdSe NWs + hν and CdSe NWs + hν + carbazole as photoactive layers, respectively. Since these traces exhibit a complex decay, we compare the half-life of the two traces to obtain a qualitative trend in the recombination lifetime. The apparent half-life as determined from the OCVD decay increases from t1/2 = 1.3 s for (CdSe NWs + hν) to 3.3 s for (CdSe NWs + hν + carbazole) electrodes. Since the presence of carbazole quickly scavenges the holes from the nanowires we expect the suppression of hole recombination with accumulated electrons. Since an increased lifetime of OCVD allows one to accumulate a greater amount of electrons under steady state irradiation, we expect an increase in the greater open circuit voltage for CdSe NWs + hν + carbazole based solar cells.
We also tested the effect of carbazole on the stability of the photoelectrochemical cell. Fig. 7 shows the photocurrent response to on–off cycles of illumination of photoanodes containing CdSe NWs and CdSe NWs + carbazole as photoactive layers. The photocurrent response to visible light illumination for both these cells is prompt, but they differ in magnitude and stability. The solar cells employing unmodified CdSe NW electrodes alone exhibit continuous photocurrent decay during on–off cycles of illumination. We attribute this instability to the slower hole transfer and participation of holes in anodic corrosion. As shown in our earlier study, scavenging of photogenerated holes is an important criterion in minimizing anodic corrosion of metal chalcogenides in the sulfide/polysulfide medium. Formation of the CdSeS layer at the interface was confirmed as the product of anodic corrosion in these studies. The use of carbazole as a hole transporter brings greater stability as it mediates the hole transfer between photoexcited CdSe and the S2−/Sn2− redox couple. These results further point out the beneficial aspect of carbazole in stabilizing the CdSe NWs against anodic photocorrosion by scavenging the photogenerated holes.
Shuttling of holes across a 1-D semiconductor is a major limiting factor towards achieving photoconversion efficiencies that are comparable to quantum dot based solar cells. The use of a hole mediator such as a carbazole derivative can improve the photoelectrochemical performance of CdSe nanowire based solar cells. The carbazole moiety seems to be energetically matched with the valence band of CdSe NWs and thus captures the holes formed during photoexcitation. Quick scavenging of holes is also crucial in suppressing the anodic corrosion of CdSe NWs. Stable photocurrents obtained with CdSe NWs + carbazole further ascertain the need for a hole transporter for achieving better performance of 1-D semiconductor based solar cells.

The research described herein was supported by the University of Notre Dame SAPC program (HC, MK and GVH). PVK acknowledges the support by the Division of Chemical Sciences, Geosciences, and Biosciences, Office of Basic Energy Sciences of the U.S. Department of Energy through the award DE-FC02-04ER15533. This is contribution NDRL 4948 from the Notre Dame Radiation Laboratory. We thank Ian V. Lightcap and Jeffrey Christians for TEM and SEM images, respectively.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Cyclic voltammogram data of carbazole thiol are presented. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta10387k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013