 DOI: 10.1039/C7NJ02691A
(Perspective)
New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 10508-10527


Mahesh Datt
Bhatt
 and 

Jae Sung
Lee
*

School of Energy & Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science & Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, 689-798, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jlee1234@unist.ac.kr

Received
24th July 2017
, Accepted 23rd August 2017
First published on 6th September 2017
The solution-processed organic–inorganic lead halide perovskite solar cells have recently emerged as promising candidates for the conversion of solar power into electricity. The certified power conversion efficiencies of these solar cells have rapidly increased from 3.8% in 2009 to 22.1% in 2016. Although the certified experimentally observed value of efficiency of perovskite solar cells to date is up to 22.1%, some main issues such as stability, lead toxicity, and hysteretic behavior in I–V characteristics in addition to high efficiencies have been creating problems regarding their industrial applications. Theoretical results to date have demonstrated that the organic–inorganic lead halide perovskites exhibit a series of superior electronic and optical properties for solar cell applications, such as proper electronic band alignment, controlled doping ability, lattice point defects, ferroelectric properties, dynamic disorder, domain walls, and local structural properties. In this review, the important properties required to produce highly efficient perovskite solar cells are discussed based on experimental and theoretical studies. We also present the key scientific challenges and future research directions for the development of this field regarding their commercialization.

Due to continuous decrease in the known resources of oil, coal, and gas, harnessing solar power would yield a permanent energy supply worldwide. The conversion of sunlight into electricity in an efficient and cost-effective way is really a big challenge. Solar cells are the most promising means to convert sunlight directly into electricity. The current photovoltaic market is completely dominated by the crystalline silicon solar cells due to the fact that they have been continuously advancing in efficiency (more than 20%) and reducing in cost of fabrication over the last 40 years. However, they are still expensive compared to the cost of electricity generated from fossil fuels. Therefore, it is necessary to reduce the cost of solar energy, which can be achieved by either reducing the cost of solar cells or by increasing their power conversion efficiencies by continuously search for other photovoltaic technologies alternative to conventional or first-generation silicon solar cells. As an alternative, second and third generation solar cells have been developed, for example, CdTe or CIGS, and solution processed solar cells based on organic semiconductors, hybrid composites, or inorganic semiconductors. Moreover, third-generation photovoltaic solar cells such as organic photovoltaics, dye-sensitized solar cells, and quantum dot solar cells, which are fabricated through solution-based processing such as blade coating, screen printing and spraying, have exhibited low cost solar power by using unconventional substrates, which have led to tremendous advancement in efficiency, reproducibility and stability. Although a significant improvement in the efficiency of third-generation solar cells has been achieved, their power conversion efficiencies still lag behind the conventional silicon solar cells. In this regard, a new generation of mixed organic–inorganic perovskite solar cells offers very good prospects for both conditions of low-cost fabrication and high power conversion efficiency. In particular, the organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells have been the most significant advancement in the field of photovoltaics in the present decade due to the remarkable increase in their power conversion efficiencies that has occurred since 2008.

Perovskites have the general formula ABX3 where A and B are monovalent and divalent ions respectively, and X is O, C, N or a halogen. They form an octahedral BX6 structure, which forms a 3D structure connected at the corners. They are named after L. A. Perovski, a Russian mineralogist and have a cubic structure. In fact, “perovskites” is the nomenclature for any materials that adopt a similar crystal structure to calcium titanate (CaTiO3). The most common perovskites currently used for photovoltaic applications are CH3NH3PbI3, CH3NH3PbBr3, and the mixed halide system CH3NH3PbI3−xClx. For the archetypal halide perovskite CH3NH3PbI3, the α to β and β to γ phase transitions occurred at 330 K and 160 K respectively. The crystal structure of CH3NH3PbI3 in different phases is shown in Fig. 1. A non-perovskite δ phase was found for perovskites such as HC(NH2)2PbI3, FAPbI3, CsPbI3, and CsSnI3.
The best solar cells obtained from the CH3NH3PbI3 material have a band gap of 1.50–1.55 eV observed from UV-photoelectron, UV-Vis, and incident photon-to-electron efficiency spectra, close to the optimum one for photovoltaic performance (∼1.4 eV). As the HOMO position was similar for the three perovskite systems CH3NH3PbI3, CH3NH3PbBr3, and CH3NH3PbI3−xClx, the LUMO energy was found to be sensitive to the nature of the halogen. This feature allows energy level and HOMO–LUMO gap (Eg) tuning and has been found effective for CH3NH3Pb(I3−xBrx)3 perovskite. The solar cells based on CH3NH3PbI3 perovskites enable excellent external quantum efficiency up to 800 nm, harvesting the photons in the visible range of the solar spectrum and part of the near infrared. The main success of the perovskites is due to their unique properties, such as, (1) they are capable of producing high-quality semiconductor films from solution processing methods; (2) they exhibit reversible phase transitions as a function of temperature. For example, their stable orthorhombic phase exists at low temperature (100 K) and the phase transition between the tetragonal (β) and orthorhombic (γ) phase occurs at around 160 K; (3) the effect of the grain boundaries (GBs) on halide perovskites is electrically invisible; (4) they have a sharp band gap that leads to high absorbance; (5) they have balanced electron–hole transport that leads to excellent charge carrier mobilities; etc.
This review focuses on the recent developments in the organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells as well as the key scientific challenges for their industrial applications. We first review the major experimental and theoretical achievements of solar cells based on the organic–inorganic halide perovskites. We then conclude with the key scientific issues associated with perovskite solar cells and future research directions regarding their commercialization.

In this section, we discuss both the experimental and theoretical achievements to date based on the available literature.


There has been a rapid increase in the PCE of solution-processed organic–inorganic lead halide perovskite solar cells in the last 7 years as shown in Fig. 2. We discuss this experimental achievement from 2009 to 2016 as follows.

In 2009, Kojima and co-workers demonstrated a liquid electrolyte perovskite solar cell with a PCE of only 3.8%. The authors efficiently sensitized TiO2 with organohalide perovskite compounds CH3NH3MX3 (M = Pb, Sn; X = halogen) exhibiting different energy gaps for visible light conversion in photoelectrochemical cells. However, perovskite was found unstable in liquid electrolyte. The IPCE spectra for photoelectrochemical cells and I–V characteristics of CH3NH3PbBr3/TiO2 and CH3NH3PbI3/TiO2 under 100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5) irradiation are shown in Fig. 3(a and b). Fig. 3 represents that the IPCE is greater for the CH3NH3PbI3-sensitized cell than for CH3NH3PbBr3. On the other hand, the VOC of the CH3NH3PbBr3-sensitized solar cell (0.96 V) is greater than the VOC of the CH3NH3PbI3-sensitized solar cell (0.61 V), which is probably due to the higher conduction band of bromide compared to that of iodide, signifying interaction of the perovskite sensitizer with the surface conduction band levels of TiO2 that have a distribution between particles.
In 2011, Im et al. reported the PCE of a perovskite solar cell to be 6.54% using the same dye-sensitized concept. However, the stability of the perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 quantum-dot-sensitized solar cell under continued irradiation was found to be approximately 10 minutes because the quantum dots dissolved gradually into the redox electrolyte. The PCE was improved from 6.2 to 6.54% due to surface modification of TiO2 with Pb(NO3)2 prior to deposition of perovskite quantum dots with increased VOC as shown in Fig. 4. Moreover, in 2011, Burschka et al. developed a high molar extinction coefficient organic D–π–A sensitizer and p-doped spiro-MeOTAD as a hole conductor with a record PCE of 7.2% measured under standard solar conditions (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2), probably due to the influence of p-type doping for tuning the charge-transport properties of spiro-MeOTAD in the solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells, capable of replacing the commonly used photo-doping method.
In 2012, the solid-state mesoscopic heterojunction solar cells used nanoparticles of light harvesters with a PCE of 9.7% with standard AM 1.5G sunlight. The authors showed the charge separation to proceed by hole injection from the excited CH3NH3PbI3 nanoparticles into the spiro-MeOTAD followed by electron transfer to the mesoscopic TiO2 film. The authors claimed that the use of a solid hole conductor dramatically improves the device stability compared to the CH3NH3PbI3-sensitized liquid junction cells as shown in Fig. 5, which represents an improvement of the initial PCE by about 14% after 200 h due to the increase in fill factor and the PCE remained stable during the author's test period.
Moreover, in 2012, Chung et al. reported a new type of all solid-state inorganic solar cell system that consists of the p-type direct band gap semiconductor CsSnI3 and n-type nanoporous TiO2 with the dye N719 with a PCE of 10.2% due to the enhancement of visible light absorption on the red side of the spectrum as compared with the lead halide perovskite solar cells. Also, in 2012, Lee et al. demonstrated a CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite sensitized solar cell on an Al2O3 scaffold with a PCE of 10.9% in a single junction device under simulated full sunlight. The authors reported that the functionality arises from the use of mesoporous alumina as an inert scaffold that structures the absorber and forces electrons to reside in and be transported through the perovskite as shown in Fig. 6 and 7 respectively. The better performance of the perovskite solar cell based on CH3NH3PbI3 was found to be due to significantly slow charge recombination.
In 2013, Burschka et al. demonstrated a new deposition technique for a sensitized architecture exceeding 15% efficiency by a two-step solution processing at a similar time. Moreover, in 2013, Liu et al. also reported more than 15% efficiency for a planar solar cell fabricated by means of thermal evaporation. In early 2014, Jeon et al. reported a PCE of 17.9% for CH3NH3Pb(I1−xBrx)3 (x = 0.10–0.15) as the absorbing layer and poly(triarylamine) as a hole-transporting material with the use of a mixed solvent of γ-butyrolactone and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) followed by toluene drop casting.
Moreover, in August 2014, Zhou and co-workers claimed the highest certified PCE of 19.3% for perovskite devices due to the control over carrier dynamics throughout the entire device so that the charge carrier recombination became minimum in the absorber, facilitating carrier injection into the carrier transport layers, and maintaining good carrier extraction at the electrodes. The structure and energy level alignment of the perovskite solar cells based on CH3NH3PbI3 are shown in Fig. 8(A–E). Its photoluminescence and photovoltaic characterization are shown in Fig. 9(A–D).

Fig. 9(B–D) show the enhancement of the PCE of a perovskite cell with different modified films. Finally, the carrier lifetimes, normalized EQE spectrum, and the average J–V characteristics of the cell without an antireflection coating are shown in Fig. 10(A–D).
In 2015, W. S. Yang and co-workers in the KRICT laboratory in Korea reported an approach for fabricating high-quality formamidinium lead iodide (FAPbI3) with a certified efficiency of the perovskite solar cells of 20.1% under AM 1.5G full-sun illumination. The SEM observation, I–V, and EQE measurements are shown in Fig. 11(A–C). The cross-sectional FESEM image of the device consisting of FTO-glass/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/perovskite/PTAA/Au is shown in Fig. 11(A) and the comparison of the FESEM surface images of the FAPbI3-based layer formed on mp-TiO2 by IEP and the conventional method is shown Fig. 11(B).

Fig. 11(C(a)) shows the J–V curves measured for reverse and forward bias with no hysteresis. Fig. 11(C(b)) shows the EQE spectrum and integrated JSC for one of the best-performing solar cells with JSC = 24.7 mA cm−2, VOC = 1.0 V, and FF = 77.5%. Such a study provides an effective technique for the fabrication of efficient and low-cost organic–inorganic perovskite solar cells. The higher efficiency was attributed to the high quality of the perovskite film with preferred crystallographic orientation, large-grained microstructures, and flat surfaces without residual PbI2. In 2016, Michael Saliba et al. applied a mixture of triple cesium/methylammonium/formamidinium cations for the first time and reported high efficiency of perovskite solar cells with a stabilized pCE at 21.1% and an output at 18% under operational conditions after 250 h with full illumination at room temperature.

J–V and stability characteristics of the perovskite system containing cesium/methylammonium/formamidinium are shown in Fig. 12(a and b). The authors showed their highest stabilized PCE exceeding 21% (21.1%) at 960 mV as shown in Fig. 12(a). In addition, they investigated the long-term device stability of a high performance Cs0M and Cs5M device within a nitrogen environment at room temperature under constant illumination and maximum power point tracking updated every 60 s as shown in Fig. 12(b). Here, Cs0M indicates no Cs in the device and Cs5M indicates 5% Cs added to the perovskite film. The authors claimed that the higher efficiency of the perovskite device with a mixture of triple cesium/methylammonium/formamidinium cations is attributed to thermal stability, low phase impurities, and less sensitivity to processing conditions. In 2016, the maximum certified efficiency of the perovskite solar cells was reported to be 22.1%. Moreover, in 2016, Chen and co-workers synthesized ultrathin highly conductive and transparent electrodes to achieve a record efficiency of 16.5% for a metal wetting layer in a semitransparent perovskite solar cell. However, when a semitransparent PSC is stacked atop a near-infrared-enhanced silicon heterojunction solar cell, the efficiency of the silicon solar cell was measured to be 6.5%, receiving a summed efficiency of 23.0%, which is higher than both the silicon and perovskite sub-cells. The authors fabricated infrared enhanced silicon heterojunction cells (IR cells) by using a double-layer antireflection coating at the front side and a MgF2 back reflector layer at the rear side as shown in Fig. 13(a).
The total absorbance and EQE spectra of the infrared-enhanced and reference heterojunction cells are shown in Fig. 13(b). The authors fabricated an IR cell with an area of 4 cm2, measured alone at 1 Sun, which had a PCE of 21.2% with a VOC of 716 mV and FF of 75.6%; the reference cell had a PCE of 20.1% as shown in Fig. 13(b). The transmittance, reflectance, and absorptance of a semiparent perovskite solar cell under front illumination are shown in Fig. 14(a). The J–V curves and EQE spectra of the perovskite solar cell are shown in Fig. 14(b and c).

Fig. 14(a) shows the absorption of the perovskite top cell, with transmission of 10–20% of red light (600–700 nm) to the bottom cell. For near-infrared light, 10–20% light was also reflected by the semitransparent PSC, together with 15–30% absorption and 60% near IR light for the silicon IR cell. After the filtration of light by the perovskite top cell, the JSC and VOC values of the silicon bottom cell are expected by the authors to decrease due to the reduced effect of series resistance at lower illumination. The filtered silicon IR cell possessed a VOC of 679 mV, a JSC of 12.3 mA cm−2, and a FF of 77.9% for a PCE of 6.5%. The summed efficiency of the perovskite cell (16.5%) and silicon cell (6.5%) yields 23.0% as shown in Fig. 14(b and c). The perovskite/Si tandem cells offer an attractive path to increase the efficiency of perovskite and silicon cells beyond the single cell counterpart.
Many researchers have also demonstrated CH3NH3PbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) perovskite solar cells to improve their performance by applying various approaches. For example, Etgar et al. have proposed for the first time that CH3NH3PbI3 nanocrystals can act both as an efficient light absorber and as a hole transporter in perovskite solar cells comprising a mesoscopic CH3NH3PbI3/TiO2 heterojunction. The main role of the TiO2 nanoplatelets was found to be to accept the electrons and transport them to the front collector. Eperon and co-workers have demonstrated CH3NH3PbI3−xClx based on perovskite solar cells by controlling their morphologies by means of different processing conditions and proposed that the PCE of 11.4% and the highest photocurrents are observed due to large surface area. Docampo and co-workers have used the ambipolar perovskite CH3NH3PbI3−xClx with fully air- and low-temperature processed solar cells and found its PCE approaching 10%. Such a type of demonstration removes the barriers to adoption of the perovskite technology by the organic- and solution-processed photovoltaic community. Juarez-Perez and co-workers have studied the effect of electron- and hole-selective contacts in the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells with TiO2 and spiro-OMeTAD as electron- and hole-contacts respectively in order to determine the recombination rate. However, some other materials have been used for hole-selective contacts such as polymers, inorganic CuI,etc. and for electron-selective contacts such as C60, graphene/TiO2 nanocomposites, ZnO, etc. due to the fact that the selective contacts play a key role in the final cell performance. In hole transport material-free heterojunction solar cells, a schottky junction with a metal–semiconductor interface between the CH3NH3PbI3 and Au electrode has been formed to ensure smooth electron transport via ohmic contacts by means of heavy doping. However, perovskite organic lead iodide was found to be unstable at high temperature or in polar solvents, making it difficult to be doped with certain atoms in the back contact region. Various types of techniques have been applied to the CH3NH3PbI3 based perovskite solar cells to get better performance with stability of the cell. However, toxicity of lead is another big issue in the perovskite solar cell based on CH3NH3PbI3. Therefore, replacing Pb with Sn in the cell removes the problem of toxicity, but the performance of CH3NH3SnI3-based perovskite could not be found as high as that of the CH3NH3PbI3-based perovskite cells. G. Murugadoss et al. developed various solvents to synthesize a copper(I) thiocyanate (CuSCn) as a hole transport material to achieve a chemically stable perovskite solar cell with efficiency more than 10% under full sun illumination. Similarly, Chen et al. fabricated an electron transport layer of low temperature electrodeposited crystalline SnO2 to synthesize a bilayered SnO2/CH3NH3PbI3 film. The authors claimed that such a bilayered film provides an efficient electron extraction capability from perovskite with a high PCE of 13.88%. K. M. Lee et al. explored the thickness-dependent characteristics of the thermally evaporated C60 thin films by using different techniques. Their measured results reveal that the photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells significantly depends on the thickness of C60 thin film. L. Yang et al. explored conjugated polymer poly(9-vinylacarbazole) (PVK) as an efficient hole transport material to replace PEDOT:PSS for the synthesis of p–i–n type, inverted planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells. The authors reported the efficiency of the perovskite solar cells to be 15.8% in the ITO/PVK/MAPbI3/PCBM/Ag format. T. Ye et al. studied the temperature effect of the compact TiO2 in the planar perovskite solar cells with TiO2/perovskite heterojunctions, which exhibited reproducible efficiency values and good stability. The authors claimed that an efficient device can be fabricated by optimization of TiO2 annealing conditions. G. Fu et al. investigated the efficiency enhancement in the planar CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite solar cells adding bidentate halogenated additives into the percursor solution of perovskite. The authors found the efficiency of the perovskite solar cells to be 19.1%. Z. Zhang et al. fabricated perovskite solar cells with a structure of FTO/nanocrystaline titania (NRT)/CH3NH3PbI3/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au by adopting DC reactive magnetron sputtering of PbO for large surface area perovskite solar cells with a high efficiency (14.1%) under standard AM 1.5 conditions with an active area of 0.09 cm2. L. Calio et al. introduced dopant-free triazatruxene as the hole transport material in vacuum deposited perovskite solar cells with a high efficiency of 15% with a negligible degree of hysteresis. S. Sidhik et al. fabricated a high-performance hysteresis-free perovskite solar cell with the deposition of a co-solvent ethoxyethane and doping of FK209 Co(III) complex, which provides a high 90% reproducible, hysteresis-free perovskite solar cell with an average power conversion efficiency of 13.3%. This high efficiency was attributed to the impact of deposition time and the role of ethoxyethane as an anti-solvent.
The most obvious choice for Pb replacement is to use group 14 metals Sn and Ge, and group 15 metals Sb and Bi. For example, Noel et al. reported the first completely Pb-free, CH3NH3SnI3 perovskite solar cell processed on a mesoporous TiO2 scaffold, achieving an efficiency of over 6% under 1 Sun illumination. Moreover, Hao et al. reported lead-free solution-processed solid-state CH3NH3SnI3 having an optical bandgap of 1.3 eV incorporated with the organic hole-transport layer Spiro-OmeTAD and found absorption at 950 nm (IR region). So, the authors substituted CH3NH3SnI3 chemically by CH3NH3SnI3−xBr to control the band gap that can absorb a large part of the visible light with an initial conversion efficiency of 5.73% under simulated full sun light. Similarly, Lee et al. introduced CssSnI6 as a hole conductor with tin perovskite materials CH3NH3SnI3 to make a perovskite solar cell that is stable in air and moisture. The authors achieved a 4.7% energy conversion efficiency for a Z907 DSSC by doping CssSnI6 with additives into the DSSC with a mesoporous TiO2 film due to reduction in the internal device resistance.
Krishanmoorthy et al. synthesized three AGeI3 (A = Cs, CH3NH3 or HC(NH2)2) perovskite materials and found that these are stable at 150 °C and the bandgaps correlated with the A-site cation size. The authors achieved power conversion efficiencies of 0.11% and 0.20% for the CsGeI3 and CH3NH3GeI3 perovskite solar cells respectively under simulated full sunlight of 100 mW cm−2. Hebig et al. reported a lead-free (CH3NH3)3Sb2I9 perovskite material in the form of a planar heterojunction cell with a (CH3NH3)3Sb2I9 absorber layer that yields a power conversion efficiency of 0.5%, an open circuit voltage of 890 mV, and a fill factor of 0.55. Park et al. investigated a solar cell with A3Bi2I9 (A = CH3NH3 or Cs) and found that the solar cell with Cs3Bi2I9 perovskite shows the highest performance and a power conversion efficiency over 1% (0.6 FF, 0.85 V, and 2.15 mA cm−2) is obtained. The cross-sectional SEM images for (a-1) MA3Bi2I9Clx, (a-2) MA3Bi2I9, and (a-3) Cs3Bi2I9 based solar cell devices, and the (b) J–V and (c) IPCE curves for the solar cells using these three different materials are shown in Fig. 15.
Efficient perovskite solar cells have incorporated methyl ammonium (CH3NH3+ or MA+), formamidinium (CH3(NH2)2+ or FA+), or cesium (Cs+) as the A cation in the general formula ABX3. The most popular divalent B metal cations are typically Pb2+ or Sn2+, and the final component is halide anion X = (Cl− or Br− or I−). The bandgap of perovskites can be tuned widely by inter-mixing these compounds. A promising recent avenue has been the partial substitution of Cs+ for FA+, MA+, and MA+/FA+ for which significant enhancement of PCE and photo- and moisture stability were found by various research groups. For example, Deng et al. investigated unsealed devices with mixed cation MA+/FA+ perovskite films, fabricated by the doctor-blade coating method. The authors achieved PCE > 18% and stability longer than 20–30 days in air. The freedom of controlling parameters during the initial film formation stage to obtain high-quality perovskite films with tunable composition demonstrates that the doctor-blade coating method is better than the spin coating method. The authors also claimed that Cu can be a more stable cathode metal than pure Al or Ag with higher device performance and good stability. Similarly, Saliba et al. demonstrated triple-cation perovskite solar cells with stabilized efficiencies above 21%, suggesting that the addition of Cs+ to MA+/FA+ mixed cation perovskites further removes the remaining yellow phase impurities. Rehman et al. reported important links between the crystal phase stability, photostability and optoelectronic properties of the mixed-cation lead mixed-halide perovskite CsyFA1−yPb(BrxI1−x)3. The authors demonstrated a region for cesium content between 0.10 < y < 0.30 that features high crystalline quality, long charge carrier lifetimes, and excellent charge carrier mobilities. The authors concluded that the addition of cesium yields a more photo-stable perovskite system whose absorption onsets can be tuned for the bandgap-optimized tandem solar cells. Recently, Epron et al. demonstrated a mixed cation Cs0.17FA0.83Pb(Br0.4I0.6)3 perovskite with a bandgap of 1.74 eV that allowed for 17% PCE in a single-junction device and exhibited high crystallinity, long carries lifetimes, and excellent mobilities. This finding along with that of Zhou et al. suggests that enhanced crystallinity may open a pathway towards suppressing halide segregation and creating a perovskite absorber with wide bandgap and high open-circuit voltage.
Very recently, 2D Ruddlesden–Popper layer perovskites have been developed for optoelectronic applications due to their good moisture-resistance. This family of 2D layered halide perovskites has a general formula (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1, where n is the number of the metal cation layers between the two layers of the organic chains. For example, Tsai et al. investigated the 2D Ruddlesden–Popper perovskite solar cells, achieving a poor efficiency of 4.73% and promising stability. This poor efficiency is due to the poor charge transport by the organic cations that act as insulating spacing layers between the conducting inorganic slabs. The authors also reported very high efficiency of 12.52% with no hysteresis and greatly improved stability in comparison to their 3D counterparts after producing thin films of near-single-crystalline quality that facilitate the efficient charge transport. The authors claimed that the unencapsulated 2D perovskite devices retain over 60% of their efficiency over 2250 h under constant standard AM 1.5G illumination, and exhibit greater tolerance to 65% relative humidity than do 3D devices and the encapsulated devices do not show any degradation under constant AM 1.5G illumination or humidity as shown in Fig. 16(a–d). Safdari et al. reported the synthetic route and properties of three 2D hybrid organic–inorganic lead iodide perovskite materials. The resulting products were [NH3(CH2)4NH3]PbI4, [NH3(CH2)6NH3]PbI4, and [NH3(CH2)8NH3]PbI4. The absorption spectra showed their bandgaps of 2.37 eV, 2.44 eV and 2.55 eV respectively. The best performing material under moist, ambient conditions was [NH3(CH2)6NH3]PbI4 (efficiency = 1.08%), which is comparable to [NH3(CH2)4NH3]PbI4 (efficiency = 2.1%). Owing to their superoptoelectronic properties compared with their bulk counterparts, 2D micro/nanoplates of single crystal semiconductor have been intensively investigated for nanoelectronics and nanophotonics applications in the past two decades. The exploration of this exciting phenomenon drew the attention of many researchers who devised novel experiments and performed extensive theoretical analyses aiming to understand and control the origins of the unique properties of the 2D perovskites. Moreover, Stoumpos et al. reported the large-scale synthesis, crystal structure, and optical characterization of the 2D (CH3(CH2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1, 2, 3, 4, infinity) perovskites, a family of layered compounds with tunable semiconductor characteristics. The authors found that perovskite thickness (n) can be synthetically controlled by adjusting the ratio between the spacer cation and the small organic cation. The authors also performed DFT calculations to confirm the experimental trend and predict a direct bandgap for all the members of the Ruddlesden–Popper series. The higher n members can be used as efficient light absorbers in solar cells with better solution processability and good stability.
Consequently, solution processable semiconducting perovskite solar cells based on CH3NH3PbI3 have been developed with published PCEs of up to 12.3% due to their ambipolar transport nature, which allows them to replace the electron or hole transporter in hybrid cells, making them suitable for solution-processed thin film solar cells. However, the solution-processed CH3NH3PbI3-based perovskite solar cell has two main key problems: stability and lead toxicity. The CH3NH3SnI3-based perovskite solar cells could be a replacement for lead halide based perovskite solar cells; however, the efficiency in the tin halide based perovskite solar cell was low. In order to make highly efficient stable organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells, different research groups worldwide have been developing the perovskite solar cells by applying various experimental techniques such as: (i) currently most state-of-the-art perovskite-based devices utilize spiro-OMeTAD as the hole transport material in their structures, although other types of HTMs have been reported by some groups and Juarez-Perez and co-workers have used both hole- and electron-selective contacts to investigate the role of these contacts in the performance of lead halide perovskite solar cells; (ii) some groups have employed P3HT/PCBTDPP as effective hole conductors and Sb2S3 or Sb2Se3 as sensitizers; (iii) some groups have employed mixed halide based perovskite solar cells;etc. In this regard, more experimental efforts should be made to develop non-toxic, low-temperature operating, stable and highly efficient organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells for their commercialization.
Conclusively, the perovskite solar cells and their performance are summarized in Table 1 based on the experimental results already discussed in this section.
Perovskite materials
Efficiency (%)
Stability tested for
Ref.
CH3NH3MX3 (M = Pb, Sn; X = halogen)
3.8
Unstable

30

CH3NH3PbI3 quantum dot
6.2–6.54
10 m

31

CH3NH3PbI3 nanoparticle/Spiro-MeOTAD
9.7
Test period

26

CH3NH3Pb(I1−xBrx)3 (x = 0.10–0.15)
17.9
Stable

36

CH3NH3PbI3
19.3
—

39

FAPbI3
20.1
—

40

Cs+/MA+/FA-mixing cations
21.1
250 h

41

Perovskite
22.1
—

42

Combined silicon/perovskite subcells
23.0
—

43

CH3NH3PbI3−xClx
11.4
—

45

CH3NH3PbI3/SnO2
13.88
—

68

ITO/PVK/MAPBI3/PCBM/Ag
15.8
1000 h

70

CH3NH3PbI3−xClx
19.1
—

72

CH3NH3PbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
14.1
—

73

CH3NH3PbI3/triazatruxene
15
—

74

CH3NH3SnI3/TiO2
>6
—

65

CH3NH3SnI3/Spiro-OMeTAD
5.73
—

76

CH3NH3SnI3/Cs3SnI6
4.7
800 h

77

CsGeI3, CH3NH3GeI3
0.2
—

78

(CH3NH3)3Sb2I9
0.5
—

79

A3Bi2I9 (A = CH3NH3 or Cs)
>1
28 d

80

Mixed MA+/FA+ cations
>18
20–30 d

89

Triple cation (Cs+/MA+/FA+)
>21
250 h

41

Cs0.17FA0.83Pb(Br0.4I0.6)3
17
Stable

91

2D Ruddlesden–Popper perovskite
12.52
2250 h

93


There have been many theoretical investigations into organic–inorganic lead halide perovskite solar cells using DFT methods in agreement with experimental results available to date. For example, Mosconi et al. computationally investigated the key organometal CH3NH3PbX3 and mixed halide CH3NH3PbI3X perovskites (X = Cl, Br, I) in applications of high-efficiency solid-state solar cells. They found a good agreement between the calculated band structure and experimental trend of optical band gaps. The calculated band structures for these perovskite materials are shown in Fig. 17.

The authors suggested that the interplay of the organic and inorganic perovskite components, mediated by hydrogen bonding between the ammonium groups and the halides, appears to be the key to structural variability regarding their better photovoltaic performance. Fig. 17 shows that the conversion of the 3D structure of CH3NH3PbI3 to the 2D structure of (C4H9NH3)2PbI4 causes flattening of the band dispersion along the vertical directions of the Brillouin zone as discussed by Umebayashi et al.
In general, a large number of hybrid perovskites have been reported; however, the variation in electronic structure with the dimensions and orientations of the underlying perovskite lattice is not yet clear. The three-dimensional organic–inorganic perovskites based on relatively small organic cations have been suggested as a novel class of materials for dye-sensitized solar cells with enhanced photoconversion efficiency due to the conduction band and valence band alignments between the absorbers and TiO2, resulting in better understanding of charge transfer and transport; however, their modeling is not still adequate. Mosconi et al. also recently developed a computational approach for the description of mixed Sn–Pb compounds compared to experimental compositions. However, the state-of-the-art efficiency for the Sn-based perovskite solar cells has been observed to be about 6%.
The photovoltaic application by fabricating Pb–Sn perovskites (CH3NH3SnxPb1−xI3) recently reported a significant increase in the extension of the sunlight absorption compared to lead halide perovskites, shifting the absorption onset down to the near-infrared. Mosconi and co-workers have found that CH3NH3SnI3 is a good hole transporter and CH3NH3PbI3 is a good electron transporter. They also found that the 50:50 ratio for the Sn–Pb compound retains the best composition for getting red-shifted and increased absorption spectra along with almost balanced electron and hole transport properties, as calculated in terms of their effective masses (see Fig. 18). Lang et al. studied the electronic and optical properties of cubic ABX3 (A = Cs, CH3NH3, NH2CHNH2; B = Sn, Pb; X = Cl, Br, I) type compounds using the first-principles methods that employ the hybrid density functional method including a spin–orbit coupling effect. The authors found that: (i) the lattice constants and band gap of ABX3 increase with an increase in the size of A, (ii) the band gap of ABX3 increases with variation of B from Sn to Pb, (iii) the lattice constant increases and band gap decreases as X ranges from Cl to Br to I, (iv) all the ABX3 compounds have similar electronic properties, and (v) CH3NH3SnBr3 is a promising non-toxic material for a solar cell absorber with a perfect band gap and good optical absorption. Menendez-Proupin and co-workers studied the electronic structure and properties of the orthorhombic phase of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite by means of DFT methods. The authors reproduced the experimental band gap by combining the spin–orbit coupling effects and a hybrid functional in which the fraction of exact exchange was tuned self-consistently to the optical dielectric constant. The computed binding energy of the unrelaxed exciton agreed with experimental data, and the values found implied fast exciton dissociation at ambient temperature. They claimed that fast dynamics and large carrier diffusion lengths are key parameters in the high photovoltaic efficiency shown by these perovskite materials. Frost and co-workers provided theoretical insights into the key material properties of organometallic perovskites that contribute to their photovoltaic performance. The authors suggested the manipulation of the dipole moment (to affect ferroelectric behavior and dielectric constant) and cation size (to manipulate band gap and ferroelectric behavior), and moving to an aprotic cation (to avoid a degradation pathway). They also suggested a lead-free material with high performance and reduced degradation for a major step forward for this technology. Filippetti and Mattoni studied the MPbI3 and MPbI2Cl (M = CH3NH3) perovskites using first-principles calculations. Their structures (unitcells), band structures, DOS, and optical properties calculated using DFT methods are shown in Fig. 19(i–iv) respectively. They claimed some conceptual conclusions: (i) optical and transport properties are substantially independent of the electronic states of the molecule, (ii) the orientation of M largely affects the optical and transport properties, and (iii) Pb2+ ions play a key role in the optical properties of these systems since the band gap opens between Pb(6s)–I(5p) valence states and a conduction band manifold of exclusive Pb(6p) character. Moreover, the fundamental properties of the active absorber layers, hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite formed from mixing metal, and organic halides are largely unknown, although the performance of the perovskite solar cells already exceeded 15% solar-to-electricity conversion efficiency for small area devices. Brivio and co-workers have calculated the dielectric constants and band gap, which were found to be orientation-dependent with a low barrier of the organic cations. The carrier collection was supposed to be enhanced due to a photoferroic effect as a result of the electric dipole of the organic (methyl ammonium) cation. Recently, the methyl ammonium cation has been widely used, resulting in highly efficient perovskite structured photovoltaic absorbers.
2D organic–inorganic hybrid materials have attracted much interest due to the versatility of the organic part affording the possibility of fine tuning the materials’ properties and their potential applications in optoelectronic devices. Even et al. have investigated the role of spin–orbit coupling in the electronic band structure of two 3D hybrid PV-devices based on CH3NH3PbX3 (X = I, Br) and found that the band gap of these compounds can be tuned by spin–orbit coupling in the conduction band and the electronic states involved in optical absorption are slightly perturbed by local distortions of the lattice due to strong spin–orbit coupling. Umari et al. have performed relativistic GW calculations on the CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3SnI3 perovskites for solar cell applications due to the fact that the replacement of Pb by Sn would facilitate the large uptake of perovskite-based photovoltaics by means of relativistic effects. Recent electronic structure calculations have shown that the dominant defects in CH3NH3 PbI3 produce only shallow defect levels, whereas those able to act as deep traps have high formation energy. Such theoretical investigations have suggested that the methyl ammonium group does not play any significant role in the electronic structure around the band edges and the only role of the molecules is to stabilize electrostatically the perovskite structure. Motta et al. conducted DFT calculations for the CH3NH3PbI3 cubic phase by taking into consideration the experimentally reported evidence of the fast rotation of CH3NH3. van der Waals interaction was applied by the authors to change the direct band gap into an indirect band gap and obtain accurate lattice parameters. The authors suggested that the molecular rotation can cause the dynamical change of the band structure, and this might be the origin of slow carrier recombination and superior conversion efficiency of CH3NH3PbI3 approaching 20%. Ferroelectric materials contain domain walls separating regions of homogeneously polarized domains. The domains as two-dimensional topological defects have been studied in inorganic ferroelectrics. It is well known from the previous demonstration that the electronic properties of domains are different from their bulk counterparts. The presence of ferroelectric domains in β-CH3NH3PbI3 has been confirmed by piezoresponse force microscopy measurements. However, the local structure and electronic properties of the domain walls in organo–metal halide perovskites remain unknown. Liu et al. have demonstrated switchable domains in CH3NH3PbI3 and focused on the structural and electronic properties of the ferroelectric domain walls in CH3NH3PbX3 (X = I, Br, Cl).
The authors found that the organometal halide perovskites can form both charged domain walls (CDW) and uncharged domain walls (UCDW) due to the flexible orientation order of the CH3NH3 molecule. The charged domains significantly reduced the band gap by 20–40%, but the uncharged domains had no effect on the band gap. In this sense, the charged domain walls could serve as segregated channels for the motion of charge carriers as electrons and holes are supposed to move separately along different CDWs under internal or external electric fields, reducing the rate of recombination; a 180° wall may not result in a strong potential step for electron–hole separation due to the small polarization component along the domain wall normal for UCDWs; and 90° domain UCDWs may act as dipole layers that give rise to effective potential steps supporting the efficient charge separation and enhancement of exciton diffusion lengths in hybrid halide perovskites (see Fig. 20). The optimized orthorhombic unit cells and the domain structures with 180° and 90° domain walls in MAPbCl3, MAPbBr3, and (c) MAPbI3 are shown in Fig. 21(i-a, b, c) and (ii-a, b, c) respectively.
Conclusively, DFT calculations have been proven to be powerful methods for studying the electronic, optical, and defect properties of perovskites, and providing atomistic explanations and guidance for experimentalists. Theoretical results to date have demonstrated that the organic–inorganic lead halide perovskites exhibit a series of superior electronic and optical properties of solar cell applications, such as proper electronic band alignment, controlled doping ability, ferroelectric, and lattice point defect properties.

Within a few years, the PCE of perovskite solar cells has increased from 3.8% to 22.1%. The recently reported organic–inorganic halide perovskites, possessing the desirable properties of high absorption coefficient, a long exciton diffusion length, an appropriate band gap, and solution processability, show great potential for photovoltaic applications. The experimental reports on the working mechanisms, device structures, preparation methods, and materials applied continue to emerge. With regard to mechanisms, first-principles calculations served as a powerful tool for predicting the material properties. In addition, optical and electronic studies are able to reveal the key factors such as exciton diffusion length, density of charge transfer and recombination within the perovskite and interfaces to determine the device efficiency. Overall, first-principles calculations play an important role in the understanding and development of the emerging technology of perovskite solar cells in the sense that such calculations have demonstrated that halide perovskites exhibit a series of superior electronic and optical properties for solar cell applications, such as proper electronic band alignment, high light absorption, bipolar conductivity, controlled doping ability, lattice point defects, ferroelectric properties, domain walls, local structure, and dynamic disorder properties. However, there is lack of theoretical studies on doping/defects on hybrid halide perovskite solar cells. We believe that such types of studies will certainly enhance the performance of PV-devices based on hybrid halide perovskites.

Although there has been improvement in the PCE of the perovskite solar cells, there are still some questions that are unclear in this field. While estimating lifetime costs, one also needs to account for the stability, lead toxicity, and hysteretic behavior in I–V characteristics in addition to high efficiencies. As perovskite is a flexible structure type, many elements in the periodic table such as Co2+, Fe2+, Mn2+, Pd2+, Ge2+, Eu2+, etc. can be incorporated through various structural applications. As an alternative to toxic Pb, attempts have been made with Sn and Ge. However, the stability of the 2+ state decreases from Pb, to Sn, to Ge, which presents a considerable problem. Other alternatives that could be explored include other organic cations such as formamidinium. By introducing longer chained organic components at the ‘A’ site of ABX3, perovskite-type layer compounds can be created. Ab initio calculations are useful to identify newer families of photovoltaic perovskites. In the laboratory, 500 h device stabilities have already been reported in dry ambient temperature. However, it has also been reported that humidity degrades the perovskite performance. Halide alteration has been found promising in this regard, with increased stability in humid environments at minor performance penalty occurring when a low proportion of Br is introduced (i.e. mixed halide is formed). The content of Pb is also another drawback for the viability of these cells. The stability of the perovskite remains an issue in the sense that the negative Gibbs free energy for iodide perovskite degradation with moisture indicated the sensitiveness of perovskite to water. Thus, sealing of the perovskite and water-proofing of other materials are necessary. The band level of electron and hole transport materials should comply with the valence and conduction band energy levels respectively.
In this way, the high-efficiency and cost-effective materials and processes for perovskite solar cells make them economically viable for commercialization. The efficiency limit of the perovskite solar cells (without angular restriction) is about 31%, which is close to the Shockley–Queisser limit (33%) achieved for GaAs solar cells. However, commercialization is still challenging because of the toxicity of Pb atoms and long-term stability. As utilization of Pb-based materials has been restricted due to their intrinsic toxicity, future research directions should explore Pb-free light-absorbing materials. The recent research strategies in the development of highly efficient perovskite solar cells can assure the commercialization of these cells in coming years. This commercialization for large energy production could be possible by developing high performance tandem cell technology that uses both perovskite and existing technology in the form of a new premium product in the market.
Conclusively, the successful commercialization of perovskite solar cells includes the comprehensive understanding of the photovoltaic principles and degradation mechanisms, new materials development, optimization of device structure, and related manufacturing technologies.

In this article, we have given an overview of the brief historical progress in the development of organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells and the theoretical progress regarding their electronic and optical properties in agreement with their recent experimentally observed high PCE of 22.1%. We also review the current-state-of-the-art and the key scientific challenges regarding the commercialization of the perovskite technology.

PSC
Perovskite solar cell
PCE
Photo-conversion-efficiency
IPCE
Incident photon-to-current efficiency
HOMO
Highest occupied molecular orbital
LUMO
Lowest unoccupied molecular orbital
FF
Fill factor

V
OC

Open-circuit voltage

J
SC

Short-circuit current density
DOS
Density of states
EQE
External quantum efficiency

There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the Korea Center for Artificial Photosynthesis (KCAP, 2009-0093880, 2009-0093886), Basic Science Research Program (No. 2012-017247), BK Plus Program and A3 Foresight Program, all funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning through the National Research Foundation (NRF) Korea.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2017