 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA07830G
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22480-22488


Jing
Liu
,

Lik-Kuen
Ma
,

Zhengke
Li
,

Huawei
Hu
,

Tingxuan
Ma
,

Chenhui
Zhu
,

Harald
Ade
 and 

He
Yan
*

Department of Chemistry, Hong Kong Branch of Chinese National Engineering Research Center for Tissue Restoration & Reconstruction, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST), Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong. E-mail: hyan@ust.hk

Advance Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

Department of Physics, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695, USA

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen Research Institute, No. 9 Yuexing 1st RD, Hi-tech Park, Nanshan, Shenzhen 518057, China

Received
6th September 2017
, Accepted 6th October 2017
First published on 7th October 2017
Non-fullerene organic solar cells (NF-OSCs) require donor polymers with different morphological properties from those used in fullerene devices to achieve optimal cell performance. In this paper, we report a random donor polymer (PTFB-M) constructed from an asymmetric donor unit (T–FB–T-M), which can effectively tune the morphology and thus enhance the performance of NF-OSCs. Compared with its analog polymer PTFB-P based on a C2 symmetric monomer, the asymmetric T–FB–T-M unit introduces some randomness in the PTFB-M polymer yielding several beneficial effects. Firstly, although the neat PTFB-M film exhibits slightly reduced crystallinity and hole mobility compared to PTFB-P, it can, to our surprise, better maintain its crystallinity when blended with non-fullerene acceptors, hence yielding NF-OSCs with higher hole mobility and fill factors (FF) compared to devices based on PTFB-P. In addition, PTFB-M also exhibits smaller and more favorable domain sizes in NF-OSCs, leading to higher external quantum efficiency (EQE) and short circuit current density (Jsc). As a result, when combined with a small molecule acceptor (SMA) ITIC-Th, PTFB-M yields a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 10.4%, whereas the PCE is only 8.4% for PTFB-P:ITIC-Th-based cells. This provides a useful approach to tune the morphology of donor polymers and to enhance the performance of NF-OSCs.

During the past few decades, solution-processable OSCs have attracted extensive attention because of their advantages of low processing cost, light weight and mechanical flexibility. Generally, most efficient OSCs are based on the so-called bulk heterojunction (BHJ) structure, which consists of an interpenetrating blend of electron donors and acceptors. Fullerene derivatives (PC60BM and PC70BM) have been widely used as electron acceptors since they were introduced into the OSC field in the 1990s. Over the past few decades, the design of efficient donor polymers enables a power conversion efficiency (PCE) over 11% for fullerene-based OSCs. However, further enhancement of performance is challenging due to the limitations of fullerene derivatives, such as weak absorption in the visible region, limited tunability of energy levels, and large voltage losses. Hence recent efforts have been devoted to developing efficient electron acceptors to replace fullerenes. Among these reported SMAs, indacenodithiophene (IDT)-type fused-ring small molecules are demonstrated to achieve many efficient solar cell systems. Although much progress in this field has been driven by the development of new SMAs, it is equally important to design matching donor polymers, as they play critical roles in controlling the BHJ morphology and photovoltaic performance.

Importantly, many reports show that the state-of-the-art donor polymers with high crystallinity applied in fullerene-based OSCs may not be ideal matches for non-fullerene acceptors. Instead, the crystallinity of donor polymers should be slightly reduced in order to match better with non-fullerene acceptors. With the consideration of slightly tuning down the crystallinity of donor polymers, multiple approaches have been reported including changing the quaterthiophene-based polymer backbone with asymmetric terthiophene units, inserting a benzene unit between two thiophenes and increasing the length of alkyl side chains. Another important study on the rational design of donor polymers for NF-OSCs was based on two analog polymers named PTFB-P and PTFB-O. Although PTFB-P exhibited higher crystallinity and better performance in fullerene-based OSCs, it suffered from excessively large domain sizes when combined with the SMA ITIC. In particular, PTFB-P lost its crystallinity in the PTFB-P:ITIC blend and thus the device suffered from relatively low hole mobility and a poor FF. With these, it is important to develop rational approaches to tune the morphological properties of donor polymers for NF-OSCs.
In this paper, we report an asymmetric building block T–FB–T-M to construct a random polymer PTFB-M, which can effectively tune the morphology of polymer:SMA blends. To better understand the structure–property relationship, we compare PTFB-M with the reported polymer PTFB-P, as they have a nearly identical structure except for different symmetries of their monomers. When PTFB-M was combined with ITIC-Th, the solar cell yielded a PCE up to 10.4%, which is significantly higher than that of the device based on PTFB-P:ITIC-Th (8.4%). Due to the asymmetric nature of T–FB–T-M, the resulting polymer PTFB-M is essentially random due to two possible orientations of difluorobenzene in each repeating unit of the polymer backbone. Furthermore, the change of the monomer structure results in more twisting between the difluorobenzene unit and one of its neighboring thiophenes. The slightly twisted structure of PTFB-M combined with the random nature of its backbone reduces the aggregation tendency and crystallinity of the neat polymer compared to PTFB-P. Despite the slightly reduced intrinsic crystallinity of the pure film, PTFB-M, to our surprise, can retain most of its crystallinity and hole mobility in the non-fullerene blend, which is in sharp contrast to PTFB-P that was demonstrated to lose its crystallinity when blended with ITIC-Th. This difference yielded a much higher (2×) hole mobility and thus a higher FF (69% vs. 61%) for PTFB-M-based devices. Another advantageous feature of PTFB-M is that it produces BHJ films with smaller domain sizes, thus yielding improved Jsc and EQE for the device. This work provides a useful design rationale to tune the morphology of NF-OSCs and also reveals the importance of the structure–performance relationship for developing matching donor polymers for efficient NF-OSCs.

Here we report an asymmetric donor unit T–FB–T-M (Scheme 1) (‘T’, ‘FB’, and ‘M’ stand for thiophene, difluorobenzene and meta positions in benzene) to construct a random donor polymer PTFB-M and its synthetic route is shown in Scheme 1. When the meta-difluorobenzene unit is incorporated into the polymer backbone, it could have two possible orientations with two fluorine atoms pointing to the right or left side as shown in Scheme 1. In this sense, this unit is essentially an asymmetric building block that causes some randomness for the polymer PTFB-M. The number-average and weight-average molecular weights are 83.4 kDa and 156.7 kDa for PTFB-M as measured by high-temperature gel permeation chromatography (GPC). To better understand the properties of PTFB-M, it is compared with its close analog polymer PTFB-P (Fig. 1), which is constructed from the para-difluorobenzene unit with a nearly identical structure except for the different symmetry of the monomer. The only minor difference between these two polymers is fluorine substituted positions in the benzene, which will influence the polymer ordering and device morphology significantly.


The chemical structures of PTFB-M, PTFB-P and ITIC-Th are shown in Fig. 1a with the UV-vis absorption spectra of their pure films shown in Fig. 1b. The optical bandgap of PTFB-M is 1.98 eV as determined by its optical absorption onset (625 nm), similar to that of PTFB-P (1.97 eV). The main absorption ranges of PTFB-M and PTFB-P are identical (400–600 nm), offering complementary absorption to ITIC-Th, which is beneficial for harvesting more photons across the solar spectrum. The temperature-dependent UV-vis absorption spectra of PTFB-M are shown in Fig. 1c, indicating the temperature-dependent aggregation (TDA) properties of the polymer. During the cooling process from 100 °C to room temperature, the polymer in the solution tended to aggregate at around 40 °C, which, as evidenced by the appearance of the peak at 570 nm, is similar to that of PTFB-P (Fig. S1). The TDA properties of PTFB-M are beneficial for achieving an optimum morphology during the film processing as described in previous reports. The energy levels of PTFB-M were characterized by cyclic voltammetry (CV) experiments (Fig. S2). The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of PTFB-M was estimated to be −5.36 eV as determined from the oxidation peak in the curve. As the reduction data collected from the CV spectrum of PTFB-M is unreliable, the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) was calculated to be −3.38 eV based on the HOMO level and the optical bandgap. There are no considerable differences of energy levels or absorptions between PTFB-M and PTFB-P due to their nearly identical chemical structures.

BHJ devices were fabricated with an inverted structure of ITO/ZnO/active layer/V2O5/Al to investigate the photovoltaic performance of PTFB-M:ITIC-Th and PTFB-P:ITIC-Th blends. The active layer was spincast from the solution of the donor and the acceptor with a weight ratio of 1:1.5. The current–voltage (J–V) and EQE curves of PTFB-M:ITIC-Th and PTFB-P:ITIC-Th optimized devices are shown in Fig. 2, while the photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. For the PTFB-M:ITIC-Th-based solar cell, the device exhibited the best PCE up to 10.4% with an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.89 V, a Jsc of 16.56 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.70, significantly higher than that of PTFB-P-based NF-OSCs (8.4% PCE). The enhancement of the performance of PTFB-M-based devices is ascribed to the improved Jsc and FF, the reason for which will be discussed later. The PTFB-M:ITIC-Th-based solar cell has a positive photon response in the range of 300–800 nm and a maximum EQE value of over 73% is recorded, contributing to high Jsc of the device. The integrated current density from the EQE curve is 15.4 mA cm−2, which generally agrees with the measured value (16.3 mA cm−2) within 5.5% mismatch.
Donor

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Best PCE (%)

μ
h [cm2 V−1 S−1]

μ
e [cm2 V−1 S−1]

a The average values of PCE for over 10 devices.

PTFB-M
0.90 ± 0.01
16.29 ± 0.7
0.69 ± 0.02
10.0 ± 0.2
10.4
4.7 × 10−4
9.3 × 10−4
PTFB-P
0.89 ± 0.01
14.97 ± 0.6
0.61 ± 0.02
8.2 ± 0.2
8.4
2.3 × 10−4
9.5 × 10−4

DFT calculations at the B3LYP/6-31G* level were performed to better understand the relationship between the minor structural difference and polymer conformation for PTFB-P and PTFB-M. For simplicity, all the alkyl chains in two polymers were replaced with methyl groups and the optimized geometry of PTFB-M and PTFB-P is shown in Fig. S3. It has been reported that the position of fluorine atoms can influence the orientation of adjacent thiophene units via the interaction between fluorine and sulfur atoms. In addition, fluorinated substitution can also enhance the co-planarity and molecular ordering of the polymer backbone. For PTFB-P, two fluorine atoms on benzene units can have intramolecular interaction with both thiophene units on two sides of the benzene ring, yielding a nearly co-planar structure for the polymer PTFB-P. For the random polymer PTFB-M, however, due to its asymmetric structure, the C–C–C–S dihedral angles on two sides of the benzene unit are significantly different. As shown in Fig. S3a, the side with two fluorine atoms exhibits a C–C–C–S dihedral angle of 5° while the other side with two hydrogen atoms is more twisted as evidenced by a larger dihedral angle (13°). The less coplanar backbone of PTFB-M (introduced by its random structure) should lead to weaker intermolecular interactions and reduced crystallinity for the polymer.

To reveal the impacts of the structural difference on polymer crystallinity, grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) was carried out on the neat polymer films. As shown in Fig. 3, both polymers exhibit a higher order lamellar stacking peak (h00) but PTFB-P is more crystalline as evidenced by its clearly visible (400) peak, which is not shown in the neat film of PTFB-M. In addition, the (010) coherence length (CL) of PTFB-P is estimated to be 17.6 nm, which is significantly larger than that of PTFB-M (4.6 nm). These results demonstrate that PTFB-M exhibits reduced crystallinity than PTFB-P both in (100) and (010) directions, which corresponds well to theoretical calculation results and the following mobility data. The hole mobilities of neat films were measured via the space charge limited current (SCLC) method (ESI, Fig. S4a). It showed that PTFB-P exhibited a higher hole mobility of 5.9 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 S−1, versus (3.9 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 S−1) for PTFB-M, consistent with the regioregular structure of PTFB-P and the random backbone of PTFB-M. Generally, the reduced crystallinity and hole mobility of the donor polymer should lead to a lower FF and thus poor performance of solar cells. It is surprising that PTFB-M-based OSCs achieved a higher PCE (10.4%) than PTFB-P-based devices, which is due to the significant enhancement of the FF and Jsc.
To resolve this puzzle, the morphology of PTFB-M:ITIC-Th and PTFB-P:ITIC-Th blend films was also investigated by GIWAXS, which is shown in Fig. 3 and the corresponding data are summarized in Table 2. To our surprise, the (010) CL of PTFB-P in the blend film was dramatically reduced to 3.5 nm from that (17.6 nm) in the neat film, meaning that PTFB-P somehow lost its high crystallinity when blended with the SMA, whereas, PTFB-M can maintain its crystallinity in the blend film as evidenced by the unchanged (010) coherence length (4.6 nm) of the blend. PTFB-M can better keep its crystallinity when combined with the SMA while PTFB-P cannot, hence leading to a higher hole mobility and FF for the PTFB-M:ITIC-Th-based device. The mobility data of the two blend films were collected and they agree well with the above conclusion. PTFB-M:ITIC-Th exhibited a hole mobility of 4.7 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 S−1, double that for PTFB-P:ITIC-Th (2.3 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 S−1) (Fig. S4c), and the electron mobilities of two blends are comparable due to the usage of the same acceptor in two blends (Table 1). It can be concluded that the higher hole mobility and more balanced charge mobilities benefit the charge transportation and collection in blend films that further explain the higher Jsc and higher FF of PTFB-M:ITIC-Th-based solar cells.
Materials
(100) coherence length (nm)
(100) d spacing (Å)
(010) coherence length (nm)
(010) d spacing (Å)
PTFB-M
13.8
23.5
4.6
3.6
PTFB-P
17.7
22.3
17.6
3.6
PTFB-M:ITIC-Th
12.0
23.7
4.6
3.6
PTFB-P:ITIC-Th
16.7
22.6
3.5
3.6
The conclusion above was supported by resonant soft X-ray scattering (R-SoXS) data and the profile is shown in Fig. 4a. A peak at 0.088 nm−1 was observed for the PTFB-M:ITIC-Th blend and the domain spacing was estimated to be 71 nm, which is smaller than that of PTFB-P:ITIC-Th (80 nm). Furthermore, atomic force microscopy (AFM) was employed to investigate the surface topographies of two blends and the height and phase images can be found in Fig. S5. This indicates that the PTFB-P-based blend exhibited larger domain sizes, which is consistent with the results determined by R-SoXS data. The larger domain sizes in the PTFB-P-based device should affect the charge separation, leading to a lower EQE and Jsc for the solar cell. In general, the reduced crystallinity of PTFB-M, and more importantly, the good maintenance of this property in the blend film contributed to smaller domain sizes and higher hole mobility simultaneously in the blend film, hence yielding enhanced Jsc, FF and photovoltaic performance for PTFB-M-based devices.
Another interesting observation is about the lamellar stacking of the PTFB-M polymer. It was shown by GIWAXS data that the lamellar stacking distance is 23.5 Å for PTFB-M, which is slightly larger than that of PTFB-P (22.3 Å) and indicates that the alkyl chain interdigitation between PTFB-M polymer chains is not as tight as that in PTFB-P. Combined with the fact that PTFB-P exhibits a higher order (400) peak and a larger (100) CL, it is safe to conclude that PTFB-P exhibits much stronger lamellar stacking than PTFB-M. To further understand this difference, we show the orientation of the alkyl side chains of these two polymers in Fig. 5. As shown in Fig. 5a, the para-difluorobenzene unit offers two different atoms (H and F) to the neighboring thiophenes on side and the H and F atoms have different intramolecular interactions with the S and H atoms on the thiophene unit. This is important, because the intramolecular attraction between the F atom on the difluorobenzene unit and the S atom on the thiophenes dictates the molecular conformation between difluorobenzene and thiophenes and the orientation of the alkyl side chains along the polymer backbone. This F–S intramolecular interaction creates a perfectly parallel and regioregular arrangement for the alkyl side chains on PTFB-P (Fig. 5c), which is the reason why this polymer film exhibits strong alkyl chain interdigitation and lamellar stacking. In contrast, for the PTFB-M polymer, its meta-difluorobenzene unit has a different symmetry. As shown in Fig. 5b, the two fluorine atoms on the difluorobenzene unit are pointing to the thiophene unit on the same side. Therefore, the S atom on the thiophene could interact with either one of the F atoms on the benzene, resulting in two possible molecular geometries between the difluorobenzene and thiophenes (Fig. 5b). As a result of this “randomness” in molecular geometry, the perfectly parallel and regioregular alkyl chain arrangement observed for PTFB-P is no longer guaranteed for the PTFB-M (Fig. 5d). From the GIWAXS data, it is observed that the lamellar stacking of PTFB-M is significantly reduced compared to that of PTFB-P. Therefore, the random nature of the PTFB-M polymer has two components: one is the random positioning of the difluorobenzene unit, while the other is the random orientation of the alkyl side chains.
Finally, regarding the regioregular structure of PTFB-P and the random nature of PTFB-M, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) results were applied to analyze the difference of their thermal properties (Fig. S6 and 4b). The DSC curve of PTFB-M shows an obvious transition peak at 268.2 °C during the heating process, whereas PTFB-P shows the melting point at 276.0 °C. The DSC results suggest that both PTFB-M and PTFB-P possess crystal-like behavior, yet PTFB-P exhibits a relatively higher rigidity of the polymer backbone as evidenced by its higher melting point, which is consistent with the GIWAXS results that both PTFB-M and PTFB-P are crystalline but PTFB-P exhibits higher crystallinity as confirmed by its clearly visible (400) peak. The introduction of the asymmetric building block to the polymer could indeed reduce the crystallinity of the donor polymer to some extent.
To further explore why the more crystalline polymer PTFB-P lost its crystallinity when combined with ITIC-Th, DSC data of the two neat polymers and polymer-based blends were employed to reveal the degree of molecular miscibility in two polymer:SMA blends. As shown in Fig. 4b, the random polymer PTFB-M shows a melting enthalpy (ΔHf) of 24.7 J g−1 and a melting point of 268.2 °C during the heating process. After PTFB-M was blended with ITIC-Th, the DSC curve shows a slightly decreased melting point of 262.6 °C. While for PTFB-P, which exhibits a ΔHf of 24.0 J g−1 in the neat polymer, the melting point is obviously decreased from 276.0 °C to 259.5 °C after being blended with ITIC-Th. The above results indicate that the PTFB-M:ITIC-Th blend exhibits more ordered molecular packing than the PTFB-P-based blend. Furthermore, the depression of the melting point in the two blends can be utilized to calculate the molecular interaction parameter (χ) using the Flory–Huggins approximation (further details about the χ calculation are shown in the ESI). The higher χ means a lower degree of molecular miscibility and the higher phase purity. For the PTFB-P-based blend, the χ is calculated to be 0.97 while it is 1.40 for the PTFB-M:ITIC-Th blend, indicating that the molecular miscibility between PTFB-P and ITIC-Th is higher and PTFB-P exhibits lower phase purity in the blend. Therefore, the stronger molecular interaction between PTFB-P and ITIC-Th makes PTFB-P lose its crystallinity in the blend film and thus leads to a lower FF for the solar cell.
Previously, we synthesized a large bandgap donor polymer PTFB-P using our TDA strategy. However, the π–π stacking of this polymer is too strong and it tends to form large domain sizes in the blend film. More importantly, it will lose its crystallinity when blended with the SMA. Thus, in this paper, we introduce the asymmetric key unit to tune the morphology of the donor polymer and thus enhance the performance of NF-OSCs.

In summary, we reported a random polymer PTFB-M constructed from an asymmetric building block T–FB–T-M to effectively tune the morphology of NF-OSCs. When comparing PTFB-M to its analog close polymer PTFB-P, the dihedral angle (C–C–C–S) between the difluorobenzene unit and one of its adjacent thiophenes in PTFB-M is increased to 13°. Besides, the alkyl chains in PTFB-M exhibit a random arrangement yet they are in a parallel manner in PTFB-P. Due to the change of the monomer, PTFB-M exhibits a more twisted backbone and a random structure, resulting in reduced crystallinity and hole mobility for the polymer. To our surprise, PTFB-P lost most of its crystallinity when blended with the SMA while PTFB-M can maintain this property well, hence leading to a higher hole mobility and FF in PTFB-M-based devices. In addition, PTFB-M generates smaller and more favorable domain sizes in the blend, yielding improved EQE and Jsc for PTFB-M-based devices. As a result, the PTFB-M:ITIC-Th-based solar cell exhibits a PCE up to 10.4%, which is significantly higher than that of the PTFB-P-based device (8.4%). The design rationale in this paper suggests a useful approach to tune the morphology and performance of NF-OSCs and also provides important guidelines to develop matching donor polymers for non-fullerene photovoltaic devices.


The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


J. L. and L. M. contributed equally to this work. The work described in this paper was partially supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program project numbers 2013CB834701 and 2014CB643501), the ShenZhen Technology and Innovation Commission (project number JCYJ20170413173814007), the Hong Kong Research Grants Council (project numbers T23-407/13 N, N_HKUST623/13, 16305915, 16322416, 606012, and 16303917), HK JEBN Limited, HKUST president's office (Project FP201) and the National Science Foundation of China (#21374090). We especially thank Hong Kong Innovation and Technology Commission for the support through projects ITC-CNERC14SC01 and ITS/083/15. X-ray data acquisition and manuscript input by NCSU authors supported by ONR Grant No. N000141512322. X-ray data were acquired at Advanced Light Source, which was supported by the Director, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta07830g
‡ Dual contributors.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017