 DOI: 10.1039/D0TA07567A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 19555-19560


Shufang
Li
,

Linna
Zhu
*,

Zhipeng
Kan
,

Yong
Hua
* and 

Fei
Wu
*

Chongqing Key Laboratory for Advanced Materials and Technologies of Clean Energy, School of Materials & Energy, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, P. R. China. E-mail: lnzhu@swu.edu.cn; feiwu610@swu.edu.cn

Yunnan Key Laboratory for Micro/Nano Materials & Technology, School of Materials and Energy, Yunnan University, Kunming 650091, Yunnan, P. R. China

Organic Semiconductor Research Center, Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chongqing, China

Received
3rd August 2020
, Accepted 27th August 2020
First published on 28th August 2020
High-quality perovskite films are critical to realize efficient photovoltaic performances of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). An unprocessed perovskite film contains a high density of defects, which results in low film quality. In order to reduce the trap density and passivate non-radiative recombination centers of perovskite films, scandium trifluoromethanesulfonate (Sc(OTF)3) is introduced into the perovskite precursor solution as a multifunctional additive. The sulfonic group could coordinate with lead ions, thus reducing the perovskite crystallization process, and a high quality perovskite film with large grain size, high crystallinity and few defects is obtained. Meanwhile, the doping of the rare earth ion Sc3+ in the perovskite precursor solution could lead to the interaction of Sc3+ with the perovskite, thereby improving film morphology and prolonging the charge carrier lifetime. In addition, the strong hydrogen bonding interaction between Sc(OTF)3 and MA+ could immobilize methylamine ions (MA+), contributing to the improved stability of the perovskite film. As a result, inverted PSCs with Sc(OTF)3 at a low doping amount of 0.1 mg ml−1 show a remarkable efficiency of 20.63% along with an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 1134 mV, a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 21.71 mA cm−2, and a high fill factor (FF) of 83.80%. So far, the FF of this system represents one of the highest results for inverted PSCs.

The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells has soared from the initial 3.8% to the state-of-the-art 25.2% in recent years. The impressively high efficiency of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) benefits from the outstanding optoelectronic properties of perovskite materials, such as strong and broad optical absorption, suitable optical band edge, and long and balanced charge diffusion length. However, due to the solution-based manufacturing process and the ionic nature of perovskite materials, there are still some defects in perovskite films. These defects could act as non-radiative recombination centers and thus deteriorate the performance of PSCs. At the same time, due to the chemical degradation of perovskite materials caused by defects, the long-term stability of PSCs is also adversely affected.

The defects in perovskite materials will seriously affect the growth of perovskite crystals and the quality of perovskite films. It is recognized that reduced defects and contact passivation of perovskite films is critical to obtain photovoltaic devices with excellent performance. The quality of a perovskite film can be effectively improved by additive engineering, which works to passivate the non-radiative recombination centers and affect the perovskite crystallization behavior. For example, functional molecules containing sulfonic groups have been reported to form complexes with lead ions, which can reduce the speed of the perovskite crystallization process and help in the formation of high-quality films. Zheng et al. demonstrated the formation of coordination bonds between the sulfonic groups of DPSI small molecules and lead ions in a perovskite, and thus neutralized the charged defects at the surfaces and grain boundaries of the perovskite film. Yang et al. introduced DMSO additive in a perovskite precursor to form complexes with PbI2, resulting in large grained dense microstructures and a flat FAPbI3 film with few defects. Metal-ion doping is utilized to control the crystallization kinetics and optimize the film morphology of perovskite materials. Wang et al. introduced Nd3+ in a hybrid perovskite precursor, which was confirmed to reduce the impurity phases and eliminate the deep defects in the perovskite film. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi et al. demonstrated that the substitution of metal Bi, Sc, Ni, and Zr for MA+ in MAPbBr3 compounds could improve the perovskite film morphology and enhance the charge carrier lifetimes. Fluorinated organic compounds generally have excellent moisture and heat resistance. At the same time, multifunctional fluoropolymers can be used to passivate anion and cation vacancies simultaneously because of their extremely high electronegativity. In addition, the strong hydrogen bonding of F⋯H–N can immobilize organic cations (MA+/FA+) and thus enhance the thermal stability of a device. Yang et al. introduced fluorinated perylenediimide into a perovskite film to enhance its thermal stability by the formation of the strong hydrogen bonding F⋯H–N. Li et al. employed fluoride to simultaneously passivate both anion and cation vacancies through strengthening chemical bonds with lead and organic cations. As mentioned above, due to the complexity and diversity of defects, most of these strategies only target on passivating one or two kinds of defects, and adding a variety of additives will increase the complexity of the system and the difficulty of experimental operation. Therefore, developing a single additive which could passivate multiple defects in perovskites is thus necessary.
In this study, we introduce scandium trifluoromethanesulfonate (Sc(OTF)3) into a perovskite precursor. The additive contains the rare earth ion Sc3+, negatively charged sulfonic groups, and highly electronegative fluorine atoms. The doping with Sc3+ could lead to the interaction of Sc3+ with the perovskite film and optimize the perovskite film morphology. At the same time, the charge carrier lifetimes were also enhanced. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurement were conducted to confirm the interaction between Sc3+ and the perovskite. In addition, it has been reported in the literature that the addition of Sc3+ in a perovskite precursor could improve the perovskite film morphology. The sulfonic group can form coordination with lead ions, which reduced the speed of the perovskite crystallization process and helped in the formation of a high-quality film. The synergistic effect of Sc3+ and sulfonic groups makes the perovskite film have fewer defects with fewer grain boundaries. In addition, we hypothesize that the strong hydrogen bonding between Sc(OTF)3 and MA+ could help to immobilize the methylamine ions (MA+), thus contributing to the improved device stability. As a result, inverted devices based on a 0.1 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 doped perovskite film showed a champion efficiency of 20.63% with improved stability. In comparison, the control device based on the pristine perovskite film showed an efficiency of 18.02%. Therefore, Sc(OTF)3 is able to work as a multifunctional additive that could effectively improve the performance of MAPbI3−xClx-based inverted perovskite solar cells.

We introduced a small amount of the multifunctional additive Sc(OTF)3 (0.1 and 0.5 mg ml−1) into a perovskite (MAPbI3−xClx) precursor. In the one-step spin coating process, during the annealing process, the perovskite film containing Sc(OTF)3 turned black slower than that without Sc(OTF)3. This illustrated that Sc(OTF)3 can slow down the perovskite crystal growth rate during film formation, which is consistent with the phenomenon reported in the literature. To verify the formation of coordination bonds between Sc(OTF)3 and lead ions in the perovskite, Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) experiments were conducted. As shown in Fig. S1, the SO peak at 1035 cm−1 is attributed to Sc(OTF)3. The peak of SO shifted to 1045 cm−1 when Sc(OTF)3 is doped into the perovskite. According to the literature, this shift can be attributed to the coordination between Sc(OTF)3 and the perovskite. The XPS test further confirmed this point. Fig. S2(a–c) show the XPS spectra of different MAPbI3−xClx films. The binding energies of Pb 4f decreased from 137.28 eV for the pristine perovskite film to 137.08 eV for the Sc(OTF)3 doped perovskite film. The lower binding energy of Pb 4f than that of the reference sample illustrates that the electron density around lead is increased in the doped perovskite film, indicating the formation of coordination bonds between Sc(OTF)3 and the perovskite. The formation of coordination bonds could slow down the perovskite crystallization process and is beneficial for obtaining high-quality perovskite films. At the same time, we found that the Sc 2p peak of the doped perovskite film shifts toward lower binding energy than that of Sc(OTF)3. These results further confirm the interaction between Sc3+ and the perovskite. In addition, the F 1s peak of the doped perovskite film shifts toward higher binding energy than that of Sc(OTF)3, and this might be the result of the formation of hydrogen bonds between the highly electronegative fluorine and MA+, as could be confirmed by the FTIR measurements (Fig. S1). It is observed that the hydrogen of MA+ shifted to high frequency after adding Sc(OTF)3, indicating the formation of F⋯H–N hydrogen bonds. The strong hydrogen bonds could prevent the decomposition of organic cations in the perovskite film, which may contribute to the improved stability of the perovskite film.

To investigate the morphology of MAPbI3−xClx films with different concentrations of Sc(OTF)3 (0, 0.1, and 0.5 mg ml−1), SEM and atomic force microscopy (AFM) images were obtained and are shown in Fig. 1a–f. It is observed that the pristine perovskite film shows irregular and small grain size, while the 0.1 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 doped perovskite film displays enlarged and more uniform grain size. The 0.5 mg ml−1 Sc (OTF)3 doped perovskite film also showed slightly larger grain size than the undoped perovskite film. The larger grain size of the 0.1 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 doped perovskite film is beneficial for charge transport in the corresponding devices. AFM images show the difference in surface roughness of different perovskite films. The root-mean-square (RMS) roughness value is 19.8 nm for the perovskite film without Sc(OTF)3, while the RMS roughness value becomes slightly smaller for the 0.1 mg ml−1 doped film (15.2 nm). The 0.5 mg ml−1 doped film shows an RMS roughness value of 20.5 nm, which is similar to that of the pristine perovskite film. The smooth surface of the 0.1 mg ml−1 doped film can form effective contact passivation and benefit charge transfer. To explore the impact of Sc(OTF)3 on the crystal structure and quality of the perovskite film, XRD measurement was conducted on different films. As shown in Fig. 2a, no new peak appeared in the two doped perovskite films, which indicated that the crystal structure of the perovskite was not affected by the added Sc(OTF)3. In addition, the pristine perovskite film shows a PbI2 peak at 13°, while the PbI2 peak in the doped film became very weak (Fig. S3). A stronger diffraction intensity and a narrower full width at half maximum (FWHM) were observed for the two doped perovskite films, suggesting that the doping with Sc(OTF)3 endows the perovskite film with large grain size, high crystallinity and few defects, thus facilitating charge transport and inhibiting nonradiative charge recombination in the corresponding devices.

Fig. 2b shows the UV-vis absorption spectra of perovskite films doped with Sc(OTF)3 at different concentrations. We can see that the pristine perovskite film shows intensive absorption from 500 nm to 800 nm. The doped films with 0.1 mg ml−1 and 0.5 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 show a higher absorption value than the pristine perovskite film, in which the 0.1 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 doped film shows the maximum absorption value. We attribute the increase in the absorption value to the improvement of the quality of doped perovskite films. Meanwhile, we found that the band gap of the perovskite films did not change after doping. To evaluate the carrier extraction of different films, we performed a steady-state-photoluminescence (PL) experiment. Fig. S4 shows the PL spectra of the perovskite films doped with different concentrations of Sc(OTF)3 in the precursor solution. Compared to the pristine perovskite film, the 0.1 mg ml−1 and 0.5 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 doped perovskite films present obvious enhancement in PL intensity, which indicated that the Sc(OTF)3 additive can passivate defects and decrease non-radiative recombination in perovskite films.
To further explore the passivation effect of Sc(OTF)3 on perovskite, space-charge limited current (SCLC) measurement was performed on hole-only (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite(400 nm)/MoO3(30 nm)/Ag) and electron-only (ITO/C60(30 nm)/perovskite(400 nm)/C60(30 nm)/Al) devices to estimate the trap-state density of different perovskite films. Fig. 2c and d present the corresponding J–V characteristics of the hole-only and the electron-only devices fabricated with the pristine perovskite film and that doped with 0.1 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3. Three different regions were identified using the different values of the exponent n (J ∝ Vn): the ohmic region for n = 1, the trap-filled limited (TFL) region for n = 2, and the child region for n > 3. The voltage of the crossover point between the ohmic and TFL regions is the trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL) and can be used to determine the trap density. The VTFL values of the hole-only devices based on the pristine film and the 0.1 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 doped film are 0.70 V and 0.56 V, while those of the electron-only devices are 1.05 V and 0.65 V, respectively. The hole-trap and the electron-trap densities of the pristine perovskite film are 1.56 × 1016 cm−3 and 2.35 × 1016 cm−3, respectively, which are higher than those of the 0.1 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 doped perovskite film, namely 1.25 × 1016 cm−3 and 1.45 × 1016 cm−3. The hole-trap and the electron-trap densities of the pristine perovskite film are consistent with those from the literature. The reduced trap density can be interpreted as the passivation effect of the Sc(OTF)3 additive.
To study the impacts of the Sc(OTF)3 additive on the photovoltaic performance of PSCs with different doping concentrations (0, 0.1, and 0.5 mg ml−1), we fabricated inverted PSCs with the structure of ITO/P3CT-Na/perovskite/C60/BCP/Ag (Fig. 3a). The cross-sectional SEM image of the device is shown in Fig. S5. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the PSCs with different amounts of Sc(OTF)3 are displayed in Fig. 3b, and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. The device without Sc(OTF)3 gives a PCE of 18.02%, with an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 1097 mV, a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 20.60 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 79.73%. The inverted device containing 0.1 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 exhibits a high PCE of 20.63% with a Voc of 1134 mV, a Jsc of 21.71 mA cm−2, and a remarkable FF of 83.80%. When the Sc(OTF)3 concentration was increased to 0.5 mg ml−1, a PCE of 19.37% is obtained with a Voc of 1124 mV, a Jsc of 20.88 mA cm−2, and a FF of 82.53%. In addition, the average PCE values of the devices based on 0, 0.1 mg ml−1 and 0.5 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 doped films are 17.17%, 20.12% and 18.68% based on 20 individual devices. As shown in Fig. S6, the 0.1 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 doped devices show higher PCE values with a narrower dispersion, indicating good device reproducibility. As shown in Fig. S7a, when further increasing the Sc(OTF)3 concentration to 1 mg ml−1, the perovskite film showed non-uniform and smaller grain size. At the same time, grain boundaries appeared on the 1 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 doped perovskite film, thus resulting in more defects. The PCE severely reduced to 16.06% (Voc = 1102 mV, Jsc = 18.70 mA cm−2, and FF = 77.94%). The J–V curve and the corresponding parameters are shown in Fig. S7b. The severely reduced Jsc and FF indicate that the perovskite film with excessive Sc(OTF)3 may generate more defects and lead to poor charge transport and non-radiative recombination. From the above photovoltaic performance data, the devices based on the 0.1 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 doped perovskite film exhibit the highest Voc, Jsc and FF simultaneously.
Sc(OTF)3 (mg ml−1)

V
oc (mV)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a The data in parentheses are the average values acquired from 20 devices.

0
1097
20.60
79.73
18.02 (17.17 ± 0.45)
0.1
1134
21.71
83.80
20.63 (20.12 ± 0.28)
0.5
1124
20.88
82.53
19.37 (18.68 ± 0.38)
The enhanced Voc in doped devices benefits from the optimized perovskite film morphology and high crystallinity. The enhancement of Jsc could be attributed to the increased absorption value and the reduced trap density in doped devices. Besides, the remarkably increased FF results from the more efficient contact, enhanced charge carrier lifetime and decreased non-radiative recombination centers in doped perovskite films.
External quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra and the corresponding integrated photocurrent curves of devices with various amounts of Sc(OTF)3 are shown in Fig. 3c. The pristine device shows EQE photoresponse in the wavelength range from 300 nm to 800 nm. The 0.1 mg ml−1 and 0.5 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 doped devices exhibited higher photoresponse than the pristine device, and the 0.1 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 doped device exhibited the highest EQE photoresponse value. The integrated Jsc values measured from the EQE spectra are 19.61 mA cm−2, 20.69 mA cm−2, and 20.08 mA cm−2 for the devices based on 0, 0.1 mg ml−1 and 0.5 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3, respectively, which are consistent with the results from J–V measurements. Reverse–forward scanning was implemented to investigate the hysteresis of the devices, and the corresponding J–V curves and photovoltaic parameters are shown in Fig. 3d and Table S1. PCE values of 17.52%, 20.49%, and 19.05% were obtained for the devices based on 0, 0.1 mg ml−1 and 0.5 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 doped films from reverse scanning. As can be seen from the above PCE results, the device with 0.1 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 shows negligible hysteresis when scanning from different directions, indicating the low defect density and suppressed ion migration in the doped perovskite film, which is consistent with the trap-state density measurement. As shown in Fig. S8(a–c) the stabilized Jsc values of the devices based on 0, 0.1, and 0.5 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 doped perovskite films are 19.09 mA cm−2, 21.21 mA cm−2 and 20.33 mA cm−2, respectively. The stabilized PCE values of the devices based on 0, 0.1, and 0.5 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 doped perovskite films are 17.56%, 20.15% and 18.91%. The results indicate that all devices display stable and reliable performance output. The stability of perovskite films with and without Sc(OTF)3 was studied in the ambient environment with about 50% humidity and without encapsulation for 30 days. As shown in Fig. S9a, the appearance of the 0.1 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 doped perovskite film was almost unchanged after 30 days, while the control film decomposed and showed yellow color. At the same time, a strong PbI2 peak appeared for the control film in an XRD test (Fig. S9(b and c)). In contrast, the doped film showed stronger diffraction intensity of the 110 main characteristic peak with a weak PbI2 peak. This suggests that the doped perovskite film is more stable than the control film. To evaluate the stability of devices based on different amounts of Sc(OTF)3, stability measurement was conducted in a N2 environment for 30 days. As shown in Fig. S10, the PCE of the unencapsulated device based on the pristine perovskite film decreased to approximately 88% of the initial PCE, while the 0.1 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 doped device retained nearly 93% of its initial PCE value when stored for 30 days in a N2 environment at room temperature. The improved stability of the doped device might be attributed to the strong hydrogen bonds F⋯H–N between Sc(OTF)3 and MA+.
Transient photovoltage (TPV) and transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements were conducted to find out how Sc(OTF)3 affects the charge carrier lifetime and the charge recombination process in the devices. As shown in Fig. 4a and b, devices based on the 0.1 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 doped perovskite film exhibited an obviously faster photocurrent decay than pristine devices, indicating a more efficient charge carrier extraction in 0.1 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 doped devices. The longer photovoltage decay in 0.1 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 doped devices than that in pristine devices implied that the generated charge carriers possess a longer lifetime to achieve the spatial separation of electrons and holes in the device, which could suppress the non-radiative charge recombination in the devices. The shorter charge-extraction time and longer charge-recombination decay time contribute to the higher Jsc and FF for the 0.1 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 doped device. In order to further study the interfacial charge transfer kinetics, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed on devices based on various amounts of Sc(OTF)3. EIS was carried out under dark conditions at a bias of 0.96 V, and Fig. 5 shows the Nyquist plots and the corresponding equivalent circuit, which consists of a series resistance (Rs) and a recombination resistance (Rrec). The Rs values of the control device, 0.1 mg ml−1 and 0.5 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 doped devices are 31.46 Ω, 13.64 Ω and 28.88 Ω, respectively. The radius of the semicircle represents the Rrec of different devices. The largest semicircle suggests the smallest Rrec value of the 0.1 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3 doped device among the three kinds of devices. Apparently, the smaller Rs and larger Rrec values indicate that more reduced contact resistance and recombination rate were achieved on the doped PSCs, thus leading to increased Jsc and FF in the 0.1 mg ml−1 Sc(OTF)3-based device.

In summary, we demonstrated a multifunctional additive of Sc(OTF)3 for improved performance of inverted perovskite solar cells. The addition of Sc(OTF)3 in the perovskite precursor significantly improved the quality of the perovskite film with reduced trap density, decreased non-radiative recombination centers and enhanced charge carrier lifetime. In addition, the hydrogen bonds between Sc(OTF)3 and MA+ could prevent the decomposition of organic cations in the perovskite film and enhance the stability of the perovskite film. As a result, doping with Sc(OTF)3 boosts the PCE of the inverted PSCs to 20.63% with a remarkable FF value of 83.80%.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The work described in this paper was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51703183), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (XDJK2019B065, XDJK2020B002), and the “Project supported by Basic research and Frontier Exploration of Chongqing Municipal Science and Technology Commission (cstc2018jcyjAX0568)”. Y. Hua acknowledges the Key Project of Natural Science Foundation of Yunnan (KC10110419), the Fund for Excellent Young Scholars of Yunnan, and the Program for Excellent Young Talents of Yunnan University.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta07567a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020