 DOI: 10.1039/C6EE01037G
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2262-2266


Heetae
Yoon
,

Seong Min
Kang
,

Jong-Kwon
Lee
* and 

Mansoo
Choi
*

Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea. E-mail: mchoi@snu.ac.kr

Global Frontier Center for Multiscale Energy Systems, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jklee7@snu.ac.kr

Received
8th April 2016
, Accepted 26th May 2016
First published on 27th May 2016
Hysteresis-free, highly efficient and stable perovskite solar cells processed at low temperatures are strongly demanded to realize flexible or perovskite-based tandem solar cells. Here, we report a hysteresis-free planar CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cell with a power conversion efficiency of 19.1% using a room-temperature vacuum-processed C60 electron transport layer (ETL) without the hole blocking layer. By optimizing the thickness of the C60 layer, the highly homogeneous, uniform, and dense ETL with a thickness of 35 nm is found to not only passivate the grain boundaries and surfaces of the perovskite layer, but also enhance charge transport properties. Thus, the C60 layer deposited on perovskites eliminates the photocurrent hysteresis and improves the cell efficiency. Also, compared to the device adopting the C60 and bathocuproine (BCP) combination, the one with the C60 layer without the BCP layer shows better performance due to enhanced electron extraction properties. Furthermore, for the first time, we have demonstrated a hysteresis-free flexible perovskite solar cell using the C60 ETL on a polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) substrate with 16.0% efficiency.

Metal halide perovskite solar cells have attracted enormous attention as an emerging cost-effective thin film photovoltaic with superb power conversion efficiency. For practical commercialization of the perovskite solar cell or its flexible application, one of the greatest concerns is to remove the photocurrent hysteresis for stable operation under environmental conditions. What we choose in this study is a low-temperature-processed compact C60 material with a thickness of 35 nm as an electron transport layer, which passivates the surfaces and grain boundaries of the perovskite layers, as well as facilitates electron transport with reducing leakage loss due to its wide band gap, high mobility, and low charge transport resistance. As a result, hysteresis-free and highly efficient perovskite solar cells have been developed for the first time using both rigid glass and plastic substrates. The presented cathode-interface engineering with the C60 layer for eliminating the photocurrent hysteresis offers a viable approach to realize stable perovskite-based flexible or tandem architectures with high efficiency.


Organic/inorganic hybrid perovskites have been considered to be promising materials for use in the photoactive layers of solar cells due to their superb power conversion efficiency (PCE) and simple processes along with low material costs. Also, the rapid energy payback time of perovskite solar cells was recently demonstrated as a key advantage by environmental examination using life cycle assessment. Their high absorption coefficient, balanced electron/hole mobility, smaller exciton binding energy, and longer exciton diffusion length than those of organic materials enable researchers to continuously increase the device efficiencies from 3.8% in 2009 to 22.1% in 2016. The perovskite solar cells with high performances have usually adopted the n–i–p architecture, commonly using a TiO2 material as the electron transport layer (ETL). Here the TiO2 compact layer requires a high-temperature process over 450 °C, which precludes its application in flexible substrates. To solve this limitation, low-temperature solution-processed TiO2 has been used as the ETL. However, the serious hysteretic behavior due to the deep charge traps in the TiO2 layer, related to the low electron mobility induced charge accumulation and UV light induced oxygen vacancies, has prevented the correct evaluation of their device performance. As an alternative to the TiO2 layers, organic materials have been used to fabricate the p–i–n type perovskite solar cells. Thus, solution-processable poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) and 6,6-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) have been mainly adopted for a hole transport layer and an ETL, respectively, which show still lower efficiency than the n–i–p devices employing a TiO2 ETL.

Fullerenes such as PCBM and C60 have been used as the ETL in perovskite solar cells because they are known to reduce the density of trap states and passivate the grain boundaries of the methylammonium lead iodide (CH3NH3PbI3) absorbing layer. In addition, the C60 can be packed more densely than PCBM to facilitate intermolecular charge transport, and shows much higher electron mobility (1.6 cm2 V−1 s−1) and conductivity (2.3 × 10−3 S cm−1) compared to PCBM (6.1 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 3.2 × 10−4 S cm−1, respectively). Thus, it is reported that the p–i–n type perovskite solar cells adopting the solution-processed C60 layers showed better performance than the devices using PCBM and indene-C60 bisadduct interface layers. However, a very low solubility of C60 in commonly used solvents makes it difficult to deposit a compact C60 layer with complete coverage using the solution process. Thus, it is highly required for a compact C60 material for complete coverage placed on the bottom ETL in the n–i–p architecture. Also, the realization of the n–i–p structure via low-temperature processing would make the device architecture much more favorable, due to versatile choices of p-type layers and effective realization of tandem perovskite structures. In this regard, W. Ke et al., reported a planar perovskite solar cell with 16% efficiency using a vacuum-processed C60 ETL with a thickness of 7.5 nm. However, they showed noticeable photocurrent hysteresis with relatively lower efficiency compared to the perovskite solar cell adopting the TiO2 layer. Furthermore, there have been no reports of a hysteresis-free flexible perovskite solar cell with a high efficiency of over 16%.
Therefore, we aim to develop a hysteresis-free high efficiency solar cell using a low temperature process, and, here we demonstrate hysteresis-free n–i–p type perovskite solar cells with 19.1% efficiency comprising indium-tin oxide (ITO)/C60/CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3)/2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-MeOTAD)/Au. By controlling the thickness of the C60 layer, we found that a 35 nm-thick C60 layer coated on the ITO electrode shows homogenously compact structures with improved electron extraction, resulting in eliminating photocurrent hysteresis and showing the best efficiency of 19.1%. By comparing with the device adopting C60 and BCP as the ETL and the hole blocking layer (HBL), respectively, the one with the C60 layer without HBL significantly improves the hysteresis and enhances the device performance due to better electron extraction properties. The observed results were confirmed by impedance analysis, measured absorption spectra, and shunt/series resistance characterization. Moreover, we demonstrated hysteresis-free flexible perovskite solar cells with over 16.0% efficiency for the first time by adopting the same n–i–p architecture.

Fig. 1a shows the conventional device configuration of the perovskite solar cell consisting of Au/Spiro-MeoTAD/MAPbI3/mesoporous-TiO2/compact-TiO2/fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO)/glass. To develop a hysteresis-free low temperature processed high efficiency solar cell that can be applied to flexible substrates, we fabricated planar perovskite solar cells by replacing the TiO2 layer with the C60 layer as an ETL without the HBL such as BCP (Fig. 1b). Here, since we did not need a high-temperature process for mp-TiO2 formation, the ITO electrode with higher transmittance in a visible range than the FTO electrode was utilized as a cathode on a glass substrate. Then, the C60 layer was prepared via thermal evaporation in a vacuum environment on the ITO/glass substrate. Subsequently, the metal halide perovskite (MAPbI3) and Spiro-MeOTAD were spin coated on the top of the C60 layer. Finally, Au as an anode was thermally evaporated in a vacuum environment. Details of fabrication processes are provided in the Experimental section (ESI). The energy band diagram of the MAPbI3 based perovskite solar cells employing the C60 layer as an ETL is represented in Fig. 1c, where the HOMO and LUMO levels of the BCP layer as a HBL are additionally drawn for comparison. In the case of the BCP/C60 layers commonly used as an ETL combination in a normal structure of organic photovoltaics (OPVs), which is the same as the inverted structure (p–i–n) of perovskite solar cells, the BCP layer transports electrons through tunneling and partially prevents electron transport due to its lower LUMO level than the C60 and MAPbI3 layers, while its higher HOMO level blocks hole transport effectively. Even upon dropping the HBL, we can expect that the continuous energy levels between the electrodes and the perovskite layer allow efficient electron/hole transport along with low leakage loss.
To compare the performance of MAPbI3 based devices adopting the C60 layer with the ones incorporating the C60/BCP layer, we measured device characteristics with varying the thicknesses of BCP from 0 nm to 20 nm under air mass 1.5 global (AM 1.5G) conditions. Fig. 2a shows the representative (J–V) characteristics of the MAPbI3 solar cells employing a 35 nm-thick C60 layer with or without the BCP layer. As we increase the thickness of the BCP layer, the device shows degraded performance, and the photocurrent hysteresis is significantly increased. It is noted that the BCP layer, a well-known effective HBL in OPVs, is only effective with a maximum thickness of 10 nm due to its low mobility and limited electron transporting rate through the tunneling effect. To investigate the difference in J–V characteristics between the C60 based device and the C60/BCP based ones, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analysis was performed under illumination conditions, applying a 25 mV AC signal over the constant applied bias of 1.05 V in the frequency range from 0.1 kHz to 50 MHz. The Nyquist plot of the device with C60 or C60/BCP as shown in Fig. 2b exhibits a semicircle in a relatively high frequency range (>1 kHz), implying that the total series resistance is mainly influenced by the interfacial charge-transfer resistance. The smaller semicircle corresponding to the C60 based device compared to that of C60/BCP based devices indicates a lower charge transfer resistance in the interface between the ITO electrode and the C60/perovskite layers. Also, it is found that the small humps in a semicircle in the high frequency regime are observed only for the devices with C60/BCP, indicating that the additional resistor capacitor (RC) component because the BCP layer adversely affects the transport properties. Also, the series resistance (RS) estimated from the leftmost end of the semicircle at a high frequency limit increases as the thickness of the BCP layer increases, which coincides well with the measured RS values from the J–V characteristics as shown in Fig. 2b. These observed results support the higher Fill Factor (FF) of the device adopting the C60 layer compared to the device with the C60/BCP combination. Thus, by taking out the BCP layer, the device not only shows increased overall performance, but also reveals hysteresis-free characteristics with negligible 0.005% difference between the forward scan and the backward scan. This suggests that the existence of the BCP layer does not exert any positive effects on the overall efficiency of the MAPbI3 based perovskite solar cells; rather it could cause unnecessary trap states that lead to hysteresis loss.
To identify the optimum thickness of C60 as an ETL in MAPbI3 solar cells, systematic characterization of the C60 based device was performed because the C60 layer was used as an effective light absorbing layer in planar OPVs with a band gap energy of 1.7 eV.Fig. 3a and d show the main figure of merit of the measured samples, i.e., short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), FF, and PCE, depending on the different thicknesses of the C60 layer. As the thickness increases up to 40 nm, the transmittance of the C60/ITO/glass is gradually decreased while a noticeable reduction in transmittance in a wavelength of 350 nm to 550 nm occurs as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). Thus, it is reasonable to observe a slight drop in Jsc due to the decreased absorption in the perovskite layer. However, the Voc starts to increase and reaches the peak value at 35 nm, while Jsc shows little variation. These results indicate that as the thickness increases, the C60 layer itself absorbs incident light as an active layer and creates excitons in this layer. Then, the generated electrons and holes in the LUMO and HOMO levels of the C60 layer are efficiently separated and moved toward the ITO electrode and the perovskite layer, respectively, resulting in an improved carrier transport in the device. This explanation can be verified by the measured RS and shunt resistance (RSH) as shown in Fig. S2 (ESI); as the thickness of C60 increases, the RS continuously drops to a thickness of 35 nm and then goes up to 40 nm thickness while the RSH increases to 30 nm and then saturates at a thickness of more than 30 nm. However, the conductivity of the C60 layer does limit the maximum thickness, which can be confirmed by the increased RS as the thickness exceeds 40 nm as shown in Fig. S2b (ESI). Also, the cross-sectional SEM images of the devices with the different thickness of the C60 layer (Fig. 3e) show that the C60 layer with a thickness below 30 nm has lots of pin-holes that can connect the ITO electrode directly with the perovskite layer. Thus, a C60 layer more than 30 nm-thick is needed to fully and uniformly cover the underlying ITO electrode, which can improve the electron transport properties and reduce the leakage loss at the interface. The C60 layer slightly lowers light absorption in the MAPbI3 perovskite layer, but does highly enhance the carrier transport consequently leading to the improvement in the overall device performance.

Fig. 4a and b show the current density versus voltage (J–V) curve and external quantum efficiency (EQE) data of the best performance cell, respectively. This cell was measured with various dwelling time from 20 ms to 800 ms at mV per step depending on the voltage scan direction in order to confirm that there is no photocurrent hysteresis. The integrated photocurrent from the EQE spectrum was calculated to be 23.3 mA cm−2, which is close to the Jsc value obtained from J–V measurements. Table 1 summarizes the device parameters for the best cell, showing less than 0.002% difference between the forward scan and the backward scan. Table 2 represents the averages and standard deviation values of the photovoltaic parameters obtained for 92 planar cells. To perform stability analysis for the best cell, we took a steady-state photocurrent output for 10 minutes at a bias of 0.82 V, which corresponds to the maximum power point, as shown in Fig. S3 (ESI). The cell yielded a stabilized current density of 21.7 mA cm−2, corresponding to a power output of 17.8 mW cm−2. Therefore, by applying the C60 layer with an optimized thickness of 35 nm to the planar-type perovskite solar cell as an ETL, we were able to develop a hysteresis-free low-temperature-processed cell for the first time with the best PCE of 19.1%. The corresponding EQE data of the MAPbI3 based perovskite solar cell also show high values of approximately 90% in the visible range except some decrease in a wavelength range of 350 nm to 500 nm due to the slight light absorption by the C60 layer as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI).
Device

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
Fill factor (%)
PCE (%)
Planar rev
1.09
23.67
73.95
19.11
Planar fwd
1.09
23.91
73.15
19.12
Flexible rev
1.02
23.21
67.33
16.00
Flexible fwd
1.03
23.45
63.80
15.45
Device

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
Fill factor (%)
PCE (%)
Planar cell
1.07 ± 0.02
23.68 ± 0.78
70.43 ± 2.29
17.85 ± 0.83
Flexible cell
1.01 ± 0.02
23.69 ± 0.43
64.98 ± 2.14
15.52 ± 0.43
To verify that our strategy is applicable to flexible solar cells, we fabricated the MAPbI3 based perovskite solar cell with the C60 ETL on ITO-coated polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) substrates as schematically shown in Fig. 5a. By investigating the cross-sectional view of the device structure using field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) (Fig. 5b), we confirmed that the C60 layer with a thickness of 35 nm is uniformly and densely coated on the underlying ITO/PEN substrate and well separates the ITO electrode from the perovskite active layer. Then, we were able to demonstrate a flexible, hysteresis-free perovskite solar cell for the first time with the highest efficiency of 16.0%, which is the highest one among flexible CH3NH3PbI3 solar cells (Fig. 5c). Here, the inset shows the digital camera image of the fabricated flexible perovskite solar cell. The measured device parameters of the best cell depending on the direction of a voltage scan rate are summarized in Table 1 in order to show no appreciable change in Jsc, Voc, FF, and PCE. Also, the average values with standard deviations of the device parameters for 44 flexible cells are shown in Table 2. To observe the device stability against the mechanical bending of the flexible cells, we performed a bending test during 1000 consecutive bending cycles at different radii of curvatures (R) of 10 mm and 5 mm. The flexible cell at R of 10 mm exhibited no appreciable decrease in PCE, retaining its initial PCE as shown in Fig. 5d. Meanwhile, the flexible cells at R of 5 mm showed 95% of initial PCE after 100 bending cycles, and the PCE decreased by approximately 20% compared with the initial efficiency after 1000 cycles (Fig. 5d). Thus, the observed results demonstrate that these flexible cells have good device stability against the mechanical bending, which agrees well with the previous report adopting the ITO electrode. Here, a slightly lower efficiency of the flexible cell than that of the cell on a glass substrate is mainly attributed to the use of a rigid ITO electrode, which becomes brittle after cyclic bending. By replacing this brittle ITO electrode with the one suitable for flexible substrates, we will be able to increase the cell efficiency and stability comparable to the cell on a glass substrate, which is the subject of ongoing research conducted by several research groups including that of ours.

A hysteresis-free planar perovskite solar cell with a PCE of 19.1% was developed by using a room-temperature vacuum-processed C60 as an ETL. With a thickness of 35 nm, the fabricated CH3NH3PbI3 device shows the best PCE with the device parameters such as a Jsc of 23.7 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.1 V, and a FF of 74.0%. The slight decrease in transmittance with increasing the thickness of the C60 layer up to 35 nm has no appreciable change in Jsc, while the Voc and FF are increased due to the improved electron transport properties and the reduced leakage loss. Also, the device with the C60 layer showed better performance, due to the better electron transporting rate, than the one adopting interface layers of the C60/BCP. Furthermore, a hysteresis-free flexible perovskite solar cell fabricated on a PEN substrate with the PCE of 16.0% was demonstrated for the first time by using the same processes. Thus, the presented work can be regarded as an effective and promising method for realizing high performance flexible perovskite solar cells without hysteresis.


This work was supported by the Global Frontier R&D Program of the Center for Multiscale Energy Systems funded by the National Research Foundation under the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, Korea (2011-0031561).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee01037g
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016