 DOI: 10.1039/C5CC08156D
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 970-973


Liangzheng
Zhu
,

Zhipeng
Shao
,

Jiajiu
Ye
,

Xuhui
Zhang
,

Xu
Pan
* and 

Songyuan
Dai
*

Key Laboratory of Novel Thin-Film Solar Cells, Institute of Applied Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei 230031, China. E-mail: xpan@rntek.cas.cn

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China

State Key Laboratory of Alternate Electrical Power System with Renewable Energy Sources, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, China. E-mail: sydai@ipp.ac.cn

Received
30th September 2015
, Accepted 9th November 2015
First published on 10th November 2015
One of the limitations of TiO2 based perovskite solar cells is the poor electron mobility of TiO2. Here, perovskite oxide BaSnO3 is used as a replacement. It has a higher electron mobility and the same perovskite structure as the light harvesting materials. After optimization, devices based on BaSnO3 showed the best performance of 12.3% vs. 11.1% for TiO2.

Due to their high photovoltaic performance, potential high efficiency and simple procedure for assembly, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are gaining more and more attention. In 2009, Miyasaka et al. employed CH3NH3PbX3 (X = Br, I) as a sensitizer in dye-sensitized solar cells to replace organic dyes. However, CH3NH3PbX3 is not suitable for liquid electrolyte-based devices because of its poor stability in polar solvents. In 2012, Park and his co-workers first reported a relatively long-term stable all-solid-state PSC with a promising power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 9.7%. Snaith et al. used Al2O3 as a mesoporous layer and achieved an excellent efficiency of 10.9%. After that, Gratzel et al. developed a novel sequential deposition method for the fabrication of PSCs and attained a PCE of 15%. Then, PSCs were investigated intensively and great achievements were made. Recently, Seok et al. reported an approach for depositing high-quality formamidinium lead iodide (FAPbI3) films by the direct intramolecular exchange. The resulting FAPbI3 based PSC exhibited an efficiency of over 20%.

There are two branches of PSCs: mesoscopic nanostructure and planar structure. The most widely used mesoporous layer is TiO2 for its unique chemical and electronic properties and good performance in dye-sensitized solar cells. The role of the mesoporous layer is quite important. It has been proved that carrier transport through the mesoporous TiO2 layer is not neglectable. The successful application of Al2O3 in PSCs not only inspired researchers but also challenged them. This proves that the carrier transport process can be carried out by perovskite itself and provides ideas for the emerging planar heterojunction PSCs. But the application of Al2O3 in PSCs also challenged them why would the carrier transport through TiO2 with higher priority. Anyway, it verifies the importance of the mesoporous layer in PSCs. Other candidates expected to replace TiO2 were also studied. The successful introduction of Al2O3 and functionalized silica nanoparticles directly into the perovskite precursor solution to form a co-deposited mesoporous layer made a contribution to the commercialisation and scale-up of PSCs. ZnO has an electron mobility approximately two orders of magnitude higher than TiO2. Many PSCs based on ZnO nanorods or nanowires were fabricated, because this nanostructure reduces unnecessary path of the charge carrier. Effects of the mesoporous layers are highly anticipated, and Zn2SnO4, SrTiO3 and graphene/TiO2 nanocomposites were also used as mesoporous layers in PSCs.
BaSnO3 (BSO), a kind of transparent semiconducting perovskite oxide, has a large optical band gap, of around 3.1 eV, and a relatively high electron mobility (μ) at room temperature. It is quite easy to modify its electronic or optical properties by manipulating the composition or doping. One of the limitations of TiO2 based PSCs is the comparatively low electron mobility of TiO2. However, La-doped BSO single crystals and epitaxial thin films show unprecedentedly high μ values of about 320 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 70 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. Because of the advantages mentioned above, BSO was already applied in dye-sensitized solar cells and exhibited quite good performances. The commonalities and differences between the crystal structures of BSO and CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3), which is a classic light harvester in PSCs, are shown in Fig. 1a and b. BSO has the same perovskite structure as the light harvester, which might produce a more efficient interface. However, as far as we know, BSO has not been employed as an electron transporting layer in PSCs.
Herein, we report the first use of mesoporous BSO (mp-BSO) as the mesoporous electron-transporting layer in PSCs. It has higher electron mobility than TiO2 and the same structure as CH3NH3PbX3, which might promote electron transport. The effects of the mp-BSO layers have been investigated and compared with the conventional mesoporous TiO2 (mp-TiO2) based devices.
The electronic band structure calculated from the literature confirms that perovskite BSO is an indirect band gap semiconductor and has a large band gap of 3.1 eV, computed by using an experimental test, which is coincident with the UV-vis absorption spectra (Fig. S1a, ESI). In a direct band gap semiconductor, electrons in the conduction band could fall into the valence band without any change in momentum, which means the recombination of hole–electron could be quite easy, namely the direct recombination. Different from the direct band-gap TiO2, electrons in the conduction band of BSO are more difficult to fall or recombine. Fig. 1c presents the estimated energy levels (relative to the vacuum level) of each functional layer in the device. The energy level of BSO matches well with other layers lowering the driving force needed for electron injection from MAPbI3 to BSO.
The synthesis of BaSnO3 nanoparticles was conducted using a method given in the literature. The crystallinity of nanoparticles could have a deep influence on charge transport in devices. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of the BSO nanoparticles are shown in Fig. 2a and b. The particle size distribution is relatively concentrated in a small area. The crystallinity and purity of BSO nanoparticles were also characterized in detail using X-ray diffraction (XRD), as shown in Fig. 2c. The crystal structure of BSO obtained from XRD is compared with MAPbI3 as given in the literature. As shown in Fig. 1a and b, both BSO and MAPbI3 have ABX3 perovskite structures, which are different from anatase or rutile TiO2. The stability and geometric distortion of a perovskite ABX3 structure can be estimated based on the Goldschmidt tolerance factor (t), t = (rA + rX)/[√2(rB + rX)], where rA, rB and rX are the effective ionic radii for A, B and X ions, respectively. The closer the tolerance factor is to unity, the less distorted the structure will be. The t value of BSO is 1.01, which makes it almost an ideal cubic phase with little distortion and high stability. In contrast, the t value of MAPbI3 is 0.83, which deviates from 1 and makes it a tetragonal phase structure.
In Fig. 3a and b, it can be observed that both mesoporous BSO and TiO2 based PSCs have a good surface coverage with a MAPbI3 capping layer. The films are well crystallized and there are few voids between crystal boundaries. In contrast, the MAPbI3 crystals above mp-BSO are more homogeneous than the mp-TiO2 sample. Greater surface coverages lead to a better overall contact and this would make the MAPbI3 more uniform. It illustrates that BSO has a better contact with MAPbI3 and makes the crystals grow more uniformly. The cross-sectional views of mp-BSO and mp-TiO2 based PSCs are shown in Fig. 3c and d. These two films have a similar total thickness of about 500 nm. The MAPbI3 is infiltrated into the mesoporous films very well with an almost 100% surface coverage above the mesoporous layer, which is coincident with the results of Fig. 3a and b. However, upon comparing the mesoporous and MAPbI3 layers, it can be seen that the interfaces between mp-TiO2 and MAPbI3 are more obvious in the mp-TiO2 film. The mp-BSO/MAPbI3 film has fewer crystalline boundaries or grainy textures and this will reduce the energy loss and result in a lower interface resistance. The XRD (Fig. S2, ESI) spectra confirm the basic component and indicate that our films remain a part of the unreacted PbI2. Previous research has indicated that devices containing PbI2 can slow down the recombination rate and increase the lifetime of charge carriers by a passivation effect.
To further optimize and study the performance of mp-BSO based PSCs, a series of experiments to optimize the thickness of the mp-BSO layer have been conducted. The thicknesses of the mp-BSO layers are between 360 nm and 220 nm, which are controlled by changing the spin-coating speed and measured by cross-sectional SEM images (Fig. S3, ESI). The average values with standard deviation for PCE, short-circuit current density Jsc, open-circuit voltage Voc and fill factor (FF) are given in Table 1. (Each group contains 8 samples; detailed device parameters are shown in Table S1, ESI) The highest PCE of 12.3% was achieved using a spin-coating speed of 2000 r.p.m., yielding a Jsc of 16.8 mA cm−2, Voc of 1.03 V, and FF of 0.711 (Fig. 4a and b). The integrated Jsc value obtained from the incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) data is 15.9 mA cm−2, which agrees with the measured value. The hysteresis of the devices was examined by changing the scan direction in the J–V measurements (Fig. S4, ESI). However, the mp-BSO based device exhibited quite large hysteresis, which was mainly reflected in the differences in the fill factor. Many possible causes have been proposed, such as ferroelectric polarization, charge trapping and ion migration, but there is still no consensus reached at this point. To our knowledge, the hysteresis effect should be related to the nature of the perovskite light harvesting materials and mainly occurs in planar structures. In our case, such large hysteresis in mesoporous structure is quite unique and is rarely reported. Thus a further investigation is needed on this phenomenon.
Thickness (nm)
PCE (%)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
385
8.8 ± 2.2
15.2 ± 1.9
0.96 ± 0.05
0.59 ± 0.07
326
11.5 ± 0.7
16.5 ± 0.2
1.02 ± 0.01
0.68 ± 0.03
285
10.2 ± 0.8
14.7 ± 0.9
1.00 ± 0.02
0.69 ± 0.03
253
11.0 ± 0.5
15.4 ± 0.5
1.01 ± 0.01
0.71 ± 0.02
244
10.4 ± 0.6
14.5 ± 0.8
1.01 ± 0.02
0.71 ± 0.02
226
11.0 ± 0.4
14.7 ± 0.5
1.01 ± 0.01
0.74 ± 0.02
To compare the PCE of mp-BSO and mp-TiO2 based PSCs, both devices were fabricated in a similar two-step procedure without TiCl4 treatment of the mesoporous films. Each group contains 8 samples; the detailed device parameters are shown in Table S2 (ESI). The detailed experimental procedures are shown in the experimental section. The J–V curves and IPCE spectra of typical mp-BSO and mp-TiO2 based PSCs are presented in Fig. 4c and d. The J–V curves show that the mp-BSO device can perform as well as the mp-TiO2 one and even better. The Jsc, Voc and FF values of mp-BSO and mp-TiO2 based devices are 16.3 mA cm−2, 1.02 V and 0.714, and 15.7 mA cm−2, 0.98 V and 0.716, respectively. The difference of Jsc between the two cases can be attributed to the relatively high electron mobility of BSO. However, the difference is not significant enough. There are three possible reasons: first, the whole device based on mp-BSO still remains bl-TiO2, which has a lower electron mobility and can slow down the entire charge carrier transport. Second, from the normalized UV-vis absorption spectra (Fig. S1b, ESI), it can be seen that the absorption of the BSO/MAPbI3 film is lower than the mp-TiO2/MAPbI3 film, which can also decrease the Jsc value. Third, a higher electron mobility can increase Jsc and carrier recombination at the same time. The BSO layer exhibited a conduction band minimum (CBM) of 3.91 eV, which is close to the CBM of MAPbI3. It can make charge carrier “fall back” to MAPbI3 easier and increase carrier recombination. Meanwhile, the relatively close CBM can also lower the driving force for electron injection, which makes the Voc of the mp-BSO device higher than the mp-TiO2 one. The IPCE of the mp-BSO device is lower in the short-wavelength region between 400 nm and 600 nm, which can be attributed to the relatively low UV-vis absorption in this wavelength region (shown in Fig. S1b, ESI). There is no significant difference of UV-vis absorption between mp-BSO and mp-TiO2 films in the long-wavelength region between 600 nm and 800 nm, while the mp-BSO device exhibited a better IPCE performance in this region.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was employed to study the charge transport and recombination in devices (Fig. 4e and f). Upon comparing the Nyquist plot of the mp-BSO and mp-TiO2 based devices measured at 1.0 V, the recombination resistance (Rrec) of the former is much smaller. Under a low bias voltage, mp-BSO and mp-TiO2 based devices have the same order of magnitude of Rrec. They tend to decrease when the bias voltage increased, but the mp-BSO one decreased more. Higher electron concentration in a semiconductor would cause a higher rate of carrier recombination. These data imply that the mp-BSO based devices have almost the same charge recombination rate with mp-TiO2 under a low bias voltage. However, when the carrier concentration is increased by a higher bias voltage, the charge recombination rate of the mp-BSO based devices increases much faster than the mp-TiO2 one. The carrier concentration is also increased by mobility, which means the mp-BSO with a higher electron mobility will have a higher carrier concentration compared with the mp-TiO2 one under the same bias voltage. The relatively close CBM of mp-BSO and MAPbI3 layers is also an influencing factor for the higher carrier concentration. However, as the high electron mobility can increase the charge transport in either, the devices still performed well in PCE.
In summary, we have used a novel perovskite oxide, the mp-BSO, as the mesoporous electron-transporting layer in PSCs. As a result, devices based on mp-BSO gave the best performance of 12.3%. A better surface coverage leads to a better overall contact; BSO has a better contact with MAPbI3 and makes the crystals grow more unity. The high electron mobility of BSO allows an efficient charge collection and contributes to the increase in Jsc. And the large band gap can avoid the light absorption competition between BSO and MAPbI3. The comparison between mp-BSO and mp-TiO2 based devices showed that the mp-BSO device could perform as well as the mp-TiO2 one. However, it also has some issues in the new mp-BSO based device. For example, it has higher charge recombination rate under a high bias voltage. The new mp-BSO based PSCs will be a competitive candidate in future by further optimizing the fabrication procedure and conquering these issues.
This work was financially supported by the National High Technology Research and Development Program of China under Grant no. 2015AA050602, the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant no. 61204075 and 21273242).
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Full experimental procedures, UV-vis absorption spectra and XRD patterns of BaSnO3/MAPbI3 films and detailed device parameters for optimizing the thickness of the BaSnO3 layer. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cc08156d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016