 DOI: 10.1039/D1TA09024K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 779-788


Kang
Yin
,

Xiao
Xu
,

Muyu
Wang
,

Jiazheng
Zhou
,

Biwen
Duan
,

Jiangjian
Shi
*,

Dongmei
Li
,

Huijue
Wu
,

Yanhong
Luo
* and 

Qingbo
Meng
*

Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: shijj@iphy.ac.cn; yhluo@iphy.ac.cn; qbmeng@iphy.ac.cn

Center of Materials Science and Optoelectronics Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China

School of Physical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China

Songshan Lake Materials Laboratory, Dongguan 523808, P. R. China

Received
20th October 2021
, Accepted 30th November 2021
First published on 1st December 2021
Crystallization growth plays a crucial role in influencing the film quality and final photoelectric conversion performance of a kesterite Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe) solar cell. Herein, an exploration of a two-step selenization strategy to control the growth kinetics of an aqueous solution derived CZTSSe film for high solar cell efficiency is reported. By synergistically exploiting the benefits of high and low temperature selenization in facilitating the CZTSSe phase formation, introducing beneficial point defect states, configuring the interfacial energy band structure, and sustaining excellent surface microstructure, a total-area cell efficiency of 12.5% has been achieved. These results demonstrate the significance of controlling the crystallization growth of CZTSSe to improve the device performance. The high cell performance achieved here is comparable to that of hydrazine or dimethyl sulfoxide solution-based cells and thus would help facilitate the development of CZTSSe solar cells toward more diversified film fabrication technologies.

Kesterite Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe) has emerged as a promising photovoltaic material for thin film solar cells due to its earth-abundant and non-toxic element components. Over the last couple of decades, extensive research on CZTSSe solar cells has been carried out and the power conversion efficiency (PCE) has been promoted to 12.6% using a hydrazine solution method. Most recently, a new PCE record of 13.0% has been achieved by using a dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) solution method and defect control. Nevertheless, a large open-circuit voltage (VOC) deficit is still the main factor that limits the performance of CZTSSe-based devices. Defects in the bulk and surface of CZTSSe films have been considered to play a predominant role in causing charge loss. Currently, a series of efforts have been focused on reducing the defects of the CZTSSe film, such as using +1 or +2 valent cation doping/substitution to suppress Cu/Zn disorder, using Ge doping or alloying to regulate the Sn-related deep defect, and using +3 valent cation doping to optimize the carrier characteristics. These fine regulations on the electronic properties have indeed made considerable contributions to the progress of CZTSSe solar cells.

The crystallization growth process is another crucial step to influence the film quality, especially the crystal microstructure, of CZTSSe absorber layers. Organics-free hydrazine solution can promote CZTSSe growth into large crystals at a relatively moderate temperature under atmospheric conditions, which provides a foundation for obtaining high-efficiency devices. Nonetheless, even for the world-champion cell, CZTSSe crystallization growth still needs to be optimized since large holes still exist at the CZTSSe/Mo interface. The nonhydrazine solution method, such as DMSO, is another CZTSSe fabrication technology developed rapidly in recent years. However, the introduction of organic solvent and ligands makes the CZTSSe films have to undergo high temperature selenization and more complicated crystallization growth processes. Through controlling the metal–organic molecule coordination structure, chemical reaction route and crystallization process, the CZTSSe formation has been optimized. This optimization has helped suppress intermediate secondary phases and surface defects and thus helped promote the PCE of CZTSSe solar cells.
Recently, we have developed a water-based precursor solution method, using deprotonated thioglycolic acid as the metal ligand, for CZTSSe film fabrication. Through forming metal–S strong coordination, the crystallization of CZTSSe is improved and a highly conductive graphitized carbon layer between CZTSSe and a Mo substrate is introduced. With the aid of this carbon layer, CZTSSe adopts a heterogeneous phase separation growth mechanism; element exchange mainly occurs at the CZTSSe/carbon layer interface, and the top CZTSSe layer continuously grows upwards without showing crystal fusion in the vertical direction, which is different from other reported CZTSSe preparing systems. In this growth mode, a single-phase and composition tolerant CZTSSe film can be formed under more moderate selenization conditions.
Herein, based on a more comprehensive understanding of the crystallization growth kinetics, we have controlled the initial nucleation and the following crystal growth processes of the CZTSSe film for further promoting the cell performance. It is found that a higher temperature could accelerate the phase transformation from the CZTS precursor phase to kesterite CZTSSe in the initial nucleation stage but leads to excessive ripening of CZTSSe grains in the following crystal growth stage. Comparatively, a lower temperature enables the CZTSSe film to sustain a smooth and dense surface. These pros and cons have driven us to explore a two-step selenization strategy to simultaneously realize fast phase transformation, high graphitization, and an excellent film surface microstructure, which enables the realization of a high total-area PCE of 12.5% (0.276 cm2, active-area PCE: 13.7%). This result demonstrates the significance of controlling the crystallization growth of CZTSSe to improve the device performance, and it can facilitate the development of nonhydrazine solution based CZTSSe solar cells.

The preparation of CZTSSe films was performed using a previously reported solution approach. The Cu–Zn–Sn–S precursor solution was obtained by dissolving CuO (99.9%, ZhongNuo Advanced Material), ZnO (99.99%, Aladdin) and SnO (99.9%, Aladdin) in a mixture of 1.2 ml TGA (98%, Aladdin) and 2.6 ml NH3·H2O (28%, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd). The precursor solution was spin-coated on Mo-coated soda-lime glass (SLG) at 4000 rpm for 20 s in a glovebox. The wet film was immediately annealed on a hot plate at 410 °C for 2 min. The coating–annealing–cooling cycle was repeated six times to build up a precursor film with a thickness of ∼1.5 μm. The two-step reactive thermal annealing was realized in a rapid thermal processing furnace and N2 atmosphere by heating up to 570 °C in 1 min and holding for 3 min and cooling down to 480 °C in 2 min and then keeping for 10 min under atmospheric pressure, one-step reactive thermal annealing was performed at 510 °C for 15 min. The temperature profile of the reactive thermal annealing is depicted in Fig. 3(d). The carbon layer is obtained by following our previous work.


The selenized CZTSSe film was fabricated into a typical cell structure with stacks of SLG/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO/Al:Ni. The CdS buffer layer with a thickness of 50 nm was deposited on the CZTSSe film by the chemical bath deposition method. And 50 nm i-ZnO followed by 250 nm ITO was deposited by RF magnetron sputtering onto CdS. Then a 1 μm Al:Ni electrode was thermally evaporated subsequently. Finally, 110 nm MgF2 was deposited by the thermal evaporation method.


XRD was performed by using an X-ray diffractometer with the Cu Kα line as the source (Empyrean, PANalytical). Raman spectra were acquired by using a Raman Spectrometer (Lab-RAM HR Evolution, HORIBA), excited with a 532 nm or 325 nm laser. AFM and KPFM characterization were performed by using an atomic force microscope (Multimode 9, Bruker). The compositions of selenized films were determined by using an energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometer (EDX-7000, Shimadzu). The metal element composition of the absorber was determined by using an energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS, AZtec X-Max 50). The SEM images of selenized films were taken by scanning electron microscopy (Oxford JSM7610F). The external quantum efficiency was measured by using an Enlitech QE-R test system using a xenon lamp and a bromine tungsten lamp as the light sources and a certified Si and InGaAs diode was used as the reference detector. The J–V curves were recorded using a Keithley 2400 Source Meter under simulated AM 1.5 sunlight at 100 mW cm−2 irradiance generated by a solar simulator (Zolix SS150A). Modulated transient photocurrent and photovoltage (M-TPC/TPV) measurements were obtained by using our lab-made setup, in which the cell was excited with a 700 nm pulse laser (Opotek, RADIANT 532 LD) and the photovoltage decay process was recorded by using a sub-nanosecond resolved digital oscilloscope (Tektronix, MDO3040). A signal generator (Tektronix, AFG3052C) together with a low-pass filter was used to provide steady-state bias voltages to the cell. The DLCP were obtained by using an electrochemical workstation (Versa STAT, Princeton). The DLCP is obtained using 3 kHz and 300 kHz ac bias with an amplitude from 10 to 100 mV and with dc bias from 0 to −0.5 V.


We firstly use time and temperature dependent selenization experiments to study the crystallization growth process of the CZTSSe film derived from the thioglycolic acid-NH3 aqueous solution method (Fig. 1(a) and S1). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images in Fig. 1(a) show the surface morphology evolution of the CZTSSe film under 510 °C selenization. In the early stage (1 min in Fig. 1(a)), small, round-like, and discrete particles formed on the surface, which act as nuclei for the following CZTSSe crystallization growth. Afterwards, these small nuclei grow into faceted grains (5 min in Fig. 1(a)), which is a signature of a reaction-controlled growth mode. The faceted grains finally grow into rounded and compact large grains through fusion and ripening (15 min in Fig. 1(a)). This process is mainly dominated by a diffusion-controlled mode. As such, the selenization process of the CZTSSe film can be characterized by two stages: reaction-controlled nucleation and diffusion-controlled grain growth, as depicted in Fig. 1(b). After the selenization process, a bottom layer comprised of a conductive carbon framework and residual elements forms between the top CZTSSe layer and the Mo electrode. It has been demonstrated that this bottom carbon layer plays an important role in improving the interfacial contact and stabilizing the CZTSSe composition in the upper layer.

The reaction kinetics of the initial nucleation stage was further studied using Avrami's model, which describes a phase transformation grain growth reaction process. The content ratio of Se in the film, that is Se/(Se + S) (defined as α), is used here as a variable to reflect the reaction degree (Fig. 1(c) and S2). According to the model (ln[−ln(1−α)] = nlnt + nlnk, where t is the selenization time, n is Avrami's exponent to reflect the kinetic mechanism, and k is a kinetic rate constant), the relationship between ln[−ln(1−α)] and ln(t) is extracted and shown in Fig. 1(d). It can be clearly seen that the nucleation processes of the samples at different selenization temperatures all follow this model and they have a similar n ≈ 2. This means that all the samples follow the same nucleation mechanism—reaction-controlled mode. The temperature mainly influences the kinetic rate constant k. An analysis of the Arrhenius relationship between k and the temperature obtains an initial selenization reaction activation energy (Ea) of about 40.5 kJ mol−1. This small Ea implies that Se can easily react with the metal element in the film to form binary, ternary or multinary selenides.
Despite a similar kinetic mechanism, we find that temperature has an obvious influence on the CZTSSe phase formation process. As shown by the X-ray diffraction (XRD) results in Fig. 2(a), the CZTSSe phase has already formed after 1 min selenization at 570 °C, while at 510 °C, only precursor wurtzite CZTS and CuxSe phases can be observed. At 2 min, the CZTSSe XRD peak is enhanced obviously for the 570 °C sample while only a weak XRD peak appears in the 510 °C sample. Similar phenomena can be observed from the Raman spectra presented in Fig. 2(b). The CZTSSe Raman signal at ∼199 cm−1 can already be seen when the film is selenized at 570 °C for 1 min. For the 510 °C sample, although the CZTSSe signal appears at 2 min, signals arising from secondary phases still exist in the spectra. These results mean that higher temperature can accelerate the formation of the CZTSSe phase in the initial nucleation stage. Fast phase transformation would help suppress defect formation on the film surface, which should be beneficial for obtaining high performance solar cells.
However, this advantage has not been directly reflected in the cell efficiency. As shown by the current density–voltage (J−V) characteristics in Fig. 2(c) (PCE box statistics in Fig. S3), although the cell derived from 570 °C selenization has the highest short-circuit current density (JSC), its VOC and fill factor (FF) are much lower than those of the cell selenized at 510 °C. The main reason is that the selenized CZTSSe film at 570 °C shows a much worse surface morphology with large voids between grains as clearly seen from the atomic force microscopy (AFM) images (Fig. 2(d) and S4). This will lead to a direct contact between top CdS/ZnO/ITO and the bottom conductive carbon layer, thus causing serious current shunting. Comparatively, the CZTSSe film selenized at lower temperature exhibits a compact and smooth surface with relatively small grains. These differences in the film surface morphology mainly appear in the second-stage grain growth and ripening process as depicted in Fig. 2(e). High temperature, such as 570 °C, makes the precursor elements have much higher diffusion activity to realize grain fusion for decreasing surface energy. Excessive crystal ripening will make the grains prefer to have a round shape and thus cause the separation of neighbored grains, leaving large voids between them.
The above CZTSSe crystallization growth studies show that it is difficult to find an optimal selenization temperature to simultaneously realize fast phase transformation and an excellent film surface morphology in our film system. This drives us to explore a two-step selenization strategy, as shown in Fig. 3. In the first step, we adopt selenization at 570 °C to accelerate the nucleation and phase transformation to CZTSSe; in the second step, the selenization temperature is decreased to 480 °C to reduce the activity of element diffusion and grain ripening to obtain a better surface microstructure. This strategy (denoted as HL) should be able to combine the benefits of high and low temperature selenization together, and thus to provide higher cell performance. Notably, 480 °C used here is selected after an optimization process (Fig. S5). For simplicity, selenization at 570 and 510 °C that have been discussed in the above section is denoted as H and L, respectively.
With the two-step HL selenization strategy, the cell performance has been significantly enhanced. As shown in Fig. 4(a), the averaged PCE increases from 9.5% to 11.9% with obvious improvement in both JSC and VOC. The J–V characteristics of the best efficient cells are given in Fig. 4(b). The champion cell with a total area of 0.276 cm2 achieves a total-area PCE of 12.5% with a JSC of 34.7 mA cm−2, VOC of 519 mV and FF of 0.693. The active-area PCE of the cell is 13.7%. This cell performance is the highest one among aqueous solution based CZTSSe solar cells, which is comparable to hydrazine or DMSO solution-based cells. Comparatively, the cell derived from the single-step low temperature selenization only gives a PCE of 10.1% with a JSC of 31.1 mA cm−2, VOC of 488 mV and FF of 0.663. The EQE spectra of these two cells indicate that the JSC improvement arises from both the extending of the light absorption edge and the enhancement in the quantum efficiency (Fig. 4(c)). With the HL selenization, the CZTSSe bandgap (Eg) is reduced by about 40 meV. Assuming a quantum efficiency of about 60% in the long wavelength region, this Eg reduction can help increase the JSC by about 1.2 mA cm−2. This means that improvements in the charge extraction and collection of the cell have contributed about 2.4 mA cm−2 to the JSC increasements. The higher VOC and FF also indicate that the charge extraction and collection of the cell are promoted. A detailed analysis of EQE spectra indicates that the bandgap fluctuation (σg) and electrostatic potential fluctuation (γopt) of CZTSSe are decreased a little by using the HL strategy. This may result from a faster transformation toward the CZTSSe phase in the initial nucleation stage.
The detailed device parameters of our cells are given in Table 1. The device parameters of currently reported DMSO6 and hydrazine1 solution-based cells are also shown here for comparison. The HL cell exhibits a similar VOC deficit (Eg/q − VOC) to the hydrazine-based cell and is still much larger than that of the DMSO-based cell. This means that the charge recombination loss of the cell still needs be suppressed. Compared to the hydrazine-based cell, optical shadowing arising from the top grid electrode of our cell needs be further optimized. To promote the FF of our cell to over 70%, film uniformity in the horizontal direction is also a very important factor to be improved.
Sample
PCE (%)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (mV)
FF (%)

A


J
0 (A cm−2)

R
sh (Ω cm2)

R
s (Ω cm2)

E
g (eV)

E
g/q − VOC (mV)
L
10.1
31.1
488
66.3
1.77
7.2 × 10−7
388
0.51
1.170
682
HL
12.5
34.7
519
69.3
1.59
1.4 × 10−7
593
0.35
1.130
611
DMSO6
12.5
32.1
540
72.3
1.44
1.7 × 10−8
452
0.33
1.074
534
Hydrazine1
12.6
35.2
513
69.8
1.45
7.0 × 10−8
621
0.72
1.130
617
The performance enhancement mechanism of the cell has been further studied. From the perspective of the film morphology characterized by SEM (Fig. 5(a)), it can be found that the HL process has indeed enabled the CZTSSe films to have a smooth and dense surface with closely packed grains. This surface morphology is similar to that of the L process induced CZTSSe film and is much superior to that of the H sample. Cross-sectional SEM images show that a 570 °C annealing process results in a thinner bottom carbon layer, implying a denser microstructure of this layer. This may help enhance the charge transportation ability of this layer, as reflected by a much smaller series resistance of the HL based cell. Additionally, the thickness of the MoSe2 layer in the HL based sample is also much smaller than that of the other two samples (Fig. S6). This may arise because the HL process can help the film surface to achieve a high crystal coverage, thus preventing the fast diffusion of Se vapor to come into contact with the Mo substrate.
In the Raman studies, although these samples show similar CZTSSe signatures under 532 nm excitation (Fig. S7), an obvious difference has been observed when excited at 325 nm. As shown in Fig. 5(b), Raman signatures correlated with the Cu vacancy (VCu) and Zn/Sn substitution (ZnSn) can be clearly seen at about 165, 225 and 245 cm−1, respectively. For the HL sample, its Raman peaks at 165 and 225 cm−1 is much weaker while the peak at 245 cm−1 is much stronger than those of the L sample, indicating that the HL sample exhibits a higher concentration of VCu and ZnSn point defects. The VCu could help increase the hole doping and the ZnSn may help eliminate deep defects at grain boundaries, which is beneficial for the cell performance. The improvement in the hole doping is confirmed by measuring the work function (WF) of CZTSSe films with the surface contact potential difference (CPD) using Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM).
Here, an Au film having a WF of 5.1 eV is used as a reference. The CPD results shown in Fig. 5(c) indicate that the HL and L CZTSSe films have a WF of 4.960 eV and 4.950 eV, respectively (Fig. S8). Capacitance–voltage (C–V) and drive level capacitance profile (DLCP) measurements also show the small increase of the hole density for HL based CZTSSe (Fig. 5(d and e)). The difference between the charge densities derived from C–V and from the DLCP indicates that the interface defect density (NIT) of the HL based sample is also reduced. This reduction finally leads to a larger charge depletion width of the cell, which can help enhance the charge separation ability of the cell.
We further perform a study on the metal element diffusion kinetics of these three samples by monitoring the element content in the bottom carbon layer (Fig. S9 and S10). It can be found that the diffusion velocity of Cu at low temperature is obviously higher than that of Zn and Sn because Cu element has much higher migration activity. As such, at low selenization temperature, more Cu-rich phase, such as CuxSe, will form in the initial nucleation stage. Comparatively, an initial high temperature process would promote the diffusion of Zn and Sn to balance the Cu content and thus facilitate the phase formation of CZTSSe. It is also found that more Zn compared to Sn will diffuse to the top crystals in the nucleation stage at a higher temperature, leading to the formation of ZnSn point defects. Thus, in terms of the CZTSSe crystals, one advantage of the HL strategy is that the initial high temperature selenization can balance the element diffusion kinetics to facilitate the CZTSSe phase formation and induce more VCu and ZnSn point defects and the subsequent low temperature can avoid excessive CZTSSe ripening to sustain an excellent surface morphology.
We further study the influence of the selenization strategy on the electrical properties of the bottom layer since it plays an important role in ensuring the charge transportation and interfacial contact of the cell. The Raman spectra of the bottom carbon layers are shown in Fig. 6(a). The D and G bands corresponding to the graphite-structure carbon are clearly seen in both the spectra. The spectra are detailly studied by considering both the graphite phase and the sp3 carbon. The sp3 signal mainly arises from uncarbonized hydrocarbons. Besides a slight difference in the peak position, an obvious difference in the intensity ratio between the sp3 peak and the graphite D and G peaks is seen between these two layers. As shown in Fig. 6(b), the HL strategy can result in a lower sp3 relative intensity, indicating a higher degree of graphitization of the bottom layer. The current–voltage (I–V) measurement of an In/bottom carbon layer/Mo contacting junction confirms that the bottom layer with a higher degree of graphitization has a much higher charge transporting ability with a 2.5-fold enhancement in the conductivity, as shown in Fig. 6(c). This could be the main reason for the reduced series resistance of the HL based cell. CPD measurements show that the HL based bottom carbon layer has a larger WF of 5.17 eV, about 70 meV higher than that of the L based bottom carbon layer (Fig. 6(d)).
According to the above results obtained from the CPD measurement, the relative energy level position of the top CZTSSe and the bottom carbon layer is shown in Fig. 7(a). With this energy level position, the energy band alignment of the CZTSSe/bottom caron layer contact can be schematically depicted, as shown in Fig. 7(b and c). The higher WF of the HL induced bottom layer helps the top CZTSSe to possess a larger energy band upward bending at the contact interface. An energy barrier of about 0.21 eV can be formed at this interface, which is about 60 meV higher than that in the L process-based cell. The larger energy barrier could better reduce the charge loss arising from the electron transferring from CZTSSe to the bottom carbon layer.
The effect of preventing electron reverse transfer is further confirmed using voltage dependent transient photocurrent (TPC) measurement, as shown in Fig. 7(d and e). One difference between these two cells is that the HL based cell has a much shorter TPC decay time, indicating faster charge transportation in the cell and agreeing well with the above studies. Another significant difference is that negative TPC signals can be observed in the L based cell at high bias voltages. This negative signal arises from reverse transient photocurrent and thus is a clear signature of electron transfer from CZTSSe to the bottom layer. In a solar cell, without effective electron blocking at the back contact interface, such as a hole transporting layer free perovskite solar cell, negative TPC signals can easily appear at high bias voltages. In contrast, no such signals can be observed in the HL based cell, indicating that most of the photoinduced electrons have been effectively extracted into the CdS/ZnO window layer. Based on electrical transient measurements, charge extraction efficiency (ηext) and collection efficiency (ηC) are further derived and shown in Fig. 7(f). It can be seen that the HL based cell has a much higher ηC and ηext. The higher ηC mainly arises because the cell has a lower interfacial defect density, as indicated by the C–V and DLCP characterization. The higher ηext confirms the electron blocking effect of the CZTSSe/bottom layer contact achieved by the HL strategy. The higher ηext is the main reason for the higher JSC obtained by the HL based cell. Thus, the advantage of the HL process is that the initial high temperature process could help promote the graphitization of the bottom carbon layer to improve both the charge transportation of this layer and the interfacial energy band structure of the CZTSSe/bottom layer junction.

In this work, we report a 12.5% efficiency from an aqueous solution based CZTSSe solar cell based on a more comprehensive understanding of the crystallization growth kinetics of the CZTSSe film and an artificially designed two-step selenization strategy. It is found that the nucleation and growth process of CZTSSe adopt different mechanisms. High temperature in the initial nucleation stage facilitates the CZTSSe phase formation while low temperature in the following growth stage could sustain the film to exhibit a smooth surface morphology. The benefits of the high and low temperatures are synergistically combined in the two-step selenization strategy, which enables the final film to possess higher charge transportation ability, more beneficial point defect states, an improved interfacial energy band structure, and a better surface microstructure. These results demonstrate the significance of controlling the crystallization growth of CZTSSe in improving the device performance. The high cell performance achieved here is comparable to that of hydrazine or DMSO solution-based cells and thus should help facilitate the development of CZTSSe solar cells toward more diversified film fabrication technologies.


Kang Yin, Jiangjian Shi, Yanhong Luo and Qingbo Meng conceived the idea, designed the experiments and did the data analysis. Kang Yin and Jiangjian Shi did the experiments and the data acquisition. Muyu Wang and Xiao Xu supported CZTSSe solar cell fabrication. Xiao Xu, Jiazheng Zhou and Biwen Duan performed KPFM, SEM, EDX, DLCP, and mTPC/TPV measurements. Dongmei Li and Huijue Wu supported the characterization and discussions. Kang Yin, Jiangjian Shi, Yanhong Luo and Qingbo Meng participated in writing the manuscript. All the authors were involved in the discussions and approved the manuscript.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (U2002216, 52172261, 51961165108, 51972332, 51421002, and 51627803).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional figures. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta09024k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022