 DOI: 10.1039/C6RA00357E
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 29003-29019

Hee-Je Kim,
Hyun-Dong Lee,
S. Srinivasa Rao,
Araveeti Eswar Reddy,
Soo-Kyoung Kim and 
Chebrolu Venkata Thulasi-Varma*

School of Electrical Engineering, Pusan National University, Geumjeong-Ku, Jangjeong-Dong, Busan 609-735, South Korea. E-mail: tulasinaidunaidu@gmail.com; Fax: +82 51 513 0212; Tel: +82 10 4675 2989

Received
6th January 2016
, Accepted 28th February 2016
First published on 1st March 2016
The integration of hierarchical nanostructure design and encapsulation strategies using a combination of chemical bath deposition, hydrothermal, and in situ reaction methods has been recognized as one of the most effective strategies to realize practical applications of various quantum-dot sensitized solar cell materials. Herein, a facile and scalable method is developed to synthesize a composite CoS–NiS counter electrode through low-cost chemical bath deposition followed by hydrothermal process. The proposed synthesis offers several advantages, including simplicity, efficiency, and low cost. The QDSSCs based CoS–NiS counter electrode under one-sun illumination (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2) yielded a high short circuit current density (Jsc) of 14.76 mA cm−2, open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.590 V, fill factor (FF) of 0.450, and power conversion efficiency (η) of 4.70%. These values are much higher than those of the CoS and Pt CEs (η = 3.29% and 1.12%). The amount of NiS used in the synthesis process has a remarkable effect on the features of CoS nanospheres. Our studies have revealed that both the exceptional electrical conductivity of the NiS and the excellent catalytic activity of the CoS nanospheres improve the conversion efficiency of the uniformly CoS–NiS composite counter electrode. In the present study CoS–NiS composite has obtained higher electro-catalytic activity in comparison with CoS, and Pt CEs, which plays a crucial role to improve the high performance of QDSSC. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), cyclic voltammetry (CV), and Tafel-polarization measurements were used to investigate the electrocatalytic activity of the CoS–NiS composite, CoS and Pt CEs.

Increasing energy demands and the global population over usage of fossil fuels has led to environmental pollution, fuel depletion, and global warming. Therefore; many researchers have paid significant attention to developing green and sustainable energy storage systems. In the past few years, quantum-dot sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) have emerged as a new generation of photovoltaic devices for the development of third-generation solar cells. They have a low cost, simple fabrication, high theoretical power conversion efficiency, and they are attractive photon harvesters.

Semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) are used as light harvesters in QDSSCs. The device structure is similar to dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) which include a quantum dot-loaded nonporous TiO2 electrode, a redox polysulfide electrolyte, and counter electrode (CE) to collect the electrons and catalyze the redox couple generation. In comparison with dye light harvesters, inorganic semiconductors have several advantages, such as tunable band gap, large intrinsic dipole moments, multiple exciton generation (MEG), hot electron injection, and high molar extinction coefficient. So far, various kinds of semiconductor QDs have been reported as sensitizers for QDSSCs, such as CdS, CdSe, CdTe, PbS, PbSe, InP, InAs, and CIS. However, the conversion efficiency of QDSSCs remains much lower than that of DSSCs (12.3%). Recently Ke Zhao et al. reported that the conversion efficiency of QDSSCs is typically about 8%. Such low photovoltaic performance is mainly attributed to the narrow absorption range of QDs (especially in case of CdS QDs). Poor charge transfer to the oxidized polysulfide redox species (Sn2−) on CE is also considered to be a major hurdle to attaining high fill factor and conversion efficiency of QDSSCs.
To improve the performance of QDSSCs, the optimization and design of the CE also play a very important role in determining the efficiency. The CE collects electrons from the external circuit and catalyzes the reduction of (S2−/Sx2−) at the CE/electrolyte interface. In DSSCs, platinum (Pt) is regarded as a highly efficient CE for the (I−/I3−) redox couple with excellent electrocatalytic activity, but Pt shows very poor performance for the reduction of polysulfide electrolyte in QDSSCs. The iodide/triiodide (I−/I3−) redox couple is commonly used in DSSCs but not suitable for QDSSCs due to its strong chemisorption with sulfur ions, leading to much higher over-potentials for electrolyte regeneration, decreasing the conductivity and surface activity of the electrodes. Therefore, an aqueous polysulfide electrolyte is usually used in QDSSCs. Moreover, the expensive of platinum greatly limits the large-scale application of QDSSCs.
To overcome the limitations of the CE and in order to improve the fill factor, many kinds of materials have been proposed as the CEs for QDSSCs using polysulfide electrolyte, such as carbon, Cu2S/reduced graphene oxide (RGO), CoS, NiS, PbS, Cu2ZnSnSe4, and conducting polymers. Among these CEs, metal chalcogenides have acquired more and more attention and exhibit excellent electrocatalytic activity due to their morphology diversity, low price, and convenience of fabrication. The best results were achieved by metal sulfides, which show great promise as CEs in QDSSCs, especially CuS (or Cu2S), CoS, and NiS compounds. However, studies on the fabrication procedures of metal sulfide CEs are still insufficient.
To overcome this problem, various deposition methods have been applied to deposit metal sulfides on FTO or ITO glass, such as successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR), electrodeposition, proximal (or direct) adsorption, epitaxial growth, chemical bath deposition (CBD), chemical linking of colloidal QDs, and hydrothermal methods. But all these methods are expensive and time consuming, except CBD and the hydrothermal method. In addition, there is an urgent need to reduce the processing cost and develop facile methods for fabrication of CEs materials. For practical applications, the CBD and hydrothermal methods gained popularity for the synthesis of metal sulfides on FTO or ITO substrate due to simplicity and, more importantly, the intimate contact between donors and acceptors. However, in spite of these advances, there remains a need to develop new Pt-free CE materials for QDSSCs that exhibit high stability, higher electrocatalytic activity, and consistent performance in polysulfide electrolyte.
In this respect to increase the efficiency of QDSSCs, it is necessary to exploration of high-performance and novel electrocatalytic composite CE materials rather than a single CE material. M. Que et al. reported a flexible quantum dot-sensitized solar cells employing CoS nanorod arrays/graphite paper as effective counter electrodes with 2.70%. W. Guo et al. reported carbon fiber/Co9S8 nanotube arrays hybrid structures for flexible quantum dot-sensitized solar cells with 3.79% efficiency. James G. Radich et al. reported Cu2S reduced graphene oxide composite for high-efficiency quantum dot solar cells with efficiency of 4.40%. Chang et al. reported a composite CuS/CoS CE for CdS/CdSe QDSSCs with 4.1% efficiency. Arabzade et al. demonstrated CdS/CdSe QD-sensitized cells and sequentially deposited CuS/PbS CEs with cell performance of 3.58%. Gentian Yue et al. demonstrated cadmium selenide quantum dots solar cells featuring nickel sulfide/polyaniline as efficient counter electrode provide 4.15% efficiency. Yueyong Yang et al. reported a composite counter electrode based on nanoparticulate PbS and carbon black with an efficiency of 3.91%. Linlin Li et al. reported controlled growth of CuS on electrospun carbon nanofibers as an efficient counter electrode for QDSSCs.
However, these works revealed considerable improvement in the photovoltaic performance of QDSSCs, but it is still hard to evaluate the electrocatalytic activity of the CEs due to various factors influencing the cell performance including large internal resistance, high over potential for the reduction of CE/electrolyte interface, and improved stability in some cases. Therefore, it is necessary to prepare facile fabrication methods and low-cost CEs with high catalytic activity and adequate stability.
Recently CoS and NiS have been attracting great attention for specialized applications such as supercapacitor, lithium ion batteries, photo catalytic H2 generation, and solar cells. Cobalt and nickel sulfides (CoS and NiS) are most efficient candidates because both high conductivity and excellent electrocatalytic activity for the reduction of polysulfide electrolyte. Our previous study also reported that NiS can act as the most effective CE for QDSSCs. Moreover, both are P-type conductors that are more abundant than CuS and PbS. In this respect, we developed new composite structure using CoS and NiS, which were fabricated by a facile low-temperature chemical route and applied as an efficient CE for QDSSCS. Therefore, we first prepare the CoS CEs on a conducting FTO substrate using chemical bath deposition method (CBD), which exhibits good catalytic activity toward the polysulfide electrolyte. Furthermore, by introducing the NiS layer on the surface of CoS substrate using hydrothermal synthesis to afford the CoS–NiS composite electrodes for better conductivity and low charge transfer resistance at the electrode/electrolyte interface has been achieved. The hydrothermal treatment of CoS–NiS composite electrode shows outstanding electrocatalytic activity and unsurpassed stability in the polysulfide electrolyte. An improved energy conversion efficiency of 4.70% has been achieved for CdS/CdSe/ZnS QDSSCs using optimized CoS–NiS composite CEs. The improved photovoltaic performance is mainly due to the improved electrocatalytic activity and morphology of the CoS–NiS composite CE towards polysulfide electrolyte. However, to the best our knowledge, reports on using CoS–NiS composite CEs in QDSSCs with polysulfide electrolyte are limited and which is the best efficiency of QDSSC so far using CoS–NiS composite electrode.
The transport pathways of electrons and photoelectrical conversion configuration of a TiO2/CdS/CdSe/ZnS based QDSSCs with nanoplatelets structure of CoS–NiS CE as described in Fig. 1. The configuration consists the anatase of TiO2/CdS/CdSe/ZnS QD sensitizer, polysulfide electrolyte and FTO/CoS–NiS CE.

The following chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich: cobalt chloride hexahydrate (CoCl2), nickel sulfate hexahydrate (NiSO4·6H2O, 99%), thioacetamide (CH3CSNH2, 99.0%), urea (CH4N2O), acetic acid (C2H4O2), cadmium acetate (Cd(CH3COO·2H2O), sodium sulfide (Na2S·9H2O), sodium sulfite (Na2SO3), selenium (Se) (100 mesh 99.5%), zinc acetate (CH3CO2)2Zn, 99%), potassium chloride (KCl), and TiO2 paste (Ti-nanoxide HT/SP). All chemicals were used directly without further purification.


Prior to CBD of the CoS CEs, FTO substrates with a sheet resistance of 7 Ω cm−2 (Hartford Glass) well cleaned ultrasonically with acetone, ethanol, and deionized water (DI) for 10 minutes each. Briefly, cobalt chloride (CoCl2·6H2O), nickel sulfate (NiSO4·6H2O) were used as a nickel and sulfur sources, thioacetamide (CH3CSNH2) was used as a sulfur source, respectively. For the preparation of CoS CE, 0.1 M of CoCl2·6H2O and 0.8 M CH3CSNH2 dissolved in 25 ml of deionized water (DI) and vigorously stirred for 30 minutes to obtain a transparent color. Then 0.8 M of urea and 0.7 M of acetic acid (C2H4O2) were added to the solution and vigorously stirred for about 30 min to obtain transparent solution. The role of urea is to increase the rate of TAA decomposition, and acetic acid acts as a stabilizer, strong reagent in this one-step preparation. The cleaned FTO glass substrates were immersed vertically in the growth solution and placed in a hot air oven. The deposition temperature was carried out 70°, 80°, and 90 °C with a time period of 2 h. When we go for 100 °C, the CoS-coated substrates peeled off from the film, so further experiments were done with CoS CEs using deposition temperatures of 70°, 80°, and 90 °C. After the deposition, the CoS-coated thin films were removed from the oven and cooled to room temperature. After cooling, the CoS-coated FTO substrates were rinsed with DI water and ethanol and dried with an air stream. Finally, the prepared electrodes denoted as a C70, C80, and C90.

For further deposition of NiS, the as prepared CoS CEs were used to prepare composite CoS–NiS CEs. The composite CoS–NiS CE was prepared by a simple hydrothermal treatment. In a typical procedure, 0.1 M of nickel sulfate (NiSO4·6H2O) and 0.4 M of CH3CSNH2 were dissolved in 25 ml of DI water to form a clear pink solution. The NiS precursor solution was transferred into a 50 ml Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave. The as prepared C80 electrode was placed vertically into the NiS precursor solution at the wall of an autoclave. The autoclave was sealed and maintained at 80 °C for 2 h. After cooling down to room temperature, the resulting film was taken out and rinsed with DI water and ethanol several times and then dried with N2 gas. The obtained CoS–NiS composite CE was labeled as CN80.
To fabricate a Pt electrode, well-cleaned FTO glass substrate was coated with a Pt paste (Pt catalyst T/SP, Solaronix) using the doctor blade method and sintered at 450 °C in air for 10 minutes.

For the preparation of photoanodes, FTO substrates were ultrasonically cleaned with acetone, ethanol, and DI water for 10 min each. Commercial porous TiO2 paste composed of Ti-nanoxide HT/SP (Solaronix) was coated on FTO substrate with the doctor blade technique with an active area of 0.27 cm2 and then dried and sintered at 450 °C for 30 minutes. After solvent evaporation, the thickness of TiO2 electrodes was 7.5 μm. The SILAR method was used to deposit CdS and CdSe QDs on the TiO2 electrodes. For the preparation of CdS QDs, anionic (Cd2+) and cationic (S2−) ion sources were prepared with aqueous solutions of 0.1 M Cd(CH3COO)2 and 0.1 M Na2S. The as prepared TiO2-coated FTO substrates were dipped into anionic (Cd(CH3COO)2) solution for 5 minutes to allow the Cd2+ ions to coat the TiO2 electrode. The film was sublimated with DI water and ethanol for 1 minute to remove the excess Cd2+ ions and layer was dried with nitrogen (N2) gas. The adsorbed anionic (Cd2+) electrodes were then immersed into the Na2S solution for about 5 minutes to adsorb cationic (S2−) ions and react with the anions (Cd2+) to form CdS QDs. This was followed by rinsing with DI water and ethanol, removal of the anions, and drying with N2 gas. This two-step process consists of 1 cycle. The process was repeated for 5 cycles were done at room temperature to achieve CdS QDs. The as-prepared substrates were named as TiO2/CdS5.

For the deposition of CdSe, the CdS-sensitized TiO2 electrodes were dipped into aqueous solution of 0.1 M of Cd(CH3COO)2 and Se sources were used for 8 alternate dipping cycles. For the preparation of Se solution, a refluxing technique was used with an aqueous solution 0.2 M of Se and 0.4 M of Na2SO3 at 120 °C for 4 h. The as-prepared photo-anodes are represented as TiO2/CdS5/CdSe8 electrodes. Finally, the ZnS passivation layer was deposited on the CdS5/CdSe8 layer with an aqueous solution of 0.1 M of Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O and 0.1 M of Na2S applied for 1 minute for about 2 cycles. This was followed by rinsing with DI water and ethanol alternately and drying with N2 gas.
The ZnS passivation layer can efficiently prevent corrosion of the QDs in the polysulfide electrolyte and block the recombination of electrons in the electrolyte, thereby significantly improving the cell performance of the QDSSCs. The photo-anode and the fabricated CoS and CoS–NiS CE were inserted between hot-melt sealing sheets (SX 1170-60, Solaronix) at 100 °C. The space between the electrodes was filled by capillary action with a redox liquid electrolyte containing 1 M of Na2S, 2 M of S, and 0.2 M of KCl with methanol and DI water at a ratio of 7:3.

The symmetrical CEs of CoS, CoS–NiS, and Pt thin films were inserted in hot melting sheets (SX 1170-60, Solaronix) at 100 °C, and internal space was filled with a redox liquid electrolyte containing 1 M of Na2S, 2 M of S, and 0.2 M of KCl with methanol and DI water with a ratio of 7:3 EIS and Tafel polarization with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 were performed using a BioLogic potentiostat/galvanostat/EIS analyzer (SP-150, France). Symmetrical dummy cells of CoS–CoS, CoS–NiS–CoS–NiS and Pt–Pt CEs were measured in dark conditions in the frequency range of 100 mHz to 500 kHz.


The crystal structure of prepared CEs was characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) on a D8 ADVANCE with a Cu Kα radiation source (λ = 1.54060) operated at 40 kV and 40 mA in the range 20–80°. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, VG Escalab 250) was done with a hemispherical energy analyzer using mono-chromated Al Kα radiation. The surface morphology, thickness, and elemental compositions of the CoS, and CoS–NiS CE films were investigated using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, SU-70, and Hitachi) operated at 10.0 kV with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) operated at 15 kV.

The surface roughness of the CoS, and CoS–NiS FTO substrate was characterized by atomic force microscope (JPK NanoWizard II AFM, JPK Instruments, Berlin, Germany) with a scan rate of 0.8 Hz in contact mode. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was carried out in a three-electrode system with an aqueous solution of 0.1 M KCl, 0.1 M Na2S, and 0.1 M S, at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 using a BioLogic electrochemical analyzer. Pt worked as a CE, and Ag/Ag+ worked as a reference electrode. The photocurrent–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the QDSSCs were obtained under one-sun illumination (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) using an ABET technologies (USA) solar simulator with an irradiance constancy of ±3%. UV-visible absorption spectroscopy was carried out using an Optizen 3220 UV spectrophotometer. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed with a BioLogic potentiostat/galvanostat/EIS analyzer (SP-150, France) under one sun illumination, and the frequency range was 100 mHz to 500 kHz. The applied bias voltage and AC amplitude were set to Voc of the QDSSCs and 10 mV, respectively.

Fig. 2 and 3 shows the top-view high-resolution scanning electron microscopy (HR-SEM) images of the CoS and composite CoS–NiS CEs thin films deposited with varying deposition temperatures. The HR-SEM images show that both the CoS and composite CoS–NiS nanostructures are uniformly grew on the FTO substrate. Varying the deposition temperatures using CBD and hydrothermal deposition clearly affects the surface morphology of the films and it can produce high surface area. For the optimization of composite CoS–NiS CE, we have fabricated CoS CEs at 60°, 70°, 80°, 90°, and 100° temperatures. Interestingly, the formation of CoS on FTO substrate was not observed when the deposition temperature was less than 60 °C. However, we obtained great morphology changes between 70° to 90°, from nanoparticles to nanospheres, and nanoflakes. Fig. 2(a, a1, b, b1, c and c1) shows the HR-SEM images of CoS deposited on the FTO substrate. When the deposition temperature was 70°, the surface morphology acted like a nanoparticles structures formed on the FTO substrate (Fig. 2(a and a1)) and the film thickness was found to be 789 nm (Fig. 4(a)), respectively. When increasing the deposition temperature from 70° to 80°, the surface structure of nanoparticles were converted in to nanospheres with rough surface morphology. The film thickness was about 848 nm (Fig. 4(b)). After 80°, the film had improved morphology, as shown in Fig. 2(b and b1), which may increase its electro-catalytic activity to proficiently transfer electrons in QDSSCs. When the deposition temperature further increased to 90°, the surface morphology of nanospheres started to grow into nanoflakes formed on the FTO substrate, as shown in (Fig. 2(c and c1)). The nanoflakes were interconnected with each other, and the film thickness was 750 nm (Fig. 4(c)). When the deposition temperature was 90°, the nucleation and growth rates of CoS were faster, which may directly result in the formation of nanoflakes. The change in surface morphology from nanoparticles to nanospheres and nanoflakes is based on the deposition temperature exceptional.

The HR-SEM images of Fig. 2(a, a1, c and c1) show the C70 and C90 films are not thickly packed, which means the deposition temperature greatly contributes to the surface morphology changes from nanoparticles to nanoflakes structure. The apparent difference in the CoS morphologies can be ascribed to the different nucleation and growth rates of CoS induced by different reaction temperatures. When we go for 100 °C, the CoS CEs started to peel off from the FTO substrate.
Fig. 3(a and a1) shows the hydrothermal synthesis of composite CoS–NiS electrode. It is found that the deposition of NiS catalysts are uniformly decorated on the surface of CoS substrate (C80). Which clearly affects the surface morphology in that the CoS nanospheres (C80 film) combined to form denser nanoparticles through agglomeration. The film thickness was found to be 873 nm (Fig. 4(d)). The deposition of NiS gradually covers the full surface of the CoS substrate (C80), which means the thickness and density of the nanoparticles increased. This morphology is favorable for the effective flow of the electrolyte ions throughout the whole device, resulting in excellent electrocatalytic activity and enhanced performance of QDSSCs. In addition, the well-dispersed NiS on the surface of the CoS (C80) film should be more beneficial for the reduction of polysulfide electrolyte. When we using hydrothermal treatment for composite structure, the density, thickness, and morphology are varied through controlling the temperature, resulting enhanced photovoltaic performance and excellent electrocatalytic activity for the reduction of polysulfide electrolyte in QDSSC.
We obtained good adhesion on the FTO substrate with composite CoS–NiS CE (CN80). The adhesion of the CE is a major factor for obtaining efficient QDSSCs. If the materials do not adhere to FTO substrate, and then they may affect the performance and peel off from the substrate. It is believed that the adhesion of the composite CoS–NiS (CN80 film) is very robust due to the uniform material coating and merits of the hydrothermal technique. Based on the surface morphology, we concluded that the unique agglomerated nanoparticle structure of composite CoS–NiS CE may offer high conductivity for fast electron transport, and the improved morphology will improve the charge transfer at the interface of the CE/polysulfide electrolyte, which are the determining factors for the QDSSC performance. Finally, we expect that the reaction conditions of 80° temperature and 2 h are most suitable for large-scale surface area of CoS and CoS–NiS CEs fabrication. The growth and change in surface morphology of CoS and composite CoS–NiS CEs with different deposition temperatures are described in Scheme 1.
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was used to study the surface roughness and for better quantification of the film grain sizes of CoS and CoS–NiS CEs. The corresponding 2-dimensional (2D) and 3-dimensinal (3D) images are shown in Fig. 5. The grading ratio of the Ni (nickel sulfate), CoCl2, and thioacetamide (TAA) concentrations can spatially vary on the surface energy due to difference in the chemical composition. The estimated average root-mean-square (rms) roughness values of the CoS CEs (C70, C80, and C90) are 18.37 nm, 249.4 nm, and 1.421 μm, respectively. The AFM images of CoS (C70 and C90) CEs are shown in (ESI, Fig. S5). The films had an intermediate surface roughness and the surface morphology of CoS CEs shows the presence of granular grains and we observed some white spots on the film. On the other hand the (rms) roughness value of composite CoS–NiS CE is 579.4 nm. The variation of grains and grain boundaries (GB) are due to difference in crystallographic orientation, contaminants, and film quality. Therefore, composite CoS–NiS CE shows large specific surface area than CoS CEs (C70, C80, and C90) based on many agglomerated nanoparticles covering the surface of the CoS, (rms) value and surface images of AFM (Fig. 5). This value completely satisfies the roughness requirements. High apparent surface roughness on a CoS–NiS CE (CN80) enhances the electrocatalytic activity for a polysulfide electrolyte system and also these results imply that the charge transfer resistance at the CE/electrolyte interface would be lower in the case of CoS–NiS CE. This indicates that while increasing the deposition temperature the roughest films offers more electro-catalytic activity sites for the reaction of (S2−/Sn2−) redox couple in the electrolyte and also increases area between the electrode and electrolyte. The performance of the composite CoS–NiS CE is likely governed by not only the low surface resistivity but also by the improved surface roughness. The SEM images of Fig. 3(a and a1) and AFM images of Fig. 5(b and b1) show that the composite CoS–NiS (CN80 film) has much higher porosity and surface roughness than the CoS (C70, C80, and C90) CEs. The AFM results clearly support the attractive performance of the composite CoS–NiS (CN80) CE, has great effect in the surface morphology and roughness of the film.
X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) analysis was used to investigate the effect of morphology on the structure of the as-synthesized CoS and CoS–NiS CEs, as shown in Fig. 6. The diffracted peaks of CoS (C80 and C90) located at 30.62° and 54.44° can be assigned to the [100] and [110] crystal planes of the hexagonal structure. Those values are in good agreement with the standard X-ray diffraction data file (JCPDS card no. 03-065-3418). The diffraction peaks of NiS located at 30.89°, 37.88°, 54.79°, 65.04°, 78.12°, and 80.96° can respectively be indexed to the [110], [111], [211], [220], [131], and [222] crystal planes of rhombohedral structure. The reported values of NiS matched well with JCPDS card no. (01-073-0698). The strong and sharp diffraction peaks indicated that the obtained products were well crystallized without any impurity phase. From the XRD data, it was confirmed that the compounds CoS and CoS–NiS consist of both cobalt and nickel sulfide. These results indicate that the CoS and CoS–NiS were successfully deposited on the FTO substrate through CBD fallowed by hydrothermal treatment.
We introduced XPS analysis to better understand the elemental compositions and chemical valence state of the as-prepared CoS and CoS–NiS CEs in the near-surface range at different temperatures is shown in Fig. 7. There are no other elemental peaks observed on the surface of samples, indicating that the as-prepared CoS and CoS–NiS CEs are relatively pure. Obviously, all the peaks can be ascribed to the elements of Co, Ni, S, O, C, and N. The elements of C, O, and N can be attributed to the exposure of air. The XPS spectrum of Co 2p for CoS and CoS–NiS CEs are shown in (ESI, Fig. S4(a)). The binding energies of Co 2p for CoS and CoS–NiS (C70, C80, C90, and CN80) CEs are 779.32, 779.89, 779.85, and 782.89 eV, respectively. The results suggesting that the presence of cobalt in the form of Co3+ for CoS and CoS–NiS CEs. The energy difference between the CoS (C80) and composite CoS–NiS (CN80) CEs is 3 eV, which is caused by charge transfer screening and is attributed to the presence of Co cations in the CoS (C80 film) and CoS–NiS (CN80 film). The binding energy of Ni 2p3 for CoS–NiS CE is 857.64 eV (ESI, Fig. S4(b)). The well-defined peak with higher energy is from the Ni3+. It is also consistent with the reported values for NiS1+x (Ni 2p3 in NiS 852.80 eV). When we compare the peak intensity of CoS–NiS electrode, the peaks of CoS CEs greatly repressed, with an enhanced signal of the peaks at low energy value. Moreover, we can clearly see that there abundant Ni in the composite structure, which is good accordance with the result of EDX. It is conforming that the composite structure is mainly composed of CoS and NiS rather than nickel/cobalt oxides or hydroxides. The XPS spectrum of S 2p is shown in (ESI, Fig. S4(c)). The binding energies of S 2p for CoS and CoS–NiS CEs (C70, C80, C90, and CN80) are 161.84, 162.88, 163.88, and 172.98 eV. The strong peaks of 162.88 and 172.98 eV are consistent with the typical values reported for CoS and NiS. There is a little deviation in the peak position from pure CoS and CoS–NiS due to the synergistic effect of the two different metal sulfides in the composite structure. However, the existence of higher sulfur oxidation states seems not affecting the catalytic activity of CEs, as it can be concluded by both the cyclic voltammetry analysis and functional tests of devices reported below. In the S 2p spectrum of CoS, the peak at 161.8 eV is a characteristic of S2−, and the component at 162.8 eV can be ascribed to the sulfur ion with low coordination on the surface. The peak centered about 163.8 eV is typical metal–sulfur bonding (Co–S and Ni–S). Moreover it is suggesting that the conductivity would have been increased which in turn reduced the RCE for CoS–NiS CE at the polysulfide/electrolyte. This demonstrates that the oxidation state of composite CoS–NiS CE (Co, Ni, and S) changes (it is clear evident from the SEM images). Finally, we believe that the as prepared CoS and CoS–NiS nanostructured surface is pure CoS and CoS–NiS counter electrodes.
EDX measurements were used to further indicate the elemental compositions of the CoS and CoS–NiS CEs on the FTO substrate, as shown in Fig. 8. The Fig. 8(d) reveals that the atomic percentages of (15.88), (34.31), (49.81%) were observed for the cobalt, nickel, and sulfur in the CoS–NiS based CN80 film. When the deposition temperature was increased from 70 °C to 90 °C, the atomic percentages of both Co and S were gradually increasing from 0.13 to 6.1% (Co), whereas the S content is 0.92 to 18.11%. In contrast to the hydrothermal deposition of CoS–NiS CE, the deposition of Ni ions faster than that of S, resulting higher percentage of Ni (34.3%) than Co (15.88%). The atomic percentage of composite CoS–NiS CE (Ni, Co, and S) was greatly increasing when compared to bare CoS CE (Co, and S). Apart from the surface morphology, the atomic ration of Ni in the CoS–NiS composite might also play a vital role in increasing the electrocatalytic activity of the CE. The EDX results confirmed that the formation of CoS and CoS–NiS on FTO substrate without any other impurities such as nickel oxide (NiO, and CoO).
To further elucidate the catalytic properties of the CoS and CoS–NiS symmetrical CEs and study the electron transport behavior, EIS experiments were carried out with the presence polysulfide redox couple under dark conditions. Fig. 9 shows the typical EIS Nyquist plots obtained at open circuit bias potential in the frequency range of 100 mHz to 500 kHz and 0.6 V, respectively. The inset of the Fig. 9 presents the equivalent circuit used to fit the experimental EIS data using Z-view software at different deposition temperatures. The equivalent circuit shows the series resistance (Rs) at the high frequency intercept on real axis, including the sheet resistance of two identical CEs and the electrolyte resistance. The first semi-circle in the middle frequency represents the charge transfer resistance (Rct) at the CE/electrolyte interface with a constant phase angle element (CPE). The semicircle at low frequency is assigned to the Nernst diffusion impedance (Zw) corresponding to the diffusion resistance of the Sn2−/nS2− redox couple. The CPE is frequently used as a substitute for the capacitor in an equivalent circuit to fit the impedance behavior of the electrical double layer more accurately when the double layer does not behave as an ideal capacitor. The fitted parameters are summarized in Table 1.
CEs
Rs (Ω)
Rct
CPE (μF)
Zw (Ω)
C70
9.77
13.33
17.38
1.34
C80
9.58
11.47
35.46
1.06
C90
9.84
14.57
9.73
1.26
CN80
7.36
9.07
83.6
0.71
Pt
9.91
15.6
6.15
2.39
Rct controls the charge exchange between the CE and polysulfide electrolyte. The Rct values of CoS (C70, C80, C90), CoS–NiS (CN80) CEs, and Pt CEs are 13.33, 11.47, 14.57, 9.07, and 15.6 (Ω). Because of corrosion of the Pt surface by various S species, the Pt CE shows a higher Rct value than the CoS–NiS and CoS CES, which has improved electron transfer kinetics for Sn2− reduction. In contrast to the Pt and CoS CEs, the CoS–NiS CE has smallest Rct value, which results highest electrocatalytic activity and good conductivity for the reduction of polysulfide electrolyte. The low Rct value influenced the electron transfer from the CE/electrolyte interface, thus leading to higher Jsc and FF. This is consistent with the Rct values obtained from the Tafel polarization results and photovoltaic performance of QDSSCs. The charge transfer resistances at the interface also insist the power conversion efficiency. The Rs values of CoS (C70, C80, C90), CoS–NiS (CN80), and Pt CEs are 9.77, 9.58, 9.84, 7.36, and 9.91 (Ω), respectively. The low Rs value of the CN80 CE is due to the good adhesion of the CE on the FTO substrate. The high contact area at the CE/electrolyte interface can be reflected by the different Cdl. The (Cμ) values of CoS (C70, C80, C90), CoS–NiS (CN80) and Pt CEs were 40.4, 78.9, 35.5, and 5.59 μF. In comparison with those of CoS (C70, C80, C90), and Pt CEs, we achieved high (Cμ) for composite CoS–NiS due to low recombination and high surface area, which is key factor for high electrocatalytic activity.
In view of the SEM image from Fig. 3(a and a1), the CoS–NiS CE has high specific surface area, suggesting that the composite structure of CoS–NiS has a significant impact on the electron transfer through the CE/electrolyte interface. The growth of NiS nanoparticle on the surface of the CoS is beneficial for the diffusion of the polysulfide electrolyte, which lead to lower Zw for CoS–NiS electrode. The Zw values of CoS–NiS, CoS, and Pt CEs are shown in Table 1. In comparison with CoS and Pt CEs, the composite structure has a lower Zw value (0.71 Ω). The lower Zw value of the CoS–NiS CE indicates a very high rate of electrolyte reduction with improved electrolyte diffusion for mass transport of the electrons, which will improve the performance of the QDSSC. The Pt CE does not catalyze the reduction of electrolyte effectively, indicating poor performance and very low FF, which will affect the photovoltaic performance. We conclude from the impedance spectra of symmetrical cells that the CoS–NiS CE facilitates the penetration of electrolyte into the film and enables more electrochemical active sites for the Sx2−/S2− redox reaction.
To further characterize the catalytic activity and interfacial charge-transfer properties of different CEs, Tafel polarization measurements were carried out using symmetrical dummy cells under dark conditions, with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1, and as a function of the logarithmic current density (logJ) vs. potential (V). Fig. 10 shows the Tafel plot curves used to estimate the relationship between over-potential and current density, which can give the exchange current density (Jo) and limiting current density (Jlim). Generally, the curve is divided into three major zones: a polarization zone, Tafel zone, and limiting diffusion zone from low to high potential. The curve at low potential represents the polarization zone, and the current density is smaller than the exchange current density (Jo). The curve at middle potential with a steep slope represents the Tafel zone, which determines the catalytic ability of CEs. The third zone represents the diffusion zone at high potential. The curve in the diffusion zone is caused by transport of Sn2−/nS2− in the polysulfide electrolyte.
The limiting current density (Jlim) can be derived from the plot at high potential. The exchange current density (Jo) is attained from the zero intercept of the approximately linear region of the curve. These two parameters are measures of the electrochemical catalytic activity of different CEs. Jo depends on the Rct value obtained from the EIS analysis:
(1)
where
R is the gas constant, T is temperature, F is the Faraday constant, n is the number of electrons involved in the reduction of disulfide at the CE, and Rct is the charge transfer resistance at the CE/electrolyte interface obtained from EIS spectra.

From the graph, it can be seen that the CoS–NiS-based CN80 CE clearly exhibits larger slope than the CoS C70, C80, C90, and Pt CEs. According to the Tafel eqn, the Jo value of the CN80 CE is higher than that of the C70, C80, C90, and Pt CEs, indicating high catalytic activity for the reduction of polysulfide electrolyte at the CE/electrolyte interface. Greater Jo value means more ability to reduce the polysulfide electrolyte. The improvement of the catalytic activity of the CoS–NiS-based CN80 CE also increases the logarithmic current densities in the anodic and cathodic reduction of Tafel polarization. Generally, the trends in Jo for the different CEs in the Tafel plot are in a good agreement with the CV and EIS measurements. Another important parameter that can be extracted from this Tafel graph is Jlim, which is the limiting diffusion current density. Jlim can depend on the diffusion coefficient of the redox couple in the electrolyte, which can be expressed by eqn (2):
(2)
where
D is the diffusion coefficient of the polysulfide, l is the electrolyte thickness, n is the number of electrons involved in the reduction of disulphide at the CE, F is the Faraday constant, and C is the polysulfide concentration.

The CoS–NiS-based CN80 CE shows greater limiting current density Jlim compared to the C70, C80, C90, and Pt CEs in the diffusion zone. The Tafel plot indicates higher diffusion velocity in the reduction of electrolyte. Because of high Jlim, the CoS–NiS-based CN80 CE achieves greater catalytic activity compared to the other CEs in the reduction of the polysulfide electrolyte. This is due to NiS nanoparticles covering the surface of the CoS, resulting in a higher diffusion coefficient for the polysulfide electrolyte, as shown in eqn (2). The Tafel polarization results are consistent with the EIS results. The surface morphologies of the agglomerated nanoparticle structured CE thin films have particularly large surface. This can decrease the resistances of charge transfer, accelerate the diffusion of electrolyte, and increase the electron lifetime. These are determining factors affecting the QDSSC performance. The increase in the slop from Tafel plot, and decrease in the charge transfer resistance from EIS data were confirmed that the composite CoS–NiS counter electrode has the highest catalytic activity in the polysulfide electrolyte for QDSSCs.
CV measurements were conducted to investigate the electrocatalytic activity and enhanced redox reactions of different CEs at the CE/electrolyte interface using a three-electrode system. Fig. 11(a) shows the CV curves of the CoS, CoS–NiS, and Pt CEs in the voltage range of −0.5 to 1.5 with a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. The electrolyte used for this study was 0.1 M NaCl, 0.1 M Na2S, and 0.01 M NaOH. A pair of oxidation and reduction peaks was observed for the CoS and CoS–NiS CEs, but not for the Pt CE, as shown in Fig. 11(a). The peak current density and peak-to-peak separation (EPP) are two important parameters for analyzing the catalytic activity of various CEs. The oxidation and reduction peaks at both the photo anode and the CE can be represented by eqn (3) and (4), respectively:

S2− + 2h+ → S; Sx−1 + S2− → Sx2− (x = 2–5)

(3)

Sx2− + 2e− → Sx−12− + S2− (x = 2–5)

(4)
As shown in Fig. 11(a), the CoS–NiS-based CN80 CE shows the high current density and good reversibility compared to the CoS-based C70, C80, C90, and Pt CEs. This reveals that the composite CoS–NiS CE is a better electrochemical catalyst for the reduction of polysulfide electrolyte compared to CoS and Pt CEs. These results could be attributed to its high uniformity and high porosity of nanoparticle morphology through agglomeration, as shown in the HR-SEM images in Fig. 3(a and a1). A better carrier concentration enriched by the sulfur ions as well. This is due to the high specific surface area, high surface roughness, and superior electrical conductivity of the CoS–NiS CE for electron transport from the photo anode to the CE, which leads to a capacitive behavior in these two cases and gives rise to high current density.
However, no reduction peak is observed for the CoS-based CEs in this low potential interval, suggesting considerable amount of reversibility with the shift of redox peaks and reduced current density for the reduction reaction of Sx2− ions to S2− ions on the CoS CEs. Fig. 11(b) shows the CV curves of the CoS–NiS CE at different scan rates of 20, 40, 60, 80, 100, 200, 300, and 400 mV s−1. When we increase the scan rates, the current density of the CoS–NiS CE gradually increases, which means the Jsc value strongly depends on the electrocatalytic ability of the CE. From the CV results, we concluded that the CoS–NiS composite electrode can be inferred to have a strong impact on the catalytic activity in reducing polysulfide electrolyte.
Optical band gap energy and characteristics of semi-conductor materials play a crucial role in the utilization of the materials in the QDSSCs and DSSCs. Fig. 12(a) shows the deposition of NiS on the CoS extends the absorption spectrum to wavelengths exceeding the infrared region. The spectra reveal a peak centered at around 350.60 nm. This can be attributed to the metal–ligand charge transfer which is a dπ–π* transition. By extrapolating the straight-line portion to the energy axis at zero absorption coefficient (α = 0), leads to estimation of band gap energy values (Eg) values. The red shift of the absorption spectra is due to quantum confinement effect and it is consistent with the theoretical argument made by Brus. The CoS–NiS CE absorb strongly due to high thickness and lie beyond instrument limitation. Moreover, the steep absorption edges observed indicate the uniform particle size and morphology with fairly good crystallinity. The ability to absorb long-wavelength irradiation makes CoS–NiS composite could be considered as a potentials material for harvesting residual light that penetrates a photoanode such as TiO2/CdS/CdSe/ZnS.
Fig. 12(b) shows the energy bands and the related charge transfer processes in the QDSSC based on the CoS and CoS–NiS CEs and TiO2/CdS/CdSe/ZnS photoanode with polysulfide electrolyte. The open-circuit voltage (Voc) of the QDSSCs device is the energy difference between the quasi-Fermi levels (qEf) of the anode and cathode; i.e., Voc = Voc1 + Voc2. The quasi-Fermi level of the anode or the cathode depends on the equilibrium position between the electrode and electrolyte solution. Illuminating the photoactive electrode moves to the quasi-Fermi level near the vacuum Fermi level. Under one sun illumination, the photo-voltaic response of QDSSCs based on the CoS–NiS CE has a noticeable Voc2, respectively. The density of the NiS agglomerated nanoparticles on the surface of CoS may change the value of Voc2, resulting a noticeable change is observed in the Voc of QDSSCs.
Fig. 12(c) shows the possible catalytic mechanisms of CoS and CoS–NiS CEs for (S2−/Sx2−) reduction during the photoelectrons is expected to transfer to the polysulfide electrolyte. The CoS–NiS electrode serves as a counter electrode and a photocathode to facilitate electron injection to the polysulfide electrolyte to achieve a greater Jsc. In the pure CoS CE, the poor connections between the CoS nanoparticles may create a bottleneck for the electrons flowing from the external circuit to transport to the CoS/electrolyte interface. This means that catalytic sites on CoS nanospheres may not be fully utilized, thus resulting in a higher Rct value in comparison with a CoS–NiS CN80 CE. As for the CoS–NiS CE, the NiS nanoparticles have good connections with the CoS nanospheres nanostructure, producing an agglomerated nanoparticles structure that tightly holds the CoS nanospheres as shown in HR-SEM images Fig. 3(a and a1). The agglomerated nanoparticles structure of NiS nanoparticles serve as the excellent tunnels for the electron transport and thus significantly reduce the internal resistance of the CE film, which ensures full utilization of highly catalytic CoS nanospheres. On the other hand, the proper amount of NiS on the surface of CoS nanospheres structure can improve the performance of QDSSCs.
The J–V characterization obtained using TiO2/CdS/CdSe/ZnS cascade photoanode was used to evaluate the photoelectrical performance and catalytic properties of CoS, CoS–NiS, and Pt CEs for QDSSCs are measured under sunlight illumination (A.M 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2) as shown in Fig. 13. The detailed parameters, including the short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (η) are described in Table 2. The QDSSCs based on a Pt CE show Jsc, Voc and FF values of 7.04 mA cm−2, 0.0.570 V, and 0.36, resulting in very low η of 1.12%. The poor performance of the Pt CE is mainly because of low catalytic activity in the polysulfide electrolyte, which affects the surface morphology and FF. As a result, low power conversion efficiency η (1.12%) and FF (0.36) are achieved by the QDSSC based on the Pt CE.
Parameter
Voc (V)
Jsc (mA cm−2)
FF
η (%)
Rs (Ω)
RCE (Ω)
Rct (Ω)
Cμ (μF)
Zw (Ω)
τn (ms)
C70
0.553
10.45
0.44
2.57
13.38
11.01
7.95
9.77
3.72
0.0062
C80
0.565
11.16
0.52
3.29
10.21
13.37
5.77
46.04
1.93
0.0074
C90
0.529
9.90
0.39
2.07
19.96
13.9
7.09
7.94
2.74
0.0044
CN80
0.590
14.76
0.53
4.70
8.94
2.17
3.84
72.21
1.24
3.1
Pt
0.570
7.04
0.36
1.12
12.43
15.77
15.03
2.07
18.27
0.0019
For optimization of CoS and CoS–NiS CEs we prepared without using acetic acid (reagent) and urea, unfortunately no visible coating on the FTO substrate. The presence of acetic acid and urea in the preparation of CoS and CoS–NiS CEs, we observed semitransparency with long term stability in polysulfide electrolyte. The composite CoS–NiS CE shows better performance than the CoS and Pt CE. For the composite CoS–NiS CE (CN80), the values of Jsc, Voc, and FF were 14.76 mA cm−2, 0.590 V, and 0.53, and it had the best η of 4.70%. The efficiency of the CoS C70, C80, and C90 CEs were 2.57, 3.29, and 2.07%, respectively. We observed nearly similar Voc and minor changes in Jsc. The composite CoS–NiS CE (CN80) shows the remarkable improvement of the power conversion efficiency from 2.07% to 4.70% in comparison with CoS (C70, C80, and C90 electrodes). It is reported that the manner of the hydrothermal deposition of NiS on the surface of CoS substrate has a strong influence on the morphology and electrocatalytic activity of CoS–NiS composite CE. Generally, Jsc mainly depends on the light harvesting efficiency, charge collection efficiency, and electron and hole injection efficiency.
Notably, the introduction of the NiS layer on the surface of the CoS CE (C80) not only improve the short-circuit current density (Jsc) value but also improves the fill factor (FF) value. The increase in Jsc for the CN80 CE possibly results from the high cathodic current density and enhanced diffusivity of the reduction of polysulfide electrolyte (which is good accordance with CV and Tafel polarization measurements). The improvement in FF can be attributed to the lower Rct at the CE/electrolyte interface in the EIS tests. The improved morphology of composite CoS–NiS CE is mainly due to the high electrical conductivity of the NiS porous nanoparticles covered on the surface of CoS substrate (C80) and it demonstrates an indispensable role in improving the photovoltaic performance of CoS–NiS CE. This results increases the high active specific surface area, charge transfer at the CE/electrolyte interface, and it reduce the internal resistance, recombination rates, and concentration of gradients in the electrolyte, resulting improved FF, Jsc. The CoS (C80) substrate shows the moderate electro-catalytic activity, and CoS (C70 and C90) exhibits low electro-catalytic activity. The J–V results suggest that the CoS–NiS-based CN80 CE exhibits excellent electrocatalytic activity for the reduction of polysulfide electrolyte and serves as an impressive CE for QDSSCs. This demonstrates that the deposition temperature of 80°/2 h could significantly improve the efficiency of QDSSCs using composite CoS–NiS CE and it is best substitute for Pt CEs.
A comparison with previously reported power conversion efficiency values with different CE materials (CoS/graphite, CF/CoS, CuS/RGO, CuS/CoS, CuS/PbS, NiS/PANI, graphene/PbS, and CuS/EC) is depicted in Fig. 14, which clearly shows our present work CoS–NiS based CN80 CE has superior performance and high electrocatalytic activity for the reduction of polysulfide electrolyte when compared to different QDSSCs based CE materials.
To further study the dependence of the short-circuit current density and fill factor on the internal resistance, interfacial charge transfer, electron transport property, and recombination properties, EIS was used to characterize the QDSSCs. The corresponding Nyquist plots for the frequency range of 100–500 kHz are shown in Fig. 15. The impedance spectra were found based on an equivalent circuit consisting of two parallel RC circuits, a series resistance (Rs), and the Warburg impedance (Zw). The Nyquist plots were fitted using Z-view software. Rs is the combined resistance of the electrolyte and electrode, while the sheet resistance of Rct1, Rct2 and Rdiff was added to the real axis of the impedance plot. The left circle at high frequency signifies the electrochemical reaction at the CE/electrolyte interface. The middle semi-circle signifies the charge recombination in the conduction band of the TiO2/electrolyte interface (Rct), which is parallel to the chemical capacitance (Cμ). The right semicircle in the low frequency region presents the diffusion resistance (Zw). Therefore, the catalytic capability of various CEs is reflected by Rct1 (the left circle in the high frequency region). In accordance with the EIS model, the electron lifetime (τn) is also determined from the peak angular frequency in the Bode plot, as shown in the Fig. 15(b). The τn can be obtained with the following eqn:

τn = 1/(2πfmax)

(5)
Electrochemical parameters and the electron lifetime values are summarized in Table 2. Obviously, the first semi-circle decreases in size, and the RCE values of the CoS (C70, C80, C90), CoS–NiS (CN80), and Pt CEs are 11.01, 13.37, 13.9, 2.17, and 15.77 (Ω) respectively. The CoS–NiS-based CN80 CE has the lowest RCE value compared to the CoS (C70, C80, C90), and Pt CEs. The decreased first semi-circle indicates the acceleration of the electron transfer at the CN80/electrolyte interface. This is consistent with the enhanced fill factor due to decreased series resistance. The decreased series resistance may also be responsible for improved short-current density. The Rct, Zw, and Cμ values of CoS–NiS (CN80) CE are 3.84 Ω, 1.24 Ω, and 72.21 μF, respectively. The values for the Pt CE are 15.03 Ω, 18.27 Ω, and 2.07 μF. The composite CoS–NiS CE exhibited the smallest charge transfer resistance (Rct) and highest chemical capacitance in comparison with CoS and Pt CEs, indicating low recombination results in high capacitance that is essentially associated with a large number of photo-excited charge carriers in the conduction band of the photo anode.
The small value of Zw (1.24 Ω) for the CoS–NiS CE represents additional electrolyte diffusion with faster mass transport of electrons. The RCE and Rct values of the CoS–NiS CE is the best CE for the reduction of polysulfide-based redox couple in QDSSCs. Moreover, τn is inversely proportional to fmax, which supports a faster diffusion rate and lifetime that prevent electron recombination. This makes it better and results in an efficiency of 4.70%. In comparison, the τn values for the CoS (C70, C80, C90), CoS–NiS (CN80), and Pt CEs are 0.0062, 0.0074, 0.0044, 3.1, and 0.0019 ms. In comparison with CoS and Pt CEs, the electron lifetime in the CoS–NiS CE improves greatly due to lower recombination rate of injected electrons for reduction of polysulfide electrolyte. The QDSSC with the Pt CE exhibits very low electron lifetime due to the higher Zw value and higher recombination of the injected electrons with the polysulfide/electrolyte, which results in an extreme loss of FF and reduced electron lifetime and affects the performance of the cell. The improved photovoltaic performance of QDSSCs using the CoS–NiS composite CE is also due to an increase in the atomic ratio of Ni, Co ions in CoS–NiS, which plays an important role in the improved surface morphology with improved electro-catalytic activity of the CEs. From these results, we conclude that the decreased series resistance with improved electron lifetime and current density of the CoS–NiS CE has contributed to the higher photovoltaic performance.
The electron recombination kinetics of the various CEs was further investigated by open-circuit voltage decay (OCVD) measurements. Fig. 16 shows the OCVD characteristics of the QDSSCs with CoS–NiS, CoS, and Pt CEs. At high-voltage resolution, Voc provides a continuous reading of the lifetime of electrons. The measurements were carried out in open circuit conditions during relaxation from an illuminated quasi-equilibrium state to the dark equilibrium. According to the formula, the Voc decay rate is directly related to electron lifetime.
(6)
where
kBT is the thermal energy and e is the positive elementary charge.

Generally, the Voc of the solar cell can be attributed to the energy-level difference between the quasi-Fermi level of TiO2 at the anode and the redox potential of electrolytes at the cathode. When the visible light illumination was switched off, the excess electrons were removed from the external circuit due to the electron recombination with the electron acceptors in the polysulfide electrolyte. Therefore, the Voc decay rate directly relates to the electron lifetime. The QDSSCs based CoS–NiS CE show the slowest voltage decay rate in comparison with CoS, and Pt CEs. The increased lifetime of the CoS–NiS CE is based on the denser nanoparticles surface morphology through agglomeration, which produce the slowest recombination kinetics and improve the enhancement of Voc and Jsc. Also, more electrons persist in the reverse reaction. This effect also improves the performance of QDSSCs. The dark-current voltage characteristics of CoS–NiS, CoS and Pt CEs are shown in (ESI, Fig. S1).
The photovoltaic performance of the QDSSCs with the CoS, CoS–NiS, and Pt CEs were compared based on the charge-transfer resistance at the CE/electrolyte interface, as shown in Fig. 17. Fig. 17(d) shows that the CoS–NiS (CN80) CE offers a lower charge-transfer resistance (Rct) at the CE/electrolyte interface, which is inferior to that of CoS CEs (C70, C80, and C90) and is several orders of magnitude lower than that of the Pt CE. The lower Rct of the CoS–NiS (CN80) CE suggests much enhancement of the charge transfer, which would improve the electron flow from the external circuit to the CoS–NiS/electrolyte interface. The lower Rct value of CoS–NiS (CN80) CE shows better photovoltaic performance than the CoS (C70, C80, C90), and Pt CEs. Higher photovoltaic performance and low internal resistance were observed for the CoS–NiS (CN80) CE, which is in good agreement with the solar cell performance results.

We have successfully deposited NiS nanoparticles grown on functionalized CoS nanospheres through facile chemical bath deposition followed by a hydrothermal process. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time reporting the fabrication of vertically aligned composite CoS–NiS CE with improved nanoparticle morphology on FTO substrate and on their application in QDSSCs. The improved performance of composite CoS–NiS CE exhibits impressive power conversion efficiency (η) of 4.70%, which is higher than those of CoS (2.57%, 3.29%, 2.07%) and Pt (1.12%) CEs. A proper amount of NiS was introduced into CoS nanospheres to strengthen the bonding between CE film and FTO substrate and the electrocatalytic activity as well. In EIS analysis, the composite CoS–NiS CE shows lowest charge transfer resistance (9.07 Ω) compared to the CoS (13.33 Ω, 11.47 Ω, 14.57 Ω) and Pt (15.6 Ω) CEs at the polysulfide/electrolyte interface. The improved photovoltaic performance is mainly attributed to the surface energy of the CoS–NiS CE, faster electron transport and lower electron recombination rate. Apart from its η value, our fabricated QDSSC is expected to exhibit more attractive prospect in the widespread application in the future because of the facile synthetic approaches of the hydrothermal deposition and low-temperature feature of the chemical bath process. We anticipate that this method can be applied to other substrates for potentially high-efficiency QDSSCs, supercapacitor, and fuel cells.


This research was supported by Basic Research Laboratory through the National Research Foundations of Korea funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning (NRF-2015R1A4A1041584). We also thankful to KBSI for HR-SEM, AFM and XRD measurements.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ra00357e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016