 DOI: 10.1039/D1TA04030H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 16500-16509


Hong
Lian
,

Mingao
Pan
,

Jinba
Han
,

Xiaozhe
Cheng
,

Jiaen
Liang
,

Wenqiang
Hua
,

Yongquan
Qu
,

Yucheng
Wu
,

Qingchen
Dong
*,

Bin
Wei
*,

He
Yan
* and 

Wai-Yeung
Wong
*

MOE Key Laboratory of Interface Science and Engineering in Advanced Materials, Taiyuan University of Technology, 79 Yingze West Street, Taiyuan, 030024, China. E-mail: dongqingchen@tyut.edu.cn

MOE Key Laboratory of Advanced Display and System Applications, Shanghai University, Shanghai, 200072, China. E-mail: bwei@shu.edu.cn

Department of Chemistry, Hong Kong Branch of Chinese National Engineering Research Center for Tissue Restoration & Reconstruction, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China. E-mail: hyan@ust.hk

Shanghai Advanced Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 201210, China

Department of Applied Biology and Chemical Technology and Research Institute for Smart Energy (RISE), The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Hong Kong, China

Received
12th May 2021
, Accepted 27th June 2021
First published on 28th June 2021
In this paper, we demonstrate a solution-processed MoSe2 quantum dots/PEDOT:PSS bilayer hole extraction layer (HEL) for non-fullerene organic solar cells (OSCs). It is found that the introduction of MoSe2 QDs can alter the work function and phase separation of PEDOT:PSS, thus affecting the morphology of the active layer and improving the performance of OSCs. The MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS bilayer HEL can improve the fill factor (FF), short-circuit current density (Jsc) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of OSCs based on different active layers. The best PCE of up to 17.08% was achieved based on a recently reported active layer binary system named SZ2:N3, which is among the highest reported values to date for OSCs using 2D materials as an interface modifier. Our study indicates that this simple and solution-processed MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS bilayer thin film could be a potential alternative HEL to the commonly used PEDOT:PSS conducting polymers.

Bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells (OSCs) have received notable scientific and industrial interest because of their merits of being light weight, low-cost, easy-flexibility, and the promise for mass production by a roll-to-roll printing process. To date, due to the continued progress in the exploration of low band-gap polymer donors and non-fullerene acceptors, the maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the single-junction and tandem non-fullerene OSCs has reached over 17%, respectively, allowing them to be one step closer to commercial applications. In addition to the advances in synthesizing novel materials, interface engineering is currently recognized as one of the most efficient strategies to boost device efficiency and stability. In particular, the hole extraction layer (HEL) between the anode and active layer plays a key role in anode modification, energy level alignment, charge collection, morphology control, etc. Therefore, various kinds of HELs are being used to further improve the performance of OSCs. The reported HELs were mainly transition-metal oxides, metal sulfides, conducting polymers, conjugated polyelectrolytes (PCPDTK0.50H0.50-TT, PCPDTffPhSO3K), graphene oxides, etc. Among them, the conducting conjugated polymer poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) has been widely used as a HEL in organic optoelectronic devices because of its appropriate work function, excellent conductivity, high optical transparency and compatibility with the solution processes. However, as is well known, the high acidity and hygroscopicity of PEDOT:PSS can corrode the indium tin oxide (ITO) electrode, which will eventually degrade the performance and long-term stability of OSCs. Furthermore, the poor electron blocking ability and anisotropy in the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films usually lead to serious leakage current and inhomogeneous charge extraction in some locations. Based on the above issues, the main solutions focus on substituting PEDOT:PSS with transition-metal oxides, such as molybdenum oxide (MoO3), vanadium oxide (Va2O5), nickel oxide (NiO), tungsten oxide (WO3), etc. Unfortunately, these materials are usually fabricated by high vacuum techniques, which are not only costly and have complicated processing steps but also not compatible with the roll-to-roll manufacturing technology. Another effective approach is to insert an interfacial modifier between the HEL/ITO interface for improving the interfacial contact quality and reducing electrical losses.

Much effort has been devoted to the HEL/ITO interface engineering of single-junction OSCs. Solution-processed transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) (MoS2, WS2, TaS2, NbSe2, etc.) have recently attracted considerable attention due to their unique optical and electronic properties. In particular, single- and few-layered TMDs or TMD quantum dots (QDs) have been used to modify the HEL, or within the active layer of OSCs to enhance device performance and stability. In 2013, Gu et al. proposed the integration of chemically exfoliated solution-processed MoS2 nanosheets and NbSe2 nanoplates as an efficient anode buffer layer for performance optimization of OSCs. The as-reported PCE with the PTB7:PC71BM system as the active layer is superior to that obtained by using traditionally vacuum deposited e-MoO3. In 2014, Le et al. reported the use of spin-coated ultraviolet ozone (UVO)-treated, sonication exfoliated MoS2 nanosheets as an interlayer between the anode and PEDOT:PSS in a P3HT:PC61BM-based OSC. This device exhibited enhanced stability without degradation of its photovoltaic performance compared to the device employing only PEDOT:PSS. It is noteworthy that the mechanism of performance improvement based on MoS2 nanosheets as interfacial modifiers for the HEL has never been systematically explored yet.
In this work, we report for the first time, a solution-processed composite HEL within MoSe2 QDs and PEDOT:PSS to improve the device performance and stability of OSCs. Meanwhile, the working principle of two-dimensional (2D) MoSe2 QDs as a HEL interface modifier in OSCs was studied thoroughly for the first time. Compared to the device with only PEDOT:PSS, the MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS bilayer HEL efficiently reduced the charge recombination and enhanced the charge extraction and transport due to its well-matched work function (WF) and superior conductivity. We also investigated the stability of OSCs without and with MoSe2 QDs and found that the stability of OSCs with MoSe2 QDs is dramatically improved due to the separation of ITO and PEDOT:PSS caused by the insertion of MoSe2 QDs. The champion device based on MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS showed a PCE of 17.08%, which is so far the highest value among OSCs with 2D materials as the interface modifier. The excellent PCE of the MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS based device is attributed to its higher short-circuit current density (Jsc), which is mainly derived from the superior conductivity and suitable work function of MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS.

The MoSe2 QDs were synthesized through a lithium intercalation and ultrasonication method as depicted in Fig. 1a. It is worth noting that MoSe2 QDs prepared by most methods suffer from intrinsic structural defects, which are detrimental to device performance. The crystal structure of the layered MoSe2 QDs is presented in Fig. 1a. It is a typical sandwich structure and the interlayer effect is relatively weak and easy to peel off, leading to specific anisotropic mechanical and electrical properties. In addition, some in situ derived structural defects in MoSe2 QDs are usually difficult to avoid. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution TEM (HR-TEM) images were used to measure the crystal structures of MoSe2 QDs. Fig. 1b shows a conventional bright field TEM image showing many crystalline QDs. The dark contrasts correspond to Bragg contrasts and the inset selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern reveals the presence of MoSe2 (hexagonal, a = b = 0.329 nm and c = 1.293 nm). To further analyze the atomic structure of individual MoSe2 QDs, we recorded the HR-TEM image of a single MoSe2 QD (as presented in Fig. 1c), revealing that these as-prepared MoSe2 QDs possess high crystallinity. The fast Fourier transform (FFT) of the QD (inset of Fig. 1c) is in perfect agreement with a [110] projection of the MoSe2 structure. To investigate the composition of the resultant MoSe2 QDs, the corresponding energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) elemental mapping images were recorded, as shown in Fig. S1. The results indicate that Mo (green) and Se (yellow) elements were uniformly distributed over the entire QDs.

It was pointed out in previous literature studies that high-temperature annealing could tune the WF of the HEL, improving the performance of OSCs. However, the underlying mechanisms have not yet been studied. Herein, the MoSe2 QD film was annealed at high-temperature and its structural composition was confirmed by the X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS), as depicted in Fig. S2a–c. Notably, the characteristic peaks around 235.7 and 232.2 eV, as well as the peaks at 59.5 and 58.7 eV, corresponding to Mo6+ 3d5/2 and Mo6+ 3d3/2, and Se4+ 3d5/2 and Se4+ 3d3/2, respectively, were also observed. This indicates that Mo and Se elements in MoSe2 QDs are partially oxidized to MoO3 and SeO2 species. Generally, SeO2 seldom exists in the HEL, given that it has a low sublimation temperature. The Mo6+ 3d spectrum exhibits another two peaks, located respectively at 235.2 and 231.9 eV, which can be assigned to the O–Mo–Se band due to the participating lattice oxygen atoms. It is deduced that the O incorporation could not only partially fill the Se vacancies and passivate the structural defects, but also lead to a change of interfacial energy level alignment (change n-type MoSe2 to p-type), which is beneficial to device efficiency and stability (see details in the ESI and Fig. S2d). Then, we studied the morphology and optical properties of the thin films. The as-prepared MoSe2 QD solution and PEDOT:PSS were spin-coated onto ITO substrates, respectively. Fig. S3(a–c) shows the atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of the ITO substrate, PEDOT:PSS and MoSe2 QD thin films coated on ITO, respectively. It can be observed distinctly that the root-mean-square (Rq) surface roughness of ITO, ITO/PEDOT:PSS and ITO/MoSe2 QDs is 3.70, 2.62 and 1.27 nm, respectively, indicating that MoSe2 QDs can decrease the RMS of ITO and then result in a smaller leakage current. The normalized UV-vis absorption spectrum of the post heat-treated MoSe2 QD film is shown in Fig. S3d. It can be clearly seen that the MoSe2 QD film may absorb some amount of UV light, while not impacting the absorption of the active layer in solar cells. This is highly desirable for the device performance and stability optimization of OSCs. The overall transmittance spectra of ITO, ITO/PEDOT:PSS and ITO/MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS are presented in Fig. S3e. It can be found that the transmittance of the ITO/PEDOT:PSS thin film is higher than that of pure ITO in the range of 300–800 nm. With the introduction of MoSe2 QDs into PEDOT:PSS, the transmittance is nearly unchanged. This may be attributed to the fact that the energy distributions of both PEDOT:PSS and MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS have been changed due to the different interfaces between ITO and the HEL, which facilitates the enhancement of light interference and thus the increase of transmittance. This is in agreement with the analysis results shown in Fig. S3d, and demonstrates that the MoSe2 QD layer can serve as an effective interlayer in traditional ITO/PEDOT-based OSCs. In addition, the effect of MoSe2 QDs on the morphology of the active layer was also measured by AFM, as shown in Fig. S3f and g. Compared to Rq of PEDOT:PSS/BHJ (6.65 nm), the surface roughness of MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS/BHJ increases to 6.94 nm after the insertion of MoSe2 QDs. Such a change is likely caused by a positive interaction between MoSe2 QDs and PEDOT:PSS, which is instrumental in forming solid contact with the BHJ, thus preventing the BHJ from spreading to the HEL. The slightly increased Rq is beneficial for modulating the phase separation of the BHJ, increasing device efficiency and stability. The discrepancy of Rq is ascribed to the different surface energies of the HEL or ITO, which can be quantitatively calculated by the water contact angle. The contact angles of different materials measured with water and ethylene glycol (EG) as testing liquids (equal volume of liquids for each test) are displayed in Fig. 2. The calculation details are described in the ESI and Table S1–S3. The MoSe2 and MoSe2/PEDOT:PSS films exhibit water and EG contact angles lower than the ITO and pristine PEDOT:PSS. It was pointed out in the literature that the surface energy of the HEL has a marked impact on the orientation of the BHJ, that is, the face-on orientation dominates at high surface energy, while the edge-on orientation is easier to form at low surface energy. The surface energies of ITO, MoSe2, PEDOT and MoSe2/PEDOT:PSS films are 68.8, 70.0, 85.5 and 89.0 mN m−1, respectively. The corresponding interfacial energies of MoSe2 and PEDOT:PSS and MoSe2/PEDOT:PSS and PM6:Y6 are calculated to be 7.5 and 128.4 mN m−1, respectively, which are much higher than those of ITO and PEDOT (4.4 mN m−1) and PEDOT:PSS and PM6:Y6 (121.0 mN m−1), indicating that the insertion of MoSe2 QDs can not only alter the morphology of the PEDOT:PSS and BHJ but also facilitate the phase separation in the PEDOT:PSS and BHJ, which benefits the face-on orientation of the BHJ and enhances the device performance.
The OSCs with a standard structure were fabricated based on a typical binary blend of PM6:Y6 and the state-of-the-art BHJ system of SZ2:N3 to investigate the influence of MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS as a composite HEL on device performance. A schematic device structure and the chemical structures of the components in the active layer are presented in Fig. 3a and b. Since the WF of the HEL plays an important role in controlling the carrier injection properties, the WFs of PEDOT:PSS and MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS thin films coated on the ITO substrates were determined by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). The corresponding UPS spectra are shown in Fig. 3c. The secondary electron cut-off (Ecut-off) values of the PEDOT:PSS and MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS films are measured to be 16.2 and 16.0 eV, respectively. Therefore, the WF of the MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS film was determined to be 5.2 eV (WF = 21.22 eV − Ecut-off − Eonset), which is slightly higher than that of PEDOT:PSS (5.0 eV). The energy diagram of the OSCs with different HELs is illustrated in Fig. 3d. All of the energy levels of ITO, PM6, Y6, SZ2, N3, PFN-Br and Al refer to the values as reported in the literature. It can be clearly observed that the insertion of MoSe2 QDs can increase the HOMO energy level of the HEL, which is favorable for efficient hole extraction and reducing charge recombination near the anode. Moreover, the MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS HEL can also block the electron transport better compared to the one with only PEDOT:PSS, resulting in a smaller leakage current. The increase of WF is ascribed to the formation of Mo6+ species due to the oxidation of selenium vacancies and edge termination, indicating that the MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS HEL has a p-type conductive mechanism.
The thickness of the MoSe2 QDs film is optimized by changing the spin-coating speed to obtain an optimal value (see Fig. S4a and Table S4). Fig. 4 displays the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the fabricated devices and their detailed photovoltaic performances including Jsc, open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and PCE are summarized in Table 1. Clearly, after inserting MoSe2 QDs as the surface modifier, the Jsc and FF of OSCs with the MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS composite HEL realize an obvious increase compared to those of the control cell. In the PM6:Y6 system, the champion device based on the composite HEL exhibited a maximum PCE value of 16.08% with a Jsc of 25.84 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.83 V, FF of 74.69% and series resistance (Rs) of 3.63 Ω cm2 while the control cell with the PEDOT:PSS HEL exhibited a maximum PCE value of 15.48% with a Jsc of 24.68 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.84 V, FF of 74.29% and Rs of 7.94 Ω cm2. This indicates that this simple and solution-processed MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS bilayer thin film could contribute to boosting the device efficiency. The impressive device performance makes the MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS bilayer thin film a promising HEL candidate for near future high-efficiency optoelectronic devices. The maximum EQE value of the OSC with MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS as the HEL is approximately 80% and the integrated photocurrent (Jcal) is 24.05 mA cm−2, which is consistent with the value extracted from the J–V measurements with a deviation of only 5%. As for the SZ2:N3 system, these results are in agreement with those of PM6:Y6. Fig. 4c and d show the J–V curves and EQE spectra of the control cell and MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS-based cell. Evidently, compared with the control cell, the Jsc and FF values of the MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS-based cell increase from 25.22 to 25.63 mA cm−2 and 77.11 to 77.52%, respectively.
BHJ
Description

J
sc [mA cm−2]

V
oc [V]
FF [%]
PCE [%]

R
s [Ω cm2]

J
cal [mA cm−2]

a Average PCE with standard deviations was obtained from 10 devices.

PM6:Y6
PEDOT:PSS
24.68 (24.56 ± 0.2)
0.84 (0.84 ± 0.002)
74.29 (74.26 ± 1.08)
15.48 (15.18 ± 0.23)
7.94
24.05
MoSe2/PEDOT:PSS
25.84 (25.68 ± 0.3)
0.83 (0.84 ± 0.003)
74.69 (74.31 ± 1.30)
16.08 (15.75 ± 0.24)
3.63
25.32
SZ2:N3
PEDOT:PSS
25.22 (25.21 ± 0.3)
0.85 (0.84 ± 0.003)
77.11 (77.09 ± 0.09)
16.53 (16.32 ± 0.12)
8.36
25.00
MoSe2/PEDOT:PSS
25.63 (25.72 ± 0.3)
0.86 (0.85 ± 0.003)
77.52 (76.34 ± 1.42)
17.08 (16.86 ± 0.20)
4.23
25.23
According to the EQE spectra, the corresponding Jcal value of the EQE spectra increases from 25.02 to 25.21 mA cm−2, which agrees well with the Jsc in J–V characteristics, showing a good reliability of our results. In particular, the OSC based on SZ2:N3 with MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS as the HEL yielded a maximum PCE of 17.08%, while the control cell only showed a PCE of 16.53%. In order to ensure the reproducibility and reliability of the PCE, the histogram of PCE based on SZ2:N3 using different HELs is plotted in Fig. S5. It is obvious that PCE values of SZ2:N3 based solar cells follow a normal distribution. The average PCE of PEDOT:PSS and MoSe2/PEDOT:PSS based solar cells is 16.28 ± 0.14% and 16.89 ± 0.12%, respectively, with a reasonably narrow standard deviation, which further indicates the good reproducibility and reliability of the PCE of the corresponding OSCs. Recent reports of 2D materials as the interface modifier in OSCs are given in Table S5. The PCEs of our OSCs and those of previously reported OSCs with 2D materials have been compared in Fig. 4e. The PCE value in our work is so far the highest value among those of OSCs with 2D materials as the interface modifier.
In order to investigate the effect of MoSe2 QDs on the charge generation and dissociation processes, the photocurrent density (Jph) and exciton dissociation probabilities P(E,T) versus effective voltage (Veff) are measured and plotted, as shown in Fig. 4c and S6a. The charge extraction/collection values of these devices are extracted from the Jph–Veff curves, suggesting that the MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS-based cell shows more efficient charge extraction/collection capability compared with the control device. Apart from the factors of charge generation and dissociation, the charge recombination loss of OSCs is also a key parameter for the analysis of the enhancement mechanism of PCE. Fig. S6b and c show the variation of Jsc and Vocversus the light intensity (I) for all cells with I ranging from 5 to 100 mW cm−2. Herein, the α value of the cell based on the MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS HEL are significantly higher than that of the control cell (0.967), demonstrating that the insertion of MoSe2 QDs reduces the bimolecular recombination of the cell (see details in the ESI). Furthermore, the transport characteristics of cells were measured to gain an insight into the mechanism responsible for the PCE enhancement. In fact, it is worth mentioning that the MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS-based cell exhibits a higher α value (0.989), which was very close to 1, indicating a negligible bimolecular recombination process. In case of Vocversus I, Voc is proportional to lnI. From Fig. S6c, it is observed that the minimum slope of the MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS-based cell is 1.04kT/q, meanwhile, the slope of the control cell is 1.14kT/q. The results imply that the insertion of MoSe2 QDs can effectively suppress monomolecular recombination originating from traps and defects, which helps in improving the performance of OSCs.
The dark J–V characteristics of the cells are plotted in Fig. S7a, in which the device with the MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS HEL enables a lower leakage current and a higher rectification ratio, and thereby reduced Rs in the cells, as shown in Table 1. Additionally, we fabricated two hole only devices with the device structures of ITO/MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS/PM6:Y6/MoO3/Al and ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PM6:Y6/MoO3/Al, respectively, and then employed the space charge limited current (SCLC) method for the evaluation of hole only transport properties. The hole mobility is evaluated using the Mott–Gurney equation:
(1)
where
εr is the relative dielectric constant (assumed to be 3), ε0 is the permittivity of free space (8.85 × 10−12 F m−1), μh is the hole mobility, Veff is the effective voltage and d is the film thickness of the active layer (150 nm). As shown in Fig. S7b, the hole mobility (μh) of the MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS-based cell and the control cell is calculated to be 2.26 × 10−4 and 6.30 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. Evidently, OSCs with MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS as the HEL exhibit higher conductivity compared with the control cell owing to its unique chemical structure and physical properties, which agrees well with the results of conductivities as measured by the van der Pauw four-probe conductivity technique (Table S6). Since the lower frequency arc is associated with the charge recombination behavior, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements are often used to analyze the interface properties in OSCs. Nyquist plots of the impedance spectroscopy (IS) of the control cell and ITO/MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS-based cells at zero bias under dark conditions are shown in Fig. S8a. It can be obviously seen that, compared to the control cell, the MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS-based cell show smaller semicircles, indicating the lower transport resistance and interfacial barrier between the ITO and MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS. The reduced transport resistance is favorable for charge transport and extraction, which benefits the increase of Jsc and FF values. Fig. S8b shows the PL emission spectra of ITO/PM6, ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PM6 and ITO/MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS/PM6 thin films, respectively. The MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS/PM6 film exhibits a much lower PL quenching efficiency (9%) than the PEDOT:PSS/PM6 film (20%), indicating that the exciton dissociation in the MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS/PM6 film is more efficient than that of PEDOT:PSS/PM6, which results in higher EQE and Jsc for the corresponding OSCs. The corresponding PL intensity of the active film with MoSe2 QDs was significantly enhanced as compared to that without MoSe2 QDs, primarily due to the diminished exciton quenching effect after insertion of MoSe2 QDs. The PL measurements again prove that the embedded MoSe2 QDs can facilitate the charge transport and thus contribute to boosting the efficiency of OSCs. Fig. S8c displays the PL intensity decay profiles obtained for PEDOT:PSS/PM6:Y6 and MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS/PM6:Y6 thin films. It is obvious that the lifetime of excitons in the MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS device (0.840 ns) is shorter than that in the PEDOT:PSS device (0.962 ns), which is mainly attributed to the efficient exciton dissociation and charge collection of MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS. So, we can infer that the introduction of MoSe2 QDs can increase the charge extraction rate and thus reduce charge recombination, which is beneficial to the enhancement in Jsc of the devices.

In order to further deeply explore the intrinsic working mechanism of MoSe2 QDs in OSCs, we measured the XPS spectra for the pristine PEDOT:PSS and MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS thin films to examine the change of the chemical and electronic properties of PEDOT:PSS before and after the insertion of MoSe2 QDs. Fig. 5 shows that there are two characteristic S 2p peaks with a binding energy of 167.5 eV and 163.5 eV, respectively, in the S 2p XPS spectrum of the pristine PEDOT:PSS film, which are assigned to the S species of PSS and PEDOT, respectively. In the pristine PEDOT:PSS film, PEDOT was attached by insulating PSS via coulombic interactions which promotes the dissolution of PEDOT in solution, whereas hinders the charge transport in solid films of the device. However, when MoSe2 QDs and PEDOT:PSS form a bilayer, the ratio of PSS to PEDOT gradually decreased from 6.98 for the pristine PEDOT:PSS to 6.88 for MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS. This reveals the interfacial interaction between MoSe2 QDs and PEDOT:PSS, which results in a phase separation between PEDOT and PSS and then causes aggregation of conducting PEDOT. Hence, the insertion of MoSe2 QDs helps remove partially insulated PSS with strong acidity and hygroscopicity, which enhances the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS and device stability. To gain more insights, we investigated the zeta potential of MoSe2 QDs (Fig. 5c), which is measured to be −38.8 mV. Consequently, 2D MoSe2 QDs with the negatively charged surface can promote the aggregation of PEDOT to form a more regular chain-type morphology, and thus weaken the shielding effect of PSS on PEDOT and improve the electron conductivity of PEDOT:PSS. There is no deny that the conformational change of PEDOT is concerned with the conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS film. Therefore, the Raman spectra were recorded to examine whether the improvement of conductivity is due to the conformational change of PEDOT chains from a coil (benzoid structure) to linear (quinoid structure) or expanded-coil structure or not. It is noted that no obvious change was observed between 1400 and 1500 cm−1, denoting the CαCβ double bond in the PEDOT thiophene ring (Fig. 5d), implying that the enhanced conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS film was not because of the conformational change of PEDOT chains. Taking the above phenomena into account, we proposed a reasonable mechanism about the conductivity enhancement of the PEDOT:PSS film induced by MoSe2 QDs. From the chemical structures, one can conclude that the PSS chain is of much higher molecular weight than the PEDOT chain, thereby showing that more positively charged PEDOT molecules are attached to the PSS chains. As a result of the positive charge on PEDOT, the repulsion between the PSS anions was weakened, allowing PEDOT to form a coiled or core–shell structure surrounded by insulated PSS. Furthermore, the negatively charged MoSe2 QDs can attract PEDOT and reject PSS, accelerate the aggregation of PEDOT in the core–shell structure, promote more conductive PEDOT chains to escape from the PSS encirclement and boost the conductivity of the whole PEDOT:PSS layer.
Finally, grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) was carried out to study the molecular packing and crystal orientation of PM6:Y6. Fig. S9(a–c) shows the 2D GIWAXS images of PM6:Y6 based on different HELs and the corresponding profiles along both the in-plane (IP, dotted line) (qxy) and the out-of-plane (OOP, solid line) (qz) directions. The profiles of the PM6:Y6 film with different HELs exhibit the strong (100) diffraction peak in the IP direction and (010) diffraction peak in the OOP direction, indicating the co-existence of the face-on and edge-on molecular orientation in the BHJ. It could be clearly observed from Fig. S9c that the PEDOT:PSS based PM6:Y6 film exhibits a strong (010) peak in the OOP direction at 1.74 Å−1. By introducing the MoSe2 QD interlayer, a (010) peak resulting from the π–π stacking can be observed in the OOP direction at 1.76 Å−1. According to the formulas of d = 2π/q and L = 2πK/Δq, where q is the peak position, K is the Scherrer constant (∼0.9), and Δq is the half maximum of each peak, the π–π stacking distance (d-spacing) and the coherence length L are determined to be 0.360 nm and 0.217 nm and 0.352 and 0.403 nm, respectively, for PEDOT:PSS/PM6:Y6 and MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS/PM6:Y6. So, it is clear that the π–π stacking distance of the PM6:Y6 film based on the bilayer HEL is smaller than that of the PM6:Y6 film based on the PEDOT:PSS HEL, which is favourable for intermolecular electron hopping. In addition, the coherence length of the PM6:Y6 film based on the bilayer HEL is larger than that based on PEDOT:PSS. Note that the increased L corresponds to higher crystallinity and better phase separation of the BHJ, leading to increased charge transport and decreased bimolecular recombination.
In order to further investigate the effect of MoSe2 QDs on the mesoscopic structure, the grazing incidence small-angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS) of PEDOT:PSS and PM6:Y6 thin films with and without MoSe2 QDs was performed. Fig. S10a and b show the 2D GISAXS images of the HEL and active layer with and without MoSe2 QDs, respectively. As shown in these scattering images, the Yoneda peak with a high intensity peak along the IP direction can be observed. The corresponding 1D IP profiles are shown in Fig. 6a and b and no obvious scattering peak is detected along the IP direction, indicating that the nanostructure of PEDOT:PSS was less ordered along the qxy direction. Fig. S10c and d show the 2D GISAXS images of the active layers with and without MoSe2 QDs. It is clear that the scattering peaks were seen along the OOP direction, implying that the PM6:Y6 thin film forms a layered structure. It is believed that the domain size is another key impact factor for the performance of OSCs. The radius of gyration (Rg) of the clusters of the PEDOT:PSS and PM6:Y6 thin films with and without MoSe2 QDs is quantitatively calculated by Guinier approximation according to the following equation:
(2)
where
I(qxy) and I(0) are the scattering intensity and the zero-angle scattering intensity, and qxy is obtained using  where θ is the scattering angle and λ is the wavelength of incidence light. So, Rg is the average of the absolute values of two slopes (lnI(qxy) vs. qxy2) in the low-q region (ca. 0.05–0.13 nm−1). As shown in Fig. 6c and d, the Rg of PEDOT:PSS, MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS, PEDOT:PSS/PM6:Y6 and MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS/PM6:Y6 thin films is calculated to be 35.18, 22.92, 33.82 and 29.36 nm, respectively, indicating that the insertion of MoSe2 QDs contributes to the reduction of domain sizes and phase separation of both PEDOT:PSS and PM6:Y6.

It is well established that stability is an important factor for the practical application of OSCs. To evaluate the stability of our OSCs, the performances of the control cell and the champion cell based on MoSe2 QDs-6000r/PEDOT:PSS after simple encapsulation in air are measured as shown in Fig. S11. It can be seen distinctly that the PCE based on the MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS composite HEL can maintain 85% PCE after 120 h, which is superior to that of the control cell (67%). The better long-term stability is ascribed to the insertion of MoSe2 QDs which can alleviate the large area contact of the ITO and active layer with PSS.
To demonstrate the universality of the strategy discussed in this work for performance optimization of OSCs, we also applied the MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS composite HEL into other nonfullerene and fullerene-based systems, namely, PBDB-T/ITIC, PTB7-Th/PC71BM, and P3HT/PC61BM. The device performances of these OSCs are plotted in Fig. S12 and S13. It can be found that the insertion of MoSe2 QDs leads to PCE improvement from 9.51% to 10.41%, 7.88% to 8.32%, and 2.93% to 3.24%, respectively, for the PBDB-T/ITIC, PTB7-Th/PC71BM, and P3HT/PC61BM-based cells. Detailed photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table S7. A similar performance enhancement in other systems demonstrates that introducing MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS as the bilayer HEL is an effective pathway for the optimization of OSCs.

To conclude, MoSe2 QDs were synthesized by a lithium intercalation method and utilized as a modifier in the HEL for the optimization of OSCs. We found that high temperature annealing of the thin film of MoSe2 QDs led to the generation of the O–Mo–Se bond due to the participating lattice oxygen which partially fills the Se vacancies and passivates the structural defects and the formation of MoO3 species. Meanwhile, we also learnt that the insertion of MoSe2 QDs can induce the phase separation of PEDOT and PSS, and thus weaken the shielding effect of PSS on PEDOT and improve the electron conductivity and WF of PEDOT:PSS. The device characterization results show that the BHJ solar cell based on the MoSe2 QDs/PEDOT:PSS composite HEL in PM6:Y6 and SZ2:N3 systems yielded a maximum PCE of 16.08 and 17.08%, respectively, which is significantly higher than that of the control cell based on PEDOT:PSS (15.48 and 16.53%). These remarkable efficiencies in our work are so far the highest value among those of single junction solar cells with 2D materials as the interface modifier. The enhancement of device performance is mainly attributed to the improved hole transport ability and WF of the HEL, increased exciton dissociation and charge extraction probability at the electrode/function layer interface, and reduced charge recombination due to the better phase separation of PEDOT and PSS and active layer as a result of the introduction of the MoSe2 QD interlayer. Moreover, the stability of OSCs with MoSe2 QDs is improved remarkably because the MoSe2 QD interlayer can prevent PEDOT:PSS from corroding the ITO electrode and remove the partial PSS from the interface of the HEL and active layer. All these factors work synergistically and result in a significant enhancement of device performance. This strategy is also adaptable to other OSC systems, which therefore opens a new pathway for the application of TMD materials as interfacial modifiers in the 3rd generation OSCs.


Hong Lian and Mingao Pan fabricated the solar cell devices and optimized their processing parameters for photovoltaic performance. Jinba Han produced and characterized the MoSe2 QDs. Xiaozhe Cheng performed subsequent stability tests with the help of Hong Lian. Jiaen Liang synthesized the SZ2 material. Bin Wei and Qingchen Dong supervised the materials synthesis and device fabrication. Wenqiang Hua conducted the GIWAXS measurements and analysis. Yongquan Qu performed the UPS and XPS measurements and analysis. Yucheng Wu participated in the discussion and provided suggestions. The manuscript was written by Hong Lian, Qingchen Dong and He Yan. The project was planned, directed and supervised by Qingchen Dong, He Yan and Wai-Yeung Wong. All authors discussed the results and commented on the manuscript.


The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.


We acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant no. 61774109). This work was also supported by the Youth “Sanjin” Scholar Program, Key R&D Project of Shanxi Province (International cooperation program, no. 201603D421032), and the Natural Science Foundation of Shanxi Province (Grant no. 201801D211007). W.-Y. W. acknowledges the RGC Senior Research Fellowship Scheme (SRFS2021-5S01), the Hong Kong Research Grants Council (C5037-18G), Hong Kong Polytechnic University (1-ZE1C), Research Institute for Smart Energy (CDA2) and the Endowed Professorship in Energy from Ms Clarea Au (847S). We acknowledge the beamline BL16B1 at Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility for providing beam time.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta04030h
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021