 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA01919C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8419-8429


Weijing
Shao
,

Zhiqiang
Liang
,

Tianfu
Guan
,

Jianmei
Chen
,

Zhifang
Wang
,

Haihua
Wu
,

Jianzhong
Zheng
,

Ibrahim
Abdulhalim
 and 

Lin
Jiang
*

Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials Laboratory (FUNSOM), Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices, Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, China. E-mail: ljiang@suda.edu.cn

Department of Electrooptic Engineering, The Ilse Katz Institute for Nanoscale Science and Technology, Ben Gurion University, Beer Sheva 84105, Israel

Singapore-HUJ Alliance for Research and Enterprise (SHARE), Nanomaterials for Energy and Energy-Water Nexus (NEW), Campus for Research Excellence and Technological Enterprise (CREATE), Singapore 138602

Received
28th February 2018
, Accepted 13th April 2018
First published on 16th April 2018
Integrating multiple-morphology plasmonic metal nanostructures into organic photovoltaics (OPVs) is highly desirable to enhance the efficiency of solar energy conversion because of their broadband plasmonic absorption. However, it remains challenging to develop facile fabrication methods that enable plasmonic metal nanoparticle (NP) arrays with multiple morphologies, a low degree of aggregation, and large-scale production. Herein, we report a one-step integration of well-dispersed and size-tunable multiple-morphology gold (Au) NP arrays on titanium dioxide (TiO2) thin films via a facile sonochemical route. The multiple-morphology Au NP arrays are successfully employed to enhance the photovoltaic performance of bulk heterojunction OPVs. The multiple-morphology Au NPs exhibited a broad absorption band, which resulted in a large overlap with the absorption band of the OPV active layer, thus enhancing light absorption as well as photovoltaic performance. The average power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of the devices with Au NP arrays were remarkably enhanced by up to 20.5%: from 3.42% to 4.12% for a P3HT:PC61BM active layer, and the best device showed a PCE of 4.25%. For the high-efficiency PTB7:PC71BM blend system, the average PCE was enhanced by up to 14.5%, from 7.46% to 8.54%, and the best device showed a PCE of 8.68%. The PCE enhancement mainly arose from the increased light absorption, which was caused by the strong surface plasmon resonance effects of the Au NP arrays. These results clearly demonstrated that such a multiple-morphology Au NPs array integrated on TiO2 thin films can serve as a promising plasmonic component to raise OPV performance. This approach could be easily extended to other types of solar cells and other mainstream light-conversion systems used in photocatalysis and solar water splitting, and organic light-emitting diodes.

One of the growing demands for light-harvesting devices used in applications such as photovoltaics, water-splitting, and photocatalysis is highly efficient solar energy conversion. Plasmonic metallic nanostructures show promise to enhance light harvesting as well as the performance of various optoelectronic devices without increasing device size. Localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) and surface plasmon polaritons are the two main plasmonic excitations that are used to concentrate light at the nanoscale in active plasmonic devices. In recent years, plasmonic noble metals (e.g., Au, Ag, and Cu) have been widely explored to enhance the light absorption and photovoltaic performance of bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic photovoltaics (OPV) because of their strong surface plasmon and scattering effects. OPVs with a BHJ active layer have attracted extensive attention because of their prominent advantages of low cost, light weight, compatibility with flexible substrates, solution-based roll-to-roll manufacturing, and short energy payback time. For the viable practical application of OPVs, further enhancement of their power conversion efficiency (PCE) is still urgently required, particularly for single-junction devices. Considering the low carrier mobility and short exciton diffusion length of conjugated polymers, the optimum thickness of the photoactive layer (∼100–200 nm) is determined by the trade-off between maximizing the optical absorption and minimizing the charge recombination loss to realize efficient charge extraction. In this regard, developing light manipulation approaches to enhance the light absorption of the active layer without needing to increase its thickness is important to further enhance the efficiency of OPVs.

To date, Au NPs with various shapes and sizes have been demonstrated to enhance the efficiency of OPVs upon blending them into the photoactive layer or interlayers (e.g., cathode buffer layer or anode buffer layer). This is because of the strong and tunable surface plasmon effects of Au NPs in the visible spectral region. Moreover, the electrical properties of OPVs can also be improved by the plasmonic electrical effects of the incorporated plasmonic metal nanostructures. However, the strategy of blending metal NPs into OPV architectures is limited by the strong tendency of free metal NPs to aggregate during the tedious processes of synthesis, centrifugation, cleaning, and blending of organic active-layer solutions. For example, the as-synthesized metal NPs need to be isolated from the growth solution by centrifugation and then re-dispersed in cleaning solvent to wash off residual precursor and reductants. In addition, to avoid undesirable exciton recombination, an additional surface coating procedure performed in chemical solution is required to coat an insulating shell (e.g., SiO2 or TiO2) on metal NPs to prevent their direct contact with the active layer. The change of the medium in the above-mentioned tedious processing steps results in undesired NP aggregation. The aggregation of NPs strongly affects their LSPR, which in turn decreases the enhancement of light absorption as well as device performance. Moreover, NP aggregation in the active layer harms the morphological evolution of the BHJ active layer and increases current leakage in the device. Organic ligands capped on NPs have been used to improve their dispersion in blend solutions of active-layer materials. However, the presence of surfactants and capping ligands promotes undesirable exciton quenching. Therefore, controlling the dispersion of Au NPs in the active layer is particularly important to effectively utilize their LSPR effects and optimize the photovoltaic performance of OPVs.
To prevent the aggregation of metal NPs in OPVs, one promising strategy is using patterned nanostructures, such as metal NP arrays, instead of free NPs. Recently, patterned plasmonic nanostructures fabricated by a combination of block copolymer lithography and nanoimprinting lithography, and a plasmonic nanostructured rear electrode produced by hole-mask colloidal lithography have been explored to enhance the light absorption of OPVs. However, the tedious processing steps with low yield, and the expensive and complex instruments required for lithographic fabrication hamper their use in light-harvesting systems and may not be commercially viable. Self-assembly has been developed as a promising method to prepare arrays of noble metal NPs on flat substrates. However, to smoothly assemble the metal NPs on substrates, the metal NPs must be previously synthesized and cleaned via tedious routes, and a tedious surface modification treatment of the substrate is also required.
To date, very few reports have explored the use of patterned nanostructures in OPVs because of the difficulty of their fabrication. Additionally, light trapping efficiency can be further increased by simultaneously incorporating plasmonic metal NPs with different shapes or sizes because of their broadband plasmonic absorption. Integrating multiple-morphology plasmonic metal nanostructures into OPVs is obviously highly desirable to optimize photovoltaic performance. However, the ability of well-dispersed arrays of multiple-morphology Au NPs to enhance the performance of OPVs has not yet been reported. Apparently, it remains a challenging to fabricate plasmonic metal NPs arrays with multiple morphologies, a low degree of aggregation, and large-scale.
In this work, we demonstrate a one-step integration of well-dispersed and size-tunable multiple-morphology Au NP arrays on TiO2 thin films via a facile sonochemical approach in aqueous solution. This approach uses only three starting materials, namely, HAuCl4, ethanol, and water; no additional reducing agents are required. The well-dispersed NP array fixed on a TiO2 film effectively avoids the common aggregation problem of plasmonic metallic NPs, allowing their practical application in light-harvesting systems. Additionally, compared with Au nanospheres, the multiple-morphology Au NPs exhibit a broadened absorption band, which results in a larger overlap with the absorption band of OPV active layers, and thus enables a noticeable enhancement in light absorption as well as photovoltaic performance. Compared with that of reference devices, the average PCE of the devices with a multiple-morphology Au NP array is enhanced by up to around 14.5%. The best device shows a PCE of 8.68%, which is achieved for the high-efficiency poly[[4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl) carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl]]:phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PTB7:PC71BM) blend. For devices with a poly(3-hexylthiophene):[6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT:PC61BM) active layer, the average PCE is remarkably enhanced by up to ∼20.5%, from 3.42% to 4.12%. The improvements in photovoltaic performance achieved in this work reach a high level comparable with that of similar state-of-the-art materials in plasmon-enhanced devices. Importantly, a considerable enhancement of PCE is achieved using the multiple-morphology Au NP arrays fabricated by a facile sonochemical route. Such a facile one-step fabrication method with a low growth temperature and the potential for low-cost manufacture on a large scale will promote the practical use of OPVs. In addition to use in various plasmon-enabled or enhanced light-harvesting systems, the developed Au NP array on semiconductor metal oxide thin films is also of particular interest for application to optoelectronic devices such as organic light-emitting diodes.

Titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) (75 wt% in isopropanol) and 1,2-dichlorobenzene (DCB, anhydrous, 99%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. N-Butanol (>99%) and ethanol (>99.5%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Tetrachloroauric acid (HAuCl4·3H2O, >99.5%) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, and stored as a 10 mM solution in deionized water at 4 °C. PC61BM (99.5% purity) and PC71BM, (99.5% purity) were purchased from Solenne BV. PTB7 (99.5% purity) and P3HT (99.5% purity) were purchased from One-Material Inc. Milli-Q water with a resistivity of ∼18 MΩ cm−1 was used. All devices were fabricated on ITO-coated glass (10–15 Ω sq−1) substrates. The ITO substrates were cleaned by sequential ultrasonication in 2% Micro-90 detergent in water, deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol for 15 min each, and then dried under nitrogen flow. The cleaned ITO substrates were further treated with oxygen plasma (200 W) for 1 min before use.


TiO2 precursor solution (0.5 mol L−1) was prepared by dissolving titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) in n-butanol under vigorous stirring for 1 h at room temperature. A ∼35 nm-thick TiO2 dense film was obtained by spin-coating the precursor solution onto a clean ITO substrate at 3000 rpm for 30 s, followed by baking at 350 °C for 30 min. The multiple-morphology Au NP arrays on TiO2 films were fabricated via a facile one-step sonochemical method as follows. First, HAuCl4 solution (0.5 mM) was prepared by dissolving HAuCl4 in a mixture of water and ethanol (1:1 by volume) under vigorous stirring at room temperature in air. Second, an ITO/TiO2 sample was immersed in the HAuCl4 solution. The beaker was sealed and then irradiated by ultrasound (40 kHz) with an ultrasonic power of 100 W for a certain period at room temperature. The ITO/TiO2 sample with an as-grown Au NP array was rinsed in deionized water and then dried in an oven at 80 °C for 10 min. Au NP arrays fabricated with different HAuCl4 precursor concentrations and reaction times were investigated in this work. To incorporate a TiO2/Au NP array into the BHJ active layer of an OPV device, an ultrathin TiO2 cover layer (∼7 nm) was coated on the surface of the as-grown Au NPs via an atomic layer deposition (ALD) method. Water and titanium tetrakis(dimethylamide) were used as sources of O and Ti, respectively, and the deposition temperature was 180 °C.


Commercial software (FDTD solutions 8.15, Lumerical solutions, Inc., Vancouver, Canada) was used to perform the FDTD simulations. Considering that the experimental absorption spectrum was an average of the multiple-morphology Au NPs, the geometrical parameters of the multiple-morphology Au NP arrays were used in the simulation. According to the field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM, Dimension Icon, Bruker) characterization results, the Au NPs in the simulation were modeled as spheres, rods, and triangular plates. The spheres had a diameter of 28 nm. The rods had a diameter and length of 20 and 50 nm, respectively. The triangular plates had a side length and height of 32–90 and 18 nm, respectively. Additionally, for comparison, monodisperse Au nanospheres with a diameter of 30 nm were also calculated. To simulate the extinction spectrum, Au NPs were placed in an air environment. A total-field/scattered-field plane-wave source was used to estimate the interaction between propagating plane waves and the Au NP array. The incident wavelengths were set from 400 to 900 nm.


A P3HT:PC61BM blend solution containing 20 mg mL−1 P3HT and 20 mg mL−1 PC61BM was dissolved in o-DCB solution by stirring at 60 °C overnight. PTB7:PC71BM (1:1.5 wt%, 25 mg mL−1) blend solution was dissolved in a mixture of CB and 1,8-diiodooctane (97:3 by volume) by stirring at 60 °C overnight. Prior to spin coating, both P3HT:PC61BM and PTB7:PC71BM solutions were filtered through a 0.22 μm polytetrafluoroethylene filter. For the P3HT:PC61BM device, the active layer (∼200 nm) was obtained by spin coating the blend solution at 700 rpm for 30 s. The wet film was slowly dried in a covered glass Petri dish and then baked at 120 °C for 10 min in a glove box to promote the self-organization of P3HT. For the PTB7:PC71BM device, the active layer (∼100 nm) was obtained by spin coating PTB7:PC71BM blend solution at 1000 rpm for 1 min. The wet film was slowly dried inside a vacuum chamber under dynamic vacuum for 2 h. For all devices, a 10 nm-thick MoO3 buffer layer and 100 nm-thick Ag electrode layer were deposited onto the active layers under a vacuum of 8 × 10−5 Pa. The area of the solar cells prepared on ITO substrates was ∼2.4 cm2 and the effective device area was defined to be 0.0666 cm2 using a shadow mask. To ensure consistent results, the spin coating of active layers and deposition of MoO3 and Ag layers were conducted simultaneously for the reference and plasmonic devices. All of the above-mentioned parameters were fixed throughout the device fabrication process.


The morphology, size, and height of the Au NPs and cross-sectional images of devices were investigated by transmission electron microscopy (TEM; Tecnai G2 F20), FE-SEM (Zeiss), and AFM (Dimension Icon, Bruker). Absorption spectra were measured using a UV/Vis/NIR spectrophotometer (PerkinElmer Lambda 750). Current density–voltage (J–V) curves were measured under a solar simulator with an AM1.5G filter (AM = air mass) at an irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2. External quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements were carried out using an integrated system (Enlitech, Taiwan), and the intensity of the light source was calibrated using a reference monocrystalline silicon solar cell. Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra were measured with a fluorescence spectrometer (Horiba Fluoromax-4) with a continuous-wave laser (532 nm) as the excitation source.


In this work, well-dispersed multiple-morphology Au NP arrays on TiO2 thin films were fabricated by a facile one-step sonochemical method using only three starting materials, namely, HAuCl4, ethanol, and water; no additional additives were required. ITO/TiO2 samples were immersed in a HAuCl4 solution in water and ethanol in a sealed beaker, and then subjected to ultrasonic irradiation processing. The as-grown Au NP array on the ITO/TiO2 substrate was then rinsed and dried. Fig. 1a presents a schematic diagram of a TiO2 dense film, Au NP array, and Au NP array coated with an ultrathin TiO2 cover layer. Fig. 1b shows the Au NPs on the TiO2 surface fabricated using 0.5 mM HAuCl4 and ultrasonicated for 1 h. The as-grown Au NPs have multiple morphologies, including spheres, rods, and triangular plates. The particle sizes mainly ranged from 20 to 60 nm, with an average size of around 30 nm. Both the size and coverage of Au NPs derived from this approach can be easily tuned by adjusting the concentration of HAuCl4 precursor and ultrasonic irradiation time, as shown Fig. S1 and S2.Fig. 1c and d present FE-SEM images of the Au NPs coated with an ultrathin (∼7 nm) TiO2 cover layer, which was controlled by the ALD procedure. In the active layer in OPVs, the TiO2 cover layer served as a protection layer to avoid the direct contact between the Au NPs and active layer and prevent undesirable exciton recombination. The height profiles of three typical types of Au NPs (Fig. 1e and f) showed that the Au NPs had a height of around 15–30 nm. Furthermore, a three-dimensional AFM image of an Au NP array containing numerous particles and the corresponding statistical distribution result (Fig. S3) further confirmed that the height of the Au NPs was mainly distributed in the range of 15–30 nm, which is suitable for their incorporation into the active layer of OPVs. More importantly, the well-dispersed Au NPs fixed on a TiO2 thin film could effectively avoid the common aggregation problem of plasmonic metal NPs in OPVs.

According to previous reports, acoustic cavitation (the formation, growth, and subsequent collapse of bubbles) releases the concentrated energy stored in bubbles, thus creating areas inside bubbles that are high temperature (∼5000 K), high pressure (∼1000 atm), and have high heating and cooling rates (>1010 °C s−1). These extraordinary conditions facilitate a variety of chemical reactions and fast synthesis of a wide range of nanostructured materials in a room-temperature liquid that would otherwise require high temperatures, high pressures, and/or long reaction times.

Fig. 2a schematically shows the reduction mechanisms of Au3+ and the growth of Au crystals on the TiO2 film. During ultrasonic irradiation of aqueous liquids, the primary sonolysis products of highly reactive ˙H radicals and ˙OH radicals are created in the collapsing cavitation bubbles because of the synergistic effect of exceedingly high temperatures and high pressures generated by ultrasonic cavitation. These reactive radicals can further react with organic additives, ethanol (denoted as RH) here, in the solution to generate secondary radicals (˙R). Both the ˙H radicals and secondary radicals ˙R are considered to act as reductants, promoting the reduction of Au3+ and the growth of Au nanocrystals at the TiO2 surface and in solution without the need for additional reductants. The overall reaction sequence resulting in the formation of Au NPs can be summarized as follows:
H2O → ˙H + ˙OH
(1)
RH (volatile vapor) → ˙R + ˙H
(2)
RH + ˙H (or ˙OH) → ˙R + H2O (or H2)
(3)
Au(III) + reducing radicals (˙H, ˙R, etc.) → Au(0)
(4)
In addition to the reduction of Au3+ by various radical reductants, the electrons excited by ultrasonic cavitation may also facilitate the reduction of Au3+ and the formation of Au crystals on the TiO2 surface. It has been reported for ZnO supports that the electrons excited by ultrasonic cavitation can accumulate on the surface of ZnO nanostructures because of the specific piezoelectric effect of ZnO, which can also favor the reduction of Au3+ during sonochemical treatment. Considering the similar band structures of ZnO and TiO2, we suggest that the electrons in the valence band of TiO2 can also be excited to the conduction band by the activation energy generated by ultrasonic cavitation. The free electrons in the conduction band could transfer and accumulate on the surface of the TiO2 film through the piezoelectric effect. Then, the accumulated electrons could promote the reduction of Au3+ and contribute to the growth of Au nanocrystals on the TiO2 surface. Overall, the reduction of Au3+ and the growth of Au NP arrays on the TiO2 films proceeded through the synergistic reactions involving various reducing species and free electrons. As a result, the initial pale yellow solution turned brownish red after 0.5 h of ultrasound irradiation treatment (inset of Fig. 2b). This color change implies that Au NPs formed and were suspended in the reaction solution. The UV-vis absorption spectrum of the solution after sonochemical treatment for 1 h (Fig. 2b) shows an absorption band at around 555 nm, which further indicated the formation of Au NPs. A TEM image of the Au NPs centrifuged from the reaction solution (Fig. 2c) clearly confirmed that the Au NPs synthesized via this facile one-step sonochemical approach had multiple morphologies, which mainly included spheres, rods, and triangular plate. Additionally, we found that the intensity of the absorption bands of the reaction solution increased with lengthening ultrasonic irradiation time (Fig. S4), which implies that the number of Au NPs increased, possibly along with their particle size. The statistical size distributions of the Au NPs formed on the surface of TiO2 films clearly show that the average size of the Au NPs increased with lengthening ultrasonication time (Fig. S5). The TEM (Fig. 2c) and FE-SEM (Fig. 1b) characterization results reveal that Au NPs with different morphologies and sizes formed simultaneously in solution and on the surface of the TiO2 film during sonochemical treatment. Considering that the extreme and transient conditions generated by acoustic cavitation are complex, many different crystallographic planes form, change, and reorient during sonochemical treatment, which strongly affects the reduction of Au3+ and nucleation of Au NPs. As a result, the Au NPs synthesized by the sonochemical synthesis approach possess multiple morphologies and different sizes. Such a wide dispersion of Au NP morphologies is expected to result in a broad absorption band, which should further facilitate the enhancement of the photovoltaic conversion efficiency of devices containing the Au NP arrays.

Fig. 3 presents the experimental UV-vis spectra and calculated extinction spectra of monodisperse Au nanospheres and the multiple-morphology Au NPs. Fig. 3a clearly shows that, compared with that of the Au nanospheres with an average diameter of 30 nm, the extinction spectrum of the multiple-morphology Au NPs exhibits a red shift of peak position from 530 to 550 nm and a remarkably broadened absorption band. Considering that the multiple-morphology Au NPs have an average size of around 30 nm, the broadened absorption band may result from the strong LSPR effect of the multiple-morphology plasmonic NP array structure. To obtain deeper insight into the observed plasmon resonance effect, the extinction spectrum of the multiple-morphology Au NPs was calculated by the FDTD method (Fig. 3b). The calculated extinction spectrum for the multiple-morphology Au NPs also shows a red shift of peak position and broadened absorption band compared with that of the Au nanospheres, which matches well with the experimental extinction spectrum. The obviously broadened absorption band results in better overlap with the absorption band of active layers, and thus should enable greater enhancement of the light absorption of the BHJ active layer as well as improved photovoltaic performance.

To enhance the light absorption of the active layer in OPVs, the multiple-morphology Au NP array synthesized using 0.5 mmol L−1 HAuCl4 solution and ultrasonic irradiation for 1 h was selected because of its well-dispersed NPs with suitable sizes and coverage. Inverted devices (Fig. 4a) with an Au NP array on a TiO2 films embedded in a thin TiO2 cover layer were constructed and investigated. In the inverted devices containing the TiO2/Au NP arrays, the TiO2 thin films and Au NP arrays served as electron-collecting and light-harvesting layers, respectively. Prior to the deposition of the active layer, an ultrathin TiO2 layer (∼7 nm) was grown on the Au NP array to avoid the direct contact between the active layer and Au NPs to prevent undesired photogenerated exciton quenching at the interface of the Au NPs and OPV active layer.

Two of the most widely used and well-studied active layers, P3HT:PC61BM and PTB7:PC71BM blends, were used to fabricate solar cells to demonstrate the effects of the Au NP arrays on photovoltaic performance. Fig. 4b and c present cross-sectional FE-SEM images of devices with pristine TiO2 and TiO2/Au NP array/TiO2 shell layers, respectively. The cross-sectional FE-SEM image of the plasmonic device and energy-dispersive X-ray spectrum (Fig. S6) of the particles indicated in the FE-SEM image confirmed that the Au NPs were successfully incorporated into the active layer of the device. Fig. 4d depicts the J–V characteristics of devices with and without an Au NP array for both P3HT and PTB7 blend systems under illumination of 100 mW cm−2. The averaged device performance data are summarized in Table 1.
Active layer
Device

J
SC [mA cm−2]

V
OC [V]
FF [%]
PCE [%]

R
S [Ω cm]

R
SH [Ω cm]
P3HT:PC61BM
Reference
10.29
0.59
57.4
3.42
66.58
15207.12
P3HT:PC61BM
Plasmonic
11.47 (8.45)
0.59 (0.44)
60.3 (49.0)
4.12 (1.75)
56.67 (137.26)
15650.57 (7086.9)
PTB7:PC71BM
Reference
16.30
0.76
60.0
7.46
110.37
7362.19
PTB7:PC71BM
Plasmonic
17.73
0.76
63.3
8.54
75.11
7563.43
The average photovoltaic parameters of devices with the Au NP arrays without a TiO2 coating are also presented in Table 1 for comparison. The solar cells containing pristine Au NPs without a TiO2 coating exhibit poor performance compared with that of devices using Au NPs coated with a TiO2 thin layer. This result reveals that the TiO2 coating works as a protection layer to prevent undesirable exciton recombination. Compared with that of the reference devices with pristine TiO2 films, the presence of an Au NP array in the OPV increased both the short-circuit current density (JSC) and fill factor (FF), whereas the open-circuit voltage (VOC) remained constant. For the devices with a P3HT:PC61BM active layer, the average PCE was enhanced by 20.5%, from 3.42% to 4.12%, and the best device showed a JSC of 12.02 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.60 V, FF of 62.9%, and PCE of 4.25%.
To investigate the universality of the sonochemically synthesized Au NP arrays in OPVs, the high-efficiency PTB7:PC71BM blend system was also used to fabricate solar cells. For the PTB7:PC71BM devices, the incorporation of an Au NP array resulted in PCE enhancement of approximately 14.5%, from 7.46% to 8.54%. Table 1 reveals that the PTB7:PC71BM reference device showed a JSC of 16.30 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.76 V, FF of 0.60, and PCE of 7.46%. Meanwhile, the plasmonic device showed a JSC of 17.73 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.76 V, FF of 0.63, and PCE of 8.54%. For the devices based on both P3HT:PC61BM and PTB7:PC71BM blends, the enhancement of PCE mainly resulted from the increased JSC, whereas VOC remained almost constant. The relatively smaller enhancement in device performance for the OPV with a PTB7:PC71BM active layer than that of the device with a P3HT:PC61BM active layer may be because the PTB7:PC71BM active layer has higher light absorption ability than the P3HT:PC61BM one. A non-exhaustive survey of OPVs containing Au plasmonic nanostructures with P3HT:PC61BM and PTB7:PC71BM active layers is presented in Table S1. Compared with that of similar state-of-the-art materials (Table S1), the improvements in photovoltaic performance achieved in this work reached a high level. Importantly, the facile one-step integration of a multiple-morphology Au NP array on a TiO2 film at low growth temperature and with the potential for low-cost manufacturing on a large scale will promote the practical application of OPVs.
For BHJ OPVs, the interfacial contact between the active layer and cathode buffer layer influences charge transport characteristics and device performance. Thus, as an initial investigation, the effects of an Au NP array on the interfacial contact between the active layer and cathode buffer layer were examined by measuring dark J–V characteristics. Fig. S7 shows the effect of an Au NP array on the dark J–V characteristics of devices. The two types of devices exhibited negligible differences in their dark J–V characteristics, implying that the Au NP array had little effect on interfacial contact as well as charge transport characteristics. This situation was also confirmed by the similar series resistances (RS) of the reference and plasmonic-enhanced devices of 66.58 and 56.67 Ω cm, respectively (Table 1). In addition, the constant VOC for the plasmonic devices also suggested that the incorporation of an Au NP array in the devices had negligible influence on the nature of the electrode–organic interface.
To explore the origin of the enhanced JSC of the plasmonic devices, the EQE spectrum (Fig. 5a) and change of EQE spectrum (ΔEQE) (Fig. 5b) of the best device relative to those of the corresponding reference device were also recorded and calculated. Here, ΔEQE was obtained by subtracting the EQE of the reference device from that of the device with an Au NP array. Therefore, ΔEQE reveals the change/enhancement of EQE caused by the Au NP array. Compared with that of the reference device, the EQE of the device with the Au NP array exhibited a pronounced enhancement in the wavelength range of 450–600 nm (Fig. 5a). Fig. 5b clear illustrates that the wavelength region of the ΔEQE band matches well with the absorption band of the Au NPs. This result implies that the enhanced EQE results from the LSPR and scattering effects of the multiple-morphology Au NP array. The EQE spectra of PTB7:PC71BM devices with and without an Au NP array are shown in Fig. S8, which also reveal a remarkable enhancement for the device with an Au NP array. This means that the Au NP array can also effectively enhance the light absorption of PTB7:PC71BM devices. Both the experimental UV-vis spectra and FDTD-simulated extinction spectra clearly indicated that the multiple-morphology Au NPs possessed a broad LSPR spectrum (Fig. 3), which increased the light absorption of the BHJ active layer as well as the EQE spectra of devices. However, compared with the P3HT:PC61BM blend system, the wavelength region of the ΔEQE band (Fig. S8) for the PTB7:PC71BM devices shows a small mismatch with the absorption band of the Au NPs. This may also be a reason for the smaller enhancement in PCE for the PTB7:PC71BM devices compared with that for the P3HT:PC61BM devices.
For polymer donor/fullerene derivative blend systems, the excitons in the active layer are predominately generated by the polymer donor. To further examine the effect of an Au NP array on the excitons in the active layer of the devices, PL spectra of P3HT films with and without an Au NP array were recorded, as shown in Fig. 5c. It should be noted that prior to incorporation into the P3HT film, the Au NPs were covered with a thin TiO2 layer to prevent the recombination of photogenerated excitons. Fig. 5c indicates that the PL emission intensity of the P3HT/Au NP array system is markedly increased in the wavelength range of 670–770 nm compared with that of the pristine P3HT sample. For the P3HT film, the PL emission originates from recombination of photoexcited excitons. The considerable enhancement of PL emission intensity suggests that the LSPR effect of the Au NP array enhances the light absorption of P3HT, thereby promoting the generation of excitons.
Based on the EQE and PL results, we suggest that the multiple-morphology Au NP array could serve as a promising plasmonic platform to enhance the photoabsorption of the active layer in OPVs. To further confirm that the JSC enhancement is caused by the increased light absorption in the active layer, the maximum exciton generation rates (Gmax) of P3HT:PC61BM with and without a multiple-morphology Au NP array were also calculated. Fig. 5d presents plots of the photocurrent density (Jph) against the effective voltage (Veff) on a double-logarithmic scale for the devices with and without an Au NP array. Here, Jph and Veff were determined as Jph = Jlight − Jdark and Veff = V0 − Va, respectively. Jlight and Jdark are the current densities under illumination and in the dark, respectively.V0 is the voltage where Jph equals zero (Jlight = Jdark) and Va is the applied bias voltage.Jph increased linearly with the voltage at low Veff (<0.1 V) and then tended to saturate at high Veff (>1 V) for both types of devices. The saturated Jph at large reverse bias (Veff > 1 V) is the saturation current density (Jsat), which is only limited by the total amount of absorbed incident photons and is independent of the bias and temperature. From Fig. 5d, we determined that Jsat was 111 and 120 A m−2 for the devices without and with an Au NP array, respectively. Additionally, it has been demonstrated that Gmax can be calculated using the equation Jsat = qGmaxL, where q is the electronic charge and L is the thickness of the active layer. Thus, the calculated Gmax values are 3.47 × 1027 m−3 s−1 (Jsat = 111 A m−2) and 3.75 × 1027 m−3 s−1 (Jsat = 120 A m−2) for the devices without and with an Au NP array, respectively. Because Gmax is governed only by the maximum number of absorbed incident photons, the noticeable enhancements in Jsat and Gmax further suggest enhanced light absorption and exciton generation in the active layer for the device with an Au NP array. Further enhancement in the photovoltaic performance of OPVs could be achieved by precisely tuning the plasmonic properties of the Au NP arrays by carefully adjusting the size and distribution of Au NPs. Furthermore, besides the light absorption enhancement caused by the LSPR and scattering effects, it has been demonstrated that the incorporation of plasmonic metallic nanostructures in OPVs can also deliver improvements of electrical properties through plasmonic electrical effects. In this work, the plasmonically induced hot carrier transfer from the Au NPs to the TiO2 film may help to improve the J–V characteristics of the devices. In addition, the Au NPs deposited on the surface of TiO2 substrates may lower the electron extraction barrier and facilitate the carrier transport in OPVs through charge accumulation effects. We suggest that the enhanced FF and decreased RS of the plasmonic devices, as shown in Table 1, can be ascribed to the improvement in electrical properties caused by the plasmonic electrical effects of the Au NP arrays.

In this study, well-dispersed multiple-morphology Au NP arrays were integrated on TiO2 thin films via a facile one-step sonochemical route in aqueous solution. The reduction of Au ions and the growth of Au nanocrystals on TiO2 films proceeded through synergistic reactions with various reduction species (˙H and secondary ˙R radicals) and the free electrons accumulated on the TiO2 surface, which were generated by the effects of the exceedingly high temperature and pressure caused by ultrasonic cavitation. For the first time, multiple-morphology Au NP arrays containing NPs with different sizes and shapes derived from a sonochemical process were found to enhance the light absorption and efficiency of OPVs. Compared with that of a control device based on a pristine TiO2 film, the average PCE of the devices with the Au NP arrays were remarkably enhanced from 3.42% to 4.12% for those with a P3HT:PC61BM active layer, and the best device showed a PCE of 4.25%. For the highly efficient BHJ blend of PTB7:PC71BM, the best device showed a PCE of 8.68%, and the average PCE was enhanced from 7.46% for the control device to 8.54% for the Au NP array-based device. The enhanced JSC was mainly attributed to the increased light absorption of the active layer, which was caused by the broad LSPR effects of the multiple-morphology Au NP array. The experimental results in this work clearly demonstrate the promise of multiple-morphology Au NP arrays as a plasmonic nanostructure to enhance the performance of OPVs. Such arrays could be easily extended to improve the performance of other types of solar cells and many other light-harvesting applications such as photocatalytic degradation and solar water splitting. The combination of the multiple-morphology Au NPs with other enhancement schemes is also planned and expected to reveal even greater performance improvements.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China [51503136], the International Collaboration program granted by the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology [2016YFE0129800], and the Israel Ministry of Science, Technology and Space. This project was also supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province, China [BK20150007], the Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, 111 Project, and the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD). This research is partially supported by grants from the National Research Foundation, Prime Minister's Office, Singapore under its Campus of Research Excellence and Technological Enterprise (CREATE) programme.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: SEM images, dark J–V curves, UV-vis spectra, and EQE spectra. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta01919c
‡ Weijing Shao and Zhiqiang Liang contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018