 DOI: 10.1039/C5EE00120J
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1602-1608


Jin Hyuck
Heo
,

Hye Ji
Han
,

Dasom
Kim
,

Tae Kyu
Ahn
 and 

Sang Hyuk
Im
*

Functional Crystallization Center (FCC), Department of Chemical Engineering, Kyung Hee University, 1732 Deogyeong-daero, Giheung-gu, Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do 446-701, Republic of Korea. E-mail: imromy@khu.ac.kr

Department of Energy Science, Sungkyunkwan University, Seobu-ro 2066, Jangan-gu, Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea

Received
13th January 2015
, Accepted 1st April 2015
First published on 1st April 2015
Hysteresis-less inverted ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3)/PCBM/Au planar hybrid solar cells with 18.1% average power conversion efficiency irrespective of the scan rate were fabricated by depositing dense pinhole-free MAPbI3 perovskite on a PEDOT:PSS/ITO substrate via a single-step spin-coating of solubility controlled MAPbI3 solution. The conductivities of PEDOT:PSS, PCBM, poly(triaryl amine) (PTAA):tert-butylpyrridne (tBP) + Li-bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li–TFSI), MAPbI3, and TiO2 were 0.014, 0.016, 0.034, 0.015, and 0.00006 mS cm−1, respectively. The average PL lifetimes (τav) of the inverted and normal cell were 1.277 and 1.94 ns, respectively. The diffusion coefficient (Dn) and charge carrier lifetime (τn) for the inverted MAPbI3 planar hybrid solar cells were increased by 1.14-fold and 1.1-fold, respectively, compared with the conventional FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/PTAA:tBP + Li–TFSI/Au planar hybrid cells. Hence, the inverted MAPbI3 planar hybrid solar cells exhibited better power conversion efficiency and stability than the conventional MAPbI3 cells because (i) the electron extraction from MAPbI3 to the electron conductor was improved because the electron conductivity of PCBM is higher than that of TiO2; (ii) the EQE value was increased by the better charge injection/separation efficiency between MAPbI3 and PCBM, and by the higher charge collection efficiency than the conventional cell; (iii) the fill factor is improved by the increased Dn and τn; and (iv) the air and humidity stability is improved by the absence of corrosive additives in the device architecture and the hydrophobicity of the PCBM top layer. The reduced current density–voltage (J–V) hysteresis with respect to the scan rate and scan direction in the inverted planar hybrid solar cells could be attributed to a more balanced electron flux (Je) and hole flux (Jh), and a reduced number of surface traps.

Planar MAPbI3 perovskite hybrid solar cells have the simplest device architecture. However, mesoscopic electron conductors, such as TiO2, which requires a high processing temperature, are necessary to eliminate the photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) hysteresis with respect to the scan direction and scan rate. This is because it is more difficult to balance the electron flux and hole flux for the number of carriers per unit time and unit interface area in the planar device architecture than for mesoscopic MAPbI3 solar cells owing to the reduced freedom of interface area control. Here, we fabricated hysteresis-less planar MAPbI3 perovskite hybrid solar cells with 18.1% power conversion efficiency by constructing the inverted device architecture of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/Au instead of the conventional FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/PTAA (or Spiro-OMeTAD) + corrosive additive/Au structure. The better efficiency, stability, and lower J–V hysteresis of the inverted cells compared with the normal cells was attributed to the balanced electron and hole flux and absence of corrosive additives.


Electricity is the most convenient and safe energy for everyday use, and the demand for electricity is increasing. Therefore, direct generation of electricity from solar energy is of great interest because it is clean, renewable, abundant, and sustainable. However, the power generation cost of solar cells is still more expensive than that of fossil fuel, so widespread use of solar cells has yet to be achieved. Accordingly, significant effort is required to develop cost-effective innovative solar cells with increased power conversion efficiency and reduced processing costs. Recently, innovative organic/inorganic perovskite hybrid solar cells satisfying above criteria because the perovskite hybride solar cells can be fabricated by all solution process and their power conversion efficiency is known to reach over 20% under 1 sun condition (100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G).

Since perovskite hybrid sensitized solar cells were first reported by Kojima et al., efficient solid state mesocopic, meso-superstructured, and planar perovskite hybrid solar cells have been developed. Although the CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) or CH3NH3PbI3−xClx mixed halide perovskite hybrid solar cells exhibited high device efficiency, they had significant photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) hysteresis with respect to the forward and reverse scan direction owing to charge accumulation or dielectric polarization by ferroelectric properties.
Recently, Jeon et al. reported that the J–V hysteresis of mesoscopic MAPbI3 perovskite hybrid solar cells with respect to the scan direction can be significantly reduced by adjusting the thickness of mesoscopic TiO2 to ∼200 nm because a MAPbI3 perovskite layer at least 300 nm thick is required to absorb the light fully; however, the charge carriers' diffusion length for MAPbI3 perovskite is ∼100 nm. To balance the electron flux (Je) and hole flux (Jh), a 200 nm-thick mesoscopic TiO2 electron conductor may be required because mesoscopic TiO2 provides an extended effective surface area and the charge carriers generated in MAPbI3 can be effectively transported to the electrode by injection into the TiO2 electron conductor, or by self-transport through MAPbI3. However, in planar MAPbI3 perovskite hybrid solar cells the interface area cannot be controlled, so there is less scope to balance Je and Jh compared with the mesoscopic MAPbI3 perovskite hybrid solar cells if the mobility and conductivity of the carriers of the electron and hole conductors cannot be controlled.
In general, the device architecture of MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells is F-doped tin oxide (FTO)/electron conductor/MAPbI3/hole conductor with a dopant such as tert-butyl pyridine (tBP) and Li-bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li–TFSI). Although the dopant can improve the device performance, tBP can dissolve the MAPbI3 perovskite and absorb moisture, which degrades the device stability of MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells under exposure to ambient humidity. Very recently, Liu et al. reported that dopant-free mesoscopic MAPbI3 solar cells with a dopant-free tetrathiafulvalene derivative hole conductor exhibited improved device stability compared with conventional mesoscopic MAPbI3/hole conductor solar cells containing a dopant. Therefore, it is challenging to develop hysteresis-less planar MAPbI3 perovskite hybrid solar cells without dopants. In this respect, inverted MAPbI3 perovskite hybrid solar cells are desirable because (i) the corrosive tBP and Li–TFSI dopant can be removed by using PEDOT:PSS instead of a hole conductor with corrosive dopants; (ii) a [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) top layer is more hydrophobic than a hole conductor with a dopant, and increases the device stability because of the lower absorption of moisture; and (iii) the PCBM layer is more electron conductive than the TiO2 layer, which is expected to reduce the J–V hysteresis with respect to the scan direction because of the balanced Je and Jh.
Since Jeng et al. reported MAPbI3/PCBM planar hybrid solar cells, there have been many studies on developing efficient MAPbI3/PCBM inverted pervoskite hybrid solar cells, and inverted MAPbI3 perovskite planar solar cells with a power conversion efficiency of 14.1% were demonstrated. Inverted MAPbI3−xClx mixed halide perovskite planar solar cells were also developed with efficiencies of up to 11.5% under 1 sun conditions (100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G). However, the efficiency of the inverted planar perovskite hybrid solar cells was still lower than the normal planar perovskite solar cells because the dense perovskite thin-film deposition method might be not sufficient, although a two-step solvent dripping process was demonstrated by Seok and colleagues. In this work, we formed a pinhole-free dense MAPbI3 perovskite thin film on a PEDOT:PSS/indium tin oxide (ITO) substrate via a single-step spin-coating of a solubility controlled MAPbI3 solution and demonstrated inverted MAPbI3 planar hybrid solar cells with a power conversion efficiency of 18.1% without significant J–V hysteresis with respect to the forward and reverse scan directions.

MAI was synthesized by reacting hydroiodic acid (50 mL, 57% in water, Sigma-Aldrich) and methylamine (50 mL, 40% in methanol, Junsei Chemical Co. Ltd) in a 250 mL round-bottom flask at 0 °C for 2 h with stirring. The precipitate was recovered by evaporation of solvents at 50 °C for 1 h with a rotary evaporator. To purify MAI, the products were dissolved in ethanol, recrystallized from diethyl ether, and finally dried at room temperature in a vacuum oven for 24 h. MAPbI3 solution (40 wt%) was prepared by mixing the MAI powder and PbI2 (1:1 mole ratio, Sigma-Aldrich) in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) at 60 °C for 30 min and hydriodic acid was added to the MAPbI3 perovskite solution.


For inverted MAPbI3 planar hybrid solar cells, filtered poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonic acid) (PEDOT:PSS, Clevios, Al4083)/methanol (1:2 v:v) was coated on a clean ITO glass substrate by spin-coating at 3000 rpm for 60 s and dried at 150 °C for 20 min. A 40 wt% MAPbI3/DMF solution containing hydriodic acid (100 μL per 1 mL MAPbI3/DMF solution) was then spin coated on the PEDOT:PSS/ITO substrate at 3000 rpm for 200 s and was dried on a hot plate at 100 °C for 2 min. A PCBM (nano-C) layer was deposited on the MAPbI3/PEDOT:PSS/ITO substrate by spin-coating PCBM/toluene (20 mg per 1 mL) solution at 2000 rpm for 60 s. Finally, an Au counter electrode was deposited by thermal evaporation.

For normal MAPbI3 planar hybrid solar cells, a 50 nm-thick dense TiO2 electron conductor was deposited on a clean FTO (TEC8, Pilkington) glass substrate by spray pyrolysis deposition with 20 mM of titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) (Sigma-Aldrich) solution at 450 °C. The same 40 wt% MAPbI3/DMF with hydriodic acid solution was spin-coated on the TiO2/FTO substrate at 3000 rpm for 200 s and was dried on a hot plate at 100 °C for 2 min. A poly(triaryl amine) (PTAA, EM index) hole conductor was deposited on the MAPbI3/TiO2/FTO substrate by spin coating PTAA/toluene (15 mg mL−1) solution containing Li-bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li–TFSI)/acetonitrile (7.5 μL, 170 mg mL−1) and tBP/acetonitrile (7.5 μL, 1:1) additives at 2000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, the Au counter electrode was deposited by thermal evaporation. The active area was fixed as 0.16 cm2. All device fabrication was conducted below relative humidity of 50%.

The current density–voltage (J–V) curves were measured by a solar simulator (Peccell, PEC-L01) with a potentiostat (IVIUM, IviumStat) under illumination of 1 sun (100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G) which is calibrated with a Si-reference cell certificated by JIS (Japanese Industrial Standards). For the measurement of J–V hysteresis with respect to the scan rate and direction, the forward and reverse scan rate was set to 100–1000 ms per 10 mV. The J–V curves of all devices were measured by masking the active area with a metal mask of 0.096 cm2. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured by using a power source (150W Xenon lamp, 13014, ABET) with a monochromator (MonoRa-500i, Dongwoo Optron Co., Ltd) and a potentiostat (IviumStat, IVIUM).



Fig. 1 depicts a schematic of the device architecture of the planar MAPbI3 perovskite hybrid solar cells with the normal and the inverted structure. First, the normal MAPbI3 planar perovskite hybrid solar cells are composed of FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/poly(triaryl amine) (PTAA):tBP + Li–TFSI/Au as shown in Fig. 1(a), so that the generated electrons and holes in MAPbI3 layer are transported into the TiO2 electron conductor and the PTAA:tBP + Li–TFSI hole conductor, respectively. Upon illumination, the charge carriers generated in MAPbI3 are transported at a rate of 10−2–100 cm2 V−1 s−1 and the holes transported into the PTAA:tBP + Li–TFSI hole conductor are also transported into the Au electrode with similar rate of 10−3–10−1 cm2 V−1 s−1. In contrast, the electrons injected into TiO2 are slowly transported into the FTO electrode at a rate of 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. Accordingly, the charges can be accumulated in the capacitant element at the TiO2/MAPbI3 interface or in the TiO2/MAPbI3 layer. If we assume that the interface area of TiO2/MAPbI3 and MAPbI3/PTAA:tBP + Li–TFSI is similar, Je and Jh are unbalanced because the flux represents the number of charge carriers per unit area and per unit time. Although the tBP + Li–TFSI dopant in PTAA can greatly enhance the hole conductivity/mobility of the PTAA hole conductor, thereby significantly improving the device efficiency, tBP can gradually corrode or dissolve the MAPbI3 active layer. Second, the inverted MAPbI3 planar perovskite hybrid solar cells consist of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/Au, as shown in Fig. 1(b). Upon illumination, the holes (electrons) generated in MAPbI3 are efficiently transported to the electrode through the PEDOT:PSS (PCBM) intermediate layer, without significant charge accumulation at traps in the PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM layer because of the similar charge carrier mobility in each layer. Accordingly, the inverted MAPbI3 planar perovskite hybrid solar cells exhibit improved device efficiency and reduced J–V hysteresis with respect to the scan rate and direction. Fig. 1(c) is a cross-sectional SEM image of the representative inverted MAPbI3 planar hybrid solar cell. To form pinhole-free MAPbI3 thin films on an electron conductor/transparent electrode, we used MAPbI3/DMF solution with HI as the additive. HI can increase the solubility of MAPbI3 in DMF, enabling the formation of a dense single-crystal thin film, which suppresses the formation of PbI2 impurities and reduces the number of traps. Therefore, the higher quality MAPbI3 planar solar cells fabricated with HI should exhibit better device efficiency than conventional MAPbI3 planar solar cells without HI. The XRD pattern of the MAPbI3 thin film with HI in Fig. S1 (ESI) indicates that there was no PbI2 impurity, whereas tiny PbI2 impurity XRD peaks appeared when the MAPbI3 thin film was formed without HI.


Fig. 2 shows the photovoltaic properties of inverted and normal MAPbI3 planar perovskite hybrid solar cells. The J–V curves of the inverted MAPbI3 planar perovskite cell in Fig. 2(a) had an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.1 V, a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 20.9 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 79%, and overall power conversion efficiency (η) of 18.1% in the forward scan direction, and Voc of 1.1 V, Jsc of 20.9 mA cm−2, FF of 79%, and η of 18.2% in the reverse scan direction under illumination of 1 sun (100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G). Accordingly, the inverted planar MAPbI3 perovskite hybrid solar cells did not show significant J–V hysteresis with respect to the scan direction, whereas the normal planar MAPbI3 perovskite cell revealed a small J–V hysteresis with respect to the scan direction, as shown in Fig. 2(c), because its photovoltaic properties were Voc of 1.1 V, Jsc of 20 mA cm−2, FF of 75%, and η of 16.5% for the forward scan, and Voc of 1.1 V, Jsc of 20.1 mA cm−2, FF of 78%, and η of 17.2% in the reverse scan direction under the same measurement conditions. The photovoltaic properties of the inverted and normal MAPbI3 planar perovskite hybrid solar cells are summarized in Table 1. The average η of the inverted planar MAPbI3 perovskite hybrid solar cells were higher than that of the normal cells (the η deviation of 20 solar cells is shown in Fig. S2, ESI), and the efficiency improvement was mainly attributed to the improved average Jsc (20 → 20.9 mA cm−2) and FF (76.5 → 79%) in normal and inverted cells. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the inverted and normal MAPbI3 planar perovskite cells in Fig. 2(b) and (d) confirmed that the EQE value of the inverted cell was higher than that of the normal cell. The EQE is the product of the light harvesting efficiency (ηlh), charge injection/transfer efficiency (ηinj), and charge collection efficiency (ηcc), so the improvement of the device efficiency results from the improved ηinj and ηcc, because ηlh is constant under the present experimental conditions.
Device type
Scan direction

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

η (%)
Scan rate = 10 mV per 200 ms, delay time = 200 ms.
Inverted cell
Forward
1.1
20.9
79
18.1
Reverse
1.1
20.9
79
18.2
Normal cell
Forward
1.1
20.0
75
16.5
Reverse
1.1
20.1
78
17.2

Fig. 3(a) shows the hysteresis of η with respect to the scan direction and scan rate in inverted and normal MAPbI3 planar perovskite hybrid solar cells. Both solar cells exhibited the same trend of η hysteresis with respect to the scan direction and scan rate. η measured in the forward scan direction increased and became saturated with the scan rate (delay time) and η measured in the reverse scan direction decreased and remained constant at a value that converged with the value in the forward scan. η of the inverted MAPbI3 planar perovskite hybrid solar cell with respect to the scan direction converged around a delay time of 500 ms, whereas η of the normal cell converged around 1000 ms. To confirm whether both the inverted and normal planar MAPbI3 perovskite hybrid solar cells have saturated/stable power conversion efficiency, we measured the variation of current density at the maximum power (Pmax) condition under an applied optimum bias voltage (Vopt) with a light soaking time as shown in Fig. 3(b). Under continuous illumination, both cells exhibited a stable saturated maximum current density (Jmax), indicating that the average η measured in the forward and reverse scan direction or the value at which η converged was correct, irrespective of the scan rate (delay time). For short light soaking times, Jmax increased and became saturated, which is similar to the η value measured in the forward scan. The saturation times in the inverted and the normal cell of the Jmax curve in the magnified graph in the blue rectangle in Fig. 3(b) were 500 and 1000 ms, respectively. This is consistent with the time that the η values took to converge. The stability of Jmax during light soaking implies that the MAPbI3 planar perovskite hybrid solar cells are stable. To compare the stability of the inverted and normal MAPbI3 planar perovskite hybrid solar cells, we checked the photovoltaic properties of unencapsulated solar cells as a function of storage time (Fig. 3(c)). As expected, the inverted planar MAPbI3 perovskite hybrid solar cells exhibited better stability than the normal cells because the inverted cells have a more hydrophobic PCBM top layer and do not contain a corrosive dopant, whereas the normal cells have a more hydrophilic PTAA:tBP + Li–TFSI top layer and contain corrosive tBP + Li–TFSI solution. The normal cells were degraded more than the inverted cells because of the decomposition of MAPbI3. The efficiency of the encapsulated MAPbI3 hybrid solar cells were not significantly degraded over one month, although the encapsulated inverted cell also exhibited slightly better stability than the normal cell.
To understand why the inverted MAPbI3 planar perovskite hybrid solar cells exhibit better device performance and smaller J–V hysteresis with respect to the scan direction and scan rate, we measured the current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of sandwiched cells consisting of ITO/PCBM or PTAA:tBP + Li–TFSI or MAPbI3 thin film/Au device and FTO/TiO2 thin film/Au device, as shown in Fig. 4(a). The DC (direct current) conductivity (σ0) can be determined from the slope of the I–V plot, I = σ0Ad−1V, where A is area of sample (0.16 cm2) and d is the thickness of the sample. The thicknesses of the PCBM, PTAA:tBP + Li–TFSI, MAPbI3, and PEDOT:PSS thin films were 200, 680, 300, and 200 nm, respectively, and the corresponding conductivities of PCBM, PTAA:tBP + Li–TFSI, MAPbI3, and PEDOT:PSS were 0.016, 0.034, 0.015, and 0.014 mS cm−1, respectively. In contrast, the conductivity of the TiO2 film was 0.00006 mS cm−1, which is around 250-fold lower than the PCBM electron conductor (Fig. S3, ESI). Therefore, it is expected that the charge carriers generated in the MAPbI3 layer are more efficiently transported to the PCBM electron conductor than to TiO2 and the electron flux (Je).
To compare the charge injection/separation behavior, we measured the time-resolved photoluminescent (PL) decay curves of an FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3 film and a glass/MAPbI3/PCBM film, as shown in Fig. 4(b). The PL quenching in the glass/MAPbI3/PCBM film was faster than that in the FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3 film, confirming faster transfer of the charge carriers from MAPbI3 into the PCBM electron conductor than into the TiO2 electron conductor. This means that the charge injection from MAPbI3 to PCBM is more efficient than to TiO2, and consequently the charge injection/separation efficiency (ηinj) is improved in the inverted ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/Au planar perovskite hybrid solar cells. From the deconvolution of the time-resolved PL decays with a tri-exponential function, the average PL lifetime (τav) of inverted ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/Au planar hybrid solar cell (1.277 ns) is shorter than that of the normal FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/PTAA:tBP + Li–TFSI/Au planar hybrid solar cell (1.94 ns), as listed in Table S1 (ESI).
To understand why the inverted MAPbI3 planar hybrid solar cells have better device efficiency than the normal planar cells, we measured the diffusion coefficient (Dn) and charge carrier life time (τn) with intensity modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) and intensity modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS), as shown in Fig. 4(c) and (d). The Nyquist plots of IMPS and IMVS are provided in Fig. S4 (ESI). The plots of Dn and τn with current density (J) indicate that the Dn and τn of the inverted MAPbI3 planar hybrid solar cell are increased by 1.14-fold and 1.1-fold, respectively, compared with those of the normal cell. As a result, the diffusion length (Ln = (Dn × τn)0.5) of the inverted and normal MAPbI3 planar hybrid solar cell was 390 and 350 nm, respectively. This implies that the charge collection efficiency (ηcc) is also improved by using the PCBM electron conductor instead of the TiO2 electron conductor. From the results of the conductivity, time-resolved PL, IMPS, and IMVS experiments, we can conclude that (i) the EQE value of the inverted ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/Au planar hybrid solar cell is increased by the improved charge injection/separation efficiency, which increases the short circuit current density (Jsc); (ii) the FF of the inverted cell is improved by the increase of Dn and τn, which decreases the recombination of the charge carriers; and (iii) the reduced J–V hysteresis of the inverted cell with respect to the scan rate and scan direction is attributed to the balanced electron flux (Je) and hole flux (Jh) owing to the better electron extraction in the PCBM electron conductor than in TiO2. Very recently, Shao et al. reported that the thermally annealed PCBM layer on MAPbI3 planar solar cells could reduce the number of surface traps significantly and consequently reduce the J–V hysteresis with respect to the scan rate and direction because there were fewer capacitance elements in the surface traps. This also suggests that the origin of the better electron extraction from MAPbI3 to the PCBM electron conductor is the decrease in the number of surface traps and the increased electron conductivity and mobility compared with the TiO2 electron conductor. Therefore, the inverted ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/Au planar hybrid solar cells should exhibit better efficiency and stability compared with normal FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/PTAA:tBP + Li–TFSI/Au planar hybrid solar cells, unless dopant-free hole conductors and better electron conductors than TiO2 are developed for normal MAPbI3 planar solar cells.
Finally, we fabricated the inverted ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/Au planar hybrid solar sub-module, 10 × 10 cm in size, as shown in Fig. 5. The sub-module was constructed by serially connecting 10 sub-unit cells, and it exhibited Voc of 10.1 V, Isc of 80.1 mA, FF of 63.7%, and power conversion efficiency of 12.9% under 1 sun conditions (100 mW cm−2 AM1.5G).

We fabricated hysteresis-less inverted MAPbI3 planar hybrid solar cells with 18.1% average power conversion efficiency irrespective of the scan rate by depositing dense pinhole-free MAPbI3 perovskite on a PEDOT:PSS/ITO substrate via a single-step spin-coating. The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS, PCBM, PTAA:tBP + Li–TFSI, MAPbI3, and TiO2 was 0.014, 0.016, 0.034, 0.015, and 0.00006 mS cm−1, respectively. The average PL lifetime (τav) of the inverted and normal cell was 1.277 and 1.94 ns, respectively. The Dn and τn of inverted MAPbI3 planar hybrid solar cell were increased 1.14-fold and 1.1-fold, respectively, compared with the normal cell. Compared with the normal MAPbI3 planar hybrid solar cells comprised of FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/PTAA:tBP + Li–TFSI/Au device, the inverted ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/Au cell exhibited better power conversion efficiency and stability because (i) the electron extraction from MAPbI3 to the electron conductor was improved because the electron conductivity of PCBM is higher than TiO2; (ii) the EQE value was increased by the better charge injection/separation efficiency from MAPbI3 to PCBM and charge collection efficiency; (iv) the FF was improved by the increased Dn and τn; and (iv) the air and humidity stability was improved by the corrosive additive-free device architecture and hydrophobicity of the PCBM top layer. The reduced J–V hysteresis with respect to scan rate and scan direction in the inverted planar hybrid solar cells may be attributed to more balanced Je and Jh and the reduced number of surface traps.


This study was supported by Mid-career Research Program (No.: NRF-2013R1A2A2A01067999), Basic Science Research Program (No. 2014R1A5A1009799) and the Global Frontier R&D Program of the Center for Multiscale Energy System through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Efficiency deviation of 20 samples, IMPS and IMVS of inverted and normal solar cells and summary of fitting parameters for time-resolved PL. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ee00120j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015