 DOI: 10.1039/C4CP04741A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 2750-2756


Hammad
Cheema
,

Robert
Younts
,

Louis
Ogbose
,

Bhoj
Gautam
,

Kenan
Gundogdu
 and 

Ahmed
El-Shafei
*

Polymer and Color Chemistry Program, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA. E-mail: ahmed_el-shafei@ncsu.edu

Physics Department, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA

Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, Nigeria

Received
18th October 2014
, Accepted 1st December 2014
First published on 1st December 2014
In this study, an intriguing difference caused by structural isomerization based on anthracene and phenanthrene stilbazole type ancillary ligands in Ru(II) sensitizers for dye sensitized solar cells (DSCs) has been investigated using femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy. Both anthracene and phenanthrene based sensitizers HD-7 and HD-8, respectively, resulted in a similar extinction coefficient, photophysical and thermodynamic free energy of electron injection and dye regeneration as measured by UV-Vis, excited state lifetime and cyclic voltammetry measurements, respectively. However, TiO2 adsorbed HD-7 resulted in up to 45% less photocurrent density than HD-8 although photovoltage was similar owing to comparable thermodynamic characteristics. It was obvious from the measurement of incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) that excited electrons in HD-7 are prone to internal energy loss before injection into the TiO2 conduction band. Analysis of photo-induced spectral features measured by femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy showed that excited electrons in HD-7 are prone to ISC (intersystem crossing) much more than HD-8 and those triplet electrons are not injected into TiO2 efficiently. Interestingly, from impedance measurements, HD-7 showed higher recombination resistance than HD-8 and N719, but a shorter lifetime for electrons injected into the TiO2 conduction band.

Dye sensitized solar cells (DSCs) are photovoltaic cells that mimic the natural photosynthesis. In a DSC, the dye absorbs the photons and converts those photons to electric charges, which are then extracted to the outer circuit through the TiO2 semiconductor, whereas the mediator regenerates the oxidized dye. A sensitizer is a pivotal component in terms of determining the spectral response, color, photocurrent density, long term stability, and thickness of a DSC. Hence since the invention of DSCs in the laboratory of Michael Grätzel in 1991, DSCs in general and sensitizers for DSCs in specific have been the focus of academic research.

Charge separation on the dye/TiO2 interface is arguably the most critical step to ensure efficient translation of absorbed photons into photocurrent. The theory which is used to predict the rate of electron transfer between two chemical species was developed by Marcus in 1960. The theoretical adaptation of Marcus theory for electron transfer from an optically excited sensitizer to the conduction band of a wide band metal semiconductor has been reviewed elsewhere. However, it is important to mention that the three components that govern the rate of electron injection are (i) electronic coupling between the electron donating orbital of a sensitizer and the electron accepting orbital of a semiconductor, (ii) density of states (DOS) in the conduction band of a semiconductor and (iii) the free energy difference between the dye excited state and the conduction band edge of the oxide. Electron transfer at the dye/TiO2 interface becomes even more complex, considering the fundamental difference in the discrete molecular state of the sensitizer and a continuum of the delocalized bulk states in the semiconductor.
During the last decade, extensive studies to understand both the efficiency and kinetics of electron injection have been carried out by pump–probe transient absorption, time correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) and luminescence quenching methods. Electron injection from an excited sensitizer to the TiO2 conduction band shows two main components, ultrafast <100 fs time scale correlated to singlet (1MLCT) injection and a slow component with hundreds of picoseconds attributed to triplet (3MLCT) injection. Ardo and Meyer in an elegant review with more than 480 references summarized meticulously the different electron injection, intramolecular relaxation and recombination pathways and time domains for transition-metal compounds anchored to TiO2 semiconductor surfaces.
In this study, femto-second pump probe and time correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) techniques were employed to study the anomaly in photovoltaic and IPCE observed for structural isomers based on Ru(II) sensitizers HD-7 and HD-8 as shown in Fig. 1. Impedance spectroscopy was employed to study the interface properties which have direct correlation with photocurrent and photovoltage as found previously. Photovoltaic measurements of the current–potential (I–V) curve and IPCE were carried out under AM 1.5 irradiation conditions. It was found that although HD-7 and HD-8 are structurally not very different, both sensitizers when employed in DSCs showed remarkably different I–V and IPCE owing to the substantial difference in electron injection and dye/TiO2 interface properties. The purpose was to qualitatively compare and understand the influence of isomerization on the photovoltaic performance of DSCs, without quantitative calculations of kinetic parameters for intersystem crossing (ISC), electron injection from singlet and triplet states, which have been reported and discussed extensively elsewhere.

For the synthesis of proposed sensitizers HD-7 and HD-8, the corresponding antenna ligands were synthesized first by reaction of relevant aromatic aldehydes and 4,4′-dimethyl-2,2′-bipyridyl in a pressure tube in the presence of excess of chlorotrimethylsilane to produce the corresponding bis-stilbazole in Knoevenagel condensation type reaction. The synthetic procedures for the ligands and complexes can be found in ESI.

The proposed Ru(II) sensitizers were then synthesized in the typical one pot three step synthetic scheme as given in ESI. The yield of the crude products was in the range of 90–95%, which were purified through a Sephadex LH-20 column three times to give the highly pure products in 50% yield. The pure product was then characterized by FT-IR, 1H-NMR, and high resolution mass spectrometry (ESI). The chemical structures of HD-7 and HD-8 are depicted in Fig. 1.

The photon harvesting capability of Ru(II) sensitizers can be tuned by the functionalization of the bipyridyl ancillary ligands with extended conjugation or electron donating groups as found previously. Ancillary ligands for HD-7 and HD-8 were named LH-7 and LH-8 and are shown in Scheme S1 (ESI). To characterize the photophysical properties of LH-7 and LH-8, absorption and emission were performed and the results are shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). Absorption λmax for LH-7 was 389 nm compared to 346 nm of LH-8. Apparently, the absorption spectrum of LH-7 is better in terms of harvesting more visible photons. Emission λmax was at 492 nm for LH-7 compared to 425 nm of LH-8 leading to Stokes shifts of 103 nm and 79 nm, respectively. Thus, it can be concluded based on Stokes shifts that comparatively more energy was lost from excited electrons (most likely by vibrational relaxation or intersystem crossing) before luminescence decay for LH-7 than for LH-8.

A comparison among the UV-Vis absorption and emission spectra of HD-7, HD-8 and N719, measured in DMF using a concentration of 2 × 10−5 M, is given in Fig. 2 and the results are summarized in Table 1.
Sensitizer
Absorption λmax (nm)

ε (M−1 cm−1)
Emission λmax (nm)
HD-7
305, 411, 533 (d→π*)
44150; 22100; 17200
721
HD-8
300, 365, 537 (d→π*)
34750; 21000; 11900
730
N719
310, 381, 529 (d→π*)
46100; 14400; 12800
712
In order to study the effect of extended conjugation on the excited state lifetime of sensitizers HD-7 and HD-8, time correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) method was employed. Fig. S2 (ESI) shows the excited state decay behavior of the dyes. The emission decay lifetime for HD-7, HD-8 and N719 was measured and found to be 31 ns, 51 ns, and 38 ns, respectively, as given in Table S1 (ESI) without purging the solutions with argon. The measured value of the excited state lifetime for N719 in air saturated ethanol solution is 40 ns, which was 38 ns as found in DMF for this study.

The comparison between the ground state oxidation potential (GSOP), excited state oxidation potential (ESOP), electron injection and dye regeneration free energy for HD-7, HD-8 and N719 is shown in Fig. 3 and the results are summarized in Table S2 (ESI). The measurements of GSOP and ESOP by cyclic voltammetry are explained in ESI whereas E0–0 was calculated from the onset of absorption spectra. The GSOP values of −5.46 eV, and −5.45 eV for HD-7, and HD-8, respectively, confirmed that the HOMOs of these dyes are below the I3−/I− redox couple (−5.2 eV), and there is enough thermodynamic driving force for efficient dye regeneration. Additionally, the ESOP level of HD-7 and HD-8 was at −3.6 eV and −3.54 eV, respectively, which lay above the conduction band edge of nanocrystalline TiO2 (−4.2 eV). Thus owing to the energetically favorable excited states, efficient electron injection into the CB edge of TiO2 and dye regeneration was achieved with sensitizers HD-7 and HD-8.


The photovoltaic performance of complexes HD-7 and HD-8 on the nanocrystalline TiO2 electrode was studied under standard AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2, one sun illumination). The TiO2 electrode was prepared by using the method reported by Grätzel et al. and details about the steps and the materials used are given in ESI.

Under similar conditions, HD-8 outperformed benchmark N719 in terms of incident-photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) response in the wavelength range of 450–800 nm as shown in Fig. 4. IPCE response as high as 79% was achieved for HD-8 compared to 76% for N719. Better IPCE response by HD-8 can be attributed to extended conjugation by incorporation of stilbazole and phenanthrene in the ancillary ligand. In comparison, IPCE response by HD-7 was poor, though both HD-7 and HD-8 employ a very similar strategy for extension of conjugation. In a similar Ru(II) sensitizer (MH11) by employing pyrene instead of phenanthrene, El-Shafei et al. attributed the higher IPCE and Jsc to the highly conjugated, bulky and hydrophobic nature of the ancillary ligand. Similarly, phenanthrene and anthracene-based ancillary ligands were expected to offer a barrier to recombination or loss of excited electrons by combining with the oxidized dye or the electrolyte. According to IPCE results, phenanthrene performs as anticipated whereas anthracene was far poor in photocurrent response than expected. Similar results for the I–V curve were obtained which are shown in Fig. 5.

Table 2 summarizes the photovoltaic parameters including the short-circuit photocurrent density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factors (FF) and overall cell efficiencies (η, %).
Sensitizer

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF

η (%)

a 
J
sc, short-circuit photocurrent density; Voc, open-circuit photovoltage; FF, fill factor; η, total power conversion efficiency. TiO2 active area 0.18 cm−2.

HD-7
9.48
0.65
0.72
4.4
HD-8
16.96
0.68
0.68
7.9
N719
15.1
0.71
0.71
7.6
HD-8 outperformed other two sensitizers resulting in a Jsc of 16.96 mA cm−2 and a Voc of 0.68 V. Superior IPCE response of HD-8 translated into higher Jsc than HD-7 and N719. The overall η (%) for HD-8 was 7.9 compared to 4.4 for HD-7 and 7.6 for N719 under similar conditions. The overall better photovoltaic parameters of HD-8 can be attributed to thermodynamically more favorable ground and excited state properties than N719. On the other hand, poor IPCE response of HD-7 translated into a low Jsc of 9.48 mA cm−2. Though HD-7 has thermodynamically favorable redox properties, the poor performance of DSCs can be attributed to the internal loss of excited electrons either through recombination or intersystem crossing since the Voc of HD-7 is not substantially lower than HD-8. In order to rationalize the excited electrons loss for HD-7, femtosecond transient absorption and impedance measurements were performed.

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is a powerful tool which gives the phase and magnitude of response as a function of modulation in the frequency of voltage. This then leads to analysis and measurements of appropriate transfer functions. In DSCs, EIS can be effectively used to characterize the interfacial charge transfer process at TiO2/dye, Pt/electrolyte and predict the electron lifetime in the TiO2 conduction band. The combination of charge transfer resistance and chemical capacitance give rise to a semicircle at the complex plane. The EIS Nyquist and Bode plots for the DSCs based on HD-7, HD-8 and N719 are shown in Fig. 6 and 7. In EIS Nyquist plots, the electron recombination resistance was in the order HD-7 > N719 > HD-8. Although, the order of radius size for the semicircle is usually consistent with Voc obtained from devices, however anomaly in HD-7 recombination resistance was observed. A similar anomaly in the form of higher recombination resistance was observed and reported previously for sensitizers which favor triplet state injection while anchored to TiO2.

In Fig. 7, the frequency response in the range of 0 to 2.5 Log Hz−1, is related to the electron lifetime in the CB of TiO2 (eTiO2). In essence, the Bode plot compliments the Nyquist plot and the sensitizer which offers the highest resistance at the TiO2 surface for charge recombination with the electrolyte shows the highest phase change peak shifted towards lower frequency. In this case, the frequency (0–2.5 Log Hz−1) peak of the DSCs based on N719 and HD-8 was shifted to lower frequency relative to that of HD-7 indicating a shorter recombination lifetime for HD-7, thus resulting in lower Voc for HD-7 compared to N719 and HD-8 as given in Table 2 for solar cells.
The injected electron lifetime (eTiO2) can be determined by using the relationship (τCB = 1/2πf), where τ is the lifetime of electrons in TiO2 and f is the mid frequency peak in Bode plots. The frequency peak of the DSCs based on HD-7, HD-8 and N719 was at 17 Hz, 16 Hz, and 10 Hz, corresponding to eTiO2 of 9.4 ms, 10 ms and 16 ms, respectively, thus resulting in lower Voc for HD-7 and HD-8 compared to N719, which correlates well with the actual Voc reported for the solar cells.
Anomaly in the form of higher recombination resistance observed in the Nyquist plot of HD-7 and poor IPCE response shows that the excited electrons are in a state which either hinders the charge difussion (both on the TiO2 surface and in recombination with the electrolyte) or the excited electrons are going through internal loss such as higher intersystem crossing.

Femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS) was employed to investigate the early charge injection dynamics in HD-7 and HD-8 films and understand the underlying causes which result in such a drastic difference in short circuit current density (Jsc). TA spectra of HD-7 and HD-8 films with the addition of an iodide-based electrolyte are shown in Fig. 8(a) and (b), respectively. The spectra show negative ground state bleaching (GSB) features, which result from a decrease in absorption in the excited (pumped) dye, less than 620 nm (>2.0 eV). The spectra are dominated by a broad photo-induced absorption (PA) band, which results from increased absorption of the excited (pumped) dye, greater than 620 nm (<2.0 eV). This broad PA band is the convolution of two PA spectral features. We attribute one PA feature to the absorption of the excited-state dye (dye*) at approximately 650 nm, and the other to the absorption of the oxidized-dye (dye+) at approximately 760 nm, which is in agreement with previous studies on Ru(II) based DSCs. The oxidized-dye is formed after charge injection occurs, and is therefore a probe of the ultrafast charge injection dynamics in DSCs. It is important to note in Fig. 8 that in HD-7 film, after 500 ps, at 760 nm (dye+) there is a large increase in the PA signal while at 650 nm (dye*) the PA signal is unchanged. In contrast, after 500 ps, in the HD-8 film the PA band at 760 nm (dye+) decreases slightly while the PA signal at 650 nm (dye*) decreases significantly. Comparison of TA spectra of HD-7 and HD-8 at 1 ps and 500 ps in the presence of the electrolyte is shown in Fig. S10 (ESI).

To understand the significant differences in the spectral evolution in HD-7 and HD-8, we compared the time evolution of the dye* and dye+ PA bands in films with and without the addition of the electrolyte as shown in Fig. 9. It has been shown previously that the electrolyte solution can shift the energy of the conduction band in TiO2 and as a result can affect the charge injection dynamics. It has also been shown previously in similar Ru(II) DSCs that the slow secondary rise of dye+ can be attributed to charge injection from the triplet MLCT states (3MLCT) and occurs over pico to ns timescales, similar to that of HD-7. Thus addition of the electrolyte solution favors additional charge injection pathways to form. Therefore, upon addition of electrolyte to the HD-7 and HD-8 films, the dye+ TA signal increases due to the increase in injection from both singlet and triplet MLCT states.
However, HD-7 shows a significantly larger TA signal related to the oxidized triplet state than HD-8 (Fig. 9), which suggests that either HD-7 has a significantly larger proportion of initially filled 3MLCT states or has a higher ISC rate to the triplet state than HD-8. As a result, HD-7 has less singlet charge injection (1MLCT) and preferred slow triplet charge injection (3MLCT) for which free energy of electron injection is lower. In contrast, the dominant charge injection pathway for HD-8 is through singlet injection (1MLCT), which is confirmed due to the presence of fast sharp decay in the TA signal of HD-8 (Fig. 9b), whereas no such fast sharp TA decay component was observed for HD-7 (Fig. 9a). Since the free energy of injection is higher for the singlet state than the triplet state pathway, charge injection from the 1MLCT states is likely to contribute more to the current density of the device. The significantly larger proportion of singlet injection in HD-8 than HD-7 correlates well with a drastically large increase in short circuit current density in HD-8 than HD-7. Further studies are underway to understand why HD-7 prefers ISC or internal excited electrons loss compared to HD-8 and either this happens only when HD-7 is anchored on TiO2 or HD-7 shows similar behavior in solution. This will eventually help to understand and compare the ultrafast events on the interface and photophysics in solution as a function of isomerization.

In TCSPC, emitted photons are counted and photon arrival time is recorded, which represents the luminescence decay as a function of time which depends on the lifetime of the excited state. For DSCs, the TCSPC method can be employed to study the emission decay behavior of dyes anchored to TiO2, particularly in the presence of the electrolyte which retards the kinetic processes due to electrolyte induced shifts in the dye–TiO2 system.

For this study, similar films as employed in femtosecond TAS were used in the presence of the electrolyte and the resultant decay curves are shown in Fig. 10.
It is obvious from the decay curves of Fig. 10 that under similar measurement conditions and film preparation the signal intensity of decay curves for the same number of counts was much less for HD-7 compared to HD-8, showing the difference in the population of the excited state contributing to radiative and non-radiative transitions. Population of the excited state contributing to radiative transitions was significantly higher for HD-8 than HD-7 based film. This unambiguously concludes that in the presence of the electrolyte, HD-7 favors raditionless loss of excited electrons, which was established by femtosecond TAS experiments.

In summary, this study showcases the crucial findings related to the role of triplet state and ultrafast singlet electron injection for Ru(II) sensitizers in DSCs. HD-7 employing an anthracene based ancillary ligand was found to be prone to ISC before singlet injection into TiO2 as found by femtosecond TAS. In femtosecond TAS, time evolution of the transient absorption signal of the oxidized dye clearly shows the dominant presence of triplet state oxidized form for HD-7 compared to HD-8. However, the observed dominant triplet state for HD-7 does not translate into photocurrent efficiently, due to lack of enough thermodynamic driving force for electron injection caused by the low energy of the triplet state whereas the dominant charge injection pathway for HD-8 is through singlet injection (1MLCT) as found by femtosecond TAS. Impedance and TCSPC measurement comparison for employed sensitizers favors the conclusion of raditionless loss of excited electrons for HD-7 compared to HD-8. This raditionless loss of energy is most probably related to ISC for the Ru(II) HD-7 sensitizer with an anthracene ancillary ligand. The findings of this study support the dominant role of fast singlet injection for HD-8 compared to less efficient slow triplet state injection of HD-7.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Synthesis details, FT-IR, High-Resolution -ESI-MS, 1H-NMR and cyclic voltammetry graphs. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cp04741a
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015