 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA06731F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21599-21608


Won Seok
Chi
,

Dong Kyu
Roh
,

Chang Soo
Lee
 and 

Jong Hak
Kim
*

Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Yonsei University, 50 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-749, South Korea. E-mail: jonghak@yonsei.ac.kr; Fax: +82-2-312-6401; Tel: +82-2-2123-5757

Received
26th August 2015
, Accepted 7th September 2015
First published on 9th September 2015
This report provides a facile process to produce shape- and morphology-controlled MIL-125(Ti), a subclass of metal organic frameworks (MOFs) using poly(ethylene glycol) diglycidyl ether (PEGDGE) as a structure directing agent. Upon deliberate calcination, MIL-125(Ti) is converted to mesoporous hierarchical TiO2 (hier-TiO2) with an anatase phase, a large surface area and a variety of nanostructures. The morphology changes from 200 nm circular plates to 1 μm bipyramids with increasing PEGDGE amount, indicating the pivotal role of PEGDGE as a shape controller. When the hier-TiO2 is deposited onto a nanocrystalline TiO2 (nc-TiO2) layer as the scattering layer, the dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) with a quasi-solid-state polymer electrolyte records a high conversion efficiency (7.1% at 100 mW cm−2), which is much higher than that of DSSCs with a nc-TiO2 layer only (4.6%) or with commercial scattering TiO2 (cs-TiO2) on a nc-TiO2 layer (5.0%). A solid-state DSSC using a single component solid polymer, i.e., poly((1-(4-ethenylphenyl)methyl)-3-butyl-imidazolium iodide) (PEBII), also exhibits an excellent efficiency of up to 8.0%. The improved efficiency results from the pivotal role of the hier-TiO2 in improving the surface area and light harvesting properties, as demonstrated by N2 adsorption/desorption isotherm, reflectance spectroscopy, incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE), and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analyses.

There has been a large focus on dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) as a promising alternative to conventional silicon solar cells because of their high efficiency, low cost, and easy fabrication. Most of the current research has focused on the enhancement of device performance, which can be achieved through the development of novel sensitizers, metal oxide photoanodes, catalytic counter electrodes, or electrolytes. Among these, the photoanode is an especially important component as it directly affects dye absorption, light trapping ability, charge recombination, and interfacial contact between the electrode and electrolyte. Typically, mesoporous TiO2 is employed as a photoanode material because of its suitable energy level, superior dye absorption ability, and ease of structure control.

As a main element of photoanodes, a nanocrystalline TiO2 layer is generally deposited on a transparent conducting oxide substrate for dye adsorption. However, this approach has some disadvantages such as a low surface area, poor interconnectivity, and smaller light scattering ability because of the poorly organized morphology resulting from a small and regular particle size without effective pores. To address these issues, light scattering particles with a large size were deposited onto a nanocrystalline TiO2 layer to harvest reflecting light. This method increased the light scattering ability as well as the dye loading amount of the photoanode, resulting in enhanced solar energy conversion efficiency in DSSCs.
Despite the high-energy conversion efficiency of DSSCs based on a conventional liquid electrolyte, solid-state or quasi-solid-state DSSCs have recently received great attention because of the need for long-term stability, flexible design, and lightweight cells. In particular, DSSCs with enhanced energy conversion efficiency and long-term stability need to be developed for future applications such as building integrated photovoltaic systems. Not only for DSSCs, but also for energy storage devices such as rechargeable batteries, the design of solid-state electrolytes is of pivotal importance to obtain durable performance as well as high efficiency. One important consideration for such DSSCs is to obtain deep penetration of solid electrolytes with a large molecular volume into the TiO2 mesopores, which is greatly affected by by the pore size, porosity, and pore interconnectivity. Despite much progress in incorporating solid-state or quasi-solid electrolytes, there have not been extensive efforts to enhance the device performance by modification of photoanode structures.
Metal organic frameworks (MOFs) have been widely investigated for their attractive unique properties, which can be tunable by the design of the coordination between metal ions and organic linkers. MOFs can possess infinite features such as framework geometries, pore sizes, and functionalities by tailoring both the organic ligand and metal selection. Their highly flexible potential makes them candidates for wide applications in the fields of gas adsorption separation, catalysts, sensors, and batteries, which are in demand for sustainable and renewable energy devices.
Recently, MOFs have been researched as promising photovoltaic materials for DSSCs. Cu-based MOFs were substituted as a new sensitizer instead of N719 dye using a layer-by-layer technique. A Mg-MOF was introduced into a polymer composite electrolyte by UV radiation, which increased the photoenergy conversion efficiency through interactions between carboxyl groups in the Mg-MOF and hydroxyl groups in the TiO2 surface layer. Furthermore, a metal–organic gel electrolyte composed by coordination of Al3+ and 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylate provided good accommodation ability. For electrode applications, MOFs worked as both the template and precursor to provide functional materials with a high surface area retaining the particle morphology. Cobalt sulfide nanoparticles derived from surfactants assisted the preparation of zeolite imidazole framework-67 (ZIF-67) with a high surface area and good catalytic properties. As a result, CoS-derived counter electrode-based DSSCs showed a higher solar power conversion efficiency than Pt-based counter electrodes. A leaf-like ZIF film was also converted to a porous ZnO nanosheet photoanode, which enabled high dye loading, efficient electrolyte diffusion, rapid dye adsorption by nanopores, and good light harvesting ability. Also, hierarchical ZnO parallelepipeds were prepared from MOF-5, a subclass of the MOF series, and used as a scattering layer in the DSSCs. However, most previous studies are based on a ZnO photoanode with which it is difficult to achieve a high efficiency because of the low surface area and dye loading.
In this study, we report a facile way for preparing multifunctional, hierarchical, anatase TiO2 with a large surface area and various morphologies directly derived from MIL-125(Ti), a subclass of the MOF series. In particular, poly(ethylene glycol) diglycidyl ether (PEGDGE) was employed as a structure-directing agent to form various MIL-125(Ti) structures. Upon deliberate calcination, MIL-125(Ti) was converted to hierarchical TiO2 (hier-TiO2) with a large surface area and a variety of nanostructures. The hier-TiO2 synthesized was used to form top scattering layers on a nanocrystalline TiO2 (nc-TiO2) layer for use in DSSC applications, and these hier-TiO2 layers were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm analysis, UV-visible light absorption, and reflectance spectroscopy. The performance of DSSCs was investigated by measuring current density–voltage (J–V) curves and using incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analyses.

Titanium(IV) butoxide (TBT), terephthalic acid (4-benzenedicarboxylate, BDC), poly(ethylene glycol) diglycidyl ether (PEGDGE), poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG10k, 10000 g mol−1), lithium iodide (LiI), 1-methyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide (MPII), iodine (I2), dimethylformamide (DMF), methanol, ethanol, and acetonitrile were purchased from Aldrich and used without further purification. Ruthenium dye (535-bisTBA, N719) was purchased from Solaronix, and commercially available TiO2 paste (Dyesol paste, 18NR-T) was purchased from Dyesol. FTO conductive glass was purchased from Pilkington, France.


First, 3.5 g of terephthalic acid was completely dissolved in DMF solvent. Different amounts (0, 0.06, 0.6, and 1.2 ml) of PEGDGE, 1.82 ml of titanium butoxide, and 7 ml of methanol were sequentially added to this solution, followed by stirring for 20–30 min to produce homogeneous mixtures. The resultant solutions were hydrothermally reacted in an autoclave at 150 °C for 24 h. The synthesized MIL-125(Ti) was centrifuged at 10000 rpm for 30 min and washed with fresh methanol several times. The final products were dried in a vacuum oven overnight at 50 °C to completely evaporate the DMF. MIL-125(Ti) synthesized using 0, 0.06, 0.6, and 1.2 ml of PEGDGE was named MIL-125(Ti)1, MIL-125(Ti)2, MIL-125(Ti)3, and MIL-125(Ti)4, respectively.


The synthesized MIL-125(Ti) was calcined at 380 °C for a long time (i.e., 5 h) with a slow increase in temperature (i.e., 10 °C min−1) to produce a mesoporous anatase structure while controlling the release of gas from the MIL framework. Setting temperature moderate was the most important factor to generate a highly mesoporous structure, while maintaining the basic framework of MIL-125(Ti) without pore blocking and formation of big pores by the connection of small pores.


The as-prepared hier-TiO2 particles (0.1 g) were dispersed in 1 ml absolute ethanol solvent by sonication and stirring for 5 h. After distribution of particles in solution, 0.4 ml of α-terpinol and 0.05 g of ethyl cellulose were added to the suspension to increase the viscosity. The resultant solutions were sonicated for 30 min and stirred overnight for perfect dissolution of organic materials in the TiO2 suspension. Ethanol solvents were evaporated during stirring while maintaining a homogeneous state, resulting in the formation of highly viscous TiO2 paste. The as-prepared TiO2 pastes were doctor-bladed onto the nc-TiO2 layer and heated in a drying oven at 50 °C for 1 h and 80 °C for 1 h. This process was performed to prevent crack formation after calcination. Finally, the TiO2 photoanodes were calcined at 500 °C for 30 min. TiCl4 post-treatment was not necessary because of the good physical and adhesion properties.


DSSCs with an active area of 0.16 cm2 were fabricated according to our previous studies. First, the FTO (Pilkington Co. Ltd, 8 Ω) glass pieces were cut to 1.5 cm × 2 cm and cleaned with acetone and ethanol under sonication. For the blocking layer, Ti(IV) bis(ethyl acetoacetato) diisopropoxide solution in 1-butanol was spin-coated onto FTO glass and then the glass was heated stepwise to 450 °C and maintained at this temperature for 30 min. A 6- to 7-μm thick nc-TiO2 layer was prepared on the blocking layer on the FTO substrate using commercial TiO2 paste (Dyesol paste, 18NR-T) by the doctor-blade method and then calcined at 450 °C for 30 min, resulting in the formation of a transparent TiO2 photoanode. The TiO2 photoanodes were immersed in dye solution containing 13 mg N719 in 50 ml absolute ethanol solution and incubated in an oven at 50 °C for 3 h. The resulting photoanodes were washed with pure ethanol several times and dried by using an air gun. The Pt counter electrode was prepared by spin-coating solution containing 7 mM H2PtCl6·H2O in 2-propanol onto the FTO glass, followed by heat treatment at 450 °C for 30 min. The quasi-solid-state electrolyte was prepared using PEG10k (Mn = 10000 g mol−1), MPII, LiI and I2 in acetonitrile solvent. Poly((1-(4-ethenylphenyl)methyl)-3-butyl-imidazolium iodide) (PEBII) without any additives was used as the single component solid electrolyte. The prepared electrolytes were directly cast onto the photoanode. Both electrodes were superimposed and pressed between two glass plates to slowly evaporate the solvent and produce a thin electrolyte layer. The cells were placed in a vacuum oven for 1 day to allow complete evaporation of the solvent and then sealed with an epoxy resin.

The photovoltaic properties of DSSCs were characterized using a Keithley Model 2400 and a 1000 W xenon lamp (Oriel, 91193). The light intensity was homogeneous over a 20 × 20 cm2 area. The mismatch between the simulated light and natural sunlight was calibrated by adjusting the photocurrent density of a Si solar cell (Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy System, Mono-Si + KG filter, Certificate no. C-ISE269) for a sunlight intensity of unity (100 mW cm−2). More than three identical DSSCs were fabricated and tested to increase the reliability of the characterization, and all of the DSSCs were characterized at room temperature using a thermoelectric cooler to maintain the temperature. EIS data were measured using an electrochemical workstation (Keithley Model 2400) with a frequency range from 0.01 Hz to 0.1 MHz and an AC amplitude of 0.2 V.

N719 dye-sensitized TiO2 photoanodes with an active area of 1.0 cm2 were immersed in 10.0 ml of 0.1 M NaOH in a 1:1 (by volume) mixed solvent of ethanol and deionized water. The resulting solutions were stirred until the N719 dye molecules detached fully from the surface of the TiO2 photoanodes. Finally, the original N719 dye loading on the photoanodes was calculated based on UV-visible spectroscopy analysis of the solutions using the absorbance peak value at 515 nm according to the Beer–Lambert law (A = εlc), where A is the absorbance at 515 nm, ε = 14100 M−1 cm−1 is the molar extinction coefficient of the N719 dye at 515 nm, l is the length of the analytical light path, and c is the concentration of the N719 dye.


Materials synthesis was characterized by using an Excalibur Series FT-IR (DIGLAB Co.) instrument over a frequency range of 4000–400 cm−1. Each element was investigated by using an XPS equipped with K-alpha (Thermo, UK) with a monochromated Al Kα X-ray source. UV-vis spectroscopy was performed with a spectrophotometer (Shimadzu) in the range of 300–800 nm. The thermal stability of materials was determined by TGA (Mettler Toledo TGA/SDTA 851e, Columbus, OH) under air atmosphere from 50 °C to 700 °C at a rate of 20 °C min−1. The morphology of materials was characterized by energy-filtering transmission electron microscopy (EF-TEM, Carl Zeiss, LIBRA 120, Germany).


Hydrothermal reactions of the solution containing TBT, BDC, and PEGDGE were conducted at 150 °C for 24 h to synthesize MIL-125(Ti) with various structures and sizes. To confirm successful preparation of MIL-125(Ti), the FT-IR spectra were measured as shown in Fig. 1a. The strong absorption band at 1381 cm−1 and the weak absorption band at 1437 cm−1 corresponded to carbonyl symmetric stretching vibrations. Also, three absorption bands from 1400 to 1500 cm−1 are assigned to carbonyl asymmetric stretching vibration modes. The small shoulder peak at 1255 cm−1 indicates the C–H symmetric stretching vibrations of the benzene ring. The sharp peaks presented in the region of 400–800 cm−1 correspond to Ti–O–Ti–O vibrations. The intensity of the carboxylic acid functional group of MIL-125(Ti) in the range of 1300–700 cm−1 gradually increased with increasing amount of PEGDGE in the reaction solution, indicating surface modification of MIL-125(Ti) by PEGDGE.

TGA is a useful tool that can be used to confirm the transition process from MIL-125(Ti) to TiO2. As shown in Fig. 1b, the first weight loss was observed under the calcination process up to 100 °C, and is due to residual solvents that were primarily water adsorbed onto MIL-125(Ti). In the range of 100–300 °C, the second slow weight loss was caused by the removal of DMF molecules and unreacted organic chemicals captured within MIL-125(Ti) pores. Above 300 °C, the stable MIL-125(Ti) started to undergo phase transition and structural reorganization to TiO2 without external configuration of particles, probably due to the loss of hydroxo groups. It was confirmed that MIL-125(Ti) instantaneously decomposed to TiO2 at 450 °C and maintained the resultant TiO2 structure under further heat treatment.
XRD patterns of the MIL-125(Ti) series produced by different amounts of PEGDGE were measured to identify the crystal phase of materials, as shown in Fig. 1c. The crystal structure was composed of μ-OH corner-sharing TiO6 octahedra chains through Ti4+ ions, which were interconnected by BDC molecules to develop three-dimensional architecture pores. The crystal structure and phases of the MIL-125(Ti) series were consistent with previously reported values. However, the relative peak intensity was primarily affected by the amount of PEGDGE used for the hydrothermal process. With increasing amount of PEGDGE, the peaks at diffraction angles (2θ) of 9.7°, 15.3°, 19.5°, and 25.0° increased, whereas the peaks at 6.7°, 11.6°, 15.0°, 16.5°, and 17.9° decreased. This indicates that the growth of the MIL-125(Ti) crystalline structure was affected by PEGDGE and thus the crystal was reconstructed, leading to a change in the particle morphology and surface area. After calcination, a pure anatase TiO2 phase structure was observed for all MIL-125(Ti)-based hierarchical TiO2 (denoted as hier-TiO2) particles regardless of the PEGDGE content, as shown in Fig. 1d. The peaks at 25.3°, 37.9°, 47.8°, and 54.7° corresponded to reflections from the (101), (004), (200), and (105) crystal planes of anatase TiO2, respectively.
The MIL-125(Ti) series, controlled by the amount of PEGDGE in the synthesis procedure, presented various particle sizes (200 nm−1 μm) and shapes (circular plates to truncated bipyramids), as seen in Fig. 2a–d. Hydrothermal reactions of a homogenous solution composed of TBP and BDC in a DMF/methanol mixture without PEGDGE produced a small particle size (200 nm) and circular plate morphology. The use of the modulator PEGDGE resulted in more phase separation between the solvent and precursor, leading to an aggregated structure and a larger particle size up to 1 μm. Furthermore, the direction perpendicular to the circular plate generated new growth and facet formation that was exposed on the crystal structure, triggering formation of truncated bipyramids.

Fig. 2e–h show the SEM images of mesoporous anatase hier-TiO2 particles derived from MIL-125(Ti) via dispersion in ethanol solution and casting onto a glass substrate. Distributed hier-TiO2 particles were densely packed and maintained their morphology, even after calcination with crystal structure alternation. Only TiO2 particle sizes were reduced by shrinkage of MIL-125(Ti), in which the pores were formed from frameworks of intertwined Ti metal and organic linkers after calcination. These submicrosized and microsized hier-TiO2 particles are expected to efficiently enhance the light scattering ability.
To more clearly identify the morphology and size of MIL-125(Ti) and hier-TiO2 particles, TEM observations were conducted as shown in Fig. 3. MIL-125(Ti) exhibited a large size of greater than 500 nm without an evident pore structure due to the very small pore size of less than 2 nm. The framework structure gradually changed from circular plates to truncated bipyramids, consistent with the above SEM observations. Upon calcination, well-defined TiO2 particles were generated with organized mesopores and a large surface area, which would be effective for enhancing dye loading and pore filling of the polymer electrolyte. All hier-TiO2 particles retained highly interconnected pores with shrunken particle sizes. These special characteristics of mesoporous anatase TiO2 would act to boost solar energy performance, which needs a large surface area and excellent light scattering properties.
Under mild calcination conditions, the MIL-125(Ti) series were completely converted to anatase mesoporous hier-TiO2 particles. The specific surface area of MIL-125(Ti) and hier-TiO2 particles is summarized in Table S1, as determined by N2 adsorption–desorption measurements using the BET method. Because of the small-scale frameworks coordinating the organic linker and metal ions, the MIL-125(Ti) series exhibited a high surface area of over 1300 m2 g−1, which is comparable to recently reported values. After calcination, the pores of MIL-125(Ti) were shrunken, such that anatase TiO2 particles had an area of over 100 m2 g−1, but retained the particle frameworks. As shown in Fig. 4a, type-IV isotherms with H1-type hysteresis loops at P/P0 = 0.5–0.8 were observed for all hier-TiO2 particles, indicating the presence of large mesopores. The average pore diameters of hier-TiO2 particles were quite similar at approximately 6–10 nm, as estimated using the BJH method (Fig. 4b).
UV-visible absorption spectra were measured to investigate changes in dye loading of bilayer photoanodes of hier-TiO2 on nc-TiO2. The results are summarized in Table 1. The hier-TiO2 layered photoanodes exhibited greater dye loading than neat nc-TiO2 monolayered photoanodes due to the increased film thickness and increased surface area. In particular, the deposition of the hier-TiO2 layer on nc-TiO2 photoanodes resulted in a nearly two-fold increase in dye loading (from 77 to 139 nmol cm−2), which would help to significantly improve the efficiency of the DSSCs.
Photoanode
Dye loading (nmol cm−2)

V
oc (V)

J
sc
 (mA cm−2)
FF

η (%)

R
s (Ω)

R
1 (Ω)

R
2 (Ω)

W
s (Ω)

a Values in parentheses refer to the Jsc obtained from IPCE curves.

hier1-TiO2/nc-TiO2
139
0.66
17.4(18.6)
0.56
6.6
16.1
2.9
38.0
7.0
hier2-TiO2/nc-TiO2
137
0.65
18.5(18.8)
0.55
6.7
17.0
2.5
38.5
7.5
hier3-TiO2/nc-TiO2
128
0.65
18.7(19.5)
0.55
6.8
18.1
3.3
37.3
10.5
hier4-TiO2/nc-TiO2
113
0.66
19.1(19.7)
0.55
7.1
14.8
3.0
37.2
6.3
cs-TiO2/nc-TiO2
—
0.68
13.5(16.9)
0.54
5.0
19.9
3.0
50.1
10.7
nc-TiO2 only
77
0.68
11.7(14.6)
0.57
4.6
16.7
2.4
53.9
7.0

Fig. 4c shows photographs of different hier-TiO2/nc-TiO2 bilayer photoanodes and neat nc-TiO2 monolayer photoanodes. By the naked eye it was obvious that the photoanodes became opaque after the deposition of hier-TiO2 on transparent nc-TiO2, demonstrating efficient light reflectance and scattering. The reflective abilities of hier-TiO2/nc-TiO2 bilayers and a neat transparent nc-TiO2 monolayer were measured by UV-vis reflectance spectroscopy in the visible range from 300–800 nm as shown in Fig. 5a. The photoanode with a transparent nc-TiO2 monolayer presented low reflective ability with retaining values between 10% and 20% and maximum reflectance at 390 nm. On the other hand, higher reflective properties were observed for the bilayer photoanodes composed of scattering hier-TiO2 on the nc-TiO2 layer over the entire range, recording over 50% reflectance. All of the photoanodes with a scattering layer exhibited a similar reflectance ability without large differences. This reflectance ability could strongly affect the performance of the DSSCs, which might be dependent on the light trapping ability of the photoanode for recycling light.
Surface and cross-sectional SEM images of the photoanodes layered by the doctor blade technique are shown in Fig. S1 and S2. The surface SEM images of hier-TiO2 on nc-TiO2 photoanodes were not significantly different from those of neat hier-TiO2 particles (Fig. 2e–h), indicating that the original morphology and particle size were not perturbed by the organic binder (i.e., ethyl cellulose and α-terpinol) and the doctor blade technique. However, the interconnectivity between the TiO2 particles could be enhanced to provide increased electron transportation. The dual porous structure of the hier-TiO2 layer formed by small inner pores in the particles as well as large pores between the particles would be effective in improving energy conversion efficiency based on a multifunctional effect. In general, commercial scattering layers are deposited with less than 4 μm thickness because of their own resistance and lower effectiveness of pore filling. However, we were able to increase the thickness of the hier-TiO2 layer up to approximately 6 μm by controlling the viscosity of the paste and using the doctor blade technique, resulting in improved DSSC efficiency. This is because the hier-TiO2 scattering layer has a greater ability to improve dye adsorption and light utilization, without having any negative effect on the pore filling of the polymer electrolyte even at a higher film thickness.
The solid-state or quasi-solid-state DSSCs are more advantageous than the liquid electrolyte-based counterpart because of the need for long-term stability, a flexible design, and light-weight cells. DSSCs based on a hier-TiO2 layer were fabricated using a quasi-solid-state polymer electrolyte consisting of PEG10k, MPII, LiI, and I2. This quasi-solid-state polymer electrolyte is based on the ethylene oxide group and a high molecular weight (10000 g mol−1) enough to produce better mechanical stability and faster ion transportation via the Grotthus hopping compared to the ones reported by other groups. The J–V curves of the DSSCs with different photoanode structures were measured at 100 mW cm−2 as shown in Fig. 5b and their photovoltaic parameters, including short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and overall energy conversion efficiency (η), are summarized in Table 1. The hier-TiO2 bilayer photoanodes enhanced the solar energy conversion efficiency to as high as 7.1%, which is much higher than that of the nc-TiO2 monolayer photoanode (4.6%). The obtained cell efficiency was not significantly changed at room temperature up to several days. There were no significant differences in FF and Voc values among the DSSCs. Thus, the much higher efficiency of hier-TiO2 based DSSCs is mostly attributed to an improvement in the Jsc value, resulting from increased dye loading and the light scattering effect. Although there was a slight difference among the hier-TiO2 based DSSCs, hier4-TiO2 showed the highest efficiency, which will be characterized in the next section using EIS and IPCE measurements.
The electrochemical analysis provides important information on the internal and interfacial resistances in equivalent circuits. The EIS spectra of DSSCs fabricated with hier-TiO2 based photoanodes are shown in Fig. 5c and summarized in Table 1. The resistance parameters consisted of ohmic series resistance of the conducting glass substrate (Rs), interfacial charge transfer resistance between the counter electrode and electrolyte (R1), interfacial charge transfer resistance between the photoanode and electrolyte (R2), and mass transport resistance related to the electrolyte redox couple (I−/I3−), which is known as Warburg diffusion (Ws). The Rs and R1 values of the DSSCs were not significantly different because these parameters were not strongly related to the resistance of the photoanode element. The R2 value is a pivotal parameter for investigating the charge transfer corresponding to the photoanode, which determines how effectively the TiO2 scattering layer functions electrochemically. The R2 values of DSSCs with hier-TiO2/nc-TiO2 bilayer photoanodes (37.2–38.5 Ω) were much smaller than that of the nc-TiO2 monolayer (53.9 Ω) or cs-TiO2/nc-TiO2 double layer photoanode (50.1 Ω). In particular, the R2 value of the hier4-TiO2 based DSSC was the smallest, indicating smaller charge transfer resistance at the photoanode interface. The hierarchical structure with high porosity and good connectivity based on both inner mesopores and inter spaces of hier-TiO2 facilitated deep penetration of the polymer electrolyte and improved conductivity, leading to efficient ion transportation and dye regeneration.
IPCE is defined as the ratio of the number of electrons in the external circuit produced by incident photons to the number of generated charge carriers at a given wavelength. Hence, the light scattering effect can be evaluated by measuring the IPCE spectra of DSSCs. The IPCE spectrum is directly related to the Jsc value measured in J–V curves, which is largely determined by dye loading, electron transport, and light harvesting. The IPCE spectra of DSSCs with a quasi-solid-state polymer electrolyte and various photoanodes were measured at 100 mW cm−2 as a function of the illumination wavelength, as shown in Fig. 5d. To ensure size dependency as well as dye loading ability, the normalized IPCE curves were also plotted by dividing entire IPCE values by the highest IPCE value to give a maximum IPCE value of 1 (Fig. S3). The IPCE values of the DSSCs fabricated with hier-TiO2/nc-TiO2 bilayer photoanodes were always much higher than those of the nc-TiO2 monolayer or the cs-TiO2/nc-TiO2 double layer over the whole spectral range. This indicates that DSSCs based on hier-TiO2 photoanodes exhibited enhanced light utilization ability through light scattering layer deposition. The maximum IPCE value was observed at 525 nm, corresponding to the absorption peak of N719 dye, due to visible t2 to π* metal to ligand charge transfer. The IPCE value is a result of the amount of dye absorption at lower wavelengths below 525 nm, but is related to light scattering efficiency at wavelengths above 525 nm. The DSSCs with bilayer photoanodes exhibited higher IPCE values compared to those with a neat nc-TiO2 layer-based photoanode at both low (<525 nm) and high (>525 nm) wavelengths, which is indicative of enhancement of both dye loading and light scattering properties. The light scattering effect increased with an increase in TiO2 particle size, consistent with the reflectance results in the wavelength range between 600 and 700 nm. Despite lower dye loading, the hier4-TiO2 based DSSC showed the highest efficiency as a result of better light scattering properties in higher wavelength regions, indicating that light scattering is more important than dye loading for the scattering layer.
We also tested the effectiveness of hier-TiO2 as a light scattering layer by fabricating solid-state DSSCs employing a single component solid PEBII electrolyte, as shown in Fig. 6. PEBII solidifies as a result of free radical polymerization of an ionic liquid, and the ionic conductivity reached 2.0 × 10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature due to the well-organized structure coupled with the π–π stacking interactions. Thus, PEBII functioned well as the solid electrolyte even without any additives such as iodide salt or iodine (I2). The efficiency of solid-state DSSCs based on a hier-TiO2/nc-TiO2 double layer reached 8.0%, which is among the highest values reported for N719-based solid-state DSSCs. This again demonstrated that the hier-TiO2 layer is highly efficient because of its multifunctionality, namely, (1) a large surface area that allows high levels of dye loading and thereby enhances the light harvesting efficiency, (2) a morphology that reflects light back into the nc-TiO2 layer, and (3) higher porosity that allows deep penetration of a large molecular volume polymer electrolyte.

We have reported a synthesis of anatase hier-TiO2 nanostructures derived from shape- and morphology-controlled MIL-125(Ti) via direct conversion by a calcination process. MIL-125(Ti) functioned as both the template and precursor with control of the structure and particle size through the use of PEGDGE as the structure-directing agent in the hydrothermal reaction. The use of large amounts of PEGDGE produced a larger particle size and changed the morphology from a circular plate to a bipyramid. The hier-TiO2 possessed high porosity as well as good interconnectivity, making it effective as the scattering layer in a bilayer photoanode for DSSCs. The DSSC fabricated with a hier-TiO2/nc-TiO2 bilayer photoanode and a quasi-solid-state polymer electrolyte exhibited greatly improved solar cell performance efficiency as high as 7.1%, compared to the nc-TiO2 monolayer photoanode based DSSC (4.6%). The efficiency of solid-state DSSCs fabricated using a single component PEBII solid polymer also reached a high value of 8.0%, which is among the highest values reported for N719-based solid-state DSSCs. The improved light harvesting efficiency of cells including hier-TiO2 layers was attributed to their bifunctionality, namely their ability to reflect light back into the dye as well as their high surface area that allowed high dye loading. This MOF template strategy demonstrated the possibility of introducing MOFs into photovoltaic energy device application and provided a significant contribution to the development of high-performance DSSCs, including structure controllable MOF materials. Furthermore, this strategy is very versatile and can be applied to other types of photovoltaic systems such as perovskite solar cells to obtain better performance with the scattering effect as well as high absorption ability.


This work was supported by the Center for Advanced Meta-Materials (NRF-2014M3A6B3063716), the Korea Center for Artificial Photosynthesis (NRF-2009-0093883), and the Human Resources Program in Energy Technology of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP, 20154010200810).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta06731f
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015