 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM31124K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13013-13022

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Jihua
Chen
*,

Xiang
Yu
,

Kunlun
Hong
,

Jamie M.
Messman
,

Deanna L.
Pickel
,

Kai
Xiao
,

Mark D.
Dadmun
,

Jimmy W.
Mays
,

Adam J.
Rondinone
,

Bobby G.
Sumpter
 and 

S. Michael
Kilbey II
*

Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA. E-mail: chenj1@ornl.gov; mkilbey@utk.edu

Chemical Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA

Department of Chemistry, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA

Computer Science & Mathematics Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA

Received
22nd February 2012
, Accepted 9th May 2012
First published on 24th May 2012
Nanophase separation plays a critical role in the performance of donor–acceptor based organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices. Although post-fabrication annealing is often used to enhance OPV efficiency, the ability to exert precise control over phase separated domains and connectivity remains elusive. In this work, we use a diblock copolymer to systematically manipulate the domain sizes of an organic solar cell active layer at the nanoscale. More specifically, a poly(3-hexylthiophene)-b-poly(ethylene oxide) (P3HT-b-PEO) diblock copolymer with a low polydispersity index (PDI = 1.3) is added to a binary blend of P3HT and 6,6-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) at different concentrations (0–20 wt%). Energy-filtered TEM (EFTEM) results suggest systematic changes of P3HT distribution as a function of block copolymer compatibilizer concentration and thermal annealing. X-ray scattering and microscopy techniques are used to show that prior to annealing, active layer domain sizes do not change substantially as compatibilizer is added; however after thermal annealing, the domain sizes are significantly reduced as the amount of P3HT-b-PEO compatibilizer increases. The impact of compatibilizer is further rationalized through quantum density functional theory calculations. Overall, this work demonstrates the possibility of block copolymers to systematically manipulate the nanoscale domain-structure of blends used for organic photovoltaic devices. If coupled with efficient charge transport and collection (through judicious choice of block copolymer type and composition), this approach may contribute to further optimization of OPV devices.

One of the biggest issues facing the commercial viability of organic photovoltaics (OPVs) is development of robust active layer systems that have power conversion efficiencies on the order of 10%. Organic photovoltaics based on hole-transporting polymers and electron-transporting fullerene (C60) derivatives have attracted extensive scientific interest in the past two decades due to their extraordinary potential for cost-effective harvesting and conversion of solar energy. Among the various active layer materials that have been examined to-date, poly(3-hexylthiophene)–6,6-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT–PCBM) blends have bench-mark power conversion efficiencies and are frequently used as a model system. Phase separation of this binary system and subsequent effects on photovoltaic performance have been carefully examined in a variety of studies. Indeed, a corroboration of recent results consistently suggest that it is crucial to manipulate the P3HT–PCBM interfaces in order to enhance device performance; however the often-used post-fabrication annealing methods in the P3HT–PCBM system have already been explored to their full capacity.

It is well-known that including a third component to modify interfaces in a binary blend provides abundant opportunities to achieve useful microstructures. In terms of ternary blends for organic solar cell active layers, there are two major approaches that rely on either (i) small molecule processing aids or (ii) block copolymer compatibilizers to tune morphology. The former approach is aimed at increasing the polarity difference between donor- and acceptor-rich domains to avoid thermal annealing steps, while the latter approach is used to stabilize donor–acceptor interfaces, especially after thermal annealing. Although poly(3-alkylthiophene) based diblock copolymers including all-conjugated diblock copolymers have been used in donor–acceptor based OPV systems, the most commonly used P3HT–C60-based diblock copolymer compatibilizers count on the π–π interactions between the PCBMs in the diblocks and the PCBMs in matrix to modify film morphology, and the compatibilizer effect on nanophase separation is largely uncertain because of the poor contrast between donor- and acceptor-rich domains. For example, Lee et al., reported the compatibilized P3HT–PCBM morphology variation as a function of thermal annealing time for a P3HT–C60-based compatibilizer at the micron scale, without significant changes observed at the nanometer scale. Block copolymers based on polystyrene-b-P3HT have also been used, although the PS blocks reside mainly in the P3HT domains and act to enhance P3HT crystallinity.
In this work, a conjugated diblock copolymer is applied as an interfacial compatibilizer to systematically manipulate the domain sizes of P3HT–PCBM films at the nanoscale, which has not been achieved previously with any other types of compatibilizers. Control of domain size through use of an interfacial compatibilizer may have important implications for designing ternary active layers in OPV devices. Herein we focus on the ternary phase behavior of a 1:1 P3HT–PCBM blend compatibilized with a poly(3-hexylthiophene)-b-poly(ethylene oxide) (P3HT-b-PEO) diblock copolymer, which utilizes attraction forces between PCBM fullerenes and PEO blocks to mediate interactions and facilitate self-assembly. As noted above, this mode of action is fundamentally different from other diblock copolymer compatibilizers that incorporate P3HT blocks and blocks with fullerene-decorated side chains, as those rely on π–π interactions between the fullerene-decorated side chains and PCBM fullerenes to control phase separation. In fact, this is the first study to our knowledge, in which the polar interactions between the compatibilizer diblock (i.e. the PEO block of P3HT-b-PEO) and the PCBM in matrix are utilized to drive the self-assembly of P3HT–PCBM system. In addition, while most of the previous OPV compatibilizer works heavily rely on regular TEM and AFM, herein we combined energy filtered TEM, electron diffraction, AFM, grazing-incidence small and wide angle X-ray to generate comprehensive and complementary views of compatibilized P3HT–PCBM films, from surface topography to bulk morphology, with careful differentiation between donor and acceptor domains. Unlike other reported block copolymer compatibilizers, P3HT-b-PEO leads to a systematic variation of nanoscale domain size changes in compatibilized P3HT–PCBM system.

The P3HT-b-PEO block copolymer compatibilizer was synthesized by anionic polymerization followed by Grignard metathesis polymerization yielding a copolymer having PEO blocks of narrow molar mass distribution (PDI < 1.1) and P3HT blocks of high regioregularity (>95%). Although P3HT-b-PEO diblock copolymers have previously been synthesized by Suzuki coupling of P3HT and PEO homopolymers, using P3HT-b-PEO as a OPV compatibilizer has not yet been reported to the best of our knowledge. A novel aspect of the synthetic scheme reported here is the use of 4-bromobenzyl bromide to enable the crossover from anionic polymerization to Grignard metathesis polymerization. As shown in Fig. S1 in the ESI and described in the Experimental section, the benzyl bromide reacts with the living poly(ethylene oxide) anion, leaving an aryl bromide that subsequently can be used to initiate the Grignard metathesis polymerization to grow the P3HT block. The P3HT-b-PEO block copolymer used here has block sizes, given as number-average molecular weights, of 9.7 kDa-b-3.1 kDa (12.8 kDa in total) and a PDI of 1.3. The radius of gyration (Rg) of the PEO block (Mn = 3100, degree of polymerization = 68) is ∼3.6 nm, which is several times larger than the diameter of a PCBM fullerene (∼0.7 nm). We note that the PEO content of the P3HT-b-PEO diblock copolymer is 24 wt%, which is comparable to the weight percentage of the insulator-type linking groups present in P3HT-based C60-containing diblocks used previously.


To establish a foundation for understanding the morphology of the ternary system, binary blends of P3HT and P3HT-b-PEO were examined with energy filtered TEM (EFTEM) first. As shown in Fig. 1, for each blend composition we collected an image using elastic electrons (0 ± 4 eV, top row), an image using low-loss inelastic electrons (19 ± 4 eV, middle row), and a thickness map (t/λ, where t is the film thickness and λ is the mean free pathway of an electron, bottom row). The grayness seen in the 0 eV images reflect both mass–thickness contrast and thickness variation, while the thickness map reflects thickness variation only. The 19 ± 4 eV images have higher brightness for P3HT-rich regions. As seen in Fig. 1, pure P3HT shows a high degree of correspondence between its thickness map and 19 eV map, while P3HT-b-PEO does not. For both pure P3HT and P3HT-b-PEO films, P3HT nanofibril structures are observed, and these appear as darker regions in 0 eV images because of their higher electron density, and as brighter regions in the corresponding 19 eV images because of their higher low-loss contribution at 19 eV. The presence of a sharp (020) ring in the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns suggest that both P3HT and P3HT-b-PEO have a regular π–π stacking with an interlayer spacing of 0.39 nm (data not shown). No crystalline peak from PEO blocks is visible with grazing-incidence X-ray diffraction.

Subsequently, three binary blends were examined. As shown in the 19 eV maps, the binary blend of P3HT and 5 wt% P3HT-b-PEO shows a reduction in P3HT nanofibril sizes with minimal PEO aggregation. P3HT with 10 wt% P3HT-b-PEO loading or 5 wt% PEO homopolymer (Mn=100k) exhibits significant aggregation (>20 nm) of PEO, as evidenced from the white circular domains in 0 eV map and corresponding dark regions in 19 eV map.
To study the ternary phase behavior of OPV active layers, P3HT/PCBM/P3HT-b-PEO films were spin-coated on poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)–poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT–PSS) modified indium tin oxide (ITO) substrates, floated on deionized water surface, and collected for examination by EFTEM. Fig. 2 shows the 19 ± 4 eV images as a function of P3HT-b-PEO loading (0–20 wt% diblock in a P3HT–PCBM 1:1 blend) before and after thermal annealing at 120 °C for 30 minutes at a constant defocus value of 5 microns. (For thermally annealed samples, the corresponding 0 ± 4 eV images and thickness maps are provided in Fig. S2 of the ESI.) Fig. 2 shows that the contrast between P3HT and the rest of the active layer was low before annealing, relatively independent of compatibilizer concentration in the range of 0–20 wt%. However, significant changes are observed after thermal annealing at 120 °C for 30 minutes: films with 0–10 wt% block copolymer show nanofibril structures typical of P3HT with 10–20 nm diameters, but films with 20 wt% P3HT-b-PEO loading show large phase-separated domains composed of P3HT-rich and P3HT-deficient domains that are 40–100 nm in size. Our 19 eV images of thermally annealed P3HT–PCBM films (with 0% P3HT-b-PEO) are comparable to previous results, although contrast differences are expected because we are using an in-column energy filter at 120 kV on films from PEDOT/ITO substrates with different processing conditions. Further contrast enhancement may be carried out with principal component analysis and tomography, which is not pursued in this work. As revealed by the imaging conditions used in this work, 19 ± 4 eV images of annealed ternary films with 0–20 wt% block copolymer compatibilizer show a strong dependence on compatibilizer loading. A gray value analysis demonstrates that the domain sizes (defined by the distance between two neighboring minima along a grayness line scan) of P3HT-rich domains decrease from 17 ± 3 nm in films with 0 wt% compatibilizer, to 14 ± 3 nm for films having 5 wt% compatibilizer, and to 10 ± 2 nm for films with 10 wt% diblock compatibilizer, according to 15 measurements taken on each sample. The grayness line scans of six domains are given at the bottom of Fig. 2 for films with loadings of 0 wt%, 5 wt%, and 10 wt% P3HT-b-PEO after thermal annealing.

SAED patterns and intensity plots of thermally annealed (120 °C for 30 minutes) ternary films are shown in Fig. 3. At 5 wt% compatibilizer loading, the intensity of the P3HT (020) peak remains largely unchanged compared to films without the diblock compatibilizer, suggesting that regular π–π stacking with a spacing of 0.39 nm is preserved at low compatibilizer loading. When the block copolymer concentration is higher than 10 wt%, the (020) rings disappear. Both as-spun and thermally annealed films share the same trend as compatibilizer loading increases.


Surface morphology of the ternary films was studied with atomic force microscopy (AFM). As shown in Fig. 4, AFM phase images clearly reveal the strong influence of P3HT-b-PEO loading and thermal annealing, in agreement with the EFTEM results. For the P3HT–PCBM film without the compatibilizer, AFM phase images indicate that the surface domain size increases from 12 ± 1 nm in as-spun films to 17 ± 3 nm after thermal annealing at 120 °C for 30 minutes, based on line scans taken from 15 different locations on each sample. In samples subjected to thermal treatment, there is a strong correlation between surface domain sizes obtained by AFM phase imaging and compatibilizer concentration. Based on line scan analyses that used 15 different measurement locations on each thermally annealed sample, the surface domain sizes decrease from 17 ± 3 nm in 0% P3HT-b-PEO films to 11–15 nm for 5 wt% and 10 wt% P3HT-b-PEO loading.


Grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray diffraction (GIWAXD) of the ternary films before and after thermal annealing (at 120 °C for 30 minutes) demonstrates that the intensity of the P3HT (100) peak depends on compatibilizer concentration, as can be seen in Fig. 5. For all of the ternary films, the (100) peak intensity increases considerably after thermal annealing. This increase reflects organization of P3HT into lamellae brought about by thermal annealing, and this behavior is in agreement with previous findings. The (100) peak intensity in as-spun films is less sensitive to P3HT-b-PEO loading, especially in the range of 0–10 wt%. On the other hand, in thermally annealed films, both the intensity and q value of the (100) peak exhibit distinguishable correlation with block copolymer concentration: as the compatibilizer loading increases in the thermally annealed films, there is a slight and gradual decrease in the (100) intensity, and the (100) d-spacing increases from 1.64 nm at 0 wt% P3HT-b-PEO, to 1.67 nm for 5 wt%, 1.68 nm for 10 wt%, and 1.69 nm for 20 wt%. This suggests that the increase in block copolymer loading slightly widens the P3HT lamellar spacing and, at the same time, makes the lamellar structure slightly less organized.

Grazing-incidence small-angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS) measurements on the ternary blends also suggest that the compatibilizer has little effect on morphological structure before annealing, but a strong compatibilizer-concentration dependence emerges in annealed films. The raw data in I vs. q format are available in Fig. S3 and S4. The data in I−0.5vs. q2 plots, presented in Fig. 6, are fit in the range 0.1 nm−2 < q2 < 0.5 nm−2 with a Debye–Bueche model, which models a two-phase system:
(1)
where
ξ is the correlation length. In agreement with trends from other techniques, the correlation length of P3HT–PCBM films without P3HT-b-PEO increases from 20 ± 2 nm before annealing to 24 ± 2 nm after thermal annealing (at 120 °C for 30 minutes). In annealed samples, as compatibilizer loading increases, ξ decreases from 24 ± 2 nm (0 wt% P3HT-b-PEO), to 17 ± 1 nm at 5 wt% diblock loading, and to 18 ± 1 nm and 19 ± 1 nm for 10 wt% and 20 wt% loadings, respectively.


Fig. 7 summarizes the domain size analyses resulting from the range of characterization techniques applied to the ternary films both before (Fig. 7a) and after thermal annealing at 120 °C for 30 minutes (Fig. 7b). Surface domain sizes (W) are obtained from line scans of AFM phase and height images. P3HT domain sizes W(P3HT) are estimated from the gray value analysis of the 19 ± 4eV images, as mentioned previously. Correlation lengths ξ of the two-phase system obtained using the Debye–Bueche model are extracted from GISAXS data fitting. In addition, GIWAXD is used to determine the apparent P3HT crystal size along the (100) direction based on the Scherrer equation:
(2)
Here,
β100 is the full-width at half-maximum of the (100) peak. From the combination of results, we conclude that compatibilizer loading does not significantly change the domain sizes in the as-spun ternary system (Fig. 7a), because the spin-coating process rapidly arrests the structure upon solvent evaporation. On the other hand, the results show that addition of block copolymer compatibilizer effectively reduces surface and bulk domain sizes after thermal annealing at 120 °C for 30 minutes. We believe this is due to P3HT-b-PEO block copolymer migrating to the P3HT–PCBM interface (Fig. 7b), an inference that is buttressed by results discussed below.


All-electron quantum density functional theory (DFT) calculations are used to provide additional insight into the strength of molecular interactions between the different oligomeric units (3HT, EO) and PCBM, as well as to explore the structural arrangements of molecules that lead to the fundamental interactions. The interaction energies between the different components in the P3HT/PCBM/P3HT-b-PEO ternary blends determined from DFT calculations are listed in Table 1. In particular, it is found that the interaction energy between PEO and PCBM (3.50 kcal mol−1 per monomer) is substantially larger than that of a P3HT–PCBM pair (3.05 kcal mol−1 per monomer), and that the interaction energy of a PEO–P3HT pair (2.59 kcal mol−1 per monomer) is smaller than that of a P3HT–P3HT pair (2.95 kcal mol−1 per monomer). These results support the hypothesis that PEO–PCBM interaction is one of the major driving forces in the ternary system, and that the P3HT-b-PEO diblock is thermodynamically favored at P3HT–PCBM blend interfaces. Most importantly, these results indicate that controlling the strength of intermolecular interactions between a polymer matrix and PCBM, which is in part governed by chain connectivity and monomeric size but primarily by the underlying interactions, provides a possible method to optimize the spatial dispersion and miscibility.Fig. 8a shows a molecular model of P3HT-b-PEO in P3HT–PCBM 1:1 blend based on structural optimization using density functional theory and a tight binding Hamiltonian that accounts for charge transfer and van der Waals interactions. The calculation shows that the PEO blocks interact with the methyl ester group of PCBM, and as a result the P3HT-b-PEO diblock would be favored at P3HT–PCBM interfaces, thereby modifying P3HT–PCBM phase separation. These ideas are combined with the experimental observations and incorporated into schematic drawings of uncompatibilized and compatibilized P3HT–PCBM films (Fig. 8b and c). In these schematic drawings, the P3HT homopolymers are simplified and represented by yellow chains and PCBM fullerenes as blue dots. The PEO blocks of the P3HT-b-PEO copolymers are shown in red and the P3HT blocks in orange. The interfacial boundaries between P3HT- and PCBM-rich domains are marked by the dotted purple lines. The P3HT-b-PEO compatibilizers locate at domain boundaries and modify the interfacial tension. Note that in the schematic representing the as-cast film without compatibilizer, there is a small amount of P3HT in the PCBM-rich domains (and vice versa) because P3HT and PCBM are highly miscible.

Interaction energy (kcal mol−1 per monomer)
P3HT–P3HT
2.95
P3HT–PEO
2.59
P3HT–PCBM
3.05
PEO–PEO
2.58
PCBM–PCBM
6.01
PCBM–PEO
3.50

To investigate the effect of the P3HT-b-PEO diblock on OPV device performance, devices based on bulk heterojunction blends of P3HT and PCBM (1:1 by mass) with various levels of compatibilizer were fabricated and tested. The I–V curves of OPV devices using 1:1 P3HT–PCBM blends with 0% and 5% P3HT-b-PEO compatibilizer are shown in Fig. 9, and the photovoltaic characteristics of the devices with various amounts of P3HT-b-PEO block copolymers are summarized in Table 2. With the addition of 5 wt% P3HT-b-PEO compatibilizer, the OPV devices show a slightly increased open circuit voltage (VOC) but a smaller short circuit current (JSC), which results in the power conversion efficiency being slightly lower than that in a P3HT–PCBM bulk heterojunction system made without the diblock. The results are consistent and based on measurements from 6 devices for these compositions. Devices with 10–20% P3HT-b-PEO show significantly smaller JSC and VOC, yielding power conversion efficiencies less than 2%.

P3HT-b-PEO (wt%)
Number of tested devices

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
Fill factor (%)
PCE (%)
0
>6
9.2
0.58
57.8
2.9
5
>6
8.2
0.61
54.4
2.6
10–20
3 for each
<7
<0.5
<50
<2
Although only a single P3HT-b-PEO diblock and a few concentrations were tested, the P3HT-b-PEO block copolymer compatibilizer is expected to have both positive and negative effects on the power conversion efficiency. Charge transfer at the interface, as estimated by Koopman's theorem, is expected to be slightly reduced in the current system because of the insulating PEO components at the P3HT–PCBM interface. However, the reduction in domain sizes in the ternary system is expected to be beneficial because domain sizes in donor–acceptor blends are usually large as compared to the exciton diffusion length. After optimal thermal treatments, typical donor–acceptor domains are ∼20 nm in P3HT–PCBM system, while the exciton diffusion lengths are estimated to be 4–18 nm for P3HT and 5–8 nm for C60-fullerenes (or PCBM). Control of domain sizes is especially pertinent, as a recent study reported that incomplete (only 41%) exciton harvesting from PCBM domains in P3HT–PCBM solar cells may be due to the small exciton diffusion length in PCBM as compared to the characteristic PCBM domain size. Further device optimization may be possible via reducing domain sizes without sacrificing charge transport and collection, through judicious choice of block copolymer type and composition.
Non-conjugated, flexible block copolymers containing at least one block that is compatible with one of the two polymeric components of an immiscible polymer–polymer blend are often used as a compatibilizer or as emulsifying agents in order to improve the interfacial adhesion and control morphology. A low compatibilizer concentration can lead to a rapid drop in domain sizes until a critical concentration of interfacial modifier is reached, at which point the domain sizes remain constant. This general behavior is consistent with the results reported here for the P3HT/PCBM/P3HT-b-PEO system after thermal annealing, in spite of the fact that P3HT and PCBM are miscible, and the P3HT–PCBM system behaves very different from a typical, immiscible, polymer–polymer blend.
For a diblock compatibilized ternary polymer blend, the diblock copolymer compatibilizer straddles the interfaces, extending its two blocks into the corresponding domains, thereby reducing its enthalpy as well as the enthalpy of the homopolymers displaced from the interface. These enthalpy reductions are balanced by the loss of mixing and configurational entropy, because the copolymer chains tend to stretch out to achieve a denser interfacial packing. On the other hand, the compatibilizing block copolymers can also form micelles that do not contribute to the compatibilizing effect. For compatibilized polymer blends, the interfacial coverage, Γ, is a useful parameter for understanding the compatibilization efficiency of the block copolymer compatibilizer. If one assumes that all of the block copolymer compatibilizer is at the interface, Γ can be calculated as the number of block copolymer chains per unit interfacial area:
(3)
where
NA is Avogadro's number, Q is the interfacial area per unit volume, and ρBCP, ϕBCP and Mn are the density, volume fraction, and number-average molecular weight of the block copolymer, respectively. The maximum interfacial coverage of block copolymer compatibilizer, Γmax, can be estimated by assuming that a dense block copolymer monolayer forms at the interface, and the critical interfacial coverage, Γc, that prevents phase coalescence and reduces domain dimensions can be determined experimentally. In general, effective modification and stabilization of polymer blend interfaces requires an optimal interfacial coverage Γopt that is less than the maximum interfacial coverage but greater than the critical interfacial coverage.

By analogy, in our system, aggregation of the PEO blocks or micellization of the diblock copolymer compatibilizer should be minimized in order to maximize the ability of the P3HT-b-PEO compatibilizer to modify donor–acceptor interfaces. In other words, it is important for the diblock copolymer to be dispersed at the interface between the P3HT- and PCBM-rich domains in order to effectively manipulate donor–acceptor nanophase separation. Our results show that when the compatibilizer concentration is low (∼5 wt%), the nanoscale P3HT–PCBM domain structures can be systematically modified, implying Γ > Γc and minimal P3HT-b-PEO micelle formation. On the other hand, when the P3HT-b-PEO content is high (>10 wt%), substantial aggregation of PEO domains or micelle formation can occur. The presence of these aggregates or micelles suggests that Γ > Γmax, and the resultant morphology will be deleterious to efficient charge transport.

Through extensive experimental and computational study we thoroughly examined the phase behavior of P3HT/PCBM/P3HT-b-PEO ternary films before and after thermal annealing. The P3HT-b-PEO block copolymer is shown to reduce domain sizes both in binary P3HT–compatibilizer blends and in ternary systems. Energy-filtered TEM and atomic force microscopy along with selected area electron diffraction, GIWAXD, and GISAXS results demonstrate that incorporation of a P3HT-b-PEO compatibilizer is an effective method for manipulating P3HT–PCBM domain sizes at the nanoscale, which to the best of our knowledge, has not been achieved previously with any other choice of compatibilizer. Density functional theory calculations suggest that the polar interaction between PEO segments and PCBM is an important driving force for the self-assembly of the P3HT–P3HT-b-PEO–PCBM ternary system. Overall, this work demonstrates the potential of block copolymers to systematically manipulate the domain-structure of blends suitable for organic photovoltaic devices at the nanoscale. If coupled with efficient charge transport and collection (through judicious choice of block copolymer type and composition), this approach may contribute towards further optimization of OPV devices. Importantly, this approach is not anticipated to be specific to particular donor–acceptor materials, but rather, widely applicable to other polymer- or small-molecule-based OPVs.


The P3HT-b-PEO block copolymer compatibilizer was synthesized by a combination of anionic polymerization and Grignard metathesis polymerization (Fig. S1). First, ethylene oxide monomer was polymerized anionically in dry THF with (CH3)3COK initiator and terminated by 4-bromobenzyl bromide. The resultant 4-bromobenzyl-capped PEO chains were then reacted with an excess of tetrakis(triphenylphosphin)-nickel(0) (Ni(PPh3)4), and extra ligand was removed by washing three times with in-distilled hexanes. The regiospecific thienyl monomer, 2-bromo-3-hexyl-5-magnesium chloride thiophene, was subsequently added to the reaction vessel and allowed to react overnight before isopropylmagnesium chloride was added to terminate the polymerization. The solution containing the polymer was filtered to remove salt and then precipitated into hexane. The recovered polymer was purified using Soxhlet extraction in different solvents. Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) was used to determine that the PEO block has a PDI of 1.1 and a number-average molecular weight, Mn = 3.1 kDa. The final P(3HT)55-b-P(EO)70 block copolymer (Fig. S1) has an Mn = 12.8 kDa as determined by proton NMR and a PDI = 1.33, with a single unimodal peak showing in the SEC elutogram. The P3HT block of the P3HT-b-PEO block copolymer is highly regioregular (>95% as measured by 1H NMR based on a method reported by McCullough), and both 1H and 13C NMR confirm the structure of the P3HT-b-PEO diblock copolymer. In particular, the proton of thiophene rings appears at 6.98 ppm and those of the hexyl side chains appear at 2.80 ppm and at 0.72–1.80 ppm; protons from PEO appear at 3.65 ppm.


The P3HT homopolymer (regioregularity > 93%, Mw = ∼50 kDa, Rieke Metals) and PCBM (Sigma Aldrich, Purity > 99.5%) were used as received. Except for films made for X-ray experiments, the films studied in this work were fabricated as if they were made to be active layers in organic solar cells. The conductive ITO substrates (sheet resistance of ∼35 Ω per square, Delta Technologies) were cleaned by ultrasonication in soap water, deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol (10–15 min for each step). After drying the ITO substrates with a stream of air or nitrogen and treating the surface with UV ozone for 20 minutes, a PEDOT–PSS (H.C. Starck) layer was spin-coated onto the surfaces at a spin speed of 4000 rpm and then dried at 120 °C for 15 min. Ternary blends of P3HT, PCBM, and P3HT-b-PEO were made by dissolving the materials in dry 1,2-dichlorobenzene (Sigma Aldrich) (performed inside a glove box at 50 °C) for 6–12 h to yield solution with a total-solids concentration of 20 mg ml−1. The ternary blend solutions were spin-coated in the glove box onto the PEDOT–PSS modified ITO to yield films with thickness of ∼100 nm. Thermal annealing of ternary films was conducted on a hot plate inside a glove box, and the annealing temperature was calibrated and measured using a surface thermometer (PTC Instruments).


AFM images were collected directly on the resultant films while TEM samples were prepared by floating the films on deionized water surfaces. Binary blends were drop-cast directly from dilute dichlorobenzene solutions onto carbon-coated copper grids to observe the inherent morphology and crystal structure without thermal annealing. In order to maximize diffraction signals, X-ray experiments were performed using films that were spin-coated on Si wafers. AFM images were acquired with a Digital Instruments Dimension 3100 in tapping mode. TEM work was performed using a Zeiss Libra 120 with an in-column energy filter or a Hitachi HF3300. Selected area electron diffraction patterns were calibrated against Au (111) standards (0.2335 nm). (Contrast enhancement for grayness analyses was performed in Digital Micrograph and Image J.) Thickness maps are generated based on the intensity ratio of unfiltered and filtered images. X-ray diffraction results were collected with an X'Pert PRO MPD Diffractometer and Anton Paar SaXess using Cu Kα radiation.


All-electron density function theory (DFT) calculations of PCBM interacting with 3–10 monomers of PEO and P3HT were performed using NWChem with the local density approximation (LDA). The gas phase oligomer–PCBM and oligomer–oligomer interactions energies are computed by the difference in energy of the optimized polymer–fullerene pair and the individual components with connections to basis set superposition error (BSSE) and deformation energy. The interaction strength per monomer was computed from the total interaction energy divided by the number of monomers comprising the oligomers. PCBM was taken to represent 1 monomer.


OPV active layers were fabricated as described above in the Film preparation section. After thermal annealing at 120 °C for 0 or 30 minutes, the devices were completed by thermal evaporation of 15 nm calcium and 85 nm aluminum through a shadow mask. The I–V characteristics were extracted at AM1.5 with a measurement unit from Newport.


This research was conducted at the Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, which is sponsored at Oak Ridge National Laboratory by the Scientific User Facilities Division, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). This work was supported by a DOE Laboratory Directed Research and Development award (#5388). A portion of this research was conducted at the SHaRE User Facility, which is sponsored by the Division of Scientific User Facilities, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, U.S. Department of Energy.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm31124k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012