 DOI: 10.1039/D2TC02548E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 14982-14992


H. H.
Hegazy
,

Amir Muhammad
Afzal
*,

A.
Dahshan
,

Muhammad Waqas
Iqbal
 and 

Imen
Kebaili


Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, King Khalid University, P.O. Box 9004, Abha, Saudi Arabia

Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Al-Azhar University, 71524 Assiut, Egypt

Department of Physics, Riphah International University, 13-Km, Raiwind Road, Lahore, Pakistan. E-mail: amirafzal461@gmail.com

Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Port Said University, Port Said, Egypt

Université de Sfax, Laboratoire de Physique Appliquée, Groupe de Physique des matériaux luminescents, Faculté des Sciences de Sfax, Département de Physique, BP 1171, Université de Sfax, 3018 Sfax, Tunisie

Received
17th June 2022
, Accepted 30th August 2022
First published on 2nd September 2022
Two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides (2D-TMDs)-based energy conversion devices have received much consideration because of their unique and novel characteristics. In this research, 2D-TMD molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) and hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) were grown on a 3D silicon (p-Si) substrate to design a MoS2/interfacial layer/Si hybrid dimensional p–n heterojunction solar cell. The estimated values of Schottky barrier height (SBH) were 0.72 to 0.91 eV in the case of SiO2, Al2O3, and h-BN as interfacial layers, respectively. The ideality factor was amended from 1.97 to 1.20 with h-BN as an interfacial layer because of the improvement in interface quality and reduction in recombination rate. The recombination resistance was calculated using the diode ideality factor, which was more significant than that of pristine devices. Further, the recombination rate and charge transfer of charge carriers were explained by using the diode model and Simmons-based approximation of tunneling (direct tunneling (DT) and Fowler–Nordheim tunneling (FNT)). A high open circuit voltage (Voc) value of 0.61 V was obtained with h-BN. The hybrid dimensional p–n heterojunction solar cell showed the efficiency of 7.2, 9.1, and 11.8% with SiO2, Al2O3, and h-BN as interfacial layers, respectively, which was much higher as compared to the reference sample (n-MoS2/p-Si) and previously reported values. These findings provide a unique platform for developing high-performance and astonishing optoelectronics devices.

Two-dimensional semiconductor (2D) materials with ultrathin structures have attracted much attention from the research community, owing to their novel and exceptional characteristics, such as large surface-to-volume ratio, layered structure, anisotropic characteristics, layer-dependent bandgap, and multiple chemical compositions. 2D materials are considered marvelous because of their high chemical stability, broadband absorption of light, biocompatibility, and flexibility. Among the family of 2D materials, graphene has gained pronounced attention as a replacement for conventional Si semiconductors for biochemical sensors and high-frequency devices due to high carrier mobility. However, the major drawback of graphene is its zero bandgaps, which limit its application as a switch in electronics.

2D materials are widely used in energy harvesting devices. However, the efficiencies of 2D-based solar cell devices are not remarkable, and thus, hinder their application at the industrial level. In 2010, the Gr/Si-based solar cells reported an efficiency of 1.5%. Hu et al. reported Gr/Si-based solar cells with an efficiency of 4.92%. They used platinum nanoparticles to treat the graphene surface and enhanced the PCE up to 7.04%. Geng et al. designed Gr/n-Si-based solar cells and enhanced the PCE up to 6.52% by using carbon quantum dots to improve the interface quality. Further, the performance of Gr/Si-based solar cells was enhanced to 9.1% by using HfO2 as an interfacial layer. Yavuz et al. used graphene oxide (GO) as a doping layer in Gr/Si solar cells and promoted the efficiency up to 10.6%. After the discovery of graphene, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have attracted much attention due to the layer-dependent bandgap and work function. Besides, the layers in TMDs materials are stocked with weak van der Waals forces and can easily be exfoliated to reach the desired thickness, such as monolayers or bilayers. TMDs have widely been used in optoelectronics because of their layer-dependent optical characteristics. A 2D-TMD, MoS2, has a wide application and is a competent candidate for use in next-generation transistors. MoS2 shows extraordinary light-absorption characteristics at lower and longer wavelengths because of its distinct optical response. Because of the direct bandgap (1.2 eV) and outstanding optical response, it is a promising contender for optoelectronic devices, such as light-emitting devices, photodetectors, and photovoltaic cells. Bernardi et al. 2013 have grown the MoS2 semiconductor materials and studied the effect of thickness on the absorbance of light. They claimed that the absorbance was maximum (5–10%) at a thickness of ∼1 nm, which was higher than that of Si and GaAs.
Significant research has been done on the preparation of MoS2 thin layers, such as by thermolysis of the precursor containing Mo and S atoms, intercalation-assisted exfoliation, scotch tape-assisted micromechanical exfoliation, solution exfoliation, hydrothermal synthesis, electrochemical synthesis, physical vapor deposition, and sulfurization of molybdenum oxides. By controlling the synthesis parameters, the MoS2 can be obtained in different morphologies, such as 0D, 1D, and 2D structures. Thermolysis and spin coating of ammonium thiomolybdate or alkyl-diammonium thiomolybdate in polar organic solvents have been used to prepare films of MoS2 that are up to tens of nanometers thick. For semiconductor and catalytic applications, (NH4)2MoS4 has been extensively used in previous studies to grow single and multilayered MoS2. Shanmugan et al. grew MoS2 and fabricated 220 nm-thick layers, and Au was used as an electrode to create a Schottky junction at the interface (MoS2/Au). For practical applications of MoS2 in a solar cell device, the most crucial aspect is to develop cost-effective devices. MoS2 has also been used to fabricate Schottky p–n junctions with silicon because of the similar bandgap. Lin et al. designed MoS2-based solar cells and improved the efficiency of solar cells up to 5.42% by using the gallium arsenide (GaAs) interfacial layers. Further, the performance of the MoS2/Si solar cell was enhanced (4.5%) with the incorporation of a nano-scale silicon oxide. All these junctions based on MoS2 material exhibit photovoltaic effects and their applications in solar cells have been thoroughly verified. Nevertheless, the progress and research till now are copious for practical applications in electronic and optoelectronics, and further research is compulsory to advance and enhance the efficiency of solar cells based on TMDs.
In this work, MoS2/interfacial layer/Si hybrid dimensional p–n heterojunction solar cells were fabricated with different interfacial layers, such as SiO2, Al2O3, and h-BN. The 2D MoS2 was grown by using the chemical route. The synthesized samples were annealed at different temperatures (450–700 °C) to check the tenability of bandgap and solar cell performance. The h-BN and Al2O3 were grown using chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and atomic layer deposition (ALD). The structure morphology, elemental composition, thickness, and interface were studied using the FE-SEM and XPS. The mobility of MoS2 FETs was measured with surface treatment and different substrates. The n-MoS2/p-Si hybrid dimensional p–n heterojunction solar cell was measured in the dark with different interfacial layers to estimate the Schottky barrier height (SBH) and ideality factor. The effect of different interfacial layers on the recombination rate was estimated by calculating recombination resistance (Rrec). Further, the improvement in current and obtained interface quality has been explained with Simmons-based approximation of tunneling (direct tunneling (DT) and Fowler–Nordheim tunneling (FNT)). Furthermore, the n-MoS2/p-Si hybrid dimensional p–n heterojunction solar cell was measured under light, and Jsc, Vov, FF, and PCE were conceived. The TMD-based solar cells have attracted extensive interest and provide a path to developing high-performance energy-harvesting devices in electronics and optoelectronics.

In DI (deionized) water, 10 mg mL−1 (NH4)2MoS4 (ammonium thiomolybdates) was dissolved. A fixed temperature (60 °C) and an inert atmosphere were required to make a good solution. This solution was filtered through 0.22 μm poly-tetra-fluoro-ethylene. Before the growth of MoS2, the substrate (n-Si) was doped with phosphorous without native oxides, such as SiO2, having a resistivity in the range of 1–5 Ω cm. The RCA-1 and RCA-2 method was utilized to clean the silicon surface from contamination and native oxides. The deionized water, ammonium hydroxide, and hydrogen peroxide were used in the ratio of 5:1:1, respectively. The substrate was placed in a beaker for 20 minutes. The substrate was washed with enough water to clean the surface from impurities and chemicals. The n-Si wafers were again put into buffer oxide to eradicate the oxide layer.

For more cleaning, the substrates (n-Si) were put into RCA-2 solution, deionized water, hydrochloric acid, and hydrogen peroxide with 4:1:1 and adopted the same steps as in RCA-1. An interfacial layer was deposited with the help of atomic layer deposition (ALD). The samples were placed inside the chamber on the sample holder to grow the interfacial layers. First, the h-BN was synthesized by a thermal CVD method. NH3 and B2H6 diluted with H2 and Ar were used as precursors in low-pressure chambers. The temperature and pressure of the chambers were maintained at 500 mbar and 1100 °C, respectively, with a certain flow rate (NH3:B2H6:H2:Ar = 1:0.2:500:4500 cubic centimeters per minute). Moreover, the Al2O3 used as an interfacial layer was deposited between the MoS2 and p-Si using ALD. The precursors, such as trimethylaluminum (TMA-Al (CH3)3), from Sigma-Aldrich, and H2O (Fisher, optima grade) were used. N2 was used as carrier gas. After the growth of interfacial layers, the solution was spin-coated through a spin-coating process at a constant speed of 2000 RPM for 90 s. The film was then heated in a glove box with an argon atmosphere, having parameters of O2 < 0.1 and 100 mW cm−2. The thermolysis process of (NH4)2MoS4 in an O2 environment depended on two steps. For the conversion of (NH4)2MoS4 to MoS3, the sample was annealed at 120–150 °C. The conversion process is described in the equation below,
(NH4)2MoS4 → 2NH3 + H2S + MoS3
(1)
To get MoS
2, the samples were annealed at >400 °C,

MoS3 → MoS2 + S
(2)
The phase development started at >400 °C. The samples were annealed at different temperatures to obtain a good quality film of MoS2. A thin layer of Al2O3 (2 nm) was used as a passivated layer on the surface of MoS2 to enhance charge carriers. The substrate was placed into the chamber for the electrodes under a vacuum (10−6) Torr. The top (Cr/Au: 40/150 nm) and back electrodes (Ti/Pd/Ag: 10/10/500 nm) were deposited using a thermal evaporation system.

Raman spectroscopy was used to measure the fingerprint of MoS2 materials. The input power was fixed at 1 mW with a spot size of 0.8 μm to prevent the samples from heating and damage. The atomic force microscopy (AFM) and field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) were used to study the surface morphology and thickness. The photovoltaic characteristics were measured under the dark and solar simulator (∼1 sun power; Newport). A picometer (Keithley-2635A) and a source meter (Keithley 2400) were used.



Fig. 1(a) shows the fabrication flow chart of MoS2/interfacial layer/Si hybrid dimensional p–n heterojunction solar cells. First of all, the p-Si substrate was cleaned with buffer oxide, methanol, and acetone to remove the native oxides, impurities, and residues. The interfacial layer of h-BN and Al2O3 were deposited using chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and atomic layer deposition (ALD) methods to enhance conductivity and decrease the recombination rate. The compound ammonium thiomolybdates (NH4)2MoS4) was purchased from Sigma Aldrich with a purity of 99.9%. To make the solution, 10 mg mL−1 of (NH4)2MoS4 was added to dimethylformamide (DMF = 20 mL) to obtain a 1.25 (wt%) solution, which was sonicated for 20 minutes before use. The solution was spin-coated on the substrate and annealed at different temperatures to get large area flakes of MoS2 with high conductivity. The back (Ti/Pd/Ag) and top (Cr/Au) electrodes were deposited using the thermal evaporation system. Fig. S1 and S2 (ESI) show the optical and FE-SEM images. The thickness and morphology of MoS2 were uniform and grew over the substrate.

To measure the fingerprints of MoS2, the Raman spectra were measured of all the samples annealed at different temperatures (400–700 °C), as shown in Fig. 1(b). The intensity of Raman peaks was tuned with the temperature because of a change in thickness. The vibration in-plane (E12g) and out plane (A1g) appeared at 387.5 and 404.7 cm−1, respectively, which matched previously reported values. The structural transition from bulk to single-layered materials correlated with the Full Width at half maximum (FWHM) of A1g and E12g peaks. The FWHM of A1g varied from 4.65 to 5.1 cm−1 at a temperature of 400–700 °C. In the case of E12g, the FWHM decreased from 4.39 to 3.96 cm−1 at a temperature of 400–700 °C. At four distinct annealing temperatures, Raman spectra indicated two unique vibration modes (Fig. S3, ESI). As compared to un-annealed MoS2, the intensities of these modes were stronger for annealed MoS2 films, notably for the 700 °C annealed sample. As compared to the E12g vibration mode, the A1g vibration mode presented a much more significant increase. The atomic motions of Mo atoms in out-of-plan vibrational mode followed the same c-axis as dz2 orbitals, which determined the final state of electron transfer. Fig. S4 (ESI) shows the Raman spectroscopy image of the CVD-grown h-BN. A sharp and prominent Raman peak, E2g, was observed at 1365 cm−1 which corresponded to the in-plane vibrational mode of the boron and nitrogen atoms. The full-width half maxima of the E2g was 29.6 cm−1 which was nearly equal to the previously reported values of a few layers of h-BN. Consequently, the in-plane was enhanced because of a robust phonon–electron coupling in the direction of the c-axis during resonance at K-point during the Raman scattering.
Further, the effect of annealing temperature on the bandgap was estimated by using the UV-Vis absorption spectrum of few-layered MoS2 flakes. To calculate the optical energy bandgap, the UV-Vis absorption spectrum of few-layered MoS2 flakes was measured (Fig. S5, ESI). The graph is plotted between (αhν)2 and hν and bandgap was estimated with the Tauc relation (αhν)n = A(hν − Eg), where α, Eg, and n denote the absorption coefficient, bandgap, and nature of the electronics transition. The bandgap decreased with the annealing temperature because of the improvement in electronic structure. Fig. 1(c) shows the cross-sectional TEM image of the structure of the MoS2/h-BN/p-Si heterostructure. Its shows the uniformity in the growth of MoS2 and h-BN. To check the superiority of MoS2, mobility was measured by designing the field-effect transistors (FETs). Fig. S6(a) (ESI) showed the schematic diagram of MoS2 FET with a Cr/Au electrode. The Al2O3 was used as a passivated layer on the MoS2 surface to decrease the trap states and increase the number of charge carriers. To measure the surface morphology and thickness, AFM was used. The thickness of MoS2 is shown in Fig. S6(b) (ESI), which was ∼5 nm. The inset figure shows the AFM image of MoS2. The electrical measurement (transfer curves) was measured with and without passivation of MoS2. The inset shows the optical image of the FET device (Fig. S6(c), ESI). The MoS2 FETs were also measured for the different interfacial layers, such as SiO2, Al2O3, and h-BN (Fig. S6(d), ESI). The μFE of n-MoS2 FETs was found by using the following equation:
(3)
Here,
L, W, and  represent the length and width of the channel and slope estimated from the transfer characteristics, respectively. The Cbg is the gate capacitance of the substrates. The mobility of MoS2 FET increased from 56 to 90 cm2 V−1 s−1 with Al2O3 passivation. The passivation of Al2O3 increased the n-type conductivity of MoS2 with doping. Moreover, the estimated mobility values were 102 and 145 cm2 V−1 s−1 with Al2O3 and h-BN, respectively (Fig. S6(e), ESI). The mobility increased in the case of h-BN because of slight surface roughness, low trap states, less charge scattering, and surface optical phonon scattering as compared to the other substrates. Furthermore, the current–voltage characteristics were measured to check the electrode suitability with MoS2. Fig. S6(f) (ESI) shows the increase in current as compared to the un-passivated MoS2.


Fig. 2(a–f) shows the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy measurement of the sample to check the composition and binding energies of ML-MoS2 (Mo and S). In the case of Mo 2d, the peaks appeared at 229.3 and 232.5 eV, which was accredited to the doublet Mo 3d5/2 and Mo 3d3/2. The sulfide peaks, such as S 2p1/2 and S 2p3/2, appeared at 163.3 and 162 eV. Fig. 2(c) and (d) represent the B 1S and N1S core-level spectra observed at 190.4 and 398.0 eV, respectively. In addition, the Al 2p core-level peak appeared at 74.3 eV, which was a clear indication of the presence of an interfacial layer. To check the effect of passivation on the photovoltaic devices, the MoS2 FETs were measured under the DUV light. We observed that the photocurrent increased in case of passivation of the MoS2 surface because of the decrease in trap states, amendment in phonon dispersion, and reduction in the Coulomb scattering rate (Fig. S7, ESI). The MoS2/p-Si hybrid dimensional p–n heterojunction solar cell was measured in the dark and under the light for solar cell measurement. Fig. 3(a) shows the current–voltage curves under dark conditions. First, the samples were annealed at different temperatures (400–700 °C) and measured by the devices. The best sample annealed at 700 °C was characterized further by different interfacial layers. The I–V curves of MoS2/interfacial layer/Si hybrid dimensional p–n heterojunction solar cells with different interfacial layers, such as SiO2, Al2O3, and h-BN, were measured in the dark. The leakage current was prominent in the pristine sample (MoS2/Si) as compared to the interfacial layer samples.
Further, the leakage current was decreased more than 10 times by inserting the interfacial layer (h-BN) as compared to the SiO2 and Al2O3. Photocurrent density was significantly correlated with the movement of charge carriers (h and e). A suitable interfacial layer with proper thickness was required to control the charge carriers and performance of the device, which increased charge carriers, enhanced the tunneling current, and limited the leakage current with the interfacial layer. The thickness of the interfacial layer was carefully tuned in the construction of the proposed device. The recombination rate in the MoS2/Si junction case mainly occurred at the interface because of low surface potential. The generated charge carriers, such as holes easily migrated toward the Si side, while the electrons moved toward MoS2. The thermionic emission model was used to estimate the Schottky barrier height (SBH) of MoS2/interfacial layer/Si hybrid dimensional p–n heterojunction solar cells.
(4)
where
A and JRev are Richardson's constant and reverse saturation current. Fig. 3(b) shows the variation in SBH with different interfacial layers that were calculated at a small voltage in a reverse-biased region. The value of SBH increased from 0.72 to 0.91 eV. It directly indicated the accumulation of additional charge carriers at the interfaces. This meant a large number of charge carriers were accumulated compared to the reference sample. The ideality factor was estimated by using the following equation.

(5)
Here,
Jph, Jrev, T, and Rsh shows the photocurrent and reverse current density, absolute temperature, and shunt resistance. Rs is the series resistance. The n is the ideality factor which was determined by using the following equation.

(6)
where
q is the charge and T is the temperature. The series and shunt resistance are parasitic, i.e., they directly affect the charge carrier density and device performance. The value of n was obtained by fitting the I–V curves at the low voltage region in the forward bias region (Fig. 3(c). The observed values were 1.97, 1.70, 1.66, and 1.20 with MoS2/Si, MoS2/SiO2/Si, MoS2/Al2O3/Si and MoS2/h-BN/Si, respectively (Fig. 3(d)). The decreasing trend in the value of n shows the better performance of the device because of the decrease in the recombination rate. The lower values of n show the more outstanding superiority and uniformity of the junction. A higher recombination rate was observed due to the higher value of n and the small value of the fill factor at the interface. Moreover, the junction quality also decreased. In an ideal diode or junction, the value of n is 1, which is impossible in photovoltaic devices because of e–h pair recombination, series and shunt resistance, and photon-thermalisation. The ideality factor (n) is a crucial factor in photovoltaics devices (p–n junctions) to estimate the suppression of the charge carrier recombination rate. The smaller value of n for the h-BN interfacial layer directly manifested a small recombination rate. Further, the decrease in recombination rate was also confirmed by using the following mathematical relation and estimating the recombination resistance (Rrec):

(7)
where
Ve represents the effective voltage; q is the carrier's charge, and Voc is the open-circuit voltage. The estimated value of Rrec(≈ 307 Ω) with an interfacial layer was much larger than the Rrec(≈ 105 Ω) without any interfacial layers. It is clear from the results that the sample with an h-BN interfacial layer showed high resistance to the charge carrier and decreased the recombination rate.


Fig. 3(e) shows the vs. plot to differentiate the tunneling mechanism and explain the type of tunneling (DT & FNT) at low and high bias voltage. The Simmons approximation in p–n and p–i–n junction devices describes the current transport mechanism based on tunneling. In the forward region, the DT and FNT currents were described by the following equations:
(8)
and,

(9)
where
ϕ, d, and m* represent the barrier height, the tunneling barrier height of the tunneling region, and the effective mass of tunneling charge carriers. The value of d was obtained by the slope method in the linear voltage region. The graph showed two regions: FNT and DT regions. Without doping and interfacial layer, the FNT region did not exist, and the slope was zero. In the case of the interfacial layer, a prominent linear region was observed because of the tunneling current through FNT. The temperature-dependent measurement was performed to observe the transport of charge carriers through the potential barrier. Mainly, the charge carriers were transported through the potential barrier by thermionic emission (diffusion process). Fig. S8 (ESI) shows the ln (I/V2) vs. 1/V plots reconfigured from current–voltage curves measured at different temperatures. To calculate the slope, the linear region of the curves was fitted. The estimated value of the slope was 1.7, which remained constant in all the curves. It was confirmed that the nature of the current transport was tunneling-based. The tunneling-mediated transport was independent of the temperature. In thermionic and diffusion transport, the transportation was based on temperatures.


Fig. 4(a–c) shows the energy band diagram with the interfacial layer and flow of the charge carriers in the presence of h-BN. Fig. 5(a) shows the energy band diagram before and after the contact. The electron affinities of Si and MoS2 were 4.05 and 4.3 eV, respectively. The energy bandgaps of Si and MoS2 were 1.12 and 1.3 eV. After the contact, the Fermi level was aligned. Fig. 4(b) shows that the energy difference increased when an interfacial layer was deposited between MoS2 and p-Si, decreasing the recombination rate. These four steps explain the transport of charge carriers through the junction in the tunneling mechanism. At negative voltage, the Fermi-level was lower on the p-side than the conduction band minima on the n-side. The h-BN blocked the carriers because the SBH was further increased. The electrons did not move from the p-side to the n-side, so the reverse or leakage current was small. At zero voltage, the Fermi level was aligned. When the voltage was positive (V > 0 V), the current increased with direct tunneling (DT) of electrons from the n-side to the p-side (Fig. 4(c)). As a result, a large amount was injected from the n-side to the p-side. When the voltage was further increased, the current enhanced more because of Fowler–Nordheim tunneling (FNT). The current increased because of a thin triangular barrier that appeared with the presence of h-BN. Fig. 5(a) shows the current–voltage characteristics under the light to calculate the critical parameters of MoS2/p-Si hybrid dimensional p–n heterojunction solar cells. We observed that the MoS2/h-BN/Si hybrid dimensional p–n heterojunction solar cell performed better than the other samples. The following equation was used to calculate the power conversion efficiency (PCE);
(10)
and

(11)
where,
Jsc, FF, Voc, Pin, Imax, and Vmax represent the short circuit current density, fill factor, open-circuit voltage, input power, and maximum current and voltage. Key parameters, such as a change in open-circuit voltage, saturation current density, fill factor, and PCE were described in Table 1. A large value of VOC = 0.61 V was estimated with h-BN as an interfacial layer (Fig. S9, ESI). The PCE was enhanced from 4.3 (reference sample) to 11.8% by using the h-BN as an interfacial layer (Fig. 5(b)). In the case of h-BN, extraordinary performance was observed because of the increment in the generation of charge chargers and the reduction in the recombination rate. These remarkable outcomes confirmed the recombination rate suppression by insertion of the different interfacial layers. Fig. 5(c) represents the change in PCE concerning the thickness of interfacial layers. In the case of SiO2 and Al2O3, the maximum value of PCE (7.2% and 9.1%) was observed at 3 nm, respectively. The interfacial layer (h-BN) showed a maximum value (11.8%) with a thickness of 5 nm, which was a much better performance as compared to the previously reported values (Table 2). The thickness controlled the SBH and charge carrier transport through the interface. At a small thickness, the charge carriers directly tunneled through the barrier. The separation process was enhanced as the thickness increased due to SBH and built-in potential. Furthermore, the considerable thickness of the interfacial layer decreased the field strength on the interface and again decreased the performance of the device. Consequently, in small thicknesses, the SBH was relatively low, resulting in significant leakage of current owing to recombination. On the other hand, the SBH was significantly enhanced with an interfacial layer. The interfacial layer supported the transportation of electrons through a tunneling mechanism. The electrons could easily pass through the interfacial layer. An optimized thickness of the layer was necessary to control the electron tunneling process. The SBH increased more than two times for the 4 nm h-BN sample. These findings show that lowering the recombination rate by inserting an insulating layer with fewer flaws may improve photovoltaic performance. Furthermore, the stability of the device was also measured with different interfacial layers. The device with h-BN showed better performance than other devices (Fig. 5(d)). Fig. 5(e) compares the results with previously reported values. It was observed that the 2D-MoS2/3D-p-Si showed better efficiency than previous results. Furthermore, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured to estimate the performance of heterostructure-based solar cells. Fig. 5(f) represents the EQE of MoS2/p-Si, MoS2/Al2O3/p-Si, and MoS2/h-BN/p-Si-based solar cells. In the case of the absence of an interfacial layer, a small value of EQE (= 58%) was observed because of the significant recombination rate and trapping states. The values of EQE were enhanced up to 80% by using h-BN as an interfacial layer, which is the direct signature of the improvement in interface and decrease in the recombination rate. A high value of PCE from TMDs-based solar cells provides a platform to design astonishing energy-harvesting devices.

Sample
SBH (eV)

n


V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
n-MoS2/p-Si
0.72
1.97
0.36
25.25
49
4.31
n-MoS2/SiO2/p-Si
0.83
1.70
0.45
27.61
59.3
7.20
n-MoS2/Al2O3/p-Si
0.89
1.66
0.51
30.10
60
9.12
n-MoS2/h-BN/p-Si
0.91
1.20
0.61
32.20
62
11.83
Ref.
Structure

V
oc (V)
Fill factor (%)
PCE (%)

60

Gr/Al2O3/n-Si
0.49
61.0
6.8

65

Gr/ITO/BFO/ZnO
0.67
47.5
7.4

10

Gr/CQDs/n-Si
0.51
67.1
6.5

66

ITO/BFO/Si
0.58
49.2
0.06

62

Pt NP/Gr/n-Si
0.41
60.3
7.0

67

HF/Gr/p-Si
0.26
58.2
6.0

68

Graphite/BFO/ZnO/ITO
0.64
58.0
3.9

11

Gr/HfO2/n-Si
0.49
56.2
9.1

62

TiO2/Pt NPs/Gr/Si
0.41
60.3
7.0

69

Gr/Si
0.35
35.7
3.1

70

Gr/h-BN/n-Si
0.53
60.0
10.9

71

Au/HNO3/Gr/Si
0.51
61.0
10.2

64

Gr/n-Si
0.46
41.4
4.2

12

GO/Gr/n-Si
0.20
53.0
6.6

72

Gr/n-Si
0.48
44.3
5.2

73

AuCl3/Gr/SiHA/Si
0.52
55
10.4

72

rGO/pyramidal silicon
0.37
63.2
1.7

74

Gr/Al2O3/n-Si
0.45
48.1
6.4
This work
n-MoS2/SiO2/p-Si
0.45
59.3
7.20
n-MoS2/Al2O3/p-Si
0.51
60
9.12
n-MoS2/h-BN/p-Si
0.60
62
11.83

High-performance MoS2/p-Si hybrid dimensional p–n heterojunction solar cells were designed. The MoS2 film was grown using the simple chemical route (two-stepped thermolysis process). The MoS2 film, annealed at different temperatures, was investigated by Raman spectroscopy, XPS, AFM, SEM, and TEM. The surface of MoS2 was passivated with a thin layer of Al2O3 to enhance the conductivity. The interfacial layers Al2O3 and h-BN were grown by ALD and CVD, respectively. The ideality factor (1.20) and SBH (0.91 eV) were estimated. A significant value of Voc = 0.61 V was observed. The efficiency of the solar cells was enhanced up to 11.8% with h-BN as the interfacial layer. The charge transport mechanism has been explained using the Simmons-based approximation of the DT and FNT mechanisms. Furthermore, the device with the interfacial layer showed a high value of EQE of ∼80%. Our results are proof of practical applications of the heterostructure of n-MoS2 film over p-Si-based efficient photovoltaic cells.


The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.


The authors extend their appreciation to the Deputyship for Research & Innovation, Ministry of Education in Saudi Arabia, for funding this research work through the project number IFP-KKU-2020/12.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2tc02548e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022