 DOI: 10.1039/C8NJ02238K
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 14104-14110


Muhammad
Aamir
,

Tham
Adhikari
,

Muhammad
Sher
,

Neerish
Revaprasadu
,

Waqas
Khalid
,

Javeed
Akhtar
* and 

Jean-Michel
Nunzi
*

Department of Chemistry, Queen's University, Kingston, ON K7L 3N6, Canada. E-mail: nunzijm@queensu.ca

Department of Chemistry, Materials Laboratory, Mirpur University of Science & Technology (MUST), Allama Iqbal Road, Mirpur Azad Jammu & Kashmir, 10250, Pakistan. E-mail: javeedkt@gmail.com

Department of Chemistry, Allama Iqbal Open University, Sector H-8, Islamabad-44000, Pakistan

Department of Chemistry, University of Zululand, Private Bag X1001, Kwadlangezwa, 3886, South Africa

Functional Materials Lab, Department of Physics, Air University, Sector E-9, Islamabad, Pakistan

Received
7th May 2018
, Accepted 26th June 2018
First published on 27th June 2018
Inorganic lead halide perovskite solar cells with mixed halides have achieved reasonable power conversion efficiency with the advantage of enhanced stability. In this work, we report the fabrication of an all-inorganic cesium lead bromoiodide based planar perovskite solar cell with a ZnO electron transport layer. The method described herein includes the use of one step spin coating solution processing using a solvent mixture (DMF + DMSO) to avoid the solubility issues of CsPbBr2I perovskite in DMF. The substrate temperature during spin coating was found to be a critical parameter to generate the required crystalline morphology of the perovskite thin films. Post-annealing of the as-deposited perovskite film at 275 °C led to the formation of the cubic phase of CsPbBr2I with an optical band gap of 2.06 eV. Interestingly, cubic shaped CsPbBr2I morphology was obtained via single-step spin-coating processing that otherwise required two-step solution deposition of the hybrid perovskite. The best performing devices achieved 4.8% power conversion efficiency with minimal hysteresis and enhanced thermal and photo-stability. Owing to enhanced thermal and photo-stability, inorganic perovskites appear as viable alternatives to hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites for solar cell applications.

Hybrid lead halide perovskite materials have gained tremendous attention in recent years due to a rapid upsurge in power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 3.8% to over 20%. Although high PCE has been achieved, the use of organic cations like methylammonium has rendered them rather thermally unstable under ambient conditions, thus limiting their practical applications. On the other hand, inorganic lead halide perovskites which have improved thermal stability have attracted progressive consideration for their photovoltaic, fluorescence sensing, photocatalysis and light emitting applications. The inorganic perovskite, CsPbI3, has a cubic phase with a more desirable band gap of 1.73 eV. Unfortunately, it tends to convert to the yellow insulating non-perovskite phase at temperatures lower than the cubic orthorhombic phase transition of 315 °C. However, partial alloying of the inorganic perovskite with Br lowers the phase transition temperature, while increasing the band gap of the resultant perovskite. Recently, CsPbBrI2 perovskite with a band gap of 1.82 eV has been reported to achieve the highest PCE of 11.5%. Further increase in the bromide to iodide ratio leads to the formation of CsPbBr2I perovskite which has a low phase transition temperature of 100 °C and a band gap of 2.06 eV, making it a potential candidate to be used as a top cell in tandem solar cells. Ma et al. have reported the first CsPbBr2I perovskite based planar transport material free solar cell with a PCE of 4.7% using the dual-source thermal evaporation technique. Lau et al. have further improved the PCE to 6.3% by fabricating a mesoporous CsPbBr2I perovskite solar device via spray assisted solution processed deposition. Li et al. have adopted the gas assisted solution process method to fabricate a planar CsPbBr2I perovskite solar cell with a stabilized PCE of 6.07%. However, in these reports, a TiO2 electron transport layer (ETL) was used, which requires sintering. Therefore, there is potential to use other electron transport materials like ZnO.

Practically, perovskite solar devices have been fabricated by sandwiching a perovskite layer between the electron transport layer (ETL) and the hole transport layer (HTL). These layers (ETL & HTL) facilitate the transportation of carriers generated in the perovskite layer and also prevent carrier recombination at the interfaces. Organic or n-type inorganic metal oxide ETLs were used either as compact films or compact/mesoporous layers. However, planar device architectures are of interest due to their ease of processing. During device fabrication, Some metal oxide ETLs require high sintering temperatures like the widely used TiO2 which requires about 500 °C, making it incompatible with plastic substrates. On the other hand, ZnO, which has the same energy levels as TiO2, has the advantage of low temperature fabrication, tunable morphology and high electron mobility.
In this work, we report the fabrication of CsPbBr2I inorganic perovskite using single step spin-coating onto a low temperature processed ZnO layer on an ITO glass substrate. A series of experiments investigating the effect of substrate temperature (Ts) on the perovskite film and photovoltaic efficiency was performed. Aiming at simple architecture and low temperature solution processed devices, we fabricated a planar ITO/ZnO/CsPbBr2I/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag solar cell, first of its kind with the best efficiency of 4.8%, a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 8.7 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.04 V and a fill factor (FF) of 52.5% at a substrate temperature (Ts) of 150 °C.

Cesium iodide, lead bromide, zinc acetate, 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxy phenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD), lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl)imide (Li-TFSI) and 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP), chlorobenzene, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. All chemicals and reagents were used without further purification.


Indium tin oxide (ITO) coated glass used as the substrate was purchased from Luminescence Technology Corporation. ITO film thickness was 135 ± 15 nm with a sheet resistance of 15 Ω sq−1. UV-visible absorption spectra were acquired using a Hewlett-Packard 8453 spectrometer or an Olid HP8452 Diode Array Spectrometer. Current density–voltage (J–V) was characterized using a Keithley 4200-SCS in the dark and under illumination. All the photovoltaic parameters of the cells were measured under ambient conditions using Xenon light with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 calibrated with an AM 1.5 solar simulator. XRD patterns were obtained using an Xpert Pro Philips powder X-ray diffractometer. A field emission scanning electron microscope (FEI Quanta 650 FEG) supplemented with an EDAX detector (Bruker XFlash detector 1.9) was used to analyse the morphology, size and composition of the nanocrystals. Surface morphology was characterized using an Ambios multimode Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) in the tapping mode at a frequency of 300 kHz. Photoluminescence (PL) was acquired using a Flau Time 300 (FT-300) steady-state and lifetime spectrometer, PicoQuant GmbH, Germany, with pulsed LED laser excitation source. XPS spectra were recorded on a Kratos Nova AXIS spectrometer equipped with a 150 W Al-Kα source at 1486.69 eV. Samples were mounted onto a coated aluminum plate using double-sided adhesive Cu tape and kept under 10−9 Torr vacuum overnight inside the preparation chamber before being transferred to the 10−10 Torr analysis chamber of the spectrometer. Binding energies referred to the C 1s peak at 285 eV. Survey spectra were recorded from −5 to 1200 eV at a pass energy of 160 eV using an energy step of 1 eV and a dwell time of 100 ms. High resolution spectra of Cs 3d, O 1s, C 1s, Pb 4f and Br 3d were recorded in appropriate regions at a pass energy of 20 eV using an energy step of 0.1 eV and a sweep time of 60 s. XPS maps of Cs, I, Pb and Br elements were acquired in the same 300 × 700 μm2 area as above using the same radiation source.


An ITO-glass substrate was cleaned by sonicating successively in a solution of detergent, NaOH, ethanol, acetone and isopropanol for 15 min. After drying on a hot plate, the substrate was treated with oxygen plasma for 20 min. The ZnO sol–gel was prepared as reported previously. The ZnO compact layer was fabricated by spin coating the as-prepared sol–gel at 2000 rpm for 30 s and annealing for 30 min in air, at three different temperatures such as 100 °C, 150 °C, and 200 °C. The perovskite film was deposited using single step spin coating in a N2 filled glove box. The solution of 367 mg of PbBr2 and 259 mg of CsI in DMF:DMSO (1:1.2) was spin coated at 2000 rpm for 30 s, followed by annealing at 275 °C for 30 minutes. The perovskite layer thickness was measured with a profilometer and found to be around 150 nm. After perovskite formation and cooling down to room temperature, a solution of 72.3 mg of spiro-OMeTAD, 9.1 mg of Li-TFSI and 28.8 μL of TBP was spin coated at 4000 rpm for 30 s, as reported previously. Finally, a set of four 100 nm-Ag electrodes was deposited behind a shadow mask using thermal evaporation under 1 × 10−6 mbar vacuum. The device structure is shown in Fig. 4(a). The active area of each individual element is 6 mm2.


The ZnO electron transport layer was deposited on cleaned substrates using a sol–gel method via spin coating followed by annealing at three different temperatures of 100 °C, 150 °C and 200 °C. It was found that the increase in temperature increases the roughness of the ZnO film. Fig. S1(a–d) (ESI) shows the AFM images of ZnO thin films. The mean roughness of ZnO annealed at 100 °C and 150 °C was 12.6 nm and 13.2 nm, respectively. The roughness increased to 14.0 nm at 200 °C which reflects the well-known fact that annealing temperature increases crystallinity. The SEM images of the as-deposited ZnO layer shows a flack like morphology at all annealing temperatures as presented in Fig. S2 (ESI). Similar topography has been reported in the literature.

To obtain the perovskite layer, we adopted the single step solution processing method. CsPbBr2I is insoluble in pure DMF. To bypass the solubility issue, we used a solution of CsPbBr2I in a solvent mixture of (DMF:DMSO). In order to get better coverage and crystallinity, the ITO/ZnO substrate temperatures were set at room temperature (25 °C), 150 °C and 200 °C during the fabrication of the CsPbBr2I film. Samples were then post-annealed at 275 °C for 30 min. Elevated temperature post-annealing yields cubic phase CsPbBr2I perovskite. Fig. S3 (ESI) shows the p-XRD pattern of as-deposited CsPbBr2I perovskite. The diffraction peaks at 17.38°, 24.60° and 35.19° correspond to the (100), (111) and (211) planes of the cubic phase perovskite.
The morphology of the perovskite film was studied using SEM as shown in Fig. 1(a–f). It was found that increasing the temperature increases the crystallinity and promotes a well-defined cubic morphology of the film. The CsPbBr2I perovskite deposited at a substrate temperature (Ts) of 25 °C appears rather flat with pinholes (Fig. 1(a and b)). However, larger (∼300 nm) cubic shaped fused crystals appear at a substrate temperature (Ts) of 150 °C as shown in Fig. 1(c and d). A further increase in the substrate temperature (Ts) (200 °C) produces ∼600 nm cubic-shaped crystals with well separated boundaries (Fig. 1(e and f)). According to the literature, the formation of cube shaped morphologies is associated with a two-step deposition process. However, in our work, similar cubic shaped crystals appeared upon single-step spin coating.
Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) was performed to determine the stoichiometry of as-deposited samples. The composition of as-deposited CsPbBr2I perovskite films at all substrate temperatures shows the atomic ratio of 1:1:2:1 which matches the expected CsPbBr2I stoichiometry. In addition, the distribution of Cs, Pb, Br and I in the perovskite film was determined using EDX elemental mapping. Fig. S4 (ESI) reveals the uniform distribution of Cs, Pb, Br and I in the probed area of the perovskite film. The crystallinity of the CsPbBr2I perovskite film was also determined by AFM. Fig. 2 shows the AFM images of as-deposited CsPbBr2I perovskite films at different substrate temperatures. The film deposited at Ts = 25 °C shows small crystallinity and the mean roughness of the CsPbBr2I film is 130.8 nm. However, the crystallinity increases at Ts = 150 °C and the mean roughness decreases to 90.9 nm. The decrease in roughness reveals a smoother film and may lead to the formation of a better composite with a ZnO layer at elevated temperature, whereas the mean roughness increases to 202.3 nm at a substrate temperature (Ts) of 200 °C which may be due to well-formed cubic crystals as shown in Fig. 1.
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was employed to analyse the chemical composition and valence states of the surface, as shown in Fig. S5(a–d) (ESI). The Cs 3d3/2 and Cs 3d5/2 binding energy curves were observed at 738.4 eV and 724.5 eV. The peaks of Pb 4f5/2 and 4f7/2 were found at 138.3 eV and 143.1 eV respectively. However, relatively weak intensity signals of I 3d3/2 and I 3d5/2 were positioned at 630.6 and 619 eV. Similarly, the weak intensity peaks of Br 3d3/2 and Br 3d5/2 were positioned at 69.3 and 68.2 eV, respectively. This shows that Cs, Pb, Br and I elements belong to 1+, 2+, 1− and 1− formal valence states, respectively. The elemental distribution of the as-deposited CsPbBr2I perovskite thin film at a substrate temperature of 150 °C was also determined using XPS elemental mapping which shows the uniform distribution of Cs, Pb, Br and I in the interrogated area of the inorganic perovskite thin film, as shown in Fig. S6(a–d) (ESI).

Fig. 3 shows the UV-Vis spectra of CsPbBr2I perovskite films. The as-deposited perovskite material shows a broad absorption peak with an onset around 600 nm. The band gap of the perovskite material was calculated using a Tauc-plot as shown in the inset of Fig. 3. The estimated bad gap was found at 2.06 eV, which matches the band gap reported in the literature. Fig. S7 (ESI) shows the PL lifetime of CsPbBr2I perovskite films deposited at three different substrate temperatures (Ts = 25 °C, 150 °C and 200 °C). Photoluminescence radiative recombination lifetimes are generally quality indicators of perovskite thin-film application to solar cells and other optoelectronic devices. Perovskite thin film growth conditions and treatments after deposition can be pivotal in attaining the desired film morphology, lifetime of carriers and device performance. The time resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) of CsPbBr2I was carried out by exciting the specimen at 600 nm, which indicates that the longest recombination lifetime of 6.1 ns is achieved for the perovskite film formed on a Ts = 150 °C treated ZnO/ITO substrate. The spectra indicate single to stretched exponential decay functions.
The AFM images in Fig. 2 indicate increased crystallinity at Ts = 150 °C, with a minimal film roughness of 90.9 nm for this set of depositions. As the substrate temperature is increased to 200 °C, the roughness of the film increases to 202.3 nm. This large roughness might increase the density of quenching sites, thus favouring the non-radiative recombination of the charge carriers. Similar sort of behaviour was described for CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite thin films by Yu Li et al. where fluorescence decay was associated with film thickness and disappeared for thicker films. SEM (Fig. 1e and f) images suggest that well-formed cubic structures might be responsible for the increased roughness and thickness of the films.

Fig. 4(a) shows the architecture of planar devices used to explore the photovoltaic properties of inorganic CsPbBr2I perovskite-based devices in the dark and light. The current density voltage (J–V) characteristics in the dark and light of the planar ZnO/CsPbBr2I/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag device is shown in Fig. 4(b and c). The best PCE was 4.8% with Jsc = 8.7 mA cm2, Voc = 1.04 V and FF = 52.5%. Ma et al. reported a hole transport layer free planar c-TiO2 electron transport layer based CsPbBr2I perovskite solar cell with a forward scan efficiency of 3.7% and a reverse scan of 4.7%. Our present work clearly shows improved efficiency over their devices, with comparable Jsc and FF. Similarly, Jsc obtained in our work is also larger than that obtained with the glass-FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/CsPbBr2I/spiro-OMeTAD/Au devices fabricated by Lau et al. In addition, the devices reported by both Ma and Lau et al. were fabricated at high temperature owing to the use of a TiO2 electron transport layer, unlike ours.
The variation in substrate temperature (Ts) affects the device performance. It was found that the devices fabricated at Ts = 25 °C (room temperature) show lower current density (Jsc = 5.64 mA cm−2), open circuit voltage (Voc = 0.92 V), fill factor (FF = 49.9%) and PCE (2.59%) than the devices fabricated at Ts = 150 °C (Jsc = 8.78 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.04 V, FF = 52.5%, PCE = 4.8%). The decrease in PCE and other parameters can be attributed to the poor crystallinity of CsPbBr2I upon room temperature processing; whereas the obtained cubic crystals at Ts = 150 °C have fused boundaries which may possibly lead to increased charge mobility and reduced charge recombination. Seo et al. also reported that the cubic shaped CH3NH3PbI3 perovskites support larger carrier densities and fewer defect states than non-cubic perovskites.
We also note that the devices fabricated at Ts = 150 °C show a lower series resistance (Rs = 574 Ω) and a larger shunt resistance (Rsh = 24174 Ω) than the devices fabricated at Ts = 25 °C (Rs = 715 Ω, Rsh = 23743 Ω) which suggests improved film-forming quality during device processing at Ts = 150 °C.
The devices processed at Ts = 200 °C show a PCE of 4.16%, Jsc of 8.6 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.96 V and FF of 50%. Again, PCE and other parameters in these devices are improved with respect to the devices processed at Ts = 25 °C owing to better interface and crystalline quality, while the optimum is achieved at Ts = 150 °C. This decrease in efficiency at a higher Ts may be attributed to the formation of larger crystals with well separated boundaries (Fig. 1e), which may reduce mobility and increase charge recombination, although these devices show lower series resistance and increased shunt resistance compared to both lower Ts processed devices. Fig. 4(d) shows the hysteresis curve of the ZnO/CsPbBr2I/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag devices processed at Ts = 25 °C and Ts = 150 °C. It is observed that as-fabricated inorganic perovskite solar cells have limited hysteresis. Fig. S8 (ESI) shows the incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) of the best devices processed at Ts = 150 °C, which matches the absorption spectrum in Fig. 3. An IPCE of around 40% was observed for the best device.
The photostability of the devices was assessed by measuring photocurrent density across a 2000 Ω external load under repeated illumination–darkness cycles. The duration of each cycle was 250 seconds. Fig. 5 shows that no decrease in current density was observed upon light–dark cycles which suggest that inorganic CsPbBr2I perovskite-based devices are photo-stable. Current density was also monitored under continuous illumination for 3600 seconds and a 2.5% drop in current density was observed, as shown in Fig. S9 (ESI), which also suggests that ZnO based inorganic perovskite solar devices are photo-stable. The drop in efficiency was permanent.
The thermal stability of as-deposited CsPbBr2I on ZnO thin films was assessed at 100 °C for 8 hours with oxygen and moisture levels of 6 ppm and 45 ppm in an LC-glove box. Fig. S10 (ESI) shows no detectable phase change or appearance of impurity peak or change in the colour of CsPbBr2I suggesting that limited thermal degradation of CsPbBr2I perovskite takes place. On the other hand, hybrid perovskites deposited on a ZnO electron transport layer were found to be unstable. They undergo degradation upon heating due to the very nature of ZnO which absorbs protons from methyl ammonium and convert it into methylamine. We attributed the improved stability of our CsPbBr2I perovskite on the ZnO substrate to its non-protonic inorganic nature.

In summary, we have fabricated inorganic CsPbBr2I perovskite solar cells via a single step spin coating process at three different substrate temperatures. A mixture of DMF and DMSO solvents was used to dissolve the CsPbBr2I perovskite material for spin coating. The single step spin coating process at different substrate temperatures followed by annealing at 275 °C allows the successful formation of CsPbBr2I cubic phase perovskite with an optical bad gap of 2.06 eV. The devices processed at a substrate temperature of 150 °C show the best efficiency of 4.8%. The substrate temperature happens to be the critical parameter to achieve the best crystalline morphology of the film while it does not affect the stoichiometry of the perovskite material. The as processed perovskite devices show limited hysteresis and improved stability, making the CsPbBr2I perovskite materials promising alternatives to hybrid perovskite solar cells.


There are no conflicts to declare.


MA thanks the Higher Education Commission (HEC) of Pakistan for IRSIP funding and Queen's University Kingston, Canada, for laboratory and facilities. Research at Queens was supported by the National Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Discovery Grants program (RGPIN-2015-05485). JA thanks ORIC-MUST for providing the start-up grant.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: AFM, SEM, p-XRD, XPS, EDX mapping, XPS Q-mapping, photoluminescence lifetime, and photo- and thermal stability data. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nj02238k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2018