 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA06199G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19123-19128


Bert
Conings
*,

Aslihan
Babayigit
,

Tim
Vangerven
,

Jan
D'Haen
,

Jean
Manca
 and 

Hans-Gerd
Boyen


Hasselt University, Institute for Materials Research, Wetenschapspark 1, Diepenbeek, 3590, Belgium. E-mail: bert.conings@uhasselt.be

Hasselt University, X-LaB, Agoralaan Building D, Diepenbeek, 3590, Belgium

Received
7th August 2015
, Accepted 11th August 2015
First published on 12th August 2015
Perovskite solar cells are well known to degrade under post-fabrication stress, among others due to humidity as a consequence of the hydrophilic properties of the organic cation. On the other hand, it has been shown that the controlled addition of water molecules during the formation of the perovskite (while starting from water-free precursor materials) yields larger perovskite crystals with less defects, resulting in better device performance. One aspect still missing in this line of research is the water content of the perovskite precursors themselves: although most of them are prepared with anhydrous solvents as a precaution towards premature degradation, it is still unclear whether or not the precursors really need to be dry. In this paper, the impact of the perovskite precursor's water content up to 10 vol% is investigated, in the form of a detailed study regarding the opto-electronic and morphological properties of the resulting films and devices. It is found that only modest changes occur in the films that do not affect the final photovoltaic performance, thus relaxing the conditions for large-scale production of this upcoming photovoltaic technology.

Organometal halide perovskite solar cells can truly be considered a trailblazing new photovoltaic technology. After the seminal papers that introduced full-solid-state perovskite-sensitized solar cells with power conversion efficiencies around 10%, intensive study and process optimization have led to record efficiencies passing already 20%. Residing in this performance category, and possessing an extraordinarily short energy payback time, perovskite solar cells meanwhile emerged as real competitors of silicon solar cells. In order to become a veritable rival of silicon, however, several more challenges have to be met, one of which is the development of upscalable deposition processes. As perovskites can be processed from solution, a great deal of printing and coating techniques can be explored, such as inkjet printing, spray coating and slot-die coating. It is not clear, however, how strict the processing requirements should be in a corresponding production line. This is based on the well-known hurdle that perovskite solar cells tend to degrade under several forms of stress, as in exposure to oxygen molecules, slightly elevated temperatures and also humidity, as a consequence of the hydrophilic property of the typically used organic cations. The latter in particular has proven to be contentious. On the one hand it has led to the widespread use of anhydrous solvents in the preparation of perovskite precursors to avoid any risk of premature degradation of the freshly made films. It was indeed observed that the presence of even minute amounts of moisture during fabrication can have a detrimental influence on the perovskite's morphology, optical properties and crystallinity, which is obviously reflected in much lower device performance. In stark contrast, it has also been demonstrated that the presence of water molecules during the fabrication of the perovskite (induced by processing under controlled humidity) can actually yield larger perovskite crystals with less defects, resulting in better device performance. In the light of this controversy, an equally pertinent question that yet remains unanswered so far is therefore whether the use of anhydrous solvents is in fact necessary to achieve decently performing perovskite solar cells. This is an important issue that codetermines the stringency of processing conditions in future large-scale production facilities for perovskite solar modules.

Aiming to resolve this issue, here we present a systematic study that isolates the sole effect of water content in the perovskite precursor. To this end, perovskite films and solar cells were prepared using otherwise dry precursors where well defined amounts of water were purposefully added, working in the protective atmosphere of a glovebox to rule out any other source of moisture. An investigation that weighs up morphology, crystallinity, optical properties and photovoltaic performance so allows to critically map the consequences of water-contaminated precursors in film properties and resulting power conversion efficiencies.

In the entirety of this work, all perovskite layers were deposited using one of the most well-established one-step procedures (see ESI). Briefly, methylammoniumiodide (MAI) and lead chloride (PbCl2) were dissolved in dimethylformamide (DMF) (with added H2O where appropriate) and spin cast at 2000 rpm, after which the coated samples were annealed at 100 °C to crystallize into CH3NH3PbI3−xClx, where x ≪ 1. Besides adding to the generality of the results, with this one-step procedure the potential interaction of water with other solvent(s), solvent vapor or additive(s) is avoided. This is pivotal, as a significant amount of up to 10 vol% of the original precursor solvent DMF is replaced by water in our experiments (vol% will be shortened to % in the remainder of the paper), and the occurrence of side effects may obscure or entirely mask the effect of water alone.

First of all, the morphology of such perovskite films, prepared using precursors with a water content of 0 to 10%, is examined. Fig. 1(a) shows Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) images of the resulting morphology when a precursor based on pure anhydrous DMF is used, and Fig. 1(b)–(e) represent the analogous films based on precursors where 1, 2, 4 and 10% of the DMF is replaced by water. At first sight, there is no dramatic impact of the water, if not for the amount and size of pinholes. To quantify this, the equivalent of >30000 μm2 of the film was analyzed for each of the conditions. The histogram in Fig. 1(f) shows the recorded abundance of pinholes in the films as a function of their size. Areas below 0.1 μm2 were not considered as they were at the limit of what could be reliably distinguished, taking into account the threshold of grey values and the resolution of the images. For only 1% or 2% of water in the precursor, the area distribution of the pinholes does not change, in contrast to their absolute number. From 4% water content, the smaller pinholes become less abundant, and the number of larger sized ones begins to grow. Then, there is a clear transition from 4% to 10% water content, where the histogram changes shape and shifts substantially. Here, noticeably larger holes of up to several μm2 are detected and the larger holes now outnumber the smaller ones, an effect that is also discernible in Fig. 1(e), in comparison to Fig. 1(a)–(d). We propose that the surface coverage is reduced as a likely result of the different wetting properties of water compared to DMF, due to a large difference in their respective surface tension. In addition, despite the similar viscosity of DMF:H2O mixtures versus pure DMF, there is a possibility that the lower boiling point and much higher vapor pressure of water compared to DMF could give rise to shifted drying kinetics of water-containing perovskite precursors and thereby impact the morphology as well.
Another aspect not be overlooked is that DMF is a good solvent for both MAI and PbCl2, whereas water is only a good solvent for MAI but a bad solvent for PbCl2. This may very well induce a local compositional imbalance and result in inferior crystalline quality of the resulting perovskite film, a hypothesis that was tested by recording X-ray diffractograms (XRDs) of the same set of samples, presented in Fig. 2. If compositional inhomogeneity would truly arise on the grounds of different solubilities of the two precursor salts in water and DMF, local under-stoichiometry of MAI (and commensurate over-stoichiometry of PbCl2) would lead to reduced preferential crystal orientation and the presence of PbI2. Remarkably, the diffractograms of all samples are identical, regardless of the water content in their precursors. Apart from the main perovskite peaks, no contribution of PbI2 is detected, demonstrating full conversion of the starting products into the perovskite phase. The presence of amorphous PbI2 (as would be undetected in XRD) is highly unlikely as PbI2 crystallizes very easily at room temperature without special measures. Clearly, the water content in the precursor and the differences in the solubility of the precursor salts in the respective solvents are of no influence on the crystallinity and phase-purity of the perovskite films. The corresponding absence of local compositional inhomogeneity thereby also rules out that strongly PbCl2-deprived regions would leave holes behind after the annealing-induced evaporation of MAI, and supports the idea that the formation of larger holes in the films at higher water content of the precursor is more likely related to the basic solvent properties of the H2O:DMF mixture, as mentioned previously. Further study would however be required to understand the mechanism in more detail.
While the bulk crystalline quality of the films can be investigated by XRD, it is much harder to resolve local disorder. In that respect, it has been shown by others that the exponential decay of the density of states at the band edge, also referred to as “Urbach tail”, is an adequate measure of the defect density in perovskite films. The Urbach tail is affected by, for example (but not limited to), Frenkel or Schottky defects or even temperature-driven iodine movement. In practice, the steepness of the slope of the Urbach tail – as from an absorption or external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurement – is fitted, resulting in a value for the “Urbach energy” EU (EU ∼ defect density).Fig. 3 shows representative EQE spectra measured on finished solar cells where the active layers were prepared with water-contaminated precursors. The estimated EU values are within the error margin equivalent, and in good agreement with previous literature. The invariable degree of order, irrespective of the precursor water content, as inferred from the XRD measurements, is thus further corroborated by the Urbach energy determination, suggesting a similar defect density for all films.
Next, the effect of precursor humidification on the optical properties of perovskite films is evaluated. The shape of the absorption curves, shown in Fig. 4(a), does not seem to change, which is expected from the very similar morphology of these films (see Fig. 1). The overall trend, however, is a modest reduction in the magnitude of the absorption, likely originating from the reduced film coverage for wetter precursors. Corresponding photoluminescence (PL) curves are presented in Fig. 4(b). The PL curves are identical in shape, but are slightly red-shifted for higher precursor H2O content, a phenomenon that has been linked to an increase in the perovskite crystal size, yet not to the extent that there is a discernible peak broadening in the XRD data (Fig. 2).
Finally, planar heterojunction solar cells were prepared in the n–i–p structure (ITO/TiO2/perovskite/poly-3-hexylthiophene (P3HT)/Au) with active perovskite layers fabricated using precursors with varying water contents. Their photovoltaic performance, shown in Fig. 5, is now evaluated and discussed with respect to the observations made previously. As only minor changes in properties have been detected so far, it comes as no surprise that also the overall power conversion efficiency of the corresponding solar cells does not suffer from water-contaminated precursors: the initial efficiency of around 10% (determined from JV curves) is constant for all cells with active layers fabricated with a DMF:H2O precursor, compared to the reference cell (pure anhydrous DMF). Furthermore, these values eventually all stabilize around 9% while held at maximum power point (see Fig. S1). A weak trend can be seen in the short circuit current (Jsc) where devices with more moisture containing precursors draw marginally higher current. This can be attributed to the somewhat coarser morphology because of the dilating pinholes in the perovskite that, despite lowering the absorption, assist in improved light scattering. On the other hand, the larger pinholes create shunt paths, resulting in a hint of decrease in fill factor. The open circuit voltage (Voc) decreases by approximately 20 mV as a result of water contaminating the perovskite precursor. While the observed PL red-shift (Fig. 4(b)) does signal a slightly narrower band gap, this should not amount for more than 10 mV loss in Voc. Additionally, if trace amounts of water would at all be trapped inside the perovskite crystal, the band gap is expected to widen rather than shrink, or at least stay unaffected, as follows from molecular dynamics simulations by Mosconi et al. We therefore surmise that the decreased Voc (as does the reduced fill factor) stems from the induced recombination from the direct contact between hole and electron transport layers at the observed pinholes.
In summary, we have investigated the influence of water contamination in organometal halide perovskite precursors on the resulting perovskite films and solar cells. The small changes that do occur in terms of morphology and optical properties of the films are found not to have considerable influence on the photovoltaic performance of devices. Our findings thus demonstrate that to obtain decently performing perovskite solar cells, in principle no precautions need to be taken concerning the anhydrous quality of the used precursor solvent. This is a far-reaching outcome as the elimination of this redundant requirement relaxes the necessary conditions for the fabrication of perovskite-based opto-electronic devices, and brings perovskite technology one step closer to large-scale production and applications.

Patterned ITO substrates and glass substrates were successively cleaned with soap, water, acetone and boiling 2-propanol. After a short oxygen plasma treatment, a colloidal dispersion of TiO2 nanoparticles was spin cast on the substrates and baked at 500 °C for 45 minutes to obtain a dense TiO2 blocking layer. The substrates were then transferred to a nitrogen-filled glovebox (<1 ppm O2 and H2O). MAI:PbCl2 (3:1) precursors were prepared with a concentration of 700 mg ml−1 in DMF:H2O ratios of x:1 − x in volume, with 0.9 ≤ x ≤ 1. The precursor solutions were spin cast at 2000 rpm, after which the substrates were ramped from room temperature to 100 °C at a rate of 1 degree per minute, followed by a 60 minute dwell at 100 °C. For the solar cells, a 15 mg ml−1 P3HT solution in anhydrous chlorobenzene was spin cast on top at 1200 rpm, and the devices were finalized with an evaporated Au electrode (100 nm).

SEM images were recorded with a FEI Quanta 200FEG-SEM. SEM images were analyzed using image analysis software ImageJ64, version 1.45s. XRD was performed with a Bruker D8 diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. Optical absorption measurements were acquired on a Varian Cary UV-vis spectrometer and photoluminescence spectra were taken by using a Horiba-Jobin Yvon Fluorolog-3 device, with an excitation wavelength of 450 nm. Current–voltage characterization was performed using a class A solar simulator (Newport 91195A), calibrated with a silicon NIST reference solar cell under AM1.5G conditions at 100 mW cm−2. Stabilized power output was measured using a maximum power point tracker built in LabVIEW. EQE was measured on a home-built setup fitted with a Newport 6257 xenon lamp (100 W), a Newport Cornerstone 130 monochromator (with sorting filters) and a Stanford Research Systems SR830 lock-in amplifier. The light beam was mechanically chopped at 10 Hz. Calibration was done with an FDS-100 calibrated silicon photodiode. Fourier transform photocurrent spectroscopy (FTPS) was performed using a Thermo Nicolet 8700 FTIR with an external detector. The spectra were recorded with a quartz beamsplitter and appropriate optical bandpass filters to improve the signal to noise ratio. All spectra were corrected for the frequency response (Vandewal et al., Thin Solid Films 2008, 516, 7135). Urbach energies were determined by fitting the slope of the spectral tail at low energy.

This work was financially supported by the Bijzonder Onderzoeksfonds (BOF, Hasselt University). B. C. is a postdoctoral research fellow of the Fonds voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek (FWO). The authors thank Jan Mertens for technical support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta06199g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015