 DOI: 10.1039/C8NR09353A
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 3733-3740


Raja Bhaskar Kanth
Siram
,

Mark V.
Khenkin
,

Angelica
Niazov-Elkan
,

Anoop
K. M.
,

Haim
Weissman
,

Eugene A.
Katz
*,

Iris
Visoly-Fisher
* and 

Boris
Rybtchinski
*

Department of Organic Chemistry, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel. E-mail: boris.rybtchinski@weizmann.ac.il

Department of Chemistry, School of Science, Gitam University (deemed to be university), Rudraram, Hyderabad 502329, India

Department of Solar Energy and Environmental Physics, Swiss Institute for Dryland Environmental and Energy Research, J. Blaustein Institutes for Desert Research, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Midreshet Ben-Gurion 8499000, Israel. E-mail: keugene@bgu.ac.il; irisvf@bgu.ac.il

Ilse Katz Institute for Nanoscale Science and Technology, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Be'er-Sheva 8410501, Israel

Received
20th November 2018
, Accepted 2nd February 2019
First published on 4th February 2019
We report on utilizing free-standing hybrid perylenediimide/carbon nanotube (PDI/CNT) films fabricated in air as back contacts for fully inorganic perovskite solar cells (glass/FTO/dense TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/CsPbBr3/back electrode). The back contact electrode connection is performed by film transfer rather than by vacuum deposition or by wet processing, allowing the formation of highly homogeneous contacts under ambient conditions. The use of this novel electrode in solar cells based on CsPbBr3 resulted in efficiency of 5.8% without a hole transporting layer; it is significantly improved in comparison to the reference cells with standard gold electrodes. Overall device fabrication can be performed on air, using inexpensive processing methods. The hybrid film electrodes dramatically improve the cell photo-stability under ambient conditions and under real-life operating conditions outdoors. The champion unencapsulated device demonstrated less than 30% efficiency loss over 6 weeks of outdoor aging in Negev desert conditions. The CNT/PDI electrodes offer the combination of fabrication simplicity, unique contacting approach, high efficiency and good operational stability for perovskite photovoltaics.

Metal halide perovskites brought a breakthrough in photovoltaic (PV) technologies due to their unique combination of direct band gap, reasonably high charge carrier mobilities, long carrier diffusion lengths, and solution-based processing, resulting in high energy conversion efficiencies at low costs. Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) with record power conversion efficiency (PCE) above 23% are based on hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites. However, these devices suffer from poor thermal, air and photo-stability. In particular, degradation of perovskite materials upon exposure to water or oxygen impose strict requirements on the encapsulation strategy. Inorganic PSCs, based on CsPbBr3 for example, are much more robust than their hybrid counterparts, but generally yield lower PCE (∼5–7%). The limiting factor for CsPbBr3 as a PV material is its large bandgap (2.3 eV) which is unfavorable for a single junction cell, but has potential applications in multijunction photovoltaics, for example as a top sub-cell in a four-terminal PSC/silicon tandem cells or in two-terminal all-perovskite and PSC/PSC/silicon triple-junction cells.

It has been recently shown that gold electrodes (commonly used in PSCs) can be deleterious for the long-term stability of solar cells due to penetration of gold into the active layer. Furthermore, to reduce the cost of solar cell fabrication, it is necessary to replace the vacuum evaporated Au electrodes with low cost materials prone to solution processing. In this respect, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) possess several advantages: excellent electrical conductivity, good thermal dissipation properties, high chemical stability, well-defined morphology, and relatively low costs (for multiwall (MW) CNTs). Importantly, hydrophobic CNTs may protect water-sensitive perovskite materials from moisture, improving the overall device stability at ambient conditions. CNTs have been utilized as hole transporting materials in organic and perovskite solar cells, as well as electrodes in CdTe, organic, and dye sensitized solar cells. Several reports described utilization of carbon nanotube films as electrodes or hole extraction layer in perovskite solar cells. In these references, CNT film was prepared via the floating catalyst chemical vapor deposition method using high temperatures (∼1150 °C). This method is not easily scalable to afford large area films.
Here we employ new hybrid CNT-based electrodes for PSCs. The electrodes are made using a simple solution-based in-air fabrication procedure. We have recently shown that organic nanocrystal/carbon nanotube (ONC/CNT) hybrid films can be prepared by self-assembly to afford free-standing films with excellent conductivity and high thermal stability. Importantly, these films are solution-processed in aqueous media, affording full cell processing in ambient, as shown herein. Furthermore, the fabrication method of our hybrid CNT films allows scaling-up to create large area films, whose nature can be tuned by ONC choice. Production or aging of perovskite solar cells in ambient atmosphere is a highly desirable feature for industrial upscaling of the technology. We used ONC/MWCNT films to fabricate back contact electrodes for CsPbBr3 solar cells using simple mechanical deposition that results in good adhesion. A film transfer process greatly simplifies device manufacturing as compared to commonly utilized vacuum deposition or wet processing (spin coating, doctor blading, etc.). Our electrodes allow the formation of highly homogeneous contacts even on non-planar/curved surfaces, being of potential use also for flexible cells and other advanced solar cell structures.
In this work we used fully inorganic PSCs with a structure of glass/FTO/dense(d)-TiO2/mesoporous(mp)-TiO2/CsPbBr3/CNT-based electrode. Such devices are expected to be more stable than those based on the hybrid perovskites as their structure eliminates the use of identified degradation sources such as methylammonium or iodine in the active layer, organic hole transport layers (HTL), and diffusive metal back contacts. The use of the novel hybrid CNT back contact rather than gold not only increases device PCE from 4.7% to 5.8% (the published record efficiency achieved for such cells is 6.7%) but also significantly improves the devices’ photo-stability, with less than 30% decrease in PCE after 6 weeks of outdoor exposure in the Negev desert without encapsulation or any intentional UV filtering. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first determination of outdoor stability of CsPbBr3-based solar cells, showing an unmatched stability for unencapsulated devices under real-life conditions. Thus, our findings significantly advance the practical application of perovskite solar cells.

Free-standing hybrid organic nanocrystal (ONC)·MWCNT films were fabricated from their dispersion in water:THF = 7:3 (v/v, see ESI for details). The fabrication and characterization of these films have been recently reported by us. In this work we used nitro-substituted perylene diimide (PDI) derivative and organic nanocrystals (ONC1) based on it, as well as unsubstituted PDI and its ONCs (ONC2, see Fig. 1a) to disperse the MWCNTs (average diameter of 9.5 nm, 1.5 μm length). Briefly, the MWCNTs were mixed in water:THF = 7:3 (v/v) with ONC1 or ONC2 in 1:1 weight ratio. The mixtures were sonicated for 45–60 min until nearly complete MWCNT dispersion (Fig. 1b), and then centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 5 min to remove the undispersed MWCNTs. The supernatant was filtered through a PTFE membrane under argon pressure of 2 bar, then the residue was detached from the membrane and dried under vacuum overnight to give the free standing hybrid ONC·MWCNT films (Fig. 1b and c). The SEM images of the hybrid films are shown in Fig. 1c and d, revealing 3D network of MWCNT intertwined with the PDI ONC network. The organic nanocrystals can be removed from the film by washing with acetone (Fig. S1), affording MWCNT membrane that contains 1–5% PDI (“buckypaper”, Fig. 1e).

The architecture of the cell was Glass/FTO/d-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CsPbBr3/ONC·MWCNT (Fig. 1f), see ESI for the details of fabrication. In control devices, Au electrode was used instead of ONC·MWCNT. We note that these reference cells did not include HTL, similarly to the devices with the CNT electrodes, whose design aims at eliminating unstable components. Subsequently to perovskite deposition, the ONC·MWCNT film was wetted with acetonitrile and transferred onto the perovskite layer. The film was dried at 70 °C for about 1 min. Gold electrodes (90–100 nm thick) in the control devices were deposited by thermal evaporation. The cross-sectional SEM images of devices are shown in Fig. 2. The in-lens SEM image indicates the 30 nm thick layer of d-TiO2, covered by 400–450 nm of mp-TiO2 layer; ∼200 nm thick continuous perovskite layer is obtained on top. The hybrid CNT film is somewhat discontinuous (Fig. 2b) due to the breaking of the device for the cross-section measurement. The cross-sectional SEM images obtained with a back scattered detector (Fig. S2) confirm that the mp-TiO2 layer is impregnated with the perovskite.
The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of FTO/d-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CsPbBr3/back contact solar cells (where the back contact was comprised of Au or ONC·MWCNT) under simulated sunlight are shown in Fig. 3. Hysteresis was found to be negligible in our devices. The solar cell characteristics of champion devices with different electrodes are summarized in Table 1. The J–V curve of the solar cell with ONC1·MWCNT electrode exhibits a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 5.6 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.28 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.76, resulting in PCE of 5.4%, which is by 17% higher than that of the control Au electrode devices (PCE = 4.7%). Superior performance of the hybrid CNT electrode compared to control devices appears to stem from effective surface passivation, lower interface recombination, and better charge extraction. The charge carrier extraction takes place from the carbon nanotubes but not from the ONCs, because the charge transport characteristics of CNTs are superior to those of the ONCs. Thus, there is not much difference in short circuit density between the devices ONC1·MWCNT and ONC2·MWCNT. The observed minor difference (∼6%) in the FF could be explained by small difference in the interfacial energy level alignment due to the electron accepting nitro group in ONC1. Further improvement in device performance was achieved by washing most of the PDI material (ONC1 and ONC2) from the hybrid MWCNT films, resulting in VOC of 1.33 V and η = 5.8%. We note that this value is not too far from the published record efficiency achieved for such cells is 6.7%.
ONC1·MWCNT
ONC2·MWCNT
Washed ONC1·MWCNT buckypaper
Au
F
R
F
R
F
R
F
R

V
oc (V)
1.28
1.28
1.27
1.28
1.33
1.33
1.24
1.23

J
sc (mA cm−2)
5.60
5.63
5.57
5.54
5.55
5.55
4.81
4.81
Fill factor (FF)
0.75
0.76
0.70
0.70
0.79
0.80
0.78
0.79
PCE (%)
5.36
5.44
4.94
5.01
5.80
5.87
4.66
4.67
The work function of our hybrid electrodes is ∼4.7 eV, which is too low to explain the high VOC values achieved. However, it is still debated whether the electrode work function governs the VOC value in perovskite solar cells. We suggest that perovskite surface passivation by the hybrid electrode is responsible for the observed improved solar cell performance, as it was demonstrated before with other carbon based materials. Good surface passivation is consistent with low J–V hysteresis in our devices, since it is believed to originate from the combination of ion migration and surface recombination.
Recent works reported on using other carbon materials as electrodes in CsPbBr3 solar cells. Hence, we utilized a carbon tape and carbon paint (SPI supplies, catalog no. Z05006) as back contacts to compare their performance with the ONC·MWCNT electrodes. The carbon tape electrode did not exhibit observable charge collection behavior (Table S1). In the case of carbon paint, large hysteresis was observed with PCE of 1.01 and 1.65% in forward and reverse scanning directions, respectively (Fig. S3, ESI). As the hysteresis is believed to be due to the combination of ion migration and surface recombination, we suppose that high recombination at the interface of perovskite and carbon paint electrode might be responsible for both high hysteresis and poor performance of these cells. The discrepancy between these and previously reported results of cell performance with carbon paint may originate from variable compositions of the carbon paint. Our electrodes showed highly reproducible results (see below).
Fig. S4 shows the External Quantum Efficiency (EQE) spectra of the cells with ONC·MWCNT or Au electrodes. Short-circuit current densities (Jcalcsc) calculated from the EQE spectra are in a good agreement with corresponding values obtained by J–V measurements (Table S2). EQE spectra line shapes in the entire spectral range are similar for all the devices (Fig. S4b) independent of the electrode used, proving that the hybrid electrode films do not contribute to photocurrent generation which occurs fully in the perovskite layer.
In order to demonstrate reproducibility, 55 solar cells were investigated. As follows from the PCE histogram shown in Fig. 4, the efficiencies are distributed over a narrow range with an average value of 4.5% for hybrid ONC1·MWCNT electrodes and 3.6% in case of gold electrodes (the widths of Gaussians in Fig. 4 are 1.1 and 0.7% for ONC1·MWCNT and gold electrodes, respectively). Histograms of all the solar cell parameters for both device configurations are shown in Fig. S5 and S6, respectively.
In terms of stability, two strategies are currently employed to improve perovskite cell lifetime: a search for resilient perovskite and charge transport materials, and the design of highly protective device encapsulation. In the current work, we did not employ any encapsulation as our hybrid electrode can protect the perovskite layer from air and moisture. Furthermore, the MWCNT-based back contact eliminates the need for a selective hole transport layer.
The photo-stability of the CsPbBr3 active layer was verified by accelerated aging with concentrated sunlight. The material absorbance remains unchanged after 10 hours under 100 suns illumination (1 sun = 100 mW cm−2) and demonstrates superior stability compared to organic–inorganic counterparts (see Fig. S7).

Fig. 5 summarizes the stability of devices with ONC1·MWCNT and conventional gold electrodes under different stressing conditions: “on shelf” stability (at 25 °C, 25–35% relative humidity (RH)); thermal stability (60 °C; in air in the dark); photo stability under continuous illumination (simulated sunlight, 100 mW cm−2; open circuit; in air); and outdoor stability (open circuit). These conditions were close to ISOS protocols D-1; D-2; L-1 and O-1, respectively. The devices showed decent on-shelf and thermal stability (Fig. 5a and b). The cells’ performance remains relatively unchanged when they were kept for 60 days in the dark, in air with relative humidity of 25–35% at room temperature. Heating cells to 60 °C in air also did not result in decrease of the devices’ PCE with either electrode material, in agreement with the demonstrated CsPbBr3 stability. The evolution of principal PV parameters corresponding to the experiments shown in Fig. 5 is provided in Fig. S8–11 in ESI.
The difference in the stability of gold- and ONC1·MWCNT-based devices appears once they are continuously exposed to light (Fig. 5c). Cells with gold electrode show noticeable decrease of PCE already after two hours of continuous illumination due to the decrease in JSC (see Fig. S9), while ONC1·MWCNT counterparts are completely stable on the same timescale. JSC evolution upon 5 h of maximum power point tracking, shown in Fig. S12, further proves this point. One of the possible loss mechanisms is photo-induced gold diffusion into perovskite layer, which was previously shown to have a detrimental effect on PSCs. Particularly, our experimental conditions are similar to those in ref. 58, where Au clusters formation within the perovskite layer was observed after illumination at room temperature. Gold diffusion in our cells might be relatively fast due to the absence of HTM which otherwise could have served as a diffusion barrier.
During outdoor exposure the cells are simultaneously affected by multiple factors which can cause degradation: oxygen/water from the atmosphere, light, including UV- and IR-radiation, electric bias and temperature variations. Altogether the outdoor testing protocol represents very harsh conditions for unencapsulated cells. We performed outdoor stability studies in Sede Boqer (the Negev Desert, Israel), where natural sunlight spectrum (noontime ± 3 hours) is very close to AM1.5G standard. Weather conditions during the experiments presented in Fig. 6 are given in Fig. S13 (ESI). Outdoor stability of the devices with gold electrodes was extremely poor (Fig. 5d). Apart from JSC degradation that was also observed in the indoor photo-stability experiment (Fig. S10), VOC and FF showed dramatic decrease already on the first day of outdoor exposure (Fig. S11). Replacement of the gold contact with the ONC1·MWCNT electrode resulted in the dramatic increase of cells’ lifetime (Fig. 5d). During two weeks, the cells did not degrade but exhibited a minor PCE improvement. Stability enhancement compared to conventional electrodes may be due to the absence of Au atoms diffusing into the perovskite layer and – crucially, – protective effect of CNT membrane against oxygen/water penetration.
It should be noted that during outdoor experiments, shown in Fig. 5d, the cells were kept inside a desiccant box during night-times to avoid cell contact with liquid water from the morning dew. The later can cause instant deterioration of device performance (see Fig. S14). Liquid water can both decompose the perovskite and remove the decomposition products, allowing faster penetration rates compared to water vapor.
We used outdoor aging experiment (close to realistic operational conditions) to demonstrate long-term stability of the devices with the hybrid electrodes. The devices were held at open circuit during aging, which may result in the different degradation rate compared to devices held at maximum power point. However, in most cases open circuit conditions result in shorter device lifetime and, therefore, represents an optimal stability limit. Forty five days-long outdoor experiment shown in Fig. 6 allowed to estimate T80 cell lifetime for the devices with ONC1·MWCNT (where T80 is the time in which PCE drops to 80% of its initial value). The T80 lifetime is found to be in the range of weeks (17–35 days, depending on JV scan direction), without encapsulation or intentional UV filtering (Fig. 6). The degradation in this case is dominated by JSC and FF decrease. Judging by the J–V curve transformation (see Fig. S15), FF drop is mostly due to series resistance increase with minor contribution of shunt resistance decrease. Such change together with the observed degradation of JSC and stability of VOC indicates that charge collection is affected by aging, but trap density and charge carriers lifetime in the absorber are rather stable. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first determination of outdoor stability of CsPbBr3-based solar cells, also being remarkable for an unencapsulated device under prolonged sunlight illumination. For comparison, Chauhan et al. showed that outdoor stability (T80) of unencapsulated CH3NH3PbI3−xClx-based solar cells is less than one hour. Thus, the outdoor stability results reported here are very promising for in ambient processing and outdoor operation of perovskite solar cells.

We utilized new hybrid free-standing films based on organic nanocrystals and MWCNTs (ONC·MWCNT) as back electrodes for perovskite solar cells. The unique contacting scheme, by film transfer, allows easy in-air processing and can be applicable to curved devices. Solar cells based on CsPbBr3 showed excellent efficiencies, significantly improved compared to reference cells with standard gold electrodes. Furthermore, solar cells employing the hybrid contacts demonstrated enhanced photo-stability under operative conditions outdoors. Apparently, the ONC·MWCNT electrode protects the perovskite layer from exposure to air which results in prolonged device lifetime. The champion cell was found to lose only ∼30% of its initial PCE upon 6 weeks of outdoor exposure without encapsulation or UV filtering. Facile in-air fabrication, no need for encapsulation, and high stability outdoors under continuous sunlight illumination significantly advance the prospects for commercial applications of perovskite solar cell.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The research was funded by Dana and Yossie Hollander (Israel), Israel Ministry of National Infrastructures, Water and Energy Resources (grant no. 0399202/215-11-037), and by the Adelis Foundation. I. V. F. and E. A. K. acknowledge partial support from the Israel Science Foundation-NSFC joint program (Grant number 0752/15). E. A. K. and M. V. K. thank the United States – Israel Binational Science Foundation (grant no. 2015757). A. K. M. is grateful to the Albert Katz Graduate School (BGU) for PhD fellowship, and R. B. K. S. to the Planning and Budgeting Committee (PBC), Israel, for postdoctoral fellowship. A. N.-E. is a recipient of the Adams Fellowship for PhD studies. We thank Prof. David Cahen and Prof. Gary Hodes for allowing us to use the device fabrication facilities and for the valuable discussions.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional Experimental section such as device fabrication, hybrid MWCNT electrode deposition, device J–V characterization, microscopic characterization and stability studies.
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019