 DOI: 10.1039/D1TA09762H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 4170-4180


Asif
Mahmood
,

Ahmad
Irfan
 and 

Jin-Liang
Wang
*

Key Laboratory of Cluster Science of Ministry of Education, Beijing Key Laboratory of Photoelectronic/Electrophotonic Conversion Materials, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, 100081, China. E-mail: jinlwang@bit.edu.cn

Department of Chemistry, College of Science, King Khalid University, Abha 61413, Saudi Arabia

Received
14th November 2021
, Accepted 28th December 2021
First published on 6th January 2022
Organic solar cells are the most promising candidates for future commercialization. This goal can be quickly achieved by designing new materials and predicting their performance without experimentation to reduce the number of potential targets. We introduce a multidimensional design and discovery pipeline to systematize materials discovery and reduce the dependence on a serendipitous approach. Machine learning models are trained on data collected from the literature for the prediction of various properties, such energy levels (HOMO and LUMO), UV/visible absorption maxima (both in solution and film) and power conversion efficiency (PCE). More than 5000 new small molecule acceptors (SMAs) are designed using easily synthesizable building blocks. 1700 small molecule acceptors without a suitable energy level match with PBT7-Th are filtered off. SMAs with blue-shifted absorption maxima are not further considered. The number of SMAs was reduced to 2350 on the basis of the predicted UV/visible absorption maxima. Then, the SMAs were further screened on the basis of the predicted power conversion efficiency (PCE). More than 100 SMAs with PCE >13% were selected and further studied using molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. The mixing behavior of the PBT7-Th:SMA blends was studied using the Flory–Huggins parameter. 15 SMAs that exhibited balanced mixing with PBT7-Th were selected. Finally, the best predicted PCE is over 15% with the common IDTT core, which is far better than that of reported results. This is an effective pipeline to design and screen potential materials without revisiting the previous experimental work, and thus will pave the way to cost- and time-efficient discovery of novel materials.

Organic solar cells (OSCs) are amongst green energy resources and have received huge attention from the scientific community. Device architecture design, the design of the active layer materials and film processing have led to higher power conversion efficiencies (PCEs). However, this success is the result of a long and tedious journey. New design ideas are produced from knowledge obtained from expensive and time-consuming synthesis, characterization and device optimization. Trial and error methods do not always lead to success in the end. Extensive and expensive experimental work requires knowledge of the performance of a material for OSCs. Therefore, computer-guided material design is ultimately needed.

The rise of machine learning, high-performance computing and the availability of enough data have provided the opportunity to systematize materials discovery. Machine learning has gained the attention of materials scientists after marvelous success in image recognition and translation. It is very helpful to understand the fundamental factors underlying a material's behavior. It is much faster as compared to experiments and quantum chemical calculations. Machine learning explores the hidden patterns of data that it is not possible for human to do.
We have elaborated the potential of machine learning and molecular dynamics simulations for designing and screening materials for organic solar cells through a case study. The data by itself won't lead to discoveries, the methods and strategies for collection and analysis lead to discoveries. Therefore, the size and shape of the data is very important. Like the other materials science fields, the data is scattered and heterogeneous for organic solar cells due to their complex working principle. To avoid this situation, we have collected the data of organic solar cells where poly([2,6′-4,8-di(5-ethylhexylthienyl)benzo[1,2-b;3,3-b]dithiophene]{3-fluoro-2[(2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl}) (PTB7-Th) was the donor material and non-fullerene acceptors were the acceptor materials. This will help to link the performance of OSCs with the chemistry of the acceptor materials. The chemical structure of PTB7-Th is given in Fig. 1. PTB7-Th is also known as PCE10 and PBDTTT-EFT. Its HOMO value is −5.22 eV and its LUMO value is −3.64 eV. It has shown UV/visible absorption maxima at 696 nm (solution) and 705 nm (film). PTB7-Th-based OSCs have achieved a 10 years lifetime. Therefore, the design of efficient acceptor materials to pair with PTB7-Th will help to achieve the goal of commercialization of OSCs. PTB7-Th has been paired with fullerene acceptors such as PC61BM, PC71BM, ICBA etc. However, it has a higher PCE with non-fullerene acceptors. The design of efficient acceptors can further increase the PCE.
No doubt, several studies about the machine learning analysis of organic solar cells have been reported. So, the question is: how is the present study better than previously reported studies? In this regard, several aspects make our study unique. In many already reported studies, the data were extracted from the Harvard Clean Energy Project (HCEP). The majority of compounds are very different from those reported in the literature. Therefore, there is less chance of finding a suitable candidate for organic solar cells. Moreover, density functional theory (DFT) calculated energy levels were used as the input for Scharber's model to calculate the PCE. Neither DFT calculated energy levels nor Scharber's model are as accurate as experimental data. Our collected data have experimental PCE values and commonly used materials. In some studies, a mixture of donors and acceptors were used. This makes it difficult to develop accurate structure–property relationships. We have collected the data of OSCs having one donor with different acceptors. This will help to develop a structure of the acceptor-property relationship for that donor material. In a few studies, just the energy levels were used to train the models and other properties were ignored. In the present study, we have calculated a large number of molecular descriptors to consider the maximum structural and chemical features of the acceptor materials. More importantly, we have also predicted energy levels on the basis of experimental data. The UV/visible absorption maxima in solutions and thin films are predicted on the basis of experimental data. Film morphology strongly affects the photovoltaic performance. Machine learning analysis is based on statistical data fits and ignores the miscibility of the donor and acceptor materials. Molecular dynamics simulations are performed on the lead candidates to study the miscibility of the donor and acceptor material through the Flory–Huggins parameter (χ). To the best of our knowledge, there is no study that explores so many aspects of organic solar cells. The optimal values of the above parameters are necessary to achieve high performance organic solar cells. Therefore, it is necessary to predict these parameters before synthesis to find potential candidates. The use of existing experimental data can help to design better materials.
In the present study, we collected the data of 265 non-fullerene acceptors against a single donor (PTB7-Th). Machine learning models for the prediction of the PCE, energy levels and UV/visible absorption maxima in the solution and film states were trained. A general framework for machine learning model construction is given in Fig. 2. About 5000 easily synthesizable small molecule descriptors were designed and screened. The screening pipeline is given in Fig. 3. Finally, more than 100 potential candidates with PCE >13% and suitable energy levels and absorption maxima are selected. Morphological insights into the blends of PTB7-Th and the potential candidates were obtained using molecular dynamics simulations. The use of fast machine learning models significantly reduced the number of designed SMAs. Computationally expensive molecular dynamics simulations were performed on 100 SMAs. The molecular dynamics simulations provided insight about the intermolecular mixing. The mixing is analyzed by calculating the Flory–Huggins interaction parameter. Finally, 15 SMAs were selected because their blends with PTB7-Th show optimal values of the Flory–Huggins parameter. More importantly, the best predicted PCE (15%) is higher than reported values. Our multi-stage design and screening pipeline will be helpful to select potential acceptor materials for PTB7-Th-based OSCs, and this approach can be used to select acceptor materials to pair with other donors using a slight modification in the screening pipeline.

Data of 265 OSC devices, where PBT7-Th was the donor and NFAs were the electron acceptor, were collected from the literature. The highest PCE was considered. The distribution of the PCEs in the dataset is shown in Fig. S1. The PCE of the majority of devices was lower than 10%. Most of the work is done on the basis of a trial and error method. The working principle of organic solar cells is very complex. Sometimes, two materials with relatively similar structures show very different PCEs. The energy level mismatch, overlap of the donor–acceptor absorption profile and balance of film morphology is responsible for the lower performance. The highest reported PCE value for a PBT7-Th-based OSC is about 13%.


The geometries of the molecules were drawn using Gauss view 6 and optimized using Gaussian 09. For this purpose, the semiempirical AM1 method is used, which is not computationally expensive. More than 3000 molecular descriptors were calculated using online resources: OCHEM and ChemDes. The descriptors with constant values or missing values were removed. The highly intercorrelating descriptors were also removed. A few descriptors, highly correlating with the target properties, were selected and further used to construct the machine learning models.


Machine learning analysis was performed using KNIME and Weka. KNIME is a free user-friendly platform for machine learning. Weka is also free and is a collection of machine learning algorithms.


The molecular dynamics simulations were performed using the Blends module of Materials Studio 6.1. The COMPASS force field and force-field-assigned charges were used. Group-based summation methods were used for both electrostatic and van der Waals interactions. A 15.5 Å cut-off distance was used.


Before developing machine learning models, a simple Pearson correlation was studied between the PCE, open-circuit voltage (VOC), short-circuit current density (JSC), fill factor (FF), highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the acceptor materials. A heatmap based on Pearson correlation is given in Fig. 4. Jsc (r = 0.952) is strongly correlated with PCE, while the other parameters showed very low or negative correlation with PCE. Therefore, molecular descriptors were calculated to understand the effect of the acceptor's chemistry on the performance of OSC devices. The detailed information of the descriptors having high correlation with PCE is given Table S3.


To predict the PCE values, regression analysis was performed. Random forest (RF), k-nearest neighbor (k-NN), linear regression (LR) and support vector machine (SVM) were used. The performance of random forest (RF) is much better than that of other models. The scatter plots for the correlation between the experimental and predicted PCE are given in Fig. 5 (RF and k-NN) and S2 (LR and SVM). The details of the statistical performance parameters of the trained models are given in Table S4. The RF model showed the lowest root mean square error (RMSE) and mean absolute error (MAE) values.


A suitable energy level match between the donor and acceptor materials is necessary to provide a driving force for exciton dissociation. When ITIC was paired with different donors having different energy levels, it showed a PCE in a wide range (1.25–12.80%). It is indicated that the energy level match between the donor and acceptor is very important for enhancing the PCE. A scatter plot of the PCE, HOMO and LUMO data of 265 acceptors paired with PTB7-Th is given in Fig. 6. This graph indicates the range of energy levels (HOMO and LUMO) of the reported acceptors. The higher PCE values fall in the HOMO range of −6.00 to −5.20 eV and LUMO range from −4.25 to −3.50 eV. The energy level (HOMO and LUMO) data of over 900 organic small molecules were collected from the literature. The shortlisted descriptors for training ML models for HOMO and LUMO prediction are given in Tables S5 and S6, respectively. Various ML models were used to develop the regression model. Only RF and k-NN exhibited better performance. The scatter plots of the correlation between the experimental and predicted energy levels are given in Fig. 7 (using RF) and S3 (using k-NN). The details of the statistical performance parameters of the trained models are given in Table S7. All of the parameters clearly indicate that the performance of the RF model is much better than that of k-NN.


SMAs with the ability to absorb light in the visible and near near-infrared (NIR) regions are required to assist the donor in light absorption. From a solution to a thin film, a red shift indicates strong aggregation and intermolecular interactions in the solid state. To find the effect of the absorption behavior of the electron-acceptor on the performance of organic solar cells, the data of absorption for PBT7-Th-based OSCs were used. Here, the light absorption contribution from the donor is constant due to the presence of the same donor. The correlation between various experimental parameters was studied and plotted in the form of a heatmap between the short circuit current (Jsc), PCE, absorption maxima (λmax) for the solution (λmax(s)), λmax for the film (λmax(f)) and the red or blue shift from the solution to film form (Δf–s). Fig. S4 indicates that the Jsc showed 0.665 and 0.684 correlation with λmax(s) and λmax(f), respectively. The PCE showed 0.634 and 0.648 correlation with λmax(s) and λmax(f), respectively. The correlation of Jsc and PCE with Δf–s is relatively lower, 0.480 and 0.439, respectively.

To train a ML model for the prediction of λmax, the data of λmax of the UV/visible spectra of about 650 SMAs were collected from research papers. The absorption spectra were determined in solution and pristine films cast from the same solvent. Widely used solvents are chloroform and dichloromethane. Luckily, λmax is not as complicated as the PCE is. λmax mainly depends on the chemical structure of the material and somehow depends on the solvent used. The effect of the solvent is ignored to collect a sufficient amount of data to increase the accuracy of the ML models. Here, it is important to mention that λmax don't represent the whole spectrum; the range of the absorption profile also strongly affects the absorption behavior of the acceptors. The UV/visible spectra are represented in the form of various combinations. In the majority of cases, the UV/visible spectra of the acceptors are presented with that of the donor in the same graph. In some cases, the UV/visible spectra of acceptors in various solvents are given in one graph. Sometimes, the UV/visible spectra in the solution and film states are given together and sometimes in separate graphs. This situation makes it almost impossible to use images of UV/visible spectra for deep learning. The lack of standardization left no choice. Therefore, only the λmax values were considered to study the light absorption behavior of the electron-acceptors. The descriptors having high correlation with λmax(s) and λmax(f) are given Tables S8 and S9. Various models were used for model construction. The values of r and R2 for k-NN and RF are given in Table 1. Full details of the statistical parameters are given in Table S10. The performance of RF is better than that of k-NN. RF showed a root mean square error (RMSE) of about 30 nm, and this error is comparable with that of time consuming quantum chemical methods.
Solution
Film
Training set
Test set
Training set
Test set
k-NN

r = 0.83, R2 = 0.68

r = 0.83, R2 = 0.68

r = 0.73, R2 = 0.53

r = 0.83, R2 = 0.63
RF

r = 0.96, R2 = 0.92

r = 0.96, R2 = 0.90

r = 0.96, R2 = 0.91

r = 0.96, R2 = 0.90
The performance of machine learning models for PCE prediction is lower than that for energy level (HOMO and LUMO) and λmax prediction. The energy level (HOMO and LUMO) and λmax mainly depend on the chemical structure of the material. However, the PCE depends on the chemical structures of the active layer materials (both donor and acceptor), solvent, solvent additive, processing conditions, size of the active layer and many more factors. In addition, the number of data points for PCE prediction is lower than that for other properties.

The structural versatility of organic building blocks allows the design of countless organic materials. It is not possible to explore this large chemical space. Therefore, it is essential to define the chemical space that needs to be explored. We imposed constraints on the construction of the chemical space on the basis of our knowledge about organic solar cells. Not every type of organic semiconductor can be used as an active layer material. We defined the chemical space by keeping in mind the synthesizability of building blocks and their suitability for organic solar cells. Our knowledge-based sampling of the building blocks resulted in a reasonable chemical space to save computational cost and time.

There are different ways to classify the building blocks that are generally used to design small molecule acceptors used for OSCs. These building blocks can be classified into three groups: middle core, π-spacer and terminal groups. Various electron-rich and electron-deficient groups can be used at these positions to achieve desirable properties.
We designed about 5000 small molecule acceptors using various building blocks (Fig. 8). A large number of middle building blocks were used to explore a wide range of structural features. Groups of various sizes were used as the π-spacer to extend the conjugation. Some groups were used both as a central core and a π-spacer. All of the terminal groups are derivatives of dicyanomethylene-3-indanone through the modification of the conjugation, and the addition of electron-rich and electron-deficient atoms. The synthesis strategy of the terminal groups is similar.
The geometries of the designed SMAs were optimized using the semiempirical AM1 method. Molecular descriptors are calculated using web-based services. We used a multistep screening approach (Fig. 3). In the first step, we predicted the HOMO and LUMO values using the previously discussed RF model. The distribution of the predicted values is given in Fig. 9. The majority of the HOMO values fall between −4.5 to −6.0 eV and the majority of LUMO values fall from −2.5 to −4.5 eV. Fig. 6 shows the distribution of experimental PCE against experimental HOMO and LUMO values of PBT7-Th-based OSCs. The data in this figure helped us to select the SMAs that have a suitable energy match with PBT7-Th. We have selected the SMAs having a HOMO value between −5.0 to 6.0 eV and LUMO values from −3.3 to −4.5 eV. Therefore, about 3300 SMAs were retained for further analysis.
In the next step, the absorption maxima in the solution and film states were predicted using the RF model. SMAs with red-shifted absorption maxima were selected. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) was predicted and SMAs with PCE >13% were selected; the structures of the potential candidates are given Fig. S6. The selected candidates were based on almost every type of middle group and terminal group. The HOMO, LUMO, λmax(s), λmax(s) and PCE values of more than 100 lead candidates are given in Table S11.

ML models predict a property on the basis of statistical data fits and avoid the complexity of the device. However, they help to filter away candidates with undesirable properties. Molecular dynamics simulations were performed on the 100 lead candidates to further screen the candidates.

The donor–acceptor miscibility controls the phase separation and consequently affects the PCE. The interactions between the donor and acceptor molecules control the purity of the mixed phases, which strongly effects the free charge generation and recombination of free charges. Indeed, the aggregation behavior of the donor and acceptor is strongly determined by the molecular thermodynamics and kinetics. To achieve information about the amorphous miscibility, the degree of molecular mixing of the active layer materials needs to be quantitatively determined. Quantification of miscibility is very helpful to achieve the ideal film morphology. Flory–Huggins theory has been used for this purpose. Various experimental methods, such small-angle neutron scattering, synchrotron radiation-based scanning transmission X-ray microscopy, secondary-ion mass spectrometry and differential scanning calorimetry, are used to determine the Flory–Huggins interaction parameter (χ). However, it is not easy to determine it. A wide range of χ values for OSC systems are reported. Therefore, computational methods are alternate methods that can speed up the miscibility calculations for a given pair of molecules, even before synthesis. The Flory–Huggins interaction parameter (χ) is a measure of the net enthalpic interaction energy upon exchange of constituent units from a like (demixed) to an unlike (mixed) environment. A much larger χ leads to too-large pure phases, which reduces the charge generation. A much smaller χ can lead to too-large mixing that increases the recombination of free charges. It is reported that the best fill factor (FF) and PCE can be obtained with the optimum miscibility and thus optimal χ.
In the present study, Blend's module in Materials Studio (Accelrys Inc., San Diego, CA) was used to determine the Flory–Huggins parameter (χ) at 298 K. Experimentally, it is difficult to estimate the Flory–Huggins parameter; there are different methods and a wide range of χ values for OSC systems are reported. Therefore, computational methods are alternate methods that can speed up calculating the miscibility of a given pair of molecules. The Blend module generates many pair configurations for mixing molecules, regraded as “base” and “screen”. It then calculates the binding energies and coordination number for each of the possible molecular pairs. The average of the binding energies and coordination numbers of all possible pair configurations is used to calculate the mixing energy at a temperature T through the following equation:
(1)
where
Z is the coordination number, E is the binding energy, and subscripts s and b represent screen and base molecules, respectively. Lower ΔEmix indicates favorable mixing and therefore a stable system. The Flory–Huggins parameter can be calculated using the following equation:

(2)
We found that there is a difference between the Flory–Huggins parameter (χ) using PBT7-Th as “base” and as “screen”. Therefore, we calculated χ using both ways, and then took the average. Indeed, calculated values are not comparable to experimental values. However, experimental methods are relatively complicated and first require the synthesis of the materials. More importantly, it is expensive to test a large number of materials. A fast and easy computational method can help to filter off the many less efficient candidates.
The calculated χ values for more than 100 PBT7-Th:SMA blends are given in Table S10. The χ values range from 111 to −41. There are several reports that the Blend module gives results with a large variation. In the majority of experimental studies, a higher PCE is reported for χ values between 0–3. Keeping the lower accuracy of the theoretical method in mind, we selected SMAs with χ between 6 and −6. On the basis of this criterion, about 15 SMAs were retained. Their structures are given in Fig. 10 and the predicted parameters are given in Table 2.
In the top SMAs, SMAs based on indacenodithiophene (IDT) and indacenodithienothiophene (IDTT) derivatives are higher in number. They have already been proven as excellent acceptor materials. More importantly, the no. 46 and no. 49 SMAs are derivatives of IDTT with a fused structure, and they have exhibited suitable energy levels (HOMO and LUMO), red-shifted absorption (comparative to donor), higher PCE values and optimal values of Flory–Huggins parameter (χ). A few SMAs, such as 56, 57, 73, 76 and 78, are new types of SMAs (Table 2). SMAs were designed using a large number of new core fragments, and the machine learning-assisted pipeline has successfully identified the best candidates. Their performance is comparable to famous IDT and IDTT derivatives.
No.
HOMO (eV)
LUMO (eV)

λ
max(s) (nm)

λ
max(f) (nm)
PCE (%)

χ

4
−5.44
−3.89
698
793
13.66
3.20
7
−5.25
−3.56
671
737
13.78
5.30
25
−5.51
−3.99
790
789
13.09
3.98
46
−5.39
−3.94
751
740
15.24
3.99
48
−5.48
−4.02
722
723
13.43
−3.29
49
−5.49
−3.83
754
739
15.49
−0.12
56
−5.73
−3.86
585
605
14.25
5.09
57
−5.53
−3.84
579
592
13.70
−1.39
64
−5.44
−3.98
730
797
14.09
−4.34
66
−5.37
−3.88
709
773
14.76
−2.30
73
−5.43
−3.94
612
753
13.00
5.79
76
−5.42
−3.78
655
725
13.05
−3.71
78
−5.52
−3.82
719
766
13.10
4.58
88
−5.53
−3.87
711
754
13.81
−5.07
96
−5.52
−3.80
725
725
14.25
4.46

Machine learning models were trained for the prediction of key parameters related to OSCs, such as energy level (HOMO and LUMO), UV/visible absorption maxima in solution and film states, and power conversion efficiency (PCE). About 5000 new SMAs were designed and screened on the basis of the predicted properties. SMAs having a suitable energy level match with PBT7-Th are retained (3300). On the basis of the predicted λmax, a large number of SMAs are filtered off, leaving behind 2350 SMAs. Further screening was done on the basis of the predicted PCE and more than 100 SMAs having a PCE higher than 13% were selected. The mixing of PBT7-Th and the SMAs was studied using molecular dynamics simulations. Lead candidates having suitable mixing with PBT7-Th were selected. The Flory–Huggins parameter was used as the selection criterion. Multistep screening increased the chances to getting efficient candidates. Finally, the best predicted PCE was over 15% with the common IDTT core, which is far better than the reported results. We believe that our screening pipeline with sub-second computational cost will assist experimentalists in synthesizing efficient SMAs for PBT7-Th-based organic solar cells. This approach can be used to test large databases of hypothetical molecules, and with slight modification it can also help to select promising acceptor materials for other donors.


All the data used in this study are available from the authors at reasonable request.


Asif Mahmood: conceptualization, data collection, machine learning analysis, writing – original draft. Ahmad Irfan: molecular dynamics simulations. Jin-Liang Wang: supervision, writing – review and editing.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors acknowledge the support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21971014, 21672023, 21950410533) and the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2018YFA0901800). Jin-Liang Wang was supported by the Thousand Youth Talents Plan of China and BIT Teli Young Fellow Recruitment Program. A. Irfan expresses appreciation to the Deanship of Scientific Research at King Khalid University Saudi Arabia through a research groups program under grant number R.G.P. 1/110/42. The authors thank the Analysis & Testing Center, Beijing Institute of Technology for the NMR experiments.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta09762h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022