 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA12701J
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10116-10119

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Wei
Yue
,

Xiaodong
Huang
,

Jianyu
Yuan
,

Wanli
Ma
*,

Frederik C.
Krebs
 and 

Donghong
Yu
*

Department of Biotechnology, Chemistry, and Environmental Engineering, Aalborg University, Sohngaardsholmsvej 57, DK-9000, Aalborg, Denmark. E-mail: yu@bio.aau.dk

Sino-Danish Centre for Education and Research, SDC, Niels Jensens Vej 2, DK-8000 Aarhus, Denmark

Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University, 199 Ren-Ai Road, Suzhou Industrial Park, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, P. R. China. E-mail: wlma@suda.edu.cn

Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, Technical University of Denmark, Frederiksborgvej 399, DK-4000, Roskilde, Denmark

Received
12th July 2013
, Accepted 23rd July 2013
First published on 24th July 2013
A low band gap polymer PBDPDP-DTP, with alternating benzodipyrrolidone (BDP) unit and dithienopyrrole, was synthesized and characterized. A PCE of 2.60% and a Voc of up to 0.74 V were realized in PSCs, which demonstrated the strong potential of BDP as the electron deficient unit in the design of donor–acceptor conjugated polymers for PSCs.

Electron deficient fused hetero-aromatic systems are of great importance in tailoring the optical band gap of optoelectronic polymers and play an influential role in their performance. In addition to their accepting ability several requirements need to be fulfilled before they can be successfully employed, most importantly ease of synthesis, high charge carrier mobility, and good molecular energy level matching with that of organic donor units. High efficiency donor–acceptor (D–A) conjugated polymers for polymer solar cells (PSCs) and organic field effect transistors (OFETs) have been designed and implemented in this manner. Examples of reported fused ring systems are thieno[3,4-b]pyrazines, perylene derivatives, benzothiadiazole (BT), quinoxaline, thiadiazoloquinoxaline, isoindigo, diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) and benzodifuranone to name a few. They all exhibit high electron affinity and strong ability to reduce the band gaps of the D–A type conjugated polymers compared to their corresponding homo-polymers.

Among the above-mentioned acceptor moieties, DPP represents a bislactam containing dye with a planar and highly conjugated lactam structure resulting in strong π–π interactions and electron withdrawing properties. When incorporated into alternating D–A polymers a low band gap (LBG) conjugated polymer is obtained. Compared to DPP, benzodipyrrolidone (BDP) (or termed as benzodipyrrolinone) incorporating two pyrroliones fused by 1,4-cyclohexadiene, representing a constitutional isomeric DPP system, has an enlarged planar aromatic structure, which may facilitate the interchain packing of the resulting polymer and may further enhance the carrier mobility. Further examination of the literature revealed that BDP has received relatively little attention. Wudl, Zhang and Liet al. have reported benzodipyrrolidone-benzene (PBDPDP-B) and benzodipyrrolidione-thiophene (PBDPD-T) polymers, N-acylated BDP polymers, and benzodipyrrolinone-bisthiophene (PBDP'DP-BT), respectively, with which hole and electron mobilities of up to 0.03 and 0.012 cm2 V−1 s−1 were realized. Most recently, Rumer reported two thiophene-flanked benzodipyrrolidone (BPT)-based polymers; BPT-T exhibited high and balanced ambipolar transport with hole and electron mobilities of 0.21 and 0.10 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. However, the use of BDP based materials in polymer photovoltaics has, to our knowledge, not been reported. Meanwhile, for D–A LBG polymers, the dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole (DTP) was considered as one of the strongest donors, and this moiety has been widely used as a building block due to its strong electron-donating ability, molecular planarity and ease of synthesis. Here, we report a fused-ring LBG polymer possessing BDP as an acceptor unit and N-(1-pentylhexyl) substituted DTP as a donor bridged with the phenylene moiety. The photophysical and electrochemical properties were fully investigated, PSC devices were also fabricated, and a PCE as high as 2.60% was obtained, demonstrating the strong potential of BDP as a novel acceptor moiety for LBG polymer based PSCs.
The structure and synthetic route leading to PBDPDP-DTP are illustrated in Scheme 1. Compounds 1 and 2 were prepared as reported.PBDPDP-DTP was synthesized via a Stille coupling reaction using tris(dibenzylideneacetone)dipalladium as a catalyst and tri(o-tolyl)phosphine as the ligand with a yield of 72%. The product was highly soluble in common organic solvents such as THF, chloroform and chlorobenzene (CB). The number-average molecular weight (Mn), 29000 g mol−1, of PBDPDP-DTP was determined by means of high temperature gel permeation chromatography (HT-GPC) at an elevated temperature of 150 °C with 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene as an eluent against polystyrene standards. The thermal stability of PBDPDP-DTP was characterized by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). As shown in Fig. S1, the decomposition temperature (5% mass loss) is 416 °C, which proves its excellent thermal stability for solar cell applications.

Fig. 1 presents the UV-vis absorption spectra of PBDPDP-DTP recorded in both 1,2-dichlorobenzene (o-DCB) solution and thin films. Compared to the weak absorption for the π–π* transition in the 300–500 nm range, the intense absorption in the range of 550–900 nm originating from the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) between DTP and BDP entities indicates a strong electron-withdrawing effect of BDP units. As depicted, the maximum absorption bands of PBDPDP-DTP in solution were observed at 393 and 714 nm, while in the solid film they were slightly red-shifted to 396 and 722 nm. The ICT band measured in the solid film is broader than that measured in solution, suggesting the π–π interaction in the solid state from stacking which facilitates charge transport. The maximum absorption measured in the solid film is only red-shifted by 8 nm compared to the spectrum measured in solution, which is not obvious since the polymer chain is planar and rigid. We propose that the reason for the small red-shift originates from the aggregation of the polymer chains formed in solution. To verify our assumption, the absorption spectrum of PBDPDP-DTP was also measured in o-DCB solution at an elevated temperature of 70 °C, in which the absorption maximum is located at 698 nm, showing a blue-shift of 16 nm compared to the one measured at 25 °C. The blue shift can be attributed to break-up of interchain aggregates in o-DCB solution at the higher temperature. The optical bandgap of PBDPDP-DTP in the solid state based on the optical absorption edges of the film spectrum is 1.39 eV which is ideal, confirming that BDP is an effective unit for constructing LBG polymers for PSCs.
The electrochemical characteristics of PBDPDP-DTP in thin films were studied by cyclic voltammetry (CV) with TATBF4 (0.1 M in acetonitrile) as the electrolyte at a scan rate of 200 mV·s−1. The potentials were calibrated with a ferrocene/ferrocenium redox couple (Fc/Fc+). As demonstrated in Fig. S2, PBDPDP-DTP exhibited one reversible oxidation process and two reduction processes. The oxidation and reduction onsets are at 1.17 V and −0.27 V, respectively, leading to HOMO and LUMO energy levels of −5.27 and −3.83 eV. The LUMO level is positioned approximately 0.37 eV above that of PCBM, which offers a reasonable driving force for electron transfer. The electrochemical bandgap of PBDPDP-DTP is 1.44 eV, which is in good agreement with the optical bandgap.
We further examined the electronic properties of PBDPDP-DTP by computational studies at the B3LYP/6-31G* level on the model compound using Gaussian 09 program suite. The optimized structure is presented in Fig. 2; the BDP core is fully planar, but the large dihedral angles between BDP and the two benzene rings (being 28.56° and 30.51°, very close to the single crystal data) account for the twisting and certain coil-like polymer conformation, and furthermore lead to enhanced torsional relaxation along the backbone. It could be part of the reason for the relatively small red-shift (8 nm) of absorption maxima between solution and films, which was mainly caused by polymer aggregation in solution as previously discussed. It was pointed out that the torsional disorderliness along the polymer chain is disadvantageous to the conjugation and intramolecular charge transfer, and thus could strongly affect the absorption of the polymer and the blend films and the π–π interactions between polymer backbones in films, and reduce the charge carrier mobility in the active layers. However the dihedral angles between the DTP moiety and the phenylene unit were found to be 20.89°, suggesting that the phenylene group provides better planarity with DTP than with the BDP structure. It is important to mention that all side-chain substituents were replaced with a methyl group in order to simplify the calculation, nevertheless, the side chains typically play an important role in modeling torsion angles of conjugated polymers. Herein we used the same simplified side group for both DTP and BDP moieties and therefore the results regarding the torsion angles between them and the phenylene unit should be reasonable. The HOMO of the model compound is delocalized along the whole conjugated backbone, while the LUMO is mainly localized on the acceptor group. The HOMO energy level calculated is −4.91 eV, which is 0.36 eV higher than the value from electrochemical measurements, while the LUMO (−3.79 eV) is consistent with the result from CV. Considering the small number of aromatic cycles taken into account by the calculation, these results are meaningful to understand the electronic properties of PBDPDP-DTP.
The PSCs with the device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PBDPDP-DTP:PCBM/LiF/Al were fabricated. The active layers were respectively cast from chloroform and chlorobenzene solutions. The photovoltaic properties of the devices are listed in Table 1, and the corresponding current–voltage curves of the devices are illustrated in Fig. 3a. When chloroform was used as the solvent, the best performance was obtained at a polymer:PCBM ratio of 1:2, with an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.70 V, a short circuit current (Jsc) of −4.75 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 33.6%, and a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1.12%. Considering the HOMO energy level of PBDPDP-DTP (−5.27 eV), the Voc is reasonable according to the semiempirical equation presented by Scharber et al. When chlorobenzene was used as the solvent, it seems that the PCEs are independent of the polymer:PCBM ratios, since the PCEs changed a little while the weight ratios were varied from 1:1.5 to 1:2.5. The highest PCE was obtained with a polymer:PCBM ratio of 1:1.5; a slightly larger Voc of 0.74 eV, 65% higher Jsc and 33% larger FF than those of the devices cast from chloroform solution were obtained, leading to a PCE of 2.60%, which is more than twice that of the value obtained from chloroform solution. The hole and electron mobility in the active layer in both cases were measured by using the space charge limited current (SCLC) method, which is shown in Fig. S3 and Table S1. The hole mobility of the blend film cast from chloroform is 1.0 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1, which was one order of magnitude lower than that of the blend film cast from chlorobenzene solution (2.0 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1); this partially explains its lower Jsc and FF. While their electron mobilities were similar, which was 3.50 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the chloroform cast film and 2.50 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the chlorobenzene cast one. But the low hole mobility and imbalanced hole–electron mobility of the blend films had an important impact on their low Jsc and FF in both chloroform and chlorobenzene solution cast devices. The film morphology of PBDPDP-DTP:PCBM (1:2) was studied in order to address the reason for this large difference in the device performance when two different solvents are applied. The AFM images shown in Fig. S4 revealed that both of the films have uniform mixing of PBDPDP-DTP and PCBM. The film cast from chlorobenzene solution is smoother and more uniform than that cast from chloroform solution. The root mean square (RMS) roughnesses of the two films are 1.11 and 2.54, respectively, which is consistent with the reported results.
Weight ratio of polymer and PCBM
Solvent

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
1:2
Chloroform
0.70
−4.75
33.6
1.12
1:1.5
CB
0.74
−7.87
44.6
2.60
1:2
CB
0.72
−7.83
45.5
2.57
1:2.5
CB
0.73
−7.62
46.4
2.58
In Fig. 3b external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the corresponding PSCs cast from chloroform and chlorobenzene solutions are shown. The photovoltaic response ranges of the devices are consistent with the UV-vis absorption spectra of the polymers, indicating that all the absorption of the polymer contributed to the photovoltaic energy conversion. The EQE values of the device cast from chlorobenzene solution are noticeably higher than the EQE values of the one cast from chloroform solution in the entire absorption range, this explains the big difference of the photocurrent of the two devices.
In conclusion, a novel low bandgap polymer, PBDPDP-DTP, using dithienopyrrole containing unit as the donor and benzodipyrrolidone as the acceptor was successfully synthesized. Its absorption covers from the visible to the near-infrared region of 350–900 nm, with an electrochemical bandgap of 1.44 eV, suggesting this class of materials as promising candidates for polymer solar cell applications. PSC devices were fabricated using the PBDPDP-DTP:PCBM blend as the active layer and a PCE of 2.60% was obtained, proving the BDP moiety as a good acceptor unit for PSCs. Further work on optimizing the devices and fabricating large area cells using full roll-to-roll processing is ongoing.
The authors gratefully acknowledge support from the Danish National Research Foundation (DNRF) for the Danish-Chinese Center for Organic based Photovoltaic Cells with Morphological Control, within which this work was performed. Support from the Sino-Danish Centre for Education and Research (SDC) is also fully acknowledged.
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, TGA, CV and AFM images. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta12701j
‡ Equal contributions from the two authors.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013