 DOI: 10.1039/C8CC04271C
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 8237-8240


Yanan
Li
,

Jialong
Duan
,

Yuanyuan
Zhao
 and 

Qunwei
Tang
*

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266100, P. R. China

Institute of New Energy Technology, College of Information Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, P. R. China. E-mail: tangqunwei@jnu.edu.cn

Joint Laboratory for Deep Blue Fishery Engineering, Qingdao National Laboratory for Marine Science and Technology, Qingdao 266237, P. R. China

Received
29th May 2018
, Accepted 3rd July 2018
First published on 3rd July 2018
We present here the construction of all-inorganic bifacial CsPbBr3 perovskite solar cells to harvest solar energy from both sides. The quantum dot modified bifacial device achieves front and rear efficiencies of 7.55% and 7.44% under one sun illumination, respectively. The solar cell without encapsulation retains around 95% of the initial efficiency at 60% RH over a period of 1000 h.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have received significant attention because of their prominent photoelectric properties, high carrier mobility, low exciton binding energies and long diffusion length. To date, the highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) has been elevated to >22%, which exceeds the records for amorphous or polycrystalline solar cells, CIGS, dye-sensitized solar cells and quantum dot-sensitized solar cells, and is approaching that of state-of-the-art monocrystalline silicon solar cells. Although great achievements have been made for organic–inorganic hybrid PSCs by scalable materials and techniques, the hybrid halides have poor tolerances under persistent attacks by moisture and heat, making improved device stability a challenging problem. The poor durability mainly arises from the ion-type crystal structure and instable consolidation of iodide ions, making hybrid halides destroyable by polar solvents, thermal attack and iodide diffusion. Moreover, the high cost of state-of-the-art hole-transporting materials (∼$600 g−1 for P3HT) and gold electrodes (∼$50 g−1) has been an economical burden for their commercial applications.

By replacing organic CH3NH3+ or CH(CH2)2+ with inorganic Cs+ ions and substituting I− with Br−, the all-inorganic CsPbBr3 halide shows good thermal, compositional and moisture stabilities as well as high carrier mobility; therefore inorganic CsPbBr3 solar cells with a classical TiO2/CsPbBr3/carbon architecture have been attracting growing interest in the last two years, and the first PCE in a prototype has reached 6.7%. A remaining problem for these inorganic PSCs is that they can only harvest solar energy from the photoanode due to complete coverage by nontransparent carbon back-electrodes. When applied in photovoltaic power stations, as shown in Fig. 1a, the front side of a solar panel reflects some sunlight to the back side of the front row. In this fashion, monofacial solar cells cannot harvest the reflected and scattered light from the rear side. A golden rule in designing high-performance photovoltaics is to maximally absorb solar energy; therefore bifacial inorganic solar cells that can absorb and convert incident light into electricity from both the front and rear sides are a good solution to this impasse. Previous work in this field mainly focuses on bifacial silicon solar cells formed by complicated structural reorganization or bifacial dye-sensitized solar cells and bifacial quantum dot-sensitized solar cells by creating transparent back electrodes. However, the concept is so far inapplicable to CsPbBr3 solar cells because of the restriction of transparent back electrodes with matching energy levels and hole transporting functions.
Inspired by hybrid PSCs and other types of photovoltaics, we demonstrate here bifacial all-inorganic CsPbBr3 solar cells with an FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/CsPbBr3/carbon/CsPbBr3/m-TiO2/c-TiO2/FTO configuration, in which the front and rear cells share a single carbon electrode. The photographs of the actual devices are provided in Fig. S1 (ESI). And this device can be seen as a back-to-back 2-termial tandem cell. Due to the large energy differences at m-TiO2/CsPbBr3 and CsPbBr3/carbon interfaces, carbon quantum dots (CQDs) and CuInS2/ZnS quantum dots (C-ZQDs) are used to extract charges and to reduce electron–hole recombination. Upon illumination by standard sunlight (air mass 1.5, 100 mW cm−2), the optimal bifacial inorganic PSC yields a front efficiency of 7.55% and a rear efficiency of 7.44% with a bifacial factor (BF) up to 98.5%. BF is a significant parameter to evaluate bifacial photovoltaics, and the bifacial factor as high as 98.5% reported in this work is in a very high level in comparison to state-of-the-art bifacial devices.
One of the major applications of bifacial PSCs is in photovoltaic power stations by aligning bifacial solar panels, as shown in Fig. 1a. The front side of a solar panel harvests incident light to convert it into electricity, and simultaneously reflects some sunlight to the back side of the forward panels. Solar energy harvesting from both the front and rear sides calls for bifacial PSCs as shown in Fig. 1b. In a symmetric device with a configuration of FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/CsPbBr3/carbon/CsPbBr3/m-TiO2/c-TiO2/FTO one carbon electrode is shared by two single solar cells. This structure is realized in assembly processes using the good cohesiveness of carbon slurry. Upon sunlight irradiation from either side, the perovskite-structured CsPbBr3 halide absorbs photons to release electrons at its conduction band (CB), these photogenerated electrons flow to the CB of TiO2 and finally to the fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) layer, leaving holes transferred to the carbon electrode. According to the energy level diagram in Fig. 1c, there are energy differences as large as 0.7 and 0.6 eV at the TiO2 (−4.0 eV)/CsPbBr3 (−3.3 eV) and CsPbBr3 (−5.6 eV)/carbon (−5.0 eV) interfaces, respectively. The large energy difference increases charge recombination and energy loss; therefore intermediate energy levels are always set at interfaces to promote charge extraction. In our work, CQDs (ELUMO = −3.5 eV, EHOMO = −5.3 eV) are applied to modify the TiO2/CsPbBr3 interface to extract electrons, while C-ZQDs (ELUMO = −4.1 eV, EHOMO = −5.5 eV) are set at the CsPbBr3/carbon interface for hole extraction.
Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite films are always made by a one-step or two-step strategy. However, either method is inapplicable to high-purity all-inorganic CsPbBr3 solar cells due to different concentrations of CsBr and PbBr2 solutions; the major reason for this is the formation of mixed phases of CsPbBr3 and CsPb2Br5. Therefore, we have developed a multi-step method for CQD and C-ZQD modified PSCs as shown in Fig. 2a, and the detailed processes are demonstrated in the Experimental section. From the cross-sectional SEM image in Fig. 2b, one can find that the final solar cell has a layered structure with 100 nm, 200 nm and 5 μm thickness for the c-TiO2/m-TiO2, CsPbBr3 and carbon layer, respectively. Notably, the CsPbBr3 film comprises dense and compact grains with a size of 200–500 nm (Fig. 2c). Five characteristic peaks at 2θ = 15.23°, 21.65°, 26.5°, 30.74° and 37.87° are detected in X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns (Fig. S2a, ESI), confirming the formation of a perovskite-structured CsPbBr3 phase. The absence of diffraction peaks for PbBr2 or CsBr suggests a high-purity CsPbBr3 structure using the so-called multi-step method. The inorganic CsPbBr3 halide is found to have a bandgap of 2.3 eV, therefore it has an optical absorption at a wavelength shorter than 545 nm (Fig. S2b, ESI).

Fig. 3a shows the photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves of a single-sided CsPbBr3 PSC under standard sun illumination (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2) from the front or rear side. When illuminated from the TiO2 anode (front side), the device achieves an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.24 V, short-circuit current (Jsc) of 6.64 mA cm−2, fill factor (FF) of 74% and PCE of 6.15%. On the contrary, the J–V curve passes the origin of the coordinate upon illumination from the carbon electrode (rear side), yielding a zero rear efficiency. When two single-sided devices are coupled by sharing a carbon electrode, the bifacial PSC achieves a front PCE of 6.17% and a rear PCE of 6.09% (Table S1, ESI). Notably, BF (BF = PCErear/PCEfront × 100%) is a significant parameter to evaluate a bifacial solar cell. The bifacial inorganic PSC free from CQDs and C-ZQDs yields a BF as high as 98.7%, which is much higher than 93.3% for bifacial silicon solar cells and 91.1% for bifacial dye-sensitized solar cells. In order to further improve cell efficiencies, intermediate energy levels are set at the TiO2/CsPbBr3 and CsPbBr3/carbon interfaces through CQDs and C-ZQDs, respectively. As shown in Fig. 3b and c, the front and rear efficiencies are improved to 6.84% and 6.77% by using CQDs only as interfacial modifying materials, and further increased to 7.55% and 7.44% by modifying with both CQDs and C-ZQDs, achieving maximal power outputs of 7.55 and 7.44 mW cm−2, respectively. The corresponding BF values still remain more than 98.5%. The J–V curves of the CQD and C-ZQD modified bifacial PSCs are measured by the forward and reverse scan modes (Fig. S3, ESI), revealing a minor hysteresis. The J–V curves of various solar cells under both-side light illumination at a time are shown in Fig. S4 (ESI), achieving a PCE as high as 13.10% (Voc = 1.376 V, Jsc = 13.30 mA cm−2, FF = 71.6%). By tuning the incident light intensity from 10 to 100 mW cm−2, the J–V curves under front illumination are shown in Fig. S5a (ESI) and the plots between Pmax as a function of Pin are shown in Fig. S5b (ESI), giving a linear dependence.
The incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE) curves and integrated Jsc of the three types of bifacial PSCs are shown in Fig. 3d. A pristine device has a maximal IPCE value of 68% in a wavelength range of 350–525 nm, which abruptly reduces to zero at 550 nm. The narrow absorption range in comparison with state-of-the-art organic–inorganic hybrid PSCs arises from the large bandgap (2.3 eV) of the all-inorganic CsPbBr3 halide, while the maximized IPCE data are increased to ∼78% and∼85% upon interfacial modification of CQDs-only and CQDs/C-ZQDs, respectively. The reasonable mechanism behind this enhancement is efficient electron extraction by CQDs and hole extraction by C-ZQDs. Steady state current densities at the maximum power point voltages and corresponding PCEs are recorded to cross-check the photovoltaic measurements, as shown in Fig. 3e and f. Apparently, the pristine and modified PSCs have stabilized current outputs over a period of 100 s and the front and rear PCEs are found to be 5.94% and 5.84% for the QD-free cell and 7.20% and 7.11% for the CQDs/C-ZQDs tailored solar cell, respectively. The efficiency deviations may be attributed to the hysteresis effect.
In order to study the reproducibility of the so-called bifacial all-inorganic PSCs, the statistical photovoltaic parameter (PCE, Voc, Jsc and FF) distributions are shown in Fig. S7 (ESI). At first glance, the distributions follow the order of pristine PSC < CQDs-only PSC < CQDs/C-ZQDs PSC. Therefore, we make a conclusion that bifacial all-inorganic PSCs with high PCEs, BFs and reproducibility can be realized using the technique reported here.
It has been above-mentioned that CQDs and C-ZQDs promote the charge extraction effect and lead to photovoltaic performance enhancement, and therefore they are characterized by high-resolution TEM and UV photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). The preliminary results reveal an average diameter of 5 nm and crystal lattice of 0.35 nm for glucose converted CQDs (Fig. S8a, ESI), and the C-ZQDs have an average diameter of 7 nm and crystal lattice of 0.31 nm (Fig. S8b, ESI). By plotting (Ahν)2versus energy (hν), the LUMO and HOMO positions are determined to be −3.5 and −5.3 eV for CQDs as well as −4.1 and −5.5 eV for C-ZQDs, respectively (Fig. S9, ESI). When applied as interfacial modification materials, the CQDs and C-ZQDs have homogenous distributions, as shown in Fig. S8c and d (ESI). The well-aligned deposition and matching energy structures of CQDs/C-ZQDs promote charge extraction from CsPbBr3 halides and therefore reduce electron–hole recombination, which is a prerequisite for increased photovoltaic performances.
The charge recombination mechanism of bifacial CsPbBr3 solar cells is investigated by plotting front Jsc or Voc as a function of incident light intensity. Fig. 4a illustrates the linear relationships of Jsc and light intensity for three devices according to Jsc ∝ Lα (α ≤ 1), where L represents light intensity and α is an exponential factor to evaluate charge recombination. The α value is 0.94 for pristine PSCs and it increases to 0.96 and 0.98 for CQD-only and CQDs/C-ZQDs modified devices, respectively. The large energy differences at TiO2/CsPbBr3 and CsPbBr3/carbon interfaces call for serious charge recombination and therefore yield a lower α value in QD-free solar cells. By modifying these interfaces with CQDs and/or C-ZQDs to bridge intermediate energy levels, the interfacial charges (electrons and holes) are effectively extracted to the corresponding transporting layers. In this fashion, the α values are markedly enhanced to nearly 1.0. Fig. 4b shows the plots of Vocversus light intensity by obeying Voc ∝ nkT/qln(L), where k, T and q are the Boltzmann constant, the temperature in Kelvin, and the elementary charge, respectively. The n values obtained by the fitting plots are 2.37, 1.84 and 1.59 kT e−1 for QDs-free PSCs, CQDs-only PSCs and CQDs/C-ZQDs PSCs, respectively. Both Jsc and Voc confirm the reduced recombination reactions, arising from charge extraction effects of CQDs and C-ZQDs.
The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra are performed to gain further insights into charge transfer kinetics of the CsPbBr3 film with and without QDs. As shown in Fig. 4c, the bifacial PSC through modifying the TiO2/CsPbBr3 interface with CQDs exhibits an obvious PL quenching compared to the pristine device. The diminished PL intensity indicates an effective electron extraction from the CsPbBr3 light-harvesting layer. When simultaneously decorated by CQDs and C-ZQDs, the PL intensity is further reduced through diploid charge extraction at TiO2/CsPbBr3 and CsPbBr3/carbon interfaces. The reduced interfacial energy loss is in favor of Jsc, Voc, FF and PCE outputs. Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra are also investigated to obtain the charge lifetime measurement for better comparison, as shown in Fig. 4d. The PL decay lifetime in an FTO/TiO2/CsPbBr3 configuration is 3.71 ns, and it reduces to 3.31 ns for FTO/TiO2/CQDs/CsPbBr3. This indicates that the photo-induced electrons rapidly transfer to the TiO2 layer through their intermediate energy band from CQDs. Upon irradiation of the glass/CsPbBr3/C-ZQDs/carbon structure, an increased PL decay lifetime of 5.97 ns suggests hole extraction and sluggish electron–hole recombination processes. All of these spectral characterizations cross-check the electron extraction of CQDs and hole extraction of C-ZQDs. The charge-transfer resistance in electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) spectra (Fig. S10, ESI) follows CQDs/C-ZQDs PSCs < CQDs-only PSCs < pristine PSCs, this result is consistent with spectral characterizations.
Improved stability is equally important as high efficiency for practical applications of bifacial all-inorganic PSCs. To address this issue, we measure the long-term stability in high humidity or high temperature without encapsulation. Fig. S11a (ESI) plots the PCEs over a period of 1000 h for the bifacial PSCs without QDs and modified by CQDs/C-ZQDs at 60% RH and 25 °C. The pristine PSC retains around 92% of its initial front and rear performances (Fig. S12, ESI), and this value is nearly 95% for the CQDs/C-ZQDs modified device. When suffering persistent thermal attack at 80 °C, as shown in Fig. S11b (ESI), there is no apparent degradation in PCE over a period of 800 h. These results reveal that the all-inorganic bifacial PSCs have high tolerances to moisture and heat, preventing CsPbBr3 solar cells from being damaged in a high humidity and temperature atmosphere.
In summary, we launch a strategy of building bifacial all-inorganic CsPbBr3 solar cells by coupling two symmetric cells with a shared carbon back-electrode. CQDs and C-ZQDs with matching energy levels are developed to bridge the TiO2/CsPbBr3 and CsPbBr3/carbon interfaces, extracting electrons and holes from CsPbBr3 halides, respectively. The optimal bifacial CsPbBr3 PSC yields a front efficiency of 7.55% and rear efficiency of 7.44% under one sun illumination. The so-called bifacial device achieves a BF as high as 98.5%, which is incomparable to state-of-the-art bifacial photovoltaics. Moreover, all-inorganic bifacial solar cells have improved long-term stability even under persistent attacks by high humidity and temperature.
The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61774139, 21503202) and Director Foundation from Qingdao National Laboratory for Marine Science and Technology (QNLM201702).

There are no conflicts to declare.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cc04271c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018