 DOI: 10.1039/C3CC49175G
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 2618-2620


Wenjun
Wang
,

Xu
Pan
*,

Weiqing
Liu
,

Bing
Zhang
,

Haiwei
Chen
,

Xiaqin
Fang
,

Jianxi
Yao
 and 

Songyuan
Dai
*

Key lab of Novel Thin Film Solar Cells, Institute of Plasma Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, PR China. E-mail: sydai@ipp.ac.cn; mars_dark@hotmail.com; Fax: +86 (0)551 5591377; Tel: +86 (0)551 5591377

State Key Laboratory of Alternate Electrical Power System with Renewable Energy Sources, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, China

Received
3rd December 2013
, Accepted 10th January 2014
First published on 28th January 2014
The FeSe2 films with controllable morphologies (including 3D flower-like and sphere-shaped) have been applied as the counter electrodes (CEs) for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). It is found that 3D flower-like FeSe2 CEs perform comparably to conventional platinum CEs (power conversion efficiencies of 8.00 and 7.87%, respectively).

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are promising alternatives to conventional solid-state photovoltaic devices based on materials such as Si, CdTe and CuIn1−xGaxSe2, owing to their low cost, ease of production and high efficiency. In general, a typical DSSC usually comprises three main components: a dye-sensitized porous nanocrystalline titanium dioxide (TiO2) film as the photoanode, an electrolyte traditionally containing an iodide/triiodide (I−/I3−) redox couple and a counter electrode (CE).

As a crucial component, CE plays an important role in the performance of a DSSC in that it collects electrons from external circuit and fulfills electron transfer from the CE interface to the electrolyte by catalyzing the reduction of I3− to I−. Usually, fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) glass loaded with noble metal platinum (Pt) is the preferred material for the CE due to its superior conductivity, electrocatalytic activity and stability. However, in view of the low abundance and high cost of platinum, much incentive exists in developing other cost-effective alternatives for Pt. For instance, carbon materials, conducting polymers and inorganic compounds have been utilized as CEs in DSSCs. In particular, some metal chalcogenides among these Pt-free electrocatalysts have been shown to be quite effective and have exceeded the performance of Pt. As another compound in the metal chalcogenide series, iron diselenide (FeSe2) is an important VIII–VI transition metal selenide semiconductor and has drawn enormous attention owing to its unusual structure and electronic properties, as well as the opportunity it offers to engineer special shapes for application in the development of advanced functional devices. In recent years, much effort has been devoted to the synthesis of FeSe2 films, low-dimensional FeSe2 micro/nanostructures and anisotropic three-dimensional (3D) FeSe2 nanostructures. However, to the best of our knowledge, no research on the use of FeSe2 as CEs in DSSCs has been reported so far.
Herein, as the electrocatalytic activity may depend on the morphology, we have prepared the FeSe2 films with controllable morphologies, including 3D flower-like FeSe2 assembled with nano/microrods (Fr) and sphere-shaped FeSe2 assembled with sphere-shaped particles (Fs), via a facile hydrothermal synthetic approach, and used them as Pt-free electrocatalysts for DSSCs, respectively. Electrochemical results of the Fr CE showed Pt-like catalytic activity for triiodide reduction, surpassing that of the Fs CE. As a result, the power conversion efficiency (η) of the DSSC with the Fr CE was 8.00%, which was comparable to that of the Pt CE (7.87%), while the η of the Fs CE was 7.38%. Details of the fabrication method are shown in the experimental section of the ESI.
The crystallographic structures of the as-synthesized FeSe2 products were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD). From the XRD patterns (Fig. 1), all diffraction peaks of Fr and Fs can be readily indexed to an orthorhombic phase of FeSe2 (JCPDS No. 65-2570). The morphologies of the FeSe2 samples (Fr and Fs) were observed using typical scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). As shown in Fig. 2a, the as-obtained Fr CE in the reaction system without citric acid consists almost entirely of the flower-like FeSe2 assembled with micro/nanorods with an average diameter of 0.5–3 μm. Only a small portion of single micro/nanorods can be found. As shown in Fig. 2(b) and (c), the 3D flower-like microconstruction is composed of many 1-dimensional subunits (micro/nanorods) that connect with each other by self-assembly. The inset shows the TEM image of Fr. Fig. 2d shows the SEM image of the as-obtained Fs CE in the same reaction system with additional citric acid. The surface is partially covered with single relatively uniform sphere-shaped particles (Fig. 2e). Meanwhile, other parts of the film have large near-spherical particles. The sizes of the large near-spherical particles are found to be in micrometer-scale. As can be seen at higher magnification (Fig. 2f), the large near-spherical particles are composed of lots of nanoparticles. The inset of Fig. 2d shows the TEM image of single sphere-shaped particles with a mean size of 200–400 nm.
The performances of the DSSCs with Fr and Fs CEs were studied in comparison to that of the DSSC with the Pt CE. The photocurrent–voltage (I–V) curves of the DSSCs applying Fr, Fs and Pt CEs are shown in Fig. 3 (under simulated solar light illumination of 100 mW cm−2). The corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. As shown in Table 1, when the Fr was used as the counter electrode, the DSSC exhibits a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 14.93 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 744 mV, a fill factor (FF) of 0.721 and an η of 8.00%. The DSSC with the Pt CE, on the contrary, renders a Jsc of 15.13 mA cm−2, a Voc of 741 mV, a FF of 0.702 and an η of 7.87%. The Fr-based cells showed a comparable, even slightly higher, η than Pt, which is mainly attributed to the slight improvement in the FF. Meanwhile, the η of 7.38% has been obtained by the DSSCs applying Fs CEs, indicating a poorer catalytic activity for the reduction of I3−. The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of these DSSCs were also collected (see ESI).
CEs

V
oc/mV

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF

η/%

R
s/Ω cm2

R
ct/Ω cm2

Z
N/Ω cm2

E
pp/mV
Fr
744
14.93
0.721
8.00
16.82
0.53
0.43
252
Fs
724
14.60
0.698
7.38
27.05
0.96
0.79
302
Pt
741
15.13
0.702
7.87
17.01
0.78
0.59
262
To investigate the reaction kinetics of various electrodes in the I−/I3− electrochemical system, cyclic voltammetry (CV) was carried out in a three-electrode system. Fig. 4(a) shows the CV curves of the Fr, Fs and Pt CEs, respectively. Two pairs of redox peaks (peak I/peak I′ and peak II/peak II′) are observed for all of the materials. The left redox peaks correspond to eqn (1) and the right ones correspond to eqn (2)
I3− + 2e− ↔ 3I−
(1)
3I2 + 2e− ↔ 2I3−
(2)
Since the counter electrode of a DSSC is responsible for catalyzing the reduction of I3− to I−, the characteristics of peak I and peak I′ are the focus of our analysis. The peak current and the peak-to-peak separation (Epp), which is negatively correlated with the standard electrochemical rate constant of the redox reaction, are two critical parameters for comparing electrocatalytic activities of different CEs.
As shown in Fig. 4(a), the lower Epp and higher current densities of the Fr electrode indicate that Fr produces higher reversibility of the I3−/I− redox reaction and remarkable electrocatalytic activity for I3− reduction, even better than Pt, which is advantageous for the application of the Fr electrode as an efficient CE in DSSCs. Meanwhile, the lower peak current densities and larger Epp of the Fs electrode reveal that the electrocatalytic activity of the Fs electrode is inferior to that of Fr and Pt electrodes. The conclusion from the CV data is consistent with previous energy conversion efficiency results. The η of the Fs-based DSSCs are lower than those of Fr and Pt-based DSSCs, which stems from the inferior electrocatalytic ability of the Fs electrodes.

Fig. 4(b) and (c) represent the typical CV curves of Fr and Fs electrodes in the I−/I3− system with different scan rates. As shown in Fig. 4(b) and (c), the peak current densities (Ip) changed with the scan rate. Also, the cathodic peaks gradually and regularly shifted negatively, and the corresponding anodic peaks shifted positively upon increasing the scan rate. The inset of Fig. 4(b) and (c) illustrates a linear relationship between the redox peak current density and the square root of scan rates. According to the Langmuir isotherms principle, this linear relationship indicates the diffusion limitation of the redox reactions (eqn (1)) on the surface of Fr and Fs CEs. This phenomenon also shows that the adsorption of iodide species is little affected by the redox reaction on the surface of Fr and Fs CEs and there is no specific interaction between the I−/I3− redox couple and Fr and Fs CEs as is the case of the Pt CE.
To further elucidate the electrocatalytic activity of the FeSe2 CEs in the reduction of I3− ions, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was conducted on the symmetrical Fr–Fr, Fs–Fs and Pt–Pt electrochemical cells. Fig. 4(d) shows the Nyquist plots obtained by the EIS analysis of symmetric cells and the equivalent circuit diagram used for the simulation. Generally, the high-frequency intercepts on the real axis represent the series resistance (Rs), which is mainly composed of the bulk resistance of CE materials, resistance of FTO glass substrates, contact resistance, etc. The high frequency semicircle indicates the electrochemical charge transfer resistance (Rct) at the interface of CE/electrolyte for I3− reduction and the corresponding constant phase element (CPE) describing deviation from the ideal capacitance, due to the electrode roughness, whereas the low frequency semicircle indicates the Nernst diffusion-limited impedance (Zn) of the I−/I3− redox species in the electrolyte. The Nyquist plots were fitted and the impedance parameters of various electrodes obtained by fitting are shown in Table 1. The Fr CE possessed the lowest Rct (0.53 Ω cm2), so it had a relatively high catalytic activity. The conclusions derived from the EIS and CV data are consistent. Furthermore, previous analyses have indicated that the total series resistance (Rseries) of solar cells strongly influences the FF and η. In DSSCs, the Rseries is mainly related to Rs, Rct, the diffusion impedance of I3− ions in the electrolyte and the electron transfer at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface. The lowest Rct, Rs and Zn of the Fr CE resulted in the minimum series resistance, and hence the Fr based device showed a corresponding improvement in the FF and η. Meanwhile, the Rs of Fs increased significantly compared to Fr, which also resulted in a lower electrocatalytic activity.
In addition, although the exact reason for the influence of morphology on the performance of FeSe2 CEs is still unclear, the following points may be noted. In principle, the prerequisite for triiodide reduction is the adsorption of acceptor-like species (such as I2 and I3−) at active sites of semiconductor catalysts (FeSe2) through charge-transfer chemisorption. Therefore, the performance of FeSe2 CEs is sensitive to their surface structure. The 3D flower-like morphology may improve the total surface area exposed to the electrolyte, which may facilitate the triiodide reduction reaction on the Fr CE. In contrast, the Fs CE consists of many large near-spherical particles, which may result in an increase in the Rs as well as the average current carrier transport length before reaching the site for triiodide reduction. Meanwhile, with irregular surfaces, the electrons or holes must move through many interfaces before they can meet and recombine with each other, which may result in the inferior electrocatalytic activity of Fs. However, the Fs CE is also covered with single sphere-shaped particles that may be active sites to improve the electrocatalytic activity. As a consequence, the Fs CE still exhibits good electrocatalytic activity.
In conclusion, we have shown that FeSe2 films with controllable morphologies (including 3D flower-like and sphere-shaped) can be used as electrocatalysts for triiodide reduction in DSSCs. The Fr CE has been successfully demonstrated to be an efficient electrocatalyst with low charge-transfer resistance (Rct) and fast reaction rates for the reduction of I3− ions, even slightly superior to Pt. As a consequence, the DSSC with the 3D flower-like FeSe2 CE shows an η of 8.00%, slightly higher than that of the DSSC using a Pt CE (7.87%). In contrast, the Fs CE is inferior to the Fr CE. Furthermore, the simple preparation procedure and inexpensive cost properties of the FeSe2 CE allow the development of a high-performance FeSe2 CE to replace the expensive Pt CE catalyst in large-scale industrial DSSC production.
This work was financially supported by the National Basic Research Program of China under Grant No. 2011CBA00700, the National High Technology Research and Development Program of China under Grant No. 2010AA050510, and the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 21273242, 21173227, 21103197.
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Full experimental procedures. See DOI: 10.1039/c3cc49175g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014