 DOI: 10.1039/C6NR07689K
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 4691-4699


Xuhui
Zhang
,

Jiajiu
Ye
,

Liangzheng
Zhu
,

Haiying
Zheng
,

Guozhen
Liu
,

Xuepeng
Liu
,

Bin
Duan
,

Xu
Pan
* and 

Songyuan
Dai
*

Key Laboratory of Novel Thin-Film Solar Cells, Institute of Applied Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei 230031, China. E-mail: xpan@rntek.cas.cn

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China

State Key Laboratory of Alternate Electrical Power System with Renewable Energy Sources, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, China. E-mail: sydai@ncepu.edu.cn

Received
29th September 2016
, Accepted 16th December 2016
First published on 19th December 2016
Two-step deposition has been widely used in the perovskite layer preparation for perovskite solar cells due to its attractive morphology controllability. However, the limited diffusivity of CH3NH3I (MAI) might cause some PbI2 to remain in the perovskite film. The residual PbI2 in the perovskite film would lead to inferior performance of devices, such as, low power conversion efficiency (PCE), poor reproducibility and weak air stability. In this work, we developed a sandwich structure MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor film to prepare a PbI2-free CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite film. In comparison to the two-step approach, the MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor film with a typical sandwich structure formed a uniform and pinhole-free perovskite film without any PbI2 residue, which could significantly improve the performance of the devices. Moreover, the bottom MAI layer of the MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor film could improve the interfacial contact of the porous TiO2 layer, leading to the promotion of the charge transfer and reduction of the recombination rate. Therefore, the devices fabricated from the sandwich structure MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor films showed dramatic improvements of open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and PCE. As a result, a promising PCE of 17.8% with good long-term air stability was achieved for the MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor film based PSC, which is better than that prepared by a two-step approach.

Due to their long diffusion length, high carrier mobility, suitable optical bandgaps, and strong absorption of light, organometal halide perovskites have recently been attracting attention for use in perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Miyasaka and his colleagues first employed CH3NH3PbX3 (X = Br, I) as a sensitizer in dye-sensitized solar cells to replace organic dyes and achieved a PCE of 3.8% in 2009, and then Nam-Gyu Park and his colleagues used spiro-MeOTAD as a hole-transporting layer for all-solid-state perovskite solar cells and achieved a striking PCE of 9.7% in 2012. The efficiency of perovskite solar cells increased to 22.1% within 4 years, which is the fastest growing solar cell technology to date.

The most classical approach for perovskite deposition reported in the literature is solution chemistry, mainly including two preparation routes. The first route is a one-step solution process via spin coating of the perovskite precursor solution onto the substrate, followed by thermal annealing to form the perovskite film. The second commonly used route is two-step deposition. Two-step deposition of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites was initially adapted by Michael Grätzel and his colleagues to fabricate mesoscopic PSCs. The advantages of the two-step method are its great morphology controllability of perovskite films and good pore-filling in mesoscopic PSCs, leading to a compact and uniform perovskite film and high performances of PSCs. However, the CH3NH3PbI3 film prepared by the two-step deposition method generally retains a certain amount of residual PbI2. Most of the residual PbI2 is the unreacted PbI2 left in the conversion of PbI2 to CH3NH3PbI3 which is due to the insufficiency of MAI solution diffusion into PbI2 films. Many groups have demonstrated that the PbI2 residue in perovskite films has negative effects on the performance of PSCs. In order to obtain a full conversion of PbI2 to CH3NH3PbI3, Mitzi et al. soaked a PbI2 film in MAI isopropanol solution for hours; this method could peel off or dissolve the perovskite. Yixin Zhao and Kai Zhu have used a three-step sequential solution deposition method to obtain PbI2-free CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite films. A thermally unstable stoichiometric PbI2·CH3NH3Cl precursor film was first deposited on a mesoporous TiO2 substrate, followed by thermal decomposition to form PbI2, which was finally converted into CH3NH3PbI3 without any traceable residue PbI2.
Herein, we demonstrated a sandwich structure MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor film to prepare a PbI2-free CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite film. By employing a relatively high concentration of MAI to obtain MAI layers in the sandwich structure of the MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor film, a smooth and dense PbI2-free perovskite thin film was formed after annealing. Compared to the conventional two-step method, the devices fabricated from sandwich structure MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor films showed dramatic improvements for all the performance parameters. A promising efficiency of 17.8% was achieved with a uniform, pinhole-free, PbI2-free perovskite layer prepared by using the optimized sandwich structure MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor film. Moreover, the devices based on the sandwich structure MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor film showed better long-term stability.

F-doped SnO2 glass (FTO, 15 Ω per square) was obtained from Pilkington TEC. CH3NH3I was purchased from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp. Titanium isopropoxide (98%), lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl)imide (Li-TFSI) and 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) were bought from Aldrich. Bis(acetylacetonate) (99%) was purchased from SCRC. Isopropanol (IPA, 99.7%) and N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.9%) were purchased from Alfa. TiO2 (particle size: about 30 nm, crystalline phase: anatase) was obtained from Dysol. Lead(II) iodide (PbI2, 99%) was purchased from TCI. 2,2′,7,7′-Tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) was purchased from Merck KGaA. All chemicals were used as received without further purification.


A 35–60 nm thick TiO2 compact layer (c-TiO2) was deposited on a clean and etched FTO substrate by aerosol spray pyrolysis at 450 °C, using a precursor solution of 0.4 mL of bis(acetylacetonate) and 0.6 mL of titanium diisopropoxide in 7 mL of isopropanol. A meso–microporous TiO2 layer (100–150 nm in thickness) was then deposited on the c-TiO2/FTO substrate by spin coating at 5000 rpm for 30 s. After drying at 100 °C, the meso–microporous TiO2 films were annealed at 510 °C for 20 min to remove the organic residue.

Two-step deposition of perovskite: a PbI2 DMF solution (1 M) was first spin coated onto porous TiO2 at 3000 rpm for 30 s, and then a 50 mg mL−1 of MAI IPA solution was spin coated on the PbI2 film at 3000 rpm for 30 s immediately. The deposited film was then annealed at 105 °C for 60 min to form a perovskite layer.
MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor film preparation for perovskite: a high concentration (30 mg mL−1, 40 mg mL−1 or 50 mg mL−1) of MAI IPA solution was first spin coated onto a porous TiO2 film at 3000 rpm for 30 s, and then a PbI2 DMF solution (1 M) was dripped onto the MAI film during spinning. After that, a 50 mg mL−1 of MAI IPA solution was spin coated on the film at 3000 rpm for 30 s again. Then the MAI–PbI2–MAI film was annealed at 105 °C for 60 min to form a perovskite layer.
The HTM solution (25 μL) was dripped onto the perovskite layer during spinning at 3000 rpm for 20 s. The solution was made by mixing spiro-OMeTAD (73.5 mg), TBP (29 μL), LiTFSI solution (17.5 μL, 520 mg of LiTFSI in 1 mL of acetonitrile) and FK209 (tris(2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tert-butylpyridine)cobalt(III) bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl)imide) solution (6 μL, 300 mg of FK209 in 1 mL of acetonitrile). Finally, an Au counter electrode (60–80 nm-thick) was made by thermal evaporation on the top of the device.

The morphologies of all samples were characterized by using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, sirion200, FEI Corp., Holland). The X-ray diffraction spectra of PbI2 films and perovskite films were recorded on an X'pert PRO X-ray diffractometer. The data were collected at room temperature in the 2θ range of 10–60°. Ultraviolet-visible (UV-VIS) absorption spectra were measured by using an UV-VIS spectrophotometer (U-3900H, HITACHI, Japan) at room temperature. PL spectra for perovskites prepared on glass were recorded by exciting the perovskite films deposited onto glass at 473 nm with a standard 450 W Xenon CW lamp. The signals were recorded by using a spectrofluorometer (Photon Technology International) and analyzed by the software Fluorescence. Transient absorption (TA) responses of perovskites deposited onto glass were recorded on a LKS (LKS80, England). The samples were measured with a pump light wavelength of 470 nm and a probe light wavelength of 775 nm. The repetition rate was 5 Hz, and the energy of the laser device was 150 μJ cm−2. Solar cell performance was measured using a class solar simulator (AAA simulator, Oriel USA) which was calibrated to give simulated AM 1.5 sunlight at an irradiance of 100 mW cm−2. The irradiance was calibrated using a Si-reference cell certified by NREL. Current–voltage curves were recorded using a sourcemeter (Keithley 2400, USA). The applied bias voltage was from 1.2 V to −0.1 V for the reverse scan, and from −0.1 V to 1.2 V for the forward scan. The scan rate was 50 mV s−1. All solar cells were covered with a black mask which was used to define the active area of the devices, and in this case it was 0.09 cm2. The incident monochromatic photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) was measured using an IPCE measuring system (Newport Corporation, CA) equipped with a Xe lamp as the light source.



Fig. 1 presents a schematic diagram of the mesoscopic PSC architecture and cross-sectional SEM image of the best-performing perovskite device prepared by using a sandwich structure MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor film, as well as the deposition process of a perovskite layer by using the sandwich structure MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor film. The cell architecture (Fig. 1a) includes a conductive substrate, a compact layer, a porous TiO2 layer, a perovskite layer, a hole transporting layer, and a metal electrode. For this architecture, the formation of a PbI2-free, uniform, density and complete filling perovskite layer is extremely important, and we developed a sandwich structure MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor film as an effective precursor film to generate such a layer. The process involves six stages, as shown in Fig. 1c. First, a high concentration (30 mg mL−1, 40 mg mL−1 or 50 mg mL−1) of MAI solution was spread over the entire surface of a porous TiO2 layer. Second, the spin-coater was accelerated to the desired rotational speed and maintained there for several tens of seconds to evaporate the solvent, and the bottom MAI layer was prepared. Third, a 1 M of PbI2 DMF solution was dripped onto the MAI film during spinning, and the middle PbI2 layer of the sandwich structure was formed. Fourth, a 50 mg mL−1 of MAI solution was spread over the entire surface of the PbI2 layer. Fifth, the spin-coater was accelerated to the desired rotational speed and maintained there for several tens of seconds to evaporate the solvent again. After the five steps, a sandwich structure MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor film was successful fabricated. Finally, the sandwich structure MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor film was converted into a highly uniform and crystalline perovskite by annealing at 105 °C for 60 min. For clarity of presentation, hereafter, we designate the PbI2 films deposited on different MAI films as PbI2-x (x = 0, 30, 40, 50), which means the concentrations of MAI for the bottom MAI layer are 0 mg mL−1 (without the bottom MAI layer, the conventional two-step deposition method), 30 mg mL−1, 40 mg mL−1 and 50 mg mL−1, respectively. The perovskite films based on the PbI2-x films are designated as MAPI-x (x = 0, 30, 40, 50), and the corresponding PSCs are designated as PSC-x (x = 0, 30, 40, and 50).

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was employed to observe the surface morphology of the meso–microporous TiO2 film and MAI film deposited on the porous TiO2 film in the first step. Although the commonly used mesoporous TiO2 nanocrystal film has the merit of a large surface area, the small size of the mesopores leads to incomplete filling of the perovskite. The flat surface is not conducive to the charge separation for the perovskite layer. In this study, we used a mixed porous TiO2 nanostructure film with small mesoporous pores and large macropores to substitute the classic mesoporous TiO2 film. As shown in Fig. 2a and b, the macroporous/mesoporous pores in the meso–microporous TiO2 film were continuous and uniformly dispersed, and the diameter of macroporous pore was about 200–300 nm. This nanostructure with a rough surface is conducive to the deposition of the perovskite film. After spin coating with a high concentration (30 mg mL−1, 40 mg mL−1 or 50 mg mL−1) of MAI solution, a uniform and dense MAI film was formed on the meso–microporous TiO2 film. As shown in Fig. 2c, we can see that the MAI film was highly pure, smooth and very dense even without any pinhole.

Fig. 3 shows the surface morphology of PbI2-x films (x = 0, 30, 40, 50) deposited on different substrates. Apparently, the PbI2 films deposited on the MAI films (Fig. 3b–d) were more porous than that deposited on a TiO2 film (Fig. 3a), and this is propitious to the transformation of PbI2 to MAPbI3 in the following setup.
XRD analysis was conducted to verify the crystallization of the PbI2-x films. The XRD patterns of the PbI2-x films are shown in Fig. 4. When the PbI2 film was deposited on the MAI-free porous TiO2 film (PbI2-0), it displayed a strong characteristic XRD peak at about 12.5°. This main PbI2 diffraction peak decreased substantially while the PbI2 films deposited on MAI films, and the higher the concentration of the MAI solution, the weaker the PbI2 diffraction peak. This may be due to some MAI in the bottom MAI layer infiltrating the PbI2 layer during the PbI2 layer preparation, which decreased the crystallinity of the PbI2 layer. Moreover, the deposition step of the PbI2 film deposited on the MAI film did not result in any detectable MAPbI3 diffraction peaks such as the main (110) peak near 14°. This was consistent with the UV-VIS absorption spectra. The UV-VIS absorption spectra (Fig. 2a) of the PbI2 films deposited on different MAI films exhibit an absorption onset near 510 nm, which is the characteristic absorption for PbI2, and there was no absorption onset near 760 nm, which is the characteristic absorption of MAPbI3.
After spin-coating a 50 mg mL−1 of MAI IPA solution onto the PbI2-x films, sandwich structure MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor films were formed (except the PbI2-0 film). The corresponding MAPbI3 films were denoted as MAPI-x films. Their XRD patterns are shown in Fig. 5a. There were strong diffraction peaks of PbI2 observed in the XRD of MAPI-0 film, indicating incomplete conversion of PbI2 to MAPbI3. This is a common phenomenon in the two-step deposition of perovskites. The signal of PbI2 was also found in the MAPI-30 film, while the concentration of MAI for the bottom MAI layer increased to 40 mg mL−1, and the signal disappeared. Moreover, the concentration of MAI for the bottom MAI layer was higher, and the main (110) diffraction peak of MAPbI3 was stronger. These results suggest the single side contact reaction of PbI2 and MAI could be the main reason leading to the residue of PbI2. UV-VIS spectra (Fig. 5b) showed that the absorbance exhibited a rising tendency in the visible light region (between 500 and 850 nm) from MAPI-0 to MAPI-40, but when the concentration of MAI for the bottom MAI layer increased to 50 mg mL−1, the absorption was not increased further. Obviously, the increased absorption of the MAPbI3 films originated from the full conversion of PbI2 to MAPbI3. When the concentration of MAI for the bottom MAI layer increased to 50 mg mL−1, the bottom MAI layer was too thick and the MAI was in excess, and then the absorption was not increased.

Fig. 6 shows the surface morphology of MAPI-x films. It was obvious that the MAIPbI3 film of MAPI-0 achieved by the two-step method had a lot of pinholes. This would lead to the ohmic contacts of HTM and electron transport layers, leading to recombination of charge carriers, affecting the device performances. In contrast, compact and hole-free MAPbI3 layers were achieved for MAPI-30, MAPI-40 and MAPI-50 by using sandwich structure MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor films. This may due to the sandwich structure precursor films make the reaction of PbI2 to MAPbI3 more homogeneous and sufficiently. Although the MAPI-30 film was compact and hole-free, it was non-uniform and the grains were too small, which usually produce more defects. Meanwhile, we can see a compact layer with a low degree of crystallinity covered on the surface of MAPI-50. This may be because of an excess of MAI assembled on its surface. Among the four films, the MAPI-40 film was the most uniform and compact, and the grain size of the film was 200–500 nm. Thus, to achieve a high uniform and compact MAPbI3 film, the concentration of MAI for the bottom MAI layer should be kept around 40 mg mL−1.
We further studied and characterized the MAPI-x films by steady-state fluorescence (PL) spectroscopy to explore the recombination properties of light-excited electrons and holes in perovskite films. All the samples were prepared on glass and their thicknesses were almost the same. Fig. 7 shows the PL spectra of various MAPI-x samples. MAPI-0 presented the lowest PL intensity, proving that the introduction of a sandwich structure MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor film to the growth of perovskite is beneficial to eliminate the defects and trap sites in a perovskite film. Moreover, among the three kinds of perovskites prepared by using sandwich structure MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor films, the MAPI-40 showed the strongest peak intensity, followed by MAPI-50 and MAPI-30 perovskite films, indicating that MAPI-40 had harvested the highest quality perovskite film with the least trap sites and defects, which was ascribed to fact that the film had the best morphology and high crystallinity without any PbI2 residue.
To further understand the quality of MAPI-x films, we used the transient absorption (TA) response to detect the internal recombination in the MAPbI3 layers. If the recombination of electrons and holes occurs with difficulty, the recombination time will become longer. In other words, a perovskite layer with a longer recombination time represents a better film which has an appropriate morphology and few defect states, which means more effective charges will be produced. The TA response and dynamics are shown in Fig. 8. We observed an increasing trend of the recombination time when the MAPbI3 films were prepared by using sandwich structure MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor films. The recombination time of the MAPbI3 layer prepared by the two-step method only sustained for 35 ns, while for perovskite layers prepared by using sandwich structure MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor films, the recombination times significantly increased to 45–173 ns. The best one exceeded 173 ns based on the MAPI-40. Obviously, the high quality perovskite film without any traceable residue PbI2 was conducive to electron and hole diffusion.

Fig. 9a shows the typical photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves of mesoscopic PSCs prepared by using different MAPI-x films under simulated one-sun illumination. The details of photovoltaic parameters of all these devices are given in Table 1. The device PSC-0, which was prepared by two-step deposition, showed a Voc of 0.98 V, Jsc of 17.52 mA cm−2, FF of 0.68, and PCE of 11.64%. All the device photovoltaic parameters of PSCs prepared by using the sandwich structure MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor films have great improvements. This is owing to the uniform, pinhole-free and incomplete pore filling in a porous TiO2 layer of a PbI2-free perovskite layer prepared by using a sandwich structure MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor film. As there was full conversion of PbI2 to CH3NH3PbI3 and the MAIPbI3 film was highly crystalline, more visible light would be absorbed and converted, so the Jsc increased obviously. Higher Voc and FF resulted from the more uniform, pinhole-free and high quality MAIPbI3 film. Moreover, the bottom MAI layer of the MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor film may have interfacially modified the porous TiO2 layer to promote the charge transfer and reduce the recombination rate, which also had a positive effect on the performances of PSCs. However, when the concentration of MAI for the bottom MAI layer increased to 50 mg mL−1, all device parameters were reduced. This is probably because the concentration of MAI for the bottom MAI layer was too high and an excess of MAI assembled on the MAPbI3 surface after annealing of the MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor film. The MAI residue on the MAPbI3 surface was not favourable to the charge transfer and would increase the recombination rate for the PSC. A typical PCE for PSC-40 which was prepared by using a MAPI-40 film was 17.82% with Voc of 1.10 V, Jsc of 21.08 mA cm−2, FF of 0.77. The current–voltage (J–V) curves of typical PSC-40 in different scan directions are shown in Fig. 9c. There was almost no hysteresis, which meant a high quality perovskite film and good balanced electron and hole transport rates for the device.Fig. 9d shows the PCE histogram of 20 pieces of PSC-40 devices in one experiment, which had good consistency.
Samples

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
PSC-0
0.98
17.52
0.68
11.64
PSC-30
1.10
18.34
0.72
14.44
PSC-40
1.10
21.08
0.77
17.82
PSC-50
1.08
19.74
0.73
15.58
Besides, the incident-photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra (Fig. 9b) revealed that the efficiencies of PSC-x (x = 30, 40, 50) were much higher than PSC-0 in the whole film absorption range of 300–850 nm. The lower IPCE efficiency at a long wavelength arose from poor light harvesting and inefficient charge extraction, resulting in a lower Jsc of the device. This was also compatible with the J–V curves of PSC-x.
Finally, we studied the stability of devices PSC-0 and PSC-40. All cells were tested in ambient air, in which the temperature and humidity were 25 °C and 40%–70%, respectively. As shown in Fig. 10, the PSC-40 exhibited better stability than PSC-0. After two months, the PCE of PSC-40 still remained over 65%, but that of the PSC-0 remained 40% only. It was obvious that the PSC prepared by using the sandwich structure MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor film was more stable than that of the conventional two-step deposition. This may be due to two causes. One was that the PbI2 residues in the perovskite film had a negative influence on the device stability, and the other was that the perovskite layer prepared by using the MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor film was more compact with no obvious voids/pinholes so that the moisture in air would find it more difficult to penetrate into and reach the internal perovskite layer and thus degrade the long-term stability of the device.

In summary, we demonstrated a sandwich structure MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor film to prepare PbI2-free CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite films. By employing a relatively high concentration MAI to prepare the MAI layers of the sandwich structure MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor film, a smooth and continuous PbI2-free perovskite film was formed after annealing. When the concentration of MAI for the bottom MAI layer was 40 mg mL−1, the fabricated perovskite device showed the best PCE of 17.82% with the photovoltaic performance such as Voc of 1.10 V, Jsc of 21.08 mA cm−2, FF of 0.77. Compared to the conventional two-step method, the devices fabricated from the sandwich structure MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor film showed dramatic performance improvements of Voc, Jsc, FF and PCE. The uniform, pinhole-free and incomplete pore filling in the mesoporous TiO2 layer of the PbI2-free perovskite layer prepared by using the sandwich structure MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor film was the key factor for these improvements. Moreover, the bottom MAI layer of the MAI–PbI2–MAI precursor film may interfacially modify the porous TiO2 layer, promoting the charge transfer and reducing the recombination rate for those PSCs. Additionally, the devices based on the high-quality CH3NH3PbI3 film without the PbI2 residue showed better long-term stability in ambient air. It is expected that our work gives a way to prepare highly efficient and stable PSCs.


This work was financially supported by the National High Technology Research and Development Program of China under Grant No. 2015AA050602, the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 21273242, and the State Key Laboratory of Alternate Electrical Power System with Renewable Energy Sources (Grant No. LAPS14012).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017