 DOI: 10.1039/D2MH01229D
(Communication)
Mater. Horiz., 2023, 10, 566-575


Xiaobo
Zhou
,

Hongbo
Wu
,

Urvashi
Bothra
,

Xingze
Chen
,

Guanyu
Lu
,

Heng
Zhao
,

Chao
Zhao
,

Qun
Luo
,

Guanghao
Lu
,

Ke
Zhou
*,

Dinesh
Kabra
*,

Zaifei
Ma
* and 

Wei
Ma
*

State Key Laboratory for Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China. E-mail: msewma@xjtu.edu.cn; msekzhou@xjtu.edu.cn

Advanced Low-dimension Materials, State Key Laboratory for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials, Center for College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, China. E-mail: mazaifei@dhu.edu.cn

Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai, 400076, India. E-mail: dkabra@phy.iitb.ac.in

i-Lab & Printable Electronics Research Center, Suzhou Institute of Nano-Tech and Nano-Bionics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Suzhou, 215123, China

Frontier Institute of Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710054, China

Received
1st October 2022
, Accepted 11th November 2022
First published on 15th November 2022
Indoor organic photovoltaics (OPVs) have shown great potential application in driving low-energy-consumption electronics for the Internet of Things. There is still great room for further improving the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of indoor OPVs, considering that the desired morphology of the active layer to reduce trap-assisted recombination and voltage losses and thus simultaneously enhance the fill factor (FF) and open-circuit voltage for efficient indoor OPVs remains obscure. Herein, by optimizing the bulk and interface morphology via a layer-by-layer (LBL) processing strategy, low leakage current and low non-radiative recombination loss can be synergistically achieved in PM6:Y6-O based devices. Detailed characterizations reveal the stronger crystallinity, purer domains and ideal interfacial contacts in the LBL devices compared to their bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) counterparts. The optimized morphology yields a reduced voltage loss and an impressive FF of 81.5%, and thus contributes to a high PCE of 31.2% under a 1000 lux light-emitting diode (LED) illumination in the LBL devices, which is the best reported efficiency for indoor OPVs. Additionally, this LBL strategy exhibits great universality in promoting the performance of indoor OPVs, as exemplified by three other non-fullerene acceptor systems. This work provides guidelines for morphology optimization and synergistically promotes the fast development of efficient indoor OPVs.

Indoor organic photovoltaics (OPVs) have been considered to be a major breakthrough in the application of self-sustainable indoor electronic devices. Previous studies have shown that a layer-by-layer (LBL) film with ideal interface contacts is conducive to reducing trap-assisted recombination, thereby improving the fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of indoor OPVs. However, the significant contribution of VOC for efficient indoor devices is currently ignored because the relationship between voltage losses and LBL morphology remains obscure. Herein, after finely optimizing the bulk and interface morphology of the PM6:Y6-O system during LBL processing, the optimal LBL device obtained a record PCE of 31.2% among indoor OPVs under 1000 lux light-emitting diode illumination, mainly due to its excellent FF (81.5%) and reduced voltage losses. Detailed characterizations revealed that the stronger crystallinity, purer domains and ideal interfacial contacts in the LBL devices can simultaneously reduce trap-assisted recombination, leakage current and non-radiative recombination voltage loss compared to their bulk-heterojunction counterparts. Additionally, this work demonstrated that the LBL strategy has great potential in promoting the commercialization of indoor OPVs, as it can promote device performance universally, as confirmed in other efficient systems, and increase the long-term stability of indoor OPVs.


Due to the rapid development of non-fullerene acceptors and their derivatives, the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of single-junction organic photovoltaics (OPVs) have exceeded 19% under AM 1.5G illumination (1 sun). The continuously improving device performance provides opportunities to focus on promoting the application of OPVs. Recently, OPVs have exhibited favourable potential to persistently power nodes for wireless technologies and large networks of connected devices by harvesting ambient light, which has caused indoor OPVs to attract great attention. Compared to inorganic materials, organic materials used as the active layer of indoor OPVs possess strong absorbance in the visible light region (390–760 nm), which matches better with the spectra of indoor light sources such as light-emitting diodes (LED) and fluorescent light (FL). Therefore, the theoretical PCE of indoor OPVs is more than 50%, which is much higher than that under 1 sun. Although there is a large amount of works promoting the performance of indoor OPVs and the best PCE is around 30%, there is still great room for further improving the performance of indoor OPVs.

In addition to the variation of the spectrum, the charge carrier density of indoor OPVs is typically 2–3 orders lower when changing the illumination conditions from 1 sun to indoor light. Therefore, there are two essential demands for an ideal indoor OPV. First, to obtain a high short-circuit current density (JSC), the absorption of the active layer should be tuned to match the indoor light spectrum well, and the external quantum efficiency (EQE) in the visible range should be as high as possible. Secondly, the charge recombination and voltage losses should be simultaneously reduced to achieve a high fill factor (FF) and open-circuit voltage (VOC). Due to the low charge carrier density of indoor light sources, the influence of bimolecular recombination is negligible for indoor OPVs. However, the leakage current and trap-assisted recombination, which are usually negligible under 1 sun, will have a dramatic effect on the performance of indoor OPVs. Here, the magnitude of the leakage current is determined by the value of shunt resistance (Rsh). The higher the Rsh, the less current that goes through the device. According to the equivalent circuit model, at low light intensities, the effects of shunt resistance on FF can be expressed based on the following equation:
(1)
where
 and , respectively. As depicted in the above equation, the FF will dramatically decrease as the Rsh decreases under low light intensities. On the other hand, according to the relationship VOC ∝ log(Pin), where Pin is the incident light intensity, there is additional VOC loss above 0.1 V for common OPV devices when the light intensity is varied from AM 1.5G to indoor light (1000 lux LED). This VOC loss can be effectively reduced by suppressing the trap-assisted recombination. In addition, the voltage loss induced by non-radiative recombination should also be inhibited in order to obtain a high VOC. In short, when the absorption of the active layer covers the visible light range well, the leakage current, trap-assisted recombination and non-radiative recombination voltage loss should be significantly reduced so as to achieve both high FF and VOC for efficient indoor OPVs.

Currently, bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) active layers are usually employed in most indoor OPVs. Recently, Ko et al. chose a highly crystalline acceptor (ITIC-Th) that had comparable solubility to the acceptor IT-4F and incorporated it in a non-fullerene blend (PM6:IT-4F). The ITIC-Th can act as a morphology controller in the ternary blend to improve the molecular packing and arrangement of PM6 as well as IT-4F. Therefore, the optimized morphological properties, including the phase separation and crystallinity, facilitate a high PCE of 30.11% for the ternary device under 500 lux LED illumination. However, the non-ideal interface due to the physical contact between the donor and electron transport layer (ETL) or between the acceptor and hole transport layer (HTL) will induce charge recombination and hinder charge collection. The increased recombination, especially the trap-assisted recombination, will cause more dramatic drops in VOC and FF, indicating that the BHJ morphology is intrinsically not the best choice for indoor OPVs. On the other hand, under 1 sun conditions, some works have demonstrated that the layer-by-layer (LBL) strategy by sequential deposition is an effective method to induce the formation of a vertical phase distribution with the acceptor enriched at the ETL and donor enriched at the HTL. This ideal interface contact can suppress the trap-assisted recombination losses and promote charge transport. For example, Kim et al. used the LBL strategy to manufacture indoor OPVs and found an obvious PCE enhancement under 1000 lux for the LBL device due to increased FF. Compared to BHJ structures, the LBL film exhibited a more favorable morphology with ideal interface contacts. However, the significant contribution of VOC for efficient indoor devices is currently ignored because the relationship between voltage losses and LBL morphology remains obscure. Therefore, the typical features of bulk and interface morphology that will favor simultaneously decreasing the trap-assisted recombination and non-radiative recombination voltage loss and consequently facilitating the FF and VOC for the efficient indoor OPVs need to be further investigated.
In this work, LBL indoor photovoltaic devices based on PM6 and Y6-O were fabricated via sequential processing, and the morphology-dependent device performance under indoor light (LED) was investigated in detail. After finely adjusting the morphology, the optimal LBL device obtained a record PCE of 31.2% among indoor OPVs under 1000 lux LED illumination, mainly due to its excellent FF (81.5%) and better VOC, which are much higher than those of the corresponding BHJ devices. The LBL film can form the desired vertical phase distribution with PM6 enrichment at the bottom in conventional devices, and stronger crystallinity and higher domain purity can be concomitantly observed. This favourable morphology facilitates charge transport and reduces trap-assisted recombination, leakage current and energy loss, which simultaneously promotes the FF and VOC of the indoor OPVs. Moreover, the LBL strategy can effectively increase the long-term stability of indoor OPVs due to the optimized phase separation. This work highlights the relationship between morphology and device performance, and demonstrates the excellent universality of the LBL strategy in enhancing the photovoltaic performance of indoor OPVs.

The PM6:Y6-O BHJ device has been reported for its high efficiency under indoor light. In this work, the conventional device structure with the geometry ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/PDINO/Al based on PM6:Y6-O was utilized to fabricate LBL devices. The details of the device fabrication can be found in the Supporting Information. Fig. 1(a) shows the chemical structures of PM6 and Y6-O. PM6 shows an absorption peak at 614 nm and a shoulder at 576 nm, while Y6-O possesses an absorption peak at 776 nm (Fig. S1a, ESI). The absorption spectra of both the BHJ and LBL films (300–800 nm) match the LED spectra well, as shown in Fig. S1b (ESI). The absorption peak of the acceptor in the LBL film exhibits a slight red-shift (from 764 nm to 768 nm), indicating its more aggregated Y6-O compared to the BHJ film. The J–V curves of the BHJ and LBL devices under 1 sun illumination are presented in Fig. 1(b), and their photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. The LBL device presents a slightly higher JSC (22.8 mA cm−2) than that of the BHJ device (22.5 mA cm−2). As shown in Fig. S1c (ESI), the LBL device shows higher EQE values in the wavelength range from 600 to 800 nm than the BHJ device. Therefore, the corresponding integrated current density (JEQE) of the LBL device calculated from the EQE spectra is higher than that of the BHJ device, and their JEQE values are consistent with their JSC values. Additionally, the LBL device exhibits a higher VOC of 0.975 V and FF of 77.5% compared to the BHJ device (VOC, 0.957 V; FF, 76.0%). Eventually, a better PCE of 17.2% is achieved for the LBL device.

Active layer

V
OC (V)
FF (%)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
PCE (%)

J
EQE (mA cm−2)

R
sh (kΩ cm)

R
s (Ω cm2)

a The average parameters were calculated from over 10 devices.

BHJ
0.957
76.0
22.5
16.4 (15.9 ± 0.2)
22.1
57.5
4.76
LBL
0.975
77.5
22.8
17.2 (16.8 ± 0.5)
22.6
343
5.54
To explain their performance differences, especially the JSC and FF differences, we investigated their exciton dissociation and recombination dynamics. As shown in Fig. S2a (ESI), we applied the photoluminescence (PL) analysis of the BHJ and LBL films to evaluate the exciton dissociation behaviour, in which an excitation wavelength of 740 nm was used. The exciton quenching efficiency is represented by the PL quenching rate in Table S1 (ESI). The PL quenching rate of the LBL film (99.0%) is higher than that of the BHJ films (98.2%), indicating its slightly higher dissociation efficiency. The photocurrent density (Jph) was analyzed as a function of the effective applied voltage (Veff) to investigate the charge extraction of the devices, as shown in Fig. S2b (ESI). The exciton dissociation probability (Pdiss) was calculated as Pdiss = Jph/Jsat under short-circuit conditions, and the results are shown in Table S1 (ESI). Both the devices can reach saturated current when the Veff is high, indicating the effective charge carrier collection. The higher Pdiss (96.8%) of the LBL device confirms its more efficient exciton dissociation. These results are consistent with their JSC. To study the charge transport properties, the electron mobility (μe) and hole mobility (μh) were measured using the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) method. As shown in Fig. S3 and Table S2 (ESI), the LBL device shows a higher μe of 1.24 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and thus a more balanced hole and electron mobility (μh/μe = 1.02), compared to the BHJ device (μe = 1.07 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1; μh/μe = 1.15). Balanced mobility will reduce charge accumulation and suppress charge recombination, thereby facilitating a higher FF for the LBL devices. The dependences of VOC and JSC on the light intensity in logarithmic form were analyzed to investigate the charge recombination mechanism. If Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination is involved, a strong dependence of VOC on the light intensity with a slope larger than 1 kT q−1 will be observed. As shown in Fig. S4a (ESI), the slope of the LBL device (1.01 kT q−1) is smaller than that of the BHJ device (1.05 kT q−1), representing its lower trap-assisted recombination, which possibly induces dramatic difference in their performance under indoor light illuminance. Furthermore, the fitted slopes (α) of the JSCvs. light intensity curves are 0.972 and 0.995 for the BHJ and LBL devices, respectively (Fig. S4b, ESI). The larger α of the LBL device reveals its lower bimolecular recombination, which contributes to its higher FF.
Considering the high VOC and EQE values in the visible light range, the photovoltaic performances of the corresponding devices under indoor light conditions were investigated. Light intensities of 250, 500 and 1000 lux were selected to meet the illuminance demands of indoor applications. The light power intensities of the LED (3000 K) were measured and calculated as per a reported paper. The J–V curves of the BHL and LBL devices are presented in Fig. 1(c) and Fig. S5 (ESI), and their corresponding parameters are summarized in Table 2. It is clear that the LBL devices can achieve better performance than the BHJ devices under all light intensities. The LBL device shows an excellent PCE of 31.2% (VOC, 0.866 V; JSC, 134.9 μA cm−2; FF, 81.5%) under 1000 lux. Notably, this FF and PCE are the best values among indoor OPVs to the best of our knowledge, as shown in Fig. 1(d) and Table S3 (ESI). Even when the light intensity was decreased to 500 and 250 lux, the LBL device achieved impressive PCEs of 30.3% and 29.2%, respectively. As shown in Fig. S6a (ESI), the integrated current density Jcal values were calculated to be 128.6, 64.3 and 32.2 μA cm−2 under 1000, 500 and 250 lux, respectively, which show only small deviations (<5%) from the JSC values obtained based on J–V curves. The BHJ device exhibits a lower PCE of 28.8% (VOC, 0.840 V; JSC, 133.8 μA cm−2; FF, 78.4%) under 1000 lux compared to the LBL device. Additionally, when the light intensity is reduced to 500 and 250 lux, the BHJ device exhibits lower PCEs of 27.5% and 25.3%, respectively. The Jcal values of the BHJ device were calculated to be 127.6, 63.8 and 31.9 μA cm−2 under 1000, 500 and 250 lux (Fig. S6b, ESI), respectively, which are also consistent with the JSC values obtained from the J–V curves. Noteworthily, the indoor BHJ devices show higher FF and VOC but lower JSC and PCE compared to that in the literature13 under LED illumination, which may be due to differences in the LED spectrum and calibration.
Active layer
Light intensity (lux)

P
in (μW cm−2)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (μA cm−2)

J
cal
 (μA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a The Jcal were calculated from the EQE spectra.
b The average parameters were calculated from over 10 devices.

BHJ
1000
306.2
0.840
133.8
127.6
78.4
28.8 (28.1 ± 0.5)
500
153.1
0.820
66.9
63.8
76.3
27.5 (26.7 ± 0.6)
250
76.6
0.796
33.5
31.9
72.4
25.3 (24.6 ± 0.3)
LBL
1000
306.2
0.866
134.9
128.6
81.5
31.2 (30.3 ± 0.6)
500
153.1
0.846
67.4
64.3
81.1
30.3 (29.6 ± 0.8)
250
76.6
0.825
33.7
32.2
80.0
29.2 (28.5 ± 0.4)
The light-intensity-dependent performance of the BHJ and LBL devices under LED illumination was further analyzed to investigate the charge recombination under low carrier densities. The J–V curves and corresponding parameters of BHL and LBL devices under 125 and 1500 lux are presented in Fig. S7 and Table S4 (ESI). The dependence of VOC on the light intensity curves is shown in Fig. S8a (ESI). The fitted slopes of the BHJ and LBL devices are 1.39 kT q−1 and 1.23 kT q−1, respectively, which are clearly higher than those under outdoor lighting conditions, indicating the severe effect of trap-assisted recombination on the performance of the indoor OPVs. Additionally, the smaller slope of the LBL device indicates its lower trap-assisted recombination compared to that of the BHJ device. The LBL device can maintain a high FF (>80%) over a wide range of light intensity (250 to 1500 lux), as shown in Fig. 1(e). However, the FF of the BHJ device decreases significantly with decreasing light intensity. The slopes α of the JSC vs light intensity curves are very close to 1, which confirms that bimolecular recombination is negligible for both the BHJ and LBL devices under low light intensity (Fig. S8b, ESI). Eventually, the small variations in VOC and FF lead to a smaller PCE decrease with decreasing light intensity for the LBL device than the BHJ device, as shown in Fig. 1(f). The LBL device maintains a high PCE of 26.6% even under 125 lux, which is much higher than that of the BHJ device (21.8%).
Grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS), resonant soft X-ray scattering (RSoXS) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) were employed to investigate the correlation between active layer morphology and device performance. The 2D GIWAXS diffraction patterns and corresponding line profiles of pure PM6 and Y6-O and their BHJ and LBL films are illustrated in Fig. S9 (ESI) and Fig. 2(a). It is shown that PM6 and Y6-O exhibit pronounced (010) diffraction peaks at qz = 1.70 Å−1 and 1.81 Å−1, respectively, in the out-of-plane direction, indicating the preferential face-on orientation of molecular ordering in both neat films. Similar peak positions at around qz = 1.80 Å−1 are recorded for the BHJ and LBL films, indicating that this peak mainly corresponds to the (010) diffraction peak of Y6-O. The fitting results of the (010) peaks of corresponding films are summarized in Table S5 (ESI). The LBL films exhibit a higher coherence length (CL) of π–π stacking (27.8 Å) compared to the BHJ film (CL of 27.3 Å), indicating its stronger crystallinity of Y6-O. The enhanced Y6-O crystallinity probably contributes to the charge transport, and thus the higher μe, of the LBL device. The film surface morphology was revealed by AFM measurements. As shown in Fig. 2(b), both the BHJ and LBL films exhibit low root-mean-square (RMS) roughness values of 1.02 and 0.97 nm, respectively, indicating that the surface roughness is not the major cause of their different device performances. The extent of phase separation in the films was measured by RSoXS. The domain size and domain purity can be extracted by fitting the scattering profiles, as shown in Fig. 2(c) and Table S5 (ESI). The BHJ and LBL films present domain sizes of 20.7 and 22.5 nm, respectively. The bigger domain size in the LBL film may be attributed to the strong crystallinity inducing the phase separation. Additionally, the LBL film exhibits a higher relative domain purity compared to that of the BHJ film, which could effectively supress the charge recombination.
LBL processing is an appropriate method designed to control the vertical phase distribution. Therefore, we adopted the facile approach of using film-depth-dependent light absorption spectra to further investigate the variations in donor and acceptor composition in the vertical direction. The film-depth-dependent light absorption spectra of the BHJ and LBL films are illustrated in Fig. S10a and b (ESI), and the extracted sub-layer absorption spectra are shown in Fig. S10c and d (ESI). The stronger absorption of the donor PM6 than the acceptor Y6-O at the bottom indicates that there are more PM6-rich regions at the bottom of the BHJ and LBL films. Combined with the neat film absorption spectra of PM6 and Y6-O, the component ratio and calculated D/A ratio can be obtained, as depicted in Fig. S10e, f (ESI) and Fig. 2(d). Approximately homogeneous distributions of PM6 and Y6-O from the top surface to a depth of around 85 nm are found in both the BHJ and LBL films. However, compared to the BHJ film, the LBL film exhibits a significantly higher D/A ratio at the bottom, indicating that there is more donor PM6 accumulated at the bottom. Time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS) was further utilized to monitor the differences in the vertical phase distributions. Notably, the cyano group (CN−) was used to track the acceptor Y6-O. After analyzing the CN− signal and CN− intensity ratio (CN−(BHJ)/CN−(LBL)) as depicted in Fig. 2(e) and (f), it can be concluded that the polymer donor PM6 is enriched at the bottom and the Y6-O acceptor gathers at the top few nanometers in the LBL film. The favourable vertical phase separation can effectively reduce trap-assisted recombination and suppress the leakage current at the active layer/ETL (HTL) interface. The middle part of the LBL film possesses similar donor and acceptor vertical distributions to the BHJ film, indicating the BHJ-like morphology in the middle part of the LBL film. The well-mixed middle part provides sufficient D/A interfaces for charge separation, together with better charge transport; thus, the LBL device can obtain a slightly larger JSC than that of the BHJ device. Therefore, combining the results of all these morphology characterization, the vertical phase separation in the optimized BHJ and LBL films can be depicted in detail, as presented in the inset of Fig. 2(d). The distinct difference in the vertical texture of the BHJ and LBL films is directly reflected in their device properties, especially at low light intensities.
The physical properties of the devices involving leakage current, traps and charge recombination losses were investigated in detail to further understand the intrinsic mechanism of the morphology-induced performance enhancement. First, we measured the dark J–V curves to determine the difference in leakage current, as the dark current is usually dominated by the leakage current at low bias voltage. As shown in Fig. 3(a), it is apparent that the LBL device presents an approximately one order of magnitude lower dark current and thus a much higher shunt resistance than the BHJ device (Table 1). This is one of the key reasons why the LBL indoor device obtains a significantly higher FF than that of the BHJ indoor device. We speculated that the strong crystallinity, large and pure domains (less boundaries for leakage) and ideal interface contact all contribute to the low leakage current of the LBL device. To distinguish the leakage current of the bulk phase and interface is beyond the scope of this work. For LBL devices with the same film thickness, it is demonstrated that the leakage current will decrease as the donor thickness increases (probably more donor enrichment at the bottom), indicating that the LBL sequential processing is an effective strategy to control the leakage current, as shown in Fig. 3(b). The optimized LBL device with 50 nm PM6 and 60 nm Y6-O presents low leakage current and the best performance, as shown in Fig. S11 and Table S6 (ESI).
The SCLC measurements were further utilized to analyze the trap density of the BHJ and LBL devices. For the hole- and electron-only devices, part of the injected current will be captured by the traps, which causes an abrupt transition from the space-charge-limited regime to the trap-filled limit. This process is evident in the J–V curves as an abrupt increase in the current at a voltage called the trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL), as shown in Fig. S12a (ESI). The trap density (Nt) can be estimated by the equation:
(2)
where
L is the film thickness, εr is the permittivity of the semiconductor, and ε0 is the permittivity of free space. The LBL device shows a lower VTFL; thus, its electron trap density (Nt ≈ 1.5 × 1022 m−3) is lower than that of the BHJ device (Nt ≈ 1.7 × 1022 m−3). Transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements can provide information on carrier transport and, in particular, on whether traps affect the transport in devices. As shown in Fig. S12b (ESI) and Fig. 3(c), the current signal of the LBL device is slightly larger than that of the BHJ device, which is consistent with the trend in their JSC. Additionally, the transport time of the LBL device (0.69 μs) is significantly faster than that of the BHJ device (1.27 μs), suggesting its reduced trapping and thus more efficient charge transport. Additionally, the charge carrier lifetimes of the BHJ and LBL devices were investigated using transient photovoltage (TPV) measurements. As shown in Fig. S13 (ESI), the LBL device exhibits obviously larger charge carrier lifetimes, which may be ascribed to its reduced charge recombination compared to the BHJ device. These results are sufficient to account for the difference in their FFs under 1 sun and indoor light illumination.

Voltage loss measurements were carried out to determine the recombination losses in the BHJ and LBL systems. The voltage loss can be further divided to find the contribution from each component based on the Shockley–Queisser (SQ) model.
(3)
ΔVOC = ΔVSQOC + ΔVgen + ΔVband-tailrad + ΔVnon-rad
(4)
where
q is the elementary charge and Eg is the bandgap, which is defined from the derivative of the EQE edge (Fig. S14a, ESI). VSQOC is the thermodynamic limit of the VOC at a given optical band gap, VSCOC is the current-limited SQ limit of VOC due to the non-unity EQE of devices above the bandgap, and VradOC is the radiative limit of VOC at which radiative recombination is assumed to be the sole recombination channel in the device. VSCOC and VradOC were calculated from the high-sensitivity EQE (EQEsen) spectra corrected by the electroluminescence (EL) spectra (Fig. S14b, ESI), AM 1.5 solar photon flux density, and blackbody photon flux density. ΔVnon-rad is determined by the EQEEL of the OPVs:  As shown in Fig. 3(d), the LBL device exhibits a higher EQEEL value (8.91 × 10−5) than BHJ device (5.91 × 10−5). Therefore, the LBL device possesses a lower non-radiative recombination loss of 0.232 eV, compared to that of the BHJ device (0.244 eV). Although the Eg of the LBL device is smaller than that of the BHJ device, the non-radiative recombination loss of the LBL device is lower, resulting in its lower Eloss and higher VOC. The results obtained from the calculation are shown in Table 3 and depicted in Fig. 3(e). In addition, when the light intensity decreases from 1 sun to 1000 lux LED illumination, the LBL device will suffer a smaller additional VOC loss due to its supressed trap-assisted recombination, compared to the BHJ device. Therefore, the LBL device obtains a much higher VOC under indoor light intensity.

Active layer

E
g/q (V)
ΔVSQOC (V)
ΔVgen (V)
ΔVband-tailrad (V)
ΔVnon-rad (V)
ΔVmeaOC (V)

E
CT (eV)

λ (meV)
BHJ
1.530
0.267
0.006
0.056
0.244
0.957
1.405
79
LBL
1.523
0.265
0.006
0.046
0.232
0.975
1.399
70
The different processing conditions of the active layer also affect the interfacial energetics; therefore, we also analyzed the D:A interface and charge transfer (CT) binding energy in these devices. The energy of the CT state (ECT) was calculated using high-sensitivity EQE measurements by fitting the CT spectral region of the EQE with the below equation:
(5)
where
λ is the reorganization energy, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature and E is the photon energy. Fig. 3(f) shows the EQE spectra for both the devices fitted using eqn (5). The extracted interfacial parameters λ and ECT are shown in Table 3.

The reorganization energy is correlated with the interfacial disorder as it signifies the broadening of CT states. The reorganization energy increases from 70 to 79 meV on changing the processing from LBL to BHJ, indicating higher energetic disorder at the D:A interface for the BHJ compared to the LBL devices. The higher disorder at the CT interface results in larger non-radiative recombination in the devices, therefore reducing the VOC for the BHJ devices. We also measured the degree of energetic disorder in the bulk by calculating the Urbach energy (EU) using the below expression:
(6)
The bulk EU was calculated to be ∼23 meV for both the devices. To understand the energetic disorder in both the devices without the contribution from CT state disorder, we subtracted the CT state absorption from the total absorption, and the result is shown in Fig. S15 (ESI). The EU calculated from EQE without the CT state contribution is ∼22 meV, indicating similar bulk disorder in both the devices. Interestingly, these results suggest that the different active layer processing predominantly affects the D:A interface, which results in a disordered interface and higher voltage losses for BHJ devices. Therefore, LBL processing is the preferred technique to reduce the CT state disorder and voltage losses. These findings suggest that BHJ puts a steric hinderance and vibrational coupling in reduction of interfacial disorder.
Based on all the above results, the correlation between the morphology of the active layer and the performances of the indoor OPVs could be analyzed in a more systematic way. Compared to the BHJ film, the LBL film possesses stronger crystallinity, larger domain size and better phase separation, which is better for the charge transport. Additionally, the LBL film exhibits a higher relative domain purity, which could effectively supress the charge recombination. The polymer donor PM6 is enriched at the bottom and the acceptor Y6-O gathers in the top few nanometers in the LBL film. This favourable vertical phase distribution induces more ideal interface contact, which could also facilitate the charge transport. We speculate that the strong crystallinity, large and pure domains and ideal interface contact all contribute to the low trap-assisted recombination and leakage current, which promote the FF and decrease the extra VOC loss (due to the decreased light intensity) of the LBL indoor OPVs. Furthermore, all the favourable morphological features of the LBL film contribute to reduced CT state disorder and non-radiative recombination loss, and thus decreased voltage losses. Therefore, the LBL indoor OPVs can simultaneously achieve much higher FF and VOC compared to those of the BHJ indoor OPVs.
We also investigated the storage stability of the LBL and BHJ devices in a nitrogen atmosphere at a temperature of ∼25 °C. As shown in Fig. 4(a), under 1000 lux LED illumination, the unencapsulated LBL devices exhibit superior stability and maintain ∼98% of their original PCE after storage for 500 hours, compared to ∼93% for the BHJ devices. The excellent stability of the LBL devices under weak light illumination suggests great potential in practical indoor applications. Under 1 sun illumination, both the BHJ and LBL devices suffer a faster decrease in their PCEs, as shown in Fig. 4(b). However, the LBL devices still exhibit better stability over a long period, maintaining more than 86% of their original PCE after 500 hours of storage, compared to ∼80% for the BHJ devices. The morphology degradation has been proved to be responsible for the performance degradation of OPVs. We believe that the LBL processing strategy promotes more favourable phase separation and purer phases, which create a more stable thermodynamic state and thus guarantee the superior long-term stability of the OPVs. To further verify the universality of this sequential processing strategy, three different devices based on PM6:BTA3, PM6:Y6 and PCE10:PC70BM systems were fabricated with the same device structure. The experimental results demonstrate that the PCEs of both the LBL devices are higher than those of the BHJ devices under 1 sun, as shown in Fig. S16 and Table S7 (ESI). Additionally, all the LBL devices show lower dark current than the corresponding BHJ devices (Fig. S17, ESI). Eventually, the PM6:BTA3, PM6:Y6 and PCE10:PC70BM LBL devices all exhibit a much higher PCE under 1000 lux LED illumination, which is mainly attributed to the significant improvement of VOC and FF, as shown in Fig. 4(c), (d), Fig. S18 and Table S8 (ESI).

In conclusion, the performance of indoor OPVs has been successfully improved via morphology manipulation using a LBL processing strategy. It is demonstrated that the LBL film exhibits stronger crystallinity, purer domains and an optimized vertical phase distribution with ideal interface contacts, which are conducive to charge transport and reducing the recombination loss and leakage current. All these favorable photoelectric processes simultaneously promote the FF and VOC, thus contributing to the impressive PCE of indoor LBL OPVs, whose FF of 81.5% and PCE of 31.2% are the highest values for indoor OPVs reported so far. Additionally, experimental results validated that the LBL strategy can improve the performance of indoor OPVs universally and increase the device stability under 1 sun and indoor light. This work provides guidelines for morphology optimization by revealing the structure-performance correlation and synergistically promotes the fast development of efficient indoor OPVs.


Xiaobo Zhou fabricated the solar cell devices and performed the UV-vis, PL, and AFM measurements; Hongbo Wu performed the energy loss and TPC tests; Urvashi Bothra helped interpret the energy loss data; Guanyu Lu performed the film-depth-dependent light absorption spectra measurements; Xingze Chen performed the TOF-SIMS measurements; Heng Zhao and Baojun Lin helped analyze the data; Dinesh Kabra proposed constructive opinions for the energy loss analysis; Zaifei Ma helped analyse the energy loss and TPC data; Wei Ma and Ke Zhou conceived and directed the experiments. All authors contributed to analysis and manuscript writing.


There are no conflicts to declare.


Thanks are given for the support from the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2022YFE0132400), NSFC (52173023, 21875182, 52073056), Key Scientific and Technological Innovation Team Project of Shaanxi Province (2020TD-002), and 111 project 2.0 (BP0618008). X-ray data was acquired at beamlines 7.3.3 and 11.0.1.2 at the Advanced Light Source, which is supported by the Director, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract no. DE-AC02-05CH11231. The authors thank Dr Eric Schaible and Dr Chenhui Zhu at beamline 7.3.3, and Dr Cheng Wang at beamline 11.0.1.2 for assistance with data acquisition. D. K., and U. B. acknowledge financial support of the Ministry of Education, Government of India via IoE funding.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2mh01229d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023