 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA08499H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21039-21046


Dezhong
Zhang
,

Chunyu
Liu
,

Zhiqi
Li
,

Xinyuan
Zhang
,

Xulin
Zhang
,

Shengping
Ruan
,

Xindong
Zhang
 and 

Wenbin
Guo
*

State Key Laboratory of Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, 2699 Qianjin Street, Changchun 130012, People's Republic of China. E-mail: guowb@jlu.edu.cn

Received
1st September 2018
, Accepted 2nd October 2018
First published on 2nd October 2018
Compared with the charge recombination loss from the unfavorable defects of the perovskite layer, the inferior charge transport characteristics of the interlayers deteriorate the efficiency in solar cells and slow the response speed in photodetectors. Here, 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4-TCNQ) is incorporated into a 4,4′,4′′-tris(3-methylphenylphenylamino)triphenylamine (m-MTDATA) layer to facilitate hole transport by providing deep electron traps. The increased work function and enlarged hole mobility of the composite hole transport layer are beneficial for the photoelectric conversion process of the perovskite photovoltaic devices. Consequently, an enhanced efficiency of 18.35% is achieved for the perovskite solar cells and a shortened decay time of 39.8 ns is obtained for the perovskite photodetectors. This work reveals the limitation of the transport layers on the perovskite solar cells and photodetectors, and provides an effective method to obtain high efficiency solar cells and fast photodetectors.

Halide perovskites have attracted tremendous interest due to their strong light absorption, large charge carrier mobility and long charge recombination lifetimes since they were first incorporated into the solar cells and achieved a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.8% in 2009. In particular, a high PCE of 23.2% was achieved recently. Moreover, remarkable achievements have also been made in other perovskite photoelectric conversion devices over the past decade, such as photodetectors. The charge transport characteristics have been proven to play an important role in enhancing the photoelectric conversion efficiency of the perovskite devices. Therefore, some endeavours have been made in facilitating charge transport across the device by adjusting the energy levels of the whole device, optimizing the photoelectric properties of the perovskite layer, and improving the charge transport characteristics of the transport layers in solar cells and photodetectors.

Finely modulating the matched energy levels is crucial to facilitate charge transport across the device and reduce charge recombination, thus improving the photoelectric conversion efficiency of the device. Furthermore, defects at the film surface and grain boundaries (GBs) of the perovskite layer are widely considered to be responsible for the severe charge recombination loss, and some efforts have been devoted to passivating the surface defects and enlarging the grains of polycrystalline perovskite films to reduce the GB area, leading to an improved charge carrier mobility in the perovskite layer. However, the charge carrier mobility of the commonly used transport layers is usually several orders lower than that of the perovskite layer. Therefore, it should be specifically taken into account that the photoelectric conversion efficiency in perovskite devices will actually be limited by the properties of the transport layers. Additionally, the low charge carrier mobility of the transport layers inevitably causes the efficiency loss in solar cells and slows down the response speed of photodetectors.
Herein, we incorporate 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4-TCNQ) as the deep electron trap into 4,4′,4′′-tris(3-methylphenylphenylamino)triphenylamine (m-MTDATA) to improve the charge transport characteristics of the hole transport layer (HTL) and the photoelectric conversion efficiency in perovskite photovoltaic devices. The devices are fabricated with the structure of indium tin oxide (ITO)/m-MTDATA:F4-TCNQ/CH3NH3PbI3/fullerene (C60)/bathocuproine (BCP)/Ag, which can simultaneously act as the solar cells and self-powered photodetectors. In solar cells, the introduction of deep electron traps can increase the work function (WF) of the HTL and enlarge the hole mobility due to the strong electron affinity of F4-TCNQ, which effectively improves the open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), and PCE. In photodetectors, here it is found that the decay speed is greatly affected by the mobility of the transport layers due to the extremely unmatched charge carrier mobility between the perovskite and transport layers. Consequently, the decay time is significantly decreased to 39.8 ns after using the composite HTL with improved hole mobility. In addition, another key point is also shown here that the poor performance in the device based on poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) is related to the serious electron loss in the small grain region of the CH3NH3PbI3 layer, rather than the undesirable hole transport capacity of PEDOT:PSS being commonly considered.

The perovskite photovoltaic devices with the typical p-i-n structure are fabricated. The m-MTDATA:F4-TCNQ (m:F) acting as the composite HTL was spin-coated onto the ITO electrode, and the composite HTLs are named m:F-1 to m:F-5 with the gradually increased F4-TCNQ concentration, respectively. The chemical structures of m-MTDATA and F4-TCNQ are given in Fig. S1 (ESI). To further compare and explore the effect of hole transport characteristics on the photoelectric conversion efficiency of the perovskite devices, the devices based on pristine m-MTDATA and PEDOT:PSS are also prepared. C60 is the electron transport layer (ETL) in the devices, and is covered by the BCP/Ag electrode. The schematic diagram is shown in Fig. 1a. The layered energy levels of all materials are shown in Fig. 1b. It can be noted that the PEDOT:PSS and m-MTDATA have the same highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of −5.1 eV, and can provide suitable energy bands for hole transport. Furthermore, F4-TCNQ possesses deep-lying energy levels with the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of −5.2 eV, which can act as deep electron traps in the m:F composite HTL. A high transmission for the underlying transport layer is necessary to ensure sufficient light absorbance of the perovskite layer. As seen in Fig. 1c, both PEDOT:PSS and pristine m-MTDATA have high transmission across the visible wavelength region. For the m:F composite layers, the doping concentrations applied here do not demonstrate the obvious change in their transmission spectra, and the heavy doping of the m:F-5 layer presents a similar result. Also, the absorbance spectra of the perovskite layers coated onto the different HTLs are measured. There is only slightly higher light absorption around 700 nm for the perovskite layer on the PEDOT:PSS due to the formation of more of the CH3NH3PbI3 phase, which has been investigated in detail in our recent work. The surface morphology of the ITO substrate and different HTLs is analyzed using the atomic force microscope (AFM) height images, as shown in Fig. 1d–g. It is worth noting that the ITO substrate presents a large root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 2.89 nm. After ITO was covered by PEDOT:PSS, the surface roughness decreased to 1.61 nm. The surface of the m-MTDATA layer on the ITO substrate is very dense and smooth, exhibiting a small surface RMS roughness of 0.39 nm. The incorporation of F4-TCNQ inevitably has little influence on the surface morphology, and the m:F-2 layer as shown in Fig. 1g has a slightly rougher surface with a RMS roughness of 0.42 nm. The surface WFs of the ITO substrate and three kinds of HTLs are analyzed and the Fermi level distributions are plotted in Fig. 1h. The WF of ITO is about 4.69 eV, and its rough surface morphology implies the large fluctuation. The surface WFs of PEDOT:PSS and m-MTDATA are similar, suggesting that they have approximate hole extraction capacities in the devices. The surfaces of m-MTDATA and m:F-2 are much smoother and have homogeneous Fermi level distribution at −4.88 eV and −4.94 eV, respectively. The enlarged WF is attributed to electron transfer from m-MTDATA to F4-TCNQ due to the strong electron affinity of the dopant. In addition, the electron trapping process is shown in Fig. S2 (ESI). After incorporating the F4-TCNQ into the m-MTDATA HTL, electron transfer occurs from the HOMO of m-MTDATA to the LUMO of F4-TCNQ, due to the exceptionally strong acceptor character of F4-TCNQ molecules. As a result, the background hole concentration in the m-MTDATA increases, leading to reduced charge carrier recombination and larger hole mobility in m-MTDATA, which is more beneficial for hole transport.


Fig. 2a shows the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the perovskite solar cells based on different HTLs. The device with PEDOT:PSS shows a lower Voc and Jsc than the device with m-MTDATA. As the energy levels of PEDOT:PSS and m-MTDATA are similar, the lower performance should be ascribed to some other factors, which will be given in the subsequent discussion. Owing to the incorporation of deep electron traps into the HTL, the device with m:F-2 achieved the maximum PCE of 18.35%, accompanied by a Jsc of 22.12 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.053 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 78.8%. Meanwhile, the devices with different doping concentrations of F4-TCNQ are also fabricated and the corresponding J–V characteristics are shown in Fig. S3 (ESI). The detailed photovoltaic parameters of all the devices are summarized in Table S1 (ESI). The dark J–V characteristics are shown in Fig. 2b. It can be seen that the devices based on PEDOT:PSS and pristine m-MTDATA have almost the same forward turn-on voltage, which results from the similar built-in electric field distribution inside the devices. Especially, the device based on m:F-2 has a slightly higher turn-on voltage, originating from the enlarged WF of the HTL. And, it presents a prominent rectifying characteristic with a lower reverse leakage current and higher forward conducting current. This indicates that the m:F-2 HTL has better reverse hole selection (electron limitation) and forward hole transport characteristics. When the doping concentration is continuously increased, the rectifying characteristics will not be improved. As seen in Fig. S4 (ESI), the devices with m:F-3, m:F-4, and m:F-5 HTLs have a certain probability of being broken-down within −1 V reverse bias, and the break-down voltage gradually decreases. It's remarkable that the slopes of the reverse break-down current for different devices are nearly the same, suggesting that the overdoping forms a specific channel to transport the reverse break-down current. It is reasonably deduced from the inset of Fig. S4 (ESI) that the conduction band of F4-TCNQ forms the transport channel for the reverse electron current. Thus, the poor hole selection capacity of the composite HTL is considered as the main reason for the decreased PCE of devices with the heavy doping, not just because of the increased aggregation of F4-TCNQ. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the devices are shown in Fig. 2c. The device based on PEDOT:PSS displays an undesirable EQE around 400 nm, much lower than the values at more than 550 nm wavelength, which was widely observed in other previous reports, and it is a sign of the photogenerated charge loss at specific wavelengths. The device based on m-MTDATA has high EQE across the overall spectrum range and the optimal device with m:F-2 demonstrates an improved EQE value of over 80% in a wide range from 350 to 750 nm. Fig. 2d displays the steady-state photocurrent output and stabilized PCE of the devices measured at the maximum power point. The results confirm the absence of the photocurrent hysteresis and indicate excellent light stability for three series of devices. Meanwhile, the recorded PCE values agree with the data obtained from J–V measurement.
The surface scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of CH3NH3PbI3 on three different kinds of HTLs are shown in Fig. 3a–c. It can be observed that the grain size of perovskite is smaller on PEDOT:PSS, while it is larger on pristine m-MTDATA and m:F-2. The reason can be obtained from the cross-sectional SEM image shown in Fig. 3d. There is a small grain region near the PEDOT:PSS surface within about 40 nm thickness, and the size of these small grains is generally less than 20 nm. The SEM image of the small grain region with higher magnification is shown in Fig. S5 (ESI). When away from this small grain region, larger grains of CH3NH3PbI3 can be re-obtained. Similar perovskite crystallization was observed frequently on the PEDOT:PSS surface. On the contrary, the perovskite layers on m-MTDATA and m:F-2 consisted of larger grains without the small grain region, as seen in Fig. 3e and f. It has been reported that a non-wetting and dense surface can lead to a large perovskite crystal size, and PEDOT:PSS was classified as the wetting surface. Herein, we discuss the role of different HTLs on perovskite crystallization more directly by the contact angle measurements of the perovskite precursor solution, which are displayed in the insets of Fig. 3a–c. It can be found that the precursor solution has much stronger surface affinity for PEDOT:PSS than m-MTDATA and m:F-2, and the DMF solvent can be completely spread on these three surfaces (Fig. S6 (ESI)). It reveals that there is a strong interface adhesion between the CH3NH3PbI3 phase and PEDOT:PSS, thus the CH3NH3PbI3 phase cannot freely move on the PEDOT:PSS surface and the grain growth near the contact interface is limited, leading to the formation of the small grain region. In comparison, the CH3NH3PbI3 phase and GBs can move on the surfaces of m-MTDATA and m:F-2 more easily, which is beneficial for larger grain formation.
The optical electric field distribution in the CH3NH3PbI3 layer of the devices is simulated and shown in Fig. 4a. At around the wavelength of 400 nm, the optical electric field of incident light just distributes to a depth of tens of nanometers due to the large light absorption coefficient of CH3NH3PbI3. Most of the light absorption occurs close to the incident interface. Therefore, for the CH3NH3PbI3 layer on PEDOT:PSS, a large quantity of photogenerated electrons and holes will be produced in the small grain region. The holes can be transferred, but the photogenerated electrons will be severely trapped in this region, because the rich GBs around the small grains act as the electron traps, which is the reason for the obvious EQE loss at around 400 nm (Fig. 2c). When the wavelength of the incident light increases, the depth of optical electric field distribution and light absorption both gradually enlarge. The transport of photogenerated electrons no longer needs to go through the small grain region, as shown in Fig. 4b. Thus, the incident light with long wavelengths can obtain a higher EQE. To sum up, the lower performance of the device with PEDOT:PSS is actually caused by the electron loss in the perovskite layer. For the devices with m-MTDATA and m:F-2, there are not the problems discussed above, and both the electrons and holes can smoothly transport in the perovskite layer. Therefore, the enhanced performance of the device with m:F-2 can be due to the improved charge transport characteristics of the composite HTL. More importantly, it can be concluded that the device performance is greatly limited by the transport layers when the perovskite layer possesses good crystallization.
To further investigate the charge transport characteristics in the perovskite devices, the Nyquist plots are characterized and displayed in Fig. 5a, and the inset is the equivalent circuit. The arc of the device with m:F-2 in the high-frequency region (left) is much smaller than that of the other two devices, indicating that the hole transport across the device is more efficient. Also, the devices with PEDOT:PSS and pristine m-MTDATA have a comparable hole transport capacity. However, in the low-frequency region (right), the arc of the devices with m-MTDATA and m:F-2 is larger, which implies that their electron transport characteristics are superior to those of the device with PEDOT:PSS, simultaneously verifying the existence of electron loss in the device based on PEDOT:PSS. The hole-only devices with the structure of ITO/HTL/perovskite/Au are fabricated and corresponding dark J–V characteristics are shown in Fig. 5b. The measured J changes with the Vn and forms different regions: the ohmic contact region (n = 1) at low voltage and the space charge limited current (SCLC) region (n = 2) at high voltage. When the hole-only devices work in the SCLC region, it can be fitted by the Mott–Gurney law
J = 9εrε0μV2/8L3
(1)
where
εr and ε0 are the relative dielectric constant of CH3NH3PbI3 and the vacuum permittivity, respectively, μ is the charge carrier mobility, V is the applied voltage, and L is the thickness of the perovskite film. The calculated hole mobilities of the devices with PEDOT:PSS, m-MTDATA and m:F-2 HTLs are 7.61 × 10−4, 9.57 × 10−4, and 1.73 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. The values are much smaller than the hole mobility of the CH3NH3PbI3 layer prepared with a one-step solution method (more than 1 cm2 V−1 s−1). It indicates that the hole mobility of the whole perovskite devices is severely limited by the HTLs. The much lower charge carrier mobility of the transport layers will reduce the charge collection efficiency and aggravate the charge recombination in devices. In addition, the electron-only device is also fabricated with the structure of ITO/perovskite/C60/BCP/Ag and the calculated electron mobility is 2.76 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Fig. S7 (ESI)), which is higher than the hole mobility in these three hole-only devices. The higher electron mobility can be attributed to the excellent electron transport characteristics of C60 ETL. So it can be deduced that the optimal device based on m:F-2 is still limited by hole transport, and the device performance will be further enhanced by unceasingly improving the hole mobility of HTL.

The improved hole mobility contributes to the fast photoelectric conversion process, which is extremely important to obtain a fast response speed when the fabricated devices act as self-powered photodetectors. Fig. 6a is the transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements under a 550 nm light source for devices with three different HTLs. Because of the improved hole mobility, an obviously accelerated decay speed is attained for the device based on m:F-2 with a decay time of 39.8 ns, which is much shorter than that for the devices with pristine m-MTDATA (71.3 ns) and PEDOT:PSS (89.1 ns). The relationship between the decay time and hole mobility of devices is investigated here and shown in Fig. 6b. It is interesting to find that the three devices demonstrate a very good linear relationship, and this is understandable in fact. The charge transport time in the perovskite layer can be ignored due to its much higher mobility than that of the transport layers. Based on that, the decay time is just limited by the mobility of the transport layers when devices have similar built-in electric field distributions and charge transport distances. According to this linear relationship shown in Fig. 6b, it can be deduced that the perovskite photodetectors with a response time lower than a nanosecond will be obtained if the mobilities of both the electron and hole transport layers can reach 10−1 cm2 V−1 s−1. Therefore, the development of a suitable transport layer material with high mobility is the key to achieve ultrafast photodetectors. In addition, the multiple time response characteristics of the device based on m:F-2 is measured under chopped 550 nm light with the frequency of 400 Hz, as shown in Fig. S8 (ESI). Under the continuous testing conditions, the photodetector exhibits enough stability and reproducibility. Some other necessary measurements of the fabricated photodetectors are performed. The spectral specific detectivity (D*) of the devices is displayed in Fig. 6c, which is a key criterion to estimate the weak light detecting capacity of a photodetector. By assuming the shot noise from the dark current density (Jd) as the major contributor, D* can be calculated as follows
D* = R(λ)/(2eJd)1/2
(2)
where
R(λ) is the spectral responsivity, and e is the elementary charge. R(λ) can be obtained from

R(λ) = EQE(λ)/Ehν
(3)
where
Ehν is the incident photon energy. R(λ) is plotted in Fig. S9 (ESI). Owing to the improved EQE and decreased Jd, the device with m:F-2 obtains the maximum spectral D* (higher than 1 × 1012 Jones at the wavelength of 550 nm) under 0 V bias. To satisfy the detection requirement of both strong and weak light, a larger linear dynamic range (LDR) is indispensable for the photodetectors. The LDR can be characterized from the photocurrent density (Jph) with the light intensity. The Jph of the device based on m:F-2 is linear under the wavelength of 550 nm within the light intensity range from 5 × 10−9 to 5 mW cm−2, corresponding to a LDR of 90 dB as seen in Fig. 6d. Meanwhile, the equivalent R (obtained from R = Jph/P, where P is the light intensity) at different light intensities is also given in Fig. 6d, and it only fluctuates under very weak light. The value of steady R is very close to the result from the corresponding spectral R at 550 nm (0.38 A W−1) in Fig. S9 (ESI).


In summary, we employ the m:F composite HTL to improve the photoelectric conversion efficiency of perovskite photovoltaic devices. The enhanced efficiency of perovskite solar cells and boosted response speed of perovskite photodetectors are attributed to the improved charge transport capability, which results from the incorporation of deep electron traps into the HTL. Meanwhile, the degraded device performance from the excessive F4-TCNQ is caused by the damaged hole selection capacity of the composite HTL. In addition, it can be proved that the lower performance of the device based on PEDOT:PSS results from the electron loss in the small grain region of the perovskite layer. Therefore, our study points out a feasible way to enhance the efficiency of perovskite solar cells and improve the response speed of perovskite photodetectors.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


The authors are grateful to the Special Project of the Province – the University Co-constructing Program of Jilin Province (SXGJXX2017-3), the Science and Technology Innovation Leading Talent and Team Project of Jilin Province (20170519010JH), and the International Cooperation and Exchange Project of Jilin Province (20170414002GH, 20180414001GH) for their support of the work.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details; chemical structures of m-MTDATA and F4-TCNQ; electron trapping process; J–V characteristics; dark current–voltage characteristics; SEM image; contact angle images; J–V characteristics of electron-only devices; multiple time response; spectral R and the table of detailed photovoltaic parameters. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta08499h
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018