 DOI: 10.1039/D0SE01062F
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 5271-5276


Yang
Yang
,

Fei
Wu
*,

Huiqiang
Lu
,

Shufang
Li
,

Cheng
Zhong
* and 

Linna
Zhu
*

Chongqing Key Laboratory for Advanced Materials and Technologies of Clean Energy, School of Materials & Energy, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, P. R. China. E-mail: feiwu610@swu.edu.cn; linzhu@swu.edu.cn; Tel: +86 23 68254957

Hubei Key Lab on Organic and Polymeric Optoelectronic Materials, Department of Chemistry, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, P. R. China

Received
17th July 2020
, Accepted 6th August 2020
First published on 7th August 2020
In this work, a unique 2,2′-diphenyl-5,5′-bipyrimidine building block is used to synthesize two new hole transport materials (HTMs), named MD–T and MD–C, which are applied in conventional perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Carbazole derivatives and dimethoxydiphenylamine moieties are included in MD–C and MD–T as periphery groups, respectively. The introduction of the electron-withdrawing bipyrimidine group increases the molecular dipole moment, thus leading to an enhanced dipole–dipole interaction, which promotes charge transfer and affords a high hole mobility. Notably, MD–C with carbazole periphery groups exhibits well-matched energy levels with perovskite materials and shows a higher hole mobility along with a better film morphology. Eventually, the devices containing the MD–C HTM achieve a superior power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 19.93% with a high fill factor (FF) of 80.02%, surpassing that of MD–T based devices (PCE = 15.55%). Thereby, the newly designed MD–C with the 2,2′-diphenyl-5,5′-bipyrimidine core structure could be a promising candidate for constructing HTMs in PSCs.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted much attention because of their rapid increasing power conversion efficiency (PCE). With the continuous optimization of materials and device structures, the efficiency of PSCs has increased from 3.8% (ref. 4) to 25.2% (ref. 5) in just ten years. Conventional PSCs are composed of ITO/FTO conductive glass, electron transport materials (ETM), perovskite light-absorbing layers, hole transport materials (HTMs) and counter electrodes. HTMs are indispensable for efficient PSCs and they play an essential role in improving the Schottky contact between perovskite and the metal electrode, promoting effective separation of electrons and holes, and slowing down the charge recombination process. Moreover, HTMs could protect perovskite from the erosion of water and oxygen, beneficial for the long-term stability of PSCs. Therefore, different kinds of HTMs have been prepared and applied for PSCs, including p-type inorganic semiconductors, organic polymers and small molecular HTMs. Among these materials, small molecular HTMs have attractive advantages due to their facile synthesis, adjustable structure, good film-forming ability and solution processabilityy. To date, the most widely used HTM in PSCs is 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD), however, the complex synthetic routes and high cost remain a major obstacle to commercialization and practical applications of PSCs. Therefore, it is still necessary to develop low-cost and efficient new HTMs.

The properties of organic HTMs such as hole mobility, energy levels, and film-forming ability are closely related to their molecular structure. The core structure as an important component of organic small molecule-based HTMs has significant effects on their performance. For example, Shaoet al. reported an asymmetric 3D HTM based on a highly twisted triphenylethylene core, and such a core structure enables a good hole transporting ability and film morphology. The Molina-Ontoria group synthesized three new HTMs based on an isomerized benzotrithiophene (BTT) core and the isomerization of the core group has a great influence on the performance of the HTMs. Our group reported two HTMs JY5 and JY8 incorporating the benzothiadiazole (BT) and thiadiazolopyridine (PT) units as core structures for comparison, the JY8 with a stronger electron-withdrawing core showed a superior PCE of 18.98%. Qiao and co-workers developed a series of new HTMs (M101-M106) with different nonfused core structures; the introduction of a nonfused oligothiophene core has a significant influence on conductivity, hole mobility, energy levels, and solubility of HTMs.
In this work, we design a new liner core structure to construct two HTMs MD–T and MD–C. MD–T and MD–C take the 2,2′-diphenyl-5,5′-bipyrimidine group as the core moiety and diphenylamine and carbazole diphenylamine as peripheral groups, respectively. The electron-withdrawing bipyrimidine group could increase the molecular dipole moment, thus leading to an enhanced dipole–dipole interaction, which is beneficial for charge transfer. The different peripheral groups make MD–T and MD–C exhibit different electronic properties and energy levels. Furthermore, the different molecular configuration gives them a distinct film morphology and an elevated glass transition temperature. Compared with MD–T, MD–C shows a more suitable energy level, a higher hole mobility, and a smoother surface morphology. Therefore, the device based on MD–C affords a high PCE of 19.93%, which is much higher than that of the control device based on Spiro-OMeTAD (18.74%), while the device based on MD–T shows a poor PCE of 15.55%. As a result, MD–C could be potentially used as a hole transport material in optoelectronic devices.

The molecular structures of MD–T and MD–C are shown in Fig. 1. The synthetic procedures of MD–T and MD–C are shown in Scheme S1. Then, the structures of MD–T and MD–C were carefully characterized by the 1H NMR, 13C NMR and high-resolution MALDI-TOF spectrum (see the ESI for full preparation details).

Their UV-Vis absorption spectra in dichloromethane solution and thin film states are shown in Fig. 2a, with the corresponding data summarized in Table 1. The absorption peaks of MD–T and MD–C at 411 nm and 382 nm are caused by the p–p* transition. The absorption bands of MD–C are blue-shifted compared with those of MD–T due to the reduced electron-donating ability of the carbazole diphenylamine group, which may be attributed to a more twisted structure between the carbazole diphenylamine group and the core structure. Moreover, the thin film state absorption of MD–T and MD–C exhibited slight red-shifts 14 nm and 10 nm respectively with respect to those in the solution state.
HTM

λ
abs
/nm

λ
abs
/nm

E
HOMO
/eV
Reorganization energy (eV)
Dipole moments (D)

a Maximum of the absorption bands in dichloromethane solution.
b Absorption spectra measured in the thin film state.
c 
E
HOMO was obtained from the first oxidation curve from CV.
d All optimizations were performed at the PBE0/def2-SVP level with Grimme's D3BJ empirical dispersion correction. Then the vertical and adiabatic excited states are calculated at the same level with TDDFT. The PCM solvation model was used with diphenyl ether (eps = 4.2) as solvent to simulate the dielectric environment in the solid. All the calculations are performed using the Gaussian 09 program.

MD–T
411
425
−5.31
0.166
0.2206
MD–C
382
392
−5.19
0.162
7.5327
The electrochemical properties of the new molecules in dichloromethane solution were determined by cyclic voltammetry (CV) as shown in Fig. 2b and S7. Their highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) levels are derived from the onset of the first oxidation peak of CV (EHOMO = −(4.74 + (Eonset.ox vs. Fc+/Fc))). The HOMO energy levels of MD–T and MD–C were calculated to be −5.31 eV and −5.19 eV, respectively. The valence band (VB) of the perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) used here is −5.43 eV, and MD–C is positive to the valence band of the perovskite used in this work, suggesting that it has the capability to extract holes from perovskite. The HOMO level of MD–T is slightly lower than the perovskite valence band, which may not be conducive to hole extraction and hole transport. Furthermore, the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels of MD–T and MD–C were estimated to be −2.77 eV and −2.26 eV, respectively, according to the equation of ELUMO = EHOMO + Eg, in which Eg is calculated from the absorption onset (Eg = 1240/λonset). The conduction band (CB) of perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) is −3.93 eV, indicating that the LUMO level of MD–C is much higher than the conduction band of perovskite, which is beneficial to block the electron transfer from perovskite to the metal electrode.
The optimized molecular geometries, and electronic density distribution of the LUMO and HOMO levels for MD–T and MD–C are explored by density functional theory (DFT) calculations, which were carried out at the B3LYP/def2SVP level with Grimme's D3BJ empirical dispersion correction (Fig. 3). It is observed that the HOMO distribution of the MD series is different. The HOMO of MD–T is distributed on the whole molecule, while the HOMO of MD–C is mainly distributed on the peripheral carbazole diarylamine group. This might be due to the more distorted configuration of MD–C than MD–T. The LUMO orbitals are mainly distributed on the core structure of the 2,2′-diphenyl-5,5′-bipyrimidine group for both MD–T and MD–C. Moreover, the reorganization energy of MD–C (0.162 eV) is smaller than that of MD–T (0.166 eV), which is conducive to obtaining larger hole mobility. Furthermore, the calculation result of the dipole moment of MD–T (0.2206 D) is smaller than that for MD–C (7.5327 D), suggesting that the presence of the carbazole moiety in MD–C, not only provides strong electron-donation capacity but also brings larger dipole moments compared to the diphenylamine in MD–T.
The thermal properties of MD–T and MD–C were determined by using thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements (Fig. S8). In TGA experiments, thermal decomposition temperatures (Td) of MD–T and MD–C are 416 °C and 501 °C, respectively, which are high enough for the HTMs to withstand the temperatures encountered during the fabrication of PSCs (100 °C). Interestingly, the Td of MD–C is superior to that of Spiro-OMeTAD (424 °C), and the relatively lower Td for MD–T might be ascribed to its low molecular weight. From DSC measurements, it can be observed that MD–T and MD–C exhibit high glass transition temperatures (Tg) of 141 °C and 114 °C, respectively, these values maintain the same level as those of Spiro-OMeTAD. The experimental result indicated that MD-based series HTMs are suitable for application in PSC devices because they have thermal stability.
The morphology of the charge carrier transport layer is a key factor in the performance of PSCs. The top-view SEM image of different HTM films is studied. As shown in Fig. 4a and b, it can be found that MD–C-based films exhibit a relatively smooth uniform morphology. In contrast, the MD–T film shows a fibrous morphology perhaps due to its relatively poor solubility (around 15 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene solvent) compared to MD–C (over 50 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene solvent). Besides, the atomic force microscopy (AFM) images (Fig. 4c and d) show that the root-mean-square (RMS) roughness values of the MD–T and MD–C films are 11.24 nm and 10.27 nm, respectively. The roughness of the MD–C film is lower than that of the MD–T film, which is consistent with the above SEM results. Such a uniform surface is favorable for the interfacial contact and facilitates hole extraction. Therefore, it is expected that MD–C films could reduce charge recombination and is conducive to increase Jsc and improve the PCE of the device.
To confirm the hole transport properties of two HTM film as PSCs, the hole mobility of HTMs are important factor reaction by a performance of PSCs. We have measured the hole mobility of HTM layers based on MD–T and MD–C fabricated by the space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) method (Fig. S10). The hole mobility of MD–T and MD–C films are determined to be 7.58 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 8.72 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 respectively. It shows that the MD–C-based HTM layer has higher hole mobility, which is more favourable as a HTM in PSCs.
To reveal the influence of MD–T and MD–C as HTMs on the photovoltaic performance, n–i–p PSCs with an ITO/compact TiO2/perovskite/HTM/Ag architecture were fabricated as illustrated in Fig. 5a. A clear layered structure of the PSC device can be viewed in the cross-sectional SEM images of the PSC devices shown in Fig. S9 (see the ESI for full preparation details). The photovoltaic characteristics of PSCs employing new molecules as HTMs under AM 1.5 illumination (100 mW cm−2) are presented in Fig. 5b and detailed data listed in Table 2. The device with MD–C yields a high PCE of 19.93%, with a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 22.59 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.10 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 80.20%, which are higher than those of the control device using Spiro-OMeTAD (a PCE of 18.74%, Jsc of 21.93 mA cm−2, Voc of 1.10 V, and FF of 77.68%) (Fig. S11). In contrast, MD–T based PSCs achieved a lower efficiency of 15.55% with a Jsc of 20.86 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.03 V, and a FF of 72.37% because of its rough surface morphology and bad solubility. The relevant parameter values of the MD–C-based device are higher than those of the MD–T devices presumably because of the perovskite/HTM interface having more efficient charge extraction. In terms of molecular structure, MD–T and MD–C share the same core structure and have different peripheral groups. The different periphery groups bring about different electronic properties of the two molecules. MD–C with carbazole diphenylamine as the periphery group exhibited a higher hole mobility and a more homogeneous film morphology than MD–T. These factors promote hole extraction and hole transport in MD–C films, which reduces charge recombination at the perovskite/Ag interface. Therefore, the MD–C-based device shows higher photovoltaic performances compared to the MD–C-based device. Besides, Table 2 lists the average values with standard deviation (STDEV) of Voc, Jsc, FF and PCE. The statistical analysis of the photovoltaic parameters based on 20 devices (Fig. S12) exhibits a narrow distribution, indicating the reliability and reproducibility of the results.
HTM

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a The data in parentheses are the average value based on 20 devices.

MD–T
1.03 (1.01 ± 0.02)
20.86 (20.61 ± 0.27)
72.37 (69.88 ± 0.02)
15.55 (14.50 ± 0.66)
MD–C
1.10 (1.08 ± 0.02)
22.59 (22.25 ± 0.26)
80.20 (78.07 ± 0.01)
19.93 (18.82 ± 0.59)
The hysteresis behavior of the devices based on MD–T and MD–C was measured through forward and reverse scanning of J–V curves in Fig. 5c and Table S1. The PSCs with MD–C show negligible hysteresis with a little hysteresis index (HI) of 0.05 compared to MD–T-based PSCs (0.08). The slightly high HI (0.08) of the MD–T-based PSC can be attributed to poor uniformity. The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of PSCs with MD–T or MD–C as the HTM are shown in Fig. 5d in which the devices both show a high response from 350 nm to 750 nm. The integrated current densities calculated from the EQE spectra for MD–T and MD–C-based devices are 19.67 mA cm−2 and 21.47 mA cm−2, respectively. Besides, the obtained integrated Jsc from IPCE spectra is consistent with the Jsc from J–V curves. The stabilized PCEs of the devices of the MD series measured at the maximum power point were tested within 200 seconds (Fig. 5e and S14). The devices based on MD–C exhibited a stabilized PCE of 19.51%, and a Jsc of 19.51 mA cm−2 was obtained. Also, the devices based on MD–T and MD–C both have stable PCEs of 19.51% and 15.07%, and Jsc values of 19.27 mA cm−2 and 20.45 mA cm−2 respectively. The durability of the MD–T and MD–C based PSCs were also investigated in a N2 atmosphere. As shown in Fig. S15, the devices with MD–C maintains over 85% of its initial PCE after 30 days, while that of MD–T-based PSCs is less than 60% of the original efficiency after 30 days, which might be ascribed to the poor solubility of MD–T resulting in a poor film morphology and the incomplete coverage on the perovskite surface. The measurements show that the PCE was decreased to 17.06% for MD–C and 10.76% for MD–T after 30 days.
To evaluate the hole extraction capability of MD–T and MD–C, the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra were studied. The steady-state PL spectra of pristine perovskite and perovskite coated with different HTMs are shown in Fig. 6a. As shown in Fig. 6a, PL quenching in perovskite/MD–C is more efficient, indicating that MD–C has a better hole extraction ability compared to MD–T. Meanwhile, to further elucidate the relationship between charge carrier dynamics and device performance of different HTM layers, the transient photovoltage (TPV) and photocurrent (TPC) measurements were conducted. From Fig. 6b, the prolonged decay photovoltage lifetime for the MD–C device indicates a longer carrier diffusion length and less carrier recombination within the perovskite. Furthermore, compared with the MD–T device, a shorter charge transport time of the MD–C device is observed from Fig. 6c, which indicates that the MD–C device has enhanced charge transport. These results are consistent with the higher FF and Jsc in the MD–C-based PSCs. These results were further supported by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analysis (Fig. 6d), using an equivalent circuit as shown in Fig. 6d, which is composed of a series resistance (Rs) and a recombination resistance (Rrec). The Rs values of MD–T and MD–C-based PSCs are 23.06 Ω and 16.27 Ω, respectively. However the lower Rs shows good agreement with the higher FF of MD–C-based devices. The Nyquist plots of PSCs with different HTMs were obtained at a potential bias of 1.0 V in the dark. The MD–C-based PSCs show a higher Rrec than MD–T-based devices, suggesting lower charge recombination of the MD–C-based device. Overall, the more uniform morphology, more efficient hole extraction and hole transport properties, as well as lower carrier recombination lead to a higher PCE in MD–C based PSCs compared to the MD–T-based PSCs.

To summarize, we have designed two 2,2′-diphenyl-5,5′-bipyrimidine group core moiety-based HTMs and applied them in conventional PSCs. The two compounds share the same core structure and have different peripheral groups. The bipyrimidine core group leads to an increased molecular dipole moment, thus enhancing the dipole–dipole interaction, which is beneficial to intermolecular charge transfer. Different periphery groups result in different molecular configurations, energy levels and charge delocalization. MD–C with carbazole diphenylamine as the periphery group exhibited higher hole mobility and a more homogeneous film morphology than MD–T. When applied in PSCs, the devices containing the MD–C HTM achieve a superior PCE of 19.93% with a high FF of 80.02%, surpassing that of MD–T based devices (15.55%). Our work demonstrated that the introduction of the 2,2′-diphenyl-5,5′-bipyrimidine group unit as the core structure is a promising strategy for designing efficient HTMs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The work described in this paper was supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities XDJK2019B065 and XDJK2020B002, and the “Project supported by Basic Research and Frontier Exploration of Chongqing Municipal Science and Technology Commission (cstc2018jcyjAX0568)”. Prof. Zhong acknowledges the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51873160). The DFT calculations in this paper have been performed on the supercomputing system in the Supercomputing Center of Wuhan University.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0se01062f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020