 DOI: 10.1039/C9CE00164F
(Communication)
CrystEngComm, 2019, 21, 3137-3141


Yulei
Wu
,

Li
Wan
,

Wenxiao
Zhang
,

Xiaodong
Li
 and 

Junfeng
Fang
*

Ningbo Institute of Materials Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ningbo 315201, China. E-mail: fangjf@nimte.ac.cn

Center of Materials Science and Optoelectronics Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China

School of Physics and Materials Science, Ministry of Education Nanophotonics & Advanced Instrument Engineering Research Center, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062, China

Received
31st January 2019
, Accepted 13th April 2019
First published on 16th April 2019
AgBiS2 nanorod arrays are grown directly on a substrate by a simple in situ preparation method in this work. TEM characterization shows that a single nanorod is 50 nm in diameter and 180 nm in length. Additionally, the nanostructured AgBiS2 film has a useful band gap (∼1.0 eV) with a very high absorption coefficient (105 cm−1). By applying these nanorods to photovoltaic devices, an efficiency of 1.4% is achieved. This simple preparation method provides a new route for the synthesis of nanostructured materials.

In past decades, nanostructured materials have received great attention for their novel optical and electronic properties, in comparison with their corresponding bulk materials. Among various nanostructures, one-dimensional (1D) nanostructured arrays like nanorods and nanowires have attracted wide interest because of their excellent technological advantages in solar conversion and storage, sensors, catalysis, etc.

In addition, the carriers in 1D nanostructured materials are restricted in the radial dimension, and electronic conduction tends to be along the axial direction through the arrays to their substrate. Due to these excellent characteristics, various preparation techniques have been developed for the synthesis of 1D nanostructured arrays, including the hydrothermal method, template assisted technique, and others. However, most of these methods are time-consuming, and the processes are not convenient. Spin-coating has been commonly used to prepare thin films. If nanostructured arrays could be grown directly on a substrate by this method in situ, it would be convenient, fast, and cost effective. However, it has seldom been reported that nanostructured arrays can be grown on a substrate directly by spin-coating.
Non-toxic ternary chalcogenide silver bismuth sulfide (AgBiS2) is one of the important I–V–VI2 semiconductors. It is a direct-gap semiconductor with a band gap of ∼1.0 eV and an absorption coefficient of up to 105 cm−1. Therefore, AgBiS2 is a very promising light-absorber for photovoltaic devices. Huang et al. reported that a solar cell with AgBiS2 nanoparticles synthesized by a sequential ionic layer adsorption reaction process could reach an efficiency of ∼0.5%. Bernechea and co-workers produced AgBiS2 nanoparticles by a hot-injection method. When thieno[3,4-b]thiophene/benzodithiophene (PTB7) and poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) were used as the hole transport layer (HTL), the efficiencies of devices with a structure of ITO/ZnO/AgBiS2/HTL/MoO3/Ag were up to 6.31% and 3.99%, respectively. Recently, Hu et al. have improved the efficiency to 4.3% for a device with P3HT as the HTL. In our work, in order to simplify the preparation process and directly form a nanostructure film, we report an in situ growth method for AgBiS2 nanorod arrays by spin-coating the precursor solution containing AgCl, BiCl3 and thiourea (Tu) on the substrate. A photovoltaic device with the structure of FTO/ZnO/AgBiS2/P3HT/MoO3/Al shows a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of ∼1.4% when this nanostructured AgBiS2 is introduced as the light-absorbing layer.

The metal-thiourea (Tu) complex solution is prepared by dissolving 0.4 mmol of AgCl (99.5%, Sinopharm Chemical Regent), 0.4 mmol of BiCl3 (99%, Energy Chemical), and 1.6 mmol of thiourea (Tu, 99.0%, Sinopharm Chemical Regent) into 5 mL dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) at room temperature (RT). Then, this complex solution is stirred for several minutes at RT to obtain a clear yellowish Ag–Bi–Tu complex solution (Fig. S1). The Ag–Bi–Tu complex solution is stable for at least 1 week in ambient conditions.


All fabrication steps are performed in a glovebox. FTO (F-SnO2, Rs = 14 Ω; transmittance = 90%, Jinge-solar Energy, Wuhan, China) is used as a transparent conductive electrode to collect electrons. It is cleaned by ultrasonication in soap water, deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol for 15 minutes each, and dried with N2. The ZnO layer is grown by the sol–gel method. Briefly, zinc acetate dehydrate (1 g) is dissolved in 10 mL 2-methoxyethanol and 284 mL ethanolamine. The solution is spin-cast onto the substrate at 4000 rpm and heated at 300 °C for 30 min.

The AgBiS2 precursor solution is deposited by spin-coating at 4500 rpm for 30 s. The as-coated samples are then thermally decomposed at 300 °C for 2 min in N2. The two processes of spin-coating and thermal decomposition are repeated 4 times. Subsequently, the samples are annealed on a pre-heated hot plate at 400 °C for 10 min in N2. For the application to solar cells, P3HT (10 mg in chlorobenzene, annealed at 100 °C for 10 minutes after spin-coating) and Al (100 nm thick) are sequentially deposited on the FTO/ZnO/AgBiS2 by spin-coating and thermal evaporation, respectively.


J–V characteristics of photovoltaic cells are taken using a Keithley 2400 source meter under a simulated AM1.5G spectrum with an Oriel Sol3A solar simulator equipped with a 450 W xenon lamp. External quantum efficiency (EQE) is measured using a Newport quantum efficiency measurement system (ORIEL IQE 200TM) with a lock-in amplifier and 150 W xenon lamp. The light intensity at each wavelength is calibrated with a standard single-crystal Si/Ge photovoltaic cell. All the measurements are performed in an ambient atmosphere at room temperature.

Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy(UPS) is performed using a Kratos AXIS ULTRA DALD XPS/UPS system. UPS is carried out using He I radiation at 21.2 eV from a discharge lamp operated at 20 mA, with a pass energy of 5 eV, and a channel width of 25 meV. A −7.35 V bias is applied to the samples in order to separate the sample and analyzer low-kinetic-energy cut-offs. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) is carried out on a CHI600D electrochemical workstation with a platinum working electrode of 2 mm diameter and a platinum wire counter electrode at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 against a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) as the reference electrode with an argon saturated anhydrous solution of 0.1 mol L−1 tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (Bu4NPF6) in acetonitrile. Nanostructured AgBiS2 film is coated on strips of FTO substrate for CV characterization. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) is performed on a Pyris Diamond TGA/DTA (PerkinElmer In.) under a N2 flow rate of 200 mL min−1. The precursor solution (∼13 mg) is put into a small aluminum oxide crucible, and heated at a rate of 10 °C min−1 from room temperature to 500 °C. The morphology of the films is investigated using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) (Hitachi S-4800). Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) is performed on a FEI-SEM (FEI Quanta FEG 250, USA). UV-vis spectra are recorded on a GS54T spectrophotometer (Shanghai Lengguang Technology Co., China). Raman spectroscopy is performed with a Reflex Raman system (RENISHAW, Wotton-under-Edge, UK) using a 532 nm He-Ne laser. X-ray diffraction (XRD) is performed using a powder X-ray diffractometer (Bruker AXS D8 Advance, Germany) equipped with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.154 nm). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is performed using a FEI Tecnai F20 TEM coupled with EDX. The nanorods are scraped from substrates and dispersed in ethyl alcohol.

In previous work, silver nitrate or silver acetate, with bismuth nitrate or bismuth acetate have normally been used as the metal sources for AgBiS2 preparation. In this work, in order to reduce the impact of impurity elements (C, O, N) on the device performance, metal chlorides (AgCl, BiCl3) are used as metal sources, and thiourea is used as the sulphur source. Low-toxicity DMSO, DMF, ethylene glycol, and 2-methoxyethanol are used as the solvents. In situ TGA analysis running in N2 with a ramp rate of 5 °C min−1 from room temperature to 450 °C is applied to study the thermal decomposition process of the AgBiS2 precursor solution (Fig. S1). Weight loss starts at RT and continues until 173 °C. The weight loss between RT and 173 °C mainly derives from solvent evaporation. The precursor decomposition mainly begins at 173 °C, and the curve gradually becomes flat by 300 °C which indicates the complete decomposition.

The AgBiS2 precursor solution is spin-coated on the substrate and subsequently annealed on a preheated hotplate at 300 °C in the N2 glove box, to form nanorod arrays. The top-view SEM images of the nanostructured thin films are displayed in Fig. 1a and b with different section sizes (1 μm to 5 μm). It can be seen that the nanorods are uniformly grown on the substrate.
X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Raman spectroscopy are executed to characterize the AgBiS2 film. As shown in Fig. 1c, without regard to the diffraction peaks of FTO, the diffraction peaks of the nanostructured film are consistent with those of cubic AgBiS2 (JCPDS 89-3672). The XRD patterns of Bi2S3, AgBiS2 and FTO are also displayed for comparison (Fig. S2). Major peaks are indexed to the diffraction planes and no secondary phases or impurities are detected. To further identify the phase purity of the AgBiS2 nanorod-array film, the Raman spectrum is measured at room temperature with an excitation of 532 nm (Fig. 1d). A Raman peak at 104 cm−1 and a broad peak centred at 231 cm−1 are observed, corresponding to Ag lattice vibrations and Ag–S bond vibrations, respectively. Additionally, Raman peaks at 257 cm−1 and one broad peak centred at 476 cm−1 are consistent with Bi–S bond vibrations. These Raman bands are characteristic of AgBiS2 and are consistent with a previous report.
Elemental distribution is demonstrated by energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy mapping (Fig. S3). The result is consistent with the morphology characterization by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Due to the probe depth limitation of EDX, the apex of the nanorods tends to be detected easily, while it is very hard to probe the part close to the substrate. Thus a uniform and dense distribution of dots is obtained. The atomic ratio of Ag/Bi/S is measured as 24.82:25.19:49.99, which is close to the stoichiometric ratio of 1:1:2 (Fig. S4).
The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images (Fig. 2a) of the AgBiS2 nanorods display uniform sizes of ∼50 nm in diameter and ∼180 nm in length. The single-crystalline nature of the as-synthesized AgBiS2 nanorods is verified by high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) (Fig. 2b–d). The interplanar distances are 0.33 nm and 0.28 nm, corresponding to the (111) and (200) planes, respectively. HRTEM images (Fig. 2b and c) demonstrate that the growth direction of the AgBiS2 nanorods is oriented along [111]. The SAED pattern (Fig. 2d) further confirms this growth direction and reveals the single crystal nature of the AgBiS2 nanorod. The HRTEM-EDX atomic distribution mapping of an AgBiS2 nanorod confirms that Ag, Bi, and S atoms are homogeneously distributed (Fig. S5).
In order to understand the nanorod formation process, we study the SEM results after different spin-coating repetitions. The top view and cross-sectional SEM images with one to eight layers are displayed in Fig. S6 and S7, respectively. A discontinuous film is formed after the first spin-coating process (Fig. S6a and S7a), which provides the nuclei of the subsequent nanorods. From the second repetition, the nanorods begin to grow up and to become obviously longer (Fig. S6b and S7b). However, as the number of repetitions increases to more than four (Fig. S6d to S6h), the lengths of the nanorods no longer change. Instead, the diameters of the nanorods become wider with the spin repetitions increasing from 3 to 8 (Fig. S7c to S7h). The growth process mentioned above matches well with the general procedure of nanorod growth from nucleation to rod. With the increase of spin repetitions, the aspect ratio of the nanorods initially increases, and then it decreases as the repetitions exceed four. The direct growth of nanorod arrays on the substrate by this in situ method is possibly due to the low melting point of bismuth.
The work function calculated from the ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) curve is −4.5 eV (Fig. 3a). Here, Ag is used as a reference. The UV-vis absorption spectrum is extended to the near IR until ∼1200 nm as depicted in Fig. 3b. The band gap (Eg) is calculated to be ∼1.03 eV. The lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) is −4.08 eV, and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) is −5.11 eV; the calculation method is presented in the supporting information (Fig. S8). Cyclic voltammetry (CV) is used to confirm the results of UPS. The LUMO is −4.03 eV and the HOMO is −5.13 eV calculated from the CV test results (Fig. 3c). Band gap and energy levels of the AgBiS2 nanorod-array film from the CV measurement are in good agreement with the results obtained from UPS.
In this work, we then apply the AgBiS2 nanorod arrays to photovoltaic devices. The fabrication process is depicted by the scheme shown in Fig. 4. The device architecture is FTO/ZnO/AgBiS2 nanorod arrays/P3HT/MoO3/Al. P3HT is used as the HTL in this device. As shown by the band diagram displayed in Fig. 3d, band alignment between AgBiS2 and P3HT favours the flow of photo-generated carriers between AgBiS2 and P3HT. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics (Fig. 5a) of the AgBiS2 solar cells are investigated under 100 mW cm−2 simulated AM1.5G irradiation. The champion device exhibits a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 16.56 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.23 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 36.75%, corresponding to the PCE of 1.40%. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum of the AgBiS2 solar cell is presented in Fig. 5b. The broad EQE spectrum extends to 1200 nm, which is consistent with the absorption measurement.
Next, devices with P3HT, PTB7 and poly[[2,6′-4,8-di(5-ethylhexylthienyl)benzo[1,2-b;3,3-b]dithiophene][3-fluoro-2[(2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl]] (PTB7-th) as the HTL are tested (Fig. S9). Unfortunately, there are no significant differences in the device performances (Table S1). The low efficiency is mainly due to the low Voc and FF. The Voc and FF are directly related to the transport and recombination properties of the charge carrier. Efficient transport and low recombination in bulk or interface can result in high Voc and FF. To further improve the device efficiency, small molecule organic materials with oxygen and nitrogen functional groups could be adopted. These materials can interact with metal ions and thus effectively passivate the defects in the interface. Besides, a precise control of post-sulfurization conditions and the Ag/Bi ratio are necessary to decrease the defects in the bulk; a further study is still in progress.

In summary, we have developed an in situ growth method to form AgBiS2 nanorods through spin-coating the precursor solution of AgCl, BiCl3 and thiourea on a substrate. The nanorod arrays directly formed as the precursor film are annealed in an inert atmosphere. Single nanorods with a diameter of ∼50 nm and length of ∼180 nm present good crystallinity. Nanostructured AgBiS2 films present a suitable band gap with a very high absorption coefficient, and thus they are applied to photovoltaic devices, achieving an efficiency of 1.4%. We believe that this simple preparation method provides a new route for the synthesis of nanostructured materials. By introducing a passivation method and component optimization of the active layer, we believe the device efficiency could be improved further in the future.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 51773213), the Key Research Program of Frontier Sciences (Grant No. QYZDB-SSW-JSC047) and the Zhejiang Province Science and Technology Plan (grant no. 2018C01047). The work was also supported by the National Youth Top-Notch Talent Program of China.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ce00164f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019