 DOI: 10.1039/C5CP00941C
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 9752-9760


Muhammad A.
Abbas
,

Muhammad A.
Basit
,

Tae Joo
Park
* and 

Jin Ho
Bang
*

Department of Advanced Material Science and Engineering, Hanyang University, 55 Hanyangdaehak-ro, Sangnok-gu, Ansan, Kyeonggi-do 426-791, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jbang@hanyang.ac.kr; tjp@hanyang.ac.kr; Fax: +82-31-400-5457; Tel: +82-31-400-5505

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Hanyang University, Republic of Korea

Department of Bionanotechnology, Hanyang University, Republic of Korea

Department of Chemistry and Applied Chemistry, Hanyang University, Republic of Korea

Received
13th February 2015
, Accepted 6th March 2015
First published on 6th March 2015
Despite the potential of PbS quantum dots (QDs) as sensitizers for quantum-dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs), achieving a high photocurrent density over 30 mA cm−2 remains a challenging task in PbS-sensitized solar cells. In contrast to previous attempts, where Hg2+-doping or multi-step post-treatment is necessary, we are capable of achieving a high photocurrent exceeding 30 mA cm−2 simply by manipulating the successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) method. We show that controlling temperature at which SILAR is performed is critical to obtain a higher and more uniform coverage of PbS QDs over a mesoporous TiO2 film. The deposition of a CdS inter-layer between TiO2 and PbS is found to be an effective means of ensuring high photocurrent and stability. Not only does this modification improve the light absorption capability of the photoanode, but it also has a significant effect on charge recombination and electron injection efficiency at the PbS/TiO2 interface according to our in-depth study using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). The implication of subtle changes in the interfacial events via modified SILAR conditions for PbS-sensitized solar cells is discussed.

To address future energy demands, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and their analogues such as QDSSCs have emerged as a promising technology for solar energy conversion. So far, a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of more than 13% has been demonstrated using inorganic dyes; however, the development of new sensitizers with considerable improvement in device photostability, panchromatic characteristics, and the possibility to generate multiple excitons has paved the way for replacing molecular dyes in conventional DSSCs. QDs are attractive materials for use as sensitizers in these types of solar cells because of their tunable energy band, ease of fabrication, low cost, and material diversity. The size of QDs can be manipulated to optimize their band gap, or they can be co-sensitized with other semiconductor QDs to tune their photospectral response for better design and improved performance of QDSSCs. In recent years, cadmium chalcogenides such as CdS, CdSe, CdTe, and some ternary systems including CuInS2, CuInSe2, and CdPbS QDs have been studied for their photovoltaic performances. PbS has also been extensively investigated as an inorganic sensitizer because of its ability to generate multiple excitons, its high absorption coefficient (1–5 × 105 cm−1), and the ability to utilize simple synthesis methods based on a wet chemical process.

With a band gap of 1.3 eV, PbS is theoretically projected to have a maximum current density of 38 mA cm−2. Despite the potential of PbS QDs as a sensitizer, early attempts to utilize PbS QDs were unsuccessful. Such failure was mainly attributed to a high degree of interfacial charge recombination and photo-corrosion of PbS. There have been several significant strides made in PbS-sensitized solar cells recently, however. For instance, Park and co-workers demonstrated a high current density of 30 mA cm−2 with Hg2+-incorporated PbS QDs (PbS:Hg). Several strategies to improve the stability of PbS QDs have also been proposed. Lee and co-workers reported that improving the crystallinity of PbS via heat-treatment and embedding oxysulfide phases into PbS QDs substantially enhanced the performance and stability of PbS-sensitized solar cells. Passivation of the PbS layer via a wide bandgap semiconductor material such as CdS and Al2O3 has been reported to improve stability. PbS QDs are typically deposited on mesoporous TiO2 layers via various methods including SILAR, chemical bath deposition (CBD), or an ex situ method where preformed colloidal PbS QDs are deposited onto the TiO2 surface. Among these, the use of the SILAR method is generally favored, because it enables a relatively high loading of QDs (thus leading to a high photocurrent) compared to other methods, in addition to simple processability and high reproducibility. Despite its popularity, Grätzel and co-workers pointed out that, in contrast to the SILAR method performed for Cd-based chalcogenides, better control over the SILAR of PbS is necessary, because the conduction band edge of PbS is likely to be positioned below that of TiO2 when PbS QDs exceed a critical size (∼4.3 nm). Moreover, achieving a high photocurrent of over 30 mA cm−2via the conventional SIALR method is still a great challenge. While the Hg-doping strategy allows for high photocurrent generation, the high loading of PbS:Hg QDs over the TiO2 surface is severely limited because of the strong oxidation power of Hg2+ ions. Without great caution, TiO2 film tends to be quickly bleached by the Hg2+ ions during the SILAR process; therefore, a special surface modification using triethanolamine was suggested to accommodate higher loading of PbS:Hg QDs. In a recent strategy developed by Lee and co-workers to achieve high performance, on the other hand, PbS deposited via SILAR must be subjected to post annealing followed by dipping in the polysulfide electrolyte, thus rendering the overall fabrication process complicated and time-consuming. Given these current limitations, optimizing the conventional SIALR method without significant modification is highly desirable to obtain a high photocurrent.
In this report, we delicately controlled the conventional SILAR process to optimize this deposition method and to elucidate critical factors governing the conversion efficiency and stability of PbS-sensitized solar cells. First, the effect of temperature-controlled SILAR on the performance of solar cells was investigated. We found that the temperature at which SILAR is performed has a significant influence on solar cell performance. With increased SILAR temperature, the photocurrent density of the solar cell increases; we were capable of achieving a remarkable photocurrent density of over 30 mA cm−2 only by controlling the temperature. We also investigated the influence of CdS co-sensitization on PbS-sensitized solar cells. Our study reveals that introducing a CdS inter-layer underneath the PbS layer is critical to ensure both high photocurrent density and stability. According to an in-depth EIS study, the origin of such improvement is ascribed to higher recombination resistance and the resulting longer electron lifetime, as well as the suppressed photo-corrosion of PbS.

Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrates were cleaned with dilute HCl, acetone, ethanol, and deionized water in an ultrasonic bath for 30 min for each cleaning agent. A thin, compact TiO2 film was deposited as a blocking layer on the FTO glass by immersing the FTO glass in 40 mM TiCl4 aqueous solution at 70 °C for 30 min. The FTO glass was then rinsed with deionized water and dried in air. Mesoporous TiO2 film was deposited via screen printing using commercial TiO2 paste (Solaronix, Ti-nanoxide T/SP). After each screen printing cycle, the TiO2 film was left in air for 3 min for surface relaxation and dried at 125 °C for 6 min. The screen printing process was repeated until 10 μm-thick mesoporous TiO2 film was obtained. For the deposition of the scattering layer of TiO2, the same screen printing process was employed, though with a different TiO2 paste (Dyesol, TiO2 Paste 18NR-AO). The resulting 15 μm-thick TiO2 film was sintered at 550 °C for 60 min to remove organic binders and improve the contact between TiO2 nanoparticles.


PbS QDs were deposited on the mesoporous TiO2 film using the SILAR process. The TiO2 film was briefly immersed in a 0.02 M methanol solution of PbNO3 for 1 min and rinsed with methanol. The film was subsequently immersed in a 0.02 M water:methanol (1:1, v/v) solution of Na2S for 1 min and rinsed thoroughly with methanol. This completes one SILAR cycle. To investigate the effect of SILAR temperature on the deposition of PbS QDs, both precursor solutions were placed in an oven at a desired temperature for 10 min prior to deposition. SILAR was then carried out in the oven at various temperatures (30 and 50 °C). In the case of SILAR at 10 °C, the precursor solutions were kept in an ice bath to maintain the temperature at 10 °C. The same procedure was employed for the deposition of CdS, except that a 0.05 M methanol solution of Cd(NO3)2 and 0.05 M water:methanol (1:1, v/v) solution of Na2S was used. The number of SILAR cycles for CdS deposition was varied from 1 to 3. Each type of photoanode was passivated with two SILAR cycles of ZnS. ZnS was deposited by alternatively immersing in a 0.05 M methanol solution of Zn(CH3COO)2 and 0.05 M water:methanol (1:1, v/v) solution of Na2S. After each step ZnS was thoroughly rinsed with methanol. Note that PbS SILAR was performed at 30 °C for the co-sensitization study; this was done for two main reasons. First, when PbS SILAR was carried out at 50 °C, the PbS film was already too thick, thus resulting in degraded cell performance when co-sensitized with CdS (Fig. S1 in the ESI). This degradation is presumably associated with clogged mesopores in the TiO2 layer. Second, methanol evaporation occurs very rapidly at 50 °C, which minimizes the practicality of this temperature for long-term use.


TiO2 film was grown on an HF-cleaned Si wafer of commercial grade via atomic layer deposition (ALD). Titanium tetra-isopropoxide as a metal precursor and H2O as an oxygen source were injected into the reactor for 0.5 and 2 s, respectively. The N2 purging time after each chemical pulse was 20 s, while the temperature of the ALD reactor was maintained at 280 °C. The ALD cycle was repeated 250 times to deposit a TiO2 film with an average thickness of 9 nm. The sample was annealed at 700 °C for 30 s in an O2 environment at a flux rate of 200 sccm using a rapid thermal annealing system, which results in a complete crystallographic transformation of the amorphous TiO2 phase. PbS deposition via SILAR was performed with this substrate at various temperatures, and the resulting films were observed using an atomic force microscope (Park Systems, Model XE-100).


The use of highly-active electrocatalysts has been demonstrated to be critical to obtain highly-efficient QDSSCs. In this work, we employed CuS film deposited on FTO for a counter electrode. CuS was deposited on cleaned FTO glass via chemical bath deposition. A 1 M aqueous solution of CuSO4 was mixed with a 1 M aqueous solution of Na2S2O3 in a 1:4 volume ratio. The pH of this mixed solution was adjusted to 2 using acetic acid. FTO glass was immersed in this solution with the FTO side facing upwards at 70 °C for 3 h. The obtained CuS film was rinsed with deionized water and dried in air, and was then annealed at 130 °C under air for 30 min to improve electrical conductivity (see SEM and TEM images of CuS deposited on FTO glass in Fig. S2, ESI).


A hot-melt ionomer film (Surlyn) was melted at 90 °C for 5 min on FTO glass with PbS-sensitized TiO2 film. A drop of the electrolyte (0.25 M S/0.625 M Na2S in water:methanol (3:2, v/v)) was placed on the PbS-sensitized TiO2 film. A sandwich-type cell was made by carefully placing the photoanode and counter electrode together and clamping them with two steel clips.


Diffuse reflectance ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra were recorded using a UV-vis spectrophotometer (SCINCO S-3100) equipped with a diffuse reflector (SCINCO). For the measurement of photocurrent–photovoltage (J–V) curves, the light intensity from a solar simulator (HAL-320, Asahi Spectra) was adjusted to 1 sun (Air Mass 1.5G) using a standard silicon diode (CS-20, Asahi Spectra). A Keithley 2400 source meter was used to record J–V characteristics under illumination. The active area of the cell was 0.188 cm2. Open-circuit voltage decay (OCVD) and photocurrent stability measurements were also performed with the same instruments. The incident-photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) was measured using a QEX7 (PV Measurements, Inc.). The electrochemical impedance measurements were performed using a Potentiostat (IM6, ZAHNER) equipped with a frequency response analyzer (Thales) in a frequency range of 0.1 Hz to 100 kHz with an AC amplitude of 10 mV under dark conditions.


Achieving high loading of QDs on the TiO2 surface is one of the critical requirements for efficient QDSSCs. Since the solubility product of PbS is quite low (∼8.0 × 10−28, thus the reaction between Pb2+ and S2− is very fast), the amount of QD loading via SILAR is likely to be affected significantly by the diffusion constant of each ion. The diffusion constant (D) of spherical particles in liquid media is described by the Stokes–Einstein equation (eqn (1)):

(1)
where
kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, η is the dynamic viscosity, and r is the radius of the spherical particle. When the mesoporous structure of TiO2 and the interfacial interaction between QDs and the TiO2 surface is almost identical, the diffusion constant tends to be governed primarily by temperature. The concentration of each ion could also be a critical factor in SILAR. A solution with a high concentration is in general desirable in terms of obtaining high loading and reducing the number of SILAR cycles; however, unlike Cd-based chalcogenides, the use of a low concentration is preferred for PbS deposition, because of the need for better control over SILAR to avoid lowering of the conduction band edge, as reported previously. In this regard, using a highly concentrated solution is undesirable for achieving high PbS loading, and controlling temperature could then be a practical solution. In this work, we examined the performance of solar cells as a function of the temperature at which PbS SILAR deposition was executed. The performance of solar cells improved with increased SILAR temperature (Fig. 1A). The solar cell parameters of each QDSSC are summarized in Table 1. Improvements observed were primarily due to the increment in photocurrent. PbS-sensitized solar cells showed an increase in short-circuit current density (JSC) as we increased the SILAR temperature. The QDSSC fabricated at 50 °C showed ∼36% better JSC than the cell fabricated at 10 °C, and also exhibited ∼24% higher JSC than the cell fabricated at 30 °C. However, all cells showed similar open-circuit voltages (VOC) regardless of SILAR temperature. The smaller improvement in PCE as compared to that of JSC is because the JSC enhancement is partly counter-balanced by the deteriorated fill factor (FF). While increased QD loading at higher temperatures can lead to higher JSC, it may cause pores in the TiO2 film to become clogged. We speculate that the decrease in FF is associated with the clogged pores, because it hinders effective electrolyte diffusion. Solar cells prepared at 50 °C showed a JSC of 30.1 mA cm−2, which is comparable to the JSC obtained by Hg-doped PbS. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report achieving a high photocurrent of over 30 mA cm−2 using PbS QDs without any doping or post-treatments. It is interesting to note that the PCE decreased when we increased the number of PbS SILAR cycles (Fig. S3, ESI), which is attributed to decreased electron lifetime by charge recombination (Fig. S4, ESI). In our study, three SILAR cycles were found to be optimum for the deposition of PbS QDs.

Temperature (°C)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
PCE (%)
10
22.1
0.412
0.37
3.38
30
24.3
0.411
0.36
3.67
50
30.1
0.419
0.30
3.88
The main reason for the improvement in solar cell performance can be ascribed to enhanced light absorption. Fig. 1B exhibits the diffuse-reflectance UV-vis absorption spectra obtained from three photoanodes prepared at various temperatures. The PbS-sensitized TiO2 photoanode prepared at 50 °C shows higher absorption over the entire visible light region than other photoanodes obtained at lower temperatures. This trend in the absorption spectra is also reflected in the photograph of each film (inset in Fig. 1B), where the color of the TiO2 film turns from brown to black with temperature. Fig. 1C displays the IPCE spectra of PbS-sensitized solar cells, where the quantum efficiency of QDSSCs increased by increasing the SILAR temperature. This is consistent with the trend observed in the UV-vis absorption spectra.
AFM measurements were performed to gain more insight into the effect of temperature on PbS deposition. Since the mesoporous TiO2 film was too rough to be observed by AFM, we used a thin TiO2 film deposited via ALD on a Si wafer to observe the growth characteristics of PbS at various temperatures (Fig. S5, ESI). The AFM images show that the coverage of deposited PbS QDs was improved with increased temperature. This change originates from an increase in the nucleation sites of the adsorbed ions on TiO2 at higher temperatures. The film prepared at 50 °C exhibits a higher number of QDs across the entire surface with the lowest peak-to-valley height (Rpv) (Table S1, ESI). This decrease in Rpv values implies that more nucleation sites were created at 50 °C due to accelerated nucleation at higher temperatures. It is inferred that by increasing the temperature of SILAR deposition, a more uniform deposition of PbS QDs over TiO2 surface can be achieved, in addition to higher loading.
While enhanced light absorption caused by the higher PbS loading was mostly responsible for the improved performance, the amount of PbS loading may also influence the electron transfer characteristics and resistances at the interface of PbS/TiO2. In our study, EIS was employed to elucidate the characteristics of the electrolyte/QD/TiO2 interface. Fig. 2 exhibits the various cell parameters as obtained after fitting the EIS spectra to an equivalent circuit (inset in Fig. 2A). Fig. 2A shows the chemical capacitance (Cμ) as a function of VF (VF = Vappl − VS − VCE, where Vappl, VS and VCE are the applied bias, the voltage drop by series resistance, and the voltage drop at the counter electrode, respectively). VF, which is referred to as the Fermi voltage, is related to the rise in Fermi level of TiO2 (VF = (EFn − EFo)/q), where q, EFn, and EFo are elementary charge, electron Fermi level, and equilibrium electron Fermi level, respectively. The chemical capacitance increased with the increase in SILAR temperature, and there was a noticeable increase in chemical capacitance for the cells prepared at higher temperatures. Chemical capacitance is directly proportional to the difference in conduction band (ECB) and Fermi level (EFn) of TiO2 (eqn (2)):
(2)
As Mora-Seró et al. noted, a higher capacitance at the same VF implies a downward shift of the conduction band of TiO2. Since the difference between the conduction band edge of TiO2 and PbS is very small, this downward shift with increased SILAR temperature may have a significant effect on electron transfer kinetics. In general, electron injection kinetics are expressed in the following equation based on the Marcus theory (eqn (3)):
(3)
where
ket is the rate constant of electron transfer, ΔG0 is the energy difference between conduction band edges at the semiconductor interface, ρ(E) is the density of states at energy E from the conduction band edge, H(E) is the average electronic coupling between the initial and final states of electron transfer, and λ is the total reorganization energy. While the electron transfer kinetics are dictated by various factors, the rate constant is likely to be governed primarily by ΔG0 at the interface of PbS/TiO2. On the basis of the trend in chemical capacitance, we speculate that the electron injection from the PbS into the TiO2 was facilitated in the cells prepared at higher temperatures. Higher capacitance also implies that the direct contact of the electrolyte with the TiO2 is reduced (recombination at the interface of PbS/TiO2 is diminished). To make a fair comparison of recombination resistances of different cells, one should have a similar number of electrons in the conduction band. This can be ensured if the gap between the conduction band of TiO2 (ECB) and electron Fermi level (EFn) is the same for all solar cells, and this condition is called the common equivalent conduction band (Vecb). As indicated in eqn (2), the chemical capacitance is directly proportional to the ECB − EFn, hence by shifting the voltage scale and making the chemical capacitance of the cells overlap, the Vecb condition is obtained. This condition is also used for comparisons of electron lifetime. Fig. 2B shows that recombination resistance (Rr) increased with the increase in SILAR temperature. It is more likely that the QDs act as a blocking layer and hinder the electron transfer from TiO2 to electrolyte by increasing the number of PbS QDs on the TiO2 surface, resulting in higher recombination resistance, which is reflected in our result. We also observed that electron lifetime (τ = CμRr) increased with increased SILAR temperature (Fig. 2C), which is in agreement with the trend in solar cell performance. One would speculate that the VOC of the cell should increase with the increase in SILAR temperature because of the reduced recombination resistance; however, as previously mentioned, by increasing the SILAR temperature the chemical capacitance increased, which lowered the conduction band of TiO2 and eventually decreased the VOC. Both of these parameters have opposite effects on VOC, hence we speculate that these influences were counter-balanced, so that there was no noticeable change in the VOC of the cell as a function of SILAR temperature.


Co-sensitization using two types of QDs has proven to be an effective strategy to enhance the performance of QDSSCs. CdS was chosen as a co-sensitizer for PbS in this work to construct a panchromatic solar cell. For the optimization of CdS–PbS co-sensitized solar cells, the number of SILAR cycles of CdS was changed from 1 to 3 while keeping the PbS SILAR cycles fixed. Two cycles of PbS SILAR were found to be optimal for the CdS–PbS co-sensitized solar cells.


Fig. 3A shows the J–V characteristics of the CdS–PbS co-sensitized solar cells, and the solar cell parameters are summarized in Table 2. With the increase in the CdS SILAR cycles, the VOC of the solar cells increased continuously. This could result either from the enhanced absorption of the co-sensitized solar cells (Fig. S6, ESI) or from the shift in the conduction band of the TiO2. The improvement in VOC caused by the conduction band shift will be discussed below in the EIS analysis. The JSC and PCE of the co-sensitized solar cells increased until two SILAR cycles of CdS was reached. After three cycles of CdS, however, both the JSC and PCE of the cells decreased. QDs have in general a larger band gap than the corresponding bulk material, and it has been reported by many researchers that the increase in the band gap of QDs as compared to bulk material is ascribed to the shift in the conduction band. Hence the most likely band structure in the CdS–PbS co-sensitized solar cell can be depicted in Scheme 1. When a photon is absorbed by PbS, excited electrons in the conduction band of the PbS tunnel through the CdS layer to move to the conduction band of TiO2. The electron transfer through this tunneling barrier decreases exponentially with increasing CdS layer thickness according to this equation (eqn (4)):
ket = k0et × e−βd
(4)
where
ket is the electron transfer rate, β is the tunneling parameter, and d is the barrier thickness. Thus, when we increased the number of CdS SILAR cycles (thicker CdS film), the tunneling efficiency of the excited electrons deteriorated, consequently decreasing the cell efficiency. The optimum CdS–PbS solar cells showed a 24% increase in JSC and a 15% increase in PCE as compared to the cell prepared with only PbS QDs (Fig. 3A). This enhanced performance of the CdS–PbS co-sensitized solar cell can be partly attributed to efficient light harvesting, which is evidenced by the UV-vis absorption spectra (Fig. S6, ESI) and IPCE measurements (Fig. S7, ESI).

Solar cells

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
PCE (%)

a Numbers in parentheses refer to the number of SILAR cycles.

PbS(3)
24.3
0.411
0.36
3.67
CdS(1)–PbS(3)
29.0
0.419
0.33
3.78
CdS(2)–PbS(3)
30.1
0.425
0.31
4.23
CdS(3)–PbS(3)
24.8
0.439
0.31
3.40
Along with the improved light harvesting, the CdS inter-layer may be further advantageous for the CdS–PbS co-sensitized solar cell by protecting the PbS against photo-corrosion, as well as suppressing thermal loss and interfacial recombination. In the PbS-sensitized solar cells, photons absorbed by PbS move electrons from the valence band of PbS to its conduction band. The band gap of PbS QDs is only ∼1 eV, hence all the excited electrons with energy greater than the band gap first have to go through thermal relaxation to reach the conduction band edge. These excited electrons are then transferred to the conduction band of TiO2. This thermal relaxation contributes to significant loss of energy, and ultimately results in lower cell performance. A panchromatic absorption via co-sensitization with a wider band gap material has been suggested to alleviate this undesirable loss. In our co-sensitized solar cell, CdS was deposited underneath PbS, thus most photons with energy higher than the bandgap of CdS (∼2.5 eV) are likely to be absorbed by CdS (eqn (5)), while photons with lower energy, which is transmitted through the CdS layer, are absorbed by PbS (eqn (6)). This stepwise absorption of photons improves the light harvesting ability of the photoanode while suppressing the thermal losses.
CdS + hν → CdS (h+ + e−) (λ < 496 nm)
(5)
PbS + hν → PbS (h+ + e−) (496 nm < λ < 1240 nm)
(6)
 Another benefit of this gradual absorption is the protection of PbS against photo-corrosion. Since CdS absorbs high energy photons, the photon flux incident on PbS that could result in the photo-corrosion of PbS is substantially diminished. This renders more stability to the cell, which is evidenced by the photocurrent stability measurement in
Fig. 3B. To further prove this hypothesis, a photocurrent stability test of the PbS-sensitized solar cells was carried out under various light conditions (Fig. 4). As anticipated, the photocurrent of the solar cells under low intensity irradiation degraded at a slower rate. Conversely, the photocurrent degradation process was accelerated by increasing the intensity of light irradiation. Photocurrent stability was also tested using a 420 nm band-pass filter at 100 mW cm−2 to simulate the condition that is somewhat similar to those encountered by PbS in the CdS–PbS co-sensitized solar cells. Under these conditions, the photocurrent degradation of PbS was also slowed. On the basis of these observations, we conclude that the presence of a CdS layer underneath the PbS layer reduces the photon flux reaching PbS QDs, which slows the photocurrent dissipation during solar cell operation.

The effect of CdS co-sensitization on the conduction band position and the resistance of QDSSCs is elucidated through EIS analysis. Fig. 5A shows the chemical capacitance plot as a function of VF, where the chemical capacitance of the cell decreased with the increase in CdS SILAR cycles. This indicates an upwards shift in the conduction band of TiO2. Since the conduction band of PbS and TiO2 are very close, even such a slight upward shift of the TiO2 conduction band could significantly reduce the electron injection efficiency from PbS to TiO2. This reduced electron injection efficiency could therefore lower the JSC of solar cell when the CdS layer became too thick, which was supported by our J–V measurement (Fig. 3A). However, this up-shifted conduction band could also increase VOC at the expense of JSC, which was reflected in the J–V measurement (Table 2). Fig. 5B and C show the recombination resistance and electron lifetime found in the CdS–PbS co-sensitized solar cells, respectively. Both parameters increased by increasing the thickness of the CdS layer (Fig. 5B). As demonstrated earlier, the QD inter-layer could act as a blocking layer to improve recombination resistance by suppressing direct recombination with the electrolyte. By introducing the CdS layer between TiO2 and PbS, back electron transfer from TiO2 to the valance band of PbS can be reduced (Process 7 in Scheme 1). In the presence of the CdS layer, electrons have to tunnel through the CdS layer to recombine with holes at the valance band of PbS or electrolyte. By increasing the thickness of the CdS, the thickness of the tunneling barrier is increased, which makes it more effective in suppressing this recombination process and results in higher recombination resistance. This also leads to longer electron lifetime than PbS-only-sensitized solar cells (Fig. 5C). Given the implication of EIS analysis, the CdS inter-layer turns out to be beneficial in various ways, while the benefits can be counter-balanced by the reduced electron injection efficiency. Under an optimal condition (2 cycles of CdS interlayer in our study), all factors (lower chemical capacitance, better recombination resistance, and prolonged lifetime) contributed to the higher VOC and JSC of the PbS-sensitized solar cell.

In this work, we were able to achieve a high photocurrent density of more than 30 mA cm−2 from PbS-sensitized solar cells, not by doping or post-treatment, but by controlling SILAR temperature. Conducting SILAR at a higher temperature substantially promoted the loading of PbS QDs and allowed for uniform deposition. Along with enhanced light absorption from the higher loading, the use of high temperature during SILAR was found to suppress interfacial recombination and improve electron transfer kinetics by lowering the conduction band of TiO2 according to the EIS analysis. Co-sensitizing PbS with CdS as an under-layer also ensured a high photocurrent density and stability. CdS plays a role as an absorber of high-energy photons, alleviating the undesirable thermal energy loss that is an inevitable consequence of the inherent low band gap of PbS. The CdS inter-layer also improved the stability of photocurrent generation, and helped reduce recombination caused by back electron transfer to the electrolyte. Given the simplicity and reproducibility of SILAR, we believe that there is room for further improvement through control of the SILAR method.


This research was supported by grants from the Basic Science Research Program (NRF-2013R1A1A1008762) through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF), funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning. It was also supported by a grant from the Human Resources Development Program (20124030200130) of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP), funded by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy. We also acknowledge Prof. Y. S. Kang for his generous permission to use IPCE equipment and an impedance analyzer.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: J–V curves of PbS- and CdS–PbS-sensitized solar cells fabricated under various conditions; SEM and TEM images of CuS; electron lifetimes obtained from open-circuit voltage decay; AFM images of PbS(3)–ZnS(2) deposited by SILAR at different temperatures; UV-Vis absorption and IPCE spectra of CdS–PbS co-sensitized photoanodes. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cp00941c
‡ Both authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015