 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA03119F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8724-8733


Hua
Zhang
,

Lingwei
Xue
,

Junbo
Han
,

Yong Qing
Fu
,

Yan
Shen
,

Zhiguo
Zhang
*,

Yongfang
Li
 and 

Mingkui
Wang
*

Michael Grätzel Center for Mesoscopic Solar Cells, Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Luoyu Road 1037, Wuhan, 430074, P. R. China. E-mail: mingkui.wang@mail.hust.edu.cn

CAS Key Laboratory of Organic Solids, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: zgzhangwhu@iccas.ac.cn

Wuhan National High Magnetic Field Center, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1037 Luoyu Road, Wuhan 430074, China

Department of Physics and Electrical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering and Environment, Northumbria University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, NE1 8ST, UK

Received
15th April 2016
, Accepted 4th May 2016
First published on 4th May 2016
In this study, for the first time, we introduced amino-substituted perylene diimide derivative (N-PDI) as an alternative electron transport layer (ETL) to replace the commonly used TiO2 in planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells. Two types of device structures, i.e., glass/FTO/N-PDI/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-MeOTAD/Au and polyethylene terephthalate PET/ITO/N-PDI/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-MeOTAD/Au, were fabricated on both rigid and flexible substrates using room-temperature solution processing technique. Based on the proposed device structures, power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 17.66% was obtained based on glass/FTO rigid substrates, and a PCE of 14.32% was achieved based on PET/ITO flexible substrates. The results showed that the terminal amino group in N-PDI enhanced the wetting capability of the surfaces to perovskite, reduced the surface work function of the FTO substrate and passivated the surface trap states of the perovskite films. These results confirm that small molecule semiconductor N-PDI can serve as an effective electron-transport material for achieving high-performance perovskite solar cells and draw molecular design guidelines for electron-selective contacts with perovskite.

Over the past five years, there has been tremendous development in the field of perovskite solar cells, which have the advantages of low cost, simple fabrication and high efficiency. To date, the certified maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells has reached 22.1%. Perovskite solar cells, based on either mesoscopic or planar structure architectures, are typically composed of a light harvesting perovskite layer sandwiched between an electron transport layer (ETL) and hole transport layer (HTL). For conventional perovskite solar cells (i.e., n–i–p), the most ETL and HTL materials reported in the literature are TiO2 and 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-MeOTAD), respectively. Spiro-MeOTAD has become as one of the most widely used HTM materials for highly efficient perovskite devices owing to its high conductivity after doping with additives. On the other hand, TiO2 is an excellent ETL due to its high conductivity (1.1 × 10−5 S cm−1) and suitable energy levels of conduction band (∼−3.9 eV) and valence band (∼−7.2 eV).

In addition to TiO2, several other metal oxides, including In2O3 (ref. 8–13) and SnO2, exhibit similar or even better electronic and optical properties; thus theoretically, they could be as good as the TiO2 as an ETL material. For example, perovskite solar cells using SnO2 as an ETL have achieved a PCE value over 18%. However, utilization of these inorganic ETLs, particularly TiO2 requires a high-temperature process to increase its crystallinity and charge carrier mobility. High temperature sintering/annealing has many drawbacks, such as increasing cost and slow production, as well as limiting uses of temperature-resilient substrates. Therefore, replacing these sintered/annealed ETLs with new materials by low-temperature processes can promote the successful applications of perovskite photovoltaic technology into wide fields.
In this study, low-temperature solution-processed n-type organic semiconductor will be investigated as the ETL as an alternative new approach. Compared to its inorganic counterparts, organic ETLs have the advantages of adjustability of optoelectronic properties by structural changes, availability of multi-defined structures, easy purification and synthesis in material processing, as well as batch-to-batch reproducibility and flexibility. Recent studies on the organic ETLs have confirmed that they could fill the trap states of perovskite active film, thus improving the charge extraction property. However, due to the poor understanding of the interactions between the perovskite layer and the organic materials, few organic materials have been used successfully as ETLs. Although currently fullerene derivative [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) was regarded as a successful example, its high price and photochemical instability limit its successful commercial applications.
In this study, we demonstrated, for the first time, the possibility of utilizing n-type organic semiconductor perylenediimide derivatives (PDIs) as ETLs in perovskite solar cells with an n–i–p structure of FTO/PDIs/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-MeOTAD/Au. The PDIs are n-type semiconductors with low lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels due to the electron affinity of its imide parts. Their high electron mobility benefits from the rigid the rigid, planar π-skeletons conducive to ordered molecular packing. Owing to small-molecule PDIs, they are easier to functionalize and purify compared to polymeric molecules. This is important for improving the photochemical stability and reproducibility of the device performance. These fascinating properties of PDIs promote them as potential ETL in PVSCs. For instance, its dimer (diPDI) has been applied as an ETL to replace PCBM in inverted perovskite solar cells and achieved a PCE of 10%. In contrast, PDI with amino N-oxide group (PDINO) has been developed as a cathode buffer layer in an inverted structure. As its insolubility in chlorinated solvents makes it impossible to be investigated as an ETL (replacing PCBM). However, under a regular device structure, its use as an ETL might benefit from the solvent resistance. Inspired by this, we tested PDIs with alkyl (C-PDI) or amino (N-PDI) as the terminal substituent at the imide-positions (Fig. 1a) to replace the commonly used TiO2 in regular perovskite solar cells. Using the N-PDI as the ETL, we successfully fabricated perovskite solar cells with a competitive PCE of 17.66% on rigid substrates and 14.32% on flexible substrates under simulated irradiation of AM 1.5G at 100 mW cm−2. This result highlights the possibility of using PDIs as the next generation ETLs in perovskite solar cells and emphasizes the critical role of the terminal substituents in the performance of the ETLs.

The C-PDI and N-PDI were synthesized from perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic dianhydride by sequential reactions with the corresponding alkylamine following the literature procedure.


Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass (Pilkington TEC 15, 15 Ω square−1) was patterned first. The flexible PET/ITO was etched using 0.1 M HCl solution diluted in milliQ water without Zn powder. The etched substrates were cleaned with 2% hellmanex diluted in the milliQ water, rinsed with milliQ water/ethanol and then dried with clean air. For the FTO/PDI-based device, C-PDI was dissolved in chlorobenzene and N-PDI was dissolved in methanol with the assistance of acetic acid (2% in volume). To optimize the N-PDI thickness, solutions of methanol and N-PDI with various concentrations (from 2 mg mL−1 to 8 mg mL−1) were then spin-deposited onto the FTO substrate at 3000 rpm for 30 s and then annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. For the perovskite layer, 9 mg CH3NH3Cl was added to 1 mL of a 45 wt% CH3NH3PbI3 solution and stirred for 4 hours at 50 °C. The CH3NH3PbI3−xClx solution was then dropped onto the FTO/PDIs substrate. The substrate was then spun at 5000 rpm for six seconds and anhydrous chlorobenzene (200 μL) was then quickly dropped onto the center of the substrate. The obtained films were dried at 100 °C for 10 min. The hole-transport material was deposited by spin coating at 4000 rpm for 30 s. The spin coating solution was prepared by dissolving 72.3 mg spiro-MeOTAD, 17.5 μL of a stock solution of 520 mg mL−1 lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl)imide in acetonitrile and 28.8 μL 4-tert-butylpyridine in 1 mL chlorobenzene. Device fabrication was finally completed by the thermal evaporation of a 70 nm-thick gold film as the cathode and all the spin-coating processes were carried out in a dry air-filled glove box and a humidity of <1.0 ppm. For comparison purpose, the control device without ETL and flexible device based on the N-PDI were prepared following the abovementioned processes.

The control device based on high-temperature processed TiO2 as the ETL followed the same processes except the TiO2 compact layer was produced by spraying pyrolysis at 500 °C using 40 mL of a titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) solution (75% in 2-propanol, Sigma-Aldrich) diluted in ethanol (1:25, v/v) and oxygen as the carrier gas, and sintered on a hot plate for 1 h at 500 °C.

A solar simulator with a Xe light source (450 W, Oriel, model 9119) and an AM 1.5G filter (Oriel, model 91192) was used to give an irradiance of 100 mW cm−2 on the surface of the solar cell. The current–voltage characteristics of the cell were obtained by applying an external potential bias to the cell and measuring the photocurrent generated under these conditions using a Keithley model 2400 digital source meter (USA). A similar data-acquisition system was used to control the photon-to-current response (IPCE) measurements. A white-light bias of 10% solar intensity was applied to the sample during the IPCE measurements, which employed a monochromatic light modulated at 10 Hz. The steady-state PL spectrum was measured using Horiba Jobin Yvon system with an excitation laser beam at 532 nm. X-ray diffraction (XRD) experiments were conducted using a Philips X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. The samples were scanned from 10° to 70° 2θ with a step-size of 0.02°. The electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were collected with an Autolab Frequency Analyzer setup comprising the Autolab PGSTAT 30 (Eco Chemie B.V., Utrecht, The Netherlands) and the Frequency Response Analyzer module. The measurements were performed at VOC ±0.2 V (via tuning the bias light intensity with white LED light radiation) over the frequency range of 0.01 Hz to 1 MHz with oscillation potential amplitudes of 30 mV. The obtained impedance spectra were fitted using Z-view software (v2.8b, Scribner Associates Inc.). The fitting elements were described as follows: Rct is the charge-transfer resistance of the charge recombination process between electrons in the ETL film and holes in the MAPbI3−xClx film; Cct is the corresponding capacitance; Rion and Cion are the transport resistance of the ion motion and the corresponding capacitance in the MAPbI3−xClx film; RCE and CCE are the charge-transfer resistance and the corresponding double-layer capacitance at the counter electrode (CE) surface, respectively; RS is the series resistance, including the sheet resistance of the FTO glass and the contact resistance of the cell. For better fitting, all capacitor elements were replaced with constant phase elements that, in any case, keep the constant phase element (CPE) exponent p quite close to the perfect capacitor value, p = 1. The devices without encapsulation were stored under ambient conditions (relative humidity ca. 50%; temperature ca. 28 °C) to test the stability.


Combining the unique features of the electronic conductivity, we constructed n–i–p heterojunction planar cell based on CH3NH3PbI3−xClx (CH3NH3+ being abbreviated as MA thereafter) with the PDIs as ETLs, as shown in Fig. 1b. The MAPbI3−xClx films were directly deposited onto the substrates pre-coated with the PDIs using a one-step spin-coating method, resulting in the absence of any PbI2 phase in the perovskite film as evidenced by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis (Fig. S1). Following the deposition of MAPbI3−xClx layer, a spiro-OMeTAD HTL (∼150 nm) was deposited by spin coating. The cells were finished with thermally evaporated Au back contacts. The PDIs, including C-PDI and N-PDI, were obtained easily using environmentally friendly reagents (referring to Experimental section). As illustrated in Fig. 1a, their LUMO energy levels align well with the conduction band (CB) of the MAPbI3−xClx, which in principal can serve as good ETLs to not only energetically promote electron extraction, but also effectively block holes migrating from MAPbI3−xClx to the conductive substrates. The C-PDI with the alkyl group as the terminal substituent provides a large solubility in chlorinated solvents such as chlorobenzene and dichlorobenzene. The N-PDI with an amino group as the terminal substituent is water-soluble when adding acetic acid (2% in volume), while it is insoluble in chlorinated solvents. Therefore, as shown in Fig. S2, the hydrophobic nature of the alkyl group in the C-PDI molecules results in a non-wetting surface, with a contacting angle of 105° for water droplets. However, the presence of an amino group in the N-PDI makes the material more hydrophilic, reducing the contacting angle from 105° to 36°. Consequently, it is difficult to reach 100% coverage of the MAPbI3−xClx film (Fig. S2c) with the C-PDI modified substrates due to their hydrophobic property, which makes the C-PDI less suitable for device optimization. In contrast, a highly uniform MAPbI3−xClx thin film can be formed easily onto the N-PDI modified substrates (Fig. S2d), which are subjected for further investigation.

Benefiting from the extended planar structures of the PDI units and the polar aliphatic amino groups, the N-PDI shows high conductivity (0.8 × 10−5 S cm−1). This value is comparable to those of high-temperature sintered or annealed TiO2 (1.1 × 10−5 S cm−1) and fullerene derivative. During the fabrication of perovskite solar cell devices with the n–i–p structure, we must take into account of the solvent resistance of the N-PDI in aprotic polar solvents such as N,N-dimethyl-formamide (DMF) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). Fig. S3a shows the measured solubility in DMF and methanol, which clearly indicates that the obtained N-PDI film can survive from repeated DMF rinsing. This well addresses the issues of finding orthogonal solvents for solution-processed perovskite devices. More importantly, the N-PDI modified substrates showed a good optical transmittance (Fig. S3b), which inspired us to apply the N-PDI as a potential ETL for the perovskite devices. In addition, we propose that the N-PDI can not only lower the surface work function of conductive oxide substrates via the amino group, which produces large dipole moment at the substrate/N-PDI interface, but also passivate the surface trap states of the perovskite films, as illustrated in Fig. 1c, which will be discussed below.
Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) were performed to gain insight into the electronic properties of the N-PDI interlayer on the conductive oxide substrates such as FTO. Fig. 2a displays the results of the UPS measurements. After deposition of an ultrathin layer (8 nm) of N-PDI, the work function of the FTO was decreased to 4.0 eV from its original 4.4 eV, which facilitates efficient electron transport from the perovskite layer to the FTO electrode. The presence of an interaction between the N-PDI and FTO substrate was further confirmed from the FTIR spectrum for the mixed SnO2/N-PDI complex. Fig. 2b reveals the spectral features and peak positions for the mixed powder from the FTIR analysis. The broad peak centered at 624 cm−1 corresponds to the SnO group (black curve). The bands in the range about 930–1100 cm−1 arise from the C–N group (blue curve) and the signals located at 2866–2985 cm−1 and 2823–2850 cm−1 are due to the C–H stretching mode from the CH2 and CH3 units adjacent to the amino group, respectively. For the N-PDI modified SnO2 sample (red curve), we found the C–H stretch mode of –N(CH3)2 for the N-PDI shifted from ∼2950 cm−1 (red curve) to 2904 cm−1 in Fig. 2b. In addition, the peak for SnO group shifted to about 638 cm−1 for the N-PDI-modified SnO2 sample. The deformation modes of both the C–H and SnO bands indicates an interaction between the amino group and Sn(IV), which cause the reduction of work function of the FTO substrate.
Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved PL decay of the MAPbI3−xClx film on the N-PDI modified substrates were further conducted to investigate the charge extraction process. A laser beam with an excitation wavelength of 532 nm and an estimated penetration depth of ∼80 nm (much less than the perovskite film thickness of ∼300 nm) was used to excite the perovskite layer from either the FTO side or the air side. As illustrated in Fig. 2c, the perovskite film without the ETL showed a PL peak at 778 nm, which were independent to the incident light directions. In contrast, the perovskite film, with the N-PDI as the ETL, showed a blue-shifted PL peak from 778 to 770 nm when the FTO side was excited. This is a signature of filling the surface trap states of the MAPbI3−xClx film by the N-PDI. One of the identified types of surface defects in the ionic MAPbI3−xClx crystals is the halide vacancy, due to the loss of an I− ion accompanying the generated shallow donors (V′I), which acts as trap states at the crystal surface. We suggest that the N-PDI can passivate the V′I at the MAPbI3−xClx crystal surface via the interaction between the terminal amino group and V′I. This was further verified by the FTIR spectrum characterization of the mixed N-PDI/MAPbI3−xClx sample, as shown in Fig. 2b (cyan curve). The C–H stretching vibrations from CH3 units are slightly shifted to the lower wavenumber, whereas the vibrations from CH2 adjacent to the amino group are deviated significantly from the counterpart in the N-PDI to the higher wavenumber. This detection of deviations of C–H stretching vibrations accompanying the deformation mode of the C–N at about 1070 cm−1 confirms the amino group coordinated to V′I, resulting in the passivation effect. This conclusion agrees well with the similar observation in a previous report on an amino-functionalized copolymer (PFN-2TNDI).
Furthermore, the MAPbI3−xClx film deposited on the N-PDI substrate exhibits stronger PL quenching compared to that based on a bare FTO substrate. The efficient PL quenching of the N-PDI was verified by studying the charge carrier lifetime of the MAPbI3−xClx. The PL lifetimes were determined by a single-exponential fitting to the PL decay and the results are shown in Fig. 2d. The PL lifetime of the MAPbI3−xClx on the FTO and FTO/N-PDI substrates were estimated to be 18.1 and 12.8 ns, respectively. The obtained shorter lifetime suggests faster carrier extraction by N-PDI from the MAPbI3−xClx film, indicating N-PDI as efficient ETL.
To provide a better understanding of using the N-PDI as the ETL, the morphology of the N-PDI thin film on the FTO substrate was investigated, as illustrated in Fig. 3a. The N-PDI molecules present a morphology of “layer by layer” orientation to the substrates with a tilted angle about 49.6° and an inter-planar spacing of 8.5 Å. The terrace height for the N-PDI monolayer was estimated to be 15.8 Å according to the calculated molecular length of 20.8 Å for the N-PDI. Consequently, the ordered molecules with a small terrace height resulted in a reduction of the surface roughness from 17.16 to 16.69 nm by coverage of a monolayer N-PDI and continuous to 8.5 nm by the multilayer (Fig. 3b and c and S4). However, the monolayer of the N-PDI failed to work as an effective ETL to block the holes and reduce the interfacial charge recombination, which was evidenced by the approximately symmetric and linear J–V curve in the rectifying characteristics for the monolayer N-PDI modified FTO/MAPbI3−xClx junction (Fig. 3d). Such J–V curves indicate an ohmic contact at this junction. Increasing the N-PDI interlayer to the multilayer promotes it as an efficient channel for the ETL (Fig. 1c), resulting in a rectifying characteristic of non-symmetric J–V curve (Fig. 3d). This clearly indicates the formation of a Schottky barrier at the N-PDI (multilayer)/MAPbI3−xClx interface, which would accelerate electron-extraction and hole-rejection from perovskite layer, thereby reducing recombination at the interfaces. These results clearly indicate the significance of using the N-PDI multilayer as an ETL for device optimization.

Perovskite solar cells with a configuration of FTO/N-PDI/MAPbI3−xClx/spiro-MeOTAD/Au were fabricated and characterized. The detailed fabrication procedures of these devices will be described in the Experimental section. Fig. 4a presents the current density vs. voltage (J–V) curves measured via reverse bias scanning under the simulated irradiation of AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) at room temperature for the perovskite solar cells using N-PDI with different thicknesses. The scan rate was maintained at 20 mV per step with a delay time of 10 ms in the reverse scan direction. By comparison, a control device without the N-PDI was also made and its properties were measured.

The measured photovoltaic parameters of the devices are summarized in Tables 1 and 2. The PCEs of devices varied significantly with the thickness of N-PDI. The optimized thickness for N-PDI was about 8 nm. A further increase in the thickness resulted in a deterioration in the performance due to an increase in electrical resistance (Table 2). Perovskite solar cells with the optimized thickness (8 nm) of the N-PDI exhibited a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 21.80 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 0.75, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.08 V, and an impressive PCEmax value of 17.66%. It is noted that the control device without an ETL showed a JSC of 19.51 mA cm−2, a FF of 0.67, a VOC of 0.986 V, achieving a PCE of 12.89%. The improvement of VOC from 0.986 V for the control device to 1.08 V for the studied device can be attributed to a better energy alignment at the FTO/ETL interface and ETL/perovskite interface, as well as the passivation effect of the N-PDI, as discussed above. These effects can minimize the potential loss at the ETL/perovskite interfaces and enlarge the built-in potential across the device. In addition to the higher VOC, significant increases in both values of JSC (from 19.51 to 21.80 mA cm−2) and FF (from 0.67 to 0.75) were obtained when comparing the perovskite solar cells with 8 nm of N-PDI to those without ETL (see Table 1). The enhanced JSC and FF can be interpreted as a consequence of efficient electron extraction and hole-blocking of the N-PDI interlayer. For a better evaluation of N-PDI as an ETL, the hysteresis effect and reproducibility of the devices was investigated. As shown in Fig. S5a–c, the studied devices exhibited a hysteresis in the current–voltage curves, which diminished with decreasing scanning rate. An example of a current–voltage curve recorded at 20 mV per step with a delay time of 10 ms is shown in Fig. S5b, where the reverse and forward scanning directions yielded PCE values of 17.66% and 15.84%, respectively (a difference of 10.3%). By contrast, for the control device, the hysteresis is much more pronounced, with a difference in PCE values between the backward and forward scans of 15.8% (Fig. S5d). Moreover, the average PCE for the control devices obtained from over 20 devices was 11.7%, which was increased to 16.5% using N-PDI as the ETL, as shown in Fig. S5e. The less hysteresis effect and higher average PCE value suggests that N-PDI can serve as an efficient ETL.
Substrates

J
SC [mA cm−2]

V
OC [V]
FF
PCEmax (PCEavg) [%]

n



J
0
 [mA cm−2]

a The average PCE was obtained from over 20 devices.
b Extracted from the dark J–V curves.

FTO
19.51
0.986
0.67
12.89 (11.5)
1.67
3.4 × 10−7
N-PDI/FTO
21.80
1.08
0.75
17.66 (16.5)
1.32
2.1 × 10−8
HBL layer
Thickness [nm]

J
SC [mA cm−2]

V
OC [V]
FF
PCE [%]

R
S [Ω cm−2]
N-PDI
5
20.42
1.05
0.69
14.79
3.14
8
21.80
1.08
0.75
17.66
2.01
12
19.47
1.06
0.70
14.44
3.43
16
18.87
0.98
0.68
12.57
4.36
26
15.67
0.85
0.67
8.92
6.58

Fig. 4b compares the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) for the optimized perovskite solar cells. The N-PDI based device has a slightly higher IPCE response than that of the control device in the wavelength range between 500 and 750 nm, resulting from the faster electron extraction (Fig. 2d) and less charge recombination. This is also reflected in the dark current characterization of the perovskite solar cells. As shown in Fig. 4c, the N-PDI based device possesses a weaker dark current density compared to the counterpart of the control device. This implies that the interfacial recombination in the N-PDI based devices is reduced significantly, relative to the control device.
To gain an in-depth understanding of the influences of the N-PDI on interfacial recombination and photovoltaic performance, the dark J–V curves of the perovskite solar cell were modelled using the Shockley diode equation for a single junction device:
(1)
where
J0 is the reverse saturation current density, JD is the dark current density, V is the applied bias, q is the electron charge, KB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, and n is the ideal factor of the real diode. The obtained diode parameters, such as n and J0, for the studied devices are summarized in Table 1. The smaller values of n and J0 were obtained for the FTO/N-PDI device compared to those of the control device. This suggests that N-PDI as an ETL possesses good electron selectivity, which results in a decreased charge recombination loss at the ETL/perovskite interfaces.


Fig. 4d illustrates the dependence of JSC and VOC upon the light intensities for the studied solar cells. The results can be used to probe the recombination mechanism, which affects the device physical performance. A weaker VOC dependence on the light intensity (1.45KBT/q) was observed for the FTO/N-PDI-based device compared with the control device (1.92KBT/q) in a wide light intensity range. In principle, a slope of KBT/q for the VOCversus light intensity indicates that the dominant recombination is a bimolecular process. A larger slope of the KBT/q means that an additional interfacial trap-assisted Shockley–Read–Hall recombination is involved. Therefore, as shown in Fig. 4d, it clearly indicates that the N-PDI, as an effective ETL, can significantly mitigate the recombination loss at the ETL/perovskite interfaces.
In contrast to the results obtained in the open-circuit conditions, all photo-generated charge carriers are assumed to be extracted to generate current in a short-circuit condition, thus the charge collection mechanisms can be interpreted from the relationship between the measured JSC values and the light intensity. Under the short-circuit condition, the device shows a superior linearity of the photocurrent with light density (see the inset of Fig. 4d), indicating that the charge collection of perovskite solar cells based the FTO/N-PDI is independent of light-intensity. In this study, because we used the exactly same protocol for fabricating the MAPbI3−xClx layer, there is no apparent difference in morphology of the perovskite thin films with different substrates, as indicated in Fig. S6. Therefore, we attributed this discrepancy in the light intensity dependence to the hole-blocking and passivation effects of the N-PDI. This also confirms that the N-PDI as ETL can effectively reduce the interfacial trap-assisted recombination, which is critical to increase the value of the VOC.
To obtain a more reliable PCE, Fig. S7a shows the stabilized power output near the maximum power point for the FTO/N-PDI-based perovskite solar cells. The stabilized power output current density at 0.88 V with a stable output PCE of 17.13% is very close to the PCE obtained from the reverse scan for the J–V measurement. This suggests the highly efficient performance of perovskite solar cells based on N-PDI as ETL, which is comparable to those of the typical devices based on high-temperature sintered/annealed TiO2 as an ETL (Fig. S7b).
To further understand the electronic transport processes at the perovskite/ETLs interfaces, we performed electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) on similar n–i–p perovskite solar cells based on low-temperature processed N-PDI and high-temperature TiO2 as the ETLs. Three elements are readily identified in the obtained Nyquist plot (Fig. 5a) and Bode plot (Fig. 5b) for both the devices, indicating the similar interfacial charge transfer processes. In the order of increasing frequency, these elements are attributed to ion migration processes during the MAPbI3−xClx, charge carrier recombination processes, i.e., interfacial recombination of the electrons in the ETL with holes in MAPbI3−xClx, or electrons in MAPbI3−xClx with holes in HTM, and charge transfer at the counter electrode together with the transport through the hole conductor. We fitted the EIS data based on an equivalent circuit model of three RC circuits in series, as shown in Fig. S8. The description of fitting elements for this equivalent circuit model is given in the Experimental section. Although the N-PDI based solar cell has a slightly lower conductivity (0.8 × 10−5 S cm−1) than that of high-temperature processed TiO2 device (1.1 × 10−5 S cm−1), it is interesting to find that the interfacial resistance of the N-PDI based device is slightly smaller than that of the TiO2 one (Fig. 5c). This should be attributed to the passivation effect of the N-PDI, resulting in a faster electron extraction process. Owing to the reduction of electron trap density by passivation, a smaller capacitance was obtained from the response in the intermediate frequency region in the EIS (Fig. 5d) for the N-PDI based device, compared to that of the TiO2-based device. This decrease in capacitance results in a higher VOC value and boosts the JSC and FF for N-PDI-based devices.
From the above results, it can be concluded that the N-PDI is a very promising ETL and can be used to achieve a high performance for the perovskite solar cells. Owing to its low-temperature solution process, it is possible to fabricate flexible solar cells on polymer substrates. Herein, we replaced the rigid glass/FTO substrate with a flexible polyethylene terephthalate (PET)/ITO substrate and fabricated the devices using the same procedures. The optical transmittance and absorption spectra for the device on the flexible substrate are shown in Fig. 6a. The transmittance of the PET/ITO/N-PDI is similar to that of the FTO/N-PDI. However, a much less transmittance in the range between 450 and 600 nm was observed for the PET/ITO/N-PDI we used. To determine the reason for this, we obtained the optical absorbance spectrum of the MAPbI3−xClx on such a substrate in this spectral region and the results are shown in Fig. 6a. Clearly, there is no apparent decrease in the absorption in this region due to the large optical coefficient of MAPbI3−xClx at around 500 nm.Fig. 6b and c show the J–V characteristics of such flexible devices. In the J–V tests, the scan rate of the applied voltage was maintained at the same value of 20 mV per step with a delay time of 10 ms. A best PCE of 14.32% for a reverse scan was obtained, indicating the good performance of such flexible perovskite solar cells (JSC: 20.05 mA cm−2, VOC: 1.05 V and FF: 0.68). The IPCE spectrum for the flexible devices is shown in Fig. 6d. It shows a lower response in the short wavelength range of 300–340 nm due to the less transparent flexible substrate in this spectral region (Fig. 6a). The almost flat spectral profile approaching 80% in the remaining wavelength range of 380–750 nm is indicative of excellent light harvesting for the high photocurrent. In addition, the flexible devices also show excellent flexibility by repeatedly bending to a radius of 1 cm over 20 cycles. Clearly, there was no apparent reduction of the performance after 20 cycles, i.e., the values of the JSC and VOC remain almost identical, except for the fill factor decreasing slightly from 0.68 to 0.64. This demonstrates that the flexible devices can tolerate the mechanical bending deformation well. Moreover, the stabilized power output current density (Fig. S9a) and narrow PCE distribution (Fig. S9b) strongly indicate the efficient and good reproducibility of the flexible device based on the N-PDI as an ETL.

We have demonstrated that the N-PDI can be used as an outstanding solution-processed ETL for perovskite solar cells based on both rigid and flexible substrates. The suitable energy levels and good electron-transport mobility are benefited from the perylene diimide backbone. The wetting capability of surface accompanied by the unique dipole moment and passivation effect was attributed the terminal amino group in the N-PDI. These fascinating properties make it as an excellent ETL in perovskite solar cells with an excellent PCE of 17.66% and 14.32% in rigid and flexible substrates, respectively. Our results expand the present range of the available ETL layer to small molecular semiconductors and draw molecular design guidelines for electron-selective contact with perovskite.


Financial support from the National Basic Research Program of China (2014CB643506 and 2013CB922104), the Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province (No. ZRZ2015000203), Technology Creative Project of Excellent Middle & Young Team of Hubei Province (No. T201511), the Director Fund of the WNLO, the Wuhan National High Magnetic Field Center (PHMFF2015018) and Royal Academy of Engineering-Research Exchange with China and India is gratefully acknowledged.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: XRD pattern of MAPbI3−xClx thin film on FTO and FTO/N-PDI, the contact angle of water, the absorption and transmittance spectra, the influence of scan rates on the current–voltage characteristics, top-view SEM images, steady-state photocurrent output, the equivalent circuit and the stability test of devices. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta03119f
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016