 DOI: 10.1039/C3RA42792G
(Communication)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 16288-16291

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


George
Kakavelakis
,

Emmanuel
Stratakis
* and 

Emmanuel
Kymakis
*

Center of Materials Technology and Photonics & Electrical Engineering Department, School of Applied Technology, Technological Educational Institute (TEI) of Crete, Heraklion, 71004, Crete, Greece. E-mail: kymakis@staff.teicrete.gr; Tel: +30-2810379895

Department of Materials Science and Technology, University of Crete, Heraklion, 71110 Crete, Greece

Institute of Electronic Structure and Laser (IESL), Foundation for Research and Technology-Hellas (FORTH), Heraklion, 71110 Crete, Greece. E-mail: stratak@iesl.forth.gr; Tel: +302810-391274

Received
6th June 2013
, Accepted 18th July 2013
First published on 22nd July 2013
Enhancement of both the efficiency and stability of bulk heterojunction photovoltaic devices is demonstrated by the addition of highly stable Al NPs, generated via laser ablation, into the photoactive layer. An efficiency enhancement of 30% is demonstrated, which can be attributed to multiple scattering effects and enhanced structural stability of the photoactive blend. Surprisingly, the devices with Al NPs die after ∼150 h of operation under continuous illumination, compared with the pristine devices which die after ∼30 h.

Organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices hold the promise for a low cost, lightweight solar energy conversion platform targeting small scale power generation and portable consumer electronics applications, which can benefit from room temperature printing of the device layers. Compared with their inorganic Si counterparts, OPVs are based on the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) concept, where a conjugated polymer (donor) and a fullerene (acceptor) material are blended together in nanoscale morphology. Rapid progress in the development of new materials and device optimization has brought commercialization of OPV closer to reality, with recent reports of power conversion efficiencies (PCE) exceeding 10%. In particular, novel polymer materials with broad absorption spectra, high mobility and appropriate band gap have been developed. However, the conjugated polymers have a low charge carrier mobility and small exciton diffusion length, which limit the thickness of the active layer and lead to poor absorption of incident photons. As a result, thin active layers are inefficient due to poor absorbance, and thicker ones are inefficient due to bulk recombination losses. An effective strategy to tackle this trade-off is to increase the light absorption of the photoactive layer without increasing its thickness, by introducing an efficient light concentration and coupling mechanism. In this way, it is possible that the external quantum efficiency (EQE) to match the internal quantum efficiency (IQE) of the device, a situation which is not likely to happen since in most cases the EQE is limited by optical absorption to < 70%.

Several light trapping strategies have been proposed, including photonic crystals, 3D configurations and plasmonic nanoparticles. In particular, plasmonic metallic nanoparticles (NPs) have recently been identified as a breakthrough route for efficiency enhancement of OPVs. Metallic NPs of various sizes, shapes and configurations have been integrated into the OPV cell architecture (inside photoactive or buffer layer or between interfaces) in order to tune and enhance, in a wavelength-dependent manner, the optical absorption of the respective devices. The NPs confine resonant photons by inducing coherent surface plasmonic oscillation of their conduction band electrons. At the local surface plasmon resonance (LSPR), a significant enlargement of the NPs' light absorption and scattering take places.
NPs dispersed into the photoactive layer of OPV devices can offer a major enhancement on its optical absorption, either via the formation of scattered waves at the large diameter NPs or due to excitation of LSPR modes at the smaller diameter NPs. However, the utilization of chemically synthesized NPs into the photoactive layer does not lead to efficiency enhancement, mainly due to undesirable exciton quenching, via non-radiative energy transfer between the dispersed NPs and the active layer, which decreases the plasmonic improvement effect. Hence, NPs coated with insulating materials or uncoated NPs were directly mixed in the active layer leading to high efficiency enhancement. In particular, Au and Ag NPs, free of surfactants and passivation layers, synthesized by ablation in liquids with pico- and femtosecond laser pulses were successfully utilized as additives in the active layer of OPVs leading to both efficiency and stability enhancement. However, a recent study suggested that Al NPs have the potential to yield significantly greater enhancement than Ag or Au, due to the much higher plasma frequency of Al, which ensures a better overlap between plasmon resonance and absorption band of organic semiconductors. Nevertheless, there are no reports on the literature on the use of Al NPs, since chemically synthesized ones become oxidized immediately after exposure to ambient conditions.
Herein, we report the results of a study that demonstrates significant efficiency and stability enhancement that arises from the addition of surfactant free Al NPs with various diameters to BHJ OPVs fabricated from poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT)-[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM). An improvement in power conversion efficiency by 30% compared to the pristine device without NPs was recorded, mainly due to strong light scattering from the large diameter NPs and improvement of the blend morphology. Moreover, the devices with Al in the active layer die after ∼150 h operation under continuous illumination, compared with the pristine devices which die after ∼30 h.
As prepared Al NPs were spherical and had relatively uniform diameters. The respective size distribution determined from a series of TEM images Fig. S1 and Fig. S2, ESI indicates that the majority of NPs exhibit sizes ranged from 10 to 70 nm with an average of ∼30 nm. The absorption spectrum of the colloidal Al NPs solution in ethanol is shown in Fig. S3, ESI with the distinct peak at ∼300 nm, which corresponds to the theoretically predicted enhanced absorption due to plasmon resonance. Fig. S4, ESI displays the UV-vis absorption spectra of pristine P3HT/PCBM BHJ active layer and the doped with Al nanoparticles layer. The red shoulder at 602 nm indicates the effective self-organization of the regioregular P3HT. In the spectral region between 450 and 650 nm where the P3HT:PCBM absorbs, an increase in the percentage of absorbance occurs proportional to the volume ratio of Al NPs. Before spin-casting of the polymer solution blended with Al, it was necessary to disperse the NPs in the solution so that they could be better dispersed in the BHJ film. A polymer–fullerene solution blended with Al nanoparticles was therefore subjected to ultrasonic agitation for 10 min and then directly spin-cast in ambient conditions. This step was important for the proper dispersion of the Al NPs in the polymer-fullerene matrix. As the LSPR of Al NPs lies in the UV spectral region, the improvement of the absorption can be attributed to light scattering from Al NPs. In particular, Al NPs act as an effective “optical reflector” and multiple reflections will cause solar light to pass multiple times through the BHJ layer.

Fig. 1 shows the current voltage (J–V) curves of the pristine and OPV devices incorporating different Al NPs concentrations, under illumination with 100 mW cm−2 power intensity. The respective averaged photovoltaic characteristics are summarized in Table 1. It is shown that the incorporation of Al NPs into the active layer induces a significant enhancement of 32% to the short-circuit current (JSC) of the most efficient device, whereas the open-circuit voltage (VOC) and the fill factor (FF) remain almost constant. As a result, an increase of 30% in the device efficiency (PCE) is obtained for the device with the optimum Al NPs concentration of 9%. The optimum 9% Al NPs device exhibits a power conversion efficiency of 4.00% (VOC = 0.6 V, JSC = 11.3 mA cm−2, FF = 0.59). At concentrations higher than 10%, degradation of the device performance is observed, probably due to the occurrence of local shunts due to NPs directly bridging the ITO or Al electrode. Furthermore, the excessive content of NPs may disturb the formation of P3HT and PCBM domains leading to an inhomogeneous surface morphology and to lower carrier mobility, which can be the reason for the lower observed photocurrent at concentrations higher than 9%.

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Pristine
8.59
0.6
61
3.14
8% Al NPs
10.60
0.6
60
3.82
9% Al NPs
11.31
0.6
59
4.00
10% Al NPs
10.06
0.6
58
3.50
In order to get an insight for the mechanism behind the enhanced performance of the devices, the incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) curve of the device exhibited the best efficiency is measured and compared with the pristine one. As shown in Fig. 2a, the IPCE increases remarkably upon the introduction of Al NPs, which complies with the enhanced JSC observed.
The pristine device exhibits a maximum IPCE of 60.66%, while the Al doped device exhibits an enhanced maximum of 72.56%. The IPCE enhancement is broad and almost uniform ranging from 400 to 650 nm, which can be directly attributed to multiple scattering by the large diameter Al NPs. In order to confirm that the JSC enhancement is caused by multiple scattering effects, the diffuse reflectance of the devices fabricated with and without Al NPs was recorded. As shown in Fig. 2b the lower reflectivity of the NPs-doped devices in the whole spectrum clearly indicates stronger absorption of the incident light due to scattering. Hence, the P3HT/PCBM BHJ device with Al NPs (9 wt%) has a higher level of optical absorbance than the pristine P3HT/PCBM BHJ device. The scattering effect of the Al NPs increases the effective length of the optical path, which in turn increases the generation of electron–hole pairs. This enhanced optical absorbance is directly related to the improved JSC and PCE levels in the Al doped BHJ devices.
We have previously reported that the incorporation of Au and Ag NPs into the active layer of BHJ OPVs increases the device lifetime under continuous solar illumination.Fig. 3 compares the normalized PCE of a pristine, Au and Al NPs doped devices as a function of exposure time in air. In each specific time a complete J–V curve is obtained. Between successive measurements, devices were continuously irradiated in the open circuit mode. OPV devices were fabricated without encapsulation, in order to allow humidity to readily affect their performance. Degradation of the pristine device is caused essentially by a single-step exponential decay of the JSC, while VOC is relatively stable over the same time. Such photocurrent loss is attributed to both the morphological instability of the active layer and the degradation of the active layer–cathode interface. In contrast, the morphological as well as photo-oxidation stability of the NP doped device correlates well with the slower degradation rate of the respective device.
For the first 20 h, an abrupt aging of the pristine cell was detected, caused essentially by a single-step exponential decay, while, the cell dies after 30 h. On the contrary, it is surprising that in the same time scale, the degradation rate of the Al NPs doped device is much slower, preserving more than 38% of its initial PCE for over 20 h, more than 21% of its initial value after 45 h and about 5% after 100 h. As a consequence, the Al NPs doped device died after ∼150 h of operation under continuous illumination, while the pristine and the Au doped devices died after ∼30 and ∼65 h respectively, i.e. an improvement by a factor of 5 and 2 respectively. This stability enhancement upon embedding surfactant free Au NPs into the photoactive layer was extensively investigated by in situ time-resolved energy dispersive X-ray reflectometry (EDXR), photoluminescence (PL) and Raman spectroscopy as well as device degradation electrical measurements, in our previous study. It was shown that the morphology of the cathode layer does not undergo any modification during device operation, in contrast to the pristine, NP-free device. So, it can be concluded that the Au NPs embedded into the blend act as quenchers of the triplet excitons and in this way the photo-oxidation process can be impeded. This hypothesis can be also considered for the Al NPs, with the difference that its effect is extremely stronger, increasing the lifetime to 100 h and higher. This effect may be attributed to the higher reactivity of Al to oxygen compared to Au. Further experiments are currently in progress to elucidate the stability improvement.
To summarize, we demonstrated highly efficient and stable plasmonic OPVs that incorporate Al NPs into the photoactive layer. In particular, the PCE was enhanced by 30% via incorporation of 30 nm Al NPs into a P3HT:PCBM based OPV device. Such efficiency enhancement is due to improved absorption caused by scattering effects due to the presence of NPs. Interestingly, the lifetime of the devices was remarkably increased by 5 times, leading to the conclusion that the addition of Al NPs is an efficient technological solution to mitigate photodegradation effects.
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Detailed experimental details, TEM, UV-VIS of the Al NPs, absorption spectra of the BHJ devices. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ra42792g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013