 DOI: 10.1039/D2TA08780D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 6237-6247


Yanxian
Ma
,

Quanbin
Liang
*,

Hongbin
Wu
* and 

Yong
Cao


Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, P. R. China. E-mail: liangqb@scut.edu.cn; hbwu@scut.edu.cn

Received
9th November 2022
, Accepted 10th February 2023
First published on 13th February 2023
Non-fullerene (NFA) organic solar cells (OSCs) are gaining a rapid progress currently, with a reported power conversion efficiency (PCE) exceeding 19% in single junction devices. However, further improvement of OSCs is severely hindered by various recombination kinetics mechanisms, thereby requiring a good understanding of charge carrier recombination kinetics that determines the features relevant to photogeneration and recombination. Here in this study, we utilize a transient optoelectronic technique to investigate the impact of nongeminate recombination (NGR) kinetics on device performance in a series of organic solar cells based on material systems consisting of a state-of-the-art electron donor polymer and electron acceptors. It is found that Y6-derivative-based devices exhibit significantly suppressed recombination rate coefficients as low as 2 × 10−12 cm3 s−1 in addition to ultra-high photogeneration (high EQE and broad absorption), leading to a PCE of 18% in the D18:L8-BO device despite a relatively low mobility on the order of 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. In contrast, the D18:IT-M device exhibits much less efficient absorption and also much more severe recombination. We apply an enhanced simulation model that jointly takes into account the optical properties, charge recombination, charge carrier mobility and energy level bending at the heterointerface at the same time to predict the new efficiency limit for the NFA OSCs. The simulation reveals that further decreasing the recombination rate coefficient to <2 × 10−13 cm3 s−1 or promoting the mobility to >10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 can boost the PCE to 21% based on the existing material systems. Our experimental and simulated analysis provides a comprehensive description from the charge carrier recombination kinetics perspective and useful design rules for further improvement in NFA OSCs.

Organic solar cells (OSCs) have emerged as a viable source of renewable energy, wherever low cost, lightweight flexible photovoltaic devices are desirable. Benefiting from the rapid development of non-fullerene electron acceptors (NFAs), the performance of OSCs continues to improve, with record power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 19% reported recently. Compared to fullerene-based devices, NFA-based devices not only broaden the absorption spectrum for enhanced short-circuit current (Jsc), but also exhibit much lower energy loss to yield particularly high open-circuit voltage (Voc) outputs. In an attempt to improve charge transport in OSCs, the fill factor (FF) of the resultant devices has been promoted to more than 80%, suggesting that the competition between charge extraction and recombination (also considered as the ratio of carrier drift or diffusion lengths to thickness) is a key issue to overcome for high efficiency.

While tremendous studies based on different morphological characterization methods have illustrated the important role of nanoscale phase-separated morphology in the optoelectronic properties for OSCs via its effects on exciton generation, exciton diffusion, charge carrier generation and recombination, investigations from charge generation and recombination aspects are also desired. Various techniques, including impedance spectroscopy and open circuit voltage decay technique, are applicable to probe recombination dynamics in working NFA devices, where nongeminate recombination to the ground state has been found to be the dominant loss process in most high-efficiency NFA OSCs. Some recent reports have shown that nongeminate recombination in OSCs is specifically identified as bimolecular recombination, whose rate shows a power-law dependence on carrier density following
R = k2n2
(1)
where
k2 is the nongeminate recombination rate coefficient and n is the average charge density in the active layer. Recently, Neher's group employed an experimental method called time-delayed collection field (TDCF) to investigate photocurrent extraction. It was revealed that the state-of-the-art PM6:Y6 system exhibited field-independent photocurrent generation, which is indicative of negligible geminate recombination. The experimentally determined NGR coefficient k2 was 1.7 × 10−11 cm3 s−1 when measured under 1 sun illumination conditions, much higher than the 5 × 10−13 cm3 s−1 for the same system measured by Nguyen's group through the impedance spectroscopy method. This is probably because the extracted charge carrier densities from impedance spectroscopy are mostly affected by the choice of the calculation method, which requires more sophisticated analysis. Nevertheless, reduction in the absolute magnitudes of the nongeminate recombination coefficient is a key factor determining the device performance. For example, Firdaus et al. investigated the influence of charge transport and recombination mechanism by numerical simulation. By improving balanced electron and hole mobilities above 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 in combination with a low NGR rate coefficient k2 of 10−12 cm3 s−1, a PCE of 20% was predicted. McGehee's group reported that the substantially suppressed Langevin recombination in most organic photovoltaic systems may stem from the reformation and resplitting of charge transfer (CT) states at the donor/acceptor interface, where an equilibrium between free carriers and CT states was reached. On the basis of the results, Neher's group proposed that in an encounter-dominated regime, nongeminate recombination in an organic photovoltaic device basically followed the Langevin expression, while in a resplitting-dominated regime, nongeminate recombination mainly depends on the morphology, charge transfer and charge-separated energetics.

Despite these studies, further efforts to investigate the fundamental mechanism are needed. In particular, the issues associated with the coexistence of high photogeneration and low recombination in NFA devices need to be addressed. Another question is how the efficiency limit can be improved by optimizing charge dynamics with the current NFA materials.
In this work, we prepared high-performance devices with power conversion efficiency up to 18% based on several D18:NFA blends and compared their recombination rate through experimental transient optoelectronic analysis and theoretical simulation analysis. We then established the relationship between the fundamental recombination properties and the device performance. We arrive at the conclusion that further decrease in the recombination rate coefficient by one order of magnitude or increase in the mobility to >10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 can give an optimized PCE value of 21%.

A set of organic solar cells were fabricated with a conventional device structure, which is ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/PDIN/Ag, where ITO is indium–tin oxide, PEDOT:PSS is poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) and PDIN is perylene diimide functionalized with amino N-oxide. We chose a wide-bandgap polymer D18 (ref. 23) as the electron donor, paired with four NFA materials, including Y6 (ref. 24), BTP-eC9 (ref. 25), L8-BO (ref. 26) and IT-M (ref. ) to fabricate high performance devices. The chemical structures of D18, Y6, BTP-eC9, L8-BO and IT-M are represented in Fig. 1a. Y6, BTP-eC9, and L8-BO share the same rigid backbone but differ in the alkyl chains, thus the latter two can be regarded as Y6-series, while BTP-eC9 is a chlorinated Y6 derivative and L8-BO is also a Y6 derivative obtained by substituting the β-position of the thiophene unit with branched alkyl chains. The normalized UV-vis absorption spectra for the corresponding pristine films are shown in Fig. 1b. As can be clearly seen, the absorption of the four NFAs is complementary to that of the D18 donor, while Y6, BTP-eC9 and L8-BO exhibit a redshifted absorption edge, compared to the IT-M film. This can result in a relatively higher photocurrent but possibly a smaller photovoltage. Note that all the devices are fabricated based on as-cast films without any post-annealing treatment. The representative J–V characteristics under AM 1.5G illumination with a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 are shown in Fig. 1d and the corresponding key performance parameters are summarized in Table 1. A maximum PCE of 18.08% was achieved for the D18:L8-BO device, with a Voc of 0.899 V, a Jsc of 27.67 mA cm−2 and a FF of 72.72%, respectively. The D18:BTP-eC9 blend, with similar optical properties to that of the D18:L8-BO blend, exhibits a comparable Jsc of 27.49 mA cm−2 and FF of 73.4%, leading to a high PCE of 17.52%, despite a slightly decreased Voc (0.869 V). In contrast, despite a noticeably larger Voc of 1.019 V, the D18:IT-M device exhibits a significantly reduced Jsc of only 14.4 mA cm−2 and a reduced FF of 55.4%, yielding a maximum PCE of 8.13%.

Active layer

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

J
sc,cal
 (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Measured/fitted
Measured/fitted
Measured/fitted
Measured/fitted

a 
J
sc,cal is the integrated Jsc from the EQE spectra, which is in good agreement with those obtained from the J–V curves within 5% error.

D18:Y6
0.841/0.852
28.117/27.989
26.919
0.739/0.722
17.492/17.218
D18:BTP-eC9
0.869/0.871
27.490/26.890
26.931
0.734/0.734
17.520/17.181
D18:L8-BO
0.899/0.893
27.669/27.263
26.188
0.727/0.738
18.082/17.979
D18:IT-M
1.019/1.023
14.406/14.350
14.379
0.554/0.557
8.129/8.178

In order to gain insight into the differences in Jsc, the EQE spectra were measured, as shown in Fig. 1e. The EQE spectra of devices based on the blend of D18 with the Y6-series acceptors show a broad photoresponse ranging from 300 to above 900 nm with a high maximum of 87%, implying that the exciton generation and dissociation processes, which ultimately give rise to free carriers, are sufficiently high. The D18:IT-M device exhibits photoresponse up to 800 nm and gives a lower maximum EQE value less than 70%. Note that the EQE spectrum can be described by EQE = ηabsIQE, where ηabs is the light absorption efficiency and IQE is the internal quantum efficiency. As ηabs can be calculated using the transfer matrix method, the IQE can be determined accordingly. Based on these results, the exciton generation profile Gex for each device, which depicts the exciton distribution in the device, can also be obtained from optical simulation (see ESI Note 1). The results of Gex together with the ηabs for each device are shown in Fig. S1. As can be clearly observed in Fig. S1e, the devices based on the blend of D18 with the Y6-series acceptors absorb noticeably more photons than the D18:IT-M device. The results of the determined IQE spectra are also included in Fig. 1e for comparison. The difference in IQE (nearly 95% vs. 80%) can straightforwardly be attributed to the different exciton dissociation probability as discussed below.

It has been usually recognized that energy offset at the donor/acceptor interface plays an important role in determining not only the Voc, but also the exciton dissociation probability. Subsequently, a high IQE is reached if both efficient charge transfer and transport processes are satisfied. Nevertheless, neither the energy offset difference between the lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals (LUMOs, determined by UPS are depicted in Fig. 1c) of the donor polymer and the acceptor, nor the energy offset difference between the highest occupied molecular orbitals (HOMOs) of the acceptor and the donor polymer was necessary to explain the trend in Voc. On the other side, in a recent study, Frédéric et al. reported that the IQE can be described by a model in which ultrafast energy transfer from the wide-bandgap donor to the low-bandgap acceptor precedes charge transfer. As a consequence of this, IQE over the range of absorption was found to be wavelength-independent and increased with HOMO offset following
(2)
where
B is the bias potential at the D/A interface and represents the extent of HOMO and LUMO energy level bending and σ is the standard deviation for a Gaussian distribution of energy level bending at the donor–acceptor interface, while erfc is the error function, as schematically indicated in Fig. 2a.


Fig. 2b shows the spectrally averaged IQE (IQEavg) from Fig. 1e as a function of the corresponding HOMO offset (see Fig. 1c). We find that when taking IQEmax = 95%, B = 330 meV and σ = 70 meV, the empirical model proposed by Frédéric et al. is appropriate to describe the trends of charge generation for the D18:NFA systems. These observations suggest that the internal quantum efficiency is limited by the HOMO offset and unity IQE is accessible for the D18 based device so long as a sufficiently large offset is ensured.
Besides the high charge photogeneration yield, small photon energy loss is another prerequisite for high performance in OSCs. The photon energy loss, Eloss, which is given by Eloss = Egopt − qVoc (q is the elementary charge, Egopt is the optical gap of the active layer), of these devices is summarized in Table S1. Note that the IT-M device exhibits the largest Eloss of 0.567 eV, compared to that of Y6-series devices which is about 0.50 eV. The voltage loss of OSCs can be split into two contributions: ΔVloss = ΔVradoc + ΔVnonradoc. Here, ΔVradoc is the difference between the optical bandgap of the absorber and Vradoc, where Vradoc is an upper limit for Voc, namely, radiative open circuit voltage in the case of pure radiative recombination, while ΔVnonradoc represents the loss due to nonradiative recombination, which can be given by  where EQEEL is the electroluminescence quantum efficiency. The measured EQEEL values are 8.36 × 10−3% for the D18:Y6 device and 5.20 × 10−3% for the D18:IT-M device (Fig. S2), which correspond to ΔVnonradoc of 0.24 V and 0.25 V, respectively. The calculated ΔVradoc values are 0.267 V for the D18:Y6 device and 0.317 V for the D18:IT-M device. Hence, compared with the IT-M-based OSCs, the Y6-series-based devices exhibit greater potential in reducing photon energy loss.
Having understood the charge generation contribution, we now pursue insight into charge transport and recombination, as well as their influence on device parameters. In an OSC under operation conditions, good charge-transport properties are expected to partly resist recombination and provide the presence of charge-collection required for good solar-cell performance. Fig. S3 shows the J–V characteristics of the single-carrier device, which follows the Mott–Gurney relationship for space charge limited current (SCLC). The best performing D18:L8-BO device exhibits a fastest mobility of 6.21 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, suggesting a sufficiently short sweep-out time for free carriers under different voltage biases. In contrast, the D18:IT-M device shows a relatively lower value of 1.54 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, while the fastest mobilities for other devices are found to be in the range between 1.53 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 6.03 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. Obviously, charge-transport property alone cannot explain the FF difference found between the devices, which may be understood by consideration of the competition between charge collection and recombination.
To gain quantitative insight into the charge recombination kinetics, we carried out transient optoelectronic measurements, such as transient photovoltaic (TPV) and transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements, and undertook a detailed study of the dynamics of charge carriers and the corresponding recombination rate in devices under operation. Such a technique, which is also named the differential capacitance method, has previously been employed by us to determine the spatially average excess charge carrier density n produced by light. It is noteworthy that impedance spectroscopy is another powerful perturbation technique for OSC study that measures differential capacitances and reveals frequency dependent electrical behavior. The transient optoelectronic analysis, which enables determining the charge carrier density and lifetime under operating conditions, has become a convenient experimental method to investigate recombination dynamics in OSCs. The charge densities as a function of voltage for these devices are shown in Fig. 3a, with the details of calculation documented in ESI Note 2. All the measured carrier densities of devices increase exponentially with voltage, following n = n0eγVoc, where n0 is the nominal charge carrier density in the dark, and γ is the slope of the ln(n)–Voc curves and given by q/2kBT for an ideal semiconductor. Assuming a drift current J = qnμE holds in the device, the Y6-series devices would deliver larger photocurrent than the IT-M one in all range of voltages as expected from their obviously higher charge density (Fig. 3a), which is consistent with the measured Jsc shown in Table 1. The same density data as a function of corresponding light intensities are displayed in Fig. S4. The results clearly demonstrate that the Y6-series devices can yield much more carriers than the IT-M device under the same illumination conditions, thus responsible for the observed much larger Jsc. In addition, the prefactor γ is related to the characteristic tail energy Eu following: Eu = 1/(2γ), which reflects the degree of distribution of tails that impose transport limited charge recombination within devices. Calculating the Eu value of these four devices from the prefactor γ, we find a large Eu = 116 meV for the D18:IT-M device, indicative of a wider distribution of density of states (DOS) and a determining factor for cell performance. In contrast, the Eu values of the Y6-series devices are relatively lower (in the range between 61 meV and 102 meV). The influence of tail states on recombination in the devices will be discussed below.
Under the conditions where non-geminate recombination is the dominant recombination mechanism in OSCs, the recombination current can be expressed by means of the following equation
Jrec = qdR ≈ qdk2n2
(3)
where
d is the active layer thickness. The measured J–V characteristic is the superposition of photo-generated current Jgen and the competing recombination current Jrec, given by

J(V) = Jgen − Jrec(V) = Jgen − qdk2(n)n2
(4)
where
Jgen is voltage independent and can be approximately equal to the short circuit current Jsc. Therefore, the density dependent recombination rate coefficient k2(n) can be calculated as follows:

(5)
Note that the deduction of recombination rate coefficient is qualitatively reasonable, because the plots of Voc and Jsc as a function of light intensity shown in Fig. S5 indicate that these devices predominantly suffer from bimolecular recombination. The calculated k2(n) as a function of Voc under different bias intensities for the devices is depicted in Fig. 3b. Noticeably, the high-efficiency Y6-series devices exhibit a similar recombination rate coefficient as low as 2 × 10−12 cm3 s−1, which is far lower than that of the IT-M device (on the order of 10−11 cm3 s−1), suggesting that the IT-M device undergoes more severe non-geminate recombination, subsequently leading to lower FF. Furthermore, owing to the suppressed nongeminate recombination losses, the Y6-series devices can afford higher charge accumulation, thus enabling a larger Jsc.
Note that the measured recombination rate coefficients k2(n) of these devices are all effectively lower as compared to the Langevin formula (kL), which is defined as  with μ being the mobility, and εrε0 the dielectric constant and the permittivity of free space, respectively. Using the measured mobilities in Table S2, the kL here is calculated within the range of 1 × 10−10 to 3 × 10−10 cm3 s−1. The Langevin reduction factor of each device, which is given by ζ = k2(n)/kL, is listed in Table S2 for comparison. We find that ζ of the IT-M device is 0.09, about 14 times larger than that of the D18:L8-BO device (∼0.007). The Y6-series devices show higher charge carrier densities, which would suggest more severe nongeminate recombination effects. Nevertheless, the significantly suppressed recombination rate coefficient helps in alleviating this. Based on the results, the outstanding cell performance in these systems with relatively low mobility on the order of 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 could be explained from the reduction in recombination. To sum up, mobility is indeed a key determinant, but not the only one, in determining the device performance. Broadened absorption, reduced energy loss and recombination rate coefficient are also needed for performance improvement. Nevertheless, further improvement of mobility is still one of the future development directions for boosting device performance.

In an attempt to boost the OSC performance to their efficiency limit, we further explore to what extent the mobility and absorption should be increased, as well as the level at which the voltage loss and recombination rate should be reduced. To fulfill this goal, we employ an optical simulation model, in combination with an electrical model, to probe the interplay between charge carrier generation, recombination and extraction. In this simulation model, the built-in potential within the device is assumed to be the CT state energy ECT, as obtained by subtracting (ΔHOMO − B) from the optical bandgap of the acceptor EAgopt according to the model with interfacial energy level bending included (Fig. 2a), as follows:

ECT = EAgopt − ΔHOMO + B = EAgopt − (ΔHOMO − B)w
(6)
where
B is the interfacial bias potential at the D/A interface and previously defined in eqn (2). Also, in this model, charge generation input G0 is calculated from the exciton generation profile Gex (Fig. S1e) and the measured IQE (Fig. 1e) through G0 = Gex × IQE.

Using the measured mobilities, energy bandgap, optical constant, IQE and layer thickness as the input parameters, together with other default parameters listed in Table S3, our model suffices to reconstruct the J–V characteristics of the devices, as shown in Fig. 1d. The calculated charge carrier densities as a function of bias voltage are depicted in Fig. 3a, in excellent agreement with that determined from the experimental work. Furthermore, in our electrical model assuming that recombination takes place via the exponential tail of localized states, the nongeminate recombination rate coefficient k2 can be approximately expressed asw
(7)
here
βnp is the capture rate coefficient for the trap, Nc0 is the density of tail states per energy interval at the conduction-band edge, Nc is the effective density of states in the conduction-band, Efn is the quasi-Fermi levels for electrons, Ec is the conduction-band edge, Eu is the Urbach energy for the conduction-band tail, and  is the thermal voltage. The approximate treatment on the recombination rate is illustrated in ESI Note 3. It reveals that in this model, k2 is charge density independent, but related to capture rate coefficient and Urbach energy. With these variables listed in Table S3, the value of nongeminate recombination rate coefficient k2 for each device is calculated and shown in Fig. 3b, in comparison with those obtained from measurements. The good agreement between the experimental and simulation results in J–V, –V and k2–V curves validate our model, highlighting the need of controlling the recombination loss for improving device performance. With the fitting results in Table S3 as input parameters, we use this model to generate several device-efficiency maps with changes in bandgap, mobility, thickness, etc.

It is important to extend our analysis to other systems with different optical bandgaps. Having generated the extinction coefficient of the active layer across the entire visible-NIR range by shifting the long-wavelength edge of the acceptor from that of D18 (Fig. S6), which is 640 nm, to 1080 nm (corresponding to a bandgap between 1.95 eV and 1.05 eV) but keeping charge mobility unchanged (ESI Note 4), we further employ the current model to address the role of other parameters, such as the energy offset, which impact the charge recombination and final performance. Fig. 4 shows the contour plots of device performance parameters, such as Voc, Jsc, and PCE between devices with different bandgaps of acceptor and energy offsets (ΔE = ΔHOMO − B). It can be seen from Fig. 4a that Voc increases with increasing the Egopt of the acceptor and reducing the energy offset. An ultrahigh Voc of 1.4 V can be achieved theoretically (Fig. 4a), while it is preferable to use a low-bandgap acceptor for Jsc gain (Fig. 4b). Overall, maximal PCE values are seen in acceptors with bandgap between 1.35 eV and 1.8 eV (Fig. 4c). The symbols for the measured data points of the Y6-series and IT-M devices are also shown in Fig. 4 for comparison. Indeed, the Y6-series devices show trends that are characteristic of good performing behavior, while the IT-M device is overestimated due to the assumption of sharing the same outstanding extraction properties as the Y6-series (Fig. S7). These results also indicate that materials with a wide range of bandgap are promising to achieve high PCE under the condition that it has excellent carrier transport properties.
We further present an analysis of the influence of mobility on device performance. In addition to the kinetic competition with charge recombination, charge transport properties appear to have an impact on charge collection as well. The charge carrier mobility in typical OSC devices is limited to an order of 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 or less at carrier densities associated with operating conditions. Nevertheless, in a device with a thin active layer (≈100 nm), the low and unbalanced charge carrier mobility of electrons and holes is not a severe problem because the charge extraction time of the device could be noticeably longer than its transit time. Fig. 5 shows the contour plots of Jsc, FF and PCE in devices with varying mobility and layer thickness. Indeed, the Jsc and FF have pronounced improvement with increasing mobility, which in turn enables a thicker active layer for more efficient absorption without sacrificing charge transport. We find that a relatively lower mobility of 2 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 is sufficient to realize a PCE close to 19%. This is in direct contrast to the results of some previous prediction models, in which mobility above 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, even 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1, was a prerequisite for high performance. Note that a high PCE value of 21% can be achieved, if a mobility of 2 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 is satisfied. Furthermore, higher mobility above 2 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 also enables relative tolerance to layer thickness, resulting in PCE over 19% at the range of thickness from 100 to 400 nm. This could be one of the most attractive characteristics for large-area fabrication.
Apart from mobility, recombination coefficient k2 is also a determining factor for device performance. Through changing the variables in eqn (7), the value of k2 changes within the range between 10−13 cm3 s−1 and 10−9 cm3 s−1. The impact of mobility and k2 on device performance is depicted in Fig. 6, in which high mobility and low recombination coefficient are preferable in order to boost the PCE. In the case of high recombination coefficient (i.e., k2 > 2 × 10−10 cm3 s−1), PCE value decreases to 12% even at a high mobility of up to 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1. On the other side, in the regime of low recombination coefficient (i.e., k2 < 10−13 cm3 s−1), a high PCE of 18% can be delivered despite a relatively lower mobility of 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. Decreasing k2 while increasing the mobility at the same time would improve both Jsc and FF, leading to a superior efficiency. For instance, by decreasing k2 from 10−11 cm3 s−1 to 10−13 cm3 s−1 but keeping a constant carrier mobility of 3 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, the PCE value is improved from 15% to 21%, mainly due to the improvement of FF from 64.2% to 80.9% and Voc from 0.87 V to 0.95 V. Knowing the impact of recombination coefficient helps to reveal the recombination loss pathways and explains why the IT-M device shows an inferior FF despite its comparable mobility to the Y6-series devices. Nevertheless, Jsc is not sensitive to k2, especially when the charge mobility is sufficiently high (Fig. 6b). The measured mobility and k2 for the Y6-series devices are consistent with the calculated theoretical values required for a PCE of about 18% (Fig. 6d). Consistent with the findings for the case of fullerene systems, variations in nongeminate recombination or recombination coefficient could give rise to variations in photon energy loss (see Fig. 6e); for instance, reducing k2 by two orders of magnitude can lead to reduction in photon energy loss by 0.1 eV. In short, the inherent properties of high mobility and low recombination coefficient in NFA OSCs establish the basis for future material and device design.

In summary, we have fabricated high-performance organic solar cells based on material systems consisting of a state-of-the-art electron donor polymer D18 and non-fullerene acceptors including Y6, BTP-eC9, L8-BO and IT-M, with the best PCE up to 18% despite the relatively low mobility on the order of 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. Transient optoelectronic analysis and external/internal quantum efficiency measurements reveal that the outstanding performance originates from simultaneously an increasing charge generation, namely broad absorption from 300 nm to 1000 nm with high IQE ≥ 95%, and a reducing recombination rate coefficient k2 as low as 2 × 10−12 cm3 s−1, thus maintaining high Jsc and FF while reducing voltage loss at the same time. We further employ a refined drift–diffusion simulation considering energy offset and interfacial bending to examine the impact of optical bandgap, energy offset, mobility and recombination rate coefficient on the device performance. We find that increasing mobility and diminishing recombination rate coefficient k2, which can both enhance the FF and suppress the photon energy loss, are key determinants to further improve the efficiency of organic solar cells. With the other properties unchanged, further improving the charge mobility to 2 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 or reducing k2 to 10−13 cm3 s−1 in the existing NFA system can potentially boost the efficiency to 21%. In short, this study provides a comprehensive description of the relationship between fundamental material properties (including optical bandgap, energy offset and mobility) and device performance. Insights from transient optoelectronic analyses of the device performance are also provided.


Yanxian Ma: literature investigation, methodology, device fabrication and writing – original draft. Quanbin Liang: literature investigation, methodology, conceptualization and visualization, formal analysis, validation, writing – review & editing. Hongbin Wu: conceptualization, formal analysis, funding acquisition, validation, project administration, supervision and writing – review & editing. Yong Cao: validation, project administration.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 52273177, 91333206 and 51521002) for financial support.


† Dedicated to Professor Thomas P. Russell on the occasion of his 70th birthday.
‡ Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta08780d
§ Y. M. and Q. L. contributed equally to this paper.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023