 DOI: 10.1039/D1MH00986A
(Review Article)
Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 2929-2963


Xu
Chen
,

Zhifeng
Shi
*,

Yongtao
Tian
,

Pei
Lin
,

Di
Wu
,

Xinjian
Li
,

Bin
Dong
*,

Wen
Xu
 and 

Xiaosheng
Fang
*

Key Laboratory of Material Physics, Ministry of Education, School of Physics and Microelectronics, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450052, China. E-mail: shizf@zzu.edu.cn

Key Laboratory of New Energy and Rare Earth Resource Utilization of State Ethnic Affairs Commission, School of Physics and Materials Engineering, Dalian Minzu University, Dalian 116600, China. E-mail: dong@dlnu.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory on Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, 130012 Changchun, China

Department of Materials Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China. E-mail: xshfang@fudan.edu.cn

Received
25th June 2021
, Accepted 2nd September 2021
First published on 3rd September 2021
Since the first discovery of Ti3C2 in 2011, two-dimensional (2D) transition-metal carbides, carbonitrides and nitrides, known as MXenes, have attracted significant attention. Due to their outstanding electronic, optical, mechanical, and thermal properties, versatile structures and surface chemistries, Ti3C2 MXenes have emerged as new candidates with great potential for applications in optoelectronic devices, such as photovoltaics, photodetectors and photoelectrochemical devices. The excellent metallic conductivity, high anisotropic carrier mobility, good structural and chemical stabilities, high optical transmittance, excellent mechanical strength, tunable work functions, and wide range of optical absorption properties of Ti3C2 MXene nanostructures are the key to their success in a number of electronic and photonic device applications. Herein, we summarize the fundamental properties and preparation of pure Ti3C2 MXenes, functionalized Ti3C2 MXenes and their hybrid nanocomposites, as well as their optoelectronic applications. In the end, the perspective and current challenges of Ti3C2 MXenes toward the development of advanced MXene-based nanostructures are briefly discussed for future optoelectronic applications.

Xu Chen

Xu Chen is a lecturer of School of Physics and Microelectronics in Zhengzhou University. He was born and raised in Henan, China, and earned his BS degree from Jilin University. Then, he received his PhD degree from Jilin University in 2019 under the supervision of Professor Hongwei Song. His research interests focus on local field enhanced upconversion and its applications in photoelectronic devices, etc.

Zhifeng Shi

Zhifeng Shi is currently a professor at the School of Physics and Microelectronics, Zhengzhou University. He received his PhD degree in Microelectronics and Solid-State Electronics at Jilin University in 2015. His research interests relate to the controllable synthesis and photophysics of semiconductor optoelectronic materials and their applications in functional devices. He has published over 70 peer-reviewed papers with more than 3000 citations. He was awarded the Youth Science and Technology Award of Henan Province and was selected into the National Young Talents Program.

Xinjian Li

Xinjian Li is a professor in School of Physics and Microelectronics, Zhengzhou University. He received his PhD degree from University of Science and Technology of China. His research interests relate to luminescent materials, energy conversion materials and photoelectronic devices.

Bin Dong

Bin Dong is a professor in Dalian Minzu University. He is mainly engaged in the fundamental and application research of rare earth functional materials and he has published more than 120 articles. He won five science technology awards, such as First Prize of Natural Science in Jilin Province and Second Prize of Natural Science in Liaoning Province, etc.

Wen Xu

Wen Xu earned his BS degree in 2009 and received his PhD degree in 2014 from Jilin University. From 2015 to 2018, he worked as a research fellow in Nanyang Technological University, and JSPS research fellow in Tokyo Institute of Technology, respectively. Currently, he is an associate professor in College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University. His research interests focus on luminescent materials, plasmonics and photoelectric devices.

Xiaosheng Fang

Xiaosheng Fang is currently a Professor in the Department of Materials Science, Fudan University, China. He received his PhD degree from the Institute of Solid State Physics (ISSP), the Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2006. Afterward, he worked at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Japan as a JSPS postdoctoral fellow and ICYS-MANA researcher. His research interest mainly focuses on semiconductor nanostructure-based photodetectors.

Since the successful exfoliation of graphene from graphite using Scotch tape by Novoselov, Geim and their co-workers in 2004, two-dimensional (2D) materials have been extensively studied in the past decade due to their excellent electrical, optical, thermal, and mechanical properties. Undoubtedly, 2D graphene nanomaterials possess one of the great potential applications in optoelectronics, rechargeable lithium-ion batteries, catalysis, environmental protection and biomedicine. Hence, other graphene-like ultrathin 2D nanomaterials have also been explored and extensively studied. Due to their similar structural features but different compositions from graphene, 2D metal–organic frame-works (MOFs), transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4), black phosphorus (BP), hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), layered metal oxides, and layered double hydroxides (LDHs) are considered typical graphene-like ultrathin 2D nanomaterials that exhibit versatile properties. Recently, a new family of novel 2D transition metal carbides, nitrides, and carbonitrides, MXenes, was discovered by Naguib et al. and has attracted extensive attention.

2D MXenes are generally synthesized by selectively etching away the atoms from their parent ternary “MAX” phases. The synthesized 2D MXenes with a hexagonal lattice symmetry have the general formula: Mn+1XnTx, where “M” is an early transition metal (Sc, Ti, V, Cr, Zr, Nb, Mo, Hf, Ta, or W), “A” is a group IIIA or IVA element (Al, Ga, Si, etc.), “X” is carbon and/or nitrogen, and Tx describes the surface-terminated functional groups (–O, –OH, –F, etc.). Since their discovery in 2011, about 30 different stoichiometric MXenes have been synthesized and the structures and properties of dozens more have been theoretically predicted. Owing to their promising physicochemical properties, 2D MXenes pioneered by Gogotsi and co-workers are considered as promising alternatives to graphene and other carbon nanomaterials, and have been developed and predominantly used in transparent conductors, catalysis, electronics, biomedicine, energy conversion and storage applications.
The high surface area and rich surface termination of MXene nanostructures endowed their impressive optical properties, tunable electronic properties, hydrophilic surfaces and large number of active sites with efficient loading of active substances and strong redox reactivity. Additionally, MXenes have excellent metallic conductivity, high anisotropic carrier mobility, good structural and chemical stabilities, high optical transmittance, excellent mechanical strength, tuneable work function (WF) and broadband absorption. Among them, 2D Ti3C2Tx nanostructures in the MXene groups were first discovered and investigated, which exhibit an electronic conductivity in the range of 6000–15000 S cm−1, an impressively high Young's modulus in the range of 0.33 ± 0.03 TPa measured in the single layer, and a broadband absorption from the ultraviolet (UV) to near-infrared (NIR) region. Moreover, the large range (1.6 to 5.8 eV) of adjustable WF enables Ti3C2Tx MXenes combined with other semiconductors or metals to form Ohmic contacts or Schottky junctions at will. Thus, these provide unique and new opportunities for MXene applications in optoelectronics. In addition, some initial studies have reported their application in solar cells, photodetectors (PDs) and photoelectrochemical (PEC) devices. Therefore, there is a great need to underline their optoelectronic mechanism and compile their applications in MXene optoelectronic devices.
In this review, we systematically and comprehensively summarize the recent advances in MXene photoelectronic applications based on Ti3C2Tx MXene nanostructures. First, we summarize the synthetic methods for the preparation of pure MXene nanostructures, functionalized MXene nanostructures and their hybrid nanocomposites. Then we provide highlights of the theoretical studies about the effects of surface modification on their electronic and optical properties, and explore experiments to further expand their electronic, optical and mechanical properties. Afterwards, we give a demonstration of the preliminary achievements in their various optoelectronic applications, such as photovoltaics, photodetectors and photoelectrochemical devices (Fig. 1). Finally, we present a perspective on the current challenges and future development opportunities of MXenes for optoelectronic applications, aiming to inspire a broader interest in the near future.

Similar to the MAX phases, MXenes are also hexagonal crystals with a P63/mmc space group. As shown in Fig. 2a, the M atoms are arranged in a compact hexagonal structure with X element atoms at the octahedral interstitial sites. The model structures for 2D MXene systems can be constructed by removing the A element from the bulk MAX phases. In the MAX phases, the in-plane M–X bond has a lower chemical activity than the metallic M–Al bond, making it possible to selectively etch the Al element layer, as discussed in the previous section. When hydrofluoric acid (HF) or a fluorine salt selectively etches the A layer from the MAX phases, the M–A bond is gradually replaced by surface terminals such as –OH, –F, and –O, which results in the good hydrophilicity and surface structure tunability of MXenes. Chen et al. used a modified model based on the HF etching method to investigate the surface structure of Ti3C2Txvia density functional theory (DFT) calculations.Fig. 2a displays the energetically most favorable configuration of F and OH terminations, where the OH and F terminations are orderly adsorbed on the surface of the Ti3C2 monolayer and prefer to stay on the topmost sites of the Ti atoms. The different surface terminations have dramatic effects on the structural, electronic, optical and mechanical properties of Ti3C2 nanostructures, which has been demonstrated using theoretical and experimental research studies. In the following section, we will summarize the synthesis of MXene nanostructures, interlayer engineering and the surface modification of MXenes.


To date, a growing number of synthesis methods have been developed to produce high-quality MXene nanosheets in high yields by selectively etching the A atoms from their parent MAX phases. A schematic of the synthesis of MXenes from MAX phases is illustrated in Fig. 2b. The most commonly used etchant for the MXene phase, Ti3AlC2, is aqueous HF. However, mainly due to the safety concerns associated with the storage and handling of HF, there is a fast shift toward its in situ generation using hydrochloric acid (HCl) and lithium fluoride (LiF), ammonium hydrogen difluoride (NH4HF2), or ammonium fluoride (NH4F). Meanwhile, some fluoride-free etching methods, such as hydrothermal method in alkali, electrochemical etching method, and Lewis acid treatment, have been developed and some novel fabrication routes have been explored. Then, the Ti3C2Tx MXenes were intercalated and delaminated by the intercalation of large organic molecules and cations, which were usually used for expanding the interlayer distances of multilayered MXenes, followed by sonication treatment to produce monolayer MXenes.

On this basis, we focus on the synthesis techniques of Ti3C2Tx MXenes as well as their respective pros and cons, as listed in Table 1. We summarize the recent advances in Ti3C2Tx MXene synthesis and elucidate the relationship between the synthesis techniques and structural properties of Ti3C2Tx MXenes. The detailed characteristics of the synthesis techniques as well as the properties of Ti3C2Tx MXenes will be discussed in the following sections.
Method
Etchant
Temperature
Reaction time
Sample type
Advantage
Disadvantage
HF etching
50% HF
RT
2 h
Accordion-like structure; 1–20 μm of size range
Selectively etched and feasible
Highly toxic and dangerous; small flake size with plenty of defects; low yield
Fluoride salt etching
LiF, NH4HF2, NH4F
40 °C
45 h
Few layer; a lateral dimension of 0.5–1.5 μm
Milder; a large lateral size, high electrical conductivity
Less hazardous; a high etching temperature and long time
Alkali etching
NaOH, KOH
270 °C
12 h
52 μm in thickness
No F-termination
A high etching temperature and high concentration of etchant
TMAOH
RT
24 h
A lateral dimension of 500–1000 nm
Facilitating delamination; no F-termination; very efficient etching
The presence of the Al(OH)4−1 surface termination might affect the potential applications
Electrochemical etching
NH4Cl and TMAOH
RT
5 h
Average lateral size over 2.4 μm; –O, –OH terminations
High yield (over 90%); no F-termination
A complex process; hydrolyzed Al(OH)4−1 surface termination
Lewis acidic melts
ZnCl2, CuCl2, CdCl2
550 °C
5 h
Accordion-like structure
Controllable surface terminations; no F-termination
A high synthetic temperature and energy consumption; a small flake size

In 2011, Gogotsi et al. first fabricated Ti3C2Tx nanosheets using a 50% HF solution to selectively etch aluminum (Al) from Ti3AlC2 powders at room temperature (RT). Subsequently, this HF etching method has been extensively explored for preparing Ti3C2Tx MXenes. This facile and simple method is beneficial for the high yield and easily scalable production of MXenes. The scanning electron micrograph (SEM) images of Ti3AlC2 and multilayer Ti3C2Tx are shown in Fig. 2c and d. The etching reaction based on HF etching can be described by the following equations:

Ti3AlC2 + 3HF = AlF3 + 3/2H2↑ + Ti3C2
(1)
Ti3C2 + 2H2O = Ti3C2(OH)2 + H2↑
(2)
Ti3C2 + 2HF = Ti3C2F2 + H2↑
(3)
The weak bonding energy of metallic Ti–Al bonds induced the selective etching of the Al atoms by HF, and the exposed Ti atoms per unit formula in the exfoliated Ti
3C2 layers need dangling bond passivation. Both DFT-based geometry optimizations and experiments demonstrated that the surfaces of Ti3C2Tx were terminated with abundant –OH and –F surface groups. There are some modified methods through changing the etching temperature, HF concentration (10–50%) and reaction time to obtain flakes of different sizes, excellent conductivities and other properties of Ti3C2Tx MXenes. However, the difficulties associated with the high toxic nature and the dangers in handling, probably resulting in plenty of surface defects on the obtained MXenes.

Considering the disadvantages of the HF etching method, a mild etchant using LiF/HCl, NH4HF2, and NH4F was proposed for the in situ formation of HF with similar etching behavior. After the etching of Ti3AlC2, apart from the –F and –OH terminations on the surface of Ti3C2Tx, there were many more –O terminations in the etched samples, evidenced by the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) experiments. Compared to the HF etching material, the obtained Ti3C2Tx MXenes have high quality, clay-like plasticity, large lateral size, high electrical conductivity and weak interlayer interactions. Cation (Li+) intercalation could promote the delamination of Ti3C2Tx MXenes with a large interlayer spacing, and is beneficial for further structural regulation. Another merit of this mild etching method is that it causes little damage to the MXenes, which reduces the defects on the Ti3C2Tx nanosheets.

Although the HF and fluoride salt-based etching methods could effectively etch the Al from Ti3AlC2, the processes are harmful to the environment and decrease the electrochemical performance due to the F-terminal groups in Ti3C2Tx. Thus, some fluoride-free methods were implemented to prepare the Ti3C2Tx. Recently, due to its strong binding ability with the amphoteric element Al, alkali has been selected as an etching agent to synthesize Ti3C2Tx from Ti3AlC2. For example, Geng et al. used an organic etchant, tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAOH) for the etching and delamination of Ti3AlC2 to obtain Ti3C2 nanosheets terminated with Al(OH)4. Li and his co-workers reported potassium hydroxide (KOH) mixed with a little water as an etching agent to prepare Ti3C2(OH)2 nanosheets by the hydrothermal method at 180 °C. In addition, Zhang et al. employed a 27.5 M sodium hydroxide (NaOH) solution to selectively etch away Al atoms from Ti3AlC2 at 270 °C and successfully obtained high-purity (92 wt%) Ti3C2Tx terminated with O and OH groups. The Al atoms in Ti3AlC2 can be oxidized to soluble Al(OH)4−1 by NaOH. The reaction temperature and the concentration of NaOH play a key role in the quality of Ti3C2Tx involving the following reactions:

Ti3AlC2 + OH− + 5H2O = Ti3C2(OH)2 + Al(OH)4− + 5/2H2↑
(4)
Ti3AlC2 + OH− + 5H2O = Ti3C2O2 + Al(OH)4− + 7/2H2↑
(5)
Although high-purity Ti
3C2Tx MXenes could be obtained by the above alkali-assisted hydrothermal etching method, the preparation methods generally require high temperature, pressure and alkali concentration to dissolve Al (oxide) hydroxides. Feng and co-workers prepared Ti3C2Tx by an electrochemical etching method in a binary aqueous electrolyte. The aqueous electrolyte consisted of 1.0 M ammonium chloride (NH4Cl) and 0.2 M TMAOH with a pH value >9. By tailoring the composition of electrolyte, the selective removal of Al atoms followed by the replacement with hydroxide groups enable the formation of single or bilayer sheets with high yield (>90%) and large average dimension.


Very recently, another method was proposed to synthesize halide-terminated MXenes by employing Zn-based MAX as precursors and molten ZnCl2 salts as etchants in 2019. Firstly, Zn-based MAX was synthesized by using Lewis acids (molten ZnCl2 salts) to replace the A element in traditional MAX phases at 550 °C, as the molten ZnCl2 salts could generate strong electron-accepting ligands, which thermodynamically reacted with the A element in the MAX phases. Then, Ti3ZnC2 could be further transformed into Ti3C2Cl2 MXene, as Zn dissolved well in molten ZnCl2 due to the redox reaction between Zn and Zn2+. Huang and his co-workers further proposed to directly etch MAX phases by redox coupling between the A element and the cation of CuCl2 molten salt at 750 °C. The synthesis involves the following reactions:

Ti3SiC2 + 2CuCl2 = Ti3C2 + SiCl4(g)↑ + 2Cu
(6)
Ti3C2 + CuCl2 = Ti3C2Cl2 + Cu
(7)
Lately, Talapin
et al. obtained Ti3C2Cl2 and Ti3C2Br2 MXenes using CdCl2 and CdBr2 molten salts at 610 °C. Due to the labile surface bonding of Cl- and Br-terminated MXenes, MXenes with O, NH, S, Cl, Se, Br, and Te surface terminations, as well as bare MXenes (no surface termination) were successfully prepared by the substitution/elimination reactions. The method yielded MXenes with Cl− and Br−, which are more stable than MXenes with F−. Moreover, the reaction time is also efficiently shortened compared to that of HF etching and the reaction is environmentally friendly, which are beneficial for the large-scale and even commercial applications of MXenes. But the disadvantages of the etching process are the high synthetic temperature and energy consumption.


In order to obtain ultrathin MXene nanosheets and small-sized nanoflakes from multilayered MXenes (Fig. 2e) typical intercalation and delamination processes followed by mechanical forces are required. Intercalants are adopted to enlarge the interlayer spacing of MXenes through weakening the interlayer interactions within multilayered MXenes. A variety of organic molecules, such as N-methyl formamide (NMF), TMAOH, tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (TBAOH), tetrapropylammonium hydroxide (TPAOH), polypyrrole (PPy), dodecyltrimethylammonium bromide (DTAB), tetradecyltrimethylammonium bromide (TTAB), hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), stearyltrimethylammonium bromide (STAB), dioctadecyldimethylammonium chloride (DDAC), hydrazine monohydrate,N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and urea, have been applied to swell the multilayered MXenes. For example, Gogotsi and his co-workers attempted to intercalate DMSO and urea into Ti3C2 at RT, and the c-lattice parameter of Ti3C2 increased from 19.5 Å to 35.04 Å and 25.0 Å, respectively. Interestingly, TMAOH not only served as an effective etchant for Al to exfoliate MXenes, but also weakened the interactions within adjacent Ti3C2 nanosheets and expanded the interlayer spaces.

Apart from organic molecules, metal cations, including Li+, Na+, K+, NH4+, Mg2+, Al3+, Rb+, Cs+ and Ca2+, in aqueous solutions can also be used to intercalate multilayered MXenes for delamination, due to the intrinsic negative charges on MXenes. The intercalated ions could enlarge the interlayer spacing of MXenes and weaken the van der Waals force among the layers. For instance, Gogotsi and his co-workers incorporated a variety of cations (Na+, K+, NH4+, Mg2+, and Al3+) of various charges and sizes to multilayer exfoliated Ti3C2Tx and obtained few layers of Ti3C2Tx. This phenomenon depends on the pH and nature of the cations. Consequently, the intercalated multilayer MXenes can easily be delaminated by mechanical force such as magnetic stirring, sonication or manual shaking to form a stable colloidal solution of monolayer nanosheets.
Recently, some groups applied aqueous KOH solution to synthesize ultrathin Ti3C2 nanoribbons by continuous shaking treatment. The as-prepared Ti3C2 exhibited increased interlayer d-spacing, oxygen-terminated surface, narrow widths of nanoribbons, and 3D interconnected porous frameworks. Wu and Huang et al. demonstrated a simplified and effective approach to exfoliate multilayer Ti3C2Tx flakes via the gentle water freezing-and-thawing (FAT) method. The intercalated water molecules could lead to the volume expansion of Ti3C2Tx flakes and promote the exfoliation of Ti3C2Tx nanosheets. After four cycles of the FAT process, the yield of large Ti3C2Tx flakes with special wrinkles could be up to 39%. However, on further treatment with the sonication process, the yield of small-sized Ti3C2Tx flakes can reach to a record high value of 81.4%. This work could greatly improve and simplify the aforementioned laborious intercalation procedures, and permit large-scale fabrication of Ti3C2Tx MXene nanostructures.

Ti3C2Tx MXene quantum dots (MQDs), fragments of single- or few-layer Ti3C2Tx nanosheets with generally very small lateral dimensions, have been explored for several years due to their novel structures and various unique electrical and optoelectronic properties, such as a high surface area, hydrophilic surfaces, and photoluminescence (PL) properties due to quantum confinement effects, excellent electrical conductivities and high anisotropic carrier mobility. The electronic and optical properties of MQDs can be tuned by changing the surface termination, morphology and composition of the QDs. The above properties make them much more desirable for many applications in optoelectronics, biological, catalysis, sensing, energy etc.

Until recently, the strategy for the fabrication of MQDs was mainly focused on the top-down method. In 2017, Zhi and his coworkers firstly reported Ti3C2 MQDs using a facile hydrothermal method. As shown in Fig. 2f and g, the as-prepared MQDs exhibit excitation-dependent PL properties with a quantum yield of 9.9%. At the same time, our group synthesized functionalized MQDs (10.2 nm) via a solvothermal method with Ti3C2 nanosheets as the starting material and polyethylenimine (PEI) as the surface passivation agent. The functionalized MQDs exhibited bright excitation-dependent blue PL with an absolute quantum yield of 7.13%, and a pH dependent luminescence behavior. Besides the hydrothermal/solvothermal method, many other methods including ultrasonic treatment, reflux method, ball-milling and microexplosion have also been proposed to synthesize MQDs. Recently, Tao et al. developed a self-designed microexplosion method to prepare nonoxidized MXene-Ti3C2Tx QDs. The average lateral particle size is 7.23 nm with a thickness of ∼5 nm. This method could be completed in a few minutes, and exhibits the advantages of safety, nontoxicity, simplicity and low-cost, and is suitable for large-scale preparation.
Based on the above statements, though various synthetic methods could efficiently provide MQDs, some obstacles should be solved, such as time consumption, low production yield, and low repeatability. Combined with the excellent electronic and optical properties of MQDs, it is desirable to explore more efficient strategies with the advantages of controllable, low-cost manufacturing process, large-scale preparation and so on.

Due to the high proportion of surface exposed Ti atoms and the Ti–OH/F/O binding nature, Ti3C2Tx MXenes have high surface activity and vulnerable resistance to oxidization, which offers abundant opportunities to prepare functional Ti3C2Tx MXenes and Ti3C2Tx MXene-based nanocomposites. Therefore, surface modification based on MXene nanostructures retains the original 2D morphology but expands the properties and applications of the MXene materials, in pursuit of modified physiochemical properties. In this section, four surface modification methods of Ti3C2Tx MXene-based nanostructures are summarized and discussed, including controlling oxidation, ion-exchange reactions, Ti3C2Tx MXene-based hybrid nanocomposites and self-assembled hierarchical structures, which will provide insight on the surface modification of Ti3C2Tx MXene-based nanocomposites.


Surface functional group oxidation is able to tune the surface structure and dielectric properties, and increase the electronic conductivity of Ti3C2Tx MXenes. During delamination and storage in ambient air environment, the delaminated-Ti3C2Tx monolayers are not stable toward oxidation in the colloidal solution, and spontaneously transform into titanium oxide (TiO2) nanocrystals for the formation of Ti3C2Tx MXene–TiO2 composites. Subsequently, a few calcination methods have been implemented to in situ oxidize Ti3C2Tx MXenes while maintaining the morphology of layered structure. Annealing under ambient conditions (Ar, vacuum, CO2, and air), reaction temperature and reaction time plays a crucial role in controlling the degree of oxidation. After annealing at 1200 °C under Ar atmosphere, the OH and F groups on the surface of Ti3C2Tx nanosheets can be eliminated without damaging the layered structure and the hexagonal crystal structure of Ti3C2Tx at the stable phase.

Taheri et al. synthetically investigated the effect of vacuum annealing temperature on the de-intercalation and surface de-functionalization of Ti3C2Tx MXenes using in situ electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) and ex-situ thermogravimetric analysis with mass spectroscopy (TGA-MS). They demonstrated that the de-functionalization of –OH and –F termination species at high temperatures (300 to 775 °C) could increase MXene conductivity. Han and his co-workers prepared localized sandwich structures of Ti3C2Tx MXenes decorated with TiO2 nanoparticles and amorphous carbon by the simple annealing treatment (Fig. 3a). The bilateral Ti layers were oxidized by surface oxygen groups, and amorphous carbon was formed due to the outward migration of the inner Ti layer. The localized sandwich structure retained the original layered morphology.
Recently, some groups proposed alkaline oxidative reagents (NaOH and KOH) for the in situ synthesis of Ti3C2-based nanocomposites at RT. Yang and his co-workers prepared novel sandwich-like Na0.23TiO2/TiO2 composites through a facile, mild and scalable strategy. Interwoven amorphous Na0.23TiO2 nanobelts in situ grew on layered Ti3C2 nanosheets though the decomposition of Ti3C2 layers, which were oxidized by dissolved O2 in the NaOH solution. The content of Na0.23TiO2 nanobelts and Ti3C2 nanosheets can be simply altered by controlling the reaction time. However, hydrothermal method was also used to fabricate TiO2/Ti3C2Tx nanocomposites by oxidizing the MXene surface. Other research studies indicated MXenes can be also oxidized by Ar sputtering and plasma treatment for the modification of terminal groups. This could quantify the distribution of certain functional groups on the surface of Ti3C2Tx MXenes, which is a significant key to design Ti3C2Tx MXene-based nanocomposites for improving optoelectronic properties and lead to the realization of semiconducting, magnetic, and topologically insulating MXenes for potential applications.

The ion-exchange in Ti3C2Tx MXenes is evidenced as an effective method to tune the surface functional groups for distinctive structural, optical and electronic properties. As mentioned above, 2D MXene materials generally have rich surfaces with varied terminations (–OH, –F, and –O) after exfoliation. The cation substitution of OH groups can provide some ion-exchange sites to enhance the optical, electrochemical and other physiochemical properties of Ti3C2Tx MXenes. For example, Peng and his co-workers demonstrated functional 2D-MXene materials with alkalization–intercalation treatment, that exhibited excellent lead (Pb) uptake performance. The adsorption behavior of Pb(II) is related to the ion-exchange reaction on the cation substitution of OH groups in activated Ti sites. Inspired by the Pb(II) uptake behavior of alkalized Ti3C2Tx, the Sn4+ ions in the polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)/SnCl4 solution were anchored on the surface and entered the interlamination of Ti3C2, constituting PVP–Sn(IV)@Ti3C2 nanocomposites through ion-exchange and electrostatic interaction (Fig. 3b). Subsequently, CTAB was used to intercalate the Ti3C2 interlayers and replaced the H+ in [Ti–O]–H+ to form [Ti–O]–CTA+, providing some ion-exchange sites on the cation substitution of OH groups. Then Sn4+ was intercalated into the CTAB@Ti3C2 matrix by ion-exchange interaction with the CTA+ group, forming CTAB–Sn(IV)@Ti3C2 nanocomposites. With the aid of the –OH groups, the Ti3C2Tx surface was functionalized by organofunctional siloxanes with –NH2, –COOR, –C6H6, and –C12H26 groups. Additive Al3+ ions were added during the etching process of MAX phases, which could be converted into Al oxoanion functional groups Al(OH)4− in the presence of excessive TMAOH.

A similar cation substitution of –F groups is observed for Ti3C2Tx when treated with KOH, which is explained by a replacement reaction between KOH and F termination. Another effective ion-exchange method based on the etching of MAX phases in Lewis acidic melts was implemented by the substitution/elimination on the surface terminations of Ti3C2Cl2 and Ti3C2Br2. Due to the labile surface bonding of Cl- and Br-terminated MXenes, Ti3C2Tx with O, NH, S, Cl, Se, Br, and Te surface terminations, as well as bare MXenes (no surface termination) were obtained.

In order to expand the photoelectronic, electrochemical and other physicochemical performances of Ti3C2Tx MXenes, many research studies were focused on Ti3C2Tx MXene-based hybrid nanocomposites, which included carbon-based nanomaterials such as carbon nanotubes, carbon nanoplating, nano-carbon sphere, graphene, reduced graphene oxide; simple substance such as Si, Ni, Pt, Ag, Rh, Au, Pd, Cu, Co, and Ru; compounds such as TiO2, C3N4, Cu2O, Co3O4, BP, Fe2O3, Fe3O4, Bi2WO6, MoS2 and CdS; and polymers such as poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA) and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), PPy, polyaniline (PANI), polystyrene (PS), epoxy, natural rubber, polyacrylamide (PAAm), sodium alginate (SA), poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythio-phene)–poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), and poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO). These nanocomposites have been extensively applied in photocatalysis, electrochemical energy conversion and storage, electrocatalysis, electromagnetic interference shielding, photoelectrochemical devices and so on. In this section, we mainly discuss the synthesis of the related nanocomposites with photoelectronic properties.

Recently, Yin and his co-workers prepared a brand new Janus-structured Co-Ti3C2 QD Schottky catalyst through a facile thermal-anchoring hydrothermal method (Fig. 3c). Co nanoparticles can be obtained via the reduction of Co(NO3)2·6H2O under the effect of sodium citrate. As the thermal-anchoring reaction temperature of the initial precursor cobalt increases from 45 to 65 and 85 °C, the amount of Co nanoparticles loaded on the surface of Ti3C2Tx MXenes can be efficiently improved. Zhang et al. synthesized the Ti3C2/Cu2O nanocomposite via a simple oil bath heating reaction. Cu2O nanoparticles were hybridized with Ti3C2 by the reaction of Cu(CH3COO)2·H2O and Ti3C2 in C6H12O6 solution at 90 °C for 6 h. The large surface area and rich surface termination of Ti3C2 nanostructures are beneficial to the growth of Cu2O. Subsequently, TiO2/Ti3C2Tx/Cu2O composites were prepared using the hydrothermal reaction between TiO2/Ti3C2Tx and the precursor of Cu2O. TiO2/Ti3C2Tx was synthesized in an oven at 120 °C for 16 h, and then reacted with Cu(CH3COO)2·H2O and C6H12O6 as the reducing agents. The Cu(CH3COO)2·H2O/C6H12O6 ratio could tune the photocurrent signal of the TiO2/Ti3C2Tx/Cu2O heterojunction.
In the work by Gao and his co-workers, Ti3C2Tx MXenes were cut into nanoparticles and integrated on the surface of CdS via a hydrothermal strategy. It is worth to note that the surface –F on Ti3C2Tx nanoparticles can be replaced by –O and –OH groups under hydrothermal conditions. Meanwhile, nucleation of CdS nanoparticles on Ti3C2Tx nanoparticles occurred. The heterogeneous nucleation can be ascribed to the adsorption of Cd2+ cations on these oxygen-containing groups. Further growth and aggregation of CdS nanoparticles led to the cauliflower-structured CdS@Ti3C2 sub-microspheres, on which the Ti3C2Tx nanoparticles were intimately coupled. Then, various heterojunctions including Cu/TiO2@Ti3C2Tx, Ti3C2/MoS2/TiO2 nanosheets, Ti3C2(TiO2)@CdS/MoS2, Ceria/Ti3C2, CdS nanorod/Ti3C2, Zn2In2S5/Ti3C2, Ag3PO4/Ti3C2, CsPbBr3/Ti3C2, C3N4/Ti3C2Tx, and Ti3C2/Bi2WO6, were investigated for photocatalytic application.

The above mentioned surface modification methods are all based on chemical reaction approaches, and the size, morphology, and distribution of the nanocomposites are difficult to be controlled. However, Ti3C2Tx MXenes would be oxidized by oxygen dissolved in aqueous solutions, even along with the damage of Ti3C2Tx MXene skeleton during the high temperature reaction. Relying on the electrostatic interactions, the hydrogen bond and van der Waals interactions of Ti3C2Tx MXenes with the abundant surface functional terminals, a self-assembly method with mild preparation conditions and simple process can be utilized to obtain Ti3C2Tx MXene-based nanocomposites.

Recently, Chen et al. used an electrostatic self-assembly method to construct the hierarchical Ti3C2Tx QDs/Cu2O nanowires (NWs)/Cu heterostructures, as illustrated in Fig. 3d. Firstly, Ti3C2Tx QDs were synthesized through hydrothermally cutting the Ti3C2Tx nanosheets and passivated by PEI, and the surface charge of the Ti3C2Tx nanosheets was transformed from negative to positive. Then, a Cu2O NWs/Cu mesh was fabricated through calcination at 550 °C in a N2 atmosphere, and further treated with poly(sodium 4-styrenesulfonate) (PSS) to obtain negatively charged surface on Cu2O NWs. Finally, Ti3C2Tx QDs modified with positively charged PEI are self-assembled onto the Cu2O NWs through electrostatic interaction, forming the hierarchical Ti3C2Tx QDs/Cu2O NWs/Cu heterostructure. The PSS and PEI on the Ti3C2Tx QDs/Cu2O NWs/Cu heterostructure are completely eliminated via the calcination treatment in an inert atmosphere. Yin et al. proposed a facile solution-phase co-feeding and electrostatic attraction self-assembly approach based on negatively charged Ti3C2Tx nanosheets and N-rich porous carbon nanosheets modified with positively charged PDDA. The PDDA/Ti3C2Tx nanocomposites, with a porous interconnected conductive network structure and high specific surface area, can ensure Ti3C2Tx nanosheets and the NPCNs in intimate contact, which could combine the advantages of both components and promote more accessible active sites. Similarly, Yu and his co-workers prepared MXene@polystyrene nanocomposites based on the negative MXene nanosheets and the positive PS microspheres via the electrostatic assembly approach. Wang and his co-workers fabricated molecular-level Ti3C2/Ni–Co–Al–LDH heterostructures by a similar method through the assembly of NiCoAl–LDH and Ti3C2Tx MXenes. The difference is that the electrostatic attraction of the Ti3C2/Ni–Co–Al–LDH heterostructure is owing to the assembly of negatively charged Ti3C2Tx and positively charged NiCoAl–LDH nanosheets.
Hydrogen bond and van der Waals interactions also could contribute to the self-assembly process. Recently, Guo et al. reported an iron phthalocyanine (FePc)/Ti3C2Tx hybrid based on FePc and Ti3C2Tx MXenes in DMF solution by the self-assembly approach. The self-assembly process was driven by the strong interactions between FePc and MXene through intermolecular van der Waals forces or hydrogen bonding. Xu et al. prepared transition metal oxide (TMO)/MXene heterostructures via the one-step assembly method with van der Waals interactions. The self-assembly process occurs in the tetrahydrofuran (THF) solution, where the Ti3C2Tx nanosheets have a huge surface energy and TMO nanostructures (TiO2 nanorods and SnO2 NWs), in the presence of an organic (oleylamine/oleic acid) layer on the surfaces, have a relatively low surface energy. For minimizing the surface energy of the Ti3C2Tx nanosheets, the TMO nanostructures could be simply and efficiently assembled on the surfaces of the Ti3C2Tx nanosheets through van der Waals interactions. Yan et al. presented transition metal layered double hydroxide (TMLDH) decorated on the surface of MXene nanosheets by a facile self-assemble process. The self-assembly process can be attributed to the fabrication of OH-F hydrogen bonds between the –OH groups on the surface of TMLDHs and the –F groups on HF-etched Ti3C2Tx MXene nanosheets.
Recently, capillary-forced assembling strategy was adopted to synthesize hierarchical 3D Ti3C2Tx architectures with excellent electronic and mechanical properties. A similar method was used to prepare Ti3C2-based nonocomposites. Quan et al. obtained the g-C3N4/Ti3C2Tx nanocomposite by an evaporation-induced self-assembly method. The g-C3N4 nanosheets and Ti3C2Tx nanosheets were mixed and stirred in a 60 °C water bath for 8 h until the solvent evaporated completely. Our group reported the TiO2 inverse opal photonic crystals (IOPCs)/Ti3C2Tx QD heterojunction prepared via the evaporation-induced self-assembly method. These exciting works open a new horizon in the nano-engineering of metal/chalcogenide and metal/ternary oxide semiconductor heterointerfaces for potential device applications.
Based on the discussions above, the synthetic methods of pure Ti3C2Tx MXenes and Ti3C2Tx MXene-based nanocomposites have been investigated. Intuitively, the synthesis route adopted would influence the surface chemistry of Ti3C2Tx MXenes. In fact, different synthesis methods will affect their electronic structure, conductivity, WF and optical properties. The outstanding electrochemical and optoelectronic properties due to the morphology, composition, and stability of Ti3C2Tx MXenes make them attractive as supports for photoelectric devices, electromagnetic interference shielding, energy storage, catalysts, field effect transistors and biomedicine. Therefore, the most attractive characteristics of Ti3C2Tx, including their electronic, optoelectronic and stability properties as well as their mechanical properties, will be discussed in the following sections.

DFT calculations were performed to determine the electronic band structures and the total and projected densities of states (DOS) of the Ti3C2 monolayer. As shown in Fig. 4a and e, the non-terminated Ti3C2 monolayer presents a metallic character with the continuous electronic states crossing the Fermi level in both the spin-up (red lines) and spin-down (blue lines) channels. The DOS of Ti3C2 near the Fermi surface is mainly composed of the outer layer Ti 3d electrons, which could be modified by surface functionalization. Therefore, various surface terminations that bond with the outer layer Ti atoms, could significantly modify the electronic band structures through electron transfer from the transition metal to electronegative surface terminations. Due to the acceptance of a single electron, the identical oxidation states of F and OH groups present similar influence on the electronic structures of Ti3C2Tx MXenes. However, O groups display different behaviors because they accept two electrons in the equilibrium state. With hydroxylation of the 3d orbitals of the Ti sites and the p orbitals of X atoms, the electronic structures of Ti3C2(OH)2 and Ti3C2F2 present a semiconducting state with observable narrow band gaps of around 0.05 and 0.04 eV, respectively, as shown in Fig. 4b, c and f, g, while the band structure of the Ti3C2O2 monolayer displays metallic behavior (Fig. 4d and h), which has been demonstrated by previous calculations and experiments. Chen and his co-workers calculated the total and projected DOS of O-terminated Ti3C2 QDs by DFT simulation, as shown in Fig. 4i. It can be seen that numerous electronic states cross the Fermi level, indicating that the O-terminated Ti3C2 QDs possess excellent conductivity. Li et al. demonstrated that both pristine Ti3C2O2 QDs and N-doped Ti3C2O2 QDs presented metallic behavior through DOS calculations.

WF was also obtained from the first-principles calculations based on DFT, which is critical for photoelectronic device applications. WF is defined as the energy difference between the Fermi energy and the vacuum potential, highly dependent on their surface functional groups (Fig. 4j). It can be observed that the WFs of bare, F, OH, and O terminated Ti3C2Tx MXenes are distributed in the ranges of 3.3–4.8, 3.1–5.8, 1.6–2.8, and 3.3–6.7 eV, respectively, which are independent of the thickness (n). Functionalized Ti3C2Tx MXenes with O and F surface terminations induce the Fermi level to shift lower, resulting in increasing the WFs. However, OH-terminated Ti3C2Tx MXenes have a lower WF than bare Ti3C2Tx MXenes. This suggests that the WFs of F- or O-terminated MXenes can be tuned by the following factors: the induced dipole moments by charge transfers between F/O and the substrate, and the changes in the total surface dipole moments caused by surface relaxation upon functionalization. Besides these two factors, the intrinsic dipole moment of the OH groups in the OH-terminated Ti3C2Tx MXenes plays the most important role in determining the total dipole moment, which consequently justifies the ultralow WF.
Recently, Koch and co-workers reported that different surface terminations affected the WF and electronic properties of Ti3C2Tx by different annealing temperature treatments. Through comparing the experimental and the calculated WF, they found that the interactions between the different surface moieties and their local dipoles were crucial. The WF of Ti3C2Tx increased from 3.9 to 4.8 eV after heating at 380 °C in vacuum, mainly owing to the desorption of water, carbon-dominated contaminations, and OH species. With desorption of –F at higher temperatures from 500 to 750 °C, the WF of Ti3C2Tx decreases again to 4.1 eV. Considering the surface dipoles together with the weak Fermi level pinning effect, Ti3C2Tx MXenes can be used to construct Schottky-barrier-free contacts with semiconductors or metals through van der Waals junctions, in which the well-matched WFs between the Ti3C2Tx MXenes and semiconductors or metals will lead to a suitable barrier height for photoelectric current generation and transport. Thus, these pave a way for potential applications in field emission, catalysis, and photoelectric devices.

According to theoretical calculations, different surface termination groups have distinct effects on the electronic, optical, and transport properties of Ti3C2Tx nanostructures for use in photovoltaics, optoelectronics and transparent conductive electrode devices. The surface termination groups have a prominent effect on interband transition involving the surface Ti dz2 orbitals hybridized with the C p states, which induces a 40% variation of optical conductivity in the middle of the visible spectrum. From the first-principles DFT calculations, the real (ε1) and imaginary (ε2) parts of the dielectric function as a function of the photon energy are shown in Fig. 5a. It can be seen that compared to bare Ti3C2, both absorption and reflectivity of all functionalized Ti3C2Tx increase in the UV energy range. In the visible range, the absorption coefficients of O-terminated Ti3C2 are much larger than those of pristine, and F- and OH-terminated Ti3C2. This is due to the numerous electronic states of O atoms near the Fermi energy level. Fig. 5b shows the UV-visible absorbance spectra of Ti3C2Tx in organic solvents (DMSO, DMF, N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), propylene carbonate (PC), ethanol (EtOH), methanol (MeOH), acetone (ACE), acetonitrile (ACN) and deionized water (H2O)). It can be found that the Ti3C2Tx films absorb light in the UV-visible region from 300 to 500 nm and exhibit a broad absorption band at around 700–900 nm, which is assigned to LSPR absorption. The optical absorbance of Ti3C2Tx shows a linear relationship with thickness. Moreover, Ti3C2Tx are better dispersed in polar solvents and exhibit good dispersion stability, which could expand the opportunities for processing techniques and the applications of Ti3C2Tx nanostructures.

The transmittance spectra are corresponding to the absorption spectra, and there is a relatively flat absorption in the visible region. The thickness-dependent transmittance spectra demonstrate that as the thickness increases from 5 to 70 nm, the transmittance inversely decreases from 91.2% to 43.8%, respectively, as shown in Fig. 5c. Indeed, the thickness of a single layer (1.2 nm) results in a light loss of 3% in transmittance, which is quite similar to that of per-layer graphene (a light loss of ∼2.3%, 0.34 nm). Moreover, the Ti3C2Tx films displayed good transparency and were flexible (Fig. 5d).
However, compared to multilayered Ti3C2Tx nanosheets, Ti3C2Tx QDs exhibit excellent optical properties, attributed to their quantum confinement effects and surface defects. Moreover, Ti3C2Tx QDs have numerous hydrophilic functional groups, large specific surface area and excellent electrical conductivities, endowing them with tunable properties, by changing their composition and terminal functional groups. Therefore, Ti3C2Tx QDs could be extensively applied in optoelectronics, catalysis, biomedicine, and energy areas. For example, the Ti3C2Tx QDs were utilized to engineer the perovskite/TiO2 electron-transport layer (ETL) interface and perovskite absorber for improving the performance of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Ti3C2Tx QDs could also enhance both the efficiency and range of visible light absorption, thus increasing the photocatalysis activity of the Ti3C2Tx QDs/Cu2O NW composite. Janus-structured cobalt-nanoparticle-coupled Ti3C2Tx QD Schottky junctions could efficiently facilitate photogenerated carrier separation/injection, serving as a high-performance photoelectrochemical water oxidation photoanode.
The optoelectronic properties of different Ti3C2Tx nanostructures were investigated by employing physical vapor deposition, spin-casting, and spray coating methods. However, the synthetic methods of Ti3C2Tx nanostructures definitely have a significant impact on the surface chemistry and the associated electrochemical and optoelectronic properties. Generally, HF-MXenes mainly contain –F ends, while those etched by LiF/HCl contain more –O terminations. A significant improvement in conductivity was achieved when a mixture of LiF/HCl was used as an etchant. Moreover, heat treatment of MXenes in an inert environment could also lead to a significant increase in conductivity due to the removal of intercalated molecules and surface terminations.
The conductivity of single-layer Ti3C2Tx is measured to be around 6.76 × 103 S cm−1. The present highest electrical conductivity of pure Ti3C2Tx films (214 nm) is 15100 S cm−1 after annealing treatment, because vacuum annealing at higher temperatures could remove the intercalated water molecules between Ti3C2Tx flakes and the surface functional groups and improve electronic conductivity.Fig. 5e displays the transmittance–resistance relationship of Ti3C2Tx sprayed from ethanol and water solutions. It can be seen that the water-based solutions always show smaller resistance than their ethanol-based counterparts at similar transmittance intensity, which might be due to the different surface functional groups. The sheet resistance (Rs) data are plotted as a function of films thickness (t) in Fig. 5f. From a linear fit to these data, the bulk conductivity of the films was calculated to be 7450 S cm−1. The measured DC conductivity did not vary with different thicknesses of Ti3C2Tx films, indicating that the films have almost no percolation problems.
Combined with the transparent optical properties and electrical conductivity, the extraordinary properties of the Ti3C2Tx films make them excellent candidates for use as transparent conductors, which could be potentially applied in various futuristic photoelectric devices, including photovoltaics, photodetectors, transparent heaters and so on. To date, 2D MXene materials have been widely studied in transparent conducting films. To compare the optoelectronic properties of transparent conductive electrodes, the figures of merit (FoMe), defined as the ratio of DC conductivity and optical conductivities, is calculated to quantitatively evaluate them. In addition, the conductivity and transmission of Ti3C2Tx MXenes were compared with those of other transparent conductors, as shown in Table 2. It can be seen that Ti3C2Tx MXenes exhibit higher conductivity and comparable transmission to other transparent conductors. Besides the PEDOT:PSS, ITO, Cu NWs and silver NWs, the current FoMe of Ti3C2Tx MXenes are larger than those of single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs), graphene or reduced graphene oxide (GO). These results suggest that Ti3C2Tx MXene conducting films could open up a new direction for future inexpensive, scalable, and transparent electrodes.
Materials
Thickness (nm)
Transmittance (%)
Sheet resistance (Ω sq−1)
DC conductivity (S cm−1)
FoMe
Ref.
Ti3C2Tx
2.8
95
1032
5376
15

300

Ti3C2Tx
5
86
330
6500
7.3

58

Reduced-GO
18
80
1000
1000
1.6

309

Graphene
40
60
1000
150
0.4

312

Ag NWs
107
85
13
6472
500

305

CNT
—
90
462
540
2.7

313

Cu NWs
50
83
30
—
66

306

PEDOT:PSS
—
90
102
936
39

307

Graphene
—
90
377
—
11

310

SWCNT
—
97
2 × 105
300
1.9

311

ITO
100
83
42
—
46

308


Chemical and thermal stabilities of single- or few-layer Ti3C2Tx MXene nanosheets are of critical importance for both the solution and thin film optoelectronic applications. Therefore, in this section, we focus on the effects of environment, light radiation and annealing on the chemical and thermal stabilities of Ti3C2Tx MXenes (Table 3). Generally, the Ti3C2Tx MXene nanosheets with exposed metal atoms on the surface are not indefinitely stable in high temperature environments, and when exposed to oxygen and water, and are easily oxidized to TiO2 nanocrystals. In addition, high-power UV illumination could promote the formation of titanium hydroxide and/or TiO2 in aqueous Ti3C2Tx solutions. Thus, some research studies have been devoted to slow down the oxidation rate and enhance the long-term stability of Ti3C2Tx solutions by storing in organic solvents, oxygen-free and freezing water, antioxidants, or polymer media. For example, the stability of MXenes in organic solvents, such as isopropanol, DMF, DMSO, methanol, ethanol, N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone, and propylene carbonate, has been studied to extend the shelf time of delaminated Ti3C2Tx over 30 days.

Materials
Solvent
Environment
Temperature
Storage time
Stability
Ref.
Ti3C2Tx (50% HF)
DMF, NMP, DMSO, PC, ethanol, water
Sealed
RT
96 h
Good, disperses

296

Ti3C2Tx (LiF/HCl)
Aqueous
Air
23 °C
15 days
0%

196

Ar
5 °C
25 days
95%
Ti3C2Tx (LiF/HCl)
Aqueous
Air
−20 °C
650 days
∼100%

317

Ti3C2Tx/polyanions
Aerated water
Air
RT
3 weeks
Good

319

Ti3C2Tx (LiF/HCl)
Anhydrous iso-propanol
O2/Ar
RT
5/13 years
No apparent change

320

Ti3C2Tx (LiF/HCl)
Aqueous
UV/air
RT
24 h
A conductivity loss of over > 85%

314

Dark/air
27 days
Ti3C2Tx (LiF/HCl)
Aqueous
Air
−80 °C
39 weeks
∼100%

316

Ti3C2Tx (LiF/HCl)
—
Vacuum
775 °C
—
Some TiO2

155

Ti3C2Tx (49% HF)
—
Ar
800 °C
—
A few TiO2

149

Ti3C2Tx (40% HF)
—
Ar
1200 °C
—
A small of TiCxO1−x

146

The degradation of Ti3C2Tx nanosheets in water solution usually starts at the edges with a single-exponential decay model. Barsoum et al. proposed a simple method to suppress the oxidation of Ti3C2Tx nanosheets in aqueous colloidal solutions via capping the edges of Ti3C2Tx nanosheets with low-cost and green polyanions (polyphosphates, polyborates, and polysilicates). Due to the negatively charged surface and positively charged edges of the Ti3C2Tx nanosheets, the negatively charged polyanions are selectively decorated on the edges of Ti3C2Tx nanosheets. This behavior drastically suppressed the oxidation even in aerated water for 3 weeks. Green and his co-workers demonstrated that adding sodium L-ascorbate as an antioxidant to colloidal Ti3C2Tx MXene nanosheets could keep their colloidal stability for 21 days. However, these methods were only reported for short-term (∼30 days) storage of Ti3C2Tx MXenes, and could not satisfy the requirements for practical applications. Recently, aqueous Ti3C2Tx MXene flakes were stored at low temperature to substantially reduce the oxidation degree. Surprisingly, even after 650 days of freeze storage, the Ti3C2Tx MXene flakes could also retain the initial flake morphology and physical properties.
The effect of ambient atmosphere on the electrical and optical properties of Ti3C2Tx films was also studied, as illustrated in the sheet conductance of three films with different transmittance values in the sequence of wetting and drying (Fig. 5g). The colors blue, red, purple, orange, green, and yellow represent the following storage conditions, respectively: as prepared, dry N2 overnight, continuous 2 days with H2O-saturated N2, dry N2 for 1 day, open atmosphere for 2 days, and finally dry N2 for 1 day. Dehydrating Ti3C2Tx films using dry N2 dramatically increases their sheet conductance obtained in air or H2O-saturated N2. The change in sheet conductance through dehydrating/hydrating Ti3C2Tx films is reversible. The short-term effect of O2 was compared in the open atmosphere for 2 days (green) and under dry N2 for 1 day (yellow). Similar to wet N2, hydrating films in the open atmosphere decrease sheet conductance. Then the subsequent dehydration using dry N2 increases sheet conductance. Interestingly, the transmittance of Ti3C2Tx films shows no change after storage under atmosphere for 30 days. Thus, the air stability, which induces the change in the electrical conductivity and concomitant optical properties of Ti3C2Tx MXenes, should be given extensive attentions for practical optoelectronic applications.
Thermal stability is another vital index of Ti3C2Tx that depends on their chemical composition and the environment. For example, Ti3C2Tx (F and OH groups) nanosheets are stable at 200–800 °C in Ar atmosphere, but existence of some F or OH groups and small amount of formed TiO2 and AlF3 is attached on the surface of Ti3C2Tx nanosheets after heated to 500 °C. Furthermore, the hexagonal crystal structure of Ti3C2Tx can be preserved even at 1200 °C and the defects were eliminated. But there are some non-layered TiC particles. The Ti3C2Tx nanosheets with in situ vacuum annealing were investigated using the rotationally averaged (RA)-selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern. After final annealing at 775 °C, the Ti3C2Tx samples largely retained their structure with small amounts of anatase. At vacuum annealing temperatures above 800 °C, a phase transformation would occur and cubic TiC and TiO2 were formed with CO/CO2 gas evolution. On the contrary, while Ti3C2Tx were annealed in oxygen atmosphere, they could be oxidized into anatase TiO2 nanocrystals on Ti3C2Tx layers at 200 °C, and then completely converted to rutile TiO2 at 1000 °C. By controlling the heating rate, annealing temperature and exposure time, the Ti3C2Tx MXenes could be transformed into carbon sheet-supported TiO2 with different crystal structures, particle sizes and morphologies, which have been observed in the in situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images. Therefore, these attractive properties could be a viable support or template for preparing functional Ti3C2Tx MXenes and Ti3C2Tx MXene-based nanocomposites.

Apart from the excellent optical, electrical and thermal properties, the Ti3C2Tx films also exhibit outstanding mechanical properties for potential applications in flexible photovoltaic, optoelectronic and transparent conductive electrode devices. DFT and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations were carried out to investigate the mechanical properties of Ti3C2Tx MXenes.Fig. 5h shows the calculated strain–stress curves. Young's modulus can be calculated from the initial regions (≤1%) of the strain–stress curves by a linear fit, about 502 GPa, which is insensitive to the strain rate in the range of 0.0002–0.001 ps−1. Subsequently, Sinitskii and his co-workers measured the Young's modulus of Ti3C2Tx monolayers and bilayers through nanoindentation with the tip of an atomic force microscope (AFM). The effective Young's modulus of monolayer Ti3C2Tx was determined to be 0.33 TPa, which is higher than those of other solution-processed 2D materials.

Similar to other properties, the mechanical properties of Ti3C2Tx also strongly depend on the surface terminated groups, due to the presence of van der Waals and hydrogen bonds between the sheets. The gap distance between two OH terminated Ti3C2Tx layers is only ∼0.57 Å, which is much narrower than that that of O and F terminated Ti3C2Tx (∼2.5 Å), resulting in a higher normal-to-the-plane elastic modulus for Ti3C2Tx decorated with OH group. According to the contact resonance AFM (CR-AFM) techniques, the corresponding elastic moduli of flat Ti3C2Tx flakes in air and water are found to range from 12 to 75 GPa and from 7 to 70 GPa, respectively. More importantly, the mechanical properties of Ti3C2Tx films could be enhanced though combining with polymeric materials, such as PVA, polyethylene, chitosan, PEI and polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS). However, some research studies reveal that the Ti3C2Tx films also exhibit good mechanical properties when coated on flexible substrates. As shown in Fig. 5i, the resistance of Ti3C2Tx films coated on flexible substrates changes with the bending radius in the range of 13.5 to 3.8 mm. It can be seen that the films exhibit excellent electromechanical stability as the bending radius is up to 8 mm, and then Rs increases about 15% at a minimal radius of 3.8 mm during the first bending cycle. Subsequently, the resilience of the films is measured after 10 bending cycles to be r = 3.8 mm, as shown in the inset of Fig. 5i. Rs exhibits a variation of 14% during the first cycle and fluctuates around 25% during subsequent cycles. Moreover, the films were found to be intact after the bending tests, which indicates that the Ti3C2Tx films have excellent electromechanical properties and could be applied in flexible optoelectronic devices.

Based on their outstanding structural, electronic, optical, thermal and mechanical properties, Ti3C2Tx nanostructures have great potential as a new class of conducting materials in many applications including photoelectric devices, supercapacitors, catalysis, biomedicine, electromagnetic interference shielding and so on. For many applications that have already been predicted or verified, the tunable chemistry and controllable structure of Ti3C2Tx should be optimized to highlight the desired electrical, optical, and other physicochemical properties. Here, we will give a brief summary on the preliminary development and achievements of optoelectronic device applications of Ti3C2Tx nanostructures, mainly focusing on the photovoltaic, photodetection, and photoelectrochemical devices.


To date, due to the wide range of WFs (from 1.6 to 5.8 eV) achieved by tuning by their composition and surface termination groups, Ti3C2Tx nanostructures have been applied in organic/polymer solar cells, silicon solar cells, and PSCs.Fig. 6a shows that an interpolating quadratic function covers the whole phase-space of relative F:OH:O concentration of Ti3C2Tx, while the ratio of the mixture F:OH:O is 62:25:13, and the calculated WF value (3.75 eV) is similar to the experimental WF value (3.69 eV, black star). Ti3C2Tx nanostructures mainly consist of monolayer or few-layer Ti3C2Tx nanosheets and Ti3C2Tx QDs by versatile cutting methods. They also have superior electrical conductivity, high and anisotropic carrier mobility, excellent optical transparency, and good dispersion stability in different solutions for processing technology.

In addition, Ti3C2Tx nanostructures with rich hydrophilic functional groups and a large specific surface area could alter photoactive layer morphology and enable an intimate contact between the interface layer and photoactive layer. Such fascinating properties have provided an intrinsic motivation to the research community to develop facile, effective, rapid, and reproducible synthetic methods, which are suitable for large-scale production and effectively useful for photovoltaic devices. As shown in Fig. 6b, Ti3C2Tx MXenes as transparent conducting electrodes could construct the heterojunction with the n-type silicon, and efficiently enhance device efficiency. Ti3C2Tx MXenes also could be used as the electron and hole collection layers for solar cells (Fig. 6c) to accelerate charge extraction for high photovoltaic efficiency. Meanwhile, Ti3C2Tx MXenes could be doped into the electron transport layer, hole transport layer, or activity layer to modify the energy level and enhance conductivity and carrier mobility (Fig. 6d–f). It can be seen that Ti3C2Tx MXenes have extensive applications in solar cells to effectively improve the performance, due to adjustable WFs and high conductivity. In the following sections, the application of Ti3C2Tx nanostructures in different photovoltaic devices will be discussed in detail.

Ti3C2Tx nanostructures have been frequently utilized as photoactive layers and interface layers between the perovskites and the charge transport layers (CTLs), owing to their wide range WF. To reveal the role of Ti3C2Tx MXenes in perovskites, the whole phase-space of the mixed surface terminations of F, OH, and/or O in Ti3C2Tx MXenes was investigated to tune the WF of Ti3C2Tx MXenes by first-principles calculations, and the MXene/perovskite interface was further analyzed. Fig. 7a shows the most relevant feature of the Ti3C2O/perovskite interface, which has a slight distortion of the surface PbI2 layer in contact with Ti3C2O. In order to understand the behavior of the MXene/MAPbI3 coupled system, they firstly calculated the WF of different relative fractions of OH, O, and F terminations, based on randomly distributed OH, O, and F terminations and the preserved symmetry between top and bottom surfaces (Fig. 7b, Φ1 represents the WF of the perovskite/MXene interface). It can be observed that as the fraction of different terminal sites changes, Φ1 exhibits a pronounced nonlinear behavior. And the minimum WF value in both OH/O and OH/F is found as the relative fraction of OH terminations is 75%, which is a nonlinear behavior. The nonlinear behavior is investigated in detail at the behavior of the calculated charge densities and surface dipoles, and is explained in terms of the nonlinear electronic response in screening the surface dipoles. The behavior of WF (Φ2) of MAPbI3 at the vacuum/perovskite interface for mixed surface terminations is reported in Fig. 7c.

They further investigated the WF of the perovskite/MXene interface, and the band structures of the MAPbI3/Ti3C2OH, MAPbI3/Ti3C2F and MAPbI3/Ti3C2O interfaces are displayed in Fig. 7d–f, respectively, where Φ0 represents the WF of bulk MAPbI3. They pointed out that the WF of the perovskite/MXene interface is affected by the nature of the Ti3C2Tx MXene surface termination. In the MAPbI3/Ti3C2OH and MAPbI3/Ti3C2F systems, the Fermi energy is up-shifted, related to the decrease of Φ2 with respect to Φ0. On the contrary, in the MAPbI3/Ti3C2O structure, the Fermi energy is down-shifted, related to the increase of Φ2 with respect to Φ0. The WF reduction (0.9 eV) induced by the OH terminated MXene surface is much more pronounced than the WF increase (0.6 eV) induced by O terminations. Therefore, the authors assume that the WF of Ti3C2Tx MXenes is influenced in a nonlinear manner by mixed surface terminations, leading to a reduction in interface WF.
In 2018, Ma and his co-workers firstly reported the incorporation of Ti3C2Tx MXene nanostructures into the perovskite absorber layer for a 12% improvement in device power conversion efficiency (PCE). This opened up a new version for the use of Ti3C2Tx as a new class of conducting materials in PSC applications. As listed in Table 4, the Ti3C2Tx nanostructures have been successfully applied in PSCs. One can observe that the Ti3C2Tx nanostructures can be used to fine-tune the band alignment between the perovskite layer and CTLs, even alone as the ETL, hole transport layer (HTL), and electrode in the PSCs. Compared to the reference PSCs without Ti3C2Tx nanostructures, the performance of Ti3C2Tx-based devices has been significantly improved.
Ti3C2Tx
Device structure
PCE (%)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
Ref.
Nanoflakes (∼200 nm)
ITO/SnO2/perovskite:Ti3C2Tx/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
17.41
22.26
1.03
76

92

Sheets (1.5 to 2.5 μm)
ITO/SnO2–Ti3C2/CH3NH3PbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
18.34
23.14
1.06
75

341

Nanosheets (∼500 nm)
ITO/Ti3C2Tx/CH3NH3PbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
17.17
22.63
1.08
70

342

Sheets (1.5 to 2.5 μm)
FTO/cTiO2 + MXene/mTiO2 + MXene/MXene/perovskite + MXene/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
20.14
23.82
1.09
77.6

87

Nanoflakes (∼100–200 nm)
FTO/c-TiO2/CsPbBr3/Ti3C2-MXene/Carbon
9.01
8.54
1.444
73.08

335

Nanosheets (∼500 nm)
FTO/TiO2/perovskite/Ti3C2
13.83
22.97
0.95
63

343

Nanosheets (∼3 μm)
FTO/MXene/SnO2/perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
20.65
24.34
1.11 V
76

339

QDs (8–15 nm)
FTO/cTiO2/QD-perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
17.1
23.9
1.00
67

340

QDs (∼5.1 nm)
FTO/TiO2/m-TiO2/QD/QD-perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD:Cu1.8S/Au
21.64
24.12
1.14
78.7

179

Very recently, Vito et al. used Ti3C2Tx MXene nanostructures with O, OH and F terminations to tune the WF of the perovskite absorber and the TiO2 ETL, and to engineer the perovskite/ETL interface, as shown in Fig. 8a. The complete device structure of the heterojunction PSCs is displayed with a typical layer sequence of FTO/cTiO2/mTiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au as the reference (cTiO2 is compact TiO2, mTiO2 is mesoporous TiO2). Type A is FTO/cTiO2/mTiO2/perovskite + MXenes/spiroOMeTAD/Au. Type B is FTO/cTiO2 + MXene/mTiO2 + MXene/perovskite + MXene/spiro-OMeTAD/Au. Type C is FTO/cTiO2 + MXene/mTiO2+ MXene/MXene/perovskite + MXene/spiro-OMeTAD/Au. Fig. 8b shows the average improved PCE of Type A, Type B and Type C with respect to that of reference cells. The best-performing Type C devices exhibit an enhanced PCE of 20.14% with a fill factor (FF) of 77.6%, a short-circuit current (JSC) of 23.82 mA cm−2 and an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.09 V, which is improved by 26% compared with that of the reference cells without MXene and with hysteresis reduction.
The WF of Ti3C2Tx flakes has been discussed, with a lower WF, which could be exploited to finely control the energy level alignment between the perovskite absorber layer and the CTLs. They measured the effect of the Ti3C2Tx MXenes on perovskite by the UV photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurements. The energy diagram in Fig. 8c displays the WF and IE reduction of a Ti3C2Tx MXene-doped perovskite. The WF of pristine perovskite, determined from UPS, is 4.72 eV, which is shifted to 4.37 eV after the addition of Ti3C2Tx MXenes. The valence band (VB) and the energy gap of the Ti3C2Tx MXene-doped perovskite films are nearly similar to those of pristine perovskite. The WF shift has been found for both single and multi-cation perovskites doped with Ti3C2Tx MXenes, which demonstrates the general applicability of this strategy. The increase in VOC was induced by the reduced barrier at the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD interface and the additional upshift of the TiO2 band induced by MXene doping and MXene interlayer in Type C PSCs. Thus, MXenes have the potential to be key players in WF tuning of perovskite absorbers and CTLs in PSCs to enlarge the design parameter space and improve device performance.
Recently, our group utilized Ti3C2Tx QDs to engineer the perovskite/TiO2 ETL interface and perovskite absorber for high performance and stability, as shown in Fig. 8d–f. The schematic diagram of the complete device structure of heterojunction PSCs is displayed in Fig. 8d with a structure of cTiO2/mTiO2-Ti3C2Tx QD/Ti3C2Tx QD-perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD-Cu1.8S cells. Fig. 8e shows the J–V curves for the TiO2/perovskite (Control), TiO2/Ti3C2Tx QD/perovskite (S1), and TiO2/Ti3C2Tx QD/Ti3C2Tx QD-perovskite (S2) cells. It can be observed that for the device in which Ti3C2Tx QDs were added into m-TiO2, the PCE reaches 19.65%, whereas that without the Ti3C2Tx QDs only achieves 18.31%. However, the optimized device is the TiO2/Ti3C2Tx QD/Ti3C2Tx QD-perovskite cell with a PCE of 20.72%. Finally, the device stability without encapsulation was studied under an ambient environment (16–25 °C temperature, and 25–30% humidity) (Fig. 8f). S3 device was fabricated with the configuration of TiO2/Ti3C2Tx QD/Ti3C2Tx QD-perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD:Cu1.8S films based on the optimized device (S2) with Ti3C2Tx QDs described above. Both the S2 and S3 devices exhibit significantly improved stability compared with the control ones, which retain about 85% and 93% of the initial values even after 2400 h of degradation in the atmosphere.
We also analyzed the enhanced performance of PSCs based on the modification of Ti3C2Tx QDs. The introduction of QDs at the perovskite/TiO2 interface is beneficial to more suitable energy band alignment and improvement of electron extraction efficiency, which suppress charge recombination. The QDs have rich oxygen-based surface termination groups, which can form strong affinities between the Pb2+ ions and QDs in the perovskite absorber layer. And the passivation of QDs could decrease the chemical activity on the perovskite surface to suppress the hydration reaction and halide migration within the perovskite or lithium salts migrating through the perovskite layer. Thus, the introduction of QDs plays a vital role in enlarging the grain size, improving the uniform surface and decreasing the grain boundaries of perovskite, which are beneficial to the decrease of pinholes and surface trap state density to protect perovskite films from moisture. In addition, due to the optical properties of Ti3C2Tx QDs, the QD modified devices could also inhibit the UV-induced photocatalysis of the ETL.

He and coworkers employed the delaminated few layered Ti3C2Tx MXene nanostructures onto Si solar cells as a metal electrode. The device had a sandwich structure, consisting of the light-harvesting (np+-Si) side (pyramidal surface), n-type Si, and textured microgroove structures (Ti3C2Tx/n+-Si), as shown in Fig. 9a. Ti3C2Tx was uniformly drop-casted on the n+-Si microgroove surface, and then the device was treated by rapid thermal annealing (RTA) under an inert atmosphere. The contact conditions between Ti3C2Tx and the Si surface are of great importance for the electrical properties of the devices. Through the contact angle measurement and surface morphology measurements of the Ti3C2Tx/n+-Si substrate, they determined that the surface tension is enough small to make moderate shrinking. They further employed the Kapton tape to investigate the adhesion between Ti3C2Tx MXene and n+np+-Si solar cell or glass substrate with and without RTA treatment. It is found that the drop-casted Ti3C2Tx film on the substrates after RTA treatment has better stability than the Ti3C2Tx/substrates without RTA treatment.

The WFs of n+-Si and Ti3C2Tx were determined via scanning Kelvin probe microscopy (SKPM) method to be 4.10 and 4.28 eV, respectively. After different temperature RTA treatments, the WF of Ti3C2Tx films changed a little, owing to the removal of oxygen rich surface termination groups in Ti3C2Tx. Then they depicted the energy diagram of the Ti3C2Tx/n+np+-Si solar cell, as shown in Fig. 9b. Ti3C2Tx and n+-Si form a superior Ohmic contact at the surface, owing to the matching WF, which could also introduce a barrier to minority carrier flow to the surface of Ti3C2Tx. Therefore, the photogenerated electrons could migrate from n+-Si to Ti3C2Tx electrode, while the photoexcited holes transfer to the Ag/Al finger-patterned electrode at the p+-Si side. And the formation of a built-in electric field between n+-Si and the Ti3C2Tx electrode could suppress the charge carrier recombination.

Fig. 9c displays the J–V curves of Ti3C2Tx/n+np+-Si solar cells under the AM 1.5G illumination without and with RTA treatment at different temperatures. The best-performing Ti3C2Tx/n+np+-Si solar cell without RTA treatment exhibits a PCE of 9.53%, a JSC of 36.89 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.55 V, and an FF of 46.79%. The PCE of solar cells gradually increased with increasing RTA temperature up to 300 °C. At a temperature of 400 °C, PCE decreases, which is because the Ti3C2Tx films could be degraded at the high temperature. The champion Ti3C2Tx/n+np+-Si solar cell after 300 °C RTA treatment shows a PCE of 11.5%, a JSC of 36.70 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.54 V, and an FF of 57.99%. To gain insights into the influence of RTA on the performance of the devices, they investigated the electrical properties of Ti3C2Tx films without and with RTA treatment by the Hall measurements. The Rs values of Ti3C2Tx/n+np+-Si solar cell before and after RTA treatment are calculated by linearly fitting the plots of dV/dlnI versus I in Fig. 9d. The Rs values before and after RTA at 100, 200, 300, and 400 °C are 4.90, 4.22, 2.53, 2.38, and 2.78 Ω, respectively. It can be observed that at a temperature of 300 °C, the Rs value is the lowest. The decrease in Rs is due to the low Rs of the Ti3C2Tx MXene films, inducing the improvement of JSC and FF. Thus, the high performance of Ti3C2Tx/n+np+-Si solar cell after RTA treatment is mainly due to the electrical contact formation between the metallic Ti3C2Tx MXene and Si, which improves the conductivity and reduces the Rs associated with Ohmic losses.

Inspired by their excellent properties, attempts have been made to use the Ti3C2Tx MXene nanostructures in organic solar cells as the electron- and/or hole-transport materials. Ouyang et al. employed the Ti3C2Tx MXene nanostructures with different WFs as the ETL and HTL for nonfullerene PBDB-T:ITIC organic solar cells. The WF of Ti3C2Tx MXene nanostructures could be tuned from 4.08 to 4.95 eV by the UV-ozone and/or hydrazine treatments. Besides, the organic solar cells use Ti3C2Tx MXene nanostructures as the electron or hole collection layers, and exhibit a PCE of 9.06%, which could reach the level of using conventional charge-collection buffer materials. Recently, single-layered Ti3C2Tx nanosheets were used as the HTL in polymer solar cells. The architecture of polymer solar cells is shown in Fig. 10a. Fig. 10b shows the energy level diagrams of the polymer solar cells. The WF of Ti3C2Tx nanosheets is determined to be about 5 eV. It can be seen that the Ti3C2Tx-based devices have a suitable energy band alignment, which could facilitate hole extraction and transmission.

The authors studied the transmittance spectra of the Ti3C2Tx films with different thicknesses spin-coated on ITO substrates. As shown in Fig. 10c, as the thickness of the Ti3C2Tx films increases from 1.5 to 15 nm, the transmittance values gradually decrease from 89.23% to 83.43%, which is close to the value of bare ITO substrate. This indicates that the Ti3C2Tx films have high optical transmittance for incident light by the active layer of polymer solar cells. Moreover, the conductivity of Ti3C2Tx films (4035.61 S cm−1) is much higher than that of PEDOT:PSS (0.0068 S cm−1), which could improve the hole transport and collection efficiency. They also compared the hydrophobic properties of Ti3C2Tx films and PEDOT:PSS. In contrast, the Ti3C2Tx films exhibit higher hydrophobicity, which could enable an intimate contact between the HTL and the photoactive layer. These further promote hole transport and reduce contact resistance.
The J–V curves of organic solar cells with different HTL layers are shown in Fig. 10d. It is found that the ITO-only devise displays a low PCE of 4.21%, a JSC of 13.63 mA cm2, a VOC of 0.75 V, and an FF of 41.23%. Notably, the Ti3C2Tx-based devices have higher performance. When the thickness of the Ti3C2Tx films is 3 nm, the best-performing polymer solar cell shows a PCE of 10.53% with high JSC (17.85 mA cm2), VOC (0.88 V) and FF (67.06%), which 4% overpasses that of the PEDOT:PSS based device (10.11%). The thinner thickness (1.5 nm) of Ti3C2Tx films presents a lower PCE, owing to the poor morphology of the Ti3C2Tx films. As the film thickness increases from 3 to 15 nm, the PCE reduces from 10.53% to 9.20%. This is because thick films have low transmittance and high serial resistance. Compared to the PEDOT:PSS-based device, the enhanced PCE of Ti3C2Tx-based device is mainly attributed to the increased JSC, which matches well with the external quantum efficiency (EQE) value (Fig. 10e). Fig. 10f displays the long-term stabilities of different HTL-based polymer solar cells without encapsulation under the air atmosphere. It can be observed that the Ti3C2Tx-based device still retained 53% of its initial PCE after 45 h, while the PEDOT:PSS-based device quickly degraded to zero after 12 h. This suggests that the Ti3C2Tx films could be a more stable HTL than the PEDOT:PSS films. Based on these research studies and discussions, although the performance of Ti3C2Tx-based solar cells has been enhanced, which usually is attributed to the tunable WFs, high conductivity and abundant terminating groups, the mechanisms are not explored sufficiently. Therefore, it is expected that more theoretical analyses accurately guide the experiments for high performance of devices. However, optimising the structure of Ti3C2Tx MXenes could further promote the performance of solar cells through modifying the interface and active layer. Finally, the transparent, flexible properties of Ti3C2Tx MXenes provide abundant opportunities for the development of related flexible devices.

As mentioned above, in addition to the excellent optoelectronic properties, the Ti3C2Tx MXene nanostructures have high transparent and outstanding mechanical properties, which are beneficial to applications in flexible optoelectronic and transparent conductive electrode devices. Ti3C2Tx nanosheets are easily oxidized to TiO2 during delamination and storage in oxygen-rich atmosphere, forming Ti3C2Tx–TiO2 nanocomposites in situ to expand their applications in electrochemical and optoelectronic devices. In 2018, Mochalin and co-workers prepared Ti3C2Tx–TiO2 nanocomposites by in situ oxidization of Ti3C2Tx for UV photodetection.Fig. 11a displays the architecture and morphology of the Ti3C2Tx–TiO2 nanocomposite-based photodetection device. The UV-visible transmittance of 16 and 38 nm thick Ti3C2Tx films is shown in Fig. 11b; the transmittance values are about 80–86% and 65–75%, respectively. In addition, it can be observed that the transmittance values of Ti3C2Tx films possess a sharp drop at the UV region (about 450 nm), which is attributed to the absorption of the TiO2 nanocrystals. They measured the Nyquist plots of 16 nm thick films with and without UV irradiation in an Ar atmosphere, as shown in Fig. 11c. Based on the Nyquist plots, the equivalent circuit model is given in the inset, consisting of real (resistor, R1) and imaginary (capacitor, C1) components. The resistance under UV irradiation is 85 kΩ, which is lower than that (133 kΩ) without UV irradiation. On the contrary, the capacitance under UV irradiation is 22 pF, which is higher than that (18 pF) without UV irradiation.

In order to explore the electronic and optoelectronic properties, the authors studied the effect of different atmospheres on the photoresponse at 1 V applied voltage in a controlled environment chamber. As shown in Fig. 11d, the fresh sample preserved in Ar gas retains a stable current (8.5 μA) for 6 days (red squares), indicating the electronic stability of the Ti3C2Tx films in inert atmosphere. Subsequently, the sample was kept in air, and the current had a slow drop. The current decay rate is ∼3 times lower than that of freshly prepared sample immediately exposed to air over the same time. These results could be attributed to the quick oxidation of the Ti3C2Tx films in air atmosphere to form TiO2 nanocrystals, and the resistance of the films quickly increases. Therefore, the oxidation process of Ti3C2Tx films can be influenced by different atmospheres, offering more opportunities for constructing Ti3C2Tx MXene–TiO2 nanocomposites.
Furthermore, they investigated the photocurrent of Ti3C2Tx films under UV irradiation in a controlled environment chamber. The Ti3C2Tx films could survive higher power UV laser radiation than other 2D materials. In Fig. 11e, after the initial UV irradiation in Ar atmosphere (from “UV on” to “UV off”), the photocurrent rapidly increases to a maximum value. As the UV irradiation is turned off, the photocurrent slowly decays. However, changing the gas from Ar to air causes a sharp photocurrent decay, which may originate from the adsorption of some electronegative atoms on the Ti3C2Tx film surfaces. Interestingly, while switching the gas from air back to Ar, the Ti3C2Tx films exhibit the same photoresponse behavior as the above process. Subsequently, the effect of other atmospheres, O2 and water vapor was also investigated (Fig. 11f). It can be observed that the photocurrent relaxation is not affected by H2 and Ar, but O2, ambient air (with 20–30% humidity), and water vapor significantly accelerate the decay of the photocurrent. It is likely that the molecules such as O2 or H2O adsorbed on the surface of films, which contain atoms with high electronegativity, could create traps for electrons and reduce the photocurrent. However, the H2O vapor process and H2O deintercalation as the O2 flow process (Fig. 11f) have opposite effect. This is because Ti3C2Tx MXenes are strongly hydrophilic and can be easily intercalated by H2O molecules, even when exposed to humid air. Thus, H2O deintercalation could compress the films and lead to better electrical contacts and higher current through the sample. These findings demonstrated that the partially oxidized Ti3C2Tx films through in situ and controllable oxidation could be applied to UV photodetection and environment sensing.
Recently, utilizing excellent electrical conductivities and transparent contacts, the Ti3C2Tx films were employed as the transparent electrodes to GaAs PDs. Nabet and co-workers demonstrated that Ti3C2Tx-based devices with Schottky contact, compared to the Au-based devices, display much higher responsivity, detectivity, quantum efficiency, and better dynamic range. They also show comparable sub-nanosecond response speeds and could operate in a few gigahertz range. More importantly, the WF of Ti3C2Tx films can be adjusted in a very wide range from 2.14 to 5.65 eV by changing the surface terminations, which could be employed as Ohmic or Schottky contacts at will, resulting in a broad range of optoelectronic applications. Subsequently, combining with excellent mechanical properties, we reported the bio-inspired Ti3C2Tx films as transparent flexible electrodes with high transmittance and a low Rs, which were firstly integrated with electrospun TiO2 films for flexible UV PDs (Fig. 12).

Fig. 12a shows the fabrication process of leaf-based Ti3C2Tx electrodes. The leaf veins are obtained from a myrica rubra leaf by etching in a hot alkali solution. The Ti3C2Tx solution is synthesized using a mild etchant mixed with LiF and HCl. Then the dark Ti3C2Tx (named m-Ti3C2Tx) solution was coated on the dried leaf veins. As shown in Fig. 12b, Ti3C2Tx-based transparent conductive films exhibit a high transmittance of around 90%, and a low Rs value of around 3 Ω sq−1. Compared to the other transparent electrodes, such as ITO, Ag NWs, SWNTs and graphene films, the Ti3C2Tx-based transparent conductive films possess much outstanding properties. Then the as-fabricated Ti3C2Tx-based transparent conductive films are employed to fabricate a flexible UV PD as a free-standing electrode with high transparency and conductivity. Fig. 12c shows the architecture of the RD with the leaf veins coated by two types of MXenes (m-Ti3C2Tx and h-Ti3C2Tx) and lightweight electrospun TiO2 thin films. The h-Ti3C2Tx is synthesized for obtaining different WFs by HF etching and TBAOH intercalation method. The WFs of m-Ti3C2Tx and h-Ti3C2Tx are 4.33 and 3.71 eV, respectively, which are lower than the WF of anatase TiO2, indicating that there is no blocking layer between TiO2 and the Ti3C2Tx electrodes. It is noteworthy that the adjustable WFs of Ti3C2Tx could be used to extensive and different PDs.
As shown in Fig. 12d, the responsivity (R) of the UV PD is measured under irradiation with different wavelengths at 5 V bias. It can be observed that the responsivity could reach up to about 6 mA W−1 at 5 V. The inset of Fig. 12d shows the optical image of the UV PD, which could be easily bent to a helix. This indicates that the PD has excellent flexibility, owing to the ultra-flexibility of the leaf electrode and TiO2 films. Moreover, the Ti3C2Tx-based electrode and TiO2 films are in intimate contact, suggesting its potential applications under different circumstances. The photocurrent–time (I–t) curves of the PD were recorded under 350 nm illumination at 5 V bias after being bent for different cycles (Fig. 12e). The rise time and fall time of PD before bending tests are 2.27 and 2.54 s, respectively. Interestingly, the PD after being bent at 180° 1000 times still keeps over 90% of its initial photocurrent, which indicates that the device has superb flexibility and outstanding stability. This work not only provides a versatile avenue to simultaneously boost the transmittance and conductivity of Ti3C2Tx-based electrodes, but also expands the opportunities for optoelectronic applications.
2D Ti3C2Tx MXene nanostructures with multiple optoelectronic properties and van der Waals interaction could form the Ohmic or Schottky contacts with n-Si, according to the adjustable WFs of Ti3C2Tx MXenes. Gao and co-workers reported the Ti3C2Tx/n-Si van der Waals heterostructure by drop-casting Ti3C2Tx solution on the n-type silicon substrate for a self-driven vertical junction PDs.Fig. 13a shows the fabrication process of the Ti3C2Tx/n-Si heterostructure through drop-casting the Ti3C2Tx colloidal solution on n-type silicon wafer followed by natural drying at RT. The thickness-dependent transmittance and Rs of Ti3C2Tx films are investigated by changing the concentration of Ti3C2Tx colloidal solution, as shown in Fig. 13b. It can be seen that with increasing solution concentration, the transmittance and Rs gradually decrease.
According to previous discussions, excellent electrodes based on Ti3C2Tx nanosheets should have a high transmittance and low Rs. Thus, the authors balanced the transparency and conductivity of Ti3C2Tx thin films by tuning the concentration of Ti3C2Tx colloidal solution. Fig. 13c shows the JSC and VOC of Ti3C2Tx/n-Si device with different concentrations of Ti3C2Tx colloidal solution. It can be observed that as the concentration of Ti3C2Tx colloidal solution increases, the VOC only increases a little, while the JSC of the Ti3C2Tx/n-Si device exhibits a gradual increase as the concentration increases from 0.2 to 2.0 mg mL−1. Over a critical concentration value of 2.0 mg mL−1, the JSC decreases. This result is mainly attributed to the following two reasons. On the one hand, the Ti3C2Tx thin films have a good transmittance, which allows more photons to pass through it and generates more carriers in n-Si. On the other hand, the Ti3C2Tx thin films have high series resistance consisting of the contact resistance with n-Si and Rs, and form a weak built-in electric field with n-Si. Thus the photon-generated pairs of electrons and holes could not be separated, generating a negative effect on VOC and JSC of the Ti3C2Tx/n-Si device.
In order to investigate the carrier separation and transport processes, the energy band diagram of Ti3C2Tx/n-Si Schottky junction is shown in Fig. 13d. The WFs of n-Si and Ti3C2Tx are calculated by the UPS to be ∼3.71 and ∼4.35 eV, respectively. Thus, the EF difference between n-Si and Ti3C2Tx is calculated to be 0.64 eV, which leads to the band bending of n-Si and generates a built-in potential between n-Si and Ti3C2Tx with a field pointing from n-Si to Ti3C2Tx. The Schottky barrier height (ΦB) between n-Si and Ti3C2Tx is 0.74 eV. While the Ti3C2Tx/n-Si heterostructure is illuminated, the photon- generated carriers in or near the space-charge region could be separated by a strong built-in electric field. The holes could transport to Ti3C2Tx, and the electrons transport to the metal back electrode through n-Si, generating electrical signals in the external circuit.
Subsequently, the authors investigated the effect of temperature on the electronic properties of the Ti3C2Tx/n-Si Schottky junction, as shown in Fig. 13e, and the ideal factor of the Ti3C2Tx/n-Si van der Waals heterostructure device was studied. The ideal factor is determined by the I–V curves of the Schottky junction diode, which is a vital parameter to evaluate the performance of Ti3C2Tx/n-Si Schottky junction. The closer the ideal factor is to 1, the better the Schottky junction performance of the Ti3C2Tx/n-Si device. By comparing the I–V characteristics of Ti3C2Tx/n-Si Schottky junction before and after vacuum annealing at 200 °C, the ideal factors and ΦB of the Ti3C2Tx/n-Si device could be calculated to be 3.10 and 0.48 eV, and 2.53 and 0.53 eV, respectively. It can be observed that after annealing, the current and ideal factor both decrease, which is attributed to the elimination of the interface defect between the n-Si and Ti3C2Tx films. However, annealing Ti3C2Tx in Ar could remove the OH and F groups from the Ti3C2Tx surface, which could increase the WF of Ti3C2Tx. Thus, the ΦB of Ti3C2Tx/n-Si after annealing treatment is higher than that without annealing, which suggests that ΦB between n-Si and Ti3C2Tx could be modulated by adjusting the surface functional groups of Ti3C2Tx.
The photoresponse of the Ti3C2Tx/n-Si device is measured under 405 nm laser illumination (15.17 mW cm−2). As seen in Fig. 13f, the on/off ratio (Ron/off) and the responsivity of Ti3C2Tx/n-Si device are determined to be ∼105 and 26.95 mA W−1, respectively. This work shows that Ti3C2Tx MXenes, as a novel transparent and conductive material with wide range adjustable WF, could form a good Schottky junction with Si by van der Waals force. Key performances of Ti3C2Tx MXene based Si devices are comparable with those of recently reported graphene based Si detectors, as listed in Table 5. We also listed the related Ti3C2Tx MXene based PDs, which exhibited excellent optoelectronic performances. These indicate that Ti3C2Tx MXene based devices are highly competitive among different PDs, with a wide range of applications from optical sensing to light detection and ranging and telecommunications. Therefore, considering these properties, including high transmittance, high electrical conductivity, adjustable WFs and excellent flexibility, Ti3C2Tx MXenes are very suitable for the fabrication of large-area, ultra-flexible and high-performance PDs. For further improving the performance of the devices, the synthetic methods of monolayer Ti3C2Tx MXenes with large size are needed to be explored. However, it is also required to explore the carrier transport mechanism of the PD, and optimize the relationship of transmittance, conductivity and flexibility for transparent conductors. Finally, Ti3C2Tx MXenes can be easily oxidized, so it is necessary to improve the stability of Ti3C2Tx MXenes further.
Material
Wavelength (nm)
Self-powered

R (A W−1)

D* (Jones)

R
On/Off

Ref.
Ti3C2/SiOx/Si
900
Yes
0.402
2.03 × 1013
106

345

Ti3C2Tx/n-Si
405
Yes
0.027
—
105

302

Al2O3/Gr/Si
365
Yes
0.2
1.6 × 1013
1.2 × 106

347

Gr/SiO2/n-Si
890
Yes
0.73
4.08 × 1013
∼107

348

Gr/n-Si/n-p junction
860
Yes
0.52
1.43 × 1013
—

349

Gr/n-Si
905
Yes
0.76
3.53 × 1013
—

350

Gr/h-BN/Si
725
Yes
—
2.83 × 1010
107

351

Gr/Si
532
Yes
0.51
—
105

352

Ti3C2Tx/GaN
355
Yes
284
7.06 × 1013
1.42 × 106

98

Ti3C2Tx/TiO2
350
No
6
∼1011
103

344

CsFAMAPbIBr/Ti3C2Tx
532
No
84.77
3.2 × 1012
5.74 × 103

91

CsPbBr3/Ti3C2Tx
450
No
0.0449
6.4 × 108
2.3 × 103

304

GaAs/Ti3C2Tx
532
No
0.155
8 × 1010
—

303


Ti3C2Tx nanosheets not only have excellent optical and electronic properties, but also possess large surface area and rich hydrophilic functional groups (–OH, –F and –O) on their surface, enabling them to easily and strongly connect with a variety of semiconductors as well as photoactivator supporters. In addition, Ti3C2Tx nanosheets have much stronger redox properties than other 2D carbon materials, due to the exposed terminal Ti atoms. Thus, MXenes will be promising materials to be employed in PEC devices. In 2019, Zhang and co-workers proposed a PEC non-enzymatic sensor based on Ti3C2Tx/Cu2O heterostructure for the detection of glucose, in which the Cu2O acts as a photoactive material and Ti3C2Tx as the supporting material. A schematic illustration regarding the principles of the glucose PEC sensing is shown in Fig. 14a. Under visible light irradiation, the electrons are excited from the VB of Cu2O to the conduct band (CB) and the holes are retained in the VB. Owing to the low WF of Ti3C2Tx, the holes could transfer from the VB of the p-type Cu2O to Ti3C2Tx and the electrons are accepted by the dissolved O2. Then after adding glucose into the electrolyte, the partial reduced species (O2−, H2O2) of O2 are consumed by glucose, which causes the inhibition of electron transfer and the decrease in photocurrent.

The UV-visible absorption spectra of multilayered Ti3C2Tx, Cu2O and Ti3C2Tx/Cu2O nanocomposite are displayed in Fig. 14b. The Ti3C2Tx shows a broadband absorption from 200 to 800 nm without an obvious absorption edge. Cu2O has an absorption edge at 650 nm, exhibiting a strong visible light absorption capacity. The light absorption capacity of Ti3C2Tx/Cu2O nanocomposite is stronger than that of pristine Cu2O. As shown in Fig. 14c, with the increase of glucose concentration from 0.5 nM to 0.5 mM, the photocurrent gradually decreases. The relationship between photocurrent and the logarithm value of glucose concentration is linear. The detection limit is about 0.17 nM. This research demonstrates that the Ti3C2Tx/semiconductor based heterostructure can be successfully applied to the PEC non-enzymatic sensor and has enormous potential in the PEC fields.
In 2019, our group prepared TiO2 IOPCs/Ti3C2 QD composite films by the self-assembly method for the PEC sensing of glutathione (GSH), as shown in Fig. 14d–f. The PEC process with the TiO2/Ti3C2 electrode based PEC cells could be proposed as schematically shown in Fig. 14d. It can be observed that the incorporation of Ti3C2 and TiO2 results in a uniquely matched Type-II heterojunction. For TiO2 IOPCs/Ti3C2-based devices under light illumination, the heterojunction enables the entire collection of cold electrons from Ti3C2 interband transitions and the hot electrons for Ti3C2 intraband interactions. The photogenerated electrons from Ti3C2 can be directly injected into the CB of TiO2 IOPCs, with the photogenerated holes oppositely injected into the CB of Ti3C2, leading to an enhanced carrier separation performance for PEC detection.

Fig. 14e displays the photocurrent responses of TiO2/Ti3C2/Nafion electrode with the concentration of GSH under a Xenon light excitation (150 W). The photocurrent of TiO2/Ti3C2/Nafion gradually increased as the GSH concentration increased from 0.1 to 1000 μM. The inset of Fig. 14e displays the linear calibration curves, which have a good linearity with a detection limit of 9.0 nM. We also investigated the selectivity of the PEC sensor for GSH. As shown in Fig. 14f, after adding GSH (100 μM), the photocurrent increased. While the ascorbic acid (AA), glucose (GLU), uric acid (UA), and Fe3+ (100 μM) were added, the photocurrent changed a little. This implies that the PEC device has an excellent selectivity for GSH detection, and also indicates a good anti-interference capacity of the TiO2/Ti3C2/Nafion electrode.
Considering the weak optical response ability of metallic multilayered Ti3C2Tx MXene without an obvious absorption edge, the Ti3C2Tx MXene quantum dots exhibit strong optical response behavior in the UV region, and could be promising candidates for photoanode materials for high-performance PEC devices. Yin and co-workers firstly reported a brand-new Janus-structured Co nanoparticle modified Ti3C2 MQD (Co-MQD) Schottky catalyst for efficient PEC water oxidation. The Janus-structured Co-MQD is synthesized through a facile thermal anchoring-hydrothermal method. Fig. 15a displays the low-magnification TEM image of Co-MQD-48, in which 48 is the Co/Ti molar ratio. The average sizes of MQD and Co-MQD are about 3.48 and 6.66 nm, respectively. The Co/Ti molar ratio of Co-MQD-x (x = 26, 48, and 65) could be tuned by the thermal-anchoring reaction temperature (from 45 to 65 and 85 °C), respectively. From the high-resolution TEM (HR-TEM) image of Janus-structured Co-MQD in Fig. 15b, it can be easily observed that there are two different lattice distances of 2.66 Å and 2.03 Å with different brightness, which can be assigned to the (010) and (002) planes of Ti3C2 and Co, respectively.
To investigate the photoelectronic properties of Janus-structured Co-MQD, the UV-visible absorption spectra were obtained and are shown in Fig. 15c. It can be seen that Ti3C2 MQD has quite a strong absorption intensity within 200–600 nm, which is attributed to the quantum confinement effect. After modifying the MQD with Co nanoparticle, the absorption intensity increases with the Co/Ti molar ratio in the visible light region. Notably, there is an obvious additional absorption edge in 380–520 nm, which results from the surface plasmon effect of Co nanoparticle. Note that the surface plasmon effects could improve the visible light harvesting capability and generate more photo-generated excitons. Then, the PEC water oxidation performances of MQD and Co-MQD were investigated, as shown in Fig. 15d. From the linear sweep voltammogram (LSV) curves of MQD and Co-MQD, the Co-MQD-48 photoanode was found to have the highest photocurrent density of 2.99 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V (versus RHE), which is almost two times larger than that of pristine MQD (1.54 mA cm−2). This drastically enhanced PEC performance might be attributed to the following three factors. The first is that the surface plasmon effect of Co nanoparticle enhances the light harvesting capacity. Second, the carrier transport between the MQD and Co nanoparticle could be efficiently improved. Third, the exposed Co sites could lead to much stronger redox reactivity and strongly boost the surface water oxidation kinetics. While, for the Co-MQD-65 photoanode, the photocurrent density sharply reduces, which is the reason that the excessive Co terminals lead to severe quantum efficiency loss.
In Fig. 15e, the incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) of MQD and Co-MQD is measured to evaluate the light harvesting efficiency and electron injection efficiency for PEC water oxidation. For the pristine MQD sample, the optimal IPCE intensity could be up to 45% at 225 nm, and rapidly decreases to almost zero around 600 nm, which is related to light harvesting efficiency. After modifying MQD with Co nanoparticles, the IPCE intensity significantly increases. In contrast, the Co-MQD-48 photoanode has the largest IPCE intensity of about 90%. Moreover, it can be obviously seen that after modifying the Co terminals, an additional IPCE peak was found in the wavelength range of 380–520 nm, assigned to the surface plasmon effect of Co nanoparticles. Moreover, the IPCE intensity of Co-MQD-x increases in the visible light range. Thus, the coupling of the MQD and Co nanoparticles could efficiently promote the PEC water oxidation performance of Janus-structured Co-MQD. Then, they investigated the carrier transport in the Co-MQD Schottky junction through quantitatively calculating the charge separation (ηchargeseparation) and charge injection (ηchargeinjection) efficiency of pristine MQD and Co-MQD-x, as shown in Fig. 15f and g. The Co-MQD-48 sample has the largest ηchargeseparation efficiency of about 95.6% (1.23 V versus RHE), which is almost 146% higher than that of pristine MQD. Co-MQD-48 sample also achieves the highest ηchargeinjection efficiency of about 91.9% (1.23 V versus RHE), which is almost 162% larger than that of pristine MQD. The charge migration efficiency, determined to be ηchargeseparation × ηchargeinjection, is up to 87.56%, which has increased by 236% comparing with that of pristine MQD.
To verify the PEC water oxidation kinetics, the reaction schematic illustration of Janus-structured Co-MQD-48 Schottky catalyst is displayed in Fig. 15h. It can be observed that the enhancement of PEC water oxidation performance is mainly due to the surface plasmon effect introduced by the Co nanoparticle. However, owing to the energy band bending effect induced by the unique Schottky junction at the Co nanoparticle and MQD interfaces, the photo-generated carriers could be effectively separated. The photoinduced electrons transform to the MQD, and the trapped holes from MQD could be rapidly consumed by the modified Co terminal to oxidize OH− from water into oxygen. Obviously, this process would boost the electrode/electrolyte interfacial charge injection and further improve the carrier separation within the Co-MQD structures. Therefore, the Janus-structured Co-MQD Schottky junction could be efficiently applied to the PEC water oxidation. Based on the discussions and analysis above, the application of Ti3C2Tx MXenes in the PEC devices is mainly due to their adjustable WF, high conductivity, strong redox properties, large surface specific area and abundant functional groups. Firstly, the reaction mechanism of PEC device should be expounded with the theoretical prediction and experiments. Secondly, it is necessary to develop simple, low cost and efficient synthetic methods to prepare Ti3C2Tx MXenes with controllable functional groups. Finally, optimizing the structure and enhancing the light absorption ability could further improve the performance of PEC devices.

This review summarizes the recent progress of photoelectric applications based on Ti3C2Tx MXene nanostructures from the following aspects: (1) the various synthesis strategies for Ti3C2Tx MXene nanostructures, which contain three major synthesis routes, including HF and HCl/LiF etching, alkali etching, and Lewis acidic melts. (2) The surface modification of MXene-based nanostructures, including controlling oxidation, ion-exchange reactions, MXene-based hybrid nanocomposites and self-assembled hierarchical structures, has been discussed to obtain functionalized MXene nanostructures and MXene-based hybrid nanocomposites. (3) Theoretical studies and experimental research are discussed to explore the effects of surface modification on electronic, optical and mechanical properties. (4) The development and achievements of potential photoelectric device applications based on Ti3C2Tx nanostructures have been summarized and discussed in three categories, including photovoltaics, photodetection, and photoelectrochemical devices.

The Ti3C2Tx MXene nanostructures possess excellent and attractive electronic, optical and mechanical properties for various photoelectric devices applications with high performances. However, some challenges exist that have to be faced and addressed for future study. First, the instability of aqueous colloidal MXene solutions is still one of the main drawbacks, which restricts their further practical applications. Aqueous colloidal solutions of MXenes decay fast without any protective measures, due to the attack from dissolved oxygen and water molecules on the defects/edges of the nanostructures. Therefore, there is an urgently need to extend the shelf-life of Ti3C2Tx MXene nanostructures and endow them with high stability. Second, the large-scale fabrication of Ti3C2Tx MXene nanostructures via a simple method still remains to be a great challenge. Currently, the Ti3C2Tx MXenes are mainly prepared through top-down strategies, in which controlling their surface terminations is difficult. Thus, synthesizing Ti3C2Tx MXenes with a particular surface termination is highly needed but challenging for experimentalists. In particular, bare MXenes with no surface termination is difficult to obtain, despite DFT predictions. Hence, it is desirable to search for more high-yielding, low-cost, environmentally friendly approaches that can be explored to prepare MXenes with controllable morphology, structures and surface terminations. Third, apart from the excellent electrical properties, light absorption based on the metallic thin layered Ti3C2Tx MXenes is limited, which greatly impedes the quantum efficiency of the potential photoelectric application. Therefore, strong optical response behavior of Ti3C2Tx MXene nanostructures is quite essential. Ti3C2 QDs possess attractive properties of luminescence and would be promising candidates for photoanode materials for high-performance photoelectric devices. However, the synthesis of Ti3C2 QDs is quite challenging, due to the broad size distributions, uncontrollable morphology, and less reproducibility. Thus, searching for efficient synthesis methods of Ti3C2 QDs is highly desirable. Fourth, from the perspective of optimizing Ti3C2Tx MXene based photoelectric properties, combining the Ti3C2Tx MXene nanostructures with other semiconductors or metals to form Ohmic contacts or Schottky junctions with tuneable Schottky barrier heights is beneficial to improving light adsorption and significantly increasing the charge transfer efficiency. Moreover, the combination of Ti3C2Tx MXene nanostructures with other types of functional materials to form hybrid materials will combine the advantages of both materials and make it possible for multifunctional photoelectric applications.
We expect that this comprehensive review will serve as a guide to those exploring the electronic, optical and mechanical properties of Ti3C2Tx MXenes for photovoltaic, photodetection, and photoelectrochemical applications. Overall, we predict that Ti3C2Tx MXene-based photoelectric application will continue its fast progress made in less than half a decade in the future with growing speed. Combining theoretical calculations and experimental research studies, further investigations should be devoted to increasing the fundamental understanding and widespread utilization of the Ti3C2Tx MXenes in practical photoelectric applications. Thus, we hope this review could provide a broad insight into the current challenges and future opportunities for optoelectronic applications, aiming to inspire a broader interest in the near future.

Z. S., B. D. and X. F. provided the conceptualization. X. C., P. L. and D. W. performed the literature review and summary. Y. T. and X. L. carried out the methodology. X. C. wrote the original draft. W. X., Z. S. and X. F. edited the article. Z. S. and W. X. provided the funding support.


The authors declare no conflict of interest.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (11974143, 11874181, 12004346, 12074347, 11774318), the Project funded by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2019M662508), Natural Science Foundation of Henan province of China (202300410437), Young Talent Support Project of Henan province of China (2021HYTP003), and the Natural Science Foundation of Jilin Province (20200201252JC).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021