 DOI: 10.1039/C5TC02329G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 513-520


Yun-Ming
Sung
,

Ying-Chih
Lai
,

Ming-Fong
Tsai
,

Hsing-Hua
Hsieh
,

Min-Han
Yang
,

Philander Penn
Wei
,

Chen-Sheng
Yeh
,

Fang-Chi
Hsu
* and 

Yang-Fang
Chen
*

Department of Physics, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan. E-mail: yfchen@phys.ntu.edu.tw

Department of Chemistry, Center for Micro/Nano Science and Technology, Advanced Optoelectronic Technology Center, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, 701 Taiwan

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National United University, Miaoli 360, Taiwan. E-mail: fangchi@nuu.edu.tw

Received
29th July 2015
, Accepted 3rd December 2015
First published on 7th December 2015
A large enhancement in the performance of solar cells, arising from plasmonic nanomaterials with a broad band absorption spectrum, is proposed. Gold nanorod-in-shell (Au NR-in-shell) nanomaterials can absorb photons covering the UV-visible-NIR region in contrast to the two distinct narrow peaks for bare Au NRs. The broad localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) induced light absorption enhancement as well as series resistance, carrier lifetime and device mobility for devices containing Au NR-in-shells are superior than those for Au NR devices. To illustrate our working principle, we implemented Au NR-in-shells in polymer solar cells, which resulted in high efficiency. This led to the realization of polythieno[3,4-b]-thiophene/benzodithiophene:[6,6]-phenyl C71 butyric acid methyl ester (PTB7:PC71BM) polymer solar cells (PSCs) with a power-conversion-efficiency (PCE) of 9.01%, which is more than twice the enhancement for that of Au NRs incorporated cells and sets the highest record reported to date for PTB7 based inverted devices adopting the plasmonic light trapping strategy. Our approach shown here is a key step for the further development of high performance optoelectronic devices.

Recently, researchers have tried to enhance the light absorption strength of solar cells through introducing metallic nanoparticles (NPs) into either anodic or cathodic buffer layer to further boost the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of photovoltaic devices. A typical increment of PCE of about 10% has been reported. It is known that metallic NPs are good scatters that can lengthen the optical path for an increase in absorption probability within the light absorbing layer, and their localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effect can enhance the photon absorption capability on nearby light absorbing materials within a range of wavelengths. Typically, the absorption windows for metal NPs, such as Au and Ag, are confined in a small spectrum region and they show a single narrow peak. Au NPs exhibit LSPR properties in the longer visible wavelength up to 600 nm with a resonance peak centered at ∼530 nm, while that for Ag NPs is restricted to the wavelength range of 400–500 nm. Mixing both types of NPs reveals a broader LSPR absorption due to the summing up of the individuals, showing a much higher improvement in PCE than those with single NPs. In addition, it has been reported that an inclusion of Au nanorods (Au NRs) having two plasmonic peaks at 520 and 715 nm in the hole transport layer exhibits a better increment of PCE. Furthermore, Baek et al. designed Au@Ag core–shell nanocubes with a broad and strong LSPR absorption band spanning from 350 to 650 nm and also demonstrated superior performance of their devices compared to those with single metal NPs due to a broader absorption spectrum. Thus, metal nanostructures having a broad LSPR region are expected to be more effective in enhancing the performance of devices.

In 2009, Yeh's group reported the use of Au NR and Au NR-in-shell nanomaterials for efficient near IR (NIR) and nonlinear optical imaging agents. In particular, the peanut-like Au NR-in-shells inspired by Au@Ag (core/shell) have an extraordinarily broad and strong LSPR band, which can efficiently augment nonlinear optical processes 55 times larger than Au NRs. The superior optical properties of Au NR-in-shells over Au NRs provide an excellent opportunity to explore their applications in many opto-electronic technologies.
Polymer solar cells (PSCs) have attracted great attention among scientists and engineers in the past decades due to their potential in developing low-cost renewable energy. The basic structure for a PSC is composed of a polymer-based photoactive film sandwiched between two metal electrodes. To collect charges more effectively, buffer layers for transporting electrons and holes are further included at the polymer/metal interfaces. In the past few years, significant progress has been made to improve the performance of devices from various aspects, including photon harvest capability. Lower bandgap polymers (∼1.5 eV), such as polythieno[3,4-b]-thiophene/benzodithiophene (PTB7) and poly[N-9′′-hepta-decanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)] (PCDTBT), have been developed to harvest more photons with high PCE. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) and MoO3 are good candidates for anodic buffer materials, while TiO2 and ZnO are widely chosen for transporting electrons. The inclusion of both charge transporting layers can reduce the charge barrier height and prevent short contacts at the polymer/metal interface, which improves charge extraction out of the photoactive layer.
Herein, we report the use of the broad band plasmonic light-trapping strategy in inverted low bandgap polymer based solar cells. We adopted Au NR and Au NR-in-shell nanomaterials and mixed them with ZnO nanoparticles as the electron transporting layer in PTB7:[6,6]-phenyl C71 butyric acid methyl ester (PTB7:PC71BM) PSCs. We compared the effect of Au NRs and Au NR-in-shells on the performance of PTB7:PC71BM PSCs. Unlike Au NRs, which only have two distinct LSPR absorption peaks, Au NR-in-shells possess strong and broad absorption strength in the UV-vis-NIR spectrum. It is expected that this unique feature of Au NR-in-shells should be able to greatly enhance the PCE of photovoltaic devices. To the best of our knowledge, the use of plasmonic materials having resonance bands across the UV to NIR region in solar cell fabrication has not been reported in the literature to date and the Au NR-in-shells reported in this study carry the broadest absorption feature as compared to the reported metallic nanomaterials for optical manipulation in PSCs. Note that the LSPR-induced light absorption enhancement from Au NR-in-shells covers the entire absorption spectral range of PTB7:PC71BM, whereas that for Au NRs only partially improves the light absorption of PC71BM. Interestingly, as expected, a PCE of 9.01% for PSCs incorporated with Au NR-in-shells has been achieved, which is more than twice the enhancement of PSCs doped with Au NRs. To the best of our knowledge, the reported efficiency is the highest to date for PTB7 based inverted PSCs that adopt the plasmonic light-trapping strategy. The improvement is primarily from the largely improved short circuit current (Jsc) and subtly enhanced fill factor (FF). The large improvement in Jsc is mainly due to the broad and strong LSPR property of Au NR-in-shells in comparison with Au NRs. In addition, the incorporation of both Au nanomaterials also slightly reduces the series resistance (Rs), lengthens the free carrier lifetime and improves device mobility. The improvement in both optical and electrical properties of devices can account for the Jsc and FF enhancement.

ZnO nanoparticles were synthesized according to ref. 27. Initially, 440 mg of zinc acetate dihydrate (Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O) powder was dissolved in 20 mL of ethanol. Then, 116 mg of lithium hydroxide monohydrate (LiOH·H2O) was added to the previous solution and the mixture was placed for 30 min in an ultrasonic bath. After the solution turned clear, 0.4 mL of DI water was then added and stirred at 500 rpm in a 60 °C water bath to complete the reaction. The synthesized ZnO nanoparticles were then collected by centrifuging the resulting solution. A ZnO nanoparticle solution was prepared by re-dispersing 15 mg of the collected nanoparticles in 1 mL of isopropanol.

Au nanomaterials were synthesized as follows: 100 mL of a 0.5 mM HAuCl4 precursor solution (prepared by mixing 5 mL of 5 mM HAuCl4 with 5 mmol cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), and increasing the volume to 50 mL with DI water) was vigorously stirred, while 120 μL of a 100 mM AgNO3 solution was added dropwise. After 5 min, 600 μL of a 100 mM ascorbic acid (AA) and 40 μL of 1.6 mM NaBH4 were added consecutively followed by stirring for another 150 min. The obtained suspension was centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 12 min. The supernatant was discarded, and the precipitate was repeatedly washed with DI water under sonication followed by centrifugation under the same conditions. Finally, the Au NRs were dispersed in DI water with a particle concentration of ∼4 × 1012 particles mL−1.
To prepare Au NR-in-shells, core–shell Au NR@Ag particles were initially synthesized. In brief, Au NRs were re-dispersed in a 50 mM CTAB solution to obtain 1 mL of the NR solution with an Au concentration of 50 ppm. This solution was then added to 5 mL of a 1 wt% polyvinylpyrrolidone solution followed by the sequential addition of 1 mL of 1 mM AgNO3, 0.125 mL of 100 mM AA, and 0.25 mL of 0.1 M NaOH solutions. The mixture was then stirred slowly for 10 min. The obtained orange-red solution is denoted as Au NR@Ag core–shell-type NRs with a 4–5 nm Ag shell. The resulting Au NR@Ag colloid was centrifuged at 10000 rpm for 10 min. The obtained precipitate was washed with DI water under sonication, followed by centrifugation under the same conditions. Finally, the precipitate was re-dispersed in DI water. To prepare the Au rod-in-shell nanostructure, an Ag nanoshell in Au NR@Ag was replaced with Au. In total, 550 μL of a 0.94 mM Au NR@Ag (based on Ag ion concentration) was dispersed in 5.75 mL DI water followed by the sequential addition of 500 μL of 100 mM CTAB, 125 μL of 100 mM AA, and 400 μL of 1 mM of HAuCl4. This mixture was stirred vigorously for 16 min before the reaction was stopped. The obtained products were purified by washing with a saturated NaCl solution followed by repeated DI water washing through centrifugation at 10000 rpm for 10 min. The grown Au NR-in-shell nanomaterials were then re-dispersed in DI water for further characterization. The concentrations for the Au NR and Au NR-in-shell dispersions are ∼2.4 × 1011 particles mL−1.

Indium tin oxide (ITO)-patterned glass substrates (Lumtec) were cleaned by successive sonication in a commercial wafer cleaning buffer solution, acetone and isopropanol and then dried under a N2 gas flow before use. An ∼30 nm thick ZnO film was deposited by spin-coating the prepared nanoparticle solution on the cleaned ITO glass substrates. For doped ZnO film deposition, initially, 50 μL of as-prepared ZnO nanoparticle solution was diluted in 1 mL of isopropanol. Then, 30 μL of Au NR or Au NR-in-shell suspensions was mixed with 1 mL of the diluted ZnO nanoparticle solution followed by spin-coating to form doped ZnO films. The resulting films containing the Au NR nanomaterials were ∼30 nm thick as well. Photoactive materials composed of PTB7 (1-material) and PC71BM (Lumtec) were purchased commercially and used as received. A mixture of 10 mg of PTB7 (1-material) and 15 mg of PC71BM (Lumtec) in a mixed solvent of chlorobenzene and 1,8-diiodoctane with a volume ratio of 97:3 was stirred at 500 rpm and at 50 °C on a hot plate for one day in a N2 filled glove box. The resulting solution was then spin-coated onto the ZnO film at 1000 rpm for 2 min followed by vacuum drying. The resulting film served as the light absorber (∼100 nm). Because ZnO and the photoactive layers were deposited through the spin-coating method, we varied the spin-coating speed and measured the resulting thickness of the film using a Veeco Dektak 6M surface profiler. By setting up the appropriate spin-speed parameter to process each layer, we were able to control the thicknesses of the films among devices. Finally, the successive thermal deposition of MoO3 (7 nm) and Ag (100 nm) layers was carried out on the light absorber layer to complete the solar cell device fabrication. The active area of the finished device, which is defined by the overlapping of ITO and Ag electrodes, was 0.036 cm2.


Optical absorption and transmission measurements were conducted using a JASCO Model V-630 UV-vis spectrophotometer. Surface morphology measurements were conducted using an atomic force microscope (AFM, Digital Instruments, Nanoscope III). The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the finished solar cell devices were evaluated using a Keithley Model 2410 source meter under the irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2 from a calibrated solar simulator (Newport Inc.) with an AM 1.5G filter. The calibration was carried out using a standard Si photodiode. Incident-photon-conversion-efficiency (IPCE) spectra were recorded using a setup composed of a lamp system, a chopper, a monochromator, a lock-in amplifier, and a standard silicon photodetector (ENLI Technology). For transient photocurrent and photovoltage measurements, devices were illuminated by a white light LED background (LCS-6500, Mightex), which was calibrated to 1 sun by a standard Si photodiode, equipped with a 200 μs pulsed 530 nm green light LED (LCS-0530, Mightex) with an intensity of 40 mW cm−2. Both white and green LEDs were driven by LED drivers (SLC-AA02-US, Mightex). The photovoltage signal was measured by connecting a solar cell to an oscilloscope (DSO5054A, Agilent) with an input impedance of 1 MΩ in series. The current signal was measured by the same setup except that the input impedance of the oscilloscope was 50 Ω. The thickness of the film was measured using a Veeco Dektak 6M surface profiler. All the measurements were conducted under laboratory conditions.



Fig. 1(a) and (b) show transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the synthesized Au NR and Au NR-in-shell nanomaterials, respectively. The aspect ratio of the Au NRs is ∼3.9 (length 38.2 nm and width 9.8 nm), while that for the Au NR-in-shells is ∼2.3 (length 53.2 nm, width 26.2 nm and gap 2.3 nm). Due to the synthesis approach, the inner core of the NR-in-shells has similar dimensions as the bare Au NRs and there is a 2.3 nm gap in-between the inner core and outer shell. The Au NRs exhibit two plasmon resonance modes with longitudinal LSPR peak centered at ∼750 nm and a transverse LSPR band centered at 520 nm, whereas the Au NR-in-shells exhibit a single broad band spanning from ∼300 to 1200 nm with a small shoulder at 520 nm (see Fig. 1(c)). The single broad band absorption of the Au NR-in-shells can be well understood according to an earlier simulation result. Assuming a cylindrical shape for the NR-in-shells, the Au NR-in-shell structure is expected to have four distinct transverse resonance modes and one longitudinal mode. The four transverse resonance modes are distributed in the wavelength regions of 400–700, 700–1000, 1000–1200, and 1200–1300 nm due to the interaction between the dipoles at the core and at the shell. In particular, the second mode at 700–1000 nm is relatively much weaker than the rest, including the longitudinal mode located in the same wavelength region. Because the shape of the synthesized Au NR-in-shells is more peanut-like rather than the ideal cylinder and their sizes are inhomogeneous, these distinct five resonance modes are, thus, smeared out and become a broad band, as shown experimentally.

The two types of Au nanomaterials were mixed with ZnO nanoparticles of 7 nm in diameter to serve as the hole blocking and electron transporting layer. Fig. 2 depicts the optical properties of the blend films deposited on quartz substrates. The absorption spectra show the typical absorption edge of ZnO at 375 nm for all the films. There is a strong reduction in the intensity of spectra at wavelengths shorter than 375 nm, while the change is moderate in the range of 400–800 nm. As demonstrated in Fig. 1(c), there are two plasmonic resonance modes at 520 and 750 nm for the Au NRs and a broadly distributed absorption band from 300 to 1200 nm that peaks at 660 nm with a small shoulder at 520 nm for the Au NR-in-shells. Interestingly, these characteristic peaks are not present in the measured absorption curves in the wavelength region of 400–800 nm for the doped films or the transmission curves (see Fig. 2(a) and (b)). Instead, a slight decrease in the intensity of the absorption spectra is observed after doping, suggesting the weak absorption strength of both Au nanomaterials at the prepared concentration and the partial replacement of ZnO by the nanomaterials, as reflected in the largely reduced intensity at shorter wavelengths.

Fig. 3(a)–(c) display the surface morphologies of the pristine and Au nanomaterials doped ZnO nanoparticle films deposited on ITO-coated glass substrates. The surface textures of these three films are similar, which show the connection of small particles. The root-mean-square (r.m.s.) surface roughness is 1.37, 1.28, and 1.34 nm for the pristine, Au NR-doped, and Au NR-in-shell doped ZnO layers, respectively. Apparently, there is negligible change in the surface roughness of the ZnO film after the inclusion of Au nanomaterials, suggesting that the rod-like or peanut-like nanomaterials are mostly embedded in the ZnO layer. Fig. 3(d)–(f) depict the morphology images of PTB7:PC71BM deposited on the three ZnO layers. The morphologies for the three polymer films are relatively homogeneous and show no distinctive difference in surface features. The corresponding r.m.s. roughness is 1.06, 0.79, and 0.88 nm for the blend films deposited on pristine, Au NR doped, and Au NR-in-shell doped ZnO layers, respectively. This result indicates that the polymer films are of similar surface roughness, regardless of the doping of ZnO layer underneath.
To determine the effect of the broad band LSPR of the nanomaterials on polymer solar cells, we first optimized the device performance with each type of nanomaterial, and then we compared the results with those of the standard cell using pristine ZnO nanoparticles as the electron transporting layer. We evaluated several batches of devices fabricated under the same conditions and the average result is presented. Fig. 4(a) shows the typical J–V characteristics of the three types of cells and the average performance parameters are summarized in Table 1. The schematic device configuration is also presented in the inset of Fig. 4(a). The performance of the standard cell agrees well with those reported earlier. After doping Au NRs into the ZnO layer, open-circuit voltage (Voc) remained similar, short circuit current density (Jsc) increased from 17.77 to 17.94 mA cm−2, and fill factor (FF) increased from 60.90% to 62.21%. As a result, PCE was enhanced from 7.94% to 8.34%. Remarkably, by incorporating Au NR-in-shells into the ZnO layer, Jsc improved to 18.53 mA cm−2, Voc remained similar, and FF enhanced slightly to 63.43%, which led to an improved PCE of 8.89%. For the best device, a PCE of 9.01% was achieved and this PCE value is the highest reported to date for PTB7 based inverted solar cells that apply the plasmonic concept. Doping the ZnO layer with Au nanomaterials enhanced the performance of devices due to the improved Jsc and FF. In particular, the improvement is more pronounced with Au NR-in-shell incorporated devices for an increment in PCE, which is more than twice as much as that for Au NRs.

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Standard
17.77
0.73
60.90
7.94
Au NR
17.94
0.75
62.21
8.34
Au NR-in-shell
18.53
0.76
63.43
8.89
(18.68)
(0.76)
(63.35)
(9.01)
To understand the superior performance of Au NR-in-shell devices over Au NR devices, absorption properties of the photoactive materials were determined and IPCE measurements were conducted to elucidate the improvement of Jsc. The UV-visible absorption spectra of the neat materials on glass substrates and the polymer blend films on the three types of ZnO buffer layers are shown in Fig. 5. The neat PTB7 film absorbs photons from 550 to 750 nm, whereas the pristine PC71BM compensates the weak photon harvesting region of PTB7 in the visible range. The resulting PTB7:PC71BM blend film on the pristine ZnO layer exhibits a strong photon absorption in the wavelength range of 300–800 nm. This clearly shows that the absorption strength of the PTB7:PC71BM film is enhanced after the ZnO layer is doped with Au nanomaterials. Because the photoactive layers are of the same thickness, enhanced absorption can arise from either the in-part absorption or the scattering effect of the doped Au nanomaterials. As shown in Fig. 2, the UV-vis absorption and transmission spectra of the pristine ZnO film show negligible changes in spectral characteristics in the wavelength region of 400–800 nm after doping. Therefore, the in-part absorption of the doped Au nanomaterials has negligible contribution to the observed absorption enhancement of the photoactive layer. The scattering effect caused by the Au nanomaterials through lengthening the light traveling pathways should play an important role in the enhancement of photon absorption.

Fig. 4(b) depicts the IPCE spectra of a different set of devices, which also have the same trend of performance as that shown in Fig. 4(a). The spectrum for the standard device resembles the absorption profile of the ZnO/PTB7:PC71BM structure except at wavelengths shorter than 400 nm. For devices with Au NRs, IPCE values increase from 320 to 680 nm and for those with Au NR-in-shells, the values increase from 320 to 800 nm. The ranges for the IPCE enhancement are consistent with the corresponding LSPR band of the nanomaterial. Because the Au NR-in-shell devices exhibit the highest IPCE values in the measurement spectral region, their photocurrents therefore have the largest response. We then took the ratio of the IPCE spectra for the doped devices to the standard devices, and the resulting curves of the enhancement factor are presented in the inset of Fig. 4(b). Apparently, there was an ∼6% up-shift of the curve for the Au NR-in-shell devices away from that for the Au NR devices, which reveals the broad and effective effect of the NR-in-shell structure. Importantly, there is a peak located at approximately 520 nm for both types of devices, which suggests that the scattering effect due to the LSPR of the Au NRs is involved in the improvement of the Jsc.
As shown in Fig. 1, there is a small shoulder at 520 nm in the absorption spectrum of the Au NR-in-shells. Furthermore, the obtained IPCE enhancement maxima at ∼520 nm falls in the first region of the transverse mode based on the theoretical prediction. Both observations indicate that 520 nm can be one of the transverse modes for the Au NR-in-shell structure after decomposing the broad absorption spectra. Therefore, the LSPR at ∼520 nm, which is also a resonance mode for Au NRs, enhances the photon absorption probability of the incident electromagnetic waves primarily by the PC71BM component.
Transient photovoltage measurements were employed to obtain information on the free carrier lifetime within the device. We recorded the voltage decay transient of a device kept at open-circuit under a continuous background light illumination of one sun and a probing light pulse of 0.4 sun. The small light pulse perturbation gives rise to a voltage change, ΔV, and the transient of ΔV decay can be evaluated from the recorded voltage curve after subtracting the Voc generated by the background light. The perturbed voltage decay dynamics can be described by ΔV = Aexp(−t/τ), where A, t, and τ are pre-factor, time, and decay time constant, respectively. As the fitted result shown in Fig. 6(a), the free carrier lifetimes τs are 7.40, 8.03, and 8.47 μs for the standard, Au-NR, and Au NR-in-shell devices, respectively. The doping ZnO buffer layer slightly extends the free carrier lifetime and the lifetime is slightly longer in the Au NR-in-shell devices. The extended carrier lifetime can originate from the reduced carrier recombination, enhanced charge extraction, or both. Both cases may result from an improvement in carrier mobility.
We conducted transient photocurrent measurements to obtain the device mobility under each condition.Fig. 6(b) displays the short-circuit current response of the three devices to the 200 μs square-pulse optical excitation from a 530 nm green-light LED driven by matching driver. Photocurrent is presented as current instead of current density due to the illumination size of the light spot that is within the area of the devices. We observed fast turn-on and turn-off dynamics for the three samples. To calculate the carrier mobility from the recorded photocurrent under the short circuit condition, we determined the effective transit time, τt, as the time for photocurrent to decay to 1/e of its equilibrium value. The effective mobility of the device can be estimated from μ = d/(Eτt), where d is the thickness of the photoactive layer and E is the internal electric field. The internal electric field can be calculated from 1/E = d/(Vs − V), where Vs and V are the build-in voltage (∼0.8 V) and applied voltage (0 V), respectively. The calculated mobility values for the standard, Au NR, and Au NR-in-shell devices are 1.3, 1.6, and 1.8 × 10−4 cm2 (V s)−1, respectively. We also measured the conductivity of the three ZnO films using the two-probe approach based on the Ag/ZnO/Ag structure. The obtained average conductivity values for the pristine, Au NR doped, and Au NR-in-shell doped ZnO films are 1.195 × 10−2, 1.208 × 10−2, and 1.230 × 10−2 S cm−1, respectively. The incorporation of Au nanomaterials slightly improves the electrical conductivity of the neat ZnO film. Therefore, doping the ZnO layer slightly improves device mobility, which can be ascribed to the increased conductivity of the ZnO layer.
By taking the reciprocal of the slopes at Voc for all the J–V curves, the series resistance (Rs) values for standard, Au NR, and Au NR-in-shell devices are 7.43, 6.49, and 6.17 Ω cm2, respectively. Because there is a negligible change in the surface roughness of the photoactive layer on the doped ZnO layer, the change of the bulk morphology of the photoactive layer can be ignored. The moderate reduction in the Rs of the devices after incorporating Au nanomaterials into the ZnO layer can be attributed to the enhanced conductivity of the ZnO layer, which is beneficial for charge extraction out of the photoactive layer and reducing the carrier transient time τt thus resulting in improved device mobility. The improved device mobility induced by doping the ZnO layer can benefit charge transport and minimize the probability for carrier recombination within devices, which improve the photocurrent and FF.
The effects of plasmonic resonance characteristics on the performance of solar cells are summarized as follows. Both Au nanomaterials are metallic, have similar composition, and have different dimensions. The metallic nanostructures are expected to produce surface plasmons under the irradiation of photons. The Au NR-in-shells exhibit a relatively broad absorption band in the wavelength region of 300–1200 nm, while the Au NRs demonstrate two distinct absorption peaks in the visible region. Due to the absorption edge of PTB7:PC71BM at approximately 750 nm, the LSPR effect from the Au NR-in-shells can affect the entire absorption spectral range of the photoactive material, whereas that from the Au NRs primarily influences the absorption cross-section of PC71BM. Devices doped with Au nanomaterials indeed show wavelength dependency on the enhanced optical absorption and IPCE values, which follow the absorption profile of the corresponding nanomaterial. In particular, a peak at ∼520 nm is observed in the curve of IPCE enhancement for both the doped devices, which is a fingerprint for the involvement of the LSPR effect. Due to the fact that the diameter of the NR-in-shells is slightly smaller than the thickness of the ZnO layer, the plasmonic near-field can be coupled into the photoactive layer to enhance the absorption cross-section more effectively. Likewise, it has been reported that the scattering cross section of Au NRs increases rapidly with an increase in the diameter of NRs. For the NR-in-shell structure, the diameter of the outer shell is almost three times the size of NRs, and thus is expected to produce a stronger scattering effect than the NRs. Because both the plasmonic-enhanced local field strength and light scattering power are possibly presented in the studied systems, the broad band LSPR effect from the Au NR-in-shells is more beneficial for assisting photon harvesting, and thus demonstrates the highest enhancement in Jsc. Notably, it has been reported that the Ag component can enhance the scattering power of Au in a Au@Ag nanocube structure. Because the outer shell of the Au NR-in-shell structure is composed of 52.5% Ag, the Ag component may magnify the scattering power of the Au NR-in-shells and contribute to Jsc enhancement as well.
In addition to photon absorption, the conductivity of the ZnO layer slightly increases after incorporating the Au nanomaterials. The subtle improvement in the conductivity of the cathodic buffer layer reduces the Rs of the devices and slightly improves the device mobility. The carrier lifetime becomes slightly longer due to the enhanced device mobility, and less charge recombination can occur within the devices. Thus, the charge transport property of the devices is slightly modulated, which is triggered by the incorporation of Au nanomaterials. Compared with the Au NR devices, the Au NR-in-shell devices show better results in reducing Rs and improving free carrier dynamics. The enhanced conductivity of the doped ZnO layer and the improvement in carrier dynamics can also be ascribed to the improvement in both Jsc and FF. The metallic nanostructures, which have a broad LSPR absorption band, indeed show superior behavior in improving device performance.
We also tried to evaluate the performance of solar cells incorporating Au NR-in-shells with a 6.5 nm gap and obtained a lower PCE of 8.89% due to the slightly reduced Jsc (18.43 mA cm−2) in comparison with the devices fabricated with a 2.3 nm gap. The reason for this inferior performance may be due to the fact that the wider gap weakens the dipole–dipole interaction between the inner core and outer shell, which lowers the coupling strength of the resonance modes, as revealed in the less intense optical absorption intensity. In addition, charge recombination is likely to occur at the ZnO/polymer interface because the size of the Au NR-in-shells with a 6.5 nm gap is comparable to the thickness of the ZnO layer, which is an effect that can be avoided by using the Au@silica core/shell structure. The charge loss at the interface due to recombination can lower the Jsc.
Ng et al. found that doping gold nanocubes into the hole transporting layer (PEDOT:PSS) has negligible effect on the resistance of PEDOT:PSS, as well as a minor effect on the enhancement in the charge transport and collection of devices in a conventional structure, leading to small changes in FF and an increment of ∼10% in PCE. In our case, instead of the hole transporting layer, we incorporated Au nanomaterials into the electron transporting layer, which resulted in a moderate reduction in Rs and improved charge transport properties of devices for ∼14% increment in PCE.
Generally, Au nanomaterials are incorporated into the anodic buffer layer instead of the cathodic buffer layer, as shown in this study. Due to the designed inverted device architecture, it is difficult to disperse nanomaterials in a thermally deposited MoO3 layer. Thus, incorporating Au nanomaterials in a solution processed electron transport layer is relatively robust. As the energy band diagram shows in Fig. 6(c), hole charges transported in PTB7 are likely to be captured by the Au nanomaterials and then recombine with electrons. Fortunately, there is negligible change in the surface roughness of the ZnO layer after the inclusion of Au nanomaterials. The similar surface property of the ZnO layer reveals two facts. The doped rod-shape Au nanomaterials are mostly embedded inside the ZnO layer without directly contacting the photoactive material to capture hole charges. The majority of hole charges are blocked by the ZnO layer. Secondly, the geometrical scattering caused by the surface roughness of the ZnO layer is negligible in this device configuration. The plasmonic optical effect is dominant in the device performance. The application of proposed broad band Au NR-in-shells can be generalized to other low bandgap polymers or perovskite systems as well. A further boosting of the efficiency of earlier reported devices is possible by adopting broad band LSPR nanomaterials.

In summary, we have successfully improved the PCE of PTB7:PC71BM PSCs by introducing a broad band plasmonic nanomaterial into the ZnO buffer layer. The Au NR-in-shells absorb photons ranging from UV-vis-NIR and the associated LSPR effect induces local field enlargement and light scattering throughout the absorption spectral regions of the photoactive material in contrast to the partial enhancement of the LSPR modes from Au NRs. Therefore, the light absorption enhancement region is much broader for the Au NR-in-shell structure. In addition, the series resistance (Rs), carrier lifetime and device mobility are slightly improved. A high PCE of 9.01%, which was improved from 7.94%, has been achieved, and this is more than twice the enhancement for that of Au NRs. We believe that this study can provide an effective approach to enhance the performance of many optoelectronic devices.


This study is supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan (Project No. MOST 102-2112-M-239-001-MY3).


† These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016