 DOI: 10.1039/D3SE00242J
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2023, 7, 3316-3325


Hamed
Javanbakht Lomeri
,

Giuseppina
Polino
,

Suresh
Podapangi
,

Thomas M.
Brown
* and 

Francesca
Brunetti
*

University of Rome Tor Vergata – CHOSE, Department of Electronic Engineering, via del Politecnico 1, 00133 Rome, Italy. E-mail: thomas.brown@uniroma2.it; francesca.brunetti@uniroma2.it

Received
24th February 2023
, Accepted 16th May 2023
First published on 20th May 2023
Organic solar cells (OSCs) are showing great potential to be employed in indoor and outdoor applications. The utilization of portable electronics, internet of things (IoT), and sensors for wearable and healthcare applications that are used in both indoor and outdoor conditions highlight the importance of the development of photovoltaic devices that can efficiently perform under various light intensities. In this paper, we fabricated OSCs with polyethyleneimine ethoxylated (PEIE) and a water-based material, polylysine, as interfacial layers (IFL), and investigated the devices' performance under 1 sun and indoor light. Our results show that the choice of the interfacial layer is important and affects significantly the performance of devices. Under 1 sun illumination devices with polylysine as an interfacial layer exhibit the highest average efficiency of 7.72% whereas PEIE-based devices displayed a lower average efficiency of 7.13%. When moving to indoor illumination (1000 lx) the performance of the two devices are inverted: polylysine-based devices demonstrated reduced average efficiency (7.09%) compared to their 1 sun illumination results while PEIE-based devices achieve an increased average efficiency of 12.25%. The different behavior of the two interfacial layers can be ascribed to varying shunt resistance values, which are lower for polylysine, causing a reduction in indoor performance. This study highlights the importance of properly choosing the interfacial layer of the OSC depending on the desired application, paving the way toward OPV devices suitable for portable and wearable applications.

The significant increase in power conversion efficiency (PCE) of organic photovoltaics (OPVs) that now surpasses 19% along with their low fabrication cost, has made OPVs an attractive candidate for various industrial applications. OPVs show great potential to be employed in indoor and outdoor applications due to bandgap tunability, reduced toxicity, and compatibility with flexible substrates enabling industrially favorable roll-to-roll production of lightweight applications. Initially, outdoor applications of OPVs in building-integrated photovoltaics (BIPVs), such as solar modules on the facades and roofs of the buildings, public lighting, and semitransparent organic solar cells (ST-OSCs) as electricity-generating windows have been explored. Lately, with the development of the internet of things (IoT) and the emergence of portable wearable electronic devices and healthcare applications, the demand for energy-harvesting devices that can operate not only under 1 sun illumination but also under low light intensities (indoor conditions) has been highlighted, leading to, initiatives, startup companies, and other players entering in wearable photovoltaic technology market. Since these portable applications must work in different light conditions, characterization and investigation of these devices play a significant role in optimizing the devices which can work efficiently in both conditions.

The main difference between indoor and outdoor illumination is the light spectrum and its intensity. In outdoor conditions, the source of the light is the sun with an air mass of 1.5 global (1000 W m2) spectrum. Whereas in indoor conditions, the devices have to operate under various artificial light sources (LEDs, fluorescent lamps). In indoor light illumination, lux is used as a measure of illuminance that is the convolution of the radiometric units with the sensitivity of the human eye; the normal range of illumination in offices is between 200 and 1000 lx which is 100–500 times lower than direct sunlight.
Steim et al. investigated the J–V characteristic of OPVs under the indoor condition of 1000 lx to study the impact of shunt and series resistance on the device performance. They demonstrated that in dimmed light conditions, higher shunt resistance is beneficial for devices to perform efficiently. Although according to the best research-cell efficiency chart reported by NREL (National Renewable Energy Laboratory), the maximum PCE of c-Si-SCs (26.1%) is higher than the PCE of organic PV (18.2%) under 1 sun illumination, the trend is the opposite in indoor condition, with OPVs exhibiting better performance. Mori et al., reported the indoor characterization of OPVs and their comparison with crystal silicon solar cells (c-Si-SCs) under indoor light illumination. They determined the PCE of c-Si-SCs and OPV (PTB7-Th:PC71BM) under I-Sun illumination are 13.49% and 8.43%, respectively, while, the indoor performance of OPV has a higher PCE of 11.63% compared to lower PCE of c-Si-SCs (9.65%) at 890 lx illumination. In 2022, Kim et al. reported a record PCE of 31.9% by utilizing non-fullerene OPV (PM6 as donor and Y6-O as acceptor) under indoor illumination from a LED lamp (1000 lx).
In this context, to achieve devices that operate efficiently under different lighting conditions, three key parameters should be considered for the optimization of photovoltaic characteristics. Firstly, the material of the photoactive layer (PAL) has to match the spectrum of indoor and outdoor lighting. The ideal bandgap for solar irradiation and indoor lightning is 1.3–1.4 eV and 1.9–2.0 eV, respectively. As shown is shown in Fig. 1, a wider band gap is more suitable for indoor applications, and the selection of PAL material can be based on the final application. Minimizing the VOC losses is another key parameter that has to be taken into account. A loss in VOC of OPVs due to indoor lighting conditions is unavoidable because VOC is subjected to the photogenerated current as shown in the following formula:
(1)
where
n is the ideality factor, KB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, e is the elementary charge and I0 and Iph are saturation and photogenerated currents, respectively. It has been proven that Isc has a linear dependence on the light intensity and based on the aforementioned formula, VOC shows a logarithmic behavior as a function of light intensity. To prevent further losses, the reverse dark saturation current I0 has to be minimized. Low shunt resistance causes power losses in solar cells (parasitic leakage current). The effect of shunt resistance is particularly severe at low light levels. Steim et al. showed that a shunt resistance of at least 85 kΩ cm2 is needed for operation under 1000 lx whereas series resistance is suggested to be lower than 50 Ω cm2 which is less critical compared to outdoor applications. To maintain the VOC of the outdoor applications, the series resistance is more critical and it has to be lower than 3 Ω cm2, and shunt resistance above 1 kΩ cm2 is sufficient. As a result, for the devices which have to work in both indoor and outdoor conditions, minimum shunt resistance of 85 kΩ cm2 and maximum series resistance of 3 Ω cm2 are required. The third parameter which affects the performance of OPVs is trap-assisted recombination, which becomes a dominant factor in low light intensities. A dramatic decline in current density is expected when the lighting condition changes from 1 sun to indoor, but the presence of these traps, not only impacts the short circuit current (JSC) but also decreases the VOC and the fill factor (FF). Consequently, suppressing trap-assisted recombination is an essential parameter for obtaining high FF, particularly under low light intensities. To tackle the aforementioned issues (losses in VOC and FF), interfacial layers (IFLs) are introduced to reduce contact resistance and carriers recombination and to facilitate charge transport. Interfacial layers can significantly increase the device performance by altering the work function (WF) of the contacts, increasing the Rsh, and decreasing the dark current. Hence, interfacial engineering is beneficial for indoor and outdoor conditions and has attracted the researcher's attention to further increase the PCE of OPVs. Many variants have been used as interlayers, including oxides and biological materials, even for indoors. Amongst the most effective have been polyethylenimine ethoxylated (PEIE) which beneficially affects morphology, change in the WF and reduction in the current leakage. Shin et al. have investigated the effect of three different layers of ZnO, PEIE, and the combination of ZnO and PEIE (ZnO/PEIE) as ETLs and an interlayer on the performance of P3HT:ICBA-based OSCs in indoor and 1 sun lighting conditions. The PCEs of the ZnO, PEIE and ZnO/PEIE-based devices under standard 1 sun illumination were 4.6, 4.3, and 5.2%, respectively. Whereas, under a LED lamp with a luminance of 1000 lx the ZnO, PEIE, and ZnO/PEIE-based devices showed PCEs of 5.7, 12.6, and 14.4%, respectively. Shin et al. by utilizing the Kelvin probe showed that surface modification of ZnO by PEIE decreases the WF value from 4.5 eV to 3.8 eV. Huang et al. by using ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) noticed that introducing polylysine to ZnO would decrease the WF by 0.06 eV. For the devices that perform under 1 sun, UV light aids in the adsorption of oxygen species on the surface of ZnO nanoparticle and alters the WF value. In indoor lighting condition, the defective performance of the ZnO-based devices without IFL was perceived, originating from the absence of UV light in the spectra of LED lamps, leading to a massive voltage loss. As a result, under 1 sun illumination due to the presence of UV light, a reduction in the WF value was expected, favouring better energy level alignment. In contrast, in indoor lighting conditions without UV light, no reduction of the WF is observed and thus leading to an imperfect energy level alignment and reduced performance of devices.

Recently, polylysine as a green interfacial material in OPVs was introduced by Huang's group. They have demonstrated the effect of polylysine on morphology improvement and WF tuning, leading to more efficient and stable devices. In the presence of IFLs, under 1 sun illumination the maximum PCE of 12.5%, 15.3% and 7.92% for PBDB-T-2Cl:IT-4F, PBDB-T-2F:Y6 and PBDB-T:ITIC based devices were obtained, respectively.
In this paper, we investigate the effect of interfacial layers on the performance of OPVs under 1 sun illumination and indoor lighting condition of 1000 lx. In particular, we study for the first time polylysine based OPV for indoor application and compare it with PEIE based devices in a non-fluorene PBDB-T-:ITIC based OSC. Devices without interlayer demonstrated the highest Rs and lowest Rsh, with the highest dark current and consequently lowest PCE, confirming the beneficial role of the interfacial layers. Although poly lysine-based devices under 1 sun conditions display higher photovoltaic parameters compared to the other devices, in low light intensities, they show worse performance than PEIE-based devices. The indoor photovoltaic characterizations reveal that PEIE-based devices demonstrate the lowest Rs, highest Rsh, and highest FF. As a result, by suppressing the leakage current and trap-assisted recombination they present better PCE among other devices.

The transmittance spectra of the spin-coated interfacial layers were obtained using UV-visible spectrophotometer. Initially, ZnO as an ETL was deposited on ITO-coated glasses and then interfacial layers of PEIE and poly-lysine were spin-coated. Fig. 2a shows that adding the IFLs on top of ZnO did not reduce the transmittance and acted as an antireflective coating for the wavelength range of 360 nm to 500 nm and 580 nm to 850 nm, increasing the transmittance.

Optical images were taken by confocal microscope (Olympus) to investigate the surface morphology of ZnO film with and without the interfacial layers. Root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of ZnO without any interfacial layer was 3.2 nm, as shown in Fig. 3b. The presence of IFLs helped reduce the roughness from 3.2 nm to 2.8 nm and 2.9 nm for PEIE and polylysine, respectively, as shown in Fig. 3c and d. Incorporating the IFLs changed the surface morphology of ZnO films in favor of better photoactive blend deposition which facilitates charge transportation and improves the performance of the devices.

The bandgap and absorption spectra of photoactive material (PBDB-T:ITIC) are compatible with the spectra of outdoor lighting condition, and consequently, good performance of devices are expected under 1 sun illumination. Based on the literature, the ideal bandgap of a single junction solar cell illuminated by the AM 1.5 G Spectral Irradiance is 1.34 eV and this value matches the bandgap of PAL which is 1.39 eV. In this study, inverted OSCs were fabricated with three different device configurations: ITO/ZnO/Interlayer/PBDB-T:ITIC/MoO3/Ag. One of the configurations is without any interfacial layer and in the other two configurations, either PEIE or polylysine is incorporated, as shown in Fig. 3.

Photovoltaic parameters of the organic solar cells with and without interfacial layers under 1 sun illumination are shown in Fig. 4 and listed in Table 1. The J–V characteristics of the best-performing devices are plotted in Fig. 5a. The listed results in the Table 1 reveals that polylysine-based devices display a higher PCE of 7.72 ± 0.56%, a higher open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.82 ± 0.01 V, and short-circuit current (JSC) of 15.05 ± 0.41 mA cm2 and a better fill factor (FF) of 59.77 ± 3.75%. Whereas, PEIE-based devices and devices without IFLs showed poorer performance. Although PEIE-based devices showed lower performance compared to polylysine-based devices, in general, the improvement in all photovoltaic parameters for the devices with IFL is noticeable. The effect of the interfacial layers on two other OPVs with other photo active layers has been also studied. As shown in Fig. S1 and S2, both of the blends of PBDB-T-2Cl:IT-4F and PM6:Y6 under 1 sun illumination show a beneficial effect on the performance of the solar cells. The summarized results in Table S1 display that incorporating the IFLs, in particular, polylysine in both OPVs under 1 sun lightning conditions increase the performance of the devices. Incident-photon-to-current-efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the devices are shown in Fig. 5b, an increase in IPCE response of polylysine devices over PEIE-based devices and in particular, over the devices without IFL is observable. An improvement in the generation of charge carriers for PEIE and polylysine-based devices at the wavelength ranging from 420 nm to 480 nm and from 540 nm to 720 nm is observed, which can be attributed to higher transparency of IFL-based devices at the aforementioned wavelength, leading to a higher influx of incoming light. Incorporating the IFLs increases the average short-circuit current (JSC) under AM 1.5 illumination from 14.74 mA cm−2 for pristine devices to 14.86 mA cm−2 and 15.05 mA cm−2 for PEIE and polylysine-based devices, respectively. The obtained JSC values are consistent with the integrated current measured by the IPCE setup within 3% mismatch. Transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements were performed to better study the charge extraction process. Charge extraction time can be driven by the TPC curve, the fast photocurrent decay suggests a faster carrier extraction, thus it requires a shorter time for the carriers to be collected by the electrodes. As shown in Fig. 5c, the decay curve for both IFL-based devices is faster than the one obtained for the devices realized without interfacial layers; this implies faster carriers collection leading to increased JSC compared to devices without IFLs. These results are in good agreement with the obtained JSC and the integrated current density. The charge carrier extraction time obtained from the TPC decay curves reveal that devices without an interfacial layer have a charge extract time of 6.27 μs, while devices with a PEIE interfacial layer and a poly-lysine interfacial layer exhibit charge extract time of 5.60 μs and 5.34 μs, respectively as shown in Table S2. This quantitative data further supports the observation of faster carrier collection in devices with IFLs.
Light sources
Interlayer

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
MPP (mW cm−2)
PCE (%)
1 sun
NO IFL
0.78 ± 0.03
14.74 ± 0.12
56.64 ± 4.37
6.53 ± 0.56
6.53 ± 0.56
PEIE
0.85 ± 0.01
14.86 ± 0.46
57.34 ± 5.79
7.13 ± 0.78
7.13 ± 0.78
Polylysine
0.85 ± 0.01
15.05 ± 0.41
59.77 ± 3.75
7.72 ± 0.56
7.72 ± 0.56
LED lamp-1000 lx
NO IFL
0.36 ± 0.01
0.125 ± 0.007
54.20 ± 1.73
0.027 ± 0.002
6.47 ± 0.64
PEIE
0.56 ± 0.02
0.128 ± 0.008
64.68 ± 2.69
0.045 ± 0.003
12.25 ± 1.14
Polylysine
0.42 ± 0.03
0.125 ± 0.007
50.80 ± 2.81
0.026 ± 0.005
7.09 ± 0.77
As shown in the Table 1, an improvement in VOC for devices with IFLs with a value of 0.85 ± 0.01 V for both PEIE and polylysine-based devices is reported, whereas the pristine devices displayed a lower VOC of 0.78 ± 0.03 V. The increase in the VOC could be attributed to the incorporation of the IFLs that alter the work function, leading to a change in the energy band alignment and lowering the surface recombination probability, as already reported in the literature. Transient photo-voltage (TPV) measurements were performed to investigate the charge recombination process by analyzing the photovoltage decay of the fabricated devices in open circuit condition using continuous lightning and a small perturbation at various light intensities. Sharp voltage decay in the TPV graph represents a shorter lifetime of the charge carriers and a higher recombination rate. Normalized TPV decay graph for the devices under the illumination equivalent to 1 sun illumination is plotted in Fig. 5d. It can be seen that polylysine-based devices are showing longer photovoltage decay time compared to other devices. The charge carrier recombination lifetimes, as extracted from the TPV decay curves, demonstrate that the polylysine-based devices have the longest lifetime of 17.34 μs, which further supports their enhanced performance with respect to reduced recombination, as shown in Table S2.
Average shunt resistance (Rsh) and series resistance (Rs) of fabricated devices with and without IFLs are extracted from the current density–voltage (J–V) curves under 1 sun lighting condition and are plotted in Fig. 6. Additionally, the average values with standard deviation are presented in Table S3. To maintain the VOC of devices under outdoor conditions, series resistance lower than 3 Ω cm2 is favorable and the shunt resistance of 1 kΩ cm2 is sufficient.Rsh of PEIE and polylysine-based devices are 20.2 kΩ cm2 and 5.64 kΩ cm2, respectively, and meet the requirement to operate efficiently. In outdoor condition, the series resistance is the critical parameter, and ideally, it has to be lower than 3 Ω cm2 which in all types of fabricated devices is above this value. The average Rs of devices without IFL displays the lowest value of 17.2 Ω cm2 and for PEIE and polylysine-based devices, the values are measured 77.7 Ω cm2 and 88.8 Ω cm2 respectively. Since all fabricated devices with and without IFL do not fulfill the series resistance criteria, PCE loss is unavoidable. Based on the aforementioned parameter (series resistance) it is expected that devices without IFL have to operate efficiently but significant increases in the photovoltaic parameters of IFLs-based devices originated from the WF shift higher shunt resistance, and morphological improvement that outweighs the better series resistance of pristine ZnO.

Although the highest PCE in indoor lighting is obtained when the bandgap is close to 1.9 eV, our photoactive material with absorption spectra ranging from 400 to 770 nm can still be used for indoor applications, considering both white LED and fluorescent lights as light sources which have the emission spectra reported in Fig. S3.. The devices have been characterized, and the results are summarized in Table 1 showing the effect of IFLs is profound in low light intensity, increasing the PCE of the working devices by up to 70%. As shown in Fig. 7, PEIE-based devices in an indoor environment at 1000 lx demonstrated a highest PCE of 12.25 ± 1.14% with the highest VOC of 0.56 ± 0.02 V, highest JSC of 0.128 ± 0.008 mA cm−2, and highest FF of 64.68 ± 2.69%. Although polylysine-based devices displayed high JSC and relatively comparable VOC, their inferior FF decreased the performance of these types of devices as plotted in Fig. 8a. Higher JSC for both PEIE and polylysine-based devices is ascribed to optical gains due to their antireflecting behavior and the faster charge carriers collection in particular for PEIE-based devices as presented in the TPC decay curve in Fig. 8b. Unlike under 1 sun illumination, the VOC of the devices is very dependent on the IFLs. In the absence of IFL at 1000 lx, a noticeable decline in the VOC with a value of 0.36 ± 0.01 V was observed, whereas the values for PEIE-based and polylysine-based devices are 0.56 ± 0.02 V and 0.42 ± 0.03 V, respectively. The degraded performance of the organic solar cells without IFLs in indoor conditions is mainly due to the significant voltage losses. This voltage loss in low light intensities is due to the absence of UV light in the spectra of LED lamps. UV light helps the adsorption of oxygen species on the surface of ZnO nanoparticle and alter the WF value. As a result, under 1 sun illumination due to the presence of UV light, a reduction in the WF value is expected, which contributes to a superior energy level alignment. In contrast, in indoor lighting conditions and the absence of the UV light the initial reduction of the WF is recovered, leading to an imperfect energy level alignment. Hence, applying the IFLs assist to lower the WF and consequently align the energy level of organic solar cell for better performance. The normalized TPV decay curve under indoor conditions in Fig. 8c shows a fast voltage decay for both polylysine-based devices and those without IFL, implying a higher recombination rate for the aforementioned devices. As presented in Table S2, the charge carrier recombination lifetimes extracted from the TPV decay curves show that devices with an interfacial layer have more than two times longer lifetimes compared to devices without an interfacial layer, with a value of 41.8 μs. This highlights the significant improvement in recombination properties for devices incorporating an interfacial layer.

The TPV decay curve is in good agreement with reported voltages and also with the dark J–V curves presented in Fig. 8d. The JON/JOFF ratio between the dark current densities at −0.1 V and 0.8 V for PEIE-based devices is higher by more than one order of magnitude compared to pristine ZnO, validating the low leakage current for PEIE-based devices. This corresponds to faster photovoltage decay of pristine ZnO compared to IFL-based devices. On the other hand, a severe decline in FF is also observed when polylysine is incorporated, indicating the well-known trap-assisted recombination phenomenon at lower light intensities.
Under indoor light intensities, improvement in JSC for IFL-based devices is also observed but unlike under 1 sun illumination, in low light intensity PEIE-based devices are the champions which indicate the lower charge recombination and better charge collection in PEIE-based devices as shown in TPC decay curve. As shown in Table S2, The charge extraction time for devices without an interfacial layer is 5.92 μs, and it reduces to 5.79 μs and 3.63 μs for polylysine and PEIE-based devices, respectively. The experimental results in 1 sun and indoor lighting conditions reveal the beneficial roles of the IFLs, making both materials good candidates for use as IFLs due to their high transparency (no optical losses) and antireflecting behavior (optical gain) and leakage current suppression. Additionally, in inverted configuration OPV with ZnO as electron transport layer (ETL) under low light intensities (absence of UV light), it is perceived that incorporating PEIE as IFL leads to superior performance compared to polylysine and pristine ZnO.
For OPVs to work efficiently in low light intensities, a minimum shunt resistance of 85 kΩ cm−2 is essential. Even though Rsh for both IFL-based devices are very low, surprisingly for polylysine-based devices the situation is even worse and its value is one-fourth of PEIE-based devices as reported in Fig. 6. Since at dim lighting condition the carrier density is tremendously low, lower Rsh leads to leakage current, causing a detrimental impact on VOC.

In summary, organic photovoltaics for indoor and outdoor applications requires further optimization to achieve higher values of shunt resistance and lower values of series resistance. In this work, we explored for the first time the use of polylysine as interfacial layer for indoor OPV application. We compared three different devices realized without interfacial layer, with PEIE and polylysine interfacial layer. We have demonstrated that devices without interfacial layers have higher voltage loss under 1 sun illumination, and this is particularly evident under low light intensities. It was found that the effect of IFLs is profound in low light conditions and, therefore, choosing the right IFL is crucial. Specifically, we discovered that although polylysine-based devices showed the highest average performance of 7.72% under 1 sun illumination, in dim lighting conditions PEIE-based devices presented a superior average PCE of 12.25%. The performance of PEIE-based devices is substantially better (almost 90% and 70%) than pristine ZnO and polylysine-based devices, respectively. On the other hand, shunt resistance also plays a fundamental role in the overall efficiency of OPV devices for indoor applications. Devices without IFLs have the lowest Rsh, and accordingly, they experience the highest dark current. At low light intensity of 1000 lx the shunt resistance of PEIE is higher than that of polylysine, suppressing the leakage current and justifying the increase in device performance.

To address the relatively low VOC values under indoor illumination, several strategies could be explored in future work. First, the use of materials with a higher energy bandgap might be beneficial. Second, optimizing the thickness and morphology of the active layer could allow for better charge extraction. Third, alternative interfacial layer materials might be worth investigating. Additionally, introducing buffer layers or modifying the interfaces between the active layer and the electrodes could help reduce energy level mismatch, improve charge carrier extraction, and ultimately enhance VOC. Our study highlights the importance of selecting the right IFLs and their role in enhancing the performance of portable OPV devices which can operate efficiently in both indoor and outdoor lighting conditions.

The inverted OSCs were fabricated on pre-patterned ITO-coated glass substrates with a sheet resistance of ∼10 Ω per square. The substrates were cleaned sequentially by an ultrasonic bath in soap deionized water, deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol for 10 min at each step. The devices were fabricated with either a polyethyleneimine ethoxylated (PEIE) or poly-lysine as an interfacial layer with the following stacks: glass ITO/ZnO/Interlayer/PBDB-T:ITIC/MoO3/Ag (Fig. 3). For a better understanding and comparison, some devices without any interfacial layers were also fabricated. The ZnO as an electron transport layer was diluted in isopropanol with a ratio of (1:1) and spin-coated on ITO-coated glass substrates at 4000 rpm for 50 s and annealed at 120 °C for 10 min. PEIE is diluted in ethanol with the ratio of (1:100) and spin-coated at 3500 rpm and poly-lysine was spin-coated as it was purchased at 2000 rpm for 50 s and they were annealed at 120 °C for 10 min to form the interfacial layers. Photo active blend is prepared with a ratio of 1:1 in which 10 mg of PBDB-T and 10 mg of ITIC were dissolved in 2 mL chlorobenzene/DIO (97:3% by volume). The polymer solution was stirred at room temperature overnight to guarantee the full dissolution of the polymers. The active layer was deposited on top of the interfacial layers using the spin-coating method at 1200 rpm for 50 seconds and followed by thermal annealing at 100 °C for 10 min. All aforementioned layers were formed out of the glovebox, then the substrates were transferred into the metal evaporator to thermally evaporate 5 nm of the molybdenum oxide (MoOx) as a hole transport layer and 100 nm of silver (Ag) as a top contact by using a shadow mask.


Zinc oxide (Helios ETL spray) as an ETL was purchased from GENESINK. Polyethyleneimine, 80% ethoxylated (PEIE) solution, poly-lysine solution (0.1% W/V in H2O), 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO, 98%), and the solvents chlorobenzene (CB), 2-propanol (absolute, 99.8%), and ethanol (absolute, 99.8%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The polymer donors PBDB-T was purchased from California Organic Semiconductors (Cal-OS), and the acceptor polymer ITIC was purchased from 1-Material.


Ultraviolet-visible transmittance spectra were obtained by UV-vis 2550 spectrometer set up from Shimadzu. The JV characterization of solar cells was measured with a computer-controlled Keithley 2420 source meter under AM1.5 G, 100 mW cm2 (1 sun) calibrated with an ECO Pyranometer MS-602 at room temperature. The general JV setting for the voltage step was 20 mV, with a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. The EQEs were measured using IPCE (Incident Photon-to-current Conversion Efficiency) system (Arkeo-Cicci Research s.r.l.), which has been calibrated using a UV-enhanced Si detector (Thorlabs, 250–1100 nm). Monochromatic light was generated from the lamp source.

For indoor device performance, JV characterization was measured by a customized setup, a wooden enclosure featuring black walls and an lamp holder at the top, as depicted in Fig. S4. By adjusting the supporting plate's position along the z-axis, we controlled the incident power density to achieve the desired illuminance level for the devices being measured. During the I–V evaluations, a black curtain shielded the opening to prevent external light from entering. In order to determine and adjust the light intensity before each measurement, we used a National Institute of Standard and Technology NIST-traceable calibrated DigiSense 20250-00 light meter. A black scotch mask with an area of 0.1 cm2 as an active area of the solar cell was used in all measurements.
Dark J–V characteristics, illumination intensity dependence of VOC and JSC, and open-circuit voltage rise/decay measurements were performed using a modular testing platform (Arkeo – Cicci research s.r.l.) which is composed of a white LED array (4200 K) tunable up to 200 mW cm−2 of optical power intensity and high-speed source meter unit.
Transient photo-current (TPC) and transient photo-voltage (TPV) are measured by commercial setup (Arkeo – Cicci research s.r.l.). The measurements were performed using a high-speed light-emitting diode (LED, 5000 Kelvin) at various light intensities. The setup detect short-circuit current or open-circuit voltage at 10 different illumination ramp. The lowest detectable light intensity corresponds to 30 mW·cm−2 is used for indoor illumination and higher light intensity of 100 mW·cm−2 simulates 1 sun illumination.

Hamed Javanbakht Lomeri: conceptualization, investigation, visualization, data curation, writing – original draft, Giuseppina Polino: investigation, data curation, Suresh Podapangi: investigation, data curation, Thomas M. Brown: supervision, validation, writing – review & editing, Francesca Brunetti: supervision, validation, writing – review & editing, project administration, funding acquisition.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the European H2020 project, “Wearable Applications enabled by electronic Systems on Paper (WASP)” (grant no. 825213).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3se00242j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023