 DOI: 10.1039/C2NR31214J
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4464-4469

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Hyo-Jin
Ahn
,

Sun-I
Kim
,

Jong-Chul
Yoon
,

Jung-Soo
Lee
 and 

Ji-Hyun
Jang
*

Interdisciplinary School of Green Energy, KIER-UNIST Advanced Center for Energy, Low Dimensional Carbon Materials Center, UNIST, Korea. E-mail: clau@unist.ac.kr

Received
18th May 2012
, Accepted 31st May 2012
First published on 13th June 2012
We have investigated the effects of the introduction of an antireflection layer consisting of a hierarchically patterned diffraction grating into a conventional TiO2 working electrode on the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of a DSSC. High index-contrast TiO2 nanowires (NWs) were grown in the circular holes of the two-dimensional diffraction grating prepared through the use of a polymer template fabricated via interference lithography (IL) for maximized photon trapping effects in the visible region of light. The larger scale dimension of the polymer template was determined using the beam parameters of the IL and the smaller scale dimension in the structures was controlled by the growth conditions of the TiO2 NWs. Compared with a conventional DSSC, the hybrid nanostructure with an additional antireflection layer demonstrated higher and wider absorption bands of wavelength spectra, leading to an increased PCE due to enhanced light trapping effects achieved by the combination of antireflection and diffraction of the light on the front surface of the devices with minimum loss in the surface area of the hierarchical structure. The excellent performance of the optimized hybrid nanostructure indicates that the nanophotonic effects have strong potential for solar energy conversion, photocatalyst, and photoelectrode applications.

The dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC), a photovoltaic system formed in a sandwich arrangement of a few-micron-thick mesoporous TiO2 layer coated with a dye as the working electrode and a layer of Pt islands deposited onto a transparent conducting oxide (TCO) as the counter electrode, has attracted much attention due to its high energy conversion efficiency and low cost industrial scalability. Electrons injected by the photoexcitation of dyes under visible light illumination diffuse through the TiO2 nanocrystal thin film to the collecting TCO substrate creating a closed circuit by returning electrons to the dyes through the electrolyte solution. It is particularly important to employ a properly designed architecture with a maximized photon trapping effect for realizing a highly efficient DSSC, since the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the solar cell strongly depends on the absorption properties of the device. It has been demonstrated that the nano-structural morphology of the device is widely considered to be a key factor for efficient light trapping. For example, rough interfaces at the front or back of the active material in the thin microcrystalline layers can increase the path length of the light by scattering and consequently increase absorption.

A diffraction grating (DG) is an optical component with a few hundred nanometer scale of periodic structure, which splits light into several streams travelling in diffraction paths. After light interacts with the grating, the diffracted light is composed of the sum of interfering wave components stemming from each slit in the grating. It has been reported that the optical path length can be increased through diffraction or scattering. In fact, higher order diffracted light can have advantage in light harvesting in that it may induce total internal reflection (TIR) in addition to providing longer optical interaction lengths.
Nanocrystalline-TiO2 (NC-TiO2) particles with a diameter of 25 nm, which have been widely used for the fabrication of the working electrode in the conventional DSSC, allow for a large surface area, thereby maximizing the uptake of dye molecules. However, they are not efficient light scatterers; this results in relatively low light harvesting in the red and near-infrared region of the light spectrum, since effective scattering is mainly achieved by structures having dimensions comparable to the wavelength of the exposed light. Alternatively, a new type of optical element, monodisperse TiO2 beads with a submicrometer-sized diameter, has been introduced as a highly efficient scatterer to increase the photon path length in the devices. However, they suffer from a relatively low Voc due to their lower surface area caused by the introduction of larger particles. Upon this background, a better understanding of the relation between the surface area of the devices and efficient light trapping properties of hybrid nanostructures is important to design an optimized structure in the DSSC.
Another relatively low-cost method for increasing PCE of solar cells is to introduce antireflection (AR) layers. Antireflection layers have played an important role for silicon solar panel efficiency because silicon is highly reflective and any light that is reflected cannot be harvested. The moth-eye nanostructured surface and grating-like structures in the brown-colored cuticle of the Oriental hornet are good examples of bio-inspired optical components enhancing the solar collections achieved by a textured surface of the AR layer. A few hundred nanometer scale bumps or grating works for this purpose since the dimensions of these structures which are a bit smaller than the wavelength of visible light are able to absorb more light by the effective interference of waves. The porosity in the nanostructure allows the adjustment of the effective refractive index between the structure and air, which helps reduce reflection losses of the nanostructure. Indeed, not only reflective silicon solar cells but also high-efficiency DSSCs with an interface between the high refractive index TiO2 and relatively low index FTO layer require a textured front surface as an antireflective layer in the form of a diffraction grating layer to reduce reflectance and to improve the optical path length of the diffracted light for maximized light trapping. To date, the effective AR layer based on nanopores which can also increase the light absorption induced by photon trapping, incorporated in DSSCs, has not been reported, although an AR layer fabricated inside/outside the device and a scattering layer constructed on top of the working electrode are researched separately.
Interference lithography (IL) is an efficient and reliable technique for the fabrication of large area, defect-free nanostructures by transferring the light intensity distribution into a light sensitive medium. Through the appropriate choice of beam parameters, the geometry and volume fraction of the nanostructures can be precisely controlled. An advantage of IL in areas where visible light is used as a light source for excitation is that it permits easy access to long-range ordered structures with a scale of a few hundred nanometers without defects, whose dimensions are particularly important for effective photon trapping.
Here we report the coupling of a bio-inspired dual-scale AR layer in the form of a 2-dimensional (2D) TiO2 diffraction grating (DG) fabricated via IL into a conventional TiO2 working electrode in a DSSC in order to achieve an enhanced photon trapping effect. The spacing between the holes in the polymer templates was determined through control of the wave vectors and polarization vectors of the exposed light. TiO2 nanowires (NWs) were grown in the circular holes of polymer templates followed by the removal of the template by sintering at high temperature. A dual-scale nano-periodic pattern, which exhibits not only excellent antireflection but also enhanced diffraction/scattering, has been adopted to minimize the loss in surface area. In contrast with a conventional DSSC, the hybrid structure with the dual-scale AR layer demonstrates stronger light absorption in the UV-visible region, leading to both a greater PCE and IPCE in the overall spectral range. The improved efficiencies of the DSSC coupled with the AR layer can be explained by the maximized photon trapping in the red region of the solar spectrum by the introduction of a high index-contrast nano-periodic structure with comparable lattice parameters to the wavelength of exposed light. The higher efficiency of the hybrid nanostructures as working electrodes in a DSSC indicates that proper design of nano-architecture will open up the possibility of improved performance for energy related materials such as the electrodes for organic solar cells and the substrates for surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy.
In an extensive search of inspiring organisms, moths proved to have the most effective abilities for the performances of solar panels in that the moth eye shows a remarkable anti-reflective capability that is vital to their sight abilities. Numerous methods have been tried to mimic the moth-eye structure with a 2D pattern of bumps, each roughly 200 nm high and spaced on 300 nm centers.Fig. 1a shows the schematic illustration for the fabrication of a TiO2 working electrode (V) with a modified moth-eye inspired AR layer (IV) in the DSSC device (VI). The SEM images of a thin layer of a 2-dimensional diffraction grating (DG or AR, IV) composed of TiO2 NWs grown in the circular holes of a SU-8 polymer template fabricated by IL are shown in Fig. 1b. The polymeric template (II) targeted here is an inverse structure of a moth-eye inspired 500 nm thick 2D square lattice with a diameter of 380 nm. The dimensions of the polymer templates were determined so as to efficiently reduce the reflection as well as scatter the light for an enhanced light trapping effect. The TiO2 NWs in the polymer template were grown using modified hydrothermal methods. The length and diameter of the wires can be tuned by varying the concentrations of the precursors, reaction times, and through other means. In particular, we have controlled the concentrations of precursor solutions in order to obtain TiO2 NWs with diameters of 20–30 nm in a single SU-8 hole. A hierarchically patterned dual-scale structure has been designed to minimize the loss of surface area for dye absorption and to achieve the excellent antireflection and enhanced diffraction properties. Finally, the SU-8 patterns were removed by sintering. Fig. 1c is a cross-sectional image of a NC-TiO2 working electrode coupled with a 2D patterned TiO2 AR layer. The photoanode (V) fabricated in this study is a double layered hybrid nanostructure composed of a thin under-layer of AR (or DG) composed of approximately 70–80 TiO2 NWs with diameters of 20 to 30 nm and heights of 500 nm in circular holes of 380 nm diameter in a square lattice and a 5 μm thick upper-layer of a conventional NC-TiO2 structure. The surface area of the 5.5 μm thick double layered structure obtained by BET is 109 cm2 g−1, which is slightly lower than that for a compact pure mesoporous TiO2-NC film (117 cm2 g−1) due to the presence of the 500 nm thick layer of larger scale patterns.

Fig. 2 shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of hydrothermally prepared TiO2 nanostructures after sintering in air for 1 h at 500 °C. As-synthesized NWs are rutile TiO2 with an enhancement in the (110), (101), and (211) planes as confirmed by JCPDS # 88-1175. The crystal structure of the annealed sample could be further confirmed by TEM measurement. Fig. 2b shows a high-resolution TEM image of the TiO2 NWs confirming that the NWs are crystalline with interplanar d-spacings of 0.32 nm and 0.24 nm corresponding to (110) and (211) planes, respectively, of rutile TiO2. It can be seen that the annealed TiO2 NWs are tightly connected and faceted NWs with an average diameter of about 20–30 nm in the rutile phase, in agreement with the obtained XRD pattern.
The enhanced antireflection property due to the coupling of properly designed underlying 500 nm thick dual-scale AR layer can be quantified by the reflection spectra measured by shining the light from the front glass side on a 5 μm thick P25 NC-TiO2 and 5.5 μm thick hybrid nanostructure composed of 500 nm underlying patterned TiO2 NWs layer and 5 μm NC-TiO2 upper layer. In this configuration, the light passes through air/glass/FTO/(P-TiO2 NWs)/TiO2 NC interfaces from air to the TiO2 NC layer, and it is assumed that the majority of reflectance originates from the interface of FTO (n = 1.7) and TiO2 (n = 2.49) due to the notable difference of the refractive index. Fig. 3a shows that the hybrid structure with an underlying patterned TiO2 NW layer gives a much lower reflectance as compared to the reference structure with a pure TiO2 NC structure over the entire spectral range (nearly one order of magnitude lower at 460 nm). This implies that much more light is able to participate in the light harvesting process in the hybrid structure. This is attributed to the gradual change of the refractive index due to the presence of the patterned TiO2 NW layer with the capability of modulating the effective refractive index according to the porosity of the patterned structure between the FTO and TiO2 NC layers in the hybrid structure. In the case of our AR layer, the effective refractive index is approximated to be 1.97 as calculated in the ESI.
Next, in order to investigate the intensity of diffusely scattered light under beam irradiation on the device, the diffuse reflection spectra of a pure TiO2 film made from P25 nanocrystals, a hierarchically patterned AR layer of TiO2 NWs, and a hybrid nanostructure were measured. Interestingly, compared to the P25 NC-TiO2 film, the films with a very thin AR layer showed significantly higher diffuse reflection spectra in the visible spectrum of light wavelengths (from 450–650 nm), indicating that the absorbed light was efficiently scattered within the nanostructure film. This is ascribed to extension of the light path within the films by introduction of a few hundred nanometer scale structure in the AR layer. The diffuse reflectance spectra do not show any notable difference between front side exposure and back side exposure.
UV-vis spectroscopic measurements were further undertaken in order to explore the final optical response of nanostructured TiO2 with and without an AR layer. Fig. 3c shows the UV-vis extinction spectra of a 5 μm thick plain NC-TiO2 layer, 500 nm thick AR layer, and 5.5 μm thick hybrid structure composed of the two aforementioned layers illuminated at normal incidence from the glass side. The absorption peaks spanning 300 to 400 nm were assigned to the absorption of the conventional TiO2 nanoparticles. Interestingly, the latter two samples (even the 500 nm thick TiO2-AR layer) demonstrated a more intense and wider spectrum with a strong and broad absorption band ranging from 450 to 650 nm with the absorption maxima at 525 nm and 550 nm than the pure NC sample, even though the density of TiO2 is much lower than that of the NC-TiO2 structure. The absorption maximum for the hybrid structure (P-NWs + NC) shows a blue-shift compared with that of the pure AR layer (P-NWs) due to the presence of small scale of NC-TiO2. The enhanced UV absorption of both samples with the diffraction grating (or AR) is attributed to the combination of antireflection and a scattering effect obtained by the larger dimensions of nanostructures in the patterned TiO2 NWs structure. As expected from the previous results, compared with the single layer of NC-TiO2, the double layered structure assembled with an AR layer (P-NWs) in a larger dimension reduces the reflection of the light and induces longer effective light path lengths and thus a clear and strong absorption band in the longer wavelength region ranging from 450 nm to 800 nm.
To investigate the characteristics of the hybrid nanostructures as a working electrode for solar cells, the photovoltaic performances were measured under illumination of AM 1.5 100 mW cm−2. The incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE), the number of photogenerated electrons per incident photon, obtained for the conventional TiO2 anode and hybrid structure, is shown in Fig. 4a. The broad IPCE curves, covering the visible spectrum from 380–770 nm, exhibit a maximum of 60% and 70% at 530–560 nm for the reference mesoporous TiO2-NC film and hybrid structure, respectively, which explains the greater PCE in the hybrid cell. Current–voltage curves of the reference cell and hybrid structure and a schematic diagram of a DSSC with a hybrid type working electrode are illustrated in Fig. 4b. The power conversion efficiency (η) of the hybrid structure with a 5 μm thick NC structure on an additional AR layer and the reference cell with the same thickness is 6.5% and 5.0%, respectively. The efficiency of the improved light trapping structure exhibits 30% enhancement compared with the reference cell, which implies that the a hierarchically patterned TiO2 layer with proper dimensions has a crucial impact on the performance of photovoltaic devices. Importantly, it can be seen that the short-circuit current density of Jsc in the hybrid structure is considerably higher while the open-circuit voltage (Voc) is not affected by the dual-scale AR layer, as shown in Table 1. This is different from previously reported data that showed decrease in the Voc and fill factor due to the greatly reduced surface area when a scattering layer of large beads was used as light trapping structures. In our procedure, the fill factor (FF) is slightly decreased in the hybrid structure indicating the slower carrier mobility due to another junction between the NC-TiO2 and AR layers. However, the Voc remains the same probably due to the minimum loss in surface area of the hierarchically patterned structure (slight decrease from 117 cm2 g−1 to 109 cm2 g−1).

V
oc (mV)

J
sc


P
max

Fill factor

R
s


R
ct

Efficiency
Reference
729
11.3
1.4
60.5
2.4
0.8
5.0
Hybrid
729
15.6
1.5
57.6
1.9
0.96
6.5
In order to gain better insight into the dynamics of interfacial charge transfer processes, which are strongly related to the difference in I–V performance between two kinds of working electrode based DSSCs, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements on symmetrical dummy cells composed of two identical electrodes were carried out. The high frequency (around 100 kHz) represents the sheet resistance (Rs) and the peaks between 1000 Hz and 1 Hz correspond to the charge-transfer resistance (Rct) at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface, respectively in the Nyquist plots of the symmetric cells. As shown in Table 1, the hybrid structure has a lower Rs (Rs = 1.9) than the conventional TiO2 working electrode (Rs = 2.4), which explains the efficient light trapping at the interface between the TiO2 NW AR layer and the FTO substrate as well as good adhesion to the substrate in the hybrid structure. The tight bonding between FTO and TiO2 NWs is likely due to the direct growth of TiO2 NWs on the FTO substrate in hierarchical structure compared to the rough bonding obtained by sintering of NC-TiO2 in the reference electrode. However, the Rct value of the hybrid structure was 0.96, which is slightly higher than 0.8 of the reference electrode. This indicates that the reference electrode has a lower resistance at the interface of the working electrode and electrolyte than the hierarchical structure with an additional interface of TiO2 NWs and NC-TiO2 does, which also explains the lower fill factor in the hybrid structure (the additional resistance curve for this interface was not observed in the Nyquist plot). Although the hybrid structure has a slightly larger resistance and therefore, lower FF than the reference electrode, Jsc of the hybrid structure is much higher than that of the reference, resulting in 30% of the overall power conversion efficiency enhancement, indicating that light harvesting by the introduction of a modified antireflective layer with minimum loss in surface area and the ability for higher scattering is efficiently balanced by the loss in interfacial resistance caused by the addition of another interface. We believe that further investigation of characteristics of the photovoltaic device can fully optimize charge mobility and recombination rates.
In conclusion, we have fabricated a hybrid structure incorporating a modified bio-inspired AR layer as a working electrode for use in DSSCs. A 500 nm thick hierarchically patterned 2D diffraction grating was introduced to maximize photon trapping via effective reduction in reflection and enhanced light scattering triggered by the dimensions of the nanostructure, which are comparable to the wavelength of exposed light. The light trapping structure with minimum sacrifice of surface area, achieved by antireflection and diffraction, leads to a significant increase of absorption in the red spectral range, resulting in a 30% improvement in overall efficiency relative to cells prepared using pure P25 TiO2 electrodes of the same thickness. These results demonstrate that the proposed methodology is a low-cost and deterministic approach for achieving efficiency enhancement by light trapping in a thin film DSSC.

TiO2 NWs were grown by placing the 2D-patterned substrates fabricated via IL in the solution of 20 mL of toluene, 0.5 g of tetrabutyl titanate, 0.5 mL of titanium tetrachloride (1 M in toluene), and 1 mL of hydrochloric acid (37 wt%) in 30 mL of the Teflon reactor at 180 °C for 1 h. The polymer template was removed by sintering at 500 °C for 1 h. A layer of NC-TiO2 (Solaronix Ti-nanoxide T/SP) was coated on top of prepatterned TiO2 nanowires by doctor blading followed by drying at 120 °C for 10 min. The film was then annealed at 500 °C for 30 min. This doctor blading procedure with paste (coating, drying, and annealing) was repeated to obtain a working electrode with appropriate thickness. The TiO2 electrode was immersed in a 0.5 mM N719 dye (Solaronix) solution in a mixture of acetonitrile and tert-butyl alcohol (v/v: 1:1) and kept at room temperature for 24 h. To prepare a platinum counter electrode, a commercial Pt catalyst (Solaronix platiso T) was coated on drilled FTO glass and was annealed at 450 °C for 30 min. The Pt coating procedure was repeated to achieve appropriate performance. The dye-adsorbed TiO2 with a dimension of 0.25 cm2 (5 mm × 5 mm) and the platinum counter-electrode were assembled into a sandwich-type cell and sealed with hot-melt Surlyn (Solaronix) with a thickness of 25 μm. A drop of the electrolyte (Solaronix Iodolyte AN-50) was injected through a hole on the back side of the counter electrode.


Photovoltaic performance of the DSSC was characterized under simulated AM 1.5 illumination (100 mW cm−2, Oriel). The intensity of incident light was calibrated with a reference Si cell (PV measurement Co.). An EIS experiment was carried out using a computer controlled potentiostat (Versa STAT 3, AMETEK) and the data were fitted by using Zsimpwin 3.21 software. The measured frequency ranged from 100 mHz to 100 kHz with 10 mV AC amplitude. The bias of the EIS measurements was set at −0.75 V. IPCE measurements were also conducted using an EQE system (Model QEX7) by PV Measurements Inc. (Boulder, Colorado). The SEM images were taken by a scanning electron microscope (FEI/USA Nanonova 230). The reflectivity and absorption spectrum were measured using a Cary-100 conc UV/vis/NIR spectrophotometer (Varian). The surface area was collected by using a Belsorp max (Bel Japan). The NC-TiO2 film thickness was measured using a surface profiler (P-6 KLA_Tencor/USA).


This work is supported by NRF with the contract nos NRF-2011-0027950 and 2012-0002413 and supported by NRF through the Human Resource Training Project for Regional Innovation.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2nr31214j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012