 DOI: 10.1039/C9EE02324K
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1187-1196


Peng
You
,

Guijun
Li
,

Guanqi
Tang
,

Jiupeng
Cao
 and 

Feng
Yan
*

Department of Applied Physics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong. E-mail: apafyan@polyu.edu.hk

Received
13th March 2019
, Accepted 29th November 2019
First published on 29th November 2019
Perovskite solar cells have attracted much attention recently for their high efficiency, ease of preparation and low cost. Here, we report a novel laser-annealing method for perovskite films at a low substrate temperature by scanning laser spots on the film surfaces. An ultrafast crystallization process within a few seconds is realized under a laser with a high intensity and a fast scanning speed. Because the crystalline perovskite phase has a stronger light absorption than the amorphous phase, the fast laser annealing can induce a higher temperature in the former and lead to the selective growth of large perovskite grains. Under optimum conditions, perovskite films with high crystallinity are successfully fabricated, resulting in perovskite solar cells with high power conversion efficiency and good stability. Moreover, a faster laser-annealing process of perovskite films is achieved by using a linear laser beam, which is expected to be a promising technique for the mass production of large-scale perovskite solar cells.

Perovskite solar cells have attracted much attention recently due to their high efficiency, low cost and convenient fabrication processes. Perovskite films are normally prepared by thermal annealing for a long period of time (about 1 hour), which is time and energy consuming and incompatible with low-temperature fabrication required by certain devices such as flexible solar cells on plastic substrates. In this work, we demonstrate an ultrafast perovskite annealing strategy by scanning a laser spot on the film surface with a speed of tens of millimeter per minute. The fast scanning of the laser spot on the perovskite surface induces high temperature gradient in the perovskite film, which can accelerate the growth of perovskite grains in a short period of time (only several second) while the substrate is maintained at the room temperature. The resultant devices show high efficiency (over 21%) and good stability due to the high quality of the perovskite films under laser annealing. More importantly, this fast annealing approach can be used in the fabrication of large-area perovskite solar cells by utilizing linear laser. Therefore, the ultrafast laser scanning method is a promising technique for the mass production of perovskite solar cells with low cost.


Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted tremendous attention in recent years due to their high power conversion efficiency (PCE) and low fabrication cost. The unique properties of the organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites, like the high light absorption coefficient, high carrier mobilities, small exciton binding energy and long carrier diffusion lengths, are responsible for the high photovoltaic performance of PSCs. Since the first report of PSCs with a PCE of 3.8% in 2009, the certified efficiency was improved rapidly to over 25% in the past decade. The crystallinity of perovskite films has been found to be critical to the device performance. Perovskite films with larger grains normally have lower density of trap states and higher carrier mobilities, which can lead to reduced carrier recombination and enhanced photovoltaic performance of PSCs. The annealing conditions of perovskite films are detrimental to the growth of perovskite grains. However, it is challenging to precisely control the crystallization of perovskite films based on a conventional thermal annealing method. Besides, a thermal-annealing process is time and energy consuming, and it is incompatible with low-temperature fabrication required by certain devices such as flexible PSCs on plastic substrates. Therefore, the perovskite annealing process can be a bottleneck for the mass-production of PSCs, and novel annealing approaches are desirable to overcome these limitations.

Laser-annealing techniques have been successfully used in semiconductor industry for the mass production of large-scale devices. They can be utilized for the treatment of various materials, like silicon, metal oxides and nanomaterials, and demonstrate numerous advantages over thermal annealing, including controllable crystallization, low-temperature processing, large-area fabrication and being a non-contact process. More importantly, an ultrafast annealing process can be achieved on large-area samples by scanning the laser beams on their surfaces, which can hardly be realized with other heating methods. Complex patterns can be produced by scanning the laser spot in a programmable path with computer-aided designs. Furthermore, a suitable temperature gradient induced by localized laser-annealing can be favorable for crystal growth. Although some attempts of using laser to anneal perovskite films have been reported, no high-performance PSCs have been realized based on the technology until now. Besides, photonic flash annealing of perovskite films has been demonstrated by using white light or infrared light. However, these methods will induce high substrate temperatures, and the device efficiencies are even lower than those of the control devices.
In this work, we developed a novel annealing approach for methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) and (CsPbI3)0.05(FAPbI3)0.95(MAPbBr3)0.05 mixed perovskite films by fast laser beam scanning. The laser-annealing process was optimized by tuning the laser scanning conditions, including laser wavelength, scanning speed and output power. The laser-annealed perovskite films demonstrate larger grain sizes than thermal-annealed samples, which can be attributed to the temperature gradient generated between perovskite seeds and the amorphous components around them due to different light absorption coefficients of the two phases. Under optimum conditions, the average PCE of the devices is relatively improved for about 20% in comparison with the control devices prepared by thermal annealing. By using a linear laser beam, large-area devices can be prepared with a high speed, which paves a way for the mass production of PSCs at a low temperature.


Fig. 1a shows the schematic illustration of the laser annealing process. MAPbI3 perovskite films were prepared by using a typical antisolvent-assisted spin-coating method. Then, a robotic laser scanning system (see ESI, Fig. S1a) was used to anneal the as-deposited perovskite films. A continuous-wave diode laser with controllable output power was fixed on an X–Y motorized stage. The downward laser beam can scan along a designed track on the sample surface with a speed (see ESI, Fig. S1b) under the control of a computer program. The laser spot on film surface was controlled to have a diameter of 1.0 mm. Laser diodes with different wavelengths (405 nm, 450 nm and 660 nm) were used in film annealing. Notably, as-deposited perovskite films were light brown, indicating that they were partially crystalized before annealing. The coexistence of crystalline and amorphous phases in as-deposited perovskite films was also confirmed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns (see ESI, Fig. S2). After the laser scanning processes, perovskite films were completely crystallized and turned into black, as shown in Fig. 1a.

The surface temperature distribution of a perovskite film was monitored by an infrared thermal imager (inset in Fig. 1b) during the laser annealing process (wavelength: 450 nm). Fig. 1b and c show the 2-dimensional (2D) and 3-dimensional (3D) infrared thermal images of the perovskite film surface. The laser output power and the scanning speed here are 150 mW and 25 mm min−1, respectively. It is noteworthy that only a small local area near the laser beam center shows an apparent higher temperature than the other part of the surface. Fig. 1d shows the temperature distribution along the dash line passing through the laser beam center in Fig. 1b. The maximum temperature of the perovskite surface is 100 °C, which is equal to the optimum thermal annealing temperature of a MAPbI3 perovskite film on a hotplate (see ESI, Fig. S3). For other laser beams with different wavelengths (405 nm and 660 nm), the central temperatures on perovskite surfaces can also be controlled at the same value by tuning the output power (see ESI, Fig. S4). Notably, the substrate temperature we measured on the back surface is equal to the room temperature because the laser is only absorbed on the top surface of the perovskite film. So the substrate temperature is not increased by the laser annealing, which is critical to some substrates that cannot sustain high temperatures.

Fig. 1e presents the XRD spectra of the thermal-annealed and laser-annealed films (laser wavelength: 450 nm). All diffraction peaks (apart from those peaks from the fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO)/TiO2 substrate) belong to the MAPbI3 tetragonal phase, indicating that both films were well crystalized after the annealing processes. We can find that the (110) main diffraction peak shows a higher peak intensity than the other peaks corresponding to other lattice planes. The peak intensity ratios of (110) peaks over some other diffraction peaks of the laser-annealed film are much higher than those of the thermal-annealed film (see ESI, Table S1), indicating that a preferred orientation along (110) direction has been obtained in the former. Notably, the highly oriented perovskite films prepared by laser annealing are favorable for exciton dissociation, charge transfer and diffusion.
In addition to the annealing of as-deposited perovskite films, the laser scanning system can be used for precisely patterning crystalline perovskite films. As shown in Fig. 1f, the well crystallized perovskite film can be patterned with the laser beam based on a design from the control system (the inset picture). When the laser beam is focused on the sample surface to a tiny point, the localized high temperature can decompose the crystalline perovskite film following a reaction of CH3NH3PbI3 → PbI2 + CH3NH3I(vapor). So a layer of PbI2 can be obtained after the laser-patterning, as confirmed by the XRD pattern (see ESI, Fig. S5). The laser-patterning technique may find applications for large-scale module processing of PSCs or light emitting diodes (LEDs) based on perovskite films.

Fig. 2 shows the plan-view SEM images of the perovskite films fabricated by thermal-annealing and laser-annealing. The statistical diagrams of the grain size distribution based on the SEM images are presented in the insets. Laser beams of different wavelengths (405 nm, 450 nm and 660 nm) were driven at the same scanning speed (25 mm min−1) with the same central temperature (100 °C) on perovskite films. It is obvious that the average grain sizes of the laser-annealed perovskite films are much larger than that of the thermal-annealed film. The cross-sectional SEM images of the perovskite films shown in Fig. S6 (ESI) also demonstrate that most of the perovskite grains were penetrating through the perovskite capping layer, and most of the grain boundaries were perpendicular to the substrate, which is beneficial for charge transport from perovskite to charge collection layers. Moreover, this microstructure may result in a reduced surface area of the grain boundaries and a low concentration of defects in the perovskite films. So nonradiative charge carrier recombination in the perovskite films can be alleviated, which will lead to enhanced photovoltaic performance of the PSCs.
To better understand the laser-annealing effect, UV-visible absorption spectra of the as-deposited and laser-annealed perovskite films were characterized, as presented in Fig. 2e. The light absorption of the perovskite film is much higher than that of the as-deposited film at any wavelength, indicating that the perovskite grains or seeds can absorb more energy from the laser and have higher temperatures than the surrounding amorphous phase, as illustrated in Fig. 2f. The laser spot was scanned on the surface with a high speed (25 mm min−1), the actual annealing time for each point is estimated to be 1.5 s (see ESI, Fig. S7). Notably, the surface temperature can be increased to 100 °C in a few seconds with the rate up to 43 °C s−1. During the fast laser annealing process, localized temperature gradient on the boundaries of perovskite grains can be generated, which acts as a driving force for the growth of perovskite grains. Large grains can absorb more energy and have higher temperatures than small grains, which can induce the selective growth of the large grains. However, for thermal-annealing, heat is transferred from the bottom glass/FTO/TiO2 substrate to the upper perovskite film, and it can be uniformly absorbed by both the crystalline and the amorphous phases of the perovskite film, leading to a high density of nucleation seeds in the films upon annealing. Therefore, the fast laser-annealing approach can result in larger grains than the thermal annealing process.
Notably, the crystallinity of the laser-annealed perovskite films is closely related to the laser wavelength. The average grain sizes were different when three different lasers (wavelength: 405 nm, 450 nm and 660 nm) were used in the annealing processes and 450 nm laser led to the largest average grain size of ∼476 nm (see ESI, Table S2). We consider that this effect can be attributed to the different light absorption coefficients of the perovskite films at different wavelengths. It is noteworthy that the absorbance ratio of the two absorption spectra shown in Fig. 2e changes with the light wavelength and peaks at around 450 nm. Therefore, the 450 nm laser can induce the biggest temperature gradient on grain boundaries in perovskite films and provide the largest growth driving force for the perovskite seeds in the as-deposited film.
We have studied the influence of scanning speed and laser output power on the morphology of the perovskite films. For the fixed power (150 mW) of the laser, the grain size increased with the decrease of scanning speed and then decreased when the speed was less than 25 mm min−1 (see ESI, Fig. S8). We found that the surface temperature increased with the decrease of scanning speed and the largest grain size was obtained when the central temperature was 100 °C (see ESI, Fig. S9). For a fixed scanning speed of 25 mm min−1, the crystallinity increased with the increase of output power and then decreased when the power was over 150 mW (see ESI, Fig. S10). The corresponding surface temperature as a function of output power was also obtained (see ESI, Fig. S11). Both experiments indicated that the maximum grain size was achieved at the central temperature of 100 °C, which is consistent with the condition required by a thermal annealing process.
We then prepared PSCs with a device configuration of glass/FTO/compact TiO2 (c-TiO2)/mesoporous TiO2 (mp-TiO2)/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au, as shown in Fig. 3a. Current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the devices prepared by laser-annealing and thermal-annealing (control) processes are presented in Fig. 3b. The detailed photovoltaic parameters of the PSCs are summarized in Table 1. All parameters are considerably improved for the PSCs fabricated by laser-annealing processes in comparison with the control devices processed by thermal annealing. The control devices show an average PCE of 16.89%, Voc of 1.069 V, short circuit current density (Jsc) of 22.36 mA cm−2 and fill factor (FF) of 70.64%. In contrast, the 405 nm laser treated devices show an enhanced average PCE of 19.71%, Voc of 1.112 V, Jsc of 23.18 mA cm−2 and FF of 76.44%. The average efficiency is further increased to 19.92% with Voc of 1.119 V, Jsc of 23.22 mA cm−2, and FF of 76.68% by using 660 nm laser. The device performance is maximized when 450 nm laser is adopted, demonstrating an average PCE of 20.23%, Voc of 1.124 V, Jsc of 23.29 mA cm−2 and FF of 77.27%. The greatly enhanced device performance by laser annealing is consistent with the improved crystallinity of the laser-annealed perovskite films. Notably, the champion device by laser-annealing shows PCE of 20.98% (19.90%), Voc of 1.13 V (1.125 V), Jsc of 23.41 mA cm−2 (23.41 mA cm−2) and FF of 79.3% (75.5%) for reverse (forward) scan. Fig. 3c presents the corresponding EQE spectra, demonstrating an improved quantum efficiency in the whole wavelength range for the champion device. The integrated photocurrent from the EQE spectra is in good agreement with the Jsc derived from the J–V curves in Fig. 3b.
Laser wavelengths (nm)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Champion PCE (%)
Thermal-annealing
—
1.069 ± 0.011
22.36 ± 0.47
70.64 ± 2.02
16.89 ± 0.72
18.10
Laser-annealing
405
1.112 ± 0.009
23.18 ± 0.21
76.44 ± 1.24
19.71 ± 0.38
20.23
450
1.124 ± 0.009
23.29 ± 0.20
77.27 ± 1.16
20.23 ± 0.35
20.98
660
1.119 ± 0.008
23.22 ± 0.21
76.68 ± 1.17
19.92 ± 0.38
20.45
For the champion device, a steady-state efficiency of 20.20% was achieved at the maximum power point of 0.96 V (see ESI, Fig. S12). Besides, we also collected the statistical data of devices (40 devices for each condition) prepared by using the optimized laser-annealing and thermal-annealing approaches, respectively, as shown in Fig. 3d. The target devices have an average efficiency of 20.23%, which is much higher than that of the control devices (16.89%). It is notable that the PCEs of the target devices are distributed in a narrow range from 19.41% to 20.98%, showing good reproducibility.
We further investigated the influences of the laser scanning speeds and laser output power on the device performance (laser wavelength: 450 nm) (see ESI, Fig. S13 and Tables S3, S4). The effects of laser scanning speed and laser power on the device performance were quite similar. With the increase of the laser scanning speeds from 10 mm min−1 to 100 mm min−1 (or the laser output power from 110 mW to 170 mW), the average PCEs were firstly increased and subsequently decreased with a maximum value of 20.23% at the scanning speed of 25 mm min−1 and the laser power of 150 mW, which is consistent with the condition for obtaining the biggest perovskite grain size. These results suggest that the photovoltaic performance of the PSCs is closely related to the crystallinity of the laser-annealed perovskite films.
To gain a deeper insight into the nature of the outstanding photovoltaic performance of the PSCs prepared by laser-annealing approach, we performed steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) measurements of the perovskite films prepared at different conditions, as shown in Fig. 4a and b. The perovskite films for PL measurements were fabricated on pure glass substrates without FTO layers. It is notable that the optimized laser-annealed perovskite film exhibited more than three-fold increase in PL intensity relative to that of the thermal-annealed film. Meanwhile, the PL peak demonstrated a slight blue shift from 768 nm (thermal-annealing) to 766 nm (laser-annealing). The enhanced PL intensity and the blue-shifted PL peak stem from the decreased bulk defect density in the perovskite absorber, which can lead to reduced charge recombination. To analyze the dynamics of the charge recombination in the perovskite films, time-resolved PL decay measurements were also performed. The PL decay processes for thermal-annealed and laser-annealed perovskite films were shown in Fig. 4b. A much slower PL decay can be found in the laser-annealed film. The decay curves were fitted with a biexponential function: Y = A1exp(−t/τ1) + A2exp(−t/τ2). The fast decay lifetime (τ1) was attributed to the nonradiative recombination in the region with high-density defects such as the film surface, while the slow decay lifetime (τ2) was ascribed to the recombination in the region with lower density of defects. The laser-annealed perovskite film displayed the two decay lifetimes of τ1 = 51.9 ns and τ2 = 193.6 ns. In contrast, the thermal-annealed film exhibited much shorter lifetimes: τ1 = 17.3 ns and τ2 = 45.6 ns. The longer PL lifetimes of the laser-annealed perovskite films imply the decreased concentrations of defects and traps, which can result in an increased short-circuit current and a higher open-circuit voltage of a PSC.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements of the PSCs were performed under light illumination of 100 mW cm−2. Fig. 4c shows the EIS spectra of the devices at a bias voltage of 0.8 V. A big half circle corresponding to charge recombination process can be found in the Nyquist plot. The target device exhibits a much larger recombination resistance (∼639.6 Ω) than that of the control device (∼271.3 Ω), indicating reduced charge recombination in the perovskite films or at the interfaces between perovskite and charge transport layers.Fig. 4d shows the recombination resistance (Rrec) values at different applied voltages under light illumination of 100 mW cm−2 (derived from the impedance spectra in Fig. S14, ESI). It is notable that Rrec was larger for the target device at any bias voltage than that for the control device, indicating a slower recombination rate in the target device, which can be attributed to the lower density of trap states in the laser-annealed perovskite film. Furthermore, the increased Rrec will contribute to the shunt resistance of the solar cells, which is a main reason for the increased FF of the target devices.
We also investigated the long-term stability of the PSCs fabricated by laser-annealing and thermal-annealing processes. The encapsulated devices were kept in air with a relative humidity ∼30% for stability study. J–V curves of the devices were characterized for every 240 h. The statistical data of the PCEs after degradation for 1200 h was shown in Fig. S15 (ESI). Apparently, the devices fabricated by laser-annealing were much more stable than the control devices. The target devices maintained about 90% of its initial average PCE after the storage for 1200 h, while the control devices retained only 78% of the original efficiency. The improved stability of the target devices can be attributed to the improved crystallinity of the laser-annealed perovskite films.
To realize faster laser annealing of perovskite films, we then used linear laser beams in our experiments, which was generated by introducing a cylindrical convex lens. Fig. S16a (ESI) shows the schematic diagram of the laser annealing process of the as-deposited perovskite films by using a linear laser beam. Fig. S16b (ESI) shows the infrared thermal image of the as-deposited perovskite film surface during linear laser scanning (wavelength: 450 nm, step distance: 2 mm). The temperature distribution close to the linear laser beam along two vertical directions is shown in Fig. S17 (ESI). The high temperature region (>70 °C) is about 5 mm. So it is much faster to anneal a sample by using the linear laser than a laser spot. The J–V curve of the champion small-area PSC prepared by the linear laser annealing is shown in Fig. S16c (ESI). The device shows a high efficiency of 20.25%, Voc of 1.115 V, Jsc of 23.04 mA cm−2, and FF of 78.8% (derived from the reverse scan curve). By using this linear laser scanning process, we also prepared large-area PSCs with an active area of 1.0 cm2. The device photo and corresponding J–V curves of the laser-annealed PSCs are shown in Fig. S16d (ESI). The laser-annealed PSC exhibits a relatively high efficiency of 17.26%, which is 13.7% higher than that of the thermal-annealed device (15.18%), as shown in Table S5 (ESI). So we can compare the laser-annealing time with the thermal-annealing time reported in the literature. For a device with the size of 1 cm × 1 cm, the laser-annealing time is estimated to be ∼24 s, which is much shorter than the conventional thermal-annealing time on a hotplate (tens of minutes). Importantly, this technique can be scaled up for a much higher throughput simply by using more or bigger laser sources. In addition, the power consumption for laser-annealing can be far less than that of thermal-annealing. Therefore, the cheap and fast laser-annealing technique is promising for the large-scale fabrication of high-efficiency PSCs.
In addition to the MAPbI3-based PSCs, (CsPbI3)0.05(FAPbI3)0.95(MAPbBr3)0.05 mixed PSCs were also prepared by using laser-annealing approach. The as-deposited mixed perovskite films were annealed by scanning laser beams with wavelengths of 405 nm, 450 nm or 660 nm. The surface temperature distribution of the mixed perovskite film was monitored by the infrared thermal imager (see ESI, Fig. S18). We then prepared mixed PSCs with the same device structure as the above mentioned MAPbI3-based PSCs. The device performance was then optimized by controlling the laser power. Under the optimum conditions, we found that the maximum surface temperatures of the perovskite films are all close to 150 °C (equal to the optimum thermal-annealing temperature of the control device). Similarly, only a very small area of the perovskite film surface near the beam center shows relatively high temperature, while the surface temperature of the other part of the film is close to the room temperature. The maximum heating rate is about 100 °C s−1, which cannot be achieved by a normal thermal annealing method (see ESI, Fig. S19).

Fig. 5 shows the SEM images of the mixed perovskite films prepared by thermal-annealing (150 °C for 10 min) and laser-annealing processes. The average grain sizes of the laser-annealed perovskite films (1.84 μm for 450 nm laser, 1.5 μm for 660 nm laser, and 1.38 μm for 405 nm laser) are much larger than that of the control film prepared by thermal-annealing (0.88 μm) (see ESI, Table S6), which is consistent with the result of MAPbI3 perovskite films. More importantly, the grain size is closely related with the laser wavelength. Therefore, we checked the UV-visible absorbance spectra of the as-deposited and laser-annealed mixed perovskite films (see ESI, Fig. S20). Notably, the absorbance ratio between the two films varies with the light wavelength and peaks at around 450 nm. At this condition, the average grain size is the maximum, which further confirms that the temperature gradient in the film is critical to the growth of perovskite grains. As explained above, the 450 nm laser can provide the largest growth driving force for the perovskite seeds in the as-deposited films. As a result, perovskite films annealed with 450 nm laser show largest average grain size.

Fig. 5e shows the J–V curves of the devices fabricated by thermal-annealing and laser-annealing processes. Detailed photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 2. Notably, the device performance is better for the devices with larger perovskite grains. A high Voc of 1.175 V and high PCE of 21.5% were achieved when 450 nm laser was used for the laser-annealing process. The champion device can get a steady-state efficiency of 21.2%, as shown in Fig. 5f. Moreover, the optimized devices also show negligible hysteresis and increased quantum efficiency (see ESI, Fig. S21 and Table S7).
Laser wavelengths (nm)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Champion PCE (%)
Thermal-annealing
—
1.09 ± 0.01
22.83 ± 0.46
73.10 ± 1.18
18.22 ± 0.46
19.01
Laser-annealing
405
1.13 ± 0.01
23.56 ± 0.34
76.60 ± 0.84
20.19 ± 0.32
20.45
450
1.14 ± 0.01
23.56 ± 0.21
77.44 ± 0.69
20.82 ± 0.31
21.50
660
1.14 ± 0.01
23.40 ± 0.26
76.68 ± 0.65
20.44 ± 0.30
20.79
The quality of the perovskite films can be reflected by the Urbach energy (Eu), which is normally related to the impurities, ionic disorder and atomic vibrational fluctuations in the films. We have calculated the Urbach energy according to the EQE spectra of the best MAPbI3 and mixed PSCs (see ESI, Fig. S22). Based on the equation of EQE = EQE0exp[(E − Eg)/Eu] (where EQE0 is the EQE value at the bandgap), the slope of the exponential EQE tail defines the Urbach energy. The derived Urbach energy values are shown in Table S8 (ESI). Notably, both MAPbI3 and mixed PSCs prepared by laser-annealing technique show slightly lower Urbach energies (18.3 meV and 14.2 meV) than those obtained from thermal-annealing method (19.8 meV and 15.7 meV), indicating better quality of the laser-annealed perovskite films, which leads to the increased Voc of the PSCs prepared by laser-annealing processes.
Besides, we tested the device stability of the mixed PSCs under both dark or light illumination conditions (see ESI, Fig. S23). After storing in dark for about 2000 hours, there was no obvious decrease in PCE for the device prepared by laser-annealing process, while the PCE of the control device can only retain 85% of the original value. Even under light illumination of 100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5G), the devices prepared by laser-annealing can maintain 95% of the initial PCE after light soaking test for over 200 hours, while the control devices lost about half of its value. The greatly improved device stability of the PSCs prepared by laser-annealing should be ascribed to the increased crystallinity of the perovskite films.

In summary, we have developed an ultrafast laser annealing approach for the preparation of both MAPbI3 and mixed perovskite films at room temperature. Perovskite films were crystalized under high-intensity laser in a few seconds and the average grain size was controlled by tuning the laser wavelength, scanning speed and output power. Under optimum conditions, high-quality perovskite films with good crystallinity, preferred orientation and low density of defects were successfully fabricated. We consider that the different light absorption coefficients in perovskite grains and amorphous phases can induce temperature gradient at the boundaries of perovskite grains under the laser annealing. The temperature gradient can act as a driving force for the crystallization of perovskite grains and lead to larger grain sizes than the conventional thermal annealing method. Furthermore, a linear laser beam has been successfully used to achieve a fast annealing process in a large area, which would be highly compatible with the mass production of PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work is financially supported by the Research Grants Council (RGC) of Hong Kong, China (Project No. PolyU 152087/17E) and the Hong Kong Polytechnic University (Project No. 1-ZVGH).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee02324k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020