 DOI: 10.1039/C6NR01601D
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11403-11412


Seongrok
Seo
,

Ik Jae
Park
,

Myungjun
Kim
,

Seonhee
Lee
,

Changdeuck
Bae
,

Hyun Suk
Jung
,

Nam-Gyu
Park
,

Jin Young
Kim
* and 

Hyunjung
Shin
*

Department of Energy Science, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea. E-mail: hshin@skku.edu

Photo-Electronic Hybrids Research Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST), Seoul 136-791, Korea

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea. E-mail: jykim.mse@snu.ac.kr

Integrated Energy Center for Fostering Global Creative Researcher (BK 21 Plus) Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea

School of Chemical Engineering and Department of Energy Science, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea

Received
25th February 2016
, Accepted 9th May 2016
First published on 24th May 2016
NiO is a wide band gap p-type oxide semiconductor and has potential for applications in solar energy conversion as a hole-transporting layer (HTL). It also has good optical transparency and high chemical stability, and the capability of aligning the band edges to the perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) layers. Ultra-thin and un-doped NiO films with much less absorption loss were prepared by atomic layer deposition (ALD) with highly precise control over thickness without any pinholes. Thin enough (5–7.5 nm in thickness) NiO films with the thickness of few time the Debye length (LD = 1–2 nm for NiO) show enough conductivities achieved by overlapping space charge regions. The inverted planar perovskite solar cells with NiO films as HTLs exhibited the highest energy conversion efficiency of 16.40% with high open circuit voltage (1.04 V) and fill factor (0.72) with negligible current–voltage hysteresis.

Photovoltaic devices based on organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite absorbers such as CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPI) have achieved great improvements in power conversion efficiency (PCE) of up to 20.1% within only a few years. This shows the following attractive physical as well as chemical properties of the photo-active layer, MAPI: a direct bandgap of approximately 1.5 eV, a high extinction coefficient (∼104 cm−1 at 550 nm), a low exciton binding energy (20–30 meV), an ambipolar transport property with a long electron–hole diffusion length (0.1–1 μm) and a facile solution process to form high quality thin films with an excellent tolerance for defects. The most successful architecture of the perovskite solar cells until now has adopted the regular configuration (n-i-p) of mesoporous TiO2 (electron transport layer, ETL)/MAPI/2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N′-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD; hole transport layer, HTL). In view of reliability, however, this configuration has exhibited some shortcomings such as serious current–voltage hysteresis and instability of the organic HTL when the device is exposed, even under ambient conditions. Moreover, some authors argue that mesoporous TiO2 films can contribute to the degradation of the perovskite layer, due to their enhanced photocatalytic properties. Replacing the organic HTL, Spiro-OMeTAD, by an inorganic one on the top of the perovskite layer is quite difficult. Therefore the design with an inverted configuration (p-i-n, HTL/MAPI/ETL) of the perovskite solar cells is more appropriate and promising for the stability. In addition to their competitive high efficiency, inverted type solar cells showed beneficially less or no hysteresis. The origin of hysteresis in perovskite solar cells is not completely clear yet, simply because of its controversial origins, such as perovskite's ferroelectricity, defects, ion migration, and so on. The relationship between an unbalance in the electron and hole diffusion length and cell architecture (n-i-p or p-i-n) clearly contributes to the hysteresis. Since significant amounts of charge carriers are generated near transparent conductive oxide (TCO), the inverted p-i-n configuration would be more beneficial for charge collection and suppressed hysteric behavior compared to the regular n-i-p type due to the asymmetric diffusion length of electrons and the hole in MAPI.

Most of the inverted perovskite solar cells have adopted poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) as HTL until now. However, the hydroscopic and acidic nature of PEDOT:PSS can lead to instability of devices in spite of its good properties as HTL. As a result, several groups have studied inorganic nickel oxide (NiO) as a stable alternative to HTL. NiO can be a suitable candidate for HTL, due to its p-type characteristics with a wide band gap (Eg > 3.50 eV), high optical transmittance, chemical stability, and an appropriate valence band alignment with various photo-active layers. Indeed, NiO has already been studied as a potential HTL candidate in many photovoltaic systems. The first time NiO was applied was in a dye sensitized solar cell (p-DSSC) in the year 2000. p-DSSC based on NiO was designed to obtain a greater solar spectrum and higher open-circuit voltage by making a tandem structure combined with an n-type TiO2-based photoanode, although the efficiency remained quite low (<2%). Meanwhile, Irwin et al. successfully demonstrated the first replacement of unstable PEDOT:PSS by NiO in organic photovoltaics (OPV) and demonstrated an enhanced device performance and stability. Their pioneering work on the application of NiO in advanced photovoltaics, now has led to its application in perovskite solar cells. Perovskite solar cells based on NiO, however, have suffered from a relatively lower performance with a smaller fill factor as compared to devices based on PEDOT:PSS. It is mainly because of the high resistivity of un-doped NiO and a rather large absorption loss in doped NiO as well. Recently several approaches were applied to improve the fill factor and photocurrent of NiO-based perovskite solar cells such as the Al2O3 meso-superstructure coating on NiO films, solution-processed Cu doped NiO, nanostructured NiO fabricated by pulsed laser deposition (PLD), and the PDEOT/NiO hybrid layer. Although improvements in performance are being made by external controls including electrical doping and interfacial engineering, there has been a lack of research on the fundamental material design through focusing on pure un-doped NiO as HTL. We believe that there is still room to further tap the potential to increase the conversion efficiency of perovskite solar cells based on NiO through maximizing the intrinsic properties and film quality.
NiO films can be prepared by various methods, such as, spin coating, spray pyrolysis, electro-deposition, sputtering, and pulsed laser deposition. NiO has a highly stable ionic crystal structure (cubic rock-salt structure; space group of Fmm) with a high melting point of 1955 °C. Due to the high bonding strength holding the ions in place, NiO thicker than a few nanometers showed intrinsically high insulating behaviors. The lowest film thicknesses reported to date as HTL, however, have been limited to 15–20 nm, due to the limitation of uniform film coverage by most of the reported preparation techniques. If one can prepare NiO as ultrathin films, where the film thickness is comparable to the characteristic length of the space charge region, that is, the Debye length and which have high conformality, the films will have a higher electrical conductivity without losing any optical transparency. Different conductivity behaviors as HTL are expected when the film thickness is comparable to or smaller than the width of the space charge region. At this point, NiO loses its bulk properties and generates anomalous transport properties. In addition, NiO has hydroxylated species such as NiOOH on its surface under ambient conditions. It greatly changes the surface properties of NiO with a resultant work function variation between 5.0 and 5.6 eV as reported. This defective surface hydroxyl group (NiOOH) has a deeper valence band position than NiO, which consequently hinders the hole transport from perovskite to NiO. Thus, a greatly improved performance of ultra-thin, pure, and un-doped NiO as HTL in planar type of perovskite solar cells through the control of not only its thickness but also surface hydroxyl groups is expected.
In this study, we propose high performance ultrathin pure un-doped NiO films as HTL deposited by the atomic layer deposition (ALD) method for highly efficient planar perovskite solar cells. ALD allows for the deposition of highly conformal and dense ultrathin films with a precise sub-nanometer scale control of thickness through a self-limiting growth mechanism at a relatively low temperature. We have observed an apparent increase of the effective work function in ultrathin NiO when the thickness is comparable to its Debye length (∼1–2 nm by the calculation), which positively contributes to the hole extraction performance. Furthermore, heat treatment provides even purer NiO by the successful control of the surface NiOOH layer generated by surface hydroxylation. The newly developed ultrathin pure un-doped NiO films deposited by ALD exhibited a short circuit current, Jsc, of 21.9 mA cm−2, open circuit voltage, Voc, of 1.04 V, fill factor, FF, value of 0.72 and an overall PCE of 16.4% with a negligible voltage–current hysteresis. To the best of our knowledge, this performance is the highest one achieved among the inverted planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells using un-doped NiO. More importantly, this is the first demonstration that an oxide semiconductor with thicknesses close to the Debye length exhibits a better charge transport property, which is applicable to a variety of other functional oxide semiconductors.
The energy band diagram for the device structure of our inverted planar perovskite solar cells based on NiO films is depicted in Fig. 1A (also see the cross sectional SEM image in Fig. 1B as inset). Ultra-thin NiO films grown by ALD with different numbers of cycles were prepared on glass/ITO substrates for the extraction of holes from MAPI. Then, MAPI layers (with a thickness of 200–250 nm) were deposited onto NiO films via spin coating using the so-called solvent-engineering technique, as reported. The energy diagram shows efficient charge extractions at the NiO/MAPI (hole) and MAPI/PCBM([6,6]phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester) (electron) interfaces, respectively, due to its suitable energy band alignment. Furthermore, NiO can block electrons effectively because of its conduction band edge at approximately −1.8 eV (vs. vacuum), which is much higher than that of MAPI at −3.9 eV. PCBM, however, with a relatively similar valence band (VB) to MAPI may not block holes effectively, which induces positive (hole) leakage currents at the MAPI/PCBM interfaces. Perovskite solar cells using PCBM typically stack additional 2,9-dimethyl-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline (BPC) or LiF layers to help complete hole blocking and consequently have 1–2% more efficiency. In this study, however, we did not adopt a further hole blocking layer in order to focus more on the effect of NiO films on the photovoltaic performance. In spite of this, devices based on our NiO films showed competitive performance compared to other inverted type cells using an additional hole blocking layer. Fig. 1B shows that the coated perovskite MAPI layer was dense and uniform. Next, the thin PCBM layer (∼50 nm) was coated, and the device was completed with an Ag electrode by thermal evaporation.
For a systematic study on the device performances with respect to NiO film thicknesses, we have established the ALD growth conditions of NiO films to retain the film thickness control. The thickness of NiO films is plotted in Fig. 2A against the number of ALD cycles at a deposition temperature of 200 °C. The NiO film thickness (determined by atomic force microscopy, (AFM)) increased linearly with the number of ALD cycles, demonstrating sub-nm thickness control (∼0.34 nm per cycles) over even a few nanometer thicknesses through a simple change in the number of ALD cycles. Further AFM characterization confirms that NiO films prepared on the Si/SiO2 wafer by ALD show extremely flat surfaces of 0.3–0.4 nm roughness in root-mean-square (Fig. 2B). Moreover, the growth behavior of NiO deposited on relatively rougher ITO than the Si/SiO2 wafer was characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) as shown in Fig. S1. The overall thickness of 225 cycles of ALD-processed NiO on ITO was determined to be 7 to 8 nm, which revealed that the growth rate of NiO on ITO is similar to that on the SiO2/Si wafer. AFM measurements of the topography and electrical current mapping (Fig. S2) showed that NiO films were uniformly coated on the ITO substrates structurally as well as electrically. As a result, such a precise control over the thickness and uniform film coverage of ALD-grown NiO makes the films have a nanometer scale resolution in thickness variation, which is hardly achieved by other deposition methods. The device based on even ultra-thin 2.5 nm NiO films, providing dense and uniform films with the help of the ALD method, showed a reasonably high performance, which verifies the good electron blocking performance of our NiO without pinholes throughout the film. In contrast, the device based on ultrathin charge transfer layers prepared by other deposition methods, such as sputter and spin coating, completely loses its performance.

Fig. 2C shows the optical transmittance spectra of NiO films with different thicknesses of ∼2.5, 5, 10, and 20 nm, respectively, corresponding to the ALD cycles of 75, 150, 300, and 600. A relatively thick NiO film (20 nm in thickness) in our experiments was also found to be highly transparent (>90%) in the visible range. A higher transparency was observed with even thinner NiO films, which is highly desirable for photovoltaic devices, as it generally leads to the enhanced light-harvesting capability of the perovskite layer. Fig. 2D shows grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) patterns of the ALD-grown NiO film with a thickness of 10 nm. The GIXRD pattern indicates that the films are polycrystalline as deposited at 200 °C. All peaks were clearly indexed with the rock-salt symmetry (space group, Fmm (NaCl-type)) of NiO, as shown in the Joint Committee on Powder Diffraction Standards (JCPDS, no. 71-1179) file.
To gain more insight into the effect of the thickness of the NiO films on the device performance, we investigated the films by Mott–Schottky impedance analysis to obtain information on their electronic properties, such as the types of semiconductors, work function (Efb) and hole concentration (Na). Detailed analysis of a potential (V vs. RHE) versus capacitance (C−2) curve from NiO films by Mott–Schottky analysis can be found in the ESI (Fig. S3) and a series of electrochemical Mott–Schottky results are also shown in Fig. S4.Fig. 3A shows a plot of Efb and Navs. the film thickness (t) of NiO measured by electrochemical Mott–Schottky analysis at a frequency selected from 8 to 20 kHz, where C−2 shows a linear dependence on V in the electrolyte of pH = 12. The work function (5.02 eV) of our NiO film with the thickness of 10 nm showed a good agreement with 4.93 eV measured by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS; see Fig. S5). NiO films thicker than 7.5 nm (Regime A) have a similar Na (1.0 to 5.0 × 1019 cm−3) and Efb (∼5.0 eV) regardless of the thickness, which is considered as the bulk property of our NiO films. Films thinner than 7.5 nm (Regime B), however, begin to increase their Efb and Na apparently. Schematics shown in Fig. 3B provide an explanation for the increase by relating the formation of space charge regions in the p-type semiconductor film. Fig. 3B postulates that the p-type semiconductor films were embedded by other materials that have a lower work function. Charged species including ionic defects and holes tend to be biased toward the interfaces to lower the electrostatic potential of the system. These interfacial charges are compensated by the space charge formed by accumulation of opposite charges through the whole film, thereby forming a space charge region with band bending. The characteristic length of this space charge region in the solid state is related to the Debye length, LD,
LD = (εrε0k/Tq2N)1/2
where
εr is the relative dielectric constant of the semiconductor, ε0 is the permittivity of free space, N is the carrier concentration, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, and q is the unit charge. LD strongly depends on the material preparation and its resultant dielectric constant as well as on the carrier concentration of the material. Thus, LD of NiO films in this work was calculated and used for further discussion. The dielectric constant was taken from the literature (εNiO = 12). Assuming that the carrier density in these films reaches the level of N = 1–5 × 1019 cm−3 taken from the Mott–Schottky method, the calculated LD of NiO films in this work is 1–2 nm, approximately. Even though hole concentrations measured by the Mott–Schottky method can be slightly overestimated, due to the non-ideal flat surface of the ITO film and the possible contribution from interfacial defects and defect activation, the calculated LD is acceptable as compared to the reported values in the literature. As the film thickness (t) approaches the Debye length, LD, the space charge concentration at the center of the film no longer reverts. LD started to overlap in NiO films thinner than 6–8 nm (few times of LD). Under these circumstances, the resultant work function and hole concentration of the film should be increased apparently. When the thickness of the NiO films was large enough compared to the LD, the NiO films were bulk-like, thus insulating ones as shown in the inset (schematic picture at the top). Once the films’ thicknesses were thin enough, the LD started to overlap, and thus the apparent work function and hole concentration are increased (middle). Even in thinner films, the LD is severely overlapped (bottom). Our experimental results also showed an increase in the apparent work function and hole concentration in NiO films with a thickness of ∼5 nm.


Fig. 3C depicts the photovoltaic (PV) parameters of perovskite solar cells based on as-deposited NiO films (extracted from current–voltage characteristics under 1-sun illuminations) with a function of film thickness. We found that as the NiO film thicknesses decreased from 10–15 to 2.5–7.5 nm, the short-circuit current (Jsc; ∼16.5 to ∼18.5 mA cm−2) and fill factor (FF; ∼0.55 to ∼0.60) values clearly increased. This improvement is ascribed to the improved conductivity of the thinner film as the thickness is sufficient to be overlapped by the Debye length. Open-circuit voltages (Voc) were 1.02–1.03 V in the range of all thicknesses, indicating that the work function (or effective Fermi level) of the hole-extraction (or transporting) layer may not be the crucial parameter for determining the Voc of the perovskite solar cells with this particular structure. The highest average performance (i.e., PCE of 11.82% with Jsc of 18.94 mA cm−2, Voc of 1.02 V, and FF of 0.61) was accomplished by the devices with NiO films of 5 nm thickness. The photovoltaic performances were obtained from 20–25 devices for each condition. The performances have decreased slightly from a 5 to 2.5 nm thickness of NiO films, where the Debye lengths are severely overlapped as shown in the schematic picture in the bottom inset of Fig. 3B. This is due to the insufficient blocking of electrons by the tunneling leakage of too thin films, although 2.5 nm NiO has a higher work function and hole concentration. This observation is consistent with the slightly reduced photocurrent and fill factor of the device with 2.5 nm NiO from PV parameters shown in Fig. 3C. As a result, the perovskite solar cells based on NiO films with the thickness comparable to a few times that of LD, where the Debye lengths are overlapped, as shown in Fig. 3B (schematic picture in the middle inset), exhibited a performance improvement due to the better conductivity of thin NiO films followed by its higher work function and hole concentration.
Furthermore, the increased Efb and Na were observed in an annealed NiO film compared to the pristine film. A plot of C−2vs. V for pristine (black squares) and annealed (red spheres) NiO films measured by Mott–Schottky impedance analysis is shown in Fig. 4A. The measured Efb and Na of NiO films increased after annealing, for example, Efb of 5.04 to 5.22 eV and Na of 4.9 × 1019 to 1.4 × 1020 cm−3. Pristine and annealed NiO films were also characterized by XPS. Both samples were 7.5 nm in thickness. Fig. 4B shows high-resolution XPS scans of the Ni 2p 3/2 and O 1s XPS spectra with pristine (top) and annealed (bottom) NiO films, respectively. The Ni 2p 3/2 region comprises the main peak (Peak 1), the shoulder (Peak 2), and its satellites (Peak 3) at 854.1, 856.0 and 862.0 eV, respectively. It is known that understanding the electronic structures by XPS analysis for the first row transition metals and their oxides and hydroxides is quite challenging due to the complexity of their 2p spectra because of peak asymmetries, complex multiplet splitting, shake-up process, final state effects, and uncertain, overlapping binding energies. When a core electron vacancy is formed by photoionization, a strong coupling occurs between the unpaired electron in the core and the unpaired outer shell electron. The coupling leads to multiplet splitting and creates a number of final states and a resulting complex and broad 2p spectra in XPS. Many studies show that a minimum of four peaks is required to depict the experimentally observed line spectrum of intrinsic NiO as shown in Fig. 4B denoted by 1 to 4. Peak 1 (∼854.1 eV) as the main peak is ascribed to the chemical state of Ni2+ in the standard NiO6 octahedral bonding configurations in the cubic rock-salt NiO structure. Peak 2 (∼856.0 eV) as the shoulder was initially assigned to the Ni3+ ions in the literature. It is currently interpreted as the combination of more than a single state such as a nonlocal screening process and partial contribution from surface states. The interpretation is now accepted as the chemical states of screening and surface states rather than initially assigned Ni3+ defects in NiO. The annealing of NiO films results in a slight decrease in the intensity of peak 2 relative to the pristine one. The reduction can be understood by the changes in the chemical state of Ni only at the surfaces, considering that annealing occurred at a relatively lower temperature, i.e., 300 °C under ambient conditions. This is further verified by O 1s spectra. The binding energy of the O 1s spectra is mainly resolved in three oxygen states. Two side peaks come from the lattice oxygen at 529.5 eV and adsorbed water at 533.4 eV, the middle peak 531.6 eV is attributed to surface hydroxyl groups. There is a noticeable difference in the reduction of the amount of water and hydroxyl groups from pristine NiO to the annealed one, which demonstrates that the annealing process mainly contributes to the elimination of NiOOH and water adsorbed at the surfaces of NiO films. Indeed, hydroxylation is a ubiquitous phenomenon for oxide materials, and NiO is no exception. All samples have been exposed to ambient air, and the surfaces of NiO were to be hydroxylated, even though NiO is prepared in a vacuum system without water as a precursor. Therefore, annealing a NiO film is a salient process to remove water and hydroxyl groups on the surfaces of NiO films for a better interface property to enhance the conductivity of the film as well as the stability of the perovskite film due to its decomposable nature with water.
Typical results of photocurrent density (J) versus voltage (V) for perovskite solar cells with pristine and annealed NiO films as HTL are shown in Fig. 5A, and the detailed photovoltaic performances are summarized in Table 1. The 300 °C annealed NiO-based perovskite solar cells exhibited the highest PCE of 16.40%, with a Jsc of 21.87 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.04 V, and a FF of 0.72. The device fabricated on pristine NiO films showed a PCE value of 11.93% with Jsc = 18.80 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.03 V, and FF = 0.62. The property of the NiO layer with an optimum thickness has a definite contribution to the improvement of the PV performance, in particular, the improved Jsc of 21.87 mA cm−2 and FF. This is consistent with the measurements of conductive atomic force microscopy (C-AFM) with clearly improved I–V characteristics of the annealed NiO films compared to the pristine films from the conducting current 0.17 nA to 1.1 nA at 0.5 V (Fig. S6) through the AFM tips. It suggests an increased electrical conductivity due to the improved surface property as well as a reduction in the carbon–nitrogen related defects after annealing (Fig. S7). The reported dc electrical conductivities of MAPI, PCBM, and NiO are 0.015, 0.016 and 0.00016 mS cm−1, respectively. It is expected to be a more balanced charge carrier extraction between PCBM for electrons and NiO for the holes through a conductivity matching of annealed NiO to PCBM. Therefore, the improvement in the Jsc, FF and overall performance is ascribed to the improved electrical conductivity of annealed NiO films.

t (film thickness of NiO, nm)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)

E
ff (%)
205
18.53 ± 0.21
1.04 ± 0.009
60 ± 0.6
11.50 ± 0.30
5
18.94 ± 0.25
1.02 ± 0.006
61 ± 1.0
11.82 ± 0.34
7.5
18.46 ± 0.33
1.03 ± 0.011
59 ± 1.8
11.19 ± 0.44
10
16.18 ± 0.72
1.03 ± 0.008
56 ± 2.0
9.26 ± 0.60
5
16.46 ± 1.10
1.03 ± 0.016
54 ± 2.0
9.14 ± 0.70
Annealed NiO (7.5)
20.64 ± 0.73
1.03 ± 0.010
70 ± 1.8
14.94 ± 0.58
We also examined the incident-photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE; Fig. 5B). The integrated photocurrent (annealed NiO: 20.2 mA cm−2, pristine NiO: 18.6 mA cm−2) from the IPCE is consistent with the measured Jsc value. Unlike devices with a doped front transport layer (TiO2 or NiO), which usually led to improvements in the short wavelength of IPCE, our annealed NiO-based device increased in the overall, mid-range, and even longer wavelength of IPCE as shown in Fig. 5B. Fig. S8 gives the explanation with the red-shifted optical transmittance spectrum of ITO/NiO thin films after annealing. Indeed, the small dip at 570 nm in the pristine NiO device red-shifts to 600 nm in the annealed NiO device, which means that the annealed NiO device can absorb more photons in the longer wavelengths. Furthermore, in contrast to other highly efficient perovskite solar cells based on nanostructured-NiO, doped NiO has a rapid reduction in quantum efficiency from 450 to 480 nm simply because of the absorption by dopants in NiO. On the other hand, our ultrathin, un-doped NiO-based cells maintain high photoresponses to the photons near the 400 nm wavelength owing to the high transmittance.
Hysteresis during the J–V measurement of the perovskite solar cells has various origins including the unbalanced flux between electron and hole transport, to which we add another contribution from the hole transporting layer.Fig. 6 shows the J–V curve of solar cells based on pristine NiO films with definite hysteresis and annealed films with negligible hysteresis. Similar hysteresis behavior of a large hysteresis in ITO/pristine NiO and less hysteresis in ITO/annealed NiO also appears in dark current–voltage measurements by C-AFM (Fig. S6). The experimental results give us the insight that a certain level of conductivity of NiO films or transport layers is needed for the mitigation of hysteresis, a similar argument in PEDOT:PSS-based devices, which indicates that the hysteresis might not solely originate from ferroelectric, or ion migration phenomena occurring in the bulk of the perovskite.
In conclusion, we have successfully prepared ultra-thin un-doped NiO films grown by ALD to fabricate highly efficient perovskite solar cells. A key finding in this study is that when the film thickness of NiO becomes extremely thin, its work function and hole concentration are apparently increased due to the overlap of the Debye length (LD), thereby enhancing the photovoltaic performances. Moreover, annealing provides a very simple and effective way to make NiO films with a better interfacial property by reducing hydroxylated NiOOH on the surfaces. A higher electrical conductivity was also obtained by the better interfacial properties as well as the reduction in C–N related defects, evidenced by XPS spectra and C-AFM. This work demonstrated the possibility to fabricate highly efficient inverted planar perovskite solar cells with ultra-thin un-doped NiO films ensuring a high optical transmittance and efficient hole extraction performance. As a result, the inverted planar perovskite solar cells based on NiO hole extraction layers grown by ALD exhibit the highest PCE up to 16.40% with negligible hysteresis.

Methylammonium iodide (CH3NH3I) and [6,6] phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester ([60]PCBM, 99.5% purity) were purchased from Dyesol Ltd (Queanbeyan, Australia) and Nano-C Co., (Massachusetts, USA), respectively. Nickel-bis(1-dimethylamino-2-methyl-2-butanolate), Ni(dmamb)2, was purchased from DNF Co., Ltd (Daejeon, Korea). Lead(II) iodide (PbI2, 99%), Hellmanex III, γ-butyrolactone (GBL, 99%), anhydrous dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, 99.9%), and anhydrous toluene (99.8%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Co., Ltd (St Louis, MO, USA). Acetone (99.5%), ethanol (99.5%), hydrochloric acid (HCl, 37 wt% aqueous solution), sodium sulfate (Na2SO4, 99.9%), monobasic sodium phosphate (NaH2PO4, 99.9%), and sodium hydroxide (NaOH, 99%) were purchased from DUKSAN Chemicals Co., Ltd (Gyeonggi-do, Korea).


20 × 20 mm ITO glasses (Fine Chemicals Industry Co., Gyeonggi-do, Korea, 10 Ω sq−1) were patterned by wet etching (etched area: 4 × 20 mm) with 37 wt% solution of HCl at 60 °C for 2 min. The substrates were then cleaned in an ultrasonic bath for 10 min in a detergent solution (5 wt% of Hellmanex III in deionized (DI) water), 10 min in DI water, 10 min in acetone, and 10 min in ethanol sequentially. An ALD grown-NiO ultrathin film was prepared on the ITO substrate. Before the ITO substrates were transferred to the ALD chamber, they were treated in a UV/ozone cleaner for 10 min. The NiO-deposited ITO glasses were transferred immediately into an argon-filled glove box (H2O and O2 < 1 ppm) to deposit perovskite films after the ALD process. To prepare the CH3NH3PbI3 solution, PbI2 and CH3NH3I (PbI2:CH3NH3I = 1:1 molar ratio, 43 wt%) were dissolved in a mixture of GBL and DMSO (7:3 v/v) solvent and then were stirred at 60 °C for 12 h to fully dissolve in an inert glove box. The solution (80 μl) was dropped onto the substrate and then coated by spin-coating (spin coater, JS201-100, Jaesung Engineering Co., Gyeonggi-do, Korea) at 1000 rpm for 15 s (200 rpm s−1 of acceleration) and 4500 rpm for 25 s (1000 rpm s−1 of acceleration), sequentially. During the second step, toluene (100 μl) was dropped which is known as solvent engineering, and substrates were transferred to a hot plate at 100 °C and dried for 10 min. Subsequently, 40 μl of the PCBM solution (20 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene) was spin-coated at 2000 rpm for 60 s (2000 rpm s−1 of acceleration). Finally, a 120 nm thick Ag was thermally evaporated on top of the active area (0.24 cm2) with a shadow mask under high vacuum (<1 × 10−6 torr). The fabricated solar cells were measured by using a solar simulator without delay.


The NiO ultrathin films were prepared on the clean ITO substrates or 300 nm SiO2/Si wafer. The Ni(dmamb)2 precursor and O3 as the oxidizer were used for deposition of NiO by the ALD system (NCD Lucida, Daejeon, Korea, flow-type reactor) in the temperature range of 120 to 240 °C. The growth conditions were established by following the report with slight modifications. Briefly, Ni(dmamb)2 was evaporated at 65 °C, ozone (7 wt% of O3 in O2 mixture) was delivered at room temperature with a fixed flow of 500 sccm. The base pressure was maintained at 5 × 10−2 torr with an additional flow of Ar 50 sccm under working conditions. A typical 1 cycle is composed of 3 s of Ni(dmamb)2, followed by 8 s of Ar purging and 5 s of O3 pulsing followed by 8 s of Ar purging (3–8–5–8). The targeted film thickness is obtained by increasing the number of cycles with the calculated growth rate (nm per cycle).


Mott–Schottky impedance analysis was applied to measure the electronic properties of the NiO film in a custom three-electrode cell using a potentiostat system (VMP3, Bio-Logic) with a platinum counter electrode, and an Ag/AgCl in a saturated KCl reference electrode. The exposed area of NiO films as the working electrode to the electrolyte was set to 0.785 cm2. The aqueous electrolyte contained 1 M Na2SO4, 0.1 M monobasic sodium phosphate buffer, and the pH (11.96) was adjusted by adding 1 M NaOH solution. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy was carried out by obtaining the ac current response to 10 mV of a sinusoidal potential perturbation with the frequency range from 1 kHz to 20 kHz to determine the real (Z′) and imaginary (Z′′) components of the impedance. Impedance spectroscopy can be changed depending on the frequency level because of the different responses of the ionic species in the film. However, 8 to 20 kHz showed quite stable values regardless of frequencies (doping level fluctuation was under 1 order in Mott–Schottky plot). 12 kHz of frequency was finally selected to determine the doping level and flat band potential in this experiment.


In this work, the electrochemical potentials were reported versus the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE), which is derived from the Nernst equation: ERHE = Ea + Eref + 0.059 pH, calculated at room temperature. Ea is the measured electrochemical potential (vs. reference electrode potential), Eref is the potential of Ag/AgCl in saturated KCl (versus standard hydrogen electrode, ESHE) and pH is the measured pH value of the solution (in this work, 11.96). The potential of the vacuum level has been determined to be −4.44 ± 0.02 V (at RT) vs. a standard hydrogen electrode (SHE). Since the flat band potential of NiO shifts with pH by −0.059 pH during the hydrogen evolution reaction the values referenced to ERHE are the same as those referenced to ESHE.



JV curves were measured using a solar simulator (Peccell Technologies) with a potentiostat (CHI 608C, CH instruments) under AM 1.5 illumination (100 mW cm−2), and calibrated using a reference cell (PV measurements). The illuminated area of the device was fixed to 0.14 cm2 by using a metal shadow mask. The JV scanning protocol follows the scan window of 1.2 to −0.05 V for a reverse scan (−0.05 to 1.2 V for forward scan) with 10 mV of the voltage step and 500 ms of equilibration times. There was no pre-bias condition before measurements.


The cross-sectional structures of the device and morphology of the perovskite film were taken by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, JSM-7600F, JEOL). Grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD, SmartLab, Rigaku) was used to interpret the crystal structure of the NiO film. The topography and local conductance of NiO films were measured by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and Conductive-AFM (Nanonavi II, SII Nanotechnology). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, SIGMA PROBE) was used to obtain the information on the chemical state of the nickel oxide with C 1s, Ni 2p3/2, and O 1s binding energy spectra. The transmittance spectra of NiO and ITO were recorded by using a Uv/Vis spectrophotometer (OPTIZEN POP, Mecasys). IPCE was measured on a quantum efficiency measurement equipment (IQE 200™, Newport) under monochromatic light illumination from a 300 W xenon lamp with optical cut filters and a monochromator. The incident monochromatic light intensity was calibrated by using a silicon reference cell, which produced 0.05 mW cm−2.


The authors acknowledge financial support from the National Research Foundation of Korea Grant funded by the Korean Government (2012M3A7B4049986, 2013K2A1B8054379). This work was supported by the Human Resources Development program (no. 20124010203270) of the KETEP grant funded by the Korean Government Ministry of Knowledge Economy and in part by the Agency for Defense Development (ADD) of the Republic of Korea.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6nr01601d
‡ The authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016