 DOI: 10.1039/C9CC09901H
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 3159-3162


Xianfu
Zhang
,

Zi’an
Zhou
,

Shuang
Ma
,

Gao
Wu
,

Xuepeng
Liu
*,

Muhammad
Mateen
,

Rahim
Ghadari
,

Yunzhao
Wu
,

Yong
Ding
,

Molang
Cai
 and 

Songyuan
Dai
*

Beijing Key Laboratory of Novel Thin-Film Solar Cells, North China Electric Power University, Beijing, 102206, P. R. China. E-mail: liuxuepeng@ncepu.edu.cn; sydai@ncepu.edu.cn

Computational Chemistry Laboratory, Department of Organic and Biochemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Tabriz, Tabriz, 5166616471, Iran

Received
21st December 2019
, Accepted 3rd February 2020
First published on 3rd February 2020
A fused tetraphenylethylene-based hole transporting material shows higher power conversion efficiency and better stability compared with its non-fused counterpart, and the former molecule even outperforms the conventional spiro-OMeTAD.

During the last decade, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted great attention as next generation photovoltaics because of their high photoelectric conversion efficiency and easy preparation process. A recorded PCE of over 25% has been achieved. PSCs without any hole transporting materials (HTMs) achieve an efficiency of around 16%, which is much lower compared with standard devices using HTMs. Due to the stiff price and low hole mobility of the conventional 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD), lots of alternatives have been developed, including small organic molecules, polymers, and inorganic semiconductors. Among them, small molecules have attracted much attention due to their simple and well-defined structure, and insignificant batch-to-batch variation compared with polymers. Lots of tetraphenylethylene-based small-molecular HTMs with high mobility and a suitable HOMO level have been proved as efficient candidates for spiro-OMeTAD, such as TAE-4, DBC-OMeDPA, DMZ, TPE, KR216 (Bifluo-OMeTAD), EtheneTTPA (TAE-1), pm-TPE-4DPA, and W2, illustrating their great application potential. The molecular structures of these reported tetraphenylethylene-based HTMs are also illustrated in Scheme S1 (ESI).

A planar molecular conformation and enhanced π-conjugation have been proved as efficient ways to facilitate intermolecular charge transport and adjust their HOMO level with perovskite materials. Herein, we reported a new tetraphenylethylene-based HTM with a fused structure, termed F-TPE. A reference compound, termed TPE in this work, was also prepared, which had been proved as an efficient HTM for Tin-Based PSCs. The molecular structures of the investigated compounds are illustrated in Fig. 1. F-TPE is sequentially synthesized via the Scholl reaction and Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reactions, as mentioned in the ESI.
The optimized molecular geometries, electronic density distribution of the LUMO and HOMO levels, electrostatic surface potential map and hole reorganization energy for TPE and F-TPE are explored by time dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) using Gaussian 16 at B3LYP under the B3LYP/6-311G* level. As illustrated in Fig. 2 and Fig. S1 (ESI), F-TPE owns a superior planar structure compared with TPE from the optimized molecular geometries (smaller dihedral angles), allowing for better close molecular packing. The orbital density of the HOMO of F-TPE is fully delocalized evenly over the whole molecule, illustrating superior conjugation and promoting carrier transport. Therefore, F-TPE is more conducive to offset the disparity between the HOMO and the valence-band maximum of perovskites. The electrostatic surface potential (ESP) illustrates the more electronegative character of the fused tetraphenylethylene core, while the most electropositive unit is delocalized on the whole non-fused counterpart. Therefore, fused tetraphenylethylene molecules possess a dipole in the structure, which may also lead to close molecular packing. On the other hand, the calculated hole reorganization energies (λhole) of TPE and F-TPE are 0.121 and 0.085 eV, respectively, illustrating stronger driving forces of the fused tetraphenylethylene molecule for charge transfer. Therefore, tetraphenylethylene-based molecules would exhibit higher hole mobility after being fused.

Fig. 3a shows the UV-vis absorption and emission properties of TPE and F-TPE in a CH2Cl2 solution, and the corresponding characteristic data are summarized in Table 1. The UV-vis spectra of TPE exhibit an absorption peak (λmax) at 362 nm. Interestingly, when the tetraphenylethylene core of TPE is fused with a single bond, it shows an obvious bathochromic spectral response, which is consistent with the TDDFT calculated absorption spectra (Fig. S2, ESI) and the electron cloud result. The λmax of fused tetraphenylethylene-based F-TPE rises to 388 nm. Therefore, a fused core owns stronger conjugation ability with triphenylamine groups than its non-fused counterpart, which is beneficial for localized aromatic π–π* excitation migration from the core to the terminal moieties. On the other hand, though F-TPE shows slightly stronger absorption in visible light than TPE, it is not large enough to compete significantly with the perovskite light harvesting layer in PSCs, which has been extensively proved in a lot of literature studies. The photoluminescence results of TPE and F-TPE display a maximum peak at 551 and 528 nm, respectively, with the Stokes shifts of 189 and 140 nm. It is noted that the Stokes shift of a fused tetraphenylethylene based molecule is smaller than for a non-fused one, which could result from higher planarity after being fused, also illustrating smaller conformational changes in the excited state. The optical band gaps (Eg) of TPE and F-TPE estimated from the normalized UV-vis and PL spectra are 2.79 and 2.71 eV, respectively.
Compound

λ
max
 (nm)

λ
PL

,
 (nm)

λ
Stokes (nm)

E
g
 (eV)
HOMO (eV)
LUMO (eV)

μ (cm2 V−1 s−1)

λ
hole
 (eV)

a Measured in CH2Cl2 solution.
b Excitation at λmax.
c 
E
g = 1240/λintersection.
d Evaluated from DPV curves.
e 
E
LUMO = EHOMO + Eg.
f Hole reorganization energies, determined at the TDDFT/B3LYP/6-311G* level of theory.


TPE

362
551
189
2.79
−5.26
−2.47
3.21 × 10−4
0.121

F-TPE

388
528
140
2.71
−5.29
−2.58
7.48 × 10−4
0.085
The electrochemical properties of the investigated molecules are evaluated by cyclic voltammetry (CV) and differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) measurements. As shown in Fig. S3a (ESI), the redox peaks of TPE and F-TPE are greatly reversible, illustrating that the molecules own superior electrochemical stability. The HOMO levels of TPE and F-TPE estimated from the DPV data (Fig. S3b, ESI) are −5.26 and −5.29 eV, respectively. It can be noted that a fused tetraphenylethylene based molecule owns a slightly lower HOMO level compared with a non-fused one, suggesting that a higher open-circuit voltage (Voc) of the corresponding PSCs could be obtained. The valence band of a conventional (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 perovskite is located at −5.65 eV, proving that the investigated molecules are favorable for hole extraction from the perovskite. The LUMO levels of TPE and F-TPE calculated from Eg and the HOMO levels are −2.47 and −2.58 eV, respectively. The significantly positive LUMO levels of the investigated molecules compared with the conduction band of (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 (−3.92 eV) could inhibit unexpected electron back transfer to the counter electrode and decrease the chance of recombination. The energy level diagram with TPE and F-TPE as HTMs is outlined in Fig. 3b. Moreover, the HOMO (LUMO, Eg) levels of TPE and F-TPE from TDDFT are −4.41 (−1.29, 3.12) and −4.41 (−1.34, 3.05) eV, respectively. All experimental data are consistent with the TDDFT results.
To investigate the effect of the fused core on charge carrier mobility, we carried out space charge limited current (SCLC) measurements through a hole-only device with the architecture of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/HTM/Au referring to previous reports. The current–voltage (J–V) curves are shown in Fig. S4 (ESI), and the hole mobility values of TPE and F-TPE calculated according to the Mott–Gurney law are 3.21 × 10−4 and 7.48 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, which is consistent with their hole reorganization energies. It is noted that F-TPE owns obviously higher hole mobility than TPE, which could result from better intermolecular π–π stacking and conjugation of the fused tetraphenylethylene based molecule.
The effect of the investigated molecules on film morphology deposited on a perovskite layer is analyzed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements, as shown in Fig. S5 (ESI). It can be noted that F-TPE (RMS = 11.2 nm) exhibits smaller root-mean-square roughness compared with TPE (RMS = 18.7 nm). To investigate the hydrophobicity of the investigated molecules, the water-contact angles of TPE and F-TPE are recorded. As shown in Fig. S5 (ESI), TPE and F-TPE exhibit water-contact angles of around 79° and 84°, respectively. A fused tetraphenylethylene based molecule owns obviously better hydrophobicity than its non-fused counterpart, which may result from the better intermolecular π–π stacking of the former one as there is no hydrophobic long chain alkyl group on the structure and it forms a better compact film (as confirmed by the above AFM measurements).
The effect of a fused core on the charge-transfer dynamics at the perovskite/HTM interface is investigated by steady-state photoluminescence (TIPL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements, as illustrated in Fig. S6 (ESI). In TIPL measurements (Fig. S6a, ESI), it can be noted that the quenching values of perovskite coated with TPE and F-TPE are 91% and 95%, respectively, compared with a perovskite monolayer. In TRPL curves (Fig. S6b, ESI), the τe values are around 11.26, 2.51 and 1.58 ns for perovskites and the perovskites coated with TPE and F-TPE, respectively. Therefore, a fused tetraphenylethylene based molecule owns obviously better hole extraction ability compared with its non-fused counterpart, which could result from higher hole mobility after being fused.
In order to explore the molecular structure variation of HTMs on the photovoltaic properties, conventional PSCs with the architecture of FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/perovskite/HTM/Au using TPE or F-TPE as HTMs are assembled referring to our previous reports. The detailed device fabrication process is illustrated in the ESI. Each group of PSCs without or with dopants in the HTMs includes 8 independent samples. The photovoltaic performance of the devices is recorded under AM 1.5 illumination (100 mW cm−2), and the detailed parameters are listed in Table S1 (ESI).
The current–voltage (J–V) curves and parameters of the best-performing PSCs with different HTMs are shown in Fig. 4 and Table 2. The best device with dopant-free F-TPE illustrates a PCE of 13.11%, together with an Voc of 1.05 V, a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 18.21 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 0.69. Interestingly, when the HTM layer is substituted by non-fused dopant-free TPE, the device exhibits a lower PCE of 10.98%. When TPE and F-TPE are doped with conventional TBP and Li-TFSI, the device performance displays an obvious improvement, which is identical to most of the reported HTMs. The best-performing device employing a doped F-TPE illustrates a promising PCE of 18.30%, which is also obviously higher than the doped TPE (PCE = 15.84%). It can be noted that F-TPE-based devices exhibit better performance regardless of concentration or whether dopants exist, as illustrated in Table S1 and Fig. S7 (ESI). The enhanced Voc of the devices based on a fused tetraphenylethylene based molecule could result from a lower HOMO level compared with its non-fused counterpart, leading to enhanced hole–electron separation efficiency at the perovskite/HTM interface, as shown in the TIPL and TRPL study. The Voc variation of the devices employing a fused or non-fused tetraphenylethylene based molecule also fully coincides with the CV data. Moreover, the fused tetraphenylethylene based molecule owns higher hole mobility because of better planar configuration and better π conjugation between the core and terminal groups compared with the non-fused one, which enables tetraphenylethylene molecule based devices to display higher FF and Jsc.
HTM

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Dopant-free

TPE

1.03
17.21
62
10.98

F-TPE

1.05
18.21
69
13.11
Doped

TPE

1.07
20.87
71
15.84

F-TPE

1.11
21.35
77
18.30
Spiro-OMeTAD
1.09
22.31
75
18.16
As a reference, doped spiro-OMeTAD shows a PCE of 18.16% (Fig. S8, ESI), which is even behind F-TPE under the same conditions. Therefore, we believe that a PCE of PSCs employing F-TPE as HTMs exceeding 20% might be attainable through extensive optimization of the device fabrication and perovskite preparation. The incident photo-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the best-performing PSCs with doped TPE or F-TPE were also recorded to confirm the photocurrent, as shown in Fig. S10 (ESI). It can be noted that F-TPE exhibits obviously higher values than TPE in the range of 400–750 nm, which is consistent with the Jsc results obtained from the J–V measurements. Therefore, the results further prove that the fused HTM owns superior hole extraction and transfer ability. As shown in Fig. S11 and Table S2 (ESI), the hysteresis behaviors of the best devices employing doped TPE or F-TPE are also investigated through different scan directions. It can be noted that the fused tetraphenylethylene based molecule exhibits minor hysteresis compared to that of the non-fused counterpart, which could have resulted from its high hole mobility.
Finally, the long-term stability was also measured, and the devices with doped HTMs are stored at room temperature without encapsulation in a dark drying oven (∼20% relative humidity). As shown in Fig. 4b, it can be noted that the PSC with F-TPE owns obviously better stability compared with that of TPE, which may be due to better hydrophobicity after tetraphenylethylene was fused. Moreover, F-TPE-based devices show similar long-term stability compared to spiro-OMeTAD (Fig. S9, ESI and Fig. 4b).
In summary, we have developed a novel facile fused tetraphenylethylene-based HTM, which has lower HOMO level and higher hole mobility compared with a reference non-fused counterpart. The PSCs with a fused tetraphenylethylene-based HTM show better photovoltaic properties regardless of the existence of dopants than that of a non-fused one, and even outperform the conventional spiro-OMeTAD. The results further prove that tetraphenylethylene with a fused structure can be used as a promising unit for developing new HTMs for efficient and stable PSCs.
This work is supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2018YFB1500101), the 111 Project (No. B16016), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61904053, 51702096, U1705256 and 51572080), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. 2019MS026, 2019MS027).

There are no conflicts to declare.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cc09901h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020