 DOI: 10.1039/C4TC02103G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 447-452


Yifan
Wang
,

Xingang
Zhao
 and 

Xiaowei
Zhan
*

Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences and Key Laboratory of Organic Solids, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. E-mail: xwzhan@pku.edu.cn

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China

Received
19th September 2014
, Accepted 9th November 2014
First published on 12th November 2014
Layer by layer (LL) solution processed organic solar cells (OSCs) were fabricated using a squaraine small molecule (DIB-SQ) as a donor and a perylene diimide polymer (PPDIDTT) as an acceptor. DIB-SQ and PPDIDTT exhibited matched energy levels and complementary absorption. Compared with the blend structure, the LL devices exhibited better morphology for exciton dissociation and reducing charge recombination. Moreover, efficient vertical phase separation can also be achieved using the LL method, which is beneficial for charge transport and collection at the appropriate electrodes. The traditional blend OSCs exhibited no photovoltaic response, while the LL devices yielded power conversion efficiencies of up to 1.12%.

Organic solar cells (OSCs) have been the focus of research in the last decade because of their potential in providing low-cost green energy. Most organic solar cells are based on interpenetrating networks of a polymeric donor and a fullerene acceptor, which exhibit a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of >10%. Nowadays, non-fullerene acceptors have received increasing attention due to some advantages over fullerene derivatives. Fullerene acceptors exhibit weak absorption in the visible region, while non-fullerene acceptors can achieve broad and strong absorption via molecule design. Besides, lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels in non-fullerene acceptors can be tuned to achieve a suitable charge separation driving force towards obtaining a high open circuit voltage (VOC). Four combinations of electron donors and non-fullerene acceptors can be utilized as active layers: polymer donor/polymer acceptor, polymer donor/small molecule acceptor, small molecule donor/small molecule acceptor and small molecule donor/polymer acceptor. Fullerene-free OSCs based on polymer donor/polymer acceptor blends and polymer donor/small molecule acceptor blends have achieved PCEs of >5%, while fullerene-free OSCs based on small molecule donor/small molecule acceptor blends have achieved PCEs of >3%. We reported the first example for OSCs based on a small molecule donor/polymer acceptor blend. However, the PCE was very low (<0.3%). Recently, a PCE of 2.1% was achieved for this kind of device. However, the reason why this kind of device showed the lowest efficiency is still unclear.

In this contribution, we tried to find different methods to fabricate photovoltaic devices based on a small molecule donor and a polymer acceptor and figure out the reason for the relatively low efficiencies of this kind of device using the blend method. We used a polymer acceptor PPDIDTT and a small molecule donor DIB-SQ (Fig. 1a) to fabricate inverted OSCs employing a layer by layer (LL) solution process. As reported in our previous work, the perylene diimide-based polymer acceptor PPDIDTT exhibited high electron mobilities (>0.01 cm2 V−1 s−1), broad absorption (300–800 nm) and good film-forming properties; PPDIDTT-based all-polymer solar cells exhibited PCEs of up to 3.45%. Squaraine (SQ) dyes have also shown tremendous potential for OSCs because of intense absorption in the red and near-infrared spectral regions, ambient stability and non-toxicity. For LL devices, the thicknesses of the separate layers of the donor and the acceptor must be thin enough to reduce exciton quenching and charge recombination. As a result, the absorption coefficient of the donor material should be very high in order to collect incident light within a short optical path. SQ compounds have been demonstrated to meet these requirements. We chose the squaraine dye DIB-SQ as the donor material because DIB-SQ and PPDIDTT exhibited matched energy levels (Fig. 1b) and complementary absorption (Fig. S1, ESI). Furthermore, DIB-SQ exhibited good solubility in dichloromethane while PPDIDTT was insoluble in it, which allows the LL solution process.
Vertical phase separation plays an important role in device performance, since it affects the dissociation of excitons as well as transportation, recombination and extraction of the charge carriers. The LL solution process can achieve ideal vertical phase separation because of its controllability in structure construction. In the LL inverted OSCs, the electron donor (DIB-SQ) was expected to aggregate near the anode while the acceptor (PPDIDTT) near the cathode, leading to the formation of proper vertical phase separation. After thermal annealing, a PCE of 1.12% was achieved, while the traditional blend OSCs exhibited no photovoltaic response.

Unless stated otherwise, solvents and chemicals were obtained commercially and were used without further purification.


Zinc acetate dihydrate [Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O] was first dissolved in anhydrous 2-methoxyethanol (0.5 M concentration) and then ethanolamine was added to the solution as a sol stabilizer (0.5 M concentration) followed by a thorough mixing process with a magnetic stirrer for 12 h.


Blend or LL organic solar cells were fabricated with the structure: ITO/ZnO/PPDIDTT/DIB-SQ/MoO3/Ag. The patterned ITO glass (sheet resistance = 15 Ω □−1) was pre-cleaned in an ultrasonic bath of deionized water, acetone and isopropanol (each for 10 min), and treated in an ultraviolet-ozone chamber (Jelight Company Inc, USA) for 25 min. The prepared ZnO sol–gel was spin-coated on the ITO-coated glass substrate with 3000 rpm and then annealed at 200 °C for 1 h in air. For blend devices: DIB-SQ and PPDIDTT (10 mg mL−1 in total) in chloroform was spin coated on the ZnO layer to form an active layer (40 nm). For LL devices: PPDIDTT in o-dichlorobenzene (8 mg mL−1) was first spin coated on the ZnO layer with 800 rpm (15 nm for the PPDIDTT layer), DIB-SQ in dichloromethane (7 mg mL−1) was subsequently spin coated on the PPDIDTT layer (26 nm for the DIB-SQ layer), thermal annealing was used after the spin-coating of the donor layer. The thickness of films was measured by using an Ambios Technology XP-2 profilometer. A MoO3 (ca. 5 nm) and silver layer (ca. 80 nm) was then evaporated onto the surface of the photosensitive layer under vacuum (ca. 10−5 Pa) to form the positive electrode. The active area of the device was 4 mm2. The J–V curve was measured with a computer-controlled B2912A Precision Source/Measure Unit (Agilent Technologies). An XES-70S1 (SAN-EI Electric Co., Ltd.) solar simulator (AAA grade, 70 × 70 mm2 photobeam size) coupled with AM 1.5G solar spectrum filters was used as the light source, and the optical power at the sample was 100 mW cm−2. A 2 × 2 cm2 monocrystalline silicon reference cell (SRC-1000-TC-QZ) was purchased from VLSI Standards Inc. The EQE spectrum was recorded using a Solar Cell Spectral Response Measurement System QE-R3011 (Enlitech Co., Ltd.). The light intensity at each wavelength was calibrated by using a standard single crystal Si photovoltaic cell.


Hole- or electron-only diodes were fabricated using the architectures: ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PPDIDTT/DIB-SQ/Au for holes and Al/PPDIDTT/DIB-SQ/Al for electrons. Mobilities were extracted by fitting the current density–voltage curves using the space charge limited current (SCLC) method. The J–V curves of the devices were plotted as ln(J) versus ln(V) using eqn (1) for holes and electrons, where J is the current density, d is the film thickness of the active layer (ca.70 nm), μh is the hole mobility, μe is the electron mobility, εr is the relative dielectric constant of the transport medium, and ε0 is the permittivity of free space (8.85 × 10−12 F m−1).

J = 9ε0εrμeV2/8d3
(1)
Calculation of hole and electron mobilities was done using SCLC methods, V = Vappl − Vbi, where Vappl is the applied voltage, Vbi is the offset voltage (for hole-only diodes, Vbi is 0.2 V; for electron-only diodes, Vbi is 0 V).

Thin-film (on quartz substrate) UV-vis absorption spectra were recorded on a JASCO V-570 spectrophotometer. The XPS spectra of films were recorded by using an ic96132 X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (VG, England). Depth profiling experiments were performed using an Ar+ sputtering gun operating at 500 V, rastering a 1 × 1 mm2 area with 200 s etch delays. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) characterization was carried out on a JEM-1011. The samples for the TEM measurements were prepared as follows: the active-layer films were spin-cast on ITO/PEDOT:PSS substrates, and the ITO glass with the active layers were submerged in deionized water to make the active layers float on the air–water interface. Then the floated films were picked up on unsupported 200 mesh copper grids for TEM measurements.


Blend and LL processed inverted OSCs were fabricated with the structure of ITO/ZnO/PPDIDTT/DIB-SQ/MoO3/Ag. For the OSCs based on DIB-SQ–PPDIDTT blends, we have tried different solutions (o-dichlorobenzene, chlorobenzene, chloroform), different donor and acceptor ratios and different post-treatment methods (thermal annealing and solvent annealing), but almost no photovoltaic response was observed (Fig. S2, ESI). For LL processed devices without post-treatment, a weak photovoltaic response with a PCE of 0.06% was observed. After thermal annealing at 100 °C for 1 min, the device performance was significantly improved: VOC from 0.65 to 0.77 V, short circuit current density (JSC) from 0.24 to 2.76 mA cm−2, fill factor (FF) from 25.8% to 51.3%, and PCE from 0.06% to 1.12%. Fig. 2a presents the J–V characteristics of the best LL processed OSCs with and without thermal annealing under 100 mW cm−2 air mass 1.5 global (AM 1.5G) illumination. The dramatic improvement in JSC is consistent with the change in the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum (Fig. 2b), in which the region of 300–500 nm is mostly attributed to the absorption of PPDIDTT, while the region of 500–800 nm mostly attributed to the absorption of DIB-SQ. The EQE in both regions increased significantly after thermal annealing. However, after thermal annealing for a longer time (e.g., 3 or 5 min), the devices showed worse performance (Table 1, Fig. S2, ESI).

Processing method
Annealing time (min)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
average
best
Blend
—
—
—
—
—
—
LL
—
0.65
0.24
25.8
0.04
0.06
LL
1
0.77
2.76
51.3
1.08
1.12
LL
3
0.71
1.59
51.6
0.59
0.65
LL
5
0.62
1.0
53.4
0.33
0.38
We used optical microscopy and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to investigate the morphology and microstructure of the blend and LL films. DIB-SQ films spin-coated on silica glass substrates have a strong tendency to aggregate into spherulites due to crystallization (Fig. S3a, ESI). When DIB-SQ blended with PPDIDTT, large size crystalline domains and phase separation were formed (Fig. S3b, ESI), which led to a great amount of charge recombination and no photovoltaic response. For LL devices, DIB-SQ was spin cast onto the polymer (PPDIDTT) film and still tended to aggregate into the dendrite (Fig. 3a and b), revealing that the DIB-SQ phase was in a meta-stable state. From the TEM image (Fig. 3c), large aggregation domains were observed. After thermal annealing, DIB-SQ diffused into the polymer acceptor layer and formed smooth and uniform films with fibrous crystals. The film morphology remained almost unchanged even after being exposed to air for 24 h (Fig. 3d and e). The uniform morphology and smaller phase separation were also confirmed by the TEM image (Fig. 3f). A bicontinuous morphology of donor and acceptor phases guaranteed that the separated electrons and holes traversed the bulk of the film and were collected at the electrodes with a limited amount of charge recombination, which is the main reason for the significant increase in JSC, FF and PCE.
To gain insight into charge transport in blend and LL films, the hole and electron mobilities were measured by the space charge limited current (SCLC) method (Table 2, Fig. S4, ESI). The hole mobility (9.8 × 10−7 cm2 V−1 s−1) and electron mobility (1.12 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1) of the LL device were higher than those of the blend device (μh = 3.6 × 10−7 cm2 V−1 s−1, μe = 3.74 × 10−7 cm2 V−1 s−1). Thermal annealing led to a decrease in hole mobility and increase in electron mobility of the LL devices. Since the difference in mobilities is not big and all devices had nearly balanced hole and electron transport, the charge transport is not the main reason for the big difference in photovoltaic performance.
Structure
Thermal annealing

μ
h (cm2 V−1 s−1)

μ
e (cm2 V−1 s−1)
Blend
—
3.6 × 10−7
3.74 × 10−7
LL
—
9.8 × 10−7
1.12 × 10−6
LL
100 °C/1 min
6.2 × 10−7
2.05 × 10−6
We used depth analysis X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) to investigate vertical phase separation. The XPS survey scans of the DIB-SQ–PPDIDTT (2:1) blend film (40 nm) and the LL DIB-SQ (26 nm)/PPDIDTT (15 nm) film are shown in Fig. 4a. Since both DIB-SQ and PPDIDTT contain nitrogen atoms (N) and only PPDIDTT contains sulfur atoms (S), we attribute the S 2p (∼160 eV) spectral line to PPDIDTT, and N 1s (400 eV) spectral line to DIB-SQ and PPDIDTT. We can calculate the DIB-SQ weight content at different depths from the N/S ratio (ESI). The calculated DIB-SQ weight content of blend and LL films on ITO/ZnO substrates at different depths is shown in Fig. 4b. In the thermally annealed LL structure, the DIB-SQ weight content continuously dropped from 98% to 37% with increasing depth from 0 to 40 nm, indicating that the donor content is rich near the anode while the acceptor content is rich near the cathode, which is beneficial to transportation and extraction of charge carriers at the appropriate electrodes. The blend structure showed a rich donor content near the anode as well (ca. 80%). However, with increasing depth from 8 nm to 40 nm, the DIB-SQ content remained almost unchanged at ca. 50–56%, indicating that vertical phase separation for the blend structure is not as good as the LL structure. This could be one reason that accounts for the big difference in performance between blend and LL devices.

Fig. 5 illustrates the hypothetical scheme for evolution of the active layer in LL devices before and after thermal annealing. After thermal annealing, DIB-SQ diffused into the polymer acceptor layer and formed an intermixed heterojunction with ideal vertical phase separation and uniform lateral phase separation, which is beneficial for charge transport and reduction of charge recombination.

We fabricated inverted organic solar cells based on a small molecule donor (DIB-SQ) and a polymer acceptor (PPDIDTT) using a layer by layer solution process. After thermal annealing at 100 °C for 1 min, the LL devices showed a PCE of >1%, while their blend counterparts exhibited no photovoltaic response. Compared with the blend structure, the LL structure yielded better morphology for exciton dissociation and reducing charge recombination. Moreover, efficient vertical phase separation can also be achieved using the LL method, which is beneficial for charge transport and collection at the appropriate electrodes. Our preliminary results highlighted the prominent benefits of the layer by layer solution process and the great potential for small molecule donor/polymer acceptor-based organic solar cells.


We thank the 973 Program (2011CB808401), the NSFC (21025418, 51261130582), and the Chinese Academy of Sciences for financial support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Calculation of the DIB-SQ weight content from XPS; UV-vis spectra; J–V curves; optical microscopy images; SCLC. See DOI: 10.1039/c4tc02103g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015