 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM16853G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6259-6266

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Fan
Li
,

Wei
Chen
 and 

Yiwang
Chen
*

Institute of Polymers, Nanchang University, 999 Xuefu Avenue, Nanchang 330031, China. E-mail: ywchen@ncu.edu.cn; Fax: +86 791 83969561; Tel: +86 791 83969562

Jiangxi Provincial Key Laboratory of New Energy Chemistry, Nanchang University, 999 Xuefu Avenue, Nanchang 330031, China

Institute of Advanced Study, Nanchang University, 999 Xuefu Avenue, Nanchang 330031, China

Received
27th December 2011
, Accepted 30th January 2012
First published on 20th February 2012
A new donor–acceptor type liquid-crystalline copolymer, poly[3-(6-(cyanobiphenyoxy)thiophene)-alt-4,7-(benzothiadiazole)], P3HbpT-BTD, was designed via copolymerization of liquid-crystalline electron-donating thiophene units and electron-accepting benzothiadiazole (BTD) units. The nanostructure and photoelectric properties of the copolymer under different thermal treatment conditions were systematically investigated. Studies of the relationship between the annealing conditions and the nanostructures of the copolymer revealed that the cyano-biphenyl mesogenic units could induce the copolymer chains into a well ordered lamella structure upon annealing at the liquid crystalline state temperature. When the hybrid films of P3HbpT-BTD/ZnO nanoparticles (NPs) were annealed at a temperature below or above the mesophase temperature region, less ordered copolymer chains resulted in an undeveloped interpenetrating network and caused great aggregation of ZnO NPs. Most strikingly, the hybrid film annealed at the liquid-crystalline state temperature (180 °C) achieved a well-dispersed and highly oriented nanoscale assembled nanoparticle region. The spontaneous self-organization of P3HbpT-BTD enhanced the crystallinity and orientation of the ZnO NPs. Therefore, the resulting nanoscale phase separation of the hybrid films led to well-ordered percolated networks. Hybrid bulk heterojunction photovoltaic devices based on the copolymer P3HbpT-BTD and ZnO NPs were fabricated under different annealing treatments. A maximum power conversion efficiency of 1.98% was achieved upon annealing at the mesophase temperature (180 °C).

Fabrication of photovoltaic devices using solution processable materials is a field of intense scientific interest. The potentially low production costs and variability in device design, such as flexible substrates and color of devices, are clear advantages of this emerging technology as opposed to standard silicon solar cells. Great progress on device performance has been achieved for organic photovoltaics in the last decade mainly due to the introduction of the bulk heterojunction concept, yielding power conversion efficiencies of up to 8% recently. However, superior performance is commonly only reported for devices based on polymers blended with fullerene derivatives. Alternatively, organic–inorganic hybrid solar cells (HSCs), which use a combination of polymers and inorganic semiconductor nanocrystals, have been widely studied as an alternative to fully organic solar cells (OSCs). HSCs have a few interesting advantages compared to OSCs, such as high electron mobility, and the good physical and chemical stability of inorganic semiconductors. The choice of inorganic semiconductors starts with CdSe and extends to TiO2 and ZnO. Among these inorganic semiconductors, ZnO has attracted a lot of attention for use in HSCs due to its nontoxicity, good stability, good electrical and optical properties, and low costs. Conjugated polymers that have been utilized in ZnO-based devices are poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), and poly(phenylene vinylene) derivatives, such as MEH-PPV. These studies have led to significant improvements in efficiency, with the current state-of-the-art materials having efficiencies of ca. 2%. One of the main factors limiting the efficiency of these solar cells is the large (∼2.1 eV) band gap of the polymer, which prevents the efficient harnessing of the red and near-IR parts of the solar spectrum. Hence, some new low band gap copolymers have been designed and applied to improve the optical absorption abilities of the active layers of polymer/ZnO nanocrystal HSCs.

In a bulk-heterojunction solar cell, the efficiency of charge transfer from donor to acceptor can be unity as the donor and acceptor are often phase separated at a length scale within the exciton diffusion length (10–20 nm). With appropriate control of the morphology, all excitons can be created within a diffusion length of a donor–acceptor interface, and hence can be harvested. Therefore, control of the nanoscale morphology, or microstructure of the blend is critical to ensure that all excitons are dissociated and collected. In addition, the transport of the holes and electrons through each phase will be strongly influenced by the local order and crystallinity within each phase, with crystalline morphologies generally providing continuous percolation pathways for hole and electron transportation.
Liquid crystalline (LC) polymers can self-assemble into a well-ordered nanostructure and liquid crystalline materials can facilitate hole transport in active layers, particularly after undergoing thermal treatment in the mesophase. The relationship between the structures and properties and the photoelectric application of several LC polythiophene derivatives has been widely investigated by other researchers. Due to the increased structural order and crystallinity of LC conjugated polymers upon LC state heat treatment, bulk-heterojunction solar cells made from these liquid-crystal conjugated polymers have been demonstrated to exhibit favorable device performance. Hence, it is a good opportunity to control effectively the ordered microstructure of the active layers of bulk-heterojunction hybrid solar cells and then to improve their power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) by using LC conjugated polymers as electron-donors in bulk-heterojunction hybrid solar cells. In our previous studies, we have synthesized liquid crystalline polythiophene derivatives containing cyano-biphenyl mesogens with alkyl terminal groups and found that the spontaneous organization of the liquid-crystalline molecules pushes ZnO nanoparticles into forming a nanodispersing structure. However, the homopolymer has no strong light absorption abilities, and hence leads to relatively low photovoltaic performances of our devices based on homopolymer and ZnO NPs. This situation inspires us to design a polymer with electron-accepting and electron-donating building blocks, that is, a donor–acceptor (D–A) type alternating copolymer with a liquid-crystalline side chain, to improve the optical abilities, optimize processability and crystalline nanostructure, and eventually control the nanoscale morphology of the hybrid active layer.
In this paper, we designed a new donor–acceptor type liquid-crystalline copolymer (see Scheme 1), poly[3-(6-(cyanobiphenyoxy)thiophene)-alt-4,7-(benzothiadiazole)], P3HbpT-BTD, via the copolymerization of liquid-crystalline electron-donating thiophene and electron-accepting benzothiadiazole (BTD) units. We have investigated the microstructure and photoelectric properties of the copolymer under different treatment conditions. We found that the low band gap LC copolymer possessed great optical absorption abilities and spontaneous organizational properties after undergoing mesophase annealing treatment. The self-assembly of mesogens could also induce the ZnO nanoparticles to form a well-dispersed and highly orientated nanoscale assembled nanoparticle region and could enhance the orientation degree of the hybrid active layer, which could greatly facilitate the hole and electron transport and improve the photovoltaic efficiencies of hybrid solar cells. Hybrid photovoltaic devices based on P3HbpT-BTD and ZnO nanoparticles were fabricated and characterized under various conditions. A maximum power conversion efficiency of 1.98% was achieved under an AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) condition after undergoing annealing at the mesophase temperature (180 °C).

The synthesis of the copolymer P3HbpT-BTD is outlined in Scheme 1. Donor monomer 1 was prepared according to our previously reported method. The copolymerization of donor monomer 1 with acceptor monomer 2 was carried out by a Suzuki coupling reaction using Pd(PPh3)4 in toluene (see supporting information for details). The copolymers were purified by Soxhlet extraction with methanol and hexane and were obtained in high yields (87%). 1H NMR (supporting information) and elemental analysis (EA) established the identity and purity of this new copolymer. Gel permeation chromatography (GPC) measurements in chloroform solution, relative to polystyrene standards, showed a moderate to high number-average molecular weight (Mn) of 17.6 K. The polydispersity index (PDI) was 1.41. The polymer is thermally stable and almost does not lose any weight at temperature as high as 370 °C in the thermogravimetric analysis, which is ascribed to the mesogenic appendages being well wrapped around the conjugated backbone to protect them from perturbations by heat and attack by the degradative species (Fig. S3).

The mesomorphic behavior of P3HbpT-BTD has been studied by polarizing optical microscopy (POM) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) (Fig. 1). From the POM image, an enantiotropic optical anisotropy with an ellipse-like structure of the copolymer emerges from the dark background when heated or cooled, suggesting the nature of the liquid-crystalline phase. At the same time, polymer P3HbpT-BTD exhibits two discrete endothermic transitions at 172.6 °C and 209.7 °C on the second heating scan in the DSC curves. The first transition corresponds to the solid–mesophase transition, and the second corresponds to the mesophase–isotropic transition. The liquid-crystalline properties and the packing arrangement of the molecules can also be supported by XRD analysis (discussed later).
It is well known that the UV-vis absorption peaks of crystalline π-conjugated polymer thin films are usually red-shifted relative to those measured in solution. This behavior is due to the enhanced intermolecular interactions between the polymer chains and the planarization effect of the π-conjugated polymer backbone, which enable the polymer chains to self-assemble into a well-ordered nanostructure in the solid state. The extent of the red shift is related to the degree of order in the polymer; for example, the red shift can be up to 70 nm for some regioregular π-conjugated polymers, such as HT-P3HT (head–tail), whereas there is only a small shift or no shift at all for others, such as HH-P3HT (head–head).Fig. 2A shows the normalized UV-vis absorption spectra of P3HbpT-BTD in a chlorobenzene solution and in the solid state. The absorption peaks corresponding to the π–π* transitions of the copolymer P3HbpT-BTD in the solution and solid phases (annealing at 180 °C) are present at 515 and 590 nm, respectively. This large red shift (75 nm) suggests the presence of strong interchain interactions. In addition, the effects of thermal annealing on P3HbpT-BTD films were investigated using UV-vis absorption spectra (Fig. 2A). A 20 mg mL−1 chlorobenzene solution of P3HbpT-BTD was spin-coated to fabricate films that were subsequently annealed at 80, 120, 180, and 230 °C for 60 min under an inert atmosphere. For the as-cast sample, the main absorption band of the P3HbpT-BTD thin film is at 571 nm. Importantly, as the annealing temperature increases to 120 °C, the main absorption peak red-shifts to 581 nm due to more oriented π–π stacking. These features become dramatically pronounced (19 nm red-shift) for samples annealed in the mesophase region (at 180 °C). However, when the annealing temperature exceeds the mesophase, it would disrupt the trend and give worse results. The location of the band gap and band edges of the HOMO and LUMO (vs. vacuum) of P3HbpT-BTD under various treatment conditions, and ZnO NPs are shown in the inset of Fig. 2A. The numbers in the bar next to P3HbpT-BTD are the annealing temperatures. Data were obtained from the onset potentials in cyclic votammograms (CV) (Fig. S4). Table 1 summarizes the electrochemical properties of the copolymer, and the band-gaps calculated from the optical onsets are also given for comparison. It is worth noting that the treatment using LC state annealing (180 °C) can lower the band gap more than other heat processes, and the results of the various treatments exhibit the same trends in our previous report.
Polymers

E
onset/ox/eV

E
onset/red/eV
HOMO/eV
LUMO/eV

E
g/eV

E
g/eV

a Calculated from the absorption band edge of the copolymer films, Eg = 1240/λedge.
b Calculated from Eg = e(Eonset/ox − Eonset/red).
c The number in brackets after the polymer represents the annealing temperature.


P3HbpT-BTD

0.76
−1.10
−5.47
−3.61
1.82
1.86

P3HbpT-BTD (120)


0.77
−1.07
−5.48
−3.64
1.79
1.84

P3HbpT-BTD (180)

0.79
−1.00
−5.50
−3.71
1.75
1.79

P3HbpT-BTD (230)

0.77
−1.08
−5.48
−3.63
1.81
1.85
In order to examine the molecular orientation under the thermal annealing of conjugated polymers in thin solid films, the structures of the thin films were investigated by measuring the polarized absorption spectrum. Through the polarized absorption (insets in Fig. 2B and C) of the films annealed at 80 °C (575 nm) and 180 °C (590 nm) at their maximum absorption peaks, we could conclude that the long axis of the molecule is arranged at a 149° polarization angle. Fig. 2B and C show the absorption spectra of the cast film with the incident linearly polarized light parallel (at 149°) or perpendicular (at 37°) to the long axis. For the film annealed at low temperature (80 °C), the absorption curves show tiny increases when the light was parallel, while a much stronger absorption was observed for the parallel direction after mesophase annealing (180 °C). The dichroic ratio (A//:A⊥) at the maximum absorption at long wavelengths of the films annealed at 80 and 180 °C (at LC state) changed from 1.21 to 4.25, respectively. These results indicate that the LC thermal treatment promote the uniaxially alignment of the molecule structure parallel to the long axis direction (details of orientation in the XRD data).
To investigate the solid-state morphology and supramolecular organization of the liquid crystal copolymer P3HbpT-BTD, we performed X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis on thin films drop-casted from chlorobenzene solution onto a glass substrate under various annealing temperatures. The XRD spectra of the corresponding films are shown in Fig. 3A. First-order and third-order Bragg reflections of P3HbpT-BTD were detected after the films were annealed at the liquid crystal state temperature (180 °C). The diffraction peak at 4.67° corresponds to an interlayer lamellar d100-spacing of 18.90 Å, which is almost the same as the calculated molecular length in its most extended conformation (l = 19.21 Å), thus providing a smectic A mesophase in a monolayer arrangement (inset of Fig. 3A). The high angle diffraction peak at 20.88° (d300-spacing of 4.25 Å) corresponds to the interside chain distance, that is, the distance between the mesogenic cores of the side chains. However, there is only a low intensity and a broad diffraction peak in the high-angle area for P3HbpT-BTD annealed at temperatures below or above the LC state. It implies that the formation of liquid-crystalline domains with well-ordered crystalline nanostructure could be induced by oriented cyanobiphenyl only after LC thermal annealing. The improved film crystallinities are associated with significantly enhanced performance of our hybrid photovoltaic device. With the aid of the polarized optical absorption spectra and POM, we find that the packing arrangement of the liquid-crystalline copolymer preferentially adopts well-ordered intermolecular π–π lamellar stacking (inset of Fig. 3A). The greater crystallinity of the LC state annealed film is also in good agreement with the optical absorption spectra (Fig. 2A) and DSC measurements (Fig. 1), as discussed above.
The morphology of the photoactive layer greatly contributes to the performance of π-PSCs by influencing both the charge separation and transport processes. This means that the interfacial area between the donor and acceptor should be maximized with a regular domain size compared with the exciton diffusion length, and a continuously interpenetrating network should also be formed to favor the transport of charge carriers. To gain insight into the relationship between the morphology of the photoactive layer and the device performance, XRD, AFM and TEM were combined to investigate the morphology of blend films of P3HbpT-BTD/ZnO NPs at different thermal annealing temperatures.
We first performed X-ray diffraction of the P3HbpT-BTD/ZnO (1:3 wt%) films spin-coated on the ITO substrate (Fig. 3B). After the addition of the P3HbpT-BTD, diffraction peaks caused by ZnO crystallites are obvious in the XRD pattern of each sample. However, the intensity of the ZnO crystallite diffraction peaks in the films annealed at 120 and 230 °C dramatically decreases compared with the pristine ZnO nanoparticles. Meanwhile, it can be found that the order Bragg reflections of P3HbpT-BTD have not been detected. However, when the blend films are treated by LC state annealing at 180 °C, the crystallinity of the ZnO NPs is significantly enhanced, the high-angle peak (2θ = 20.65°) (corresponding to the distance between cyano-biphenyl mesogens) and the low-angle peak (2θ = 4.70°) (layer distance of polymer backbone) are all observed, which indicates that the spontaneous assembly of the liquid-crystalline molecules pushes ZnO NPs into forming an oriented nanodispersed structure with highly orientated channel layers, only after annealing at the liquid-crystalline state. The ordered polymer crystals and ZnO nanoparticles with good crystalline quality would effectively favor better charge transport.

Fig. 4 shows the tapping-mode atomic force microscopy (TM-AMF) topographic images of P3HbpT-BTD/ZnO NPs hybrid films annealed at 120 °C, 180 °C (mesophase region) and 230 °C, respectively. The root-mean-square (rms) surface roughness of the hybrid films annealed at 120 °C and 230 °C are 13.6 and 17.4 nm, respectively. The presence of ZnO NPs aggregation can be clearly observed in these hybrid films, indicating the poor contact between the nanoparticles and polymer domains. However, a reduced surface roughness (9.23 nm) is observed in the hybrid film annealed at the mesophase, which means that effective interpenetrating networks of P3HbpT-BTD and ZnO nanoparticles are formed in this hybrid film. An optimized micro-morphology of the active layer is expected to result in more D–A interfaces, and improve the charge separation and transport efficiencies, leading to more efficient photovoltaic performance.
The morphology of spin-coated P3HbpT-BTD/ZnO NPs hybrid films was further probed by TEM under different annealing conditions, as shown in Fig. 5. The relatively dark areas represent ZnO rich regions or aggregates, while the relatively light areas correspond to polymer domains. For the samples annealed below (120 °C) and above (230 °C) the liquid crystal state temperature, the interpenetrating networks are not well developed and the composite films show extensive ZnO NPs aggregation. Most strikingly, the blends annealed at liquid-crystalline phase (180 °C) achieve highly orientated nanoscale assembled nanoparticle regions, which create excellent phase separation interfaces for charge separation and provide favorable transport channels for electrons and holes to respective electrodes, which can reduce the electron–hole recombination ratio, and then improve the short-circuit current and fill factor of the photovoltaic devices (discussed later). This well oriented micromorphology of the mesophase annealed hybrid films is probably due to the self-organization of P3HbpT-BTD chains into a more ordered structure, induced by mesogens after the annealing treatment at LC state temperature, which in turn induced the ZnO nanoparticles to better disperse in the polymer matrix and form an oriented nano-dispersed structure along the long axis direction of the molecular arrangement of the LC copolymer.

Fig. 6A shows the normalized UV-vis spectra of the P3HbpT-BTD/ZnO NPs blend films under various treatment conditions. The spectral shapes of these composite films are similar to those of pristine polymer films, showing good optical absorption abilities and a maximum absorption peak at ca. 590 nm after annealing in the mesophase (180 °C). Photoluminescence (PL) quenching is usually used as an effective tool for the evaluation of the charge-transfer efficiency in the donor–acceptor blend films. Typically, conjugated polymers are good hole conductor materials, but recombination in the pure polymer is higher because of low mobility and a short exciton diffusion length, giving rise to a strong PL signal. Fig. 6B shows the PL spectra of pure P3HbpT-BTD and P3HbpT-BTD/ZnO NPs hybrid (1:3 wt%) films at various annealing conditions. The PL of P3HbpT-BTD is quenched with the addition of ZnO NPs, providing evidence of photoinduced charge transfer between P3HbpT-BTD and ZnO NPs. It is worth noting that the PL quenching of P3HbpT-BTD occurs almost completely after annealing treatment at the mesophase (180 °C), indicating that under these circumstances, ZnO NPs are sufficiently dispersed throughout the blend film to form an excellent D–A interface with P3HbpT-BTD, more effectively accepting electrons from photoexcited P3HbpT-BTD. The photophysics of pristine P3HbpT-BTD and P3HbpT-BTD/ZnO NPs hybrid thin films has been investigated by time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectroscopy (inset of Fig. 6B). The addition of ZnO NPs in P3HbpT-BTD creates a large number of interfaces for charge separation, resulting in a shortening of the PL lifetime. The PL lifetime (τPL) for the film annealed at LC state temperature is much shorter (337 ps) compared to that for annealed film below or above LC state temperature. This is attributed to the formation of highly ordered P3HbpT-BTD domains and well-dispersed ZnO NPs during annealing at LC state, giving rise to an overall enhanced charge separation efficiency with a higher PL quenching efficiency and charge transfer rate, which are consistent with the analytical results of PL.
The optical properties and morphology analysis demonstrate that variations in the annealing conditions of the P3HbpT-BTD/ZnO NPs system result in drastic changes in the molecular orientation, crystallinity, and nanoscale morphology of those thin films. Furthermore, hybrid bulk heterojunction photovoltaic devices were constructed to investigate the influence on photovoltaic properties introduced by the liquid-crystalline side chains.

Fig. 7A shows the current–voltage characteristics of the photovoltaic devices using P3HbpT-BTD/ZnO nanoparticles hybrid films as an active layer, which were prepared using the typical procedures as discussed in supporting information. The typical device structure is ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HbpT-BTD:ZnO NPs/LiF/Al. The schematic diagram of our device is shown in the inset of Fig. 7A. The device annealed at 120 °C (below LC state temperature) shows a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 3.34 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.79 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.41 under simulated AM 1.5 illumination (100 mW cm−2), giving a power conversion efficiency of 1.08%. A significant improvement of the photovoltaic performance is achieved in the hybrid device annealed at LC state temperature (180 °C), with an increased Jsc (4.71 mA cm−2), Voc (0.81 V), and FF (0.52) and a power conversion efficiency of 1.98%. The enhancement of the Jsc and FF could be attributed to the increased charge separation and transport efficiency for the sample annealed at LC state, which consists of well-dispersed ZnO NPs within a well organized P3HbpT-BTD matrix. The improved device performance is the result of a highly ordered nanostructure and increased interfacial area. However, after annealing above the LC state temperature, the photovoltaic performance dramatically decreases to a Jsc (3.15 mA cm−2), Voc (0.78 V), and FF (0.39) and a power conversion efficiency of 0.97%. Table 2 summarizes the PV parameters of those photovoltaic devices.
PV devices

V
oc/V

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF
PCE (%)

a 
V
oc is the open-circuit voltage.
b 
J
sc is the short-circuit current.
c The fill factor (FF) is a graphical measure of the squareness of the J–V curve.
d The number in parentheses after the polymer represents the annealing temperature.


P3HbpT-BTD (120)


0.79 ± 0.02
3.34 ± 0.05
0.41 ± 0.01
1.08 ± 0.02

P3HbpT-BTD (180)

0.81 ± 0.01
4.71 ± 0.06
0.52 ± 0.02
1.98 ± 0.03

P3HbpT-BTD (230)

0.78 ± 0.01
3.15 ± 0.06
0.39 ± 0.01
0.97 ± 0.02
The incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the devices annealed at various annealing temperatures are shown in Fig. 7B and closely resemble the optical absorption spectra of the photoactive layers. The IPCE spectra shows two bands: one at the lower wavelength region (320–370 nm) corresponding to the photocurrent contribution from the photon absorption by ZnO NPs and another at the higher wavelength region (450–750 nm) corresponding to the polymer. To be specific, for the device annealed at 120 °C, a peak value of 28% at a wavelength of 580 nm is obtained. Furthermore, the IPCE of the device based on P3HbpT-BTD/ZnO NPs is enhanced after undergoing annealing at the mesophase (180 °C) and shows a maximum peak value of ca. 42% at a wavelength of 590 nm where the maximum is red-shifted and even broadened up to 750 nm. We attribute the enhancement of the IPCE to the increase of absorption abilities of the active layers and an improvement in the charge carrier mobility because of fewer defects in the LC phase as a result of self-healing processes. The maximum of the IPCE at a wavelength near 572 nm dramatically decreases with the annealing temperature above the liquid-crystalline state (230 °C).

In summary, we have reported the synthesis and characterization of a novel liquid crystal D–A copolymer P3HbpT-BTD for the purpose of controlling the micro-morphology of the hybrid solar cells by utilizing the self-organization of liquid-crystalline conjugated materials. The P3HbpT-BTD containing cyano-biphenyl shows red-shifted absorption bands under mesophase annealing compared with that under other annealing conditions, suggesting that the incorporation of mesogenic pendants could enhance the orientation degree of the polymer and that cyano-biphenyl fine-tunes the energy levels. A study of the relationship between the annealing conditions and the nanostructures of the polymer has revealed that the films treated with liquid crystalline annealing can assemble into the most ordered lamella structure. When the hybrid films of P3HbpT-BTD/ZnO NPs are annealed at temperatures below the solid mesophase transition, the less ordered copolymer chains result in undeveloped interpenetrating networks. However, if the temperature is raised above the mesophase–isotropic transition, the isotropic polymer causes the large aggregation of ZnO NPs domains. Most strikingly, annealing in the mesophase, and the spontaneously self-organization of P3HbpT-BTD enhance the crystallinity and orientation of the ZnO NPs. Without extended optimization, the resulting nanoscale phase separation of the hybrid films leads to well-ordered percolated networks. Hybrid bulk heterojunction photovoltaic devices based on the copolymer P3HbpT-BTD and ZnO NPs were fabricated under different annealing treatments. A maximum power conversion efficiency of 1.98% is achieved after annealing at the mesophase (180 °C). These results show that the highly crystalline, well-organized low band-gap liquid crystalline copolymer which can be used to control effectively the nanoscale morphology of hybrid bulk-heterogeneous photovoltaic devices is a promising organic semiconductor for hybrid solar cell applications.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51073076, 51172103 and 50902067).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: text giving the experimental details, synthesis of polymers, instrumentation, fabrication details and characterization procedures of the solar cell devices. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm16853g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012