 DOI: 10.1039/C8NJ05409F
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 6480-6491


Narendra Nath
Ghosh
,

Md.
Habib
,

Anup
Pramanik
,

Pranab
Sarkar
 and 

Sougata
Pal
*

Department of Chemistry, University of Gour Banga, Malda-732103, India. E-mail: sougatapal_1979@yahoo.co.in

Department of Chemistry, Visva-Bharati University, Santiniketan-731235, India

Received
26th October 2018
, Accepted 17th March 2019
First published on 18th March 2019
Herein, we present a theoretical investigation of a series of metal-free organic dyes containing triazatruxene to explore the effect of designed anchoring groups on their photovoltaic properties and electron injection efficiencies for their potential applications in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). Density functional theory (DFT) and time-dependent DFT calculations are performed to provide a systematic analysis on the effect of different designed anchoring groups over the widely used anchor cyanoacrylic acid. A detailed assessment of the computational results indicates that the newly designed anchors are capable of producing decent quality light absorption spanning the entire visible range of the solar spectrum, enabling an improved light harvesting capacity and open circuit voltage compared to that of cyanoacrylic acid. More importantly, an ultrafast electron injection is observed from the dyes embedded onto the TiO2 surface. The interfacial electron transfer (IET) dynamics indicate that heteroatom substitution in the anchors offers more efficient electron injection. These findings are important in the context of providing guidelines for device modeling of highly efficient DSSCs.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are the most innovative candidates for the next-generation of clean renewable solar energy sources. Owing to their tunable electronic structures, high energy-conversion efficiencies and low cost availability, considerable scientific and industrial interests have been paid to them. Extensive efforts in many aspects covering electrolytes, counter electrodes, semiconductors, and sensitizers have been made to improve the performances of DSSCs. To date, DSSCs based on common metal organic complexes of porphyrins and phthalocyanines, polypyridyl, etc. have received major attention owing to their striking energy conversion efficiencies (η) above 11% under standard (Global Air Mass 1.5) illumination. Ru(II)–polypyridines, such as N3 or “black dye”, absorb most of the visible spectrum and show high efficiencies for interfacial electron transfer (IET) across TiO2 nanosurfaces. Despite their excessive efficiencies, widespread use of Ru-complexes as DSSCs is restrained due to the rarity of the metal in the earth's crust and hence their price effectively rendering Ru a limited resource. Besides, the poor absorption in the near-IR region of the visible spectrum, and toxicity related environmental issues limit the practical realizations and usability of Ru-complexes in DSSCs.

In preceding decades, diverse attempts have been made with different metal free organic dyes based on different donor–(π-spacer)–acceptor (D–π–A) architectures in the effort to find an alternative to metal-complex dyes. Metal-free organic dyes have been paid considerable attention due to their structural diversity, high molar extinction coefficient, and ease of structural tuning. These dyes, due to their strong electron donating abilities as well as their efficient intermolecular charge transfer characteristics, have been found to be efficient in D–π–A architectures. To date, metal free dyes have shown strong absorption in the UV-visible region with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of up to 12%. In designing efficient DSSCs, the dye plays a crucial role as it should capture as much incident light as possible by optimization of the absorption strength (molar extinction coefficient) and overlap of the absorption with the solar spectrum. At the same time, the dye should inject the photogenerated electrons into the semiconductor oxide on an ultrafast time scale.
Recent experimental investigations show that triazatruxenes (TAT) represent interesting alternative dyes as they show comparable light to electricity conversion efficiency as that of Ru(II)–polypyridine. Triazatruxene (TAT), in which three indole units are combined by one benzene ring, can be considered as an extended delocalized π-system with an excellent electron-donating capability both for intermolecular (π–π stacking) and intramolecular charge transfer (donor → acceptor) cases. Triindole-based single crystalline or liquid crystalline molecules exhibit elevated charge motilities (up to μ = 0.4 cm2 V−1 s−1), due to their extended highly ordered columnar supramolecular arrangements. Owing to their distinctive aromatic structures, attractive physical and electronic properties e.g. liquid crystallinity, strong fluorescence, etc., they have been widely used in different fields such as organic-light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) and field-effect transistors (FETs), two-photon absorption (TPA) and organic solar cells (OSCs),etc. In addition to these, triindole-based molecules show a high solid-state fluorescence quantum yield. Their facile preparation, high solubility, electrode compatibility, wide bandgap with good transparency in the visible region, high LUMO (lowest unoccupied molecular orbital) energy level, and modest HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital) level also make them a novel solar cell material. Experimental evaluation of the electrochemical properties of TAT has already been done and their ability to sensitize a TiO2 semiconductor has also been successfully demonstrated. There are two possible pathways toward improving the efficiency of TAT-sensitized DSSCs. The first approach is to increase the electron rich π-backbone by functionalizing different kinds of groups so as to increase the ICT characteristics for efficient charge transfer from donor to acceptor. In principle this can be fulfilled by various artificial synthetic modifications.
The second approach (aims to include those in the present work here) is to increase the rate of the IET in TAT-sensitized TiO2 assemblies, so that it occurs on an ultrafast time scale. Anchoring groups that covalently link sensitizers to the semiconductor surface represent an important structural parameter that controls the kinetics of the IET transfer in DSSCs and were therefore chosen as targets for the modifications. However, to the best of our knowledge, there are no theoretical reports about the atomistic descriptions of TAT in the field of DSSCs. Inspired by its proven strong intramolecular charge transfer characteristics, synthetic flexibility, and high stability, herein, we present theoretical investigations of a series of metal free organic D–A type TAT-based dyes to explore the effect of designed anchoring groups on photovoltaic properties and electron injection efficiencies for potential applications in DSSCs. The influence of the linker group identity on the visible light absorption properties and kinetics of the IET process in TAT–TiO2 assemblies is explored here. The aim is to identify viable alternatives to the commonly used cyanoacrylic acid linker that could potentially increase the efficiency of the IET process across a range of visible wavelengths in TAT–TiO2 sensitized solar cells.

The chemical structures of the investigated dyes and their corresponding names are shown in Fig. 1. The series of dyes (D–π–A) considers the same donor (TTA) and π-spacer (thiophene) but various anchoring groups. For the parent dye TD1, the widely accepted cyanoacrylic acid is used as an anchoring group while triple bonded benzoic acid and its cyano, fluoro, and nitrogen derivatives are modeled as the anchoring groups for the rest of the dyes, TD2–TD6. Considering the computational costs, experimentally synthesized TD1 has been simplified by refining its long alkyl chains with methyl groups. Former analogous simplifications have implied that such variations can capture the basic character of organic dyes, while leaving unaltered the fundamental traits of the projected results. In due course, we chose a TiO2 nanocluster as well as a (101) periodic surface as a component of the electron acceptor material in the composite system with two different binding modes to study the interfacial electron transfer dynamics. The details of such calculations are given below.


The effect of the cluster size on the interfacial electron injection process has been the subject matter of different experimental and theoretical studies and it has been shown that smaller TiO2 clusters are able to mimic the true electronic properties of anatase structures. Inspired by this, we chose a (TiO2)15 nanostructure to simulate the interfacial electron transfer dynamics in model dye–TiO2 composite systems. The dyes are attached to the (TiO2)15 cluster with a monodental binding mode, where one of the O atoms of the carboxylate group is covalently linked with Ti and the H atom is attached to the nearby O atom of the (TiO2)15 cluster. Such adsorption modes for different dyes have already been reported previously. Ground state geometry optimizations of the model dyes have been carried out within density functional theory (DFT) by using the B3LYP hybrid functional. Such a hybrid functional is well known to offer precise geometry in good agreement with experimental ones. All the lighter elements (S, C, N, O, and H) were described by using localized 6-31G(d,p) basis sets while for Ti, the LANL2DZP basis set with pseudopotential is used. Following the ground state optimized geometry, time-dependent DFT (TD-DFT) calculations were employed to obtain excited state properties by taking into account the lowest 30 singlet excitations. In the TD-DFT calculations, solvent effects (THF) were incorporated by applying the polarizable continuum model (PCM) using the integral equation formalism variant in THF as implemented in the Gaussian 09 package. We have tested the TDDFT calculations in different hybrid functionals with several exchange correlation functionals, including B3LYP, PBE0, CAM-B3LYP, BHandHLYP, wB97XD in conjunction with the 6-31G(d) basis sets to find out the effect of different functionals on the excitations. The corresponding results of two major absorption peaks for TD1 are collected in Table 1, from which it has been revealed that the B3LYP hybrid functional with the 631G(d,p) basis set reproduces the experimental data with reasonably good accuracy. To interpret the nature of the transition states, the auxiliary program package GaussSum 2.2.5 was employed for evaluating the major orbital contributions.

Dye system
B3LYP
CAM-B3LYP
PBE0
BHandHLYP
wB97XD
Expt. value

TD1

318, 447
394, 466
242, 420
250, 420
264, 409
316, 474

A two dimensional (2D) periodic slab was constructed by cutting the anatase TiO2(101) surface, consisting of 48 Ti and 96 O atoms, using a two-layer 2 × 4 super cell. Periodic boundary conditions (PBC) with a super cell of 10.224 Å × 22.6924 Å × 50.00 Å dimensions and a k-point sampling of (1 × 1 × 1) were utilized in all calculations. In order to guarantee decoupling between neighboring systems, a vacuum region of 40 Å above the anatase TiO2(101) slabs was used. The super cell was optimized by using the Quantum Espresso ab initio simulation package, employing generalized gradient approximation (GGA) with the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) functional with ultrasoft pseudo potential. Due to limitations in computational power, a pure functional (PBE) was chosen over a hybrid functional (B3LYP). The cutoff energy for the plane-wave basis set was set to 30 Ry. For the geometry optimizations, the atoms of the bottom layer of the TiO2(101) slab were fixed to their respective bulk positions, while the rest of the atoms were allowed to relax until the forces on each ion were reduced to <0.01 eV A−1, and the resulting structures were subsequently used to calculate the electronic structures and interfacial electron transfer dynamics.


Interfacial electron transfer in all the dye–TiO2 nanocomposite systems were investigated according to the extended Hückel (EH) model Hamiltonian formalism, in which the time-dependent electronic wave function, Ψ(t), is propagated with time. The detailed quantum dynamical simulation methodology could be found elsewhere. So far, a number of molecular dynamics simulations techniques have been developed. The majority of them are predicated on Tully's surface hopping, the stochastic Schrödinger equation, nonadiabatic molecular dynamics (PYXAID program), and propagation of the density matrix. Our approach incorporates a semi-empirical EH Hamiltonian that enables us to establish the timescale of IET as well as the spatial evolution of the excited electron wave packet. Furthermore, with this methodology, one can precisely simulate systems containing a thousand or more atoms. The EH particle states served as the initial states for the IET simulations of the entire dye–TiO2 systems, and were evolved in time according to the time-dependent Schrödinger equation. Survival probability, P(t), which is the probability that the photoexcited electron remains in the adsorbate molecule at time t after excitation of the system was computed by projecting the time evolved electronic wave function of the dye–TiO2 system onto the atomic orbitals of the dye at each simulation step. The time-dependent wave function can be written as a linear combination of atomic orbitals

(1)
where |
i,α〉, represents the atomic orbital α of atom i. The required expansion coefficients Bi,α(t) incorporated in eqn (1), can be computed according to

(2)
where
Cq is the expansion coefficient of the initial state

(3)
The eigenvectors and eigenvalues
Qq and Eq were obtained by solving the generalized EH eigenvalue problem,

HQq = EqSQq
(4)
where
H is the EH Hamiltonian matrix and S is the atomic orbital overlap matrix.

Once the time-dependent wave function is obtained, the survival probability can be computed as follows:
(5)
where
Si,jα,β = 〈i,α|j,β〉 and the indices α and β represent specific orbitals in atoms i and j, respectively. The initial states are defined in terms of the excited electronic states of the adsorbate with significant electronic couplings with the semiconductor conduction band. Quantum dynamical simulations of all the nano-composites viz. dye–(TiO2)15 and dye–TiO2(101) periodic systems were run for 1 ps with a step-size of 0.1 fs in vacuum at a frozen geometry. For the dye–(TiO2)15 composites, the electron transfer dynamics simulations were performed on the previously relaxed electronic structure described by DFT at the B3LYP level of theory. For PBC, a super cell of 10.224 Å × 22.6924 Å × 50.00 Å dimensions and a k-point sampling of (1 × 1 × 1) were utilized in all calculations containing the TiO2(101) slab. In order to avoid artificial recurrences in the electron transient populations, absorbing potentials (i.e. imaginary terms to the diagonal elements of the Hamiltonian) were assigned to the bottom layer of the Ti atoms. Finally, the survival probabilities obtained from the IET simulations were fitted to a linear combination of exponential functions.


To demonstrate the influence of different linkers on the electronic structures of the dyes, we examine the nature of their frontier molecular orbitals (FMOs). The electronic distributions of some selected orbitals that determine the electron injection processes of those dyes viz. HOMO and LUMO are shown in Fig. 2 (the corresponding energy eigenvalues are shown in Table S1 in ESI). For the HOMO, the electron density is unvaryingly distributed along the TAT unit and the π-spacer, while the LUMO shows perfectly localized electron density over the cyanoacrylic acid for TD1 and triple bonded benzoic moiety for the rest of the dyes and its adjacent π-spacer. This scenario inevitably ensures the possibility of a photo-induced intramolecular charge transfer along the π-conjugated skeleton and finally electron injection from the dye to the conduction band of TiO2.

From Fig. 2, it is clear that the LUMO levels of all the studied dyes are above the conduction band (CB) of TiO2 (−4.0 eV) and the HOMO levels are sufficiently deeper than the redox potential of the I−/I3− system (−4.80 eV). This suitable energy layout of the dye-sensitizers opens up the possibility that all dyes are capable of injecting hot electrons into the conducting bands of TiO2 and the excited dye can be regenerated by receiving electrons from the I−/I3− electrolyte. From Fig. 2, it is further evident that the introduction of newly designed anchoring groups has a profound impact on the increase in energy of the LUMO levels of these dye systems. Among them, particularly, the dyes containing two N atoms in the benzoic acid moiety decreases the energy level of the LUMO markedly. Going from TD1 to TD6, the HOMO levels of the dye molecules remain almost unaltered, while the band gap increases slightly due to raising the LUMO level. However, a small change in the LUMO energy level can have a significant influence on the interfacial electron injection dynamics that will be discussed later.

Incorporation of the model anchoring groups into the dye system must allow one to tune the photo absorption behavior of the dyes. In order to obtain a basic idea of how the heteroatom in the anchoring groups affects the light-harvesting efficiency, we have performed TD-DFT calculations to obtain the absorption spectra of the dyes, TD1–6. Fig. 3 represents the simulated absorption spectra of the dyes, all of which reveal a broad absorption band in the UV-visible region. All the dyes show two major absorption bands, one centered at around 300 nm and the other at around 500 nm (please see Table S2, ESI for more specific values). As already mentioned, the simulated absorption maxima are in good agreement with the recent experimental observation that anticipates two major absorption bands for TAT-based dyes at 280–350 and 400–550 nm in THF solution. It is noteworthy that the shorter wavelength band is assigned to the localized aromatic π–π* transitions, while the long wavelength corresponds to the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) transition. The intensity of the π–π* transitions is higher than that of the ICT transitions for TD1 and TD2 while for the rest of the dyes, an opposite trend is observed (please see Fig. 3). Remarkably, all the designed dyes (with modified anchoring groups) show significantly broader and red-shifted absorption bands compared to that of the original TD1 dye as can be found in Fig. 3. This can be ascribed to the better electron delocalization over the whole molecule with the conjugated linker. Based on the absorption profiles alone, particularly, TD5 and TD6 might be considered to provide the best combination of spectral coverage and absorption intensity among the dyes investigated. Furthermore, the oscillator strengths of absorption for all the modeled dyes are also increased in comparison to the parent dye as summarized in Table S2 (ESI).

The light harvesting efficiency of D–π–A type of dyes is normally ascribed to efficient intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) characteristics. ICT transitions from donor to acceptor generated by the excited state are also responsible for the injection of electron into the conduction band of the semiconductor. Fig. 3 shows that the newly designed anchors are capable of displaying a decent level of light absorption covering the entire visible range of the solar spectrum, enabling an improved light harvesting capacity compared to the parent dye. The molar extinction coefficients of TD5 and TD6 are improved by ca. 10% and 12%, respectively, in comparison to that of TD1. The introduction of N and F heteroatoms into the anchoring group greatly enhances the light-absorption properties of the dye. The broadening of the absorption peak and the increase in the molar extinction coefficient relative to the parent dye TD1 can be explained by the increased resonance in the aromatic backbone due to the introduction of heteroatoms.
The short circuit current (JSC) is another important parameter for recognizing efficient solar cells, which can be calculated from the following expression
(6)
The above equation is important to present at this stage to display that
JSC is closely dependent on the light-harvesting efficiency (LHE), the electron-injection efficiency (φinj) and the collection efficiency (ηcoll). Considering the role of the dyes in DSSCs, the LHE is a very important factor for organic dyes which is directly related to the absorption intensity by:

LHE(λ) = 1 − 10−ε(λ)bc
(7)
where
ε(λ) is the molar absorption coefficient at a certain wavelength, λ, and b and c are the TiO2 film thickness and dye concentration, respectively, which are usually assigned the experimental values of 10 μm and 300 mmol L−1, respectively. All the model dyes show higher LHE values than the parent dye, especially the LHE values of TD5 and TD6, which fall in a narrow range 0.90–0.902 (Table S2, ESI), revealing that these model sensitizers may afford a much higher photocurrent than the parent dye. Further enhancement of JSC can be done by the improvement of the electron injection free energy (ΔGinj) which is defined as the free energy change for the electron injection and can be expressed as the energy difference between the excited state oxidation potential of the dye (E*(dye)) and the TiO2 conduction band energy (ECB(TiO2) = −4.0 eV), i.e. ΔGinj = E*(dye) − |ECB(TiO2)|. For an unrelaxed excited state, the excited state oxidation potential is expressed as Edye* = Edye − E0–0, where Edye is the ground state oxidation potential of the dye (approximated as negative HOMO energy) and E0–0 is vertical excitation. All the dyes exhibit negative ΔGinj values (see Table 2), revealing that the electron-injection process is spontaneous. TD3–TD6 possess a higher absolute value of ΔGinj than that of the parent dye, providing the fastest electron-injection process. Considering the geometrical structures, energy levels, absorption spectra, and calculated electronic properties of TD1–TD6, better JSC values are expected for TD5 and TD6, due to their observed slight red-shifting in optical absorption in combination with the 10–12% increase of the molar extinction coefficient which should lead to an increased JSC value, thus improving the photocurrent efficiency of DSSCs. We know the overall efficiency (η) of the DSSC can be calculated from the short-circuit photocurrent density (JSC), open circuit voltage (VOC), the fill factor (FF) and the intensity of incident solar light (Pin) as

(8)
Now, the values of
JSC, VOC, and FF can be obtained from the current–voltage characteristics in illuminated conditions and are beyond the scope of this study. The analytical relationship between the VOC and EHOMO of the dye may be expressed and defined as eVOC = EHOMO(dye) − ECB(TiO2), where ECB is the conduction band energy of the semiconductor surface, TiO2. Nevertheless, a large value of VOC, as a result of the deep-lying HOMO state of the dye is in favor of better suitability of the material for use in DSSCs.

Dyes

E
dye (eV)

E
0–0 (eV)
ΔGinj

τ (ns)

eV
OC


TD1

5.16
2.80
−1.64
3.63
1.23

TD2

5.04
2.64
−1.60
3.67
1.90

TD3

5.07
2.85
−1.78
3.10
1.50

TD4

5.06
3.06
−2.00
2.33
1.80

TD5

5.07
3.00
−1.93
2.52
1.72

TD6

5.08
2.81
−1.73
2.94
1.51

Another recommended factor that influences the efficiency of a DSSC is the reorganization energy (Λ). The favorable charge injection, transport ability, and the balance between electron and hole transport can be regarded as important criteria for the performance of a DSSC and are determined by the value of Λ. Fig. S1 (ESI) summarizes the reorganization energies of electrons (Λe) and holes (Λh) for all the days and the details of such calculations can be found in the ESI. Superior charge transfer balance performance of these dyes has been established from their smaller Λh and Λe values. More importantly, Λh values for all the dyes are quite a lot smaller than values of Λe, revealing that these dyes are better hole transporters as agreed by previous experimental studies. Noticeably, the values of Λh and Λe are lowest for TD3 along the dye series. For TD5 and TD6, theses values are smaller than the parent dye TD1 which ensures the better electron and hole transporting performances for the former than the latter. Apart from those, Fig. S1 (ESI) summarizes the vertical ionization potential (IP) and vertical electron affinity (EA) values of the studied dyes which are also very important factors for determining the performance of the dyes. It is known that IP basically indicates the oxidation potential, while EA indicates the reduction potential of the dye. A smaller IP value facilitates hole injection while a larger EA value will facilitate electron injection.

Efficiency of the charge transfer is determined by the excited state lifetime (τe) of a dye. A dye with a stable cationic form and a longer excited state lifetime is more likely to exhibit long-term stability, which should favor charge transfer. The τe values of the dyes can be evaluated by using the following equation:
τe = 1.499/fE2
(9)
where
E is the excitation energy of the different electronic states and f is the corresponding oscillator strength of the electronic transition. The first excited-state lifetime values of all the dyes are listed in Table 2 which are in the range of 2.3–3.7 ns.


Fig. S2 (ESI) presents the optimized structures of the dyes (with isosurfaces plots) anchored onto the surface of the (TiO2)15 nanocluster. As already mentioned, the dyes bind to the nanocluster through a monodentate binding mode. However, as Fig. 4 shows, the vacant states of the cluster enter into the HOMO–LUMO gap of the dyes, resulting in a type-II band alignment (please see Fig. S3 in ESI). The resultant HOMO–LUMO gaps for the TD2–TD6–(TiO2)15 composites systems are quite a lot smaller than the parent TD1–(TiO2)15 composite, indicating that the former interact with the nanocluster much more strongly than the latter. Anchoring groups largely alter the neighboring energy states of the conduction (HOMO and HOMO−1) and valence (LUMO and LUMO+1) bands of the composite systems. TD1–(TiO2)15 has the highest LUMO energy level, indicating an excess of energy upon excitation, leading to wasted energy expenditure through thermal relaxation and a lower extent of dye regeneration from the electrolyte. The corresponding isosurface plots of the molecular orbitals offer an insightful view into charge separation: the “push–pull” effect is strengthened if further separation between the electron and hole distributions is realized. The HOMOs are mainly localized in the donor region of the organic dyes, whereas the LUMOs lie mainly in the (TiO2)15 cluster. The calculated HOMO–LUMO gaps of the dye–(TiO2)15 composites lie within 0.60–1.34 eV which falls in the visible light excitation region and these have the characteristics of spatial separation of the charge densities on the two different components of the composite systems. Even for the higher excitations, as charge recombination is more likely to occur from the lowest excited state, it is predicted that the recombination would be slower for those systems. For the designed dye–(TiO2)15 composites, the HOMOs are relatively more localized and therefore we anticipate that the designed dyes with modified anchoring groups experience slower charge recombination processes. It is noteworthy that the rates of the charge injection and recombination process are very sensitive to the energy position of the acceptor state (TiO2). Thus, considering the LUMO level of the (TiO2)15 cluster (−4.60 eV) instead of the standard CB level of the TiO2(101) surface (4.0 eV), the overall rates are expected to be changed. However, comparing the relative energy positions from Fig. 2 and Fig. S3 (ESI), it is noted that the qualitative trend remains the same.


The electronic structure of the dye–TiO2 interface is very important for predicting the photovoltaic performance of a DSSC. Again, the interfacial electronic structure depends on the nature of the binding mode between the two components of a composite. Thus, for better understanding of the dye–TiO2 interface, we choose the (101) face of anatase TiO2 as the dye substrate for this interface model, since this TiO2 surface is considered to provide the most efficient dye binding for the adsorption process. For these dyes the most stable dye–TiO2 binding mode is bidentate bridging. The charge distributions of the corresponding Kohn–Sham (KS) states offer an intuitive view of the interspatial charge separation. The charge densities of the particular KS states that participate in the electron injection processes are shown in Fig. 5. For all the composites, the valence band maximum (VBM) electron density is entirely localized on the donor region of the organic dyes, while that of the conduction band minimum (CBM) is confined to the semiconductor surface. The electronic structures of the dye–TiO2 interfaces were further examined by the projected density of states (PDOS) of the bare and dye adsorbed regions of the TiO2 surface, as shown in Fig. 6. Compared to the bare (101) surface, the band gap of the TiO2 surface is decreased following the dye adsorption, with a concomitant lowering of the TiO2 CB. This can be explained in terms of the generation of a favorable dipolar field at the interface to tune the band energy levels of the surface TiO2, which is due to charge transfer between the dye molecules and TiO2. This band gap reduction for the TiO2 surface should facilitate electron transport, as well as afford an increased gap between the LUMO of the dyes and the CBM of TiO2 which leads to an increased driving force for charge injection at the interface. Nevertheless, lowering of the CB of the TiO2 surface should also lead to a reduced VOC value. Furthermore, the PDOS of the dye molecules shifts to a higher energy after adsorption, indicating significant charge transfer from the dye molecules onto the TiO2 surface. The HOMOs of the dye molecules thus shift into the band gap region of TiO2, and the LUMOs increase above the CBM of the TiO2 surface, providing a sufficient driving force for charge injection, which is crucial for DSSC applications. The band gaps of isolated TD1–TD6 are decreased with respect to the free dyes, indicating that the absorption ranges for the dyes are shifted to the more visible region.


For the IET simulations, the initial wavepacket is formed by introducing the excited electron into a LUMO orbital on the dye extracted from EH simulation. This method has been widely used to simulate the IET process across the molecular and semiconductor interface. The time dependent Schrödinger equation (TDSE) was propagated using sufficiently small time intervals of 0.5 fs to 1000 fs simulation time. P(t) is the time-dependent survival probability that an electron resides in the dye complex at time t. Survival probabilities of IET simulation for the corresponding dye–(TiO2)15 nanocomposite are represented in Fig. 7, which clearly indicates that the photoexcited electron decays much rapidly in case of the nitrogen derivatives of triple bonded benzoic acid and resides for a longer time in case of the TD1 dye.


Fig. 8 presents the time evolution of the excited electron of the dye–TiO2 assemblies. Fig. 8 reveals that the photoexcited electron moves on an ultrafast time scale from the dye conduction band level to the valence band of the TiO2 slab system. The simulated curves are fitted with the following exponential equation
f(t) = exp(−t/τ)
(10)
which gives the corresponding population decay constant as indicated by the inset of
Fig. 8. The results showed that all the dyes exhibit IET processes occurring at an ultrafast timescale. The decay curves for the TD2–6–TiO2 composites are quite similar and much steeper than the decay curve of the parent dye TD1–TiO2 composite. Electron injection times for TD1 to TD6 are shown in the inset of Fig. 8 and are represented by τ1–τ6, respectively. It has been found that electron injection is significantly faster (τinj = 12–40 fs) for the bidentate binding mode (with TiO2 surface) than for the monodentate binding mode (τinj > 600 fs) with the (TiO2)15 cluster. A similar observation was found for the Ru(II)–polypyridine complexes. For nitrogen and fluoro substituted benzoic acid (TD3–TD6) as the linker, electron injection is much faster than the parent dye with cyanoacrylic acid as linker. In order to provide consistent interface electronic coupling of the LUMO states of the anchoring groups with the semiconductor surface states, we have computed the two most important parameters for determination of the initial IET rate; the percentage of electron density on the linker group and the number of the semiconductor acceptor states available at the energy of the excited state. The average percentage of the electron density on the linker for the LUMO to LUMO+3 orbitals is shown in Table 3. It should be noted that for the investigated cyano, fluoro, mono and double N-atom substituted benzoic acid, the LUMO, LUMO+1 and LUMO+2 orbitals afford the most electron density to this anchoring group. This gives us a qualitative comparison of the potential for the orbital overlap between the excited states of the dyes and the TiO2 surface states. Again, a closer look at Fig. 4 depicts that the number of semiconductor acceptor states available for TD2–TD6 is greater (LUMO states are more dense) than that of TD1, which means a more facile electron injection process at the excited state for the former than the latter. Nevertheless, the reason that the effect of the introduction of one N atom in the anchor is greater than the introduction of two can be explained by the localization of charge in the latter which retards the injection processes.

Dye system
% of electron density on linker
LUMO
LUMO+1
LUMO+2
LUMO+3

TD1

52
9
3
8

TD2

67
35
2
7

TD3

78
64
57
2

TD4

70
35
2
7

TD5

73
39
90
3

TD6

79
92
32
1

In this work, we have performed a theoretical investigation on the influence of the different anchoring groups on the visible light driven photovoltaic properties and kinetics of the IET process in triazatruxene based dye-sensitized solar cells with TiO2 as the photoanode. Based on density functional theory (DFT) and time-dependent DFT calculations, the structural, electronic, optical, and photovoltaic properties of triazatruxene based dyes are evaluated. Theoretical calculations show that the newly designed heteroatom substituted anchors are capable of displaying a decent level of absorption-broadening abilities over the entire visible range of the solar spectrum enabling an improved light harvesting capacity, open circuit voltage and driving force of electron injection as compared with simple cyanoacrilic acid as the anchor. More importantly, an ultrafast electron injection is observed from the LUMOs of the dyes to the conduction band of the TiO2 surface. The quantum dynamics of the interfacial electron transfer (IET) reveal that heteroatom substitution in the anchors provides efficient IET performance. Due to the presence of the hetero atom in the anchoring groups, the LUMO states of the dyes (which reside mainly on the anchoring groups) become denser, which couple strongly with the surface states of the semiconductor and thus the electron injection becomes faster. These findings imply that judicious molecular engineering of the anchor by heteroatom substitution can improve the photovoltaic performances of the triazatruxene based DSSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors sincerely acknowledge the financial support from DST Nano-Mission Project (SR/NM/NS-1005/2016(G)). SP acknowledges the financial support from CSIR, Govt. of India through project Ref. No. 01(2956)/18/EMR-II.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nj05409f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2019