 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA12872G
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 5484-5488


Xiao-Lei
Li
,

Zhen
Li
,

Gao
Zhang
 and 

Guan-Jun
Yang
*

State Key Laboratory for Mechanical Behavior of Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, P. R. China. E-mail: ygj@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Received
24th November 2019
, Accepted 22nd February 2020
First published on 24th February 2020
Searching less toxic materials with both ideal bandgaps (1.0–1.5 eV for single-junction solar cells) and excellent stability remains a big challenge in perovskite optoelectronic materials field. Here, we report the optoelectronic properties and stability of the [H3NC6H4NH3]CuBr4 perovskite material. Intriguingly, the material features a bandgap of 1.43 eV which approaches that of GaAs (1.42 eV)—the state of the art semiconductor for single-junction solar cells. Furthermore, the [H3NC6H4NH3]CuBr4 film shows excellent stability, and can tolerate continuous moisture exposure for 1200 h in air (relative humidity: 40–50%) and ultraviolet light exposure for 1008 h in a glove box filled with nitrogen. Finally, we successfully realized a pinhole-free, smooth, and large-area (>20 cm2) [H3NC6H4NH3]CuBr4 film—the largest Cu-based perovskite film ever reported—via a hot-casting technique. Owing to its ideal bandgap and excellent stability, [H3NC6H4NH3]CuBr4 can be considered as a milestone in the development of low bandgap, highly stable, and lead-free perovskite materials for potential optoelectronic applications.

In the past decade, lead (Pb)-based halide perovskites emerged as highly intriguing semiconductors for use in a lot of optoelectronic applications, including solar cells, light-emitting diodes (LEDs), radiation detectors, X-ray scintillators, nonlinear optics, and semiconducting ferroelectrics. For example, the latest record solar-to-electric power conversion efficiency (PCE) of single-junction Pb-based perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) has been reported to be 25.2%, which approaches that of a single crystal silicon solar cell (26.1%). Perovskite nanocrystals exhibit good potential as functional materials for all solid-state LEDs. Very recently, high-performance near-infrared Pb-based perovskite LEDs (PeLEDs) with a record external quantum efficiency of 21.6% has been obtained by rational molecular passivation.

Despite the exciting progress and remarkable potential, almost all state-of-the-art perovskite-based optoelectronic devices were fabricated by using toxic Pb-based materials with unsatisfactory ambient stability. Three-dimensional (3D) perovskite materials, such as MAPbI3 and FAPbI3, are prone to degradation in the presence of moisture, light, and heat. Besides, human exposure to Pb-based materials is harmful to nervous and reproductive systems, which might slow down or even hinder the commercialization of these new technologies. In addition, the use of Pb-based compounds in electronic devices is strictly restricted by more and more regions of the European Union. Thus, exploring promising Pb-free and highly stable perovskite materials for various optoelectronic applications has drawn extensive attention.
Ideal bandgaps (1.0–1.5 eV for single-junction solar cells) and excellent stability are of key importance to enable high-performance optoelectronic materials for various practical applications. However, to date, perovskites can't have their cake and eat it too—narrow bandgap and excellent stability are incompatible in organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite materials.
On the one hand, the widely studied 3D Sn-based perovskites exhibit ideal bandgaps, such as CH3NH3SnI3 (1.20 eV), CH(NH2)2SnI3 (1.41 eV), and CsSnI3 (1.3 eV). Unfortunately, these perovskites are extremely unstable under air conditions due to the rapid oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+, the nature of tin iodine perovskites, which severely retards the development of various new technologies based on Sn-based perovskite materials. Slavney et al. first reported Cs2AgTlBr6 double perovskites with a low bandgap of 1.0 eV; unfortunately, the acute toxicity of thallium makes it unsuitable to substitute lead.
On the other hand, a number of recent studies demonstrated that dimensional tailoring—specifically, quasi-two-dimensional (2D) halide perovskites—is a powerful strategy to enhance the inherent moisture stability of hybrid perovskites due to the hydrophobic nature of the organic long-chain cations. 2D halide perovskite heterostructures have created a lot of excitement owing to their remarkable moisture stability and photoabsorption and emission properties. A lot of layered materials have been explored for solar cells, LEDs, phase change memory devices, topological insulators, thermoelectric devices, and ferroelectric and ferromagnetic devices. However, 2D layered perovskites usually exhibit large bandgaps, resulting in an undesirable PCE limit according to the Shockley–Queisser (S–Q) detailed-balance model. The most common quasi-2D perovskites (BA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 and PEA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1, n = the number of metal–halide sheets in each inorganic layer) usually exhibit relatively large bandgaps. Moreover, almost all Bi- and Sb-based perovskite materials exhibit large bandgaps (>2.1 eV). In 2018, Li et al. reported a 2D layered perovskite (C6H5CH2NH3)2CuBr4 with high stability but a large bandgap (1.81 eV). However, to date, most of the stable and less toxic perovskite materials usually exhibit large bandgaps, which are not ideal for single-junction photovoltaic applications. Therefore, there is a strong demand for Pb-free perovskite materials that exhibit an ideal bandgap and excellent inherent stability. Fortunately, Xiao et al. reported that the bandgap of layered perovskites can be lowered by reducing the interlayer distance (the distance between the inorganic octahedral layers). Moreover, David B. Mitzi reported that the interlayer distance of the diammonium series, (H3NRNH3)MX4, is usually lower than that of the monoammonium series, (RNH3)2MX4. Thus, based on the above-mentioned research, a 2D layered perovskite (diammonium series) with a small interlayer distance should have a narrow bandgap.
Herein, we reported a 2D organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite, p-phenylenediammonium copper(II) bromine pPDACuBr4 perovskite (pPDA2+ = H3NC6H4NH32+), which shows an ideal band gap (1.43 eV) and remarkable stability toward humidity, heat, and ultraviolet light simultaneously. The pPDACuBr4 film shows remarkable stability, and can tolerate continuous moisture exposure for 1200 h in air (relative humidity: 40–50%) and ultraviolet light exposure for 1008 h in a glove box filled with nitrogen. Moreover, we successfully realized a pinhole-free, smooth, and large-area (>20 cm2) pPDACuBr4 film—the largest Cu-based perovskite film ever reported—via a safe hot-casting technique.

As shown in Fig. 1a and S1, the pPDACuBr4 perovskite adopts a layered crystal structure, which is similar to those of the pPDACuCl4 (ref. 29) and (H3NC2H4NH3)CuBr4 (ref. 28) perovskites. The crystal structure is layered, which means that the pPDA2+ cations are inserted between the CuBr6 octahedra sheets (see Fig. S1a). Cu atoms are situated at the centers of symmetry and each of them is surrounded by three pairs of symmetry equivalent bromine atoms (Fig. 1a). The layered crystal structure along the crystallographic z and x axis is shown in Fig. S1. For a diammonium system ((H3N-R-NH3)MX4), the metallic Cu atoms from one layer distribute directly over Cu atoms in the adjacent layers (i.e., “eclipsed” arrangement), which is different from the “staggered” arrangement of a monoammonium system ((RNH3)2MX4). Black pPDACuBr4 perovskite powders used for the XRD test were synthesized (Fig. 1c and ESI Fig. S2) through mechanochemistry—an effective method for cleaner, solvent-free, and energy-efficient synthesis of lead-free perovskite powders. Comparison of the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of pPDACuBr4 powder to those of CuBr2 and BrH3NC6H4NH3Br is shown in Fig. 1b, the dominant diffraction peaks of the pPDACuBr4 perovskite at 2θ = 8.81°, 16.39°, and 32.94° can be found. No additional peaks related to possible residuals of CuBr2 (three dominant peaks at 2θ = 14.42°, 29.11°, and 60.47°) can be found in the XRD pattern of pPDACuBr4. In addition, the experimental XRD results show good consistency with the XRD simulation results (ESI Fig. S3), indicating that the expected crystal structure is reliable.

For solar cells, the maximum theoretical efficiency limit is fundamentally determined by the intrinsic bandgap—one of the most important properties of photovoltaic materials. To test the absorption properties of the pPDACuBr4 film, ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption and transmittance spectra (ESI Fig. S4) were obtained. As shown in Fig. 2a, the pPDACuBr4 film exhibits excellent light absorption over the entire visible spectrum with an absorption onset at 835 nm. From the corresponding Tauc plot in Fig. 2b, a bandgap of 1.43 eV is estimated for the pPDACuBr4 perovskite assuming an indirect bandgap. The bandgap is consistent with the black color of pPDACuBr4 powders shown in Fig. 1c, which can absorb near-infrared light. Interestingly, this bandgap is close to that of GaAs (1.42 eV)—the state of the art light absorber for single-junction solar cells. The bandgaps of various perovskite materials are summarized in Fig. 2c and Table S1. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first reported organic–inorganic perovskite material that has an ideal bandgap and excellent stability simultaneously. The ideal bandgap range is between 1.0 and 1.5 eV, which corresponds to the maximum theoretical efficiency over 31% according to the Shockley–Queisser limit under AM 1.5 illumination. The narrow band gap might be associated with the decreased interlayer distance of octahedra layers of pPDACuBr4—the interlayer distance of the diammonium series, (H3NRNH3)MX4, is lower than that of the monoammonium series, (RNH3)2MX4. Besides, we measured the UV-vis absorption spectra of pPDACuBr4 and pPDACuBr2Cl2 films. The absorption onsets for pPDACuBr4 and pPDACuBr2Cl2 films are 835 nm and 800 nm, respectively (ESI Fig. S5). These results indicate that the bandgap can be tuned by adjusting the Br/Cl ratio. The pPDACuBr4 film shows a high absorption coefficient (9.3 × 104 cm−1) at the absorption peak wavelength (ESI Fig. S6).
To further study the optical properties of the pPDACuBr4 perovskite, the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy was performed. Here, we observed the emission peak at 500 nm, which is similar to those of MA2CuCl2Br2 and MA2CuCl0.5Br3.5 perovskites (ESI Fig. S7 and Table S2). The emission peak located at 500 nm should be caused by Cu+ ions and can be well-passivated by Cl−. The full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the pPDACuBr4 perovskite was 25.05 nm, which is lower than those of MA2CuCl2Br2, MA2CuCl0.5Br3.5, Cs2CuBr4, and Cs2CuCl4 perovskites (ESI Fig. S7 and Table S2). Moreover, Yang et al. reported Cu-based Cs2CuX4 (X is halogen) perovskite quantum dots (QDs) with blue-green luminescence, excellent stability, and a long recombination lifetime (for Cs2CuBr4 QDs, short lifetime τ1 was 42.5 ns and long lifetime τ2 was 136.5 ns). So, it is worth exploring the synthetic methods and optical properties of pPDACuBr4 perovskite QDs for potential LED applications in the future.
Inherent material stability is highly important for the practical application of various perovskite-based optoelectronic devices. Consequently, we evaluated the inherent material stability toward humidity, UV light, and high temperature. To assess the humidity stability of the pPDACuBr4 perovskite, we exposed a pPDACuBr4 sample in ambient air (relative humidity: 40–50% and temperature: ∼25 °C) continuously for 1200 h and recorded its UV-vis spectra (Fig. 3a). The results show that there is no obvious changes in the absorption intensity over this period, indicating that the pPDACuBr4 perovskite is highly humidity-stable. To give more convincing evidence of the excellent stability, we also recorded the photographs and SEM images of the pPDACuBr4 film before and after storage in ambient air for 6 and 18 days (ESI Fig. S8). The surface morphology of the film remains dense, smooth, and pinhole-free during this period, which demonstrates the excellent stability of the high-quality films. Furthermore, the XRD patterns of the pPDACuBr4 materials were measured before and after the storage in ambient air for 10 days (ESI Fig. S9). The XRD patterns do not show additional reflections during this time period, suggesting the superior stability of this novel material. The remarkable long-term ambient stability of pPDACuBr4 might be related to the hydrophobic pPDA groups preventing the intrusion of water molecules in a high humidity environment, as has been reported for 2D perovskite materials.
To investigate the UV aging effect, we exposed the pPDACuBr4 film to UV light (nitrogen atmosphere, temperature: ∼25 °C) continuously for 1008 h and recorded its UV-vis spectra (Fig. 3b). No obvious changes in the absorption intensity occurred during this period. Furthermore, the photographs and SEM images do not show obvious changes before and after UV light exposure for 18 days (Fig. S10), indicating that the material is UV light-stable. Furthermore, to evaluate the thermal stability of this material, we recorded the UV-vis absorption spectra of the pPDACuBr4 film before and after heating at 90 °C for 180 h (Fig. 3c) and no obvious changes in the UV-vis curves were observed over this period. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) shows the beginning of weight loss at ∼138 °C (see Fig. 3d). These results suggest that the pPDACuBr4 perovskites possess excellent thermal stability and could be used in a real operational environment.
A high-quality perovskite film is indispensable for various semiconductor devices. So, it is necessary to find robust methods to fabricate a high-quality pPDACuBr4 perovskite film. Here, dense, smooth, and pinhole-free pPDACuBr4 perovskite films were successfully realized via a safe hot-casting technique without the use of highly toxic anti-solvents (chlorobenzene or methylbenzene). For comparison, the photographs and scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of the pPDACuBr4 films fabricated by conventional post-annealing and hot-casting treatment are shown in Fig. 4a–d. The pPDACuBr4 film prepared by the post-annealing method exhibited poor surface coverage (Fig. 4c), while the film prepared by the hot-casting method exhibited dense, smooth, and pinhole-free surface morphology (Fig. 4d and ESI Fig. S11). The high-quality pPDACuBr4 film prepared by the hot-casting method should be associated with the fast solvent evaporation and the feature of layered structure. Besides, high-resolution atomic force microscopy (AFM, ESI Fig. S12) was used to measure the surface roughness of the smooth pPDACuBr4 perovskite film prepared by hot-casting treatment. The root-mean-square (RMS) roughness was 3.85 nm—the lowest value reported for organic–inorganic hybrid halide perovskite films (ESI Table S3). These results demonstrate that hot-casting is an effective method to obtain dense, pinhole-free, and smooth pPDACuBr4 films.
Fabricating high-quality and large-area lead-free perovskite films by solution-based deposition methods is a big challenge. Here, we try to prepare large-area (4.5 cm × 4.5 cm) Cu-based perovskite films by conventional post-annealing and hot-casting methods. The pPDACuBr4 film prepared by post-annealing shows a rough and gray surface (ESI Fig. S13), while the sample prepared by the hot-casting method exhibits a dark and mirror-like surface (Fig. 4e and ESI Fig. S13). To the best of our knowledge, a large-area Cu-based perovskite film exceeding 20 cm2 has been reported for the first time—one of the largest lead-free perovskite films. To determine the uniformity of the large-area pPDACuBr4 film, we divided a 4.5 cm × 4.5 cm film into 4 pieces, and recorded the UV-vis light absorption spectra of each piece individually (ESI Fig. S14). According to the fact that the absorption intensity is proportional to the film thickness, we select the light absorption at 600 nm as the index to calculate the film uniformity. The coefficient of variation in the absorption at 600 nm was 4.5%, suggesting that the large-area film is uniform. Due to the organic–inorganic hybrid structure, pPDACuBr4 forms a flexible film on an ITO (indium tin oxide) substrate coated with PET (polyethylene terephthalate) (Fig. 4f), suggesting that this material might be used in flexible optoelectronic applications.
To evaluate the photovoltaic performance of the pPDACuBr4 perovskites, we fabricated devices in the configuration of fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/SnO2-modified TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au. Our initial attempts to incorporate pPDACuBr4 into solar cells using this architecture obtained a PCE of 0.24% with a moderate open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.65 V (ESI Fig. S15). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time the photovoltaic effect in this novel light absorber is shown. The PCE is limited by the low short-circuit current density (Jsc, 1.14 mA cm−2) and the fill factor (FF, 32%), which is similar to the previous reports on other Cu-based PVSCs (ESI Table S4).

In summary, we investigated the optoelectronic properties and stability of the pPDACuBr4 perovskite materials. Interestingly, this material shows a low bandgap of 1.43 eV approaching that of GaAs (1.42 eV), which is appropriate for single-junction photovoltaic devices. Importantly, the pPDACuBr4 film exhibits remarkable long-term stability, and can tolerate continuous moisture exposure for 1200 h in air and UV light exposure for 1008 h in a nitrogen atmosphere, which are superior to those of the popular Pb-containing perovskites. Moreover, the RMS roughness of the pPDACuBr4 film prepared by the hot-casting technique is 3.85 nm, which is the lowest value reported for organic–inorganic hybrid halide perovskite films. Additionally, a highly dense, pinhole-free and large-area (>20 cm2) pPDACuBr4 film was realized through a hot-casting technique. To the best of our knowledge, this is the largest Cu-based perovskite film ever reported. This work opens a new direction to realize lead-free perovskite materials with an ideal bandgap and excellent stability—two key values for various optoelectronic applications. Intense experimental (materials/device engineering) and theoretical investigations are needed to assess the potential of this material in the future.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


This work was financially supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2019YFB1503200) and National Program for Support of Top-notch Young Professionals. We thank Dr Ying Hao at Instrument Analysis Center of Xi'an Jiaotong University for her assistance with UV-vis absorption spectra tests. The author Xiao-Lei Li thanks Min Qi for her valuable comments on the manuscript.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta12872g
‡ These authors contributed equally in this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020