 DOI: 10.1039/D2TA04502H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 18762-18772


Tangyue
Xue
,

Duo
Chen
,

Meng
Su
*,

Xiaotian
Hu
*,

Zengqi
Huang
,

Tingqing
Wu
,

Guanghui
Yu
,

Ke-Jian
Jiang
,

Yiqiang
Zhang
* and 

Yanlin
Song
*

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, P. R. China

Key Laboratory of Green Printing, Institute of Chemistry Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS), Beijing 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: sumeng1988@iccas.ac.cn; ylsong@iccas.ac.cn

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, P. R. China

Institute of Polymers and Energy Chemistry, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, P. R. China. E-mail: happyhu@ncu.edu.cn

College of Chemistry, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, 450001, P. R. China. E-mail: yqzhang@zzu.edu.cn

Received
6th June 2022
, Accepted 8th August 2022
First published on 9th August 2022
The in situ polymerization controlled growth of perovskites has been demonstrated as a general strategy to effectively repair grain boundary defects. However, the highly active, volatile, and brittle cross-linked scaffolds of small molecular monomers simultaneously limit the efficiency and mechanical endurance of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Here, we first adopt macromonomer poly(ethylene glycol)dimethacrylate (PEGDMA) to achieve an effective in situ cross-linking polymerization for flexible PSCs. PEGDMA can chemically anchor at the grain boundaries during thermal annealing of perovskite films, thus effectively regulating the crystallization and reducing grain boundary defects. In addition, the in situ cross-linking of PEGDMA can limit the thermal expansion of perovskites during thermal annealing, which releases the residual strain to enhance the mechanical stability of the perovskite film. Overall, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the rigid and flexible PSCs with PEGDMA reaches 23.15% and 21.41%, respectively, retaining over 90% of the initial PCE after 3500 h of storage in a glove box. Furthermore, the efficiency retention of the PSCs is maintained at more than 86% after 5000 bending cycles (bending radius: 5 mm), which is of great significance for the practical application of PSCs in portable and wearable electronics.

Organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have emerged as a new type of photovoltaic technology due to low-cost solution processing methods and high efficiency. In the past decade, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has rapidly increased from 3.8% to 25.7%, which is comparable to that of conventional single-crystal silicon solar cells. Among them, flexible PSCs have great application potential in wearable electronics due to their advantages of high flexibility, light weight, portability, and adaptability to irregular electronic products. However, the rapidly nucleated and grown perovskite films on uneven flexible substrates exhibit poor crystallization with more grain boundaries and defect sites. In addition, the natural brittleness of a perovskite film makes it easy to produce macro and micro cracks during repeated stretching or bending.

To address this issue, additive engineering has been recognized as a feasible and effective technique for regulating crystal growth, passivating defects and releasing residual strain. As previously reported, the polymer additive agents with hydroxyl, carbonyl and other groups that can form strong bonding with uncoordinated lead ions and iodine, such as polyethylene glycol, polyvinylpyrrolidone, polyvinyl alcohol and polymethylmethacrylate, have been used as scaffolds to maintain the outstanding performance of flexible PSCs. However, due to the relatively strong interaction of the polymer with PbI2, the precipitation in perovskite precursor solutions is unavoidable. This increases nucleation sites and decreases grain size, making it extremely challenging to fabricate uniform polymer-incorporated perovskite films. Therefore, an alternative approach to prepare polymer-regulated PSCs is to add small molecule monomers to perovskite precursor solutions and then trigger the cross-linking polymerization during the thermal annealing of perovskite films. For example, Chen et al. introduced the polymerizable organic small molecule thioctic acid (TA) into perovskite films to form a continuous polymer (poly(TA)) network after thermal annealing. Yang et al. reported a polymerization-assisted grain growth strategy using dimethyl itaconate (DI) monomers to form bulkier polymers. The polymers will adhere to the grain boundaries of the perovskite films, which can effectively passivate undercoordinated lead ions and reduce the defect density. However, the high activity of monomers with small molecular weight may polymerize in the precursor to disturb the crystallization of the perovskite. The highly volatile small molecule cannot remain in grain boundaries during the thermal annealing process, which further limits the efficiency enhancement and contaminates the micro-environment. In addition, the cross-linked scaffolds of small molecular monomers are brittle and cannot effectively protect the fragile perovskite films.
Here, we introduce an in situ cross-linkable macromonomer (PEGDMA) with a relatively large molecular weight (Mn = 550), a flexible chain structure and non-volatile properties into perovskite films by simple one-step antisolvent additive engineering. Dispersing PEGDMA in an anti-solvent can avoid precipitation caused by the strong bonding with the precursor solution. The thermally stable macromonomers can form stable elastic scaffolds after thermal annealing at 150 °C. The results show that PEGDMA can chemically anchor at grain boundaries, effectively regulating the crystallization and reducing grain boundary defects of the perovskite film. Meanwhile, the cross-linking polymerization of PEGDMA can be distributed at the grain boundary of the perovskite film as flexible segments and provides extra structural flexibility in the spatial perspective without introducing mechanical strain, which helps to enhance the mechanical stability of the perovskite film. Consequently, the PCE with PEGDMA reaches 23.15% (rigid substrate) and 21.41% (flexible substrate) with less hysteresis, retaining over 90% of the initial PCE after 3500 h of storage in a glove box. Furthermore, the flexible PSCs also exhibit good flexibility and mechanical stability, maintaining over 86% of the initial value even after 5000 bending cycles at a radius of 5 mm. The self-polymerization-assisted PEGDMA is expected to promote the development of self-powered wearable electronic devices.

The perovskite film is fabricated by the one-step antisolvent additive engineering method at a low temperature. Briefly, the PEGDMA macromonomer dissolves in chlorobenzene (CB) as an antisolvent for the formation of perovskite films. PEGDMA is a carboxylic ester containing two CC bonds, favoring in situ cross-linked polymerization (Fig. 1a). Simultaneously, the CC bond and the CO bonds can interact with uncoordinated lead ions and iodine in perovskite films (Fig. 1b and c). Fig. S1 (ESI) demonstrates the high thermal stability of PEGDMA with a decomposition temperature of up to 250 °C, much higher than the annealing temperatures (150 °C) for the perovskite films in our experiments. PEGDMA could remain in the perovskite films after the thermal processing without volatilizing. Previous reports indicated that small molecules containing CC bonds also have the characteristics of cross-linking polymerization. The monomers of ethylene glycol dimethacrylamide (EGDMA) are investigated for comparison and the molecular structure is shown in Fig. S2a (ESI). The thermal decomposition temperature of EGDMA is about 130 °C, which is much lower than the annealing temperature (150 °C) of the perovskite films. Thus, it could not effectively participate in the whole crystal growth process of perovskite films (Fig. S2b) (ESI). Moreover, there is no obvious change in the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images, UV/Vis absorption spectra and X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the perovskite films with and without the EGDMA-treatment (Fig. S3 and S4, ESI). Therefore, PEGDMA macromonomers with high thermal stability and in situ polymerization are selected for the modification of high-performance perovskite films.

We first investigate the in situ cross-linking polymerization properties of PEGDMA. Fig. 1d shows the photographs of pure PEGDMA before and after the cross-linking polymerization. PEGDMA changed from a liquid to a transparent solid after thermal treatment, confirming its cross-linking polymerization. Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy is conducted to monitor the cross-linking polymerization process of PEGDMA at different heating times (Fig. S5, ESI). The CO peak is chosen as the reference peak which appears at 1720 cm−1, and the CC peak appears at 1639 cm−1 as the target peak in our research. The CO peak is relatively stable, while the CC peak gradually decreased in intensity with the increase of heating time (0, 10, 15, and 20 min). After the thermal annealing of the perovskite precursor solution with PEGDMA at 140 °C, the CO stretch peak shifts from 1727 cm−1 to 1710 cm−1 after the cross-linking polymerization, which is due to the strong coordination of the CO and Pb2+ at the grain boundary (Fig. 1e). To further study the interaction mechanism, solid-state 13C magic angle spinning (MAS) NMR spectroscopy was conducted to investigate an interaction between PEGDMA and the perovskite. As shown in Fig. 1f, the CO group of PEGDMA at 162.01 ppm is consistent with the previous report. After the incorporation of PEGDMA in the perovskite film, the C signal shifted toward the high field with the CO group at 167.95 ppm, further demonstrating the chemical anchoring between PEGDMA and the perovskite. Moreover, we use X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) to demonstrate the incorporation of the PEGDMA macromonomer into the perovskite film (Fig. 1g, h and S6a, ESI). In addition, the O 1s peak also verifies the successful introduction of O atoms into the perovskite films (Fig. S6b, ESI). Furthermore, the Pb0 peaks located at 136.6 and 141.5 eV are observed in the control film. The appearance of Pb may be due to the decomposition of residual PbI2 in perovskites under light or X-ray irradiation. Interestingly, the Pb0 peaks of the perovskite disappeared after the incorporation of PEGDMA, suggesting that the residual PbI2 of the perovskite film has been effectively reduced by PEGDMA.
To explore the crystallization regulation effect of PEGDMA, we first investigate the crystallization nucleation process of perovskite films by optical microscopy. Fig. S7 (ESI) shows the crystallization nucleation process of perovskite films during the natural drying process. At 0 s, several agglomerated nuclei appear in the control film, which grow rapidly and disorderly after 40 s. Interestingly, the PEGDMA-added films formed more uniform nuclei. Over time, multiregional crystals grow in an orderly way in the whole film. Movies S1 and S2 (ESI) show the whole process of nucleation and growth of perovskite films, indicating that the addition of PEGDMA can effectively inhibit the aggregation of perovskite colloidal particles and prevent the growth of disordered crystal nuclei. Then, the micro/nano scale morphology and crystalline quality of perovskite films were determined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM). The top-view SEM images and the corresponding histogram of the grain sizes of the perovskite films are displayed in Fig. 2a and S8 (ESI). The grain size of the control perovskite films is approximately 510 nm. Compared with the control film, the grain size of the films with PEGDMA increased significantly with the increase in the PEGDMA content (0.25, 0.5, 1, 2 mg ml−1). The maximum grain size is about 1200 nm when adding 0.5 mg ml−1 PEGDMA. The results indicate that PEGDMA is beneficial for regulating the growth of perovskite films. We infer that PEGDMA would retard the kinetics of perovskite crystal growth, leading to the formation of large grain perovskite films. In addition, the cross-sectional SEM image shows that the control perovskite film is rough with a disordered crystal orientation, while the perovskite films with PEGDMA (especially at 0.5 mg ml−1) show smooth and regular crystals (Fig. 2b). On further increasing the concentration of PEGDMA, the surface and grain boundaries of the films are extremely uneven from the aggregation of more polymers. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images also show a gradual change in the grain size on introducing PEGDMA (Fig. 2c). Meanwhile, it is worth noting that the root-mean-square (Rq) of the perovskite films with different concentrations of PEGDMA first decreases and then increases, which is consistent with the results of cross-sectional SEM images. The concentration of PEGDMA is optimized at 0.5 mg ml−1 in the anti-solvent. When less PEGDMA is added (≤0.5 mg ml−1), the decrease in the RMS value is due to the larger grain size and fewer grain boundaries. The excess PEGDMA (>0.5 mg ml−1) accumulates on the surface and grain boundaries of the film, thus increasing the root mean square value of the film. To further investigate the crystallinity of PEGDMA-added perovskite films, the grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) with an incident angle of 0.3° was measured (Fig. 2d and e). There is no lattice change in the film after adding PEGDMA, indicating that PEGDMA only exists in the grain boundaries. The enhanced crystal quality demonstrates the effective regulation of crystallization. Fig. S9 (ESI) and 2f compare the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the perovskite films with different concentrations of PEGDMA. The incorporation of PEGDMA has two advantages for perovskite crystal growth: (i) the PbI2 peak at 12.7° obviously weakens or disappears, demonstrating that the formation of PbI2 is effectively suppressed or the passivation of grain boundary defects occurs; (ii) the relative intensity of the (110) lattice planes of perovskite films with PEGDMA becomes stronger, implying enhanced perovskite crystallization (Table S1, ESI). Moreover, the decrease in the FWHM value of the (001) peak indicates that the grains of the perovskite films are larger, as shown in the histogram of grain size from the SEM image (Fig. S10 and Table S2, ESI). Fig. 2g shows the UV/Vis absorption and steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the perovskite films. The PL intensity was remarkably enhanced for the film treated with PEGDMA, indicating the improved film quality. In addition, the optical absorption was slightly enhanced for the PEGDMA-treated film. Laser scanning confocal PL mapping spectra in Fig. S11 (ESI) also indicate that the PEGDMA-added perovskite films have a uniform red emission range from 700 to 800 nm, while many black holes are randomly distributed on the control film. These phenomena are consistent with the PL results. Fig. 2h and Table S3 (ESI) display the time-resolved PL (TRPL) spectra and the corresponding fitting parameters. The average double exponential fitting lifetime of the perovskite films with and without PEGDMA is 1143.05 ns and 560.05 ns, respectively. These results also demonstrate that the PEGDMA modification can passivate defects at the surface and grain boundaries of perovskite films and inhibit non-radiative recombination.
To further investigate the effect of the PEGDMA additive, we fabricate n–i–p planar PSCs with an architecture of ITO/SnO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au. Compared with the cross-sectional SEM image in Fig. S12 (ESI), Fig. 3a exhibits the well-fabricated and orderly distributed structure of the device with PEGDMA. The valence band value of the perovskite layer is investigated by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). The cutoff energy (Ecutoff) and onset energy (Eonset) are calculated by linear extrapolation in the respective regions. The corresponding values are listed in Table S4 and Fig. S13 (ESI). The Tauc plots of the control and PEGDMA-added perovskite films are presented in Fig. S14 (ESI). The conduction band energy (ECBM) of the perovskite film with PEGDMA is −4.15 eV while that of the control film is −4.48 eV. The ECBM of the PEGDMA-added film is slightly higher than the ECBM of the electron transport layer, which is beneficial to charge carrier extraction. The corresponding energy level distribution diagram of PSCs is shown in Fig. 3b. Fig. 3c presents the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the rigid devices, as illuminated by simulated solar illumination (AM 1.5G). The control device displays a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 24.54 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.14 V and a fill factor (FF) of 0.76, thereby yielding a PCE of 21.50%. The rigid device with 0.5 mg ml−1 PEGDMA achieves a champion PCE of 23.15% with a Voc of 1.16 V, a Jsc of 24.94 mA cm−2, and an FF of 0.80 (effective area: 0.04 cm2). The detailed photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1 and the inset of Fig. 3c. Furthermore, the flexible PSCs with PEGDMA achieve a PCE of 21.41%, compared with the 19.90% of the control device (effective area: 0.04 cm2). The corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 2 and the inset of Fig. 3d. The increase in PCE mainly benefits from the enhanced Voc and FF, which are attributed to the improved perovskite crystallinity, composition uniformity, and reduced charge carrier recombination. The PCE of these flexible PSCs is among the best reported efficiencies based on the flexible PEN substrate (Table S5, ESI). Moreover, Table S6 (ESI) shows the device parameters with PEGDMA, which demonstrates that the PSCs with PEGDMA are highly reproducible. In addition, the Jsc values are consistent with the integrated Jsc value of the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra (Fig. 3e).
Device

J
sc [mA cm−2]

V
oc [V]
FF
PCE [%]

a The active area of the device is 0.04 cm2.

Reverse scan control
24.54
1.14
0.76
21.50
Forward scan control
24.04
1.11
0.74
20.07
Average
24.10 ± 0.50
1.10 ± 0.04
0.73 ± 0.04
20.30 ± 1.20
Reverse scan W/PEGDMA
24.94
1.16
0.80
23.15
Forward scan W/PEGDMA
24.93
1.16
0.77
22.28
Average
24.80 ± 0.20
1.16 ± 0.02
0.78 ± 0.03
22.50 ± 0.70
Device

J
sc [mA cm−2]

V
oc [V]
FF
PCE [%]

a The active area of the device is 0.04 cm2.

Reverse scan control
23.58
1.13
0.74
19.90
Forward scan control
23.13
1.11
0.72
18.53
Average
23.15 ± 0.50
1.10 ± 0.04
0.72 ± 0.04
18.60 ± 1.30
Reverse scan W/PEGDMA
24.27
1.15
0.77
21.41
Forward scan W/PEGDMA
23.94
1.15
0.75
20.72
Average
24.00 ± 0.30
1.15 ± 0.02
0.75 ± 0.02
20.90 ± 0.50
To demonstrate the reproducibility of the device performance, the steady-state output of current density and PCE characteristics are measured at the maximum power point. Fig. 3f indicates that the optimized device delivers a stabilized photocurrent of 23.19 mA cm−2 and a steady-state PCE of 21.10% after 360 s of continuous irradiation, while those of the control devices are 22.10 mA cm−2 and 19.23% (Fig. S15, ESI). The results demonstrate the positive effects of surface and interface defect passivation. A summary of the PCE distribution of 60 PSCs with and without PEGDMA manufactured in 6 batches is shown in Fig. S16 (ESI). The results show that the PSCs with PEGDMA have better repeatability and a narrower PCE distribution. About 75% of the PSCs have a PCE distribution of over 20%. In contrast, the repeatability of the control devices is relatively poor. Notably, the wide reproducibility of the devices is important in practical applications. Based on the excellent photoelectric properties of small-area flexible PSCs with PEGDMA, large-area flexible PSCs (1.01 cm2) are also fabricated. As shown in Fig. S17 (ESI), the PSCs exhibit a stabilized PCE of 20.08% under 1 sun illumination. These large-area PSCs are promising for practical applications in portable and wearable electronics.
Next, the changes in the charge transfer and exciton recombination behavior of the devices with and without PEGDMA have been investigated. Firstly, we record the dark current–voltage (J–V) curve to elucidate the charge recombination of the devices. The dark current density of the PEGDMA-added device is lower than that of the control device, indicating that the macromonomer PEGDMA can effectively reduce the leakage current (Fig. 3g). Secondly, the space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) is measured to quantitatively estimate the defects of perovskite films. The formula for calculating the trap state density (Nt) is Nt = 2εrε0VTFL/qL, where VTFL refers to the starting voltage of the trap filling limit, q is the elementary charge (q = 1.6 × 10−19 C), L is the thickness of the perovskite layer, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity (ε0 = 8.854 × 10−12 F m−1) and εr is the dielectric constant (εr = 28.8).Fig. 3h shows the dark current–voltage curves of the electron-only PSCs with and without PEGDMA. The VTFL value of the device with PEGDMA is relatively lower. The calculated Nt of perovskite films with and without PEGDMA is 3.94 × 1015 and 4.59 × 1015 cm−3, respectively. Thirdly, hole-only devices are fabricated with an ITO/PTAA/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au structure to study the defect state density of perovskite films with and without PEGDMA (Fig. 3i). After calculations, the hole trap density is found to be 5.38 × 1015 cm−3 and 6.32 × 1015 cm−3 for PSCs with and without PEGDMA, respectively. The addition of PEGDMA can effectively reduce defects in the corresponding perovskite films. Fourthly, the charge transfer process of PSCs is investigated by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) under dark field conditions. The larger semi-circle in the low frequency region of the Nyquist plot indicates a larger recombination resistance.Fig. 3j shows that the PEGDMA-added device has a larger composite resistance, which facilitates the charge transfer and extraction. Then, the J–V performance under different illumination intensities is measured to investigate the process of carrier recombination (Fig. 3k and l). The slope of Voc with illumination intensity is kT/q (where k, T and q represent the Boltzmann constant, Kelvin temperature, and the elementary charge, respectively). In general, the ideality factor (n ≈ 1) of the measurement shows an obvious decrease in trap-assisted recombination. The PSCs with PEGDMA have a lower slope (1.68kT/q vs. 1.99kT/q), which demonstrates that the carrier recombination under open-circuit conditions is suppressed. The correlation between Jsc and light intensity can be indicated by Jsc ∝ Iα (I represents the light intensity and α represents the exponential factor), where α ≈ 1 indicates no space charge effects in the device. The α values of PSCs with and without PEGDMA are 0.982 and 0.965, respectively. The exponent α value with PEGDMA closer to 1 indicates the reduction in bimolecular recombination, and this is consistent with the results of the TRPL and EIS measurements.
The residual strain (σ) existing in perovskite films can be expressed using the formula σΔT = Ep/(1 − νp)(αs − αp)ΔT, where νp and Ep represent Poisson's ratio and modulus of the perovskite, αs and αp represent the thermal expansion coefficient of the substrate and perovskite, and ΔT represents the temperature gradient from the thermal treating temperature to room temperature. Therefore, the residual strain is inevitably generated in the final perovskite films due to the difference in high temperature annealing and thermal expansion coefficients. Among various techniques, grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) is the most widespread technique for studying the strain of perovskite films. To obtain effective grain information, a highly reproducible (012) plane at 31.6° is selected for analysis. The scattering peaks at 31.6° of the control and PEGDMA-added flexible films with a lower concentration (0.25 mg ml−1) shift to the smaller 2θ direction, demonstrating that the perovskite films are subjected to tensile strain. As the PEGDMA concentration increases, the XRD peak of the film gradually shifts to a larger 2θ direction, indicating that the perovskite films are subjected to compressive strain (Fig. 4a). The same phenomena are detected in rigid films (Fig. 4b). However, lattice distortion of PEGDMA perovskite films on flexible substrates is easier to eliminate than that on rigid substrates. It may be the differences in thermal expansion coefficients of ITO-coated glass (0.37 to 1 × 10−5 K−1) and flexible substrates (2 × 10−5 to 8 × 10−5 K−1). The thermal expansion coefficients of the widely used perovskites are 3.3 to 8.4 × 10−5 K−1, close to that of flexible substrates. Therefore, the use of plastic substrates with thermal expansion coefficients close to that of the perovskite can reduce the residual tensile stress of perovskite films. And it also shows the superiority of PEGDMA in flexible devices.
In general, fitting 2θ as a function of sin2ψ can be used to calculate the perovskite film stress (σ), and the slope of the fitting function represents the magnitude of the strain. The perovskite film is subjected to tensile stress when the slope is negative. The slopes of linear-fitted 2θ–sin2ψ for the control and PEGDMA-added flexible films with lower concentrations (0.25 mg ml−1) have negative values, and they shift to positive values for the PEGDMA-added flexible films with high concentrations (≥0.5 mg ml−1) (Fig. 4c). The slope of the perovskite film on a rigid substrate has a consistent trend (Fig. 4d). The slope of the linear fit function gradually changes with the increasing concentration of PEGDMA, demonstrating that the film achieves a transition from tensile strain to strain free and then to compressive strain (Fig. 4e). The results suggest that the strategy of tuning the residual strain of flexible films by introducing chemically cross-linked PEGDMA during crystallization is much more effective than that of rigid films.
To explore the effect of in situ cross-linked PEGDMA on the mechanical stability of flexible PSCs, the SEM images of the control and PEGDMA-added perovskite films before and after 3000 bending cycles are measured, and shown in Fig. 5a and b, respectively. No obvious cracks are found on the PEGDMA-added perovskite films with a bending radius of 3 mm, and the control perovskite film shows evident macro-cracks. The in situ GIXRD plots under different bending cycles can reflect the bending stability of perovskite films (Fig. 5c). For the PEGDMA-added perovskite films, the characteristic peak intensity and position of the perovskite films ((110), (220), and (310)) do not change significantly after 2500 bending cycles with a bending radius of 3 mm. However, for the control perovskite films, the intensity of the perovskite characteristic peak is gradually weakened. The characteristic peak of PEN (near 26°) is evidently determined, indicating that the devices have suffered serious damage. Furthermore, Young's modulus of the PEGDMA-added perovskite film surface is 170 MPa measured using the AFM mechanical model, which is less than the value of the control perovskite film (525 MPa, Fig. S18, ESI). The results indicate an effective release of the stress. A random distribution of the two-dimensional crystal model is established to simulate the stress distribution of the surface of perovskite films under bending. Fig. 5d and S19 (ESI) show that the control perovskite films have obvious fractures under large bending deformation. Notably, the PEGDMA-added perovskite films are still relatively intact. The stress distribution of the PEGDMA-added perovskite films is more uniform than the control perovskite films under different bending deflections (Movies S3 and S4, ESI). The results indicate that a polymer elastic scaffold can effectively release the stress and enhance the bending stability of the perovskite films. In addition, the PSC efficiency is measured at different curvature radii (from flat to 3 mm). Fig. 5e indicates that the PSCs with PEGDMA maintain 91% of the original PCE even at an extreme curvature radius of 3 mm. However, the control device suffers an obvious decrease of 58% of the initial efficiency, which is due to the bending cracks of the fragile ITO electrode. Then, the bending stability tests of the devices are performed with a curvature radius of 10 mm and 5 mm, respectively. Fig. S20 (ESI) demonstrates that the PCE of the control device is gradually decreased under 5000 continuous bending cycles (bending radius: 10 mm), while the PSCs with cross-linked PEGDMA still maintain over 90% of the original PCE. It can be considered that in situ cross-linked PEGDMA can effectively protect the fragile perovskite films, thus improving the bending resistance of the flexible PSCs. To further confirm the excellent mechanical stability, the devices are tested with a bending radius of about 5 mm (Fig. 5f). The devices with PEGDMA can still retain more than 86% of the original PCE after 5000 bending cycles. By contrast, the control devices are almost completely destroyed after 5000 bending cycles with a curvature radius of 5 mm. The main reason for the gradual decline in device performance is the crack formation in the naturally brittle perovskite films and the fragile ITO electrode. Moreover, Fig. 5g shows that the PSCs with PEGDMA exhibit long-term stability after being stored in a N2 glove box. The average PCE of the device with PEGDMA can be maintained at about 90% of the original PCE values after 3500 hours. The mechanical durability and long-term stability of flexible PSCs ensure the practical applications of wearable devices.

In summary, we demonstrate a novel strategy of incorporating PEGDMA macromonomers in an antisolvent for the one-step film process. The grain size of the perovskite films is increased from 510 nm to 1200 nm, thereby effectively controlling crystallization and reducing grain boundary defects. The results also confirm that the chemical chelation of uncoordinated Pb2+ in perovskite films with carbonyl groups in PEGDMA contributes to the reduction of defect density. In addition, the in situ cross-linking polymerization of PEGDMA during the perovskite crystallization process can effectively release the residual strain of the perovskite films. Furthermore, the experimental and finite element simulation results show that the polymer gathered at grain boundaries can protect the naturally brittle films and significantly improve the mechanical stability and stored stability of the devices. The PCEs of rigid and flexible PSCs with PEGDMA reach 23.15% and 21.41%, respectively, remaining above 86% after 5000 bending cycles (bending radius: 5 mm). This work provides a perspective on in situ cross-linking polymerization engineering for high-performance and stable PSCs and other optoelectronic devices.


T. X. and D. C. contributed equally to this work. Y. S., M. S. and X. H. conceived and designed the experiments. T. X., T. W. and G. Y. fabricated and characterized the perovskite thin films and devices. T. X., Z. H., K. J. and Y. Z. analysed the results. D. C., T. X. and M. S. performed the finite element simulation. T. X. completed the writing of the manuscript with inputs from all co-authors.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


Y. S., M. S., X. H. and Y. Z. acknowledge the financial support from the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2018YFA0208501), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 52103244, 22075296, 51803217, 91963212, 21401167, 22005131, and 52173169), the Beijing Nova Program from Beijing Municipal Science & Technology Commission (Grant No. Z201100006820037), Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (Grant No. BNLMSCXXM-202005), the Youth Innovation Promotion Association CAS (Grant No. 2020032), the Key R&D and Promotion Project of Henan Province (Grant No. 192102210032), the Open Project of State Key Laboratory of Silicon Materials (Grant No. SKL2019-10), and the Outstanding Young Talent Research Fund of Zhengzhou University.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta04502h
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022