 DOI: 10.1039/C5CC05879A
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15430-15433


Kai
Yao
*,

Xiaofeng
Wang
,

Fan
Li
* and 

Lang
Zhou


Institute of Photovoltaics, Nanchang University, 999 Xuefu Avenue, Nanchang 330031, China. E-mail: yaokai@ncu.edu.cn

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanchang University, 999 Xuefu Avenue, Nanchang 330031, China. E-mail: lfan@ncu.edu.cn

Received
15th July 2015
, Accepted 26th August 2015
First published on 26th August 2015
We have described the compositional engineering of mixed perovskite based on methyl- and polymeric-ammonium. The resulting perovskite films containing moisture-resistant 2D materials exhibit a maximum power conversion efficiency of over 15% with high reproducibility and good stability, offering greater tunability at the molecular level for material optimization.

All-solid-state hybrid solar cells based on APbX3 (where A is a small organic molecule such as methylammonium (MA) or formamidinium and X is a halogen) perovskites have recently attracted much attention due to their astoundingly high efficiency, low costs associated with their solution-based fabrication, and tunable optical properties. Since 2009, the photovoltaic performance race has been remarkable and high power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of over 20% have been achieved. Despite the success in boosting their efficiency, perovskite solar cells are still facing several critical challenges, including long-term stability and reproducibility, prior to realization of their commercialization.

In particular, the moisture-induced degradation of MAPbI3 is evident from the change in the XRD peaks and the decrease in film absorption, which are attributed to bond dissociation among the crystal units induced by the interaction between water molecules and the highly hygroscopic methylammonium cations. Besides normal external encapsulation strategies, the long-term stability of perovskite solar cells can also be improved by employing an additional barrier as a “moisture-shielding” layer to protect the perovskite film beneath. Previous work reported the substitution of organic interfacial layers with a higher hydrophobic composite, the insertion of a thin Al2O3 barrier layer and the use of a thick carbon electrode.
Recently, Smith et al. reported the solar cell application of a layered perovskite (PhC2H5NH3)2(CH3NH3)2Pb3I10 light absorber with enhanced moisture stability, and high-quality films can be obtained through one-step spin coating under ambient conditions without annealing. Moreover, the 2D analogues yield smooth, ultrahigh surface coverage films from the simple spin-coating approach. As is well-known, the crystalline morphology of the perovskite film is crucial to achieve high efficiency and good reproducibility of the cell performance. Therefore, we sought to assess if the layered perovskite based on bulky ammonium could act as moisture-insulating layers of MAPbI3 and control the crystal growth of 3D perovskite.
Herein, we report a facile two-step method of forming the uniform, compact perovskite films by spin-coating a mixture of PbI2 and polyethylenimine hydriodide (PEI·HI), as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI), in the first step, followed by coating of a CH3NH3I layer. As expected from the reaction of PbI2 and PEI·HI in solvent, we therefore prepared and investigated the systems containing different amounts of 2D perovskite (PEI)2PbI4 incorporated into MAPbI3—that is, (MAPbI3)1−x[(PEI)2PbI4]x with the mole ratio x ranging between 0 and 0.04. We investigated the phase structure, morphology of the perovskite films, moisture resistant, and overall performance as a function of chemical composition. Our results show that incorporation of 2D materials into MAPbI3 provides additional tunability, and devices based on these mixed perovskite films exhibit remarkably high reproducibility and enhanced stability.

Fig. 1A presents a schematic diagram of the deposition of perovskite materials by a two-step solution method. And we employed the planar heterojunction configuration for device fabrication in this work, obviating the need for high-temperature mesoscopic semiconducting TiO2 (scaffold) and simplifying the device processing procedure. Specifically, 1 M PbI2 with or without the presence of 2× PEI·HI (molar ratio, x = 0%, 2% or 4%) was spin-coated onto the PEDOT:PSS (hole transport layers) substrate, and then followed by spin-coating of a CH3NH3I layer. Subsequently, the film was annealed at 100 °C for 5 min to obtain the perovskite film (stage IV). The reaction between PbI2 and PEI·HI can be proved from the absorption spectra (Fig. 1B) of (PbI2)1−x[(PEI)2PbI4]x films. As we know, low dimensional materials possess poor electronic and optical properties with strongly bound excitons. For the corresponding (MAPbI3)1−x[(PEI)2PbI4]x perovskite films, the optical spectra displayed in Fig. 1C and D showed a shift of the absorption band edge and PL emission energy to shorter wavelengths when the content of (PEI)2PbI4 was increased up to 4%. Its band shift and increase of the emission line width can be attributed to disorder and defects. Particularly, the low content of (PEI)2PbI4 (2%) in the mixed perovskite presented similar optical spectra without significant changes. The absorption change can also be confirmed from the film images in Fig. S2 (ESI).
The phase structures of prepared (PbI2)1−x[(PEI)2PbI4]x and (MAPbI3)1−x[(PEI)2PbI4]x (x = 0%, 2% or 4%) films were studied by using X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements (Fig. 2). The XRD pattern showed sharp and strong (110) and (220) peaks of the MAPbI3 perovskite phase for all the spin-casted films, indicating a highly oriented crystal structure. When PEI·HI was added in the PbI2 solution, a strong diffraction peak at 8.02 for the 2D perovskite phase (PEI)2PbI4 appears in the first layer films and remains in the final mixed perovskite films, coexisting with the MAPbI3 phase. Note that a trend of decreasing crystalline intensity of MAPbI3 was observed with an increase of 2D materials, clearly indicating the suppressed growth of the MAPbI3 perovskite crystal. Generally, the orientation of layered perovskite, (PEI)2PbI4, strongly favors growth where the layers orient parallel to the substrate. In the mixed perovskite films, the increasing content of 2D materials would confine the growth of MAPbI3 within the planar layer, thereby restricting the size growth of the MAPbI3 grain. Interestingly, we also noted that addition of PEI·HI avoids the incomplete conversion of PbI2, which often occurred in the normal two-step method.
Furthermore, we analyzed the surfaces deposited with different x values for mixed perovskite (MAPbI3)1−x[(PEI)2PbI4]x through scanning electron microscopy (SEM) measurements. Fig. 3A shows that the surface of reference MAPbI3 exhibits an irregular morphology with bumpy roughness. Incorporating (PEI)2PbI4 into MAPbI3 (with x = 2%) not only considerably smoothed the surface, but also present a dense-grained (around 500 nm) and pore-free morphology. The incorporation of (PEI)2PbI4 retards the growth and aggregates of the perovskite crystals, which are beneficial to form a continuous film with adequate domain sizes. However, the grain size decreases to less than 100 nm when the amount of (PEI)2PbI4 increases up to 4%. Such small sized crystals in the perovskite bulk films are inefficient for charge transport in the perovskite, which are consistent with the optical spectral results. Besides the morphology change, another potential benefit that incorporation of the 2D materials would bring is their extremely high moisture stability. Pure MAPbI3 started to decompose immediately after being exposed to moisture, which decomposed into PbI2 and turned yellow after a short exposure time. In the case of (MAPbI3)1−x[(PEI)2PbI4]x, no obvious change in color (Fig. S2, ESI) and XRD patterns (Fig. S3, ESI) was observed even after exposure to moisture for two weeks.
The effect of layered materials in the mixed perovskite on the device performance was investigated by comparative studies. The inverted device architecture (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PC61BM/LiF/Ag) is shown in Fig. 4A. Particularly, all the device fabrication procedures and measurements were processed in ambient air at humidity levels of 50 ± 2%. Fig. 4B shows the current–voltage (J–V) curves of the optimal performance under simulated AM 1.5G solar illumination, and the photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table S1 (ESI). The control device of MAPbI3 showed a reasonable performance with an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.04 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 19.7 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 71.2%, and a maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 14.6%, whereas (MAPbI3)1−x[(PEI)2PbI4]x (x = 2%) exhibited a VOC of 1.08 V, JSC of 19.3 mA cm−2, FF of 72.9%, and PCE of 15.2%. Although the mixed perovskite cells show a slight drop in the JSC, their finely crystalline and smooth morphology enhances the overall performance with improved reproducibility (Fig. 4C) and no obvious photocurrent hysteresis is observed (Fig. S4, ESI). However, further increasing the ratio of (PEI)2PbI4 to 4% would significantly decrease the photocurrent to 16.2 mA cm−2 with a PCE of 12.0%. We speculate that poor light-absorbing ability of the mixed perovskite films and their small-grain film growth characteristics for charge transport generate less photocurrent and increase the strength of recombination, yielding a lower JSC and PCE. The observation of bimolecular recombination is in good agreement with the dependence of VOC on the light intensity as shown in Fig. S5 (ESI). The increased interfacial area associated with small grains boosts charge trapping and encourages hysteresis behavior (Fig. S6, ESI). And the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum (Fig. S7, ESI) confirms the change in photocurrent and matches well with the profile of the absorption spectrum.
To examine the moisture stability of our mixed perovskite, we recorded the device performance as a function of exposure time under ambient conditions with a humidity of approximately 50% without encapsulation. As shown in Fig. 4D and Fig. S8 (ESI), the device efficiency of control cells (MAPbI3) decreased dramatically and showed complete loss of photovoltaic characteristics just after 120 h of exposure, while the efficiency of the (MAPbI3)1−x[(PEI)2PbI4]x (x = 2%) and (MAPbI3)1−x[(PEI)2PbI4]x (x = 4%) cells dropped by 16% and 8% on the 14th day, respectively. With the insulating “wall” formed from inherent moisture resistance of 2D materials and the dense nature of the overall perovskite films, we can prevent the direct contact of adventitious water with the perovskite and decrease the chance of decomposition. Moreover, (MAPbI3)1−x[(PEI)2PbI4]x with x = 2% achieved the highest efficiency while the cells with x = 4% showed the best moisture tolerance. Thus, the compositional engineering of our mixed perovskite with different compositions of ammonium cations presents a way to balance the properties between photovoltaic performance and moisture stability. In addition, we also tried our mixed perovskite in conventional mesoporous structures (Fig. S9, ESI) and similar results with improved moisture tolerance and reproducibility confirmed the effect of the mixed perovskite system.
In conclusion, we have combined stable layered perovskite with MAPbI3 as the light-harvesting unit by adding a small amount of polymeric ammonium PEI·HI to PbI2 in a two-step solution method process. The incorporation of in situ formed (PEI)2PbI4 can tune the morphology of the perovskite layer by retarding the growth, aggregating the perovskite crystals, and promoting the formation of a continuous uniform film, while increasing the amount of 2D materials hinders the formation of large grained 3D perovskite crystals. The best power conversion efficiency of over 15% was obtained for (MAPbI3)1−x[(PEI)2PbI4]x at x = 2%, with remarkably higher reproducibility and better moisture stability than reference MAPbI3 ones under humid conditions. These findings emphasize the versatility and potential benefits of the 2D perovskite family for photovoltaic applications, which provide additional routes for material optimization.
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51172103 and 61464006) and Natural Science Foundation of Jiangxi Province, China (20151BAB217023). F.L. acknowledges the support from Jiangxi Province Young Scientist Project (20142BCB23002).
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cc05879a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015