 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA07349C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21176-21181


Fei
Wu
,

Zhenghui
Luo
,

Linna
Zhu
*,

Chao
Chen
,

Huiqiang
Lu
,

Zhanxiang
Chen
,

Jiang
Tang
 and 

Chuluo
Yang
*

Chongqing Key Laboratory for Advanced Materials and Technologies of Clean Energy, School of Materials & Energy, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, P. R. China. E-mail: lnzhu@swu.edu.cn

College of Materials Science and Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, P. R. China

Hubei Key Lab on Organic and Polymeric Optoelectronic Materials, Department of Chemistry, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, P. R. China. E-mail: clyang@whu.edu.cn

Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics (WNLO), Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1037 Luoyu Road, Wuhan 430074, Hubei, PR China

Received
8th July 2019
, Accepted 21st August 2019
First published on 23rd August 2019
Interfacial engineering is crucial for promoting the photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells (PSCs), especially planar inverted PSCs. In this study, sulfur-annulated perylenediimide (PDI)-based derivatives (denoted as PDI-T and PDI-V) with twisted molecular structures were developed for use as interfacial materials between the perovskite absorber and the C60 electron transporting layer. Benefiting from the decent electron mobility and good electron extraction and transporting properties of the PDI derivative-based interfacial materials, the charge transport is improved and the charge recombination at the interface is mitigated in the inverted PSCs. As a result, an inverted PSC with the PDI-T interlayer material exhibits a maximum efficiency of 20.41% and an excellent fill factor (FF) of 83.63%, representing one of the best values achieved in inverted PSCs. The PDI-V-based device shows a comparable efficiency of 20.17% and an excellent FF of 82.98%. The efficiencies over 20% achieved in this study are among the highest values reported to date in methylamine-based inverted PSCs.

Recently, inverted perovskite solar cells (PSCs), also known as p–i–n PSCs, have attracted increasing attention with respect to the conventional n–i–p type perovskite solar cells. In addition to their merits, such as low cost and facile fabrication free from high-temperature calcination processes, inverted PSCs can undergo low-temperature solution-processing; thus, they have potential to contribute to large-area and flexible applications. Another advantage of inverted PSCs is their negligible hysteresis effects because the charge accumulation induced by ion migration can be mitigated. Due to these properties, inverted PSCs are quite promising in the photovoltaic field. With the combination of work on developing new materials and device structure optimization as well as engineering strategies, the performance of inverted PSCs has improved tremendously, closely following the pace of conventional PSCs. At present, the highest PCE of an inverted PSC (21.51%) has been obtained from perovskite materials with mixed cations and halides ((FA0.95PbI2.95)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15) and with the combination of a wider bandgap perovskite thin layer. Quite recently, Huang et al. reported a stabilized PCE of 21.4% by deliberately engineering passivation molecular structures to passivate defects at the surface and grain boundaries of perovskite materials, and extremely small Voc loss was achieved. However, these values still lag behind the performance of n–i–p PSCs, for which a PCE of 25.2% was recently reported. Also, for most inverted PSCs, inferior power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) below 20% have been reported to date. Therefore, it is still essential to further improve the performance of inverted PSCs, taking into account their unique advantages.

In inverted PSCs, fullerene derivatives such as C60 and PC61BM ([6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester) are the state-of-the-art electron transporting materials (ETMs). Although these fullerenes exhibit favourable electron mobilities, they have been reported to show inefficient trap passivation abilities; thus, additional interfacial materials are often required. The interfacial layer between the perovskite photoabsorber and the electron transporting layer (ETL) is crucial in inverted PSCs; it provides effective charge-selective contact between the perovskite and the ETL, facilitating charge carrier extraction in devices. In addition, the functional groups in the interfacial material (usually carbonyl, amide, or cyano groups or heteroatoms such as N and S) have been demonstrated to passivate the trap states on perovskite films, which may result in a high open-circuit voltage (Voc) and can also enhance device stability. Furthermore, the hydrophobic organic layer covering the perovskite film may enhance the device stability. Therefore, incorporating a suitable interlayer has been demonstrated to be an efficient way to improve the performance of inverted PSCs. Generally, when designing interfacial materials, the ability to passivate defects is deliberately considered, while the charge transporting ability is not a necessary requirement. For example, a fluorine-based small molecule, B2F, with low electron mobility was introduced as the interlayer in inverted PSCs, and the B2F layer (3 nm) resulted in a 12% increase in efficiency of the corresponding PSCs. Even thin insulating layers such as polystyrene and Teflon have been employed between perovskite and the ETL; these layers enable electron transport through tunnelling while blocking holes. An interfacial material with decent electron transporting ability can enhance charge transport in addition to the interfacial modification function, which should be more favourable for achieving highly efficient and stable inverted PSCs. Therefore, it is of great significance to develop materials which can effectively passivate trap states in perovskite films while enabling effective extraction and transport of electrons.
Perylenediimide (PDI) is a widely explored n-type organic semiconductor with an appropriate energy level and high electron mobility. The large planar π-conjugated structure enables the PDI molecules to easily aggregate; this decreases the solution processability and is detrimental to film quality. Through judicious modification of the molecular structure, excessive aggregation can be effectively avoided by introducing a twisted molecular configuration. For example, 3D-type TPE-PDI4 comprising a tetraphenylethylene core surrounded by four PDIs was developed by Yan et al.; it showed excellent performance in organic solar cells as a non-fullerene acceptor material and was also successfully applied as the ETM in inverted PSCs. Helical perylenediimide (hPDI) ribbons were developed by T. J. Sisto et al.; the ribbons were utilized as electron-extracting layers in PSCs, achieving a high PCE of 18.0%. In this study, we designed and synthesized two new PDI derivatives: PDI-T, with two S-annulated PDIs connected by a thiophene ring, and PDI-V, with two S-annulated PDIs connected by a vinyl group (Scheme 1). S-Annulated PDI was employed because it has a more rigid structure, more extended conjugation and higher stability than pristine PDI. The two compounds are highly twisted, which can prevent aggregation of the rigid planar PDI. The two compounds show excellent thermal stability, suitable energy levels, decent electron mobility and electron extraction ability. Structurally speaking, the sulfur atom and the amide groups in PDI-T and PDI-V may passivate traps in the perovskite film surface. The results demonstrate that the PDI-T/PDI-V interlayer enhances the charge transport in inverted PSCs while decreasing charge recombination. Consequently, the inverted PSC with PDI-T as the interlayer exhibits a power conversion efficiency (PCE) as high as 20.41%, with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1092 mV, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 22.35 mA cm−2, and a remarkable fill factor (FF) of 83.63%. The PDI-V interlayer-based device shows a comparable efficiency of 20.17% with a high FF of 82.98%. The FF values achieved in this study represent some of the highest values obtained in inverted PSCs to date. In particular, the efficiencies greater than 20% are among the highest efficiency values reported to date in methylamine-based inverted PSCs. In striking contrast, a control device without the interlayer shows a significantly lower efficiency of 17.53%. The results demonstrate that these new S-annulated PDI derivatives are promising interfacial materials for application in inverted PSCs.

The S-annulated PDI was synthesized according to a previously reported method from the literature. PDI-S-Br, with one Br substituted at one of the bay regions of the S-annulated PDI, was reacted with 2,5-bis(trimethylstannyl)thiophene or trans-1,2-bis(tributylstannyl)ethane to afford PDI-T or PDI-V, respectively (Scheme S1). The two new compounds were fully characterized by 1H NMR, 13C NMR, and MALDI-TOF spectroscopy as well as by elemental analysis.

The UV-vis absorption spectra of PDI-T and PDI-V in the solution and film states were measured. As shown in Fig. S1, the two compounds exhibit similar absorption bands in solution, with absorption maxima at around 500 nm. In the film state, the absorption bands of PDI-T and PDI-V all broaden, while the maximum absorption band is almost unchanged; this can be ascribed to the highly twisted structures of the two molecules, which prevents severe molecular aggregation in the thin films. Electrochemical cyclic voltammetry (CV) was performed to study the electronic energy levels of the newly synthesized compounds (Fig. S2). The LUMO (lowest unoccupied molecular orbital) levels of PDI-T and PDI-V were estimated from the onset reduction potentials to be −3.85 and −3.88 eV, respectively (Table 1). The optimized molecular conformations of the two compounds were simulated by theoretical calculations using density functional theory (DFT) at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level. As shown in Fig. 1a and b, the two molecules exhibit highly twisted structures, which is beneficial for suppressing molecular aggregation. The HOMOs (highest occupied molecular orbitals) of both molecules are distributed on the whole molecular structures except for the diimide moiety, and the LUMOs are distributed evenly through the entire molecular structures, as can be observed from Fig. 1c–f.

E
LUMO (eV)

E
HOMO (eV)

E
g (eV)

T
d (°C)
Electron mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1)
PDI-T
−3.85
−6.08
2.23
386
6.59 × 10−4
PDI-V
−3.88
−6.02
2.14
379
3.46 × 10−4
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed to study the thermal stabilities of the newly developed materials (Fig. S3). It was found that both compounds show excellent thermal stability, with Td (thermal degradation temperature) values around 380 °C when measured at 5% weight loss; this indicates that PDI-T and PDI-V are suitable for application in photovoltaic devices. The electron mobilities of PDI-T and PDI-V were measured by the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) methodology and the Mott–Gurney law, based on electron-only devices with structures of ITO/ZnO/PDI-T or PDI-V/BCP/Ag; the results are shown in Fig. 2e. The two compounds show decent electron mobility, with μe values of 6.59 × 10−4 and 3.46 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 for PDI-T and PDI-V, respectively (Table 1). We note that the electron mobilities of the PDI derivatives are comparable to that of PC61BM (6.01 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) measured under the same conditions. These results reveal that the newly developed S-PDI derivatives have potential to promote electron transport in inverted PSCs.

The surface morphologies of the PDI-T and PDI-V films on top of the perovskite photoactive layer were studied by atomic force microscopy (AFM) images, as shown in Fig. 2. It was observed that deposition of PDI-T or PDI-V atop perovskite results in relatively smooth surface morphologies with low RMS values (9.66 nm for PDI-T and 7.84 nm for PDI-V) which are comparable to that of PC61BM film (8.77 nm), as depicted in Fig. 2a. The smooth morphology of the interlayer ensures good charge-selective contact at the perovskite/ETL interface, which is beneficial for charge transfer at the interface.


The photovoltaic performance of the inverted PSCs incorporating the PDI-T or PDI-V interfacial material at the perovskite/C60 ETL interface was investigated. The device structures were ITO (indium tin oxide)/P3CT-Na (poly[3-(4-carboxylatebutyl)thiophene])/perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx)/PDI-T or PDI-V/C60/BCP (bathocuproine)/Ag, and a cross-sectional SEM image is shown in Fig. 2d. P3CT-Na functions as the hole transporting material, and C60 is the electron transporting material. A control device without the interfacial layer was also measured for comparison. Fig. 3a depicts the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the devices fabricated with or without the interlayers, and the detailed photovoltaic data are summarized in Table 2. The control device without an interlayer exhibits a moderate PCE of 17.53%, with a Voc of 1068 mV, a Jsc of 21.18 mA cm−2, and a FF of 77.50%. After inserting the interlayer, the device performance is prominently improved. Excellent efficiencies exceeding 20% were obtained in the PDI-T and PDI-V-based PSCs. Particularly, the PDI-T-based device exhibited an excellent PCE of 20.41%, with a Voc of 1092 mV, a Jsc of 22.35 mA cm−2, and a high FF of 83.63%; this represents one of the highest FF values accomplished in p–i–n type PSCs reported to date. The PDI-V-based device showed a comparable efficiency of 20.17%, with a Voc of 1093 mV, a Jsc of 22.24 mA cm−2, and a high FF of 82.98%. It is noteworthy that the high PCEs surpassing 20% in this study are among the best efficiencies achieved in methylamine-based inverted PSCs. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of these devices showed high responses approaching 90% from 400 to 800 nm. The integrated Jsc values were about 21.20 mA cm−2 for PDI-T, 21.09 mA cm−2 for PDI-V, and 20.26 mA cm−2 for the control device, as determined from the EQE spectra (Fig. 3b). These data are consistent with the values obtained from the J–V curves.


V
oc (mV)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)

a The data in parentheses represent the average values based on 20 devices.

C60
1068 (1068 ± 8)
21.18 (21.01 ± 0.26)
77.50 (75.74 ± 1.40)
17.53 (16.99 ± 0.35)
PDI-T/C60
1092 (1088 ± 11)
22.35 (22.19 ± 0.24)
83.63 (81.96 ± 1.35)
20.41 (19.79 ± 0.49)
PDI-V/C60
1093 (1087 ± 10)
22.24 (22.14 ± 0.24)
82.98 (81.54 ± 1.71)
20.17 (19.63 ± 0.43)
Hysteresis effects were studied by scanning J–V curves from the forward and reverse directions. From Fig. 3c, the J–V curves of the PSCs with PDI-T/PDI-V overlap very well when scanning from different directions. Efficiencies of 19.97%/19.71% were obtained from the forward scanning of the PDI-T/PDI-V-based devices, while reverse scanning provided efficiencies of 20.41%/20.17%; this indicates that there is negligible hysteresis in the devices containing the interlayers (Table S1). The stabilized Jsc and PCE values measured at the maximum power output point (MPP) of the devices with and without interlayers are shown in Fig. 3d. Under a bias voltage of 0.96 V, the PDI-T-based device shows a stabilized photocurrent density of 20.96 mA cm−2 and a stable PCE of 20.12%. Similarly, the PDI-V-based device shows a stabilized Jsc of 20.68 mA cm−2 and a stable PCE of 19.85%. 20 devices were fabricated and measured in one batch; the PCE distribution statistics are shown in Fig. S4, and the average photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 2. The average PCEs for the PDI-T and PDI-V-based devices are 19.79 ± 0.49% and 19.63 ± 0.43%, respectively. The above results demonstrate the superior performance of the inverted PSCs incorporated into the PDI interlayer as well as the good stability and reproducibility of the devices studied. The slightly higher PCE of the PDI-T-based device compared to the PDI-V-based device may arise from the more efficient charge extraction and charge transporting properties in the corresponding devices, which we will discuss in the following part.
Summarizing the findings for the PDI-T/PDI-V interlayer-based perovskite solar cells with inverted architectures, we found that the improved device performance is mainly because of the increases in the Jsc and FF parameters as well as the slight increment in Voc. Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra were acquired to elucidate the interfacial charge extraction properties. As shown in Fig. S5, perovskite films coated with PDI-T or PDI-V exhibited significant fluorescence quenching, and even more efficient quenching was observed in PDI-T. Meanwhile, the perovskite films covered with PDI-T or PDI-V both showed accelerated PL decay. These results confirm the excellent electron extraction ability of the newly developed interlayer materials. As we have mentioned above, the decent electron mobilities of these new interfacial materials facilitate electron transport. In addition, deposition of a PDI-T or PDI-V interlayer onto the perovskite layer provides good charge-selective contact between perovskite and the C60 ETL, as concluded from the smooth and uniform surface morphologies of the interlayers. Therefore, these factors all contribute to the high Jsc and FF values in the PDI-T/PDI-V-based devices.
Furthermore, transient photovoltage (TPV) and transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements were performed to elucidate the charge recombination and charge transfer dynamics of devices with and without the PDI-T interlayer. As depicted in Fig. 4a, the device with the PDI-T interlayer showed a longer photovoltage decay lifetime than the control device without any interlayer, suggesting less charge recombination in the devices modified by PDI-T; this may arise from the trap passivation on the perovskite film surface by the interfacial material and is favourable to increase FF. Meanwhile, a shorter charge carrier transfer time was observed in the PDI-T-based device compared to the control device. According to previous reports, there is an equation describing the relationship between the photovoltage decay time (τv), photocurrent decay time (τc) and charge transfer time (τj): 1/τc = 1/τj + 1/τv. Based on the transient photovoltage and photocurrent decay, a prolonged photovoltage decay lifetime and decreased charge carrier transfer time lead to a decreased charge transfer time. That is, a shorter charge transfer time is obtained in the PDI-T-modified device. In addition, from the steady-state and time-resolved PL spectra, PDI-T exhibited superior charge extraction ability. Therefore, the charge transfer in the PDI-T-based device is enhanced compared to the control device. Overall, the decreased charge recombination at the perovskite/PDI-T interface and the marked improvement in charge carrier transport also led to the gains in Jsc and FF values obtained in the PSCs incorporating the interlayer. In addition to the above measurements, Mott–Schottky plots (C−2–V) of the inverted devices were drawn to explain the enhanced Voc values from the viewpoint of the built-in potential (Vbi).Fig. 4c provides the C−2–V plots of the devices measured with and without PDI-T, and the Vbi values of the devices were obtained from the horizontal intercepts. Apparently, the Vbi of the device containing the PDI-T interlayer (1.06 V) is larger than that of the control device (1.02 V). It is known that Vbi is usually positively correlated to the Voc of the device; therefore, a slightly increased Voc value was observed in the PDI-T-based PSCs with respect to the control device. Also, the improvement in Voc is beneficial for increasing the FF values in PDI-T interlayer-based devices because the FF is also linked to Vocvia recombination. On the other hand, the inverted PSCs with PDI-T/PDI-V interlayers showed good stability when stored in a dry atmosphere with a humidity around 30%. The J–V curves were measured at regular time intervals and the corresponding photovoltaic performance was recorded, as shown in Fig. S8. The stability tests were performed at room temperature, and the performance was recorded under 1 sun illumination. More than 80% of the initial PCE was retained after the devices with interlayers were stored for 30 days, which is better than the retained PCE of the control device without an interlayer (72%).

In summary, two sulfur-annulated PDI derivatives, PDI-T and PDI-V, were designed and synthesized and were successfully applied as interfacial materials for planar p–i–n type PSCs. The interlayer was deposited between a perovskite photoactive layer and a C60 electron transporting layer. The interlayer materials showed decent electron mobility; moreover, they could promote electron extraction and electron transport and could also decrease charge recombination at the perovskite/C60 ETL interface. Therefore, significant improvements in photovoltaic performance were observed in inverted PSCs employing the interfacial materials. Excellent efficiencies over 20% were achieved, which were much higher than that of the control device without the interlayer (17.53%), notably accompanied with an excellent fill factor of 83.63%. Altogether, our results provide new insight into material design toward fabricating highly efficient inverted PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51703183, 21572171), the Basic and Frontier Research Program of Chongqing Municipality (cstc2018jcyjAX0568), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (XDJK2019B065), and the National Postdoctoral Program for Innovative Talent (Grant No. BX20190127) for financial support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details of synthetic procedures and device fabrication. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta07349c
‡ The authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019