 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM15674A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5362-5368

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Fute
Zhang
,

Xiaoyuan
Han
,

Shuit-tong
Lee
 and 

Baoquan
Sun
*

Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices, Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University, 199 Ren'ai Road, Suzhou, China. E-mail: bqsun@suda.edu.cn; Fax: +86-512-65880846; Tel: +0512-65880951

Center of Super-Diamond and Advanced Films (COSDAF), Department of Physics and Materials Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China. Fax: +852-2784-4696

Received
4th November 2011
, Accepted 6th January 2012
First published on 6th February 2012
Hybrid solar cells based on composites of silicon nanopillar arrays (SiNPs) on silicon substrates and conjugated polymer were investigated in this study. SiNPs with three dimensional (3D) geometry could orthogonalize the directions of light absorption and charge transfer while allowing for enhanced light scattering and trapping. In addition, SiNPs were fabricated by a simple process at low temperature and displayed strong light trapping capability over a wide range of incidence angles as well as near infrared light absorption. Furthermore, a method to control the density of SiNPs had been developed to obtain pillar arrays with controllable distance, which allowed conjugated polymer to reach the bottom part of SiNPs. The thickness of organic layer played a critical role on the short-circuit current, open-circuit voltage and fill factor, and optimum thickness was indispensable to achieve the superior performance. A power conversion efficiency of 9.2% was achieved based on the heterojunction with organic thin layer under AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2. We believe that this model is appropriate for the fabrication of heterojunction hybrid devices based on alternative organic semiconductors or even inorganic semiconducting nanocrystals.

Up to now, most commercialized solar cells have been made of silicon wafer due to their higher performance as well as their compatibility with the silicon-dominated traditional semiconductor technology. Crystalline silicon (c–Si) solar cells exhibit a high conversion efficiency, however, they are also high cost. First, very high purity silicon (up to 6 N–9 N) involves an expensive purification process. The costs become even higher because solar cells require thicker slices (∼200–500 μm) of c–Si to harvest light. Second, the processes of p–n junction formation require high temperature (>1000 °C) and need to consume lots of energy.

Conjugated molecules for organic solar cells have the potential to be low-cost for solar converters. They exhibit favourable light absorption and charge transfer/transport properties, and can be processed by cost-efficient wet chemical processes. Although the state-of-the-art organic solar cells have reached 8% power conversion efficiency (PCE), however, this efficiency is rather modest compared with that of the record c–Si device (∼25%).
A possible alternative to pure organic solar cells is a silicon-conjugated molecule hybrid one, where a heterojunction is formed between silicon and organic compounds. An advantage of hybrid cells is the high carrier mobility of silicon and the light harvesting at longer wavelengths than those for organic compounds. Moreover, the utilization of the organic molecule allows hybrid cells to be superior to conventional silicon ones in terms of scalable solution processing to simplify the fabrication steps. The high-performance device combines silicon with conjugated molecule requires a large organic/inorganic interface, where photocarriers can be separated at the organic/inorganic interface and holes can be collected through the polymer film to the external electrode. In addition, the quality of the organic/inorganic interface plays a critical role in the device performance.
The organic/inorganic p–n heterojunction can be fabricated at even room temperature, which not only reduces the thermal cost, but also avoids the degradation of silicon minority carrier life time: silicon quality will degrade dramatically in high-temperature processes. This point is rather critical, because silicon wafer with low purity is preferentially used, for which thermal minority lifetime degradation is even more serious. In spite of the wide interest in developing cost-effective hybrid solar cells by using alternative conjugated molecules, PCEs are still very low, e.g. 2.46% c–Si/poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT). For this type device, the interface should be maximized to provide a large interface for photocarrier separation. Recent solar cells based on silicon nanopillar arrays (SiNPs) on a planar silicon substrate resulted in considerable enhancement of the PCEs, e. g. 5.1% SiNPs/PEDOT:PSS, 5.9% SiNPs/P3HT, where SiNPs are embedded in conjugated polymer. However, due to inferior transport properties of conjugated molecules, the layer of organic molecule is too thick to allow holes to be collected by external electrode due to the long transfer distance (∼hundred nm to several μm). An alternative hybrid solid-state device based on carbon nanotubes (CNTs)/c–Si displays an impressive efficiency of 7.4%, arising from the superior physical properties of percolated CNT networks. In this paper, heterojunction with organic thin (HOT) layer is constructed in three dimensional (3D) hybrid solar cell by orthogonalizing the directions of light absorption and charge transfer while allowing for enhanced light scattering and trapping. The organic layer should be as thin as possible to allow efficient hole collection. SiNPs on the planar silicon substrates can be fabricated by a simple process at low temperature and display strong light trapping capability over a wide range of incidence angles as well as near infrared (NIR) light absorption. As a result of all of these, we demonstrate hybrid solar cell that incorporates 3D SiNPs with HOT structure to create high absorption of light and efficient collection of the carriers displays an excellent efficiency of ∼9.2% under solar simulated 1.5 air mass global (AM 1.5G) illumination at 100 mW cm−2.

SiNPs on the planar silicon substrates were fabricated by metal ion-assisted electroless etching. Clean n-type c–Si (100) substrates (resistivity of ∼5 Ω cm) were immersed in an aqueous solution of HF (4.8 M) and AgNO3 (0.02 M) for 15 min at the room temperature. The substrates were immersed in a solution of HNO3 and then rinsed with deionised (DI) water. SiNPs were etched in an aqueous HF (5 M) for 15 min, then they were immersed in DI water for 1 min and dried under a flowing nitrogen streams. The SiNPs were immediately taken into nitrogen to avoid any re-oxidation.


First, freshly SiNPs on the planar silicon substrates were immersed in a saturated solution of PCl5 in chlorobenzene at 90 ± 10 °C for various time to control the density of pillar arrays. The samples were then rinsed sequentially with chlorobenzene and tetrahydrofuran (THF). Secondly, the treated SiNPs on the planar silicon substrates were subsequently dipped into a solution of CH3MgCl (1 M) in THF for 8 h at 70 ± 10 °C and then rinsed with THF. The samples were taken out of nitrogen, immersed in DI water for 10 min, and then washed sequentially with acetone and ethanol. In order to deposit Pt nanoparticles onto SiNPs, they were immersed in a solution of H2PtCl6 (5 mM) and LiClO4 (100 mM) in ethanol. A Pt plate was a counter electrode. A voltage of 0.8 V was biased between the two electrodes for 3 min.


The morphology of SiNPs was determined by a high resolution scanning electron microscope (SEM, FEI Quanta 200 FEG) and a FEI Tecnai G2 F20 STWIN transmission electron microscope (TEM).



P3HT films were coated onto the Si substrates by spin-coating a solution of P3HT with various concentrations in chlorobenzene. Then they were baked in nitrogen at 150 °C for 30 min. Semi-transparent copper electrodes or grid electrodes were patterned by shadow masks and were thermally deposited with a Kurt J. Lesker Mini 100. The thickness of Cu was ∼10 nm. The conductivity was around ∼2.15 × 107Sm−1 and the transmittance was over 70% in the range of 350–1100 nm, as shown in Fig. S1.Indium-gallium alloy (In/Ga) was adhered onto the rear side of the substrates. To fabricate the device with the grid electrode, a thin layer of PEDOT:PSS (CLEVIOS PH 1000, which was diluted for 2 times with isopropanol and 5 wt% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)) was deposited onto the top of the P3HT films. An additional thermal annealing at 150 °C for 30 min in nitrogen was used before deposition of the metal electrodes.


PCE and EQE measurements were taken by dispersing the emission from a xenon lamp through a Newport monochromator. A Newport 91160 solar simulator equipped with a 300 W xenon lamp and an AM 1.5G filter was applied as an irradiation source to generate a simulated solar spectrum. The irradiation intensity was calibrated by a standard silicon PV device. Two types of top contacts, either semi-transparent copper electrode or grid silver one were used. In the case of semi-transparent copper electrode, the active area was the size of metal region. In the case of the silver grid electrode, the active area was the whole size of grid region. In both cases, the surrounding regions were shielded by aluminium foil.


There are investigations on planar n–Si/conjugated polymer solar cells utilizing P3HT as hole collecting layer, where the holes generated in silicon can inject into P3HT at the interface.


Fig. 1a shows a typical current density versus voltage (J–V) curve of solely planar n-type c–Si/P3HT cells under AM 1.5G light, where thickness of P3HT is ∼50 nm. The hybrid device based on n-type c–Si with open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.447 V, short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 11.0 mA cm−2 and fill factor (FF) of 0.21 yields a PCE of 1.0%, which is as similar as those of the previously reported devices.Fig. 1b displays the short-circuit external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the hybrid device and absorption spectrum of the pristine P3HT film. The maximum EQE is 38.7% at 670 nm and a valley appears in the range of 450–650 nm due to the optical filter effect of P3HT. As shown in our previous report, the harvested light by P3HT contributes to the limited photocurrent due to the short exciton diffusion length of P3HT. All the devices based on planar silicon with different thicknesses of P3HT layer display poor FF and Jsc, as shown Fig. S1 and Table S1, yielding inferior PCEs. The lower FF should stem from the inferior carrier mobility in the P3HT film (∼0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1) compared with that of c–Si, resulting in poor charge carrier extraction. The modest Jsc should originate from both poor light absorption of planar silicon and inferior charge extraction efficiency. With this proof of concept in planar hybrid cell, the design of the higher Jsc and FF requires short carrier diffusion length and thin organic layer.

SiNPs structure provides the possibilities to allow silicon with a minority of short diffusion lengths and modest charge carrier mobility for high performance solar cell by constructing a core-shell geometry. As shown in Scheme 1, the order of the minority-carrier diffusion length is the diameter of a pillar (a few nm to one hundred nm) in radial p–n junctions. The hole transport distance is the shell thickness of organic layer. However, this design does not come into being instead of embedding SiNPs into the matrix of conjugated polymer in the previous reports, where the inferior charge carrier transport properties of the organic layer result in the poor efficiency. Few attempts have tried to build up this structure, however, the polymer cannot penetrate far down into the gaps between the nanopillars due to over-dense pillar arrays, as shown in Fig. S2. Here, we develop a method to control the density of pillar arrays. The distance between adjacent pillars dramatically increased with time by dipping in PCl5 solution, as shown the SEM images in Fig. 2. According to the SEM images, the average distances between pillars immersed into PCl5 for 1 h, 2 h, 3 h and 4 h are ∼200 nm, ∼600 nm, ∼1 μm, ∼1.5 μm, respectively. The space left allows the polymer penetrate down to the bottom part of SiNPs. Meanwhile, there is enough space left between adjacent nanopillars where the anode is allowed deposit in order to collect holes. The silicon substrates with the sparse nanopillar arrays still display a capability to trap light, as shown in Fig. S3, which shows the real hybrid device. As it is expected, with the pillar density decreasing, the PCE is dramatically improved, as shown in Fig. 3. The output characteristics are summarized in Table 1. The SiNPs electrode reach the peak PCE of 6.4% with Voc of 0.455 V, Jsc of 26.1 mA cm−2 and FF of 0.54 when it is immersed in PCl5 solution for 5 h. SiNPs with further extending time in PCl5 solution exhibits negligible performance enhancement. The high Jsc value originates from light absorption both by top SiNPs part and bottom planar silicon component. The EQE values dependence on silicon nanopillars density are also plotted in Fig. 3. The EQE in the NIR range becomes higher with the decrease in density of the silicon nanopillars, which indicates that NIR photons can be harvested further down into nanopillars, where the generated holes (minority carrier) are easily collected along the radial direction by the anode via passing through P3HT layer.

Dipping time

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
1 h
0.411
1.8
0.42
0.3
2 h
0.447
4.4
0.38
0.7
3 h
0.453
23.8
0.38
4.1
5 h
0.455
26.1
0.54
6.4
It is worth mentioning that the Jsc and PCE of SiNPs display less dependence on the angle of incidence compared with the planar one, as shown in Fig. S4. As the angle of incidence increased, the total PCE decreased as total reflection increased for both devices, although in both cases the device based on SiNPs showed higher Jsc and PCE than those of the planar one, exhibiting enhanced light harvesting capability due to suppression of reflection from the front surface. This is an advantage for SiNPs used for solar cell since it has potency to generate more electricity due to solar light illuminating angle changing.

In general, it can be predicted that the performance of the cells should be enhanced with increasing the shell thickness of P3HT layer in the first few nanometres. By further adding the polymer layer, the cell performance can be deteriorated for a couple of reasons. First of all, when the layer grows thicker, the bulk recombination in P3HT layer becomes more critical due to its inferior carrier mobility. Second, the light absorption in P3HT layer grows rapidly with thickness increasing due to its large absorption coefficient value, it should be avoided due to less photocurrent contribution. This results in a loss of Jsc. Third, when the P3HT layer becomes too thick, it will lead to formation of a barrier, because of its large sheet resistance of the polymer film. It is rather challenging to deposit a uniform P3HT layer on SiNPs. To reach a homogeneous film, a relative thicker polymer layer might be necessary.


Fig. 4a displays the J–V curves dependent on the P3HT film thicknesses, which are summarized in Table 2. The different thicknesses of P3HT, obtained by spin coating P3HT solution with concentrations of 1.25 mg mL−1, 2.5 mg mL−1, 5 mg mL−1 and 15 mg mL−1, are ∼5 nm, ∼10 nm, ∼40 nm and ∼80 nm, respectively. The thickness of P3HT displays a critical role in the J–V curves and EQE spectra. As shown in Fig. 4b, with increasing the thickness of P3HT layer, the valleys in the range of 550–650 nm gradually grow. The valleys come from the optical effect due to strong absorption of P3HT film. Only a limited amount of light harvested by P3HT can generate the photocurrent because of its short exciton diffusion length. The optimum thickness of P3HT is found to be ∼10 nm, determined by the TEM images, as shown in Fig. 5. The poor performance of the devices based on SiNPs immersed for less than 2 h may be due to contact issue between silicon and P3HT. The large P3HT molecules are too large to penetrate at the bottom part of the adjacent SiNWs. In the absence of P3HT layer, interface between metals and n–Si displays poor photovoltaic behaviour because formation of metal-silicide in the Si/metal boundary could result in high recombination rates. This non-ideal behaviour leads to low Voc and inferior PCE for n–Si/metal cells. We observe that, with a P3HT layer of ∼10 nm, the Voc of the cell increases from 0.072 V (without P3HT-layer) to 0.457 V and the FF from 0.38 to 0.54, leading to a very good PCE of 9.2%. With the thickness of the P3HT layer ranging from 0 nm to ∼40 nm, the Jsc and Voc steadily increase first and then decrease again, and the optimum thickness is ∼10 nm. In the Jsc, the trend of a falloff with increasing P3HT-layer thickness can be observed. To investigate the origin of the loss in Jsc with increasing P3HT-layer thickness, an EQE response measurement is plotted in Fig. 4b. It is obvious that the loss in Jsc can be observed in the short wavelength range as well as NIR one. In the case of the thicker P3HT layer, the loss in short wavelength stems from optical filter effect of P3HT. As shown in Fig. S5, the normalized EQE spectrum displays negligible optical effect of P3HT when P3HT concentration is reduced to 0.5 mg mL−1. This is expected, because this is the wavelength range where P3HT is mainly absorbed in the front of the cell. The loss of NIR range results from the recombination at organic/inorganic interface. In the case of thinner layer of P3HT layer, the main Jsc loss stems from formation of metal-silicide, which results in high recombination rate due to the presence of pin-hole. As shown in Fig. S5, the EQE spectrum of hybrid device made by spin-coating of 2.5 mg mL−1 displays the widest NIR response besides weak valley in visible.

P3HT thickness (nm)

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mAcm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
0
0.072
17.4
0.38
0.5
∼5
0.296
32.3
0.46
4.4
∼10
0.457
37.6
0.54
9.2
∼40
0.449
35.0
0.50
7.8
∼80
0.455
26.1
0.54
6.4
To further confirm the PCE of our devices, a large area device with top grid electrodes (0.8 cm2) is fabricated. The real device image is shown in Fig. 6. The J–V curve of the large area device is plotted in Fig. 6. The device with Voc of 0.534 V, Jsc of 33.4 mA cm−2 and FF of 0.48 yields a PCE of 8.6%. The Voc is enhanced in comparison with that of the small area devices, while the Jsc and FF are inferior to those of small area ones. The enhancement of Voc should be ascribed to the improvement of the contact between the organic/inorganic interface. After adding the PEDOT:PSS layer, the presence of pin-hole area should be minimized and the direct electric paths are avoided. However, the inserting PEDOT:PSS layer increases the film thickness, leading to poor charge transport efficiency. The final indecent charge collection efficiency results in low Jsc and FF.

The surface passivation plays critical role on achieving high performance device. The anchoring methyl group (–CH3) can dramatically suppress the surface recombination velocity. The addition of organic semiconductor layer will further enhance the surface passivation due to avoidance of silicon directly contacting with metal. The silicon oxide (–SiOx) layer is not suitable for passivation of the device in the case of organic/inorganic heterojunction due to the insulating properties. It will cause injection barrier between organic and inorganic. The organic/inorganic hybrid devices based on SiNPs with different surface termination methods (hydrogen-terminated (–H), methyl group and silicon oxide) display quite different electric output characteristic. The J–V curves under light (dark), EQE, and ln(I) versus voltage in the dark with different surface termination are plotted in Fig. 7. The current I flowing across p–n junction under bias V is modelled with the help of diode equations:

(1)
(2)
(3)
Where
A is the contact area, A* is the effective Richardson constant [≈252 A cm −2 K −2 for n-type silicon], T is the absolute temperature (298 K), e is electronic charge (1.6 × 10−19 C), Φb is the barrier height, k is the Boltzman constant (1.38 × 10−23 m2 kg s−2 K−1), n is the diode ideality factor, Is is the reversed saturation current, Rs is the series resistance.

As shown in Table 3, the different surface terminations lead to dramatically different electrical output characteristics. As shown in the J–V curves under light and EQE spectra, the device based on methyl terminated SiNPs displays superior performance in comparison with that based on hydrogen terminated SiNPs and silicon oxide. The hydrogen terminated silicon displays high surface recombination velocity, resulting in large recombination at the organic/inorganic interface. In the case where silicon oxide is the termination layer, the insulating silicon oxide can be a barrier for charge transfer between organic and inorganic, leading to insufficient charge injection efficiency. As shown in the J–V curves under light (Fig. 7(a)), the device based on silicon oxide terminated SiNPs displays an S-kink shape. In addition, the J–V curve in the dark (Fig. 7(c)) also displays lower forward current. The observation can be interpreted as the existence of the large injection barrier between organic/inorganic layer due to insertion of insulating silicon oxide. Dark ln(I) versus voltage characteristics reveals that the diode ideality factor (n) has been improved from 1.9 (hydrogen termination) to 1.4 (methyl termination) (Fig. 7(d)), indicating that less recombination currents within space charge region after methyl terminated surface passivation. In addition, the device based on methyl termination SiNPs displays the lowest series resistance (Rs). In the contrary, the device based on silicon oxide surface displays large ideality factor and series resistance, leading to the poorest FF.
Surface termination

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)

n


R
s (Ω cm2)
–H
16.9
0.212
0.33
1.2
1.9
2.13
–SiOx
19.6
0.300
0.15
0.90
4.7
5.94
–CH3
37.6
0.457
0.54
9.2
1.4
1.60

In conclusion, a solar cell based on P3HT and SiNPs on the planar silicon substrate has been demonstrated with a PCE of 9.2% under AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2. A method to control the density of SiNPs has been developed to obtain pillar arrays with controllable distance, where P3HT and the anode allow to be infiltrated in the gaps between adjacent pillars. The thickness of P3HT layer plays a critical role on Jsc, Voc as well as FF, and optimum thickness is required to achieve the highest performance. The ability to realize high-performance hybrid solar cell, as demonstrated in this work, may be a technology alternative for traditional inorganic silicon solar cell. In addition, solution processed conjugated molecules, such as by inkjet printing, further enhance the versatility of the proposed solar modules. Although the 3D configuration of HOT SiNPs cells may potentially achieve more efficient light absorption and carrier collection, further optimization of the top and bottom contacts, in terms of both optical and electrical transparency, is necessary to enable higher performance.


This work was supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program) (2012CB932402), National Natural Science Foundation of China (91123005, 60976050, 61176057), Scientific Research Foundation for the Returned Overseas Chinese Scholars of State Education Ministry, the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions, Research Grants Council of Hong Kong SAR (CityU 101909)


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm15674a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012