 DOI: 10.1039/C8EE00580J
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2253-2262


Hong
Zhang
,

Xingang
Ren
,

Xiwen
Chen
,

Jian
Mao
,

Jiaqi
Cheng
,

Yong
Zhao
,

Yuhang
Liu
,

Jovana
Milic
,

Wan-Jian
Yin
,

Michael
Grätzel
 and 

Wallace C. H.
Choy
*

Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, The University of Hong Kong, Pok Fu Lam Road, Hong Kong SAR, China. E-mail: chchoy@eee.hku.hk

Soochow Institute for Energy and Materials Innovations (SIEMIS), College of Physics, Optoelectronics and Energy & Collaborative Innovation Centre of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, Soochow University, 215006, Suzhou, China

Laboratory for Photonics and Interfaces, Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, School of Basic Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland

Received
21st February 2018
, Accepted 29th May 2018
First published on 31st May 2018
While metal halide perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) have drawn intense attention due to their high solar-to-power conversion efficiency (PCE), their practical application is hampered by their poor long-term stability against moisture. Although strategies have been reported to solve this issue, these methods are introduced during core-device fabrication processes which will increase the risk of introducing unexpected impurities during the fabrication. Herein, we introduce the first kind of simple post-device ligand (PDL) treatment to significantly improve the PCE of completely fabricated PVSCs from 18.7% to 20.13%. Meanwhile, the stability of the treated devices without any encapsulation remarkably improves, with 70% PCE maintained under ambient conditions after a 500-hour maximum-power-point tracking test, while the control unencapsulated device will completely break down within 100 hours. Equally important is that this post-device treatment shows a special ‘stitching effect’, namely repairing the as-fabricated ‘poor devices’ by healing the defects of the perovskite active region, and can improve the PCE by over 900%. We also experimentally and theoretically study the fundamental mechanism of the improvement. Consequently, our approach greatly improves the production yield of high-quality PVSCs and their module performances as well as the reduction of lead-waste. Additionally, the treatment is an off-the-shelf post-device approach that can be integrated into any existing perovskite-device fabrication, offering a general strategy to improve the stability and performance of perovskite optoelectronic devices.

Moisture stability has been a fundamental challenge for metal halide perovskite solar cells (PVSCs). Although strategies have been reported to solve this issue, these methods are introduced during the core-device fabrication processes which will increase the risk of introducing unexpected impurities during the fabrication. Besides, in the future mass-production process, the completely fabricated ‘poor’ devices will hamper the cell module performance, reduce the production yield and bring a large amount of additional lead waste. To address these issues, we introduce a simple off-the-shelf ligand treatment to simultaneously improve the performance and stability of completely fabricated PVSCs. Equally important is that this post-device modification shows a special ‘stitching effect’, namely repairing the as-fabricated ‘poor devices’ by healing the defects of the perovskite active region, and significantly improves the efficiency by over 900%. Consequently, the ligand treatment greatly improves the production yield of high-quality PVSCs and their module performance as well as the reduction of lead-waste. Our work offers a new strategy of a simple off-the-shelf process to improve the stability and performance of perovskite-based optoelectronic devices.


In the past few years, perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) have drawn enormous attention with remarkably high efficiency and prospects for low-cost fabrication. A new certified efficiency has recently reached 22.7%, which makes them a very promising candidate to be used for next-generation photovoltaics. However, PVSCs still suffer from poor stability caused by moisture, oxygen, light illumination, applied electric field, thermal stress, and defects in perovskite films. Among them, moisture has been demonstrated as the most prominent factor for perovskite degradation due to the strong interaction with water molecules. Some strategies have been reported to solve this issue. For example, encapsulation [e.g., hydrophobic materials, epoxy resins, fluoropolymers] and interface engineering [e.g., using metal oxides to replace organic carrier transport layers and moisture-resistant carrier transport layers] have been reported to enhance the moisture stability of PVSCs by blocking the moisture, but the device still degrades in a high humidity environment. Besides, the intrinsic moisture-sensitivity of perovskite films remain an unsolved problem. Recently, other strategies have been reported to solve this issue, e.g. forming water-resisting layers, adding water-proofing additives, and using two-dimensional (2D)/three-dimensional (3D) perovskite mixtures. While the stability is improved, these approaches incorporate insulating moieties in the perovskite lattice or film surfaces, which may affect the charge separation and transport processes in perovskites or charge extraction from the perovskite to the carrier transport layers. Besides, these methods are introduced during the core-device fabrication and thus increase the risk of introducing unexpected impurities during the fabrication. More importantly, until now, how to handle the completely fabricated poor devices during future mass-production processes is still an open question, which is critical to improve the performance of cell module performance and production yield, as well as the reduction of additional lead-waste.

In this work, we introduce the first kind of simple post-device ligand (PDL) treatment to simultaneously improve the performance and stability of completely fabricated PVSCs. The ligand vapours will induce chemical modification in the selected lateral regions, particularly that of the perovskite layer, which prevents the diffusion of water molecules into the protected active perovskite region, thus enhancing the PVSC stability. This post-device treatment could also passivate the surface defects of perovskites in the active region for improving the PVSC performance. Interestingly, this PDL treatment strategy shows a special ‘stitching effect’, namely repairing the as-fabricated ‘poor devices’ by healing the defects of the perovskite in the operation region, which greatly improves the production yield of PVSCs and their module performance as well as the reduction of lead-waste. It should be noted that the off-the-shelf PDL treatment, completely separated from the fabrication process of common perovskite devices, provides a general strategy to improve the stability of different completed perovskite optoelectronic devices (e.g. solar cells, light-emitting diodes, and photodetectors) without introducing any undesirable impurities during device fabrication.


Fig. 1a shows the process for improving the performance and stability of PVSCs via post-device ligand (PDL) treatment. The PVSCs have the p–i–n configuration of ITO/NiOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM:C60/Zracac/Ag, with room-temperature solution-processed NiOx nanostructures, a PCBM:C60 mixture, and zirconium acetylacetonate (Zracac) as the hole transport layer (HTL), electron transport layer (ETL), and interface layer, respectively. In this study, diethylenetriamine (DETA) with three amine groups is taken as the ligand example to treat PVSCs as depicted in Fig. 1a. Specifically, ligand vapors are employed to directly treat the as-prepared (completed) PVSC devices (Note: not to treat the perovskite or ETLs/HTLs during core-device fabrication as reported by others). In our work, the DETA molecule can interact with CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite by substitution of the surface CH3NH3+ ion, resulting in a modified CH3NH3PbI3 or a stable non-CH3NH3PbI3 phase (e.g., layered perovskite). With this in mind, the perovskite layer in the lateral regions (uncovered by metal electrode) of the PVSC (see Fig. 1a) would directly react with the ligand vapors to form stable low-dimensional perovskite complexes (see eqn (1)), while the perovskite in the active region covered by the metal electrode will not be changed dramatically.

(1)
By the PDL treatment, we aim to improve the air-stability of PVSCs by stabilizing the material in the active region and enhancing the water molecule diffusion barrier from the lateral region to the active region. Meanwhile, the ligand vapors will also passivate the defects of perovskite in the active region. As shown in Fig. 1b, the three-dimensional (3D) perovskite layer in the lateral region changes after the PDL treatment, which can be clearly confirmed from the color change and X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns (Fig. 1c). The new XRD peaks below 10 degrees show the dramatic change of low-dimensional perovskite complex formation in the lateral regions. Interestingly, thanks to the protection of the covered electrode, the perovskite in the active region was not changed significantly as evidenced from the absorbance spectra of PVSCs with and without PDL treatment as shown in Fig. 1b and Fig. S1 (ESI). There are some new XRD peaks below 10 degrees that appeared in the active region as shown in Fig. 1c, which indicates that some low-dimensional perovskites also form in the active region of the PVSCs (which are some nano-dots on the surface of the perovskite active region as discussed later). To gain insight into the post-device treatment, we investigate the perovskite materials in the lateral region and active region by using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). To prepare perovskite films for SEM measurement, the Ag electrode and fullerene ETLs in PVSC devices were removed by tape and chlorobenzene washing, respectively. As illustrated in Fig. S2 and S3 (ESI), the perovskite materials in the lateral region change from nanometer-sized grains (Fig. 1d) into micrometer-sized nanorods. Distinctly, as shown in Fig. 1e, the morphology (e.g., grain size) of perovskite materials in the active region (protected by electrode) after PDL treatment shows no obvious damage and some small nanodots appeared on the grains. These nanodots are low dimensional perovskites, which can be confirmed from the XRD results in Fig. 1c.
The surface composition of the perovskite film in the active region with and without PDL treatment, was investigated by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The preparation method of the samples for XPS was like that for the SEM test. The chlorobenzene washing treatment has a negligible effect on the surface composition of the perovskite film as illustrated in Fig. S4 (ESI). As shown in Fig. 1f and g, the C 1s peak at 284.8 eV of the PDL treated perovskite is more pronounced than that of a control perovskite. Meanwhile, a new N 1s peak at 400.0 eV illustrates that there are some additional amine groups (NH2 or NH) on the surface of the PDL treated perovskite. These results can be explained by the absorption of DETA molecules on the surface of the CH3NH3PbI3 films or partial substitution of CH3NH3+ with DETA molecules to form [DETA]x+ cations (the nanodots on the perovskite surface as shown in Fig. 1e). Besides, the XPS in Fig. S5 (ESI) shows Pb 4f spectra, which contain two main peaks Pb 4f7/2 and Pb 4f5/2 at 138.5 and 143.3 eV, respectively. The two small peaks located at 136.6 and 141.6 eV are attributed to the presence of metallic Pb. Interestingly, the metallic Pb peak is greatly reduced for the covered (active-region) perovskite with PDL treatment. A lower level of Pb defects can reduce the non-radiative recombination and increase the PL lifetime, which will be discussed later. Besides, the Pb 4f spectrum of the covered perovskite of the PDL-treated sample in Fig. S5 (ESI) shows a slight red shift, which also confirms the strong interaction between DETA molecules and CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite films. Furthermore, we found that the DETA molecules only modify the surface of the active perovskite layer (see Fig. S6, ESI). Consequently, PDL treatment modulates the surface properties of the active region perovskite which will offer the improved device performance described later.

The photovoltaic performance of PVSCs before and after PDL treatment has been investigated. To avoid the edge effect, a black shadow mask was employed to define the active area during the measurement under illumination. As shown in Fig. 2a and b and Table 1, the control device A without PDL treatment showed typical performance with a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 22.12 mA cm−2, open circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.06 V, fill factor (FF) of 79.6%, PCE of 18.67% and stabilized PCE of 18.11%. In striking contrast, the device A with PDL treatment (with the optimized modification time of 10 minutes, see Fig. S7, ESI) showed a significantly improved performance with a Jsc of 23.47 mA cm−2, Voc of 1.08 V, FF of 79.4%, PCE of 20.13%, and stabilized PCE of 19.90%. As shown in Fig. S8 and Table S1 (ESI), the PDL-treated PVSCs also showed a lower hysteresis than the control devices, which may be related to the suppressed ion migration by the formation of low dimensional perovskite nanodots at the interface of CH3NH3PbI3/fullerene. The IPCE spectrum is shown in Fig. 2c. The integration of the IPCE over the AM 1.5 solar emission spectrum produces a photocurrent that is consistent with the Jsc derived from the J–V curve, showing negligible spectral mismatch of our solar simulator with the standard solar light.

Device
PDL treatment

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

γ (s−1)

R
s (×10−5 Ohm m2)

R
sh (Ohm m2)
A–B refers to the device A and device B series-connected device. γ, Rs and Rsh are the non-radiative recombination rate, series resistance, and shunt resistance, respectively.
A
W/O
22.12
1.06
79.6
18.67
8.63
5.15
192.81
W/
23.47
1.08
79.4
20.13
5.88
5.87
12246.32
B
W/O
22.97
1.01
44.0
10.20
10.81
10.65
8.12 × 10−3
W/
23.43
1.07
74.8
18.75
7.09
14.87
100.71 × 10−3
A–B
W/O
10.69
2.04
68.6
14.95
—
—
—
W/
11.65
2.14
76.5
19.07
—
—
—
To investigate the reproducibility of the PVSCs, 37 separate devices were fabricated and tested. The histograms of the device efficiencies are presented in Fig. 2d. The PDL treatment significantly improves the device reproducibility with a standard deviation of only 1.94% in PCE which is over 220% improvement over the control (without treatment) of 4.46%. Approximate 80% of the treated cells show PCE over 18%. Furthermore, our PDL treatment strategy can also be applied to other types of perovskites (e.g., Cs5(MA0.17FA0.83)95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 mixed perovskite, see Fig. S9, ESI).
Interestingly, the PDL treatment strategy shows a special ‘stitching effect’, namely ‘repairing’ the defect points in the ‘poor’ PVSC and dramatically improving its photovoltaic performances. Some sample cases are presented in Fig. S10 (ESI). Taking device B as an example. As shown in Fig. 3a and Table 1, the J–V responses show a significant increase in photovoltaic parameters (Jsc: from 22.97 mA cm−2 to 23.43 mA cm−2; Voc: from 1.01 V to 1.07 V; FF: from 44.0% to 74.8%) and the overall PCE increases from 10.20% to 18.75% by PDL treatment. For some other poor devices shown in Fig. S5 (ESI), the PCE of the repaired PVSCs can improve by over 900% (like device C). Regarding the cause of the stitching effect in the PDL treatment, the produced CH3NH2 gas (see eqn (1)) can heal the defects of perovskite films in the active region as shown in Fig. S11 (ESI) and thus improve the performance of PVSCs.
In practical applications, solar panels are typically formed by connecting solar cell units in series. As we know, the poor solar cell unit will govern and greatly harm the overall performances of a PVSC module due to the unmatched photovoltaic parameters of individual devices. In this study, we further find that the PDL treatment can significantly improve the performance of the PVSC module by significantly repairing the ‘poor’ devices. A series-connected device (A–B) was fabricated by connecting the two representative devices (A and B) in series. The corresponding J–V curves and photovoltaic parameter summary are shown in Fig. 3b and Table 1. The series-connected device without PDL treatment shows mismatched properties and poor photovoltaic performance. After PDL treatment, the PVSC module shows dramatic enhancement in the FF from 68.6% to 76.5% and overall PCEs from 14.95% to 19.07%. As a result, PDL treatment shows enormous potential application in the commercialization of perovskite-based photovoltaic cells.
We further investigated the origin of the PDL treatment effect on the improved photovoltaic performance. Firstly, we performed time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements to study the carrier transport and recombination of the perovskite layer in the active region. We deposited the CH3NH3PbI3 films on bare quartz substrates. Other fabrication procedures are the same as those for the normal PVSCs (see Methods). As illustrated in Fig. 4a, the perovskite film with PDL treatment had a threefold stronger photoluminescence intensity and a longer lifetime (τ, 411.6 ns) than that of the control sample (τ, 304.2 ns). This indicates that the nonradiative recombination channels in the perovskite film have been suppressed by PDL treatment, which was further demonstrated by studying the defect density in perovskite films. As illustrated in Fig. S12 (ESI), the estimated defect density is considerably reduced from 1.8 × 1016 cm−3 (control) to 9.9 × 1015 cm−3 for the samples with PDL treatment.
We also conducted first-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations to simulate the defect passivation of perovskite by PDL treatment. For the control perovskite (without treatment), a Pb vacancy (VPb) defect induces a band edge state located near the surface (Fig. 4b), which increases the intrinsic band gap of the perovskite (Fig. S13a and b, ESI). Besides, these trap states can capture holes and become nonradiative recombination centres (Fig. S13c, ESI). To simulate PDL treatment, the initial structure of the DETA molecule is constructed and relaxed by Hellman–Feynman forces until the net force on each atom is less than 0.01 eV Å−1. Then the relaxed DETA molecule is put above the VPb defect. The atom positions of the DETA molecule and four upmost atomic layers are fully relaxed with the left bottom layer fixed. After PDL treatment, the VPb defect becomes much shallower and more delocalized (Fig. 4c). Overall, the DETA molecule produced by PDL treatment can passivate the VPb defect sites near the band edge, therefore reducing the band gap of the perovskite in the active region and the nonradiative recombination centers, which slightly contribute to the improved Jsc and Voc, respectively.
To understand the Voc enhancement in PDL treated devices, we firstly estimated the ideality factor (n), which is an indicator of the dominant recombination mechanism occurring within a working device. Generally, if n is equal to one, bimolecular recombination (the recombination of free electrons and holes in the photoactive layer) is dominant. When n approaches 2, trap-assisted Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination dominates in the device. By linearly fitting Vocversus log-scaled light intensity (Fig. 4d) using the equation: , we estimated n of 1.51 and 1.77, respectively, for the PVSCs with and without PDL treatment, which indicates that the PDL treatment could effectively reduce the trap-assisted SRH recombination, which contributes to the improved device performance. Electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is a powerful tool to understand the carrier dynamics in solar cells. As shown in Fig. 4e and Fig. S14 (ESI), the PDL treated PVSC exhibits a much larger recombination resistance (989 Ohms) than that of the control device (508 Ohms), which indicates that the PDL treatment effectively reduces the recombination paths and thus Voc losses. The Voc enhancement of the PDL treated devices could also be related to the formation of a new band structure between the ETL and the perovskite, which forms a higher fermi (or quasi-fermi) level and thus increased Voc (see Fig. S15, ESI). The slightly increased fermi level may be attributed to the doping effect of [DETA]x+.
We also investigated and quantified the efficiency loss of PVSCs without and with PDL treatment by using a modified detailed balance model as described in our previous study. For a J–V curve, our model will adopt the nonlinear Newton's method to retrieve only the three parameters including the non-radiative recombination rate γ, the series resistance Rs, and the shunt resistance Rsh. Fig. S16 (ESI) depicts the theoretically fitted and experimentally measured J–V curves (with the forward scanning). All the relative fitting errors are below 3% for device A and device B. This small fitting error suggests that the modified detailed balance model well captures the device physics of PVSCs. The fitting results are summarized in Table 1. In the case of PDL treated devices, the increase in efficiency can be attributed to the reduced non-radiative recombination rate and improved shunt resistance, which is well consistent with experimental results and the first-principle studies of perovskite properties (Fig. 2 and 3). Consequently, PDL treatment can significantly reduce the defect density and suppress the nonradiative charge recombination in the perovskite in the active region, which enables the enhanced performance from the corresponding PVSCs.

Without the protection of the metal electrode, the perovskites in the lateral region can easily react with moisture, which accelerates the degradation of the whole device by forming iodine-containing compounds. Low dimensional perovskites show higher moisture stability than conventional 3D perovskites. Meanwhile, recent study shows that the low-dimensional perovskites exhibit slow ion migration properties. Bearing this in mind, we propose that the molecular encapsulation of the 3D perovskite of the active region by using low-dimensional perovskites (Fig. 1a) may be a good strategy to improve the stability of PVSCs. To verify this, the moisture stability of PVSCs was monitored by putting the unencapsulated devices in an ambient atmosphere at room temperature and relative humidity of 50–85%, and the device performances are summarized in Fig. 5a. It is clearly seen that the control devices show a very fast degradation after exposure to an ambient atmosphere. Interestingly, the PDL treated devices retained almost 100% of the initial PCEs after storage under ambient conditions for two weeks. Fig. 5b and c show the corresponding XRD results of the aged devices. The much slower reduction of the perovskite (110) plane peak and the slower appearance of the PbI2 peak in the PDL treated PVSCs further demonstrate the better moisture resistance capability enabled by the post-device modification. This result conclusively confirmed that the PDL treatment could effectively improve the moisture stability of PVSCs. The improvement in moisture tolerance will substantially relax encapsulation requirements as demonstrated in Fig. S17 (ESI). We then investigated the operation stability of unsealed PVSCs by maximum power point (MPP) tracking. As shown in Fig. 5d, the control device completely degraded within 100 h. In contrast, the LPD treated device maintained ∼70% of the initial PCE under 1 sun continuous illumination for 500 h. This result reveals that the PDL treatment could also improve the stability of PVSCs under light-soaking and E-bias stress. The post-device passivation enhances the long-term stability of the PVSCs through molecular encapsulation of 3D perovskite of the active region achieved by: (i) forming the low-dimensional perovskites in the lateral region, which block the moisture diffusion into the operational region; and (ii) forming the low-dimensional perovskites at the interface between the 3D perovskites and ETLs, which neutralized and suppressed the ion migration preventing damage to the electrode (see Fig. S18, ESI).


In summary, we have demonstrated a novel room-temperature post-device ligand (PDL) treatment to simultaneously improve the performance and stability of completely fabricated PVSCs. Equally important is that this post-device modification shows a special ‘stitching effect’, namely repairing the as-fabricated ‘poor devices’ by healing the defects of the active region perovskite, which greatly improves the production yield of PVSCs and their module performance. Our theoretical and experimental results offer a fundamental understanding of the performance and stability improvement due to the inhibition of nonradiative charge recombination in the active region and molecular encapsulation of the 3D perovskite of the active region, respectively. Furthermore, the PDL treatment, completely separated from the fabrication process of common perovskite devices, provides a general strategy to improve the stability of different completed perovskite devices (e.g., solar cells, light-emitting diodes, and photodetectors).

This work also opens prospects for other ligands, such as alkylamine, arylamine, and thiols, to be explored as passivators for improving the stability and performance of PVSCs. Dimensionality engineering is also suggested to further improve the device stability via facile design of ligand molecular structure.

All the chemicals and materials were purchased and used as received unless otherwise noted. CH3NH3I, CH3NH3Br, and HC(NH2)2I (FAI) were purchased from Dyesol and used as received. PbI2 (99.99%) and PbBr2 (99.99%) were purchased from TCI. PbCl2 (99.999%) and CsI (99.9%) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. NiOx NC inks were prepared according to our previous reports.


ITO-coated glass substrates were cleaned and then ultraviolet-ozone treated for 20 min. The NiOx NC ink (20 mg mL−1 in DI-water) was spin-coated to obtain a 20 nm NiOx film. The resultant NiOx films will be used to fabricate devices without an annealing process or other treatments. The perovskite solutions were prepared by reacting CH3NH3I (190 mg) with PbI2 (500 mg) and PbCl2 (30 mg) in anhydrous N,N-dimethylformamide (1 mL) at room temperature. To deposit the perovskite film, the precursor solution was first dropped onto a NiOx/ITO substrate. The substrate was then spun at 5000 rpm and after six seconds anhydrous chlorobenzene (180 μL) was quickly dropped onto the center of the substrate, and dried on a hot plate at 100 °C for 10 min. Subsequently, the fullerene mixture (8 mg PCBM + 12 mg C60 in 1 mL dichlorobenzene) and zirconium(IV) acetylacetonate (Zracac) (2 mg mL−1 in anhydrous ethanol) were then sequentially deposited by spin coating at 1000 rpm for 60 s and 4000 rpm for 40 s, respectively. Finally, the device was completed with the evaporation of Ag contact electrodes (120 nm) in a high vacuum through a shadow mask. The Cs5(MA0.17FA0.83)95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 mixed perovskite was prepared according to the previous report. For MPP tracking, a copper electrode was deposited. All devices were fabricated in a glove box.


The as-prepared PVSCs were covered by a glass petri dish. Around 10 μL diethylenetriamine (DETA) was added at the edge of the petri dish. Since the boiling point of DETA is 204 °C, DETA vaporized in the petri dish and modified the perovskite devices moderately at room temperature. The duration of PDL treatment is in the range from 10 min to 30 min.


The XRD spectrum was obtained using a D5005 X-ray diffraction system (CuKα radiation, λ = 1.54056 Å). UV-vis absorption spectra were obtained from a home-build system with a xenon lamp as a light source and an integrated sphere associated with a charge-coupled device (Ocean Optics QE Pro) as a detector. SEM images were recorded using a LEO 1530 scanning electron microscope. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) of perovskite films was measured in the ultrahigh vacuum environment using Physical Electronics PHI 5802 with a monochromatic Al Kα X-ray source. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was characterized by using a He discharged lamp (He I 21.22 eV, Kratos Analytical). The J–V curves were recorded from 0 to 1.2 V using a Keithley 2635 apparatus with the scan rate being 0.10 V s−1. Solar-simulated AM 1.5 sunlight was generated using Newport AM 1.5G irradiation (100 mW cm−2), calibrated with an ISO 17025-certified KG3-filtered silicon reference cell. The spectral mismatch factor was calculated to be less than 1%. To avoid the side edge effect, a black mask with an aperture area of 3.36 mm2 was employed during the J–V measurement. The scan speeds for all J–V curves are 0.10 mV s−1. The IPCE measurement was performed by a system combining a xenon lamp, a monochromator (SpectraPro-2150i, Acton Research Corporation), a chopper, two optical filters (320 and 570 nm), and a lock-in amplifier (SR830, Stanford Research Systems) together with a calibrated silicon photodetector (Hamamatsu mono-Si cell). The impedance measurement was carried out by a Zahner electrochemistry station (Zennium Pro) with a DC bias of 0.1 V and a frequency range from 1 Hz and 1 MHz with an AC amplitude of 10 mV under illumination with a white LED array (100 mW cm−2 intensities). The steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence of perovskite on glass were investigated using PicoQaunt FluoTime 300. A picosecond 375 nm pulse laser (LDH-P-C-375) with a pulse width of <40 ps and a repetition rate of 2 MHz was used to excite the perovskite. The time-resolved single photon counting was performed by a time-corrected single photon counting (TCSPC, PicoHarp 300E) module with a photomultiplier (PMA-C 192-M) detector. The obtained data were fitted using a bi-exponential function below:

All calculations are performed based on the density functional theory as implemented in the VASP code. For the exchange–correlation functional, we use the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) within the Perdew Burke Ernzerhof (PBE) functional. The plane wave cut-off energy is 500 eV. For the (001) surface of β-MAPbI3, the k-point mesh is 4 × 4 × 1 based on the Γ point. With the introduction of a vacancy of Pb and the IDEA passivation, the surface is enlarged to 2 × 2 × 1 of the perfect (001) surface and the k-point mesh is 2 × 2 × 1 based on the Γ point.


W. C. conceived and supervised the project. W. C. and H. Z. conceived the idea and designed the experiment. H. Z. fabricated most of the devices and conducted the characterization. R. X. G. conducted the device simulations. X. W. C. and W. J. Y. conducted the DFT calculations and analyzed the results. J. M. performed the TRPL measurement and assisted with the IPCE measurement. J. Q. C. synthesized the NiOx NCs and assisted with the data analysis. Y. Z. assisted with the device optimization and stability test. Y. L. and M. J. discussed the results. H. Z., W. C. and M. G. wrote the paper. All authors commented on the manuscript.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the University Grant Council of the University of Hong Kong (Grants 104003113 and 102009639), the General Research Fund (Grants 17211916 and 17204117) and the Collaborative Research Fund (Grant C7045-14E) from the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China, the National Natural Science Foundation of China (under Grant No. 11674237, No. 51602211), and the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province of China (under Grant No. BK20160299). We thank Qijun Sun and Vellaisamy A. L. Roy for their help in XRD and XPS characterization. The authors also acknowledge the help from Lebing Nie for helping draw the model of the PDL modified perovskites. H. Z. would like to thank his advisor, Wallace Choy, all the collaborators, all his family members, and especially his wife, Fan Yang, for their support during his PhD study.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ee00580j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018