 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA02281J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14518-14545


Jung-Min
Ji
,

Haoran
Zhou
 and 

Hwan Kyu
Kim
*

Global GET-Future Lab & Department of Advanced Materials Chemistry, Korea University, Sejong 30019, South Korea. E-mail: hkk777@korea.ac.kr

Received
11th March 2018
, Accepted 4th July 2018
First published on 4th July 2018
Increasing energy consumption worldwide and environmental concerns about global warming have attracted great interest in the development of renewable and eco-friendly energy technologies. Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have attracted considerable attention over the last 25 years since they offer possible low-cost conversion of photovoltaic energy. The sensitizer is the most important component of a DSSC, as it is largely responsible for light harvesting and charge separation, as well as the dye regeneration process. As a result, there have been tremendous research efforts in developing sensitizers. However, many challenges remain, and a deeper understanding of the design rules of DSSC sensitizers is required to obtain efficient and long-term stable DSSCs. The purpose of this review is to discuss recent progress and the rational design criteria used in the structural design of organic dyes and porphyrin photosensitizers for use in DSSCs. The effects of molecular structural engineering on the photophysical and electrochemical properties, photovoltaic parameters, and efficiency of DSSCs are presented.
Jung-Min
Jung-min Ji received his B.S. from Wonkwang University (2014) in Korea. He is currently an integrated MS–PhD graduate student studying organic synthesis under the supervisor of Prof. Hwan Kyu Kim in the department of advanced materials chemistry at Korea University. His current research is focused on developing advanced organic semiconductors for dye-sensitized solar cells as well as photo-active organic/organometallic materials and their applications.
Haoran Zhou
Haoran Zhou is a PhD graduate student in the department of advanced materials chemistry at Korea University, and he received his Master's degree under the supervisor of Prof. Hwan Kyu Kim at Korea University in 2018. His current research interests include the synthesis of D–π–A structured porphyrin derivatives and device fabrication for dye-sensitized and perovskite solar cells.
Hwan Kyu Kim
Dr. Hwan Kyu Kim is currently a Distinguished Professor in the Department of Advanced Materials Chemistry at Korea University. He received B.S. in applied chemistry from the University of Ulsan (1980), M.S. in chemistry from KAIST (1982) and PhD in polymer chemistry from Carnegie Mellon University (1990) after research experience at KRICT (1982–1986). After postdoctoral research in Materials Science and Engineering at Cornell University (1991–1993), he joined ETRI as a project leader of the polymeric photonic device group (1993–1994) and then he joined Hannam University, where he became a Professor of Polymer Science and Engineering (1994–2007) and he served as a leader of the Creative Research Center for Smart Light-harvesting Materials (2001–2007). In 2007, he was invited as a Distinguished Professor in the Department of Advanced Materials Chemistry at Korea University and served as a director of the IT Research Center from MKE (2008–2011). His current research is focused on developing advanced organic and polymeric semiconductors for dye-sensitized and perovskite solar cells and next generation energy storage devices.

Fossil fuels have been used as the main energy source for the last two centuries, resulting in environmental hazards and the greenhouse effect. Moreover, global economic and population growth have increased the worldwide energy demand, accelerating the depletion of fossil fuels and increasing the environmental risk. Thus, solving the energy problem is critical for human life. In December 2015, the Paris Agreement, which aims at ensuring that global warming is maintained below 2 °C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit it to 1.5 °C, was adopted under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in order to combat environmental pollution and global warming. Governments of most countries have made tremendous efforts in developing new renewable energy technologies which are sustainable, carbon-free and low in cost. Of the renewable energy resources, solar energy is the most reliable energy resource, with inexhaustible, clean and safe characteristics. It has been estimated that solar cells with an efficiency of 10%, installed on only 0.1% of the earth's surface, would meet our current energy supply.

Photovoltaic technologies for harnessing solar energy are one of the most important future energy conversion technologies and appear to be the only rational large scale solution to scientific and technological energy challenges. Commercially available photovoltaic technologies are currently based on inorganic silicon semiconductors, which use crystalline and polycrystalline silicon. However, the fabrication process is complicated and costly and requires large amounts of energy.
In photovoltaics, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have attracted much interest in recent decades due to their low cost and flexibility. They are easily fabricated as the light absorption and charge transfer processes are separated by using sensitizer molecules connected to a metal oxide nanostructure. The sensitizer plays a crucial role in DSSCs, as it carries out light harvesting and initiates the electrical current in the solar cell. Therefore, sensitizers have been studied over the last 25 years, and continue to be studied, showing enhanced photo-conversion efficiencies (PCEs) in DSSCs. Until now, state-of-the-art DSSCs based on single sensitizers have reached PCEs approaching >11.5% for ruthenium dyes, >13% for porphyrin dyes and >14% for metal-free organic dyes under standard (1.5) illumination. Despite these great performances, there has been a lack of significant milestones in active commercialization, particularly with respect to using the near infra-red (NIR) region for higher photo-current values and longer device durability. Ruthenium-based sensitizers have some disadvantages for practical application in DSSCs, including rarity, environmental hazards, potential for lack of absorption in the visible region, low molar extinction coefficients and difficult purification. Compared with ruthenium sensitizers, both porphyrin and metal-free organic sensitizers have attracted interest due to their remarkable light-harvesting ability, versatile modification of the core, tunable electronic structures, their wide application (for porphyrin dyes), high structural flexibility, high molar extinction coefficients, low toxicity, environment-friendly materials and facile synthesis (for organic dyes).
This review focuses on the design concepts for high-performance DSSCs based on organic and porphyrin sensitizers and successful molecular design strategies, in an attempt to provide the design criteria for sensitizers. Representative sensitizers that have been recently developed over 2015–2017 are also discussed.

A typical liquid-electrolyte DSSC is comprised of five main components: (1) fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) on a transparent glass sheet, due to its high chemical inactivity and thermal durability; (2) a nanocrystalline semiconductor thin film (generally TiO2) for electron collection and transportation; (3) dye sensitizers for harnessing light and generating electrons; (4) a redox electrolyte or hole transporter for the recovery of the oxidized sensitizer and transportation of holes; (5) a counter electrode (CE), made of platinum, catalytic polymers and carbon materials on the FTO, for the reduction of the oxidized redox electrolyte.

A schematic overview of the structure and operating principles of a typical DSSC upon light absorption is shown in Fig. 1(a). When light enters a DSSC, the sensitizer anchored to the surface of mesoporous TiO2 absorbs a photon and is excited from the ground state (S) to the excited state (S*) (i.e., HOMO → LUMO transition). The photo-excited sensitizer (S*) (following the charge separation process) injects an electron into the conduction band (CB) of TiO2 (charge transfer process); the resulting oxidized sensitizer (S+) is immediately regenerated by a reducing agent present in the electrolyte, and the photo-generated electron flows through the external circuit to reach the counter electrode. The oxidized redox electrolyte is regenerated by reduction at the counter electrode/electrolyte interface through an electron flowing process from the photoanode. The photo-electric circuit is then complete. However, there are some undesirable processes that can occur during the operation of a DSSC, leading to a diminished performance, as the blue arrows show: (i) recombination (RC) of the injected electrons with the oxidized sensitizers (inner-path RC); (ii) RC of the injected electrons with the oxidized redox mediators (dark current, outer-path RC); and (iii) relaxation of the sensitizers from the excited state to the ground state. As shown in Fig. 1(b), all processes in a DSSC occur at different time scales, and it is important to understand the dynamics and kinetics of charge migration.
The performances of photovoltaic devices are generally characterized by means of the photocurrent–voltage curve (J–V curve) and incident photo-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE). The overall PCE (η), open circuit photovoltage (VOC), short-circuit photocurrent density (JSC) and fill factor of a DSSC are determined from the J–V curve. Their relationship can be expressed by the following formula:
(1)
where
Pin is the incident light power (generally 100 mW cm−2) on the device surface per unit area under the standard conditions (AM 1.5G).


V
OC is the potential difference between the quasi-Fermi level of TiO2 and the redox level of the electrolyte under open-circuit conditions, and depends on both the concentration of electrons in the CB of TiO2 and the magnitude of charge RC between the injected electrons and the oxidized electrolyte:
(2)
where
ECB is the CB level of TiO2, k is the Boltzmann constant, n is the number of electrons in the mesoporous TiO2 photoanode, NCB is the effective density of states in TiO2, Eredox is the redox potential of the electrolyte and q is the unit charge.


J
SC is the photocurrent per unit area (mA cm−2) produced in the external circuit under irradiation, which is strongly affected by the following characteristics: (i) the light harvesting capability of the dye sensitizer (molar extinction coefficient and absorption spectral range); (ii) energy level alignment; and (iii) the molecular orientation and arrangement of sensitizers on the TiO2 surface.
The IPCE spectrum is widely used and useful for sensitizer evaluation in DSSCs. It is defined as the photocurrent density produced in the external circuit under monochromatic illumination divided by the incident photon flux. IPCE can also be represented by the following four factors for the analysis of JSC:
(3)
where
e is the elementary charge and Φ is the incident photon flux. LHE is the light harvesting efficiency, which can be easily calculated by measuring the absorbance of the dye on the TiO2, ηinj is the electron injection efficiency, ηcol is the charge collection efficiency, and ηreg is the regeneration efficiency.

FF can be defined as the maximum output power (Pm) divided by the product of JSC and VOC:
(4)
where
Vm and Jm are the corresponding maximum values of voltage and current in J–V curves, respectively. FF is one of the important parameters that indicates the quality of a DSSC, and its value fluctuates with different device fabrication methods, measurement conditions and series resistance.


The molecular structure of the DSSC sensitizer plays a crucial role in determining the performance of the cell because it is strongly correlated with the charge separation, electron-transfer and regeneration processes at the interface between the dye bound to the TiO2 and the redox electrolyte. The followings are the indispensable design criteria for the molecular structure of sensitizers to obtain an efficient and high-performance DSSC:

(1) The sensitizer should cover wide absorption wavelengths in the visible and NIR regions with a molar extinction coefficient that is as high as possible.
(2) For efficient electron injection and regeneration, appropriate energy alignment is required. The energy level of the sensitizer LUMO should lie sufficiently higher (by 250–300 mV) than the CB of TiO2, while the energy level of the sensitizer HOMO should lie sufficiently lower than the redox potential of the electrolyte (by 100–150 mV for copper-based electrolytes, 200–300 mV for cobalt-based electrolytes, and ∼500 mV for iodine-based electrolyte).
(3) The sensitizers should have at least one anchoring group (e.g., –COOH, –CNCOOH or –Si(OR)3) and be strongly connected to the TiO2 surface atoms to ensure efficient electron injection and device stability.
(4) The aggregation of the sensitizers on the TiO2 surface should be suppressed to avoid inter-molecular energy transfer which leads to a reduction in ηinj.
(5) The charge RC of injected electrons with the oxidized sensitizer should be avoided by keeping the oxidized donor moiety away from the TiO2 surface. Preventing the electrolyte and water from coming into contact with the TiO2 surface is essential to suppress the charge RC of the injected electrons with the oxidized electrolyte and to enhance the long-term stability of the DSSC.
(6) The sensitizers should have chemical and thermal stability in the ground or excited state and in the redox reactions to achieve long-term DSSC stability, because one of the reasons for the performance drop is the destruction of the sensitizer through the formation of unstable radicals during the operation of the DSSCs. Protection from oxidizing agents, such as water and oxygen molecules, by insulating alkyl chains and the chemical structural modification of sensitizers by introducing moieties with strong robustness to light and heat soaking are required.
These criteria can be roughly divided into two classes. The first is related to the photo-physical and electrochemical properties of the sensitizer itself, such as the HOMO and LUMO levels and the absorbance (criteria 1–3). The second is related to the molecular orientation and arrangement of sensitizers on the TiO2 surface, such as aggregation, charge RC, and the interaction between the oxidized sensitizers and TiO2 surface (criteria 4–6).
To achieve criteria 1–3, the sensitizer structures can be photo-physically and electrochemically modified by introducing electron-donating and electron-accepting moieties into the sensitizer backbone, through the manipulation of the electron-donating or -accepting ability of the moieties and extension of π-conjugation (Fig. 2(a)). Criteria 4–6 can be achieved by introducing sterically hindered substituents (bulky groups) into the sensitizer backbone, such as long alkyl chains and aromatic units (Fig. 2(b)). These strategies are summarized in Table 1.
1st Parameters
2nd Parameters
Factors
Strategies

a Key parameters and factors as well as molecular design strategies were deduced from ref. 11, 19, 26 and 32.

Open-circuit photo-voltage (VOC)
Free charge carrier density in the TiO2 CB (nc)
• Outer-path recombination
• Introduction of hydrophobic side chains or aromatic rings around the donor unit of dye
Shift of the TiO2 CB
• Direction of interfacial dipole moment
• Manipulation of the donating and accepting ability of dye
• Dye loading on TiO2
• Modulation of the molecular shape and chemical structure for the dipole direction
• Injected electron lifetime on TiO2
• Introduction of minimized hydrophobic side chains or aromatic rings into dye
Minimization of loss-in potential
• Reorganization energy
• Introduction of rigidified and planar moieties into dye
Short-circuit current density (JSC)
Incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE)
Light harvesting efficiency (LHE)
• Absorption spectral range of dye
• Extension of the π-conjugation length of moieties and introduction of additional moieties.
• Molar extinction coefficient of dye
• Manipulation of the donating and accepting ability of dye
• Dye loading on TiO2
• Enhancement of the co-planarity of dye and orbital overlap between ground states and excited states
• Co-sensitization
Injection efficiency (ηinj)
• Driving force for electron injection (ΔGinj); LUMO energy level of dye
• Modulation of the accepting ability of dye
• Electronic coupling between the LUMO of dye and the CB of TiO2
• Modulation of the molecular shape for the directionality of electrons in the excited state of dye
• Molecular orientation and arrangement of dye on TiO2
• Introduction of hindrance substitutions into the dye backbone
• Inner-path recombination
• Introduction of anchoring groups that ensure the inertness of the dye/TiO2 interface without the loss of conjugation to dye
• Dye aggregation on the TiO2 surface
• Use of co-adsorbents
Regeneration efficiency (ηreg)
• Driving force for dye regeneration (ΔGreg); HOMO energy level of dye
• Modulation of the donating ability of dye
• Lifetime of oxidized dye
• Introduction of hydrophobic side chains or aromatic rings around the donor and π-bridge unit of dye
Charge collection efficiency (ηcc)
• Injected electron lifetime on TiO2
• Introduction of hydrophobic side chains or aromatic rings around the donor unit of dye
• Outer-path recombination
• Use of co-adsorbents
Long-term stability
Chemical stability & photochemical stability
• Degradation of dye under light and thermal soaking conditions
• Introduction of hydrophobic side chains or aromatic rings around the donor unit of dye
• Desorption of dye from TiO2 in operation
• Introduction of robust chromophores and moieties into dye
• Introduction of dual-anchoring groups and robust anchoring groups into dye
Generally, most efficient organic dyes have a donor (D), π-bridge (π), and acceptor (A) architecture due to the good intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) properties. ICT excitation from the D to the A moiety of the sensitizer leads to efficient electron transfer from the sensitizer to the TiO2 CB, displaying broad and intense absorption. In D–π–A systems, the HOMO levels are mainly localized on the D and the π-moiety (or π-bridge), while the LUMO levels are localized over the A moiety, which can be easily modified to tune properties for device performance optimization. Energy levels and absorption abilities are mainly modulated by tuning the structure of the D and π-moieties.
As shown in Fig. 2(c), other frameworks such as D–A, D′–D–π–A (D′ is an auxiliary donor) and D–A′–π–A (A′ is an auxiliary acceptor) have also been developed to enhance the performance of DSSCs. Sensitizers based on a D–A architecture are simple for organic dyes in DSSCs and have relatively facile synthetic routes. The D′–D–π–A configuration modification by the introduction of an auxiliary donor group into the D or π-moiety is another sensitizer design strategy. D′–D–π–A sensitizers commonly show bathochromic shifts, broadened absorption spectra and high thermal stabilities compared with the simple D–π–A system, and the HOMO and LUMO energy levels can be tuned through the introduction and modification of the D′ moiety. Attaching an additional acceptor moiety instead of D′ to the D–π–A framework is another route to designing an efficient sensitizer. The incorporated additional acceptor can lead not only to a bathochromic shift of the ICT band and extension of the light harvesting wavelength, but also to an improvement in photovoltaic performance and photo-stability. A′ can stabilize the adjacent donor and π-spacer and promote the overlap of HOMO and LUMO orbitals to enhance charge transfer from the donor to the acceptor.
In addition, as shown in Fig. 2(d), there are two simple approaches to sensitizer design. One is the top–bottom approach which is designed from a moiety to the architecture, and the other is the bottom–top approach which is designed from the architecture to moieties. They seem to be beneficial for the systematic design and study of sensitizers.

In this structure, the expansion of the π-conjugation is the main strategy to extend the absorption range of D–A sensitizers to the visible and NIR regions and obtain a high JSC value. Generally, polyaromatic and fused aromatic compounds are attached to the D and A moieties, because the use of big and planar π-conjugated compounds benefits the light harvesting and electronic communication between moieties. Conversely, the planar frames of sensitizers have a tendency to form π-stacked aggregations through intermolecular π-interactions between dye molecules. These dye aggregations exhibit the absorption shifts in the blue (H-aggregation) and red (J-aggregation) regions compared with the absorptions for monomeric species. H-aggregation quenches the excited state molecule and consequently decreases electron injection. The unfavorable aggregation of sensitizers can be easily suppressed by applying co-adsorbents such as chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) and 4-[bis(9,9-dimethyl-9H-fluoren-2-yl)amino]benzoic acid (HC-A1), and by introducting bulky substituents into the dye backbone.

Wang and co-workers reported a D–A type sensitizer with an efficiency of 10.4% (C272), using rigidified polyaromatics as the donor and the extended acceptor moiety. A phenyl functionalized N-annulated perylene (PNP) donor with two different acceptors, ethynylbenzothiadiazole-benzoic acid (EBTBA) and cyanoacrylic acid (CA), were used to construct the C272 and C271 reference dyes, respectively. The branched alkyl chain was attached to the nitrogen atom of the PNP moiety as a side chain to control the self-assembled monolayer of the dyes on the TiO2 surface. Replacing CA with EBTBA slightly affected the energy level and absorption spectrum in solution. However, the absorption spectra of C271 and C272 on TiO2 showed notable differences. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum of C272 exhibited a higher efficiency of greater than 80% over a wide range (450–600 nm, onset at 750 nm) compared with that of C271 (onset at 700 nm). The formation of non-quenching aggregates (J-aggregation) was indicated by the shifts in the EQE spectrum by about 100 nm for C271 and 150 nm for C272, in comparison with the absorption of the monomeric species. In accordance with the trends in EQE spectra, the DSSCs based on C272 in a tris(1,10-phenanthroline)cobalt(II/III) electrolyte ([Co(phen)3]2+/3+) displayed a higher JSC of 15.38 mA cm−2, a VOC of 908 mV and an efficiency of 10.4% compared with C271 (JSC = 10.18 mA cm−2; VOC = 844 mV; PCE = 6.7%) without the use of co-adsorbents. According to transient photo-voltage decay (TPD) measurements, the electron half-lifetime for the C271 device was much shorter than that in C272, accounting for the reduced VOC of the CA-based dye. In addition, there was approximately a 1.5 times higher loading amount (cm) of C272 on the TiO2 film than that of C271, explaining the higher VOC and JSC values. These results highlight the major factors that should be taken into account for D–A system dye design for high-performance DSSCs.
Wang and co-workers introduced an N-annulated indeno[2,1-b]-perylene moiety (NIP) as the donor instead of PNP in C272 (sensitizer C275). The NIP moiety was attached to the peripheral n-hexylphenyl side chains on the sp3-bridged carbon atoms. The maximum absorption wavelength (λmax) for C275 was red-shifted by 24 nm compared to that of C272 due to the expansion of π-conjugation in the donor. Notably, the molar extinction coefficient of C275 was improved by the introduction of a rigidified electron donor (5.1 × 104 for C275 and 3.6 × 104 M−1 cm−1 for C272). The DSSCs based on C275 (JSC = 17.03 mA cm−2; VOC = 956 mV; PCE = 12.5%) showed a significant improvement in JSC, VOC and PCE with respect to C275 in a [Co(phen)3]2+/3+electrolyte. The enhancement of JSC and VOC in C275 was attributed to the peripheral n-hexylphenyl side chains and the expansion of π-conjugation in the donor. These results suggest that rigidifying the donor unit, with substitution on the sp3 carbon of PNP with the NIP unit, is a rational strategy for the design of D–A type sensitizers with higher efficiencies (Fig. 3).
Furthermore, Yao et al. reported similar dyes based on the rigidified polycyclic aromatic units of 4-(thiophen-2-yl)-6H-phenanthro[1,10,9,8-cdefg]carbazole (NPT), N-annulated 6H-thieno [3′,2′:5,4]-benzo[cd]perylene (NTBP) and its isomer N-annulated 13H-thieno[2′,3′:3,4] cyclopenta[b]perylene (NTCP) combined with the electron acceptor of 4-(benzo[c]-[1,2,5]thiadiazol-7-yl)benzoic acid (BTBA), denoted by C276, C277 and C278, respectively. In accordance with previous studies, the D–A dyes (C277 and C278) with a fused aromatic moiety exhibited a remarkable absorption shift to the red region by around 100 nm, in comparison with the C276 reference dye with an unfused poly-aromatic moiety. This resulted in high JSC values of 19.42 (C277) and 19.64 mA cm−2 (C278). The efficiencies of the DSSCs were 9.4, 11.5 and 12.0% for C276, C277 and C278, respectively (Fig. 3).
To further increase the absorption range of the D–A sensitizers in the NIR region, D–A structured dyes were prepared with different donors in which the 4-((7-bromobenzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazol-4-yl)-ethynyl)benzoic acid (BTEBA) acceptor was directly attached to the 9,14-dihydro-4H-dithieno[2′,3′:2,3;3′′,2′′:10,11]piceno[1,14,13,12-bcdefgh]carbazole (DTPC) donor (C280 and C281), via two key reactions of palladium-catalyzed direct arylation and intramolecular Friedel–Crafts cyclization, and also to the 3,10-di(thiophen-2-yl)-1H-phenanthro[1,10,9,8-cdefg]carbazole (T-PC-T) donor (C279 reference dye). Compared with unfused T-PC-T in C279, the HOMO/LUMO energy band gap of C280 using the fused DTPC was markedly diminished. A distinct redshift (by around 140 nm) was observed in the absorption spectrum of C280, with a high molar absorptivity (5.9 × 104 M−1 cm−1) with respect to C279 due to the increased planarity between the donor and the acceptor. The DSSC based on C280 showed an EQE of ≥80% (approximately 480–735 nm), and the onset wavelength of EQE for C280 was around 850 nm. The DSSCs based on C280 in [Co(bpy)3]2+/3+ electrolyte generated an efficiency of 11.8% (JSC = 21.20 mA cm−2; VOC = 786 mV; FF = 0.71) without any co-adsorbent. To improve the VOC, the ethyl chain was replaced with a 2-hexyldecyl chain to form C281, generating a high efficiency of 13.0% (JSC = 21.69 mA cm−2; VOC = 815 mV; FF = 0.73) under irradiation of simulated AM 1.5G sunlight (100 mW cm−2) (Fig. 3).
These results show that the formation of non-quenching aggregates via rational attachment of some photochemically inactive segments and the formation of higher packing density of the fused polycyclic ring dyes are instrumental factors for high performance DSSCs.

D–π–A architecture is a promising strategy for dye design. Apart from D–A systems, most systems include a π-bridge as the passage for the electron transfer. Therefore, π-bridge modification for strong electric communication between the donor and the acceptor is important for highly efficient DSSCs, as well as modulating the donating ability of the donor and the accepting ability of the acceptor.

Chen and co-workers reported a series of metal-free organic sensitizers (TPA-TTAR-A, TPA-T-TTAR-A, TPA-TTART-A and TPA-T-TTAR-T-A) using a rigid planar tetrathienoacene (TTA) moiety as the central π-bridge with a triphenylamine (TPA) donor and CA acceptor. Expanding the π-conjugation by the insertion of an additional thiophene reduced the respective band gaps in the order of TPA-TTAR-A > TPA-T-TTAR-A ≈ TPA-TTART-A > TPA-T-TTAR-T-A, extending the absorption wavelength. However, their performances varied considerably depending on the addition of the thiophene moiety to the donor or acceptor. Addition to the donor (between TPA and TTA) reduced core planarity and hampered charge injection, resulting in a lower injection efficiency. In contrast, addition to the acceptor (between TTA and CA) slightly improved the planarity of the dye and its orientation on TiO2, leading to an enhanced electron injection efficiency and dye loading density on the TiO2 surface. The solar cell with (3) generated a PCE of 10.1% (JSC = 16.5 mA cm−2; VOC = 833 mV; FF = 0.74) (Fig. 4).
To further enhance the effectiveness of the TTA moiety as a π-bridge and increase the VOC by suppressing unfavorable intermolecular π–π interactions, Chen and co-workers attached branched alkyl chains (TTAR-b8) to the TTA moiety. Compared with the dyes functionalized with linear alkyl chains (C15H31 for TTAR-15 and C9H19 for TTAR-9), they found that the introduction of a branched alkyl chain to the TTA unit was able to reduce molecular aggregation and suppress charge recombination by distorting the packing order. The solar cell based on TTAR-b8 (JSC = 17.54 mA cm−2; VOC = 810 mV) afforded a higher PCE of 10.21% compared with TTAR-15 (JSC = 16.86 mA cm−2; VOC = 780 mV; PCE = 9.02%) and TTAR-9 (JSC = 15.54 mA cm−2; VOC = 780 mV; PCE = 7.60%) using the I−/I3− electrolyte in the absence of CDCA (Fig. 4).
Furthermore, controlling the energy level and improving the ICT from the donor to the acceptor in D–π–A sensitizers by modifying the π-bridge structures are essential for a better-performing DSSC, which was demonstrated by our group by introducing an asymmetric π-bridge into the D–π–A framework. In order to investigate the effects of the asymmetrical bridge on light absorption and charge transfer during DSSC operation, we incorporated asymmetric thieno[3,2-b][1]benzothiophene (TBT) with DPA-based donors and different acceptor moieties (SGT-121,SGT-129 and SGT-130). The maximum absorption wavelengths of SGT-121, SGT-129 and SGT-130 were observed at 470.5, 426 and 514.5 nm with respective maximum extinction coefficients of 2.8 × 104, 1.4 × 104 and 2.9 × 104 M−1 cm−1. These values were much lower than that for the Y123 reference dye (5.2 × 104 M−1 cm−1, 506 nm), but the λmax of SGT-130 was red-shifted. Theoretical calculations of the π-brides revealed that the HOMO energy level of TBT was lower than that of 4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′] dithiophene (CPDT) in Y123, indicating that the donating ability of TBT was weak compared with CPDT. Moreover, the LUMO level of TBT was higher than that of CPDT, and therefore modifying the TBT unit with thiophene or BTD (benzothiadiazole)-phenyl lowered the LUMO level of TBT (SGT-121 and SGT-130, respectively). The modification led to an improvement in JSC from 9.78 (SGT-129) to 14.00 (SGT-121) and 16.77 mA cm−2 (SGT-130). The DSSC based on SGT-130 exhibited the highest PCE of 10.47% with a VOC of 851 mV and a FF of 0.73 using the [Co(bpy)3]2+/3+ electrolyte under simulated AM 1.5G conditions, outperforming Y123 with a PCE of 9.5%. The DSSC based on SGT-130 displayed a broader IPCE spectrum compared with the other three dyes, and the JSC values increased in the order of SGT-129 < SGT-121 < Y123 < SGT-130. The highest VOC was also achieved by the SGT-130-based DSSC, and the VOC values decreased in the order of SGT-130 > Y123 > SGT-121 > SGT-129. This could be explained by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and intensity modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS) measurements. Compared with SGT-130, low PCEs of 8.24% for SGT-129 and 5.21% for SGT-121 were obtained under the same conditions.
To further improve the donating ability of the TBT moiety, we replaced the sulfur (S) core atom of TBT with nitrogen (N) as the bridging atom (TI) with N-substituted ethyl and hexyl chains (SGT-136 and SGT-137). We found that the TI moiety enabled a more effective π-bridge compared with the TBT moiety via optical and electrochemical experiments involving the DFT calculations for TBT and TI. SGT-136 and SGT-137 sensitizers exhibited notable bathochromic shifts in the ICT absorption wavelength (17 and 28 nm, respectively) and increased molar absorption coefficients compared with SGT-130 due to the strong electron-donating ability and co-planarity of the indole-based structure. The IPCE of the SGT-137-based DSSC showed an extended range at 800 nm, reflecting the improved light-harvesting ability of the TI moiety. The DSSC based on SGT-136 (JSC = 18.35 mA cm−2; VOC = 804 mV; PCE = 11.04%) and SGT-137 (JSC = 19.39 mA cm−2; VOC = 825 mV; PCE = 11.84%) showed a significant improvement in JSC compared with those based on SGT-130 (JSC = 16.84 mA cm−2) in [Co(bpy)3]2+/3+ electrolytes. This suggests that the substitution in the π-bridge moiety from TBT to TI is a rational strategy for enhancing the photocurrent density. The EIS and IMVS measurements revealed that the increased VOC can be attributed to the long alkyl chain. In an optimized cell with HC-A1 used as a co-adsorbent, the DSSCs with SGT-137 exhibited a significantly enhanced PCE of 12.45%. We finally applied the tandem-DSSC technique to achieve panchromatic sensitization. The parallel connected tandem device with an SGT-137-based top cell and an SGT-021-based bottom cell exhibited a markedly enhanced PCE of 14.64% with JSC = 22.06 mA cm−2, VOC = 878.4 mV and FF = 0.756, which is the highest value reported for organic-based tandem solar cells to date.
Kwon et al. reported three types of dithieno[3,2-b;2′,3′-d]thiophene (DTT)-based organic sensitizers with single (S-DAHTDTT), double (D-DAHTDTT) and triple bonds (T-DAHTDTT) incorporated between the TPA donor and the conjugated DTT π-bridge. A high performance was achieved from a thin TiO2 active layer (∼1 μm) with molecular engineering strategies that included planarity for high extinction coefficients, low aggregation and a strong ICT for efficient charge injection and broad absorption. They found that the triple bond in T-DAHTDTT led to a favorable molar extinction coefficient and charge injection due to enhanced ICT, as well as less self-aggregation compared with double-bonded D-DAHTDTT. Under standard AM 1.5G conditions, the DSSC based on T-DAHTDTT exhibited a superior JSC value, resulting in the highest PCE of 8.4% (JSC = 15.4 mA cm−2, VOC = 730 mV and FF = 0.75) in the I−/I3− electrolyte, with only a 1.3 μm active layer (Fig. 5).
Recently, Wang and co-workers reported R4 and R6, with narrow energy gaps, that contained anthracene-based polycyclic aromatic units 4H,4′H-2,2′-bibenzo[1,10]phenanthro[4,3-b] thiophene (2BPT) and 9,19-dihydrobenzo[1′,10']phenanthro[3′,4′:4,5]thieno[3,2-b]benzo [1,10]phenanthro[3,4-d]thiophene (BPT2) as π-bridges, respectively, with BPT2 and 2BPT tethered to a diarylamine electron donor and an EBTBA electron acceptor. Their λmax values were 8.1 × 104 M−1 cm−1at 631 nm for R6 and 8.5 × 104 M−1 cm−1 at 613 nm for R4. According to DFT calculations, the proportion of excitations from the HOMO to the LUMO was 80% in R6, compared to 71% in R4, accounting for the red-shifted maximum absorption wavelength for R6. The IPCE of the DSSCs based on R6 showed the same tendency, exhibiting a maximum value of 85%, which was markedly higher than that for R4 (75%) due to its more rigid electronic skeleton. The R6 cell exhibited a PCE of 12.6% (JSC = 19.69 mA cm−2; VOC = 850 mV; FF = 0.75) compared with 11.1% for the R4 cell (JSC = 17.25 mA cm−2; VOC = 852 mV; FF = 0.75) in [Co(bpy)3]2+/3+ electrolytes without any co-adsorbent, indicating remarkable photo-stability (90% of its initial value after 1000 h of continuous full sunlight at 60 °C under 53.5 mW cm−2) (Fig. 5).

Porphyrin-based DSSCs have attracted considerable attention due to the intense spectral response of porphyrins between 400–450 nm (Soret band) and 500–700 nm (Q-band), in addition to their good photo-, chemical and thermal stability. Owing to a number of reaction sites available for structural modification and them being good potential candidates for panchromatic DSSCs, a number of efficient porphyrin sensitizers have been designed and synthesized. Among these porphyrin dyes, D–π–A structures have been widely used. As shown in Fig. 6, diphenylamine, N-annulated perylene and phenothiazine derivatives have been added to porphyrin dyes as donors to enhance the electron-donating ability and broaden absorption; BTD and other electron-withdrawing groups were used as acceptors to improve light-harvesting properties. Alkyl/alkoxy chains were wrapped around the porphyrin ring or donor moiety to suppress aggregation and reduce charge recombination. Carboxylic acid or CA acted as an efficient anchoring group due to its advantages of easy synthesis and high injection efficiency.

Diau and co-workers were the first to incorporate an ethynylcarboxyphenyl acceptor, diphenylamine donor and 3,5-di-tert-butylphenyl substituent porphyrin (YD1), achieving a PCE of 6.0%. This was attributed to the strong conjugation in the π-conjugated porphyrin macrocycle that not only broadened its absorption spectrum, but also enhanced the electron injection efficiency. The same group also designed another D–π–A porphyrin (YD2), in which two tert-butyl groups in the diarylamino substituent were replaced by two hexyl chains to push the excited electrons spatially towards the TiO2 film for improved charge separation. The device performance of YD2 reached 6.8% with CDCA as a co-adsorbent. When the YD2 dye was co-sensitized with a metal-free organic dye, the co-sensitized devices showed an improved efficiency of 11% under standard illumination conditions. This work led to the development of a device made of YD2-o-C8. The long and judiciously tailored alkoxy chains of YD2-o-C8 greatly decreased the degree of dye aggregation and the rate of interfacial back-electron transfer, and displayed an increased JSC and an extremely high VOC approaching 1 V. The YD2-o-C8 device exhibited an optimized performance of 11.9% under AM1.5G irradiation with the CoII/III tris(2,2′-bipyridine) electrolyte.
Grätzel and co-workers further elaborated the molecular structure of YD2-o-C8 to create SM315. The donor moiety was modified with a bis(2′,4′-bis(hexyloxy)-[1,1′-biphenyl]-4-yl)amino group, and a more strongly electron-withdrawing BTD group was used in SM315 to elevate light-harvesting properties and improve electrolyte compatibility. SM315 displayed a much broader absorption and more intense Q-bands were significantly red-shifted to the NIR region. The device based on SM315 yielded a high VOC of 0.91 V, a JSC of 18.1 mA cm−2 and a PCE of 13% without the use of a co-sensitizer (Fig. 7).
It is important to note that bulky conjugation donors, electron-withdrawing acceptors and long alkoxy or alkyl chains have been widely investigated in high efficiency porphyrin dyes. In recent years, this has allowed researchers to develop efficient porphyrin sensitizers through structural optimization of donor and acceptor groups.
In 2016, our group designed and synthesized two porphyrin sensitizers coded as SGT-020 and SGT-021 through donor structural engineering. The effect of the donor ability and bulkiness on photovoltaic performance was investigated to determine the relationship between the molecular structure and application properties in porphyrin-triple bond-BTD sensitizers. SM315 was used as a reference to compare the photovoltaic performance of these two porphyrin sensitizers. SGT-020 (η = 10.5%), with a relatively small donor unit, showed the lowest JSC, while SGT-021 (η = 12.05%), with the bulkiest donor unit, exhibited the highest JSC of the three dyes. The SM315 cell achieved a PCE of 11.6% under the same conditions. The SGT-021 with a robustly bulky and stronger fluorenyl donor exhibited red-shifted absorption bands and a negatively shifted HOMO level, which are well-matched with the increase of the electron-donating ability and π-conjugation length. Also, the bulky fluorenyl donor in SGT-021 has major influence on the reduction of the electron recombination rate and mass-transport limitation using the cobalt electrolyte compared to relatively small donor groups in SGT-020 and SM315, leading to an increased open-circuit voltage (VOC) and thus a higher PCE. In addition, we employed tandem DSSC device configurations to further improve the maximum efficiency. The parallel tandem DSSC based on SGT-021 (top cell) and SGT-121 (bottom cell) showed an extremely high efficiency of 14% (Fig. 7).
It is well known that a large π-conjugation structure is accompanied by dye aggregation. Thus, it is important to simultaneously enhance light-harvesting efficiency and avoid aggregation. You and co-workers used a different approach by calculating the oscillator strength of the first transition in advance. The indoline-conjugated porphyrin sensitizer CM-b was found to have an extremely high Qx (the transition polarized along the x-axis in the Q-band) molar absorptivity compared the other two newly synthesized porphyrins CM-a and CM-c. As a result, CM-b-based DSSCs achieved an overall efficiency of 10.7% for iodine-based porphyrin sensitized solar cells, without the use of a co-sensitizer or co-adsorbents, while the reference cell YD2-o-C8 cell had an efficiency of 8.5% under the same conditions. They suggested that porphyrin dyes with a large molar absorptivity are able to collect more light with a lower dye loading amount, avoiding dye aggregation in DSSCs (Fig. 7).
Nitrogen-based fused ring donor moieties have also demonstrated good photophysical properties. Of these nitrogen-based rings, N-annulated perylene (NP) has led to an upsurge in the field of DSSC research owing to its photophysical properties, high extinction coefficient and charge transport properties. Wang and co-workers designed three N-annulated perylene Zn-porphyrin dyes of WW-7–WW-9 and applied them in DSSCs. Compared with the previously reported WW-6 dye, the bay-linked porphyrins WW-7 and WW-8 exhibited lower PCEs (4.4% and 4.8%, respectively). The authors attributed this moderate photovoltaic performance to the weak π-conjugation between the bay-substituted NP and the phenylethynyl-substituted porphyrin unit. Moreover, the BTD unit led to a significant red shift in absorption, thus enhancing the light-harvesting efficiency. However, the BTD-based porphyrin dye WW-9 exhibited a PCE of 9.2%, which was slightly lower than that of the reference dye WW-6. The authors suggested that the longer molecular length of WW-9 may affect the dye geometry on TiO2, resulting in increased charge recombination (Fig. 8).
There has been ongoing research into efficient acceptor group development in recent years, particularly involving BTD-based acceptors. Palomares and co-workers introduced a thiophene and a furan between BDT and the anchoring group to produce sensitizers LCVC02 and LCVC03, respectively. Another porphyrin sensitizer, LCVC01, was produced which had no spacer between the BTD unit and carboxylic acid and was compared with the above two. The DSSC performance reached 10.4% for LCVC02, and moderate efficiencies of 3.84% and 2.55% were achieved for LCVC01 and LCVC03, respectively. The authors demonstrated that introducing a thiophene spacer between the BTD unit and carboxylic acid resulted in a lower charge recombination rate and a longer electron lifetime, but the LCVC03 porphyrin dye with a furan unit did not give similar results. Notably, Grätzel and co-workers refined the molecular structure of YD2-o-C8 to create GY50, using a benzoic acid anchor substituted onto a BTD unit, resulting in a high efficiency of 12.8% using the cobalt-based electrolyte (Fig. 9).
Following this principle, Diau and co-workers also probed a series of porphyrin dyes substituted with phenyl, thienyl, thienyl-phenyl and BTD-phenyl, denoted as LD14, LW4, LW5 and LW24, respectively. In this study, LD14 and LW4 had different spacer moieties, allowing the investigation of the effect of the spacer's electron-donating ability on the photoelectric properties. The LW5 and LW24 porphyrin sensitizers were designed to determine whether an electron-deficient BTD unit or electron-rich aromatic thiophene unit was more efficient in a DSSC. The results showed that an electron-rich thiophene unit inserted between the porphyrin core and the benzoic acid anchoring group had less of an effect on the absorption range than the BTD unit. The authors suggested that this may be explained by the differences in ICT within the molecule and electron coupling in the excited state. The photovoltaic performance was explored using an iodine-based electrolyte, and LD14 and LW4 devices showed PCEs of 9.01% and 9.53%, respectively. On the other hand, LW5-based DSSCs led to a decrease in JSC, and a moderate efficiency of 8.16% was achieved. LW24-based devices exhibited an efficiency of 9.21%. Moreover, the investigation of the photovoltaic properties of these devices showed that porphyrins LW5 and LW24 with longer acceptors exhibited a lower value of regeneration efficiency and a more prolonged electron lifetime than LD14 and LW4 which had shorter acceptors.
Nevertheless, the introduction of a BTD unit does not always lead to an increase in photovoltaic efficiency. In 2017, Xie and co-workers designed and synthesized four D–π–A porphyrin dyes (XW18–XW21) to investigate the effect of alkoxy chains in the absence and presence of a BTD unit. As expected, XW20 and XW21 with the electron-withdrawing BTD unit had dramatically red-shifted IPCE spectra. However, their IPCE values were lower than that of the porphyrin sensitizers without a BTD unit (XW18 and XW19). The authors proposed two reasons: the first was that the BTD unit causes a dye-aggregation problem, resulting in lower electron injection efficiency; the second is that the electron-trapping influence of the BTD unit may induce charge recombination, leading to a decline in electron-collection efficiency for XW20 and XW21. It is noteworthy that replacing linear alkoxy chains with branched alkoxy chains led to a higher IPCE, which may be due to the suppression of dye aggregation. Furthermore, CDCA was used as a co-adsorbent to improve the DSSC efficiencies by suppressing dye aggregation and charge recombination, and thus all the porphyrin sensitizers exhibited an improvement in PCE with a 0.8 mM concentration of CDCA. Owing to the incorporation of a BTD unit and branched chains, XW21 achieved a PCE of 9.62%, which was higher than that for XW18 (PCE = 9.50%), XW19 (PCE = 9.42%) and XW20 (PCE = 8.72%) (Fig. 11).
To investigate the effect of additional chains attached to the acceptor, the same group also prepared a series of porphyrin sensitizers XW26–28 by attaching alkyl or alkoxy chains to the BTD unit. Surprisingly, compared with the reported porphyrin dye XW11 (PCE = 9.3%), only XW28 achieved a high efficiency of 10.14%, and XW26 and XW27 showed moderate efficiencies of 5.57% and 7.17%, respectively. The authors suggested that the large torsion angle between the BTD unit and carboxylic acid may be the main reason for the decline in PCE for XW26 and XW27. Unlike XW26 and XW27, only one alkyl chain was attached to BTD on the ethynylene unit for XW28, forming a dihedral angle between the BTD unit and benzoic acid that was similar to that of XW11, resulting in a significant increase in device performance. Thus, this is also an efficient way of introducing alkyl or alkoxy chains into the acceptors of sensitizers; however, molecular distortion should be taken into account (Fig. 10).

Hua et al. reported three D–A′–π–A sensitizers, comprising an indoline donor, 4-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-silolo[3,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (DTS) π-bridge, and CA acceptor with BTD (B-87), and two new modified pyrido[3,4-b]pyrazines (PP) as auxiliary acceptors (Q-85 and Q-93), to modulate the energy gap and enhance the ICT process. In addition, alkoxyl and alkyl chains were further introduced into the PP-based moiety to mitigate dye aggregation and improve their solubility. Q-85 and B-87 had similar absorption band shapes with a slightly enhanced molar extinction coefficient of 5.06 × 104 M−1 cm−1 for Q-85 and 3.46 × 104 M−1 cm−1for Q-93, and the λmax of Q-93 was red-shifted by 31 nm compared with Q-85 and B-87. According to theoretical calculations, the HOMOs of the three dyes are almost identical, while the LUMOs follow the order of Q-93 (−2.85 eV) > Q-85 (−2.93 eV) > B-87 (−3.11 eV) due to the strong accepting ability of the PP moiety. However, the DSSCs with the sensitizers showed the reverse trend in which the JSC and VOC of the devices with B-87, Q-85 and Q-93 dyes decreased in the order of B-87 (20.28 mA cm−2, 724 mV) > Q-85 (19.55 mA cm−2, 722 mV) > Q-93 (19.53 mA cm−2, 676 mV), resulting in the same PCE trend as with the iodine electrolyte. The IPCE spectrum accounted for this trend. B-87 (PCE = 10.02%) exhibited more than 80% of a wide range in the IPCE response in the visible region of approximately 400–650 nm, and the IPCE response for Q-93 (PCE = 8.17%) was the broadest but the lowest value, and was no more than 75% from 400 to 700 nm. In an optimized cell with CDCA as a co-adsorbent, the B-87 cell showed the best performance of 10.20% and the PP-based Q-85 cell also showed a high PCE of 10.01%. This molecular design strategy provides an effective approach to modulate the energy of the absorption bands and modify the optoelectronic and physical properties of the organic sensitizers to achieve high efficiency and stability. B-87-based DSSCs with an ionic liquid electrolyte achieved 95% stability in initial performances after continuous light irradiation for 1000 h at 60 °C (Fig. 12).

With an aim of potential industrial scale-up, Zhu et al. developed three CPDT bridged D–A–π–A type sensitizers with a change in the donor group (WS-37, WS-38 and WS-51). Compared with the thiophene-bridged WS-2 reference dye, replacing thiophene by CPDT as the conjugation bridge improved the ICT absorption band and molar extinction coefficients. In particular, WS-51 showed a 1.6-fold higher molar extinction coefficient (ε = 4.3 × 104 M−1 cm−1) than WS-2 (ε = 1.67 × 104 M−1 cm−1). The absorption maxima of these three dyes were red-shifted with gradually increasing electron-donating capability from the triphenylamine unit (WS-37, λmax = 536 nm) to the dialkoxy-substituted triphenylamine unit (WS-38, λmax = 546 nm) to the indoline unit (WS-51, λmax = 551 nm). The IPCE onsets were consistent with the corresponding electron-donating ability, and decreased in the following order: indoline (WS-51) > dimethoxy-substituted triphenylamine (WS-38) > triphenylamine (WS-37). The IPCE of the WS-51 dye plateaued at over 80% at around 400–700 nm, while WS-38 showed the lowest IPCE of around 60% in the visible region. As a result, under standard AM1.5 conditions, WS-51-based solar cells had the highest PCE of 10.08% (JSC = 19.69 mA cm−2, VOC = 700 mV, and FF = 0.73) in the I−/I3− electrolyte, without CDCA as a co-adsorbent. In addition, the PCE of WS-51 was maintained above 90% of the initial value after 1000 h of one-sun illumination, indicating good sensitizer stability.
Zhu and co-workers reported further similar D–A′–π–A-type organic sensitizers. Based on the structure of the WS-52 reference dye, an electron-rich moiety 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT) and BTD and benzooxadiazole (BOD) electron-deficient groups were incorporated into WS-53, WS-54 and WS-55, respectively, to reduce the energy loss between the LUMO and CB of TiO2, such as thermal relaxation during electron injection. The presence of auxiliary groups between the indole donor and dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole (DTP) π-bridge resulted in absorption in the red/NIR region, and a superior LHE. The photovoltaic efficiency greatly improved when substituting the BDT electron-deficient moiety (WS-54, 7.14%) with BOD (WS-55, 9.46%) with respect to WS-52 (3.44%) with the I−/I3− electrolyte. Conversely, introducing an electron-rich moiety into the WS-53 cell resulted in a poor PCE (0.24%) due to insufficient driving force (0.17 V) for the regeneration of the oxidized dye. Moreover, the WS-55 cell had a high PCE of 10.14% under 0.3 sunlight irradiation without co-adsorbents. This result highlights how the delicate balance of the LUMO energy levels and HOMO–LUMO energy gaps can optimize photovoltaic properties (Fig. 13).
Delcamp et al. reported a number of pro-aromatic building block based D–A′–π–A dyes (NL2–NL8). The pro-aromatic materials show stability in the excited state by incorporating excited-state aromaticity. They used thieno[3,4-b]pyrazine (TPz) as a pro-aromatic, quinoidal building block and auxiliary acceptor unit to allow access to NIR photons. The pro-aromatic nature of the TPz building block with donors and acceptors at the two thiophene positions led to dyes NL2–NL8 with absorption responses up to 840 nm, which compares favorably to the benzo[a]pyrazine (BPz) analogue dye YA422. In spite of the great absorption abilities for the NL dyes, most of them showed low efficiency in DSSCs apart from NL6 (PCE = 7.1%). These results show that pro-aromaticity is an important factor in modulating the band gap in sensitizers (Fig. 14).

Ryu and co-workers synthesized the RK series (RK-1–RK-4), consisting of highly efficient D′–D–π–A architecture organic dyes with a thin TiO2 film (<2 μm) in I−/I3− electrolyte. In these dyes, indoline was the electron donor, CA the electron acceptor and CPDT the π-bridge attached to an alkyl chain of varying lengths, ranging from a methyl to a hexadecyl group, to suppress unfavorable quenching processes on TiO2. The RK dye series all exhibited similar absorption shapes close to the HOMO energy levels, 0.72 V for RK-1 and 0.74 for RK-2–4. Photovoltaic ability was evaluated in DSSCs based on the RK dye series at different active layer thicknesses (1.8, 3.5 and 5.1 μm with a 2.5 μm scattering layer) without co-adsorbents. With a 1.8 μm active layer, RK-3 attached to dodecyl chains had the highest efficiency of 8.8% (JSC = 16.2 mA cm−2; VOC = 0.74 V; FF = 0.76), while the DSSCs based on RK-2 had a PCE of 8.78% with a 3.5 μm active layer, indicating that film thickness was strongly related to the alkyl chain length of the dyes. The estimation of injection efficiency and the IPCE spectrum for all dyes showed that RK-3 had the most favorable charge injection kinetics.

In an effort to further investigate the effects of donor planarity and electron-donating ability on DSSC performance, Ryu et al. designed and synthesized the RK series (RK-3, RK-7, RK-8, RK-9 and RK-10) with different tilt angles (17.5°, 66.4°, 20.6°, 63.0° and 18.7°, respectively), and a D′–D–π–A or D–π–A structure. In terms of planarity, these dyes showed similar trends in absorption spectra. RK-3 had the most planar donor and had a considerably broadened light absorption ability (6.96 × 104 M−1 cm−1, 478 nm) compared with that of RK-7 (6.04 × 104 M−1 cm−1, 478 nm). The D′–D–π–A structures of RK-3, RK-7and RK-10 had higher absorption intensities and broader absorption wavelengths compared with those of D–π–A structured RK-8 and RK-9. The DSSC performance was measured using the I−/I3− redox shuttle. The planar donor-incorporated dyes (RK-3, RK-8 and RK-9) showed increased PCEs compared with those of the twisted donor-incorporated dyes (RK-7 and RK-10), with increased JSC values from 4.1 (RK-10) to 16.4 mA cm−2 (RK-3). To better understand the different JSC values, they investigated the factors affecting JSC. The LHE trends were similar to the trends in absorption spectra of the film. For ηinj, the planar donor-incorporated dyes (RK-3, RK-8 and RK-9) were more efficient compared with the twisted donor-incorporated dyes (RK-7 and RK-10) due to a slow ICT in the twisted donor dyes. This trend was also observed in ηreg. According to the spin density distribution determined by DFT calculation, the twisted donor decreases the regeneration probability between the oxidized dyes and I− by hampering the delocalizing regeneration site of the oxidized dye. This study showed that the incorporation of a planar donor was essential for improving light absorption ability and rapid charge transfer, resulting in higher JSC values (Fig. 15).
Xue and co-workers incorporated N,N-difluorenebenzenamine (DFBA), N,N-dihexylbenzen amine (DHBA), benzene-hexyldithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole (BZ-HDTP) and benzene-substituted DTP (BZDTP) as terminal electron donors to construct four novel D′–D–π–A organic sensitizers (M43–M46). The maximum absorption wavelengths of the dyes were red-shifted with enhanced maximum molar absorptivity and HOMO levels. In particular, the absorption response for M45 was 7.96 × 104 M−1 cm−1 at 521 nm, compared with 6.93 × 104 M−1 cm−1 at 510 nm for M46. This was attributed to the dihedral angle between the phenyl and DTP units determined by DFT calculation, 20.5° and 45.9° for M45 and M46, respectively. DSSC performance was investigated using [Co(phen)3]2+/3+electrolytes. M43-based cells showed a PCE of 6.97% due to the low dye load amounts caused by the bulky structure of DFBA, and M44-based cells showed a poor PCE (2.95%) due to the lack of regeneration caused by the low driving force. M45-based cells had the highest PCE of 9.02% compared with that of M46 (4.3%) without co-adsorbents. The electron lifetime measurements for M45-based DSSCs were larger than those of M46-based DSSCs by around 1.6-fold, indicating that RC may be more efficiently reduced due to the blocking effect of the alkyl chain in the DTP units (Fig. 16).
Xue et al. prepared two further dyes (M59 and M60) to investigate the effect of a side alkyl chain compared with reference dyes (M42 and M58). The hex-1-en-1-ylbenzene (HEYB) unit was introduced into the M59 (a D–π–A framework) and M60 dye (D′–D–π–A framework). The insertion of a HEYB unit into the arylamine donor reduced electron communication between the donor and spacer in M59 and M60, resulting in a blue-shift in absorption compared with M58 and M42, respectively. However, there was no notable difference in the loading amounts for dyes with and without the HEYB unit. The DSSCs with M59 andM60 dyes showed higher IPCE values than for M58 and M42. Although it had the highest absorption response among all the sensitized electrodes, M58 displayed the lowest IPCE value, resulting in a relatively lower photocurrent (14.2 mA cm−1). The photovoltaic performances of the M59 cell (JSC = 15.5 mA cm−2; VOC = 866 mV; PCE = 9.13%) and M60 cell (JSC = 15.4 mA cm−2; VOC = 945 mV; PCE = 9.75%) under AM 1.5G sunlight were higher than those of the M58 cell (JSC = 14.2 mA cm−2; VOC = 843 mV; PCE = 7.90%) and M42 cell (JSC = 15.4 mA cm−2; VOC = 920 mV; PCE = 9.49%) in the co-phen electrolyte without co-absorbents. Moreover, D′–D–π–A dye-based cells (M60 and M42) showed an enhanced performance compared with D–π–A dye-based cells (M58 and M59). These results show that the introduction of the HEYB unit suppressed charge RC and aggregation, resulting in an enhancement of VOC.

The binding ability of the sensitizer to the nanocrystalline semiconductor (TiO2) is a major factor in DSSC application. As mentioned previously, carboxylic acid and cyanoacrylic acid are the most widely used anchoring groups for DSSCs due to the advantages of easy synthesis and high injection efficiency. However, these anchoring groups tend to dissociate from the TiO2, resulting in a deterioration in device performance. Therefore, studies and strategies involving anchoring groups have attracted much attention in recent years. Here, we have highlighted some valuable research to provide more insights for further development of anchoring groups.

Dual-anchoring dyes have some advantages, including effective suppression of aggregation, high packing density, increased light harvesting capability and, most notably, strong binding to the TiO2 surface for long-term stability. However, there are two considerations for dual-anchoring dye design, because these dyes commonly have a D–π–A architecture: (1) the blue shift in absorption with respect to the monomeric species caused by tilting from the connecting bridges and (2) the distance between the two anchoring moieties, because a narrow distance can induce intramolecular steric interactions and a wide distance can induce a face-to-face anchoring mode and the adsorption of either two anchors.
In this regard, Wong et al. reported seminal dual-anchoring type sensitizers denoted by BPDTA and BTTA, which were based on the D21L6 dye with different connections via either phenylene or thiophene. The direct connection of two D21L6 molecules without a spacer formed a twisted conformation, which was beneficial in hampering dye aggregation. In the absorption spectra of dyes anchored to TiO2, BPDTA and BTTA showed enhanced molar absorptivity compared with that of D21L6, indicating that the twisted conformation did not affect light harvesting. The IPCE spectra of BPDTA and BTTA (80–90%, 380–540 nm) had significantly higher plateaus compared with D21L6 (>70%, 340–590 nm), which correlated well with the absorption behaviors, indicating the effective suppression of aggregation on TiO2. In addition, the results from Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy showed that BPDTA and BTTA were anchored to TiO2 simultaneously with favorable positions. As a result, under illumination of AM 1.5G, the DSSCs generated an efficiency of 6.61% for BPDTA and 6.86% for BTTA, while an inferior performance of 5.33% was observed for D21L6 without co-adsorbents in an iodine electrolyte.
Lin and co-workers reported three Y-shaped D–(π–A)2 dual-anchoring organic dyes, comprising arylamine as the electron donor and CA as the electron acceptor with various 2,4,7-trisubstituted benzimidazole moieties as the π-linkers and spacers (MD1–MD3). The absorption maximum of the dyes increased in the order of MD1 (417 nm) < MD2 (451 nm) < MD3 (488 nm), and MD2 and MD3 had more red-shifted ICT bands (∼25 nm) compared with reference dyes (8b and 9b) due to the electron-donating ability of the alkoxyl substituent. Moreover, the results from the film spectra of all dyes showed that the presence of the aryloxy chains on the arylamine donor, and the hexyl chains on the thiophene spacers, effectively suppressed aggregation. The PCEs of the DSSCs ranged from 4.49 to 6.69%. The MD3 cell had the highest PCE of 6.69% (JSC = 14.21 mA cm−1−2; VOC = 774 mV; FF = 0.65) due to increased light harvesting and efficient dark current suppression (Fig. 17).
Silyl-anchoring groups are promising anchoring moieties for durable devices due to the formation of strong Si–O–metal bonds. Therefore, siloxane derivatives, such as silanols and alkoxysilanes, have been widely used in organic devices and DSSCs. Recently, Hanaya and co-workers reported two sensitizers with different anchoring groups (–Si(OMe)3 and –COOH), which were based on the MK-2 dye consisting of a carbazole donor, alkyl-functionalized oligothiophene π-bridge and cyanoacrylic acid acceptor (ADEKA-1 and ADEKA-2). Compared with the MK-2 dye (λmax = 489 nm; ε = 3.74 × 104 M−1 cm−1), the ADEKA-1 and ADEKA-2 reference dyes had slightly red-shifted λmax values of 498 nm (ε = 4.32 × 104 M−1 cm−1) and 504 nm(ε = 4.27 × 104 M−1 cm−1), respectively. These enhanced absorption responses were due to the introduction of the phenylamide moieties. As a result, the optimized DSSCs based on ADEKA-1 had the highest PCE of 12.5% with a VOC of over 1 V in tris(5-chloro-1,10-phenanthroline)cobalt(II/I II) ([Co(Cl-phen)3]2+/3+) electrolytes. In addition, 95% of the initial performances were retained in a mixed solvent of 3-methoxypropionitrile and water (1:1 in volume) after 120 min at 85 °C (Fig. 18).
Recently, various anchoring groups have also been used in porphyrin sensitizers based on the benchmark dye YD-o-C8. Imahori and co-workers designed and synthesized YD2-o-C8T,YD2-o-C8HA and ZnPSi2 (ref. 101) by introducing tropolone, hydroxamic acid and triethoxysilyl, respectively. Jing and co-workers also reported a salicylic acid based porphyrin sensitizer denoted as LYD-5. The photovoltaic properties of the porphyrin DSSCs were evaluated by using a cobalt electrolyte for YD2-o-C8HA and an iodine electrolyte for YD2-o-C8T, ZnPSi2 and LYD-5. YD2-o-C8T, YD2-o-C8HA and ZnPSi2 showed lower efficiencies with respect to the carboxylic acid dye YD-o-C8. Conversely, the LYD-5 sensitized solar cell had a higher PCE compared with the YD2-o-C8-based device. Furthermore, the binding stabilities of YD2-o-C8T, YD2-o-C8HA andZnPSi2 based devices were tested under acidic and alkaline conditions. All three sensitizers showed improved stability and sustainability compared with YD2-o-C8 attached to the carboxylic acid anchor. The LYD-5 sensitizer also showed stable efficiencies after fabricating a quasi-solid-state DSSC, which could be attributed to the tridentate binding mode of the salicylic acid. It is therefore essential to determine which anchors lead to both high efficiency and stability (Fig. 19).


Fig. 20 shows the design concepts and strategies of efficient sensitizers in this review with some important points for the development of high performance DSSCs. On the basis of the aforementioned molecular design criteria, we suggest the comprehensive principles for high performance sensitizers (rational design criteria). (i) To absorb over a wide wavelength in the visible to NIR region and increase dye packing density, J-aggregation without co-adsorbents should be induced on the TiO2 surface by wrapping alkyl chains and introducing sterically hindering moieties, which can also prevent unfavorable charge recombination. (ii) The HOMO and LUMO energy levels of sensitizers should be modulated by the adjacent moieties, such as D′ and A′ with appropriate levels of molecular frontier orbitals for efficient electron injection and dye regeneration. (iii) The rigidified polycyclic moieties inherent to chromophores, such as porphyrins or fused heterocyclic aromatic units, should be employed to reduce the reorganization energy as much as possible. (iv) To enhance the electron communication between molecular frontier orbitals (HOMO and LUMO), the planarity of the entire sensitizer structure should be modulated by introducing aromatics and alkynyl units. (v) The sensitizers should have a facile synthetic route.

In addition, we evaluated the cost efficiencies of some representative dyes by using multi-synthetic steps and overall yields without considering the synthetic steps of donor units, because the cost of materials is an important factor for the commercialization of DSSCs. Table 2 shows the multi-synthetic steps and the overall yield of each dye. C281, SGT-137, YD2-o-C8, SM315 and SGT-021 have a similar number of multi-synthetic steps (7–10) and the overall yields (4.3%, 4.3%, 4.5%, 2.9%, and 1.7%, respectively), but the overall yield for Y123 is 17.5%. Y123 could be considered as one of the most cost efficient sensitizers of representative sensitizers in terms of the multi-synthetic steps and the overall yield. Thus, a relatively simple route and high yield of synthesis were required for developing highly efficient sensitizers for DSSCs.
Dye
Starting materials
Multi-synthetic steps
Overall yield
PCE
Ref.

a The multi-synthetic step numbers and the overall yields for some representative dyes were deduced from the corresponding papers.


Y123

7 (82%, 86%, 87%, 99%, 48%, 75%, 80%)
17.5%
9.5%

53 and 109


C281

10 (30%, 82%, 96%, 82%, 65%, 90%, 76%, 68%, 88%, 83%)
4.3%
13.0%

48


SGT-137

7 (94%, 40%, 62%, 62%, 88%, 51%, 67%)
4.3%
12.5%

15


YD2-o-C8

9 (79%, 80%, 30.7%, 61%, 98%, 83%, 85%, 71%, 77%)
4.5%
11.9%

57


SM315

10 (79%, 80%, 30.7%, 61%, 98%, 83%, 85%, 54%, 86%, 75%)
2.9%
13.0%

13


SGT-021

9 (79%, 80%, 30.7%, 61%, 98%, 83%, 43%, 61%, 68%)
1.7%
12.0%

14


In summary, we have discussed the design criteria of sensitizers in detail and recently developed efficient sensitizers. The sensitizers were roughly classified into four architectural groups, D–A, D–π–A, D–A′–π–A and D′–D–π–A, along with the salient features of their moieties. In accordance with the classified architectures, the effects of the molecular structure on the photophysical and electrochemical properties and device performance have been highlighted, including the structural combination of sensitizers, electron-donating ability, accepting ability of the moieties, the conjugation length of the moieties, the planarity of the sensitizers for efficient electron transfer and the peripheral coordination of sensitizers for steric hindrance and pro-aromatic functionality. The detailed DSSC parameters are summarized in Table 3 for a comprehensive comparison. However, in each study, the DSSCs were not only fabricated with different fabrication conditions including different electrolyte conditions but were also evaluated on different occasions, and thus, it was difficult to identify which type of organic and porphyrin sensitizer was the best. Generally, the efficient D–A and D–π–A framework sensitizers tended to include bulky fused poly-aromatic segments, and the absorption ability of the cells was enhanced by the formation of non-quenched aggregation, resulting in a high JSC and VOC without co-adsorbents. In D–A′–π–A structures, modulating the accepting ability of the auxiliary acceptor may be important, while controlling the compatibility of the donor and the auxiliary donor may be important for D′–D–π–A framework sensitizers. An attempt has been made to describe the research into effective anchors with several examples. Most of the efficient sensitizers fit the rational design criteria that include the photophysical properties and energy alignments, and the control of the microstructure of the self-assembled layer of dye molecules on the TiO2 surface. We have highlighted sensitizer strategies and approaches that may enhance efficiency alongside successful results, which are expected to contribute to important innovations that will increase the practical applications of DSSCs.

Dye

λ
max [nm] (ε [104 M−1 cm−1])

J
sc [mA cm−2]

V
oc [mV]
FF [%]
PCE [%]
Redox couples
Ref.

C271

508 (3.47)
10.18
844
77.6
6.7
[Co(phen)3]2+/3+

45


C272

512 (3.61)
15.42
908
74.3
10.4
[Co(phen)3]2+/3+

45


C275

536 (5.11)
17.03
956
77.0
12.5
[Co(phen)3]2+/3+

46


C276

461 (3.77)
15.54
818
73.6
9.4
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

47


C277

560 (3.77)
19.42
820
72.4
11.5
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

47


C278

565 (4.32)
19.64
843
72.8
12.0
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

47


C279

470 (3.93)
14.81
734
73.6
8.0
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

48


C280

609 (5.89)
20.20
786
70.8
11.8
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

48


C281

609 (—)
21.69
815
73.5
13.0
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

48


TPA-TTAR-A

498 (—)
7.66
946
65.8
4.8
I−/I3−

50


TPA-T-TTAR-A

482 (—)
10.1
893
68.1
6.2
I−/I3−

50


TPA-TTAR-T-A

490 (—)
16.5
833
73.7
10.1
I−/I3−

50


TPA-T-TTAR-T-A

413 (—)
11.8
832
70.3
6.9
I−/I3−

50


TTAR-b8

485 (—)
17.54
810
72.0
10.2
I−/I3−

51


TTAR-15

498 (—)
16.86
780
69.0
9.0
I−/I3−

51


TTAR-9

519 (—)
15.54
780
62.0
7.6
I−/I3−

51


S-DAHTDTT

441 (4.74)
14.20
750
72.0
7.6
I−/I3−

55


D-DAHTDTT

439 (5.25)
13.30
650
73.0
6.4
I−/I3−

55


T-DAHTDTT

434 (5.86)
15.40
730
75.0
8.4
I−/I3−

55


SGT-121

337 (3.84), 470.5 (2.81)
14.00
809
72.7
8.2
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

53


SGT-129

344.5 (4.24), 426 (1.49)
9.78
760
69.5
5.2
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

53


SGT-130

343.5 (5.66), 514.5 (2.98)
16.77
851
73.3
10.5
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

53


SGT-136

338 (6.07), 531 (3.03)
18.35
804
74.8
11.0
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

15


SGT-137

343 (5.72), 542.5 (3.10)
19.39
825
74.0
11.8
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

15


SGT-137/SGT021 tandem cell (parallel)
—
22.06
878
75.5
14.6
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

15


Y123

328 (5.09), 506 (5.28)
15.2
822
75.7
9.5
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

53


R4

613 (8.55)
17.25
852
75.4
11.1
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

56


R6

631 (8.18)
19.69
850
75.4
12.6
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

56


YD1

448 (19.4), 601 (8.30), 654 (2.97)
13.60
701
62.9
6.0
I−/I3−

61


YD2

443 (22.7), 586 (1.10), 646 (3.40)
18.60
770
76.4
11.0
I−/I3−

63


YD2-o-C8

448 (21.2), 581 (12.0), 645 (31.0)
17.30
965
71.0
11.9
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

57


SM315

440 (10.5), 454 (11.7), 581 (1.20), 668 (5.30)
18.10
910
78.0
13.0
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

13


SGT-020

454 (14.3), 670 (5.99)
15.80
864
76.6
10.5
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

14


SGT-021

455 (10.8), 674 (4.57)
17.50
910
75.3
12.0
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

14


SGT-021/SGT130 tandem cell (parallel)
—
19.70
0.916
77.5
14.0
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

14


CM-a

448 (30.2), 576 (1.50), 632 (3.35)
19.26
692
61.9
8.3
I−/I3−

68


CM-b

448 (48.9), 575 (2.45), 630 (5.65)
21.90
732
64.9
10.4
I−/I3−

68


CM-c

447 (27.4), 574 (1.63), 631 (3.18)
20.78
724
62.8
9.4
I−/I3−

68


WW-6

441 (15.4), 467 (11.7), 503 (7.58), 672 (7.69)
17.16
840
73.8
10.6
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

72


WW-7

454 (24.2), 646 (3.44)
8.05
708
77.7
4.4
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

72


WW-8

456 (16.8), 660 (6.00), 724 (0.78)
8.27
733
78.6
4.8
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

72


WW-9

435 (8.13), 474 (13.2), 686 (7.91)
15.93
770
75.2
9.2
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

72


LCV01

448 (—), 579 (—), 668 (—)
7.69
650
75.0
3.8
I−/I3−

73


LCV02

434 (—), 674 (—)
20.00
700
74.0
10.4
I−/I3−

73


LCV03

434 (—), 674 (—)
5.81
580
76.0
2.6
I−/I3−

73


GY50

453 (11.9), 538(1.10), 665(5.30)
18.53
885
773
12.8
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

58


LD14

459 (25.4), 667 (6.41)
17.38
734
71.0
9.0
I−/I3−

74


LW4

462 (23.4), 671 (5.64)
17.65
751
72.0
9.5
I−/I3−

74


LW5

466 (28.3), 674 (6.59)
15.41
719
73.5
8.2
I−/I3−

74


LW24

464 (17.8), 689 (8.78)
17.14
737
72.3
9.2
I−/I3−

74


XW18

457 (25.6), 664 (6.22)
18.78
754
67.2
9.5
I−/I3−

75


XW19

457 (26.5), 663 (6.39)
18.54
742
68.5
9.4
I−/I3−

75


XW20

465 (15.4), 682 (8.63)
18.09
737
65.4
8.7
I−/I3−

75


XW21

465 (17.3), 681 (9.54)
19.62
734
66.8
9.6
I−/I3−

75


XW11

465 (20.2), 622 (1.46), 683 (10.3)
18.26
727
70.1
9.3
I−/I3−

76


XW26

465 (27.0), 620 (1.69), 675 (11.6)
11.37
708
69.1
5.6
I−/I3−

76


XW27

465 (27.6), 621 (1.93), 678 (12.7)
14.08
710
72.3
7.2
I−/I3−

76


XW28

465 (20.3), 623 (1.64), 683 (11.1)
19.38
715
73.0
10.1
I−/I3−

76


B-87

562 (4.74)
20.28
724
68.3
10.0
I−/I3−

78


Q-85

562 (5.06)
19.55
722
66.6
9.4
I−/I3−

78


Q-93

593 (3.46)
19.53
676
61.8
8.2
I−/I3−

78


WS-2

321 (2.11), 395 (1.41), 533 (1.67),
18.24
649
71.8
8.5
I−/I3−

79


WS-37

308 (2.09), 457 (1.67), 536 (3.73)
16.23
692
71.6
8.0
I−/I3−

79


WS-38

308 (2.27), 459 (1.72), 546 (4.10)
12.32
699
72.7
6.3
I−/I3−

79


WS-51

314 (2.27), 460 (2.78), 551 (4.30)
19.69
700
73.1
10.1
I−/I3−

79


WS-52

549 (5.02)
7.88
640
68.0
3.4
I−/I3−

80


WS-53

570 (3.38)
1.22
440
48.0
0.2
I−/I3−

80


WS-54

563 (4.45)
15.84
660
68.0
7.1
I−/I3−

80


WS-55

558 (3.51)
19.66
678
70.0
9.5
I−/I3−

80


NL2

621 (3.40)
10.34
497
74.0
3.9
I−/I3−

28


NL3

651 (1.80)
6.23
498
73.0
2.3
I−/I3−

28


NL4

657 (1.60)
7.07
507
68.0
2.5
I−/I3−

28


NL5

672 (0.90)
4.81
489
67.0
1.6
I−/I3−

28


NL6

605 (1.70)
17.61
553
71.0
7.1
I−/I3−

28


NL7

589 (0.90)
2.55
434
74.0
0.8
I−/I3−

28


NL8

628 (0.70)
2.64
445
74.0
0.9
I−/I3−

28


RK-1

480 (6.74), 392 (3.37)
12.13
650
73.1
5.4
I−/I3−

77


RK-2

487 (6.85), 392 (3.05)
15.94
740
74.5
8.4
I−/I3−

77


RK-3

487 (6.96), 392 (2.85)
16.19
740
75.5
8.8
I−/I3−

77


RK-4

486 (7.02), 392 (2.92)
12.94
680
72.0
6.1
I−/I3−

77


RK-7

481 (6.04)
7.5
560
74.9
3.1
I−/I3−

83


RK-8

488 (6.15)
13.6
670
71.8
6.6
I−/I3−

83


RK-9

483 (6.11)
13.2
660
72.7
6.3
I−/I3−

83


RK-10

480 (5.20)
4.1
500
75.3
1.6
I−/I3−

83


M43

529 (6.03)
11.2
915
68.0
7.0
[Co(phen)3]2+/3+

84


M44

535 (5.84)
5.6
765
69.0
3.0
[Co(phen)3]2+/3+

84


M45

521 (7.96)
15.3
867
68.0
9.0
[Co(phen)3]2+/3+

84


M46

510 (6.93)
8.0
760
71.0
4.3
[Co(phen)3]2+/3+

84


M58

502 (4.56)
14.20
843
66.0
7.9
[Co(phen)3]2+/3+

85


M59

492 (3.92)
15.50
866
68.0
9.1
[Co(phen)3]2+/3+

85


M42

538 (6.56)
15.40
920
67.0
9.5
[Co(phen)3]2+/3+

85


M60

518 (6.33)
15.40
945
67.0
9.8
[Co(phen)3]2+/3+

85


BPDTA

503 (4.81)
14.42
740
62.0
6.6
I−/I3−

92


BTTA

483 (3.70)
14.71
740
63.0
6.9
I−/I3−

92


MD1

417 (3.78)
11.73
764
54.0
4.8
I−/I3−

93


MD2

344 (2.40), 451 (3.43)
9.82
721
67.0
4.6
I−/I3−

93


MD3

345 (3.36), 488 (4.81)
14.21
774
65.0
6.7
I−/I3−

93


ADEKA-1

498 (4.32)
16.10
848
76.2
10.4
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

98

15.6
1036
77.4
12.5
[Co(Cl-phen)3]2+/3+

98


ADEKA-2

504 (4.27)
15.10
821
75.2
9.3
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

98


MK-2

489 (3.74)
15.80
814
75.3
9.7
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

98


YD2-o-C8T

—
15.60
730
68.0
7.7
I−/I3−

99


YD2-o-C8HA

—
9.80
820
77.0
6.2
[Co(bpy)3]2+/3+

100


ZnPSi2

443 (20.7), 587 (1.20), 638 (3.10)
9.03
702
71.8
4.6
I−/I3−

101


LYD-5

448 (19.8), 582 (1.14), 640 (2.59)
16.39
740
700
8.4
I−/I3−

102

In this regard, organic-based sensitizers containing a chromophore, such as rigidified N-annulated polyaromatics or porphyrins, have infinite possibilities for improvement of a wide range of properties, such as the molecular structure and function, efficient light-harvesting ability in different parts of the solar spectrum, controlling the molecular energy levels, charge separation and molecular orientation and the arrangement of the dyes on the semiconductor surface. The advantages of these materials include low manufacturing costs, eco-friendly production and efficient technologies. Consequently, they have been regarded as the most promising alternative to silicon solar cells in DSSCs, despite low absolute efficiencies (≤14% on a laboratory scale). This technology is in the early stages of commercialization, but is widespread in applications including indoor, portable energy. However, big challenges remain regarding the stability and lifetime of DSSCs, which have been demonstrated in most outdoor experiments. Therefore, further research and development of this technology are essential to improve efficiency, durability, scalability and sustainability, to enable full commercialization (for example, building applied photovoltaics and portable charging devices). Perovskite solar cells (PrSCs) have recently emerged and are expected to become a strong DSSC competitor due to their ability to outperform traditional DSSCs in terms of power conversion efficiency. Nevertheless, PrSCs also possess several disadvantages, such as environmentally hazardous heavy Pb metal and the low robustness to moisture and water vapor in air. Therefore, regarding the aspects of environmentally friendly materials, transparency, durability and applications under low or diffuse light conditions, DSSCs are still rather competitive. DSSCs must have competitive performance to endure the pressure of alternative technologies. We believe that sensitizers may provide leverage to strengthen the competitiveness of DSSCs.

There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the Korean government (Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning) through the Mid-career Researcher Program (NRF-2017R1A2A1A17069374), “Human Resources Program in Energy Technology” of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP), granted financial resource from the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy, Republic of Korea (No. 20184030201910), and the Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT Project No. KK1702-A00).


† These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018