 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA07501D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 957-962


Biao
Xiao
,

Jingnan
Song
,

Bing
Guo
,

Minli
Zhang
,

Wanbin
Li
,

Ruixue
Zhou
,

Jiyan
Liu
,

Hong-Bo
Wang
*,

Maojie
Zhang
*,

Guoping
Luo
*,

Feng
Liu
* and 

Thomas P.
Russell


Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Chemical Materials and Devices, Ministry of Education, School of Chemical and Environmental Engineering, Jianghan University, Wuhan 430056, China. E-mail: hongbo.wang@jhun.edu.cn

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Collaborative Innovation Center of IFSA (CICIFSA), Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai 200240, P. R. China. E-mail: fengliu82@sjtu.edu.cn

Laboratory of Advanced Optoelectronic Materials, College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, P. R. China. E-mail: mjzhang@suda.edu.cn

School of Science, Guangdong University of Petrochemical Technology, Maoming 525000, P. R. China. E-mail: gpluo@foxmail.com

Department of Polymer Science and Engineering, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003, USA

Received
25th August 2017
, Accepted 1st December 2017
First published on 4th December 2017
Organic solar cells (OSCs) with a fused-ring dye, ITIC, and fullerene derivative PC71BM as the acceptor materials were fabricated. Compared to PC71BM-based cells, which reach a power conversion efficiency of 6.91%, the ITIC device shows a significantly higher power conversion efficiency (9.20%). The broader absorption range of ITIC helps to improve the short-circuit current density, which leads to better device efficiency. Electrical characterization, including electrical simulations and impedance analysis, was performed to investigate the physical processes in these OSCs. The results suggest that the charge-recombination loss in the non-fullerene device is even higher than that in PC71BM cells. Morphological analysis reveals that a poor phase-separation in the photoactive layer is responsible for the large recombination loss. Our results indicate that fused-ring acceptor materials are promising candidates for high-efficiency OSCs. Furthermore, if recombination loss could be suppressed effectively, the energy conversion efficiency of non-fullerene organic solar cells can be even higher.

Non-fullerene based organic solar cells have become a research hotspot for organic photovoltaics due to their potential high power conversion efficiency (PCE), low manufacturing-cost, light weight, and compatibility with existing commercial printing methods. For conventional fullerene-based solar cells, despite significant progress in recent years, the weak absorption in the visible range and the difficulty in chemical modification of the fullerene acceptor limit further development. Thus, finding a new electron-acceptor material with strong light-absorption and good electrical properties is of crucial importance to produce better OSCs. Among the many acceptor systems, fused ring-based acceptors are very good candidates to replace fullerenes because of their excellent photoelectric characteristics. Up to now, the PCE of solar cells based on this type of non-fullerene acceptor is about 12%, which is also the highest value for single-junction OSCs.

The active layer of a typical non-fullerene OSC is the blend of a semiconducting organic donor with a non-fullerene acceptor. The performance of the cell is largely determined by the properties of the donor, the acceptor, and their interaction. In order to maximize the conversion of sunlight into electricity, solar radiation needs to be efficiently utilized by the active layer to generate enough free charge carriers. This requires that the combined components produce a broad absorption spectrum. In addition, the recombination loss of photogenerated carriers in the active layer should be minimized. To accomplish this it is necessary to optimize the blend morphology because it affects the photo-physics of OSCs. At present, the vast majority of research efforts have been dedicated to the synthesis of new acceptor materials. However, a better understanding of the complex physical processes governing energy generation within non-fullerene based new-style solar cell devices is equally important because it facilitates both material design and device optimization.
In this paper, conventional [6,6]-phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) and the fused-ring compound 3,9-bis(2-methylene-(3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-indanone))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene, ITIC, were chosen as acceptor materials for fullerene and non-fullerene organic solar cells, respectively. To increase the spectral complementarity, a wide-bandgap conjugated polymer, PTZ1, was selected as the electron-donor material. The OSCs with the ITIC-acceptor show significantly higher short-circuit current density (Jsc), which leads to a high PCE of 9.20%. By contrast, solar cells with PC71BM as the acceptor exhibit only a moderate efficiency of 6.91%. To identify the reasons for this performance improvement and the relevant underlying process in the non-fullerene devices, a series of characterization methods were carried out. These include optical modeling, electrical simulation, morphology study, and impedance analysis. Our findings suggest that the improved absorption due to ITIC is the main cause of the PCE boost. Moreover, the interfacial contact between the blend layer and the electrode is another positive factor in the non-fullerene devices. Although the overall device performance of the ITIC system is much better than that of the PC71BM cells, the charge recombination loss in the non-fullerene devices has increased. We investigated the optical, electrical performance differences between PC71BM based cells and ITIC based non-fullerene OSCs. Furthermore, we provide additional insight into the functioning of currently popular fullerene-free OSCs.

The donor material PTZ1 and the non-fullerene acceptor ITIC were synthesized according to the literature. PC71BM was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, and all the materials were used as received without further purification. The chemical structures of the active layer components are shown in Fig. 1a. The ITO substrate with a sheet resistance of 15 Ω sq−1 was purchased from CSG HOLDING Co. LTD (China).


The device structure was ITO/ZnO/PFN/PTZ1:acceptor/MoO3/Al. Pre-patterned ITO glass substrates were first cleaned using consecutive ultrasonication in acetone, detergent, deionized water, and isopropyl alcohol. ZnO precursor solution was spin-coated on the ITO-coated glass to form a 30 nm electron-transport layer. Then, the ZnO layer was annealed at 200 °C for 1 h in air. After cooling, a thin layer of PFN (5 nm) was spin-coated on top of the ZnO layer. In a N2-glovebox, PTZ1:PC71BM (1:1.25, w/w) and PTZ1:ITIC (1:1.5, w/w) active layers with a thickness of 90 nm were prepared, respectively. Subsequently, the active layers were thermally annealed at 110 °C for 10 min. Finally, the 10 nm MoO3 hole-transport material and the 100 nm Al electrode were evaporated through a shadow mask (to define a device active area of 0.045 cm2) in a vacuum (<10−4 Pa).


The PCE values were determined from the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics measured with a Keithley 2450 source-measure unit under AM 1.5G illumination provided by a solar simulator. The illumination intensity of the simulator was determined using a monocrystalline silicon reference-cell containing a KG-5 visible color filter. IPCE measurements were carried out using a QE-R3011 IPCE measurement system (Enli Technology), in which a xenon lamp was used as the illumination source, and the typical light intensity at 530 nm was around 4.5 μW cm−2. The AFM measurements were conducted with an atomic force microscope (Veeco, Dimension 3100, USA). The optical constants were obtained with an ellipsometer (J. A. Woollam Co., M-2000V, USA). The impedance spectra were recorded using an electrochemical workstation (PGSTAT204, Metrohm Autolab).


The current-density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics of the devices with PC71BM and ITIC as acceptor materials were determined under AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) illumination – see Fig. 1b. The detailed results are summarized in Table 1. The OSCs were fabricated with the inverted device structure ITO/ZnO/PFN/PTZ1:acceptor/MoO3/Al. The performance of the photovoltaic cells with ITIC as the acceptor was significantly better than that with PC71BM. Specifically, the ITIC devices exhibited a high average PCE (9.20%), with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.00 V, a fill factor (FF) of 65.50%, and a short-circuit current-density (Jsc) of 14.04 mA cm−2. However, the PC71BM devices only showed a moderate PCE of 6.91%, with a Voc of 1.01 V, a FF of 64.25%, and a Jsc of 10.65 mA cm−2. Unlike Jsc, the values for FF and Voc in both devices were relatively stable. This suggests that the PCE enhancement of the ITIC devices was primarily due to the increase in Jsc.

Active layer
PCEmax (PCEave) (%)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

J
sc (Cal) (mA cm−2)

μ
e (cm2 V−1 s−1)

μ
h (cm2 V−1 s−1)

a The average PCE was obtained from more than 20 devices.
b Calculated photocurrent density from IPCE measurements.

PTZ1:PC71BM
6.95 (6.91)
1.01
64.25
10.65
10.39
3.02 × 10−4
1.42 × 10−4
PTZ1:ITIC
9.25 (9.20)
1.00
65.50
14.04
13.75
5.20 × 10−5
9.66 × 10−5
The incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) curves of the corresponding devices using different acceptors are shown in Fig. 1c. The integrated Jsc values (see Table 1) and the Jsc from the J–V measurements matched perfectly with deviations around 2%. It was found that the IPCE spectrum of the PC71BM device ranges from 300 to 700 nm, while the IPCE of the ITIC-based cells can extend to 800 nm. The much broader spectral response of the non-fullerene device is attributed to the wide absorption of ITIC. Furthermore, higher IPCE values in the range of 300–600 nm were observed for the PC71BM devices. This indicates that the photon utilization efficiency of ITIC in this spectral region is slightly inferior to that of PC71BM. However, this drawback is compensated for by the broadened spectral response.
The optical response of the devices was investigated further using the transfer matrix method. The optical constants used for the calculation are presented in Fig. S1.Fig. 2a and b show the exciton generation and distribution within the photoactive layer in PC71BM and ITIC devices. It can be found from Fig. 2a that the main exciton generating spectral-region in the PC71BM based device was between 480 and 600 nm. By contrast, a broad range of 540–710 nm was the primary exciton-generating region in the ITIC cells (Fig. 2b). Fig. 2c shows the enhanced exciton generation rate of the ITIC based device relative to the device with PC71BM as the acceptor. The exciton generation rate in the ITIC based device is much larger than those in PC71BM devices for wavelengths longer than 600 nm. The simulated device absorption is presented in Fig. 2d. From which it is seen that the photon absorption ends at around 700 nm. The absorption edge for the ITIC device, nevertheless, extends to 800 nm. These results demonstrate that the use of ITIC helps to convert solar photons within longer wavelengths.
Besides the optical properties, the electrical properties play a critical role in OSCs. We analyzed the transport properties of photoactive layer materials using the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) method.J–V curves of hole-only and electron-only devices are shown in Fig. S2. The mobility values are summarized in Table 1. The PC71BM device has electron and hole mobilities of 3.02 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 1.42 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 respectively. After replacing PC71BM with ITIC, the hole mobility of the active layer decreased to 5.20 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 and the electron mobility to 9.66 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1. Since the hole-transport material in the interpenetrating networks is unchanged, the reduced hole-mobility in the ITIC device can be ascribed to the morphology variation, which will be discussed later.
We further employ one-dimensional drift-diffusion modelling to understand the physical differences between these two devices. It is widely known that geminate-pair recombination is considerably weak in high-efficiency solar cells. Hence, in this drift-diffusion modelling, we consider band to band bimolecular recombination as the dominant recombination pathway to make things easier to be carried out and understood as well. The typical J–V characteristics of the devices are shown in Fig. 3a together with the simulated results. The experimental J–V curves can be easily reproduced, indicating a good reliability of this simplest model. Fig. 3b shows the recombination rate as a function of the applied voltage. Under low applied bias (<0.6 V), both the PC71BM and the ITIC based device show a low recombination rate (∼1026 m−3 s−1), indicating good charge collection efficiency, especially under short circuit conditions. At a higher applied voltage (0.8–1.0 V), which is the main recombination region, the recombination rate started to increase rapidly. This is expected because the effective field in this region is weak, leading to low charge collection efficiency. Although the energy conversion efficiency of the ITIC solar cell is much higher, in the working region of a solar cell the recombination rate of the ITIC based device is higher than that of the PC71BM device. This is because of the higher photocurrent in the ITIC based device with a similar active layer thickness and open circuit voltage. This theoretical result can also be confirmed by the dark J–V characteristics (Fig. 3c) because the ITIC device shows a very large leakage-current and a low rectification-ratio.
The structure order of BHJ thin films was studied using grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXD). As shown in Fig. 4, PTZ1:PC71BM displayed a distinctive feature of a PC71BM diffraction ring, centered at 1.32 A−1, without any orientation preference. The PTZ1 polymer in blends displayed sharp lamellar (100) stacking features, centered at 0.31 A−1, with an obvious edge-on orientation. The crystal coherence length from out-of-plane line-cut profiles yielded a value of 11.4 nm. The pi–pi stacking for PTZ1 was less pronounced, and by fitting, a value of 1.79 A−1 was obtained, corresponding to a distance of 3.5 A. PTZ1:ITIC blends showed quite different GIXD features. The sharp out-of-plane PTZ1 lamellar stacking peak disappeared. A new peak centered at 0.34 A−1 showed up, coming from ITIC or ITIC and PTZ1 mixed diffraction features. In the in-plane line-cut profile, a broad diffraction peak at 0.31 A−1 was seen, coming from PTZ1 (100) packing with much reduced scattering intensity. A pronounced pi–pi stacking peak was seen in the out-of-plane line-cut profile, centered at 1.72 A−1, coming from ITIC pi–pi stacking. The comparison of these two blends yields interesting results regarding the material interaction and crystallization behaviors. The poor mixing between PTZ1 and PC71BM leads to material ordering for both components, as seen from the GIXD patterns. However, the closer chemical similarity between PTZ1 and ITIC leads to intimate mixing of the two components, and thus polymer crystallization showed a quite large reduction. As seen from the broad PTZ1 (100) diffraction peak in the in-plane direction, the crystal quality is poor. Thus the hole mobility for PTZ1:ITIC blends is much lower, leading to more severe charge recombination loss.
The surface morphology of PTZ1:PC71BM and PTZ1:ITIC blends was studied using atomic force microscopy (AFM). As shown in Fig. 5a and b, the root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of the ITIC and PC71BM based films was 0.86 and 1.08 nm, respectively. The smoother surface of the PTZ1:ITIC reflects the good mixing of materials. Resonant soft X-ray scattering was used to study the phase separation size scales in BHJ blends. A photon energy of 284.2 eV was applied to PC71BM blends and a photon energy of 285.0 eV was applied to ITIC blends to enhance the contrast. The improved contrast factors by photon energy selection yielded good resolution, which was beneficial for the investigation of phase separation. As seen from PTZ1:ITIC blends, a scattering peak at 0.0068 A−1 was seen, corresponding to a length scale of 92 nm. The PTZ1:PC71BM blends showed a broad scattering feature, with one hump at 0.0059 A−1 and one hump at 0.0142 A−1, giving distances of 106 and 44 nm respectively.
Impedance spectroscopy is a powerful technique to probe the physical processes that occur in OSCs. The Nyquist plots of the PC71BM and ITIC devices measured under 100 mW cm−2 light intensity illumination and biased at V = Voc are shown in Fig. 6, and the equivalent circuit is shown in the inset of Fig. 5. The fitted curves matched the experimental data well, suggesting that the circuit model accurately reflects the real circuit. In our equivalent circuit model, Rs represents the series resistance caused by the interfacial contact between the electrode and the organic layer. The combination of Rg and Cg stands for the geometric contribution of the devices, while the parallel elements Ri and Ci represent photogenerated carrier recombination (Ri) and storage (Ci) at the donor:acceptor interface. Additionally, the small-perturbation charge carrier lifetime τ could be determined by τ = Ri × Ci.
The fitting parameters are compared in Table 2. Rs in the ITIC device was only 29.2 Ω, while Rs in the PC71BM device showed a much higher value (37.9 Ω). This result agrees well with the above result that a smooth interfacial contact is beneficial for the reduction of series resistance. Furthermore, the smaller Ci in the ITIC device could confirm from another aspect that more charge carriers are lost through recombination. This is because the photogenerated electrons and holes often stay at the acceptor and donor phases, which produces a chemical capacitor component in the device. This feature comes from the good mixing between PTZ1 and ITIC materials and a less pronounced phase separation in blends. As mentioned earlier, charge generation in the ITIC device is more efficient, and thus the recombination loss should be quite severe (smaller Ci value). One could also find that the charge recombination resistance in the ITIC cell (179.6 Ω) is much lower than that in the PC71BM device (256.2 Ω). Since Ri can be used to evaluate the degree of charge recombination, a smaller Ri value in the non-fullerene OSCs implies that the charge carrier loss through recombination is higher. This conclusion, except for the electrical simulation results, is also consistent with the dark J–V measurements (the much larger leakage current in the non-fullerene cell indicates severe charge recombination). Consequently, the charge carrier lifetime in the ITIC-based device (1.65 μs) under open-circuit conditions is much shorter than that in fullerene cells (3.76 μs).
Active layer

R
s (Ω)

R
g (Ω)

C
g (nF)

R
i (Ω)

C
i (nF)

τ (μs)
PTZ1:PC71BM
37.9
228
4.11
256.2
14.67
3.76
PTZ1:ITIC
29.2
295
2.16
179.6
9.19
1.65

To conclude, OSCs based on the fullerene acceptor PC71BM and non-fullerene acceptor ITIC were fabricated and their performances were compared. Using a wide-bandgap p-type material, PTZ1, as the electron-donor material, ITIC based non-fullerene solar cells displayed a high PCE of 9.20%, while the conventional PC71BM-based device showed a moderate PCE of only 6.91%. IPCE measurements together with optical modeling reveal that the extended absorption in ITIC was the main contribution for the efficiency enhancement. Although the performance of the non-fullerene OSCs was superior to the PC71BM cells, structural and electrical investigation (including GIXD, RSoXS, electrical simulation, and impedance analysis) show clearly that the charge recombination loss in the non-fullerene devices is much stronger. Morphology characterization illustrates that PTZ1 and ITIC are likely to form a good mixture. The less well-defined phase-separation in the PTZ1:ITIC blend causes high charge recombination loss and low carrier mobility. The current results show that fused-ring acceptors are promising candidates as electron acceptors for high-efficiency OSCs. And, still the electrical properties of non-fullerene BHJ blends are far from optimum, leaving large room for improvement. Higher performance non-fullerene OSCs can be quite excitingly expected.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


This work was supported by the National High Technology Research and Development Program of China (2015AA033400), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21302232), the Hubei Natural Science Foundation (2014CFA098), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2016M600567), the Opening Project of Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Chemical Materials and Devices (Jianghan University), and the Ministry of Education (JDGD-201608). TPR was supported by the U.S. Office of Naval Research under contract N00014-15-1-2244. Portions of this research were carried out at beamline 7.3.3 and 11.0.1.2 at the Advanced Light Source, Molecular Foundry, and National Center for Electron Microscopy, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, which was supported by the DOE, Office of Science, and Office of Basic Energy Sciences. We are grateful to Jun Yan (SCUT&ICL) for useful discussions on device physics and modelling.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Optical constants of the PTZ1:PC71BM and PTZ1:ITIC blend layer; J1/2–Veff (Veff = V − Vbi − Vs) characteristics for electron-only and hole-only devices; input parameters for drift-diffusion model simulations. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta07501d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018