 DOI: 10.1039/C4TA03838J
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17281-17285


Dong
Yang
,

Ping
Fu
,

Fujun
Zhang
,

Nan
Wang
,

Jian
Zhang
* and 

Can
Li
*

State Key Laboratory of Catalysis, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy, 457 Zhongshan Road, Dalian 116023, China. E-mail: jianzhang@dicp.ac.cn; canli@dicp.ac.cn

Key Laboratory of Luminescence and Optical Information, Beijing Jiaotong University, Ministry of Education, Beijing 100044, China

Graduate University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China

Received
25th July 2014
, Accepted 1st September 2014
First published on 2nd September 2014
PTB7:PC71BM inverted polymer solar cells with a room-temperature TiOx/PEI electron transport layer achieve an average power conversion efficiency of 8.72% (the champion power conversion efficiency is 9.08%), which is much better than that of the control devices based on PEI (7.00%) or TiOx (7.38%). The room-temperature TiOx/PEI layer exhibits outstanding capacities, including increased electron mobility, reduced series resistance and improved electron extraction at the cathode interface.

Inverted polymer solar cells (IPSCs) with modified low work-function transparent conductive electrodes as the cathode have been extensively investigated in recent years, and the highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) of IPSCs has exceeded 9% at single stack cells. Compared with polymer solar cells in conventional configuration, IPSCs achieve higher PCE by taking advantage of the vertical phase separation and concentration gradient in active layers. Moreover, IPSCs demonstrate better long-term stability by self-encapsulating with an air-stable top electrode and avoiding the use of the corrosive and hygroscopic hole-transporting poly(3,4-ethylenedioxylenethiophene):poly(styrenesulphonic acid) (PEDOT:PSS) and low-work-function metal cathode.

A key component in IPSCs is the electron transport layer (ETL) on a transparent conductive electrode, which requires high transparency, high electron mobility and the energy level matched with the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the acceptor. Several classes of materials have been proven effective in improving the electron extraction properties of IPSCs, including metal salts such as Cs2CO3, CsF and titanium chelate (TIPD, TOPD). Among others, the incorporation of a polyelectrolyte can also enhance the electron selectivity of the IPSCs.
Alternatively, transition metal oxides, such as ZnO and TiOx, have attracted great attention in IPSCs, largely due to their excellent optical transmittance, high refractive index and good chemical stability. The valence and conduction band of TiOx are ∼4.4 and ∼8.1 eV, respectively, indicating that it can provide both an ohmic contact with the fullerene phase of polymer/fullerene solar cells and a high energy barrier for hole injection crossing the polymer phase into the TiOx layer. IPSCs based on poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT):[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) using TiOx as an ETL with PCE >4% have been reported. Moreover, PCE >8% has been achieved in IPSCs based on poly[4,8-bis(2-ethylhexyloxyl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl-alt-ethylhexyl-3-fluorothithieno[3,4-b]thiophene-2-carboxylate-4,6-diyl] (PTB7):[6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) using a metal nanoparticle incorporated TiOx as the ETL. In high-performance IPSCs, crystalline TiOx films are used, such as the anatase phase or the rutile phase, which requires thermal annealing treatment at high temperature (T > 450 °C). The thermal annealing process has several drawbacks as it results in high cost, slow production, and limited applications of temperature-sensitive plastic substrates and multijunction devices. Several approaches, such as atomic layer deposition, sol–gel, chemical sintering, high-pressure pressing and electrodeposition, have been developed in order to achieve comparable electronic properties for the ETLs in different solar technologies. However, these methods have not yet achieved a performance equivalent to the traditional high-temperature process because of unfavorable crystallinity of TiOx, crack formation in the film, and poor adhesion to the substrate.
In this work, we report a remarkable improvement in PCE of IPSCs by employing a room-temperature ETL layer by combination of TiOx and polyethyleneimine (TiOx/PEI) layers. The TiOx/PEI layer possesses high transparency, improves electron mobility, reduces series resistance and increases the electron extraction at the cathode interface. The room-temperature processed PTB7:PC71BM IPSCs with TiOx/PEI ETLs exhibited an average PCE of 8.7%, much better than control devices with PEI (7.0%) or TiOx (7.4%) as ETLs under the same conditions.

Fig. 1a shows the chemical structures of PEI, PTB7 and PC71BM. Fig. 1b shows the energy level diagram of materials in IPSCs:ITO/ETL/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag. The TiOx layer, PEI layer or TiOx/PEI layer is used as the ETL. PTB7:PC71BM IPSCs with TiOx thickness ranging from 32 nm to 166 nm were fabricated. The highest PCE of 7.38% is obtained for IPSCs with 82 nm thick TiOx (Fig. S1 and Table S1 ESI) because of the fully covered ITO surface (Fig. S2 ESI) and small series resistance (Rs). Consequently, the 82 nm-thick TiOx films are selected for this study. The work function of TiOx and TiOx/PEI films were characterized by scanning Kelvin probe microscopy (SKPM). The work function of TiOx/PEI films is 4.20 eV, which is lower than that of TiOx films (Fig. S3 ESI), which is 4.42 eV. The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) of the ITO/PEI, ITO/TiOx and ITO/TiOx/PEI are shown in Fig. S4a. The N1s peaks are clearly detected from the PEI-coated ITO and ITO/TiOx samples at around 400 eV, which is attributed to the nitrogen moiety in the PEI polymer. The result confirms that the PEI layer is present on the ITO and ITO/TiOx surface. Particularly, Ti2p and O1s peaks in TiOx films (Fig. S4b and Fig. S4c ESI) are shifted by the presence of the PEI layer, which indicates that the electronic structure of the TiOx film is affected by the PEI layer.

Fig. 2a shows atom force microscopy (AFM) images of the ITO, TiOx and TiOx/PEI films. The TiOx film is composed of nanoparticles on ITO/glass substrate, and its surface root-mean-square (RMS) roughness is 1.79 nm. After it is spin-coated with a thin layer of PEI on TiOx, the TiOx film surface is covered by PEI and the RMS roughness drops to 1.11 nm. The smoother surface of TiOx/PEI should be beneficial to the contact between the active layer and the ETL. The TiOx films exist in an amorphous form, and neither the anatase phase (147 cm−1) nor the rutile phase (448 cm−1) is observed in the Raman spectrum (Fig. 2b) because of the low deposition temperature.Fig. 2c shows the optical transmission spectra of TiOx and TiOx/PEI deposited on ITO substrates. The TiOx/PEI films on the ITO possess high transparency with >80% average transmittance in the wavelengths longer than 400 nm. Therefore, the TiOx/PEI on the ITO as transparent cathodes can allow the maximum photo flux to reach the active layer for generating photocurrents.
The charge-transporting abilities of TiOx and TiOx/PEI films are studied by the space charge limited current (SCLC) method using electron-only devices: ITO/[TiOx or (TiOx/PEI)]/Ca/Al. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics (Fig. 2d) of the electron only devices are fitted by the Mott–Gurney law:
J = (9/8)εrε0μe(V2/L3)
where
ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, εr is the dielectric permittivity of the active layer, L is the thickness of the active layer, and μe is the electron mobility. The electron mobility is calculated from the currents in the square law region. The electron mobility of 8.20 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 1.73 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 have been determined for the devices with TiOx or TiOx/PEI film, respectively. Obviously, the electron mobility in the TiOx/PEI film is much higher than that in the TiOx film, which indicates that the electrons can be effectively transported to the TiOx/PEI films.

During the formation of the TiOx/PEI layer, the spontaneous orientation of the ethylamine group within the PEI layer leads to the formation of permanent dipoles (μ) at the TiOx/active layer interface pointing outwards from the TiOx surface (Fig. S5 ESI). This dipole can reduce the work function of TiOx through a downward vacuum level shift. Therefore, the energy barrier for electron injection/transport decreases with decreasing work function of TiOx from 4.42 eV to 4.20 eV after depositing the PEI layer. Consequently, lower energy barrier for electron injection from the active layer to TiOx and improved electron transport are obtained in TiOx/PEI layers. Fig. 3a shows the J–V curves of the PTB7:PC71BM IPSCs with PEI, TiOx or TiOx/PEI films as ETLs under AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2. The key parameters of IPSCs with different ETLs, including short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and PCE, are summarized in Table 1. It can be found that the device performance is improved significantly by using TiOx/PEI as the ETL. The control devices with only PEI ETLs exhibit a Jsc of 15.38 mA cm−2, FF of 0.65, and Voc of 0.70 V, which gives a PCE of up to 7.00%. When the TiOx film is used as an ETL, the Jsc is 16.74 mA cm−2, the Voc is 0.68 V and the FF is 0.65, which leads to a PCE of 7.38%. With TiOx/PEI as an ETL, the average PCE is increased to 8.72% with a Jsc of 17.56 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.72 V and FF of 0.69. The highest PCE of the PTB7:PC71BM IPSCs with room-temperature TiOx/PEI as ETL exceeds 9% (Fig. S6 ESI). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the IPSCs with TiOx/PEI ETLs is noticeably higher than that of devices with PEI or TiOx (Fig. 3b). The calculated Jsc values of the IPSCs with PEI, TiOx and TiOx/PEI ETLs by integrating the EQE spectra with the AM 1.5G reference spectrum are 14.51, 15.48 and 16.47 mA cm−2, respectively. All the calculated values are very close to the measured values (maximum error <7%).
ETL

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)
PEI
15.38
0.70
0.65
7.00
TiOx
16.69
0.68
0.65
7.38
TiOx/PEI
17.56
0.72
0.69
8.72
The PEI layer minimizes the contact resistance between TiOx and the PTB7:PC71BM layer, as shown by electrical impedance spectroscopy (Fig. 4a). The extracted contact resistance is found to be notably reduced for the devices with TiOx/PEI ETLs (Fig. S7 and Table S2 ESI). Furthermore, the photoluminescence (PL) measurements of TiOx/PTB7 and TiOx/PEI/PTB7 films indicate the enhanced photo-induced charge transfer and reduced charge recombination loss by the introduction of the PEI layer. The PL intensity of TiOx/PEI/PTB7 films is reduced compared with that of TiOx/PTB7 films (Fig. S8 ESI), which indicates that charge separation effectively occurred before exciton recombination within PTB7 films and that TiOx/PEI ETL can improve electron extraction from PTB7 film. Compared with TiOx, the TiOx/PEI ETL improves electron mobility, reduces series resistance and increases the electron extraction at the cathode interface. Therefore, increased Jsc and FF are obtained in PTB7:PC71BM IPSCs with TiOx/PEI ETLs. Fig. 4b shows the dark J–V curves of the IPSCs with TiOx and TiOx/PEI ETLs. The leakage current of TiOx/PEI ETLs in IPSCs is one order lower than TiOx ETLs in the reverse direction, which may result from the slight increase in the Voc of IPSCs with TiOx/PEI ETLs.

In conclusion, we demonstrate that room-temperature processed TiOx/PEI layers can be efficient ETLs for high efficiency IPSCs. The PCE of PTB7:PC71BM IPSCs with TiOx/PEI layer is improved up to 8.72% from 7.38% of IPSCs using only TiOx. The TiOx/PEI layer possesses high transparency, improves electron mobility, reduces series resistance and increases the electron extraction at the cathode interface. This is the first high PCE IPSC with a room-temperature processed TiOx layer. The TiOx/PEI layer fabricated at room temperature is compatible with the roll-to-roll process and can meet the needs of manufacturing on a range of substrates in large scale and has potential for use in other emerging technologies, including perovskite solar cells and dye sensitized solar cells.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant no. 21374120 and 61377029. J. Zhang acknowledges the support by 100 Talents Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental section, images of SKPM, XRD patterns, schematic program of reduced work function, J–V curves of the best device, PL spectra, the equivalent circuit model and parameters of the IPSCs equivalent circuit. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta03838j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014