 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA12796F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12302-12309

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms

Shreyam Chatterjee,
Arnab Shit and 
Arun K. Nandi*

Polymer Science Unit, Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Jadavpur, kolkata-700032, India. E-mail: psuakn@iacs.res.in

Received
18th July 2013
, Accepted 7th August 2013
First published on 8th August 2013
Polypyrrole (PPy)–zinc oxide (ZnO) nanocomposites (PZ1, PZ2 and PZ3) are prepared by polymerizing pyrrole (1.3 × 10−6 mol) in the presence of various amounts of ZnO nanoparticles (NPs) (25, 100, 250 mg) in a lauric acid (LA)–cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) coacervate gel template. PPy formed in the gel template has a nanorod morphology, but it gradually changes exhibiting an open nanotube (nanochannel) morphology in the PZ3 sample, although ZnO has a nanosphere morphology. PPy nanorod formation is attributed to the coalescence of PPy nanospheres and the nanochannel morphology of PZ3 is attributed to the restricted growth of PPy in the gel pores due to the steric hindrance of the ZnO NPs. The ZnO NPs have a hexagonal wurtzite structure, which is also retained in the PZ samples. FTIR and UV-vis spectra indicate the presence of an interaction between the PPy and ZnO NPs. The ZnO NPs exhibit only UV band gap fluorescence at 390 nm, and in the PZ3 sample there is a reduction in the peak intensity with a red shift of 8 nm, supporting a strong electronic interaction between PPy and the ZnO NPs. The dc conductivity of the PZ3 composite is the highest (7.9 × 10−5 S cm−1) among the other composites, and also among the components. A dye sensitized solar cell (DSC) fabricated with the PZ3 composite using N719 dye as the photosensitizer has the cell characteristics Voc = 0.56 V, Jsc = 8.54 mA cm−2 and the fill factor (FF) = 0.53 giving an overall power conversion efficiency η = 2.53%, which is higher than those fabricated with pure ZnO NPs (η = 1.87%) and the PZ1 (1.98%) samples.

The synthesis of various nanostructures of different materials, like metals, semiconductors, polymers, etc. is gaining burgeoning interest in materials research due to their intriguing applications in different fields. Especially the integration of nanostructured conducting polymers gives rise to the superior properties when used as an organic nanocomponent in organic–inorganic nanocomposites. Nanotubular conducting polymers have attracted considerable attention because of their unique properties, such as reversible convertibility between redox states, metallic conductivity, fast charge/discharge capacities, high charge transport rates and short diffusion distances for ion transport. Compared with carbon nanotubes, conductive polymer nanotubes can be chemically synthesized in bulk, or electro-synthesized in benign conditions. Among them, polypyrrole (PPy) stands out because of its good environmental stability, high conductivity and diverse range of applications. Similarly different shapes and size controlled inorganic semiconductor synthesis has also occupied a vital part of materials research as they have potential applications in different areas. The fabrication of hybrid nanocomposites by assembling the organic and inorganic precursors at the molecular level by controlling the morphology, interfaces and structure is a challenging task. Such hybrid materials look promising and are gaining attention because the synergism between the components often gives rise to properties that are superior to the sum of the individual constituents. Harnessing the benefits of both the constituents requires excellent tuning of the spatial assembly of individual domains and their interfaces. Of late, various synthetic techniques have been built up to decorate metal NPs on the surface of PPy nanowires or PPy nanotubes. Semiconductor metal oxide based PPy composites are also well reported. But the morphology tuning of PPy with semiconductor metal oxides by an in situ polymerization is scarce in the literature.

With the growing research on dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs), traditional solid-state photovoltaic technologies are now often challenged by devices functioning at molecular and nano levels. The prospect of low-cost investments and fabrication are key features to draw a keen interest in silicon based inorganic solar cells. The semiconducting TiO2 layers are key components of most DSCs, through which the photoelectrons generated from the dye molecules are transported to the anodes, although other semiconductor oxides, such as ZnO, SnO2, or Nb2O5 are also employed. A reverse charge transfer in the DSCs (recombination reaction) from TiO2 to the dye or to the redox couple may severely reduce the cell efficiency. One effective way to prop up the charge transfer and to reduce backwards recombination is to incorporate a conductive network into the semiconductors. Hence we have used a newly synthesized nanochannel morphology of a PPy–ZnO nanocomposite in the DSC, as the ZnO is attached to a highly conducting PPy polymer network.
Here, we report the tuning of the nanorod morphology of PPy to the nanochannel PPy–ZnO composite by the in situ polymerization of pyrrole in the presence of ZnO NPs in a cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide–lauric acid (CTAB–LA) coacervate gel template. Different concentrations of ZnO are used for the purpose of tuning. The new type of nanochannel PPy–ZnO composite is used to fabricate a DSC with N719 dye as a photosensitizer. With this nanochannel PPy–ZnO composite we got a power conversion efficiency of 2.53%, which is 35% higher than that of a pure ZnO (1.87%) based DSC. A probable mechanism for the morphology tuning and the higher power conversion efficiencies of the systems are discussed.

Cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB, E. Merck, Mumbai), lauric acid (LA, Loba Chemie, Mumbai), Zn(NO3)2·4H2O (E. Merck, Mumbai), NaOH (E. Merck, Mumbai) and ammonium persulphate (APS) (E. Merck, Mumbai) were used as received. The middle fraction of distilled pyrrole (GR, Aldrich, USA) was used for the polymerization in this work.


Zinc oxide nanoparticles were synthesized by a wet chemical method using zinc nitrate (Zn(NO3)2·4H2O) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) precursors. In this method, a 0.5 M aqueous ethanol solution of zinc nitrate was kept under constant stirring using a magnetic stirrer to dissolve the zinc nitrate completely for 2 h and a 0.9 M aqueous ethanol solution of sodium hydroxide was also prepared in the same way with stirring for 2 h. After complete dissolution of the zinc nitrate, 0.9 M NaOH solution (aqueous) was added under high speed constant stirring, drop by drop (slowly for 1 h). The reaction was allowed to proceed for 2 h after the complete addition of NaOH in sealed conditions. After completion of the reaction, the solution was allowed to settle overnight and the supernatant solution was separated carefully. The remaining solution was centrifuged for 10 min, and the precipitate was removed. Thus, the precipitated ZnO NPs were cleaned three times with deionized water and ethanol to remove the byproducts which were bound with the nanoparticles and then dried in an air atmosphere at about 60 °C.


Pyrrole (1.3 × 10−6 mol), LA (1.2 × 10−3 mol), aqueous CTAB solution (5 ml, 3 × 10−2 M) and ZnO (25, 100 and 250 mg) were mixed by sonication in three different gel tubes and kept at 30 °C for 10 min when the system forms a coacervate gel.


2 ml 0.25 M APS solution was poured into three different gel tubes containing 25, 100 and 250 mg ZnO NPs. They were kept at 30 °C for 2 days without disturbing the gel template for self assembly. They were finally washed with methanol and dried in vacuum at 60 °C for 2 days. The samples are designated as PZ1, PZ2 and PZ3 for 25, 100 and 250 mg content of ZnO NPs, respectively.


The above powder samples were placed on a copper tape and were platinum coated. The surface morphology was recorded on a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, JEOL, JSM-6700F). The morphology of the samples was also studied using a transmission electron microscope (TEM, JEOL, 2010 EX) operated at a voltage of 200 kV. A dilute solution of the sample was dropped on a carbon coated copper grid, dried in air and finally in vacuum at 30 °C. It was then directly observed through the TEM. FTIR spectra of the samples were made from KBr pellets of the samples using a Shimadzu FTIR instrument (FTIR-8400S). UV-vis spectra of the samples were taken from a water solution (0.01%, w/v) using a UV-vis spectrometer (model 8453, Hewlett-Packard). The solutions were prepared by sonicating the samples in water and the spectra were recorded by taking them in a quartz cell of 1 mm path length. Wide angle X-ray scattering (WAXS) patterns of the dried samples were recorded using a Bruker AXS diffractomer (model D8 Advance) fitted with a Lynx Eye detector. The instrument was operated at 40 kV voltage and 40 mA current. The samples were scanned from 2θ = 15–80° at a scan rate of 0.5 s per step with a step width of 0.02°. The conductivity was measured by taking the sample between two indium-tin oxide (ITO) conducting strips of 1 mm width placed perpendicularly. The area of the sample was 0.01 cm2 and the thickness of the samples was measured by a screw gauge. The conductivity of the sandwiched samples was measured by an electrometer (Keithley, model 617) at 30 °C using the equation σ = 1/R × l/a; where ‘l’ is the thickness, ‘a’ is the area and ‘R’ is the resistance of the sample.


The photoelectrodes were fabricated on ITO glass, using a controlled drop-cast method. After that the samples were dried at 120 °C for 30 minutes to remove any residual organic matter from the material surface. By a controlled drop casting method we could control the amount of active material (here ZnO, PZ1 and PZ3 samples) and after evaporation of the organic solvent the active material forms a good contact with the ITO. The substrates (pure ZnO and PZ3 composite) were sensitized by immersing them into a 0.5 mM ethanolic solution of the N719 (a ruthenium complex) dye for approximately 20 min. The sensitization time was firmly controlled and limited to avoid the dissolution of surface Zn atoms and the formation of Zn2+/dye complexes, which may block the electron transport from the dye to the semiconductor. The samples were then rinsed with ethanol to remove any additional dye. A thin layer of graphite was coated on the ITO using a pencil tip, which acts as the counter electrode (2 × 2 cm2; the same type of ITO was used as the substrate for the pure ZnO and PZ3 nanocomposite). The iodide–triiodide based electrolyte solution, consisting of 0.5 M KI and 0.05 M I2 in γ-butyrolactone, was placed on the active electrode area drop-wise. The average active electrode area was around 0.72 cm2. The electrodes were separated by a 60 μm twofold parafilm strip and sandwiched together with clips. A small space of bare ITO glass was uncovered for wire connection on the anode. To catalyze the triiodide reduction reaction, platinum is typically used. However, the high cost and limited availability of platinum is not compatible with a low-cost sustainable technology. Therefore, research has been investigating various alternative catalysts, including graphite. Thus it is an advantage of our system to use the low cost graphite material counter electrode to get a reasonable Power Conversion Efficiency (PCE). The configuration of the solar cell is achieved by putting the pure ZnO, PZ1 and PZ3 samples opposite to the ITO substrate on the top of the counter electrode in a face-to-face fashion, to prepare the respective DSCs. The dc-current between the two electrodes was measured using a Keithley source meter (model 2401). The currents were measured by illuminating with white light from a 150 W xenon lamp source (Newport Corp. USA; model no. 67005). For all the data, the corresponding illumination was 100 mW cm−2.


In Fig. 1 the FESEM images of the ZnO NPs, CTAB–LA xerogel, pure PPy, and the three PPy–ZnO nanocomposites (PZ1, PZ2 and PZ3) are presented. Pure ZnO has a nanosphere morphology and the coacervate gel exhibits a fibril-like network morphology. Pure PPy formed in the coacervate gel template has a nanorod morphology and after in situ polymerization in the presence of ZnO NPs, PZ1 retains the nanorod morphology of PPy with some ZnO nanospheres adhering on it. In PZ2, there is a less ordered nanorod morphology with more ZnO nanospheres adhering on it, but in PZ3 there is a hierarchical open nanotube (nanochannel) morphology of the PPy decorated with nanospheres of ZnO NPs. The TEM image (Fig. 2a) also indicates the same nanosphere morphology of ZnO NPs with an average diameter 95 ± 2 nm. Fig. 2b indicates that PPy has a nanosphere morphology (average diameter 345 ± 5 nm) which coalesces to produce the PPy nanorods (cf. Fig. 1c) from the influence of the surface forces of the fibrllar network of the gel. The TEM image of the PZ3 nanocomposite (Fig. 2c) indicates that the edges of the PPy nanochannels are also decorated with ZnO nanospheres. It may also be noted here from the micrographs that in the pure PPy nanorods the PPy NPs are relatively loosely bound (Fig. 2b), whereas in PZ3 the PPy NPs are so closely packed that no bare PPy NPs are observed (Fig. 2c). The EDAX spectrum of the PZ3 sample (Fig. 2d) characterizes the presence of Zn, oxygen, carbon and nitrogen atoms suggesting the presence of both ZnO and polypyrrole in the sample and the amount of ZnO was 35.5% (w/w, ESI Table 1) which is nearly equal to that obtained from the gravimetric calculation (36.7%).

The nanochannel formation in PZ3 may be attributed to the presence of ZnO NPs of larger density than that of the other samples. One probable way to explain the nanochannel formation in the PZ3 composite is summarized here. As, CTAB and LA coacervate gel consist of ZnO NPs, the ZnO NPs enter into the cavity of the gel and with the increased concentration of ZnO NPs, the cavity becomes largely filled up by the ZnO NPs. In our previous work we reported the PPy nanorod formation in the same gel template within the network cavity by coalescence of the PPy nanospheres. But due to the hindrance from the increased concentration of ZnO NPs in the gel cavity, in this case, the coalescence of the PPy nanospheres to form the PPy nanorods could not be freely possible. A probable reason is the steric hindrance of the ZnO NPs in the gel pores where ZnO NPs can enter easily (NP size 95 nm and pore size ≈ 1.05 μm) and may adhere on its surface because of interaction between the ZnO surface and the fibrillar surface of the coacervate gel. Here it would be reasonable to think that ZnO NPs would be attached at the two diagonally opposite walls to have minimum steric hindrance, the remaining portions of the pores, however, remain blank. Some ZnO NPs would also reside in the middle of the pore and probably they play a crucial role in producing the nano channel morphology. Polymerization can start easily at the PPy adsorbed at the gel pore surface where adsorption takes place through supramolecular interaction between pyrrole and the LA part of the CTAB–LA coacervate gel. Thus, polymerization starts at the edge of the pores, but it would not encompass the whole cross-sectional area of the pore due to the steric hindrance of the ZnO NPs. The polymer then grows longitudinally along the pore surface, but it cannot fill the center space of the pore cavity to produce the nanorods because of the steric hindrance of the ZnO NPs at centre. After completion of polymerization and subsequent washing of the gel template the nanochannel morphology appears because those ZnO NPs which are at the centre disperse out, but the NPs at the edges acting as a polymerization guard remain bound to the outer side edges of the PPy nano channel through supramolecular interactions. The centre ZnO NPs also provide mechanical pressure facilitating the nanochannel formation.
Fig. 3 shows the FTIR spectra of the pure PPy, ZnO NPs, and PPy–ZnO nanocomposites (PZ1, PZ2 and PZ3). The FTIR spectra of the pure ZnO NPs is presented only for comparison with the PPy samples. For pure PPy, all the characteristic peaks at 793 cm−1 (C–H wagging), 925 cm−1 (C–C out of plane vibration), 1047 cm−1 (C–H in plane vibration), 1207 cm−1 (N–C bending), 1297 cm−1 (C–C bond stretching), 1478 cm−1 (vibration of the pyrrole ring), 1563 cm−1 (CC bond stretching) and 1705 cm−1 (CN bond stretching) are observed. The small peak at 3424 and 3112 cm−1 (not shown) are assigned to the presence of N–H stretching vibrations confirming the formation of PPy. The spectra for the PPy–ZnO nanocomposites show some shift in the wave number, as well as change in the intensity of the peaks, as compared to those of PPy. The most prominent changes are (i) the peaks in PPy at 1478 and 1563 cm−1 corresponding to the stretching vibrations of the pyrrole ring and CC bond, respectively, become broader in all three PZ1, PZ2 and PZ3 samples. The mechano-cohesive force of the ZnO NPs causes the PPy chains to be more compact, causing hindrance to the above stretching vibrations. (ii) The change of the C–H in plane vibration peak is very much prominent in the PZ2 and PZ3 samples that shift from 1048 in PPy to 1045 and 1043 cm−1 in the PZ2 and PZ3 samples, respectively. The lower energy shift in the C–H in-plane vibration may indicate that the electrons become more delocalized in the PPy ring due to the increased planarity induced by the ZnO NPs. (iii) The N–C bending vibration at 1207 cm−1 also became broader in the composites. All these results indicate an interaction between PPy and ZnO NPs originating from the cohesive force of ZnO NPs on the PPy nanosphere changing the morphology from nanorod to nanochannel structure in the PZ3 nanocomposite.

In Fig. 4 the UV-vis spectra of the PPy, ZnO NPs and all the composites are presented. PPy has an absorption peak at 566 nm for the π–π* transition and ZnO exhibits an absorption peak at 362 nm related to the semiconductor band structure. In the case of the PZ1 and PZ2 composites, both peaks due to the PPy and ZnO nanoparticles are red shifted to (569, 570 nm) and (365, 367 nm), respectively. This is due to the easy delocalization of the π-electrons, indicating π-cloud–electronic band interaction between the PPy and ZnO nanoparticles. But in the case of PZ3, having a maximum loading of ZnO NPs, there is a drastic change in the peak position. Both the peaks of pure PPy and ZnO are absent and a new peak at 511 nm is observed. This may be due to the combined effect of the interaction between the electronic band of the ZnO NPs and π-cloud of the PPy chain. It might be possible that the excitons of ZnO NPs get absorbed by PPy yielding a broad absorption peak of intermediate energy where they resonate with each other.

In Fig. 5 the photoluminescence (PL) spectra of pure ZnO and that of the nanocomposites are shown. A strong emission peak, centered at 390 nm is observed for ZnO. Thus the ZnO sample exhibits only UV bandgap luminescence, but no oxygen defect luminescence is observed (cf. Fig. 5 inset). In general, a greenish yellow emission is observed in the PL spectra of ZnO around 530 nm, due to the recombination of photo generated holes with a singly ionized charge state of a specific defect. However, absence of the greenish yellow emission in our samples indicates the potential of our synthetic strategy to produce a low concentration of oxygen defects and high optical quality of the crystalline ZnO. In PZ1 the peak intensity decreased, but the peak position is not shifted. However, in the PZ2 and PZ3 there is not only a reduction in peak intensity, but also a red shift of 8 nm (from 390 to 398 nm) occurred. As there is a quenching in the PL intensity in the nanocomposite with a red shift there exists an electronic interaction between the ZnO NPs and the PPy chain.


The WAXS pattern of the PPy, ZnO NPs and PZ1, PZ2 and PZ3 nanocomposites are compared in Fig. 6. This WAXS pattern of PPy exhibits a broad peak between 2θ = 17 and 32° giving a maximum at 2θ = 23.3°. However, these values are similar to those already reported for PPy films in this region. and this broad nature in the pure PPy indicates the mainly amorphous nature of PPy with a very low degree of molecular ordering. The ZnO NPs and PZ composites show broad peaks at 2θ = 31.63°, 34.50°, 36.25°, 47.50°, 56.60°, 62.80°, 66.36°, 67.92°, and 68.91°, which are in good agreement with the standard JCPDS file for ZnO (JCPDS 36-1451, a = b = 3.249 Å, c = 5.206 Å) and can be indexed as the hexagonal wurtzite structure of ZnO. For the PPy–ZnO nanocomposites, the presence of less intense ZnO diffraction peaks suggests that the ZnO nanoparticles were probably partially covered with PPy. The broadness of the peaks remains almost the same, which further suggests that the crystalline thickness of ZnO remains the same in the composites.


The dc-conductivities of the samples are presented in the ESI Table 2 and the conductivity of ZnO (3.19 × 10−7 S cm−1) is two orders lower than that of PPy (2.29 × 10−5 S cm−1). The conductivity of the composites is also similar in order to that of pure PPy, but its value gradually increases with an increase in ZnO NP concentration, although the latter is more nonconducting than PPy. A probable reason may lie in the delocalization of the π-electrons of PPy through ZnO NPs, as discussed in the UV-vis spectra, due to electronic interaction between the PPy and ZnO NPs. However, in the case of PZ3, a drastic change in the UV-vis and PL peak positions suggests a strong interaction attributed to the better delocalization and hence the highest conductivity amongst all the samples.


We fabricated a dye sensitized solar cell (DSC) with the PZ3 composite using N719 dye as a photosensitizer. A counter electrode was made by coating a thin layer of graphite on the ITO glass where the thickness of the graphite layer was 1.99 μm measured from FESEM images under a tilt condition (Fig. 7a). The surface morphology (Fig. 7b) indicates a uniform distribution of graphite granules in the counter electrode. After absorbing the white light by the N-719 dye, the photo excited electron enters into the conduction band of the composite and then it flows to the external circuit, from which it is reinjected into the counter-electrode. This process would be facilitated by a composite, with the highest electron mobility and as the dc-conductivity of the PZ3 is the highest among all the other composites (Table 1), we chose the PZ3 composite for making a DSC. Also a reference DSC with pure ZnO NPs and a DSC with PZ1 were constructed for comparison. The J–V characteristic curves of all the DSCs are compared in Fig. 8. From the figure it is clear that the PZ3 composite based DSC shows a higher short circuit current (Jsc) and higher open circuit voltage with reasonably higher power conversion efficiency compared to those of the pure ZnO NPs based DSC. The cell characteristics are as follows: for the PZ3, the open circuit voltage is Voc = 0.56 V, Jsc = 8.54 mA cm−2 and the fill factor (FF) = 0.53 giving an overall power conversion efficiency η = 2.53%. For the pure ZnO NPs, Voc = 0.55 V, Jsc = 6.81 mA cm−2 and the fill factor is (FF) = 0.50 giving the η = 1.87% (Fig. 8, inset). Thus the power conversion efficiency of the DSC based on the PZ3 nanocomposite is ≈35% higher than that of the bare ZnO NPs based DSC. For the PZ1 sample the Voc = 0.56 V, Jsc = 6.96 mA cm−2 and the fill factor (FF) = 0.51, giving an overall power conversion efficiency η = 1.98%. These results indicate that the power conversion efficiency increases with an increase in ZnO concentration in the PPy nanocomposites, although the cell fabricated with pure ZnO has the lowest power conversion efficiency.

A schematic diagram (Fig. 9) shows the operational principle of the PZ3 based DSC where under the white light illumination (150 W xenon lamp), the LUMO of PPy (−2.5 eV) receives electrons from the photo excited dye. The excited electrons can tunnel through the nanochannel morphology of PPy to the conduction band of ZnO (−4.0 eV) without any obstruction. Because the ZnO is anchored with the conducting PPy with nanochannel morphology, the collected electrons can, therefore, transport from PPy to ZnO to ITO quickly (Fig. 9). The conductive PPy network onto the ZnO NPs may decrease the probability of the recombination reaction. This is the probable reason for yielding a reasonably higher photocurrent density (Jsc = 8.54 mA cm−2) than that of ZnO NPs based DSC (Jsc = 6.81 mA cm−2) as a reverse charge transfer in the DSCs (recombination reaction) from ZnO to the dye or to the redox couple may severely reduce the cell efficiency. Thus the Jsc, as well as the overall power conversion efficiency (η), is increased. Also in PZ3, the nanochannel morphology provides a high surface area, which also helps the dye to be adsorbed easier than with PZ1, hence there is a better power conversion efficiency.

In conclusion we have been able to fine tune the nanorod morphology of PPy to the nanochannel morphology by polymerizing pyrrole in the presence of varying amounts of ZnO nanoparticles (NPs) in a LA–CTAB coacervate gel template. A probable reason for the nanorod formation of PPy has been attributed to the coalescence of PPy nanospheres due to the surface forces in the gel template and the nanochannel morphology of PZ3 has been attributed to the steric hindrance of the ZnO NPs causing the restricted growth of PPy and the growth occurs only at the edges of the gel pores. The ZnO NPs have a hexagonal wurtzite structure and in PZ samples the same broadness of the diffraction peaks suggests a uniform dispersion of the nanoparticles without serious agglomeration. FTIR and UV-vis spectra suggest the presence of an interaction between PPy and the ZnO NPs causing shifts of different vibration and electronic bands. The ZnO NPs exhibit only the UV-fluorescence peak at 390 nm, and in PZ composites the fluorescence peak intensity decreases with a red shift of 8 nm (from 390 to 398 nm), supporting a strong electronic interaction between the PPy and ZnO NPs. The dc conductivity of the ZnO NPs is lower than that of PPy and PZ3 has the highest conductivity of the other nanocomposites. The dye sensitized solar cell fabricated with the highest conducting PZ3 composite using N719 dye as a photosensitizer has the cell characteristics Voc = 0.56 V, Jsc = 8.54 mA cm−2 and the fill factor (FF) = 0.53 giving an overall power conversion efficiency η = 2.53% which is ≈35% more efficient than that of the bare ZnO NPs based DSC. For the PZ1 based DSC Voc = 0.56 V, Jsc = 6.96 mA cm−2 and the fill factor (FF) = 0.51, giving an overall power conversion efficiency η = 1.98%. These results indicate that the power conversion efficiency (PCE) increases with an increase in ZnO concentration in the nanocomposites, although the cell fabricated with pure ZnO has the lowest PCE value. A photoconduction mechanism has been proposed where under white light illumination the PPy nanochannel receives electrons from the photo excited dye and then becomes transferred to the conduction band of ZnO via tunneling and finally it is quickly transferred to the electrode.


We gratefully acknowledge CSIR (grant # 02 (0051)/12/EMR-II) for financial support. S.C and A.S. acknowledge CSIR and DST-INSPIRE program for the fellowship.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Tables of EDAX results and dc-conductivity data. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta12796f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013