 DOI: 10.1039/D1TC01528A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 7575-7582


Yi
Tang
,

Lan
Xie
,

Dingding
Qiu
,

Chen
Yang
,

Yanan
Liu
,

Yanan
Shi
,

Ziyun
Huang
,

Jianqi
Zhang
,

Jiawen
Hu
*,

Kun
Lu
* and 

Zhixiang
Wei
*

Hunan Key Laboratory of Two-Dimensional Materials, Advanced Catalytic Engineering Research Center of the Ministry of Education, and College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China. E-mail: jwhu@hnu.edu.cn

Chinese Academy of Science (CAS) Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication, CAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing, 100190, China. E-mail: lvk@nanoctr.cn; weizx@nanoctr.cn

Received
2nd April 2021
, Accepted 10th May 2021
First published on 13th May 2021
The energy levels and crystallinity of the polymer donor greatly affect the active layer morphology and device performance in non-fullerene organic solar cells (OSCs). In this work, a new series of polymer donors consisting of dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (DTBDT) and 2,2′-bithiophene-3,3′-dicarboximide (BTI) units were synthesized and named PDTBDT, PDTBDT-T, and PDTBDT-T-Cl. The BTI unit shows a strong electron withdrawing ability to reduce the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level and a good planarity to reduce the steric hindrance effectively. The combination of BTI and DTBDT units with high planarity and rigidity magnificently maintains the crystallinity of the polymer, improves that of the acceptor, and obtains a preferred face-on orientation, thereby greatly improving the charge transfer efficiency. The introduced thiophene π-bridges and chlorine atoms in the conjugated structure further optimized light absorption and the energy level of the polymers. With the small molecule Y6 as the acceptor, the optimized OSCs based on PDTBDT-T-Cl:Y6 achieved a power conversion efficiency of 15.63%, which is remarkably higher than those of PDTBDT-T:Y6 (12.71%) and PDTBDT:Y6 (8.22%). These results show that BTI-based polymer donors can achieve comparable performance to the classic polymer donor of PM6 by designing their molecular structure to enhance the crystallinity, promote the stacking of the acceptor, optimize the phase separation morphology, and improve the performance of the device.

Organic solar cells (OSCs) have received great attention because of their light weight, low cost, and application in preparing large-area organic flexible solar cells through roll-to-roll printing technology. With the continuous development of new materials and the joint efforts of device optimization, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of single-junction non-fullerene bulk heterojunction (BHJ) OSCs has rapidly increased from 6% to 18%. High-performance polymer donors are essential for the development of non-fullerene organic solar cells; however, only a few polymer donors such as PM6 and PTQ10 can achieve excellent performance, especially when blended with Y6. Among various conjugated polymers, the best design is to use the intramolecular donor (D) acceptor (A) alternate molecular construction to obtain a different D–A structure or a D–π–A structure conjugated polymer. The physical, chemical, and optical properties of polymer materials can be controlled by introducing different structure units. Therefore, the correlation between polymer D–A structures and device results must be deeply explored. The 2,2′-bithiophene-3,3′-dicarboximide (BTI) group has a strong ability to withdraw electrons and has a planar rigid structure, which can reduce steric hindrance, achieve expanded conjugation with the donor unit, and facilitate intermolecular charge transport. After the report by Marks et al. in 2008, the application of BTI-based polymer donors in OSCs has been continuously developed; studies have focused on the planar structure of BTI to increase the mobility or change the polymerization conditions and post-treatment conditions to enhance the molecular weight of the polymer and increase the crystallinity of the corresponding polymer. Hence, the BTI unit has become a suitable acceptor unit candidate.

The extended π-conjugation can increase the planarity and rigidity of the molecule in the film state and effectively improve the transport of charge carriers. In the research of polymer donors, many advances have been achieved with benzodithiophene (BDT) as a donor unit. As a notable aromatic analogue of BDT, dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (DTBDT) is a donor unit with two additionalthiophene rings on the flanks and a consequently larger planar backbone and extended conjugation length, which greatly affect the carrier mobility compared with BDT-based molecules. Rigid or large conjugated chains exhibit a strong intermolecular π–π stacking and orderly lamellar packing capability to prohibit excessive interchain aggregation. To date, DTBDT-based polymer donors have received less attention than BDT-based polymer donors and thus have more room for development. In this work, DTBDT was used as the donor unit and BTI as the acceptor unit to synthesize copolymers that can effectively improve the planarity and expand the conjugation length, thus further influencing the energy level, charge transport, molecular orientation, and crystallinity of the polymer and consequently enhancing the performance of OSCs. Introducing π-bridges and chlorine atoms into the thiophene side chains of the DTBDT unit is an effective strategy to effectively control the solubility, crystallinity, and aggregation structure of polymers. The former expands the polymer conjugate system to enhance absorption and charge transfer efficiency, and the latter uses the strong electron affinity of halogen atoms to reduce the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy level of the polymer donor, both of which can enhance the open circuit voltage (VOC) of devices.
Herein, three copolymers containing DTBDT and BTI as donors and named PDTBDT, PDTBDT-T, and PDTBDT-T-Cl were designed and synthesized to improve the crystallinity and charge transfer efficiency of non-fullerene organic solar cells (NF-OSCs). For amplified beneficial effects, 3-octylthiophene was used as a π-bridge, and the chlorine atom replaced the hydrogen atom at the third position of the DTBDT thiophene side chain. In this system, the active layers of NF-OSCs were blended with polymer donors and a small molecule Y6. Among them, the device based on PDTBDT-T-Cl:Y6 shows the highest efficiency of up to 15.63%, and the devices based on PDTBDT-T:Y6 and PDTBDT:Y6 have only 12.71% and 8.22%, respectively. This result reveals that when DTBDT is the donor unit and BTI is the acceptor unit, the copolymers can improve and control the crystallinity of the material to a moderate degree. Due to the suitable compatibility to optimize the phase separation of the blend film, the device based on PDTBDT-T-Cl:Y6 remarkably promotes the charge mobility and suppresses recombination, thereby effectively increasing FF. On the other hand, the addition of thiophene bridges improves the short circuit current (JSC) by enhancing light absorption, while the introduction of Cl atoms decreases the HOMO energy level to increase the VOC of devices. Through the above comprehensive actions, the efficiency of organic solar cells can be improved correspondingly.

The molecular structures of PDTBDT, PDTBDT-T, and PDTBDT-T-Cl are shown in Fig. 1a, and the detailed synthesis and characterization of these molecules can be found in the ESI. All three polymers exhibited excellent solubility in chloroform. The UV–vis absorption spectrum of the three polymers was measured in chloroform solutions and solid state films (Fig. 1b, c and Fig. S8, ESI). The main absorption range of the three polymers is 400–680 nm, which complements the absorption spectra of Y6. The absorption of PDTBDT in the film shows similar optical properties to that in the solution state with a strong shoulder at 585 nm. This finding indicates that the polymer chains in the solution have strongly aggregated. However, the absorption of PDTBDT-T and PDTBDT-T-Cl films is slightly different from that in the solution state. The maximum absorption peak of PDTBDT-T is at 563 nm and that in the film is at 555 nm. The maximum absorption peak of PDTBDT-T-Cl is at 562 nm and that in the film is at 556 nm. These two polymers exhibit a slight blue shift. In addition, the shoulder peak is very weak, indicating a low degree of molecular aggregation. According to the absorption coefficient, the value of PDTBDT-T-Cl is higher than those of PDTBDT-T and PDTBDT in the range of 450–600 nm, which is beneficial for achieving a high JSC. The energy levels of polymers were measured by cyclic voltammetry (CV) (Fig. S9, ESI). The oxidation onset potential and reduction onset potential were used to calculate the HOMO and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels, respectively. The obtained HOMO and LUMO energy levels were −5.67 and −3.28 eV for PDTBDT, −5.40 and −3.21 eV for PDTBDT-T, and −5.58 and −3.26 eV for PDTBDT-T-Cl, respectively (Fig. 1d). These results show that after the introduction of 3-octylthiophene as a π-conjugated bridge unit, the conjugated backbone has been expanded. This phenomenon has led to an increase in the HOMO energy level and a slight decrease in the LUMO energy level of the polymer donors. The halogenated 2D side chain further optimizes the polymer; the electron-withdrawing chlorine atom down-shifts the HOMO energy levels of polymer donors and enhances the VOC of the corresponding devices.


Polymer solar cells with the conventional structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/PFN-Br/Ag were fabricated to investigate the photovoltaic properties of PDTBDT, PDTBDT-T, and PDTBDT-T-Cl. The device conditions, including the donor:acceptor ratio, total concentration, solvent additives, thermal annealing temperature, and solvent annealing time, were optimized to obtain the best device performance. The specific parameters are displayed in Tables S2–S6 (ESI). The current density–voltage (J–V) and the photovoltaic parameters of the devices are summarized in Fig. 2a and Table 1. The PDTBDT-T-Cl:Y6 system exhibited the best photovoltaic performance after thermal annealing (TA) at 110 °C and then solvent vapor annealing (SVA) in THF, mainly due to the increase in JSC and FF. It can be verified that TA and SVA had a positive effect on the blend film, and its phase separation and crystallinity had been significantly improved (Fig. S10, ESI). Under the optimal conditions, the device performances of the three polymers were significantly different. PDTBDT:Y6 exhibited the highest PCE of 8.22% with a VOC of 0.895 V, JSC of 17.18 mA cm−2, and fill factor (FF) of 53.50%. After 3-octylthiophene units were introduced to broaden the conjugated system, the PCE increased to 12.71%, with an increased JSC of 24.21 mA cm−2, FF of 65.81%, and a decreased VOC of 0.780 V. After chlorine atoms were introduced into the polymer, the performance significantly improved with a PCE of 15.63% with an increased VOC of 0.860 V, JSC of 24.46 mA cm−2, and FF of 71.65%. Relative to PDTBDT, PDTBDT-T-Cl has a slight decrease in VOC, and its JSC and FF have a huge improvement. Compared with those of PDTBDT-T, its JSC is not much different, and its VOC and FF have been significantly improved. This finding has been discussed above because PDTBDT-T-Cl has a relatively low HOMO energy level and a high absorption coefficient. The increase in FF may be due to the optimization of phase separation and the strong molecular aggregation ability, which will be discussed in the next section.

Devices

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

J
cal (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

μ
h (cm2 V−1 s−1)

μ
e (cm2 V−1 s−1)
PDTBDT
0.895
17.18 (17.42 ± 0.18)
16.34
53.50 (51.83 ± 0.10)
8.22 (8.17 ± 0.02)
3.39 × 10-5
1.07 × 10-4
PDTBDT-T
0.780
24.21 (24.60 ± 0.39)
23.85
65.81 (64.25 ± 1.45)
12.71 (12.64 ± 0.07)
2.74 × 10-4
2.91 × 10-5
PDTBDT-T-Cl
0.860
24.46 (24.49 ± 0.32)
23.44
71.65 (69.92 ± 0.41)
15.63 (14.85 ± 0.32)
6.79 × 10-4
3.78 × 10-4
The external quantum efficiencies (EQE) of the three polymers were measured to explicate the JSC difference of the devices (Fig. 2b). The EQE spectra response range of the three polymer systems was approximately 300–900 nm, which is consistent with the good complementary spectrum of the polymer and Y6. The light response before 650 nm mainly originated from the polymer donors and that after 650 nm was dominated by Y6. The calculated JSC values of PDTBDT, PDTBDT-T, and PDTBDT-T-Cl are 16.34, 23.85, and 23.44 mA cm−2, respectively, which are consistent with those measured from the J–V curves within 5% mismatch. Therefore, VOC, JSC, and FF significantly differ from PDTBDT to PDTBDT-T- and PDTBDT-T-Cl-based devices. Given that VOC and JSC trends can be well explained by molecular energy levels and UV–vis absorption spectra, the considerable discrepancy in the FF values of the three systems could be oriented by the charge transport and recombination behavior and the morphologies of the blend films.
Determining the correlation between JSC and Plight can help understand the charge recombination mechanism of devices. This relationship can be fitted as JSC ∝ Pαlight, where Plight is the light intensity, and the index α is a factor related to bimolecular recombination (Fig. 2c). LogJSC and logPlight have a linear dependence, and the slopes α of PDTBDT, PDTBDT-T, and PDTBDT-T-Cl are 0.984, 0.989, and 0.993, respectively. When α is close to 1, the device has weak bimolecular recombination. The α value of the PDTBDT-T-Cl:Y6 device is closer to 1 compared with those of other devices. This finding implies that bimolecular recombination is significantly suppressed, resulting in an increase in FF.
The dependence of the photocurrent density (Jph) versus the effective voltage (Veff) was measured to further explore the operating mechanism of the device and the dissociation ability of exciton (Fig. 2d). Jph is defined as JL–JD, where JL and JD are the current densities under illumination and dark current densities, respectively. Veff is defined as V0–V, where V0 is the voltage at Jph = 0 and V is the applied voltage. The exciton dissociation probability P(E, T) can be displayed as the value of Jph/Jsat. Jsat is the saturation photocurrent density when Veff = 2V. The Jsat values of PDTBDT, PDTBDT-T, and PDTBDT-T-Cl were measured as 20.14, 25.53, and 25.16 mA cm−2, respectively. The calculated values of P(E, T) were 0.90, 0.97, and 0.98 for PDTBDT, PDTBDT-T, and PDTBDT-T-Cl, respectively. The PDTBDT-T-Cl:Y6 device has the highest P(E, T) value, indicating its great exciton dissociation and charge collection capabilities that can further improve the FF.

The charge mobility of the blend films was measured using space–charge limited current (SCLC) (Fig. S11, ESI). The hole mobility (μh) and electron mobility (μe) values of the blend film of the three systems are summarized in Table 1. Compared with PDTBDT:Y6 (3.39 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1) and PDTBDT-T:Y6 (2.74 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1), PDTBDT-T-Cl:Y6 exhibits higher hole mobility of 6.79 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 that could be attributed to the preferable planarity and strong crystallinity of the material. In addition, the electron mobility of PDTBDT-T-Cl:Y6 is significantly improved possibly due to the promoted stacking of Y6 and the enhancement of its crystallinity. On the contrary, the electron mobility of PDTBDT-T:Y6 is the lowest due to excessive crystallinity, which may lead to poor phase continuity and impeded charge transport. The grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) results will be further analyzed in the next part. In brief, the PDTBDT-T-Cl:Y6 blend film has balanced hole and electron mobilities that help reduce the charge recombination of the system, thereby increasing FF.


The morphology of the active layer was characterized by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Fig. 3a, d and g shows the AFM height images, in which the PDTBDT-T:Y6 and PDTBDT-T-Cl:Y6 blend films present a small mean-square surface roughness (Rq) of 1.65 and 2.09 nm, respectively. However, the PDTBDT-T-Cl:Y6 film has a significantly increased roughness of 3.98 nm. Such a trend could also be observed from the corresponding phase images and TEM results. The phase image of the PDTBDT-T-Cl:Y6 film (Fig. 3h) shows a significantly rougher and better phase size, showing an excellent continuous interpenetrating morphology, and the optimized phase separation morphology is conducive to better exciton extraction and carrier transport. Among these three systems, the expansion of the conjugate system and the introduction of chlorine atoms significantly affect the crystallinity and stacking ability of the molecules, thus adjusting the morphology in the active layer, producing good phase separation, and constructing an interpenetrating network. This reason mainly explains why devices based on PDTBDT-T-Cl:Y6 have achieved JSC and FF improvement.

The GIWAXS method was used to study the crystallinity of these three polymers and the molecular packing and orientation in the blend films. The 2D GIWAXS diffraction pattern and the corresponding integral curve of the films are shown in Fig. 4, and the summary of its packing parameters is given in Table S7 (ESI). The PDTBDT-T-Cl and PDTBDT-T pure films exhibit a π–π stacking (010) diffraction peak at ≈1.67 Å−1 with a d-spacing of ≈3.76 Å in the out-of-plane (OOP) direction and a (100) diffraction peak at ≈0.27 Å−1 with a d-spacing of ≈23.25 Å along the in-plane (IP) direction. This finding indicates the presence of face-on orientations in pure films, which are conducive to charge transfer in the vertical direction. Polymer PDTBDT-T-Cl also has the shortest π–π stacking distance, implying that a relatively dense interchain stacking is formed. However, PDTBDT does not have in-plane diffraction peaks and out-of-plane diffraction peaks due to the bad quality of the film. The pure film of the acceptor Y6 also shows a clear (010) peak at ≈1.73 Å−1 along the out-of-plane direction, indicating that its orientation is mainly face-on. The Scherrer formula was used to calculate the crystal coherence length (CCL) of the molecule: CCL = 2πK/FWHM, where K is the shape factor with a value of 0.9, and FWHM represents the full width at half maximum. The CCL of the (100) peaks in the IP direction of PDTBDT-T-Cl and PDTBDT-T are 80.74 Å and 86.95 Å, respectively, implying that PDTBDT-T has a strong crystallinity. Therefore, crystallinity can be improved through the thiophene bridge but will be slightly reduced after the introduction of chlorine. This trend occurs because PDTBDT-T-Cl has adjusted crystallinity and avoided the formation of excessively large molecules, which are beneficial to obtain a good phase separation. For the blend film of the three systems, all three systems have (010) diffraction peaks in the out-of-plane direction, implying their superior face-on orientations. In the in-plane direction, two diffraction peaks are found at low q ≈ 0.28 Å−1 and high q ≈ 0.41 Å−1. Considering that the diffraction peak at 0.41 Å−1 exists in the blend film and the Y6 pure film, its presence may be due to the introduction of Y6 and entails a certain degree of enhancement in the blend film. The CCL value of PDTBDT-T can reach a maximum of 141.30 Å, and that of PDTDBT-T-Cl can also reach 134.57 Å, but that of PDTBDT is only 76.38 Å. This finding indicates that PDTBTD-T and PDTBTD-T-Cl have strong crystallization ability. Therefore, the donor with the introduction of thiophene and chlorine atoms can adjust the crystallinity while maintaining its own crystallinity and simultaneously promoting the crystallinity of the acceptor Y6. This adjustment strategy improves the phase separation in the blend film, thereby optimizing the charge transport in the device.

The GIWAXS results revealed that the crystallinity of the donor is maintained after mixing and that of the acceptor is enhanced. The phenomenon may be related to the compatibility of the donor and acceptor. Hence, the phase separation between the donor and acceptor was deeply analyzed to understand the miscibility of the three donors and the acceptor. The surface tension and interfacial parameter of each material were also evaluated by the contact angle measurement. Fig. 5 shows the measured contact angles of two liquids (water and glycerol) on various pure films. The surface tension of each material and the interfacial parameter between the donor and acceptor were calculated using previous methods, and the results are listed in Table 2. The surface tensions are 14.50, 13.85, and 14.37 mN m−1 for PDTBDT, PDTBDT-T and PDTBDT-T-Cl, respectively. A similar interaction parameter was observed between the polymer and Y6 (0.13, 0.20, and 0.14 for the PDTBDT, PDTBDT-T, and PDTBDT-T-Cl systems, respectively), all exhibiting the same degree of miscibility after mixing. Based on this result and the comprehensive analysis of crystallinity and energy level control, PDTBDT-T-Cl and PDTBDT-T still maintain good crystallinity after being mixed with Y6 to improve the phase separation, while the HOMO energy level of PDTBDT-T-Cl is lower than PDTBDT-T. Under the above joint action, the charge transfer of the device and the optimization of VOC, JSC, FF parameters are realized.

Pristine films

θ
water (deg)

θ
glycerol (deg)
Surface tension [mN m−1]
interaction parameter (σ)
PDTBDT
97.00
85.09
14.50
0.13
PDTBDT-T
97.33
89.61
13.85
0.20
PDTBDT-T-Cl
97.42
85.16
14.37
0.14
Y6
91.58
80.62
17.35
—

In this work, three copolymers were designed with DTBDT as the donor unit, BTI as the acceptor unit, and 2-octylthiophene as the π-bridge, all of which were paired with Y6 to form high-efficiency NF-OSCs. A major feature of this system is the use of BTI as the acceptor unit to dramatically reduce the steric hindrance to expand the conjugated backbone. For the subsequent optimization of the structural properties of the polymer, the conjugated π-bridge was used to expand the light absorption range and control the polymer energy level through the chlorine atom. After mixing with the acceptor, PDTBDT-T-Cl:Y6 exhibits an excellent charge separation due to the balance of crystallinity and compatibility and has a highly ordered surface molecular orientation that greatly enhances the charge transport ability. Hence, the PCE of OSCs based on PDTBDT-T-Cl:Y6 reached 15.63%, with a VOC of 0.860 V, JSC of 24.46 mA cm−2, and FF of 71.65%. This work aims to emphasize that BTI units can be effectively copolymerized with donor units to achieve extended conjugation, thereby improving the optical and electrochemical properties of the polymer. This work also provides some effective strategies for the design of high performance polymer donors in the future.


Y. T. characterized the devices. L. X. and D. Q. synthesized the polymer materials, and C. Y., Y. L., Y. S., and Z. H. together helped to characterize AFM, TEM and the contact angle. J. Z. performed GIWAXS. Y. T. and L. X. prepared the paper. All authors discussed and commented on the paper. J. H., K. L. and Z. W. supervised the project.


The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


The authors acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51961135103, 21822503, 51973043, and 21721002), the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (Grant No. 2016YFA0200700), the Youth Innovation Promotion Association, and the Chinese Academy of Sciences.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc01528a
‡ These authors contributed equally to the work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021