 DOI: 10.1039/C2RA22518B
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 2910-2916
Shibu Zhu, Liming Shan, Xiangnan Chen, Lan He, Jingjing Chen, Man Jiang, Xiaoli Xie and Zuowan Zhou*
Key Laboratory of Advanced Technologies of Materials (Ministry of Education), School of Materials Science and Engineering, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, 610031, PR China. E-mail: zwzhou@at-c.net; Fax: +86-28-87600454
School of Materials Science and Engineering, Southwest University of Science and Technology, Mianyang, Sichuan, 621010, PR China
Received 15th October 2012, Accepted 18th December 2012
First published on 20th December 2012
ZnO nanorod–nanosheet (NR–NS) hierarchical architectures grown on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass substrates were prepared via a two-step solution route, which involved the growth of the ZnO nanorods on the FTO substrate, followed by a secondary growth of the ZnO nanosheet on the as-grown backbone. The characterization showed that the nanosheets composed of very small nanoparticles underwent oriented attachment by closely covering the nanorods, resulting in an enhancement of the internal surface area. The ZnO nanostructure films were applied to dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). The photovoltaic results demonstrated that the short circuit current density and the energy conversion efficiency of the NR–NS hierarchical architecture DSSCs were 4.806 mA cm−2 and 1.13%, respectively, which was almost two times higher than those of nanorod only arrays. The dye desorption result and diffused reflectance spectra indicated that the dye absorption amount and light scattering within the NR–NS hierarchical architecture photoanode were higher than those for the nanorod photoanode. The significant improvement was a consequence of the enhancement of dye loading and light scattering within the NR–NS hierarchical architecture photoanode.

Due to their low production cost, manufacturing process and relatively high power conversion efficiency, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are regarded as attractive photovoltaic devices for mass production. Until now, the most successful DSSCs, fabricated with porous TiO2 nanoparticle film, have achieved conversion efficiencies of more than 12%. In addition to TiO2, a series of other n-type metal oxide semiconductors can be used in DSSCs in principle, such as ZnO, SnO2, and In2O3. Among these metal oxides, ZnO has been considered as a promising alternative photoelectrode material owing to its higher electron mobility and similar electronic band structure with respect to TiO2, and it easily undergoes crystallization and anisotropic growth. So far, many varieties of ZnO nanostructures have been synthesized for the fabrication of photoanodes for DSSCs, such as nanoparticles, hollow spheres, nanowires, nanosheets, nanoflowers, and so on. Recently, 1-D ZnO nanostructures have been extensively studied and are expected to significantly improve the electron diffusion length in the photoelectrode films by providing a direct conduction pathway, therefore reducing the number of interparticle hops.

However, the conversion efficiencies of the 1-D ZnO nanostructured cells are still much lower compared to TiO2 nanostructures, due to their inferior surface area for dye loading and deficient light scattering. In order to further enhance the surface area of simple 1-D nanostructures, novel nanostructures combining multi-scale hierarchical configurations have recently been studied. Cheng et al. reported that branched ZnO nanowires, prepared via a two-step solvothermal method, for DSSCs could obviously enhance the overall conversion efficiency. Ko et al. and Herman et al. recently demonstrated that a nanoforest of high density, long branched treelike multigeneration hierarchical crystalline ZnO photoanodes prepared via a simple selective hierarchical growth sequence could significantly improve the DSSC’s power conversion efficiency. The above mentioned methods to synthesize ZnO hierarchical nanostructures need to prepare a secondary ZnO seed layer on the ZnO nanowire which is relatively complicated. Another approach to obtain hierarchical ZnO nanostructures is to deposit nanoparticles on a ZnO nanowire film by dip-coating or spin-coating methods. Gan et al. reported an easy and efficient method to fill the interstitial voids of the ZnO nanowires with TiO2 NPs by integrating the ultrasonic irradiation with the dip-coating method. Yodyingyong et al. fabricated nanoparticle and nanowire array hybrid photoanodes for DSSCs by spin-coating the colloidal dispersion of ZnO nanoparticles on top of ZnO nanowire arrays. A major problem of the above discussed routes for making nanoparticles and 1-D nanostructure hierarchical architectures is how to disperse a large amount of nanoparticles homogeneously among 1-D structures during the photoanode manufacturing process. So, Dong et al. synthesized ZnO nanorods stacked in a random way to form a film via a hydrothermal method, and then grew nanoparticles on the backbone, which could make sure that the nanoparticles were distributed homogeneously among the nanorods. Another issue is that the gap filling of nanoparticles in the adjacent nanowires remains deficient.
On the basis of the above discussions, in the present article, we preliminarily fabricated ZnO nanorod–nanosheet (NR–NS) hierarchical architectures through a two-step solution route. The 1-D ZnO nanorods perpendicular to the FTO substrate were prepared and served as a backbone for the direct electron transporting pathway, and then in a subsequent process, the nanosheets were directly generated on the nanorod backbone. This could create a higher internal surface area for dye loading. Furthermore, the photovoltaic properties in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) were also discussed. The conversion efficiency based on the ZnO NR–NS hierarchical architectures exhibited significant improvements compared with those of the ZnO nanorods. We expect that using the NR–NS hierarchical architecture photoanode will help us to greatly increase the dye loading and light harvesting, while retaining good electron conductivity.

All chemicals in this experiment were analytical grade and used as received without further purification. Fluorinated tin oxide (FTO, 15 Ω cm−2, Nippon Sheet Glass, Japan) was rinsed ultrasonically in acetone, ethanol and distilled water for 15 min, respectively. To synthesize the ZnO nanorod film, a simple solution route was used, which was similar to our previous report. In a typical process, ZnO-seeded FTO substrates were vertically put into a glass bottle containing 25 mM zinc nitrate (Zn(NO3)2, 99%, Aladdin), 25 mM hexamethylenetetramine (HMTA, 99%, Aladdin) and 7 mM polyethyleneimine (branched, low molecular weight, Aldrich) solution, and the hydrothermal reaction was carried out at 92 °C for 32 h. The growth solutions were refreshed every 4 h during the reaction period.


ZnO nanorod–nanosheet hierarchical architectures were prepared via a two-step solution method. The first process is the same as the synthesis of the ZnO nanorod film. For the subsequent procedure, the FTO substrate coated with ZnO nanorods was transferred to a glass bottle containing 10 mM Zn(NO3)2, 10 mM HMTA and 1 mM trisodium citrate (C6H5Na3·2H2O, AR, Chengdu Kelong Chemical) aqueous solution, and the hydrothermal reaction was carried out at 70 °C for 5 h. After the reaction, all samples were taken out to rinse with deionized water and ethanol, respectively. Finally, films consisting of NR–NS hierarchical architectures were obtained.


The obtained ZnO photoanodes were immersed into a 0.3 mM solution of (Bu4N)2Ru(dcbpyH)2(NCS)2 (N719 dye, Dyesol, Australia) in dry ethanol for 3 h, followed by cleaning with absolute ethanol to remove the abundant dye to obtain dye-sensitized photoanodes. The dye-sensitized electrode and sputtered Pt counter electrode on the FTO were assembled into a sandwich type cell. When assembling the DSSC, the electrolyte solution containing 0.3 M 1,2-dimethyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide, 0.5 M LiI, 0.05 M I2 and 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine in acetonitrile was sandwiched by a sensitized ZnO electrode and a counter electrode with two clips, and the space between the two electrodes is controlled by an adhesive tape with a thickness of ca. 50 μm.


The surface morphologies of the ZnO films were characterized by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, JSM-7001F, JEOL) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEM2100, JEOL). X-ray diffraction analysis of the as-grown ZnO nanograss film was carried out on a Philips X'Pert PRO X-ray diffractometer with a Cu-Kα radiation from 10° to 100°. The photovoltaic performance of the DSSCs was measured by a CIMPS-2 electrochemical workstation (Zahner, Germany) under simulated illumination (100 mW cm−2), which was provided by a 150 W Xenon Arc Lamp (XBO 150W/CR OFR, OSRAM). The electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) measurements were recorded by applying a 10 mV ac signal over the frequency ranging from 100 mHz to 100 kHz under simulated illumination at an applied bias of open-circuit voltage. The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area and the pore-size distribution of the as-prepared ZnO films were determined by the nitrogen (N2) adsorption method in a Micromeritics ASAP 2020 nitrogen adsorption apparatus (USA). In order to measure the amount of dye adsorbed on the ZnO film, the dye was desorbed into 0.1 M NaOH aqueous solution, and the absorption spectra of the desorbed-dye solution were measured by a UV-2550 UV-vis spectrophotometer (Shimadzu, Japan). The diffused reflectance spectra of ZnO films were obtained by UV-vis-NIR spectrophotometer (UV-3150).


Fig. 1 gives the schematic diagram of the experimental procedure. At both of the two steps, ZnO was synthesized based on the following chemical reactions:
(CH2)6N4 + 6H2O ↔ 6HCHO + 4NH3
NH3 + H2O ↔ NH4+ + OH−
Zn2+ + 2OH− ↔ Zn(OH)2 ↔ ZnO + H2O
It had been proposed that HMTA reacted with water to generate ammonia that further reacted with water to form OH−, which Zn2+ then reacted with to form ZnO. HMTA acted as a pH buffer and provided a slow and controlled supply of OH−. PEI and trisodium citrate did not react with any compounds during the whole process. At step one, a certain concentration of PEI, selectively adsorbed on the non-polar planes {010} of ZnO, controlled the aspect of ZnO nanorods. At step two, however, in the presence of trisodium citrate, preferentially adsorbed onto the positive Zn2+ (0001) lattice plane, nanosheets could be formed on the surface of the nanorods. So ZnO NR–NS hierarchical architectures were obtained via the two solution process.
The crystallinity of the obtained samples grown on the FTO substrate was investigated using X-ray diffraction analysis. Fig. 2 shows the XRD patterns of the samples coated on the FTO substrate, and the sample prepared through step one is named sample 1 and the sample obtained after step two is named sample 2. The diffraction peaks (denoted as *) in all the curves are ascribed to the FTO substrate. Compared with the XRD patterns of both the two samples, it can be found that all the diffraction peaks in the XRD patterns are in good agreement with the wurtzite hexagonal structures of ZnO (JCPDS card No. 36-1451, a = b = 3.2498, c = 5.2066). No characteristic peaks arising from reactants or intermediate products are detected, implying the high purity of the prepared ZnO nanostructure films. The highest peak intensity corresponds to the ZnO (0002) plane, centered at about 34.4°, indicating a high degree of orientation along the c-axis that was perpendicular to the FTO substrates.
The morphology and internal structure of the as-prepared ZnO samples are further characterized by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Fig. 3a shows the SEM images of the nanorods synthesized by step one. It was clear that the nanorods' length was ca. 11 μm and the diameter was nearly 125 nm. From the insert image of Fig. 3a, one can see the ZnO nanorods are almost vertically aligned on the FTO substrates, which is in agreement with the XRD results. These nanorods were perpendicular to the FTO substrate, so that the mesoporous film was formed for the photoanode. As a photoanode of DSSCs, the mesoporous structure was beneficial for the electrolyte to penetrate into the photoanode. Fig. 3b shows the SEM images of the NR–NS hierarchical architectures synthesized at both step one and step two. It is obvious that the smooth surface of the ZnO nanorods are surrounded by a nanosheet, forming a rough “shell” out of the nanorods. Compared to the bare ZnO nanorods, the diameter of the ZnO NR–NS hierarchical architectures was significantly increased, indicating that the nanosheet shell was thick. Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) analysis based on N2 adsorption has been used to determine the surface area and the pore size distribution using the Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) method. The BET surface area and the total pore volume of the NR film are 7.94 m2 g−1 and 0.1012 cm3 g−1, respectively. By contrast, the surface area of the NR–NS hierarchical architecture film increases to 15.73 m2 g−1 while the total pore volume attains 0.1946 cm3 g−1. These results directly confirm that the surface area of the ZnO NR–NS hierarchical architecture photoanode was notably enhanced.
Typical images of the ZnO nanorods and NR–NS hierarchical structure are shown in Fig. 4 (a) and (c). The mean diameter of the nanorods was about 125 nm, which was in good agreement with the FE-SEM results. It is also clearly seen that dense nanosheets with the thickness of ca. 12 nm encompass around nanorods to form the NR–NS hierarchical architectures (Fig. 4 (c)). The structural characteristics of the nanorods and the NR–NS hierarchical architectures are more distinctly observed in the corresponding HRTEM pattern (shown in Fig. 4 (b) and (d)). Lattice fringes with interplanar spacing of the observed nanorod are 2.6 Å, this is consistent with the lattice spacing of the (002) planes of hexagonal wurtzite ZnO, confirming that the nanorod is single-crystalline and grown along the [0001] direction. The single-crystalline structure would be beneficial for electron transport. Furthermore, we found that the nanosheets composed of small nanoparticles (about 10 nm) underwent oriented attachment. The lattice spacing of 2.8 Å corresponds to the (100) plane of hexagonal ZnO (Fig. 4 (d)). Trisodium citrate as a capping reagent plays an important role in the formation of the nanosheet on the surface of the ZnO nanorods. In the presence of trisodium citrate, it is believed that the citrate ion can adsorb onto the positive charged Zn2+ terminated (0001) polar plane due to the Coulombic force. The absorption effectively slowed down the crystal growth along the [0001] direction and nanoparticles were formed. Finally, these nanoparticles undergo oriented attachment to form nanosheets on the surface of the nanorods. In the NR–NS hierarchical architecture photoanodes, the hybridizing of nanosheets improved the surface area and the nanorods provided the direct pathway for electron transmission.
The ZnO nanorods and NR–NS hierarchical architectures are further used as photoanodes for DSSC applications. The current density vs. voltage (J–V) curves and the detailed parameters of short-circuit current densities (JSC), open-circuit voltages (VOC), fill factor (FF) and the overall energy conversion efficiencies (η) for the two samples are shown in Fig. 5 and summarized in Table 1, respectively. Obviously, both the two samples possess the similar VOC of around 545 ± 6 mV, which is determined by the energy difference between the quasi-Fermi level (QFL) of the semiconductor and the potential of the redox couple in the electrolyte. It can be also found that the fill factors (FF) decreased a little, which is due to a higher electron interfacial recombination in the ZnO NR–NS hierarchical architectures. However, the JSC obviously increased from 2.28 mA cm−2 for nanorods to 4.806 mA cm−2 for the NR–NS hierarchical architectures. As a result, the η increased significantly from 0.66% for the nanorods to 1.13% for the hierarchical architectures due to the increase of JSC. This was the majority of the improvement in cell performance in this study.
Electrode
Dye loading (mol cm−2)
JSC (mA cm−2)
VOC (mV)
FF
η (%)
Rω (Ω)
Rk (Ω)
keff (s−1)
ns (cm−3)
Deff (cm2 s−1)
Nanorods
1.96 × 10−8
2.28
551
0.525
0.66
16.2
245
10
2.62 × 1017
1.51 × 10−4
NR–NS
5.01 × 10−8
4.806
538
0.437
1.13
10.8
133
13.8
3.48 × 1017
1.71 × 10−4
The photocurrent density, as is well known, is strongly related to the amount of dye loading on the ZnO films, which mainly depends on the surface area of the ZnO nanostructures in this study. In general, a larger amount of dye absorbance can ensure a full absorption of the incident lights, leading to a larger short circuit current density. The amount of dye adsorbed on the films was obtained by measuring the UV-vis absorption spectra of the solutions containing the dyes detached from the films in 0.1 M NaOH aqueous solution. Fig. 6 illustrates the optical absorbance spectra of the solutions containing dyes detached from the photoanodes fabricated with different morphologies of ZnO nanostructures. The adsorbed dye amount was determined by the molar extinction coefficient of 1.41 × 104 dm3 mol−1 cm−1 at 515 nm as reported previously. It is found that the amount of dye on the film of the NR–NS hierarchical architectures is 5.01 × 10−8 mol cm−2, which is as much as 250% of that of nanorod film (1.96 × 10−8 mol cm−2) shown in Table 1. The results further certified that the NR–NS hierarchical architectures displayed a much larger surface area, resulting in a higher dye loading, more photogenerated electrons and higher photocurrents as compared to the ZnO nanorod photoanode. This is in good agreement with the BET results and the J–V data.
On the other hand, higher light scattering ability is another way to improve the light harvesting efficiency. In order to investigate the light scattering property of the two films, the UV-vis reflectance spectra were further characterized and shown in Fig. 7. As it is shown, the reflectance spectrum of the NR–NS hierarchical architecture film is higher than that of the nanorod film, indicating that the NR–NS hierarchical architecture film has a higher light scattering ability than the nanorod sample in the entire UV-vis range (400–800 nm), which can maximize the use of solar light to improve the light harvesting efficiency. Hence, both the higher dye loading and superior light scattering ability of the NR–NS hierarchical architecture film compared to the nanorod film contributed to the higher light harvesting efficiency to enhance the photocurrent density and power conversion efficiency.
Furthermore, the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) technique has been widely employed to investigate the kinetics of electrochemical and photo electrochemical process occurring in DSSCs. The impedance spectra of the DSSCs based on the nanorod arrays and NR–NS hierarchical architecture photoanodes were performed under light illumination by applying a 10 mV ac signal at the open circuit voltage in the range 0.1 Hz to 100 kHz. The results were fitted based on the diffusion–recombination model proposed by Bisquert, as illustrated in Fig. 8a, and some basic parameters were obtained and listed in Table 1. The Nyquist plots of both the measured data points and fitted curves are shown in Fig. 8b. It can be found that two semicircles can be observed from the Nyquist plot. The larger one at low frequency was related to the charge-transfer resistance of the charge recombination between electrons in the ZnO electrode and I3− in the electrolyte. The charge transfer resistance (Rk) is smaller in the NR–NS based-DSSC (133 Ω) than in the nanorod based-DSSC (245 Ω), which is due to a higher electron interfacial recombination in ZnO NR–NS hierarchical architectures. The result was in good agreement with the decrease of FF in the NR–NS hierarchical architecture based DSSC. The phenomenon was then ascribed to an increase in interface area owing to the NR–NS hierarchical architectures. The electron density (ns) and diffusion coefficient (Deff) in the ZnO nanostructure portions of the DSSCs were conducted from the Nyquist plots according to the procedure proposed by Adachi et al. It is obvious that the electron densities in the NR–NS hierarchical architecture photoanode are larger than that in the pure nanorod photoanode, owing to a higher dye loading and a more photogenerated electron in this hierarchical architecture. Moreover, it had been demonstrated that the effective diffusion coefficient of electrons (Deff) increased as more electrons were present since the deep trap was filled. These results were in agreement with the JSC results. All these observations further verified that the NR–NS hierarchical architecture photoanode was useful for improvement of the efficiency of DSSCs.
According to the above analyses, the model of dye loading and light scattering in photoanodes based on nanorods and NR–NS hierarchical architectures can be further understood as shown in Fig. 9. As is well known, the current density is determined by the initial photo-excited electron number, the electron injection efficiency from the dye molecules to the semiconductor, and the electron collection efficiency at the FTO substrate. For DSSC devices in this work, the injection and collection efficiency can be certainly considered as similar since there is no surface modification at the ZnO–dye interface. Based on the FE-SEM and HRTEM results, the ZnO single crystal nanorod grew perpendicular to the FTO substrate, which was beneficial for electron transport. In addition, it seemed that very small nanoparticles underwent an oriented attachment sideways to form nanosheets out of the nanorods. The internal surface of the NR–NS hierarchical architectures significantly increased compared with the nanorod film, resulting in sufficient dye loading. Moreover, higher light scattering was caused by the repetitious reflection of light and localization of photons in the hierarchical architectures. Therefore, it is believed that the photon localization effect would occur within the NR–NS hierarchical architectures because the incident photons can be confined inside them. This effect would efficiently prolong the photons’ travelling distance, and thus the opportunity for incident photons to be captured by the dye molecules inside the nanostructure film was enhanced. So, the performance of the NR–NS hierarchical architecture based DSSC was improved mainly due to sufficient dye loading and high light scattering within the photoelectrodes.

In summary, NR–NS hierarchical architectures were synthesized successfully through a two-step solution process at a mild temperature. It was obvious that nanosheets composed of very small nanoparticles underwent oriented attachment by closely covering the nanorod’s backbone, resulting in an increase of internal surface area. By introducing the nanosheet growth on the backbone of the ZnO nanorods, the short circuit current density and the overall light conversion efficiency of the NR–NS hierarchical architecture based DSSCs increased to almost two times higher than those of the vertically grown ZnO nanorods. The improvement in the photovoltaic performance can be attributed to the enhancement of the internal surface area for higher dye loading and higher light scattering within the NR–NS hierarchical architecture photoelectrode. Further, the concept of NR–NS hierarchical architectures is anticipated to be applicable to other semiconductor nanodevices for future potential applications.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. 51173148, 90305003), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Nos. SWJTU11ZT10, SWJTU11CX052). Shibu Zhu is grateful for financial support from the Innovation Fund for Ph.D. Students of Southwest Jiaotong University. The authors would also like to thank the Analytical & Testing Center in Southwest University of Science and Technology for UV-vis analysis.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013