 DOI: 10.1039/C1JM00016K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6383-6388

Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical Terms


Dan
Wang
,

Shaocong
Hou
,

Hongwei
Wu
,

Chao
Zhang
,

Zengze
Chu
* and 

Dechun
Zou
*

Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Key Laboratory of Polymer Chemistry and Physics of Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871. E-mail: dczou@pku.edu.cn; Fax: +86-10-62759799; Tel: +86-10-62759799

Received
3rd January 2011
, Accepted 22nd February 2011
First published on 24th March 2011
Highly efficient, flexible and large-size fiber-shaped solid state dye-sensitized solar cells (ss-DSSCs) were designed and fabricated by employment of annealed Ti wire as substrate and the subsequent polymer-templated TiO2 nanocrystalline film as photoanode. The work function measurement showed that the passivation titanium oxide layer, formed on the surface of the Ti wire substrate, reduced the Schottky barrier present at the anode interface, i.e. enhanced the charge collecting property of the substrates. The photovoltaic performance and EIS (electrical impedance spectroscopy) results reveal that the solar cells' performance can be further improved by adding PS (polystyrene) emulsion into the P25 colloid to act as a template, with the consequence that the pore filling of the electrolyte and the electron life time (τ) of TiO2 layers increase. All these aspects contribute to a high solar-to-electric conversion efficiency of 1.38%, which was much higher than the previous reported result (0.06%).

Much attention has been paid to dye sensitized solar cells (DSSC) due to their advantages of low cost, simple fabrication process, high power conversion efficiency, and large-scale production. A typical high efficiency DSSC photo-anode is composed of a dye-sensitized nanoporous TiO2 film on a transparent conductive oxide (TCO) glass. However, these cells have the inherent disadvantage of using conductive oxide glass as a substrate material, therefore, the high material cost, high rigidity and heavy weight have brought great trouble to their transformation and application.

Polymer substrates, such as ITO-coated PET, PEN and polyester, are widely used as the substrate for flexible DSSC fabrications. However, the polymer composite substrates could not endure high temperature sintering, therefore, many preparation methods were developed to improve the performance of TiO2 films via low-temperature sintering. But the devices developed through these methods have lower efficiencies than those developed through the traditional annealing ones due to the low-quality interconnections between the TiO2 nanoparticles and the incomplete removal of organic residue from the TiO2 electrode. Another way to fabricate low-cost, lightweight and flexible DSSCs is to replace the glass substrate with metal materials. Compared with the polymer-based substrate, metal materials could endure high temperature, so the research on solar cells using flexible metal sheets, metal meshes and metal wires as the substrates has been reported very extensively.
Recently, to further increase the flexibility, fiber-shaped dye-sensitized solar cells (F-DSSC) have been developed to replace traditional metal-sheet ones, which made the devices bendable and weavable. Our group previously fabricated TiO2 thin films on stainless steel wires as photoelectrodes. Because of the excellent temperature-resistance of the metal fiber substrate, the TiO2 thin film could be further annealed at high temperature above 450 °C. Much more work focused on this area was reported recently. Wang et al. used the spiral titanium wire as substrate and mesoporous TiO2 nanowire as the photo-active layer to prepare DSSCs. This type of 3D structure provided an effective transmission path for liquid electrolyte and further increased the short-circuit current to 2.3 mA cm−2, open circuit voltage to 616 mV, and efficiency to 0.86%. They also fabricated the TiO2 film on a fibrous titanium wire as the photo-anode and a titanium plate as the counter electrode. The device had a high efficiency of 5.6%. Very recently, DSSCs based on DNA-like structures using TiO2 nanotube arrays on Ti wires as the photoelectrode have been reported by the same group. They also reported dye-sensitized photovoltaic wires with highly ordered TiO2 nanotube arrays as an electrode, in which the nanotube structure was supposed to improve the charge transmission in plate-type DSSCs, and an efficiency of 2.78% was obtained.
For the work mentioned above, almost all of the fiber-shaped DSSCs are liquid-state DSSCs, which were fabricated using the I−/I3− liquid electrolyte or polymer composite electrolyte. Liquid-state DSSCs have problems of leaking and volatilization of the electrolyte, and hardly any solid-state wire-shaped DSSCs have been reported except for our previous work; however, the power efficiency was relatively low, only 0.06%. Herein, we report a high efficiency fiber-shaped ss-DSSC employing a titanium supporting substrate. The economical compound cupric iodide (CuI) was used as the solid-state electrolyte, and the experimental results indicated that solar cells using CuI as electrolyte had relatively high stability. Unlike the cells based on the stainless steel wire substrate electrode, a passivation titanium oxide layer was formed under annealing of the Ti wire substrate, which was proven to be beneficial for the electron injection and interface resistance reduction. Both the Voc (open circuit voltage) and Jsc (short circuit current) were increased remarkably through adding PS (polystyrene) emulsion into the P25 colloid to improve the pore size, thus increasing pore fillings of the electrolytes and light scattering in the titania film network, the efficiency of the cells has been improved markedly from 0.06% to 1.38%. BET measurement, dye adsorption measurement and electron impedance spectroscopy measurements (EIS) measurement were taken to further investigate the solar cell's characteristics.

The fibrous conducting substrate used was titanium wires (Alfa Aesar) and stainless steel wires (commercially used) with 0.25 mm diameters. Some other metal wires were also tried as the substrates (such as copper and silver), but the annealing process caused severe oxidation of the substrates, which cannot be used. The samples were sonicated successively in acetone and methanol for five minutes and then rinsed with de-ionized water before drying in a nitrogen stream. A passivation titanium oxide layer was then formed by annealing the titanium wires at 400 °C for 20 min while a compact TiO2 layer was prepared on the stainless steel using the aerosol synthesis method as in the literature.


The TiO2 colloid was homogeneously and repeatedly cast on the fiber with a compact titanium oxide layer to form a porous TiO2 film. The P25-based colloid was prepared as follows: 2 g TiO2 nanoparticles (P25, Degussa, Germany), 0.4 ml acetyl acetone and 10 ml H2O were mixed, and then ball milled for several hours. For further optimization of the colloid, the resulting TiO2 colloid was diluted by adding PS emulsion and de-ionized water (0.15–0.6ml PS emulsion per 1 ml TiO2 colloid). The diluted TiO2 colloid was homogeneously cast on the pre-treated photoanode. In the process of TiO2 film preparations, an electrical heating process, a totally different heating method from the infrared heating for flat DSSCs, was used. By controlling the colloid concentration, current magnitude and casting frequency, the thickness of the TiO2 film could be varied. This was a stable and controllable process, very practical for the fabrication of fiber-shaped photo-electrodes. The thickness of the photoanode layer was obtained by cross-section SEM measurement of the photoanode.

The TiO2 electrode, after soaking in TiCl4 solution at 20 °C for 24 h was then annealed at 450 °C for 30 min, and then cooled to about 100 °C. The TiO2 electrode was then immersed in an ethanol solution of 3 × 10−4 M N719 dye for 24 h.

The method used to synthesize PS emulsions was similar to that in ref. 22 but with a little modification. 10 g de-ionized water, 0.21 g Tween20 and 4 g styrene were stirred together under a N2 atmosphere for 10 min, and then ultrasonically treated for 5 min. After that, the vessel was stirred for 30 min at 60 °C; 0.003 g ammonium peroxydisulfate/1ml H2O was added and allowed to react for 12 h. Finally, the product was filtrated and kept under stirring. The size of the PS spheres was 100 nm according to TEM measurement result.


To fabricate the solid-state DSSC, a vacuum filling process was used on the electrode before CuI solution coating: the electrolyte solution was injected onto the dye sensitized substrate under vacuum (10–20 Pa), the vacuum was released and the electrolyte-casted substrate was re-immersed into the CuI electrolyte solution under ambient pressure for about 15 min. This process could improve the pore filling by electrolyte in the TiO2 film. The surface of the fibrous working electrode was then coated with CuI solution at 110 °C until the CuI formed a continuous phase. All of these processes were carried out in a N2-filled glove-box. The dye sensitized fibrous working electrode with CuI was heated at 120 °C in a vacuum for 2 h, allowed to thoroughly dry and then twisted with the 0.025 mm Au wires. The pitch could be varied by a home-made instrument, and during the twisting, the component pressure normal to the twisting axis was kept constant.


For work function measurement, the sample wires were sonicated successively in acetone and methanol for five minutes and then rinsed with de-ionized water before drying in a nitrogen stream. To investigate the effect of sintering, the treated samples were heated at 400 °C in a muffle furnace for 20 min. The measurement was conducted by an AC-2(Riken Keiki). A field emission-scanning electron microscope (FESEM, Hitachi 4800) was used to measure the TiO2 film thickness and surface morphology, the samples were sputtered by a thin layer (about 10–20 nm) of Au. The TEM experiment was performed using a transmission electron microscope (JEOL, JEM-100CX). The extent of N719 adsorption was determined by measuring the amount of the ruthenium complex that had adsorbed on the films. To conduct these measurements, the dyes were desorbed from the TiO2 films into a 0.01 M KOH aqueous solution, and the UV-visible absorption spectrum of this solution was measured with a UV-visible spectrometer (F4500). The specific surface area of the TiO2 films was determined by BET adsorption–desorption experiments (ASAP2010). The I–V measurements were performed using a computer controlled Multimeter2000 (Keithley) connected to a R6145 (Advantest) Source Measurement Unit. A beam of shining light with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 was generated by a YSS-50A (Yamashita DENSO), and a standard silicon solar cell was used to calibrate the light intensity of the illumination source. The electrochemical impedance spectra were measured with an impedance analyzer (SolartronAnalytical,1250B) connected to a potentiostat under illumination with oscillation amplitude of 10mV at the open-circuit voltage.


The TiO2 polycrystalline films have been fabricated on the Ti wire substrate as the photo-anode, with a diameter of about 270 μm, and after the dye-sensitization and CuI electrolyte coating, the counter electrode was prepared by twisting the golden wire to assemble the fiber-shaped ss-DSSC, as shown in Fig. 1A. The pitch of screw was about 290 μm, and due to the good flexibility of the golden wire, it has a very good contact with the working electrode, which is beneficial for the hole-transmission process. Another advantage of the twisting structure was that the fabrication of large area devices is facile. As shown in Fig. 1B, a highly flexible, with a band angle above 180°, 30 cm long device was fabricated, and in this cell, the electrode could be connected very conveniently which is favorable for the module fabrication.

For the ss-DSSCs, the main challenges are high charge recombination rate at the FTO/TiO2 interface, and the low hole-mobility of the hole-transport materials. In this work, two methods were used to try to solve these problems. Firstly, by the introduction of a passivation titanium oxide layer on the titanium substrates, the charge recombination could be lowered. Secondly, in order to enlarge the porosity and enhance light scattering in the titania network film, some amount of PS emulsion was added into the colloid and then burned away. An optimized performance was achieved with the titanium wire as the substrate (Ti-based) as shown in Table 1. The efficiency is about 3.4 times that based on the stainless steel substrates (S-based); the Isc (short-circuit current) increased by a factor of 2 (from 1.85 to 3.83 mA cm−2) while the fill factor (FF) reached 0.54 from 0.42. The Voc (open-circuit voltage) was increased to 0.34 V from 0.27 V, shown in Fig. 2. The light conversion efficiency η, calculated by using the projection area as the light illumination area was about 0.71%, which is higher than the previous results. An even larger improved efficiency (1.38%) was achieved by increasing the pore sizes of the TiO2 film through adding PS colloid into the P25 colloid (Ti-based-PS).
Sample

V
C/V

J
SC/mA cm−2
FF

η (%)

R
s/Ω

τ/ms
S-based
0.27
1.85
0.42
0.21
95.3
3.1
Ti-based
0.34
3.83
0.54
0.71
35.8
3.6
Ti-based-PS-2
0.36
6.49
0.58
1.38
25.2
4.4
Compared with the result we reported previously, the I–V performance of the S-based cells has been largely improved, especially the Ioc (from 0.63 to 1.85 mA cm−2) and efficiency (from 0.06% to 0.21%). We attributed the changes to the difference of the wire diameter and TiO2 film thickness and also the electrical heating process. For the S-based F-DSSCs in this work, we used the 250 μm metal fiber as the substrate rather than the 100 μm, on which a thicker TiO2 film could be fabricated (optical 10.5 μm). The thickness of the photoanode TiO2 film is a key factor affecting the cells' performance. If it is too thin to adsorb enough dye, the JSC would be largely decreased. Besides, if the thickness is above the optical value, electron recombinations would be increased, thus having a negative effect on the power effeciency. For plate-ssDSSC, the optical thickness is about 10 μm, which is equal to the one in this work. However, according to our reported results, the optical titanium thickness for the 100 μm F-DSSC is only 4 um, which is much thinner with the disadvantage of low dye loading, though it had a relatively higher VOC. Increasing the thickness of the TiO2 film on the 100 μm wire is difficult due to the uneven morphology caused by the surface tension. Therefore, the larger substrate fiber diameter makes the fabrication of TiO2 films with the demanded thickness and morphology be easier. Furthermore, the lower electrical resistivity of high diameter fiber substrates also contributed to the improved performance. Another important factor is the electrical heating fabrication process we used in this work.
Further research focuses on the investigations of the substrate materials' properties (the energy levels, internal resistance etc.) and TiO2 film characterization was taken to comprehend the improved performance.

There has been little research on the investigation of the substrate properties of DSSCs while significant attention has been paid on the interfacial properties of TiO2/electrode and electrolyte/counter electrode. For DSSCs based on metal substrates, the interfacial resistance and energy levels of the surfaces all have a large effect on the output current and voltage. In order to find the reasons for the largely improved performance of the Ti-based solar cells, we measured the surface work function of the untreated Ti wire, sintered Ti wire and the stainless steel wire after the compact layer fabrication. As shown in Fig. 3, every curve has two points, the lower one corresponds to the main component of the metal and the other one is probably due to the impurities. Curves a and c show that the surface work function of the Ti wire and treated stainless steel wire were all around 4.95 eV; however, after the annealing process, the work function of the titanium substrate decreased from 4.95 eV to 4.64 eV, thus increasing the Fermi level from −4.95 eV to −4.64 eV. We further examined the effect of the metal surface treatment using the energy band theory, as shown in the inset of Fig. 3 (EC, EF, EV stand for conduction band, Fermi level and valence band). The build-in field qϕb is the subtraction of the electron affinity of the metal (qϕm) and electronic affinity of the semi-conductor (qX). The Schottky barrier which the electron needs to overcome when injected to the Ti substrate is q(ϕm − ϕs), in which qϕs is related to the TiO2 bulk properties, so the barrier will be reduced when qϕm becomes lower. This result corresponds well with the I–V performance we have obtained.

We have also fabricated the F-DSSCs based on a titanium nanotube (TNT) array photoelectrode before—the cell showed largely improved performance compared with the previous published results. Considering the results we obtained now, we concluded that besides the transmission channels the TNT provided for the transfer, another important reason for the performance improvement is the largely induced energy barriers.

TiO2 film porosity is one of the most crucial factors for solar energy conversion for a ss-DSSC. Mesoporous TiO2 films with relatively larger pores are used in ss-DSSCs to improve the completeness of solid electrolyte pore filling into the mesoporous TiO2 film which is a key factor affecting the performance. By adding polymers with large molecular weight (such as polyethylene glycol 20000 (PEG)) and PS) to TiO2 colloids and followed by burning them away, the pore size could be controlled. Herein, we synthesized PS emulsions with PS sphere diameter probably 100 nm, as shown in inset of Fig. 4, used as the template agent to increase the TiO2 film pore size. Through adding the PS emulsion into the primary P25 colloid and stirring evenly, interspaces among all P25 aggregates were filled with PS nanoparticles. After further sintering at 200–450 °C, the organic composites were all burned off and the polycrystalline anatase structure TiO2 film was formed, as shown by the XRD pattern (Fig. 5). The larger-sized pores formed in this process allowed more complete electrolyte filling into the TiO2 film, and resulted in better contact of TiO2 nanocrystalline nanoparticles and solid state electrolyte. A SEM top-view image is shown in Fig. 4. For primary TiO2 films, aggregates with diameters of about 100 nm were formed by 20 nm P25 TiO2 nanoparticles. According to the increasing proportion of PS emulsion (from 0.15 ml to 0.6 ml per 2 ml P25 colloid), a clearly increased pore size was present and the performance of the ss-DSSCs has been improved distinctly, as shown in Table.1.

Dye loading on the surface of TiO2 was quantified by desorbing the dye from the electrode surface in alkaline aqueous medium. As shown in Table 2, the amount of dye adsorbed within 10 μm thick films was 0.22, 0.16, 0.15 and 0.16 mmol cm−3, respectively, for samples PS-0 to PS-3, with regard to the macroscopic geometric volumes of the TiO2 electrode. The measured value of 0.15–0.16 mmol cm−3 was relatively smaller than that obtained for the unmodified one. It implies that the specific surface of titania films is slightly reduced due to the large-size pores' existence. This result also agreed well with the BET measurement result, as shown in Table 2. All these four samples showed almost the same BET values which will be essential for the loading of dye sensitizer molecules. Although the results showed one distinct disadvantage of adding PS emulsion, the photovoltaic performance of the cell has been increased largely. This demonstrated that the pore filling of the electrolyte played a major role. Therefore, although the dye-loading ability is depressed to some extent, the performance of the F-DSSC is still improved. Also, the adhesion of the subsequent TiO2 layer was much improved on the metal substrate compared to the original one, although an excessive dispersion of PS emulsion would cause the surface depression and poor adhesion of the TiO2 film. This can directly lead to the decreased efficiency which was indicated by the I–V performance comparison with varied PS emulsion. When the PS emulsion/P25 ratio further increased to 0.3/1 (ml), the current was largely reduced, as shown in Fig. 6. These results highlight the significance of the ordered micro-structures on the solar cells' performance, therefore, the fabrication of TiO2 porous films with ordered pore size and high dye adsorption ability is under way.
PS-0
PS-1
PS-2
PS-3
PS volume fraction
0
0.15:2
0.3:2
0.6:2
BET/m2 g−1
49.98
55.05
54.85
54.02
Dye adsorption/mmol cm−3
0.22
0.16
0.15
0.16

To learn more about the effects of the metal substrates properties and PS addition, EIS was carried out under illumination by AM1.5 solar simulator to investigate the recombination and internal resistance in DSSCs. 10 mV ac was applied on the top of the Voc of the DSSC signal over the frequency range of 65000–0.05 Hz using a potentiostat. A simple equivalent electric circuit has been used to fit the data to obtain the resistances and capacitances of the semicircles in Fig. 7. There were two semicircles. The resistance of Rs corresponded to the sheet resistance of the metal substrates. The first semicircle, which was not so distinct, included resistances and/or capacitances of the Au/CuI and the metal/TiO2 interfaces. The resistance R1 resulted from the sum of the interfacial resistance of metal/TiO2 and Au/CuI. The second semicircle measured at low frequency was associated with resistance R2 and capacitance of recombination resistance in the nanocrystalline TiO2 film. The Nyquist plots of the impedance data of the samples are shown in Fig. 7. The stainless steel and titanium showed obviously different RS since the large difference in sheet resistance was observed after deposition of the TiO2 layer on the substrates, with titanium 35.8 Ω and stainless steel 95.3 Ω. This result demonstrated that the Ti substrates had much lower resistance, and charge collection efficiency was expected to be improved, which could be the reason for the increased DSSCs performance. To further investigate the effects of the PS addition, the electron life time (τ) of TiO2 layers was calculated from resistance R2 and capacitance of recombination resistance in the nanocrystalline TiO2 film, presented in Table1. Both the T-based and S-based cells had almost the same electron life time due to little property difference in the nanocrystalline TiO2 films. However, a much longer electron life time was obtained for the photoelectrode prepared by adding PS emulsion to the TiO2 colloids and followed by burning it away. The fast interfacial electron-hole recombination, which was the main drawback of ss-DSSCs, could be largely reduced due to the longer life time of the electrons. Due to the back-illumination mode of the F-DSSC, the light scattering effect could be improved by the large size TiO2 nanoparticles, increasing the light adsorption, thus the current, which was another important reason for the improved performance. These results were also consistent with the I–V results.


In the present investigation, we have fabricated 30 cm long, flexible fiber-shaped ss-DSSCs based on titanium substrates and a PS-templated TiO2 nanocrystalline film photoanode. The passivation layer formed on the Ti substrate after annealing had a positive effect on reducing the size of the Schottky barrier, thus improving the interfacial properties. Furthermore, by adding PS emulsion into the P25 colloid and burning it away, the pore size of the nanocrystalline TiO2 film has been largely increased, which is beneficial for the solid-state electrolyte pore filling. The highest efficiency of 1.38% was achieved and attributed to the reduced interfacial resistance and longer electron life time.


This work was supported by NSFC (50833001), MOST (2011CB933300) and MOE (309001), China.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011