 DOI: 10.1039/B924125F
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 2780-2800

Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical Terms


Sanju
Rani
,

Somnath C.
Roy
,

Maggie
Paulose
,

Oomman K.
Varghese
,

Gopal K.
Mor
,

Sanghoon
Kim
,

Sorachon
Yoriya
,

Thomas J.
LaTempa
 and 

C. A.
Grimes
*

The Department of Electrical Engineering, The Department of Materials Science and Engineering, The Materials Research Institute, The Center for Solar Nanomaterials, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA. E-mail: cgrimes@engr.psu.edu

Received
17th November 2009
, Accepted 13th January 2010
First published on
10th February 2010

Highly ordered vertically oriented TiO2 nanotube arrays fabricated by electrochemical anodization offer a large surface area architecture with precisely controllable nanoscale features. These nanotubes have shown remarkable properties in a variety of applications including, for example, their use as hydrogen sensors, in the photoelectrochemical generation of hydrogen, dye-sensitized and solid-state heterojunction solar cells, photocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide into hydrocarbons, and as a novel drug delivery platform. Herein we consider the development of the various nanotube array synthesis techniques, different applications of the TiO2 nanotube arrays, unresolved issues, and possible future research directions.
Sanju Rani completed her doctoral research at the Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, in 2009, where she worked on modification of tin oxide thin films by high-energy ion beam irradiation and on their application in gas sensing. She is presently a visiting research scholar in the Materials Research Institute at the Pennsylvania State University, where she works on the photocatalytic conversion of carbon dioxide to hydrocarbon fuels.
Somnath C. Roy earned his PhD in Physics from Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, India, in 2005. He joined the Materials Research Institute at Pennsylvania State University in 2006 as a postdoctoral scholar, where he is presently working on functionalization of titanium dioxide nanotube arrays towards improving their photocatalytic performance. His areas of interest are development of visible-light photocatalysts, nanostructured gas-sensing arrays, and magnetoelastic biosensor systems.
Maggie Paulose received her first Masters degree in Physics from Cochin University of Science and Technology, Kerala, India, in 1995 and a second one in Solid State Materials from Indian Institute of Technology (I.I.T.), Delhi, India, in 1996. She is currently a Research Associate at Materials Research Institute, the Pennsylvania State University. Her fields of interest are excitonic solar cells (dye-sensitized, solid-state polymer and hybrid), photocatalytic conversion of carbon dioxide and water vapor to hydrocarbons, gas sensing and water photoelectrolysis. She has over 65 articles published in peer reviewed journals and conference proceedings.
Oomman K. Varghese received his PhD. degree in Physics from Indian Institute of Technology (I.I.T.), Delhi, India, in 2001. He is presently working as Chief Scientist at Sentech Corporation, Boalsburg, PA, and as Visiting Scientist at Materials Research Institute, the Pennsylvania State University. His fields of interest are environmental sensing, photocatalytic conversion of carbon dioxide and water vapor to hydrocarbons, excitonic solar cells (dye, polymer, quantum dot and hybrid) and water photoelectrolysis. He is the co-author of the book “Light, Water, Hydrogen: The Solar Generation of Hydrogen by Water Photoelectrolysis”, Springer Press (2007). He has published approximately 80 publications in peer reviewed journals and conference proceedings.
Gopal K. Mor received his PhD (2002) in Physics from the Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, India. He then joined the Pennsylvania State University as a Postdoctoral Scholar, becoming a Research Associate in 2008. He is currently working as a Visiting Scientist at the Materials Research Institute of the Pennsylvania State University. His present research focuses on design, fabrication and testing of various types of solar cells such as FRET type solid-state solar cells, bulk heterojunction solar cells, and dye-sensitized solar cells. He also pursues research on water photoelectrolysis, hydrogen gas sensors, and the electrochemical anodic oxidation process of valve materials.
Sanghoon Kim received his PhD degree in materials chemistry from Korea University, Seochang, South Korea, in 2007. Since 2008, he has been engaged as a Postdoctoral Scholar with Department of Electrical Engineering, the Materials Research Institute, Center for Solar Nanomaterials, the Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA. His research interests include the synthesis of photoelectronic organic semiconducting materials and their application in devices including dye-sensitized solar cells, organic–inorganic hybrid solar cells, and bulk heterojunction solar cells.

One-dimensional (1-D) highly ordered nanowire and nanotube architectures of high surface-to-volume ratios possess useful and unique properties compared to that of their bulk counterparts. The precisely orientated nature of these ordered 1-D nanostructures makes them excellent electron percolation pathways for vectorial charge transfer between interfaces. In comparison with nanowires, nanotubes offer a larger interfacial area due to their external and internal surfaces, which make them a better candidate for surface area dependent applications. In the case of TiO2, comparative studies have shown that highly ordered, vertically oriented nanotube arrays outperform their colloidal counterpart for applications including sensors, water photoelectrolysis, dye-sensitized and solid-state heterojunction solar cells, and photocatalysis. In addition, TiO2 nanotube arrays have also shown remarkable properties for their use in biomedical applications including biosensors, molecular filtration, drug delivery and tissue engineering. Furthermore, initial investigations indicate that they also may be useful for energy storage devices such as Li-ion batteries, and super-capacitors.

TiO2 nanotube arrays have been synthesized by a variety of techniques, including the use of nanoporous alumina templates, sol–gel transcription using organo-gelator templates, seeded growth mechanisms, and hydrothermal techniques. However, fabrication of oxide nanotube arrays by electrochemical anodization of the starting metal offers superior control over nanotube dimensions by the optimization of various parameters such as the pH, concentration and composition of the electrolyte, and also the applied potential, time, and temperature of anodization. Electrochemical anodization, in which localized chemical dissolution with field-assisted oxidation and dissolution reactions taking place, allows a precisely ordered nanoscale architecture to be achieved by self-assembly.
In 1999, Zwilling and co-workers reported formation of ordered nanoporous oxide structures obtained by anodizing Ti in F−-containing electrolytes. The first report on fabrication of highly ordered TiO2 nanotube arrays was published in 2001 by Gong and co-workers, in which they reported the formation of nanotubes up to 0.5 μm length by electrochemical anodization of Ti foil in HF aqueous electrolyte. In subsequent work reported by Cai and co-workers, the second generation of nanotube array synthesis, the nanotube array length was increased to approximately 7 μm by using an aqueous buffered electrolyte and by proper control of the anodization electrolyte pH thereby reducing chemical dissolution of the TiO2 during anodization. The third generation of TiO2 nanotube array synthesis, with nanotube lengths up to approximately 1000 μm, was achieved using a non-aqueous, polar organic electrolyte such as formamide, dimethyl sulfoxide, ethylene glycol, or diethylene glycol. Recently, non-fluoride electrolyte based synthesis of TiO2 nanotube arrays has been reported, which may be considered as the fourth synthesis generation.
The vertically aligned structure, high surface area and excellent charge transfer properties of the nanotube arrays have resulted in their remarkable performances within a variety of applications. When used for hydrogen sensing, TiO2 nanotube arrays of 1 μm length demonstrate an unprecedented change in electrical resistance of 8.7 orders of magnitude (50000000000%) at room temperature; this is the largest known sensitivity of any material, to any gas, at any temperature. The enhanced light absorption and propagation characteristics arising from their precisely controlled and oriented porosity make TiO2 nanotube arrays a suitable architecture for water photoelectrolysis, in which under UV band illumination, 30 μm long nanotube arrays demonstrate a photoconversion efficiency of 16.25%. The TiO2 nanotube array based dye-sensitized solar cells show an efficiency of approximately 7%, while solid-state heterojunction solar cells based on TiO2 nanotubes show an efficiency of about 4%. Varghese and co-workers recently reported high rate solar conversion of CO2 and water vapor to methane and other hydrocarbons using TiO2 nanotube arrays. Using sunlight, a hydrocarbon production rate of 111 ppm cm−2 h−1 is obtained when the nanotube array samples are surface decorated with both Cu and Pt nanoparticles.
This paper presents a review on the important stages of development in the synthesis and major applications of the electrochemically anodized vertically oriented TiO2 nanotube arrays. Section 2 of this article deals with the nanotube array synthesis techniques detailing the different synthesis generations. Section 3 describes use of these nanotube arrays in hydrogen sensors, water photoelectrolysis, dye-sensitized and solid-state bulk heterojunction solar cells, bio-compatible materials, and in photocatalytic conversion of CO2 to hydrocarbons. Finally, it concludes with a discussion on the future prospects and existing challenges for the TiO2 nanotube arrays.

The first generation of TiO2 nanotube arrays were fabricated on Ti foil in a two-electrode electrochemical cell using 0.5% HF aqueous solution at constant anodizing voltages of 3, 5, 10, and 20 V and anodizing time from 15–45 min. Using HF aqueous solution electrolytes nanotube arrays of up to ∼500 nm in length can be prepared. Fig. 1 shows a cross-sectional field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) image of a representative first generation nanotube array prepared using a HF based electrolyte; the inset shows a top view image of the same sample. At low anodizing voltages the film morphology is similar to that of nanoporous alumina with typical pore sizes from 15 to 30 nm. Discrete, hollow, and cylindrical tube-like features begin to appear at voltages higher than 10 V; however, the nanotube structure is lost at anodizing voltages greater than 23 V, replaced by a sponge-like randomly porous structure.


Fig. 2 shows a schematic representation of the nanotube array formation process. A thin layer of oxide forms with the onset of the anodization process due to exposure of the Ti metal to the acidic electrolyte, see Fig. 2(a). Small pits originate in this oxide layer due to the localized dissolution of the oxide, shown in Fig. 2(b), making the barrier layer at the bottom of the pits relatively thin which, in turn, increases the electric field intensity across the remaining barrier layer. The increase in electric field enhances electrochemical dissolution resulting in further pore growth, see Fig. 2(c), leaving un-anodized metal portions between the pores. As the pores grow deeper the electric field in these metallic regions increases, enhancing field-assisted oxide growth and oxide dissolution, hence simultaneously with the pores well-defined inter-pore voids start forming as seen in Fig. 2(d). After this, the nanotubes and voids grow in equilibrium and the nanotube length increases until the electrochemical etching rate equals the chemical dissolution rate at the top surface. Fig. 2(e) depicts the top and cross-section of a fully grown nanotube array. A precisely controlled rate of chemical dissolution of the metal or oxide by the acidic electrolyte in the presence of an electric field plays a key role in the formation of the nanotube arrays rather than a nanoporous structure. An estimate of the amount of titanium consumed in nanotube formation is done by gravimetric analysis of the Ti foil before and after anodization and an analysis of the used solution, which reveals that for these aqueous electrolytes most of the mass loss is the loss of Ti by dissolution; only about 2% of Ti is converted into nanotubes and the underlying oxide layer.
The different stages of an anodization process are illustrated in Fig. 3, with Fig. 3(a)–(e) showing the surface topology of a Ti thin film undergoing anodization, with image (a) through (e) corresponding to points P1–P5 in Fig. 3(f) which is representative current–time behavior for anodization of a 400 nm Ti thin film at 10 V in a 0.5% HF based electrolyte. The initial formation of the oxide barrier layer reduces current to a local minima (P1) followed by an increase to the point P2 resulting from field-assisted chemical dissolution of the oxide. At this point, the pore density reaches saturation and the current gradually drops with a corresponding increase in pore depth. A well-grown porous structure appears at point P3, which transforms to a tubular structure at point P4. Between points P4 and P5, a highly ordered nanotube array is obtained with pore diameters 20–30 nm. The typical anodization current density of a Ti foil with one face covered with an inert polymer coating is shown in the inset.
In addition to length, the pore size, shape and wall thickness of the nanotubes can also be tailored by controlling the anodization parameters. Sweeping the anodization voltage produces tapered, conical shaped nanotubes. The anodization voltage is ramped up from 10 to 23 V at rates from 0.43 to 2.6 V min−1 to achieve conical nanotubes with a continuously increasing pore size from top to bottom. The variation in the wall thickness of the nanotubes can be achieved by changing chemical dissolution and electrochemical etching which, in turn, for aqueous electrolytes can be readily controlled by the electrolyte bath temperature. When the nanotube arrays are grown with a constant 10 V anodization voltage in an aqueous electrolyte of acetic acid with 0.5% HF mixed in 1 ∶ 7 ratio and kept at each of four different electrolyte bath temperatures: 5 °C, 25 °C, 35 °C, and 50 °C, the fabricated nanotubes have essentially the same pore size of about 22 nm; however, the wall thickness changes by an approximate factor of four, and the tube length by an approximate factor of two. With decreasing anodization temperature the wall thickness increases from 9 nm at 50 °C to 34 nm at 5 °C and the voids in both the inter-pore areas and tubes become more interconnected; the discrete tube-like structure approaches a nanoporous structure in appearance.
The as-anodized nanotube arrays are amorphous and a high-temperature annealing step is required to obtain the crystalline phase. Fig. 4 shows glancing angle X-ray diffraction (GAXRD) patterns of the nanotube array samples annealed at temperatures ranging from 250–700 °C, in dry oxygen ambient for 3 h. The rutile is present in the underlying barrier layer, while the tubes themselves are anatase. Fig. 5 shows representative high-resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) images of a single nanotube before (as-anodized) and after annealing at 550 °C. The corresponding selected area diffraction patterns are given in insets.

The rapid rate of TiO2 dissolution by the acid in the aqueous, first generation approach to nanotube array synthesis limits the maximum achievable nanotube length to approximately 0.5 μm. Cai and co-workers offered a solution to this problem by using weaker acids such as KF or NaF in the electrolyte along with a buffer solution to control the pH. Through use of this second generation synthesis technique nanotubes of up to approximately 5 μm in length were achieved, an order of magnitude longer compared to their first generation counterparts. Fig. 6 shows a FESEM image of a second generation nanotube array sample obtained using a KF based electrolyte; the inset shows the top view of the same sample. The anodization potential window for nanotube formation is approximately 10 V to 25 V with the pore size of the nanotubes proportional to the applied potential. The electrolyte pH affects the rate of electrochemical etching, and the rate of chemical dissolution due to the hydrolysis rate of the Ti ions. With increasing pH the hydrolysis rate increases, in turn reducing the rate of chemical dissolution resulting in the formation of longer nanotubes. For example, with an anodizing potential of 25 V, and the pH varying from strongly acidic (pH < 1) to weakly acidic (pH 4.5) the nanotube length increases from 0.56 to 4.4 μm. The nanotube pore size is largely independent of the pH at a particular anodizing voltage. In strongly acidic solutions the nanotube length is independent of the anodization duration; however, in weakly acidic electrolytes, increasing the anodizing time from 23 to 90 h increases the length from 0.8 to 2.3 μm. It appears that the most suitable pH values for the fabrication of longer nanotubes are between 3 and 5; lower pH values produce shorter but clean nanotubes, and higher pH values result in longer nanotubes but with unwanted debris—with the higher hydrolysis rate generating hydrous titanic oxides as precipitates.

Macak and co-workers showed that it is possible to achieve high-aspect-ratio growth of second generation nanotubes by local acidification (lower pH) of the bottom of the nanotube pores while a protective environment (higher pH) is maintained at the pore walls and at the pore mouths. Localized acidification at the pore bottom follows from the oxidation and hydrolysis of the elemental titanium. Using a buffered neutral solution as electrolyte and choosing the proper anodic current value, acid can be created at the pore bottom while higher pH values are established at the pore mouth as a result of migration and diffusion effects. A voltage-sweep was applied to achieve a steady current and to establish the desired pH profile. For this purpose, Ti foil 0.1 mm thick with 99.6% purity was anodized in a 1.0 M (NH4)2SO4 electrolyte containing 0.5 wt% NH4F, using a potential sweep from open-circuit potential to 20 V with a sweep rate 0.1 V s−1. The resulting self-organized nanoporous TiO2 had a thickness of about 2.5 μm and pore diameters in range between 90 and 110 nm.

The water content in the aqueous electrolytes is responsible for the rapid chemical dissolution of the formed oxide. Hence reduction of the water content in the electrolyte to a minimum value is crucial for increasing the length of the TiO2 nanotube arrays. This is the basic concept in choosing the electrolyte composition for the third generation of TiO2 nanotube synthesis, in which polar organic solvents such as formamide (FA), ethylene glycol (EG), and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) are used with a fluoride-containing species (e.g. NH4F, NaF, KF). With organic electrolytes, compared to aqueous electrolytes, the reduced availability of oxygen reduces oxide formation. At the same time reduced water content in organic electrolytes reduces the rate of chemical dissolution thereby increasing the nanotube length.



Fig. 7 shows an FESEM image of TiO2 nanotubes, approximately 90 μm in length, with an average outer diameter of 180 nm and wall thickness of 24 nm, prepared using FA-based electrolyte by 48 h anodization at a constant potential of 35 V. Illustrative electrolyte composition include FA (99%) solutions containing 1–5 wt% of deionized water and 0.3–0.6 wt% NH4F. Nanotubes with a smaller pore diameter but approximately 10% longer are obtained using N-methyl formamide electrolyte. Lower anodization potentials generally result in shorter nanotubes with smaller diameters. The increase in nanotube length with anodization voltage is attributed to the increased driving force for ionic transport through the barrier layer at the bottom of the pore, which results in faster movement of the Ti–TiO2 interface into the Ti metal. As reported by Shankar et al., the dielectric constants of FA and NMF are 111 and 182, respectively, much greater than that of water (∼80); for a given potential, higher dielectric constant results in higher electrolyte potential that induces more charges to be formed at the oxide layer, improving extraction of the Ti4+ ions. At the same time, higher electrolyte polarity allows fluoride ions to be easily dissolved facilitating its availability at the Ti–TiO2 interface.

As seen for the aqueous and buffered aqueous electrolytes, the nanotube pore diameter increases with anodization voltage. However, the range of anodization voltages over which nanotube arrays are formed in FA/NMF electrolytes, 10–60 V, is significantly larger than that for aqueous electrolytes. The anodization duration is also important since lengths increase with time up to a maximum length, beyond which they suffer dissolution induced cleaving. For example, with a 35 V potential, 48 h anodization produces nanotubes with an average length of 70 μm, which reduces to 30 μm after 88 h and further reduces to only 10 μm after 164 h. The time to maximum length is a function of the anodization voltage, and the lower the voltage the sooner the maximum is reached.

In 2005, Ruan and co-workers reported synthesis of 2.5 μm long titania nanotube arrays using a fluorinated DMSO and ethanol mixture electrolyte. Subsequently, Paulose and co-workers extended the length of DMSO generated nanotubes up to 93 μm. A typical DMSO based electrolyte contains HF with concentrations varying from 1–6%; the anodization voltages are varied from 10–70 V, and anodization duration from 20–90 h. Ti foils that are pre-anodized in 0.5% HF solution at 20 V for 20 min followed by anodization in 2% HF-containing DMSO shows superior growth rates compared to that of a sample without pre-anodization. Fig. 8 is a representative FESEM image of a TiO2 nanotube array prepared in a DMSO electrolyte.

To increase the nanotube length it is necessary to reduce the chemical dissolution of the oxide at the pore mouth while maintaining active growth at the bottom of the pore. DMSO, being protophilic, accepts a proton from HF that reduces its activity. This results in decreased chemical etching of the nanotube walls, leading to nanotube growth having fixed pore diameters. It is observed that a 2% HF–DMSO electrolyte yields a maximum nanotube length at anodization potentials between 40 and 60 V. HF concentrations more than 2% appear to result in faster etching, while HF concentrations below 2% yield nanotubes with a very slow growth rate. Addition of water to the 2% HF–DMSO electrolyte decreases tube length because of enhanced chemical dissolution. Anodization with a previously used DMSO solution affects the length and pore size of the resulting nanotubes. The conductivity of a fresh 2% HF–DMSO electrolyte is 8.76 μS cm−1, increasing to approximately 100.6 μS cm−1 after anodization of one Ti sample at 40 V for 70 h due to the Ti ions dissolved in the electrolyte. The higher conductivity of used electrolytes is useful in initiating nanotube growth; therefore, a faster initial rate nanotube formation is observed in used electrolytes. Also, because of slightly higher chemical etching in the used electrolytes, the resulting nanotubes are free from surface debris and have improved adhesion with the underlying barrier oxide layer.

Using ethylene glycol (EG) electrolytes, TiO2 nanotube arrays have been synthesized at anodization voltages ranging from 20 to 65 V, with NH4F concentrations ranging from 0.1 to 0.5 wt%, and with H2O content ranging from 1 to 4%.Fig. 9 shows an illustrative sample anodized in 0.3 wt% NH4F and 2% H2O in ethylene glycol for 17 h. Anodization in an EG based fresh (un-used) electrolyte containing 0.3 wt% NH4F and 2 vol% H2O for 4 h results in a 58 μm long nanotube; the length increases up to 360 μm for 96 h anodization time. After accounting for the porosity of the structure and the titanium dioxide dissolved during the formation of the nanotube structure, the effective current efficiency for TiO2 formation in EG based electrolytes is nearly 100%. This indicates almost no side reactions occur during the anodization process, and there is negligible bulk chemical dissolution of formed TiO2 nanotube arrays. A maximum nanotube growth rate is observed at 60 V with ethylene glycol electrolytes; anodization of a 0.5 mm foil in an electrolyte containing 0.3 wt% NH4F and 2 vol% H2O for 168 h gives a maximum nanotube length of about 380 μm. This shows almost complete consumption of Ti foil during anodization in an EG based electrolyte. Such anodization behavior of EG based electrolytes is used to form self-standing nanotube array membranes described later.

Yoriya et al. reported the use of diethylene glycol (DEG) for nanotube array synthesis. In comparison with nanotubes formed from EG based electrolytes, nanotubes formed from DEG based electrolytes result in discrete nanotube arrays completely separate and unconnected, without bundling and without suffering from unwanted precipitate on the top surface.

Recent developments in the synthesis of TiO2 nanotube arrays using fluoride free electrolytes are commonly considered as fourth generation synthesis techniques. The non-fluoride based electrolytes include HCl, H2O2, and their mixtures, perchloric acid solutions, and mixtures of oxalic acid, formic acid, and sulfuric acid with NH4Cl. In one of the first reports of ordered TiO2 nanotube array fabrication using non-fluoride based electrolytes, Allam and Grimes synthesized nanotube arrays of ∼300 nm length, 15 nm pore diameter, and 10 nm wall thickness using an aqueous solution containing 3 M HCl, observing nanotube formation in the anodization potential range of 10–13 V. Longer nanotubes of up to ∼600 nm length could be obtained by anodizing at 20 V but the resulting nanotube array was highly disordered. Their report further suggests that, for HCl based electrolytes, the concentration of the acid is very crucial because no nanotube arrays can be formed at HCl concentration lower or higher than 3 M, even if the anodization is attempted at a much wide voltage range of 5 to 60 V. The addition of a low concentration of phosphoric acid (H3PO4) as a buffering medium in the concentration range of 0.01 to 0.1 M enabled an increase in anodization voltage up to 14 V; however, the resulting nanotubes have a much larger wall thickness and smaller pore diameter such that they resemble nanorods/nanowires. It is possible to further increase the nanotube length by adding hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) to the HCl-containing electrolyte. H2O2 acts as a strong oxidizing agent that offers a thicker oxide layer available for electrochemical etching. The H2O2 mixed electrolyte allows nanotube formation over a wider range of anodization voltages with lower HCl concentrations. Anodization of a Ti foil sample in a 0.5 M HCl solution containing 0.1 to 0.5 M H2O2 at voltages between 10–23 V for one hour results in 850 nm long nanotube arrays with 15 nm pore diameter and 10 nm wall thickness. When ethylene glycol is used instead of an aqueous medium, nanotube bundles several microns in length are rapidly obtained for anodization potentials between 8 and 18 V.


Precise control of the anodization parameters and the minimal rate of electrochemical dissolution in an EG based electrolyte leads to complete anodization of a Ti foil, resulting in a free-standing nanotube array membrane. Fig. 10 shows a cross-sectional view of a self-standing TiO2 nanotube array membrane obtained upon anodizing a 2.0 mm thick Ti foil at 60 V for 216 h (9 days) in 0.5 wt% NH4F and 3.0% water in EG. The foil, which is simultaneously anodized on both sides, is transformed into a self-standing nanotube membrane. Maximum nanotube packing density is achieved using an ethylene glycol electrolyte; the nanotube coordination number is usually six, i.e. each nanotube is surrounded by six others, with strong bonding between adjacent tubes. This structure is most useful for achieving a mechanically robust membrane of uniform pore size suitable for use in filtration applications.

To form a useful membrane, one side of a Ti foil sample is protected with a polymer prior to anodization, with tube formation only on the unprotected side. The resulting nanotube array film can be separated from the underlying Ti substrate in a variety of ways; an facile approach is to dip the sample in ethyl alcohol then subject the sample to ultrasonic agitation until the nanotube array film separates from the Ti foil. The nanotube arrays have the shape of a common laboratory test tube, hence to fabricate a membrane the plugged ends of the tubes must be removed, commonly by use of a dilute acid rinse. The planar membranes, perfectly flat while wet, curl dramatically if removed from the liquid and dried in air. Since the surface tension forces of the solution acting on the membrane are mainly responsible for this behavior, rinsing with low surface tension liquids facilitates their drying flat. Alternatively, critical point drying can be used in which the membrane flatness is preserved. Fig. 11 shows a 200 μm thick membrane after critical point drying. In another report, 145 μm thick TiO2 nanotube array films fabricated by anodization in fluoride-containing ethylene glycol solvent were separated from the Ti substrate by selectively dissolving the Ti by treating in a water-free CH3OH–Br2 solution. To open the closed bottoms of the resultant free-standing nanotube layer, the bottom side of the wet nanotube film was exposed for 30 min to HF vapors. This procedure leads to preferential HF gas condensation at the tube bottoms causing etching of the backside layer.

The opaque titanium foils upon which the nanotube arrays were grown prevented the use of front illumination geometry (light incidence through the titania electrode) generally followed in excitonic solar cells, allowing illumination only through the counter electrode (back illumination) which limited their efficiencies due to light losses. This problem was overcome and tremendous advances in the field were made possible by developing titania nanotube arrays on transparent conductive fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass substrates.Fig. 12 shows the digital images of different stages in the fabrication process, starting from the Ti metal film deposited on the FTO substrate. The general strategy involved deposition of titanium films on FTO coated glass followed by anodization of the Ti layer across its entire thickness, and finally thermal annealing for crystallization of the nanotubes and conversion of any remaining metallic regions to oxide. In the first work reported on such films, titanium films a few hundred nanometres thick were sputter coated onto FTO glass substrates at 500 °C then anodized in hydrofluoric acid electrolyte. The as-anodized semi-transparent films were heat treated in oxygen ambient at about 500 °C to obtain transparent films of titania nanotube arrays. Although, transparent nanotube films of thickness up to 3.6 μm nanotube films were developed, the difficulty in obtaining metal films of greater thickness with appropriate structural quality limited the length and quality of the resulting nanotubes.

Recently, in a significant technological breakthrough Ti films of high quality (optical reflectance > 55%) and thickness as great as 20 μm were deposited on FTO glass. Using such high quality Ti films, transparent nanotube array layers of up to about 33 μm and 62 μm in length, respectively, were fabricated using DMSO and ethylene glycol electrolytes. The Ti films were deposited at temperatures close to room temperature by bombarding the growing films with energetic argon ions. The conductivities of the anodization electrolytes were modified by application of an electric field between two immersed electrodes prior to anodization. Using DMSO based electrolyte (with 2–4 vol% HF and 0–4 vol% water) and by varying the electrolyte conductivities between 1000–100 μS cm−1, transparent films with non-clumped, surface debris free nanotubes of lengths between 0.3 and 33 μm were fabricated. The films showed strong antireflection properties revealing the high optical quality of the films. These nanotube arrays have been successfully used in the fabrication of high-efficiency dye-sensitized solar cells, which are described in a later section.

TiO2 nanotubes have excellent photocatalytic properties, however due to the large band-gap (3.2 eV) absorption of light in the visible range, wherein lies the majority of the solar spectrum energy, is limited. Hence fabrication of a composite nanotube array system, TiO2 in combination with a low band-gap oxide material, appears a reasonable strategy for enhancing visible light properties. With this objective in mind, Cu–Ti–O and Fe–Ti–O ternary composite nanotube arrays were fabricated.

To fabricate Cu–Ti–O nanotube arrays, Cu–Ti alloy films of various composition were deposited on FTO coated glass substrates by simultaneous co-sputtering from titanium and copper targets. Deposition of the Cu–Ti alloy film required a substrate temperature of ∼300 °C to ensure proper adhesion of co-sputtered metals onto the FTO substrate. The relative composition of the Cu and Ti metals in the deposited film was controlled by varying the power levels on the different sputtering targets. To form the nanotube array structure, the Cu–Ti films were anodized at 30 V in EG containing 0.25 wt% NH4F and 1.0 vol% deionized water. The anodization process is similar to the 3rd generation TiO2 nanotube synthesis recipe, and the real time variation of the anodization current is similar to that observed for a pure Ti film. The length of the nanotubes varied with the thickness of the sputtered alloy film: a 1500 nm thick film having 74% Cu and 26% Ti resulted in a 1000 nm long nanotube with 65 nm pore diameter, and 35 nm wall thickness, while a 1000 nm film having 60% Cu and 40% Ti resulted in a 850 nm long nanotube with similar pore and wall thickness values. These nanotube arrays films were then annealed in oxygen ambience at 450 °C for crystallization, and oxidation of any remaining metal.
Similarly, the fabrication process of Fe–Ti–O nanotubes starts with deposition of Ti–Fe alloy thin films by co-sputtering Ti and Fe. The FTO substrate is maintained at 300–400 °C during sputtering and the relative composition of Fe and Ti is controlled by target power levels. To synthesize the nanotube arrays, the metal films were anodized at a constant voltage of 30 V in EG containing 0.3 wt% NH4F and 2.0 vol% deionized water. The as-anodized Fe–Ti–O nanotube arrays were amorphous, requiring annealing at 500 °C in oxygen atmosphere for crystallization. Well-defined nanotube array structures with good photoelectrochemical properties were obtained from sputtered metal films with up to 70% Fe content.

In 2003, Varghese and co-workers reported hydrogen sensing using TiO2 nanotube arrays. In this study, they reported a large variation of electrical resistance in nanotubes of few hundred nm in length upon exposure to hydrogen at 290 °C; the sensitivity was found to be dependent on pore size, wall thickness, and tube length. Fig. 13(a) shows the electrical resistance of 22 nm pore size, ∼200 nm long TiO2 nanotube arrays when exposed to hydrogen concentrations at 290 °C. The large change in resistance, over four orders of magnitude, is a factor of 10 greater than the maximum hydrogen sensitivity limit that had been previously reported. The test for cross sensitivity in the presence of other reducing gases such as carbon monoxide and ammonia did not reveal any significant variation in the electrical resistance. The mechanism behind this unusual change in resistance with hydrogen exposure is due to neither the reduction of the TiO2 lattice, nor removal of chemisorbed oxygen from the nanotube surface by the hydrogen. The sensing elements are fabricated with Pt electrodes, which suggest the availability of hydrogen atoms (H*), ions (H+) and various other forms of hydrogen such as H− ions and H3 on the surface of the nanotubes due to the well known spill-over mechanism of hydrogen by platinum. Although the diffusion of the “spilt” hydrogen atoms into the TiO2 interstitial positions and their subsequent ionization would enhance the conductivity, the fast response and lack of measurement hysteresis suggest that this mechanism does not contribute significantly to the overall change in nanotube resistivity. It appears the dominant mechanism behind the observed electrical behavior of the nanotubes is chemisorption of the spilled-over hydrogen atoms on the nanotube surface, which make a partial charge transfer to the TiO2, thereby creating an electron accumulation layer on the nanotube surface that enhances the electrical conductance.

Using second generation nanotubes made from an aqueous buffered KF electrolyte it is possible to obtain extremely high hydrogen gas sensitivity at room temperature. Fig. 13(b) shows the room temperature resistance variation of a nanotube array sample prepared in a pH 4.0 electrolyte using 10 V (length ≈ 1 μm, pore diameter ≈ 30 nm, and wall thickness ≈ 13 nm), annealed at 480 °C, alternately exposed to air and 1000 ppm hydrogen in nitrogen. An unprecedented high value of resistance variation, 8.7 orders of magnitude, is obtained, which is the largest known change in electrical resistance of any material, to any gas, at any temperature. Linear extrapolation of the sensitivity, assuming a 10 Ω measurement resolution, indicates the ability of the nanotube array to detect hydrogen at 20 ppt. Increasing the nanotube length to 6 μm decreases the sensitivity, with significantly longer response and recovery times due to the time required for hydrogen to diffuse inside the longer pores.
It is believed that the crystallized nanoscale walls and inter-tubular connecting points play critical roles in determining the remarkable hydrogen sensitivities of the TiO2 nanotube arrays. The adsorption of oxygen in air takes place on either side of the nanotube walls creating an electron depletion region. The width of the space charge layer L is given by L = LD [2eV/kT]1/2, where LD = [ε0εkT/2e2ND]1/2 is the Debye length, eV is the barrier height, kT is the thermal energy and ND the ionized donor density. In metal oxides the space charge layer extends to a few tens of nanometres. If the nanotube wall half-thickness t/2 is significantly greater than the width of the space charge region, as shown in Fig. 14(a), oxygen removal by hydrogen and subsequent hydrogen chemisorptions will have little effect on device resistance hence high sensitivities cannot be expected. In contrast, when t/2 is comparable to or less than the space charge region the shift in the electrical resistance on exposure to hydrogen can be very high, Fig. 14(b) and (c), a flat-band condition exists when the wall thickness is less than the width of the space charge region. The nanotube sample showing the highest sensitivity has a wall thickness of ∼13 nm, corresponding to the geometry of Fig. 14(b). The inter-wall connecting points also appear to play a significant role in enabling the ultra-high hydrogen sensitivity. The oxygen adsorption and its removal by hydrogen atoms as well as chemisorptions of hydrogen at these constricted points, Fig. 14(d), regulate the current passing from nanotube to nanotube.

A fundamental problem with chemical sensor use is that the sensors become contaminated, limiting their useful lifetime; typically the more sensitive the sensor, the more susceptible it is to contamination. It is, however, interesting to note that the photocatalytic properties of TiO2 enable ‘self-cleaning’ operation of the nanotube array hydrogen sensors. The nanotube sensor is able to self-clean with exposure to UV light, fully recovering its initial properties after being contaminated by either motor oil and/or stearic acid. The sensor response to hydrogen is fully reversible, with a change in electrical resistance of 3 orders of magnitude upon exposure to 1000 ppm hydrogen at 25 °C. Fig. 15(a) depicts the measurement set-up for the self-cleaning sensor, while Fig. 15(b) demonstrates the self-cleaning properties, showing the resistance change upon exposure to a 1000 ppm hydrogen atmosphere, before and after contamination, and after with exposure of the sensor to a 270 mW cm−2 UV light of mixed (365 nm and 254 nm) wavelength that results in sensor self-cleaning. The sensor is exposed to air during UV exposure to facilitate removal of the oil from the sensor surface. Since the potential of water and oxygen exists within the band-gap of TiO2, the photogenerated holes in the valence band can oxidize water to produce a highly reactive hydroxyl radical and the photogenerated electrons in the conduction band can reduce oxygen to form highly reactive super-oxide ions, which then assist in oxidizing the organic species.


In 1972, Fujishima and Honda reported photoelectrochemical generation of hydrogen by water splitting using TiO2 nanoparticles. Many subsequent efforts have sought to improve the photoconversion efficiency through use of different materials or different material structures. The TiO2 nanotube array architecture results in a large effective surface area in close proximity with the electrolyte thus enabling diffusive transport of photogenerated holes to oxidizable species in the electrolyte. Minority carriers generated within a “retrieval” length from the material surface, that is a distance from the surface equal to the sum of the depletion layer width and the diffusion length, escape recombination and reach the electrolyte. The relevant structure sizes of the titania nanotube arrays, that is half the wall thickness, are all smaller than 20 nm which is less than the retrieval length of crystalline titania; hence, bulk recombination is greatly reduced and the quantum yield enhanced.


In one of the first reports involving TiO2 nanotube arrays for photoelectrochemical water splitting, Mor and co-workers used first generation nanotube arrays anodized at 10 V as photoanodes in 1 M KOH electrolyte under UV illumination (337 nm) and obtained a photocurrent density of about 16 mA cm−2 at 1 V [vs. Ag/AgCl]; a maximum conversion efficiency of 6.8% was obtained for nanotubes anodized at 5 °C.Fig. 16 shows the experimental set-up used for the water photolysis measurements with the nanotube array used as the photoanode from which oxygen is evolved. The second generation nanotube arrays of 6 μm length, under a similar illumination shows a photoconversion efficiency of about 12.25%; the photocurrent increases with increasing annealing temperature, and hence improved crystallization, to 675 °C. The photocurrent dramatically decreases with samples annealed at 700 °C, photocurrents ∼10−4 A, due to disruption of the nanotube array architecture.


Fig. 17 shows the measured photocurrent density and corresponding photoconversion efficiencies of third generation nanotube arrays fabricated using a formamide based electrolyte at different anodization voltages, subsequently annealed at 525 °C for 1 h in oxygen. The use of different anodization voltages results in variation of the nanotube array length and outer diameter of the nanotube. The 20 V sample, 14.4 μm long, 94 nm outer diameter, achieves a photoconversion efficiency of 14.42%. Similar photocurrent densities are obtained also with 24 μm long nanotubes fabricated in an ethylene glycol based electrolyte; with the maximum photoconversion efficiency increasing to 16.25% for 580 °C annealed samples.

Several anionic and cationic dopants are known to enhance the visible light adsorption of TiO2. These dopants replace either the Ti or O ions in the TiO2 lattice creating impurity energy levels within the band-gap that facilitates absorption in the visible range. Among the various possible dopants, nitrogen doping is one of the most heavily investigated strategies to enhance visible light absorption of TiO2. In an effort to fabricate N-doped TiO2 nanotubes Shankar and co-workers reported an electrochemical approach that allows simultaneous nanostructuring and doping of the TiO2 films. Titanium foils were anodized in electrolytic solutions containing 0.07 M HF and 0.2 to 2.5 M concentrations of NH4NO3, with NH4OH added to adjust the pH to 3.5. N-doping in the TiO2 nanotube was confirmed by XPS, with the nitrogen concentration highest close to the nanotube surface. Diffuse reflectance spectra exhibit optical absorption in the wavelength range of 400 to 510 nm for N-doped samples. However, the photoelectrochemical properties measured in 1 M KOH solution under AM 1.5 global illumination yields a low photocurrent density of 0.5 mA cm−2 at 0.5 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) for a sample doped with 0.23 at% nitrogen. Like all doped samples (that can be made repeatedly), in spite of enhanced visible light absorption the low photocurrent values are low. This behavior is attributed to higher rates of recombination of the photogenerated charge carriers, as the dopants act as trap centers. For this reason, the photoelectrochemical properties of doped TiO2 nanotubes have not shown a meaningful improvement over that of un-doped samples. Recently, Varghese and co-workers reported the fabrication of N-doped TiO2 nanotube arrays. In situ N-doping was achieved during anodization by the use of NH4F electrolyte. By controlling ambient oxygen levels during heat treatment the absorption edge was shifted to about 540 nm as a result of nitrogen doping, compared to the intrinsic titania absorption edge near 400 nm. The film appearance changed from dark green to yellowish green when the nanotube length increased from 23 μm to 130 μm due to the increased absorption of higher wavelength photons. The use of such N-doped TiO2 arrays for photocatalytic CO2 reduction is described in a later section.


Surface sensitization of the nanotube arrays with low band-gap non-oxide semiconductors such as CdS, CdTe, and CdSe is a logical approach for increasing visible light absorption and, in turn, enhancing the photoconversion efficiency of TiO2 nanotubes. Surface coating of the nanotubes does not replace ions in the TiO2 lattice, and hence reduces the possibility of creating trap centers. Seabold and co-workers used an electrochemical technique for the deposition of cathodic CdTe films onto transparent nanotube arrays formed on FTO coated glass. An aqueous electrolyte of 0.1 M CdSO4 and 0.1 mM TeO2 at pH 1.4 maintained at 85 °C was used for the deposition. The samples were subsequently heated to 300 °C for 45 min. The CdTe layer behaves as a p-type semiconductor and results in a p–n junction with the TiO2 nanotubes. Photocurrent measurements on the CdTe/TiO2 nanotube samples were performed with light from a 300 W Xe arc lamp attached with a UV filter that allowed only visible and IR parts of the spectrum to pass. The electrolyte solution comprised of 0.6 M Na2S, and its pH is adjusted to 12 by adding NaOH. The measurements are conducted in a short-circuit condition without applying an external bias. The steady-state photocurrent values obtained for as-deposited and annealed CdTe/TiO2 samples were 50 μA cm−2, and 140 μA cm−2 respectively; in comparison, a bare TiO2 nanotube sample (without CdTe) yields only about 1 μA cm−2 under similar measurement conditions. An important difference between CdTe/TiO2 and CdTe electrodes is the photostability of the CdTe layer. The photocurrent generated by a CdTe layer deposited directly on an FTO substrate gradually diminishes over time. In contrast, the steady-state photocurrent observed by the CdTe/TiO2 electrode is stable with no signs of photocorrosion observed. This behavior is due to the more efficient hole consumption at the electrolyte–CdTe junction, and electron transfer from the conduction band of CdTe to that of TiO2 achieved by enhanced electrolyte–CdTe–TiO2 junction areas which kinetically suppress photocorrosion of the CdTe layer.


CuO and Cu2O are p-type semiconductors with a band-gap, respectively, of 1.4 eV and 2.2 eV, with the lack of stability in an electrochemical environment posing a significant problem to their successful application. Like the CdTe–TiO2 heterojunctions of improved photocorrosion stability, it is thought combining copper oxide with TiO2 should improve its photocorrosion behavior. To explore the photoelectrochemical properties of a CuO–Cu2O–TiO2 composite system, Cu–Ti–O nanotube arrays were fabricated on FTO glass substrate. The fabrication method is briefly described in Section 1 of this article. Anodization of a Cu–Ti alloy thin film with excess Cu results in p-type Cu–Ti–O nanotube arrays; the p-type behavior for samples with different annealing conditions is confirmed by the photocurrent measurements shown in Fig. 18. The samples are tested in a 5 ∶ 5 ∶ 2 methanol–water–diethylamine (DEA) solutions (pH 8). The calculated incident photon to electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) at −0.65 V vs. Ag/AgCl shows values of 10–11% in the UV range and 1–7% in the visible range.

Due to the observed p-type behavior of the Cu–Ti–O nanotube arrays, a p–n heterojunction can be formed with n-type TiO2 nanotube arrays (see Fig. 19). Such a p–n junction can act as a photoelectrochemical diode for water splitting without external bias. A representative junction is fabricated between the p-type Cu–Ti–O nanotube arrays (1 μm long, with 65 nm pore size and 35 nm wall thickness) and the n-type TiO2 nanotube arrays (0.6 μm long, with 30 nm pore size and 7 nm wall thickness). The TiO2 nanotube array side of the diode is kept in 1 M KOH solution, whereas the Cu–Ti–O side is kept in 0.1 M Na2HPO4 with a salt bridge linking the two sides. The AM 1.5 illumination was incident upon the TiO2 side of the diode, which absorbs UV photons, while passing visible light to the Cu–Ti–O side, thus minimizing any UV-assisted photocorrosion of the low band-gap material. A photocurrent density of approximately 0.25 mA cm−2 is achieved corresponding to a photoconversion efficiency of 0.30%. After 4 to 5 h of operation, only a minimal amount of photocathode photocorrosion is seen for such samples in 0.1 M Na2HPO4 electrolyte.

Ti–Fe–O ternary oxide nanotube arrays were fabricated from Ti–Fe co-sputtered thin films on FTO substrates. Such composite nanotube arrays offer the potential of effectively combining the visible light absorbing characteristics of iron oxide with the excellent charge transport properties of TiO2, which are expected to enhance the photoelectrochemical properties.Fig. 20 presents the absorbance spectra of the annealed samples, showing a red shift with increasing Fe content. The positive photocurrents, measured in 1 M KOH under AM 1.5 global illumination, reveal the n-type behavior of the Ti–Fe–O nanotube arrays. Maximum photocurrent, in the range of 1.5–2 mA cm−2 is obtained at 0.65 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) with 1.5 μm long nanotube array sample having 6.6% Fe content. This is in stark contrast to the performance of a 1.5 μm thick nanoporous Fe2O3 film, which shows a photocurrent of only 0.04 mA cm−2 under similar conditions.


A dye-sensitized solar cell (DSC), also known as a Grätzel cell, is a relatively low cost photovoltaic device using a photosensitized anode and hole transporting electrolyte where charge separation occurs at the dye layer between the semiconductor and electrolyte. The working electrodes in a typical dye-sensitized solar cell consist of a 10 μm thick film comprised of a three-dimensional network of interconnected semiconductor nanoparticles, typically 15 to 20 nm in diameter. The large surface area associated with such films enables efficient light harvesting that in turn maximizes the amount of photogenerated charge. However the structural disorder at the contact between two crystalline nanoparticles leads to enhanced scattering of electrons, thus reducing electron mobility. The highly ordered TiO2 nanotube arrays, aligned perpendicular to the surface of the transparent conducting oxide (TCO) coated glass substrate, offer the potential for reduced loss as incurred by charge-hopping across the nanoparticle grain boundaries.



Fig. 21(a) depicts a cross-sectional view of a dye-sensitized solar cell (DSC) with front side illumination geometry fabricated using TiO2 nanotube arrays grown on FTO coated glass. Under AM 1.5 illumination, a 3.6 μm thick nanotube array DSC exhibited a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 10.3 mA cm−2, an open-circuit potential (Voc) of 0.84 V and a fill factor (FF) of 0.54, for an overall conversion efficiency of 4.7%. In this case, N719 (commercially available ruthenium based dye, from Solaronix, Switzerland) in ethanol or ethanol + acetonitrile (1 ∶ 1) solution was used for sensitization.

Donor-antenna dyes provide an exciting route for improving the efficiency of dye-sensitized solar cells owing to their high molar extinction coefficients and the effective spatial separation of charges which decelerates the recombination of photogenerated charges. The donor-antenna dye cis-di(thiocyanato)(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid)-(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-bis(vinyltriphenylamine) ruthenium(II) contains the electron rich donor triphenylamine linked to the bpy by a conjugated vinyl spacer. The extended π electron delocalization in the bpy ligand that results enables the donor-antenna dye molecules to have molar extinction coefficients more than twice that of the commonly used N719 dye. Using such a donor-antenna dye, a 1 μm long TiO2 nanotube array yielded a short-circuit photocurrent density of 10.1 mA cm−2, an open-circuit potential of 743 mV, and a fill factor of 0.55 resulting in an overall conversion efficiency of 4.1%.
Varghese and co-workers recently showed that it is possible to grow TiO2 nanotube arrays up to 33 μm in length on FTO coated glass. The fabrication details are briefly described in Section 1. Ruthenium bipyridyl dye, N719, which absorbs light in the wavelength range up to 750 nm, was used for sensitizing the nanotubes. The current–voltage characteristics of DSCs fabricated using TiO2 nanotubes, on FTO coated glass, of up to 33 μm length are shown in Fig. 22(a) (all nanotube samples were synthesized in DMSO and treated with TiCl4). The DSC with 17.6 μm long nanotubes yielded a power conversion efficiency of 6.9% (open-circuit voltage Voc = 0.73 V, short-circuit current density Jsc = 15.8 mA cm−2 and fill factor 0.59). In comparison, in high-efficiency nanoparticle DSCs (power efficiency 10–11%) fabricated under highly optimized conditions (for example, using highly purified dyes), the Jsc is ∼17–18 mA cm−2, FF is close to 0.75, and Voc is 0.7–0.85 V. Fig. 22(b) shows the IPCE spectra obtained from these nanotube array DSCs. The IPCE is as high as 70–80% in a wide wavelength range (450–650 nm) and has significant magnitude up to 700 nm. The projection of the shoulder in the wavelength region above 600 nm with increasing nanotube length shows efficient conversion of low-energy photons without the need for a scattering layer as used in high-efficiency nanoparticle DSCs.

Backside illuminated dye-sensitized solar cells, see Fig. 21(b), have been fabricated using titania nanotube arrays (∼6 μm length, ∼110 nm pore size, ∼20 nm wall thickness) grown on a Ti foil substrate by anodic oxidation in a buffered KF-based electrolyte (25 V, pH 5.0), and then crystallized by oxygen anneal at 580 °C for 6 h. The electrolyte contains 0.5 M LiI, 0.05 M I2, 0.6 M N-methylbenzimidazole, 0.10 M guanidinium thiocyanate, and 0.5 M tert-butylpyridine in methoxypropionitrile (MPN). A conductive glass slide sputter coated with 1.3 nm of Pt is used as the counter electrode. Under AM 1.5 (100 mW cm−2) illumination the TiCl4 treated nanotube array DSC, infiltrated with N719 in acetonitrile, exhibits a Jsc = 15 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.842 V, and FF = 0.43; this results in an overall conversion efficiency of 5.44%. Maximum power of 5.44 mW cm−2 is delivered at Imax = 10.4 mA cm−2 and Vmax = 0.53 V. Clearly, the device suffers from a low FF, which is believed due to a relatively thick barrier layer at the nanotube–Ti foil interface arising from the high-temperature annealing process needed for nanotube crystallization.

The use of third generation nanotubes (20 μm in length) grown on Ti foil from a formamide based electrolyte for dye-sensitized solar cell results in an overall photoconversion efficiency of 6.89%, with Voc = 0.917 V, Jsc = 12.72 mA cm−2, and FF of 0.663. When a donor-antenna dye is used instead of N719 dye, a 14.4 μm long nanotube array sample shows Jsc = 13.44 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.723 V, and FF of 0.63 resulting in an overall conversion efficiency of 6.1%, a significant performance considering the light reflection and absorption losses arising from the backside illumination geometry.

Solid-state bulk heterojunction solar cells offer the prospect of lightweight, flexible photovoltaics as well as potentially low manufacturing costs. These photovoltaic devices are based on an interpenetrating network of two semiconductors, at least one of which is a polymer, with one material functioning as an electron donor and the other as an acceptor. Mor and co-workers reported such photovoltaic devices comprised of transparent TiO2 nanotube arrays into which a polymer blend containing an electron donor poly[(3-hexylthiophene)] (P3HT) and an electron acceptor [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM); a 10 mg ml−1 solution of P3HT in chlorobenzene and 8 mg ml−1 solution of PCBM in chlorobenzene were mixed in a 1 ∶ 1 ratio and infiltrated into the nanotubes. Subsequently a layer of hole injecting polymer poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) ∶ poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT ∶ PSS) was deposited by spin coating an aqueous suspension of the polymer. Fig. 23 shows the schematic representation of the polymer–TiO2 nanotube array solar cell. Charge separation in this device occurs at both the n-type TiO2–P3HT interface and the n-type PCBM–P3HT interface. A key advantage of the TiO2 nanotube array electron accepting network is that it prevents the electron donating material (P3HT) and electron accepting materials (TiO2 and PCBM) from both being in contact with the anode and the cathode of the solar cell at the same time, as is the case with the conventional bulk heterojunction device geometry. The resulting solid-state solar cells using 270 nm long and 50 nm pore size nanotubes showed Jsc = 12.4 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.641 V, and FF of 0.51, yielding power conversion efficiencies of 4.1% under AM 1.5 illumination.

To increase light harvesting in the red and near-IR portion of the solar spectrum TiO2 nanotube arrays, on FTO coated glass, are sensitized using an unsymmetrical squaraine dye (5-carboxyl-2-[[3-[(1,3-dihydro-3,3-dimethyl-1-ethyl-2H-indol-2-ylidene)-methyl]-2-hydroxy-4-oxo-2-cyclobuten-1-ylidene]methyl]-3,3-trimethyl-1-octyl-3H-indolium), then uniformly infiltrated with p-type P3HT.Fig. 24 shows the IPCE of a such a hybrid photovoltaic device in the 400–750 nm wavelength range. The IPCE depends upon the degree of surface wetness of the P3HT layer, and an optimum level of wetting is required for maximizing the efficiency. The current densities under dark and illuminated conditions are shown in Fig. 25. The solid-state solar cells fabricated in this way using 600–700 nm long, 35 nm pore size exhibit broad, near-UV to NIR, spectral response with external quantum yields of up to 65%. Under UV filtered AM 1.5 G of 90 mW cm−2 intensity, typical device photoconversion efficiencies of 3.2% are achieved, with champion device efficiencies up to 3.8%.

Varghese and co-workers reported the use of nitrogen-doped TiO2 nanotube arrays surface-functionalized with Cu and Pt particles for photocatalytic conversion of CO2 and water vapor to hydrocarbon fuels. Using outdoor sunlight of 100 mW cm−2 a hydrocarbon production rate of 111 ppm cm−2 h−1 is obtained, which is about 20 times greater than the previously reported values obtained using UV light under laboratory conditions. The nitrogen-doped TiO2 nanotube arrays used in this work were fabricated using the third generation synthesis recipe, where the anodization of the Ti foil was performed at 55 V in an ethylene glycol based electrolyte containing 0.3 wt% ammonium fluoride and 2 vol% water. Nitrogen doping of the TiO2, which is known to enhance visible light absorption, was achieved in situ during anodization with nitrogen supplied by NH4F and to a lesser extent by the atmospheric nitrogen dissolved in the electrolyte. The as-anodized nanotube arrays were annealed at temperatures between 450 °C and 600 °C for crystallization. Ultra-thin layers of Pt and/or Cu were deposited onto the crystalline TiO2 nanotubes by DC sputtering. Photocatalytic experiments were performed with 2 cm × 2 cm samples mounted inside specially designed reaction chambers fitted with a quartz window for admitting solar radiation, see Fig. 26, gas valves for CO2 injection, and septa for gas sampling. After irradiation the residual gas samples were analyzed with a gas chromatograph fitted with flame ionization and thermal conductivity detectors.

Initial experiments performed with nanotube array samples coated with Pt or Cu nanoparticles show that for the Pt-sensitized samples the H2 generation rates exceed hydrocarbon generation rates, whereas for the Cu-sensitized samples there is significantly more CO. To maximize the hydrocarbon generation rate both Pt and Cu layers were deposited over different regions of a single nanotube array sample, each covering approximately 50% of the samples surface area. Fig. 27 shows the hydrocarbon generation rate of a 600 °C annealed 40 μm long nanotube array sample; 111 ppm cm−2 h hydrocarbon was generated with no measurable carbon monoxide. Results indicate a homogeneous distribution of co-catalyst nanoparticles over the entire nanotube array surface would significantly improve hydrocarbon generation rates.
It had been earlier shown that CO2 could be reduced to CO and O2 using Pt/TiO2 catalysts. On the basis of this observation, Varghese and co-workers hypothesized that a likely process in the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 by Cu or Pt catalyzed TiO2 NT samples could be the reaction
CO2 + 2e− + 2h+ → CO + ½O2
(1)
With the redox reaction occurring in several elementary steps, such as
CO2 + H+ + e− → ˙HCO2(ads)
(2)
˙HCO2(ads) + H+ + e− → CO + H2O
(3)
2H2O + 2h+ → 2 ˙OH(ads) + 2H+
(4)
2 ˙OH(ads) → ½O2 + H2O
(5)
The CO formed in this way would react with atomic hydrogen to form hydrocarbon. On the basis of this hypothesis Varghese and co-workers proposed the following mechanism for the conversion of CO2 into methane.
H2O + h+ → OH˙ + H+
(6)
2CO2 + 4e−+4h+ → 2CO + O2
(7)
CO + 6e− + 6H+ → CH4 + H2O
(8)
The free energy for overall
methane formation:

CO2 + 2H2O (g) → CH4 + 2O2
(9)
is about 801 kJ mol
−1, a process requiring 8 photons.


Titanium and its alloys are widely used as implants due to its strength, biocompatibility, and high level of hemocompatibility. The high degree of Ti (alloy) biocompatibility is due to its ability to form stable and dense thin oxide layers in most environments. It is believed that thicker and more stable TiO2-based oxide surfaces are generally favorable for surface bioactivity. Spark anodization is commonly used to increase the biocompatibility of titanium and its alloys, with the process leading to the formation of a disordered oxide structure several hundred nanometres thick. In contrast to this approach, the electrochemical formation of highly ordered TiO2 nanotube arrays results in a unique surface for biomedical implants that offers both biocompatibility as well as drug eluting properties. We review the use of TiO2 nanotube arrays to enhance blood clot formation, apatite formation, cell activity, drug elution, and the application of TiO2 nanotubular membranes for protein separation and drug delivery.


Roy and co-workers demonstrated that blood containing dispersed TiO2 nanotubes and blood in contact with gauze pads surface decorated with TiO2 nanotubes showed, in comparison to pure blood, significantly stronger clot formation with reduced clotting times. The TiO2 samples used for this work were third generation nanotubes fabricated with polar DMSO based electrolytes which, after crystallization, were ultrasonically agitated in an ethanol–water mixture for separation and subsequent dispersion. Fig. 28(a) shows the time-dependent change in the resonance amplitude of blood immersed magnetoelastic sensors to which varying concentrations of nanotubes were added; comparative amplitude–time data for a pure blood sample, and a blood sample containing TiO2 nanoparticles are also shown. The minimum of the first derivative of the amplitude–time response defines the clotting time, while the magnitude of the derivative minimum (maximum clot rate) correlates to clot strength. The amplitude–time derivatives of the data seen in Fig. 28(a) are plotted in Fig. 28(b). The activated clotting time of pure blood is estimated to be 285 s, reducing to about 260 s for the nanotube containing blood samples. For whole blood, the elasticity is 2.21 kPa. Larger elasticity values, i.e. stronger clot strengths, are found for increasing nanotube concentrations, reaching 3.87 kPa for blood containing 1 mg mL−1 of nanotubes. In comparison, the clotting time increases 310 s for blood in combination with TiO2 nanoparticles, and the clot strength decreased to 1.97 kPa. Such enhanced clot strength and reduced clotting times are attributed to the high surface area tubular architecture that promotes greater binding of the fibrin monomers and their subsequent conversion to fibrin thread-like fibrin polymers that form the clot matrix. The experimental study also found that gauze bandages surface decorated with TiO2 nanotubes could be used to improve the rate of blood clot formation and the strength of the resulting clot.


The success of orthopedic implant surgery depends not only on the bone-implant integration, but also on the presence of sterile environment around the implant. Systematic antibiotic delivery for the prevention of infection entails certain drawbacks such as toxicity and undesired side effects, with local antibiotic therapy the preferred way of administering drugs. Popat and Desai reported the use of TiO2 nanotube array surfaces for local delivery of antibiotics at the site of implantation, with demonstrated prevention of bacterial adhesion while maintaining the osseointegrative properties of the nanostructured surface. Precise control of the nanotube length and diameter enable different amounts of drugs at different rates to be eluted at the implant site.

To investigate the usefulness of TiO2 nanotube arrays for antibiotic delivery, nanotube array films with 80 nm pore diameter and 400 nm length were loaded with gentamicin; approximately 70–80% of the drugs remained inside the nanotubes after an initial wash. To facilitate gentamicin release from the nanotubes, the samples were immersed in PBS at room temperature with orbital shaking. It is found that by changing the nanotube diameter, wall thickness, and length, the release kinetics can be altered to achieve either rapid or sustained release. Bacterial adhesion on the nanotube surface was studied by observing Staphylococcus epidermis bacteria strain growth on the samples by using fluorescence microscopy. Fig. 29 shows the bacterial colony count on Ti, nanotube (NT), and gentamicin-functionalized nanotube (NT–G) surfaces. It was found that there is a 70% decrease in bacteria colonies on the NT–G surface compared to that on Ti and NT surfaces after 4 h of culture, suggesting that gentamicin elution from the nanotubes is able to significantly reduce S. epidermis colony formation on the implant surfaces.

Biocompatible self-standing TiO2 nanotube membranes, with well-controlled and uniform pores, offer a useful membrane technology. The utility of TiO2 nanotube membranes, fabricated from an EG based electrolyte that results in hexagonal close-packed formation of the tubes, has been demonstrated by characterizing the diffusion kinetics of various bio-molecules including glucose, phenol red, bovine serum albumin (BVA), and immunoglobulin (IgG).


Great progress has been achieved in developing a variety of techniques for synthesis of electrochemically anodized TiO2 nanotube arrays. A classic example of this is the extension of the nanotube lengths from approximately 0.5 μm in the first synthesis generation to about 1000 μm in the third generation. The availability of TiO2 nanotube arrays with varying lengths, pore sizes, and wall thicknesses has facilitated wide ranging applications such as ultra-high sensitivity hydrogen sensors, visible light responsive composite nanotube arrays for water photolysis, dye-sensitized and solid-state solar cells, high performance photocatalytic materials for reduction of CO2 to hydrocarbon fuels using sunlight, and as a novel drug eluting material for enhanced osseointegration.

The variation in nanotube morphologies and their collective arrangements with respect to the anodization medium is fascinating. Although the fundamental nanotube formation mechanism, as discussed earlier, is believed to be the same for all electrolytes and anodization conditions, we lack detailed mechanistic understanding relative to effects associated with the individual electrolytes and growth conditions. Of particular importance are the roles of different electrolyte species including dissolved gases and their kinetics in determining the nanotube morphology, dimensions, inter-tubular spacing and properties. For example, while an ethylene glycol electrolyte yields a nanotube configuration close to ideal hexagonal close packing, diethylene glycol yields well-separated nanotubes. As another example, nanotubes grown in an ethylene glycol electrolyte free of nitrogen bearing radicals show a light absorption edge shift due to nitrogen doping. Although it is believed that nitrogen from air dissolved in the electrolyte takes part in the nanotube growth process, the reasons for absence of such a doping effect in nanotubes fabricated in other electrolytes are not obvious. A third issue is the insufficient knowledge about the cause of nanotube length significantly exceeding the thickness of the metal consumed. In organic electrolytes where chemical dissolution of the oxide is weak, the nanotube length can exceed three times the thickness of the metal layer consumed during anodization. This increase in length cannot be satisfactorily explained on basis of the volume expansion during metal to oxide transformation, as the enhancement estimated by Pilling–Bedworth ratio is significantly lower. It is hypothesized that this is due to the incorporation of titanium complex released into the electrolyte as a result of field-assisted chemical dissolution and lateral motion of the anodized material into the nanotube walls while the oxide–metal interface advances into the metal. A unified theory that explains different aspects of nanotube growth mechanism under various anodization conditions is required for further advancements in the field.
One such advance would be the ability to lower the pore diameter without increasing the nanotube wall thickness and spacing, which would significantly enhance the nanotube array surface area. Such a reduction in pore size would help improve the antireflection properties of the nanotube array films and their photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical performance. In the case of organic photovoltaic cells the reduced pore size would lower carrier losses. Using fluorine based electrolytes, obtaining nanotubes with pore diameter less than about 20 nm, wall thickness less than about 15 nm and length greater than about one micron remains an unmet challenge.
The as-synthesized nanotubes are amorphous and require high-temperature annealing (450–600 °C) for crystallization. Annealing at high-temperatures produces a thick barrier layer between the bottom of the nanotubes and the underlying Ti film/substrate, which hinders the charge transport to the underlying metal. In the case of TiO2 nanotubes grown on FTO substrates, high-temperature annealing also damages the underlying FTO layer posing a discontinuity in the charge transfer pathway. Furthermore, requirement of a high-temperature processing step for TiO2 nanotubes raises compatibility issues with many standard device fabrication processes. In an attempt to address this problem, Allam and co-workers have suggested a two-step anodization technique to fabricate crystalline as-anodized nanotube arrays. The first step consists of pretreatment of the Ti foil in H2O2-containing electrolytes, to oxidize the Ti surface, followed by potentiostatic anodization in fluoride-containing media. However, further optimization is needed to extend the length of the as-anodized crystalline nanotubes. Low-temperature crystallization in combination with suitable visible light sensitization is expected to result in a significant improvement in the photocatalytic properties of the TiO2 nanotubes. To that end, while encouraging progress has been achieved towards photocatalytic conversion of CO2 using sunlight, further effort is required for increasing sunlight to fuel photoconversion efficiencies, to a benchmark comparable with modern solar cells, and subsequent scale implementation of the developed technology. A visible light photocatalytic flow-through membrane, wherein CO2 and water vapor would enter one side of the nanotubes membrane with a fuel exiting from the other, see Fig. 30, offers an exciting opportunity for photonic fuels. Also, the nanotube array architecture has been found ideally suited for hydrogen gas sensing. Further work is needed towards the sensitization of the nanotubes with suitable co-catalyst nanoparticles for the selective detection of non-hydrogen gases.

Support of this work by the National Science Foundation, CBET—0927262 and CBET—0827845, is gratefully acknowledged.


This journal is © the Owner Societies 2010