 DOI: 10.1039/C6CP04793A
(Communication)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 27078-27082


B. X.
Wang
,

T. F.
Liu
,

Y. B.
Zhou
,

X.
Chen
,

X. B.
Yuan
,

Y. Y.
Yang
,

W. P.
Liu
,

J. M.
Wang
,

H. W.
Han
* and 

Y. W.
Tang
*

Institute of Nano-science and Technology, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, 430079, China. E-mail: ywtang@phy.ccnu.edu.cn

Michael Grätzel Center for Mesoscopic Solar Cells, Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, School of Optical and Electronic Information, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074, China. E-mail: hongwei.han@mail.hust.edu.cn

Received
10th July 2016
, Accepted 26th August 2016
First published on 2nd September 2016
A one dimensional nanostructure array has been considered as a successful charge transport material for perovskite solar cells (PSCs), because of its large internal surface area, superior charge collection efficiency and fast charge transport. Herein we demonstrate a ZnO nanorod (NR) array as the electron collector in a hole-conductor-free PSC with a carbon counter electrode (CE). A relatively low initial power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 5.6% was achieved using a 1 μm long ZnO NR array as an electron collector. However, by introduction of a thin TiO2 coating layer on the surface of ZnO via TiCl4 treatment, the PCE of the cell has been improved to the highest value of 8.24%. It is revealed that the performance enhancement of the ZnO/TiO2 NR based PSCs is largely attributed to the larger surface area, reduced electron combination, and superior electron transport properties.

Recently, perovskite solar cells (PSCs), evolved from dye-sensitized solar cells, as a cost-effective alternative to silicon-based photovoltaics have attracted considerable attention and shown promise toward the development of next generation solar cells. The certified PCE of PSC has increased rapidly to 22.1% within the past five years. The PSC also takes the advantages of low cost, light weight, flexibility, and roll to roll processing compatibility. In order to make it more competitive for future commercialization, multiple research groups have demonstrated various device architectures for avoiding the use of high-cost hole transporting materials (HTMs) and/or noble metal Au counter electrodes in mesoscopic TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 solar cells. Their results indicated that the devices can perform well. Most notably, to reduce the cell fabrication cost caused by HTMs and Au counter electrodes at the same time, we have developed an HTM free device based on a lead iodide perovskite containing a mixture of methylammonium and 5-aminovaleric acid cations. A mesoporous ZrO2 layer served to prevent recombination between the fully printable carbon electrode (CE) and the mesoporous TiO2 electron-transport layer, resulting in a PCE of 12.8%, along with excellent long-term stability. Yet despite the lower efficiency compared to those employing HTMs and Au metal, the architectural design indicates a very promising prospect for low-cost photovoltaic technology.

As a wide band-gap semiconductor for the sensitizer scaffolds, ZnO is considered to be an excellent candidate material for photoelectrodes due to its high electron mobility. In addition, in open structures, such as nanorod (NR) and nanowire array, ZnO serves as the backbone for the direct electron transport by providing short transport channels as well as improved perovskite infiltration within the electron transport material. Several studies have already demonstrated the use of ZnO NR arrays for application in PSCs with HTMs and noble metal counter electrodes. However, the attainable performance of the ZnO NR based device was apparently lower owing to the high rate of undesirable recombination compared with TiO2 photoanodes. Thus, some efforts have been made in the fabrication of core–shell nanoarchitectures designed to passivate the defect states on the ZnO surface and suppress charge recombination.
In this work, we explore the use of the ZnO NR array and the ZnO/TiO2 core–shell hybrid array as the electron collector in hole-conductor-free PSCs based on a carbon counter electrode, as the structure depicted in Fig. 1a. The corresponding energy level diagram of the ZnO/TiO2 NR heterojunction solar cell is shown in Fig. 1b. From the construction band of ZnO/TiO2, ZrO2 and perovskite, electrons could be easily transferred from perovskite to the ZnO/TiO2 layer continuously, forming the photoelectric current. The 0.6–0.7 eV energy band between ZnO/TiO2 and ZrO2 prevents the photogenerated electrons from flowing back to recombine with the holes from the perovskite at the back contact. In our work, ZnO NRs were prepared using a hydrothermal method and a PCE of 5.56% was achieved by using 1 μm long ZnO NR arrays as an electron collector. Furthermore, TiO2 was used to modify the bare ZnO NR, forming ZnO/TiO2 core–shell hybrid arrays. The PCE of ZnO/TiO2 NR based PSCs was increased to 8.24%. Through further dynamic study using impedance spectroscopy, we found that the ZnO based PSCs present a smaller transport resistance than the corresponding TiO2 NR PSCs while the charge recombination in the devices is larger. The performance enhancement is attributed to the retention of the transport properties of those based on the pristine ZnO and reduced electron recombination.
X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements reveal that the obtained ZnO has a wurtzite structure (Fig. 2a, JCPDS file No. 80-0074). The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image in Fig. 2c shows that the product consists of large, well-aligned NRs, which uniformly cover the entire surface of the substrate. The diameter of the NR ranges from 50 to 250 nm. The cross-section view in Fig. 2b shows that these NRs are aligned approximately perpendicular to the substrate surface with a length of about 1 μm. The surface of each rod is very smooth, which can also be found in the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of Fig. S1a (ESI). The corresponding selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of the ZnO NR in Fig. S1b (ESI) exhibits one set of clear diffraction spots, indicating that the NR possesses single-crystalline structures that are expected to provide a direct pathway for the rapid transport of electrons toward the FTO substrate. It can be seen from its HRTEM image (Fig. 2d) that the NR is well crystallized with clearly resolved lattice fringes of ZnO even on the edge of NR. The adjacent-plane distance of 2.60 Å corresponds well to the (0002) plane of ZnO, which consistent with previous data of the XRD test.

Fig. 2e shows the SEM image of the NR array after coating with TiO2. It clearly reveals that the diameter of the NR increases to 70–270 nm and the surface of the NRs becomes much rougher, because tiny nano-grains coated the surface of the ZnO NRs uniformly. We believe that the rough surface provides a bigger internal surface area when contacting the perovskite and facilitates the attachment of the perovskite, which can improve the cell performance. Fig. S1c and f (ESI) give the TEM and HRTEM images of the as-prepared TiO2 coated ZnO NRs to verify the core–shell structures. From Fig. S1c (ESI), we find that a homogeneous shell layer with a thickness of 10–20 nm is coated on the ZnO NR core. Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) (Fig. S1e, ESI) shows the presence of O, Zn and Ti elements, verifying the formation of the TiO2 layer on the surface of the ZnO NR. In addition, HRTEM images in Fig. 2f shows that the well crystallized covering layer was found assembled by interconnected small crystal grains with 5–8 nm. The lattice space in the shell is 0.202 nm which matches that of the TiO2 (200) plane well, indicating the formation of crystalline TiO2.
Hole-conductor-free PSCs with CE were prepared using the ZnO NR array and the ZnO/TiO2 NR array approximately 1 μm long, respectively. In the manufacturing steps of the PSC device, the patterned FTO glass substrates were coated by a ZnO seed layer (SEM is shown in Fig. S2, ESI) by dip-coating, and the ZnO NR array was synthesized using a hydrothermal method. A TiO2 layer was coated on the surface of ZnO via treatment of TiCl4. After being sintered at 450 °C for 30 min, a 1 μm ZrO2 space layer and a 4 μm CE were screen printed on top of the ZnO layer by layer. The deposition of perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 into the porous films was obtained using a two-step sequential method (for details, see the ESI Experimental section).
The cross-section image of a typical ZnO/TiO2 NR based PSC is shown in Fig. 3. It is noted that the pores in the ZnO/TiO2 NR film is fully filled with the perovskite presented as a continuous bulk layer morphology. We also deposited the perovskite onto the ZnO array directly and the corresponding SEM images are shown in Fig. S3 (ESI). It could be clearly seen that the gaps between the ZnO NRs have almost been filled, indicating that the morphology of the NR is beneficial for the complete infiltration of perovskite into the semiconductor scaffolds.
The XRD pattern of the ZnO/perovskite electrode is shown in Fig. S4 (ESI). The XRD peaks of the perovskite crystals are clearly observed at 14.1, 19.4, 24.6, 31.7, 35, 40.7, 43.8 and 50.6°, showing exact coincidence with previously reported XRD patterns of the perovskite absorber. The UV-vis absorption spectra (Fig. S5, ESI) of the ZnO/perovskite and ZnO/TiO2/perovskite electrodes clearly reveal that the spectra cover almost all the visible to near infrared region over about 400–800 nm. This is consistent with the band gap of 1.5 eV for CH3NH3PbI3.
The ZnO/CH3NH3PbI3/ZrO2/CE and ZnO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/ZrO2/CE devices were measured under simulated air mass 1.5 global (AM 1.5G) solar irradiation at 100 mW cm−2 and room temperature. In Fig. 4a, we show the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics, respectively, and the detailed photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table S1 (ESI). The overall distributions of the performance parameters for 30 devices are shown in Fig. S6 (ESI). ZnO/TiO2 NR based PSC exhibits good I–V performances in terms of the short-circuit current density (JSC) of 14.82 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 960.39 mV, fill factor (FF) of 0.58 and PCE of 8.24%. The bare ZnO based device shows a relatively low performance, only presenting a PCE of 5.56% with a JSC of 14.19 mA cm−2, VOC of 843.16 mV and FF of 0.46. The efficiency difference is mainly caused by the JSC and VOC. The photocurrent is enhanced by the deposition of TiO2 nanoparticles: with the bare ZnO based PSC, the JSC value is only 14.19 mA cm−2, whereas the ZnO/TiO2 NR based PSC exhibits a JSC value of 14.82 mA cm−2. The incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) is directly related to JSC. The IPCE spectra of the PSCs based on ZnO and ZnO/TiO2 NR arrays are presented in Fig. 4b. The ZnO/TiO2 PSC exhibits a relatively higher IPCE, which reaches over 70% at wavelengths as short as 400 nm, maximizing its value at 75% at 520 nm, retaining 60% up to 700 nm, and as high as 55% even at a long wavelength of 760 nm, than comparable values found for ZnO NR PSC. The value of the integrated photocurrent from IPCE is 14.64 mA cm−2 and 13.71 mA cm−2, respectively, which agree well with the measured JSC. The photocurrent difference could be attributed to the increased UV-vis absorption available by growing the TiO2 shell, which was attributed to the increase of the surface area and more stable attachment of perovskite compared to the bare ZnO NR. At the same time, the ZnO NR core facilitates the transport of electrons from TiO2 to the FTO substrate. In addition, the charge recombination in the ZnO/CH3NH3PbI3 interface can be effectively suppressed by the TiO2 interfacial passivation, and the presence of the TiO2 shell introduces an energy cascade barrier that stops photoinjected electrons from approaching the ZnO NR surface, which is confirmed by the difference in the surface work function of the ZnO (5.60 eV) and the TiO2 shell (4.80 eV). So the suppression of charge recombination and the back electron transfer from ZnO to the perovskite by the coated TiO2 lead to the increase of both the VOC and FF.
In order to have a better understanding about the charge transport and charge recombination of these cells, we carried out electro-chemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements, in which the frequency range of 100 mHz to 1 MHz with 10 mV AC amplitude under dark conditions. Fig. 5a shows the Nyquist plots derived from the results of EIS spectra of ZnO NR, ZnO/TiO2 NR, and TiO2 NR PSC films, and the equivalent circuit is presented in the Fig. 5b. The J–V curve of TiO2 NR based PSC is shown in Fig. S7 (ESI). It is noted that the VOC is 1039 mV, higher than that of the ZnO/TiO2 NR based PSC. Two clear semicircles can be observed in the high frequency region and low frequency region, which are related to the charge transfer at the perovskite/CE interface and the charge recombination at the NR/perovskite interface, respectively. The related parameters have been summarized in Table S2 (ESI). Since all of the devices show a similar value of Rct2, the charge transfer resistance at the perovskite/CE interface also appears to be similar resulting from the same device structure. On the other hand, it clearly shows the recombination resistance in the order of Rct1(ZnO) < Rct1(ZnO/TiO2) < Rct1(TiO2), revealing that ZnO NR shows a stronger recombination than that of TiO2 NR. The coating of TiO2 nanoparticles has decreased the recombination rate between NR and perovskite, although still higher than that of the TiO2 NR film. This result is consistent with the differences of VOC observed in the Fig. 4a and with a higher FF.

In summary, we have demonstrated the application of ZnO NR array in hole-conductor-free PSCs based on a carbon counter electrode. The coating of the TiO2 layer successfully increased the Rct1 at the ZnO/perovskite interface, which had been demonstrated by EIS analysis. Consequently, the ZnO/TiO2 NR based PSC achieved high PCE of 8.24% whereas the reference PSC exhibited PCE of 5.56%, which makes the ZnO/TiO2 NR array novelty candidates as electron collectors for PSCs.


The authors declare no competing financial interests.


This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51572102) and the Self-determined Research Funds of CCNU from the Colleges' basic Research and Operation of MOE (CCNU15GF006).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, TEM image and its corresponding SAED pattern of the ZnO NR; SEM images of ZnO seeds layer; SEM images, XRD patterns and UV-vis spectra of ZnO NR/perovskite and ZnO/TiO2 electrodes; TEM images and EDS pattern of the ZnO/TiO2 NR, and J–V curve of TiO2 NR based PSC; the overall distributions of performance parameters for 30 devices. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp04793a
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016