 DOI: 10.1039/D1TA01871J
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 12981-12987


Chuanyou
Niu
,

Yuancai
Gong
,

Ruichan
Qiu
,

Qiang
Zhu
,

Yage
Zhou
,

Shasha
Hao
,

Weibo
Yan
*,

Wei
Huang
 and 

Hao
Xin
*

Key Laboratory for Organic Electronics and Information Displays, Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Biosensors, Institute of Advanced Materials (IAM), Jiangsu National Synergetic Innovation Center for Advanced Materials (SICAM), Nanjing University of Posts & Telecommunications, 9 Wenyuan Road, Nanjing 210023, China. E-mail: iamhxin@njupt.edu.cn; iamwbyan@njupt.edu.cn

Received
3rd March 2021
, Accepted 29th April 2021
First published on 30th April 2021
Fabricating a thin film absorber material from a molecular solution is a very promising approach for low-cost and large area photovoltaic technology. The properties of a molecular solution processed kesterite (CZTSSe) absorber highly depends on the components in the solution, which determine the composition of the precursor film and thus the grain growth and properties of the absorber. Here, we report the chemical reactions in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) solution using CuCl, Zn(OAc)2, SnCl4, and thiourea (Tu) as precursors and the reaction path from solution to the absorber material. Our results show that SnCl4 reacts with DMF and forms complex Sn(DMF)2Cl4, whereas CuCl and Zn(OAc)2 form complexes with Tu, resulting in an amorphous sulfide kesterite (CZTS) structured precursor film. Monitoring of the selenization process reveals that the precursor film exhibits a direct substitution reaction path and top-down and bottom up bi-directional grain growth, leading to a large grain-composed double layer CZTSSe absorber film with a clean surface. A champion CZTSSe device with an efficiency of 11.5%, an open-circuit voltage of 0.491 V, and a fill factor of 70.6% was achieved. Our results demonstrate that coordination of Sn4+ with a weak ligand (like DMF or DMSO) that can easily de-coordinate during heat-treatment is the key for the formation of a kesterite structured precursor film that can facilitate direct phase transformation grain growth and thus fabrication of high quality kesterite absorber materials.

Chalcogenide based inorganic semiconductors are excellent absorbers for thin film solar cells due to their excellent stability and high absorption coefficient. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of copper indium gallium selenide (Cu(In,Ga)Se2, CIGS) and cadmium telluride (CdTe) solar cells has exceeded 22%, and both have been successfully commercialized. However, these two photovoltaic materials have limitations due to the toxicity of Cd and Te and the scarcity of In, Ga, and Te. Kesterite semiconductors, including Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS), Cu2ZnSnSe4 (CZTSe) and CuZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe), are promising alternatives to CIGS and CdTe owing to their low cost and large area module production due to their earth-abundant and non-toxic elemental composition.

Kesterite absorbers can be fabricated by both vacuum and solution-based methods. The solution process has played an important role in the development of kesterite solar cells. An IBM research team was the first to develop a hydrazine approach to fabricate a CZTSSe absorber. They reported a CZTSSe device with over 11% efficiency fabricated from a hydrazine suspension in 2012. By changing Zn powder to zinc salt, a pure molecular solution was successfully obtained by the same group, which greatly improved absorber uniformity and achieved the current world record efficiency of 12.6% for a kesterite solar cell. The development of vacuum based kesterite was once behind that of solution approach. Recently, by optimization of the precursor film structure and absorber film selenization conditions, a CZTSSe device with a similar world record efficiency of 12.62% was also obtained by the vacuum approach by the DGIST team. Compared to the vacuum approach, solution-based preparation methods are more promising for industrial production due to many advantages such as easy processing, large area deposition, and adoptable to roll-to-roll fabrication.
For safety and environment concerns, hydrazine is not a suitable solvent for commercialization due to its toxicity and flammability. A variety of other solvents have been developed, which can be divided into three major categories: (1) polar aprotic solvents, including dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and dimethyl formamide (DMF); (2) polar protic solvents, such as water and alcohol; and (3) amine–thiol solutions. Polar aprotic solvents have a high dipole moment and can solubilize many metal salts while at the same time avoiding the formation of metal–oxygen–metal bonds in the annealing process and thus have been widely used in the fabrication of chalcopyrite and kesterite absorber films. DMSO was the first polar aprotic solvent used as a molecular solution to fabricate kesterite solar cells. The efficiency of DMSO processed kesterite solar cells is now approaching that of hydrazine, indicating the great success of DMSO as an alternative solvent to hydrazine for kesterite.
Recently, DMF has demonstrated its success in achieving high performance CIGS solar cells. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of CIS and CIGS solar cells fabricated from DMF solution has, respectively, reached 14.5% and 15.2%. DMF would also be able to achieve similar efficiency to that of DMSO due to its similar properties. Compared to DMSO, fabricating kesterite from DMF solution is relatively rare. Liu et al. reported a 4.77% efficient CZTS solar cell, and Luan et al. reported an 8.01% efficient CZTSSe solar cell. The best kesterite solar cell fabricated from DMF solution is a germanium alloy (CZTGSSe) device with 11% efficiency. These reports are mainly focused on device performance and little attention has been paid to solution chemistry and the reaction path from the solution to absorber.
We have recently found that solution chemistry plays a crucial role in determining the photovoltaic properties and photovoltaic performance of kesterite absorbers. By using SnCl4 as a Sn precursor, a kesterite phase precursor film was fabricated from DMSO solution and was directly converted to a high quality CZTSSe absorber without going through secondary phases as a SnCl2 based precursor film, which resulted in a 12.4% efficient CZTSSe solar cell. In this work, we have used SnCl4 as a Sn precursor in DMF precursor solution and investigated the chemical reaction of SnCl4 in the solution and the reaction path from solution to the precursor film and the precursor film to the absorber material. Our results show that Sn4+ does not coordinate with S in thiourea (Tu, the S source compound) but coordinates with O in solvent DMF, which results in the formation of an amorphous and uniform precursor film with a kesterite structure. Monitoring the grain growth of the film demonstrated that the precursor film undergoes a direct substitution reaction without going through secondary phases, resulting in a high quality absorber material and 11.5% efficient CZTSSe solar cell.
The chemical reactions of CuCl and Zn(OAc)2 with Tu in different solvents including DMF have been reported, which show that both Cu+ and Zn2+ coordinate with Tu and form complexes Cu(Tu)3Cl and Zn(Tu)2(OAc)2. We note that CuCl itself does not dissolve in DMF, it only dissolves after forming a complex with Tu. Although Cu+ coordinates with three Tu molecules in the stable complex Cu(Tu)3Cl, we found that a very low concentration of Tu (Tu:Cu = 0.5:1, mole ratio) can completely dissolve CuCl, revealing that the number of Tu molecules coordinated with Cu+ can vary from 0.5 to 3 in DMF. The high solubility of Zn(OAc)2 does allow us to evaluate the minimal coordination number between Zn2+ and Tu, but we can expect that the same thing would also happen with Zn(OAc)2. Because the feed-in composition (Tu:Cu:Zn:Sn = 5.29:1.48:1.05:1, Tu/Cu = 3.57, mole ratio) in the precursor solution does not satisfy the maximum coordination number for both Cu+ (3) and Zn2+ (2) and the exact coordination number is not known at this point, we use Cu(Tu)xCl and Zn(Tu)y(OAc)2 to better reflect the chemical composition of the two complexes.
To investigate the chemical reaction of SnCl4 in the precursor solution, SnCl4 was mixed into DMF solution containing thiourea (the concentration of SnCl4 is 1.5 mol L−1, SnCl4:Tu = 1:1, mole ratio) and left to stand for 72 hours, from which compound A precipitated. The XRD data (Fig. 1a) show that A has a completely different diffraction pattern from that of Tu, indicating that a new compound was formed. Elemental analysis was performed to determine the chemical composition of this compound and the data are given in Table S1. The analysis shows that only trace S (0.006%) was detected, and the calculations reveal that this compound has a chemical composition of Sn(DMF)2Cl4, meaning that Tu does not coordinate with Sn4+. To verify this, SnCl4 was mixed in DMF without Tu, and compound B was obtained. Compound B exhibits an identical XRD pattern (Fig. 1a) to that of compound A, confirming that they are the same compound.
To further verify the reaction between DMF and Sn4+, Raman spectra of pure DMF, DMF solutions with Tu and SnCl4 only and a mixture of the two, respectively, were measured and the results are shown in Fig. 1b. It can be seen that the CO peak of DMF shifted to a higher value in the presence of SnCl4 (in both SnCl4 and SnCl4 + Tu solutions), revealing the coordination of CO to Sn4+. In contrast, the CS vibration and N–C–N vibration of Tu in the solution of (Tu + SnCl4) is the same as that in pure Tu solution, confirming that Tu does not coordinate with Sn4+. More detailed assignments of the vibration peaks are given in Fig. S1. The reactions in the precursor solution can be expressed as follows:
CuCl + xTu → Cu(Tu)xCl
(1)
Zn(OAc)2 + yTu → Zn(Tu)y(OAc)2
(2)
SnCl4 + 2DMF → Sn(DMF)2Cl4
(3)
In order to investigate the reaction path from solution to the final absorber film, a set of precursor films were fabricated by spin coating the precursor solution onto molybdenum-coated soda-lime glass substrates (MSLG) and annealing on a hot plate. One precursor was left as a reference, and the other precursor films were reacted with selenium in a tube furnace (selenization) to form CZTSSe absorber films. The process of selenization occurred as follows: the furnace temperature was raised from room temperature to 350 °C in 1.5 minute and kept at this temperature for 5 min, and then the temperature was rapidly increased to 540 °C in 2.5 min and kept at 540 °C for 25 minutes. The temperature profile of selenization is illustrated in Fig. S2. Selenization was interrupted at different points and the samples were characterized to monitor the progress. To simplify the description, the samples are marked as T–t, where T is the temperature and t is the dwell time at T. For example, 540–10 represents a sample taken when selenization was kept at 540 °C for 10 min.
The X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Raman spectra of the precursor film and films at different stages of selenization are shown in Fig. 2. The very weak and broad diffraction peaks of the precursor film (Fig. 2a, bottom line) reveal that the precursor film is amorphous, and the two peaks at 2-theta of 28.5° and 47.3° can be assigned to the (112) and (224) diffractions of kesterite Cu2ZnSnS4 (PDF#26-0575). Raman data (Fig. 2b, bottom line) confirmed the kesterite structure of the precursor film. No secondary phases were detected by XRD and Raman spectroscopy, revealing that CZTS is the only product of the reactions among the chemicals in the solution. Thus, the reaction path from the DMF precursor solution to the precursor film can be expressed by using eqn (4):
2Cu(Tu)xCl + Zn(Tu)y(OAc)2 + Sn(DMF)2Cl4 → Cu2ZnSnS4
(4)
The formation of the pure kesterite phase can be explained by the coordination environment of the metal ions. The coordination bond (Sn–O) between Sn4+ and DMF (CH3)2NCO) in Sn(DMF)2Cl4 is weak and easily breakable during heat-treatment (which is verified by the complete evaporation of this compound during thermal gravimetric analysis, Fig. S3), which leaves space for Sn4+ to form stronger Sn–S bonds with nearby S that was coordinated to other metal ions (Cu+ and Zn2+) and form CZTS.
The elemental composition of the precursor film was measured by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) (Fig. S4 and Table S2), which shows a Cu-poor and Zn-poor composition with [Cu]/([Zn] + [Sn]) = 0.67 and [Zn]/[Sn] = 0.89. Compared to the feed-in composition, [Cu]/([Zn] + [Sn]) = 0.72 and [Zn]/[Sn] = 1.1, the lower content of Zn in the precursor film indicates some Zn loss during spin-coating or the subsequent heat-treatment, which might be due to the higher solubility of Zn(Tu)y(OAc)2 than Cu(Tu)xCl in DMF, which needs further investigation.
From the precursor film to 350–5, the XRD spectrum exhibits a sharp and blue-shifted (112) diffraction peak, indicating the formation of the CZTSSe phase. This is confirmed by the Raman spectra which show peaks from both CZTSe and CZTS phases (Fig. 2b). The peak at 112 cm−1 is from selenium that was deposited on the film surface during sample cooling. As the temperature reached 540 °C, the intensity of the (112) peak further blue shifted with the increase of intensity along with the appearance of a (224) peak. Raman spectra also show the increase of peaks of CZTSe and decrease of peaks from CZTS. Increasing selenization time, from 540–0 to 540–25, both XRD and Raman spectra indicate the continued substitution of S by Se along with grain growth. All the diffraction peaks except for that from Mo and MoSe2 are from CZTSSe (PDF#00-052-0868) and no secondary phases were detected in the whole selenization process. Thus, the reaction path from the precursor film to the absorber film can be expressed by using eqn (5).
Cu2ZnSnS4 + 4Se → Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4
(5)
The direct kesterite phase transformation reaction (instead of decomposition to secondary phases) of the precursor film can be understood by the more favorable substitution reaction than decomposition reaction because substitution does not need to break the crystal structure.

Fig. 3 shows the top-view and cross-sectional scanning electronic microscopy (SEM) images of the precursor film and the films at different points of selenization. It can be clearly seen that the precursor film is amorphous and uniform with a smooth surface. At a low selenization temperature of 350 °C, small crystalline grains with size from tens to hundreds of nanometers are formed on the surface of 350–5 with the majority of the film still being amorphous, which is consistent with the XRD and Raman data. As the selenization temperature reached 540 °C, well-packed large grains of hundreds of nanometers to micrometers can be seen on the surface of film 540–0. The cross-sectional image shows that a large grain layer is also formed at the bottom of the film. From 540–0 to 540–20, the top-view images show that the grains continue to grow until densely packed large grains are formed. At the same time, cross-sectional images show that both top and bottom large grain layers continue to grow vertically and form a bi-layered structure in 540–20. Further increasing the selenization time to 25 min, some voids appear on the surface of the film, which can be attributed to the film decomposition caused by the decrease of Se vapour pressure and continuous ripening or agglomeration.
The reaction path and grain growth of the DMF solution processed CZTSSe absorber is very similar to that of DMSO solution based absorber fabricated using the same precursors. The unique reaction path, that is, formation of the CZTS phased precursor film from the solution followed by a direct kesterite phase substitution reaction, is a result of the similar chemistry of SnCl4 in the two solutions. The coordination of Sn4+ with the O atom of DMF (in Sn(DMF)2Cl4) or DMSO (in Sn(DMSO)2Cl4) instead of the S atom of Tu prevents the formation of SnS2 and facilitates the connection of Sn4+ with adjacent S that was bonded to Cu(Zn) during DMF (DMSO) de-coordination on heat-treatment.
From Fig. 3, it is obvious that the best morphology was achieved in 540–20. Solar cells with 540–5, 540–10, 540–15, 540–20 and 540–25 as absorbers were fabricated. The J–V curves of these devices are shown in Fig. S5 and their device parameters are summarized in Table S3. The results show that the 540–20 film achieves the best device performance, confirming that the optimal selenization time is 20 min (at 540 °C). The EDX measurements show (Fig. S4 and Table S2) that this film has a uniform composition with [Cu]/([Zn] + [Sn]) = 0.74, [Zn]/[Sn] = 1.03, and [S]/([S] + [Se]) = 0.07. Compared to the precursor film, the absorber film is almost Zn stoichiometric, indicating some Sn loss during selenization. The Zn content in this absorber is lower than that in the DMSO based absorber and other high performing CZTSSe devices reported in the literature due to Zn loss during heat-treatment as discussed earlier. There is still a lot of room for further optimization of the precursor and absorber composition.

Fig. 4 shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curve and the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the best performing solar cell (without antireflection coating) fabricated under 540–20 conditions along with the device structure and cross-sectional SEM image of the device. The current density of the J–V curve is adjusted to the integrated value from the EQE. The short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) of this device are 33.2 mA cm−2, 491 mV and 70.6%, respectively, resulting in a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 11.5%. To the best of our knowledge, this is the highest efficiency CZTSSe solar cell fabricated from DMF solution. The series (Rs) and shunt resistance (Rsh) of this device are 1.5 Ω cm−2 and 490.6 Ω cm−2, respectively. The ideality factor (n) and the reverse saturation current density (J0) were calculated from the J–V curves illustrated in Fig. 4a by using the single diode model fitting reported. The n and J0 of the device are only 1.48 and 7.35 × 10−8 A cm−2, revealing the low recombination in the depletion region and good diode properties of the device. The band gap estimated from the EQE data is 1.08 eV, and the Voc,def of the device is calculated as 0.339 V based on the above band gap. As shown in Table S4, the average Jsc, Voc, FF, PCE, Rs and Rsh of 15 cells on the same substrate are 32.1 mA cm−2, 487.8 mV, 69.6%, 10.9%, 1.5 Ω cm−2, and 495.1 Ω cm−2 respectively. All the average device parameters are very close to those of the champion device with small standard deviations, demonstrating excellent film uniformity. Device reflectance measurements (Fig. S6) show that this device has high reflectivity due to its flattened surface (Fig. 4d) and a much higher current density (up to 35.41 mA cm−2, Fig. S6) can be expected by light engineering.

In summary, we report the fabrication of highly efficient CZTSSe solar cells from DMF molecular solution using CuCl, Zn(OAc)2, SnCl4, and Tu as precursors. Solution chemistry shows Sn4+ coordinates with DMF and forms complex Sn(DMF)2Cl4 in the solution, leading to the formation of a kesterite phase CZTS precursor film without secondary phases. Investigation on grain growth from the precursor to absorber film shows a direct phase transformation reaction with top-down and bottom-up grain growth, resulting in a double-layered large grain CZTSSe absorber film. A champion CZTSSe device with a PCE of 11.5%, a Voc of 0.491 V, and a FF of 70.6% has been achieved without much optimization of the absorber composition, which is the highest efficiency kesterite solar cell fabricated from DMF molecular solution. Our results demonstrate that the coordination of Sn4+ with a weak ligand that can easily de-coordinate is the key for the formation of a kesterite structured precursor film that can facilitate direct phase transformation grain growth and thus fabrication of a high quality kesterite absorber. DMF, like DMSO, is not only a highly polar solvent that can dissolve many metal salts but also can serve as a weak ligand, demonstrating the great potential of DMF molecular solution in achieving high efficiency kesterite solar cells.


Niu C, Gong Y and Xin H conceived the idea and co-wrote the manuscript. Xin H, Yan W and Huang W supervised this study. Niu C and Gong Y fabricated the devices and conducted most of the measurements. Qiu R conducted SEM characterization. Zhu Q and Zhou Y conducted XRD characterization. Hao S conducted TGA characterization. All the authors discussed the results and provided valuable suggestions to the manuscript.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2019YFE0118100) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22075150, U1902218). Gong Y. C. acknowledges the support from Postgraduate Research and Practice Innovation Program of Jiangsu Province.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The details of the experimental materials, the preparation of the molecular solutions, the fabrication of the precursor and absorber films, and the characterization of the absorber materials and the solar cell devices are given in the ESI. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta01871j
‡ Chuanyou Niu and Yuancai Gong contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021