 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM16264D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7005-7009

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Xiao Li
Zhang
*,

Zhipan
Zhang
,

Fuzhi
Huang
,

Peter
Bäuerle
,

Udo
Bach
* and 

Yi-Bing
Cheng
*

School of Chemical Engineering, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia. E-mail: zhangxiaoli.z@gmail.com

Department of Materials Engineering, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC 3800, Australia. E-mail: udo.bach@monash.edu; yibing.cheng@monash.edu

Institute for Organic Chemistry II and Advanced Materials, University of Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, 89081 Ulm, Germany

Received
30th November 2011
, Accepted 29th January 2012
First published on 1st March 2012
Crystalline NiO nanorods with average diameters of sub-10 nm were fabricated through a classical nanocasting process, using mesoporous SiO2 as a template. Mesoporous NiO films utilizing these nanorods, compared to films prepared from commercial NiO nanoparticles, had similar surface area but narrower pore size distribution. When used as dye-sensitized photocathodes, NiO nanorod films improved the fill factor to 0.42 and enhanced photovoltage to 300 mV under full sun illumination. An overall efficiency of 0.4% was achieved with a thin photocathode film of approximately 1.7 μm thickness which presents an over 30% enhancement when compared with the p-type DSC using the same thickness of commercial nanoparticles.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) typically comprise a mesoporous TiO2 photoanode covered with a monolayer of dye molecules, electrolyte and a counterelectrode. Recently, there is an increasing interest in studying dye-sensitized photocathodes, as compounds for tandem DSCs that consist of a simple sandwich combination of a photoanode and a photocathode. Generally, double-junction SCs, e.g. tandem DSCs, feature a theoretical efficiency limit of 43%, well beyond that of single-junction SCs (∼31%). In a tandem DSC, the maximum open circuit voltage (Voc) is determined by the difference between the conduction band edge of the photoanode and the valence band edge of the photocathode. The photocurrent is limited by the lower performing side of the two photoelectrodes. In the past, p-type dye-sensitized solar cells (p-DSCs) have been shown to provide only very limited photovoltaic performances where photocurrent density and photovoltage are found to be <1 mA cm−2 and <150 mV, resulting in less than 0.05% overall efficiency. Recently, devices sensitised with organic donor–π-bridge–acceptor showed much slower recombination between the photoreduced dyes and holes in the valence band of the NiO, leading to strong increased photocurrent densities beyond 5 mA cm−2 in single-junction photocathodes.

Despite the enhanced photocurrent, the overall conversion efficiency of p-DSCs was still limited by the somewhat low photovoltage (<220 mV) due to the small energy difference between the NiO valence band and the standard redox couple of iodide/triiodide. One possible way of increasing the photovoltage is by replacing NiO with alternative p-type semiconductors with lower valence band edge position, but so far there have been few successes. In another case, Gibson et al. employed a cobalt polypyridyl complexes based redox couple, which has a more negative Nernstian potential than that of iodide/triiodide couple, and achieved a 3-fold increase in photovoltage of up to 350 mV with a light-to-power conversion efficiency of 0.2% for NiO p-DSCs. Unfortunately, the mass transport in the electrolyte was limited by the low solubility of the bulky cobalt complex, and this has led to a poor photocurrent production of 1.66 mA cm−2 due to the low ionic strength of the electrolyte. Moreover, it should be noted that in a tandem DSC, the electrolyte is equivalent to the recombination layer in conventional multijunction devices and its redox potential does not directly determine the open circuit voltage of the tandem device.
Alternatively, crystalline NiO nanoparticles were found to have favorable photovoltage performance with achieving an open-circuit voltage of over 300 mV for p-DSCs in conjunction with the standard iodide/triiodide electrolyte. This is probably due to the minimized surface defects that play a key role on reducing the back reaction rate between injected holes and I−. Here, to systematically improve the photocathode, we investigated the reliability of utilizing crystalline NiO nanorods with desired large specific surface area as photocathode materials. Electrode films composed of one-dimensional structures can offer faster charge (electron/hole) transport compared to a random polycrystalline network. A significant improvement in fill factor with a photovoltage of over 300 mV of a p-DSC was achieved through the use of the crystalline NiO nanorods with diameters down to sub-10 nm as the photocathode material.

Pluronic P123 (EO20PO70EO20, Mw = 5800), nickel(II) nitrate hexahydrate [Ni(NO3)2] and tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) were from Aldrich and used as received without further purification.


Photoelectrodes based on nanorods provide a direct charge transport highway along the long axis of the nanorods in a three-dimensional frame which might have less grain boundaries compared to electrode films based on commercial nanoparticles. To develop an efficient nanorod photocathode, NiO nanorods were synthesized through a nanocasting process to yield the desired one-dimensional structures with optimized aspect ratio, surface area and crystallinity.

Typically, 2.0 g of Pluronic P123 and 1.0 g of nickel(II) nitrate hexahydrate were dissolved in 10.0 g of ethanol under sonication dispersion until a transparent green solution was formed. 4.16 g of tetraethyl orthosilicate and 0.4 g of 1 M HCl solution were added subsequently with magnetic stirring. After approximately 30 min of stirring, the obtained homogeneous solution was transferred into an Alumina crucible and aged at room-temperature (approximately 25 °C) to form a rigid gel. The gel was covered with 2–3 mm thickness of liquid paraffin and placed into an oven at 60 °C overnight to remove the solvent. The hybrid sample was collected and cleaned before calcined at 500 °C for 6 h to remove organic surfactants and pyrolyze the nickel nitrate. NiO nanorods were obtained after removing the silica with 2 M NaOH.

NiO nanorods were ball-milled in ethanol for 2 h. The mixture of the above colloidal solution, ethyl cellulose (Aldrich) and terpinol anhydrous (≥99.5%, Fluka) was sonicated and magnetically stirred alternatively in order to disperse. A screen printing paste was made by evaporating a mixture of finely dispersed nanorods colloidal solution, ethyl cellulose and terpinol. P-type photocathode blocking layers were made by dip-coating nickel acetate (+98%, Alfa Aesar) ethanol (≥99.7%, Merck) solution (0.05 M) on FTO glass (Nippon sheet glass, resistance 13 Ω per square) before screen printing of NiO paste.

Photocathode films based on the above NiO nanorods were screen printed into 4 × 4 mm2 square on FTO glasses and dried for 5 min at 125 °C. This coating–drying procedure was repeated to increase the thickness of the film from 0.9 μm to 1.7 μm. The NiO electrodes were sintered under an air flow at 450 °C for 30 min then at 500 °C for 15 min before soaking them in a 0.2 mM dye solution overnight. The resulting NiO working electrodes were assembled and sealed with the counter electrodes made by sputtering coating Pt on FTO glass to produce a sandwich type cell. The electrolyte, containing 0.03 M iodine, 0.5 M 4-terbutylpyridine, 0.6 M 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide, and 0.1 M guanidinium thiocyanate in a mixed acetonitrile and valeronitrile (with volume ratio of 85:15) solution, was introduced into the cell via a vacuum filling method.

Morphology observation and crystal structure of NiO nanorods were verified by Transmission Electron Microscopy (JEOL 2011 TEM) and X-ray Powder Diffraction (Phillips powder diffractometer). Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) analysis based on N2 adsorption has been used to determine the surface area and the pore size distribution using the Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) method on a TriStar II 3020 Surface Area and Porosity Analyzer. The thickness of the NiO films was measured by using a profilometer (DEKTAK 150, Veeco Instruments Inc).

The sealed solar cells were shielded by a black metal mask with an aperture area of 0.36 cm2, and the photovoltaic properties were measured using a Keithley 2400 Source Meter under the irradiation of simulated sunlight (100 mW cm−2) provided by an Oriel solar simulator with an AM 1.5 filter. IPCE plotted as a function of excitation wavelength was recorded on a Keithley 2400 Source Meter under the irradiation of a 300 W xenon lamp with an Oriel Cornerstone™ 2601/4m monochromator.
Photovoltage and photocurrent transients were measured using an exciting pulse generated by a ring of white light emitting diodes (LEDs, Lumiled). Pulse widths of 1 to 10 s were used to enable the cell to reach a steady state before the probe light shut off. The pulse was incident on the photocathode side of the device and its intensity was controlled to keep the modulation of the voltage below 10 mV. The Oriel solar simulator with an AM 1.5 filter supplied the white bias light incident on the same side of the device. Usually, transients were measured at different white light intensities ranging from 100% to 1.1% sun achieved by attenuating the light with different meshes. To measure the hole transport time, the photocurrent decay was monitored under short-circuit conditions and the characteristic transport time, τtr, can be extrapolated from the decay curve. The short-circuit hole lifetime, τh,sc is determined by monitoring the transient photovoltage decay of the device by applying a steady state bias current equal to the short-circuit current. The decay process is found to be very slow compared to the transport process under the short-circuit condition. In this condition, the apparent voltage of the device is approximately equal to zero and the cell is then biased in the vicinity of short-circuit where the hole lifetime should thus be much longer than that measured under open-circuit at the same bias illumination.

The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern in Fig. 1(a) reveals the overall crystal structure and phase purity of the synthesized NiO nanorods. All peaks match well with cubic rock salt structured NiO without any ambiguity. The XRD pattern of NiO nanorods has very narrow and sharp peaks indicative of high crystallinity. Fig. 1(b) and (c) are transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high resolution TEM (HR-TEM) images of the NiO nanorods. As shown in the TEM image, NiO nanorods have a typical diameter of sub-10 nm with an aspect ratio of approximately 10 toward the longitude. Fig. 1(c) clearly shows an interval between two adjacent lattice fringes of 0.21 nm that can be indexed to the (200) plane of cubic structured NiO. The lattice fringes are clearly identified at the edge of the nanorod, confirming the highly crystalline structure.

Compared with the black commercial nanoparticles, the lab-made NiO nanorods show a dim-gray color. A higher diffuse reflection of the nanorods proves an increase in the light scattering ability, as shown in Fig. S1. This is expected to increase the optical path length of the device, benefiting the light-harvesting efficacy and thus the photon-to-current conversion efficiency of the resulting NiO p-DSC.
In order to investigate the performance of the NiO nanorods as working electrodes for a p-DSC, a screen printing paste was made by evaporating a mixture of finely dispersed nanorods colloidal solution, ethyl cellulose and terpinol, and then photocathode films based on the above NiO nanorods were screen printed into 4 × 4 mm2 square on FTO glasses, followed by the heat treatment to remove the organic compounds.
The specific surface area and pore size distribution of the NiO films have been analyzed by the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method. Fig. 1(d) shows the specific surface area and pore size distribution of the film based on NiO nanorods characterized using nitrogen gas sorption. The film exhibits a type IV isotherm with a sharp capillary condensation step at high relative pressures (P/P0 of 0.8–0.9) and a H1 type hysteresis loop. A specific surface area of 29.7 m2 g−1 is observed with a major pore size between 20 and 40 nm, which is very close to that of the commercial nanoparticles based film with a surface area of 31.5 m2 g−1 (as shown in Fig. S2), based on BET measurement.
P-DSCs with approximately 0.9 μm and 1.7 μm thickness of films prepared from NiO nanorods are subjected to measurements of photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristics under different incident light intensity exposures. Fig. 2(a) shows the chemical structure of the p-type dye used in this work which contains an oligothiophene coupled to triphenylamine as the donor and a perylenemonoimid as the acceptor. Fig. 2(b) compares the J–V characteristics of the NiO nanorod DSCs measured in the dark and under AM 1.5G illumination of 100 mW cm−2 (1 sun). Under simulated AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2, the Jsc of a p-DSC with 0.9 μm thick photocathode of crystalline NiO nanorods is 2.6 mA cm−2. The Jsc of the device further improves to 3.3 mA cm−2 if the thickness of the NiO nanorod film increases to 1.7 μm (Table 1). The significant increase in Jsc with nanorod based photoanode well corresponds to the increased surface area associated with the NiO nanorod system (Table S1), which is proved by the BET results in Fig. 1. To efficiently harvest the solar spectrum and achieve higher conversion efficiencies, one would ideally need a photoelectrode with a large surface area so that a sufficient absorption of sensitizers can be achieved. However, preparing a thick enough p-type metal oxide semiconductor film with good mechanical and electrical properties has never been an easy task without using successive screen printing or doctor-blading techniques. To the best of our knowledge, the improved cell performance shown here is the first successful example of applying p-type metal oxide semiconductor nanorods in dye-sensitized solar cells, validating the concept of using single crystalline NiO nanorods as an efficient photocathode in p-type DSCs. Meanwhile, it is interesting to note that the open-circuit voltage (Voc) barely changes, with values of 301 and 292 mV, respectively, for devices with NiO nanorod films of 0.9 μm and 1.7 μm in thickness. With a typical fill factor in excess of 0.4, the photo-to-electric conversion efficiency of p-DSCs based on single crystalline NiO nanorods under full sunlight illumination is 0.33 and 0.40% for the two film thicknesses we study here.
NiO film
0.9/μm
1.7/μm
Light intensity
10%
68%
100%
10%
68%
100%

V
oc/mV
242
292
301
234
283
292

J
sc/mA cm−2
0.31
1.84
2.60
0.41
2.34
3.30
FF
0.42
0.42
0.42
0.43
0.41
0.41

η (%)
0.30
0.33
0.33
0.40
0.40
0.40
Accordingly, Fig. 2(c) shows the incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the p-DSCs. For NiO nanorod films of 0.9 μm and 1.7 μm in thickness, the IPCEs peak at 445 nm with values of 27.8% and 31.6%, respectively, and tail off up to 700 nm. From 400 nm to 520 nm, the IPCE is correspondingly above 25% and 30% for the two devices, accounting for the high Jsc observed. It is worth noting that the highest conversion efficiency of 0.40% reported here obtained with the 1.7 μm thick NiO nanorod film is a new benchmark among the highest ones ever reported in the literature, standing for a more than 30% increase over that of photocathodes from commercially available NiO nanoparticles (0.30% in efficiency).
To better understand the evolution charge transport in the NiO nanorod based p-DSC, the charge collection efficiency (ηcc) and hole diffusion length (Lh) of the device with film thickness of 1.7 μm were carefully studied by phototransient decay experiments measured at different light intensities ranging from 0.01 to 1 sun. In principle, as the photoinjected holes undergo forward transport in the NiO and the undesirable recombination with the iodide ions in the electrolyte simultaneously, if a uniform electron generation profile is assumed throughout the NiO film, Lh and ηcc at the FTO collecting electrode can be related to the hole transport time (τtr) and lifetime (τh) by eqn (1) (ref. 16) and (2) (ref. 17),
(1)
(2)
where
d is the thickness of the NiO film. It should be noted that eqn (1) and (2) are only valid if τtr and τh are measured at the same condition, for example, both at short-circuit conditions, as the quasi-Fermi level of the semiconductor film would differ between short circuit and open circuit and the misalignment of quasi-Fermi level could give erroneous estimation of carrier diffusion length.


Fig. 3(a) displays the hole transport time (τtr) and short-circuit hole lifetime (τh,sc) of the p-DSC with 1.7 μm NiO nanorod film as a function of light density. To measure τh,sc at a certain light intensity, the p-DSC is biased with a current density equal to the Jsc of the cell to poise the cell in the vicinity of short circuit. We highlight that τh,sc is thus measured under the short-circuit condition, and is different to the hole lifetime found at open-circuit conditions in ref. 3 and 8. Both τtr and τh,sc increase exponentially with the decrease of the light intensity, presumably due to the lowering of the quasi-Fermi level of holes in the NiO at low light intensities. τh,sc shows a larger variation over the light intensity, implying that the recombination of holes with the iodide ions has a stronger dependence on the position of the quasi-Fermi level of NiO. By using eqn (1) and (2), Lh and ηcc are calculated and plotted versus the light intensity in Fig. 3(b). To achieve a close-to-unity ηcc, Lh should be significantly higher than the film thickness so that the holes in the NiO can adequately diffuse to the collecting electrode without recombining with I− in the electrolyte, as is the case mostly found at lower light intensities. For instance, in the p-DSC with 1.7 μm NiO nanorod film, Lh is more than twice as long as the film thickness for light intensity lower than 0.1 sun, but it significantly decreases as light intensifies and at full sun, Lh is only 1.8 μm, which is only slightly higher than NiO film thickness. ηcc drops concomitantly from higher than 0.9 for light intensity lower than 0.1 sun to a mere 0.80 at full sun, indicating around 20% of the photogenerated holes are lost inside the device at this light intensity. P-type DSCs are known to have poor fill factors (FF), which is usually associated with the low Voc of the devices as the fill factor of a Schockley diode is shown to be only a function of the Voc (see eqn (S1) in the ESI). However, as pointed out by Bisquert et al., if the probability of charge collection in the diode is dependent on the potential, as is the case in a DSC where current–potential curve must be based on a more general continuity equation, the FF as a function of Voc should only be considered as a first approximation, because other factors, for example the diode ideality factor (m), can significantly influence the FF. Our results here further suggest that particularly in the p-DSCs, the short hole diffusion length and the insufficient charge collection may also account for the relatively low fill factors found in the p-DSCs under simulated solar illuminations. Moreover, there remains an interesting question on whether the thickness of the NiO film could be further increased to achieve a higher Jsc. Indeed, devices with three-layered NiO (approximately 2.3 μm in thickness) were fabricated and no further increase in photocurrent at full sun was observed (results not shown here), implying that any additional light harvesting gained by thickening the NiO film is adversely offset by the inevitable increase in hole recombination and no longer results in a net increase in short-circuit photocurrent. Hence, further improvement in this system lies in refinement of the processing techniques to obtain better defined nanostructures, such as longer, more oriented and/or monodispersed nanorods, to potentially improve light harvesting and charge collection simultaneously. We are actively working in this direction to further improve the performance of the NiO based p-DSCs.

In summary, a reliable p-type photovoltaic working electrode for future tandem DSCs requires an architecture available for a high ratio of charge generation and collection. Instead of being an example of just improving photovoltaic performance of p-type DSCs, we aim to systematically improve the p-type photovoltaic electrodes and to propose a nanoscale structure with the combination of those key features and can be generally produced through a facile fabrication process. This work provides a model for future materials of electrode applications—a desired large surface area to allow sufficient dye absorption and a preferred crystalline one-dimensional structure to enhance the charge transport/collection efficiency.


The authors would like to thank the Australian Research Council providing financial support. Dr Zhang would like to thank the University of New South Wales for providing a Vice-Chancellor's Postdoctoral Research Fellow with financial support. The authors acknowledge use of facilities within the Monash Centre for Electron Microscopy (MCEM) and the Centre's provision of scientific and technical assistance. The authors would also like to acknowledge the ARC for providing equipment support through LIEF (LE0883019).


† Electronic Supplementary Information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm16264d
‡ Dr X. L. Zhang and Dr Z. Zhang contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012