 DOI: 10.1039/D1NR03624F
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 14915-14924


Weihai
Sun
*,

Jinjun
Zou
,

Xiaobing
Wang
,

Shibo
Wang
,

Yitian
Du
,

Fengxian
Cao
,

Lan
Zhang
,

Jihuai
Wu
* and 

Peng
Gao


Engineering Research Center of Environment-Friendly Functional Materials, Ministry of Education; Fujian Engineering Research Center of Green Functional Materials; Institute of Materials Physical Chemistry, Huaqiao University, Xiamen 361021, China. E-mail: sunweihai@hqu.edu.cn; jhwu@hqu.edu.cn

Fujian Institute of Research on Structure Matter, CAS, Xiamen 361021, Fujian, China

Received
6th June 2021
, Accepted 9th August 2021
First published on 9th August 2021
Regardless of the impressive progress that perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have achieved, especially considering their power conversion efficiency (PCE) over 25%, traditional PSCs still contend with an inherent instability with exposure to humidity, which remains as a critical issue for the realization of commercial production. Herein, we proposed an effective pathway to relieve the instability of PSCs without sacrificing efficiency by introducing a 2D phase at the surface of the 3D perovskite film, based on a novel organic cyclohexylmethylammonium iodide (CMAI). The self-assembled thin 2D capping layer atop the 3D perovskite layer can not only reduce the ionic defects, but also serve as a protective barrier against moisture. Consequently, the champion device incorporating 2D perovskite capping layers delivered an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.19 V, which contributes to an impressive PCE of 22.06% on account of the improved charge extraction and decreased non-radiative recombination. More importantly, an excellent long-term stability along with mitigated hysteresis was observed for the modified devices as a result of the suppressed ion migration and high humidity resistance of the 2D perovskite film. Our finding provides a comprehensive approach for simultaneously enhancing the efficiency and stability of PSCs through dimension engineering utilizing CMA-based 2D perovskite materials.

Three-dimensional (3D) organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites have emerged as promising absorber materials for thin-film photovoltaic devices because of their superior photoelectric properties, such as high absorption efficiency, controllable bandgap, low exciton-binding energies, and long carrier diffusion length, together with their ease of manufacturing, and low fabrication cost. Thanks to these excellent properties, the boosting power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) exceeding 25% has been achieved. Nonetheless, solar cells based on 3D perovskite light-harvesting layers suffer from instabilities to moisture, light, and heat, which hamper the realization of commercialization. Among these, moisture is particularly fatal to perovskites owing to the evaporation of the organic components from the surface through possible irreversible decomposition reactions with water molecules.

It has been reported that the defects could be readily formed at the grain boundaries of the surface of perovskite films owing to their small formation energy during the low-temperature solution process. These defects are considerably vulnerable to moisture or oxygen, which could incur non-radiative carrier recombination, therefore significantly lower the open-circuit voltage (Voc) of PSCs and initiate device degradation. Additionally, the notorious photocurrent hysteresis in PSCs that stemmed from the ion migration has been confirmed to be related to these defects. Thus, passivating the defects in perovskite layers proves to be an effective method to further enhance the PCE, as well as the durability of PSCs. To date, a typical defect passivation strategy is the incorporation of several chemical compounds such as fullerenes, Lewis acids or Lewis bases, insulative or conductive polymers and small organic molecules. However, a majority of these passivating agents could only mitigate one type of defect state, and thus the development of passivation of charge defects in PSCs should need more comprehensive consideration.
It has been demonstrated that two-dimensional (2D) perovskites are capable of being credible moisture-resistant photovoltaic absorber materials as a result of the sufficient protection provided by the inactive organic cations. Unfortunately, the pure 2D perovskite-based solar cells exhibit an inferior PCE in comparison with their 3D counterparts ascribed to the wide bandgap and relatively poor electrical properties. Motivated by a combination of the superb optoelectronic characteristics of 3D perovskites and the moisture blocking capability of 2D perovskites, an approach to enhance the device stability was proposed by depositing hydrophobic large ammonium cation molecules that form 2D or quasi-2D phases atop 3D perovskite layers. Moreover, the introduction of the 2D phase has presented great potential in the passivation of various ionic defects such as iodine vacancies and methylammonium vacancies. Recently, plenty of organic ammonium halides (i.e., n-butylammonium iodide, ethylammonium iodide, hexadecyl trimethyl ammonium, and phenethylammonium iodide), which serve as a capping layer, have been spun onto the 3D perovskite layer for synergistic improvement of both the PCE and durability of PSCs.
Here, we reported an effective and facile strategy by assembling a novel organic cyclohexylmethylammonium iodide (CMAI) on 3D perovskite films, which simultaneously improves the stability and PCE of corresponding devices. We found that the extra PbI2 on the surface of 3D perovskites was consumed by the reaction with organic ammonium salts and then formed a hydrophobic 2D perovskite layer, which dramatically increases their moisture tolerance by hindering water diffusion. Meanwhile, the CMAI salts on the surface of CMAI-treated 3D perovskite films could mitigate the grain boundary defects by halide ionic compensation. Thanks to the reduced trap density, interfacial non-radiative recombination losses within the devices were inhibited, thereby leading to a decreased Voc loss and a suppressed hysteresis in the modified PSCs. As a result, the 3D/2D heterostructure-based PSCs presented a maximum PCE of 22.06% with a high Voc of 1.19 V and a stabilized output efficiency of 21.12%. Moreover, the unencapsulated 3D/2D devices sustained more than 80% of the original PCE during the 50 days of storage under humid air conditions (30 ± 5% relatively humidity, 25 °C), compared with the control 3D devices that sustained only 60%.

Lead iodide (PbI2, 99.99%) and cesium iodide (CsI, 99.99%) were received from TCI. Formamidinium iodide (FAI, >99.5%), methylammonium bromide (MABr, 99.5%) and lead bromide (PbBr2, 99.99%) were bought from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Co., Ltd. Spiro-OMeTAD (99.99%) was purchased from Luminescence Technology Corp., Taiwan, China. Bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt (Li-TFSI, 99.95%), 4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP, 98%), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, 99.8%), and N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.8%) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. Cyclohexanemethylamine (>97.0%), hydroiodic acid (HI, 55–58 wt% in water) and chlorobenzene (CB, 99.8%) were acquired from Aladdin Reagents. The FTO coated glass substrates with a sheet resistance of 7 Ω sq−1 were bought from Liaoning You Xuan Tech Co., Ltd. All the chemicals were used as received without further purification.


Fig. S1 illustrates the synthetic procedure of CMAI. 5 mL of cyclohexanemethylamine was dissolved in 10 mL of ethanol and stirred at 0 °C for 20 min. Then, 7 mL of hydroiodic acid was dropped into the mixture solution and kept under stirring for 2 h. The precipitate was recovered by evaporation of the solvent using a rotary evaporator at 60 °C. The white powder was recrystallized with ethanol and washed using diethyl ether three times. The final product (CMAI) was obtained by drying at 60 °C in a vacuum oven for 24 h.


The FTO coated glass substrates were etched using a laser machine, and followed by ultrasonic cleaning with detergent, deionized water and isopropyl alcohol for 20 min, respectively. Before use, they were treated in ultraviolet–ozone for 25 min and plasma for another 5 min. The compact TiO2 electron transport layer (ETL) was deposited onto the cleaned FTO by spin-coating the colloidal TiO2 precursor solution prepared via a simple solvothermal method, followed by annealing at 500 °C for 30 min. After cooling to room temperature, the TiO2-coated substrates were further treated by ozone plasma for 10 min and then transferred to the N2 filled glovebox. The perovskite film was fabricated as follows. The perovskite precursor solution was prepared by dissolving the stoichiometric ratios of PbBr2 (0.20 M), PbI2 (1.15 M), MABr (0.14 M), FAI (1.09 M) and CsI (0.07 M) in a mixture solvent of DMF/DMSO (4:1 volume ratio), and then stirred at room temperature overnight. Subsequently, the triple-cation perovskite precursor solution was spin-coated on the TiO2 substrates via a consecutive two-step procedure at 1000 rpm for 10 s and 6500 rpm for another 20 s. When entering the second step, 120 μL of CB was dripped as an antisolvent at 5 s before the end of the process. Then, the substrates were annealed on a hotplate at 100 °C for 60 min. For forming the 2D perovskite capping layer on the surface of the 3D perovskite film, the CMAI isopropanol solution with different concentrations (0.5, 1, 1.5, 3 and 5 mg mL−1) was spin-coated onto the top of the as-prepared perovskite film at 4000 rpm for 20 s, followed by heat treatment at 100 °C for 10 min. The hole transport material (HTM) solution was prepared by dissolving 72.3 mg of spiro-OMeTAD in 1 mL of CB solution, to which 17.5 μL of Li-TFSI solution (520 mg of Li-TFSI dissolved in 1 mL of acetonitrile) and 28.6 μL of tBP were added. The hole transport layer (HTL) was formed by spin-coating the solution as mentioned above at 4000 rpm for 20 s. Finally, an Au electrode with a thickness of 80 nm was thermally evaporated under a high vacuum.


X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained using a Bruker D8 Advance X-ray diffractometer with 2θ = 5°–70°. The morphologies of the perovskite films were observed using a high-resolution scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi S-8000, Japan) and an atomic force microscope (AFM, Bruker Multimode-8J, German). AFM measurements were conducted using an intelligent mode with a scan rate of 0.977 Hz. The experiment of water contact angle for different perovskite films was performed using a Dataphysics OCA-20 drop shape instrument. A UV–vis spectrophotometer (PerkinElmer Lambda 950, America) was used to measure the absorption of perovskite films. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was carried out with a Thermo Fisher Scientific XPS spectrometer (ESCALAB 250Xi). The photoluminescence emission spectra (PL) were measured using a fluorescence spectrophotometer (LF-1303003, Thermo Scientific Lumina, America) with an excitation wavelength of 460 nm. The time-resolved PL decay (TRPL) was performed using an Omni-λ Monochromator/Spectrograph (Zolix) using an excitation wavelength of 507 nm. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurement was recorded using an electrochemical workstation (Zahner IM6e, Germany) under an illumination of 100 mW cm−2 at a bias of 0.9 V. The current–voltage characteristics of PSCs with an active area of 0.125 cm2 were tested using a Keithley 2420 source meter with a scan rate of 0.15 V s−1 under simulated AM 1.5G 100 mW cm−2 using a solar simulator (Oriel Sol 3A, Newport) under an air atmosphere. The steady-state efficiencies and current densities of PSCs were measured at the maximum power point.


To get a better understanding of the impact of the CMAI modification on the structure of the 3D perovskite, X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements for the perovskite samples treated with various concentrations of CMAI isopropanol solution and pure CMAI film were performed (Fig. 1a). It is observed that the untreated perovskite exhibits three characteristic peaks at 14.2°, 28.5°, and 31.9°, indexed to the (101), (202) and (211) reflections, which is referred to as the CsFAMA triple cation 3D perovskite. When deposited by CMAI solutions, the positions of the reflections for pristine perovskites remain unchanged, suggesting that the crystal structure of the cubic 3D perovskite layer would not be altered by the incorporation of CMAI. Apparently, the intensities of the peak at 14.2° for the CMAI-treated films are improved compared to that of pristine perovskite films, and the corresponding calculated full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) of the (101) reflection for 3D perovskites is decreased, indicating the improved crystallinity and the increased crystal size of perovskites. In addition, a small peak at 12.8° has been found in the 3D perovskite film, corresponding to the residual PbI2. Obviously, after being coated by the CMAI isopropanol solution (3 mg mL−1), the peak of PbI2 vanishes, suggesting that the unreacted PbI2 is consumed by the modification of CMAI. Meanwhile, the new peaks at 5.5° and 10.7° are observed in the CMAI-treated perovskite films (Fig. 1b), which are not found in the diffraction pattern for the CMAI film. It is reported that these additional peaks belong to the (002) and (004) reflections of 2D perovskite (CMA)2PbI4, implying that the excess PbI2 at the surface of 3D perovskites can react with CMAI to produce the 2D perovskite (CMA)2PbI4. Furthermore, the intensity of the characteristic peak at 5.5° for (CMA)2PbI4 is enhanced with the increasing CMAI concentration. It is noted that the (002l) series lattice planes of (CMA)2PbI4 illustrate a preferred orientation for the 2D perovskite crystal, paralleled to the substrate, which contributes to the growth of a compact capping 2D perovskite layer atop 3D perovskite films, verifying a prosperous formation of the 3D/2D perovskite structure.

To study the surface composition of the pristine and CMAI-treated perovskite layers, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was conducted. Fig. S2 shows the XPS survey spectra of 3D and 3D/2D perovskite films. As shown in Fig. 1c, the XPS peaks at 143.13 and 138.38 eV derived from the 4f5/2 and 4f7/2 of Pb2+ are observed at both the perovskite films. It is apparent that two weak peaks with lower binding energies at 141.53 and 136.53 eV have been found in the unmodified perovskite film, assigned to the metallic Pb0 species which acts as a primary trap state and triggers the non-radiative recombination in films. By comparison, these peaks were almost absent in the CMAI-modified perovskite sample, indicating the suppressed formation of metallic Pb atoms and defects at the grain boundaries or the surface of the 3D/2D perovskite layer. Furthermore, the two main Pb 4f peaks of the film moved toward lower binding energy after CMAI deposition, suggesting the intensive interaction between the CMAI salt and Pb2+ in the 3D/2D perovskite layer. Besides, the integrated peak area ratio of C/Pb in the perovskite film derived from XPS spectra (Fig. 1c and d) is increased from 0.12 to 0.23 after introducing CMAI, attributed to the extra organic ammonium salt CMAI on the surface of the perovskite film. Overall, CMAI treatment could mitigate the Pb defects on the 3D perovskite surface, probably resulting from the thin 2D perovskite capping layer.
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used to investigate the effect of the CMAI concentration on the surface morphology of the perovskite films, and the related photos are provided in Fig. 2a–c. The pristine 3D perovskite layer displayed a uniform and dense morphology with a homogeneous distribution of grain size and noticeable bright particles, probably speculated to be excess PbI2. After CMAI modification, the size of bright white nanoparticles decreased, attributed to the self-assembled low-dimensional perovskite (CMA)2PbI4 from the reaction between the extra PbI2 and the CMAI salt. Besides, the film treated with CMAI isopropanol solution became more uniform and the grain boundaries became blur. Thus, we inferred that the newly generated 2D perovskite film would act as a capping layer to inhibit the destruction of the underlying 3D layer caused by moisture, as well as to heal defects at the interface of the perovskite film, thereby reducing the trap density and suppressing the carrier recombination, and ultimately improving the stability and PCE of PSCs, which can be discussed later. However, the appearance of the CMAI-treated perovskite film became coarser and more inhomogeneous as the concentration of the CMAI solution increased, accompanied by some pinholes. The pinholes were probably induced by the redundant CMAI salts, which could accelerate the non-radiative recombination losses. For the further scrutinization of the surface of the ammonium salt-modified perovskite layer, atomic force microscopy (AFM) was conducted and the corresponding images are shown in Fig. 2d–f. The root-mean-square (RMS) roughness decreases from 26.8 nm for the pristine layer to 24.8 nm for the sample after being treated with the CMAI solution (1.5 mg mL−1) and then increases to 38.6 nm when further enhanced to 3 mg mL−1. It is noted that the lower RMS means a more flat and smoother surface of the perovskite film, which is not only beneficial for close contact between the hole transport layer (HTL) and the perovskite film but also reduces the possibility of water penetration into perovskite films, resulting in improved charge extraction and moisture resistance in PSCs. Unfortunately, with the increasing amount of CMAI, the RMS dramatically increases due to the excessive CMAI onto the surface of the perovskite film, matching well with the results of SEM.

Fig. 3a shows the UV–vis absorption spectra of the pristine and ammonium salt-treated perovskite layers. In particular, the 3D/2D stacking perovskite sample exhibits a tiny red-shifted absorption edge in contrast to that of the 3D perovskite layer, which is different from previous literature studies about other 3D/2D perovskite films. We calculated the optical bandgap of 1.61 and 1.60 eV for the perovskite layers before and after CMAI modification, respectively. The result is possibly caused by the constitution variation of I/Br in perovskites via the introduction of extra I− from the ammonium salt CMAI, and the increased crystallinity which is evidenced in the results of SEM and XRD. The Urbach energy (EU) is usually applied to calculate the defect density at the surface of semiconductor materials. The EU of the perovskite film can be determined by the following formula:
lnA = a0 + E/EU
(1)
where
E is the excitation photon energy, A is the absorbance and a0 is a constant. The EU value is obtained by an inverse slope of the UV–vis result for the light-harvesting layers (Fig. 3b). The calculated values of EU are 50.52 and 44.42 meV, belonging to the 3D and 3D/2D perovskite films, respectively. The decreased EU suggests a lower trap density in the film ascribed to the mitigation of defects at the surface and the grain boundary of the perovskite layer by forming 2D perovskite films by covering CMAI ammonium salt.

The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectrum and time-resolved PL (TRPL) spectroscopy experiments were carried out to analyze the influence of the ammonium salt on the optical and carrier behaviors of perovskite films. As presented in Fig. 3c, a red-shifted PL peak at 764 nm for the 3D/2D perovskite film is noticed in comparison with that of the pristine perovskite film (761 nm), as evidenced by UV–vis absorbance spectra. Additionally, the formation of the 3D/2D heterostructure perovskite film resulted in a stronger emission PL intensity in contrast to that of the 3D perovskite film, implying a reduction of surface defects and a suppression of trap assisted recombination in perovskite films by the deposited CMAI solution. To further confirm the charge transport at the interface between the perovskite layer and HTL, the PL spectra of various perovskite films covered with the HTL were measured and are shown in Fig. S3. The CMAI-treated perovskite shows a slightly higher PL intensity than the untreated one, verifying again that the trap-induced recombination can be inhibited by in situ formed the 2D perovskite capping layer. Moreover, the TRPL measurements of the 3D and 3D/2D perovskite layers on the glass substrates were carried out and are shown in Fig. 3d. The corresponding TRPL biexponential fitting data are summarized in Table S1. Notably, the fitted average lifetime (τave) is increased from 68.88 ns for the untreated film to 88.10 ns for the CMAI-treated film, indicating the decreased trap density owing to the reduced grain boundary and enhanced crystallinity of the perovskite layer. By and large, the above results confirm that the 2D perovskite capping layer could play a role of the passivating layer for the underneath 3D perovskite film, thereby inhibiting the charge recombination and generating a higher Voc in solar cells.
To estimate the effect of ammonium salts (CMAI) on the device performance of PSCs, we performed conventional n-i-p planar devices with a structure of FTO/TiO2/3D perovskite/2D perovskite/HTL/Au (Fig. 4a). Fig. S4 shows the representative scheme of the fabrication process of our PSCs with the incorporation of CMAI, where the 2D perovskite film is grown by depositing CMAI isopropanol solution atop the pristine 3D perovskite layer (Fig. 4b). The cross-sectional views of the PSC modified by CMAI salts and the unmodified device are presented in Fig. 4c and Fig. S5, respectively. We observed that the CMAI layer or the in situ formed 2D perovskite film is difficult to distinguish in the cross-sectional SEM image, probably due to its ultrathin thickness. The J–V curves of the PSCs treated with various concentrations of CMAI solution under 1 sun illumination were recorded, as shown in Fig. 4d, and the relevant results are listed in Table 1. As expected, the reference PSC delivered the lowest PCE of 19.26%, with a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 22.33 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.12 V and a fill factor (FF) of 0.77, whereas devices modified by CMAI solution exhibited improved photovoltaic performance. When the concentration of the CMAI isopropanol solution increases from 0 to 1.5 mg mL−1, the PCE was improved persistently and achieved a maximum value of 22.06%, with a corresponding Jsc of 23.18 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.19 V and an FF of 0.80. The improvement of efficiency may primarily result from the enlarged Voc, which is associated with the optimized quality of the perovskite layer and suppressed trap state by the formation of the 2D perovskite layer. However, with a further increase in the CMAI concentration beyond 1.5 mg mL−1, the PCE started to decrease, related to the extensive reduction of Voc and Jsc. We speculated that reasons for the deterioration of the device's efficiency, one is the perovskite layer with inferior surface morphology observed from the SEM and AFM results, resulting in a higher interfacial charge recombination rate within devices, another one is the lower conductivity and poor hole transport behaviors of the thicker 2D perovskite film due to its quantum confinement effect. In a word, the as-formed 2D perovskite film with moderate thickness can play an important role as the protective layer, which promotes the uniformity of the perovskite film and reduces the trap state densities at the surface of perovskites, thereby inhibiting non-radiative combination and ultimately improving the final PCE of PSCs. Additionally, the 3D device demonstrated a higher hysteresis index of 21.60% (Fig. S6 and Table S2), indicating a severe hysteresis phenomenon in the pristine PSCs, whereas the 3D/2D device exhibited a lower hysteresis index of 4.99% (Fig. 4e). The decreased value of the hysteresis index reveals a suppressed hysteresis effect, possibly associated with the inhibition of ion migration and reduction of ionic defects by the formation of the 2D perovskite capping layer.Fig. 4f and Fig. S7 show the steady-state photocurrent densities and corresponding efficiencies measured at a bias voltage of 0.99 V and 0.88 V, respectively, for devices treated with and without CMAI solution. The CMAI-treated PSC presented a stabilized Jsc and an efficiency of 21.33 mA cm−2 and 21.12%, respectively, higher than the untreated device (20.11 mA cm−2 and 17.70%), which agrees with the results derived from J–V measurements, verifying the mitigated hysteresis and the excellent reliability of high PCE measured in the CMAI modified device.
CMAI concentration (mg mL−1)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)
0
22.33
1.12
0.77
19.26
0.5
23.10
1.17
0.78
21.08
1.5
23.18
1.19
0.80
22.06
3
22.81
1.18
0.77
20.73
Moreover, we fabricated and tested 20 independent devices employing the 3D and 3D/2D perovskite films, and the statistics of the related J–V parameters for PSCs are shown in Fig. 5. Apparently, each performance index of the 3D/2D heterostructure devices was superior to those of control devices, where an average Voc increased from 1.09 ± 0.01 V to 1.18 ± 0.01 V, an average Jsc increased from 22.07 ± 0.31 to 23.06 ± 0.12 mA cm−2, an average FF enlarged from 0.75 ± 0.01 to 0.79 ± 0.01, and thus a mean PCE significantly improved from 18.18 ± 0.35% to 21.73 ± 0.26%. The results are close to the photovoltaic data obtained from the J–V characteristics, which also confirms a considerable reproducibility of our PSCs processed by CMAI treatment.
The influences of ammonium salts on the trap densities of perovskite layers were further quantitatively assessed through the space charge limited current (SCLC) method by measuring the dark J–V curves of hole-only devices with an architecture of FTO/PEDOT:PSS/3D perovskites with or without CMAI modification/spiro-OMeTAD/Au. As shown in Fig. 6a and b, there are three regions, including trap-free SCLC region, trap-filled limit (TFL) region and ohmic region. It is noted that the voltage at the point of intersection between the two fitting curves in the TFL and ohmic region is regarded as the trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL). Thus, the trap state density (nt) in the devices could be determined by the equation of nt = 2εrε0VTFL/eL where e is an elemental charge, L stands for the thickness of the perovskite film, ε0 represents the relative dielectric constant of the perovskite and εr is the vacuum permittivity. According to the above equation, the calculated trap density substantially decreased from 1.01 × 1016 to 5.61 × 1015 cm−3 when the CMAI solution was deposited onto the 3D perovskite film. The lower defect density of the 3D/2D device is helpful to suppress non-radiative charge recombination for the underlying absorber layer through the CMAI modification, in accordance with the consequences from the EU measurement.
To further study the carrier transport behavior in PSCs, we employed electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) to measure the Nyquist plots of the 3D and 3D/2D devices tested under light illumination at a voltage bias of 0.9 V under illumination (Fig. 6c) and the EIS data were fitted with a normally used equivalent circuit (the inset of Fig. 6c). Clearly, we observed two distinct arcs in Fig. 6c, where the one at low frequency stands for the charge recombination resistance (Rrec) and another at high frequency is related to the transfer resistance (Rct). Obviously, a lower Rct and larger Rrec were achieved in the 3D/2D device in comparison with those of the 3D device. The reduced Rct reveals relatively improved charge transport properties, thereby resulting in a slightly increased Jsc in PSCs. Meanwhile, the larger Rrec suggests a lower carrier recombination rate and thus enlarged Voc, which is ascribed to the passivation of defects or other recombination centers at the surface of the perovskite layer by the newly formed 2D perovskite capping layer. These agree well with the improvement of emission intensity and carrier lifetime observed in PL and TRPL measurements, respectively.
As we have known, the stability of PSCs is a critical issue for commercially available photovoltaic modules. Recent literature has proved that low-dimensional perovskites usually show higher heat and moisture resistances over their 3D counterparts. To verify this, the humidity resistance of pristine perovskite and CMAI-treated perovskite films was examined through the exposure of the unsealed films under 65 ± 5% relative humidity. Obviously, the color of the 3D perovskite film changed to bright yellow in most areas after 35 days of storage (Fig. S7), indicating that the perovskite mainly decomposed into PbI2 because of the intrinsic instability of 3D perovskite materials. As expected, when deposited with the CMAI solution, the color of the film remained the same for the majority part, owing to the fully covered 2D perovskites possessing the excellent moisture-resistant feature atop the 3D perovskite film. More importantly, we monitored the storage stability of the complete devices without and with CMAI modification by recording PCEs for devices in an ambient environment without encapsulation (Fig. 6d). Evidently, the device treated with CMAI retained 80.77% of its original PCE after being stored for more than 50 days, while the efficiency of pristine PSC dropped substantially to 60.74% of the initial value. We ascribe the improved long-term stability for the treated device to the 2D perovskite protective film. Previous literature reported that the outer low-dimensional perovskite film could not only protect from water penetration but also suppress the ion migration across interfaces between the perovskite film and charge transport layer. Besides, the decreased trap states density and the fewer grain boundaries within the PSC could also effectively inhibit the water diffusion into the inner perovskite. Furthermore, we also performed the measurement of water contact angles to test the surface hydrophobicity of 3D and 3D/2D perovskite films. As seen from Fig. 6e and f, the water contact angle was increased from only 69.71° to 91.56° for the untreated and CMAI-treated perovskite films, respectively. The enlarged water contact angle confirms that the more hydrophobic surface of the perovskite film was achieved due to the moisture-resistant 2D layered perovskite (CMA)2PbI4 with a long alkylammonium CMA+ chain.

To summarize, we introduced a bulky hydrophobic ammonium salt (CMAI), to form a 2D perovskite protective film between a triple-cation 3D perovskite light-harvesting film and the HTL for high-performance and stable PSCs. The validity of the as-formed 2D perovskite (CMA)2PbI4 was confirmed by the SEM, AFM and XRD results. The increased PL intensity, TRPL decay lifetime, the decreased EU and Pb0 defects evidenced that 2D perovskite films could function as an outstanding passivating layer and thus dramatically suppress non-radiative combination. Consequently, the 3D/2D device with an n-i-p planar structure generated a maximum efficiency of 22.06% with a mitigated hysteresis and an impressive Voc of 1.19 V. Furthermore, the unpacked 3D/2D device retained more than 80% of its original efficiency after being placed under an ambient atmosphere for 50 days, ascribed to the more hydrophobic surface of the 2D perovskite material. Our work would extend the range of applications of 2D perovskites for constructing 3D/2D hybrid PSCs with high efficiency and stability.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61804058, U1705256, 21771066 and 51972123) and the Promotion Program for Young and Middle-aged Teacher in Science and Technology Research of Huaqiao University (ZQN-706).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1nr03624f
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021