 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA03044K
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10794-10800


Tao
Liu
,

Juan
Hou
,

Bing
Wang
,

Feiming
Bai
,

Haijun
Chen
,

Lei
Gao
,

Yonghai
Cao
,

Hongcai
He
,

Jinshu
Wang
,

Ning
Wang
*,

Guozhong
Cao
* and 

Zhanhu
Guo
*

State Key Laboratory of Electronic Thin Film and Integrated Devices, University of ElectronicScience and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, P. R. China. E-mail: wangninguestc@gmail.com

Key Laboratory of Ecophysics and Department of Physics, School of Science, Shihezi University, Xinjiang 832003, P. R. China

Department of Materials and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195-2120, USA. E-mail: gzcao@u.washington.edu

Integrated Composites Laboratory (ICL), Department of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA. E-mail: zguo10@utk.edu

Received
13th April 2016
, Accepted 8th June 2016
First published on 8th June 2016
Perovskite strontium ruthenate (SrRuO3, i.e., SRO) films, for the first time serving as a Pt-free counter electrode in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), have demonstrated promising electrocatalytic activity towards triiodide (I3−) reduction, resulting in power conversion efficiency (PCE) close to that of conventional Pt counter electrodes. Furthermore, the lattice mismatch with the substrate could change the electrocatalytic activity of epitaxial SRO films, arising from the deviations from the local symmetry. X-ray diffraction (XRD) results confirm that in-plain tensile strain induces lattice shortening along the out-of-plane direction for the SRO film deposited on a (100) oriented MgAl2O4 (MAO) single crystal substrate (SRO/MAO), whereas biaxial compressive strain in the plane of SRO grown on a (100) oriented single crystal SrTiO3 (STO) substrate (SRO/STO) leads to the elongation of out-of-plane spacing. Our results show that the SRO/MAO counter electrode exhibits an improved electrocatalytic activity, reduced charge-transfer resistance (Rct) at the counter electrode/electrolyte interface, and accelerated I3− diffusion in the electrolyte compared to the SRO/STO counter electrode. The decreased Ru–I3− distance perpendicular to the surface upon application of in-plane tensile strain would contribute to the increased adsorption strength of the I3−, and thus promoted the I3−/I− redox reaction. Hence, the device with the SRO/MAO counter electrode reveals an increase of 17.18% in PCE compared to the SRO/STO based device. This work provides new insight into further enhancement of PCE through design and engineering of the crystal and microstructure of SRO films, which is applicable to a range of perovskite chemistries.

Because of their facile fabrication, environmental friendliness and good photovoltaic performance, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have been considered as one potential alternative to the commercial energy-intensive silicon-based solar cells. Traditionally, platinum (Pt) and Pt-based metallic films deposited on fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates are typically used as counter electrode catalysts due to their high electrical conductivity and excellent catalytic activity. However, the high cost, low abundance and poor stability in corrosive electrolytes greatly restrict their large-scale applications. Besides, conventional Pt-based counter electrodes exhibit less ideal catalytic activity towards the iodine-free redox couple. Thus, considerable efforts have been devoted to the search for low cost Pt-free catalysts that exhibit high electrochemical activity and fast electron transfer kinetics. A variety of catalysts have been evaluated as potential counter electrodes of DSSCs, including metal oxides (TaO, Ta2O5, and WO2), metal sulfides (CoS, NiS, FeS2, and PbS), carbon species (graphite, carbon black, mesoporous carbon nanofibers carbon nanotubes, carbon nanotube aerogel, and carbon spheres), alloys, metal nitrides,etc. The catalytic performances of some aforementioned catalysts are equal to or even better than that of a conventional Pt counter electrode.

Electronically conductive perovskites (ABO3) (A: alkaline earth or lanthanide; B: transition element) are promising basic elements for design of anode catalysts for electro-oxidation in direct alcohol fuel cells. The B-site metal ion defines the catalysis of the resulting perovskite via synergetic interactions with the A-site. For example, perovskite structure SrRuO3 (SRO) films have been used to replace conventional Pt as the catalyst in hydrogen evolution reactions and electrode materials for ferroelectric devices due to their excellent high conductivity. Both the stability and reactivity of SRO are governed by the potential-induced transformation of stable Ru4+ to unstable Run>4+. This ordered (Ru4+)-to-disordered (Run>4+) transition comes in large part from the synergy between electronic and morphological effects. Moreover, Stoerzinger et al. reported that the lattice mismatch induced epitaxial strain could change the activity of oxygen electrocatalysis for perovskite LaCoO3 thin films in alkaline fuel cells. However, the effect of strain arising from the mismatch between the perovskite film and the substrate has not been reported for the perovskite ABO3 crystal films serving as counter electrodes for DSSCs.
The present work focuses on the study of the electrocatalytic activity of DSSCs with sputtered SRO films on a (100) oriented MgAl2O4 (MAO) single crystal substrate (denoted hereafter as SRO/MAO) and a (100) oriented single crystal SrTiO3 (STO) substrate (denoted hereafter as SRO/STO) as counter electrodes, respectively. The substrate effect on the SRO crystal was studied by XRD and their effect on the electrocatalytic activity was disclosed. The in-plane strain from the tensile and the compression point was used for the first time to change the performance of DSSCs. The electrocatalytic activity, charge-transfer resistance (Rct) at the CE/electrolyte interface, the diffusion rate and reduction rate of the I3−/I− redox couple in the electrolyte were used to interpret the performance difference of the DSSCs with two different counter electrodes.

SRO films (∼600 nm) were deposited on (100) MAO and (100) STO substrates, respectively, by RF magnetron sputtering, Fig. S1(A) and (B). The details on the experimental setup could be found elsewhere. Briefly, the sputtering deposition was carried out under a base pressure of 10−6 Torr and a deposition pressure of 2 Pa with an Ar to O2 ratio of 3:1. The substrate temperature was 750 °C and the sputtering power was optimized to 200 W. For comparison, a conventional Pt counter electrode was prepared by heating a thin layer of 2 mM of H2PtCl6 dissolved in alcohol solution onto a FTO glass substrate at 400 °C for 30 min.


The ultrasonically cleaned FTO substrate (sheet resistance: 12 Ω □−1) was coated with a compact TiO2 layer (100 nm) by spin coating at 2000 rpm for 40 s using a solution of 0.04 M tetra butyl titanate in isopropanol (containing 10 μL HCl per 5 mL of solution), and then sintered at 500 °C for 30 min. Subsequently, a layer of the TiO2 porous film with a thickness of ∼6 μm was prepared by doctor-blading the TiO2 colloid, which included 9% ethyl cellulose and 73% terpineol and 18% TiO2 nanoparticles synthesized via a hydrothermal route. The above-obtained sample was annealed in air at 500 °C for 30 min, followed by cooling down to about 150 °C. Then the resulting TiO2 photoanode was further dipped into a 0.50 mM ethanol solution of N719 dye ([cisdi(thiocyanato)-N,N′-bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4-carboxylic acid)-4-tetrabutylammonium carboxylate]) (Solaronix Co., Ltd., Switzerland) for 20 h at room temperature. Dye soaked electrodes were then washed in ethanol to remove physically absorbed dye molecules before the cell assembly. Afterwards, the sensitized TiO2 photoanode and as-sputtered SRO counter electrode were assembled to form DSSCs by sandwiching the electrolyte composition composed of 0.1 M LiI, 0.05 M I2, and 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine in 8 mL of acetonitrile. The active area of each device is 3 mm × 3 mm. The configuration of the assembled DSSC is shown schematically in Fig. S1(C), where the SRO film has a pseudo-perovskite structure with a lattice constant of 3.9735 Å.


The cross-section morphology of the SRO films was investigated by using a field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM, JSM-7600F, JEOL, Japan). Microstructures of the films were examined by high resolution X-ray diffraction (HRXRD) using a Bede D1 X-ray diffractometer. An atomic force microscope (AFM, SPM9500J3, Shimadzu, Japan) equipped with a probe of tapping mode was used for estimating the surface roughness of SRO films. All the roughness values are averages over the AFM measurements on five different 5 μm × 5 μm areas, and the uncertainties are the corresponding standard deviations. The surface resistivity of SrRuO3 thin films was determined using a four-probe method. A CHI660E electrochemical workstation (CH Instrument Corp, USA) was used to characterize the cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves based on a three-electrode system, in which SRO/MAO (or SRO/STO) was used as the working electrode, and the Pt wire and the Ag/AgCl electrode were used as the counter and reference electrode, respectively. The three electrodes were dipped in an acetonitrile solution containing 10 mM LiI, 1 mM I2, and 0.1 M LiClO4 and the CV was characterized in the range of ±0.5 V at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. Two loop circuits were formed by external three wires with flat alligator clips, in which one loop was used to measure the potential and the other one was applied to measure the current. The photovoltaic tests were carried out with a Keithley 2401 source meter under irradiation of simulated AM1.5 sunlight from a 100 W xenon arc lamp (calibrated with a standard Si-based solar cell) in ambient atmosphere. The electrochemical impedance spectrum (EIS) of complete cells with different counter electrodes was characterized with a two-electrode electrochemical system under simulated sunlight. The frequency range of EIS was set from 100 mHz to 0.1 MHz and the applied bias voltage was set at the open-circuit voltage with an alternating current modulation signal of 10 mV. Nyquist plots were analyzed using Z-view software. Tafel polarization measurements were carried out on the symmetrical dummy cell at a scanning rate of 10 mV s−1 by applying a two-electrode based electrochemical system.



Fig. 1A(a) and (b) presents the XRD patterns of SRO thin films prepared on the (100) oriented MAO and STO substrates respectively, illustrating good crystallinity and matching orientation of SRO films with the substrates. As shown in Fig. 1B(a), the 2θ value (≈45.625°) (JCPDS, card no. 89-5715) corresponding to the crystal surface (200) of the bulk SRO is represented by a vertical line. The strain-induced lattice elongation and shortening along the out-of-plane direction can be deduced by the shifts in the main diffraction peak location (see Fig. 1B(b) and (c)), which is marked with an arrow, respectively. The d-values (d is the interplanar spacing) in the growth directions for epitaxial SRO thin films on the STO substrate (3.938 Å) and MAO substrate (3.995 Å) are determined by normal θ–2θ scans, respectively. In-plane Φ scan measurements for (110) SRO on both substrates (see Fig. 1C and D) show four peaks separated by 90° from each other respectively, which can be indexed to (110) SRO//(110) STO and (110) SRO//(220) MAO. Hence, according to the results of XRD θ–2θ scans and Φ scans, SRO films are epitaxially grown on STO and MAO substrates, respectively. As shown in Fig. 1E, XRD reciprocal space mappings (RSMs) are recorded around the (310) reflections of SRO and substrates, in which the only reflection spots are observed. It is very clear that the diffraction peak of (310) SRO shifts to the left and right of the (310) STO peak and (620) MAO peak, respectively, which is consistent with the normal θ–2θ results. As shown in Fig. 1F, the double-crystal X-ray diffraction peaks in asymmetric reflections of SRO/MAO and SRO/STO heteroepitaxial layers in the glancing exit are tested in the [110] direction of the MAO substrate and STO substrate, respectively. Combined with lattice constants of MAO and STO, the in-plane lattice parameters of the as-grown SRO are calculated to be 3.985 and 3.914 Å, respectively. However, the crystal parameter of bulk cubic SRO is 3.9735 Å, suggesting that the in-plane biaxial tensile (compressive) stress induces uniaxial shortening (elongation) along the out-of-plane direction, as shown in Scheme S1 and Table S1.

The CV measurements were carried out to assess the potential catalytic activity of SRO films as counter electrodes toward I3− reduction, Fig. 2. The relatively negative pair is assigned to the redox of I−/I3−, which directly affects the photovoltaic performance of DSSCs. It can be observed that Fig. 2a displays smaller potential between oxidation and reduction (ΔV = 431 mV) and higher cathode peak current density (Jred = −0.91 mA cm−2) than Fig. 2b (ΔV = 567 mV, Jred = −0.42 mA cm−2), indicating that SRO/MAO exhibits higher intrinsic electrocatalytic activity of the I−/I3− redox reaction than SRO/STO. As illustrated in Fig. 3, an atomic force microscope (AFM) is used to characterize the surface morphologies of the as-grown SRO films. SRO/MAO and SRO/STO films exhibit a similar surface roughness of 13.87 ± 0.61 and 13.95 ± 0.78 nm, respectively. Hereby, we could exclude the possibility of catalytic surface area's contribution to the improved electrocatalytic activity of SRO/MAO films. A study has shown that the decrease in the B site-O bond perpendicular to the surface of the (100) oriented ABO3 perovskite structure upon application of in-plane tensile strain would increase the adsorption strength of the active matter. Hence, in this case, the decreased lattice parameter perpendicular to the surface of the SRO/MAO film due to in-plane tensile strain would increase the strength of the adsorbed I3− and thus accelerate the I3−/I− redox reaction, indicative of the improved electrocatalytic activity of SRO/MAO films.
To investigate the effect of the catalytic properties on the photovoltaic performance, the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of DSSCs applying different counter electrodes were characterized under AM1.5G illumination. Fig. 4A shows the J–V curves of DSSCs with the best performance. The corresponding detailed photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1, including short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor  and PCE (PCE = Pmax%). Compared with the conventional Pt based device, the relatively low FF of the device in conjunction with the SRO electrode contributes to comparable PCE. Fig. 4A(a) displays improved photovoltaic parameters (Jsc = 15.25 mA cm−2, FF = 57.81%, Voc = 735 mV, PCE = 6.48%), indicating a 17.18% increase in PCE than that in Fig. 4A(b) (Jsc = 14.93 mA cm−2, FF = 51.37%, Voc = 721 mV, PCE = 5.53%). This implies that SRO/MAO exhibits stronger electrocatalytic activity than SRO/STO, consistent with the result of the cyclic voltammograms (Fig. 2). The increase in catalytic activity at the counter electrode/electrolyte interface suggests a faster reduction of I3− and a reduced availability of recombination between I3− and the photoinjected electrons, which thereby promote the regeneration of dye molecules. This behavior makes a significant contribution to the enhanced Jsc for the SRO/MAO device compared to the SRO/STO one.
Counter electrode

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)
FF (%)
PCE (%) (maximum)
PCE (%) (average)

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
ct (Ω cm2)

R
pt (Ω cm2)

a 
J
sc: short-circuit current density, Voc: open-circuit voltage, FF: fill factor, PCE: power conversion efficiency, Rs: series resistance, and Rct: charge transfer resistance at the counter electrode/electrolyte interface. Rpt: charge transfer resistance at the dyed TiO2/electrolyte interface. The average PCE values were obtained from six cells.

SRO/MAO
15.25
735
57.81
6.48
6.25
2.29
14.56
2.86
SRO/STO
14.93
721
51.37
5.53
5.41
2.16
18.39
2.94
Pt
15.39
739
63.13
7.18
6.97
1.61
4.72
5.93
The strain at the surface may also affect the number of defect sites, which could in turn influence the charge transfer resistance. Hence, it is necessary to investigate the recombination kinetics process occurring at the interface by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Fig. 4B presents the Nyquist spectra obtained from EIS measurements. Rs is the series resistance related to the transport resistance of FTO and the counter electrode. The arch in the high frequency region reflects charge-transfer resistance (Rct) and chemical capacitance (CPE1) at the counter electrode/electrolyte interface. The arch at low frequency arises from the charge-transfer resistance (Rpt) and the capacitance (CPE2) at the dyed TiO2/electrolyte interface. The corresponding simplified equivalent circuit (inset in Fig. 4B) is used to analyze the impedance spectra fitted by using the Z-view software. The fitted values of Rs and Rct are listed in Table 1. The overall transfer resistance of the cell (R = Rs + Rct + Rpt) has a negative influence on the FF according to the equivalent circuit for DSSCs. Apparently, the R of Fig. 4B(c) is the lowest among the three devices, leading to the highest FF of the Pt counter electrode. As observed in the enlarged image from the selected area of Fig. 4B, Rs in Fig. 4B(a) is a little larger than that in Fig. 4B(b), which is consistent with the measurement results of surface electrical resistivity (SRO/MAO: 1.21 × 10−2 Ω cm; SRO/STO: 1.12 × 10−2 Ω cm). The difference in resistivity could be due to the strain induced different octahedral rotations and the corresponding orbital overlap. Since SRO/MAO exhibits slightly higher film resistivity than SRO/STO, the possible effect of bulk electronic conductivity on the catalytic activities could be ruled out. Compared with the SRO/STO electrode, the enhanced electrocatalytic activity for SRO/MAO contributes to the reduced Rct values, indicating the improvement in charge transfer at the counter electrode/electrolyte interface and the attenuations of charge recombination rates. Note that Rct could be further reduced by the optimized design of the crystal and microstructure, indicating the possibility of yielding a PCE superior to that of Pt based DSSC in the future. As shown in the Bode plot, Fig. 4C(a) shows an obvious high-frequency shift of the characteristic response peak (f = 11.91 Hz) in the high frequency regime compared to that in Fig. 4C(b) (f = 4.54 Hz), which indicates a faster electron transfer at the interface between SRO/MAO and the electrolyte. This phenomenon can be ascribed to a lower interfacial charge transfer resistance, in accordance with the results obtained from EIS.
To further investigate the role of strain in the electrocatalytic activity of SRO films, the Tafel polarization measurement was carried out. Fig. 4D shows the logarithmic current density as a function of applied voltage from the symmetrical dummy cells. The exchange current density (J0) can denote directly the electrocatalytic activity towards I3− reduction, which can be derived from the intercept of the extrapolated linear region of the Tafel curve when the overpotential is zero. It is obvious that the anodic and cathodic branches in Fig. 4D(a) exhibit an obvious larger slope than those in Fig. 4D(b), indicating that SRO/MAO has a higher J0 than SRO/STO. The difference in J0 is consistent with the EIS results based on eqn (1),
(1)
where
R is the gas constant, T is the absolute temperature, n is the number of electrons involved in the reduction of I3− to I− (herein n = 2), and F is the Faraday constant. In the curve at high potential (horizontal part), the limiting diffusion current density (Jlim) can be derived, which is associated with the diffusion rate of I3− (D) based on eqn (2)

(2)
where
l is the electrolyte thickness and C is the I3− concentration. Hence, the in-plane tensile stress induces the increased strength of the adsorbed I3− and thus accelerates the reduction rate and diffusion rate of I3− for the SRO/MAO based device.

The decreased Ru–I3− distance perpendicular to the surface upon applying in-plane tensile strain could contribute to improved electrocatalytic activity towards I3− reduction, reduced Rct and faster I3− diffusion rate, thereby providing better PCE performance for the DSSC with the SRO/MAO counter electrode than that of the DSSC with the SRO/STO counter electrode.

In this work, sputtered SRO films are first used as a counter electrode in DSSCs, which exhibit excellent electrochemical catalytic activity and high PCE close to those of the conventional Pt counter electrode. Furthermore, we report the use of epitaxial strain via lattice mismatch as a means to change the electrocatalytic activity towards I3− reduction. Compared with the SRO/STO electrode, the application of in-plane tensile stress in SRO/MAO films would increase the adsorption strength of the adsorbed I3− and thus accelerate the reduction reaction of I3− at the SRO/electrolyte interface and I3− diffusion in the electrolyte, leading to the improvement of photovoltaic performance (higher PCE). Our study lays a good foundation for further understanding the reaction mechanism and thus guides the design of highly active catalysts, where the strain effect can be incorporated into a range of widely used low-cost counter electrode materials in DSSCs.


Helpful discussion with Wenbo Luo, an associate professor at the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, is appreciated. This work was supported mainly by China–Japan International Cooperation Program Funds (No. 2010DFA61410 and 2011DFA50530). The work was also supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51272037, 51272126, 51303116, 51362026 and 51472043) and Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University (No. NCET-12-0097). Z. Guo appreciates the start-up from the University of Tennessee.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta03044k
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016