 DOI: 10.1039/C7TC01678F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 6406-6419


Jie
Ge
 and 

Yanfa
Yan


Department of Physics and Astronomy & Wright Center for Photovoltaics Innovation and Commercialization, The University of Toledo, Toledo, Ohio 43606, USA. E-mail: Jie.Ge@UToledo.Edu; Yanfa.Yan@UToledo.Edu

Received
17th April 2017
, Accepted 14th May 2017
First published on 15th May 2017
Earth-abundant copper–barium–thiostannate Cu2BaSnS4 (CBTS) based thin films have recently been reported to exhibit optoelectronic and defect properties suitable for their use as absorbers for photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting and the top cell of tandem photovoltaic (PV) solar cells. In this work, we synthesise CBTS thin films from precursors with different Cu compositions and find that the Cu composition of the precursor can influence the phase formation and structural preferred orientation in the resultant CBTS. Single-phase and device-grade CBTS films can be prepared using the precursor with a slightly Cu poor content of Cu/(Ba + Sn) = 0.95 and Cu/Ba = 1.81. We also find that CBTS demonstrates an intrinsic copper poor composition leading to p-type conductivity and that exposing CBTS in air can lead to a native oxide layer of SnOx. The PEC water reduction device with the configuration fluorine-doped SnO2/CBTS/Pt/electrolyte (pH ∼ 7) is able to generate a cathodic photocurrent of 3.9 mA cm−2 at zero volt versus reversible hydrogen electrode under the illumination of a 300 W xenon lamp. The PV solar device with the configuration fluorine-doped SnO2/CBTS/CdS/ZnO/aluminum-doped ZnO suffers from a severe recombination issue at the heterointerface which greatly limits the overall device performance, evidenced by detailed characterization using capacitance–voltage and impedance spectroscopy tested with various alternating-current frequencies, temperatures, and applied direct-current biases. As a consequence, the best PV device only delivers 1.6% conversion efficiency under AM 1.5 illumination, albeit with moderate heat treatments of CBTS/CdS junctions at low temperatures mitigating the interfacial recombination to some degree.

It has been forecast that more than 30 terawatts (1012 watts) of new power will be needed globally by 2050. To maintain atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentrations near their current levels and not cause further harm to the environment and human health, the majority of new power must come from renewable energy sources such as abundant solar energy, wind energy, etc. Solar hydrogen production via photoelectrochemical (PEC) water-splitting and photovoltaic (PV) solar electricity technologies are considered two of the main choices of renewable solar energy. PEC and PV tandem/multi-junction solar cells based on III–V semiconductors have demonstrated promisingly high solar-to-hydrogen and solar-to-electricity conversion efficiencies, but at high cost due to the limited supplies of In and Ga constituent elements in the earth's crust. Therefore, it is critical to develop solar cell technologies that are based on earth-abundant materials and can be deployed at low cost and on a large scale.

Recently, the state-of-the-art earth-abundant trigonal Cu2BaSnS4 (CBTS) chalcogenide emerging as a promising and low-cost material holds promise for efficient PEC and PV solar energy conversion. Our theoretical calculations and experimental results have suggested that CBTS and its selenide counterparts exhibit less defect-related recombination centers than disordered kesterite Cu2ZnSnS(e)4 (CZTS(e)) and even chalcopyrite Cu(In, Ga)Se2 (CIGS), because their large chemical disparity among the constituent Ba, Cu, and Sn elements makes the antisite defects difficult to form. Therefore, CBTS is anticipated to serve as a better solar absorber for more efficient PEC and PV solar devices than kesterite compounds. Its wide bandgap, Eg = 2.05 eV, suggests that CBTS can suitably serve as a top-cell solar absorber in the tandem PV and PEC devices. Like CBTS, Cu2O, with a similar bandgap of Eg ∼ 2 eV, has already met with success in serving as a top cell in the PV, PEC, and/or PV integrated PEC tandem devices to split water. However, Cu2O may demonstrate deep defect recombination centers and a small absorption coefficient (i.e. large absorption depth from 500 nm to 620 nm), which may limit its PEC and PV device efficiency. In contrast, CBTS shows the dominant shallow defects of copper vacancies, a high absorption coefficient, and also a good hole transport capability. Thus, CBTS holds promise for better-performing PEC and PV solar devices compared to Cu2O. Currently, our best CBTS PEC device modified by CdS/ZnO/TiO2 overlayers has delivered a saturated photocurrent stabilized at 7.8 mA cm−2 under one sun illumination, which is on the same level with the best-performing planar Cu2O PEC cells. For PV cells, we have attained a power conversion efficiency of 2% based on a NaF doped CBTS absorber coupled with a sputtered oxygenated CdS buffer, which hitherto is the best result but still lags behind those of optimized Cu2O PV cells (6–8%). CBTS, a sulfide, exhibits better light absorption, absorbing a sufficient fraction of the solar spectrum, better defect-tolerance to suppress “killer-defect” recombination centers, and more suitable charge transport than oxides and kesterites. The initial conversion efficiency of kesterite solar cells reported in 1996 is just 0.66%, while, after 20 years of research effort the efficiencies have been boosted up to 9%, and later to 11% when Cd partially replaces Zn to reduce the band tailing. We believe that better CBTS device performances could be reached if extensive optimization research could be conducted on CBTS material quality and solar cells.
Since CBTS has emerged as a derivative of kesterite CZTS(e) and chalcopyrite CIGS, the optimization research on CBTS material growth and device fabrication can draw lessons from the histories of kesterite and chalcopyrite technologies. For instance, both CIGS and CZTSe films have been documented to exhibit considerably increased grain sizes under Cu-rich growth conditions, because CuxSe phases can conduct liquid-phase assisted grain growth around its eutectic temperature (523 °C). Additionally, Cu-rich growth can also endow the CIGS and CZTSe grains with better transport and bulk recombination properties than the growth under Cu-poor conditions. Worse, solar cells made under Cu-rich conditions usually show strong interfacial recombination and limited device performance, while etching using KCN aqueous solution can effectively decrease interfacial recombination, increase minority carrier lifetime, and thus boost device efficiency. The KCN chemical etching procedure can also selectively remove certain secondary phases (e.g. CuxSe) and excess chalcogen on the surface. Besides, some other strategies have been developed to mitigate the interfacial recombination occurring at the misfit kesterite–CdS interface, including incorporating an ultrathin layer of wide-bandgap dielectric oxides in-between the absorber and the CdS buffer, post-annealing kesterite/CdS junctions in air or nitrogen atmosphere, applying alternative buffers with more suitable band positions than CdS,etc. Our previous study has indicated that inserting a thin layer of insulating oxygenated CdS in-between CBTS and CdS can indeed mitigate the interfacial recombination. Even though many experiences can be borrowed from kesterites and CIGS technologies, it is still required to identify the areas where CBTS may need unique solutions.
The content of this work includes (1) the synthesis of CBTS thin films from the precursors with different Cu compositions, (2) post KCN treatment of the synthesized thin films, (3) heat treatment of CBTS/CdS junctions, (4) detailed characterization studies of the synthesized thin films and PEC and PV solar cells using various techniques and tools to identify the best film deposition conditions and the loss mechanism in the solar devices. The experimental findings regarding the characteristics of the CBTS material and the solar cell reported in this work are complementary to the literature and also informative to the future optimization of CBTS film deposition and device fabrication.

In this work, we use the scalable co-sputtering vacuum deposition method to grow CBTS precursor films on fluorine-doped SnO2 (FTO) substrates. The sputtering targets include BaS, SnS, and Cu purchased from Plasma Materials Company. The precursor composition was controlled by varying the power supply for each radio-frequency (RF) sputtering source. The sputtering powers for the SnS and BaS targets are 43 W and 110 W, respectively; the power for the Cu target varies a little among 44 W, 46 W and 48 W in this study. The precursor films were then annealed in sulfur vapor at 560 °C for 30 min for crystallization.

Panels (a) and (b) of Fig. 1 show the top-view scanning electron microscopic (SEM) images at different magnifications of an annealed CBTS thin film (Sample A), wherein the precursor was sputtered using the 44 W RF power for the Cu target. Under this sputtering condition, the precursor film demonstrates a Cu deficient and slightly Ba rich composition, with atomic ratios of Cu/(Ba + Sn) = 0.8 and Cu/Ba = 1.52 determined by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) (Table 1). After sulfurization, numerous secondary phases with a darker contrast segregate on the top of the annealed film (e.g. Region B in Fig. 1b). Compositional EDX analyses in Table 1 suggest that these darker areas are rich in Ba and S but deficient in Cu, with atomic ratios of Cu/(Ba + Sn) = 0.46, Cu/Ba = 0.79, and S/(Cu + Ba + Sn) = 1.2, and that the bright areas correspond to the CBTS grains, with atomic ratios of Cu/(Ba + Sn) = 0.9, Cu/Ba = 1.8, and S/(Cu + Ba + Sn) = 1.09. We additionally find that 1 min wet chemical treatment using 1 M KCN aqueous solution can remove these observed Ba rich secondary phases, as shown in panels (c) and (d) of Fig. 1. After KCN etching, a sublayer of CBTS grains (e.g. Region D in Fig. 1d) appears, with atomic ratios of Cu/(Ba + Sn) = 0.85, Cu/Ba = 1.65, and S/(Cu + Ba + Sn) = 1.02, in which the grains are still a little richer in Ba and S than the CBTS grains on the film top such as Region C where atomic ratios of Cu/(Ba + Sn) = 0.88, Cu/Ba = 1.75, and S/(Cu + Ba + Sn) = 1.00. The films before and after KCN etching were additionally characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD). As shown in Fig. 2a, the XRD pattern for the film before etching demonstrates multiple visible peaks labelled “?”, which cannot be assigned to any known phases, such as CBTS, Cu2BaS2, and BaSx. [Note: phase identification was done using the software of MDI Jade 2010 equipped with a monthly synchronized ICDD database (International Centre for Diffraction Data).] These spurious XRD peaks should come from the diffractions of the unknown Ba rich secondary phases observed by SEM (Fig. 1b) and EDX (Region B in Table 1), taking into account that many areas remain unexplored in the compositional phases of Ba related chalcogenide systems. XRD as well suggests that KCN etching is able to remove these unknown Ba rich secondary phases leaving a single-phase CBTS film. The XRD patterns additionally show visibly intense diffraction peaks from (104) and (103), suggesting that the film grown under this condition shows a strong preferred orientation along the [010] zone axis. Raman scattering shown in Fig. S1a (ESI) cannot resolve these Ba rich secondary phases as evidenced by top-view SEM images in panels (a) and (b) of Fig. 1. All the observed Raman peaks can be assigned to CBTS. However, very distinct changes in Raman peak intensity and width can be seen between the films before and after KCN etching. The film after etching demonstrates much intense and sharp Raman peaks, in contrast to the one before etching. The film before etching shows higher optical transmittance with visible interference extrema compared to the one after etching (Fig. S1b, ESI). Bandgap plots in the inset of Fig. S1b (ESI) indicate a bandgap of 2.05 eV for CBTS. The presence of the Ba rich secondary phases seems to have not much influence on estimating bandgaps.
Sample-A
Region
Cu%
Ba%
Sn%
S%
Cu/(Ba + Sn)
Cu/Ba
S/(Cu + Ba + Sn)

a Sample-A indicates the film prepared by radio-frequency (RF) co-sputtering from Cu (RF power, 44 W), SnS (RF power, 43 W), and BaS (RF power, 110 W) targets.

Before Sulfurization
29.56
19.51
17.23
33.70
0.80
1.52
0.51
A
22.60
12.55
12.70
52.15
0.90
1.80
1.09
After Sulfurization
B
14.23
17.96
13.18
54.63
0.46
0.79
1.20
C
23.38
13.34
13.12
50.16
0.88
1.75
1.00
D
23.30
14.14
13.21
49.35
0.85
1.65
1.02
We then increased the sputtering power of the Cu target, 48 W, in order to increase the Cu content in the precursor films. EDX compositional results in Table 2 show that this precursor film is slightly rich in Cu, with atomic ratios of Cu/(Sn + Ba) = 1.09 and Cu/Ba = 2.15. Panels (a) and (b) of Fig. 3 show the SEM images at different magnifications of the annealed CBTS films grown from these Cu rich precursors (Sample-B). As seen, a lot of hexagonal crystals segregate on the film top (e.g. Region B in Fig. 3b), which were identified to be CuxS phases by the compositional analysis in Table 2. The EDX compositional analysis additionally suggests that CBTS grains (e.g. Region A in Fig. 3b) are deficient in Cu, with atomic ratios of Cu/(Ba + Sn) = 0.83, Cu/Ba = 1.70, and S/(Cu + Ba + Sn) = 1.00. 1 M KCN treatment for 1 min can effectively remove the CuxS secondary phases as evidenced by the SEM images in panels (c) and (d) of Fig. 3 and the XRD pattern in Fig. 2d. After KCN etching, a lot of deep ditches have appeared, some of which have possibly penetrated through the entire film exposing the beneath FTO substrate (see the compositional analysis in Table 2 of Region D in Fig. 3d and the cross-sectional SEM image in Fig. S2, ESI). The compositional analysis in Table 2 suggests that the CBTS grains are poor in Cu after etching with Cu/Ba ratios varying from 1.54 to 1.62, such as Region C in Fig. 3d. The grain size of CBTS varies from 300 to 600 nm. No significant difference in grain size is observed among CBTS films made by Cu rich (Fig. 2) versus Cu poor (Fig. 1 and 3) precursors, contrary to the cases of CIGS and kesterite CZTSe. This suggests that CuxS cannot conduct the liquid-phase assisted grain growth at the annealing temperature of 560 °C, because CuxS has a much higher eutectic temperature (813 °C) than CuxSe (523 °C). Under slightly Cu rich growth conditions, CBTS grains still demonstrate a Cu poor composition (e.g. Regions A and C in Table 2), implying that CBTS could be an intrinsic p-type semiconductor due to Cu vacancies. This intrinsic Cu deficiency phenomenon also holds true in other copper barium polychalcogenides. The extra Cu in the precursor will form CuxS phases. The growth of CuxS grains may consume more Cu in the film. As a result, CBTS grains in Sample-B (e.g. Region C in Fig. 3d) are slightly poorer in Cu than those in Sample-A (e.g. Region C in Fig. 1d). The XRD pattern in Fig. 2d additionally shows that this CBTS film grown from a slightly Cu rich composition demonstrates a dominant diffraction peak from the (110) plane, instead of the (104) plane in the case of Sample-A (Fig. 2a).
Region
Cu%
Ba%
Sn%
S%
Cu/(Ba + Sn)
Cu/Ba
S/(Cu + Ba + Sn)

a Sample-B indicates the CBTS film prepared by radio-frequency (RF) co-sputtering from Cu (RF power, 48 W), SnS (RF power, 43 W), and BaS (RF power, 110 W) targets; Sample-C indicates the CBTS film prepared by RF co-sputtering from Cu (RF power, 46 W), SnS (RF power, 43 W), and BaS (RF power, 110 W) targets.
b Sn percentages are not real values from the CBTS grain, because the stray electrons possibly hit the FTO substrates through the film cracks and excited extra Sn signals from FTO during the EDX measurement.

Sample-B
Before Sulfurization
33.08
15.37
15.08
35.75
1.09
2.15
0.56
After Sulfurization
A
22.85
13.47
13.61
50.06
0.84
1.70
1.00
B
49.62
02.25
04.03
44.10
7.90
22.05
0.79
C
18.19
11.58
24.13
46.09
1.57
D
09.58
05.46
60.96
24.00
Sample-C
Before Sulfurization
34.43
18.99
17.36
30.23
0.95
1.81
0.43
After Sulfurization
23.01
12.89
12.85
51.25
0.89
1.79
1.05
Panels (e) and (f) of Fig. 3 show the top-view and cross-section SEM images of a sulfurized CBTS film (Sample-C) from a precursor sputtered using 46 W power for the Cu target. The precursor film demonstrates a slightly Cu poor content, with atomic ratios of Cu/(Ba + Sn) = 0.95 and Cu/Ba = 1.81 (Table 2). It can be seen that this film is free from pin–holes and compact without any secondary phases. Notably, no distinct grain boundaries could be seen from the cross-sectional SEM image, indicating a different microstructural feature from our previous CBTS films grown using 20 nm thick NaF. From the cross-sectional SEM images, we find that the CBTS film has a layer thickness of ∼2 μm, which is almost twice the thickness of its precursor (Fig. S2, ESI). The XRD pattern in Fig. 2d additionally shows high crystallinity of the film with all peaks assignable to the trigonal CBTS phase and the FTO substrate (marked by “#”). The dominant XRD peak comes from the (110) plane, instead of the (104) plane as observed in Fig. 2a for Sample-A. Compositional analyses given in Table 2 suggest that this film is slightly poorer in Cu after sulfurization, with atomic ratios of Cu/(Ba + Sn) = 0.89 and Cu/Ba = 1.81, than its precursor.
This sulfurized CBTS film (Sample-C) was then characterized by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) to identify the valence states of the constituent elements (XPS measurements were performed by Evans Analytical Group). Table 3 summarizes the calibrated binding energies of the constituent elements based on the measured XPS spectra shown in Fig. S3 (ESI). Ba 4d3/2 and 4d5/2 core levels are at 91.81 eV and 89.21 eV, respectively, with a splitting energy of 2.6 eV. Ba 3d3/2 and 3d5/2 core levels appear at 795.24 eV and 779.91 eV, respectively, with a splitting energy of 15.3 eV. Ba 4d core levels are ∼1 eV and ∼0.4 eV smaller than those in the Ba and BaO samples, respectively; Ba 3d core levels are ∼0.9 eV larger than those in the Ba and BaO samples. But, Ba 3d/4d lines in CBTS are basically consistent with those in BaS samples, indicating Ba2+. Cu 2p1/2 and 2p3/2 lines appear at 952.48 eV and 932.65 eV, respectively, with a splitting energy of 19.8 eV, indicating Cu+ or Cu0, instead of Cu2+, which are also basically consistent with Cu+ in CZTS. Furthermore, Cu LMM lines in Fig. S2b (ESI) with a peak summit at the kinetic energy of 916.96 eV indicate Cu+, not Cu0, in CBTS. S 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 lines appear at 161.01 eV and 162.21 eV, respectively, with a resultant splitting energy of 1.2 eV. The S 2p3/2 line at 161.0 eV is 1 eV larger than that in BaS, but is smaller than that in most sulfides, such as CuxS (161.7 eV), ZnS (161.8 eV), SnSx (161.7 eV), Cu2SnS3 (162 eV), CZTS (162 eV),etc. Sn 3d3/2 and 3d5/2 lines appear at 494.24 eV and 485.82 eV, respectively, with a splitting energy of 8.4 eV. The Sn 3d5/2 line at 485.8 eV agrees quite well with Sn2+ in SnS(e) and SnOx, and Sn4+ in CZTSe, but it is ∼1 eV smaller than that of Sn4+ in tin-based sulfides such as SnS2, Cu2SnS3, and CZTS; also, it is ∼1 eV larger than that of Sn0. Thus, we tentatively assume that the effective charges of Sn ions are close to 2+ in CBTS, while the charges of sulfur ions are close to 1.5− to ensure a charge balance in the matrix. This tentative assumption is also consistent with a recent theoretical report on orthorhombic Cu2BaSnSe4.
Ba 4d (eV)
Ba 3d (eV)
Sn 3d (eV)
Cu 2p (eV)
3d3/2

a Sample-C indicates the CBTS film prepared by radio-frequency (RF) co-sputtering from Cu (RF power, 44 W), SnS (RF power, 43 W), and BaS (RF power, 110 W) targets.

4d3/2
4d5/2
3d3/2
3d5/2
3d3/2
3d5/2
2p1/2
2p3/2
2p1/2
2p3/2
91.81
89.21
795.24
779.91
494.24
485.82
952.48
932.65
162.21
161.01
Analyses of the XPS spectra of the sulfurized CBTS film (Sample-C) before and after subsequent surface cleaning using argon ions reveal that air exposure of CBTS not only leads to the formation of a contamination layer of carbon/hydroxide (Fig. S4a, ESI) but also causes native oxidation of the CBTS surface. The detailed XPS spectra shown in Fig. 4a reveal that the Sn 3d lines of the CBTS sample before surface cleaning shift to higher binding energies than those after subsequent surface cleaning. This blue shift in binding energy suggests an increased oxidation state of Sn at the film surface. Peak fits using mixed Gaussian–Lorentzian curves yield two sets of Sn 3d lines as depicted by green and blue curves in Fig. 4a. As shown, the weak 3d5/2 line at 485.78 eV and its 3d3/2 partner at 494.21 eV are consistent with the oxidation states of Sn ions in CBTS; the dominant pair of lines at 486.39 eV and 494.78 eV agree quite well with the 3d5/2 and 3d3/2 lines of Sn(4−δ)+ in SnOx∼1.75, respectively, whereas they have disappeared along with the O 1s line after subsequent surface cleaning. Additionally, there are no significant peak changes in Cu 2p lines as well as Ba 3d lines before and after surface cleaning (Fig. S4b, ESI). Thus, we can basically confirm that exposing CBTS to ambient air will primarily cause the oxidation of tin, similar to CZTS. Besides, a tiny amount of oxidized sulfur from [SO3,4]2− species is observed on the film surface, evidenced by the weak peak with a binding energy of 168.31 eV in the detailed S 2p XPS spectrum as shown in Fig. 4b. The CBTS film without surface cleaning also demonstrates the dominant S 2p pair of lines with one at 161.00 eV for 2p3/2 and another at 162.24 eV for 2p1/2, consistent with oxidation states of the sulfur ion in the CBTS bulk. Peak fits additionally yield another pair of S 2p lines at slightly higher binding energies of 161.68 eV and 163.08 eV as depicted by the green curves in Fig. 4b, which may likely be corroborated as a result of the oxidized CBTS on the film surface (resembling CZTS) causing a slight chemical shifts of S 2p lines. This observed chemical shift of S 2p lines has prevailed in the oxygenated CdS.

Using the synthesized CBTS films, we prepared PEC solar cells with the configuration FTO/CBTS/Pt/electrolyte. The bare CBTS (Sample-C) electrode on the FTO substrate was first investigated by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (IS). As shown in Fig. 5a, the Nyquist plot of the dark complex impedance of the CBTS electrode consists of one semi-circle in the frequency region from 1 MHz to 1 kHz and one straight line from 1 kHz to 1 Hz. The high-frequency impedance arc should stem from the capacitance of the space charge region (CSC) and its accompanying resistance element (RSC) due to the contact of semiconductor and electrolyte. The linear component at low frequency reveals the diffusion process of ions in the electrolyte occurring in the vicinity of the semiconductor–electrolyte interface. The ionic diffusion in the low-frequency regime can be modelled by a Warburg element “W”. As an initial trial, we fit the impedance data to the circuit model including a series resistance (RS), a resistor–capacitor (RC) element pair, and a Warburg diffusion element as illustrated by Model-1 in the inset of Fig. 5a; however, this model failed to attain a good fit, particularly in the low frequency region (see the blue curve in the Nyquist plot). We then add one more RC element pair in series (see Model-2 in the inset of Fig. 5a). Fits based on Model-2 (the red curve in the Nyquist plot) are perfectly identical with the measured impedance data (open symbols) over the entire frequency region. This additional RC pair can be assigned to the semiconductor–electrolyte charge transfer resistance (RCT) and its accompanying Helmholtz capacitance (CH), contributing to part of the low-frequency response. Using the fitted values of the circuit elements presented in Table S1 (ESI), we obtain the characteristic time constants (τ = RC) of 0.45 μs and 1.07 s for the CSC–RSC and the CH–RCT pair, indicating that the electronic process in the CBTS bulk is much faster than the charge transfer process occurring at the CBTS–electrolyte interface.


Fig. 5b shows the measured Mott–Schottky (MS) plots of capacitance–voltage (CV) profiles with various frequencies of this bare CBTS (Sample-C) electrode on the FTO substrate. The testing frequencies of 10 kHz, 15 kHz and 20 kHz were selected in order to avoid the influence of the Warburg element and Helmholtz capacitance at low frequency. As shown in panel (b), the negative slope of the MS plots suggests the p-type conductivity of CBTS. The linear fits of the MS plots yield an average flat band (FB) potential of 1.14 VRHE [VRHE: volts versus the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE)] and carrier density (NA) at 2 ∼ 5 × 1016 cm−3. With an estimated Fermi level position of 0.14–0.16 eV above the valence band maximum (VBM) of CBTS, the MS plots suggest that the conduction band minimum (CBM) is 0.75 V negative than the hydrogen evolution potential, enabling p-type CBTS to work as a photocathode for hydrogen evolution. Fig. 5c shows the linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves of the FTO/CBTS/Pt/electrolyte PEC solar cells. As seen, CBTS PEC cells generate cathodic photocurrents under the illumination of a 300 W xenon lamp, again indicating that all the synthesized CBTS films are p-type semiconductors, regardless of whether the CBTS film was obtained from a Cu rich or Cu poor precursor. The p-type conductivity of these synthesized CBTS films should stem from their intrinsic Cu poor compositions as evidenced by the EDX analyses in Tables 1 and 2. As the positive bias was applied, the space charge region was minimized, therefore limiting the extraction of photocarriers (Fig. 5c inset). Under negative bias conditions, the space charge regions were extended deep into the CBTS bulk regions, favoring the extraction of the photocarriers in the bulk; therefore, the photocurrents were greatly increased in the reverse bias region. The PEC cell based on Sample-C delivers a photocurrent of ∼3.9 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE with the photocurrent onset at 0.4 VRHE, standing out among the CBTS samples studied herein.
PV solar cells were constructed based on the CBTS absorber films of Sample-C type which are compact and free from pinholes and cracks. Sputtered n-type CdS buffer layers were deposited atop p-type CBTS absorbers after KCN etching to create the p–n junction. Sputtered intrinsic ZnO and aluminum-doped ZnO (AZO) were then deposited sequentially on CdS coated CBTS to serve as transparent and conductive window layers of the PV cells. The choice of suitable n-type buffers for the CBTS absorber is of utmost importance, since it directly associates with the quality of the p–n junctions which in turn determines the device performance. It has been shown that the large lattice mismatch between CBTS and CdS may lead to a high density of deep defects at the misfit CBTS/CdS heterointerface, the presence of which will lead to a weak p–n junction diode with poor cell performances such as low open circuit voltages (VOC's), small short circuit currents (JSC's), etc.Fig. 6a shows the current–voltage (J–V) scans of the CBTS PV cells based on room-temperature sputtered CdS buffers (Cell-a batch), with the device parameters being shown in Fig. S5 (ESI). It can be seen that this batch of cells delivers small VOC below 0.5 V and low conversion efficiency below 0.77%, largely due to the low quality of the CBTS/CdS junctions. Fig. 6b and Fig. S5 (ESI) show the electrical J–V measurement results of another batch of PV cells (Cell-b), where the finished devices including ZnO window layers were entirely annealed in air at 170 °C for 10 min using a hotplate, while the CdS buffers were sputtered at room temperature as the Cell-a batch. As seen, the VOC's and efficiencies of this batch of cells (Cell-b) are increased more or less compared to those of the Cell-a batch, suggesting that the post heat treatment of the finished devices for a short time benefits improving the p–n junction quality to a considerable extent. Fig. 6c and Fig. S5 (ESI) show the electrical J–V testing results of the other batch of CBTS solar cells (Cell-c), where the CdS buffer was sputtered at a substrate temperature of 150 °C (without post-annealing the entire devices in air). This batch of CBTS cells (Cell-c) deliver the best device performances including VOC's, JSC's, fill factors, and efficiencies. The best conversion efficiencies of 1.5–1.6% have been achieved for Cell-c1, c2, and c3 subcells (Table 4). We additionally find that the subcells of Cell-c exhibit less pronounced light–dark crossover behaviors occurring at higher current densities (|J| > 1 mA cm−2) compared to those of Cell-a and Cell-b. All these observed improvements suggest that sputtering CdS at 150 °C has led to a better quality for the CBTS/CdS heterojunction, reducing the recombination centers at the heterointerface. Fig. 6d shows the photocurrent spectral responses of the selected CBTS subcells from these three batches of cells, that is, external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurement. As seen, the EQE curves reach the maxima at a wavelength of 525 nm corresponding well to the bandgap of CdS buffers, when the light beam shines from the AZO side (i.e. front illumination). As our cell configuration has transparent front (AZO) and rear (FTO) contacts, the device can be illuminated not only from the front side but also from the rear side. Under rear illumination, the EQE curves show weak responses from 525 nm to 650 nm, with the maxima at 610 nm corresponding to the bandgap of CBTS absorbers. Also, rear illumination leads to very weak J–V responses with ∼0.1% conversion efficiencies (Fig. S6, ESI).
Cell

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
Fill factor (%)
Efficiency (%)
c1
0.631
5.25
46.71
1.55
c2
0.635
5.08
46.99
1.52
c3
0.551
5.95
48.90
1.60
b3
0.522
4.37
36.08
0.82
a4
0.484
3.98
39.95
0.77
Sputtering CdS buffers at 150 °C has attained the best batch of CBTS PV cells. Nonetheless, the entire device performances, particularly the cell VOC's, are still much lower than the ideal attainable levels. In order to access the loss mechanism in the PV cells, alternating current (AC) testing measurements by impedance spectroscopy (IS) were carried out in the dark with various direct current (DC) biases superimposed. As shown in Fig. 7a, the measured complex impedance (Z) under zero DC bias demonstrates the biggest impedance arc from 1 MHz to 0.2 Hz, which appears to consist of two or more subarcs distributing in the high and low frequency regions. The impedance arcs became smaller when either positive or negative DC biases were applied across the CBTS PV cell. Notably, the imaginary parts of the complex impedances [Im(Z)] become positive at low frequency under positive DC biases. In addition, the capacitance–frequency (C–f) plots obtained under positive DC biases (Fig. 7b) exhibit negative capacitances in the low-frequency regions. The observed negative capacitance at low frequency is actually equivalent to the observed positive Im(Z) arc. This anomalous phenomenon has also been observed in other solar cells, such as hybrid organic–inorganic pervoskite, CdTe, and solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells. Multiple equivalent circuit models have been attempted to fit the measured IS data, whereas only the model shown in the inset of Fig. 7a led to the best fits (see the black solid lines) albeit with some deviations at low frequency. In this equivalent circuit model, RS represents the series resistance of the solar cell; the CSC–RSC pair represents the space charge capacitance and its accompanying resistance contributing to the capacitance plateau approximately from 0.1 to 0.6 MHz; two parallel resistor–capacitor pairs of R1–C1 and R2–C2 represent the recombinations due to the deep states in the CBTS bulk and at the cell interfaces between the functional layers, respectively, both of which can lead to the gradual incline of capacitance toward low frequency. The gradual increase in capacitance when f > 0.1 MHz observed in Fig. 7b suggests that there is a broad distribution of high concentration deep trap states; thus, the concept of constant phase elements was employed to describe its behaviour during the model fits of the IS data. Besides, an inductive loop consisting of an inductor L in series with a resistor R (see the boxed area in red on the model in Fig. 7a) was added to the equivalent circuit to model the IS data measured at positive DC biases. Indeed, this inductive loop has yielded a good fit to the positive imaginary impedance arc at low frequency, the physical origin of which is often associated with the carrier capture and emission from the interface states. The frequency of transition between positive and negative capacitance, as indicated by the circles in Fig. 7b, is displaced to higher frequencies as the positive DC bias increases, suggesting that the interface recombinations may be enhanced under forward biases. The presence of deep trap states with a non-negligible content at the cell interface causes a decrease of the charge accumulation ability of the solar cell and reduces the effective lifetime of the carriers as well as the overall device performances, especially the cell VOC. Using the simulated parameters of the circuit elements presented in Table S2 (ESI), we extracted the recombination lifetime (τrec) in the CBTS bulk (τ1 = R1C1) and at the cell interfaces (τ2 = R2C2) under different biases. As shown in Fig. 7c, τ2 (interface) is smaller than τ1 (bulk) in the whole bias range and 1–2 orders of magnitude smaller at biases greater than the cell VOC, suggesting that the overall charge recombination in the devices is dominated by surface recombination.
The CBTS solar cell was additionally characterized by temperature dependent C–f and CV measurements. As shown in Fig. 8a, a dramatic reduction of the low-frequency capacitance occurs as temperature decreases, and the incline feature of capacitance in the low frequency regions disappears at low temperature, suggesting that the deep trap states at the cell interfaces are mostly freezed out at low temperature. Panels (b–d) of Fig. 8 show the spatial defect distribution profiles (NCV − 〈x〉) derived from the CV data measured at various temperatures and frequencies, where NCV is the defect density and 〈x〉 is the profiling distance from the junction. As shown, all the NCV profiles demonstrate a “U” shape, with rapid increases at both negative and positive DC bias sides. Under negative bias conditions, the space charge region was extended deep into the CBTS region, allowing the defect states in the CBTS bulk to be tested. Therefore, the apparent increases in NCV toward the CBTS bulk suggest that a high density of deep trap states may exist either at the grain boundaries or inside the grains of the CBTS absorber. The temperature-dependent NCV profiles measured with an identical frequency of 100 kHz as shown in Fig. 8b suggest that lowering the temperature remarkably increases the width of the space charge region of the PV cell (i.e. 〈x〉 at 0 V bias). For the profiles measured with different frequencies at room temperature (Fig. 8c), NCV is gradually increased as the testing frequency decreases: for the 1 kHz profile, NCV demonstrates a minimum density of 4 × 1016 cm−3, larger than that of 0.8 × 1016 cm−3 for the 10 kHz profile. This apparent increase in NCV is direct evidence of the presence of deep trap states at the cell surface, because they are difficult to respond to the AC signals at high frequency. This observation is consistent with the inclined C–f curve (room temperature) increasing toward low frequency (Fig. 8a). No significant NCV increases are observed among the profiles measured with various testing frequencies at a low temperature of 150 K (Fig. 8d), implying that the deep trap states may likely be freezed out at low temperature, consistent with the observed flat capacitance plateaux at low temperature over a wide testing frequency region as shown in Fig. 8a. For the 1 kHz profile obtained at 150 K, NCV reaches a minimum of 0.6 × 1016 cm−3, which is much larger than that of its 1 kHz counterpart measured at room temperature (4 × 1016 cm−3). The interfacial trap density of 3.4 × 1016 cm−3 was then estimated from the difference of these two NCV minima, which is much larger than the trap density of 0.4 × 1016 cm−3 in the CBTS bulk (the NCV minimum of the 100 kHz profile measured at 150 K). This suggests that the presence of deep trap states at the cell interface is a main factor limiting the device performance. The misfit CBTS/CdS heterointerface likely produces a high density of interfacial trap states accounting for the experimental observations above.

In summary, to develop new low cost solar cell technologies, the state-of-the-art earth-abundant Cu2BaSnS4 (CBTS) thin films and their photoelectrochemical (PEC) and photovoltaic (PV) solar devices were explored in this work. We find that the Cu composition in the co-sputtered precursor can influence the phase formation and structural preferred orientation in the resultant CBTS film after sulfurization annealing. A Cu deficient and slightly Ba rich precursor composition, Cu/(Ba + Sn) = 0.8 and Cu/Ba = 1.52, led to the formation of numerous unknown secondary phases with a rich content of Ba and S floating on the film top. Wet chemical treatment by KCN aqueous solution can remove these unknown Ba-related secondary phases. When grown using this precursor composition, the resultant CBTS film demonstrates an enhanced preferred growth along [010] with the dominant diffraction peaks from (103) and (104). A slightly Cu rich precursor composition, Cu/(Sn + Ba) = 1.09 and Cu/Ba = 2.15, led to the formation of numerous CuxS phases segregating on the film top and penetrating through the entire film. Nonetheless, CBTS grains remain Cu deficient in composition. This resultant film additionally demonstrates the dominant diffraction peak from (110). The single-phase and highly crystalline CBTS film was obtained from the precursor with a slightly Cu poor content of Cu/(Ba + Sn) = 0.95 and Cu/Ba = 1.81. This CBTS film also exhibits the dominant diffraction peak from (110). We additionally find that all the CBTS grains in these prepared films are deficient in Cu content, less depending on the original Cu content in the precursor. This suggests that CBTS could be an intrinsic p-type semiconductor due to Cu vacancies. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy study reveals that the effective charge states of the CBTS constituent elements are 1+ for copper, 2+ for barium, ∼2+ for tin, and ∼1.5− for sulfur, and that exposing CBTS in air can lead to a native oxide layer of SnOx.

Our Mott–Schottky analyses estimate that CBTS, with the conduction band and valence band straddling the water reduction and oxidation potentials, is suitable for water reduction. The PEC testing results have confirmed that all our synthesized CBTS films exhibit p-type characteristics. PEC water reduction devices have been constructed with the configuration FTO/CBTS/Pt/electrolyte (pH ∼ 7), which can produce the best cathodic photocurrent of 3.9 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE with the photocurrent onset at +0.4 VRHE under the illumination of a 300 W xenon lamp. The PV solar cells with the structure FTO/CBTS/CdS/ZnO/AZO have been constructed, wherein either post-annealing the finished PV cells at 170 °C in air or sputtering CdS buffer at 150 °C can enhance device performances to a considerable extent. Sputtering CdS buffer at 150 °C led to the best CBTS device with a conversion efficiency of 1.6% under AM 1.5 illumination from the AZO side. Nonetheless, the device performance is still falling short of the attainable ideal level, especially the cell open circuit voltage. The detailed inspections using impedance spectroscopy and capacitance–voltage characterization tools indicate that the presence of strong interface recombination, which is very likely due to the misfit heterointerface, greatly limits the device performance. We additionally find that deep trap states may also exist in the CBTS bulk, locating either at the grain boundaries or inside the grains. To improve the cell performance, future focus should lay on passivating defects at the heterointerface and in the CBTS bulk.

This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under contract no. CHE-1230246 and DMR-1534686. This paper presents results from an NSF project (award number CBET-1433401) competitively selected under the solicitation “NSF 14-15: NSF/DOE Partnership on Advanced Frontiers in Renewable Hydrogen Fuel Production via Solar Water Splitting Technologies”, which was co-sponsored by the National Science Foundation, Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET), and the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, Fuel Cell Technologies Office.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details and experimental data. See DOI: 10.1039/c7tc01678f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017