 DOI: 10.1039/C7CP04132B
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 26898-26905


Hasyiya Karimah
Adli
,

Takashi
Harada
*,

Shuji
Nakanishi
 and 

Shigeru
Ikeda


Research Center for Solar Energy Chemistry, Osaka University, 1-3 Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-8531, Japan. E-mail: harada@chem.es.osaka-u.ac.jp

Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Konan University Okamoto, Higashinada, Kobe 658-8501, Japan

Received
20th June 2017
, Accepted 16th September 2017
First published on 18th September 2017
The effects of surface treatment with TiCl4 on the structural and electrochemical properties of a porous titanium oxide (pTiO2) layer deposited on a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/glass substrate covered with a dense TiO2 layer (pTiO2/dTiO2/FTO/glass) were systematically investigated in order to obtain an optimum pTiO2 layer for use in CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells. As confirmed by thermal desorption spectroscopy (TDS) analyses, the amount of surface hydroxyl groups in pTiO2 varied when the pTiO2/dTiO2/FTO/glass sample was treated with solutions with different concentrations of TiCl4 (i.e., 20, 50, 80, and 100 mM). Photoelectrochemical (PEC) analyses of the pTiO2/dTiO2/FTO/glass samples after TiCl4 treatment showed significant increments of photocurrent densities compared to the pTiO2/dTiO2/FTO/glass sample without TiCl4 treatment regardless of the concentration of TiCl4 used in the solution. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analyses of the TiCl4-treated pTiO2/dTiO2/FTO/glass samples also indicated a lower recombination probability with an increase in TiCl4 concentration. The results suggest that TiCl4 treatment resulted in passivation of defect sites on the surface of the TiO2 nanoparticles as well as improvement of the interconnectivity between the TiO2 nanoparticles in pTiO2. In contrast, the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) and short circuit current densities of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells based on these pTiO2/dTiO2/FTO/glass samples exhibited volcano-like patterns depending on the TiCl4 concentration used for the pTiO2 treatment: the highest PCE was obtained by using pTiO2/dTiO2/FTO/glass treated with 50 mM of TiCl4 solution. Structural analysis of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite part performed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) indicated that the formation of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite was inhibited by the presence of surface hydroxyl groups in the pTiO2 film without TiCl4 treatment. TiCl4 treatment using TiCl4 solutions with concentrations up to 50 mM enhanced the formation of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layer, whereas TiCl4 treatment using TiCl4 solutions with concentrations higher than 50 mM was detrimental due to the formation of nanoparticulate TiO2 aggregates that induce poor porosity and act as recombination sites.

Organometallic halide perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) solar cells have become promising devices to replace the traditional crystalline silicon solar cell because of their cost effectiveness due to their facile preparation process and low-cost equipment. Since their first demonstration as a light absorber for a sensitized photovoltaic cell, many studies have been carried out in order to improve their solar cell performance by various methods such as morphological control, interface engineering, and regulation of crystal growth. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) has reached more than 22%, which is almost comparable to that of single junction silicon solar cells. However, the CH3NH3PbI3 solar cells are still in the early stage of commercialization due to unsolved problems such as lack of stability of the perovskite material, toxicity of lead in the material, and insufficient raw technological developments for scaling-up.

It is known that exposure to moisture causes a significant drop of PCE due to the degradation of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layer. Thus, several approaches to preventing moisture damage by introducing a hydrophobic component into the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite device, e.g., addition of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) combined with PMMA and application of a hydrophobic hole transport layer, have been proposed. Recently, we found that control of the amount of surface hydroxyl (OH) groups and porosity on porous TiO2 (pTiO2) could prevent the degradation of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite to PbI2. We demonstrated that surface modification of the pTiO2 layer is a significant factor for improving CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite and solar cell efficiency.
Surface modifications of pTiO2 using HF, NH4F, and TiCl4 have been studied extensively for application to dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). Among them, TiCl4 treatment has been adopted as the standard procedure for DSSCs. It has been proposed that TiCl4 dissolved in H2O has several complex formula, [Ti(OH)nClm]2− (H2O could be a ligand too), where n + m = 6, and the ratio of n and m depends on the acidity and concentration of Cl− ion in the solution. When the acidity and the concentration of Cl− are lower, the number of OH ligands in [Ti(OH)nClm]2− is bigger. In this case, edge-shared bonding is favored leading to the formation of anatase phase through dehydration reactions. In the presence of pTiO2, the epitaxial growth of TiO2 mainly occurs on the surface of pTiO2. As a result, it has been shown that TiCl4 treatment on pTiO2 in DSSCs resulted in the improvement in the interconnectivity of TiO2 nanoparticles, increase in surface roughness of TiO2, passivation of surface traps, and a shift in the electron energy position of the conduction band minimum. Owing to the effectiveness of TiCl4 treatment in DSSCs, researchers have applied these treatments for preparing CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells. However, the effects of TiCl4 treatment on the structural, physicochemical, and electric properties of pTiO2 as well as those of the final CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cell device have not been studied in detail.
In the present study, therefore, we investigated the effects of TiCl4 treatment on the surface and electrochemical properties of pTiO2 and the resulting CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells. The best device with a PCE of ca. 15% obtained by TiCl4 treatment was found to be derived from the passivation of defect sites to decrease the amount of physisorbed water molecules on the pTiO2 surface and improvement in the interconnectivity between the TiO2 nanoparticles in pTiO2, leading to efficient electron transport and reduction of charge recombination.

An FTO/glass substrate (TEC 7, surface resistivity of ∼7 Ω sq−1) was cleaned with detergent in an ultrasonic bath for 15 min and then rinsed with water and ethanol before being exposed to UV/O3 for 15 min. A dTiO2 layer was deposited on the FTO/glass substrate by spray pyrolysis at 500 °C using 4 mL of ethanolic solution containing 0.3 mL of titanium diisoproxide bis(acetylacetonate). Then a pTiO2 layer was deposited on the dTiO2-covered FTO/glass (dTiO2/FTO/glass) by spin-coating of commercial TiO2 paste (PST-18NR, JGC Catalysts and Chemicals) diluted with ethanol followed by heat treatment at 550 °C for 30 min. For TiCl4 treatment, aqueous solutions of TiCl4 at different concentrations (20, 50, 80, and 100 mM) were prepared by adding TiCl4 to distilled water in a precooled ice bath. Then the pTiO2/dTiO2/FTO/glass sample was dipped in the as-prepared aqueous TiCl4 solutions at 70 °C for 30 min. After washing with distilled water and ethanol, the sample was annealed at 550 °C for 30 min. The thus-obtained samples were labeled pTiO2(x), where x denotes the concentration of TiCl4 used in the solution, e.g., pTiO2(20) corresponds to a pTiO2/dTiO2/FTO/glass sample after treatment with 20 mM TiCl4 solution. A pTiO2/dTiO2/FTO/glass sample without TiCl4 treatment was labeled pTiO2(0). The CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells were fabricated by a so-called two-step procedure reported in the literature. First, 90 μL of PbI2 dissolved in a mixed solution of N,N-dimethyl formamide and dimethyl sulfoxide at a ratio of 9:1 (553 mg mL−1) was spin-coated on the pTiO2(0) and pTiO2(x) samples at 4000 rpm for 30 s. Then, 200 μL of CH3NH3I dissolved in 2-propanol (40 mg mL−1) was spin-coated on the PbI2-coated samples at 2500 rpm for 30 s followed by heat treatment at 100 °C for 20 min to induce conversion of PbI2 to the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite compound. Finally, the hole transporting material (HTM) Spiro-OMeTAD was deposited on the surface of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layer by spin-coating of 40 μL chlorobenzene solution (0.06 M) containing lithium bis(trifluoromethane sulfonyl) imide and 4-tertbutylpyridine at 4000 rpm for 20 s. All of the spin-coating processes were conducted in open air with 30–50% humidity. Finally, an Au back contact was deposited by vacuum evaporation.


X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of samples were measured using a Rigaku MiniFlex X-ray diffractometer (Cu Kα, Ni filter). Thermal desorption spectroscopy (TDS) was conducted by using an ESCO HA1000PS. The pTiO2(0) and pTiO2(x) samples (in the same size area; 1 cm2) were prepared and annealed at 550 °C upon analysis. The sample was put into the vacuumed chamber and after incubation for 60 min the temperature was increased from 50 °C to 550 °C at a heating ramp of 2 °C min−1 with the background pressure on the order of 10−7 Pa. Desorbed H2O (m/z = 18) from the samples was detected by a standard quadrupole mass spectrometer. Surface morphology and cross sections of the films were observed by scanning electron microscopy using a Hitachi S-5000 high-resolution field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) operated at 20 kV. PEC analyses of pTiO2(0) and pTiO2(x) samples were conducted by using a three-electrode system in a mixed aqueous solution of NaOH (0.01 M) and Na2SO3 (1 M). A Pt wire and Ag/AgCl electrode in saturated KCl served as the counter electrode and reference electrode, respectively, and a BAS ALS700CA automatic polarization system was used to obtain voltammograms at potentials ranging from 0 V to −1.0 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1. The samples were illuminated by a 300 W xenon lamp chopped at a frequency of 0.1 Hz. Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of solar cells under simulated AM 1.5G irradiation (100 mW cm−2) were measured in both directions (negative to/from positive) with a Bunkoh-Keiki CEP-015 photovoltaic measurement system. The cell area of the samples was 0.15 cm2. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed by using Solartron 1287 potentiostat and Solartron 1260 frequency-response detector at 20 mV of applied AC amplitude. For the EIS analyses of the pTiO2(0) and pTiO2(x) samples, the above-mentioned three-electrode system for the PEC measurement was used. Measurements were performed in a deaerated 0.01 M H2SO4 solution with various frequencies ranging from 1 Hz to 40 kHz. During the measurements, a fixed DC bias voltage of 0 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) was applied and the samples were illuminated by using simulated sunlight (AM 1.5G). EIS analysis was also performed for the perovskite device (0.15 cm2 sample area) by using a two-electrode setup with a frequency range from 1 Hz to 40 kHz under 1 mW cm−2 of light irradiation. All the electrochemical parameters obtained from EIS were fitted with Zplot software based on appropriate equivalent circuit models.



Fig. 1 shows the XRD patterns of the pTiO2(0) and pTiO2(x) samples. The diffraction peaks at 26.0°, 33.2°, and 37.3° are assigned to FTO, and a small reflection peak observed at 25.0° for each sample corresponds to the anatase (101) phase (JCPDS 21-1272). The intensities of the (101) reflections were slightly increased with increase in the TiCl4 concentration; no reflection assignable to rutile TiO2 was detected.

The morphological change of the pTiO2 layer was examined by SEM observations and the results are shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). Although almost no noticeable change in morphology was observed for the pTiO2(0), pTiO2(20), and pTiO2(50) samples, the pTiO2(80) and pTiO2(100) samples showed obvious increments of thickness and surface roughness, suggesting that large amounts of TiO2 nanoparticles were deposited on the top part of the pTiO2 layer when TiCl4 treatment was applied using TiCl4 solutions with relatively high concentrations. In addition, elemental analyses of these samples using X-ray photoelectron microscopy (Fig. S2, ESI) indicated complete removal of chlorine components for all of the samples during post heating at 550 °C.
The water contents of the pTiO2(0) and pTiO2(x) samples were analyzed by TDS. Fig. 2 shows the typical TDS spectra of these samples. All of the samples have a distinct peak at temperatures ranging from 50 to 100 °C with a broad tail at higher temperatures up to 450 °C, corresponding to physisorbed water and dissociated water from surface OH groups, respectively. This physisorbed water includes water molecule adsorbed at the surface OH and multilayer water formed on this site. It is clear from the spectra that the amount of physisorbed water gradually decreased with increase in the TiCl4 concentration except for pTiO2(100). Several studies have indicated that physisorbed water is highly related to surface OH groups and the application of TiCl4 treatment with a post-annealing process was effective for improving the TiO2 surface and TiO2 particle-necking through chemical bonding, resulting in a decreases in the surface area, average pore width and porosity of the pTiO2 layer. Therefore, a decrease in physisorbed water can be explained by a decrease in surface area and improvement of the original TiO2 surface having large amounts of defect sites inducing surface OH groups. As a result, the amount of physisorbed water was dependent on the TiCl4 concentration. The increase in the amount of physisorbed water on pTiO2(100) when using a TiCl4 solution with a relatively high concentration (100 mM) was due to the increment of the surface area induced by an increase in the thickness of the pTiO2 layer (Fig. S1, ESI). In order to clarify the effects of TiCl4 treatment on electron transport abilities, PEC measurements of the pTiO2(0) and pTiO2(x) samples were carried out in an aqueous solution containing Na2SO3 under chopped illumination. In this reaction system, photogenerated holes in the pTiO2 layer were consumed by oxidation of SO32− on the surface of these samples and the remaining electrons were transported to the Pt counter electrode to induce water reduction. As shown in Fig. 3, the observed photocurrent densities were ordered descendingly from the largest one in the following order: pTiO2(100) > pTiO2(80) > pTiO2(50) > pTiO2(20) > pTiO2(0). Significant improvements of photocurrent densities near the onset potential regions were observed for pTiO2(x) samples compared with that for pTiO2(0), suggesting that TiCl4 treatment passivates defect sites of pTiO2 and lowers the recombination probability. Moreover, enhancement of the photocurrent density is likely to be due to the formation of a necking pathway between TiO2 nanoparticles in the pTiO2 layer formed by chemical bonding that facilitates percolation of electrons from one particle to the other. These results are also in agreement with the results of EIS analysis of pTiO2. Nyquist plots of EIS data obtained by fitting with the reported equivalent circuit model given in the inset are shown in Fig. S2 (ESI). The equivalent circuit is composed of a series resistance, Rs, and two R–C circuits in series, where R1 and R2 correspond to charge transfer resistance of the counter/electrolyte interface and charge transfer resistance of the pTiO2/electrolyte interface, respectively. The values of these resistances after being fitted by the above-mentioned equivalent circuit are shown in Table S1 (ESI). All of the pTiO2 samples showed almost the same Rs and R1 values. In contrast, the pTiO2(x) samples showed significantly smaller R2 values than those obtained for the pTiO2(0) sample. Moreover, the R2 values of the pTiO2(x) samples decreased with increase in the TiCl4 concentration, indicating reduction of electron–hole recombination and more efficient transport of electrons in pTiO2.

The photovoltaic properties of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells based on the pTiO2(0) and pTiO2(x) samples were evaluated under simulated sunlight (AM 1.5G) irradiation. A total of 65 devices were prepared for the experiment. The average value of the thus-obtained device parameters, i.e., short circuit current density (JSC), open circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), and PCE obtained at a reversed scan were plotted as a function of the concentration of TiCl4 solution used for TiCl4 treatment. The results are shown in Fig. 4. The device parameters obtained at a forward scan are shown in Fig. S3 (ESI). The device based on the pTiO2(0) sample showed average values of JSC, VOC, FF, and PCE of 14.3 mA cm−2, 0.92 V, 0.46, and 10.1%, respectively. The application of TiCl4 treatment to the pTiO2 layers using TiCl4 solutions with relatively low concentrations resulted in appreciable enhancement of JSC and PCE; these values appreciably decreased for devices based on pTiO2(x) samples obtained at relatively high concentrations of TiCl4 solutions. The maximum PCE of 14.9% was obtained for the device based on the pTiO2(50) sample.


Fig. 5 shows the XRD patterns of devices based on the pTiO2(0) and pTiO2(x) samples. In addition to strong peaks derived from FTO, several reflections were observed. Most of the reflections were derived from those of tetragonal CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite with the exception of a reflection observed at 2θ of 12.7° assigned to the (001) reflection peak of PbI2, indicating incomplete conversion of PbI2 into the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite compound for all of the devices used in this study. For quantitative analyses of the structural conversion from PbI2 into CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite, the peak intensity ratio of CH3NH3PbI3 (110) to PbI2 (001) (perov/iodide) was introduced. Fig. 6 shows the relationship between perov/iodide of devices and concentrations of TiCl4 solutions used for the preparation of pTiO2(x) samples. The perov/iodide values increased with increase in TiCl4 concentrations up to 50 mM and they decreased again for devices based on pTiO2(x) samples obtained from TiCl4 solutions with higher concentrations. The volcano-type trend is almost the same as that observed for the JSC and PCE (see Fig. 4a and d).
EIS analysis of the devices was carried out to clarify the effect of TiCl4 treatment on the charge transport and recombination process in the solar cells. Fig. 7 shows the Nyquist plots obtained for the devices. A reported equivalent circuit model is also shown in the inset of this figure. The equivalent circuit is composed of a series resistance, Rs, and two R–C circuits in series. An R–C circuit is the parallel association of a resistance, R, and capacitor, C. For the analyses, constant phase elements (CPEs) were used instead of ideal capacitances in order to improve the quality of fittings. Nyquist plots were fitted well by using this equivalent circuit model. The values of two resistances included in the R–C circuit differed by more than ten times, and most of the plots in the semicircles corresponded to those in the low frequency regions. As reported in the literature, the plots in the low frequency region in the Nyquist plots are related to the interfacial recombination between the electrons and holes, which has a positive correlation with the recombination resistance (Rrec). This Rrec is inversely related to the recombination rate. On the other hand, the plots in the high frequency regions in the Nyquist plots are related to the impedance of selective contacts including TiO2 and HTM, and the resistance component represents Rsc. Although the Rs and Rsc values were not so different in each device (see Table S2, ESI), it can clearly be seen that the Rrec values increased with increase in the concentrations of TiCl4 during the fabrication of pTiO2 layers up to 50 mM and then the Rrec values gradually decreased for devices based on pTiO2(x) samples obtained by using TiCl4 solutions with relatively high concentrations (80 mM and 100 mM). The electron and hole transfer properties at the interfaces of pTiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite and/or CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite/HTM should significantly affect solar cell performance. Although the electron transfer properties of the pTiO2(x) samples were increased with increase in TiCl4 concentrations during the preparation of the pTiO2(x) samples (see Fig. 3), the surface of the pTiO2 layer became rough in proportion to the TiCl4 concentration during the preparation of the pTiO2(x) samples (see Fig. S1, ESI). The surface roughness is not important for the PEC reaction of the pTiO2(0) and pTiO2(x) samples in solution because the PEC reaction occurred at the solid/liquid interface of the pTiO2/electrolyte. However, increments of surface roughness of the pTiO2(x) samples induced by using TiCl4 solutions with relatively high concentrations led to an increase in the probability of recombination at the solid/solid interface between the pTiO2 and CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layers, resulting in the inhibition of efficient electron transfer to give relatively low JSC. In contrast, slight improvements of VOC and fill factor were observed for devices from pTiO2(x) samples obtained by TiCl4 treatment with relatively high concentrations of TiCl4 solutions, even though they showed an appreciable decrease in Rrec. There are two possible explanations; one possible explanation is that improvement of the crystallinity of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite by modification of the pTiO2 surface suppresses bulk recombination because the pTiO2 layer works as a scaffold to enhance CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite film formation. The other possible explanation is that the improvement of interconnectivity of the pTiO2 layer and/or the decrement of coverage of PbI2 at the interface of pTiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite decreases the total series resistance in solar cell devices. However, further studies are needed to determine the origin of this effect.
On the basis of the above-described results and considerations, the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite–pTiO2 junctions formed in the devices are schematically illustrated in Fig. 8. The CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite device derived from the pTiO2(0) sample included a large amount of remaining physisorbed water even after heat treatment at 550 °C. Owing to the sensitivity of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite to water, the formation of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite was inhibited and residual PbI2 specifically existed at the surface region of pTiO2 (Fig. 8a). Since the existence of PbI2 on the surface of pTiO2 should block electron injection from the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite to pTiO2, there were low JSC values accompanied by decreases in the PCEs. On the other hand, when the pTiO2(x) samples obtained by TiCl4 treatment using solutions with relatively low concentrations of TiCl4 solutions were used, the resulting CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite devices had an efficient electron transfer ability in the pTiO2 layer due to the passivation of defect sites on the pTiO2 surface as well as improvement of the interconnectivity between TiO2 nanoparticles induced by the necking effect. Moreover, the amount of physisorbed water was also reduced, leading to a smaller amount of unreacted PbI2 on the surface of the pTiO2 layer. These electrical and structural improvements resulted in relatively high JSC and PCE values (Fig. 8b). However, increments of TiCl4 concentrations during the preparation of pTiO2(x) samples were detrimental. Since the porosity of the pTiO2 layer became poor in these pTiO2(x) samples, diffusion of CH3NH3I into pTiO2 filled with PbI2 was inhibited. Besides, excess nanoparticulate TiO2 aggregates were randomly formed on the surface of the pTiO2 layer. They induced increments of unreacted PbI2 components, specifically at the bottom part of pTiO2 (Fig. 8c). Hence, the PbI2 layer on the pTiO2–dTiO2 interface should be a barrier for electron transport, and these devices also showed decreases in JSC values as well as PCEs.

We investigated the effects of surface treatment by using TiCl4 solution on water content and porosity of pTiO2 in correlation with its electron transport property and the recombination resistance of the final CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite devices. As a result, an enhancement of solar cell performance was achieved by treatment using a solution with an appropriate concentration of TiCl4. The resulting devices had a small amount of physisorbed water and less defect sites on the surface of the pTiO2 layer. They also had good electric interconnection between the TiO2 particles in the pTiO2 layer. Moreover, the pTiO2 layers in these devices retained sufficient porosity, leading to the enhancement of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite conversion from PbI2 and CH3NH3I. Hence, TiCl4 treatment of the pTiO2 layer at the optimum concentration prior to device fabrication had a significant effect on the photovoltaic performance of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cell. Since a pTiO2 layer is used for various types of organic–inorganic perovskite solar cells, we believe that the results are applicable to these solar cells and will contribute to the improvement of their solar cell performance.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors would like to thank Prof. T. Minemoto, Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Ritsumeikan University, Japan, for their technical support in preparation of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite. This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Innovative Areas (All Nippon Artificial Photosynthesis Project for Living Earth), Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (B), and Grant-in-Aid for Challenging Exploratory Research from MEXT Japan. One of the authors (H. K. A.) would like to thank Ministry of Education (Malaysia) and Universiti Malaysia Kelantan for providing a scholarship throughout her study.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Cl 2p XPS data of various pTiO2 samples. Surface and cross-sectional SEM images of various pTiO2 samples. Nyquist plots of EIS measurements of pTiO2. Photovoltaic performances (Jsc, Voc, fill factor, PCE) of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells deposited on pTiO2 layers treated with solutions with different concentrations of TiCl4 for forward scan conditions. Summary of electrochemical impedance parameters of various pTiO2 samples and CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp04132b
‡ Current address: Faculty of Bioengineering and Technology, Universiti Malaysia Kelantan, Locked Bag No. 100, Jeli, 17600, Kelantan, Malaysia.
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017