 DOI: 10.1039/C2DT12464E
(Paper)
Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 6130-6136


Sawanta S.
Mali
,

Shital K.
Desai
,

Smita S.
Kalagi
,

Chirayath A.
Betty
,

Popatrao N.
Bhosale
,

Rupesh S.
Devan
,

Yuan-Ron R.
Ma
 and 

Pramod S.
Patil


Thin Film Materials Laboratory, Dept. of Physics, Shivaji University, Kolhapur, 416004, India

Chemistry Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC), Mumbai-85, India

Materials Research Laboratory, Dept. of Chemistry, Shivaji University, Kolhapur, India

Department of Physics, National Dong Hwa University, Hualien, 97401, Taiwan, Republic of China

Received
21st December 2011
, Accepted 19th March 2012
First published on 20th March 2012
Lead sulphide (PbS) quantum dot (QD) sensitized anatase TiO2 nanocorals (TNC) were synthesized by SILAR and hydrothermal techniques. The TNC, PbS and PbS–TNC samples were characterized by optical absorption, XRD, FT-IR, FESEM and XPS. The results show that PbS QDs are coated on the TNCs, the optical absorption is found to be enhanced and the band edge is shifted to ∼693 nm as compared with plain TNCs at 340 nm. The PbS–TNC sample exhibits an improved photoelectrochemical performance with a maximum short circuit current (Jsc) of 3.84 mA cm−2. The photocurrent density was found to be enhanced 2 fold, as compared with those of the bare PbS photoelectrode. The total power conversion efficiency of the PbS–TNC electrodes is 1.23%.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have attracted great attention in the area of simple and low cost, clean solar energy. Generally, DSSCs consist of a nanocrystalline TiO2 photoanode sensitized by dyes and a platinum-coated fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) cathode with acetonitrile containing an iodine redox couple as an electrolyte. In recent years, Lin et al. and co-workers progressed the preparation of nanotubes arrays by using an electrochemical anodization technique and they showed significant enhancement in the efficiency of DSSCs. Conventional DSSCs use a Ru-complex sensitizer, which typically shows a 10% solar energy-to-electricity conversion efficiency. However, even though DSSCs show high efficiency, combinations of materials and device architectures are still sought after to improve the performance and cost of solar cells. For typical efficient DSSCs, the transition should gives rise to a steep absorption edge, with absorption coefficients rising rapidly to 104–105 cm−1. However, the molecular absorption bands of typical sensitizer dyes do not exhibit such steep onsets and N719 and N3 show values significantly higher than the optimum 1.3–1.4 eV.

Recently, various sensitizers for photoelectrochemical solar cells (PECs), including inorganic semiconductor quantum dots (QDs), such as CdS, CdSe, and PbS, have been suggested along with organometallic and organic dyes. Moreover, QD sensitizers have the advantages of a high extinction coefficient (∼105 dm3 mol−1 cm−1), which is known to increase the overall power conversion efficiency of solar cells. These QDs also have a quantum confinement effect, where the physical and optical properties of the QDs can be controlled by changing their size. In addition to these advantages, QDs open up new ways to utilize electrons and/or generate multiple charge carriers and electron–hole pairs with a single photon through the impact ionization effect. However, the photoconversion efficiency of QD-sensitized PECs is still not satisfactory despite their expected potential to enhance the solar energy conversion efficiency. A major drawback underlying the relatively low light harvesting ability and the concomitant reduced photocurrents in quantum dot sensitized solar cell devices is the amount of QDs adsorbed on the TiO2 electrodes. This condition is readily met by bulk semiconductors that have a direct allowed optical transition at the appropriate band gap energy.
An attractive alternative is to use solid-state sensitizers in the form of small semiconductor particles. In order to achieve high efficiencies, materials that strongly absorb photon energies above ∼1.3 eV are required. There are two ways of selecting the right material. The first is to consider the band gaps of bulk semiconductors and to choose a material with the correct band gap. On this basis, Peter et al. showed that CdTe and Bi2S3 are the best materials suitable for efficient visible light absorbers. An alternative way is to select a material, such as PbS, with a lower band gap and then to reduce the particle size so that the band gap is tuned to the optimum energy range by quantum confinement. In the case of PbS, we can tune the band gap by simply changing its size. Also, PbS nanoparticles show a high absorption coefficient, which is beneficial for efficient sensitized solar cells.
This article deals with the investigation of PbS sensitized hydrothermally grown novel TiO2 nanocoral (TNC) photoelectrodes and their performance in quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs). The significant improvement of the QDSSCs is obtained by sensitization of PbS on the TiO2 nanocoral electrodes.

TiO2 nanocorals (TNCs) were prepared using our previous reported method. In brief, the hydrothermal inorganic precursor solution was prepared by mixing 0.05 M TiCl4 carefully with absolute ethanol in an ice-cold bath, which caused the formation of a yellow colored titanium chloroalkoxide [TiCl2(OEt)2(HOEt)2)] solution. A small amount of 0.001 M concentrated hydrochloric acid (HCl, 36%, Thomas Beaker) was added as a catalyst and nitric acid (HNO3, 38%, Thomas Beaker) was used as a peptizer. The transparent solution thus prepared was further mixed with a saturated solution of 6.8 M NaCl (extra pure grade, Thomas Beaker). The above solution was stirred for 30 min and transferred into a polytetrafluoroethylene (Teflon)-coated 25 ml vessel. The cleaned fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) coated substrate was immersed in this solution vertically. It was then sealed and maintained at 120 °C for 3 h (at 1.5 kg cm−2 pressure) and designated as TNC. Upon completion of the reaction, the autoclave was allowed to cool to room temperature and the deposited film was rinsed with double distilled water. The thickness of the deposited TiO2 thin film was measured using a surface profiler and found to be 450 nm.


The TNC electrode was exposed to Pb2+ and S2− ions by successive immersion in a methanolic solution of 0.001 M Pb(NO3)2 and a methanolic solution of 0.001 M Na2S. The electrodes were washed with ethanol and methanol in the intermediate steps. Upon completion of each cycle, a thin layer of nanocrystalline PbS was deposited onto the TiO2 surface, as shown in eqn (1). For the deposition of PbS QDs on the TNCs by the SILAR method, the experimental procedure reported by Kang et al. was employed.

(1)
PbS QDs are more desirable than CdS QDs in quantum dot sensitized solar cells, therefore, we used PbS QDs for the sensitization of the TiO2 nanocorals. This SILAR process was repeated until the desired deposition of PbS was achieved.

The structural properties of the TNC, PbS and the PbS–TNC thin films were studied by X-ray diffractometry (XRD) recorded using an X-ray diffractometer (Philips, PW 3710, Almelo, Holland) operated at 25 kV, 20 mA with CuKα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å). UV–visible absorbance spectra of the samples were obtained using a UV–visible spectrophotometer (UV1800, Shimadzu, Japan). Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) (Model Hitachi S4800, Japan) was employed for a closer insight into the morphology of the TNC, PbS and PbS–TNC films. The wettability of the samples was measured by the contact angle measurement (Ramé-hart, model 500-fl, USA). The elemental information regarding the deposited TNC, PbS and PbS–TNC samples were analyzed using an X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (VG Multilab 2000-Thermo Scientific, UK, K-Alpha) with a multi-channel detector, which can endur high photonic energies from 0.1 to 3 keV. The thicknesses of the resulting thin films were estimated using a surface profiler (Ambios XP-1).


The J–V measurements were measured with a Sol2A (Oriel New Port Corporation USA), with a Keithley-2420 source meter under 1.5 AM illumination. The cell was fabricated using a standard two-electrode configuration, comprised of PbS–TiO2/F:SnO2/glass (with an active surface area of 0.5 cm2) as the photoanode. All the measurements were carried out at room temperature in air.

The following cell configurations were used to record the J–V plots:
glass/FTO/TNC/NaOH/Pt/FTO
(2)
glass/FTO/PbS/Na2S–NaOH–S/Pt/FTO
(3)
glass/FTO/TNC–PbS/Na2S/Pt/FTO
(4)
The PbS films (average area 1 cm2) and platinum-coated FTO (prepared by dropping a H2PtCl6 solution (0.7 mM) on to FTO glass followed by heating at 400 °C for 20 min in air) (average area 1 cm2) were employed as the working and counter electrodes, respectively. The distance between the photoelectrode and the counter electrode was 0.3 cm. An aqueous solution of 0.5 M NaOH, 0.5 M polysulfide (Na2S + S + NaOH) and 0.5 M Na2S were used as the redox electrolytes for the TNC, PbS and PbS–TNC electrodes, respectively. The measurements of the power output characteristics and J–V plots were made at fixed intervals after waiting a sufficient amount of time for the system to reach equilibrium (both in the dark and under illumination).


Fig. 1(a) shows the XRD patterns of the TNCs, PbS and PbS–TNC films deposited on FTO-coated glass substrates. The match between the observed and standard ‘d’ values of the TiO2 film on the FTO substrate confirms that the deposited film is phase-pure TiO2 with an anatase tetragonal structure. The lattice parameter values, ‘a’ and ‘c’, for the tetragonal structure calculated for the deposited film are found to be in good agreement with the reported values. In the XRD spectrum of the TiO2 film deposited on the FTO substrate, the respective diffraction peaks corresponding to the (101), (103), (112), (200), (105), (211) (213) and (220) crystal planes of the anatase phase (JCPDS: 21-1272) are observed and denoted by the symbol ‘T’. The presence of broad XRD peaks is an indication of the small crystallite size in the nanoscale range, which affirms the nanocrystalline nature of the film.Fig. 1(b) reveals that PbS prepared by the SILAR method shows a cubic phase with the most intense peaks at 2θ = 25.94, 30.08, 43.14 and 51.03°, corresponding to the (111), (200), (220) and (311) planes (JCPDS file: 05-0592), respectively, and denoted by the symbol ‘P’. Fig. 1(c) shows the typical XRD spectrum of a PbS-loaded TiO2 thin film deposited on the FTO coated glass substrate. It reveals that, besides anatase TiO2, there exists the cubic phase of PbS (JCPDS file: 05-0592) on the substrate. This result confirms the successful deposition of PbS on the TNC film. The other peaks denoted by the square () symbol are due to the FTO substrate.


Fig. 2 shows the UV–visible spectra of TNC, PbS and PbS–TNC thin film samples. The strong absorption at 340 nm for the TNC sample indicates the 3.2 eV band gap due to the UV absorption of the anatase TiO2 thin film. The light absorption of SILAR deposited PbS QDs is mainly concentrated at 450–550 nm but also covers the range up to 740 nm, which signifies a relatively wide range of light absorption. Generally, PbS QDs can not absorb light under >400 nm, which is the same finding as reported here, due to the quantum-size effect. The optical absorption is found to be increase and the band edge is shifted toward the visible region. The optical spectra of PbS and PbS–TNC films show a large scattering effect below 420 nm due to the formation of nanoclusters of the semiconductor PbS.

Fig. 3 shows the IR transmittance spectra of the TNC, PbS and PbS–TNC samples over 450–2000 cm−1. The broad peak in the region of 400–600 cm−1 for the TiO2 sample is due to the transverse optical (TO) active vibration of the Ti–O bonds; it is associated with the longitudinal optical (LO) vibrational mode in the region of 700–950 cm−1. This corresponds to the TO and LO modes for the anatase phase. The sharp peak at 1400 cm−1 can be attributed to the lattice vibrations of TiO2. The absorption band at 1627 cm−1 is caused by a bending vibration of the coordinated H2O as well as Ti–OH. It should be noted that the partial oxidation of Na2S and/or PbS can take place in the presence of O2. Thus, the peak at 1124 cm−1 is likely to be the S–Ο stretch of lead thiosulfate. From the above FT-IR spectra of the TNC, PbS and PbS–TNC samples, it was found that a sharp absorption peak at 1356 cm−1 emerges along with the formation of the PbS nanoparticles, which means that the above peak is the characteristic peak of the PbS QDs stretching. The PbS–TNC sample shows both a broad peak at 664 cm−1 and a sharp peak at 1356 cm−1 due to the Ti–O–Ti bonds and may indicate the presence of TiO2 nanocorals and PbS QDs together.
X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was used to examine the surface composition of the PbS–TNC electrodes. The two main spectral regions of the TiO2 sample (Fig. 4) are the Ti 2p region near 458.74 eV (448.68–463.58 eV) and the O 1s region near 530.3 eV (526.68–538.58 eV). The XPS peak position of Ti 2p (Fig. 4(a)) appears at 457.64 eV, showing that the main chemical valency of Ti is +4. The spectrum of the TiO2 nanocorals shows a Ti 2p binding energy of 458.74 eV, which is in excellent agreement with the values reported for anatase TiO2 in the NIST database. This indicates that the material is in a fully oxidised state of Ti4+ (O–Ti–O). The same sample also exhibited an O 1s peak at 529.8 eV, characteristic of the oxide. The O 1s main peak at 532.17 eV (Fig. 4(b)) is assigned to the metallic oxides (Ti–O), which is consistent with the binding energy of O2− in the TiO2 lattices. An additional O 1s peak is observed as a higher binding energy shoulder, with a binding energy of 531.0 eV, suggesting the presence of surface hydroxyl groups. A shoulder on the main O 1s peak can be observed at a high binding energy, which can be attributed to the hydroxyl groups (–OH) or chemisorbed water molecules adsorbed on the TiO2 surface.
The main peak at 529.8 eV is assigned to the lattice oxygen ions and the minor one at 531.6 eV may be due to the contribution of extrinsic contamination, such as adsorbed water molecules on the film surface, which may be introduced during the film transfer. Fig. 4(c) shows the fine-scanned Pb 4f7/2 and 4f5/2 peaks of the PbS–TNC sample. For the Pb 4f7/2 peak, the P1 band at 136.8 eV and the P2 band at 141.7 eV are assigned to the Pb–S and Pb–Ο bonding structures, respectively (Fig. 4(d)).
The surface morphology of the hydrothermally grown TNCs was recorded by FESEM. Fig. 5(a) shows the FESEM image of the TNCs at a magnification of 35 k and shows the spherical nanocorals are uniform in nature. Fig. 5(b) shows the FESEM image of a single nanocoral at 160 k magnification. This reveals that the nanocorals contain uniform nanopolyp colonies with diameters of ∼450 nm. Fig. 5(c) shows the FESEM image of the PbS thin film and reveals that the deposited PbS QDs have a uniform distribution and are ∼45 nm in size. Fig. 5(d) shows the SEM image of the TNCs coated with the PbS nanoparticles. It shows the nanocorals are completely covered with the PbS nanoparticles. After coated with the PbS nanoparticles, the surface of the nanocorals becomes rough and the diameters were found to be more than 500 nm. From the image, it is clear that the PbS QDs are agglomerated on the TNCs. Furthermore, we assessed the wettability of the films using the water contact angle (CA) technique. Fig. 6 shows the water CA measurements for the TNCs, PbS and PbS–TNC films, which are found to be 60°, 57° and 44° (±10), respectively. The bare TNC film is hydrophilic in nature since the water CA is nearly 60° and the PbS–TNC sample shows an even more hydrophilic nature as compared to the TNC film. Such behaviour is due to the nitrate ions from the PbS precursor, which are strongly favourable for a more hydrophilic nature. This is beneficial for the better access of electrolyte into the film structure, which enhances the PEC performance.
The photovoltaic performance of the PbS–TNC electrodes was characterized by the J–V curve of a two-armed cell. The photoelectrochemical behaviour of TNC, PbS and PbS–TNC electrodes in terms of the J–V curves are presented in Fig. 7(a–c). The bare TiO2 electrode exhibits a power conversion efficiency (η) of 0.004% with Jsc = 50 μA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) = 234 mV and a fill factor (FF) = 0.32. The bare PbS electrode shows Jsc = 2.01 mA cm−2 and Voc = 312 mV with a power conversion efficiency (η) of 0.63%. However, a drastic change in the photoelectrochemical performance was observed for the PbS–TNC electrode with Jsc = 3.84 mA cm−2, Voc = 322 mV and FF = 0.49. The η of the cell is about 1.23% under illumination with a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2, which is comparable with the performance of other PbS sensitized solar cells systems (Fig. 7(c)). The solar cell parameters are summarised in Table 1.
Sample

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)
FF

η (%)

a All devices were checked at room temperature 0.5 × 0.5 cm2 illumination area.

TNC
0.050
234
0.32
0.004
PbS
2.01
312
0.42
0.63
PbS–TNC
3.84
322
0.49
1.23
Upon illumination of the PbS-loaded TNC electrodes with visible light, the prompt generation of an open-circuit voltage of 322 mV was observed, indicating the electrons from the conduction band of PbS can be effectively injected into the conduction band of the TNC films. Fig. 8 shows an artistic representation of the photoinduced electron transfer in the PbS-sensitized TiO2 photoelectrode. The PbS-sensitized TiO2 nanocorals are the working photoanode and platinium-coated FTO (Pt/FTO) acts as the counter electrode. The polysulfide electrolyte solution was added via pre-drilled holes and then sealed with a spacer. When this device is illuminated under solar flux, the following reaction process takes place step by step. The process of electron injection commences when a photon of energy is absorbed by the PbS quantum dots to create an electron–hole pair, which is shown in following reaction as:
PbS + hν → PbS(h+ + e−).
(5)
The destiny of the electron–hole pair is determined by the substrate on which the quantum dot is attached. In the case of PbS/FTO, the density of the electron–hole pair is limited by recombination:

PbS(h+ + e−) → PbS + hν*
(6)
On the other hand, when the PbS QDs are attached to a substrate that can readily accept the excited electron, as is the case in the PbS/TNC electrodes, electron transfer occurs, which leaves behind a hole in the PbS lattice:

PbS(h+ + e−) + TNC → PbS + TNC(e−)
(7)
The excited electrons are easily transferred to the conduction band of the TiO
2 nanocorals and finally percolates in FTO as per the following reaction:

PbS(h+) + TNC(e−) → PbS + TNC
(8)
From the above observation, it is clear that the photoelectrochemical performances can be enhanced by the use of PbS–TNC as the electrode (3.84 mA cm
−2), when compared to bare TiO2 nanocorals and PbS nanoparticles. This value is almost twice that of the PbS QD film electrode. The significant enhancement of the PEC due to quantum sized PbS particles produced by the SILAR method may effectively cause charge separation under visible illuminations and also constrain the electron–hole recombination centers, which results in an enhancement of the performance. However, this 3.84 mA cm−2 value is low compared to those recently reported by Kang et al. They reported a current density of 11.02 mA cm−2 for PbS sensitized TiO2 nanotubes using anodization of the Ti foil. While Ma et al. has reported 1.71 mA cm−2 with a 0.159% conversion efficiency using nanocrystalline TiO2. From the above observations, it is clear that the TNC samples show a low current density as compared to nanotubes but much higher than nanoparticles. Therefore, this hydrothermal synthesis of nanocorals TiO2 is a promising and low cost route. The TiO2 nanocoral-like morphology is suitable for enhanced QD adsorption. Such nanopolyp-like morphologies may be beneficial for effective light harvesting and fast electron transport through each nanocoral containing nanopolyps.

The photocurrent responses of the TNC, PbS and PbS–TNC electrodes are shown (Fig. 9).
The response of these electrodes to UV (TNC) and visible (PbS and PbS–TNC) illumination was prompt. The photocurrent in the PbS sample increased and reached up to 0.143 mA cm−2 and there was a significant increment in the PbS–TNC photoelectrode (0.875 mA cm−2). This significant increment in the photocurrent may be due to the effective light harvesting of photons of the PbS-loaded TNC sample.
The photocurrent produced by the PbS–TNC film electrode reached 0.875 mA cm−2. This value was 8 times that of the PbS QD film electrode and 17 times that of the bare TNC electrode.
The significant enhancement the PEC due to quantum sized PbS particles produced by the SILAR technique may effectively charge separate under visible illuminations and constrains the electron–hole recombination centers, which results in enhancement of the performance of such electrodes.

PbS QDs were synthesized using the SILAR method in situ on the surface of TNCs. The synthesized TNC, PbS and PbS–TNC samples have been characterized by various methods. The photoelectrochemical performance of the TNC, PbS and PbS–TNC films prepared by the SILAR method were investigated. The sensitization of the TNCs by the PbS QDs significantly enhances the visible light response of the electrodes. The PbS-coupled TNCs exhibit a strong red shift and significant enhancement in the short circuit current, which is consistent with an efficient electron transfer to TiO2. Additionally, PbS can effectively constrain the electron–hole recombination centers in the metal sulfide sensitized solar cells. The effect of the film thickness, the number of cycles gave promising results and these studies are underway in our laboratory.


One of the authors, SSM, wishes to acknowledge DAE-BRNS, Mumbai for financial support through the DAE-BRNS project No. 2008/37/8/BRNS/1489 between 2008 and 2012.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012