 DOI: 10.1039/D2NJ00895E
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2022, 46, 10611-10617


Shuai
Gong
,

Zhipeng
Yin
,

Xinxin
Zhang
,

Xiang
He
,

Wenjun
Zhang
*,

Shangfeng
Yang
* and 

Weijie
Song
*

Ningbo Institute of Materials Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ningbo, 315201, China. E-mail: zhangwenjun@nimte.ac.cn

Nano Science and Technology Institute, University of Science and Technology of China, Suzhou, 215123, China

College of Materials, Metallurgical and Chemistry, Jiangxi University of Science and Technology, Ganzhou, 341000, P. R. China

Center of Materials Science and Optoelectronics Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, 230026, China

Received
22nd February 2022
, Accepted 18th April 2022
First published on 22nd April 2022
Electron transport materials (ETMs) play an important role in organic solar cells (OSCs) and the rapidly evolving non-fullerene acceptors have higher demands for ETMs. A novel naphthalene diimide-based conjugated polymer (PNDI-NN) with aliphatic amino side chains at the N-position of naphthalene diimide was synthesized and introduced as an ETM in non-fullerene OSCs. The only N-substituted aliphatic amino side chains endow PNDI-NN with good solubility in alcohol and an intense self-doping effect, which can not only reduce the work function of the metal electrode (Ag), but also have a good coverage on the active layer and promote electron transport. The device with PNDI-NN showed the best power conversion efficiency of 15.6% with an improved open-circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF). The device also exhibited good long-term stability in an inert atmosphere, in a humid environment and under continuous heating.

Organic solar cells (OSCs) have received great attention and developed rapidly in the past few years due to their great advantages in terms of flexibility, light weight, low cost and solution treatment at low temperatures. Efficient OSCs are composed of electrodes, donor–acceptor heterojunctions and interfacial layers. With the revolutionary progress of non-fullerene acceptors, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of OSCs has reached over 18%. Many researchers now focus on developing non-fullerene acceptors. and the matching donor polymers. In spite of this, interfacial materials also play an irreplaceable role in the immense improvement of non-fullerene OSCs. An electron transport layer can effectively improve the extraction and transportation of electrons from non-fullerene acceptors to the cathode electrode. Since non-fullerene acceptors have versatile absorption spectra and energy levels, it is imperative to develop novel electron transport materials (ETMs) meeting the customer's requirements.

Various ETMs have been exploited for non-fullerene OSCs Among them, alcohol-soluble organic materials display stunning performance owing to their eminent regulation ability toward the metal work function (WF) and film forming with low-temperature solution processing. In 2017, Sun et al. developed two alcohol-soluble conjugated polymers PFN and PFN-2TNDI into OSCs. They found that these two interfacial materials had distinct doping effects on fullerene and non-fullerene acceptors. The self-doping material PFN-2TNDI can not only improve the electron collection but also contribute to the photocurrent enhancement. Perylene diimide (PDI) derivatives with polar pendants have been widely used in OSCs. Yao et al. found that PDINN with aliphatic amine groups had better interfacial modification than that of PDINO with amino N-oxide terminals. The devices with PDINN as the cathode interlayer exhibited higher PCEs and better stability. Naphthalene diimide (NDI) derivatives have also been adopted as ETMs for non-fullerene OSCs and have achieved satisfactory results, both as small molecules and as polymers. To introduce polar pendants, small molecules were directly substituted at the N-positions of the naphthalene core, while the polymers commonly had to introduce other monomers with polar pendants. The introduction of other monomers not only complicates the synthetic routes but also limits their solubility in alcohol, which is pivotal for the film forming on the active layer. The neutral polymers need the assistance of acetic acid, while the cationic polymers are hygroscopic, both of which are detrimental to the device stability.
In this work, we report a novel aliphatic amino-functionalized NDI polymer PNDI-NN. The aliphatic amino chains are directly introduced into the naphthalene core at the N-positions and give PNDI-NN good solubility in methanol. PNDI-NN can form an interfacial dipole layer between the active layer and cathode, and reduce the WF of the air-stabilized Ag metal. The secondary amine in the PNDI-NN side chain can form hydrogen bonds with photovoltaic materials in the active layer, resulting in good contact with the active layer. Moreover, it promotes charge separation and helps in reducing charge recombination. The non-fullerene OSCs with PNDI-NN as the cathode interlayer and PBDB-T-2F:BTP-4F (PM6:Y6) as the active layer exhibit an optimal PCE of 15.6%. The results show that PNDI-NN is a high performance cathode interfacial material for non-fullerene OSCs, which can be used for future industrial applications of OSCs.

As shown in Scheme 1, the polymer PNDI-NN was synthesized by Stille coupling reaction of 2,6-dibromonaphthalene-1,4,5,8-tetracarboxylic acid, N,N′-bis(3-(3-(dimethylamino)propylamino)propyl)bisimide and (3,3′-difluoro-2,2′-bithiophene-5,5′-diyl)bis(trimethylstannane) in our laboratory. The NDI monomer was easily synthesized with a high yield. The difluoro-bithiophene monomer was adopted to ensure that the backbone had good coplanarity. The fluorine atoms can induce special intramolecular effects and thus improve the charge transport mobility. The synthesis and characterization details of PNDI-NN can be found in the ESI. PNDI-NN shows very good solubility in methanol (over 20 mg mL−1), which makes it easy to fabricate a film by solution processing and optimize the device structure.

The photophysical and electrochemical properties of PNDI-NN are shown in Fig. 1. As shown in Fig. 1(a), the UV-vis absorption spectrum of PNDI-NN in solution has two absorption bands, which are located at about 320 nm and 560 nm, respectively. The band at shorter wavelength is attributed to π–π* transition and the band at longer wavelength is attributed to intramolecular charge transfer. Compared with the absorption spectrum in the solution state, the absorption spectrum of PNDI-NN in the film state has a slight red shift that is the result of π–π stacking. The absorption edge of PNDI-NN film is 696 nm, which is equal to a band gap of 1.78 eV (Table 1). The energy levels of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the PNDI-NN film are estimated by cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements, as shown in Fig. 1(b). According to the CV curves, we can calculate the LUMO and HOMO values of PNDI-NN to be −4.1 eV and −5.8 eV, respectively. Since the LUMO energy level of PNDI-NN matches well with that of the acceptor (here Y6, −4.1 eV) (Fig. 1(d)), the electron transport and extraction can be facile. Also, the HOMO energy level of PNDI-NN is lower than that of the donor (here Y6, −5.7 eV), which is beneficial to the blocking of hole transfer.
There is evidence that the amine side chain group can provide electrons to the electron-deficient conjugated group, resulting in self-doping behaviour. Thus, the self-doping of PNDI-NN was studied by electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy. For comparison, we also tested the signal of a conjugated polymer PNDI-C20 (see Fig S6(a), ESI for the structure), which possesses the same backbone as PNDI-NN but with alkyl side chains. As shown in Fig. S6(b) (ESI), compared with PNDI-C20, PNDI-NN shows stronger ESR signals and obvious self-doping behaviour, which is beneficial to improving the conductivity of the material. In order to study the electron transport characteristics of PNDI-NN, an electron-only device based on an indium tin oxide (ITO)/Al/PNDI-NN/Al structure was prepared. The electron mobility (μe) was extracted by fitting data according to the space charge limited current (SCLC) model (Fig. 1(c)). The μe of PNDI-NN obtained by this method is 4.18 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 S−1. This indicates that the PNDI-NN film may be a good electron transport material for organic solar cell devices in terms of charge transport performance (Table 1).
ETM
Film absorption (nm)
HOMO (eV)
LUMO (eV)
Egcv (eV)
Egab (eV)

λ
max



λ
edg



a 
λ
max and λedg are the wavelengths of the absorption peak and absorption edge, respectively.
b Calculated from CV.
c Egcv is the band gap estimated from CV by Egcv = LUMO–HOMO.
d Egab is the band gap estimated from the absorption edge.

PNDI-NN
320, 560
696
−5.78
−4.07
1.71
1.78
The intrinsic electronic properties of the metal surface, polymer film surface and polymer–metal interface were characterized by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS).Fig. 2 shows the UPS spectra of PNDI-NN on the Ag surface and the representative spectra of the polymer and silver itself. At higher binding energies, the onset of the secondary electron cut-off (Es, left) corresponds to the light excitation (21.2 eV) from the deep occupied electron state to the vacuum level. The WF of the given material is determined from the UPS spectrum using WF = 21.2 eV − Es. The lower initial binding energy corresponds to the Fermi level (EF) of the metal and the HOMO (right) level of the semiconductor, HOMO = (Es − EF) − 21.2 eV. In this study, the WF of metal Ag was measured to be 4.56 eV, and the deposition of PNDI-NN reduced the WF of Ag to 3.56 eV. At the same time, the HOMO energy level of PNDI-NN was measured to be about −5.79 eV for the pure polymer film, which was consistent with the results measured by CV.

Here we use PM6:Y6 as the active layer material, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) as the hole transport material, and ITO and silver as the anode and cathode of the device, respectively. By changing the concentration of PNDI-NN solution, the thickness of the PNDI-NN film is optimized. Fig. S7(a) (ESI) shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curves with different concentrations (0.5, 1, and 2 mg mL−1) of PNDI-NN, and Table S1 (ESI) summarizes the detailed parameters. The best concentration of PNDI-NN is 1 mg mL−1 and the thickness is about 12 nm. For comparison, we have also fabricated the OSCs with PDINN (a highly efficient ETM reported in the literature) as the cathode interlayer. Fig. 3(a) shows the J–V curves of the optimal device with different ETMs. Table 2 summarizes the main performance parameters, including short circuit current (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF) and PCE. The device without PNDI-NN shows PCE = 11.06%, VOC = 0.797 V, JSC = 25.06 mA cm−2, and FF = 57.58%. The PCE of the optimal device with PNDI-NN reaches 15.57%, with VOC = 0.843 V, JSC = 26.00 mA cm−2, and FF = 71.05%. After PNDI-NN is used as the electron transport layer, the device efficiency increases by 4.53%, mainly attributed to the enhancement of VOC (from 0.797 V to 0.843 V) and FF (from 57.58% to 71.05%). The PCE of the optimal device with PDINN reaches 15.66%, with VOC = 0.837 V, JSC = 26.19 mA cm−2, and FF = 71.42%. The photovoltaic performance of the PNDI-NN optimal device is close to that of the PDINN optimal device. As shown in Fig. 3(b), the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the OSCs with and without PNDI-NN are studied. The integral JSC values of devices with and without PNDI-NN are 25.18 mA cm−2 and 24.23 mA cm−2, respectively, which is consistent with the results measured by J–V curves. Fig. 3(c) shows the PCE distribution histograms of the devices with and without PNDI-NN, and Fig. S8 (ESI) shows the block diagram of all the photovoltaic parameters. The devices based on PNDI-NN show better reproducibility and smaller deviation than those without PNDI-NN. The average PCE of devices with PNDI-NN is 15.10%, higher than that of devices without PNDI-NN (10.22%). The average PCE improvement is also mainly contributed by the enhancement of VOC and FF.

Interface layer

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
Efficiency (%)
None
0.797 (0.790 ± 0.060)
25.06 (24.13 ± 0.41)
57.58 (55.03 ± 2.62)
11.06 (10.49 ± 0.61)
PDINN
0.837 (0.838 ± 0.004)
26.19 (26.04 ± 0.18)
71.42 (70.52 ± 0.71)
15.66 (15.39 ± 0.13)
PNDI-NN
0.843 (0.847 ± 0.005)
26.00 (25.75 ± 0.57)
71.05 (70.24 ± 1.13)
15.57 (15.33 ± 0.21)
It is well known that the surface morphology of the active layer and ETM has a crucial impact on the PCE of OSCs. Therefore, atomic force microscopy (AFM) was used to characterize the surface morphology of the active layer and PNDI-NN on the active layer. As shown in Fig. 4, it can be seen that the surface morphology of the active layer with PNDI-NN is significantly improved compared with that without PNDI-NN. The surface of the active layer containing PNDI-NN becomes smoother, and the surface root-mean-square (RMS) roughness decreases from 0.776 nm to 0.683 nm. Thus, PNDI-NN has a good coverage on PM6:Y6, which is beneficial to charge transfer and photovoltaic performance. At the same time, this coverage effect can make the active layer well separated from the Ag electrode, which is also beneficial to the stability of the device.
The charge transport characteristics of the devices with and without PNDI-NN were also studied by using the SCLC method. As shown in Fig. S9 and Table S2 (ESI), the electron-only device with PNDI-NN (ITO/Al/PM6:Y6/PNDI-NN/Ag) has higher electron mobility than the electron-only device without PNDI-NN (ITO/Al/PM6:Y6/Ag). The increase of electron mobility may weaken the excessive accumulation of carriers, which will help in reducing the charge recombination, thereby increasing JSC and FF.
Therefore, we further studied the charge recombination behaviour of these devices by measuring the dependence of the VOC and JSC characteristics on light intensity (P).Fig. 5(a) shows the variation curve of lg(JSC) with lg(P) (JSC = αln(P) + b, here is related to the dependency, P is the light intensity, and b is the intercept.). The devices with and without PNDI-NN show a linear correlation, and the slopes are close to 1, indicating that the bimolecular recombination can be ignored. Fig. 5(b) shows the relationship between VOC and lg(P). The deviation between slope and kT/q (VOC = α(kT/q)ln(P), here q is the elementary charge, k is Boltzmann's constant, T is the temperature, and α is related to the dependency) reflects the degree of single molecule recombination. It can be seen that the devices with and without PNDI-NN show slopes of 1.25 kT/q and 1.69 kT/q, respectively. Compared with the device without a PNDI-NN interface layer, the slope of the VOCvs. lg(P) for the device with PNDI-NN is closer to 1. This indicates that the existence of PNDI-NN in the interface layer reduces the single molecule recombination.
The J–V characteristic curves of the OSCs with and without PNDI-NN in the dark are shown in Fig. 5(c). It can be seen that the device with PNDI-NN has smaller dark current at low voltage, which means the leakage current is smaller and the charge recombination of the device with PNDI-NN has been inhibited. The improved dark J–V performance of the device with PNDI-NN matches the higher FF value. At the same time, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was also used to test the interface resistance of the device. Fig. 5(d) shows the Nyquist diagrams of the OSCs with and without PNDI-NN under dark conditions. The data are fitted by the equivalent circuit model. The series resistance (Rs) of devices with PNDI-NN (2.6 Ω cm2) is significantly lower than that of devices without PNDI-NN (4.6 Ω cm2), which indicates that charge transfer is improved. From the low-frequency arc, the recombination resistance (Rrec) values of devices with and without PNDI-NN are calculated to be 103.5 Ω cm2 and 56.3 Ω cm2, respectively. The higher Rrec of the device with PNDI-NN is reflected in the inhibition of recombination. The lower Rs and higher Rrec should be beneficial to the higher FF of devices with PNDI-NN.
Long-term stability is also an important feature of OSCs in commercial applications. Firstly, we studied the storage stability of the devices. As shown in Fig. 3(d), the efficiency of the device with PNDI-NN retains 84% of its initial value after storing in a nitrogen atmosphere at 25 °C for 60 days, while the efficiency of the device without PNDI-NN retains 69% of its initial value only after 30 days storage under the same conditions. Secondly, the humidity stability of the device was studied by putting the unencapsulated devices in the air with humidity of about 30%. It can be seen that after 200 h of storage, the efficiency of the device with PNDI-NN decays to 65% of its initial value, while the device without PNDI-NN is almost completely invalidated (Fig. S10(a), ESI). Finally, the thermal stability of the device was studied under the conditions of continuous heat treatment at 85 °C in a nitrogen atmosphere (Fig. S10(b), ESI). It is found that the device with PNDI-NN preserves 82% of its initial efficiency, while the device without PNDI-NN retains only 32% after heating for about 200 hours. Obviously, the devices using PNDI-NN show good stability under dark storage, continuous heating and humid conditions compared with those without an electron transport layer. We also tested the stability of the device with PDINN. It can be seen that the devices with PNDI-NN or PDINN almost exhibit the same stability in a nitrogen atmosphere at 25 °C. However, when the devices were continuously heated (85 °C), the device with PNDI-NN decays slower. This is likely contributed by the more stable morphology of the polymer film under heating.

In summary, an aliphatic amine-functionalized NDI derivative PNDI-NN was synthesized and studied as an electron transport material in non-fullerene OSCs. The polar side chain substituted at the N-position of NDI endows PNDI-NN with a good alcohol solubility and film-forming properties. PNDI-NN exhibited superior interface modification properties and electron transport capability. The insertion of PNDI-NN improved the device VOC and FF values with an optimal PCE of 15.6%. In addition, the device stabilities under an inert atmosphere, a humid environment and continuous heating were comprehensively upgraded compared with those of the devices without an ETM. Therefore, PNDI-NN is a high-performance electron transport material for OSCs, and provides a new example for material design.


PEDOT:PSS was purchased from Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Corp., PM6 and Y6 were purchased from Beijing Organtec Technology Co. Ltd. The synthesis details of polymer PNDI-NN are shown in the ESI.


Firstly, ITO substrates (2 cm × 2 cm, Rs ≤ 15 Ω sq−1, and transmittance ≥ 86%) were ultrasonically cleaned with a detergent, deionized water, acetone and isopropanol for 15 minutes successively. Then the ITO substrates were dried under a nitrogen gas flow and treated in O2-plasma for 5 minutes. After that, the PEDOT:PSS solution was spin-coated on ITO at 4000 rpm for 30 s, and then annealed at 140 °C in air for 10 min. The preparation method of the active layer was as follows: active layer materials (PM6:Y6 = 1:1.2 wt%, 16 mg mL−1) were dissolved in CHCl3 and then the solution was spin-coated on PEDOT:PSS at 3500 rpm for 40 s, followed by annealing at 100 °C for 10 min. Subsequently, different concentrations of PNDI-NN (0.5, 1, and 2 mg mL−1 in MeOH) solution were spin-coated on the active layer at 3000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, the metal electrode Ag (100 nm) was evaporated on PNDI-NN under a vacuum. The area of the device was 0.04 cm2, and the PEDOT:PSS solution was filtered using a PTFE filter membrane before use.



1H NMR spectra were measured on Bruker Advance III 100 and 150 MHz NMR spectrometers and tetramethylsilane (TMS) was used as an internal standard at room temperature. Mass spectrometry (MS) was studied by time of flight mass spectrometry on a 4600 LC-Q-TOF with CHCl3 as the solvent. The molecular weight and polydispersity index were determined by gel permeation chromatography (GPC) on an HLC8320 liquid chromatograph with N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) as the eluent and polystyrene as the standard substance. ESR was measured on an electron spin paramagnetic resonance spectrometer (E500).

The energy levels were measured by CV in an anhydrous and anaerobic acetonitrile solution with tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (n-Bu4NPF6, 0.1 mol L−1) as the electrolyte in argon using a CS310M electrochemical workstation. A platinum disk electrode, platinum wire electrode and Ag/AgCl electrode were used as the working electrode, counter electrode and reference electrode, respectively. PNDI-NN film was coated on the working electrode by dropping on its methanol solution. Ferrocene/ferrocenium (Fc/Fc+) was used as an internal standard (the energy level of Fc/Fc+ in vacuum is −4.8 eV). The HOMO and LUMO levels of PNDI-NN were, respectively, determined by the initial oxidation potential (Eoxonset) and the initial reduction potential (Eredonset) with the equations of HOMO = −(4.8 + Eoxonset − EFconset) eV and LUMO = −(4.8 + Eredonset − EFconset) eV, in which EFconset is equal to the initial oxidation potential of ferrocene. UV-Vis spectra from 300 to 880 nm were recorded on a GS54T spectrophotometer (Shanghai Refrigeration Technology Co., Ltd.).
The surface roughness was measured by AFM (size 3100, Vico, USA). EIS was fitted by the equivalent circuit model based on the data of a 1260A impedance analyzer. UPS is measured by an Axis Ultra DLD X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy.
Under simulated AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) irradiation, the J–V characteristics were measured by using a Keithley 2440 source meter in a glove box, and the J–V characteristics were measured at −0.2–1.2 V. EQE was studied using a Newport EQE system (Enlitech, QE-R3011) in the atmosphere.

There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21875272), Youth Innovation Promotion Association of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (2019300), and Key Research Program of Frontier Sciences (QYZDB-SSW-JSC047).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2nj00895e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022