 DOI: 10.1039/C7TC04899H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 334-341


Zhang
Lan
*,

Xiaoxia
Xu
,

Xuezhen
Zhang
,

Jie
Tang
,

Lei
Zhang
,

Xin
He
 and 

Jihuai
Wu


Engineering Research Center of Environment-Friendly Functional Materials, Ministry of Education; Institute of Materials Physical Chemistry, Huaqiao University, College of Materials Science & Engineering, Huaqiao University, Xiamen 361021, China. E-mail: lanzhang@hqu.edu.cn; Fax: +86 595 22693999; Tel: +86 592 6162225

Received
27th October 2017
, Accepted 4th December 2017
First published on 5th December 2017
To fabricate cost-effective solar cells, some prerequisites such as low-energy consumption, simplified technological processes, and high efficiency must be achieved. Low-temperature solution-processed planar perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are desirable for achieving these aims. Although TiO2 is the most widely used material in preparing electron-transporting layers (ETLs) of PSCs, it usually requires a high-temperature sintering process to enhance electron mobility, which not only consumes considerable energy but is also unsuitable for polymer-based flexible substrates. Here, we propose a novel strategy involving the use of a sophisticated solvothermal method with the aid of oleic acid (OA) ligands to synthesize high aspect ratio and well crystallized TiO2 nanorods. Then, the ligand-exchange treatment is applied to substitute the insulating OA ligands with BF4− ions. With this protocol, low-temperature solution-processed high-quality TiO2 ETLs can be produced with high electrical conductivity and fast electron extracting and transporting rates. Finally, the PSCs with BF4−-capped TiO2 nanorod ETLs achieves a high-power conversion efficiency of 18.76% and good reproducibility. This work offers a feasible method to achieve high-efficiency low-temperature solution-processed planar PSCs.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted much interest in recent years and have become primary candidates for next-generation cost-effective high-performance photovoltaics. Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite materials were initially used as sensitizers in liquid-junction dye-sensitized solar cells. Because of their poor stability, the liquid electrolyte was substituted by the well-known organic hole-transporting material of 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD), which led to a high-power conversion efficiency (PCE) exceeding 9% with good stability. Soon afterwards, the photovoltaic performance of mesoscopic PSCs, which evolved from solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells, showed great progress and immediately overtook the record efficiencies of dye-sensitized solar cells, organic solar cells, quantum dot solar cells, and even other types of solar cells. Although the mesoscopic structure makes for efficient electron extraction and transport in PSCs, it also brings about some apparent defects, including complex structure, inadequate pore filling of perovskite materials, and the high-temperature sintering process. Fortunately, due to the ambipolar nature of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite materials, the planar heterojunction PSCs also work efficiently, and therefore, it is possible to eliminate mesoscopic layers in the PSCs to simplify the device structure. Without mesoscopic layers in the planar PSCs, the high-temperature sintering process can be substituted with a low-temperature process by selecting suitable charge-transporting materials, which is beneficial for application of flexible polymer conductive substrates, fabrication of tandem devices, and utilization of roll-to-roll mass production in the future.

In planar PSCs, the preparation of high-quality electron-transporting layers (ETLs) is a prerequisite for achieving high photovoltaic performance because the ETLs play key roles in electron extraction and transport, hole blocking, and interface contacts in the devices. Due to the proper conduction band energy, good chemical stability, and high transparency, TiO2 has been widely used for ETLs. However, a high-temperature sintering process is usually needed to enhance the crystallinity and conductivity of the TiO2 ETLs prepared with the sol–gel method or spray pyrolysis. With the aid of expensive equipment for atomic layer deposition, electron beam evaporation, and magnetron sputtering, high-quality TiO2 ETLs can be prepared at low temperature. Nonetheless, these methodologies are complicated, time-consuming, and expensive, which is why it is necessary to develop low-temperature solution-processed methodologies. Yang's group fabricated high performance planar PSCs with the highest PCE of 19.3% by a low-temperature solution-processed methodology. They used yttrium-doped TiO2 as the ETLs to enhance carrier concentration and modified the indium tin oxide conductive glasses with a polymer-containing simple aliphatic amine group to reduce the work function, which resulted in improved electron extraction and transport and efficient photovoltaic performance. Sargent's group further verified that efficient and stable low-temperature solution-processed planar PSCs could be achieved via a contact passivation strategy using chlorine-capped TiO2 colloidal nanocrystal film. This ligand-engineering strategy is widely used in fabricating high performance quantum dot solar cells and achieves great success.
The development of advanced colloidal synthesis methods enabled us to synthesize high-quality monodisperse nanocrystals, including metallic, semiconductor, magnetic, and so on, with exactly controlled compositions, shapes, sizes, and crystal structures. Ligands, especially long hydrocarbon ligands such as oleic acid (OA) and oleylamine (OAm), are often employed for controlling nanocrystal growth, stabilizing nanocrystals in nonpolar solvents, and triggering ordered self-assemblies of nanocrystals. However, these long hydrocarbon ligand-capped nanocrystals cannot be directly used in fabricating functional devices such as solar cells, light-emitting diodes, and photodetectors because the long hydrocarbon ligands create insulating barriers around the nanocrystals to restrict electronic coupling. The ligand-exchange strategy solves these problems through replacing the original insulating ligands with specifically designed species to achieve functional applications, and the quantum dot solar cell community has demonstrated the usefulness and versatility of this design. Therefore, it is reasonable to expect that high-quality low-temperature solution-processed TiO2 ETLs can be achieved with the same strategy.
Here, we report the application of TiO2 nanorods (TiO2-NRs) to construct efficient ETLs. The high aspect ratio of TiO2-NRs is a benefit for constructing well connected electron-transporting networks, which not only form satisfactory interfacial contacts with perovskite layers but also improve electron extracting and transporting rates. In order to ensure the synthesis of high-quality TiO2-NRs, we utilized the sophisticated solvothermal synthesis method with the aid of OA ligands to control the growth of TiO2-NRs. Subsequently, these insulating OA ligands were substituted with BF4− ions through ligand-exchange treatment. Comparatively, the BF4−-capped TiO2-NRs are advantageous for preparing effective ETLs because of their higher electrical conductivity, faster electron extraction, and transport properties. As expected, devices with BF4−-capped TiO2-NR ETLs show superior photovoltaic performance as compared to devices with OA-capped TiO2-NR ETLs.

All of the chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich without further purification, unless specifically mentioned. Methylammonium bromide (MABr) and formamidinium iodide (FAI) salts were obtained from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp., China. Spiro-OMeTAD was supplied by Luminescence Technology Corp., Taiwan, China. Fluorine-doped tin oxide-coated conductive glass substrates (FTOs) with sheet resistance of 15 Ω □−1 (Nippon Glass Corp, Japan) were used as conductive substrates. TiO2-NRs were synthesized according to a previously reported method.


It has been reported that NOBF4 can effectively peel off native OA and OAm ligands on colloidal nanocrystals and exchange these ligands with BF4− ions while preserving the size and shape of the nanocrystals. Here, we used the same method to prepare BF4−-capped TiO2-NRs. In a typical process, 10 mL hexane solution of TiO2-NRs (10 mg mL−1) was mixed with 10 mL dichloromethane solution of NOBF4 (0.02 M) under vigorous stirring for 5 min. After removing the supernatant by centrifugation, the precipitated TiO2-NRs were dispersed in N,N-dimethyl formamide (DMF) with a concentration of 20 mg mL−1.


Firstly, the laser-patterned FTOs with size of 1.5 × 1.5 cm2 were consecutively washed with isopropanol, acetone, distilled water, and ethanol; then they were finally treated with UV-ozone for 30 min.

Secondly, the TiO2 ETLs were prepared by spin-coating the toluene solution of TiO2-NRs on the patterned and cleared FTOs at 4000 rpm for 30 s, and then heating at 150 °C for 30 min. In order to compare the performance differences of OA-capped and BF4−-capped TiO2-NR-based ETLs, the same concentration was used of both toluene solution of OA-capped TiO2-NRs (20 mg mL−1) and DMF solution of BF4−-capped TiO2-NRs.
Thirdly, cesium-containing triple cation perovskite layers were deposited on the TiO2 ETLs using a previously reported method. Namely, a precursor solution was prepared containing FAI (1 mol L−1), PbI2 (1.1 mol L−1), MABr (0.2 mol L−1), and PbBr2 (0.2 mol L−1) in anhydrous DMF and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) mixed solvents with a volume ratio of 4:1. Then, CsI (0.175 mol L−1), predissolved as a 1.5 mol L−1 stock solution in DMSO, was added to the mixed perovskite precursor solution to achieve the desired triple cation composition. The precursor solution was spin-coated at 1000 rpm for 10 s and then at 6500 rpm for 20 s. After 5 s of the spin-coating procedure at 6500 rpm had elapsed, 130 μL of anti-solvent consisting of chlorobenzene was poured on the spinning substrates to rinse residual DMSO and DMF from the precursor films. The substrates were then heated at 100 °C for 30 min to form crystalline triple cation perovskite layers.
Fourthly, the spiro-OMeTAD layers were constructed on the as-prepared triple cation perovskite layers by spin-coating 20 μL chlorobenzene solution of spiro-OMeTAD composed of 72.3 mg spiro-OMeTAD, 28.8 μL 4-tert-butyl pyridine, and 17.5 μL acetonitrile solution of lithium bis(trifluoromethane sulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI) (520 mg Li-TSFI dissolved in 1 mL acetonitrile) at 4000 rpm for 30 s.
Finally, 100 nm Au electrodes were thermally evaporated on the spiro-OMeTAD layers under high vacuum through a shadow mask. The entire preparation process, from ligand-exchange to fabrication of planar PSCs, is illustrated in Scheme 1.

The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded with a Bruker D8 Advance X-ray diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å). The relevant morphologies were observed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) with a SU8000 microscope and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) with a JEM-2100 microscope. The Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra were obtained with a Nicolet Impact 410 FTIR spectrometer. The transmittance spectra were measured with a Lambda 950 UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer. The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra were acquired using a fluorescence spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific Lumina). The time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra were acquired using an Omin-λ monochromator/spectrograph with the time-correlated single-photon counting method (Zolix). The TRPL decay curves were fitted using a bi-exponential equation [eqn (1)]:

(1)
where
Ai is the decay amplitude and τi is the decay time. The average PL decay times (τave) can be calculated with the fitted Ai and τi values according to the following equation [eqn (2)]:

(2)
The incident-photo-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) curves were measured as a function of wavelength from 300 nm to 850 nm using the Newport IPCE system (Newport, USA). The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristic curves of PSCs were recorded with a computer-controlled Keithley 2400 source meter under simulated AM 1.5G solar illumination at 100 mW cm−2 with a #94043A solar simulator (PVIV-94043A, Newport, USA) in air. The voltage step and delay time were 20 mV and 10 ms, respectively. The forward scan was conducted from −0.1 V to 1.2 V, and the reverse scan from 1.2 V to −0.1 V. The stabilized current density and power output were recorded close to the maximum power point, which was extracted from the J–V curves. The PSCs with the active area of 0.12 cm2 (0.3 × 0.4 cm2) and without any encapsulation were prepared for measurements. The J–V curves for evaluating the conductivity of TiO2 ETLs were also recorded with the same source meter in the dark through sandwiching TiO2 ETLs in the FTO/TiO2 ETL/Au architecture. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were conducted using a Zennium electrochemical workstation (IM6) in dark conditions, with frequencies from 100 mHz to 2 MHz, a bias of 0 V, and amplitude of 20 mV.

The typical TEM, high resolution TEM (HRTEM), and selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns were used to characterize the TiO2-NRs. The TEM image shown in Fig. 1a reveals that the as-synthesized products contain mostly TiO2-NRs with few TiO2 nanoparticles. The products are well dispersed without any agglomerations. The length and diameter distribution histograms shown in Fig. 1d and e reveal that the average length and diameter of the TiO2-NRs are 35.78 ± 6.06 nm and 2.80 ± 0.83 nm, respectively, resulting in a high aspect ratio of 12.78. The HRTEM image and SAED patterns shown in Fig. 1b and c present clearly visible atomic lattice fringes and diffraction rings, suggesting the formation of highly crystalline TiO2-NRs.


Fig. 2a shows the XRD patterns of OA-capped and BF4−-capped TiO2-NRs. The as-synthesized TiO2-NRs without sintering treatment present high crystallinity, which is consistent with the results of the HRTEM image and SAED patterns shown in Fig. 1b and c, respectively. The diffraction peaks and relevant indexed crystallographic planes marked in the XRD patterns are consistent with the anatase crystalline phase (JCPDS#21-1272). The ligand-exchange treatment did not change the crystallinity of the TiO2-NRs, because the two samples have almost similar XRD patterns.

Fig. 2b shows the FTIR spectra of OA-capped and BF4−-capped TiO2-NRs. Comparing the spectra of the two samples, it was found that the characteristic C–H stretching vibrations at 2800–3000 cm−1 ascribed to OA ligands have noticeably disappeared after ligand-exchange treatment. Furthermore, the stretching vibrations of CO and CC at 1738 cm−1 and 1640 cm−1, respectively, and the symmetric and asymmetric –COO– stretching modes at 1521 cm−1 and 1431 cm−1, respectively, also disappeared. The rest of the infrared absorption peak at 1651 cm−1 can be ascribed to the CO stretching vibration of the DMF solvent, and the peak at 1067 cm−1 is associated with BF4− ions. Therefore, we can conclude that the OA ligands were successfully substituted by BF4− ions after ligand-exchange treatment.


Fig. 3a–c show top and cross-sectional SEM images of FTO and BF4−-capped TiO2-NR ETLs on FTO. Due to the presence of different sizes of F-doped SnO2 grains, from tens to hundreds of nanometers, the bare FTO exhibits a highly rough surface (Fig. 3a). After spin-coating BF4−-capped TiO2-NRs on the FTO, the originally clear outlines of F-doped SnO2 grains become indistinct and a compact and pin-hole-free TiO2-NR ETL appears (Fig. 3b). The cross-sectional view presented in Fig. 3c reveals that the BF4−-capped TiO2-NRs can sufficiently cover the surface of F-doped SnO2 grains to avoid the formation of charge shunt pathways by the direct contact of perovskite layers with FTO. Although the TiO2-NRs are too small to be individually distinguished by SEM, the extremely small size of the TiO2-NRs is beneficial for producing continuous and compact ETLs. From the cross-sectional view of the device as shown in Fig. 3d, we can see that the BF4−-capped TiO2-NR ETL can easily support the perovskite layer with a good contact interface.


Fig. 4a shows the transmittance spectra of the bare FTO, OA-capped, and BF4−-capped TiO2-NR ETLs on FTOs. The two TiO2-NR ETLs have almost the same transmittance because the ligands are usually adsorbed on the monolayer surface of the nanocrystals, and the thickness is extremely thin, having little influence on the transmittance of the films. Compared with the bare FTO, the TiO2-NR ETLs on FTOs show decreased transmittance, whereas the variations of transmittance are very marginal (within 3%). The high transparency of TiO2-NR ETLs is propitious to limit the loss of light energy and achieve high photocurrent with the devices.Fig. 4b shows the Tafel curves of OA-capped and BF4−-capped TiO2-NR ETLs assembled in the architecture of FTO/TiO2-NR ETL/Au. Comparing the differences in current density between the two samples, one can evaluate the altered electrical conductive properties by ligand-exchange treatment. The substitution of OA ligands with BF4− ions can result in clearly enhanced current density in the Tafel curve, with a higher conductivity of the BF4−-capped TiO2-NR ETL than that of the OA-capped TiO2-NR ETL. The superior electrical conductivity of the BF4−-capped TiO2-NR ETL is advantageous for the transmission of photogenerated electrons and reduction of dark current.
Steady-state PL and transient TRPL measurements were obtained to investigate the influence of OA and BF4− ligands on the electron extraction mechanism in the devices with architectures of FTO/OA-capped TiO2-NR ETL/perovskite and FTO/BF4−-capped TiO2-NR ETL/perovskite. From Fig. 5a, one can observe that the PL intensity of the FTO/BF4−-capped TiO2-NR ETL/perovskite device is obviously lower than that of the FTO/OA-capped TiO2-NR ETL/perovskite device. Therefore, the BF4−-capped TiO2-NR ETL possesses a higher PL quenching efficiency and electron extraction rate than those of the OA-capped TiO2-NR ETL, due to the removal of OA-ligand insulating barriers and an increase in the electrical conductivity of BF4−-capped TiO2-NR ETLs. The transient TRPL spectra shown in Fig. 5b further verify the superior electron extraction rate of BF4−-capped TiO2-NR ETLs. The PL decay times (τi) and average PL decay times (τave) can be calculated according to eqn (1) and (2). The fitted results are listed in Table 1. From the data, one can find that the FTO/BF4−-capped TiO2-NR ETL/perovskite device shows much lower τ1, τ2, and τave values than those of the FTO/OA-capped TiO2-NR ETL/perovskite device, indicating a faster electron extraction process.
Sample

τ
ave/ns

τ
1/ns

τ
2/ns

A
1/%

A
2/%
FTO/OA-capped TiO2-NR ETL/perovskite
32.31
87.06
9.13
29.74
70.26
FTO/BF4−-capped TiO2-NR ETL/perovskite
8.67
32.02
3.32
18.65
81.35

The photovoltaic performance of PSCs with BF4−-capped and OA-capped TiO2-NR ETLs is shown in Fig. 6. The photovoltaic parameters, including short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), PCE, and J–V hysteresis index (HI), are summarized in Table 2. We can see that the device with BF4−-capped TiO2-NR ETLs shows superior photovoltaic performance as compared to the one with OA-capped TiO2-NR ETLs. Namely, the values of photovoltaic parameters including Jsc, Voc, FF, and PCE of the former device are higher than those of the latter one by both forward and reverse scans. The IPCE spectra as shown in Fig. 6b further confirm the superior light-to-electricity conversion ability of the former device in a broad wavelength range as compared to the latter one, thereby resulting in a larger integrated Jsc (21.25 mA cm−2) than that of the latter one (19.33 mA cm−2).

PSC with TiO2-NR ETL

V
OC/V

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF
PCE/%
HI

a The J–V hysteresis index (HI) values are calculated according to the following equation:  where JRS(0.8VOC) and JFS(0.8VOC) represent the photocurrent density at 80% of the VOC for the reverse scan and forward scan, respectively.

BF4−-Capped
Forward
1.110
22.22
0.744
18.35
0.014
Reverse
1.120
22.22
0.754
18.76
Average
1.115
22.22
0.749
18.56
OA-Capped
Forward
0.947
19.37
0.581
10.66
0.217
Reverse
1.019
20.38
0.687
14.27
Average
0.983
19.88
0.634
12.39
The calculated hysteresis index (HI) values indicate a greatly decreased J–V hysteresis of the device with BF4−-capped TiO2-NR ETLs (0.014) compared to the one with OA-capped TiO2-NR ETLs (0.217). The charge accumulation at the interface of the ETL/perovskite as a result of constant illumination, external potential, and the extraction imbalance between electrons and holes is an important factor influencing J–V hysteresis. Therefore, EIS measurements were performed, and the capacitance–frequency and capacitance–voltage curves were extracted to verify the influence of different ligand-capped TiO2-NR ETLs on the capacitance values in the devices as shown in Fig. 6c and d. Low-frequency capacitance is associated with charge accumulation. It is seen that the former device has nearly two orders of magnitude lower values of low-frequency capacitance compared with those of the latter one and nearly three orders of magnitude lower capacitance at the same bias voltage, suggesting much smaller charge accumulation in the former device. As aforementioned, the BF4−-capped TiO2-NR ETL possesses superior properties to the OA-capped TiO2-NR ETL, such as higher electrical conductivity and faster electron extracting and transporting rates, which can eliminate charge accumulation at the interface of the ETL/perovskite and finally contribute to a feeble J–V hysteresis of the corresponding device.
The ligand-exchange treatment may change the energy band of TiO2-NR ETLs and then influence the electronic dynamics in the corresponding planar PSCs. It is known that the Fermi level (EF) is one of the most important electronic properties of semiconductors, and the theoretical Voc of a solar cell is determined by the difference of the EF of the ETL and the highest occupied molecular orbital level of the hole-transporting material. Here, we applied the commonly used Mott–Schottky method to analyze the differences of EF of OA-capped and BF4−-capped TiO2-NR ETLs.Fig. 7 shows the Mott–Schottky plots of OA-capped and BF4−-capped TiO2-NR ETLs. The EF can be obtained by fitting the data with the Mott–Schottky equation as follows:
C−2 = 2(E − EF − kTe−1)/(eεε0ND)
(3)
where
C is the capacitance of the space charge region, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, ε is the dielectric constant of the ETL, e is the electron charge, E is the applied potential, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, and ND is the donor density. It was found that the ligand-exchange treatment resulted in a negative shift of EF from −0.523 V to −0.602 V, namely, the EF increased by approximately 0.079 V after OA ligands were substituted with BF4− ligands. This demonstrates that a higher Voc of BF4−-capped TiO2-NR ETL-based PSCs can be achieved.

To test the stable power output properties of the devices, the stabilized current density and PCE of the devices were measured by holding a bias close to the maximum power point derived from corresponding J–V characteristic curves. As shown in Fig. 8a and b, the current density and PCE of the device with BF4−-capped TiO2-NR ETLs can stabilize at 19.96 mA cm−2 and 18.62%, respectively. However, the device with OA-capped TiO2-NR ETLs shows much lower stabilized current density (16.36 mA cm−2) and PCE (13.45%). These results are in good agreement with the J–V characteristic curves.
The reproducibility of the two devices with different ligand-capped TiO2-NR ETLs was further investigated, and the PCE histograms along with the Gaussian fitting curves for an independently prepared batch of 30 devices with OA-capped and BF4−-capped TiO2-NR ETLs, respectively, are displayed in Fig. 8c. It is seen that the devices with BF4−-capped TiO2-NR ETLs can achieve a high average PCE of 17.83 ± 0.63%, whereas that of the latter ones is 13.94 ± 0.77%, indicating better photovoltaic performance and reproducibility of the former devices.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated a novel strategy to prepare high-quality TiO2-NR ETLs with low-temperature solution-processed methodology for efficient planar PSCs. The utilization of the OA-assisted solvothermal method can synthesize high aspect ratio and well crystallized TiO2-NRs, which were verified by TEM and HRTEM images and SAED patterns. Subsequently, the application of ligand-exchange treatment with NOBF4 reagent can absolutely substitute OA ligands with BF4− ions and maintain the same crystal structure, as confirmed by FTIR spectra and XRD patterns. The as-prepared BF4−-capped TiO2-NRs can fully cover the F-doped SnO2 grains in the FTO substrate to form compact ETLs with high transmittance, as confirmed by the SEM images and transmittance spectra. Furthermore, compared with the OA-capped TiO2-NR ETLs, the BF4−-capped TiO2-NR ETLs show faster electron extracting and transporting rates, as verified by the steady-state PL spectra and transient TRPL curves. Therefore, as expected, the device with BF4−-capped TiO2-NR ETLs achieves better photovoltaic performance than that of the device with OA-capped TiO2-NR ETLs. The findings suggest a desirable method with characteristics of low-energy consumption, simplified technological processes, and high efficiency for fabricating cost-effective solar cells.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


The authors would like to acknowledge the support of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61474047, 51002053, and 51472094), the Fujian Provincial Science Foundation for Distinguished Young Scholars (2015J06011), the Fujian Provincial Youth Top-notch Talents Supporting Program, and the Prominent Young Talents and New Century Excellent Talents Supporting Programs at Fujian Provincial University.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018