 DOI: 10.1039/C3TC31064G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 6223-6234
Erin L. Ratcliff*, Ronald C. Bakus II, Gregory C. Welch, Tom S. van der Poll, Andres Garcia, Sarah R. Cowan, Bradley A. MacLeod, David S. Ginley, Guillermo C. Bazan and Dana C. Olson*
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. E-mail: ratcliff@email.arizona.edu
Department of Chemistry, University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, USA
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO, USA. E-mail: dana.olson@nrel.gov
Received 4th June 2013, Accepted 7th August 2013
First published on 9th August 2013
This work expands on the recently reported protonation of the donor molecule 7,7′-(4,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-silolo[3,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl)bis(4-(5′-hexyl-[2,2′-bithiophen]-5-yl)-[1,2,5]thiadiazolo[3,4-c]pyridine) (d-DTS(PTTh2)2) by the poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) interlayer to include an electrostatic picture of interfacial energetic states. Ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy results initially suggested favorable band level alignment for hole extraction between d-DTS(PTTh2)2 and PEDOT:PSS. However photovoltaic device performance yields a low fill factor and photovoltage, indicative of poor hole-extraction at the hole-collecting interface, relative to the nickel oxide device. Further investigation into the interfacial composition via theory and X-ray photoelectron studies of both the interface and a control system of d-DTS(PTTh2)2 reacted with p-toluenesulfonic acid verify the presence of a chemically unique species at the interface arising from protonation reaction with the residual acidic protons present in PEDOT:PSS that was masked in the UPS experiment. From these results, the energy band diagram is re-interpreted to account for the interfacial chemical reaction and modified interfacial density of states. Additionally, the detrimental protonation reaction is avoided when the pyridyl[1,2,5]thiadiazole acceptor unit was replaced with a 5-fluorobenzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole acceptor unit, which shows no such reaction with the PEDOT:PSS substrate. These results indicate the necessity of using a large analytical toolkit to elucidate the energetics and mechanisms of buried interfaces that will impact dynamics of hole collection.

Solution-processable small molecules offer a number of advantages compared to polymers in OPV applications. They have a well-defined molecular structure (no distribution of molecular weight), can be purified using standard organic techniques, and they can be characterized by a wider range of techniques than polymeric materials (e.g. field desorption mass spectrometry). Taken together, these factors result in higher reproducibility for small molecule solar cells versus polymer based cells. In addition, the electronic and solution processing characteristics can be subtly tuned by the incorporation of end capping groups, which leads to a robust and tunable compound series. However, small molecule systems do have characteristics that must be considered when manufacturing OPV devices. Because of the lower intrinsic viscosity of solutions containing small molecules, as opposed to polymers, they often require much higher material loading to form high quality films from solution, and obtaining the proper crystallite sizes for high performance OPV applications requires the careful structural modification beyond simple chromophore tuning, and the use of solvent additives in processing is often imperative to generate high performance devices.

Recently, a series of solution-processable small molecules have been developed that have shown high performance in OPV applications when blended with [6,6]-phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC70BM). One such class of compounds exhibits an architecture consisting of a central dithienosilole core, flanked by an appropriate acceptor unit (typically pyridyl[1,2,5]thiadiazole (PT)), and end capped with an alkylated bithiophene, resulting in a D′–A–D–A–D′ chromophore (D,D′ = donor, A = acceptor, Scheme 1). In addition to choice of the different D/A group pairings in the D′–A–D–A–D′ architecture, there are secondary interactions between molecules based on the molecular symmetry that permit morphological control.
The 7,7′-(4,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-silolo[3,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl)bis(4-(5′-hexyl-[2,2′-bithiophen]-5-yl)-[1,2,5]thiadiazolo[3,4-c]pyridine), or d-DTS(PTTh2)2, molecule is part of a class of molecules in which the most basic nitrogens in the PT cycle (pyridyl nitrogens) have demonstrated to undergo protonation reactions with acidic substrates (i.e. PEDOT:PSS), changing the overall device performance.Scheme 2 shows the protonation of the two pyridyl nitrogen sites of d-DTS(PTTh2)2. Evidence for a chemical interaction between the basic pyridyl nitrogen and the acidic PEDOT:PSS was observed by UV-visible spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). It was suggested that this chemical interaction yielded interfacial states that created a hole extraction barrier at the d-DTS(PTTh2)2/PEDOT:PSS interface. Replacing the PEDOT:PSS with a solution processed, oxygen-plasma treated nickel oxide interlayer (s-NiOx) improved all factors of device performance (open circuit voltage (VOC), short circuit current (JSC), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE)), attributed both to previously observed increased work function and selectivity of the s-NiOx as well as elimination of the chemical interaction between the PEDOT:PSS and d-DTS(PTTh2)2. Furthermore, solution processed nickel oxide (s-NiOx) has recently been shown to improve device performance for both poly-3-hexylthiophene (P3HT):PC60BM (ref. 20–22) and poly[N-9′′-hepta-decanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole) (PCDTBT):PC70BM (ref. 23 and 24) heterojunctions; such improvement is suggested to be due to the high band gap and the presence of a large surface dipole at the interface between the organic and the oxide that facilitates improved hole extraction while also blocking electron transfer processes.
Based on these observations, a new donor material has been developed to eliminate the protonation reaction that occurs between the pyridyl nitrogen and the PEDOT:PSS. The donor system, 7,7′-(4,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-silolo[3,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl)bis(6-fluoro-4-(5′-hexyl-[2,2′-bithiophen]-5-yl)benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole), p-DTS(FBTTh2)2, where “p” refers to the fluorine atoms oriented proximal to the donor core is shown in Scheme 1. In this system, similar optical and electronic properties are achieved through the application of the fluorinated benzothiadiazole groups. The p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 donor has been shown to achieve 7.0% PCE on PEDOT:PSS contacts, thus indicating the elimination of the deleterious formation of interfacial states on device performance.
In this work, we evaluate the formation of interfacial traps for hole extraction created by the reaction between PEDOT:PSS and d-DTS(PTTh2)2 using ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). Efficient charge extraction at the contact/active layer interface contributes directly to the overall net PCE and stability of organic photovoltaics (OPV). In bulk heterojunction architectures, efficient charge extraction is often obtained via inclusion of interlayers between the photoactive layer and the charge collecting electrodes. These layers can have a host of functions, including acting as optical spacers or passivation layers to unwanted chemical reactions, homogenizing the electrical conductivity and/or wettability over large length scales, improving the ohmic nature of the contact, or tailoring energetic barriers at the interface. The primary function of the interlayer is to efficiently extract one particular charge carrier while maintaining a maximum offset in the electrochemical potential of the donor and acceptor. This is achieved via maximizing the separation for the quasi Fermi levels for holes and electrons. Thus, the first choice in a hole collecting contact should be one that has a work function greater than the ionization energy of the donor.
Initial results (work function and ionization potential measurements from UPS) suggest that the PEDOT:PSS interlayer should be a sufficient contact for OPVs comprised of d-DTS(PTTh2)2 donor layers, as the work function is greater than the transport level of the donor molecule. However, interpretation of the interfacial chemistry using only UPS is further complicated by underlying density of states from the PEDOT:PSS interlayer and the complexity of probing a buried interface formed by both layers being solution processed. We further investigated the interfacial energy levels by analyzing changes in energetics in a model system for PEDOT:PSS, using the strong protic acid, p-toluenesulfonic acid (p-TSA), a monomeric analogue of poly(4-styrenesulfonic acid) (PSS). The protonation has a direct impact on the energetics of the system, as indicated by absorbance and UPS, and may be explained via density functional theory (DFT) calculations. In the context of the complete data set, the revised energetic picture of the interface between d-DTS(PTTh2)2 and either PEDOT:PSS or s-NiOx can be correlated with the previously reported device performance. In addition, the interfacial interactions of the modified molecular donor that has demonstrated very high photovoltaic performance on PEDOT:PSS are characterized, where the protonation reaction is reduced due to the elimination of the pyridyl nitrogen moiety. These results indicate the limitations of employing classic semiconductor theory to interpret energy level alignments in organic interfaces without first considering the possible interfacial chemistries.

The compound d-DTS(PTTh2)2 was prepared as previously reported. The p-toluenesulfonic acid (p-TSA) monohydrate was purchased from Alfa Aesar and purified via azeotropic distillation of the water using toluene, followed by removing the residual water under vacuum (<0.5 Torr) overnight at 100 °C. Chloroform was purchased from BDH and chloroform-d was purchased from Cambridge Isotope Laboratory and both were purified by distillation from calcium hydride. All other solvents were used as received.


UV-vis-near IR spectra were collected on a Perkin Elmer Lambda 750 spectrometer. A stock solution of d-DTS(PTTh2)2 (1 mg ml−1) was prepared in chloroform in a glove box and the solutions of d-DTS(PTTh2)2 were titrated with anhydrous p-TSA/chloroform solution in the cuvettes before sealing and being brought out of the glove box for measurements.


DFT calculations were performed using Gaussian 09 Revision C.01. All structures were optimized with the B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) basis set, with solvent effects treated using the IEFPCM model.


XPS studies were performed with a Kratos Axis Ultra X-ray photoelectron spectrometer with a monochromatic Al Kα source at 1486.6 eV and a He(I) excitation source (21.2 eV) for UPS measurements. In the UPS experiments, a – 10.00 V bias was applied to the sample to further enhance the collection of the lowest kinetic energy electrons. A separate UPS spectrum was measured for a sputter-etched, atomically clean gold sample before characterization to ensure accurate values for the low and high kinetic edges relative to the Fermi edge. Reported results were repeated on at least three spots per sample on multiple samples. For XPS results, the binding energy calibration of the spectra is corrected using the procedure outlined by Powell, using the Au 4f7/2 and Cu 2p3/2 lines, with linearity corrected using the Cu L3VV line.


Thin films of PEDOT:PSS, and NiOx were spin coated from solution onto patterned ITO substrates (Thin Film Devices, Inc.) for work function and devices measurements, on glass substrates (Corning Eagle 2000) for optical absorption measurements, and on thermally evaporated gold covered glass substrates for XPS measurements. PEDOT:PSS (Clevios™ P VP Al 4083) was spun cast in air at 4000 rpm for 60 seconds follow by annealing in air at 140 °C for 20 minutes. For NiOx film deposition, 0.5 M nickel formate dihydrate (Alfa Aesar) ethylene glycol solutions containing 1 molar equivalent of ethylenediamine, filtered with 0.45 μm nylon filters, were spun cast at 4000 rpm for 90 seconds follow by annealing at 300 °C in air for 60 minutes. Surface treated NiOx films were O2 plasma treated with 150 W power and 70 mTorr O2 pressure for 2 minutes and used immediately.

Solutions of d-DTS(PTTh2)2 (0.01%, 0.05%, 0.5%) and p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 (0.05% and 0.2%) were prepared from weight percentages of molecule to chlorobenzene (anhydrous, Sigma). Films were cast by first filtering using 0.45 μm PTFE filters followed by spin casting at 2000 rpm for 60 seconds and thermally annealing films at 70 °C anneal for ten minutes. For films containing p-toluenesulfonic acid (p-TSA), deposition solutions contained 10 molar equivalents of p-TSA. Determination of exact thickness of the films formed is difficult for solution processed materials at these low weight percentage concentrations. However, all films are less than the penetration depth of the X-rays used in the XPS, indicating the films were, on average, <10 nm. Absorbance of thin films was found to increase linearly with increasing solution concentration in the UV-visible region (transmission mode). In the data interpretation, we assumed that films were uniform in coverage. Absorbance data (ESI) showed no evidence for scattering and the donor molecule was previously reported to have similar contact angles on both of the substrates.
ITO/HTL/d-DTS(PTTh2)2:PC61BM/Ca/Al devices were fabricated in a N2 filled glove box by spin coating 40 mg ml−1 70:30 d-DTS(PTTh2)2:PC61BM by weight chlorobenzene solution containing 0.4% by volume diiodooctane co-solvent at 80 °C using 0.45 μm PTFE filters onto ITO/HTL substrates. Films were then annealed at 70 °C to removed residual solvent, followed by thermal evaporation of 20 nm Ca and 100 nm Al electrodes with an area of 11 mm2via a shadow mask at a base pressure of ∼3 × 10−8 Torr. Current–voltage measurements of PV devices under a 100 mW cm−2 illumination intensity (supplied by a tungsten halogen lamp and monitored with Hamamatsu Si photodiodes equipped with a KG5 filters) were carried out with a Keithley 236 source-measuring unit in a N2 atmosphere.

Fig. 1 shows the device performance for the d-DTS(PTTh2)2:PC60BM heterojunction on two separate hole collecting contacts: PEDOT:PSS and s-NiOx, with device parameters given in Table 1. Both interlayers have work functions greater than the ionization energy of the donor (4.7 eV), as discussed below. Despite an appropriate work function, there is clearly a diminished performance for the solar cell on the PEDOT:PSS contact, with a decrease in FF, VOC, and JSC. As nothing else has changed in the device architecture and given that there is a decrease in all three major metrics (VOC, JSC, and FF) contributing to net power conversion efficiency, we suspect that the lower performance is related to poor charge extraction characteristics.
HTLs
VOC (mV)
JSC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Rshunt (ohms cm−2)
Rseries (ohms cm−2)
a Calculated from the slope of the light J–V curve from −0.1 to 0.1 V.b Calculated from the slope of the light J–V curve from 1.2 to 1.4 V.
PEDOT:PSS
543 (±1)
−10.5 (±0.5)
42 (±1)
2.4 (±0.1)
2.6 (±0.1) × 102
3.3 (±0.3)
s-NiOx
730 (±4)
−12.2 (±0.2)
56 (±1)
5.0 (± 0.1)
5.7 (±0.5) × 102
3.8 (±0.3)
The primary tool for probing energetic level alignment is UPS measurements as a function of ad-layer thickness on the contact. Fig. 2A and B show the UPS spectra of the interlayer and three different thicknesses of d-DTS(PTTh2)2 (formed via different concentrations of solution) on PEDOT:PSS and s-NiOx, respectively. The work function (ϕ) is calculated as the energetic difference between the Fermi level (EFermi) and the surface vacuum level (Evac), as defined by the secondary electron edge. The ionization energy (IE) is estimated as the onset of the density of states at the top of the valence band (adiabatic ionization energy IEadiab), with the vertical ionization energy (IEvert) defined as the local maximum density of states or the energy of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the donor molecule. Vertical tick marks denote the onset of photoemission for calculation of the sample work function (left panel) and the edges of the filled density of states that define the ionization energies (right panel). Fig. 3A gives the local work function of the near surface region as a function of coverage and Fig. 3B and C show the interpretation of the UPS results in Fig. 2 for the d-DTS(PTTh2)2 on PEDOT:PSS and NiOx interlayers, respectively. The electron affinities for the two interlayers were previously measured using inverse photoemission spectroscopy. Lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals (LUMO) levels were estimated from the optical gap of the bulk material, as shown in the ESI.
In Fig. 2A, the bare PEDOT:PSS surface exhibits a work function of 4.9 eV. There is a strong onset of density of states at about 2 eV below the Fermi, with a weak intensity leading up to the Fermi edge, corresponding to the top of the PEDOT valence states doped by the overlying PSS layer. The electron affinity (EA) of PEDOT:PSS used in Fig. 3B was previously measured by inverse photoemission spectroscopy (IPES) and found to be 3.3 eV.
In order to evaluate the energy level alignment, three different concentrations of d-DTS(PTTh2)2 were deposited via spin-casting onto the PEDOT:PSS, with the underlying assumption that there was no islanding present. This method was used to attempt to characterize the buried interface between two solution processed layers. The UPS spectra of the lowest concentration (0.01% weight percent) showed evidence for slight dipole between the d-DTS(PTTh2)2 and PEDOT:PSS, as shown by the local vacuum level moving slightly further from the Fermi level upon deposition of the thinnest film (ϕ increases from 4.9 eV to 5.0 eV in Fig. 3A). Increasing the thickness of the d-DTS(PTTh2)2 layer results in a subsequent decrease in the work function, yielding a bulk work function of 3.8 eV for the thickest film (Fig. 3A). There is no evidence for the clear HOMO peaks of d-DTS(PTTh2)2 until the thickest film. Additionally, there is a shift in the density of states, with the onset moving away from the Fermi level and the ionization energy of the donor molecule layer does not match the bulk IE (IE = 4.7 eV) until the thickest film (from 0.5 weight percent solution).
In Fig. 2B and 3A, the bare s-NiOx surface (post oxygen plasma treatment) has a work function of 5.4 eV and an ionization energy of 5.8 eV. The valence band is comprised of the O 2pσ and O 2pπ bands, with no evidence of Ni 3d states near the Fermi level. Previous measurements of this oxygen plasma treated surface have shown that nickel oxide, nickel hydroxide, and nickel oxyhydroxide surface species all contribute to the high work function. The EA = 2.1 eV in Fig. 3C was inferred from IPES measurements. There is a large vacuum level shift that predominantly occurs between the bare s-NiOx substrate and the first and second film thicknesses of d-DTS(PTTh2)2. Unlike d-DTS(PTTh2)2 on PEDOT:PSS, the Fermi level is ∼0.8 eV from the HOMO onset on NiOx, even with low coverage of d-DTS(PTTh2)2 on s-NiOx. The presence of a subtle peak corresponding to the HOMO in second thickest film (which is clearly present in the thickest film) suggests the presence of a dipole between the s-NiOx and the d-DTS(PTTh2)2. Furthermore, Fig. 2 and 3 show that in general, there is a strong dipole formed between either interlayer and the d-DTS(PTTh2)2, as there is a large shift in the vacuum level (∼1 eV). The energy band diagrams in Fig. 3B and C suggest no major difference electronically at the hole collecting interface. The change in vacuum level for the NiOx (Fig. 3A, red squares) shows a steady decrease towards the vacuum level as the film thickness increases. However, for d-DTS(PTTh2)2 on PEDOT:PSS, there is first a 0.1 eV increase within the first nanometer of the interface, and then a decrease in the vacuum level; indicative of an interfacial reaction between the two materials, although the exact nature of the interaction (dipole, chemical reaction, or charge transfer) cannot be deduced from the UPS spectra alone. Furthermore, UPS characterization of thin d-DTS(PTTh2)2 donor films on PEDOT:PSS is difficult to interpret, as there is a sufficient background density of states from the PEDOT:PSS layer.
Interpretation may also be complicated by the difficulty in determining the exact thicknesses of the donor layer on the interlayer substrates and/or possible differences in growth modes/wetting. It is certainly possible that the density of states of d-DTS(PTTh2)2 near the Fermi level could be different on the two interlayers due to multiple effects. However, given our previous work, which showed comparable contact angles for the two substrates and the absence of scattering in the absorbance data, such islanding effects (poor wetting of d-DTS(PTTh2)2) were ruled out as being major contributions to differences in the spectra. Thus, we suspect that changes in work function and ionization energy of d-DTS(PTTh2)2 measured via UPS could be due to either local dipole effects or changes in the local environment by protonation.

In order to evaluate the effect of adduct formation between the donor and the interlayers PEDOT:PSS and s-NiOx on valence and core levels of d-DTS(PTTh2)2, we first considered the model system for the reaction of d-DTS(PTTh2)2 with p-toluenesulfonic acid (p-TSA), a strong protic acid and monomeric analogue of poly(4-styrenesulfonic acid) (PSS). This section of the manuscript presents the solution phase absorption spectroscopy and highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) changes as measured by UPS of d-DTS(PTTh2)2 upon formation of the adduct.

Fig. 4 shows the UV-visible-near IR absorption spectra of d-DTS(PTTh2)2 in chloroform solutions with varying equivalents of p-TSA. Upon addition of one eq. of p-TSA (red trace), a decrease in the absorption maxima at 628 nm is observed, along with the emergence of two new absorption peaks at 660 and 775 nm, respectively. Based on our previous work with binding Lewis acids to organic chromophores, we attribute the absorption spectra to the statistical protonation of d-DTS(PTTh2)2, where d-DTS(PTTh2)2, the mono protonated species, and the bis protonated species exist in a 1:2:1 ratio Upon addition of two eq. of p-TSA (green trace), complete disappearance of the peaks at 628 and 660 nm is observed, while the peak at 775 nm becomes dominant. This spectra is attributed to the full conversion to the bis-protonated d-DTS(PTTh2)2 small molecule. The higher energy bands at approximately 390 nm remained largely unaffected by proton addition. The protonation reaction was further confirmed and investigated by 1H NMR spectroscopy (see ESI) and found to be reversible in the solution phase.
d-DTS(PTTh2)2 contains several heteroatom sites with electron lone pairs that can act as a hydrogen bond acceptor, with the extent of the reaction dictated by the basicity of each heteroatom in a given environment and the Gibbs Free energies of complexation for the formed complex. Thus, one would expect the primary reaction to take place on the pyridyl nitrogen (Scheme 2), but a proton could also react on the thiadiazole nitrogen, to a lesser extent. It may also be possible for reactions via complexes with the lone pairs on the sulfur atoms.
In order to evaluate the site of protonation and to understand the effect of protonation on the electronic structure of d-DTS(PTTh2)2, the protonation was studied computationally (full details on the methods employed can be found in the ESI). It was determined that solution phase protonation is favored on the pyridyl N-atom by 18 kcal mol−1 over the next most basic site, the azole N-atoms of the thiadiazole ring. This roughly corresponds to an equilibrium constant >1010 in favor of pyridyl-N atom protonation. Direct evidence was given for shifts in the local electronic structure, as verified using XPS of the N 1s core level before and after protonation. The ESI provides an overview of this analysis, along with a parallel description of the S 2p core level. Fig. 5 provides electrostatic potential maps for d-DTS(PTTh2)2 and the mono- and bis-protonated adducts. Protonation shows a strong effect on the electron structure of d-DTS(PTTh2)2. Specifically, the protonation of the pyridyl N-atom results in a removal of electron density from the π-conjugated backbone, increasing the electron affinity of the molecular material. Therefore, protonation of the d-DTS(PTTh2)2 is effective at reducing the band gap of the material by withdrawing the electron density from the acceptor unit.
UPS was used to evaluate the valence band structure of d-DTS(PTTh2)2 before and after exposure to the p-TSA. Fig. 6A gives the UPS spectrum for the pristine and acid exposed d-DTS(PTTh2)2 films (spectra i and ii, respectively). Vertical tick marks denote the onset of photoemission for calculation of the sample work function (left panel), the edges of the filled density of states (adiabatic ionization energy), and the local vertical ionization energy (right panel). Fig. 6B gives the interpreted energy band diagram, with the electron affinities (EA) for the two interfaces estimated from the onset of the solid state absorbance spectrum (ESI).
The UPS spectrum of d-DTS(PTTh2)2 has a secondary edge 17.4 eV below the Fermi level, resulting in a measured work function of 3.8 eV (spectra i, Fig. 6A). There is a well-defined HOMO-like peak at −1.5 eV below the Fermi level (IEvert = 5.3 eV). The first vertical IE is consistent with previously reported HOMO value of 5.2 eV for d-DTS(PTTh2)2. The adiabatic onset occurs at 0.9 eV below the Fermi, yielding an IEadiab of 4.7 eV. Given the optical gap of 1.55 eV (ESI), this puts the electron affinity at 3.15 eV from vacuum (Fig. 6B).
Exposure of d-DTS(PTTh2)2 to the acid (Fig. 6A, spectrum ii) results in a positive shift in the vacuum level (ΔEvac = +0.2 eV) from the untreated film, resulting in an increase in the work function from 3.8 to 4.0 eV. The most prominent change occurs at the top of the valence band, with a suppression of the clear features of the HOMO-like states to a general tailing feature with an adiabatic onset at 1.1 eV below the Fermi level (IEadiab = 5.1 eV). The calculated HOMO and LUMO electronic energy levels given in the ESI predict a synergistic lowering of both electronic energy levels upon protonation. Both the experimental and calculated results indicate that the LUMO is lowered by the greatest extent. As predicted computationally, the band gap was observed to narrow significantly in solution, which corresponds with the large red shift in optical absorption, as recently reported. These results are in line with previous findings that Lewis acidic organoboranes form adducts with organic chromophores with basic nitrogen atom sites and narrow the band gap.
Given this new insight into the protonation of the d-DTS(PTTh2)2, we deduce that the interface with the PEDOT:PSS is actually comprised of two unique semiconductors, the protonated d-DTS(PTTh2)2 and the un-protonated form. Furthermore, the protonated d-DTS(PTTh2)2 has a very weak and broad density of states about the valence region, making it impossible to detect above the background signal from the PEDOT:PSS substrate in UPS. Thus, we cannot deduce a dipole, charge transfer, or chemical reaction at the interface from the UPS data alone (Fig. 2). However the local change in binding energy observed in core level shifts using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is independent of the dipole effect and reflects a change in local electron density from band bending (classic semiconductor theory interpretation) or differentiation between semiconductors (chemical interpretation), assuming a unique spectral signature. A review of the previously published characterization of the d-DTS(PTTh2)2 with and without p-TSA and on PEDOT:PSS and s-NiOx is given in the ESI. A clear distinction was found in the N 1s core level due to protonation of the pyridyl nitrogen; Fig. 7 gives the binding energies of the nitrogen 1s core level component for the pyridyl nitrogen (discussed in ESI) as a function of distance from the interlayer. For d-DTS(PTTh2)2 on PEDOT:PSS, there is shift in the N 1s signal to higher binding energies near the interface with the PEDOT:PSS; protonation of the pyridyl nitrogen withdraws net electron density, making it more difficult to oxidize and increasing the relative binding energy. From this, we can confirm the presence of the unique semiconductor at the surface and differentiate the change in the onset density of states of the HOMO level, in the absence of the dipole discussed in Fig. 3. Thus, the XPS, DFT, and absorbance data all indicate that the band diagram derived from only the UPS lead to an incorrect interpretation. When we use the UPS data to set the relative vacuum level with respect to the Fermi level, the optical absorption data to dictate the band gap, and the XPS/UPS of the interface and of the control experiment (Fig. 6) to determine the relative position of the HOMO level of the interface, we see that the band diagram is consistent with a barrier for hole extraction at the interface, as shown in Fig. 8. Furthermore, based on the absorption data, the conduction band on the protonated donor bends significantly toward the Fermi level. This may locally alter the driving force for electron transfer and/or reduce the charge generation. This coupled to increased recombination at the contact interface due to the barrier for hole extraction addresses the decreased photocurrent observed in the device characteristics, as seen in Table 1. The device results overall show a direct correlation in poor OPV performance with protonation. Current density–voltage (J–V) curves (Fig. 1) show s-kink like behavior near open circuit voltage, indicative of enhanced recombination within the device due to the hole extraction barrier. The fill factor is also low, suggesting poor interfacial behavior and inefficient charge extraction under reduced field conditions (approaching VOC), previously speculated to be due to restricted charge extraction at the HTL/organic interface.
Conversely, there is little difference in the binding energy of the N 1s for d-DTS(PTTh2)2 on s-NiOx in Fig. 7. In the case of a surface dipole (i.e. d-DTS(PTTh2)2 on s-NiOx), the core level electrons are shielded by valence level electrons and little shift in binding energy is observed. We conclude that the interface between s-NiOx and d-DTS(PTTh2)2 exhibits only a strong dipole effect, which extends approximately 1–2 nm from the interface into the organic. This results primarily in a local vacuum level shift, which locally increases the work function and IE of the d-DTS(PTTh2)2 near the interface. JV characteristics of the full device (Fig. 1; parameters in Table 1) show improved performance in open circuit voltage, partially due to the increased work function of the s-NiOx and as well as efficient hole extraction at the contact/active layer interface under low electric field conditions. As such there is also a dramatic increase in fill factor, leading to an overall power conversion efficiency of 5.1%.

The previous identification of the protonation reaction at the interface of d-DTS(PTTh2)2 and PEDOT:PSS lead to the structural evolution to replace the pyridyl nitrogens resulting in p-DTS(FBTTh2)2. The pyridyl[2,1,3]thiadiazole acceptor unit was replaced with a 5-fluorobeno[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole acceptor unit (FBT). The fluorine atom provides the necessary electron-withdrawing functionality, but eliminates the lone pairs present on the pyridyl nitrogen that are susceptible to protonation. Furthermore, converting from the distal (d-) to the proximal (p-) configuration alters the magnitude and direction of the internal molecular dipole, observed to impact the self-assembly of the molecule during film formation.

UPS and absorbance measurements of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 shown in Fig. 9 suggest similar electronic structure and optical band gap to d-DTS(PTTh2)2. In Fig. 9A, the onset ionization energy is measured at 0.7 eV below the Fermi level (IEadiab), with the vertical ionization energy, or local maximum of the HOMO, at approximately 1.2 eV below the Fermi level. Both the ionization energy (4.9 eV) and the work function (4.2 eV) of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 are slightly higher than d-DTS(PTTh2)2, making the material slightly more p-type (Fig. 9B). An increase in the ionization energy using the FBT acceptor unit indicates that it is a poorer acceptor than the PT unit, a fact reflected in the blue shift in the absorbance spectrum relative to d-DTS(PTTh2)2 in Fig. 9C. The λmax values of 590 and 678 nm and λonset value of 740 nm corresponding to optical band gap of 1.7. Previous cyclic voltammogram measurements report a HOMO value of 5.1 eV with an electrochemical gap of approximately 1.8 eV.
XPS measurements of the nitrogen 1s (N 1s) and sulfur 2p (S 2p) core levels of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 on s-NiOx and PEDOT:PSS are given in the ESI. Only a single environment for N 1s was observed at 399.3 eV for p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 on PEDOT:PSS and s-NiOx, associated with the thiadiazole group on the acceptor unit. There was no apparent binding energy shift in the thiadiazole peak of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2, relative to the same thiadiazole peak of d-DTS(PTTh2)2, indicating the usage of the fluorine atom did not significantly alter the local environment on the acceptor unit. For p-DTS(FBTTh2)2, the lone pair on the nitrogens of the thiadiazole units represents the most basic sites on p-DTS(FBTTh2)2, as determined from DFT calculations (ESI). Given there is no evidence for a higher binding energy shoulder on either the PEDOT:PSS or s-NiOx interlayers, we conclude altering the structure of the acceptor unit results in complete suppression of protonation of the molecule within the detection limits of the XPS experiment in the solid state.
Fig. 10A and B gives the UPS spectra for p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 on PEDOT:PSS and s-NiOx, respectively, as well as the derived energy band diagrams derived from UPS and optical measurements (ESI) in Fig. 10C and D. Energetic level alignment of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 on PEDOT:PSS and s-NiOx both show a strong dipole at the surface, as indicated by a downward shift of the vacuum level. The work function of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 at bulk on both interlayers is 4.2 eV, but with the onset density of states occurring closer to the Fermi level on PEDOT:PSS (IEadiab 4.6 eV) than on s-NiOx (IEadiab 4.8 eV). The absence of interfacial chemistry for p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 on PEDOT:PSS suggests that the energetic barrier for hole extraction formerly due to protonation have been eliminated. In fact, a recent report of blended heterojunctions of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 donors on PEDOT:PSS demonstrated a power conversion efficiency of 7.0% with a fill factor of 0.68, indicating suppression of surface recombination at the active layer/PEDOT:PSS interface therefore resulting in very efficient charge extraction and device performance. Further optimization using an inverted device architecture has led to power conversion efficiencies up to 8.9%.

We have evaluated the detailed effects of interfacial protonation of the donor molecule d-DTS(PTTh2)2 by the acidic PEDOT:PSS hole contact layer. Changes in energetics are elucidated by considering the model system for the reaction of d-DTS(PTTh2)2 with the strong protic acid, p-toluenesulfonic acid (p-TSA), a monomeric analogue of poly(4-styrenesulfonic acid) (PSS). The protonation was found to have a direct impact on the energetics of the system, as indicated by absorbance, ultraviolet and X-ray photoemission spectroscopies, and density functional theory calculations. Only by combining the set of techniques could we achieve full elucidation of the interface, which was found to be comprised of two unique semiconductors with different energetics, along with the PEDOT:PSS interlayer. More specifically, the protonated semiconductor has a greater ionization energy and electron affinity than the neutral donor species. The creation of this second semiconductor species at the interface results in a significant extraction barrier for holes from the active layer, due to the reduction in states near the bulk hole transport energy level in the interfacial protonated species. Such a finding lead to the structural evolution of d-DTS(PTTh2)2 to p-DTS(FBTTh2)2, which eliminates the pyridyl nitrogen site while maintaining the desired optical and electronic properties. Hence, efficient charge extraction and device performance can be obtained through elimination of the protonation reaction via use of a s-NiOx contact for the pyridyl d-DTS(PTTh2)2, or through the application of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 on a PEDOT:PSS contact.

This work attempts to identify the necessity for collaborative efforts to understand buried interfaces formed by entirely solution processed methods for organic electronic applications. One of the major limitations to using UPS to measure energetics of solution processed interfaces is the ability to control thicknesses of materials <10 nm length scales without altering the interfacial properties via different processing methods or tethering architectures. In this case, in the absence of additional experimental and theoretical data, the UPS interpretation would have led to the incorrect conclusion. Furthermore, it is important to consider interfacial reaction chemistry between materials, which can significantly impact the energetics, and hence, overall power conversion efficiencies of the device. Our ability to correctly identify the underlying mechanisms contributing to poor OPV performance enabled a structural evolution of the material, leading to a solution processed small-molecule OPV with power conversion efficiencies up to 8.9%.

ELR would like to thank Dr Selina Olthof (University of Cologne) for insightful conversations. ELR was supported by the Center for Interface Science: Solar Electric Materials, an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the US Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences under Award Number DE-SC0001084. RCB, GCW, TSvdP, AG, BAM, DSG, GCB, and DCO were supported by the Center for Energy Efficient Materials, an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the US Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences under Award Number DE-DC0001009. SRC acknowledges funding from the US Department of Energy, Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE), Postdoctoral Research Fellowship through the SunShot Solar Energy Technologies Program. We acknowledge support from the Center for Scientific Computing at the CNSI and MRL: an NSF MRSEC (DMR-1121053) and NSF CNS-0960316.

† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: 1H NMR spectra, and absorbance spectra of d-DTS(PTTh2)2 reacted with p-TSA in solution, XPS and solid state absorbance measurements of d-DTS(PTTh2)2 and p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 on PEDOT:PSS and s-NiOx, and reacted with p-TSA. See DOI: 10.1039/c3tc31064g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013