 DOI: 10.1039/C3CE40900G
(Communication)
CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 6911-6917

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Qian
Li
,

Yufen
Yang
,

Meiling
Sun
,

Yannan
Mu
,

Wuyou
Fu
,

Haibin
Yang
* and 

Lecheng
Tian


State key Laboratory of Superhard Materials, Jilin University, Changchun, 130012, P. R. China. E-mail: yanghb@jlu.edu.cn; Fax: +86-431-85168763; Tel: +86-431-85168763

Received
22nd May 2013
, Accepted 4th July 2013
First published on 4th July 2013
A novel perpendicularly aligned CdTe array with cauliflower-like morphology was fabricated on a Ni substrate using a simple electrochemical synthesis method. The samples were characterized by XRD, EDX and FESEM, and the results demonstrate that a high-purity, uniform cauliflower-like CdTe array was obtained. Rod lengths can reach to 3.0 μm, with nanoparticles stacking along the rod growth direction, keeping the diameter at 1.5 μm. A schematic diagram of the possible growth process and evolution from CdTe seed nuclei to the cauliflower-like CdTe array was proposed. The device based on the aligned array-on-Ni configuration demonstrates excellent photoelectrical properties, which is ascribed to the large absorption coefficient of the material and also suggests good electronic structure quality of the cauliflower-like rods. The technique described is applicable to fabricate highly aligned cauliflower-like semiconductor arrays on other conductive substrates.

Solar power is a promising candidate as a sustainable energy supply. As a result, much effort has been put into developing inexpensive materials and architectures that reduce cost and/or increase efficiency. In the search for low-cost alternatives to monocrystalline silicon, thin film p-CdTe:n-CdS photovoltaic cells prepared by electrodeposition are reaching the point where commercial exploitation is feasible. For optimal conversion efficiency, solar devices must absorb most of the incident light and the resulting charges must be utilized before they recombine. CdTe thin film has an optical band gap which is very suitable for its use as an absorption layer in solar cell structures, so the growth of high quality CdTe nanocrystalline thin films is important. In recent years, it has been suggested that one-dimensional (1D) CdTe nanostructures can serve as functional building blocks for optoelectronic and photovoltaic nanodevices, which is a crucial aspect of increasing the current energy conversion efficiency of solar cells.

At present, CdTe one-dimensional semiconductor materials have been successfully synthesized by several methods, including electrodeposition, template-assisted solution chemical reaction, solution–liquid–solid (SLS) processes, close space sublimation (CSS), metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) and catalyst-assisted syntheses of vapor–liquid–solid (VLS), especially the electrochemical method has shown importance in the synthesis of films, since it is a low-temperature, low-cost, and facile technique with good control of the deposited composition. Electrochemistry is a powerful tool for making CdTe materials because the grain size can be adjusted by varying the electrochemical parameters such as bath composition, voltage, current, and temperature. Therefore, more and more researchers are concentrating on electrochemical deposition to fabricate patterned vertically aligned CdTe. For instance, vertically aligned CdTe nanotubes have been demonstrated on ITO glass in large scale by using ZnO nanorod arrays as templates. Herein, it remains a great challenge to develop a simple, template-free and mild (at room temperature) electrochemical synthesis method for patterned vertically aligned CdTe semiconductor materials.
In this work, we developed a simple one-step, template-free electrochemical deposition method for a novel CdTe array with cauliflower-like morphology on a Ni substrate at room temperature without the use of any external agent. Their synthesis process is carefully studied and the photoelectrochemical properties were also investigated. Detailed characterization of the sample morphology, structure and composition were performed, and a possible growth mechanism is proposed.

The electrodeposition of CdTe was performed at room temperature in a three-electrode electrochemical cell with the substrate (Ni) as the cathode, a graphite plate as the counter electrode and a saturated silver/silver chloride (Ag/AgCl) electrode as the reference electrode (Scheme 1). Before performing the experiment, the Ni substrates had been pretreated by an ultrasonic cleaner for 20 min in isopropanol, acetone, anhydrous ethanol and double-distilled water respectively. In this paper all the potentials are quoted versus Ag/AgCl. For all the experiments presented here the electrolytic solution was prepared by dissolving 0.1 M of Cd ions (the precursor salt is CdSO4·8/3H2O) in a saturated solution of Te ions (Na2TeO3, about 0.005 M). The deposition bath typically contained 0.3 M Na2SO4, which acts, among other roles as a supporting electrolyte. The pH of the electrolyte was adjusted by adding H2SO4. After deposition, the samples were washed with distilled water to remove excess telluride from the surface. Finally, the fabricated samples were annealed at 400 °C for 0.5 h in a high-purity nitrogen atmosphere, and then used for experimental tests.

The morphology of the as-prepared product were investigated using a Scanning Electron Microscope JEOLJXA-8200 (SEM). The structural properties were analyzed using a Rigaku D/max-2500 X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å). Energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX) of the sample was performed with an EDAX Genesis 2000 system (FEI Inc) installed on the XL 30 ESEM imaging instrument. Optical measurements were performed using a Pharmicia LKB Ultraspec III UV-vis spectrophotometer at room temperature and the band gap energies were calculated from the absorbance data. The optoelectronic properties were investigated using a electrochemical workstation (CH Instruments model CHI601C), which was used to measure illuminated current at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. The sunlight was calibrated by a 500 W xenon lamp (Spectra Physics) and the light intensity was simulated with a laser power meter (BG26M92C, Midwest Group), amount to light at 100 mW cm−2. A computer controlled potentiostat was used to control the potential and record the photocurrent generated.

The electrolyte proposed in this work for the electrodeposition of CdTe was an aqueous solution composed of 0.005 M sodium tellurite (Na2TeO3), 0.3 M sodium sulfate (Na2SO4), and 0.1 M cadmium sulfate (CdSO4) with a solution pH of 2.0. The sulfuric acid can prevent the two precursors (cadmium sulfate and sodium tellurite) from the reaction from generating a milky precipitate in the electrolyte solution. To investigate the electrochemical potential of CdTe in the acid electrolyte, a cyclic voltammetry test was performed on a pure Ni substrate. Fig. 1 shows the cyclic voltammogram of Cd2+ and Te4−. The potential was changed between +1 V and −1 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) and the scan rate was 100 mV s−1. Two cathodic peaks and two anodic peaks were observed. One large cathodic peak was observed at −0.56 V and another small cathodic peak was observed at −0.75 V, which respectively correspond to the reductions of TeO32− to elemental Te and Te to Te2− according to:

TeO32− + 3H2O + 4e → Te0 + 6OH−
(1)
Te0 + 2e → Te2−
(2)
Te2− + Cd2+ → CdTe
(3)
When the potential was scanned to the negative potential direction, the cathodic current began to increase gradually at about an applied potential of −0.25 V versus Ag/AgCl. At the same time, a visible dark-grey Te film appeared on the surface of the Ni substrate in our experiment. It should be attributed to the reduction of TeO32−. The redox reaction is described in eqn (1). The second peak at an applied potential of approximately −0.75 V versus Ag/AgCl is correlated with the bulk deposition of elemental Cd. The reaction is represented as follows:
Cd2+ + 2e → Cd
In order to fabricate the cauliflower-like CdTe array, Te4+ must be reduced to Te2+ to react with Cd2+, and then CdTe can be formed as a result of the electrostatic attraction on the Ni substrate in the electrolyte solution. The bath constituents, Cd and Te2−, have extremely different standard electrode potentials (E(Cd/Cd2+) = −0.403 V (SHE), E(Te/Te2−) = 0.551 V (SHE)), and according to the cyclic voltammogram for CdTe, we can estimated that the region for the formation of CdTe lies about −0.75 V (versus Ag/AgCl) where the reduction of CdTe occurs. CdTe was deposited by following reaction:
TeO32− + Cd2+ + 3H2O + 6e → CdTe + 6OH−
(4)
The morphology of the CdTe was adjusted by varying the deposition potential during the electrodeposition process.

The change of cathodic current density with time is shown in Fig. 2 during the potentiostatic electrodeposition at a potential of −0.75 V versus Ag/AgCl for the first 120 s. It was observed that the cathodic current density increases quickly at initial time and decreases gradually. During electrodeposition, first, all the current densities increase abruptly due to nucleation on the substrate surface. After the attainment of uniform nucleation on the entire surface, the current density became constant and the film growth began. In a word, the sudden increase in current density, then gradual decreasing corresponded to the formation of CdTe nucleus and growth of CdTe layer on the Ni substrate, respectively.


Fig. 3 shows the X-ray diffraction patterns of as-deposited cauliflower-like CdTe array deposited at different potentials. For pure cauliflower-like CdTe array, all the diffraction peaks marked by triangles can be respectively indexed to the (111), (220), (311), (400), and (331) planes of zinc-blende CdTe with the exception of some peaks attributed to Ni substrate. The (111) direction is obviously much more intensified than other directions, which suggests that the (111) growth direction of the cauliflower-like CdTe nanorods prepared by electrochemical method. From curve (a) of Fig. 3, the CdTe electrodeposition occurs at −0.70 V, and the Te atoms are deposited prior to the Cd atoms on the substrate surface. Some Cd2+ ions are adsorbed and almost combine with Te to immediately form the CdTe compound. Because of the presence of too many Te atoms, two small Te peaks are observed.

This result corresponds to Te-rich CdTe compounds. The perfect stoichiometry film can be observed at −0.75 V in curve (b); at this potential, the composition of CdTe is almost stoichiometric. For a more negative potential (−0.80 V), most Cd2+ ions are absorbed on Te atoms; however, excess Cd2+ ions react with electrons to produce Cd-rich CdTe compounds. Hence, there is one weak peak for Cd in curve (c). The CdTe crystals have a face-centered cubic structure of which the (111) surface atoms is the most intensive, therefore, in crystal growth of CdTe, in order to reduce the system free energy, grains will be firstly grow in the (111) plane, while grow slower in other planes, which can produce preferred orientation. The CdTe prepared on the Ni substrate has the strong textured phenomenon, so it can promote the formation of columnar crystals with a certain orientation, which is beneficial to improve the photoelectric conversion efficiency.
The energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectrum (Fig. 4) taken from the nanocable array after the electrodeposition reveals a Cd/Te atomic ratio close to 1 which suggests that the electrochemical reaction of TeO32− and Cd2+ takes place in one step, as shown in eqn (4), without the formation of intermediate elemental Te.

By adjusting the deposition potential passed through the working electrode during the electrochemical deposition process, the morphology of the CdTe sample can be tuned from nanorods to cauliflower-like CdTe rods. Fig. 5 panels a–c show the 60° tilted-angle-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the cauliflower-like CdTe array deposited at the voltages of −0.70 V, −0.75 V, and −0.80 V, respectively. It can be clearly seen that there is a morphological transition while increasing the voltage. Fig. 5(a) shows a poor cauliflower-like CdTe array at −0.70 V, a lot of rod-like particles grow upright, but there are still some cauliflower-like CdTe rods that grow well. In Fig. 5(c), high-density cauliflower-like CdTe array vertically aligned in a large area can be observed at −0.75 V, the length of the cauliflower-like CdTe rod can reach up to 3 μm, and the diameter can reach up to 1.5 μm. From the top of the cauliflower-like CdTe rod we can see it is similar to bud as shown in Fig. 5(d). When the deposition potential was increased to −0.80 V (shown in Fig. 5(b)), a lot of CdTe nanorods are mixed in the cauliflower-like CdTe array, the nanorod length can reach up to 2 μm, and the diameters reach up to 1 μm. Almost all the ends of the CdTe nanorods tend to be pointed. The pointed top of the nanorod may be due to the surface tension effects, whereby the surface-to-volume ratio is minimized.

However, on increasing the deposition voltage further cathodically, a large amount of Cd is reduced by over potential and corresponds to Cd and CdTe compounds. Because of the fast overgrowth, the thin film will be easily stripped from the substrate. These results confirmed that the addition of deposition potential in has a great impact on the morphology of CdTe electrodeposited on the electrode surface.
A cauliflower-like CdTe array was prepared from 0.1 M CdSO4·8/3H2O + 0.005 M Na2TeO3 + 0.3 M Na2SO4 in acid solution for different time durations at deposition temperature of about 25 °C. Fig. 6 shows the variation of length of the cauliflower-like CdTe rod deposited on the Ni substrate with deposition time. It is observed that initially as the deposition time increases, length of the cauliflower-like CdTe rod increases, attains maximum length and then decreases with further increase in the deposition time. The maximum length (3 μm) is attained in the first 60 min and with further deposition time, the cauliflower-like rod length decreased to 2 μm for the 80 min. This is attributed to the increase in the rate of dissolution than the rate of deposition after attaining the maximum length.

Fig. 7 shows schematically the three-step possible growth process illustration of this special structure under the respective growth condition employed in our experiment. It is well known that crystal formation in solution can be divided into two stages: crystal nucleation occurs followed by crystal growth occurring from the crystal nuclei. The latter process can also be understood as growth units diffusing in the solution and adsorbing on the nuclei. Based on the experiments and mechanism proposed previously, we think that the growth process includes three stages: in the beginning, the motion velocity of Cd and Te atoms from electrolyte to the Ni substrate is slow because of the abundance of these atoms, with a constant current density. Hence, those atoms can diffuse adequately to form the close-packed (001) plane of their own to complete the oriented growth of the CdTe nanocrystals perpendicular to the Ni substrate. These [001] oriented nanocrystals are thought to adjust the reactants' concentrations as the seed layer.
With the decrease of the reactants' concentrations continually, the velocity of those atoms increases, causing the formation of an unclose-packed (100) plane. This perpendicular transformation of the oriented direction is accompanied by the fine CdTe grains reuniting to turn into cauliflower-like grains.

The optical band gap values of the films were obtained from transmission measurements and by plotting (αhν)2vs. hν. Fig. 8 shows the approximate data at near the band edge for the cauliflower-like CdTe array deposited at three different voltages. The extrapolated values of the optical energy gap, Eg, are 1.72 eV, 1.60 eV and 1.55 eV for films deposited at −0.70 V, −0.75 V, −0.80 V, respectively. As can be seen from these data the trend is movement of the absorption edge towards lower energies appropriate for cauliflower-like CdTe array with increasing deposition voltage.

The variation of optical density with wavelength was analyzed to find out the nature of the transition involved and the optical band gap, using the relation
αhν = A0[hν − Eg]n
where
hν is the photon energy, Eg is the band gap energy and A0 is a constant which is related to the effective masses associated with the bands. The value of n is equal to 1/2 for a direct band gap material and 2 for indirect gap. The absorption (α ≥ 104 cm−1) is related to direct band transitions. The optical band gaps of the films were determined from the extrapolation of the linear plot of (αhν)2vs. hν at α = 0 (Fig. 8). The band gap of the cauliflower-like CdTe array electrodeposited at −0.75 V was found to be 1.60 eV, which is higher then the value for the band gap energy of bulk CdTe. It can be seen from Fig. 8 that the band gap energy decreases while the deposition voltage increases.

To further investigate the fundamental photovoltaic performance of the cauliflower-like CdTe array, current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics of different samples were measured under chopped white light with an intensity of ∼100 mW cm−2. The curves are shown in Fig. 9; the aqueous electrolyte contained 0.2 M NaOH, 0.2 M Na2S, and 0.2 M S and strongly absorbs at wavelengths <500 nm. This polysulfide (Sn2−) redox mediator is known to form charge-separating junctions with CdTe and to suppress photo-oxidation. The short circuit current (JSC), open circuit voltage (VOC), the fill factor (FF), and the white light power conversion efficiency (η) were determined from current density versus voltage (J–V) analysis. The efficiency of solar cells is represented by the expression:
η = VOCJSCFF100/P
in which the fill factor (FF) is given by

FF = VmJm/VOCJSC
The
VOC, JSC, FF and the effective area photoelectric conversion efficiency for the cauliflower-like CdTe array deposited at different potentials are given in Table 1. As shown in Table 1, the highest JSC and η% values are obtained from the cauliflower-like CdTe array thin film photoelectrode which was deposited at the voltage of −0.75 V. The JSC and VOC are 5.01 mA and 0.33 V, respectively, the values are much higher than that of the CdTe nanorod array photoelectrode in the latest report (ISC = 0.036 mA, VOC = 0.217 V) (Luo et al. 2012). The cauliflower-like CdTe array structure did exhibit improved overall short-circuit current densities and efficiency vs. the nanorod array structure.

Deposition potential (vs. Ag/AgCl)
−0.07 V
−0.75 V
−0.80 V

a The power of the incident light was ∼100 mW cm−2.


I
SC (mA cm−2)
3.26
5.01
3.64

V
OC (V)
0.22
0.33
0.38
FF
0.29
0.37
0.28

η (%)
0.21
0.61
0.39
It is important to point out that the high photocurrent not only resulted from the intrinsic high absorption efficiency of CdTe with an optimum band gap that matches the solar irradiation spectrum but is also attributed to the good electronic structure quality of the particular 1D cauliflower-like CdTe rod. As shown in Fig. 10, the morphology of the cauliflower-like CdTe array has a large light-receiving area, and the cauliflower-like rod geometry allows a more efficient collection of photogenerated minority carriers over a limited collection length than other structures do, consequently, when the sample is irradiated by the simulated solar light, it absorbs more light, and as a result, more electron–hole pairs would separate in the space charge region which is generated at the interface between the cauliflower-like rod and the polysulphide electrolyte. Electrons are concentrated into the center of the cauliflower-like CdTe rod to be transported, and holes are transferred to the polysulphide redox electrolyte solution. In addition, the vertical array configuration of the cauliflower-like rods on the Ni substrates ensures a direct pathway for the photogenerated charge carriers to travel along the longitudinal direction of the cauliflower-like rods with minimum loss. Although the Ni/cauliflower-like CdTe array/polysulphide junction is an intricate system, it can be a benchmarking basis that achieves the purposes of power output characteristics. As seen from the results of energy conversion efficiency, there is still much room for improvement.
Overall, the cauliflower-like CdTe array has an enhanced short circuit current and open circuit voltage compared with traditional CdTe nanorod arrays, it shows the potential in solar energy conversion devices and the excellent photovoltaic performance. The characterization of the cauliflower-like CdTe array half-cell photoelectrochemically is useful because (1) the liquid electrolyte establishes good contact with the entire surface of the cauliflower-like CdTe rods and (2) photoexcited charge carriers are generated exclusively in the cauliflower-like CdTe rods. Therefore, this work provides a cost-effective technology and architectures suitable for the fabrication of solid-state photovoltaic cells with interpenetrating heterojunctions on the nanoscale level and high-efficiency photoelectrochemical solar cells. The excellent photovoltaic performance and its array-on-Ni configuration make them a promising candidate for applications in solar energy conversion devices.

In summary, we have successfully prepared the cauliflower-like CdTe array on a Ni substrate by an electrochemical synthesis method at room temperature. A uniform growth with well-connected cauliflower-like CdTe array morphology can be obtained at −0.75 V, the length of cauliflower-like CdTe rod can reach up to 3 μm, and the diameter can reach up to 1.5 μm. The samples exhibited an improved open circuit voltage, short circuit current, and consequently an overall enhancement of the power conversion efficiency relative to nanorod arrays structure, which make them a promising candidate for applications in solar energy conversion devices. Furthermore, it may provide a reference for the preparation of other cauliflower-like semiconductor arrays by electrochemical synthesis methods. From the results of the photoelectrochemical properties studies, the cauliflower-like CdTe array will have much more potential application in photoelectrochemical (PEC) solar cells in the future. Our results might be of considerable interest to improve the efficiency of solar cells.


This work was financially supported by the Technology Development Program of Jilin Province (Grant No. 20100417) and National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51272086).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013