 DOI: 10.1039/D0TA04366D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 11859-11866


Yafeng
Xu
,

Jialong
Duan
*,

Xiya
Yang
,

Jian
Du
,

Yudi
Wang
,

Yanyan
Duan
 and 

Qunwei
Tang
*

Institute of New Energy Technology, College of Information Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, PR China. E-mail: duanjialong@jnu.edu.cn; tangqunwei@jnu.edu.cn

State Centre for International Cooperation on Designer Low-Carbon and Environmental Material (SCICDLCEM), School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, PR China

Received
25th April 2020
, Accepted 21st May 2020
First published on 21st May 2020
The electron-transporting layer (ETL) plays a non-negligible role in determining the charge extraction and transfer behaviors from perovskite films under solar irradiation for high efficiency perovskite solar cells. A suitable band structure, good conductivity, high electron mobility and low trap state density are preferred for the desired ETL to maximize the electricity generation and minimize the charge recombination. Herein, we have demonstrated that the incorporation of antimony (Sb) dopants into the lattice of low-temperature processed TiO2 nanocrystals can effectively suppress the formation of under-coordinated Ti3+ and oxygen vacancies, leading to improved electronic conductivity and mobility. When assembling into all-inorganic, carbon-based CsPbBr3 planar perovskite solar cells free of noble metal electrodes, an enhanced efficiency of 8.91% with an ultra-high open-circuit voltage of 1.654 V and reduced hysteresis from 32% to 15% is achieved based on the Sb-doped TiO2 ETL. The mechanism behind this phenomenon is mainly attributed to the improved perovskite film quality and significantly reduced charge recombination. Taking the advantages of low temperature, low defect state density, high electrical conductivity and mobility into consideration, the Sb-doped TiO2 ETL demonstrates great potential in advanced perovskite solar cells even in flexible devices.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have achieved rapid development because the power conversion efficiency (PCE) has increased from 3.8% to a certified 25.2% in the past decade due to the excellent photoelectric properties of halide perovskites. However, the unsatisfactory stability of PSCs is still one of the great challenges for commercialization. One effective strategy to overcome this bottleneck is to replace the vulnerable organic cations like methylammonium (MA+) and formamidinium (FA+) in hybrid perovskites by inorganic Cs+ to form all-inorganic CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 perovskites. Notably, the state-of-the-art PCE of CsPbI3 PSCs is over 19%, but the spontaneous phase conversion under an ambient environment due to the undesired tolerance factor still limits their use under real conditions. In contrast, tri-brominated CsPbBr3 with a large band gap of 2.3 eV exhibits excellent stability under harsh conditions even under high temperature (85 °C) and high humidity (90% RH) conditions, suggesting their great potential in semi-transparent and tandem photovoltaics. Till now, the efficiency of the corresponding device has been gradually improved to nearly 11% by means of optimizing film fabrication technology, regulating the crystal lattice, and accelerating charge extraction,etc. The large open-circuit voltage (Voc) loss is one major reason for their lower efficiency below the theoretical value of 15.9%, which is highly determined by the photogenerated carrier extraction and transfer behaviour at the interface between charge transfer layer and the perovskite film. Therefore, how to reduce the voltage loss is undoubtedly regarded as one challenge in all-inorganic CsPbBr3 PSCs.

Among the stat-of-the-art PSCs, titanium dioxide (TiO2) has been widely used as an electron-transporting layer (ETL) and a hole-blocking layer owing to its advantages of suitable energy levels in comparison to halide perovskites, high optical transparency and long-term stability, et al. However, the inevitable defects such as under-coordinated Ti3+ trap states, oxygen vacancies (OV) and interstitial cations are spontaneously formed during the phase conversion process and result in substantial charge recombination centers, especially for the low-temperature processed TiO2 nanocrystals which are compatible with large-scale fabrication and flexible photovoltaics. According to previous reports, the engineering of the crystal lattice by incorporating metal ions (such as K+, B3+, Y3+, Co2+, Li+, and Pt4+) or carbon materials (such as graphene, C60) can effectively regulate the electronic state of TiO2 films by forming metal–oxygen vacancy pairs and reducing the number of mid-gap states, which in turn promotes carrier extraction ability and alleviates charge accumulation (hysteresis effect) at the interface. Following this line of thought, employing this strategy to manipulate the properties of low-temperature processed TiO2 is promising to achieve low-cost and high-efficiency PSCs.
Inspired by previous work, we demonstrate here low-temperature processed antimony (Sb) doped TiO2 (Sb-TiO2) nanocrystals as an ETL to regulate the crystal lattice and to improve the charge extraction and transfer ability. Upon systematic optimization, the all-inorganic planar CsPbBr3 PSC with FTO/Sb-TiO2/CsPbBr3/carbon architecture achieves an enhanced PCE of up to 8.91% with an ultrahigh Voc as high as 1.654 V, and the hysteresis is also reduced from 32% to 15%. To the best of our knowledge, the Voc reported in this work is to date the highest value in single-junction photovoltaics (see Table S1) and the PCE is also a cutting-edge value in inorganic CsPbBr3 PSCs without the compositional and interfacial engineering for perovskite films, demonstrating the potential application of low-temperature processed ETLs in high-efficiency platforms even in flexible devices. The mechanism behind this performance enhancement is mainly attributed to the suppressed formation of Ti3+/OV defect states and upward band edges, resulting in significantly reduced carrier recombination.

Ethanol (AR), methanol (AR), chloroform (AR), and dimethylformamide (DMF, AR) were purchased from Guangzhou Chemical Reagent Factory. SbCl3 (99.9%), TiCl4 (99.9%), benzyl alcohol (99%), PbBr2 (99%), CsBr (99.9%) and acetonitrile (99.8%) were purchased from Aladdin. Tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (TBAPF6, 98%) was purchased from Aldrich. Carbon paste was purchased from Shanghai MaterWin New Materials Co., Ltd. All chemicals were used without any further purification.


TiO2 nanocrystals were synthesized according to a low-temperature processed solvothermal method. 0.5 mL TiCl4 was added dropwise to 2.0 mL ethanol with strong stirring in an ice-water bath. Subsequently, 10 mL anhydrous benzyl alcohol was added to the TiCl4 ethanol solution and stirred for 20 min. The light yellow solution was then transferred to a vessel and heated at 85 °C for 12 h in an oven. For Sb-doped TiO2, 0.25, 0.5, 1 and 2 mol% SbCl3 with respect to TiCl4 was added during the formation process. Finally, TiO2 nanocrystals were obtained by centrifugation at 9000 rpm for 20 min, and washed several times with ethanol to remove the residual reactants. The washed TiO2 nanocrystals were re-dispersed into the mixed solvent (chloroform/methanol = 1:1 in volume) with various concentrations of 10, 15, 20 and 25 mg mL−1 before use.


An FTO-coated glass substrate was etched with zinc powder and HCl (2 M) to obtain the desired pattern and then thoroughly cleaned with detergent, deionized water and ethanol under sonication. TiO2 nanocrystal dispersion was spin-coated on the FTO substrate at 2000 rpm for 30 s and then annealed at 150 °C for 30 min in air. CsPbBr3 films were fabricated by a multi-step spin-coating method in air. 1 M PbBr2 DMF solution was spin-coated on the FTO/TiO2 substrate at 2000 rpm for 30 s under 100 °C, and then annealed at 100 °C for 40 min. 0.07 M CsBr methanol solution was spin-coated on the PbBr2 film at 2000 rpm for 30 s and annealed at 250 °C for 5 min, then cooled to room temperature. By spin-coating the CsBr solution several times, an ideal CsPbBr3 film was obtained. Finally, the devices were fabricated by blade-coating the carbon paste and annealing at 100 °C for 10 min.


The morphology of TiO2 nanocrystals and the perovskite film was characterized using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (SEM, S4800, Hitachi). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images were obtained using a FEI Tecnai G2 20 microscope. The Sb dosage was measured by using an Agilent 725-ES inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the as-prepared films were recorded using a X-ray diffractometer (Bruker D8 ADVANCE) with Cu Kα (λ = 1.5406 Å) radiation. Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra were measured by using an ultraviolet-visible spectrometer (UV-8000A, Shanghai Metash Instruments Co., Ltd). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed on a Thermo Scientific K-Alpha XPS instrument with Al Kα radiation (hν = 1486.68 eV). The cyclic-voltammetry measurements were carried out using Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode, platinum foil as the counter electrode, and TiO2 or Sb-TiO2 film as the working electrode in an electrolyte containing tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (0.1 M in anhydrous acetonitrile). Photoluminescence (PL) spectra were measured on a spectrofluorometer (RF-5301PC, Shimadzu). The time-resolved PL (TRPL) decay curves were recorded using a Horiba spectrometer excited by using a 510 nm laser. The incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of various devices were recorded by using an IPCE kit developed by Enli Technology Co., Ltd. The photo current–voltage (J–V) curves were measured using a solar simulator (Newport, Oriel Class A, 91195A) under AM 1.5G simulated solar illumination (100 mW cm−2, calibrated by using a standard silicon solar cell). A black mask with an active area of 0.09 cm2 was applied on the surface of cell device to avoid stray light. Tafel curves, Mott–Schottky curves and open-circuit voltage decay (OCVD) curves were both measured on the CHI660E electrochemical workstation.


Prior to photovoltaic characterization experiments, we have studied the impacts of Sb dopants on the properties of TiO2 nanocrystals. Fig. 1a and b show the TEM images of low-temperature processed TiO2 nanocrystals with and without Sb dopants. Obviously, both nanocrystals display a narrow distribution with an average size of 5 nm, which is similar to previous reports and is beneficial to form a compact ETL and reduced shunt current loss upon assembling into solar cells. The HRTEM images (insets in Fig. 1a and b) indicate that the as-prepared TiO2 nanocrystals are highly crystalline with continuous lattice fringes with a spacing of 0.35 nm, corresponding to the (101) plane of anatase TiO2. From the top-view and cross-sectional SEM images of pure TiO2 and Sb-TiO2 films in Fig. 1c–f, a smooth and dense film on the FTO substrate with a thickness of ∼100 nm is fabricated. Comparing to the wrinkled FTO substrate, the smooth FTO/TiO2 substrate can effectively improve the solar light transparency to ensure enough absorption for the CsPbBr3 film owing to the gradual refractive index distribution and increased solar-weighted transmittance, which will be discussed in the following part.

XRD patterns are conducted to better understand the doping mechanism. As shown in Fig. 1g, several characteristic diffraction peaks centered at 25.3°, 37.8°, 48.0°, 53.8° and 62.7° match well with the (101), (004), (200), (105) and (204) planes of anatase TiO2 (JCPDS 21-1272), respectively, agreeing well with the HRTEM characterization experiments. In addition, the absence of other Sb-containing related phases in the XRD pattern of Sb-TiO2 indicates the formation of an excellent solid solution even at low temperatures, retaining the structure of the TiO2 host. Furthermore, the nearly unchanged diffraction peaks demonstrate that the actual doping amount may be very small (less than the feeding amount). However, there is a slight shift of the (101) diffraction peak towards a smaller angle by increasing the Sb dosage in the precursor solution, as shown in Fig. S1, which is an indicator of expanded TiO2 lattice after introducing Sb3+ with a larger radius due to the large ion radius difference between Sb3+ (92 pm) and Ti4+ (68 pm). To further confirm the successful incorporation of Sb into the TiO2 lattice and determine the Sb amount in Sb-TiO2, ICP-OES and XPS measurements were carried out to reveal the evolution of the TiO2 lattice. ICP-OES results indicate that the Sb/Ti molar ratio in Sb-TiO2 is only 0.037%, which is much lower than that in the reaction precursor (0.5%), and the corresponding SEM element mapping images are also provided in Fig. S2. Due to the very low Sb content, it is difficult to observe Sb signals in the XPS spectra of Sb-TiO2 nanocrystals (see Fig. S3a and b). However, the Ti 2p XPS spectra show that both Ti 2p3/2 and Ti 2p1/2 peaks centered at 464.4 and 458.6 eV from the Ti–O bonds shift slightly to higher binding energies upon doping Sb element, as shown in Fig. 1h. The mechanism behind this phenomenon is mainly attributed to the higher electronegativity of Sb compared with Ti (2.05 vs. 1.54), resulting in the partial electron transfer from Ti atoms to Sb atoms spontaneously, which in turn converts the Ti oxidation state from Ti3+ to Ti4+ and significantly reduces the Ti3+-mediated charge traps. In addition, the binding energies of O 1s peaks of pristine TiO2 centered at 529.9 eV and 531.0 eV are ascribed to TiO2 and hydroxyl groups or carbonate species on the surface (Fig. 1i). Obviously, the O 1s peaks exhibit the same variation trend with Ti 2p peaks in the presence of Sb atoms, further suggesting the successful linkage of Sb–O–Ti in the Sb-TiO2 lattice. Taking the lower valence of Sb3+ into consideration, the Ti3+-induced OV can be effectively passivated by forming three Sb–O bonds and the schematic diagram is shown in Fig. S4. Till now, it can be seen that the TiO2 lattice is well regulated and the defects such as Ti3+ and OV are reduced, which is beneficial for the maximal power output.
As well known, the high optical transmittance, suitable band structure, good conductivity, high electron mobility and low trap state density are several crucial parameters for high performance solar cells. With the aim to better understand their potential application as ETLs, the optical and electrical properties of TiO2 films are systematically investigated. Fig. 2a and b show the absorption and transmittance spectra of TiO2 films with and without Sb dopants. Both of them display high average transmittance in the visible region with the slightly reduced bandgap from 3.60 eV to 3.57 eV according to the Tauc's equation (αhν)1/2 = B(hν − Eg), confirming the doping effect owing to the regulated lattice (much higher doping levels were also measured as shown in Fig. S5), where α is the absorption coefficient, hν is the photon energy and B is the constant. Furthermore, comparing to the pristine FTO substrate, the optical transmission has been significantly improved upon spin-coating TiO2 onto the surface of FTO owing to the smoother surface and reduced optical loss, providing a prerequisite for enough light harvest and high PCE, which can be cross-checked by the SEM images (Fig. 1c–f). To determine the energy levels of the low-temperature processed TiO2 and Sb-TiO2, cyclic-voltammetry measurements were carried out. As shown in Fig. 2c, TiO2 and Sb-TiO2 films exhibit onset reduction potentials of −0.11 V and −0.17 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), in other words, the conduction band edges of TiO2 and Sb-TiO2 are calculated to be −4.02 eV (valence band: −7.62 eV) and −3.96 eV (valence band: −7.53 eV) by combining with optical bandgaps, respectively. The upward shift of about 0.06 eV is beneficial for enhancing the Voc of the corresponding solar cells.
To measure the electron mobility of TiO2 and Sb-TiO2 films, the electron transfer behaviors were recorded by the space charge-limited current (SCLC) method employing an electron-only device and the corresponding electrical parameters are summarized in Table S2. The dark J–V curves of FTO/TiO2 or Sb-TiO2/carbon devices fitted using the Mott–Gurney law are shown in Fig. 2d:
where
ε is the relative dielectric constant of TiO2 (ε = 55), ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, L is the thickness of the ETLs (200 nm), Vb is the applied voltage and μ represents electron mobility. After careful calculation, the electron mobility of the Sb-TiO2 film is determined to be 6.58 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is higher than that of TiO2 film (5.44 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1). Furthermore, the direct current conductivities were also calculated from the slope of the current–voltage curves according to equation I = σAL−1V, where σ and A are the conductivity and active area. As shown in Fig. 2e, the conductivity is increased to 1.99 × 10−3 mS cm−1 for the Sb-TiO2 film from 1.19 × 10−3 mS cm−1 for the pure TiO2 film, agreeing well with the results of electron mobility measurements. The significantly reduced defect states (Ti3+ and OV) are responsible for the improved carrier mobility and conductivity. As a result, the interfacial charge accumulation will be undoubtedly alleviated and therefore the much higher power output when assembling into solar cells. To highlight the trap state density (nt) in TiO2 films in-depth, we have further calculated the trap filled limit voltage (VTFL) obeying the following equation:
where
e is the elementary charge. As shown in Fig. 2f, the linear relationship (green line) indicates an ohmic response at a low bias voltage; when the bias voltage further increases over the value of VTFL, the current increases nonlinearly (blue line), indicating that the trap states are fully filled. Following this line of thought, the trap state density of TiO2 and Sb-TiO2 are determined to be 3.15 × 1017 cm−3 and 2.67 × 1017 cm−3, respectively, a direct evidence of reduced trap states by tailoring the lattice of low-temperature processed TiO2 nanocrystals with Sb atoms.

On the basis of the aforementioned advantages of Sb-TiO2, all-inorganic CsPbBr3 perovskite films were subsequently fabricated onto the planar TiO2 and Sb-TiO2 films by a multistep spin-coating method proposed by our group for the first time. As illustrated from the top-view SEM images presented in Fig. 3a and b, both films are stacked densely and are pinhole free with an average grain size of ∼0.9 μm, which is consist with our previous reports. However, compared to the CsPbBr3 film on the traditional mesoporous TiO2 substrate (Fig. S6), the grain size is significantly increased, which may be mainly attributed to the presence of Cl element (Fig. S3c) on the surface of TiO2 nanocrystals. Upon incorporating Sb3+ into the TiO2 lattice, the numerous small cracks between the two grains disappeared along with the slightly enhanced grain size owing to the regulation of nucleation kinetics and interfacial binding behaviour with the perovskite, which can be also cross-checked by the increased absorption spectra (Fig. 3c) and diffraction peak intensity (Fig. 3d). This high-quality perovskite film can effectively facilitate the charge extraction and transport.
All-inorganic CsPbBr3 PSCs free of hole-transporting layers with the architecture of FTO/TiO2 or Sb-TiO2/CsPbBr3/carbon are fabricated to understand the effect of Sb dopants on the photovoltaic performance. As control experiments, the dependences of photovoltaic performances on the dosage of Sb3+ ions and the TiO2 concentration (thickness) are also measured and provided in Fig. S7 and S8, and the photovoltaic parameters including short-circuit current density (Jsc), Voc, fill factor (FF) and PCE are summarized in Table S3 and S4, demonstrating that the optimal doping amount and TiO2 concentration are at around 0.5% and 20 mg mL−1. Fig. 4a shows the typical cross-sectional SEM image of the planar CsPbBr3 PSC, composed of Sb-TiO2, CsPbBr3 and carbon films with a thickness of 100 nm, 450 nm and 14 μm, respectively. With calculations (Fig. 2c), a schematic of energy levels of TiO2 or the Sb-TiO2 based PSC is shown in Fig. 4b. Notably, the enlarged and vertical grains as well as the higher conduction band of Sb-TiO2 can minimize the charge recombination and maximize the solar-to-electric conversion efficiency. The characteristic J–V curves of optimal and reference devices are recorded under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) and shown in Fig. 4c. The control device delivers a champion PCE of 8.26% with Voc = 1.586 V, Jsc = 6.64 mA cm−2 and FF = 78.4%, which is comparable and even higher than that based on the high-temperature processed TiO2 ETL (Fig. S9), demonstrating their great superiority in flexible devices. As expected, the Voc, Jsc and FF are increased to 1.654 V, 6.70 mA cm−2 and 80.4%, promoting the PCE up to 8.91% upon introducing the Sb into the TiO2 lattice. To the best of our knowledge, the Voc as high as 1.654 V is till now the highest value in all single-junction solar cells, which can be mainly attributed to the improved electron mobility, suppressed trap state density (Ti3+ and OV) and upward shifted conduction band of Sb-TiO2. Notably, the Voc up to 1.6 V can be achieved by the Sb-TiO2 even with a low doping amount (0.25%), and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters of representative PSCs with Voc up to 1.6 V have also been summarized in Table S5. To further ensure the validity of the efficiency enhancement, the IPCE spectra of PSCs based on TiO2 with and without Sb are presented in Fig. 4d. After calculation, the integrated current densities are determined to be 6.03 mA cm−2 and 6.06 mA cm−2, which are in good agreement with the Jsc values obtained from J–V measurements. Fig. 4e shows the photovoltaic parameter statistics of PSCs employing TiO2 and Sb-TiO2 ETLs to evaluate the reproducibility by characterizing over 50 devices, displaying the increased trend upon tailoring the low-temperature TiO2 lattice by precisely regulating the binding interaction between Sb and O atoms.
More importantly, the hysteresis index (HI) is reduced from 32% to 15% upon introducing Sb into the TiO2 lattice based on the equation: HI = (PCEreverse − PCEforward)/PCEreverse, where PCEreverse and PCEforward represent the PCE scanned under the reverse and forward directions, as shown in Fig. S10 and Table S6. It is a fact that hysteresis behaviour is generally attributed to interfacial capacitance arising from interfacial charge accumulation owing to the high trap density and unbalanced charge transport. In this fashion, the Sb-induced lattice regulation and enhanced conductivity will enlarge the electron flux and suppress the charge recombination. To systematically study the electron transfer kinetics at the TiO2/CsPbBr3 interface, steady PL and TRPL spectra of FTO/TiO2/CsPbBr3 and FTO/Sb-TiO2/CsPbBr3 films were measured. As shown in Fig. 5a, the PL intensity centered at 532 nm of FTO/Sb-TiO2/CsPbBr3 is obviously quenched by nearly 50% with respect to the FTO/TiO2/CsPbBr3 film, suggesting the more efficient electron extraction behaviour and suppressed recombination between photogenerated electrons and holes within the CsPbBr3 film. The detailed carrier lifetimes are obtained by fitting the TRPL spectra (see Fig. 5b) with a biexponential function:I = A1exp(−t/τ1) + A2exp(−t/τ2) + K, where A1 and A2 are the decay amplitudes, K is a constant, τ1 is the lifetime related to trap-mediated nonradiative recombination, τ2 is the lifetime related to radiative recombination. All parameters are listed in Table S7. By further calculating the average lifetime τave following the equation τave = (A1τ12 + A2τ22)/(A1τ1 + A2τ2), it can be seen that the charge transfer at the TiO2/CsPbBr3 interface is accelerated along with significantly reduced τave from 1.42 ns to 0.71 ns.
To cross-check the fast charge extraction behaviour, the built-in-potential (Vbi) is studied by recording the capacitance–voltage (C–V) curves under dark conditions according to the Mott–Schottky relationship:C−2 = 2(Vbi − V)/(A2eεε0N). From Fig. 5c, the Sb-TiO2-containing PSC exhibits a higher Vbi of 1.294 V compared with 1.263 V for the reference device, indicating a larger driving force for charge separation and transfer at the ETL/CsPbBr3 interface due to the regulated energy levels (Fig. 4b) and reduced trap states (Ti3+ and OV). In addition, the larger slope of the Sb-TiO2 tailored device indicates a lower interfacial charge density, therefore the charge extraction process is more efficient at the Sb-TiO2/CsPbBr3 interface, this is consistent with the results from the PL and TRPL spectra. The enhanced interfacial charge extraction-transfer behaviour undoubtedly maximizes electron sweep out and minimizes shunt current loss, which can be cross-checked by the dark J–V curves of PSCs (Fig. 5d). Lower leakage current density and higher shunt resistance are achieved for the Sb-TiO2 tailored device, which is an indicator of the suppressed trap-assisted nonradiative recombination. Till now, we can easily understand the origin of the noticeable Voc enhancement of up to 1.654 V owing to the dependence of Voc on the ETL properties. As shown in Fig. 5e and f, it is obvious that the Voc decay rate of the Sb-TiO2 based device is slower than the TiO2 based device once removing the light irradiation, following an electron–hole recombination process. Electron lifetime (τn) of the devices directly reflecting the charge recombination process of the devices can be deduced from the voltage decay curves according to the equation:
where
kB is the Boltzmann constant and T is the absolute temperature. Longer τn means that the photo-induced electrons can survive longer before being captured by trap states. Therefore, the reduced recombination depending on the decrease of Ti3+ and OV trap states in ETLs is beneficial to improve Voc output.

Finally, the long-term stability of the TiO2 and Sb-TiO2 based devices free of encapsulation are tested under an ambient environment(T = 25 °C, RH = 80%). As shown in Fig. 6, both solar cells with TiO2 and Sb-TiO2 ETLs maintain ∼80% of the initial PCE after 30 days storage, which is mainly attributed to the intrinsic stability of the CsPbBr3 lattice and the protection from the hydrophobic carbon electrode.

In summary, we have demonstrated an effective strategy to eliminate the bulk trap states such as Ti3+ and OV of low-temperature processed TiO2 by manipulating the lattice with Sb dopants. After systematic optimization, the trivalent Sb3+ can regulate the binding behaviour of Ti–O–Sb, leading to partial electron transfer from Ti to Sb owing to the higher electronegativity of Sb compared with Ti, which in turn reduces the Ti3+ and OV species and improves the electron mobility. A champion efficiency as high as 8.91% with an ultra-high Voc up to 1.654 V has been obtained employing this high-quality low-temperature processed Sb-TiO2 as an ETL, which is much higher than that of the reference device. The fast charge extraction-transfer behaviour at the Sb-TiO2/CsPbBr3 interface can significantly suppress the nonradiative recombination; as a result, the hysteresis is reduced from 32% to 15%. Combining with the excellent long-term stability, the Sb-doped low-temperature processed TiO2 may provide a choice to high efficiency platforms and flexible photovoltaics.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (2019B151502061 and 2020A1515011123), the Postdoctoral Research Foundation of China (2019M650231 and 2019M663379), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61774139, U1802257) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (21618409 and 21619311).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta04366d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020