 DOI: 10.1039/D2TC00087C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 5134-5140


Meng
Wang
,

Long
Gao
,

Peixin
Yu
,

Qian
Wang
,

Chenxi
Yu
,

Xiaoyu
Zhang
,

Yinghui
Wang
,

Weitao
Zheng
 and 

Jiaqi
Zhang
*

College of Materials Science and Engineering, Key Laboratory of Automobile Materials, Ministry of Education, Jilin University, Changchun, 130012, China. E-mail: zhangjiaqi@jlu.edu.cn

Femtosecond Laser Laboratory, Key Laboratory of Physics and Technology for Advanced Batteries, Ministry of Education, College of Physics, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China

Received
7th January 2022
, Accepted 10th February 2022
First published on 11th February 2022
Interfacial engineering has been proved as an effective strategy to passivate grain boundaries and surface defects for high performance solar cells. Herein, we report a nanocrystal interfacial engineering strategy using CsPbBrxI3−x as an interface modifier to increase the efficiency of MAPbI3-based solar cells. The CsPbBrxI3−x modification layer decreased the trap states, improved the energy alignment of the device, and enhanced the interfacial charge transfer and carrier extraction. Morphology and stability assessment demonstrated that the CsPbBrxI3−x modification reduces the surface roughness and enhances the environmental stability of photoactive MAPbI3 layers. The Br/I ratio was optimized to facilitate the energy-level matching with absorbers and hole transporting layers, which demonstrated the effectiveness of the trap state suppression and non-radiative recombination reduction. These merits facilitated the hole extraction rate so that the champion device achieved a power conversion efficiency of 19.16% with reduced hysteresis and long-term stability 16.06% greater than that of the unmodified device. Our work provides an effective and versatile perovskite nanocrystal interfacial engineering strategy that is important for the design of high-performance and long-lasting perovskite optoelectronic devices.

There has been great interest in organic–metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) because of their low cost, facile fabrication process, and high efficiency. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) certified record for single junction PSCs has reached 25.7% in the last few years, and this figure is gradually approaching that of silicon-based photovoltaic cells. However, the current PCE record is still much lower than the theoretical limits (33%). Moreover, practical commercialization of PSCs is difficult due to insufficient environmental stability.

To address the above problems, many approaches have been utilized, such as solvent engineering, composition engineering, morphological manipulation of the perovskite absorbers to enhance photo-induced carriers, and designing new electron- and hole-transporting materials to facilitate carrier extraction. Among these methods, interfacial engineering between the absorber and transporting layers is a promising strategy because it may facilely tune the energy band alignment and passivate interfacial defects, thus facilitating effective carrier extraction and increasing device stability.
It has recently been determined that perovskite nanocrystals (NCs) are effective interfacial modifiers for perovskite photovoltaics. To enhance the charge transfer, organic–inorganic hybrid NCs, such as MAPbBrxI3−x NCs, have been incorporated as the interface between the MAPbI3 layer and the hole transporting layer (HTL) in PSCs. However, the volatility of the organic component may prevent long-term stability. All-inorganic NCs as interfacial modifiers were then developed as viable alternatives because of their adaptable band-gap and enhanced thermal stability.
CsPbBr3 was first applied as an inorganic NC modifier, enabling enhanced device performance and exhibiting environmental stability. Device performance was enhanced when CsPbI3 NCs were used as modifiers between the perovskite layer and the HTL. However, other groups reported that there was increased device performance with mixed halide NCs (including CsPbBrI2, CsPbBr0.5I2.5) as compared to CsPbBr3, and even the photoactive materials utilized were the same. It was also reported that other single-component NCs were used to fabricate high-performance PSCs, such as CsPbBr1.85I1.15 and CsPbBrCl2.
The controversy regarding the most optimal composition of NCs may come from potential ion exchange between perovskite absorbers and NCs with different ligand strategies. Additionally, the morphology of the absorber and NC layers may vary with different preparation methods. For example, dispersing quantum dots (QDs) in anti-solvent can embed the QDs into absorber layers and may also change the grain size of the underlying absorbers. Thus, it is of great importance to simplify the related factors to gain an in-depth understanding of how the composition of NCs influences the PSCs.
In this report, we comprehensively investigated the influence of CsPbBrxI3−x NCs as the interfacial modifier on an MAPbI3 layer and in related solar cells. The particle size and the morphology of NCs with different compositions were constructed to be similar by precisely controlling the NC synthesis process. The NCs were mainly spread over the surface of the MAPbI3 layer, and especially at the surface grain boundaries, which reduced the surface roughness and increased the hydrophobicity of the photoactive layers. A champion device showing a PCE of 19.16% with reduced hysteresis and enhanced device stability was achieved with CsPbBr1.2I1.8 NCs in comparison with 16.06% for the control device.
The underlying mechanism of the enhanced device performance in response to NC modification was carefully explored using various methods, and confirms the importance of energy band alignment of NCs. The related carrier dynamics between the absorber, NCs, and HTL interfaces were also demonstrated by transient absorption, time-resolved photoluminescence spectra, and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS).

A series of CsPbBrxI3−x NCs was prepared with oleic acid and oleylamine as ligands by a conventional hot-injection method (see the Experimental section in the ESI). Fig. 1a shows high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images of CsPbI3, CsPbBr0.9I2.1, CsPbBr1.2I1.8, and CsPbBr3 NCs. The NCs possess similar average grain size, all approximately 20 nm, which is a value beyond the Bohr radius of all CsPbBrxI3−x NCs, and thus, will not significantly influence the bandgaps. Clear lattice fringes were also observed, indicating satisfactory crystallinity. The interplanar distance of the (110) planes of NCs was measured as 0.20 Å, 0.19 Å, 0.20 Å, and 0.20 Å for NCs with x = 0, 0.9, 1.2, and 3, respectively.


Fig. 1b exhibits the normalized photoluminescence (PL) spectra of CsPbBrxI3−x NCs. A blueshift of the emission peak was observed with increasing x, showing 685 nm, 657 nm, 635 nm, and 519 nm for CsPbI3, CsPbBr0.9I2.1, CsPbBr1.2I1.8, and CsPbBr3 NCs, respectively. Corresponding photos of the NCs under 365 nm UV illumination were collected, indicating the fluorescence color changing with the halide ratio, as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). The corresponding absorption edge also changed from 690 nm to 520 nm, with the x varying from 0 to 3, as shown in Fig. 1c. The optical band gaps of NCs derived from the Tauc plots (Fig. S2, ESI) are 1.75 eV, 1.8 eV, 1.92 eV, and 2.41 eV for x = 0, 0.9, 1.2, and 3, respectively. The above results indicate that CsPbBrxI3−x NCs were successfully synthesised.
The synthesised CsPbBrxI3−x NCs were then applied as the interfacial modifier between the photoactive MAPbI3 layer and the Spiro-OMeTAD hole transporting layer (HTL), as shown in Fig. 2a. The optimized device architecture includes a 25 nm SnO2 compact layer as the electron transporting layer (ETL) on the ITO bottom electrode, a 400 nm MAPbI3 layer coated with a thin layer of CsPbBrxI3−x NCs, a 200 nm Spiro-OMeTAD layer as the HTL, and a 90 nm evaporated Ag as the top electrode, as shown in Fig. 2b.
The representative current–voltage (J–V) curves are shown in Fig. 2c for the most optimal devices with CsPbBrxI3−x NCs, and the cell parameters are summarized in Table S1 (ESI). Note that a device without NCs was also fabricated as a control device. The J–V analysis presents significant modification of NCs for the cell performance with the Br/I ratio variation. The unmodified control cell exhibits modest quality performance metrics with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 16.06%, short circuit current density (JSC) of 20.12 mA cm−2, open circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.10 V, and fill factor (FF) of 0.70. For the CsPbBr3 NC-modified device, although the VOC was enhanced to 1.17 V, the JSC and FF decreased to 18.87 mA cm−2 and 0.68, respectively, resulting in a corresponding decrease in the PCE to 15.08%.
For pure iodide perovskite NCs, the related solar cell also exhibited a slight decrease in the PCE (15.58%), mainly because of the subtle reduction of VOC and JSC. Mixed Br/I NCs both show increased performance as compared to the control. The champion device was achieved with the Br/I ratio at 1.2/1.8, showing a PCE of 19.16%, which originated from the great improvement of JSC (22.70 mA cm−2) and FF (0.75), as well as VOC (1.13 V).
To further investigate the influence of NCs, external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the solar cells were collected, as shown in Fig. 2d. The EQE-integrated JSC is 20.26 mA cm−2, 19.80 mA cm−2, 20.90 mA cm−2, 22.12 mA cm−2, and 18.81 mA cm−2 for pristine, CsPbI3, CsPbBr0.9I2.1, CsPbBr1.2I1.8, and CsPbBr3 NCs, respectively. The deviations of EQE-derived values with the JSC value from the J–V curves are all below 2.5% for all samples, showing good agreement. The EQE curve shape over the entire visible region for all devices is similar, indicating a negligible effect of NCs on the optical field distribution. This will be further verified by the absorption data, which will be discussed later.
In addition, in order to explore the energy levels of NCs, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was applied to determine the valence band maximum (VBM) of CsPbBrxI3−x NCs, as shown in Fig. S3 (ESI). The conduction band minimum (CBM) was then calculated by the VBM, and the optical band gap was determined from the UV-vis absorption spectra. The values of VBM and CBM of NCs are shown in Fig. 2e in the flat band energy alignment diagram together with other materials used in our device stacks. The Br/I ratio significantly influenced the energy levels of NCs. The enhanced device performance with CsPbBr1.2I1.8 NCs benefited from its matched energy alignment with MAPbI3 and Spiro-OMeTAD. The VBM of CsPbBr1.2I1.8 NCs is only slightly higher than that of MAPbI3, thus retarding large VOC loss and facilitating the hole extraction and transfer to Spiro-OMeTAD. The CBM of CsPbBr1.2I1.8 NCs is also sufficiently high to prevent the electron transfer to the HTL side, which impedes the charge carrier recombination on the photoactive layer/HTL interface.
Next, we further investigated how the CsPbBrxI3−x NCs influence the underlying MAPbI3 layer. Note that the NCs were dispersed in toluene, which is a conventional anti-solvent for perovskite film preparation, and after coating, the stacks were further annealed at 50 °C for 5 min under an inert atmosphere. Thus, it is noteworthy whether the above process changes the morphology of MAPbI3 films.
The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of MAPbI3 films before and after CsPbBr1.2I1.8 NCs treatment are shown in Fig. 3a and Fig. S4 (ESI). Nanocrystals were coated on the MAPbI3 surface, especially on the grain boundaries. The average grain sizes of the films were measured from the SEM images, and exhibited similar values before and after NC coating, as shown in Table S2 (ESI), revealing that there was no appreciable influence of the NC coating on the grain size of the lower MAPbI3 layer. The MAPbI3/CsPbBrxI3−x stacks were also studied by X-ray energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), Fig. S5 (ESI). The elemental distribution revealed that the CsPbBrxI3−x NCs were uniformly coated on the MAPbI3 film in macroscopic view.
The atomic force microscopy (AFM) images in Fig. 3b and Fig. S6 (ESI) depict that the nanocrystal coating decreased the surface roughness of MAPbI3 films. The reduced roughness combined with the SEM results infers that the NCs partially filled the surface grain boundaries of the photoactive layer. According to the factors that influence the photovoltaic performance of the PSCs, the light-harvesting efficiency may be influenced by the fluorescence of CsPbBrxI3−x NCs. UV-Vis absorption measurement of the NC interfacial layer on the perovskite layer with and without HTL was conducted to characterize the effects of light harvesting (Fig. S7, ESI). We also compared the absorbance properties of the perovskite layers modified by different Br/I ratio of NCs (Fig. S8, ESI). The results showed that all the absorption spectra were similar, indicating that the CsPbBrxI3−x NC modification did not obviously change the optical absorption of the photoactive layer, which is consistent with the abovementioned EQE results. Thus, enhanced light-harvesting by the fluorescence of NCs did not occur in our experiments.
The origin of this phenomenon may be that most of the incident visible light was absorbed by the MAPbI3 perovskite layer because the devices were illuminated from the ITO side, and thus, the CsPbBrxI3−x NCs were not easily excited to the fluorescence emission state. This also indicates that the NC layer did not penetrate the perovskite layer, but rather, it acted as the interface layer. In addition, the NC film may be too thin to significantly change the optical field.
The influence of CsPbBrxI3−x NCs on the stability of MAPbI3 film was also investigated. Fig. 4a and Fig. S9 (ESI) show the XRD patterns of the fresh and 5 day-old aged perovskite layer with and without NC modification. The pattern of the aged pristine MAPbI3 layer shows a peak at 12.7° referring to the PbI2, indicating that the unmodified perovskite layer had already partially decomposed after 5 days. In contrast, the XRD patterns of the aged MAPbI3 layer with all CsPbBrxI3−x NC modifications are consistent with their fresh counterparts, which reflects that all CsPbBrxI3−x NCs have a positive influence on MAPbI3 shelf stability.
To determine why there was an increase in perovskite stability, the contact angle of water was measured for the perovskite/NC stacks, as shown in Fig. S10 (ESI) and the inset of Fig. 4b. For the pristine perovskite film, the value was 56.1°, while the values for the NC-modified perovskite films were all approximately 100°, which shows a significant enhancement of the hydrophobicity that will subsequently increase the shelf stability of the perovskites. The reason for the increased water resistance may be the residue ligands of hydrophobic oleic acid (OA) hanging on the surface of the CsPbBrxI3−x NCs, although two rounds of purification had been applied to remove the ligands on the NCs before the spin-coating of NCs on the MAPbI3 layers.
To investigate the long-term stability of the devices, the photovoltaic performance of the PSCs exposed to the air (>40% humidity) without any encapsulation was measured for 25 days. The evolution of the PCE with time is shown in Fig. 4b. The PCE of the control device changed from the initial 16.01% to 7.61% after 25 days, corresponding to an attenuation of 52%. However, the PSC with the CsPbBr1.2I1.8 NCs (champion device) experienced a PCE drop of 10% (from 19.16% to 17.16%) after 25 days. This illustrates that the modification of NCs obviously enhanced the long-term device stability due to the passivation on the penetration of water. In addition, the defects on the MAPbI3 surface may be passivated by the NCs, which also delays device degradation.
To gain an in-depth understanding of the influence of CsPbBrxI3−x NCs on the carrier dynamics of photovoltaic devices, the pristine and the CsPbBr1.2I1.8-modified (champion) devices were further compared. Fig. 5a shows the statistical distribution of the VOC, JSC, FF, and PCE values of the two types of devices, in which all parameters of the NC-modified devices were higher than those of unmodified devices. To ensure the real PCE value of the devices, the steady-state power output under the applied bias at the maximum power point was measured.
As shown in Fig. 5b, the current density for the device with NC modification stabilized at 22.51 mA cm−2, while the PCE at 19.05% was over 120 s. Moreover, the presence of NCs increased the performance and also suppressed the device J–V hysteresis, as shown in Fig. 5c, Fig. S11, and Table S3 (ESI). The control device shows a PCE of 16.06% in reverse scan and 11.54% in forward scan, and the hysteresis index is 0.28 (a definition of the index is shown in the ESI). In contrast, the CsPbBr1.2I1.8 NC-modified device displays a much lower hysteresis index of 0.06 with a PCE of 19.16% (reverse) and 17.95% (forward). The reduced hysteresis may benefit from more balanced charge transfer, suppressed ion migration, and passivated interfacial defects in the perovskite films by the NC modification.
The steady and time-resolved PL values of the MAPbI3/NCs/HTL stacks coated on glass substrates were determined to explore the influence of CsPbBr1.2I1.8 NCs on carrier dynamics. The steady-state PL spectra are shown in Fig. 5d, in which the PL intensity of MAPbI3/NCs is higher than that of the pristine MAPbI3 layer. Considering that the PL peak of the CsPbBr1.2I1.8 NCs was located at approximately 635 nm and there was a negligible absorption change by the NCs, the PL enhancement at 785 nm may only be driven by the defect passivation of MAPbI3 by the NCs. The surface defects of MAPbI3, such as iodide vacancies, may be passivated by the halide atoms in the CsPbBrxI3−x NCs and also the carboxyl group in the residue OA ligands.
The weak MAPbI3/HTL PL signal indicates PL quenching, which originates from the charge carrier extraction across the interface. However, the MAPbI3/NCs/HTL presents a weaker signal compared with MAPbI3/HTL, elucidating a faster carrier extraction process by reduced non-radiative recombination channels in the perovskite film with reduced trap states by the NC modification. This result was further validated by the time-resolved PL (TRPL) spectra of the same stacks, in which the photo-induced carrier kinetics was studied, as shown in Fig. 6a. All curves were fitted with the following attenuation equation:
y(t) = y0 + A1 exp(−t/τ1) + A2 exp(−t/τ2)
(1)
As shown in Table S4 (ESI), the NC-modified MAPbI3 film exhibited a longer lifetime (16.35 ns) than that of the MAPbI3 film (11.61 ns). This indicates that the modification of NCs passivated the surface of the MAPbI3 layer, and thus, the charge recombination was inhibited. It also facilitated carrier transfer and reduced the electron recombination with the holes in the back contact. When the HTL was coated, the stack with NCs showed a decrease in the PL lifetime than that without NCs, indicating faster emission quenching with NC modification, which may be governed by more efficient hole injection.
To further explore the carrier dynamics of the photoactive layer with NCs and HTLs, transient absorption spectroscopy (TA) measurement was performed, as shown in Fig. 6b. The TA spectra of all samples exhibited two pronounced photobleaching (PB) peaks at 470 nm and 730 nm, which were labeled as PB1 and PB2, respectively. According to the TA spectra, PB1 may originate from the conduction band (CB) edge to the deep energy valence band (VB). The PB2 peak at 730 nm can be attributed to the state-filling of CB to the first valence band maximum (VB1). The decay time of the PB2 intensity is related to the carrier population, and thus, it can reflect the trap states. Compared with the original spectra, the PB intensity of the MAPbI3 layer with NC modification decreased with decay time, which indicates the reduction of trap states. However, there was no obvious variation after adding HTLs. Then, the decay dynamics of PB2 peaks were determined in Fig. S12 (ESI). It is evident that there was faster decay in films with HTLs, which reflects the faster carrier loss. The NC-modified MAPbI3 with an HTL showed the fastest decay time as compared to the other corresponding counterparts, which confirms the fast hole-extraction rate, and is also concomitant with the TRPL spectra.
The space-charge-limited current (SCLC) measurement was used to calculate the defect densities of the devices with and without NC modification. Fig. S13 (ESI) shows the I–V characteristics of the electron-only device with the structure of ITO/SnO2/MAPbI3/CsPbBr1.2I1.8 NCs/PCBM/Ag. According to a previous study, the defect densities (Ntrap) were calculated using the following equation:
Ntrap = 2εrε0VTFL/eL2
(2)
where
εr denotes the dielectric constant of MAPbI3, ε0 denotes the vacuum permittivity, VTFL denotes the intersection voltage of the trap-filled limit and ohmic regime, e denotes the elementary electric charge, and L shows the thickness of the MAPbI3 layer. The VTFL of devices with and without NC modification is 1.32 V and 1.41 V, respectively. The defect densities are 2.56 × 1016 and 2.73 × 1016 cm−3, which indicates effective passivation of surface defects.

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was then carried out to obtain additional information on carrier transportation and recombination. Fig. 6c shows the Nyquist plots of the devices with and without the modification of CsPbBr1.2I1.8 NCs, and the corresponding parameters, including the series resistance (Rs) and the recombination resistance (Rrec), are shown in Table S5 (ESI). A similar Rs and a larger Rrec value were obtained for the device with NC modification as compared to those of the control device, which is consistent with the estimated variation from the J–V curves (V = 0 and J = 0).
A similar Rs value shows that the addition of NCs did not result in a significant increase in the bulk resistance. The NC coating may be too thin to change the series resistance, and the electrons may also transport through the residue-insulating ligands by tunnelling. A larger Rrec further demonstrates that the NC layer suppresses the carrier recombination in the devices. The NCs may fill the pinholes on the surface of the MAPbI3 films, avoiding the direct contact from the HTL and ETL, which thus decreases the interfacial carrier recombination. However, the surface defects, such as iodide vacancies, can be passivated by the inorganic perovskite NCs, thus reducing the population of deep-state recombination centres.

We comprehensively investigated CsPbBrxI3−x NCs as interfacial modifiers between the photoactive layer and the hole transporting layer of perovskite solar cells. For the MAPbI3 layers, the CsPbBrxI3−x NC modification reduced their surface roughness by filling the pinholes and surface grain boundary with tiny NCs. The environmental stability of the MAPbI3 layers was also enhanced by NC modification, which resulted in increased hydrophobicity and passivated defects. For photovoltaic devices, the performance was significantly influenced by the composition of CsPbBrxI3−x interfacial modifiers.

Considering that the NCs with different Br/I ratios conferred a negligible effect on the absorption properties and the morphology of photoactive layers, matched energy band alignment with absorbers and HTLs by precisely tuning the NC composition is of great importance for achieving high-performance solar cells. Combining the suppressed trap states and reduced non-radiative recombination channels, the hole extraction rate was therefore facilitated, and this enabled the champion device to achieve a PCE of 19.16% with reduced hysteresis and long-term stability 16.06% greater than that of the unmodified device. Our work highlights the importance of compositional modulation of interfacial modifiers in solar cells, and this strategy can also be extended to other optoelectronic fields that use halide perovskites.

There are no conflicts to declare.


J. Z. acknowledges the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61804063), the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2019YFA0705900) funded by MOST, and the Natural Science Foundation of Jilin Province (No. 20190201208JC).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d2tc00087c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022