 DOI: 10.1039/C9CP04700J
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 23179-23186


Shilin
Tan
,

Yipeng
Zhao
,

Jiansheng
Dong
,

Guowei
Yang
 and 

Gang
Ouyang
*

Key Laboratory of Low-Dimensional Quantum Structures and Quantum Control of Ministry of Education, Synergetic Innovation Center for Quantum Effects and Applications (SICQEA), Hunan Normal University, Changsha 410081, Hunan, China. E-mail: gangouy@hunnu.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Materials and Technologies, Institute of Optoelectronic and Functional Composite Materials, Nanotechnology Research Center, School of Physics and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, Guangdong, China

Received
24th August 2019
, Accepted 1st October 2019
First published on 1st October 2019
Current achievements show that inserting an insulator at the interface in van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures can improve the photoelectric conversion efficiency. However, the underlying mechanism of the intercalated insulator effect on photocarrier collection and recombination, etc., remains unclear at the atomic level. Herein, we investigate the influence of intercalated hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) on the optoelectronic properties of MoS2/WSe2 vdW heterostructures based on the interface bond relaxation and detailed balance principles. It was found that the band offsets (barrier height) at the heterointerface decrease with increasing h-BN size and decreasing transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) thickness. Moreover, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) in monolayer MoS2/11-layers h-BN/monolayer WSe2 can reach 3.23% and enhances with increasing thickness of TMDs. Also, the optimal thickness of h-BN in MoS2/h-BN/WSe2 decreases from 3.64 to 2.86 nm as the thickness of TMDs increases. Our results show that the PCE and open-circuit voltage of the MoS2/h-BN/WSe2 vdW heterostructure are obviously improved compared with the bilayer heterostructure without h-BN, and this further proves the feasibility of the intercalated insulator as a booster for highly efficient photovoltaic and optoelectronic nanodevices.

The vertical stacked van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures composed of two-dimensional (2D) layered materials, such as transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), have been extensively and intensively studied in recent years owing to their strong optical absorption and ultrafast charge transfer. The representative TMDs of monolayer (bulk) MoS2 and WSe2 show direct (indirect) bandgaps of 1.88 eV (1.29 eV) and 1.66 eV (1.20 eV), respectively, and the related vdW heterostructure has a type II band alignment. Therefore, the TMD-based heterostructures with built-in field exhibit superior carrier collection capability and optical properties. However, the samples generally have high resistance, low visible light sensitivity and strong interlayer recombination, resulting in a low power conversion efficiency (PCE) in experiment measurements (about 0.1–1%). Note that the high carrier recombination is one of the major obstacles in photovoltaic applications; hence, in order to improve PCE, the challenge of depressing the recombination rate is of critical importance in the field of new energy devices.

Recently, some significant measurements have shown that it is meaningful to introduce a suitable insulator at the heterointerface, such as h-BN, Al2O3 and SiO2, to enhance photoelectric conversion of vdW heterostructures. In these typical semiconductor (or graphene)–insulator–semiconductor (SIS) heterostructures, the insulator can balance carrier injection, reduce leakage current and suppress interlayer recombination. Moreover, they have considerable advantages over conventional semiconductor–semiconductor (SS) heterostructures, such as the small depletion regions (high light sensitivity), a lower interlayer recombination rate (low dark current) and high current. Importantly, the photoelectric conversion in the SIS vdW heterostructure can be further improved as the thickness of intercalated insulator increases. It has been suggested that the SIS heterostructure has great potential to become the next generation of high-performance photovoltaic and photoelectric nanodevices.
However, when the insulator thickness is greater than the critical thickness, the insulating layer will block carrier separation and collection. Fang et al. and Latini et al. demonstrated that 3-layer h-BN can decouple the interaction between MoS2 and WSe2 according to photoluminescence (PL) measurements and first-principles calculations. Kim et al. reported that 6.9 nm thick h-BN can effectively block carrier transfer in the MoS2/h-BN/WSe2 heterostructure. Furthermore, Li et al. introduced h-BN into the graphene/GaAs heterostructure to suppress the static charge transfer, and they found that the PCE increases from 6.51% without h-BN to 7.10% (maximum value) with 5-layer h-BN. Also, monolayer h-BN can transform the bandgap of bilayer MoS2 from indirect-to-direct transition and decouple the interlayer coupling. Importantly, h-BN lacking surface dangling bonds exhibits dielectric stability and high transmittance (over 98%). The significant effect on carrier transport indicates that it is great necessary to be able to obtain the optimal thickness of the insulator for enhancing the photoelectric conversion.
Although several achievements have shown the related properties of the SIS heterostructures, a comprehensive understanding of the electronic and optoelectronic properties at various unit thickness is still lacking at the atomic level. Moreover, the underlying mechanism of the intercalated insulator effect on carrier collection and recombination, etc., remains unclear. In particular, how to find the optimal thickness of an intercalated insulator that can realize an optimal PCE in a SIS trilayer heterostructure is still unknown. Therefore, in order to explore the quantitative relationship between the thickness and optoelectronic properties of a SIS heterostructure composed of 2D materials, in this contribution, we investigate the band offset, band alignment and PCE of vertical stacked MoS2/h-BN/WSe2 vdW heterostructures based on the interface bond relaxation and detailed balance principles (DBP). Importantly, we find the optimal conditions for the MoS2/h-BN/WSe2 vdW heterostructure and further clarify the physical mechanism from the perspective of an atomistic origin.

In general, as the size of a nanosystem decreases, surface atoms become more and more important. According to the bond relaxation mechanism, the bond identities would change spontaneously due to the loss of coordinated numbers, resulting in lattice strain, depressing the total energy and forming a new self-equilibrium state. Therefore, the cohesive energy and bandgap will be different from the bulk counterparts. Moreover, the thickness-dependent bandgap can be expressed as: , and the conduction band offset (CBO) and valence band offset (VBO) can be given by ΔEc = χi − χ2 and ΔEv = ΔEg − ΔEc, where 〈z〉 is the average coordination number (CN), zi and zb are the CNs of the ith surface atoms and bulk counterparts, γi and ci are the surface-to-volume ratio (SVR) and bond contraction coefficient, χ is size-dependent electron affinity, Eg(∞) denotes the bandgap energy of the bulk, and ΔEg is the bandgap difference between the two units. It is clear that, with the gradual decrease of unit size, the relative changes of cohesive energy, bandgap and band offset between MoS2 and WSe2 become larger. More details of the theoretical principle can be found in the ESI.

In order to clarify the relevant optoelectronic properties of MoS2/h-BN/WSe2 solar cells, we consider that only photons with energy greater than or equal to the bandgap will be absorbed to generate electron–hole pairs. Meanwhile, we ignore the effects of leakage current and resistance, and consider the light absorption associated with the thickness and absorption coefficient of the film materials, thereby the absorptivity is A(ν) = 1 − exp(−2α(ν)D), where ν is the incident photon frequency,α(ν) is the absorption coefficient, and the average value obtained from the original author is 0.1 nm−1 for 90% absorption of radiation. According to DBP, we have the photocurrent density Jsc(SQ) and radiation recombination J0(SQ) of the system after generating the hole–electron pairs under illumination
(1)
where
νg = Eg/h is the single cutoff frequency, q is the electronic charge, h (kb) denotes Planck's (Boltzmann's) constant, and Ts and Tc are the temperature of the Sun (6000 K) and the solar cell (300 K), respectively. ts is the probability of producing a hole–electron pair by absorbing an incident photon with energy greater than the band gap of the system, and fw and fc represent the geometrical factor of the sunlight incidence and system radiation (fw = 1.36 × 10−5, fc = 1 for 90% absorption of radiation), respectively.


eqn (1) can be applicable in all photovoltaic devices. However, the recombination and carrier collection mechanism of SIS trilayer solar cells is different from that of the SS bilayer cases. The intercalated insulator in SIS heterostructures has an effect on the number of photogenerated excitons, the dissociation rate of electron–hole pairs, the free carrier concentration, interlayer recombination, etc. Herein, the effect of tunneling on the internal carrier collection and recombination mechanism must be considered in the SIS vdW heterostructure, and the relationship between collection efficiency and short-circuit current density satisfies: Jsc/Jsc(SQ) = Fce. Furthermore, we assume that the distance (w) to the next interface is much lower than the diffusion length of excitons (Lχ) owing to the efficient transport and collection of photocarriers, thus the collection efficiency can be deduced as: Fce = 1/(1 + w/(2Sχτr)), where Sχ and τr are the dissociation velocity and radiative lifetime of the excitons, respectively.
On the one hand, for ultrathin bilayer vdW heterostructures with type II band alignment, the carrier collection capacity becomes stronger with increasing band offset between donor and acceptor. Generally, the dissociation velocity (Sχ) can be given by the exponential term exp(ΔEc(v)13/kbTc), where ΔEc13 and ΔEv13 are the CBO and VBO between MoS2 and WSe2, respectively. In the case of SIS heterostructures, the intercalated insulator can retain the carrier mobility of the monolayer by the trilayer. Also, owing to the effect of carrier tunneling on carrier concentration, as the insulator thickness (δ) increases, Sχ should be decreased exponentially by an additional tunneling probability factor,i.e., , where me* (mh*) denotes the electron (hole) effective mass of h-BN, and ΔEc23 (ΔEv12) is the CBO (VBO) at the WSe2/h-BN (MoS2/h-BN) interface. Therefore, the exponential dependence of the dissociation velocity can be expressed as:  for electrons (holes), where S00 is the surface recombination velocity in MoS2 and WSe2. Consequently, we obtain the collection efficiency
(2)
for the SS bilayer vdW heterostructure (SS HS), and

(3)
for the SIS trilayer vdW heterostructure (SIS HS), respectively.

On the other hand, as the insulator thickness increases, the intercalated insulator in SIS trilayer heterostructures will block partial carrier separation and weaken the optical absorption (especially the bottom material) to reduce short-circuit current. Thus, we define a decay probability exp(−βδ), where β is the attenuation constant of photogenerated carriers, and we take a value of 0.05 nm−1. Therefore, the normalized short-circuit current density can be calculated as
(4)
For the radiative recombination, the recombination in the space charge region becomes smaller compared with conventional bulk materials. Generally, as the CBO between acceptor and donor increases, the separation and collection of photocarriers will enhance to depress intralayer recombination, which can be given by exp(−ΔEc13/kbTc) owing to the unchanged hole concentration in the donor. In the case of the heterostructures with an intercalated insulator, the radiative recombination current should increase with insulator thickness (δ) by exp(ξδ/kbTc), where ξ is the decay constant. Therefore, considering the combination shown above, the normalized radiative recombination current density is
(5)
Furthermore, for the ultrathin MoS2/WSe2 vdW heterostructure, the separation of free carriers is ultrafast, and the main recombination mechanism is the interlayer recombination. Moreover, the unique non-radiation interlayer recombination mechanism can be described as: R0 = nMpW/τ(nM + pW) +BnMpWs by the combination of trap-assisted Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) recombination and coulomb-interacting Langevin recombination, where nM (pW) and τ = 1 μs are the electron (hole) density in the MoS2 (WSe2) layer and the tunneling-assisted recombination lifetime, respectively, B = 4.0 × 10−13 m2 s−1 is the Langevin recombination constant, and s = 1.2 for the MoS2/WSe2 heterostructure. However, when h-BN is inserted into the MoS2/WSe2 heterointerface, the recombination will be suppressed and decrease exponentially with h-BN thickness owing to a high electron-barrier (ΔEc12) at the interface of MoS2/h-BN, which can be determined by the tunneling probability factor. Thus, the normalized non-radiation recombination of the SIS vdW heterostructure is
(6)
Therefore, the current–voltage relationship is J = Jsc + Jr(1 − exp(qV/kbTc)), where Jr = J0 + qR is the reverse saturation current in the heterostructure. Furthermore, the open-circuit voltage is Voc = (kbTc/q)ln(Jsc/Jr + 1) when setting J = 0. Accordingly, we can obtain the PCE: , where FF = zm2/(1 + zm − e−zm)(zm + ln(1 + zm)) is the fill factor, the relationship between Voc and zm satisfies Voc = kbTc(zm + ln(1 + zm))/q, and Pin is the incident power.

The vertical stacked MoS2/h-BN/WSe2 vdW heterostructure is shown in Fig. 1a, where δ and D1 (D2) denote the thicknesses of h-BN and MoS2 (WSe2), respectively. It is worth noting that in our case, the different stacking orders basically have no effect on the electronic structure due to the lack of surface dangling bonds. Moreover, although the electrochemical intercalation may cause reconstruction of the TMD's structure, the electronic properties will be less affected with a dry transfer technique and chemical vapor deposition, and vdW bonds are weaker than covalent bonds. Therefore, we assume that the intercalated insulator causes no interfacial strain, thus we ignore the influence of stacking order and lattice mismatch at the heterointerface. In terms of the parameters in Table S1 (ESI), we choose the electron affinity of 4.2, 3.8 and 2.0 eV for monolayer MoS2, WSe2 and h-BN, respectively.

As shown in Fig. 1b and c, the band offsets at each interface of MoS2/h-BN/WSe2 show unambiguous thickness dependence. Evidently, in the case of monolayer TMD (h-BN), the CBO and VBO at the MoS2/h-BN and h-BN/WSe2 heterointerfaces increase (decrease) with decreasing thickness of h-BN (MoS2 and WSe2), and can be stable up to 9 nm h-BN (MoS2 and WSe2). According to ΔEc(v) = |E1c(v) − E2c(v)|, the trends are attributed to the enhancement of conduction-band energy and the reduction of valence-band energy as the thickness decreases. Physically, the band-edge shifts originate from the repulsion between the cation d orbital and anion p orbital for TMDs. In other words, as the thickness decreases, the SVR will increase, and the surface effect induced by bond-order loss and less-CNs will make the surface single-bond energy (bond length) stronger (shorter), resulting in a significant increment of bandgap and band-edge shifts of MoS2, WSe2 and h-BN (Fig. S1, ESI). Evidently, our results are consistent with the experimental measurements and first principles calculations. Furthermore, the CBO and VBO between MoS2 and WSe2 in monolayer WSe2 (MoS2) increase and decrease with increasing (decreasing) thickness of MoS2 (WSe2), respectively (Fig. S1d, ESI). Importantly, in the case of MoS2/h-BN/WSe2 with a special band alignment, the binding energy of intralayer excitons remains constant as the h-BN thickness increases, and the special band alignment can be modulated by the thickness (Fig. S2, ESI). Moreover, such a heteostructure may form a Morié pattern, resulting in a variation of electronic structure, but does not affect the trend of band offsets. It can be expected that this suitable and special type band alignment will give h-BN the characteristics of electron-blocking/hole-transporting and improve the photoelectric conversion, which has been verified in some experiments. Otherwise, the band offset and band alignment at different thicknesses reveal that the electron affinity and ionization energy of MoS2, WSe2 and h-BN are different, which supplies the theoretical support for the design of optoelectronic devices.
To further explore the effect of intercalated h-BN, we obtain the J–V characteristics of the vertical stacked monolayer MoS2/nL h-BN/monolayer WSe2 vdW heterostructure solar cells under AM 1.5 illumination. In our case, we assume that the insulator h-BN does not participate in optical absorption, and the parameters in our calculations are listed in Table S1 (ESI). Fig. 2a shows that in MoS2/WSe2 without h-BN, the short-circuit current density is approximately 3.56 mA cm−2, the open-circuit voltage is 0.58 V, and the maximum PCE is 1.70% that appears at V = 0.51 V. Similarly, Cao et al. reported a PCE of 1.13% at V ≈ 0.49 V in the ultrathin MoS2/WSe2 vdW heterostructure. However, after inserting single-layer (1L) h-BN into the MoS2/WSe2 heterointerface, the short-circuit current density is slightly reduced from 3.56 to 3.52 mA cm−2, the open-circuit voltage is increased from 0.58 to 0.65 V, and the PCE is also increased to 1.894% (Fig. 2a). The reason is that h-BN can weaken the optical absorption of the TMDs and slightly increase the resistance of the entire system to reduce short-circuit current density. Also, the interlayer recombination is suppressed owing to a high electron-barrier (>1.8 eV) at the interface of 1L MoS2/h-BN, resulting in an increase in the difference between band bending under illumination and dark conditions to improve the Voc and PCE. Recently, Lin et al. inserted h-BN into MoS2/GaAs to suppress the interlayer recombination, and they found that the PCE (Voc) increases from 4.82% (0.51 V) to 5.42% (0.57 V), and the Jsc reduces from 20.6 to 20.2 mA cm−2. Meng et al. indicated that 1.5 nm h-BN in the graphene/h-BN/Si heterostructure can reduce carrier recombination and increase PCE to 4.40%. Our trend is consistent with the experiments on other systems.
In fact, for the MoS2/WSe2 vdW heterostructures with type II band alignment, the photogenerated electrons are more inclined to locate in the MoS2 layer under the built-in electric field, and the holes are more confined to the WSe2 layer. Notably, there is a large interlayer recombination at the MoS2/WSe2 interface (Fig. 2b). When the thin h-BN is inserted, the h-BN will reduce the interlayer recombination, whereas it has little effect on the collection of photogenerated carriers due to the small ΔEv12 and ΔEc23. However, the thick h-BN will block carrier separation and cluster a large number of photogenerated carriers at the interface, and the interlayer recombination will be significantly suppressed (Fig. 2b). Therefore, inserting an insulator such as h-BN at the MoS2/WSe2 heterointerface is an effective method to improve the photoelectric conversion.
Aiming at clarifying the role of the insulator, we obtain the h-BN thickness-dependent optoelectronic properties of monolayer MoS2/h-BN/monolayer WSe2 vdW heterostructures. As shown in Table S2 (ESI), h-BN has an optimal thickness, and the Voc, PCE and FF will first increase and then decrease as the layer number of h-BN enhances. Moreover, the Jsc and PCE will be close to zero when the layer number is larger than 15 layers. The detailed results are shown in Fig. 3. Notably, Fig. 3a plots the short-circuit current density and collection efficiency as a function of h-BN thickness under the condition of 1L MoS2 and WSe2. Evidently, the short-circuit current density first decreases slowly with increasing h-BN thickness and then decreases rapidly as the thickness becomes more than 3.7 nm. The negative effect of h-BN on the optical absorption of the system is one of the factors that slowly reduces the short-circuit current. Also, in terms of eqn (3), the collection efficiency approaches 100% when the h-BN thickness is less than 3.6 nm, and the collection of photocarriers is significantly suppressed (<50%) when the thickness of h-BN is more than 4.29 nm (Fig. 3a). In fact, the effect of thin h-BN on hole (electron) tunneling of hole (electron) transfer from MoS2 (WSe2) to WSe2 (MoS2) is almost negligible, whereas thick h-BN can aggregate a large number of carriers at the interface without effective separation. Strikingly, the intercalated layer suppresses hole transport slightly more weakly than that of the electron, which is related to ΔEc23 > ΔEv12. Recently, Kim et al. reported that the critical thickness of h-BN that suppresses carrier transfer should be between 4.3 and 6.9 nm in the 1L MoS2/h-BN/1L WSe2 vdW heterostructure according to PL measurement, and thicker h-BN (>critical thickness) can reduce carrier collection. Moreover, it is reported that the critical thickness in graphene/Al2O3(graphene oxide, Go)/Si vdW heterostructures is 3 nm Al2O3 (2.4 nm Go), and the Jsc is firstly constant and then decreases rapidly with increasing Go thickness. Interestingly, the trend of our predictions is consistent with the experimental observations.

Fig. 3b shows that the recombination rate and the reverse saturation current of the monolayer MoS2/h-BN/monolayer WSe2 heterostructures decrease exponentially with increasing thickness of h-BN, and the interlayer recombination becomes weak at ∼0.9 nm. This can be attributed to the weak electron tunneling from MoS2 to WSe2 layer caused by a large ΔEc12. Similarly, Fang et al. reported that 3-layer h-BN can significantly suppress the interlayer recombination of 1L MoS2/1L WSe2 hetero-bilayer. Furthermore, the Voc is dependent on the photocurrent density and total recombination. Fig. 3c plots the open circuit voltage (blue curve) and PCE (red curve) as a function of the thickness of h-BN. Obviously, the open circuit voltage first increases from 0.58 to 1.36 V and then decreases as the thickness (δ) increases, the maximum of 1.36 V appears at ∼4.36 nm, which is more than twice that without h-BN. The physical origin is that the thin h-BN suppresses interlayer recombination (Fig. 3b), improving the difference between band bending under illumination and dark conditions to enhance the Voc. However, thick h-BN (>4.36 nm) also significantly suppresses the collection of carriers (Fig. 3a) owing to low hole (electron) photocarrier tunneling probability from MoS2 (WSe2) to WSe2 (MoS2), resulting in the decrement of Voc. Experimentally, Yang et al. reported that the Voc of graphene/Go/Si vdW heterostructure first increases to 0.44 V with increasing thickness of Go and then decreases as the thickness is more than 2.4 nm. Furthermore, the PCE first gradually increases from 1.70% to 3.23% and then significantly decreases with increasing h-BN thickness; the maximum PCE of 3.23% appears at ∼3.64 nm, which is equivalent to nearly twice that without h-BN (Fig. 3c and Table S2, ESI). Similarly, Li et al. reported the experimental measurements of the graphene/h-BN/GaAs heterostructure system, and they obtained the PCE of the heterostructure with 0, 1, 3, 5, 7 h-BN layers of 6.51%, 6.83%, 6.92%, 7.10%, 6.38%, respectively. Rehman et al. showed that the PCE of graphene/Al2O3/Si heterostructure first increases to 8.4% with increasing thickness of Al2O3 and then decreases rapidly as the thickness is more than 3 nm. In nature, the reason can be explained from two aspects: (I) the effect of tunneling on interlayer recombination. When h-BN thickness is less than 3.64 nm, the Voc (PCE) will be improved due to the reduction of interlayer recombination. (II) the influence of tunneling on photogenerated carrier collection. When h-BN thickness is more than 3.64 nm, the Jsc (PCE) will be reduced due to the suppression of the collection of free carriers.

Fig. 4 depicts the PCE of the MoS2/h-BN/WSe2 heterostructure as a function of h-BN thickness under different TMD thicknesses (D = D1 = D2). Notably, the PCE increases with increasing TMD thickness in the case of thin h-BN. This is attributed to an increase in optical absorption and a reduced bandgap as the thickness increases. Moreover, the maximum PCE of MoS2/WSe2 without h-BN can reach up to 14% at ∼15 nm TMD, whereas the maximum PCE of MoS2/h-BN/WSe2 can reach 23.37% at ∼2.86 nm h-BN and ∼15 nm TMD due to the significant suppression of interlayer recombination (Fig. 4 and Fig. S3, ESI). However, the PCE is reduced in the case of 10-layer h-BN owing to the suppression of carrier collection (Fig. S3d, ESI). The PCE decreases as the thickness of TMD increases in the case of thicker h-BN, such as in the range of 4.6–4.7 nm (side panel blow-ups). This is mainly because the suppression effect of thicker h-BN on carrier collection exceeds the contribution of the lower threshold value to photo-carriers. Interestingly, the optimal thickness of h-BN (δm) at the PCE extreme point decreases from 3.64 (about 11L) to 2.86 nm (about 9L) as D increases, and it basically remains the same when the TMD thickness is greater than 9 nm. In terms of eqn (3), ΔEc23 and ΔEv12 between TMDs and h-BN increase when the thickness of TMDs enhances (Fig. 1a and Fig. S2, ESI), so that δ needs to be appropriately reduced to ensure that the effect of the tunneling on the collection efficiency is not dominant. Also, we can determine the optimal thickness of h-BN for the heterostructure based on multilayer TMDs due to the small variation of δm. Therefore, in order to enhance the photoelectric conversion of the MoS2/WSe2 vdW heterostructure, it is a feasible method to introduce a dielectric layer at the heterointerface to reduce the interlayer recombination before designing a functional device. Importantly, such a design method could also effectively reduce the contact resistance at the junction and surface recombination, etc.

In summary, using the bond relaxation method and DBP, we explore the optoelectronic properties of MoS2/h-BN/WSe2 vdW heterostructures and clarify the underlying mechanism of h-BN on the carrier collection and recombination. It should be noted that the intercalated h-BN plays a vital role as an effective electron-blocking/hole-transporting layer due to the appropriate band alignment in the MoS2/h-BN/WSe2 heterostructure. Also, the excellent light harvesting of TMDs and reduced carrier recombination provide a good premise for the application of vertical stacked SIS trilayer heterostructure solar cells. Furthermore, we obtain the following main results: (I) in the case of a thin intercalated layer, h-BN has substantially no impact on the collection of photogenerated carriers, but can effectively suppress interlayer recombination; (II) after introducing h-BN into the bilayer MoS2/WSe2, the PCE first increases from 1.70% without h-BN to 3.23% with 3.64 nm h-BN and then decreases rapidly as the thickness of the intercalated layer increases; (III) as the thickness of TMDs increases, the optimal size of h-BN decreases slightly from 3.64 to 2.86 nm and the optimal PCE can reach up to 23.37%. These results demonstrate that inserting an insulator at the heterointerfaces is an effective way to enhance photoelectric conversion. Our results agree reasonably well with the related experimental measurements and simulations, suggesting that our method can be useful guidance to design 2D TMD-based optoelectronic nanodevices.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 11574080 and 91833302).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cp04700j
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2019