 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA07238A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21476-21487


Hongmei
Zhu
,

Shaohang
Wu
,

Jiaxu
Yao
,

Rui
Chen
,

Ming
Pan
,

Weitao
Chen
,

Jing
Zhou
,

Wenjun
Zhang
,

Tao
Wang
 and 

Wei
Chen
*

State Key Laboratory of Silicate Materials for Architectures, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan 430070, China

Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Luoyu Road 1037, Wuhan 430074, China. E-mail: wnlochenwei@mail.hust.edu.cn

Received
5th July 2019
, Accepted 19th August 2019
First published on 21st August 2019
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have become the front-running photovoltaic technology and have triggered enormous research interest worldwide owing to their ultra-high solar-to-electric power conversion efficiency and low fabrication costs, but their poor intrinsic stability issues still constitute the main obstacles that hinder their rapid commercialization. Herein, we demonstrate that, by carefully designing the modifier's molecular structure, a facile, highly reproducible and scalable surface modification strategy can effectively enhance both the stability and efficiency of inverted PSCs. The most efficient modifier (2-acetylpyridine) can not only passivate the surface traps of the perovskite film but also enhance its stability against moisture by forming a hydrophobic capping layer on top. Accordingly, the efficiency of the inverted PSC has been improved from 16.75% to 20.05% for the best-performing one, which is, to our knowledge, among the highest values for inverted MA-free PSCs. More encouragingly, the stability of the modified devices can also be largely enhanced: the devices retained 95%, 90%, and 91% of their initial efficiencies after storage in the dark in ambient air for 2000 hours, 85 °C thermal aging for 500 hours in the dark, and light soaking at 45 °C for 500 hours, respectively.

The state-of-the-art perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have achieved an impressive power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 24%, rivaling other established photovoltaic technologies, such as multi-crystalline silicon solar cells, copper indium gallium selenide solar cells and cadmium telluride thin-film solar cells. Coupled with their low production costs and all-earth-abundant compositions, PSCs hold great promise for realizing industrialization in the future. However, it's still difficult to achieve high efficiency and high stability simultaneously, and this remains a crucial obstacle to rapid commercialization.

A critical factor in the durability of PSCs arises from the inherent structural and chemical instability of perovskite absorbers, which govern light harvesting and charge generation. It has been suggested that perovskite absorbers with MA+ cations would lack thermal stability because they would decompose to gaseous methylamine at temperatures as low as 85 °C. Replacing MA+ by FA+ can enable a higher theoretical efficiency limit and decomposition temperature. However, PSCs based on FAPbI3 absorbers normally exhibit abrupt suppression of photovoltaic performance as FAPbI3 undergoes a phase transition from the photo-active cubic phase to the photo-inactive hexagonal phase at the operating temperature. To combat this adverse phase transition in FAPbI3, partial substitution of FA+ with nonvolatile Cs+/Rb+ and/or I− with Br− has proven effective. In particular, the complex perovskite crystals of FA1−xCsxPbIyBr3−y (hereafter, denoted as FACs) show excellent phase stability and desirable bandgaps. However, these kinds of MA-free perovskite devices with high stability usually exhibit an inadequate efficiency, with few reports over 20%. One of the main obstacles restricting the efficiency of MA-free devices is their lower open-circuit photovoltage (Voc) compared to that of MA-containing PSCs.
The loss of Voc can be induced by non-radiative recombination, which is closely related to the surface and grain boundary (GB) defects in perovskite. Surface modification was proposed as one effective way to passivate these defects and thus improve the Voc of the corresponding devices. For example, phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM), as an outstanding electron transporting material (ETM), was reported to effectively passivate halide-induced deep traps such as the negatively charged Pb–I anti-site defect PbI3− or under-coordinated halide ions in PSCs; a combination of thiophene and pyridine was found capable of binding to positively charged under-coordinated Pb2+ ions in perovskite films; supramolecular halogen bond complexation was discovered to passivate the under-coordinated iodine ions in PSCs; quaternary ammonium halide anions and cations were used to reduce the trap density and prolong the carrier lifetime of perovskites; polymer-like Teflon or poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) was deposited as a hydrophobic passivation layer on top of perovskite films; 4-dimethylaminobenzoic acid (4-DMABA) was introduced to eliminate interfacial recombination within the perovskite layer. Moreover, an appropriate surface modifier can form a compact thin layer to help enhance the corresponding PSCs' stability at the same time. Therefore, among various routes implemented for enhancing the efficiency and/or stability of PSCs, the surface modification strategy was generally accepted as an ideal choice in that it can kill two birds with one stone. However, the influence of the surface modifier's structure on the perovskite layer has not been thoroughly classified hitherto.
Herein, we selected three kinds of pyridine derivatives, with ethanoyl substituents at different positions (o-substituted, meta-substituted, or para-substituted, hereafter denoted as 2-, 3- or 4-acetylpyridine, respectively) as the surface modifiers to treat the FAC perovskites. The molecular-structure-dependent effects on the as-modified perovskite films, such as trap passivation and moisture resistance, have been demonstrated. As a result, the corresponding PSCs' efficiencies and stabilities have been simultaneously enhanced. In addition, the surface-modification strategy involved in this work features high technical scalability and reproducibility.

The processes of our surface modification strategy are illustrated in Fig. 1a. The FAC perovskite films were prepared by the classic anti-solvent extraction method. After annealing at 150 °C for 30 min, the perovskite films were immersed into a surface modification solution (different surface modifiers with controlled concentrations in the perovskite antisolvent diethyl ether) bath for 10 min. Lastly, the modified films were further annealed at 150 °C for 10 min.

Pyridine was reportedly used as a Lewis base to heal defects of perovskite films, which could effectively prolong the carrier lifetime and promote the efficiency of the as-treated film and device. However, pyridine cannot be simply used as the surface modifier since its high polarity can quickly dissolve halide perovskites. Based on these considerations, three kinds of pyridine derivatives with ethanoyl substituents at different positions (Fig. 1b) were selected as surface modifiers in this work, with the aim of preventing their destructive dissolution effect and tuning their binding modes to perovskite films.
To verify the dissolution effect of pyridine derivatives on perovskites, one drop of each of their pure solutions was dripped on the surfaces of perovskite films. Conspicuous differences between these pyridine derivatives have been observed from the optical images shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). For the pure solutions of 3-acetylpyridine and 4-acetylpyridine, instantaneous dissolution of the perovskite films occurred; however, for the 2-acetylpyridine pure solution, there was no obvious change of the perovskite film. To avoid the dissolution effect of 3-acetylpyridine and 4-acetylpyridine, we diluted them in the perovskite anti-solvent diethyl ether at different volume ratios. As seen from the optical images in Fig. S1, 1/1000-diluted 3-acetylpyridine and 1/10000-diluted 4-acetylpyridine could safely interact with the perovskites without destroying them. This should be ascribed to the steric hindrance caused by the abundant presence of diethyl ether molecules in the solutions, which largely decreased the opportunity of the 3-acetylpyridine and 4-acetylpyridine molecules to attack the perovskites.
The significantly different impacts of 2-, 3-, and 4-acetylpyridine on perovskites are caused by their differing molecular structures (Fig. 1b), which may indicate different interaction modes between FAC perovskites and pyridine derivatives. Note that the common characteristics of these pyridine derivatives are the N atoms in their pyridine rings and O atoms in their ethanoyl substituents, both of which possess lone pair electrons. According to the literature, they are Lewis base sites and tend to chelate with Pb atoms from the perovskite's surface according to Lewis acid-base theory. Here, for simplicity, their interaction modes were predicted based on calculations of the total structure energy of different chelating structures shown as the ball-and-stick diagrams depicted in Fig. 1c. The calculation was conducted using DFT theory with the wb97xd calculation method using the LANL2DZ basis set followed by single-point energy calculations for correction of the basis set superposition error (BSSE) to predict the stability of the total structure. Other weaker interactions, such as hydrogen bonding between the FA from the perovskites and the N and O sites from the pyridine derivatives, are ignored. Lower energy should imply a more stable structure. For 2-acetylpyridine and 3-acetylpyridine molecules, the structures with N and O on different sides are more stable than the structures with N and O on the same side, as reflected by their lower energies: −10904.17 eV, lower than −10903.84 eV for 2-acetylpyridine, and −10904.08 eV, lower than −10904.03 eV for 3-acetylpyridine (Table 1). But the presence of Pb2+ can change this situation. The chelating structures of Pb and 2-acetylpyridine/3-acetylpyridine have lower energies when their N and O are on the same side than when on different sides (−10983.36 eV < −10981.77 eV for 2-acetylpyridine–Pb; −10981.59 eV < −10981.51 eV for 2-acetylpyridine–Pb). Notably, 2-acetylpyridine tends to form a stable five-membered ring structure of C–C–O–Pb–N, reflected by it having the lowest structure energy among the calculated five kinds of chelating structures shown in Fig. 1c. We speculate that this special interaction mode of forming a stable five-membered ring structure may explain why there was no corrosion of the perovskite in the 2-acetylpyridine pure solution. In contrast, for 3-acetylpyridine and 4-acetylpyridine, this special five-membered ring chelating structure cannot form due to the steric hindrance of their molecular structures. On the basis of the above calculations, the speculated stable interaction modes between the pyridine derivatives and the Pb2+ of the perovskite film are shown in Fig. 1d. The dipole moment of each of the surface modifiers we used in this work has also been calculated, as it has been thought to have some relationship with the device performance after the surface modification treatment. As shown in Fig. S2 (ESI), 2-acetylpyridine with structure 2 possesses the highest electron density (negative area); thus it could provide more favorable conditions for coordination with the under-coordinated ionic defects existing in the perovskite crystal. Therefore, we deduce that the PSC modified with 2-acetylpyridine may perform best.
State
Structure energy (eV)
Molecule alone
Combined with Pb2+
−10904.17103
−10981.77001
−10903.84661
−10983.36186
−10904.08169
−10981.51236
−10904.03927
−10981.58961
−10904.04486
−10981.22889
The morphology of the perovskite film plays a vital role in the device performance; an ultra-smooth and compact surface could enable the fabrication of high performance PSCs. A poor morphology with pin-holes or sharp upward bulges in the perovskite film would lead to direct short-circuiting contacts, thus affecting the performance of the PSC device. For our surface modification strategy, there is no evident morphological change before and after different surface modifications, as shown by the top-view SEM images in Fig. 2a. Both kinds of films exhibit a dense-grained film morphology with an average grain size of approximately 500 nm without any pinholes. It is encouraging that the crystal size is comparable to the film thickness, which can help minimize the number of grain boundaries and reduce charge recombination along the charge transport paths and, finally, result in high-efficiency PSCs.
To evaluate the water-resistance of the pristine and modified perovskite films, their contact angles have been tested, and the results are presented in Fig. 2b. The measured contact angle of the pristine perovskite is calculated to be 69.13°, which is much lower than that of the modified samples (99.52° for 2-acetylpyridine; 88.76° for 3-acetylpyridine; 84.35° for 4-acetylpyridine). These results reflect that each of the modified samples has a more hydrophobic surface, and, especially, the 2-acetylpyridine-modified sample is the most hydrophobic. Note that for the samples treated with 3-acetylpyridine and 4-acetylpyridine, the solutions were diluted by 1000 and 10000 times, respectively. There may be two main reasons for the superior hydrophobicity of the sample modified using 2-acetylpyridine. First, due to the special interaction mode between the perovskite and 2-acetylpyridine, the as-formed most stable five-membered ring may influence the surface conditions of the perovskite film after modification. See the different binding modes between 2-, 3-, and 4-acetylpyridine and Pb shown in Fig. 1d, where the active N and O sites of 2-acetylpyridine are not free due to the formation of the five membered ring; however, for 3- and 4-acetylpyridine, there are remaining dangling bonds of N with lone pair electrons, which have the tendency to form hydrogen bonds with H2O. This could result in relatively higher hydrophilicity of 3- and 4-acetylpyridine-modified perovskite films. Second, the higher concentration of 2-acetylpyridine than 3- and 4-acetylpyridine in the surface modification solutions may lead to a higher absorption density of hydrophobic molecules and, thus, to different hydrophobicities of the as-treated perovskite films. The enhancement in the water contact angle is an indication of the improved waterproofing capability of the modified perovskite film, which will be helpful in improving the long-term stability of the devices.
To gain more insight into the mechanisms of the surface passivation effect, photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy, one of the most powerful tools, has been chosen to characterize the film samples. As demonstrated in the literature, recombination of charge carriers through intra-bandgap trap states will result in a red-shift of the PL emission peak away from the band edge transition. Surface modification could fill the intra-bandgap trap states and help recover the bandgap, which may result in a blue-shift of the PL peak. Indeed, slight blue-shifts have been observed for our perovskite film samples after surface modifications (780.88 nm for 2-acetylpyridine; 782.68 nm for 3-acetylpyridine; 783.43 nm for 4-acetylpyridine) in comparison with the pristine perovskite sample (784.97 nm), as shown in the steady-state PL spectra (Fig. 2c). Moreover, PL intensity enhancement has also been found after surface modification, which can be viewed as an indication of improved electronic quality of the modified perovskite films. The sample treated with 2-acetylpyridine exhibits the highest intensity and a relatively larger blue-shift among the modified films, which confirms that 2-acetylpyridine is the most effective surface modifier.
To further elucidate the improved electronic quality, time-resolved PL spectroscopy was used to investigate the carrier dynamics (Fig. 2d). The carrier-recombination lifetime is highly related to the defect concentration in the perovskite film. The values of the fitted lifetimes for the modified samples (222.9 ns for 2-acetylpyridine; 167.17 ns for 3-acetylpyridine; 156.03 ns for 4-acetylpyridine) are considerably longer than the fitted lifetime of the pristine perovskite film (101.68 ns). The results consistently support the assertion that all three surface modifiers could enhance the electronic quality of the treated perovskite films but, among them, 2-acetylpyridine has the best effect.
To further confirm the interaction mode between the surface modifiers and the perovskite films, Fourier-transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy measurements were conducted for the powder samples of the perovskite films with and without surface modifications, using liquid samples of the pyridine derivatives as the references. The sample preparation for FT-IR characterization was the same as that for device fabrication, with the surface-modified powders being collected after depositing the perovskite films on FTO glass. Before the FT-IR test, these powders were mixed with certain amounts of potassium bromide. The symmetric stretching vibration of CO (v(CO)) located at 1697.14 cm−1 is considered as the indicative spectral feature of 2-acetylpyridine (Fig. 2e), and this characteristic peak is also observed in the perovskite sample treated with 2-acetylpyridine but with a red-shift to 1685.57 cm−1. Similar results were detected for the 3- and 4-acetylpyridine-treated samples (Fig. 2f and g). The FT-IR spectra of the surface modifiers alone are shown in Fig. S3 (ESI). These shifts may indicate an interaction effect occurring between the surface modifiers and the perovskite films, as suggested in the literature. In our case, it is suggested to be ascribed to the coordination bonds formed by sharing the lone electron pair on the CO of the surface modifier with the empty 6p orbital of the under-coordinated Pb2+ in the perovskite film.
In order to directly visualize the distinct differences of the perovskite films before and after surface modification, we performed a PL mapping analysis and the results are shown in Fig. 3a–d. All of the various kinds of perovskite films were exposed to ambient conditions without any humidity control near a window (to receive the incident sunlight) for this test. The pristine perovskite film turned almost blue (meaning PL intensity decreases) after aging for only 2 days and even became dark after extended aging for 10 days (Fig. 3d). The much weaker PL intensity suggests much more serious nonradiative recombination in the film induced by decomposition and phase segregation. In contrast, the perovskite films with surface modification all exhibited brighter and more uniform PL emission across the surface, which is consistent with their improved electronic quality. Moreover, the modified films exhibited much higher resistance to the ambient atmosphere, as reflected from their PL mapping results, in which they maintained their original PL spectral color for a much longer time (Fig. 3a–c). In particular, the sample treated with 2-acetylpyridine is the most robust among them. All these results manifest that the surface modification route we chose in this work can indeed help to relieve charge recombination in the perovskite film and improve its stability as well.
The corresponding X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the perovskite films after aging for different numbers of days are shown in Fig. 3e. It is found that, for the pristine film, evident diffraction peaks corresponding to PbI2 and δ-phase perovskite appear after aging for 2 days, whereas for the modified samples, even after aging for 10 days under the same conditions, only a very small change, if any, in their XRD patterns was observed. For 2-acetylpyridine, no difference has been observed, even after aging for 10 days under the same conditions. These results reveal that the modified films possess much better stability and moisture resistance. To verify the reproducibility of the surface modification method, nine pieces of perovskite films have been treated in one batch of surface modification solution (here we chose 2-acetylpyridine). The results are shown in Fig. S4 (ESI). After drying and thermal annealing, the perovskite films uniformly show a mirror-like dark brown color (Fig. S4). The measured contact angles of these 9 films are nearly the same at 99.26 ± 0.27°. Thus, it can be concluded that the surface modification strategy we present here has high reproducibility and reliability.
The layer-by-layer stacking architecture is clearly visible in the cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image (Fig. 4a). It shows comparatively homogeneous pinhole-free over-layers with thorough coverage over the whole PSC. In addition, the entire device layer is tightly arranged perpendicular to the substrate in the vertical direction, which, in turn, helps to expedite charge transfer, decrease the grain boundary defects, lessen the internal recombination, and, finally, enhance the as-constructed inverted PSCs' performance.
The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves of the champion devices with and without surface modifications are shown in Fig. 4b. Among them, the pristine PSC exhibits a lower PCE of 16.75%, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 22.1 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.03 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 73.58% for the forward scan, with a PCE of 16.66%, a Jsc of 22.09 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.03 V, and a FF of 73.22% for the reverse scan. In contrast, notable enhancement has been observed for all of the photovoltaic parameters after surface modification. The best performing PSC incorporates the perovskite film treated with 2-acetylpyridine. It shows a Jsc of 23.15 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.08 V, FF of 79.95% and a PCE of up to 19.99% for the forward scan, with a Jsc of 23.23 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.08 V, FF of 79.93% and a PCE of 20.05% for the reverse scan. The specific performance parameters of all the various PSCs are summarized in Table 2. The improved performance of PSCs after surface modification may be ascribed to fewer defects in the modified films, leading to significant suppression of non-radiative charge recombination. Further, the best performing PSC incorporates perovskite treated with 2-acetylpyridine, which may be attributed to the modifier having the most efficient trap passivation effect.
Condition
FS/RS

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
PCE average (%)

a FS (Forward Scan): from −0.2 V to 1.2 V. RS (Reverse Scan): from 1.2 V to −0.2 V.

Pristine
FS
22.1
1.03
73.58
16.75
16.71
RS
22.09
1.03
73.22
16.66
2-Acetylpyridine
FS
23.15
1.08
79.95
19.99
20.02
RS
23.23
1.08
79.93
20.05
3-Acetylpyridine
FS
22.8
1.06
77.21
18.66
18.59
RS
22.79
1.06
76.62
18.51
4-Acetylpyridine
FS
22.6
1.05
76.49
18.15
18.13
RS
22.62
1.05
76.24
18.11
The steady-state output power can mimic the actual working conditions of a PSC under illumination and bias, and it has been viewed as a reliable choice to describe the real performance of the device. By holding a constant voltage bias near the maximum power point (MPP) and plotting the PCE as a function of time, the steady-state PCE of the PSCs with and without surface modification can be obtained. The results confirm the accuracy of our device performance parameters extracted from the J–V measurements. As shown in Fig. 4c, the PCE of the control device slowly rose to a steady-state with a maximum PCE value of 16.68% at 0.85 V, while for the modified PSCs the PCE rose quickly to a steady-state and attained higher maximum PCE values (20.02% at 0.93 V for 2-acetylpyridine; 18.54% at 0.9 V for 3-acetylpyridine; 18.12% at 0.88 V for 4-acetylpyridine). The rapid ascent and sharp corner in the PCE curve verify the absence of a large density of charge traps in the modified PSCs. Moreover, the test results confirm the enhanced device performance and improved stability provided by the surface modification process.
To validate the Jsc value obtained from the J–V measurements, the incident-photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectrum was further recorded for the champion cells over the wavelength range from 300 to 900 nm. The results are shown in Fig. 4d. The IPCE profiles manifest a broad plateau over nearly the entire visible wavelength range. Integrating the IPCE spectrum over the solar emission yields an AM 1.5 photocurrent of 22.16 mA cm−2 for the pristine PSC, and 23.18, 22.72, and 22.56 mA cm−2 were calculated for the PSCs modified with 2-acetylpyridine, 3-acetylpyridine and 4-acetylpyridine, respectively. These results are in an excellent agreement with the Jsc values obtained from the J–V tests. This finding indicates that the spectral discrepancy between the solar simulator we used and the true AM 1.5 solar emission is comparatively negligible. Considering that the optical loss caused by the FTO-glass absorption and reflection is about 10–15%, the light absorption in our device is sufficiently high to suggest that the charge collection loss within the whole PSC is quite small. The modified PSCs have a higher spectral response over the entire visible range than the pristine one, indicating that the perovskite films after surface modification possess even smaller internal recombination, especially for the PSC modified with 2-acetylpyridine.

Fig. 4e shows the histograms of PCEs for several batches of 100 devices of each type based on the four kinds of perovskite films with and without surface modification under the same conditions. The statistical PCE distributions in Fig. 4e demonstrate ultrahigh reliability and repeatability of the performance improvement induced by the surface modification, and the data are summarized in Table S1 (ESI). The PCEs for the pristine PSCs displayed an average PCE of only approximately 15.68%. However, with the help of surface modification, the devices exhibited higher average PCEs (19.07% for 2-acetylpyridine; 17.65% for 3-acetylpyridine; 17.12% for 4-acetylpyridine), and they had a narrower distribution. This result should be ascribed to the passivation effect of the modifiers, which will be discussed below.
The enhanced Voc after surface modification treatment can be attributed to the obviously improved electronic quality of the perovskite film, which may result from fewer defects because of the passivation effect, as mentioned before. As is well known, surface modification is an effective route to decrease interfacial traps to facilitate charge carrier transport and minimize nonradiative recombination. To attest to this, the dependence of Voc on light intensity for the devices was studied and shown in Fig. 4f. By linearly fitting Vocversus the log-scaled light intensity, a slope of 1.52KBT/q was obtained for the pristine PSC, while values of 1.16KBT/q, 1.31KBT/q, and 1.37KBT/q were calculated for the PSCs modified with 2-acetylpyridine, 3-acetylpyridine, and 4-acetylpyridine, respectively (where KB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, and q is the elementary charge). According to the previous research, the slope coefficient would be 1 if a device had no trapping of charge carriers, while the slope coefficient approaches 2 when trap-assisted recombination dominates in the devices. In the case of the slope greater than KBT/q, monomolecular recombination is involved, and there is Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination at the shallow traps created by impurities and defects in the interfacial layer. The results in Fig. 4f show that the modified PSCs exhibit a much smaller slope than the pristine one throughout the entire light intensity range, suggesting that fewer trap sites exist in the modified perovskite film, particularly for the PSC treated with 2-acetylpyridine.
In order to further elucidate the effect of the suppressed recombination process on the device performance, the dark J–V characteristics of the pristine and modified PSCs have been measured. The results are shown in Fig. 4g. By fitting the equivalent circuit of a Shockley diode in a single-junction device, the conclusion could be drawn that PSCs after surface modification possess better diode behavior, showing much lower reverse saturation currents (J0) (2.93 × 10−9 A cm−2 for 2-acetylpyridine; 4.35 × 10−9 A cm−2 for 3-acetylpyridine; 5.07 × 10−9 A cm−2 for 4-acetylpyridine) than the pristine one (6.37 × 10−9 A cm−2). The smaller leakage density extracted from the dark J–V curves for the modified PSCs indicates a much-suppressed charge recombination with a higher rectification ratio after surface modification.
The Voc values of the PSCs after surface modification treatment (1.06 ± 0.02 V for 2-acetylpyridine; 1.02 ± 0.04 V for 3-acetylpyridine; 1.00 ± 0.05 V for 4-acetylpyridine) are relatively higher than the Voc of the pristine device (0.96 ± 0.07 V), as can be seen in Table 2. We further employed the Mott–Schottky analysis to elucidate the origin of the improved Voc (Fig. 4h). As is well-known, the Mott–Schottky equation is as follows: 1/C2 = −2/(V − Vbi)εε0qA2N, where C is the measured capacitance in the dark, A is the active area, V is the applied bias, ε is the relative permittivity, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, q is the elementary charge and N is the concentration of free carriers. From the X-axis of the Mott–Schottky plots, the built-in potentials (Vbi) can be calculated from the intercepts in the linear region. The Vbi values of 0.76 V, 0.85 V, 0.82 V, and 0.80 V were obtained for the pristine PSC and the PSCs treated with 2-acetylpyridine, 3-acetylpyridine, and 4-acetylpyridine, respectively (Fig. 4h). The results match well with the Voc values determined from the J–V curves. Given that the charge separation and recombination of the photo-generated carriers are closely related to the built-in potential field in PSCs, the higher Vbi in the devices after surface modification should have benefited from the lower charge recombination and improved quality of the perovskite films.
It is of great importance to settle the tough issue of the long-term stability without sacrificing PSCs' outstanding efficiency. Owing to the intrinsic instability of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites, the unencapsulated solar cells usually decompose quickly and completely in the ambient environment; therefore, more extensive investigations of storage stability of PSCs are needed. In this work, all the various kinds of unencapsulated PSCs were tested by keeping them in the dark in ambient air (without control, the relative humidity of local climate is normally 40–90%) at room temperature for 2000 hours, during which the J–V curves have been periodically evaluated using a standard solar simulator. The time evolutions of the PCEs are presented in Fig. 5a and Table S2 (ESI). A notable difference appeared for the PSCs based on different perovskite films: The modified PSCs exhibited only minor deterioration (95% of the initial PCE remained for 2-acetylpyridine; 82% for 3-acetylpyridine; 75% for 4-acetylpyridine) after aging for 2000 h without encapsulation, while the pristine device's PCE dramatically decreased to 31% of its initial PCE. Such an improved ambient storage stability should be ascribed to the surface modifier, which may help prevent access of moisture/oxygen to the perovskite film by forming an internal stable “hydrophobic capping layer.”
The standardized test protocols for the long-term stability of PSCs were suggested to facilitate the standardization in degradation testing across the whole community and promote direct comparisons between laboratories and research institutions. With the aim of approaching the stability test standards for commercialized solar cells, we compared the thermal stability of the unsealed devices by keeping them in the dark at 85 °C for 1000 hours in an N2-filled glove box. According to the standard IEC 61215-1:2016 (Terrestrial Photovoltaic (PV) Modules-Design Qualification and Type Approval-Part 1: Test Requirements), 85 °C is the specified aging temperature in the thermal stability test. An inert atmosphere (N2) was advised for the thermal aging test to exclude the interference by other factors from the ambient atmosphere, such as H2O and O2. The correlative J–V curves were recorded periodically, as shown in Fig. 5b, and the parameters are summarized in Table S3 (ESI). It can be seen that the modified PSCs showed superior thermal stability (maintaining over 90% of the initial PCE for 2-acetylpyridine; 75% for 3-acetylpyridine; and 69% for 4-acetylpyridine) compared with the pristine devices (lost 45% of the initial efficiency). It is fair to note that an initial increase is detected in Fig. 5b in the first several tens of hours during the stability test, which would be due to concomitant effects such as heat-induced defect healing in the perovskite active layer or field-induced ion movement with the associated structural rearrangement and so on.
The operational stability of the PSCs has also been evaluated. The unencapsulated PSCs were measured by continuously exposing them to LED white light (provided by a white light LED array with a calibrated intensity to reach the same Jsc as for AM1.5G solar irradiation) under MPP bias conditions at 45 °C in an N2-filled glove box. The aging conditions also match the standard IEC 61215-1:2016. The relaxed atmosphere of N2 atmosphere was suggested by Snaith et al. As shown in Fig. 5c, the pristine PSCs without surface modification suffered a conspicuous decline to 50% of their original value after 500 h, and they regained some efficiency of 52.7% after storing in the dark for 40 hours, while the modified PSCs delivered much higher operational stability (maintaining 91.6% and regaining 95.1% for 2-acetylpyridine; 80.4% and regaining 83.6% for 3-acetylpyridine; 71.5% and regaining 73.3% for 4-acetylpyridine) under the same conditions. Detailed photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table S4 (ESI). Here, we recognize that the enhanced stability under thermal and light soaking conditions for the modified devices has not been conclusively understood, and we propose that it might be associated with the suppression of the corrosion reaction between inherent ionic defects in the perovskite film and the metal species that migrated from the anode. In all cases, remarkable stability improvement after surface modification has been confirmed.

In summary, we have demonstrated an effective surface passivation approach with high reproducibility for preparing efficient and stable PSCs. A striking enhancement in PCE from the original 16.75% to 20.05% has been observed, which could be ascribed to the passivation effect reducing surface traps and suppressing carrier recombination. To our knowledge, it is a fairly high PCE for MA-free inverted planar PSCs. Simultaneously, significantly improved stability of the modified PSCs has been achieved. After dark storage at room temperature in ambient air for 2000 h, 85 °C thermal aging in the dark in an N2-filled glove box for 500 h, and light-soaking at 45 °C in N2 for 500 h, the device modified using 2-acetylpyridine maintained 95%, 90%, and 91% of its initial efficiency, respectively. Additionally, three kinds of modifiers with ethanoyl substituents in o-substituted, meta-substituted, para-substituted configurations have been compared. Their different effects on tuning the devices' efficiency and stability have been discussed with the aid of theoretical calculations. It is suggested that the special interaction mode that results in the formation of a stable five membered ring structure (C–C–O–Pb–N) may explain why no corrosion occurred between 2-acetylpyridine and the perovskite film. The calculated dipole moments of these molecules manifest that 2-acetylpyridine possesses the highest electron density (negative area), which provides more favorable conditions for coordination with the under-coordinated ionic defects present in the perovskite crystal. These calculation results indicate that 2-acetylpyridine may be the best modifier among all those in this work, which is highly consistent with the experimental data. Furthermore, the surface modification route we used in this work is highly reproducible and easily scalable, and its application for producing high-performing perovskite modules is considered to be very feasible.


All reagents and solvents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received without further purification, unless stated otherwise.


The fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass (Pilkington TEC 15, 15 Ω per square) was first etched using a laser before being cleaned ultrasonically with detergent solution, rinsed sequentially with deionized water, ethanol, and acetone. Prior to use, the cleaned substrates were dried using a high-pressure N2 gas flow. A p-type, compact NiMgLiO layer (∼20 nm-thick) was then deposited on top of the FTO glass substrate through spray pyrolysis according to our previous work. Afterward, the perovskite layer was formed through a one-step antisolvent method from a precursor solution composed of mixed cations (lead (Pb), formamidinium (FA), cesium (Cs)) and halides (I and Br) dissolved in mixed solvent (dimethylformamide (DMF)/dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) (4:1 by volume)); 80 μL precursor solution was spin-coated at a rotation speed of 5500 rpm for 60 seconds with a ramp-up of 2000 rpm s−1, and quick drop-casting of 200 μL chlorobenzene as anti-solvent followed within 15 seconds. The pristine perovskite film was annealed at 150 °C for 30 min on a hotplate. For the preparation of the modified perovskite film, the as-fabricated layer was dipped into the modification solution (10−4 vol%; in diethyl ether) for 10 min to complete the surface modification process, followed by thermal annealing at 150 °C for 10 min to complete the procedure. After finishing the perovskite layer, a chlorobenzene solution of PCBM (20 mg mL−1) as an electron-transporting layer was spin-coated on top of the perovskite film at a rotation speed of 1500 rpm for 30 seconds and then dried at 70 °C for 10 min on a heating stage. Subsequently, a saturated methanol solution of BCP was spin-coated on top of the PCBM layer at a rotation speed of 6000 rpm for 30 s and annealed at 70 °C for 10 min on a hotplate. Finally, one batch of films was transferred to the evaporator chamber, and 80 nm-thick Ag electrodes were deposited by thermal evaporation under high vacuum (<3 × 10−4 Pa) to complete the whole device fabrication.


The scanning electron micrographs were obtained using a Nova Nano 450 scanning electron microscope (FEI Co., Netherlands). XRD measurements were performed on an Empyrean X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (PANalytical B.V. Co., Netherlands). The infrared spectra were obtained with a VERTEX 70 Infrared Fourier transform microscope (Bruker Co., Germany). The PL spectra were recorded on an Edinburgh FLS920 fluorescence spectrometer (Edinburgh Co., UK). A solar simulator (Oriel, model 9119) with an AM 1.5G filter (Oriel, model 91192) was used to deliver an irradiance of 100 mW cm−2. The light intensity was precisely calibrated using a standard Si photodiode detector. The active area of the solar cell was defined to be 0.09 cm2 using a black metal aperture. The IPCE was obtained through a Newport IPCE system (Newport, USA). The steady-state power output of the devices was measured using a Keithley 2400 Source Meter together with a 450 W Oriel Xenon lamp as the light source. The data for the long-term stability were provided using a CHI1000c multi-channel electrochemistry workstation (Chenhua, Co., China).


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51672094, 51861145404, 51822203, and 11627801), the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2016YFA0201001), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation Grant (2016M602286), the Self-determined and Innovative Research Funds of HUST (2016JCTD111 and 2018KFYRCPY003), the Shenzhen Science and Technology Innovation Committee (JCYJ20170307165905513 and JCYJ20180507182257563), and the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (2017A030313342). The authors thank the Analytical and Testing Center of Huazhong University Science and Technology for the sample measurements. The authors thank Mr Jiaxu Yao and Prof Tao Wang for the PL mapping measurements.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta07238a
‡ These two authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019