 DOI: 10.1039/C4TA03995E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2572-2579


Jianyu
Yuan
,

Aidan
Gallagher
,

Zeke
Liu
,

Yaxiang
Sun
 and 

Wanli
Ma
*

Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices, Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, Soochow University, 199 Ren-Ai Road, Suzhou Industrial Park, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, P. R. China. E-mail: wlma@suda.edu.cn

Received
4th August 2014
, Accepted 22nd September 2014
First published on 24th September 2014
Solution-processed hybrid solar cells (HSCs), composed of conjugated polymers and semiconducting PbS nanocrystals, are promising candidates for the next-generation photovoltaic devices. Through deliberate molecular design, a series of new organic donor–acceptor polymers bearing varying optical band-gaps (1.25–1.65 eV) and suitable HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital) energy levels (∼5.0 eV) were synthesized. Due to improved device architecture, we achieved the highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 4.23% to date for polymer–PbS based HSCs. Furthermore, the correlation between the polymer molecular structure and hybrid blend morphologies was systematically investigated using 2-dimensional grazing incidence X-ray diffraction, atomic force microscopy and scanning transmission electron microscopy. We believe our findings can be beneficial to the future molecular design toward highly efficient polymer–PbS HSCs.

Solution processed polymer solar cells (PSCs) can be fabricated on transparent, flexible substrates by scalable roll-to-roll manufacturing at low-cost. In the blend system, the polymer acts as the electron donor with the fullerene derivative as the acceptor, typically phenyl-C61-butyric-acid-methyl (PC61BM). However, the low optical absorption of the fullerene molecules leaves the polymer to capture the majority of light, and hence limits the device efficiency. Additionally, the inherent tendency of the fullerene for aggregation at elevated temperatures has been considered a key factor for the deteriorated morphology and consequently reduces the lifetime of PSCs. Therefore hybrid solar cells (HSCs), employing polymers and inorganic semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs), have attracted increasing attention in recent years due to their potential to overcome the above problems. In HSCs, the fullerene molecules are replaced with nanocrystals (NCs) which can exhibit many favorable attributes including tunable band gaps, high absorbance coefficients and carrier mobility as well as multiple exciton-generation effects. Taking these factors into account, and assuming that a synergetic combination is indeed possible, HSCs can demonstrate great potential as the next generation photovoltaic devices.

Cadmium chalcogenide NCs, such as CdSe or CdTe, have been mostly studied in HSCs due to their simple synthesis process and ease of shape control to form quantum dots, rods and tetrapods. Recently, Yang et al. reported a PCE of 4.76% for HSCs by using CdTe NCs together with aqueous poly(p-phenylenevinylene) (PPT). Xue et al. showed a PCE approaching 5% for HSCs based on CdSe NCs and a low band-gap polymer (PCPDTBT) by ethanedithiol treatment. To date, HSCs using cadmium chalcogenide NCs have not demonstrated efficiency comparable to that of PSCs or colloidal quantum dot array solar cells, with the highest reported efficiencies remaining below 5%. The moderate performance can be attributed to the ordinary photovoltaic properties of CdSe and CdTe NCs. In contrast, lead chalcogenides possess significantly larger bulk exciton Bohr radius (46 nm for PbSe and 20 nm for PbS), which endows these NCs higher bandgap tunability and charge mobility. A remarkable PCE for quantum dot array solar cells based on PbS has been obtained by Sargent and his coworkers. Nonetheless, HSCs employing PbS or PbSe NCs have rarely been investigated, with the PCE less than 1% for many years. In 2011, a breakthrough has been achieved by Prasad et al. who demonstrated a PCE of ∼3.8% by using a low-band-gap polymer PDBT together with PbS. In 2012, Tao and his coworkers also achieved a PCE approaching 4% by using a planar junction configuration for HSCs. Very recently, we largely increased the PCE to 5.5% by optimizing both device architecture and morphology, indicating great potential for such a hybrid system. The criteria for material selection in HSCs were considered to involve suitable optical band-gap for light harvesting, proper energy level alignment and miscibility between the polymer and the nanocrystal for efficient exciton separation and transport. The deep HOMO level of CdSe NCs (around 6.0 eV) allows hole transfer from NCs to many low band gap polymers. In contrast, the HOMO level of PbS NCs is relatively shallow (around 5–5.2 eV), which may seriously hinder hole transfer to most conventional polymers. Thus to further improve the HSC performance, it is crucial to design new polymers showing better energy-level alignment with lead chalcogenide NCs. So far in such HSCs, effective charge transfer has only been observed for polymers employing cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b]dithiophene (DTC) and dithieno[3,2-b:2,3-d]pyrrole (DTP) as the donor comonomer, which usually results in shallow polymer HOMO levels and lead to type-II heterojunctions between polymers and lead chalcogenide NCs.
Herein four new polymers PDBF (poly(2-(6-fluoro-7-methylbenzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazol-4-yl)-4-(heptadecan-9-yl)-6-methyl-4H-dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole)), PDTD (poly(2,5-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-3-(5-(4-(heptadecan-9-yl)-6-methyl-4H-dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrol-2-yl)thiophen-2-yl)-6-(5-methylthiophen-2-yl)-2,5-dihydropyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-dione)), PDFT (poly(4-(heptadecan-9-yl)-2-methyl-6-(5-(7-(5-methylthiophen-2-yl)benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazol-4-yl)thiophen-2-yl)-4H-dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole)) and PDTT (poly(4-(heptadecan-9-yl)-2-methyl-6-(5-(7-(5-methylfuran-2-yl)benzo[c]-[1,2,5]thiadiazol-4-yl)furan-2-yl)-4H-dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole)) based on DTP were designed and synthesized (Scheme 1), aiming to fine tune the polymer energy levels and other physical properties. For PDBF, the introduction of fluorine (F) atoms to the polymer backbone is to slightly lower the HOMO energy level and increase polymer inter- or intra-molecular interactions; for PDTD, fused π-conjugated system diketopyrrolopyrrole was adopted to adjust the polymer energy level and absorbance due to its strong electron-withdrawing properties; for PDFT and PDTT, the introduction of a π-conjugated bridge to the polymer backbone is to tune the polymer energy levels and co-planarity as well as solubility. For comparison, P3HT and PDBT were also used to fabricate HSC devices. To the best of our knowledge, such systematical molecular design for the polymer–PbS system has not been reported before. We carefully investigated the effect of polymer structures, quantum dot size and blend morphology on the device performance. By carefully adjusting the processing conditions, we achieved the highest PCE to date for polymer–PbS based HSCs. We also revealed the significant influence of polymer structures on the device performance and thus molecular engineering can be adopted as an effective approach to realize the full potential of HSCs.

The preparation methods of dithienopyrrole (DTP)-based polymers can be found in the ESI. Briefly, Stille cross-coupling reaction was used between bis(trimethyl stannane) and dibromides. The synthesis is simple and reproducible. All the prepared polymers exhibit good solubility in commonly used solvents, such as tetrahydrofuran (THF), chloroform (CF), and chlorobenzene (CB). The molecular weight and polydispersity (PDI) of the polymers were estimated by a gel permeation chromatography (GPC) method using monodispersed polystyrene as the standard and THF as an eluent (Table 1).

Polymer

M
n
 (kg mol−1)
PDI

λ
max (nm)

E
g
opt (eV)
HOMO (eV)
LUMO (eV)

a Determined by GPC using polystyrene standards and THF as an eluent.
b HOMO and LUMO levels were estimated from the onset of the oxidation and reduction peaks of cyclic voltammetry.
c According to the literature.

PDBT
18.0
1.27
421, 767
1.44
−4.95
−3.31
PDBF
12.0
1.61
397, 662
1.30
−5.00
−3.75
PDTD
32.6
1.75
413, 780
1.25
−4.88
−3.52
PDTT
13.6
1.67
460, 650
1.50
−5.05
−3.49
PDFT
13.7
2.16
422, 595
1.65
−5.12
−3.47
P3HT
—
—
455
1.90
−5.10
−3.20

UV-vis absorption spectra of PbS QDs and polymers are shown in Fig. 1. As shown in Fig. 1a, the first excitonic absorption peak of PbS NCs can be greatly changed by adjusting the reaction temperatures. The NC bandgap varies from 1.09 eV to 1.46 eV as the growth temperature changes from 60 °C to 140 °C during synthesis, showing the excellent bandgap tunability of PbS NCs. At high reaction temperature, PbS NCs capable of harvesting photons in the near infrared (NIR) region can be produced. In Fig. 1b, a large variation among the polymer absorption spectra can be observed as a result of modifying or substituting the acceptor unit in the DTP based D–A copolymers. Compared to the control polymer PDBT, the absorbance edge of PDBF and PDTD is red-shifted through the introduction of strong electron-withdrawing atom fluorine to benzothiadiazole (BT) or employing a stronger acceptor diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) respectively. Conversely, the absorption spectra of PDTT and PDFT demonstrate a blue shift when electron-donating π bridges (thiophene and furan) are inserted into the polymer backbone.

The electrochemical properties of all the prepared polymers were characterized using cyclic voltammetric (CV) measurements (Fig. S1), with the data listed in Table 1. Energy level alignment is considered as the prerequisite to efficient exciton dissociation in both polymer/fullerene and polymer/NC solar cells. Thus the focus of our molecular engineering is to fine tune the polymer HOMO level to form type-II heterojunctions with PbS NCs and meanwhile maximize the open circuit voltage. First, the strong electron donating unit DTP was shared by all the synthesized polymers to ensure a high-lying HOMO level. Then a few acceptor units with different electron-withdrawing abilities were used to further adjust the polymer HOMO levels. As shown in Fig. 2, the HOMO energy levels of the prepared polymers are all in the range of −5.0 ± 0.2 eV, which is favourable for charge transfer in polymer–PbS HSCs. The variation trend of the HOMO levels is also consistent with the electron-withdrawing strength of the acceptor units.

HSCs were fabricated by using our previously reported architecture of ITO/PEDOT–PSS (40 nm)/polymer–PbS (∼60 nm)/PbS/LiF (0.6 nm)/Al (100 nm), as shown in Fig. 3. A thin layer of pure PbS QDs was cast on top of the polymer/NC blend film, which can cover the cracks on the hybrid film and also acts as the electron transporting layer to reduce charge recombination. A weight ratio of 1/19 for polymer/QD was chosen as the optimal blend ratio for all devices. The long and insulating oleic acid (OA) ligands on the QD surface were replaced by benzene-1,3-dithiol (BDT) to improve the charge transport (see the Experimental section). The fabrication procedure of hybrid solar cells is simple and requires no high-temperature sintering, as illustrated in Fig. 3.

The current density–voltage curves (J–V curves, under AM1.5G 100 mW cm−2) of the optimized HSCs for each polymer are shown in Fig. 4, with the detailed photovoltaic parameters listed in Table 2. The performance of pure PbS QD array solar cells (using QDs with a growth temperature of 100 °C) is also included for comparison. We noticed that the device performance of all the HSCs is evidently higher than that of the pure QD devices, illustrating the synergetic effect between polymers and QDs. The champion device based on PDBT/PbS exhibits a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 13.49 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.55 V, a fill factor (FF) of 57% and a high PCE of 4.23%, which, to the best of our knowledge, is the highest one for polymer–PbS based bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells. Compared with the previously reported PDBT/PbS hybrid solar cells,Jsc and FF were both improved in our HSCs owing to the innovated device structure and optimized polymer/QD ratios, which results in enhanced charge transport. In BHJ polymer/NC HSCs, an optimal electric field or energy difference (eV) at the polymer/QD interface is needed to efficiently break an exciton generated by absorption and then to separate the electron–hole transport to different directions, and Voc is often considered determined by the difference between the HOMO level of the donor and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of the acceptor. PDTD has a shallower HOMO level of −4.88 eV, resulting in a reduced Voc of 0.50 V and a PCE of 3.65%. The HSCs employing fluorine substituted polymer PDBF deliver a high Voc of 0.59 V along with a PCE of 3.85%. The increased Voc may be attributed to the slightly deeper HOMO of PDBF (−5.0 eV) compared to that (–4.95 eV) of PDBT. Nonetheless, Voc is not further increased when the polymer HOMO levels are adjusted deeper for PDTT, PDFT and P3HT. It is not surprising since the hole transfer from PbS to the polymer becomes difficult when their HOMO levels approach each other, resulting in reduced photovoltaic parameters. Thus we concluded that the energy level alignment between polymers and PbS QDs, especially their HOMO difference, is essential for the performance of such HSCs. Note that the energy level alignment and Voc also involve the LUMO level of QDs, which is dependent on the QD size. We then systematically investigated the effect of QD size on the performance of HSCs, with the results displayed in Fig. 5. By changing the growth temperature from 60 to 140 °C during synthesis, the bandgap of PbS QDs changes from 1.09 eV to 1.46 eV, which will change the energy level alignment between the polymer and PbS accordingly. We noticed that the performance of the HSCs varies significantly with the QD size. All the polymers except P3HT achieve low PCE in HSCs when blended with very small (60 °C, Eg = 1.46 eV) or very big (140 °C, Eg = 1.09 eV) PbS QDs. And a maximum PCE is obtained for QDs with certain bandgap between the two extreme values. Note that the QD size affects not only the energy level alignment but also the charge transport in the blend film. Small QDs have deeper HOMO levels which are beneficial for the hole transfer from QDs to polymers, and their high-lying LUMO can result in larger Voc. However, their charge transport is poor due to difficult carrier hopping between quantum dots. In contrast, large QDs have unfavorable energy level alignment but show higher absorbance and carrier mobility, resulting in less recombination as well as enhanced Jsc and Voc. Thus there will be a trade-off between the two size effects, with the optimized PCE obtained for devices using QDs with medium sizes. It is worth noting that the optimal QD size varies for different polymers. We found that the optimal QD for PDBT and PDBF is with a growth temperature of 80 °C, while it is 120 °C for PDTD and 100 °C for PDTT and PDFT, which indicates that the optimal QD size is the same for polymers with similar molecular structures. We speculate that polymers with different structures may interact with QDs differently, eventually influencing the final blend morphology and device performance accordingly, which we will discuss in detail in the morphology chapter. We also noticed that the dependence between device performance and QD size for P3HT/PbS is unique, likely due to its distinctly different molecular structure from other polymers. In addition, HSCs based on P3HT demonstrated a PCE of 2.65%, which is apparently higher than the recently reported ∼1% (ref. 11a) by Firdaus et al. The increased PCE may be attributed to the optimized device architecture and QD size in our experiment.
PbS QDs (°C)

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)

a The data shown are the average values obtained from 6 devices with standard deviation.

PDBT
80
0.55 ± 0.00
13.29 ± 0.2
0.56 ± 0.01
4.10 ± 0.13
PDBF
80
0.58 ± 0.01
11.06 ± 0.2
0.56 ± 0.02
3.60 ± 0.25
PDTD
120
0.49 ± 0.01
12.76 ± 0.1
0.56 ± 0.01
3.50 ± 0.15
PDTT
100
0.44 ± 0.01
12.75 ± 0.2
0.51 ± 0.01
2.86 ± 0.15
PDFT
100
0.41 ± 0.01
12.06 ± 0.3
0.49 ± 0.00
2.42 ± 0.13
P3HT
140
0.51 ± 0.00
11.62 ± 0.2
0.42 ± 0.02
2.49 ± 0.16
PbS
100
0.38 ± 0.01
10.11 ± 0.3
0.44 ± 0.02
1.69 ± 0.17

The morphology of the blend film has been extensively investigated in polymer/fullerene solar cells since it is considered essential for the device photovoltaic performance. Likewise, the morphology study in polymer/NC HSCs is equally important, which, however, has been much less explored. In order to probe the morphology change induced by polymer structures, atomic force microscopy (AFM) was used to study the surface of the blend layer of the optimized devices for each polymer. As shown in Fig. 6, substantial morphology differences have been observed for the blend film of each polymer. The film of PDBT/PbS looks uniform and relatively smooth (Fig. 6a). In contrast, the surface of P3HT/PbS (Fig. 6f) is extremely coarse, indicating the formation of large polymer or QD domains, which are detrimental to the charge transfer between donor/acceptor components. Thus corresponding PCEs of 4.23% and 2.65% for the two HSCs are consistent with the morphology difference. For other blend films, the roughness is gradually increased as shown in Fig. 6b–e, showing a different extent of phase segregation. The phase segregation can be largely affected by the miscibility between the polymer and the QD, which can be estimated from their surface energies. A small surface energy difference between the polymer and the QD likely leads to good miscibility and fine phase segregation. Thus water contact angle measurements were carried out (Fig. S2) to obtain their surface energy information of these materials. The amorphous PDBT exhibits the smallest water contact angle of 95.1°, while PDFT shows an increased angle of 103.1° after the introduction of fluorine atoms. For PDTT and PDFT, although they have a similar structure, their surface energies still differ as a result of polarity difference between sulphur and oxygen atoms. The semi-crystalline P3HT, in comparison, has the highest surface energy, with the largest water contact angle of 106.2°. For ligand exchanged PbS QDs, the water contact angle is significantly reduced from 105.1° to 78.9° which differs least from that of PDBT and most from P3HT, consistent with the phase segregation extent in corresponding blend films. We do realize that surface energy is only one of the factors which may affect the polymer/QD miscibility. Future work will focus more on other factors like polymer crystallinity, solubility, side-chain density, quantum dot size and so on.

The surface morphology only provides limited information. Thus the film bulk morphology was investigated by high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) to further interpret the correlation with corresponding device performance. Note that for the Z-contrast of HAADF-STEM, the domains containing elements with larger atomic numbers show a lighter image. In Fig. 7a, the film shows no distinct structures, indicating uniformly distributed polymers and QD domains. In Fig. 7b and c, we can observe “crack-like” structures in different scales in the film, which are consistent with the observation in AFM images (Fig. 6). In our previous work, we have clearly revealed the occurrence of vertical phase separation in a similar polymer/QD system, resulting in an upper NC-rich region and a polymer-rich region beneath. The cracks are considered resulting from the incomplete coverage of the top NC-rich layer, which may account for the lower device performance of PDBF and PDTD compared to PDBT. In Fig. 7d and e, small dark domains are shown in both films. It is very likely that the dark domains are polymer aggregations due to the specific interaction between NCs, PDTT and PDFT which have a similar backbone bridge-structure. This polymer aggregation has been shown to hinder hole transport and leads to the reduced PCE for PDTT and PDFT. In comparison, P3HT exhibits large polymer and QD-rich domains, as shown in Fig. 7h, which is unfavourable for charge transfer and results in the lowest device performance. This unique morphology may be attributed to the semi-crystalline nature of P3HT, which may make the intercalation of QDs into a polymer matrix more difficult. In contrast, the backbone of amorphous PDBT is more flexible and the mixing between polymers and QDs can be improved accordingly. We further compared the crystallinity of these two polymers and their blend films with PbS QDs by 2-dimensional grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (2D-GIXD). As shown in Fig. 8, PDBT does not show apparent diffraction peaks in either the in-plane or the out-of-plane direction, indicating its very amorphous nature. In contrast, the ligand exchanged PbS QDs exhibit clear diffraction rings with high intensity. The blend of PDBT/PbS delivers almost an identical diffraction pattern with a largely decreased intensity, suggesting that the polymer chains are mixed well with PbS QDs to form a BHJ structure, similar to that of the polymer/fullerene blend in PSCs. In comparison, the diffraction rings of the P3HT/PbS blend have significantly higher intensity, suggesting that the PbS QDs are well packed with serious demixing between polymers and NCs. Therefore a slight change in the molecular structure may modify the polymer properties like surface energy and crystallinity significantly which will differ in the interaction between polymers and QDs, leading to different phase segregations and device performances.

In summary, we specifically designed a series of new polymers to further boost the efficiency of polymer–PbS QD hybrid bulk heterojunction solar cells. An optimized PCE of 4.23% was achieved, which is the highest one to date for polymer–PbS based HSCs. More importantly, we systematically investigated the effect of polymer structures and quantum dot size on the device performance. The energy alignment between polymers and PbS QDs is considered critical for their charge transfer. The device PCE is also largely dependent on the polymer/NC blend morphology which can be effectively controlled by tuning the polymer physical properties such as crystallinity and surface energies through molecular engineering. We believe our findings can be beneficial to the future molecular design towards highly efficient polymer–PbS HSCs.


UV-vis-NIR spectra were recorded on a Perkin Elmer model Lambda 750. AFM and STEM images were obtained with a Veeco Multimode V instrument and a Tecnai G2 F20 S-Twin Transmission Electron Microscope respectively. 2-D GIXD experiments were conducted at Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF) on diffraction beamline (BL14B1).


Colloidal PbS NCs were synthesized according to the method reported by Scholes et al. As-prepared PbS NCs were capped with oleic acid (OA). NCs were purified by precipitation twice in n-hexane and stored in a nitrogen-filled glove box.


Devices were fabricated with the structure ITO/PEDOT–PSS/polymer–PbS/PbS/LiF/Al, using PDBT, PDBF, PDTD, PDFT, PDTT, or P3HT as the active polymer in the hybrid layer. All glass substrates, pre-patterned with ITO, were sequentially cleaned in acetone, detergent, and isopropyl alcohol before being dried and UV–ozone treated for 30 minutes. PEDOT–PSS, the HTL, was filtered though a 0.45 μm filter, spin-coated at 4500 rpm for 40 s, and baked at 150 °C for 10 minutes to remove residual water. Then the devices were transferred to an N2 filled glove box. For the hybrid layer, PbS nanocrystals and polymers were dissolved in chloroform and chlorobenzene respectively, each at a concentration of 20 mg mL−1. These polymer–QD solutions were mixed at a weight ratio of 1:19. The mixed solutions were stirred and then spin-coated at 1000 rpm for 40 s. Ligand exchange was carried out by soaking the as-prepared film in a solution of 0.001 M 1,3-benzenedithiol (BDT) in acetonitrile for 30 s, rinsed with pure acetonitrile twice to remove the excess BDT and residual OA ligands. Subsequently, a pure PbS QD layer was deposited on top of the blend film from a PbS solution in octane with a concentration of 30 mg mL−1. The same ligand exchange and rinsing process were performed. The device was then baked at 100 °C for 10 minutes. Finally, 0.6 nm of LiF (0.2 A s−1) and 100 nm Al (2 A s−1) layers were then thermally evaporated on the active layer at a pressure of 1.0 × 10−6 mbar through a shadow mask (active area 7.25 mm2). The current density–voltage characteristics of the photovoltaic cells were measured using a Keithley 2400 (I–V) digital source meter under a simulated AM1.5G solar irradiation at 100 mW cm−2 (Newport, Class AAA solar simulator, 94023A-U). The light intensity is calibrated by using a certified Oriel Reference Cell (91150V) and verified with a NREL calibrated Hamamatsu S1787-04 diode.


We acknowledge the technical support from workers at Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF) on diffraction beamline (BL14B1). This work was supported by the National High Technology Research and Development Program of China (863 Program) (Grant no. 2011AA050520), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant no. 61176054), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province, China (Grant no. BK2011279), the Doctoral Fund of Ministry of Education of China (Grant no. 20113201120019), and the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions. J. Yuan thanks the State-Sponsored Scholarship for Graduate Students from the China Scholarship Council and the Innovation of Graduate Student Training Project in Jiangsu Province.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta03995e
‡ Equal contributions from these two authors.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015