 DOI: 10.1039/C5CP02007G
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 19777-19788


Uma V.
Ghorpade
,

Mahesh P.
Suryawanshi
,

Seung Wook
Shin
,

Chang Woo
Hong
,

Inyoung
Kim
,

Jong H.
Moon
,

Jae Ho
Yun
,

Jin Hyeok
Kim
* and 

Sanjay S.
Kolekar
*

Department of Materials Science and Engineering and Optoelectronics Convergence Research Centre, Chonnam National University, 300, Yongbong-Dong, Buk-Gu, Gwangju 500-757, South Korea. E-mail: jinhyeok@chonnam.ac.kr

Analytical Chemistry and Material Science Research Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, Shivaji University, Kolhapur 416-004, India. E-mail: sskolekar@gmail.com

Center for Nanomaterials and Chemical Reactions, Institute for Basic Science, Daejeon 305-701, Korea

Photovoltaic Research Group, Korea Institute of Energy Research, 71-2 Jang-Dong, Yuseong-Gu, Daejeon 305-343, South Korea

Received
7th April 2015
, Accepted 16th June 2015
First published on 16th June 2015
A quaternary indium- and gallium-free kesterite (KS)-based compound, copper zinc tin sulfide (Cu2ZnSnS4, CZTS), has received significant attention for its potential applications in low cost and sustainable solar cells. It is well known that the reaction time, reactivity of the precursors, and types of capping ligands used during the synthesis of colloidal nanocrystals (NCs) strongly influence the crystallographic phase of the NCs. In this research, a non-toxic and green synthetic strategy for both the synthesis of CZTS NCs and the fabrication of a highly efficient CZTS absorber layers using an ink formulation without a toxic solvent, which meets the comprehensive framework for green chemistry that covers major aspects of the environmental strain, is demonstrated. In particular, pure metastable wurtzite (WZ) CZTS NCs are synthesized using the environmentally harmless, polyol mediated hot-injection (HI) technique at a low reaction temperature. The influence of the reaction time on the properties of the CZTS NCs is investigated in detail. Based on detailed reaction time dependent phase evolution, a possible growth and formation mechanism is proposed. Furthermore, a scalable, low cost, binder free ink formulation process without ligand exchange is developed using ethanol as the dispersal solvent. The as-prepared WZ-derived CZTS NC thin films are observed to undergo a phase transformation to KS during annealing in a sulfur vapor atmosphere via rapid thermal annealing above 500 °C, and surprisingly, this process results in fully sintered, compact and uniform CZTS thin films with large sized grains. The best solar cell device fabricated using a CZTS absorber that was sulfurized at an optimized temperature exhibits a power conversion efficiency of 2.44%, which is the highest efficiency obtained using the polyol-based HI route.

An indium- and gallium-free kesterite (KS)-based compound, copper zinc tin sulfide (Cu2ZnSnS4, CZTS), is of particular interest because of its high absorption coefficients (greater than 104 cm−1), low toxicity and suitable band gap for solar energy harvesting. Recently, CZTS nanocrystal (NC)-based inks have been suggested as a material that would allow for global scale photovoltaic (PV) applications and which have exhibited the promising efficiency of 10.2%. However, the use of various organic solvents and surfactants, including phosphine oxide, thiols, amines, and hydrazine, during colloidal synthesis may have various impacts on the environment. Therefore, the use of an ecofriendly and less hazardous organic solvent is required. Additionally, there are difficulties related to the coordinating long chain ligands, surface capping agents, presence in a certain solvent which create stability without accumulation of NCs. However, it affects the optical and electrical properties of the material causing steric hindrances to the electronic movements. Consequently, an environmentally friendly chemical route that avoids inconvenient ligand functional groups is required.

The reported colloidal CZTS-based NCs mostly exhibit stannite or KS structures. Recently, a few research groups reported colloidal wurtzite (WZ) CZTS NCs, which are seldom observed in quaternary compounds. The randomly distributed cations in the WZ crystal phase offer greater flexibility for stoichiometry control and crystal structure, because of which the Fermi energy can be tuned over a wide range. This crystal behavior suggests that it is possible to synthesize KS structured thin films in the WZ phase at a lower annealing temperature. Li et al. reported the synthesis of WZ CZTS NCs using a mixture of oleylamine (OLA) and dodecanethiol (DDT) and controlled the crystal structure by adjusting the OLA to DDT ratio. Fan et al. reported the synthesis of WZ CZTS nanorods prepared using mixtures of DDT and triphenyl phosphite (TPP), and tunable shapes for CZTS nanorods were achieved by controlling the compositional ratio of Cu/(Zn + Sn). Furthermore, Zhang et al. reported 4.3% efficiency using OLA and DDT after a further selenization process. Although the previous researchers were able to synthesize colloidal WZ CZTS with the desired shapes, the synthesis was performed in DDT, OLA, TPP and amine-based toxic solvents at high reaction temperatures. These findings collectively contributed to the development of WZ CZTS NCs and the fabrication of CZTS-based thin film solar cells (TFSCs). However, a green and controllable synthesis of WZ CZTS NCs prepared without using toxic chemicals would provide a way to develop NCs with exciting new properties for PV applications. This encouraged the development of a new, robust, cost-effective and green synthetic strategy for the synthesis of CZTS NCs with a WZ structure that was scalable and useful for harvesting solar energy.
In this research, a synthetic strategy for creating WZ CZTS NCs using a polyol-based hot-injection (HI) route at low temperature (<200 °C) that employed ethylene glycol (EG) as a green solvent was developed. For further detailed understanding, a reaction time dependent study of the phase evolution and formation mechanism of WZ CZTS NCs was proposed. EG is a low-cost and less toxic solvent that can efficiently complex and stabilize the surfaces of NCs without agglomeration. It functions not only as a complexing agent but also as a spacer to modulate the distance between metal ions, similar to OLA, octadecene (ODE), TPP, and so on, which prevents the NCs from aggregating. Furthermore, the synthesized NCs require a stable suspension in a suitable solvent for thin film formation. The CZTS NCs capped with OLA, ODE or TPP are hydrophobic, and they can only be dispersed in an organic solvent (such as toluene or hexanethiol), which are not environmentally benign. Unfortunately, few studies have focused on a green and sustainable solvent for the preparation of WZ CZTS-based NC ink. This lack of appropriate solvent motivated us to introduce an alternative, eco-friendly, binder-free WZ CZTS NC-based ink formulation that utilizes ethanol as a dispersal solvent. This new solution can be formatted into dense, micro-structured CZTS precursor thin films with a low C concentration. Thus, CZTS-based TFSCs can be fabricated using green processes. Furthermore, to clarify the phase evolution of WZ derived CZTS NC-based precursor thin films to KS CZTS thin films, the WZ derived CZTS NCs films were annealed in a graphite box under a non-toxic, selenium (Se)–free sulfur (S) vapor atmosphere using a rapid thermal annealing (RTA) process at different temperatures. In addition to the basic studies on WZ CZTS NCs and their phase evolution to a KS CZTS absorber layer, the PV performances of KS CZTS-based TFSCs were evaluated.

In a typical synthesis, stoichiometric amounts of the metal precursors were dissolved in EG in a three-necked flask with constant magnetic stirring. The sulfur source was synthesized by dissolving thiourea into a separate EG solution and hot injecting this into the metal precursor solution at 130 °C. The flask was purged with argon for 10 min, and the reaction was allowed to remain at the optimized temperature of 190 °C. Aliquots were taken at reaction times of 1 h, 2 h, 3 h and 4 h. The resulting NCs were used further for thin film formation. The details of the synthetic procedure, characterization, ink formulation and device fabrication are explained in the ESI.



Fig. 1a shows powder-X-ray diffraction (PXRD) patterns of WZ CZTS NCs at various reaction times. All of the as-synthesized NCs exhibit broad peaks at 2θ = 26.89, 28.21, 30.40, 39.37, 47.45, 51.30 and 56.22°, which correspond to the (100), (002), (101), (102), (110), (103) and (112) diffraction planes, respectively, of the CZTS WZ phase. The relative widths of these primary peaks increase with reaction time, which could be because of the changes in the crystal structure. In addition, several peaks at 2θ = 22.9, 25.9, 32.9, 40.8, 52.96°, and so on are observed at 1 h and 2 h, which correspond to the secondary phases of Cu2−xS, Sn1−xSx and Cu2SnS3 (JCPDS No: 00-019-0412, 00-014-0619, and 00-002-1272). The PXRD pattern of the CZTS NCs after 3 h shows a shift in a few peaks when compared to the pattern obtained after 4 h, which may be because of the phase evolution from a mixture of the secondary phase and WZ CZTS to pure WZ CZTS. The results for the as-synthesized CZTS NCs after 4 h confirm the formation of a pure WZ phase based on the gradual evolution of the diffraction planes to that of a single phase. These results are consistent with those found in the literature. The combination of kinetic factors is responsible for the formation, growth and stability of the WZ phase NCs. There might be possible interactions between the metal cations and the glycol that alter the chemical environment and promote the formation of the WZ phase.

The as-synthesized CZTS NCs were further studied using Raman spectroscopy, and the Raman scattering results are shown in Fig. 1b. All CZTS NCs synthesized at different reaction times exhibit Raman peaks at 331.7 and 287.8 cm−1, which are the characteristic Raman peaks for WZ CZTS. This result indicates that the characteristic peaks for WZ CZTS may differ from the KS CZTS, which may be caused by the different arrangement of atoms in the space groups of WZ and KS CZTS. In addition to the previously mentioned Raman peaks, the presence of several other peaks of secondary phases, such as Cu2−xS, Sn1−xSx and Cu2SnS3 (CTS), are observed for CZTS NC samples synthesized for 1 h and 2 h. The presence of intense peaks at 381.8 and 470.7 cm−1 is attributed to the Cu2−xS phase in the NCs synthesized for 1 h. After increasing the reaction time to 2 h, a decrease in the intensities of these peaks is observed, which is because of the phase conversion of Cu2−xS to CTS. This behavior could be because of the possible gradient composition and the dangling of the bonds of the surface atoms. As the reaction proceeds for 3 h and 4 h, the pure phase is synthesized. The Raman spectrum in Fig. 1b, which corresponds to a 4 h synthesis, has the characteristic intense peak at 331.7 cm−1 and the weak shoulder peak at 287.8 cm−1, indicating the formation of the pure WZ phase.
The morphology of the as-synthesized NCs is strongly dependent on the surfactants and reaction conditions. Different surfactants are able to selectively bind on to particular facets, allowing for anisotropic growth. Additionally, the changes in reaction time can lead to different forms of the reaction products, varying from kinetically to thermodynamically favorable. The morphology of the as-synthesized CZTS NCs with different reaction times was investigated using field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) and shown in Fig. S2 (ESI). The presence of many secondary and ternary phases of Cu, S, Sn and Zn with spherical plate like mismatched morphology was observed for NCs synthesized for 1 h and 2 h. Furthermore, at a reaction time of 3 h, the formation of CZTS with an incomplete plate like morphology occurred. With further increase in reaction times up to 4 h, the diameter decreased because of the complete phase transition, while retaining the shape leads to the development of pure WZ CZTS nanoplates.
To study the elemental compositions of the CZTS NCs, energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) was employed, and the results are shown in Table S1 (ESI). Table S1 (ESI) shows the chemical compositions and compositional ratios of Cu/(Zn + Sn), Zn/Sn, and S/(metal) of CZTS NCs synthesized for different reaction times. With increasing reaction time, the Cu/(Zn + Sn) ratio decreases from 2.70 to 0.92, while the Zn/Sn ratio decreases from 2.25 to 1.02. The ideally stoichiometric composition of CZTS is obtained when the reaction time is increased to 4 h. This result is close to the theoretical value of 2:1:1:4. The presence of all of the elements, i.e., Cu, S, Sn and Zn, near the stoichiometric ratio after 4 h was confirmed using SEM-EDS analysis (ESI, Fig. S3a). All of the elements were distributed homogenously in the case of CZTS NCs synthesized for 4 h.
The absorption data were analyzed and the band gap energy (Eg) was estimated using the classical relationship between the absorption coefficient (α) and the photon energy (hν):
(αhν)2 = α(hν − Eg)
(1)
 The optical band gap energy is obtained by extrapolating the linear portion of the plot of (
αhν)2 against hν, as shown in Fig. 1c. The observed band gap energy values are 1.94, 1.81, 1.56 and 1.50 eV for NCs synthesized at 1, 2, 3 and 4 h, respectively. The wider band gap energies for the NCs synthesized for 1 and 2 h could be because of the presence of secondary phases, which shift the optical absorption edge towards higher energy values. The narrowing of the optical band gap energy upon increasing the reaction time is attributed to the phase evolution to WZ CZTS from these secondary phases. The band gap energy of 1.50 eV for WZ CZTS NCs synthesized for 4 h corresponds well with the results reported previously.

The morphologies of the CZTS NCs synthesized for the optimized reaction time of 4 h were investigated using bright-field transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and are shown in Fig. 2. The as-synthesized CZTS NCs were mainly hexagonal nanoplates (Fig. 2a, b and e), and the resulting CZTS NCs were approximately 25–150 nm in diameter (Fig. 2d). Li et al. and Lin et al. reported WZ CZTS Se NCs synthesized using OLA and oleic acid with size distribution ranges from 15 to 150 nm using DDT and OLA. These results indicated that the size distribution of the WZ-based NCs was fairly narrow because of the use of a high boiling point and long chain organic solvents. Indeed, a previous work reported CZTS NCs with sizes in the range of 20 to 50 nm and a narrow size distribution. This approach required large amounts of toxic and expensive organic solvents, which results in an expensive and time consuming process that has a negative environmental impact. Although relatively monodispersive NCs have been obtained, the use of such toxic organic solvents hinders the commercialization of these methods in the future. The slightly wide size distribution in our case may be because of the use of a low boiling point, short-chain organic solvent as the reaction media. However, the use of non-toxic, eco-friendly EG as the solvent is a key step, which will benefit this method for large scale production. The polycrystalline selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern (Fig. 2c) is indexed using rings from the {001}, {100}, {101}, {102}, {110}, and {112} planes of a WZ CZTS phase, which matches well with the PXRD and Raman results shown in Fig. 1a and b. A high-resolution TEM (HR-TEM) image of an individual hexagonal nanoplate (Fig. 2f and g) showed lattice fringes with a d-spacing value of 0.33 nm which was attributed to the {100} plane, which matches the WZ structure. The corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) pattern, calculated from the HR-TEM image and shown in Fig. 2h, matches well with the peaks indexed to the zone axis of the {001} direction.
X-ray photoelectron spectrometry (XPS) measurements were conducted to study the valence states of all of the four elements in the as-synthesized WZ CZTS NCs at an optimized reaction time. Fig. 3 shows the high resolution XPS analysis, which identifies the presence of Cu 2p, Zn 2p, Sn 3d and S 2p in the CZTS NCs. The spectrum of Cu 2p shows two peaks at 932.75 (2p3/2) and 952.5 eV (2p1/2) with a splitting of 19.75 eV, which is in good agreement with the standard separation (19.9 eV) of Cu(I). The Zn 2p peaks appear at 1022.6 (2p3/2) and 1045.65 eV (2p1/2) with a split orbit of 23.05 eV, which can be assigned to Zn(II). The peaks of Sn 3d show binding energies at 486.15 (2p5/2) and 494.55 eV (2p3/2) with a split orbit of 8.4 eV, which is in good agreement with the value of Sn(IV). The S 2p peaks are located at 161.55 (2p3/2) and 162.75 eV (2p1/2), which are consistent with the binding energy of S in the sulfide state in CZTS.

Based on the previous detailed time dependent crystallographic evolutions (Fig. 1a) and elemental composition development (ESI, Table S1), a possible formation mechanism was explained. The formation of the final CZTS NCs occurs through several steps: (i) The formation of spherical Cu2−xS (Fig. 1a), which is also consistent with the shape of Cu2−xS reported elsewhere. (ii) Further uncontrolled diffusion of Sn and Zn, which assists in the growth and shape transformation to irregular intermediate NCs. (iii) Finally, the complete nucleate conversion and further growth to well-defined three-dimensional nanoplates. This evolution can be explained as anisotropic growth. The anisotropic growth of the plates offers features and functions that are difficult to obtain simply by the size tuning of spherical nanoparticles because this well controlled size and shape possesses different surface areas and crystallographic facets. The corresponding photographs of the reaction solution color evolution are shown in Fig. S4 (ESI).

The high degree of dispersibility of the CZTS NCs may indicate that the surfaces of the nuclei are covered by glycol during the NC formation, which limits the growth of the NCs and stabilizes them against agglomeration. One possible explanation is that the metal ions in the solution are surrounded by dimethylene dioxy bridges (–OCH2CH2O–) and form metal chelates, which would then decompose into their corresponding sulfides at certain temperatures in accordance with their ionic product. These chelates help balance the different reactivities of the cations in solution. Thus, during the first 1 h, the metal chelate complexes were thermally decomposed to form spherical Cu2−xS at high concentrations, which can also be confirmed by the smallest solubility product constant of 2.5 × 10−48. As the reaction time proceeds, interdiffusion of Zn2+ and Sn4+ were gradually incorporated into Cu2−xS because of the similar anionic lattices of Cu2−xS and CZTS, which replaced some of the Cu+. This incorporation of Sn4+ and Zn2+ and replacement of Cu+ yielded the chemical composition, which can be confirmed from Table S1 (ESI). With further increases in reaction time to 3 h and 4 h, the diffusion of Sn and Zn reached their theoretical value, and finally, hexagonal CZTS NCs were formed through the evolution of the intermediate NCs. Thus, it can be concluded that EG not only assists as an activating agent that induces the formation of Cu2−xS during the nucleation step but also serves as a stabilizer to control the WZ phase during the growth process.

An advantage of colloidal NCs is easy dispersion in non-polar solvents. However, the high volatilities and the toxicities of mostly non-polar solvents, such as toluene or hexanethiol, make it challenging for future commercialization of NC-based TFSCs. Therefore, an attempt was made by Wang and Manthiram to find more environmentally friendly ink formulations, where the environmentally friendly and safe solvent (ethanol) was used together with ethyl cellulose as a binder. However, it is very difficult to remove the binder completely during the drying process because it decomposes into organic (carbon) impurities in the CZTS NC-based thin films. Thus, the goal is to develop an eco-friendly, binder free ink formulation method that uses ethanol as an environmentally benign solvent because it evaporates quickly, minimizing the organic impurities in the film.

Ink based on WZ CZTS NCs was prepared and was further used to deposit CZTS absorber layers onto molybdenum (Mo)-coated glass substrate using a spin coating method. To obtain the desired thickness, numerous coatings of the NC ink were performed. After each layer was deposited, the substrate was heated on a hot plate in an air at 150 °C for 2 min to evaporate the ethanol. The WZ NC films were then subjected to annealing in a S vapor atmosphere in a graphite box using an RTA system for 10 min at different temperatures ranging from 520 to 580 °C. The corresponding CZTS samples were designated as CZTS-520, CZTS-540, CZTS-560 and CZTS-580. The photographs of an RTA system and a graphite box used for the sulfurization process are shown in Fig. S5a and S5c (ESI), respectively, and the proposed sulfurization process inside a graphite box using RTA system is illustrated schematically in Fig. S5b (ESI). More details of the ink formulation method and device fabrication can be found in the ESI.

Fig. 4 shows the surface and cross FE-SEM images of as-deposited (a and f) and sulfurized films at 520 °C (b and g), 540 °C (c and h), 560 °C (d and i), and 580 °C (e and j). The as-deposited CZTS thin film exhibits a compact, non-porous and densely packed surface morphology. At 520 °C, the sulfurized thin film shows poor grain growth. As the annealing temperature increases, an enhancement of the grain growth is observed. At 560 °C, the film shows compact and superior grain growth. At 580 °C, several voids are observed at the interface between the Mo and the absorber (Fig. 4j). Complete grain growth with large grain size is observed in all films except for the film annealed at 520 °C, which is attributed to: (i) the use of ethanol as the solvent, which can be completely removed during the drying process leaving behind no carbon impurities in the film, and (ii) no pre-processing of the capping ligands, which are very difficult to remove in the washing process. The case of a sulfurized thin-film, bi-layered structure is depicted in Fig. 4. The bi-layered structure of the film is because of the formation of molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) at the CZTS/Mo interface. The as-deposited film shows a thickness of 1.23 μm, whereas the sulfurized films show thicknesses of 0.499, 0.540, 0.690 and 0.660 μm, for the CZTS-520, CZTS-540, CZTS-560 and CZTS-580 samples, respectively. The decrease in film thickness after the sulfurization process indicates shrinkage in the material because of the decomposition of the organic solvent. In contrast, the increase in the thickness of the sulfurized films is attributed to sufficient incorporation of S during sulfurization at higher temperatures. However, with precise control and optimization of the annealing conditions, i.e., S vapor pressure, ramp rate, amount of S and duration of sulfurization, the MoS2 layer can be eliminated while maintaining a continuous, non-porous, adherent and micrometer scale film for high performance solar cells. Further studies are underway in this direction in this laboratory.

Fig. 5a shows the XRD patterns of the CZTS-520, CZTS-540, CZTS-560 and CZTS-580 samples. It reveals that the hexagonal WZ phase completely disappeared and the tetragonal KS CZTS phase formed for all films after annealing at different temperatures. The XRD patterns of the sulfurized thin films exhibit strong diffraction peaks corresponding to the (112), (220) and (312) planes of a single KS structure. Notably, the diffraction planes corresponding to the KS phase showed a decreased width compared with the WZ NCs, which is consistent with the structure change from WZ to KS after annealing. The peak intensities of the (112) planes in the CZTS thin films increase with increasing sulfurization temperature. The phase transition from WZ to KS is attributed to the energetically preferred reaction. In the KS phase, each cation is bonded to four sulfur anions, and the cation layers alternate with the sulfur anion layer in the crystallographic c-direction, i.e., CuZn/SS/CuSn/SS. In the WZ phase, the surfaces are formed by {100} planes, and the surface atoms have three bonds; however, in KS, the surface is formed by {112} planes, where every atom has three bonds. This result suggests a shift of every third layer of sulfur atoms during the sulfurization process.
Furthermore, Raman analysis was performed to investigate the phase purity and crystal quality of the annealed films as a function of the annealing temperature. Fig. 5b shows Raman spectra from the CZTS-520, CZTS-540, CZTS-560 and CZTS-580 samples. The observed Raman peaks of all samples at 287.8, 337.3 and 374 cm−1 are in good agreement with the KS phase reported in previous studies. No other peaks are observed, which confirmed the formation of phase pure CZTS at all sulfurization temperatures. In addition, an increase in the crystallinity with the sulfurization temperatures is observed, which can be better understood by comparing the full width at half maximum (FWHM) values calculated from the XRD and Raman results. Fig. 5c shows the FWHM values calculated from the XRD peak with the highest intensity and the Raman spectra for the annealed samples. The values of the FWHM from the XRD and Raman spectra in the sulfurized CZTS thin films decrease with increasing sulfurization temperature, indicating superior crystallinity for the annealed samples.

Kim et al. reported the first solar cell device with an efficiency of 3.6% for pure CZTS NCs. However, the use of TPP as a solvent produces highly toxic phosphorus oxides and phosphine fumes, which makes this method cumbersome in terms of future commercialization aspects. Consequently, a polyol mediated synthesis and further CZTSSe device fabrication, exhibiting an efficiency of 2.2%, was reported by Dong et al., using diethylene glycol as the solvent. In addition to these reports, the highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) for pure CZTS synthesized via a polyol mediated route was reported to be 2.44%.

To investigate the effectiveness of this route, solar cell devices incorporating the KS CZTS thin films sulfurized at different temperatures were fabricated. The CZTS solar cell device was fabricated according to the conventional configuration of glass/Mo/CZTS/cadmium sulfide (CdS)/intrinsic zinc oxide (i-ZnO)/aluminium zinc oxide (Al–ZnO) as shown in Fig. 6a. Details of the device fabrication process are given in the ESI. The device shows sharp interfacial layers, indicating that there was no element diffusion during the solar cell fabrication process (Fig. 6a). Fig. 6b shows the J–V characteristics of the CZTS-520, CZTS-540, CZTS-560, and CZTS-580 devices measured under AM 1.5 illumination. During RTA sulfurization, the S vapor pressure produced inside the graphite box is calculated from PV = nRT, the equation for the ideal gas law. Pressures of 0.41, 0.417, 0.423 and 0.438 atm were achieved for the CZTS-520, CZTS-540, CZTS-560 and CZTS-580 samples, respectively. At 0.423 atm (inside the graphite box), the film shows a better PCE than the rest.
Upon illumination, the current density and the PCE can be clearly observed to increase with the sulfurization temperature, as shown in Fig. 6b. The magnitudes of the short circuit current densities (Jsc) are 7.89, 11.0, 12.58, and 11.86 mA cm−2 for the CZTS-520, CZTS-540, CZTS-560 and CZTS-580 devices, respectively. The corresponding open circuit voltages (Voc) were found to be 0.366, 0.362, 0.471, and 0.446 V, for CZTS-520, CZTS-540, CZTS-560 and CZTS-580 devices, respectively. The increased Voc and Jsc for the CZTS-560 device indicate that the electron–hole recombination rate is lower than in the other samples, which is possibly because of the compact, adherent, and void-free morphology with larger grains, which helps the fast transfer of electrons. Although the PCE is enhanced for a specific sulfurization temperature, the Jsc value becomes less than those measured for high efficiency (3.6%) CZTS TFSCs. This result may be attributed to the high series resistance (Rs) and low shunt resistances (Rsh) of the device. The relatively low Rsh values occurred because of shorts or leaks through the devices, whereas the high Rs values were because of the formation of thin MoS2 layers at the Mo/CZTS interface during the sulfurization process. The higher fill factor (FF) at precise conditions indicates that the superior morphology of sample CZTS-560 provides efficient transport pathways for electrons with low parasitic losses in the device. As a result, sample CZTS-560 has the highest overall conversion efficiency (η) of 2.44% compared to the CZTS-520, CZTS-540, and CZTS-580 samples with their efficiencies of 1.03, 1.47 and 2.13%, respectively. The photovoltaic performance of six solar cells from each annealing sample were also checked, and the results are summarized in Fig. S6 (ESI). Various solar cell parameters obtained for all the devices are presented in Table 1.
Sample

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
Efficiency (%)
Calculated parameters from EQE

J
sc (mA cm−2)

E
g (eV)
CZTS-520
0.366
7.89
0.36
1.03
8.5
1.37
CZTS-540
0.362
11.00
0.37
1.47
9.27
1.32
CZTS-560
0.471
12.58
0.41
2.44
14.14
1.40
CZTS-580
0.446
11.86
0.40
2.13
13.02
1.47
For further insight into the devices, external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements were performed, as shown in Fig. 6c. EQE shows an efficiency of approximately 65% for an optimized absorber layer. In the EQE curve, a long tail decreased gradually from 550 nm, which is attributed to the short minority carrier (electron) diffusion length and the incomplete absorption of light that results from the thin absorber layer. The decrease in the EQE of the device may be because of the surface recombination near the p–n junction, incomplete absorption in the absorber region at higher wavelengths and the short diffusion length. Furthermore, Jsc was also calculated by integrating the EQE curve with the standard AM1.5 solar spectrum of 1 sun bias intensity (Psolar = 1000 W m−2). A statistical analysis of the Jsc can be found in Table 1. The values are significantly higher than those measured in J–V curve which may be because of the front grid of the device and the missing EQE data at higher wavelengths.Fig. 6d and e show the effect of annealing temperature on the performance characteristics of the solar cell device. As is known, Voc and Jsc are comparable with FF and η, respectively, the increased Jsc and FF with the temperature are combined to yield a nearly threshold increase in the AM1.5 PCE of 2.44%. The simultaneous improvement in the morphological microstructure can be attributed to the increase in charge carrier mobility. Thus this improved architecture facilitates reduction in Rs, leading to the high Jsc, Voc and FF. Furthermore, at a higher temperature it yielded low PCE because of low Voc and FF because of insufficient interfacial contact. The band gaps of the absorber layers are estimated from the linear extrapolation plot of [hνln(1 − EQE)]2versus (hν), which is as shown in Fig. S7 (ESI). The band gap energy (Eg) values are found to be 1.37, 1.32, 1.40, and 1.47 eV for the CZTS-520, CZTS-540, CZTS-560 and CZTS-580 samples, respectively. The Voc values obtained for the CZTS absorber layers at different annealing temperatures does not follow the estimated band gap energy values. Generally, it is well known that the CZTS-based TFSCs exhibit Voc-deficient characteristics and the poor values of Voc for CZTS-based TFSCs were strongly related to the high recombination in the p–n junction region because of the high defect density, which can be indirectly estimated using the equation ((Eg/q) − Voc). The values of (Eg/q) − Voc are found to be 1004, 958, 923, and 1024 for the CZTS-520, CZTS-540, CZTS-560, and CZTS-580 samples, respectively. The values of (Eg/q) − Voc correlate well to the performance of solar cell rather than those of Eg.
To elucidate the origin of the loss mechanisms in the CZTS TFSCs, the J–V characteristics in the dark were measured and analyzed. The dark J–V curves were redrawn in three consecutive plots (Fig. 7a–c) to determine the diode parameters. The diode parameters, such as shunt conductance (G), series resistance, ideality factor (nd), and saturation current density (Jo), were analyzed using a lumped circuit model for the solar cells and are shown in Table 2. The values of the shunt conductance (G) were calculated by plotting dJ/dV against V (Fig. 7a) and were found to be 2.51, 2.47, 1.3 and 1.7 mS cm−2 for CZTS-520, CZTS-540, CZTS-560, and CZTS-580 samples, respectively. The shunt conductance calculated for the best solar cells in this case is higher than those of high efficiency copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS) solar cells (<1 mS cm−2).
Sample

G
sh (mS cm−2)

R
s (Ω cm2)

n
d


J
o (mA cm−2)
CZTS-520
2.51
2.88
2.52
1.36 × 10−5
CZTS-540
2.47
1.97
2.05
2.63 × 10−5
CZTS-560
1.3
1.40
1.68
8.31 × 10−7
CZTS-580
1.7
1.78
1.93
5.98 × 10−7
The current equation of a solar cell device under illumination can be expressed as:
(2)
where
J and V are the diode current density and voltage, respectively, Jo is the reverse saturation current density, e is the electronic charge, nd is the ideality factor, k is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature.Fig. 7b shows the r(J) = dV/dJ versus (J + Jsc)−1 plots for the same CZTS devices. The Rs were found to be 2.88, 1.97, 1.40 and 1.78 Ω cm2 for the CZTS-520, CZTS-540, CZTS-560 and CZTS-580 devices, respectively. These values are higher than those reported by Todorov et al. for the best CZTSSe solar cells. The most efficient CZTS solar cell device (2.44%) suffered from a high Rs value, which was caused by the formation of a thin MoS2 layer at the Mo/CZTS interface during the sulfurization process and the unavoidable impurity phases at the interfaces of the large grained CZTS absorber and the Mo layer. In contrast, the values of nd and Jo can improve the understanding of the recombination mechanism in the devices. Furthermore, the Jo values were obtained from the intercept of the linear region of the semi-logarithmic plot (J + Jsc) − GV against V as shown in Fig. 7c. The values of Jo are 1.36 × 10−5, 2.63 × 10−5, 8.31 × 10−7 and 5.98 × 10−7 mA cm−2 for the CZTS-520, CZTS-540, CZTS-560 and CZTS-580 devices, respectively. This overall decrease in the Jo values may be because of the decreased defect density and carrier recombination. Finally, the nd values were calculated from the slopes (Slope = nd = q/AkT) of the semi-logarithmic plots (Fig. 7c) and were found to be 2.52, 2.05, 1.68 and 1.93 for the devices based on samples CZTS-520, CZTS-540, CZTS-560 and CZTS-580, respectively. For the CZTS-520 and CZTS-540 devices, the resulting values are greater than the normal values (1 < nd > 2). Defects may exist in quasi-neutral region as well at the junctions and are responsible for the carrier recombination at the junction. In contrast, the CZTS-560 and CZTS-580 devices exhibit lower nd values, which suggest that the recombinations are less than those of the CZTS-520 and CZTS-540 devices. High values of nd and Jo will decrease the Voc and FF values of a solar cell. Thus, the CZTS-560 device exhibits the best performance in terms of G, Rs, nd, and Jo, which agrees well with the results from η. Additionally, the PV performances of the CZTS devices prepared using WZ CZTS NCs were highly reproducible.

Although the efficiency of this solar cell is the highest among the pure CZTS NC-based devices prepared using a greener, polyol-based synthetic approach, it has a mediocre efficiency compared with the highest efficiency obtained for phase-pure CZTS NC-based devices. The plausible reasons for the mediocre efficiency are: (i) the high Rs value, (ii) the lack of short circuit current density that results from the poor carrier collection efficiency in the range of 650 to 1100 nm, which results from the presence of voids that lead to the accumulation of defects on the back side of the absorber layer, and (iii) the poor nd and high Jo values. Several possible explanations have been provided for the resulting mediocre efficiency of our pure CZTS-based TFSC. However, a more detailed understanding of the NC synthesis and post-annealing conditions is necessary for further improvement in the device performance. This work demonstrates a synergistic attempt at the development of a greener, sustainable and scalable approach for both the synthesis of WZ CZTS NCs and the development of an ink formulation for the fabrication of high performance CZTS NC-based TFSCs. This approach is in contrast to the typical route that involves toxic solvents, such as OLA and DDT; toxic disperse solvents, such as toluene and hexanethiol; and a selenization process in a toxic hydrogen selenide gas atmosphere.

The results of this research have demonstrated a low cost, environmentally friendly, and surfactant free synthesis of pure metastable WZ CZTS NCs via a glycol mediated HI route. Furthermore, a low cost and eco-friendly binder free ink formulation method for the preparation of CZTS films was introduced. Time dependent phase evolution and the formation mechanism of the WZ derived CZTS NCs were systematically studied by examining their structural, morphological, and optical properties. Furthermore, the metastable WZ derived CZTS NCs have been shown to undergo phase evolution into KS CZTS thin films after annealing in a S atmosphere at temperatures above 500 °C for 10 min. The complete phase transition and fast grain growth are closely related to the NC synthesis and ink formulation method. The use of EG, which has a short carbon chain, as the solvent in the NC synthesis overcomes the problems associated with the washing of capping ligands, which restricts grain growth during the annealing process. In addition, a binder free ink formulation that utilizes ethanol as the solvent because it evaporates easily during the drying process resulted in large grained CZTS thin films without any residual C at the CZTS/Mo interface. These results suggest that the solvent used in the NC synthesis and the ink formation play vital roles in the fabrication of a high quality absorber layer. Our preliminary NC-based TFSCs demonstrated a PCE of 2.44% without employing toxic Se, which is the highest efficiency achieved for pure CZTS NC-based TFSCs prepared using a polyol-based HI route. The synthetic strategies developed for the WZ CZTS NC synthesis and their ink formation may have significant potential for their application in low cost, high performance solar cells and can be extended to other PV areas. It is believed that this is the first step towards the fabrication of eco-friendly, low cost and sustainable solar cells.


This work is supported by a Human Resources Development Program (No. 20124010203180) of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) grant funded by the Korea Government Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy and partially supported by the University Grants Commission, Government of India (No. 41-249/2012 (SR)).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, characterizations, FE-SEM, EDS, photo images of an RTA system, a graphite box and fabricated solar cell device and schematic diagram of sulfurization process, average photovoltaic performances, band gap energy plots. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cp02007g
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015