 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA01590E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14773-14780


Fei
Huang
,

Qifeng
Zhang
,

Benke
Xu
,

Juan
Hou
,

Yuan
Wang
,

Robert C.
Massé
,

Shanglong
Peng
,

Jianshe
Liu
* and 

Guozhong
Cao
*

College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, P. R. China. E-mail: Jiansheliu@dhu.edu.cn; Tel: +86-021-67792523

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195-2120, USA. E-mail: gzcao@u.washington.edu; Tel: +1-206-616-9084

Key Laboratory of Ecophysics and Department of Physics, School of Science, Shihezi University, Xinjiang 832003, P. R. China

Received
23rd February 2016
, Accepted 5th May 2016
First published on 6th May 2016
The design and synthesis of passivation materials are of significant importance to reducing surface charge recombination in quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSCs). In this study, the systematic characterization and comparison of the optical and electrochemical properties of ZnS and ZnSe passivation layers and their impacts on the performance of the resulting QDSCs have been investigated. The ZnS and ZnSe passivation layers were all deposited via a reproducible and controlled successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction method. QDSCs with a ZnSe passivation layer demonstrated strongly inhibited interfacial charge recombination and greatly enhanced light harvesting, resulting in a power conversion efficiency of up to 6.4%, which is appreciably higher than 4.9% for the solar cells with a ZnS passivation layer and 3.4% for the solar cells without a passivation layer.

The fabrication of more efficient and less expensive photovoltaic devices for harnessing the unlimited solar power of the sun is one of the most effective ways to solve the global energy crisis. In recent years, devices such as silicon-based (amorphous silicon, crystalline silicon and polycrystalline silicon-based film) solar cells, organic polymer solar cells and organic thin film solar cells have been widely investigated; however, in general, factors such as high cost and complicated preparation, low efficiency, low stability, and even use of rare or toxic elements which damage the environment have restricted the use of these devices. Low-cost, environmentally friendly solar cells have attracted attention; dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs), because of their simple preparation procedure, low cost and relatively high conversion efficiency, have been much studied in the past 25 years. However, it is difficult to obtain a low cost dye sensitizer that extends light harvesting in the whole sunlight spectrum. Quantum dot sensitized solar cells as a derivative of dye sensitized solar cells are being explored; instead of dye molecules, narrow band gap inorganic semiconductor nanocrystals in the type of quantum dots are used as photo-sensitizers due to their advantages, such as higher stability toward water and oxygen, band gap tunability due to the size of the QDs, high molar extinction coefficients, hot electron injection and multiple exciton generation effects. Moreover, in view of the multiple exciton generation effect, the theoretical photovoltaic conversion efficiency can reach up to 44%, which is much higher than 31% for single bandgap solar cells due to the Shockley–Queisser limit.

Although QDSCs have been widely investigated in recent years, their PCEs still lag far behind those of DSCs, which have exceeded 13%. In our previous study, we reported that it is difficult for QDs to enter the inner pores of the film; thus, the QDs cannot entirely cover the surface of the mesoporous photoanode and a part of the bare photoanode directly contacts the electrolyte, which will lead to the recombination of electrons in the conduction band of TiO2, which then transfer back to react with Sn2− in the electrolyte. Moreover, the QDs were deposited on the photoanode by in situ growth methods, including chemical bath deposition (CBD) and successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR), to ensure the homogeneous distribution of QDs and intimate contact between the photoanode and the QDs; the resulting QDs have particularly imperfect surfaces due to the low temperature processing, and thus the defects on the surface of the QDs will serve as recombination sites. All these factors lead to severe charge recombination at the TiO2/QDs/electrolyte interfaces, which is a particularly significant factor for hindering the performance of QDSCs. In view of this, suppressing the charge recombination process is one of the most important ways to improve solar cell performance. Considerable emphasis has been placed on the suppression of the interfacial charge recombination process. For example, a TiO2 layer was introduced by our group to modify the surfaces of mesoporous ZnO electrodes, which improved the photovoltaic performance of CdS/CdSe QDSCs. Similarly, an Al2O3 recombination barrier layer was also employed to modify the electrode surface and prevent recombination loss in CdS QDSCs. Moreover, ZnS is the most popular passivation material; it is often deposited after sensitization of QDs on the photoanode to reduce the substantial recombination in QDSCs. Recently, Zhong's group demonstrated a ZnS/SiO2 double layer treatment on a QD-sensitized photoanode that strongly inhibited interfacial charge recombination processes in QDSCs, with a record efficiency of 8.21%.
CdS/CdSe co-sensitized solar cells, due to their wide light absorption range in the visible-light region, superior electron transfer properties and easy synthesis, have been extensively studied. To date, ZnS and ZnSe have been the most commonly employed passivation materials for QDSCs to reduce surface charge recombination for high performance. Both ZnS and ZnSe passivation layers can be synthesized by a reproducible and controlled SILAR method. On the basis of TiO2 films, the power conversion efficiency of CdS/CdSe co-sensitized solar cells has reached 4.85% with a ZnS passivation layer. We have also introduced a ZnSe passivation layer in TiO2/CdS/CdSe QDSCs and achieved a high power conversion efficiency of 6.39%. It has been recognized that different passivation materials would dramatically affect the photovoltaic performance of such cells.
This paper reports the systematic study of the influences of different passivation strategies on the photovoltaic performance of CdS/CdSe co-sensitized solar cells. The performance of the QDSCs was characterized with current–voltage (J–V), incident photo-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE), and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements. On the basis of the TiO2/CdS/CdSe QDSCs, a PCE of up to 6.4% has been achieved with a ZnSe passivation layer, as compared to 4.9% for the QDSCs with a ZnS passivation layer and 3.42% without a passivation layer. Possible mechanisms resulting in this difference in the solar cell performance have been discussed.

Titanium oxide (TiO2, Degussa, P25), α-terpineol (C10H8O, 96%, Sigma Aldrich), ethyl cellulose ([C6H7O2(OC2H5)3]n, 48.0 to 49.5% (w/w) as ethoxyl, Sigma Aldrich), zinc acetate dihydrate (Zn(AC)2·2H2O, AR, 98.0%), cadmium acetate dihydrate (Cd(AC)2·2H2O, AR, 98.0%), cadmium nitrate tetrahydrate (Cd(NO3)2·4H2O, AR, 98.0%), sodium sulfide (Na2S, AR, 98.0%), sodium borohydride (NaBH4, AR, 98.0%), selenium powder (Se, −200 mesh, 3 N, 99.9%), sulfur (S, reagent grade), brass foil (alloy 260, 0.3 mm thick, Alfa Aesar), hydrochloric acid (HCl, 37%, USA), methanol (CH3OH, ≥99.5%, Sigma Aldrich), and ethanol (CH3CH2OH, ≥99.5%, Decon Labs) were all directly used without further purification. Ultrapure deionized water was used for the preparation of all aqueous solutions.


A TiO2 paste composed of 1 g Degussa P25 mixed with 0.5 g ethyl cellulose and 3.5 g α-terpineol was dispersed in 10.0 mL ethanol after removing the ethanol under stirring. The transparent TiO2 mesoporous film was prepared via doctor blading the TiO2 paste on a clean F:SnO2-coated (FTO, 6–8 Ω square−1) glass substrate. The film was then sintered at 500 °C for 30 min to remove impurities and improve the crystallinity.


The CdS seed layer was first deposited by the successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) method on the surface of TiO2 mesoporous film to facilitate the subsequent chemical bath deposition (CBD) growth. The film was first immersed in 0.1 M Cd(NO3)2·4H2O solution for 1 min. After rinsing with methanol and drying, the film was then immersed in 0.1 M Na2S solution for another 1 min, followed by rinsing with methanol and drying again. This process was repeated five times.

CdSe was deposited on the TiO2/CdS film through a chemical bath deposition (CBD) procedure. The CBD solution contained 0.1 M Na2SeSO3, 0.1 M Cd(AC)2·2H2O, and 0.2 M N(CH2COONa)3 with a volume ratio of 1:1:1; the TiO2/CdS film was immersed vertically in this solution under dark conditions for 3 h at room temperature.
The ZnS passivation layer was prepared by a SILAR method through dipping the TiO2/CdS/CdSe film in an aqueous solution containing 0.1 M Zn(NO3)2 and 0.1 M Na2S for 1 min, respectively. The optimization of the performance of the QDSCs with different SILAR cycles of the ZnS passivation layer is shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). This immersion cycle was repeated three times to obtain an optimal thickness.
The ZnSe passivation layer was also deposited by a SILAR method. Briefly, the films were first immersed in 0.1 M Zn(AC)2·2H2O for 2 min and then in 0.1 M NaHSe for 2 min. Following each immersion, the films were rinsed with deionized water and dried before the subsequent dipping. In this process, the Se source solution was always purged with N2. The optimization of the performance of the QDSCs with different SILAR cycles of the ZnSe passivation layer is shown in Fig. S2 (ESI). This immersion cycle was repeated three times to obtain an optimal thickness.

The polysulfide solution was prepared by dissolving 1 M sulfur and 1 M sodium sulfide in deionized water before each test. The counter electrode was a nanostructured Cu2S film on brass foil, prepared by immersing a brass foil in 37% HCl at 80 °C for 40 min, removing it to rinse it with deionized water and ethanol, drying in air, then immersing it in freshly prepared electrolyte for 5 min, resulting in the formation of Cu2S on the brass foil. The device was assembled into a sandwich-type structure using Scotch tape placed between the QDs sensitized photoanode and the counter electrode.


The morphology of the films was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JSM-7000). The compositional EDX analysis and elemental mapping on the samples were carried out by EDX integrated in SEM (JSM-7000). The photovoltaic properties were measured using an HP 4155A programmable semiconductor parameter analyzer under AM1.5 simulated sunlight with a power density of 100 mW cm−2. Optical absorption (Perkin Elmer Lambda 900 UV/VIS/IR spectrometer) was used to study the light absorption property of the samples. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was carried out using a Solartron 1287A coupled with a Solartron 1260 FRA/impedance analyzer to investigate the electronic and ionic processes in the QDSCs. The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) was determined using the 7-SCSpec response measurement system.


The SEM images in Fig. 1(a, a1), (b, b1) and (c, c1) show the surface morphology of TiO2/CdS/CdSe photoanodes without and with ZnS or ZnSe passivation layers. There is no apparent difference between the three samples, except for a slight increase in the particle size and a slight filling of the pores in the TiO2/CdS/CdSe films after introducing the ZnS or ZnSe passivation layer. The elements in the photoanodes were examined by EDX analysis, as shown in Fig. 1(a2)–(c2). The atom ratios of the elements were listed in the inset of each spectrum. In the TiO2/CdS/CdSe photoanode with a ZnS passivation layer, the atomic percentages of Cd, Se, S, and Zn were found to be 9.4%, 7.2%, 3.7%, and 1.2%, respectively (Fig. 1(b2)). Fig. 1(c2) shows the EDX analysis of the TiO2/CdS/CdSe photoanode with a ZnSe passivation layer; the obtained percentages of Cd, Se, S, and Zn were 9.5%, 12.7%, 0.4%, and 4.2%, respectively. The content of Se and Zn elements in the photoanode with a ZnSe passivation layer was substantially higher than that in the photoanode with a ZnS passivation layer, indicating that the amount of ZnSe is greater than that of ZnS in their respective photoanodes. This result suggests that the ZnSe passivation layer is more favorably deposited on the TiO2/CdS/CdSe photoanode than the ZnS passivation layer.


Fig. 2(a) compares the optical absorption spectra of TiO2/CdS/CdSe films without and with ZnS or ZnSe passivation layers over the wavelengths ranging from 350 to 800 nm under the same measurement conditions. Obviously, compared with the TiO2/CdS/CdSe photoelectrode without a passivation layer, the photoelectrodes with ZnS and ZnSe passivation layers both show an increase in the absorbance and a red shift in the absorption range, although the enhancement or the degree of change is noticeably different. For the TiO2/CdS/CdSe photoelectrode with a ZnS passivation layer, the absorbance increased slightly with a slight red-shift, indicating that ZnS has a minor influence on the light harvesting capability of the cells; this is in good agreement with previous studies reported in the literature. The introduction of the ZnSe passivation layer resulted in an appreciably increased absorbance and a significant red-shift of the absorption edge. Considering that both ZnS (3.6 eV) and ZnSe (2.7 eV) have wider bandgaps than CdSe (1.74 eV), the light absorbance itself is not the prime reason for the enhanced absorption of the films. In the literature, it has been suggested that the partial overlap of the exciton wave functions of CdS/CdSe QDs and the passivation layer resulting from an interaction between the two parts contributes to the enhancement of the absorption. However, this explanation cannot account for the appreciably higher absorption of the ZnSe passivated photoanodes compared to ZnS. In the present investigation, we measured the light absorbance of the photoanodes with different thicknesses of ZnSe passivation layers, and the results are shown in Fig. S3 (ESI). There is a strong dependence on the number of SILAR cycles for deposition of the ZnSe passivation layer. The amount and crystal size of ZnSe would increase with increasing number of SILAR cycles, resulting in an increase in the absorbance, though small. However, the red shift of the absorption edge in the absorbance occurs only in the first cycle; further increasing the number of SILAR cycles for the deposition of ZnSe passivation layer results in a negligible red shift. This phenomenon suggests that the influence of the ZnSe passivation layer on the light absorption is somewhat complex. According to the EDS result presented in Fig. 1(a2), without a passivation layer, the atomic percentages of Cd, S, and Se were found to be 9.9%, 0.8%, and 8.2%, respectively. The amount of Cd is more than the total amount of S and Se combined; therefore, excess cadmium is likely to exist on the surface of the TiO2/CdS/CdSe film and react with Se2−, leading to further growth of the CdSe QDs. This process would take place only in the first SILAR cycle; in the following SILAR cycles, there would be no further growth of CdSe. The EDS results in Fig. 1(a2)–(c2) show that the content of CdSe in the ZnSe coated sample is much higher than in the sample without passivation material. Therefore, the main reason for the higher absorption is the enhanced amount and enlarged particle size of the CdSe QDs. In the case of the ZnS passivation layer, the excess cadmium will lead to further growth of CdS, which will not affect the overall absorption because the overall absorption is actually dominated by the QDs of CdSe. As demonstrated in Fig. 2(b), the effective band gap of CdS/CdSe QDs can be estimated by extrapolating the linear portion of the (Ahν)2versus hν plots, according to eqn (1), where A is the absorbance, c is a constant, ν is the frequency and h is Planck's constant.
(Ahν)2 = c(hν − Eg)
(1)
Obviously, the TiO2/CdS/CdSe photoanode with the ZnSe passivation layer shows greater light harvesting capability compared to the photoanode with the ZnS passivation layer.

Fig. 3(a) and (b) illustrate the overall operation mechanism of the TiO2/CdS/CdSe solar cells with ZnS or ZnSe passivation layers. Under light illumination, CdS and CdSe QDs capture photons and generate photo-excited electron–hole pairs which will separate into electrons and holes; then, the electrons jump into the conduction band of the TiO2 film, while the holes are reduced by redox couples in the electrolyte. At the same time, some charge recombination processes also exist in the QDSCs, mainly including recombination of the photo-excited electrons in the conduction band of QDs with the oxidized form of the redox couple in the electrolyte and the recombination of electrons in the conduction band of TiO2, which are transferred back to react with the oxidized form of the redox couple in the electrolyte. Studies have shown that the charge recombination processes were a major factor hindering the solar cell performance. According to the data reported in the literature, the energy band alignment of the materials involved in the photoanodes and the charge transfer pathways of the solar cells are illustrated in Fig. 3(a) and (b). As illustrated in Fig. 3(a), ZnS has a more negative minimum conduction band edge (Ecb) than CdS/CdSe QDs and TiO2; thus, it can prevent the transfer of electrons from QDs and TiO2 to the oxidized form of the redox couple in the electrolyte. However, its maximum valence band edge (Evb) is more positive than CdS/CdSe QDs, so at the same time it will undesirably hinder the hole transfer from the QDs through the ZnS passivation layer to the electrolyte, causing reduced charge recombination in QDSCs. Compared with the ZnS passivation layer, as shown in Fig. 3(b), ZnSe has a more negative minimum conduction band edge (Ecb) than CdS/CdSe QDs, but a less positive maximum valence band edge (Evb). Hence, this structure not only prevents the back-transfer of electrons from the QDs and TiO2 to the electrolyte, but also facilitates the hole transfer to the redox couple through the ZnSe passivation layer, which will reduce the negative effects of ZnS on the charge separation and injection. As a consequence, ZnSe passivated TiO2/CdS/CdSe QDSCs achieve a more efficient charge separation and a more reduced charge recombination.

Fig. 4(a) compares the electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) of TiO2/CdS/CdSe QDSCs without and with ZnS or ZnSe passivation layers measured under forward bias (Voc) and dark conditions to evaluate the resistance distribution and charge recombination processes. The spectra typically consist of two semicircles, which are fitted by an equivalent circuit (inset in Fig. 4(a)). The first small semicircle corresponds to the resistance at the counter electrode/electrolyte interface (R1), and the second large semicircle corresponds to the charge transfer resistance at the TiO2/QDs/electrolyte interface and within the TiO2 films (Rct). The fitting results of R1 and Rct based on the EIS measurements are listed in Table 1. As the same counter electrode and electrolyte are used in these experiments, there are no apparent differences among these three QDSCs. However, there is a large difference in Rct; the value of Rct for the QDSCs with a ZnSe passivation layer is 127.5 Ω, while the Rct values for the QDSCs without a passivation layer and with a ZnS passivation layer are only 57.5 Ω and 92.4 Ω, respectively. The charge recombination resistance in a QDSC is mainly determined by Rct; the higher the value of Rct, the more difficult the recombination of the electrons and holes, which results in decreased charge recombination.Fig. 4(b) shows the Bode plots of the TiO2/CdS/CdSe QDSCs without and with a ZnS or ZnSe passivation layer. The curve peak of the spectrum can be used to determine the electron lifetime (τn) according to eqn (2):
(2)
where
fmin is the peak frequency at the minimum phase angle in the Bode plots. The corresponding electron lifetimes of the QDSCs are listed in Table 1. The electron lifetime of the QDSCs with a ZnSe passivation layer is 49.3 ms, which is significantly longer than that of the cell with a ZnS passivation layer and more than five times longer than that for the cell without a passivation layer. Both the increases in the Rct and τn lead to a reduced interface charge recombination process in QDSCs.

Samples

R
1 (Ω)

R
ct (Ω)

τ
n (ms)
CdS/CdSe
2.0
57.5
14.1
CdS/CdSe/ZnS
1.6
92.4
25.2
CdS/CdSe/ZnSe
1.9
127.5
49.3

Fig. 4(c) shows the J–V curves of the TiO2/CdS/CdSe QDSCs without and with ZnS or ZnSe passivation layers, measured under dark conditions. Compared with the device without a passivation layer, the dark current of the devices with a ZnS or ZnSe passivation layer all decreased; the dark current was much smaller for the ZnSe passivated device. This result shows a similar trend to the EIS result, which further indicates that the charge recombination process was strongly inhibited via introducing a passivation layer, especially the ZnSe passivation layer.
Here, it should be noted that the lattice parameters of the QD sensitizers and the passivation layers are, in most cases, quite different. ZnS over-coated CdSe QDs suffer from a larger lattice mismatch (10.6%) between the two crystal structures, which will introduce dislocations in the crystal lattice at or near the interface. Meanwhile, ZnSe over-coated CdSe QDs benefit from a smaller lattice mismatch (6.3%), which will facilitate the growth of ZnSe with higher quality and leads to the suppression of defects at the CdSe/ZnSe interface. In this case, the TiO2/CdS/CdSe QDSCs with a ZnSe passivation layer is more beneficial for inhibiting interface charge recombination processes.
To evaluate the light absorption and electron collection characteristics, Fig. 5(a) compares the IPCE (incident photo-to-current conversion efficiency) curves of TiO2/CdS/CdSe QDSCs without and with ZnS or ZnSe passivation layers. It is known that Jsc of a solar cell is the integration of IPCE over the absorption range. As expected, compared with the QDSCs without passivation layers, the QDSCs with ZnS or ZnSe passivation layer show much higher IPCE values, in a similar trend to that of the Jsc. The integral Jsc values from the IPCE spectra were 12.32, 15.67 and 19.54 mA cm−2, respectively, which are close to the values obtained from the I–V curves, as shown in Table 2. The IPCE values can be determined by three parameters according to eqn (3), where “ηLHE”, “ηct” and “ηcc” represent the light harvesting efficiency, charge transfer efficiency and charge collection efficiency, respectively.
IPCE = ηLHE × ηct × ηcc
(3)
Sample

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE
CdS/CdSe
0.50
12.94
0.52
3.42
CdS/CdSe/ZnS
0.55
15.71
0.57
4.91
CdS/CdSe/ZnSe
0.58
20.11
0.55
6.39
The light harvesting efficiency “ηLHE” is given by eqn (4).
ηLHE = 1 − 10−absorbance
(4)
“ηLHE” of the QDSCs is consistent with the light absorption of the photoelectrodes, as shown in Fig. 5(b). The LHE of the TiO2/CdS/CdSe photoelectrodes with ZnS or ZnSe passivation layers is much higher than that of the photoelectrodes without a passivation layer, especially the photoelectrodes with a ZnSe passivation layer, which have the highest LHE. “ηct” is mainly determined by the energy level difference between the conduction band edge of QDs and the photoanode. The photoexcited electrons transfer from the high conduction band to the low conduction band, and the difference in energy level is the driving force for the charge transfer. Theoretically, the conduction band edge of CdS/CdSe QDs is over 200 mV higher than that of TiO2; this will be sufficient to drive the charge transfer process. “ηcc” is related to the charge recombination in solar cells; the EIS results as well as the J–V curves in dark conditions indicate that the deposition of both ZnS and ZnSe passivation layers can reduce charge recombination processes, and the deposition of ZnSe passivation layer is better, corresponding to a much higher charge collection efficiency. Consequently, the enhancement of both the light harvesting efficiency and charge collection efficiency collectively contribute to the improved quantum efficiency.
The J–V characteristics of TiO2/CdS/CdSe QDSCs without and with ZnS or ZnSe passivation layers were measured under the illumination of one sun (AM1.5, 100 mW cm−2), as shown in Fig. 6. The performance parameters of the different samples are listed in Table 2. Obviously, the performance of the QDSCs is very much dependent on the passivation strategies. When only CdS/CdSe QDs are loaded on bare TiO2 film, the device generates a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 12.94 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.5 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.52, yielding a low power conversion efficiency (η) of 3.42%. However, when the ZnS and ZnSe passivation layers were deposited, all the values of these parameters were greatly enhanced; the QDSCs with a ZnSe passivation layer show the best performance, with Voc, Jsc and FF reaching 20.11 mA cm−2, 0.58 V, and 0.55, respectively. The best PCE of 6.39% was achieved for the QDSCs with a ZnSe passivation layer. These results present an almost 30% improvement in the PCE of the QDSCs with a ZnSe passivation layer over the ZnS passivated devices.

The present study shows that both ZnS and ZnSe passivation layers have appreciable influence on the performance of the resulting QDSCs. The photovoltaic performance of the TiO2/CdS/CdSe QDSCs varied depending on the deposition of the ZnS and ZnSe passivation layers. The UV-Vis and EIS results and the energy band alignment showed that, compared with the ZnS passivation layer, the ZnSe passivation layer contributed to a higher light harvesting capability and a reduced charge recombination for the device. Eventually, an overall PCE of 6.4% was achieved for the TiO2/CdS/CdSe QDSCs with a ZnSe passivation layer, about a 30% enhancement compared to the PCE of 4.9% for the TiO2/CdS/CdSe QDSCs with a ZnS passivation layer and an over 80% enhancement compared to the PCE of 3.42% for the device without a passivation layer. This work emphasizes the importance of determining an effective and reliable passivation strategy to obtain high performance QDSCs.


In our concurrent related publication (reference 51) ZnSe was proven to act as a good passivation layer in CdS/CdS QDSCs. In this work, we report the systematic study of the influences of different passivation strategies on the photovoltaic performance of CdS/CdSe co-sensitized solar cells. The analysis reported in reference 51 was replicated in new experiments to provide the systematic comparison reported in this paper and as such the values reported in Table 2 are also reported in reference 51.


This work was financially supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF, DMR 1505902) and in part by National Natural Science Foundations of China (No. 21377023, No. 51362026 and No. 61376011). Fei Huang would also like to acknowledge the scholarship by China Scholarship Council for the scholarship.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta01590e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016