 DOI: 10.1039/D0TA09096D
(Perspective)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 25017-25027


Yuetian
Chen
 and 

Yixin
Zhao
*

School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China. E-mail: yixin.zhao@sjtu.edu.cn

Received
16th September 2020
, Accepted 31st October 2020
First published on 2nd November 2020
Lead halide perovskites have been widely studied for successful photovoltaic applications because of their exceptional optoelectronic properties, high photoconversion efficiencies, facile solution process and low cost. However, both organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite and all-inorganic perovskite solar cells still face the challenges with respect to higher photovoltaic performances and long-term stabilities against various environmental factors. To address these stability issues, solution-processed colloidal perovskite nanocrystals have been introduced into perovskite solar cells either as the sole light absorber material, or a surface additive for bulk perovskite films. The incorporation of perovskite quantum dots onto bulk perovskite thin films has shown great potential on improving the band alignment in solar cell structures, passivating bulk and surface defects, and enhancing overall device performances. Here in this perspective, we summarize the recent development on integrating semiconductor nanocrystals, including perovskite and metal chalcogenide quantum dots, onto bulk perovskite thin films for solar cell device fabrication. We also highlight and provide an outlook of the ongoing research studies regarding how the function and mechanism of this nanocrystal incorporation, the distribution of the added components, as well as the processing route, the chemical composition and the morphology of the nanocrystal can affect the fabricated device performances.
Yuetian Chen
Yuetian Chen is currently a postdoctoral researcher at Shanghai Jiao Tong University. She received her BS degree in Chemistry from University of Science and Technology of China in 2014, and her PhD degree in Chemistry from Syracuse University in 2019. Her current research interests focus on perovskite nanocrystals, including fundamental optoelectronic and surface chemistry characterization, and material development for photovoltaic applications.
Yixin Zhao
Yixin Zhao is a professor at Shanghai Jiao Tong University. He graduated from Shanghai Jiao Tong University with BS and MS degree in Chemistry and received his PhD degree from Case Western Reserve University in 2010 followed by working as a postdoctoral fellow at Penn State University and the National Renewable Energy Laboratory. His current research interests focus on perovskite solar cells and perovskite based functional materials for solar energy conversion and environmental remediation applications.

Owing to the advantages of superior optoelectronic properties and low-cost solution processing approach, lead halide perovskites have become a promising candidate for next generation photovoltaic (PV) applications as the efficiency progress chart revealed (Fig. 1a). Two representative crystal structures of lead halide perovskites are shown in Fig. 1b. For the general chemical formula of APbX3, where X represents different halide ions (i.e. Cl, Br or I), the A-site cation could be organic cations such as methylammonium (CH3NH3+, MA) and formamidinium (CH(NH2)2+, FA) to form organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites (OIHPs), or inorganic cations such as cesium (Cs+) and rubidium (Rb+) for the construction of all-inorganic perovskites. Since Miyasaka's first seminal work of using OIHPs for photovoltaic cells in 2009, impressive progress has been made in terms of fabrication techniques and mechanism understandings, along with power conversion efficiency (PCE) improvement from the initial 3.8% to certified 25.5% in 2020. There has been tremendous effort invested into the commercialization of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). However, the volatile and hydroscopic nature of the organic cations limits the applications of these hybrid perovskites. There are many challenges regarding stability against environmental factors such as heat, moisture, light and UV irradiation. On the other hand, all-inorganic lead halide perovskites with unstable organic components substituted by inorganic cations have shown improved thermal stability. Yet there still remain some concerns regarding the long-term moisture stability of the mostly-studied CsPbI3, as well as undesired room temperature phase transition from optical active black phases to the non-perovskite yellow phase, which greatly affect the performances of the fabricated perovskite solar cells.

Many attempts have been made to retain the stability of perovskites in optical active phases under ambient operating conditions. One method is to introduce organic or inorganic components to passivate the bulk and surface defects. Compared to the commonly used polycrystalline absorbers, nanocrystalline absorbers using colloidal perovskite nanocrystals (NCs) have emerged as a promising material for application advances. Reducing the particle size of nanocrystals could adjust the ratio between surface energy to the total Gibbs energy, and then to stabilize the crystal structure that is otherwise unstable on a larger scale. Before being introduced to the field of solar cell research, solution-processed perovskite nanocrystals have already held an important place in nanoscience and nanotechnology. This is due to their high photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) and tunable optoelectronic properties, the latter of which are dictated by the size, shape and composition (Fig. 1c). Since the sizes of perovskite nanocrystals are comparable to the Bohr excitonic radius of lead halide perovskites, they are expected to exhibit a quantum confinement effect, where the electronic energy levels can be fine-tuned with particle dimensions. Moreover, perovskite nanocrystals with different shapes (Fig. 1d) such as nanowires, nanocubes and nanospheres (i.e. quantum dots, QDs) would change their surface chemistry and exciton confinement along different directions accordingly, endowing the nanocrystals with morphologically controlled optoelectronic properties. As shown in Fig. 1d, a typical synthesis normally requires different cation/anion precursors, and a carboxylic acid–amine ligand pair with fine-tuned alkyl chain lengths and stoichiometry ratios, which would facilitate the formation of nanocrystals with varied dimensions and shapes. As a result, the native surface chemistry of the as-synthesized nanocrystals is highly dynamic, maintaining an acid–base equilibrium sensitive to the ligand environment. In general, the property tunability of perovskite nanocrystals provides great potential for different optical applications such as lasing, photo-detecting and light-emitting devices. As for solar cell applications, perovskite nanocrystals show a high degree of bandgap tunability, defect tolerance, and feasibility on flexible and large-scale device fabrications.
Recent progress in the field of perovskite quantum dot solar cells (QDSCs) has been discussed in several reviews. The incorporation of perovskite quantum dots with bulk perovskite thin films is a novel but rapidly growing research topic; however, few reviews or perspectives are dedicated to the progress in this field. Here, we start from quantum dot solar cells with light absorber layers made solely from perovskite nanocrystals, but focus on the recent developments on integrating semiconductor nanocrystals with bulk perovskite thin films for photovoltaic applications. We then summarize the studies that use perovskite nanocrystals or metal chalcogenide quantum dots to modify perovskite thin films for solar cells, and discuss the function of these NC incorporations, the detailed distribution of the added components and the processing effect. Finally, we provide an outlook of the development of QD treatment on perovskite solar cell devices with enhanced performances and stabilities.

Reduction of crystal sizes causes a concurrent rise of unique properties such as the quantum confinement effect and size-induced tunability of the electronic states. Therefore, solar cells using perovskite nanocrystals as the absorber layer offer many advantages over the ones with polycrystalline bulk films. The first CsPbI3 perovskite quantum dot solar cell was reported in 2016 by Luther group. In this work, the authors used black-phase CsPbI3 QDs (optical characterizations shown in Fig. 2a) as a light absorber and constructed solar cell devices using a layer-by-layer approach (Fig. 2b). The device with a planar structure exhibited a champion PCE of 10.77% and was phase-stable at room temperature in a desiccator for over 60 days. Since the surface capping layer is composed of electronic-insulating organic ligands, QD solar cells normally exhibit relatively low short-circuit photocurrent density (Jsc) and fill factors (FF). To overcome this issue, Luther group furthered the study by developing an A-site cation halide salt (AX) post-treatment strategy (Fig. 2c) to tune the surface chemistry of the QD films. As this AX treatment tuned the coupling between the perovskite QDs, it improved the charge carrier mobility of the film and increased the photocurrent. For the FAI-coated CsPbI3 QD solar cell, a certified efficiency of 13.43% was achieved. To understand the molecular interactions during this AX treatment, a follow-up study investigated the QD surface chemistry in shown in the scheme in Fig. 2d. The authors found that the AX post-treatment would only coated the QD arrays instead of inducing grain growth or alloying into the film. This functioning mechanism ensures the retainment of the QD nanocrystalline nature. Moreover, the AX treatment could effectively improve the electronic properties of the fabricated devices, largely owing to the replacement of the native organic capping ligands of the QDs. This study provided a roadmap on how the surface chemistry of the as-synthesized QDs and the deposited thin film could affect the performances of the fabricated solar cell devices.

From then on, many studies have been devoted to improving the performance of quantum dot solar cells from different technical routes including rationally tuning the composition of the QD light absorbing layer, controlling the surface ligand chemistry of the QDs, modifying the components or the interface with other functional layers in solar cell devices. Devices made with QDs as the sole light absorbing material have demonstrated great potential in terms of room-temperature stability, high tunability of the quantum confinement effect, and ease of solution-processed fabrication of devices with larger scale and flexibility. Currently, the certified cell record efficiency for perovskite quantum dot solar cells is 16.6% as shown in Fig. 1a. However, this PCE value is far behind that of bulk perovskite solar cells, urging further efforts on achieving a balanced QD surface ligand environment for both enhanced carrier transport and well-preserved structural stability. Therefore, incorporating these nanocrystals onto bulk perovskite thin films may bring together many interesting properties as well as enhancements to the original PSC system.

One primary goal of introducing colloidal perovskite nanocrystals on top of perovskite thin films was to improve the device performances by managing interfacial band alignment. In many cases, the devices fabricated via this interface engineering approach exhibit a bandgap gradient and were therefore named “component-graded heterojunction”. As illustrated in Fig. 3a, Cha et al. first reported the use of MAPbBr3−xIx OIHP QDs to engineer the interface between the MAPbI3 thin film and the hole-transporting layer (HTL). The band alignment between the QD layer, the MAPbI3 film, and the HTL (spiro-OMeTAD in this study) could be well-adjusted by varying the Br:I ratio. As illustrated in Fig. 3b, when the valence band (VB) edge of the MAPbBr3−xIx QD lays in the middle of the VB edge of the MAPbI3 film and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the HTL, the insertion of the QD layer could facilitate hole transfer from the perovskite film to the HTL. Therefore, the device performances were improved with a higher fill factor, Jsc and PCE. The idea of interface engineering was also adapted to all-inorganic systems, where a graded bandgap was achieved with CsPbI3 quantum dot layer deposition on top of the CsPbI2Br thin film as shown in Fig. 3c. The fabricated devices with well-matched energy levels showed improved carrier mobility and longer lifetimes. With further careful selection of QD and thin film materials, Zai et al. successfully achieved a solar cell PCE of 20.56%. In this study, CsPbBr3 nanocrystals were used to modify the thin film absorber layer with the composition of FA0.85MA0.15Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3. The lattice mismatch between the two materials was as low as 7.6%, ensuring the preservation of the phase and crystal structure, as well as the optoelectronic properties when introducing NCs into the system. From a technical perspective, the authors proposed that, as the incoming solvent chlorobenzene extracting the precursor solvents dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and N,N′-dimethylformamide (DMF), the penetration of CsPbBr3 NCs into the precursor mixture during the film growth was guided, yielding a vertical gradient distribution for the final film formation as in the energy-level diagram shown in Fig. 3d. To further investigate the function of the added NCs, they also tested the device performances with a control group of FA0.85MA0.15Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 NCs, which shares the same composition as the thin film. They found that even though the film quality was improved, not as much improvement was found as per the device efficiency. Therefore, they concluded that the interface engineering method, rather than surface passivation by NCs, attributed to the improvement in photovoltaic efficiency.


The above examples utilized perovskite nanocrystals to modify the interface between the bulk perovskite film and HTL because of the favored band alignment. In other cases, perovskite QDs can also be used at the interface between bulk films and electron-transporting layers (ETLs) for defect passivation and device performance improvements. Bakr and co-workers added oleic acid (OA)-coated CsPbBrCl2 quantum dots to MAPbI3 films as bulk- and surface-passivation agents. As illustrated in Fig. 4a, they identified the functions of QDs as both elemental dopants and surface ligand carrying vehicles. In other words, the OA-coated QDs distributed elements from QDs uniformly across the MAPbI3 film and anchored the OA ligands to the surface of the film. Therefore, the QDs could reduce the trap state density of the film, and also render the surface hydrophobic, protecting the film from moisture-induced degradation and the escape of volatile organic components. This synergistic effect of elemental passivation and surface modification improves both the efficiency and stability of the fabricated PSC devices as shown in Fig. 4b and c, respectively. The detailed mechanism of open-circuit voltage (Voc) reduction and performance improvement is illustrated in Fig. 4d, where the MAPbI3 film processed with QDs showed narrower band-tail electronic states, reduced mid-gap states, and longer charge carrier lifetimes, thus exhibiting an enhanced Voc and a PCE improvement from 18.3% to 21.5%. A recent study by Xie et al. ascertained such synergistic functions of QD incorporation despite the constituents of the perovskite/HTL interface. They used multi-cation Csx(MA0.17FA0.83)1−xPbBr3 QDs with a tuned Cs content to treat the surface of OIHP films and fabricated planar solar cell devices as the structure shown in Fig. 4e inset. The statistics of the device Voc and PCE in Fig. 4f suggest that, for different Cs contents in the added QDs, the QD-modified PSC shows the most prominent performance improvements when x = 0.05. To rationalize the influence from the varied Cs content, the authors attributed it to the distribution disparity of the Cs element to the QD surface layers with the aid of 133Cs NMR. A higher percentage of Cs in the proximity of the QD surface would facilitate a higher diffusion degree to the OIHP film, and thus the enhanced PSC performances when x = 0.05 with smaller particle sizes. The collaborated effect of QD modification is illustrated in Fig. 4g, where they identified the QD modification process as ionic solid-state interdiffusion with two major contributions. One is from the ions in QDs as they occupy the vacancies at the OIHP surface and the grain boundaries to reduce defect density and suppress interfacial non-radiative recombination. The other is from the introduced hydrophobic ligands to help with the formation of low dimensional structures to improve moisture tolerance and ambient stability. In another work by Wang et al., intensively washed CsPbI3 QD was added to a multi-cation hybrid halide Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 film as shown in the schematic diagram in Fig. 4h. Even though the authors confirmed the diffusion of QDs into the bulk perovskite film, hence the formation of a thin alloying layer, a negligible passivation effect was observed in this study. They demonstrated that it was hybrid organic ligands introduced by the QD addition that contributed greatly to the device performance improvements, which were achieved by adjusting the electric structure and surface potential of the alloyed perovskite film, thus inducing a gradient between the energy levels of perovskite and ETL (C60 in this study) layers, and reducing the Voc loss.


The functions and mechanisms of QD addition seem to heavily depend on the chemical composition chosen, the addition timing and the processing route taken. Utilizing a composition-engineering method, Que et al. added solution-processed Cs-rich Cs1−xFAxPbI3 QDs onto a bulk FAPbI3 perovskite film (Fig. 5a). This incorporation not only prevents the α- to δ-phase transition of FAPbI3 but also avoids the phase segregation issue of Cs-rich Cs–FA mixed-cation perovskites. As shown in the fabrication procedures illustrated in Fig. 5b, the authors added the QD solution after the initial annealing stage of the bulk perovskite film. Such integrity of QDs was well-preserved after the deposition, which is different from the “fusing” of QD elements into the bulk film reported in other studies. The authors attributed this observation to the “negligible solubility” of the Cs-rich Cs1−xFAxPbI3 QDs in the Cs-lean FAPbI3 bulk film. The QD-modified film structure showed improved charge dynamics (Fig. 5c) and significantly enhanced stability (Fig. 5d) under ambient conditions. Based on the QD post-synthetic treatment route, most of the QD surface ligands had been removed during the purification process. Hence the authors excluded the idea of QD surface ligands functioning as a passivating agent for the bulk film. Therefore, the device performance improvement was mainly attributed to the Cs-rich surface on top of the bulk perovskite film, and not the shielding of the organic ligands brought by QDs.

Another interesting discussion regarding the QD modification approach is whether the morphology of these nanocrystals, i.e. spherical dots, symmetrical cubes, or high aspect ratio rods or wires, would affect their functions and the resulting performances of PSCs. Zhang et al. used CsPbBr3 perovskite nanocrystals with either a nanowire (NW) or nanocube morphology to modify the interfaces between bulk OIHP perovskite films and the hole-transporting layer (Fig. 5e). Since they added CsPbBr3 NC solution before film annealing, they suggested that CsPbBr3 would fuse into the perovskite thin film via a diffusion reaction. Therefore, a gradation across the film would form with a CsPbBr3-rich top surface and CsPbBr3-lean towards the bottom. While the nanocube solution tended to aggregate when added, resulting in a spatially inhomogeneous distribution on the film surface and a patchy valence band maximum (VBM) increase on matching the HTL HOMO. Interestingly, the nanowire solution yielded an even diffusion on the MAPbI3 film and helped with the lateral homogeneity of the perovskite film surface electronic states. As a result, a compositionally-graded heterojunction was formed at the perovskite/HTL interface and the devices modified with CsPbBr3 NWs exhibited improved performances as shown in Fig. 5f. To further investigate the validity of this performance influence from the NC morphology, the authors also worked with another OIHP film with the composition of MA1−xFAxPbI3. They found that the disparity still existed and concluded that, the nanowire morphology holds the key for achieving successful nanocrystal-bulk film incorporation with efficiency and stability improvements.

Owing to the well-understood optoelectronic properties and similarities to perovskite systems, metal chalcogenide quantum dots with various microstructures and compositions have also been used to modify the surface of bulk perovskite thin films. Fan and co-workers applied quantum dots with the composition of CdSe/CdS on the back of solar cell devices as a down-shifting layer. This incorporation of QDs resulted in a higher Jsc and PCE, and better light stability. Hanmandlu et al. reported the use of core/shell quantum dots with the compositions of CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS as a passivation layer on the surface of the MAPbI3 perovskite film (Fig. 6a). They found that the addition of this QD layer could efficiently decrease trap density, and stabilize the perovskite structure with increased hydrophobicity, as well as extend the charge carrier lifetime. DFT calculations were used in this study to determine the bonding details between the QD layer and the perovskite film. As illustrated in Fig. 6b, the DFT calculation results suggested that, the reduced trap density was attributed to the presence of Se2− and S2− anions from QDs, which induced van der Waals interactions with Pb2+ cations from the perovskite.

A special category of incorporation between perovskite and metal chalcogenide nanocrystals that is worth noting is the one with lead chalcogenide QDs, i.e. PbS and PbSe. Heterostructures based on bulk lead halide perovskites and lead chalcogenide QDs exhibit enhanced stability originating from the small lattice mismatch between the two materials, which would greatly benefit the optoelectronic applications including light-emitting diodes and solar cells. Recently, perovskite solar cells fabricated with PbS QD-embedded OIHP films have shown promising device performance. Han et al. found that the addition of PbS to the MAPbI3 precursor could facilitate the crystallization of the perovskite. The formed hybrid film exhibited higher carrier mobility compared to the one without QD addition, while the fabricated device showed enhanced efficiency ascribed to the higher current density and fill factor. In the FAPbI3-based system, Masi et al. discovered that the improved black phase stability of the QD-embedded films can be attributed to the interface of PbS–FAPbI3 with strong chemical bonds in the black phase structure, thus reducing thermodynamic preference for transferring into the unwanted yellow phase.

The above-mentioned developments on utilizing perovskite nanocrystals for photovoltaic applications are summarized in Table 1. Although the incorporation of semiconductor nanocrystals with bulk perovskite films holds great potential for advancement in photovoltaics, it's still in the early stage and needs systematic investigations to understand the mechanisms that govern the QD modification strategy. Based on the research achievements so far, several challenges and questions to answer are mapped out in Fig. 7. As previously discussed, the highest certified cell record of pure perovskite quantum dot solar cells so far is 16.6%. This work used an oleic acid ligand-assisted cation exchange method to prepare Cs1−xFAxPbI3 QDs and tuned the surface chemistry of synthesized QDs. As illustrated in Fig. 7a, they used excess OA capping ligands to facilitate the cation exchange and also to reduce the QD surface defect density. The resulting QDSC showed a higher short-circuit current and open-circuit voltage in this OA-rich environment, yielding a high PCE and decent photostability. This study suggested that surface chemistry has always played a crucial role in enhancing the properties of nanocrystals. Therefore, systematically tuning the surface capping ligands of QDs, both at the synthesis stage and during device fabrication, could profoundly improve the device performances.

NC material
Solar cell architecture
Highlight
PCE (%)
Year
Ref.
CsPbI3
Pure perovskite NC film, ETL: TiO2, HTL: Spiro-OMeTAD
MeOAc as an antisolvent
10.77
2016

47

CsPbI3
Pure perovskite NC film, ETL: TiO2, HTL: Spiro-OMeTAD
AX salt post-treatment
13.43
2017

48

Cs1−xFAxPbI3
Pure perovskite NC film, ETL: SnO2, HTL: Spiro-OMeTAD
Ligand-assisted cation exchange
16.6
2020

52

MAPbBr3−xIx
MAPbBr3−xIx QDs on the MAPbI3 film, ETL: TiO2, HTL: Spiro-OMeTAD
Interface engineering
13.32
2016

58

CsPbI3
CsPbI3 QDs on the CsPbI2Br film, ETL: TiO2, HTL: PTAA
All-inorganic interface engineering
14.45
2018

59

CsPbBr3
CsPbBr3 QDs on the FA0.85MA0.15Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 film, ETL: SnO2, HTL: Spiro-OMeTAD
Congeneric incorporation with small lattice mismatch
20.56
2018

60

CsPbBrCl2
CsPbBrCl2 QDs on the MAPbI3 film, ETL: C60, HTL: PTAA
Simultaneous bulk and surface passivation
21.5
2019

62

Csx(MA0.17FA0.83)1−xPbBr3
Csx(MA0.17FA0.83)1−xPbBr3 QDs on the (FAPbI3)x(MAPbBr3)1−x film, ETL: SnO2, HTL: Spiro-OMeTAD
Solid-state interdiffusion of QDs
21.10
2020

63

CsPbI3
CsPbI3 QDs on the Csx(MA0.17FA0.83)1−xPbBr3 film, ETL: C60, HTL: PTAA
QD alloying for interfacial modification
20.6
2020

65

Cs1−xFAxPbI3
Cs1−xFAxPbI3 QDs on the FAPbI3 film, ETL: SnO2, HTL: Spiro-OMeTAD
Composition engineering for the Cs-rich surface
20.82
2019

66

CsPbBr3
CsPbBr3 nanowires (or nanocubes) on the MA0.3FA0.7PbI3 film, ETL: TiO2, HTL: Spiro-OMeTAD
Compositionally-graded heterojunction
21.4
2019

67

Besides the surface chemistry of nanocrystals, there are a few other technical points that need to be addressed for the development of QD and solar cell incorporations. For example, the diffusion degree and the elemental distribution of the NC components into the bulk perovskite film are highly dependent on the NC solution addition timing and the subsequent annealing. When the NC modification process is followed by annealing, whether the NC solution is added together with the antisolvent before the annealing of the bulk film, or added separately after the film annealing, the nanocrystals tend to diffuse into the bulk film and deliver elements along with the penetration of the antisolvent. On the other hand, if the NC solution is added after the bulk film annealing with a short or no further thermal treatment, there's a higher chance for a lower degree of elemental diffusion. But as QDs and bulk perovskite materials with different chemical compositions were used in these studies, more systematical studies with control groups on the fabrication details, as well as in-depth understanding on the interactions between the incoming NC–antisolvent matrix and the perovskite film precursor, are necessary to elucidate the relationship between the degree of NC solution diffusion, the addition timing and thermal annealing. One follow-up question would be whether NC addition would deliver individual elements instead of working on a molecular or crystalline level, how would the size, morphology and the quality of the added nanocrystals affect the effectiveness of the performance improvement. In other words, once the question related to the addition timing is answered, further investigations are needed to figure out if and how the optoelectronic properties, colloidal stability and morphology of the added nanocrystals would affect the processed perovskite films and the fabricated solar cell devices.
In conclusion, we summarized not only the major advancements of perovskite QD solar cells, but also the latest development of improving bulk perovskite thin films via incorporating semiconductor NCs, especially perovskite QDs. In these photovoltaic applications, QD-based light absorber layers utilized pure perovskite nanocrystals for QDSCs, or bulk perovskite films modified with perovskite NCs or traditional metal chalcogenide QDs. The function of these NC incorporations, such as the distribution of the added NC components, their chemical composition and morphology on the perovskite film quality, and corresponding device performances were discussed. As the incorporation between nanocrystals and bulk perovskite films is a promising but relatively new research field, there are still many questions that remain unanswered, which urges further systematic and comprehensive investigations from perspectives such as QD surface chemistry and the film formation mechanism.

There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors acknowledge the support of NSFC (grant 22025505, 51861145101 and 21777096), the Program of Shanghai Academic/Technology Research Leader (grant number 20XD1422200) and the Cultivating fund of Frontiers Science Center for Transformative Molecules (2019PT02).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020