 DOI: 10.1039/C5FD00082C
(Paper)
Faraday Discuss., 2015, 185, 497-506


Ken T.
Ngo
,

Jonathan
Rochford
*,

Hao
Fan
,

Alberto
Batarseh
,

Keyur
Chitre
,

Sylvie
Rangan
,

Robert A.
Bartynski
 and 

Elena
Galoppini
*

Department of Chemistry, University of Massachusetts Boston, 100 Morrissey Boulevard, Boston, MA 02125, USA

Department of Chemistry, Rutgers University, 73 Warren Street, Newark, NJ 07102, USA. E-mail: galoppin@andromeda.rutgers.edu

Department of Physics and Astronomy and Laboratory for Surface Modification, Rutgers University, 136 Frelinghuysen Road, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA

Received
18th May 2015
, Accepted 15th June 2015
First published on 16th June 2015
The electronic properties of three porphyrin–bridge–anchor photosensitizers are reported with (1a, 1e, 3a and 3e) or without (2a and 2e) an intramolecular dipole in the bridge. The presence and orientation of the bridge dipole is hypothesized to influence the photovoltaic properties due to variations in the intrinsic dipole at the semiconductor–molecule interface. Electrochemical studies of the porphyrin–bridge–anchor dyes self-assembled on mesoporous nanoparticle ZrO2 films, show that the presence or direction of the bridge dipole does not have an observable effect on the electronic properties of the porphyrin ring. Subsequent photovoltaic measurements of nanostructured TiO2 semiconductor films in dye sensitized solar cells show a reduced photocurrent for photosensitizers 1a and 3a containing a bridge dipole. However, cooperative increased binding of the 1a + 3a co-sensitized device demonstrates that dye packing overrides any differences due to the presence of the small internal dipole.

The performance of dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) is highly dependent upon the efficiency of photoinduced charge-separation and the energy level alignment of the semiconductor/dye interface. This energy level alignment dictates the kinetics of the charge transfer step, and influences the open-circuit potential (VOC), short-circuit current (ISC) and, ultimately, the overall power conversion efficiency (η) in a photovoltaic device. While there are numerous interfaces present in a DSSC device, as illustrated in Fig. 1, we are particularly interested in the semiconductor/dye interface where molecular design can be leveraged to optimize the thermodynamic and kinetic properties of charge transfer. Examples of strategies that are pursued to tune the energy level alignment at the semiconductor/molecule interface include synthetic design of the dye (e.g., perfluorination, metallic-ion substitution, push–pull design), manipulating molecular orientation on the surface and co-depositing two or more organic species.

A concept that is attracting increasing attention is that the energy level alignment of any interface at equilibrium is shifted, relative to its component native band edges, due to an intrinsic interface dipole (IID). For example, at the semiconductor/molecule interface, the IID effect has been shown to be responsible for the attenuation of the conduction-band edge populations of TiO2 and the LUMO of surface bound organic semiconductors. This has been explained by equilibration of the TiO2 semiconductor Fermi level with the adsorbed molecule's redox potentials. As the semiconductor/molecule IID is principally dependent upon the molecular ionization energies, numerous studies have been aimed at tuning the ionization energies, although other factors also play a role such as molecular orientation and buffer effects, and photoinduced dipole moment changes.
Molecular design is an excellent opportunity to probe the dipole effect concept, and we recently introduced a promising approach by incorporating an internal electric dipole moment within the bridge framework of a chromophore–bridge–anchor molecular architecture. We recently reported the synthesis of the ZnTPP rigid-rod dyes 1–3, shown in Fig. 1, where the dipole in the bridge is created by introducing donor–acceptor (DA) or acceptor–donor (AD) substituents, where D = N,N-dimethylamino and A = nitro group (Fig. 1). Because the porphyrin macrocycle is almost perpendicular to the rigid-rod bridge, the electronic properties (HOMO–LUMO gap) of the ZnTPP porphyrin chromophore head group are decoupled from the bridge dipole, as determined by UV-Vis absorption, fluorescence emission and redox potentials. This molecular design allows us to associate any difference in energy level alignment at the semiconductor/molecule interface with the dipole orientation in the bridging unit and its influence on the IID effect. In a proof-of concept experiment we recently reported the UV photoemission spectroscopic (UPS) study of 1a, 2a and 3a bound to a ZnO(11−20) single crystal surface to probe the dipole effect on the alignment of the frontier orbital energies with respect to the band edges of the semiconductor. It was determined that the interfacial dipole layer that is formed upon binding to a ZnO(11−20) single crystal establishes a potential difference that shifts the HOMO and LUMO levels of the dye with respect to those of the semiconductor. Furthermore, the direction and magnitude of the shift was consistent with that predicted by a simple parallel-plate capacitor model. The magnitude of the shift, i.e. (±) ∼100 meV, was small. This was expected, because the internal dipole is not aligned with the surface normal, and the molecules do not bind perpendicularly to the semiconductor.
In this paper we report the electrochemical and photoelectrochemical properties of 1–3 in solution and bound to nanostructured TiO2 and ZrO2 films. First, we wanted to study any changes induced by the bridge dipoles. Second, we wanted to probe if the small dipole effect observed on a single crystal surface could be observable on nanostructured metal oxide surfaces.

Density functional theory (rB3LYP/6-31g**/PCM-acetonitrile) was employed to get a theoretical insight into the energies and distributions of the frontier molecular orbitals for each of the porphyrin dyes. Select molecular orbital energies and images are presented in Fig. 2. Immediately apparent is that the porphyrin based HOMO levels are identical for all the dyes and are completely decoupled from the bridging unit as anticipated. The LUMO level for porphyrin 2a is also based on the porphyrin macrocycle and is typical of a ZnTPP chromophore. The bridge based π* orbital of 2a occurs at a higher energy as the LUMO+2 orbital, again electronically decoupled from the porphyrin macrocycle. In contrast, introduction of the DA/AD dipoles in the bridging units of porphyrins 1a and 3a lowers the energy of the bridge based π* orbital due to the strongly withdrawing nitro substituent resulting in this energy level now being the LUMO for each of these dyes. Accordingly, the porphyrin based π* orbital now becomes the LUMO+1 level for both 1a and 3a. It should be noted that this LUMO+1 level is electronically and energetically equivalent to the LUMO level of porphyrin 2a which lacks the dipole substituents. These observations are consistent with the trend in redox potentials discussed below.


The UV-Vis absorption and fluorescence emission spectra for each of the porphyrins were recently reported. The similarity of the absorption and emission spectra confirmed that the electronic properties of the ZnTPP core were unaffected by the nature of the bridging and anchoring group. All of the dyes exhibit standard features of a ZnTPP chromophore with a strongly absorbing Soret band (S0 → S2) centered at 422 nm (ε ∼ 5 × 105 M−1 cm−1) and weaker Q-bands (S0 → S1) centred at 556 nm and 597 nm (ε ∼ 1–2 × 104 M−1 cm−1). Absorption spectra for the chemisorbed dyes 1a, 2a and 3a recorded on transparent cover glass/TiO2 thin films (Fig. 3) are, for the most part, consistent with the solution phase spectra reported earlier. However, a slight broadening on the high energy side of the Soret bands is observed for all dyes (including a 1:1 mixture of dyes 1a + 3a) most likely due to H-aggregation upon self-assembly at the semiconductor/dye interface.


Cyclic voltammetry was carried out on the methyl esters of all the porphyrins to investigate their potential for application in a TiO2 based DSSC device and to also determine the influence of the bridge dipole on dye redox potentials. The cyclic voltammetry experiments in solution were conducted with the more soluble esters, since carboxylic acids may decarboxylate or adsorb on the electrodes during the experiments. Redox potentials of the ester derivatives 1e, 2e and 3e recorded in 1,2-dichloroethane are summarized in Table 1 and the voltammograms are available in the ESI Fig. S1. All porphyrins show two reversible oxidations assigned to the formation of the ZnTPP radical cation and cation, respectively. Radical cation formation occurs at +1.0 V vs. NHE for all the porphyrins, which provides a sufficient driving force for the iodide redox mediator oxidation in a DSSC device (2I− → I2˙−, E ∼ +0.93 V vs. NHE). Additional irreversible oxidation processes are observed for porphyrins 1e and 3e, most likely due to the electron rich N,N-dimethylamino benzene moiety of the dipole bridge. Similarly, all porphyrins display two quasi-reversible reductions, assigned to the ZnTPP radical anion and anion, respectively. An additional quasi-reversible reduction process is observed at a more positive potential for 1e (−0.87 V) and 3e (−0.88 V) and is assigned to the one-electron reduction of the low lying dipolar bridge π* based orbital. The relatively positive nature of this reduction process no doubt results from the strongly electron withdrawing nitro benzene component of the dipole-containing bridge, as confirmed by DFT analysis as well as cyclic voltammetry of the independent bridging unit (Fig. S2). The more negative potential required to generate the porphyrin radical anions of 1e (−1.39 V) and 3e (−1.43 V) relative to 2e (−1.17 V) is ascribed to the fact that the former compounds are already reduced by one electron at the bridge prior to reduction of the porphyrin macrocycle.

Dyes

E
ox (V vs. NHE)

E
red (V vs. NHE)

a ±0.005 V.
b Recorded in 0.1 M Bu4NPF6 1,2-dichloroethane electrolyte.
c 
E
pa.
d 
E
pc.


1e

+1.78, +1.68, +1.39, +1.00
−0.87, −1.39, −1.56, −1.78

2e

+1.40, +1.00
−1.17, −1.53, −1.74

3e

+1.81, +1.69, +1.43, +1.00
−0.88, −1.43, −1.56, −1.75
Cyclic voltammetry was also conducted on thin films of the bound porphyrin compounds, consisting of FTO/mesoporous-ZrO2/porphyrin carboxylic acids 1a, 2a, 3a working electrodes, to investigate the consistency of solution phase voltammetry with respect to the surface bound porphyrins. The insulating ZrO2 metal oxide is more suitable for these studies as its redox chemistry lies outside the potential window of the electrolyte solution. This allows for uninterrupted observation of both the porphyrin oxidation and reduction processes at the metal-oxide/photosensitizer interface. If TiO2 electrodes were used, reduction of its conduction band would saturate the voltage response beyond −0.5 V precluding observation of the bridge and ZnTPP reduction processes. As is evident in Fig. 4, a similar redox profile is observed at the ZrO2 interface as observed in solution. For example, although there is a slight positive shift in the first oxidation potential, this is consistent for all the porphyrins. Both porphyrins 1a and 3a clearly show reduction of the dipolar bridge unit at ca. −0.9 V in the solid state which is absent for the reference PE-bridged dye 2a.

Photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) experiments were conducted for all three porphyrins 1a, 2a and 3a using standard DSSC fabrication methods (FTO/TiO2/dye/(I3−/I−)/Pt/FTO) and the results are presented in Fig. 5.

The photosensitizer 2a, which lacks a dipole on the PE bridge, shows a greater power conversion efficiency in comparison to the dyes 1a and 3a, the latter displaying the lowest overall efficiency. To investigate whether the bridge dipole inherently gives a lower overall performance, a co-sensitized DSSC device was also fabricated using a 1:1 sensitizing solution of porphyrins 1a and 3a. Surprisingly, upon co-adsorption of both 1a and 3a dyes to the same FTO/TiO2 photoanode, a significant improvement in efficiency is observed, almost twice that of the independent 3a dye and surpassing that of the 2a dye. The nature of this increase in efficiency, from a device perspective, is primarily due to an increase in the photocurrent density as all DSSCs show equal open-circuit potentials (VOC = 0.45 V) and similar fill factors (0.70 to 0.74). A subsequent binding study analysis showed an almost two-fold increase in surface coverage for the co-sensitized DSSC relative to the independent dyes which had comparable surface coverage. This observation is consistent with the trend observed for the independent photosensitizers and implies that the increase in photocurrent for the co-sensitized DSSC is related to its increased surface packing, rather than the direct result of any bridge-dipole effect. Furthermore, ground state redox potentials of the FTO/ZrO2/porphyrin carboxylic acid 1a, 2a and 3a working electrodes are consistent with solution phase cyclic voltammetry precluding any significant change in electronic structure upon adsorption in the mesoporous structure. The photovoltaic performance of each DSSC device is summarized in Table 2 which includes the short-circuit current density (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (η) data.
Dyes

Γ (10−8 mol cm−2)

V
OC (mV)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF

η (%)

a Light source: 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G simulated solar light. Working area: 0.36 cm2. Thickness: 4 μm active layer. Electrolyte: 0.06 M LiI, 0.03 M I2, 0.6 M 1,2-dimethyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide (DMPII), 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) in acetonitrile solution.


1a

4.74
0.45
1.93
0.73
0.63

2a

3.47
0.45
2.39
0.70
0.75

3a

3.37
0.45
1.34
0.74
0.45

1a + 3a
5.79
0.45
2.54
0.72
0.82

The electrochemical and photoelectrochemical properties of the rigid-rod porphyrins with (1a, 1e, 3a and 3e) or without (2a and 2e) an intramolecular dipole in the bridge were studied in solution and bound to nanostructured nanoparticle films (TiO2 and ZrO2). The experiments confirmed that the presence or direction of the bridge dipole does not change the electronic properties of the porphyrin ring. Second, on the nanostructured semiconductor films, the differences in packing that are caused by the bridge substitution override any electronic differences due to the presence of the small internal dipole, whereas a dipole effect was clearly observable on monolayers of 1a, 2a and 3a on single crystal semiconductors. Current work is devoted to addressing the difference in surface packing and to synthesizing a new class of compounds with larger dipoles.


Cyclic voltammetry was conducted on a CH Instruments 620D potentiostat for all complexes. A standard three electrode cell was used with a supporting electrolyte of 0.1 M Bu4NPF6 in spectrophotometric grade 1,2-dichloroethane under an atmosphere of argon. The electrode assembly consisted of a glassy carbon disc working electrode (3 mm diameter), a Pt wire counter electrode and a non-aqueous reference electrode to minimize IR drop. The latter consisted of a Ag wire in the same 0.1 M Bu4NPF6 1,2-dichloroethane electrolyte but separated by a porous Vycor frit. A ferricenium/ferrocene redox couple was used as a pseudo reference and was added to each porphyrin electrolyte solution at the end of every experiment for in situ calibration. For electrochemical analysis of chemisorbed FTO/ZrO2/porphyrin assemblies, the FTO conductive glass was used as the working electrode in place of glassy carbon and 0.1 M Bu4NPF6 acetonitrile electrolyte was used as solubility in acetonitrile was no longer a limiting factor. FTO electrodes were typically of dimensions 1 cm × 2 cm × 2.2 mm with an active ZrO2/porphyrin area of 1 cm × 2 cm. FTO/ZrO2 electrodes were prepared by a single doctor blade deposition using commercial Zr-Nanoxide Z/SP paste followed by sintering at 450 °C and sensitization for 3 hours at room temperature (0.2 mM dye solution in methanol).


Geometry optimization was first carried out using density functional theory (DFT) with the rB3LYP hybrid exchange–correlation functional and 6-31g** basis set for all atoms as implemented in the Gaussian '09 program using the polarizable continuum model (PCM) with the dielectric constant of acetonitrile. A vibrational frequency analysis coupled with the PCM model was carried out in order to confirm the minimum-energy geometry in solution.


All DSSCs were prepared from a commercial Solaronix test cell kit. The photoanode consisted of 2 cm × 2 cm × 2.2 mm FTO glass (7 Ω cm−2) with a 0.36 cm2 deposited area of TiO2 (Solaronix part # 74101). The electrodes were sintered for 30 min at 450 °C and cooled to 80 °C prior to dye sensitization for 3 hours at room temperature (0.2 mM dye solution in methanol). The photoanode was assembled with a pre-drilled FTO/Pt counter electrode (Solaronix part # 74201) and sealed together with a 60 μm thick Surlyn® spacer (Solaronix part # 74301). The redox mediator solution (0.06 M LiI, 0.03 M I2, 0.6 M 1,2-dimethyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide, and 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine in acetonitrile) was introduced through the pre-drilled counter electrode by vacuum back-filling. For photovoltaic (I–V) measurements, the assembled DSSCs were connected to a CH 760D potentiostat in a linear sweep voltammetry mode. A Newport Oriel 100 W Xe arc lamp was used with an AM 1.5 global filter to simulate the solar spectrum. Light intensity was calibrated at 100 mW cm−2 using a reference Si photodiode. The percentage power conversion efficiency (η) was calculated according to eqn (1):

(1)
where
JSC is the short-circuit current density (mA cm−2), VOC is the open-circuit voltage (V), FF is the fill-factor and I0 is the light flux (100 mW cm−2).


Funding by the Division of Chemical Sciences, Geosciences, and Biosciences, Office of Basic Energy Sciences of the U.S. Department of Energy through Grant DE-FG02-01ER15256, is gratefully acknowledged. A. B. thanks Rutgers University Newark for the Summer 2013 FASN Dean's Undergraduate Research Fellowship and the Chemistry Department for the 2014 Ian Fryer Memorial Award. NSF Award MRI 1229030 is acknowledged for the NMR instrumentation necessary for the characterization of 1–3.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Full citation for ref. 31, cyclic voltammograms of porphyrins 1e, 2e and 3e, cyclic voltammogram of the dipole-containing bridge intermediate, cartesian coordinates of the geometry optimized structures for 1a, 2a and 3a. See DOI: 10.1039/c5fd00082c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015