 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA02317K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9402-9411


Feilong
Cai
,

Liyan
Yang
,

Yu
Yan
,

Jinghui
Zhang
,

Fei
Qin
,

Dan
Liu
,

Yi-Bing
Cheng
,

Yinhua
Zhou
 and 

Tao
Wang
*

State Key Laboratory of Silicate Materials for Architectures, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, 430070, China. E-mail: twang@whut.edu.cn

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, 430070, China

Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, School of Optical and Electronic Information, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074, China

State Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, 430070, China

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University, Victoria 3800, Australia

Received
16th March 2017
, Accepted 13th April 2017
First published on 14th April 2017
Fabrication of efficient, hysteresis-free perovskite solar cells with stabilized power output in a planar heterojunction configuration via a low-temperature solution process remains a big challenge. Herein, we report an effective approach to prepare high performance n–i–p type planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells with eliminated hysteresis and stabilized power output over 20% via compositional and surface modifications to a low-temperature-processed TiO2 electron-transport layer (ETL). The fullerene derivative layer between the ETL and perovskite layers significantly improves electron extraction and suppresses charge recombination by reducing trap density at the ETL interface. This work manifests the presence of diffused TiO2/fullerene and fullerene/perovskite interfaces as an efficient interfacial engineering strategy to prepare high-performing perovskite solar cells.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted significant attention due to their low cost, solution processability and high efficiency. The device efficiency was boosted from 3.8% to 22.1% within a few years owing to the long charge diffusion length, high absorption coefficient and tunable optical band gap of perovskite materials.

Although some experimental studies have demonstrated that the electron or hole transport layers are not necessary to make a perovskite solar cell device work, these charge transport layers function as the charge selection layer to determine the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs. Mesoporous TiO2 has been widely used in PSCs as a high-surface-area electrode to accelerate charge transfer, as well as serving as a mesoporous framework that facilitates the infiltration of precursors and nucleates the crystallization of perovskites. With the optimization of perovskite composition using the mixed halide and cation formulation Csx(MA0.17FA0.83)(100−x)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3, and the manipulation of the device fabrication process using solvent engineering, and vacuum flash treatment that lead to high-quality perovskite crystals, the mesoporous TiO2-based n–i–p meso-structured PSCs have gained the highest efficiency over 20%. However, the high-temperature (>450 °C) sintering process to turn the amorphous oxide into its crystalline form during the preparation of dense or mesoporous TiO2 layers boosts the energy-input and limits the fabrication of perovskite solar cells on flexible plastic substrates. Tremendous research has been dedicated to address the problem by fabricating planar perovskite solar cells using to a low-temperature processed TiO2 electron transport layer.
In a planar structure, the electron injection from the perovskite to TiO2 is much slower than the hole injection from the perovskite to 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD); the charge collection process is therefore limited by the electron injection rate. However, low-temperature processed TiO2 usually contains undesired defects that lead to reduced efficiency in perovskite solar cells, together with anomalous hysteresis when measured under different scan directions and scan rates. Surface modification is usually applied to the low-temperature-processed TiO2 layer in order to obtain higher efficiency. For example, Yang et al. achieved one of the highest PCEs of 19.6% for planar PSCs by using an ionic liquid for surface optimization between the TiO2 and perovskite layers and simultaneously eliminated the notorious hysteresis phenomenon, but the sputtering process of the TiO2 layer and the vacuum deposition of the perovskite layer increase the complexity of device fabrication, therefore hindering mass production. In another low temperature, solution-processed planar PSCs, the weak coordination molecule acetonitrile was introduced that can effectively modify grain morphology and roughness to boost the efficiency to 19.7%, yet the stabilized efficiency is only 17.5% which is significantly lower than the high efficiency reported for mesoporous PSCs. Fullerene derivatives have relatively high conductivity, high electron mobility, appropriate energy level alignment with the perovskite, and are regarded as one of the best materials for interface modification. Previous work employing fullerene derivatives to modify the TiO2 surface tried to maintain a sharp interface between fullerene and the perovskite layer. The methods to achieve this include soaking the TiO2 film in solutions for over 10 hours to deposit a self-assembled fullerene monolayer, thermally-evaporating the perovskite layer to prevent redissolution of the fullerene layer, or using complex fullerene derivatives requiring specific molecular design via long preparation cycles, all of which increase the manufacturing cost and preclude large scale fabrication. More importantly, the highest efficiency achieved for these low-temperature-processed TiO2-based perovskite solar cells is less than 18%, with notable hysteresis and a lower stabilized power output.
In this work, we synthesized crystalline TiO2 nanoparticles (NPs) via a low-temperature synthesis route as the electron-transport layer (ETL), and employed titanium oxide bis(2,4-pentanedionate) (TOPD) as a binder for TiO2 NPs to reduce morphological defects within the TiO2:TOPD film. Additionally, we introduced phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester PC60BM and ethanolamine (ETA)-functionalized fullerene C60-ETA (synthesized from C60 in a simple one-step synthetic process) to further modify the TiO2:TOPD surface. Using these modified TiO2:TOPD films as ETLs, and casting methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3, with MACH3NH3) as the active layer using a sequential deposition method, perovskite solar cells with a glass/ITO/TiO2:TOPD/fullerene derivative/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au architecture demonstrated a maximum PCE of 20.3% with the short circuit current density (Jsc) of the device over 23 mA cm−2, fill factor (FF) exceeding 80%, and open circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.1 V. More importantly, these devices eliminated the serious hysteresis in pure TiO2-based devices, and achieved a stabilized power output of 20.1%. To the best of our knowledge, these are the hysteresis-free, n–i–p type, planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells with the highest PCE and power output via low-temperature processing. The maximum temperature during our device preparation is only 150 °C, much lower than that required for efficient mesoporous-TiO2 based devices. Furthermore, the simple components of the perovskite without a solvent engineering process make it easy for device fabrication. Our results pave the way for large-scale manufacture of stable, high-performance PSCs on flexible substrates.

We have used titanium tetrachloride (TiCl4) as the precursor, ethanol and benzyl alcohol as solvents to synthesize crystalline TiO2. The TiO2 NPs prepared via this route are highly crystalline, anatase type TiO2 with their typical X-ray diffraction peaks illustrated in Fig. 1a. Our synthesized TiO2 with high crystallinity omitted the subsequent high temperature sintering process. A crystal size approximately 4.5 nm can be calculated for TiO2 from the Scherrer equation using the (101) diffraction peak, and is consistent with a previous report. The as-synthesized TiO2 NPs can be dispersed in ethanol, however they tend to form large aggregates, and 10 mol% (with respect to the TiO2 content) titanium (diisopropoxide) bis(2,4-pentanedionate) (TIPD) solution was added to further disperse and stabilize TiO2 NPs. Fig. 1b shows the dynamic light scattering (DLS) measurements of TiO2 ethanol dispersion with and without the addition of TIPD. Pure TiO2 solution displays three distinct peaks, with the maximum particle size determined to be 1640 nm, indicating serious agglomeration of TiO2 NPs in ethanol. The milky-like TiO2 ethanol dispersion turned to transparent yellow after introducing TIPD into the solution for two days (see Fig. S1a, ESI), and the DLS curve exhibits a single dispersion peak corresponding to a particle size of ca. 20 nm. We attribute this to the chelation of acetylacetonate ligands from TIPD to the TiO2 nanoparticles that prevents aggregation. The TIPD component can be converted to TOPD after losing the isopropoxide group upon thermal annealing of the spin-cast blend film at a temperature over 100 °C (see Fig. S2, ESI) and has been employed as an electron collecting layer in inverted polymer solar cells. By using TiO2:TOPD as the electron transport layer, we have also prepared light-soaking-free inverted polymer solar cells with an efficiency over 10%.

The surface morphology of the as-prepared TiO2 and TiO2:TOPD thin films was measured on a scanning probe microscope (SPM). We observe that both films show uniform coverage on the ITO substrate with the absence of pin-holes, and the films consist of homogeneous NPs with the particle size of ca. 20 nm, which is consistent with our DLS measurements. The TiO2 film cast from a TiO2 ethanol dispersion presented a high root-mean-square (RMS) surface roughness around 7.6 nm (Fig. 2a), and this was reduced to 5.8 nm (Fig. 2b) by using TOPD as an adhesion agent among TiO2 NPs to enhance the connectivity, an effect that can also be evidenced by our high magnification scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of TiO2 and TiO2:TOPD films (see Fig. S1c and d, ESI). Fig. 2c and d show surface morphology of TiO2:TOPD films coated with C60-ETA and PC60BM, respectively. Both PC60BM and C60-ETA are soluble in chlorobenzene (CB) and exhibit good wetting ability on the TiO2:TOPD surface. The RMS of the 2 nm-C60-ETA coated TiO2:TOPD films was further reduced to 5.5 nm, with the TiO2 NPs still visible (Fig. 2c). The RMS of the PC60BM coated TiO2:TOPD layer was reduced to 2.2 nm by coating a relatively thick PC60BM layer (50 nm), which covered a large fraction of the TiO2:TOPD film surface.
We subsequently cast the perovskite active layer on the four surfaces shown in Fig. 2a–d following a modified two-step method (see the Experimental section). Briefly, a small amount of (non-stoichiometric) MAI was incorporated into the PbI2 precursor solution to partially expand the PbI2 framework, which was found to greatly facilitate the MAI diffusion into the PbI2 lattice and avoid the volume expansion that existed in the unmodified two-step method. Our SPM images of all perovskite films are pin-hole free. The perovskite crystal grains orientate to different directions and the grain size is between 380 and 710 nm. The RMS surface roughnesses are all around 19 nm only, which is beneficial for the deposition of Spiro-OMeTAD and can also decrease the series resistance of devices. XRD confirms the formation of perovskite (see Fig. S3, ESI) on various substrates. All perovskite films crystallize in a tetragonal phase with distinctive (110), (220), and (310) diffraction peaks at 14.2°, 28.4°, and 31.9°, respectively, in accordance with major phases of MAPbI3. The small diffraction peak at 12.6° is assigned to the (101) peak of PbI2, suggesting the presence of PbI2 residues and is consistent with previous observation in perovskite grown from a two-step solution process. Whilst PbI2 in the perovskite layer has been regarded as charge traps to deteriorate device performance, it has also been demonstrated that the incorporation of a small amount of PbI2 can improve the photovoltaic performance of devices due to its passivation effect.
By coupling the compositional and surface modifications of TiO2 films, we fabricated n–i–p type planar heterojunction MAPbI3-based devices with a structure of glass/ITO/TiO2:TOPD/fullerene derivatives/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au as shown in Fig. 3a. Each functional layer can be clearly distinguished in the cross-sectional SEM image in Fig. 3b. Fig. 3c illustrates the energy level diagram of each layer; in principle the lower work function of fullerene derivatives (see Fig. 3d) can effectively reduce the energy barrier during the electron transfer and collection.
We first examine the photovoltaic properties of our fabricated devices, with both reverse and forward scans being carried out. Additionally, the steady-state photocurrent output by applying a given bias at the maximum power point (MPP) was also taken to determine the stability of the device efficiency. The typical current density–voltage (J–V) and photocurrent output curves are shown in Fig. 4, and the statistics are listed in Table 1. The device with pure TiO2 as the ETL can achieve a relatively high PCE of 17.6% from a reverse scan (see Fig. 4a), we attribute this to the highly crystalline nature of TiO2 and high quality perovskite crystal with a rather smooth surface. What's more, the existence of a small amount of unreacted PbI2 phase (see Fig. S3, ESI) can partially passivate the defects among the grain boundaries between perovskite domains, thereby effectively depressing the recombination of free carriers. When the TiO2:TOPD film was employed as the ETL, the PCE was improved to 18.8% during a reverse scan (see Fig. 4b). Regrettably, both devices exhibit serious hysteresis so that a rather low PCE of ca. 12 and 13% was obtained during a forward scan (see Table 1). Such a significant difference in PCE was mainly due to the lower fill factors compared to those obtained from reverse scans. When the devices were biased at the MPP voltage, they exhibited an unstable photocurrent output with continuous decaying during the testing process (see Fig. 4e and f). However, after we introduced the fullerene derivative C60-ETA (2 nm thick) as an interface layer between the TiO2:TOPD and perovskite layers, the device PCE can be significantly improved to over 19.5% with reduced hysteresis (see Fig. 4c) and a steady-state output of 18% (see Fig. 4g) can be achieved during constant illumination. However, the limited solubility of C60-ETA in CB (1.5 mg mL−1 at most) prohibited the possibility to cast a C60-ETA film thicker than 2 nm. The hysteresis of our perovskite devices can be completely eliminated (see Fig. 4d) by employing a more dissolvable PC60BM to modify the TiO2:TOPD and perovskite layers with an optimized thickness of 50 nm. Perovskite solar cells incorporating a PC60BM interfacial layer of less than 50 nm thick exhibit hysteresis, and the extent increases with reducing PC60BM thickness (see the Fig. S4, ESI). As shown in Fig. 4d, our best device obtained a PCE of 20.3% with a Voc of 1.1 V, a FF of 80%, and a Jsc of 23.2 mA cm−2 in the reverse scan and obtained a PCE of 19.8% in the forward scan based on the 50 nm-thick PC60BM processed devices. By applying a bias at the MPP voltage, a stable photocurrent density of 21.9 mA cm−2 was obtained, and the stabilized efficiency reached 20.1%, which is in excellent agreement with the efficiency by J–V measurements. For a fair comparison of the effects of C60-ETA and PC60BM, we also prepared devices with 2 nm of C60-ETA or PC60BM on the top of TiO2; device J–V curves are presented in Fig. S5 (ESI). With the presence of C60-ETA and PC60BM of 2 nm only, the devices performed in a similar way: the efficiencies were lower and hysteresis existed. We have also prepared a perovskite device with the structure of glass/ITO/PC60BM/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au; therefore employing PC60BM as the sole ETL. When the thickness of the P60CBM layer is 50 nm, the device exhibited a serious light-soaking effect, i.e. the PCE continued to improve when the device was illuminated under light, and it took more than 30 minutes to achieve a stabilized device efficiency of ca. 13% (Fig. S6, ESI). The light soaking effects can be effectively mitigated by reducing the thickness of the P60CBM layer. Fig. S6b shows that the device efficiency was around 15% when the P60CBM was 30 nm thick; however, the efficiency showed undulations upon repeated testing. We speculate that when the thick PC60BM film was cast as the interface layer, part of the PC60BM layer still existed after the deposition of the perovskite layer and served as the ETL to achieve a decent efficiency, the light-soaking effect may originate from the weak hole blocking effect of PC60BM and the poor contact between PC60BM and ITO. The thinner PC60BM layer may have well been dissolved during the deposition of the perovskite layer, leading to a direct contact between ITO and the perovskite active layer, and resulting in unstable carrier transport, serious recombination, and thus unstable device efficiency. This suggests that fullerene derivatives are more suitable as an interfacial layer on top of the TiO2 layer and play a vital role in the elimination of hysteresis and stabilization of the power output of perovskite devices. Unlike the previous report that fullerene dissolution by the precursor solvent was avoided, both PC60BM and C60-ETA can be dissolved by the precursor solvent DMF in this work, and therefore a diffused interface lies between the fullerene and perovskite layers; more discussion will be provided in the next section.
ETLs
Scan direction

V
oc (V)
FF

J
sc (mA cm−2)
PCEave (PCEmax)
TiO2
RS
1.06 ± 0.02
73.17 ± 1.98
−22.28 ± 0.28
16.94 ± 0.53(17.6)
FS
0.93 ± 0.02
56.08 ± 1.08
−22.15 ± 0.26
11.83 ± 0.59(12.4)
TiO2:TOPD
RS
1.09 ± 0.01
75.56 ± 1.83
−22.49 ± 0.21
18.03 ± 0.65(18.8)
FS
1.01 ± 0.01
56.68 ± 2.15
−22.35 ± 0.18
12.94 ± 0.77(13.0)
TiO2:TOPD/C60-ETA
RS
1.09 ± 0.01
78.56 ± 1.54
−22.75 ± 0.19
19.12 ± 0.47(19.6)
FS
1.05 ± 0.01
67.59 ± 1.65
−22.85 ± 0.25
15.65 ± 0.53(16.4)
TiO2:TOPD/PC60BM
RS
1.09 ± 0.01
78.91 ± 1.32
−22.94 ± 0.17
19.71 ± 0.37(20.3)
FS
1.08 ± 0.01
76.68 ± 1.26
−22.87 ± 0.23
19.03 ± 0.45(19.8)
It is evident thus far that when fullerene derivatives are introduced as the interface layer, they produce devices with stabilized power output and reduced hysteresis. For our best n–i–p type perovskite device incorporating a 50 nm-thick PC60BM layer between TiO2 and perovskite (see Fig. 4d and h), the integration from the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the device (see Fig. 5a) gives a Jsc of 22.1 mA cm−2, a value fairly close to the Jsc obtained from our J–V sweep measurements. The J–V curves do not show any obvious dependence on the scan rate (Fig. 5b and c), further supporting the effect to eliminate device hysteresis by the fullerene layer. When the step size and voltage settling time changed in a wide range, the J–V curves show an excellent degree of coincidence, thus effectively avoiding the efficiency to be overestimated. Additionally, the devices performed superior reproducibility by using this 50 nm-thick PC60BM diffused layer at the interface, with the majority of devices presenting a PCE over 19% (Fig. 5d).
The direct current (dc) conductivities of TiO2:TOPD and TiO2:TOPD/fullerene derivative films were extracted by measuring the dark J–V curves of ITO/TiO2:TOPD/Ag and ITO/TiO2:TOPD/fullerene derivatives/Ag devices. The conductivity of our TiO2:TOPD film is 4.7 × 10−3 S cm−1, and it increases when the thickness of PC60BM and C60-ETA layers increases, reaching 8.4 × 10−3 S cm−1 after a 50 nm thick PC60BM was coated on TiO2:TOPD (Fig. S7, ESI). Thus the fullerene derivative modified ETLs can be more efficient for charge transportation.
Steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) measurements were performed to investigate the charge extraction efficiency of perovskite devices. As presented in Fig. 6a, the PL intensity and lifetime of carriers generated from perovskite films on the TiO2:TOPD substrate were higher than those on the ITO substrate. The PL intensity is closely related to the bulk properties of perovskite films as well as its adjacent interface, whilst the bulk property directed difference here can be excluded as our XRD (Fig. S3, ESI) and SPM images (Fig. 2) suggest very similar structural and morphological properties in the bulk. In consideration of the unchanged light absorption properties, the same number of carriers should be produced after laser excitation, the enhanced PL intensity and lifetime therefore indicate the relatively poor electron extraction efficiency which means that an electron transfer barrier exists at the TiO2:TOPD/perovskite interface, as previously reported in planar heterojunction PSCs. This inefficient electron injection from perovskite to TiO2:TOPD is the main reason for the existence of hysteresis and decaying power output. When the fullerene derivatives were inserted, the PL intensity was reduced by a magnitude of ten-fold. The degree of the PL intensity reduction is closely related to the thickness of the fullerene derivative layer (see Fig. S8, ESI), which suggests more efficient charge extraction as the thickness of the fullerene derivative layer increases, consistent with the gradually reduced hysteresis (Fig. S4, ESI). Through fitting the PL lifetime data with an exponential diffusion model, the carriers' lifetime was found to increase from 4.3 ns on the glass substrate to 8.7 ns on the TiO2:TOPD substrate, and then reduce to 0.88 and 0.73 ns when PC60BM and C60-ETA were introduced to the interface, respectively. This enhanced quenching yield suggests the improved electron extraction from perovskite to ETLs, which is in agreement with the increased Jsc and FF. We even observed that the ultra-thin C60-ETA shows more efficient electron injection, we attribute this large improvement to the amino group rich surface which can serve as growth sites for perovskite, in addition the dehydration condensation can occur between the hydroxyl groups on the C60-ETA side chain and TiO2 surface through heating at 100 °C, which forms a permanent dipole moment at the interface. Such an interfacial dipole layer has been verified by using polar solvent ETA treatment to TiO2 films, and thus the bridge containing polar molecules and fullerene provides a more rapid electron transfer pathway to reduce the hysteresis.
To further elucidate the effect of fullerene derivatives, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were employed to evaluate the internal electrical properties. Fig. 6b shows the Nyquist plots of perovskite devices measured near open-circuit voltage under dark conditions, and can be well fitted using the equivalent circuit shown in the inset. The circuit includes a series resistance (Rs), a contact resistance (Rco) and a recombination resistance (Rrec). When C60-ETA and PC60BM were introduced, the Rrec extracted from fitting the EIS spectra increased from 35 to 41 and 83 kΩ, respectively, suggesting a lower recombination rate compared to the pristine TiO2:TOPD based devices. This is also evidenced from our measurement of Voc as a function of light intensity shown in Fig. 6c, with the deviation of the slope from unity kT/q suggesting a combination of trap-assisted and bimolecular recombinations in all these devices. For the pristine TiO2:TOPD-based devices, a slope of 1.86kT/q suggests a severe energy loss as a result of trap-assisted recombination. For the devices after C60-ETA and PC60BM modification, the slope is reduced to 1.47kT/q and 1.33kT/q respectively, indicating a substantially reduced trap-assisted recombination and efficient charge extraction resulting from suppressed recombination. As PC60BM and C60-ETA used in this work are soluble in DMF, interdiffusion and penetration of fullerene derivatives into the perovskite crystal will take place during the film casting process. We speculate the reduced recombination rate as a result of defect passivation by the fullerene derivatives, which reduces trap density in both the bulk perovskite and the TiO2:TOPD/perovskite interface.
In order to accurately assess the trap density in a device before and after fullerene modification at the interface, we fabricated electron-only devices with a glass/ITO/TiO2:TOPD/fullerene derivative/MAPbI3/PC60BM/Ag architecture and the device dark J–V curve was measured to obtain the electron trap density.Fig. 6d shows typical dark J–V characteristics of an electron-only device with perovskite as the active layer. In general, the dark J–V curves can be divided into three regions. The linear region (the blue dashed line) corresponds to the ohmic response, while the current density is proportional to the electric field intensity. A trap filling process (the green dashed line) was determined through the enhancement of current injection at the intermediate region (the green dashed line). By increasing the bias, the trap density levels are continuously filled until the trap-filling limit voltage (VTFL) when all the traps are filled, a trap-free space-charge-limited-current region (SCLC) (the purple dashed line) is followed during which the current density is proportional to the square of the electric field intensity. The trap density can be calculated from the following equation:
VTFL = entL2/2εε0
where
L is the thickness of the perovskite film, ε is the relative dielectric constant of MAPbI3 (taken as 32 from a previous report), and ε0 is the vacuum permittivity (8.854 × 10−12 F m−1). The trap density nt in the TiO2:TOPD-based perovskite device was calculated to be 4.14 × 1016 cm−3 and was reduced to 2.91 × 1016 and 1.99 × 1016 cm−3 after modifying the TiO2:TOPD surface with C60-ETA and PC60BM, respectively. We consider this reduced trap density due to the passivation effect of the fullerene derivative as the main contribution to reduce and eventually eliminate hysteresis in our perovskite devices.

Whilst a sharp interface between fullerene and perovskite layers has to be prepared using vapor deposition of the perovskite active layer or employing a fullerene derivative that is insoluble in the perovskite solution, both approaches are either energy- or time-consuming for device fabrication and therefore not practical for mass-production. The results in this work suggest that diffused interfaces between the fullerene derivative and its adjacent layers, i.e. TiO2 and perovskite layers, are beneficial and superior to achieve higher efficiency, eliminate hysteresis and stabilize power output. We believe that parts of the fullerene derivative layer can penetrate into the perovskite precursor solution to participate in the crystallization process of the perovskite and remain in the grain boundaries of the perovskite to passivate crystal defects. The fullerene derivative on top of the low-temperature-processed TiO2 can also improve electron extraction and suppresses charge recombination by reducing trap density at the TiO2 interface.

In summary, we have demonstrated a facile and effective method to improve the device performance and eliminate hysteresis in planar heterojunction PSCs by incorporating a fullerene interfacial layer into the low-temperature-processed TiO2:TOPD ETLs. Our results illustrate that the TiO2:TOPD/perovskite interface is an important factor for hysteresis and stabilized power output; the fullerene derivative layer can eliminate the interface energy barrier and resolve the electron accumulation phenomenon, and thus effectively improves charge extraction. In addition, the recombination of photo-induced carriers is significantly suppressed due to the reduction of trap density in the bulk perovskite as well as its interface region with the ETL. As a consequence, our interfacial modification approach increases PCE, eliminates hysteresis and improves the stability of the device output, yielding the highest efficiency of 20.3% and stabilized power output of 20.1%.


The synthesis of TiO2 nanoparticles was modified based on previous literature reports. Specifically, 2.3 mL anhydrous titanium tetrachloride (99.9%, Aladdin) was added into a beaker containing 8 mL of anhydrous ethanol under the conditions of an ice water bath and magnetic stirring. The mixed solution was then transferred into a 100 mL flask containing 40 mL of anhydrous benzyl alcohol. The solution was held at 80 °C for 9 h under magnetic stirring. The translucent solution was then precipitated with diethyl ether and purified three times with acetone. During the first purification, 3 mL resulting solution was added to the 27 mL diethyl ether solution for the precipitation of the TiO2 nanoparticles. The precipitate was collected by centrifuging at 4000 rpm for 10 min. The purified TiO2 nanoparticles were dispersed in ethanol by ultrasonication to prepare a TiO2 dispersion with a solid content of approximately 10 mg mL−1. In order to disperse the TiO2 nanoparticles, 10 mol% (with respect to the TiO2 content) titanium (diisopropoxide) bis(2,4-pentanedionate) (TIPD) was added into 2 mL TiO2 dispersion, and the dispersion was stored in a refrigerator and left to stand for at least 48 h to reach an optimized state before use.


C60-ETA was synthesized following a previously reported method. In that work, C60-ETA was synthesized from a two step reaction. The electron transfer from ETA to C60 as the first step is followed by a deprotonated and free radical recombination. The primary aliphatic amine group of the ETA was more prone to react with C60 due to its stronger affinity than the hydroxyl group. According to several structural and elemental analyses, they speculated the average molecular formula of the mixed products in Fig. 3d. In a typical process, 54 mg C60 was added to a 50 mL flask containing 18 mL of ethanolamine (ETA) and reacted at 80 °C for 1 h. The solution was purified by centrifuging at 6000 rpm for 10 min to remove the unreacted C60 and the residue was collected by evaporating the solvent with vacuum distillation at 80 °C for 1 h. The residue was washed with acetone and diethyl ether and then dried in a vacuum for 12 h, yielding a dark brown powder.


Methylammonium iodide (MAI or CH3NH3I) was prepared according to our previously published method. In brief, 30 mL methylamine (33 wt% in methanol, Aladdin) and 27.5 mL hydroiodic acid (45 wt% in water, Macklin) were reacted in a 250 mL round-bottom flask at 0 °C for 2 h under magnetic stirring. A precipitate was formed by evaporating the solvent with vacuum distillation at 45 °C for 1 h. The precipitate was subsequently dissolved in ethanol and recrystallized with diethyl ether, the process was repeated three times to improve purity, and then dried in a vacuum for 24 h.


The ITO glass (resistance ca. 15 Ω sq−1) was cleaned by ultrasonication sequentially in water, ethanol, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol for 10 min each and then further treated with ultraviolet-ozone for 10 min to remove organic contaminants. A TiO2:TOPD layer was deposited by spin-coating the dispersed TiO2:TIPD solution at 3000 rpm and then annealed at 150 °C for 30 min. Afterward, samples were transferred to a nitrogen glovebox. The concentration of PC60BM and C60-ETA is 15 mg mL−1 and 0.5 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene, respectively. A fullerene derivative layer was spin-coated on the top of the TiO2:TOPD layer and then annealed at 100 °C for 5 min. The perovskite absorber layer was then deposited referring to a modified two step sequential deposition procedure. The precursor solution was prepared by dissolving 0.3 M CH3NH3I and 1.3 M PbI2 in anhydrous dimethylformamide (DMF) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (9:1, v/v). In the first step, the solution was spincoated on the substrates at 6000 rpm for 15 s, then the speed was decreased to 3700 rpm for 45 s and the MAI solution (0.2 M in isopropanol) was dripped on the spinning substrates. All perovskite films were annealed at 100 °C for 30 min resulting in the formation of high quality perovskite crystals. The Spiro-OMeTAD solution was prepared by dissolving 80 mg Spiro-OMeTAD (Lumtec, 99.5%), 28.5 μL 4-tert-butylpyridine (Sigma-Aldrich, 96%) and 17.5 μL lithium-bis(trifluoromethane sulfonyl)imide (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.95%) solution (520 mg lithium-bis(trifluoromethane sulfonyl)imide in 1 mL acetonitrile) in 1 mL chlorobenzene (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.8%). The Spiro-OMeTAD solution was deposited by spin coating at 4000 rpm for 30 s. All devices were then kept in a desiccator for at least 15 h for the complete oxidation of Spiro-OMeTAD. Finally, 80 nm-thick gold electrodes were deposited on the top of the devices through a metal shadow mask by thermal evaporation at 10−7 Torr. The active area for all solar cells was 0.04 cm2.

X-ray diffraction spectra were measured with an X-ray diffractometer (D8 Advance, Bruker, Germany) using Cu Kα radiation at 40 kV and 40 mA. The surface morphology was characterized by SPM (NT-MDT, Russian) and SEM (Hitachi S4800, Japan). The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra were obtained using a PL microscopic spectrometer (Flex One, Zolix, China); the excitation source of PL utilizes a 532 nm CW laser. Time-resolved PL decay was measured using a Delta Flex Fluorescence Lifetime System monitored at 770 nm. The conductivity of the TiO2 films and TiO2/fullerene derivatives was calculated from the I–V curves of the ITO/TiO2/Ag devices according to σ = L/(RA), with R as the electrical resistance (V/I), A as the cross-sectional area (4 mm2), and L as the film thickness. Impedance measurements were measured using the CHI660E electrochemical workstation (CH instruments, Inc.) under a bias of 0.8 V with the amplitude of 50 mV from 1 MHz to 100 Hz under dark conditions. Equivalent circuit simulations were conducted using the software package ZView (Scribner Associate, Inc.). External quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured with an EQE system (Zolix, China) equipped with a standard Si diode. The monochromatic beam was generated from a 150 W xenon lamp. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the devices were measured in ambient air under simulated air mass 1.5 sunlight (100 mW cm−2) using a Newport 3A solar simulator, with light intensity calibrated with a silicon solar cell certified by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). J–V characteristics were recorded using J–V sweep software developed by Ossila Ltd. (Sheffield, UK) and a Keithley 2612B source meter unit. The devices were masked with a metal aperture mask to accurately define a test area of 2.12 mm2 on each pixel and to eliminate the influence of any edge effects. The stabilized power output versus time of the devices was measured by holding a bias near the maximum power output point under the same conditions.

We acknowledge funding support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21504065), the National High-tech R&D Program of China (863 Program, No. 2015AA034601), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (WUT: 2015III018 and 2015III029) of China, and the Excellent Dissertation Cultivation Funds of Wuhan University of Technology (2016-YS-012). TW and YHZ also acknowledge support from the Recruitment Program of Global Experts (1000 Talents Plan) of China.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta02317k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017