 DOI: 10.1039/D1TC04097A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 15395-15406


Fuwen
Zhao
,

Jixiang
Zhou
,

Dan
He
*,

Chunru
Wang
 and 

Yuze
Lin
*

State Key Laboratory of Powder Metallurgy, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China. E-mail: hedancsu@csu.edu.cn

Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, CAS Key Laboratory of Organic Solids and Laboratory of Molecular Nanostructure and Nanotechnology, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: linyz@iccas.ac.cn

Received
30th August 2021
, Accepted 8th October 2021
First published on 11th October 2021
Solution processible organic solar cells (OSCs) have attracted much attention as one of the most promising candidates for sustainable energy techniques over the past two decades. So far, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of OSCs has reached over 18% and increasingly closed the gap with inorganic and hybrid solar cells, which exceeds the requirement in efficiency towards commercial application. Low cost is generally labeled as one of the potential advantages of OSCs, compared with other photovoltaic technologies. However, currently most of the high-performance materials need tedious synthetic steps and/or suffer from relatively high cost. In addition, halogenated solvents which are highly toxic and expensive are widely used during processing; besides, they are not environmentally friendly, which would bring about extra expense for management and disposal. Thus, the development of low-cost high-performance materials, and cheap and “green” processing for OSCs is the imperative and urgent issue to be solved towards industrial-scale production. In this review, we summarize the recent advances in low-cost materials and eco-friendly processing for OSCs from the aspects of the synthetic method, photoactive materials, interfacial materials and processing solution. We hope that this review affords an overview and deep understanding of low-cost materials and processing solutions for OSCs. Finally, we will provide our perspectives on possible directions and challenges to further reduce the material cost of OSCs.

Fuwen Zhao

Fuwen Zhao received her PhD degree in Physical Chemistry from Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS) in 2017, followed by a Marie Curie postdoc fellowship at Linköping University. Now she is a full professor at Central South University. Her current research interests include the fabrication of high-performance organic solar cells and device physics in solar cells.

Jixiang Zhou

Jixiang Zhou received his BS degree in Materials Chemistry from Central South University in 2020. He is currently pursuing his master's degree at the State Key Laboratory of Powder Metallurgy, Central South University under the supervision of Professor Fuwen Zhao. His research interests are fabricating high-efficiency solar cells.

Dan He

Dan He received his BS degree in Polymer Chemistry from South China University of Technology in 2011 and PhD degree in Physical Chemistry from National Center for Nanoscience and Technology in 2016. Now he is an associate professor at Central South University. His research interests include the design of organic conjugated molecules and their application in organic electronic devices.

Chunru Wang

Chunru Wang received his BS degree in Physics from Inner Mongolian University in 1985 and PhD in Physical Chemistry from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 1992. He has been a full professor at ICCAS since 2002. His research interests include the synthesis, characterization and applications of fullerene and endohedral fullerenes in organic solar cells and therapy of malignant tumors.

Yuze Lin

Yuze Lin is currently a professor in Laboratory of Organic Solids, ICCAS. He received his BS degree in chemistry from Beijing Institute of Technology in 2009, and PhD degree in polymer chemistry and physics from ICCAS in 2014. Before he joined ICCAS as a principal investigator in 2019, Dr. Lin conducted postdoctoral research at University of Nebraska-Lincoln and University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Now his research interests include organic/hybrid optoelectronic materials and devices for applications in energy harvesting and sensing.

Bulk heterojunction organic solar cells (OSCs) have attracted much attention and are considered as one of the most promising candidates for sustainable energy techniques due to their distinctive potential merits of low cost, mechanical flexibility and translucency, compared with other photovoltaic technologies. Previously, OSCs suffered from relatively inferior performance because of the factors including low charge carrier mobility for severe charge recombination, poor morphology hampering charge carrier dissociation and transport, and low open-circuit voltage (VOC) imposed by large energy loss. Tremendous efforts have been made to enhance the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of OSCs from the perspectives of material design, device engineering and device physics over the last two decades. As a result, significant advances have been made and PCEs of single-junction OSCs have dramatically improved to over 18%, which has exceeded the benchmark PCE of 15%, considered as the threshold for commercialization, and increasingly closed the gap with inorganic and hybrid solar cells. However, widespread commercialization of OSCs is yet to become a reality, even though impressive PCEs of over 13% in large-area modules have also been reported. Currently, some fundamental issues with respect to product cost, large-area fabrication and long-term stability etc., which are the key factors impeding the scale-up production of OSCs, are attracting more and more attention. In fact, from the tight limitations set by industrial production, low cost is the prior factor to be taken into account. Therefore, it is important to reduce the cost without sacrificing the photovoltaic performance of materials, thus boosting the commercialization of OSCs.

Low cost is widely labeled as the potential advantage of OSCs, which mainly originates from their solution processing under low temperature with high speed and throughput production, which requires low processing cost. The detailed cost analysis indicates that the overall cost of an OSC module mainly depends on material cost (including photoactive materials, buffer layers, metal electrodes, solvents, etc.). As shown in Fig. 1, Pellegrino et al. proposed that the preliminary cost of a photovoltaic material could be estimated by considering its synthetic complexity, depending on five parameters (the number of synthetic steps (35%), the reciprocal yield (25%), the number of operation units for purification (15%), the number of column chromatographies for isolation/purification (15%), and the amounts of hazardous chemicals used (10%)). Therefore, the synthetic complexity of photovoltaic materials must be as low as possible. However, currently most of the high-performance photoactive materials suffer from complicated and tedious synthetic routes. For instance, the synthesis of star materials, such as PM6, D18 and Y6 etc., needs over 15 steps from common industrial raw materials, involves highly toxic reagents in some steps and produces low total yield, which does not meet the commercial requirements at this stage. In addition, halogenated solvents with high toxicity, such as chloroform and 1,2-dichlorobenzene, were widely used in the fabrication of OSCs. However, the management of hazardous solvents requires high costs to meet the strict industrial regulations enforced during large-area processing and waste disposition. Thus, developing “green” processing for OSCs is not only environmentally friendly, but also an economic issue to be solved from the perspective of industrial production. In view of the points mentioned above, considerable efforts have been made to develop low-cost materials and adopt eco-friendly processing solvents to boost the advance of OSCs over the past years. In this review, we summarize the recent advances in low-cost materials and eco-friendly processing for OSCs from the aspects of synthetic method, photoactive materials, interfacial and electrode materials and processing solvent. We hope that this review affords an overview and deep understanding of low-cost materials for OSCs.

It is an efficient method to reduce synthetic complexity and cost of materials via simplifying the synthetic route. Here, we take the coupling reaction as an example, since it is one of the most widely-used reactions in the synthesis of OSC materials. The extended conjugated backbone of donors, acceptors and interfacial materials is constructed using robust, efficient and simple building blocks with carbon–carbon or carbon–nitrogen covalent bonds. The covalent bond is usually formed via classical coupling reactions, such as Suzuki–Miyaura, Migita–Stille, Kumada, Negishi, Heck etc., due to their high yield and universal adaptability. However, these synthetic methods generally call for multiple synthetic steps, expensive intermediates, and/or toxic organometallic intermediates, which increase the synthetic complexity and are detrimental to industrial scale-up. Metal-catalyzed direct (hetero)arylation of aromatic compounds is deemed to open new possibilities for cost-efficient and sustainable synthesis of organic semiconductors, especially conjugated polymers. For instance, it has been estimated that the cost of the direct C–H arylation polymerization (DARP) processes decreases by 35%, relative to that of the classical Migita–Stille polycondensation. Some photoactive materials have been prepared via DARP successfully. Marks et al. prepared three high-performance polymer donors (PTB7-Th, PBDTT-TPD and PTPD3T) via DARP by using Pd2(dba)3·CHCl3 as the catalyst, P(2-MeOPh)3 as the ligand and pivalic acid/2,2-diethylhexanoic acid as the additive in the eco-friendly solvent 2-methyltetrahydrofuran, as shown in Fig. 2. All polymers presented similar molecular weight and polydispersity index, and achieved similar PCEs when blended with PC71BM, compared with their counterparts prepared by Migita–Stille polycondensation. Leclerc et al. adopted the biphasic (toluene/H2O) direct (hetero)arylation polymerization (DHAP) method to synthesize the polymer donor, PPDT2FBT (Fig. 3) with different molecular weights. It also afforded a decent PCE of 8.13% by slot-die coating with a non-halogenated solvent, o-xylene. On the other hand, Leclerc et al. synthesized the classic polymer acceptor, N2200 via DARP with Pd2(dba)3 as the catalyst, K2CO3 as the base and pivalic acid as the acid, and achieved a high molecular weight (76 kDa). Blended with PTB7-Th, the DARP-prepared N2200 gained a slightly superior photovoltaic performance, compared with the Stille-prepared commercial one.

Direct (hetero)arylation of aromatic compounds is an efficient strategy to reduce the cost of the synthesis of photoactive materials. However, the limited reaction universality and selectivity for C–H bonds decrease production yield for small molecules and increase structural defects for polymers, which restricts its application in the synthesis of OSC materials. Therefore, it is important to develop a suitable direct (hetero)arylation method with high reaction universality and selectivity for high-performance OSC materials to boost their scale-up production.

According to the industrial figure of merit  proposed by Min and co-workers, the i-FoM value strongly depends on the synthetic complexity and PCE of the donor and acceptor materials. Recently, Min et al. found that reducing the thickness of the active layer could enhance its resistance to thermal stress and improve the photo-thermal stability of devices, and further modified the industrial figure of merit (from i-FOM1.0 to i-FOM2.0). This implies that materials with a simple chemical structure, a high absorption coefficient and less synthetic steps but high efficiency will be ultimately the most promising candidates for scale-up production.

According to You's estimation, the costs for some high-performance polymer donors are listed as follows (Table 1): PTB7 (160.94 $ per g), FTAZ (132.71 $ per g), PM6 (184.20 $ per g), and D18 (179.76 $ per g), resulting in a large gap with the requirement of donors for scale-up production of OSCs (≤12 $ per g) and their chemical structures are presented in Fig. 3. P3HT (16.18 $ per g) attracted much attention in the fabrication of large-area OSCs, due to its low synthetic complexity and verified large-scale synthesis. However, the PCEs of most P3HT-based OSCs were lower than 7%, which restricted their further development. P3HT faded out in highly efficient nonfullerene-based OSCs, due to the excessive miscibility of P3HT with excellent nonfullerene acceptors for inferior nanoscale phase separation. In view of the low synthetic complexity of polythiophene, other polythiophene derivatives were developed to match high-performance nonfullerene acceptors. Geng et al. combined the polythiophene, PDCBT (Fig. 3) at the cost of <20 $ per g, including raw materials, solvents and purification steps, with ITIC to fabricate OSCs and achieved a decent PCE of 10.16%. A 1,2-di(thiophen-2-yl)ethene unit was introduced into polythiophene to prepare low-cost polymer donors. For instance, Hou et al. reported a polymer donor, PTVT-T (Fig. 3), via a five-step route by using low-cost commercially available compounds as raw materials. When blended with the nonfullerene acceptors IT-4F and BTP-eC9, PTVT-T based OSCs achieved impressive PCEs of 11.28% and 16.20%, respectively. According to the material-only cost, the price of PTVT-T was estimated to be only 35.0 $ per g, lower than those of PM6 (46.9 $ per g) and D18 (63.4 $ per g). In addition, Yip et al. developed a cost-effective fluorinated polythiophene donor, P4T2F-HD (Fig. 3). According to Pellegrino's estimation method, the synthetic complexity of P4T2F-HD is 41.70, lower than those of PM6 (73.05) and D18 (75.00). The P4T2F-HD:Y6-OB based OSCs gained a high PCE of 13.65% with a non-halogenated solvent and the i-FoM of the optimized OSCs was determined to be 0.192, which showed their industrially relevant potential. In short, polythiophene and its derivatives are promising low-cost donor materials due to their simple structure.
Materials
Price per gram
Ref.
Materials
Price per gram
Ref.

a PTQ10 prepared with the optimized method.
b The cost only includes raw materials used for synthesis.

PTB7
160.94 $

44

FTAZ
132.71 $

44

PM6
184.20 $

44

D18
179.76 $

44

PTQ10
30.29 $

44

P3HT
16.18 $

45

PTVT-T
35.0 $

49

PM6
46.9 $

49

D18
63.4 $

49

PTQ10
259.3 ¥

67

O-IDTBR
683.3 ¥

67

IDIC
268.4 ¥

67

IT-4F
434.4 ¥

67

NITI
733.0 ¥

67

MO-IDIC
173.8 ¥

67

MO-IDIC-2F
250.6 ¥

67

Y6
2000 $

67

According to Pellegrino's point, the number of synthetic steps has a great impact on synthetic complexity and thus on the cost of the photoactive materials. In 2010, Andersson et al. reported a polymer donor, PTQ1 (Fig. 3) via three steps and it afforded a decent PCE of 6.0% by blending with PC61BM. Li et al. developed a low-cost polymer donor PTQ10 (259.3 ¥ per g, Fig. 3), which has the same conjugated backbone as PTQ1. PTQ10 could be easily synthesized via two-step reactions and one-time purification with a very high overall yield of 87.4%, and the synthetic complexity of PTQ10 was comparable to those of classical polymer donors, MEH-PPV and P3HT. In addition, all the raw materials used to synthesize PTQ10 are inexpensive and available from bulk chemical suppliers, which endows PTQ10 with high synthetic accessibility and low cost for commercial production. OSCs based on blending PTQ10 with a nonfullerene acceptor IDIC, achieved an impressive PCE of 12.7%. More importantly, the PCE of devices based on PTQ10:IDIC presented insensitivity to photoactive layer thickness in the range of 100–300 nm, which was beneficial to large-area fabrication. Then, Li et al. further combined PTQ10 with a nonfullerene acceptor Y6 and achieved an improved PCE of 16.53% for PTQ10:Y6 based OSCs. Recently, You et al. modified the synthetic method of 3,6-dibromo-4,5-difluoro-1,2-benzenediamine, the raw material for PTQ10, as shown in Fig. 4. As a result, the total material cost of PTQ10 significantly decreases from 214.18 $ per g to 30.29 $ per g. It should be noted that the cost of PTQ10 here, prepared via the original method, is largely different from Li's data, mainly due to the difference in price of raw materials in two countries. Besides, other simple units were also applied to reduce the synthetic complexity for low-cost copolymer donors, which could generally form intramolecular noncovalent bonds to improve molecular planarity. For example, Zhang et al. used carboxylate substituted pyrazine as the electron-deficient building block and developed a low-cost polymer donor, PFBCPZ (Fig. 3), via a four-step synthetic route. PFBCPZ:IT-4F based OSCs achieved a splendid PCE of 15.3%, which is the highest value among the IT-4F-based binary OSCs.
PCBM is the most representative fullerene acceptor and is widely used in OSCs, especially in large-area fabrication. However, the PCEs of fullerene-based OSCs were still limited to <12%, mainly due to their weak absorption in the visible-NIR region. In the past five years, the emergence of high-performance nonfullerene acceptors (such as ITIC, O-IDTBR, IDIC, IT-4F, NITI, Y6,etc., as shown in Fig. 5) significantly improved the PCEs of OSCs. However, most of them suffer from high synthetic complexity, leading to their high costs (O-IDTBR, 683.3 ¥ per g; IDIC, 268.4 ¥ per g; IT-4F, 434.4 ¥ per g; NITI, 733.0 ¥ per g; and Y6, 2000 $ per g), as shown in Table 1. One way to achieve a cost-effective photoactive layer system is to simplify the synthetic complexity of high-performance materials. For instance, Li et al. circumvented the Friedel–Crafts acylation reaction and the Wolff–Kishner reduction for the synthesis of IDIC by using amberlyst15 as the dehydration catalyst to achieve the alkylation ring-closure reaction, as shown in Fig. 6. Thus, the synthetic route of IDIC was reduced from 9 steps to 6 steps with improvement in the total yield from 22% to 36%. They further applied the strategy to develop two similar acceptors, MO-IDIC and MO-IDIC-2F (Fig. 5) via 6- and 7-step synthetic routes, respectively. The estimated costs for MO-IDIC and MO-IDIC-2F were 173.8 and 250.6 ¥ per g, respectively. When blended with the low-cost polymer donor PTQ10, MO-IDIC-2F based OSCs achieved an impressive PCE of 13.46% and the cost-per-peak-Watt of the OSC was calculated to be as low as 0.19 ¥ Wp−1, which showed great potential for commercial application.
Currently, most nonfullerene acceptors possess a large fused ring donor unit in the molecule center to sustain excellent molecular planarity for high mobility and PCE. However, a larger fused ring generally implies a higher synthetic complexity. Thus, non-fused electron-donating units were developed and used in building nonfullerene acceptors to reduce the synthetic complexity for low-cost acceptor materials. For instance, Li et al. developed three fully non-fused acceptors (PTICH, PTIC, and PTICO, as shown in Fig. 5) via “breaking” the fused ring structure of IDIC. These acceptors can be synthesized via a two-step synthetic route. In addition, their precursors were synthesized by direct palladium(II)-catalyzed C–H activation coupling reaction and the acceptors were purified by recrystallization with a high yield (∼70%), which further reduced the synthetic cost. As a result, PTIC achieves a lower synthetic complexity of 55% than ID4F (97%) and IT-2F (88%). The PM6:PTIC based OSCs afforded a comparable PCE of 10.27% with PM6:ID4F based OSCs. Furthermore, they investigated the stability of nonfullerene acceptors with fused, semi-fused and non-fused backbones, and disclosed that volume-conserving photoisomerization of nonfullerene acceptors acted as a succedaneum towards their subsequent photochemical reaction. The non-fused backbone and outward thiophene side chains of PTIC contribute to structural confinement for dense packing during aggregation and thus inhibit the photoisomerization at the molecular level. As a result, PTIC exhibited better photochemical tolerance under aerobic conditions and the decay rate of the PCE of PTIC based OSCs was about 359 times slower than that of IT-4F based ones. All in all, this indicates that PTIC is a very promising low-cost and high i-FoM value material for the scale-up production of OSCs. Likewise, Bo et al. used alpha-quadrithiopene (4T) as the donor core and developed four acceptors (4T-X, X = 1–4). Among them, 4T-3 (Fig. 5) based OSCs gained an impressive PCE of 12.04%. After carefully assessing the synthetic complexity and the i-FoM value, they demonstrated that 4T-3 exhibited a higher i-FoM value of 32.8, compared with other star acceptors (such as IT-4F, COi8DFIC, and Y6). Recently, Hou et al. developed a series of high-performance non-fused nonfullerene acceptors. Among them, A4T-16 (Fig. 5) possesses a bithiophene-based non-fused core featuring good planarity and attaching large steric hindrance side chains. A4T-16 can form a three-dimensional (3D) interpenetrated network packing structure in the crystal, which is partially retained in the blended film of PM6:A4T-16 and thus benefits the charge transport for high short-circuit current density (JSC) and fill factor (FF) in PM6:A4T-16 based OSCs. As a result, PM6:A4T-16 based OSCs achieved an excellent PCE of 15.2% with low energetic disorder for a small non-radiative energy loss (0.214 eV). This manifests that non-fused nonfullerene acceptors have great potential to achieve low-cost but high-efficiency materials via fine molecular design.
As mentioned above, P3HT is one of the most promising candidates for scale-up production of OSCs. It is deemed that an efficient method to improve the i-FoM value of devices is to develop nonfullerene acceptors to match with P3HT for cost-efficient OSCs with a high PCE or a high VOC. Motivated by the point, the nonfullerene acceptors O-IDTBT, EH-IDTBR and IDT-2BR were developed. The P3HT:O-IDTBR and P3HT:EH-IDTBR OSCs presented decent PCEs of 6.30% and 6.00%, respectively. Chen et al. removed the benzothiadiazole unit in O-IDTBR and synthesized the acceptor, O-IDTR (Fig. 5). OSCs based on P3HT:O-IDTR exhibited a slightly lower PCE of 5.39%. However, the P3HT:O-IDTR pair exhibits a higher i-FoM value of 0.26 than P3HT:O-IDTBR (0.17), due to its reduced synthetic complexity. Recently, Hou et al. removed the cyano-substituted end groups in BTP-4Cl and developed an acceptor, ZY-4Cl, with uplifted energy levels (Fig. 5). More importantly, it presents proper miscibility with P3HT for favorable phase separation, thus contributing to dramatically improved JSC and FF in P3HT:ZY-4Cl based OSCs. As a result, P3HT:ZY-4Cl based OSCs achieved an impressive PCE of 9.46%, much higher than that of P3HT:BTP-4Cl based OSCs (1.01%). The average figure of merit (, proposed by Chen et al.) of P3HT:ZY-4Cl OSC (3.41) is lower than that of PM6:Y6 (4.55). In addition, they developed a solid additive, SA4, to further optimize the molecular packing and phase separation of the P3HT:ZY-4Cl blend film, leading to enhanced charge transport and reduced carrier recombination in devices. Thus the PCE of P3HT:ZY-4Cl based OSCs with SA4 was improved to 10.24%. In view of the achievements, more efforts should be made to reduce the synthetic complexity of high-performance nonfullerene acceptors to realize scale-up production of OSCs.

According to cost analysis, the cost of the interfacial material also accounts for a considerable proportion in the manufacturing cost of OSCs. For the anode buffer layer, poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene):poly(4-styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is the most widely utilized hole transporting material in OSCs. However, the hygroscopicity and high acidity of PEDOT:PSS lead to corrosion issues on electrodes, thus impacting the long-term stability of devices. In addition, the cost of PEDOT:PSS is relatively high, 0.42 € per mL. Actually, transition metal oxides (molybdenum oxide (MoO3), vanadium oxide (V2O5), nickel oxide (NiO), etc.) were also used as the hole transporting layer. In most cases, they were prepared by the hydration method with the aid of different organic solvents, which was relatively complicated and involved a high temperature annealing process. Wang et al. simplified the procedure and deposited the hole transporting layer by using an aqueous solution of the transition metal oxide powder. The PTB7:PC71BM based OSCs with the solution-processed V2O5 film achieved a slightly higher PCE of 8.36% than that with the PEDOT:PSS film (7.46%). However, they suffer from relatively high cost and/or high toxicity. Copper oxide (CuOX) with low cost and toxicity draws great attention as the hole transporting layer. Chen et al. prepared a CuOX buffer layer via spin coating a copper acetylacetonate precursor based aqueous solution. The addition of H2O2 and UV-ozone post-treatment were adopted to enhance the work function of CuOX, and were favorable to the formation of an ohmic contact between the anode and photoactive layer. As a result, the PTB7:PC71BM OSCs with a CuOX buffer layer achieved a higher PCE of 8.68% than that with the PEDOT:PSS layer. Recently, Peng et al. developed a robust hole transporting layer by using cost-effective cobalt(II) acetate tetrahydrate as the precursor and processing from its aqueous solution followed by thermal annealing and UV-ozone treatment (Fig. 7). Due to the high work function, good conductivity and less morphological defects of the cobalt-based hole transporting layer, an excellent PCE of 18.77% was achieved with the donor/acceptor pair of PM6:L8-BO.

For the cathode buffer layer, calcium/lithium fluoride (conventional device) or zinc oxide (ZnO) (inverted device) was widely used in OSCs. In addition, organic electron transporting materials (such as fullerene derivatives, perylene diimide derivatives (PDINO), hydrosoluble conjugated polymers,etc.) were also developed and used in OSCs. However, they suffered from issues, such as poor stability, complicated synthesis or high-cost raw material. Thus, considerable efforts were made to develop cost-efficient electron transporting materials. For instance, low-cost commercial insulated polymers, PEI and PEIE were adopted as the cathode buffer layer in OSCs. This can efficiently reduce the work function of the electrode via forming a surficial dipole moment between the electrode and the amine groups of PEI or PEIE. However, the insulation nature of PEI and PEIE would bring about high series resistance in a thick film. Thus, the optimized layer thickness of the PEI or PEIE film for OSCs was generally restricted to be ∼5 nm. Recently, Ma et al. developed a low-cost and low-temperature processable nanocomposite as the electron transporting layer via combining ZnO nanoparticles and PEI. The PTB7:PC61BM OSCs with the ZnO:PEI composite film achieved a slightly higher PCE of 8.16% than the control OSCs with the ZnO or PEI film. More importantly, the device performance did not show obvious reduction even though the thickness of the ZnO:PEI nanocomposite film was increased to 60 nm. Similarly, Zhang et al. combined PEIE and 1,8-diiodoctane (DIO) via the quaterisation reaction and developed a 3D PEIE-DIO conductive network. They applied it as the cathode buffer layer in PTB7-Th:PC71BM based OSCs and it exhibited a higher PCE of 10.06%. Moreover, a decent PCE of 8.88% was also obtained with the thickness of PEIE-DIO film at 50 nm, due to the improved conductivity of PEIE-DIO.
Actually, it has been reported that indium tin oxide (ITO) is one of the most cost and energy intensive layers in OSCs. In addition, the brittle nature of the ITO film also constricts its application in flexible devices. Transparent conducting electrode materials, including silver nanowires, carbon nanotubes, graphene,etc., were developed over the last decades. Silver nanowires attracted considerable attention, due to the merits of high transmittance, fine conductivity and mechanical flexibility as well as facile synthesis. For instance, Choi et al. used the dip coating method to prepare an electrode from a 0.5 mg mL−1 silver nanowire solution and further improved the conductivity via thermal annealing at 230 °C. The silver nanowire electrode achieved a lower sheet resistance and a higher transmittance than the ITO electrode. They further adopted a cost-effective method to produce the silver nanowire electrode via centrifugal coating using a low-concentration silver nanowire solution (Fig. 8). The optimized electrode gained a sheet resistance of 7.25 Ω sq−1 with optical transmittance of 73.62% in the visible region. Thus, PTB7-Th:PC71BM based OSCs with the silver nanowire electrode on PET substrate achieved a decent PCE of 7.61%, which was comparable to that with an ITO electrode. Compared with the active layer materials in OSCs, the development of the conducting electrode materials has lagged behind. We believe that an ideal electrode material should possess the merits of low cost, high transmittance, low resistance, proper mechanical strength, and good adhesion with the active layer. More attention needs to be paid to developing low-cost high-performance electrode materials in the future.
In short, more efforts should also be made to develop low-cost and high-performance interfacial and electrode materials to boost the commercialization of OSCs since the cost of this part accounts for a considerable share in the scale-up production of OSCs.

Currently, most OSCs are still fabricated using halogenated solvents, such as chloroform, chlorobenzene and 1,2-dichlorobenzene. However, the halogenated solvents are highly toxic and not environmentally friendly. In addition, the cost of a halogenated solvent is generally higher than that of a non-halogenated solvent. For example, the price of high-performance-liquid-chromatography (HPLC) grade chlorobenzene is as over twice that of HPLC grade toluene. In addition, it requires higher cost to manage halogenated solvents and dispose of the waste to meet the strict industrial regulations. Thus, the use of non-halogenated solvents is not just an eco-friendly issue but also a production cost issue in the scale-up production of OSCs. Numerous studies have been conducted to adopt green solvents to fabricate OSCs and the PCEs of the devices have also significantly improved, which are well summarized in recent reviews. Herein, we will not discuss the details. The limited solubility of highly efficient conjugated materials in green solvents is the main reason that constrains their application in OSCs. Several strategies, such as increasing alkyl-chain length, introducing a bulky structure or heteroatoms into the side chain, twisting the backbone structure, and ternary polymerization, were developed to modify the molecular structure of the photoactive materials and inhibit molecular aggregation for improved solubility in green solvents. However, excessive modification would have negative effects on molecular packing and electrical properties of photoactive materials, thus leading to inferior morphology and photovoltaic performance. Therefore, the molecular structure of photoactive materials should be finely adjusted to achieve green-solvent processed OSCs for high PCE. In addition, other properties of the solvents including surface tension, boiling point, viscosity and polarity, should also be taken into account, since the film drying kinetics and morphology are highly related to these factors. Recently, Peng et al. used toluene as the processing solvent and found that the nonfullerene acceptor, BTP-BO-4Cl (Fig. 5) would crystallize gradually when the processing time was delayed, as shown in Fig. 9a. The degree of pre-aggregation of BTP-BO-4Cl could be controlled straightforwardly via varying the delay time. Thus the morphology of PM6:BTP-BO-4Cl blend films evolved along with the delay time (Fig. 9b–i). As shown in Fig. 9b and c, the delay process has no influence on the samples processed from CB solution. Both of them show large nanofibrils which should be templated by the PM6 organization. For the samples processed from toluene solution, the delay time significantly impacts the morphology of the blend films (Fig. 9d–i). In the early delaying stages (within 40 min), the PM6:BTP-BO-4Cl blend films exhibited uniform morphology. However, agglomerated particles accumulated when the delay time was over 60 min. PM6:BTP-BO-4Cl based OSCs presented proper phase separation with a clear nano-fibril structure and achieved the highest PCE of 17.3% upon delaying processing for 40 min, which was comparable with the state-of-the-art PCE of OSCs with halogenated solvents. Moreover, with o-xylene as the processing solvent, Huang et al. achieved an outstanding PCE of 14.4% based on PM6:DTY6 large-area modules (18 cm2), which was the highest module efficiency of OSCs reported to date. This demonstrates that it is a feasible and sustainable strategy to achieve high-efficiency OSCs via processing with non-halogenated solvents in the scale-up production.


In conclusion, we summarize the recent advances in low-cost materials and eco-friendly processing of OSCs from the aspects of the synthetic method, photoactive materials, interfacial and electrode materials and processing solution. Great progress has been achieved in developing low-cost and synthetically complex photoactive materials by employing novel synthetic methods, simplifying the molecular structure and optimizing the synthetic route. Low-cost interfacial and electrode materials were also achieved by using cost-efficient raw materials and new processing methods. High-efficiency and large-area OSCs can been obtained using non-halogenated solvents via finely adjusting the molecular structure and selecting a suitable solvent. These would help to boost the advances of scale-up production and commercialization of OSCs. We believe that more efforts could be made in the next stage as follows: (1) putting forward a unified estimation for the cost of OSC materials; (2) optimizing the synthetic route and reducing synthetic complexity of high-efficiency materials; (3) developing low-cost but high-performance interfacial materials and succedaneums for current transparent electrodes; and (4) finely adjusting the molecular structure of photoactive materials to suit green-solvent processing. Based on the Chinese proverb “the greatest truths are the simplest”, we believe that simple but high-performance OSC materials must be somewhere, which would help to realize the commercialization of OSCs in the future.


All authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.


The authors thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21805288 and 52173189), Hunan Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 2021JJ20070) and the Chinese Academy of Sciences for financial support.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021