 DOI: 10.1039/D0QM00826E
(Research Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 1906-1916


Liang
Zeng
,

Ruijie
Ma
,

Qiang
Zhang
,

Tao
Liu
*,

Yiqun
Xiao
,

Kai
Zhang
,

Suqing
Cui
,

Weiguo
Zhu
,

Xinhui
Lu
,

He
Yan
* and 

Yu
Liu
*

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Jiangsu Collaboration Innovation Center of Photovoltaic Science and Engineering, Jiangsu Engineering Laboratory of Light-Electricity-Heat Energy-Converting Materials and Applications, Changzhou University, Changzhou 213164, P. R. China. E-mail: liuyu03b@126.com

College of Chemistry, Key Lab of Environment-Friendly Chemistry and Application in Ministry of Education, Xiangtan University, Xiangtan 411105, P. R. China

Department of Chemistry and Hong Kong Branch of Chinese National Engineering Research Center for Tissue Restoration & Reconstruction, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, P. R. China. E-mail: liutaozhx@ust.hk; hyan@ust.hk

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology-Shenzhen Research Institute, No. 9 Yuexing first RD, Hi-tech Park, Nanshan, Shenzhen 518057, P. R. China

Department of Physics, Chinese University of Hong Kong, New Territories, Hong Kong, P. R. China

Received
15th October 2020
, Accepted 30th November 2020
First published on 9th December 2020
With the meteoric progress on acceptor materials for non-fullerene polymer solar cells (NF-PSCs), exploring efficient and matched copolymer donor materials has become a key issue. Herein, to achieve a balance among open-circuit voltage (VOC), short-circuit current density (JSC) and fill factor (FF), we have developed two medium band-gap (MBG) donor–acceptor (D–A) copolymers, namely, PBDTTS-TClQx and PBDTTS-TClSQx, by combining chlorine atoms and flexible alkyl (R) or alkylthio (SR) side-chains engineered quinoxaline (Qx) as the acceptor unit, as well as based on a well-known alkylthio-thienyl substituted benzodithiophene (BDTTS) donor unit. These copolymers were successfully synthesized and finally facilely employed as photovoltaic donor materials for NF-PSCs. After blending with the MeIC acceptor, the PBDTTS-TClQx:MeIC blend film exhibited more balanced electron/hole mobility (μh/μe), better efficient exciton dissociation and nice morphology in comparison with the PBDTTS-TClSQx:MeIC blend film. Encouragingly, chlorination and appropriate side-chains engineering Qx can result in a higher VOC, thus leading to enhancement in JSC and FF parameters. More excitingly, the PBDTTS-TClQx:MeIC-based PSCs exhibit a higher power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 12.59% higher than that of the device based on the PBDTTS-TClSQx:MeIC blend that had a PCE of 11.10%. The higher performance arises from the enhancement in current density (JSC) of 17.07 mA cm−2 and fill factor (FF) of 77.2%. The impressive FF of up to 77.2% is the highest reported for Qx-type copolymers-based NF solar cells to date. These results disclose that chlorination and suitable flexible side-chains are promising strategies to improve the photovoltaic performance of copolymers.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs) are considered a promising photovoltaic technology to convert solar energy into electricity, primarily due to their intrinsic merits of low production cost, lightweight, flexibility, and large-area manufacturing feasibility. In the past two years, a remarkable breakthrough of copolymer donors and non-fullerene small acceptors (NF-SMAs) innovations has led to over 17% power conversion efficiencies (PCEs). This great achievement is primarily due to the attractive advantages of NF-SMAs, i.e., tunable bandgap, strong absorption ability, and low synthetic costs. However, high-performance copolymer donors have been continuously developed, and over 18% PCE has been achieved. Accordingly, enriching efficient copolymer donors can push PCEs to a new level, as well as pull the development of NF-SMAs.

As indicated in earlier studies on PSCs, copolymers with alternating electron-rich and electron-deficient structures based on quinoxaline (Qx) units were extensively used in bulk heterojunction organic solar cells (BHJ OSCs), as the Qx unit has both an electron-withdrawing property of two imine-nitrogens and relatively stable quinone structure and can easily synthesize in higher yields. Moreover, the ease of introducing various side-chains engineering on the 2- and 3-positions leads to adjustment in the solubility, crystallinity, bandgap, absorption coefficient, and energy levels of the resulting copolymers. Consequently, by combining side-chain engineering, fused-ring strategy, and fluorination strategy, Qx-type copolymers can achieve a PCE up to 9% on fullerene-based OSCs, and >16% on NF-related PSCs. Furthermore, many researchers have demonstrated that the side-chain tuning strategy by introducing halogen atoms is effective in building D–A copolymers with considerable performance, among which F and Cl atoms are mostly considered. Introducing the Cl atom strategy is usually considered as an upgraded halogenation version of F incorporation. For example, Hou et al. reported a chlorinated copolymer PBDB-T-2Cl in the donor unit with the Cl atom replacing the F atom in the side-chain; the resulting copolymer PBDB-T-2Cl showed a lower HOMO energy level in comparison with the fluorinated PBDB-T-2F, and an impressive PCE of 14.4% was obtained in the fabrication of NF-PSCs. However, inserting Cl atoms directly into conjugated side chains of copolymers to modify the acceptor unit has rarely been reported. In view of these discussions, applying chlorinated side-chains might be a promising method to build efficient Qx-based copolymer donors. However, the alkylthio (SR) side-chains on the copolymer are a valid strategy to enhance their PSC performance. For instance, the device based on the SR substituted PNDT-QXS exhibits a higher PCE of 5.03% than the alkyl-substituted PNDT-QX with a PCE of 1.93%. Therefore, side-chain engineering is essential to improve the intrinsic properties of Qx-based copolymer donors for the development of an efficient NF-PSC.
In this work, two novel chlorination and flexible side-chains functionalized medium band-gap (MBG) D–A copolymers, namely, PBDTTS-TClQx and PBDTTS-TClSQx (Scheme 1), were successfully designed and synthesized with R or SR-substituted 4-chlorinethiophene by side-chain engineering with Qx as the acceptor unit. These copolymers were combined with a well-known alkylthio-thienyl substituted benzodithiophene (BDTTS) donor moiety for enhanced intermolecular interactions and improved VOC in photovoltaic devices. MeIC, a star NF-SMA, (Scheme 1) was selected to blend with the above-mentioned copolymer donors considering its complementary absorption with copolymer donors and its efficient photovoltaic performance in NF-SMAs-based PSCs. After system optimization, the PCE of PBDTTS-TClSQx:MeIC-based PSCs exhibited a 11.10% with an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.96 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 15.79 mA cm−2, and fill factor (FF) of 73.5%. Encouragingly, an impressively enhanced PCE from 11.10% to 12.59% with an improvement of 13% was achieved in PBDTTS-TClQx:MeIC-based cells owing to an increased JSC of 17.07 mA cm−2 and FF of 77.2%. These results reveal that the synergy strategy of chlorination and suitable flexible side-chains are an effective method for developing Qx-based copolymer donors for highly efficient PSCs.

As shown in Scheme S1 (ESI), both copolymers PBDTTS-TClQx and PBDTTS-TClSQx were prepared through a typical Stille polymerization method using toluene as a solvent and Pd(PPh3)4 as a catalyst. The exhaustive synthetic procedures are described in the ESI. All monomers and both copolymers showed consistency with molecular formulas obtained through 1H NMR, 13C NMR and elemental analysis as described in the Experimental section (Fig. S7–S22, see ESI). Using the gel-permeation chromatography (GPC) with a polystyrene standard and chloroform as the eluent, the number-average molar mass (Mn) was determined to be 55.3 kDa with a polydispersity index (PDI) of 2.5 for PBDTTS-TClQx and 69.0 kDa with a PDI of 2.4 for PBDTTS-TClSQx. As shown in Fig. S1a (ESI), the decomposition temperatures (Td) of 335.0 °C for PBDTTS-TClQx and 320.0 °C for PBDTTS-TClSQx were obtained at 5% weight loss (see ESI), and the corresponding data are outlined in Table 1. These results indicate that the thermal stability of both copolymers is sufficiently high for device applications in PSCs. Moreover, there are neither endothermic nor exothermic reactions observed from 60 to 240 °C in differential scan calorimetry (DSC) curves (Fig. S1b, see ESI), demonstrating that both copolymers present amorphous characteristics.

Copolymer

λ
solmax (nm)

λ
filmmax (nm)

E
optg (eV)

T
d (°C)
HOMODFT (eV)
LUMODFT (eV)
HOMOCV (eV)
LUMOCV (eV)

μ
h (cm2 V−1 s−1)

a Calculated from Eoptg = 1240/λonset.

PBDTTS-TClQx
607
614
1.68
335.0
−5.01
−2.73
−5.35
−3.58
9.34 × 10−4
PBDTTS-TClSQx
445
455
1.66
320.0
−5.05
−2.84
−5.43
−3.60
8.25 × 10−4

The UV absorption spectra of both copolymers in chloroform (CF) solution (2 × 10−5 M) and on thin films, and acceptor MeIC on a thin-film are shown in Fig. 1a. Table 1 provides a summary of the corresponding optical data. As shown in Fig. 1a, the UV spectra of both PBDTTS-TClQx and PBDTTS-TClSQx closely resemble each other and three absorption peaks can be distinctly observed in the range of 300–750 nm. In the range of 500–750 nm, the strong and broad absorption bands of the PBDTTS-TClQx and PBDTTS-TClSQx films centered at 605 nm and 613 nm, respectively, which should be ascribed to the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) between donor moieties and acceptor units. Furthermore, PBDTTS-TClQx and PBDTTS-TClSQx films show relative absorption peaks in the range of 300–410 and 410–530 nm, respectively, which are ascribed to the π–π* and n–π* transitions of the conjugated framework, respectively. Moreover, significant red-shifting and lowering of band gaps in films compared to the solutions occur chiefly due to more planarity and aggregation in the film state. Especially, the absorption peak of PBDTTS-TClSQx was red-shifted by 8 nm compared with that of the PBDTTS-TClQx in thin films, which may be attributed to the unique electronic effect of the S atom. Estimated from the onset of absorption spectra of the thin films using the equation Eoptg = 1240/λonset (eV), the optical band gaps (Eoptg) are around 1.68 eV and 1.66 eV for PBDTTS-TClQx and PBDTTS-TClSQx, respectively, which were calculated from the homologous absorption edge (λonset) of 738 and 748 nm, respectively (Table 1). Furthermore, as shown in Fig. S2a (see ESI), the chloroform solution (10−5 M) of PBDTTS-TClQx displayed strong absorption in 500–750 nm region with a very high maximum molar absorption coefficient (ε) value of 1.30 × 105 M−1 cm−1 at 610 nm, which is higher than that of PBDTTS-TClSQx (1.18 × 105 M−1 cm−1 at 448 nm); the fairly strong absorption ability would be increased by introducing R replaced with SR side-chains, which can make for a much better JSC of PSCs. As seen from Fig. 1c, we find that the absorption of PBDTTS-TClQx:MeIC blend film presents a slightly wide and strong band in the 500–800 nm region relative to the PBDTTS-TClSQx:MeIC blend film, which is the main range of visible light such that the PBDTTS-TClQx:MeIC blend films possess high JSC. Furthermore, the aggregation of both copolymers was corroborated in depth via temperature-dependent absorptions (from 25 °C up to 85 °C) in the chlorobenzene (CB) solution (Fig. S2b and c, see ESI). With an increase in the solution temperature from 25 °C up to 85 °C, all absorption curves of the ICT peaks showed a blue shift, and their ratios of IA0–1/IA0–0 combined with preliminary dropping implied that both copolymers exhibit various molecular stacking behaviours with a minor modification.


Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were further utilized to characterize and assess the frontier orbital levels of these copolymers, and the corresponding measurements are shown in Fig. 1b. Derived from the CV curves and based on the empirical equations: EHOMO = −(Eox + 4.35) eV and ELUMO = −(Ered + 4.35) eV; the received the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels of PBDTTS-TClQx and PBDTTS-TClSQx are estimated to be −3.58/−5.35 and −3.60/−5.43 eV, respectively (Table 1). Furthermore, the electrochemical band gaps (Eeleg) are detected to be 1.77 and 1.83 eV for PBDTTS-TClQx and PBDTTS-TClSQx (Table 1), respectively, which match well with the results of the absorption measurements (Eoptg). The lower HOMO/LUMO energy levels of PBDTTS-TClSQx were attributed to the role of SR side-chains. The lower HOMO energy levels are desirable for achieving a higher VOC value in the corresponding devices. As shown in Fig. 1d, the LUMO–LUMO offsets between the copolymer and MeIC are 0.34 eV for PBDTTS-TClQx and 0.32 eV for PBDTTS-TClSQx, respectively, thus demonstrating a sufficient driving forces for exciton separation via the photo-generated electron transfer from the copolymer to MeIC. Furthermore, the related HOMO–HOMO offsets between the copolymer and MeIC are 0.22 eV for PBDTTS-TClQx and 0.14 eV for PBDTTS-TClSQx; the ΔEHOMO between PBDTTS-TClQx (or PBDTTS-TClSQx) and MeIC is <0.3 eV, which is less than the extensively accepted minimal energy offset of 0.3 eV for an efficient hole transfer, as many recent report results suggest that ΔEHOMO < 0.3 eV can obtain an efficient hole transfer in NF-PSCs. Subsequently, for further examination of the exciton separation and hole transfer, studies on photoluminescence (PL) quenching efficiency were surveyed (vide infra).


To comprehend the microinfluence of frontier molecular orbital surfaces patterns and optimized geometry of both copolymers (Fig. 2), their energy levels, dihedral angle and HOMO and LUMO electron distributions were identified by density functional theory (DFT) at the B3LYP/6-31G*(d,p) level. To simplify the calculations, the ethylhexyl (or ethylhexylsulfane) chains were replaced with methyl (or methylsulfane) chains, and the calculations based on the two repeating monomeric units were accomplished. As depicted in Fig. 2c, the calculated HOMO and LUMO levels of PBDTTS-TClQx and PBDTTS-TClSQx are −2.73/−5.01 eV and −2.84/−5.05 eV, corresponding band gaps were 2.28 and 2.21 eV, respectively, and the similar trend is consistent with the results obtained from the CV measurements, PBDTTS-TClSQx showed not only a slightly deeper HOMO and LUMO levels, but also a minor Eoptg than the analogous PBDTTS-TClQx. As shown in Fig. 2c, with replacement of SR with R unit on symmetric side-chain engineering Qx unit, the PBDTTS-TClSQx stacking presents smaller diminished dihedral angles (25.6° and 16.2°) along the copolymer framework than homologous PBDTTS-TClQx (25.9° and 16.8°), which indicates that the introduction of the SR side-chain into the Qx group has a little effect on the backbone conformation of the system. Furthermore, the LUMO is primarily located on the Qx units, whereas the HOMO is more uniformly delocalized along the copolymer backbone. More interestingly, as shown in Fig. 2a and b, the electrostatic potential (ESP) surface images of the Qx-based units exhibit R side-chain Qx-based units possess a more negative ESP on most of its molecular surface. Distinctly, replacing the R side-chain with SR side-chain can benefit its strong electron-withdrawing characteristics, implying that the TClQx unit is a promising electron-accepting unit in constructing highly efficient photovoltaic copolymers.


To study and compare the difference in the photovoltaic performance of the two copolymers with different flexible side-chains in NF-PSCs, the photovoltaic performance of both novel Qx-copolymers were inspected by fabricating both traditional PSCs with an ITO/PEDOT:PSS (poly(3,4-ethylene-dioxythiophene): poly(styrene-sulfonate))/copolymers:MeIC/PNDIT-F3N/Ag (Fig. 3c). MeIC (Scheme 1), the NBG electron acceptor with an intense absorption from 600 to 800 nm, was picked as the acceptor materials, which not only contributes a compatible absorption to a varied MBG donor materials but also has been proved to be an excellent acceptor in the previous NF solar cells. The optimal devices were prepared by spin coating a total blend concentration of 16.8 mg mL−1 and CF as a solvent at 3000 rpm (D/A) ratio 1.1:1 (w/w), with 0.25% (vol) 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) as a solvent additive, along with thermal annealing 80 °C for 5 min. Under AM 1.5G illumination, the current density–voltage (J–V) and key photovoltaic parameters of the optimized device are shown in Fig. 3a and Table 2. Eventually, the highest PCE of 11.10% with a VOC of 0.96 V, a JSC of 15.79 mA cm−2 and an FF of 73.5% was achieved for the PBDTTS-TClSQx-based device, whereas the PBDTTS-TClQx:MeIC-based cells exhibited the highest PCE of 12.59% with a VOC of 0.96, and JSC of 17.07 mA cm−2 along with an impressive FF of 77.2%. Such enhancement in the PCEs could be primarily due to the almost same higher in VOC, but enhanced JSC and FF contribute to the variation in PCE, which could be ascribed to the better morphology of the blended film, higher hole-only mobility and much more charge carrier mobility formed in the active blend layer. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 3d, the PCE vs. FF values of the reported Qx-based copolymer as the donor material in non-PSCs were plotted, and their corresponding photovoltaic parameters based on Qx-type copolymers are shown in Table S2 of the ESI.Fig. 3d and Table S2 (ESI) show that the PCE and FF of the PBDTTS-TClQx based device are one of the top values reported in Qx-based copolymers to date. The VOC of PSC reaches higher 0.96 V owing to the introduction of the Cl atom and the reduction in the HOMO energy levels of the copolymers. The achieved outcomes in a higher value of JSC for the PBDTTS-TClQx-based device than that for the PBDTTS-TClSQx-based device, which is attributed to much more extinction coefficient, blue-shifted the absorption of PBDTTS-TClQx:MeIC blend film and the more complementary absorption spectrum of MeIC.

Devices

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCEmax/(avg) (%)

μ
h (cm2 V−1 s−1)

μ
e (cm2 V−1 s−1)

μ
h/μe

a 0.25 vol% DIO was added as the processing additive.
b The highest PCE parameters are shown with the average data ± standard deviations from 20 devices included in parenthesis.

PBDTTS-TClQx:MeIC
0.96
17.07
77.2
12.59 (12.20 ± 0.2)
6.71 × 10−4
4.23 × 10−4
1.59
PBDTTS-TClSQx:MeIC
0.96
15.79
73.5
11.10 (10.70 ± 0.2)
5.98 × 10−4
3.42 × 10−4
1.75
As shown in Fig. 3b, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurement was performed to elucidate JSC, photon capture and charge collection processes, and the relevant data are summarized in Table 2. With the PBDTTS-TClQx as the donor, the DIO-processed device exhibits not only higher and slightly broader but also stronger photoresponse in the range of 300–850 nm than the PBDTTS-TClSQx-based device, which is consistent with the UV spectrum results. The relevant integrated JSC values are 16.45 and 15.38 mA cm−2, respectively, which indicates that PSCs based on PBDTTS-TClQx can capture photons and collect charges more efficiently. Both integrated JSC values match well with the measured JSC values from J–V measurements within 5% error.

The dissociation and charge collection characteristics of devices based on PBDTTS-TClQx and PBDTTS-TClSQx are confirmed by the relationship between the photocurrent density (Jph) and applied voltage (Veff).Jph is defined as Jph = JL − JD, where JL and JD are the current densities under AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2 illumination and dark conditions. Veff is defined as Veff = V0 − Vbias, where V0 is the voltage at which Jph is equal to 0, and Vbias is the applied bias voltage. When the value of Veff is high enough (in this case, Veff ≥ 2.0 V), the photogenerated excitons will be completely dissociated into free carriers and collected by the corresponding electrodes, and then Jph reaches the saturation value (Jsat); thus, the exciton dissociation efficiency (Pdiss) can be calculated by Pdiss = Jph/Jsat. Fig. 4a shows the Jphversus Veff curves for the copolymers-based PSCs. The PBDTTS-TClQx:MeIC-based PSCs show a higher Pdiss of 84.2% in comparison with the PBDTTS-TClSQx:MeIC-based PSCs (79.7%), which indicates that the PSC based on PBDTTS-TClQx:MeIC exhibits more effective exciton dissociation and charge extraction. There is no doubt that the PBDTTS-TClQx based device should exhibit higher JSC and FF than by the PBDTTS-TClSQx based cells.

To examine the influence of various side-chains on the device performance, the dependence of VOC on light intensity (Plight) curves were measured to investigate the charge recombination behavior of the copolymers: MeIC in the devices (Fig. 4b). The relationship between JSC and Plight could be articulated as JSC ∝ Plight, where the power-law component (α) data come to unity when bimolecular recombination of charge carriers is insignificant. The values of α for the PBDTTS-TClQx:MeIC (1.0:1.1, w/w) and PBDTTS-TClSQx:MeIC (1.0:1.1, w/w) optimized devices are 0.964 and 0.937, respectively, and the results inhibit that bimolecular recombination was more depressed and would contribute to the improved FF and JSC. Especially, the PBDTTS-TClQx:MeIC-based device presented a higher FF value than that by the PBDTTS-TClSQx:MeIC-based device, indicating a more negligible second-order recombination in the PBDTTS-TClQx:MeIC-based device, which agrees well with the FF and JSC values achieved above. Moreover, the derived slopes from the relationship between VOC and Plight are shown in Fig. 4c. The deduced slopes from the relationship between VOC and light intensity in PBDTTS-TClQx:MeIC-based device presents a lower 1.24 kT q−1 and correspondingly exhibited a value of 1.31 kT q−1 for the PBDTTS-TClSQx:MeIC system. The results indicated that the bimolecular recombination in the PBDTTS-TClQx:MeIC-based device happens weakly than that in the PBDTTS-TClSQx:MeIC-based device. The suppressed monomolecular recombination is commonly beneficial for affording high FF and PCEs, which agrees well with the obtained photovoltaic results.

To further verify why such a low driving force can effectively separate the excitons, as shown in Fig. 1d mentioned above, the charge dissociation of the photocurrent conversion was investigated by steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy. The PL spectra of donor PBBDTS-TClQx, PBBDTS-TClSQx, acceptor MeIC pristine film, and their corresponding blend films were measured at an excitation wavelength of 630 nm (Fig. 4d). Compared with pure and active layered materials, the PL-quenching efficiency of corresponding blended films are nearly 90.3% and 83.6%, respectively, indicating that the electron holes can transfer much more from the MeIC to PBBDTS-TClQx than in the PBBDTS-TClSQx:MeIC system. This leads to a higher JSC in the PBBDTS-TClQx:MeIC-based device, which is consistent with the higher EQE and JSC values of the relevant PSCs.


The charge carrier mobility is one of the key parameters affecting the performance of PSC cells, especially for JSC and FF. In this experiment, we measured the hole mobility (μh) and electron mobility (μe) based on the copolymers: MeIC blend films under optimal conditions by the space charge limiting current (SCLC) method. The J–V curves of the hole-only devices with the structure of ITO/MoO3/donor/MoO3/Al and the structures of hole-only as well as electron-only devices are ITO/MoO3/donor:MeIC/MoO3/Al and ITO/ZnO/donor:MeIC/ZrAcAc/Al, respectively, and their relevant SCLC curves and values are depicted in Fig. S3a–c (ESI), and Tables 1 and 2, respectively. For the PBBDTS-TClQx:MeIC-based active layer, the μh and μe are 6.71 × 10−4 and 4.23 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 with a balanced μh/μe value of 1.59, which is higher than 5.98 × 10−4 and 3.42 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 with a balanced μh/μe value of 1.75, respectively, which would be beneficial for the elevation of JSC and FF parameters of the related PSCs.


For an extensive knowledge of the aggregation behavior of the copolymers, the microstructure of the pristine PBDTTS-TClQx and PBDTTS-TClSQx films, and the optimized blend films, such as the local molecular orientation and the intermolecular distances, the films were characterized by the grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) method, and described in Fig. 5b, c and Fig. S3 (see ESI), respectively. The resulting GIWAXS-packing parameters are listed in Table S1 (ESI). As revealed in Fig. S3 (ESI), the pure films of PBDTTS-TClQx and PBDTTS-TClSQx are out of plane (OOP) directions showing hump-shaped lamellar and π–π stacking strong π–π diffraction peaks, which indicates that both copolymers have a “face-on” dominated orientations. In the OOP direction, the PBDTTS-TClSQx film has a (010) peak at 1.71 Å−1, π–π stacking distance is 3.67 Å and the corresponding crystal coherence length (CCL) is 15.6 Å. Furthermore, the PBDTTS-TClQx film exhibits a (010) peak of 1.70 Å−1, a larger π–π stacking distance of 3.69 Å, and a larger CCL of 19.4 Å. In the in-plane (IP) direction, there is a (100) peak at 0.25 Å−1, lamellar π–π stacking distances of 25.1 Å and CCL is 46.8 Å in the PBDTTS-TClSQx film. Moreover, the PBDTTS-TClQx film shows a small (010) peak of 0.26 Å−1, a smaller interlayer spacing of 24.1 Å, and a larger CCL of 56.2 Å, suggesting that the PBDTTS-TClQx displays better crystallinity. As a result, the μh of the PBBDTS-TClSQx film was measured to be 8.25 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and a slightly improved μh of the PBBDTS-TClQx film was achieved to be 9.34 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, as shown in Fig. S3a (see ESI) and summarized in Table 1.

With regard to blend films, both blend films present evident π–π stacking peaks in the OOP direction Fig. 5c, which indicates that the blend film still retains the “face-on” arrangement. Compared with the (100) peak of the pristine copolymer film in the IP direction, the PBDTTS-TClQx:MeIC and PBDTTS-TClSQx:MeIC films display an increased CCL to be (70.3 Å) at 0.28 Å−1 and (56.2 Å) at 0.28 Å−1, respectively, which demonstrates that the crystallinity of the (100) peak of both copolymers in the IP direction will not decrease with the blending of MeIC. In the OOP direction, the crystalline coherence length increases from 15.6 Å to 16.1 Å for PBDTTS-TClSQx:MeIC and from 19.4 Å to 21.2 Å for PBDTTS-TClQx:MeIC, indicating that the PBDTTS-TClQx blend film still has higher crystallinity than that of PBDTTS-TClSQx blend film. The high crystalline performance is conducive to the corresponding device to obtain higher charge mobility and reduce the probability of bimolecular recombination, which is compatible with the measured JSC, FF, and charge mobility values of the various copolymers.

As a matter of fact, the morphology of the active layer is a key cause to influence FF and other device parameters. To gain more insights into the effect of various flexible side-chains on the surface morphology of the active layer, the pure PBDTTS-TClQx, PBDTTS-TClSQx and MeIC films and corresponding copolymer: MeIC blend morphologies were further confirmed by atomic force microscopy (AFM) in a surface area of 2 × 2 μm2 using the tapping mode, as shown from the data in Fig. 5a and Fig. S5 (see ESI), respectively. As shown in Fig. S5 (ESI), the pure films of PBDTTS-TClQx, PBDTTS-TClSQx and MeIC exhibited rougher surfaces with an average roughness (Ra) of 0.908 nm, 0.997 nm and 1.690 nm, respectively. Furthermore, as depicted in Fig. 5a, the prepared PBDTTS-TClSQx:MeIC-blending film presents a Ra of 1.780 nm. As a comparison, a relatively smooth surface Ra of PBDTTS-TClQx:MeIC was obtained to be 1.410 nm. The smoother surface demonstrates the more ordered morphology and better miscibility with the MeIC acceptor in the blend film of PBDTTS-TClQx:MeIC, which is beneficial to promote exciton dissociation and charge transport, thereby improving the photovoltaic performance of the corresponding device.


In summary, two copolymer donors, namely, PBDTTS-TClQx and PBDTTS-TClSQx, based on BDTTS and engineering Qx unit through the optimization of chlorination and flexible side-chains, were synthesized and employed for NF-PSCs. The strategy involved combining side-chains and chlorination strategies to fine-tune the optical, electrochemical and photovoltaic properties of BDTTS-Qx type copolymers. Due to the introduction of the Cl atoms with strong electron-withdrawing ability, relatively lower HOMO levels were achieved in both copolymers, which will maintain relatively higher VOC of the corresponding device. Note that replacing the R side-chains on the QX acceptor block with the SR side-chains, although the HOMO energy level can be reduced; however, this has a negative impact on crystalline performance and charge mobility. As a result, the best PCE of the PBDTTS-TClQx:MeIC-based device up to 12.59% with a VOC of 0.96, and JSC of 17.07 mA cm−2 along with an impressive FF of 77.2%; however, the PCE of the PBDTTS-TClSQx:MeIC-based device achieves 11.10% with a VOC of 0.96, JSC of 15.79 mA cm−2 and FF of 73.2%. Therefore, the synergy strategy of chlorination and suitable flexible side-chain engineering in the copolymers can be qualified for obtaining highly promising photovoltaic materials.


The authors declare no conflict of interest.


This work was financially supported by grants from the National Science Foundation of China (51573154, 51673031), the Natural Science Foundation of the Jiangsu Higher Institutions of China (18KJA480001), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20141151), Jiangsu Provincial Talents Project of High-Level Innovation and Entrepreneurship, and the Talent Project of Jiangsu Specially – Appointed Professor.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0qm00826e
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021