 DOI: 10.1039/C4RA02679A
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 35919-35927

Shoyebmohamad F. Shaikh,
Rajaram S. Mane and 
Oh-Shim Joo*

Clean Energy Research Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul, Korea. E-mail: joocat@kist.re.kr; Fax: +82-02958-5215; Tel: +82-2958-5217

Korea University of Science and Technology, 52 Eoeun dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-333, Korea

Received
27th March 2014
, Accepted 24th July 2014
First published on 28th July 2014
A facile electrospray synthesis method and potential dye sensitized solar cell (DSSC) application of SnO2 photoanodes (of ∼10 μm thickness) have been investigated. Nanocrystallites with irregular dimensions have similar crystallite sizes and appearance when the distance between fluorine–tin-oxide (FTO) substrate and metal capillary was increased from 4 to 8 cm (maximum limit). However, increase in metal capillary distance caused reduction in charge transfer resistance and a negative shift in the flat band potential. As a result, electron lifetime was increased with the open circuit voltage (410 to 510 mV). Under 1 sun light intensity, the SnO2 photoanode (obtained at 8 cm) by a thin layer of TiO2 exhibited as high as 5.56% power conversion efficiency which was ∼350% higher than only SnO2 (1.66%) photoanode. This enhanced DSSCs performance could be attributed to better dye adsorption and increased active surface area, or boosted light-harvesting efficiency. The presence of TiO2 layer on SnO2 photoanode was confirmed with X-ray diffraction and Raman shift analysis measurements. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy revealed increased electron lifetime and suppressed charge recombination for SnO2 photoanode that was modified with TiO2 compact surface layer.

Recently, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) with low-cost fabrication processing, environmental compatibility, transparency, tunable colour, and comparable energy conversion efficiencies to Si-based solar cells, etc., have attracted great research attention. Conversion of visible light into electrical energy by means of harvesting solar radiation through the sensitizer dyes adsorbed on the photoanode is the basic working mechanism of DSSCs. Now-a-days DSSCs with novel hybrid structure architectures are promising candidates to fulfil future energy needs. For optimum DSSC performance, efficient charge transportation with a low recombination rate and low light scattering at the interfaces play a critical role. Several studies have demonstrated the use of various metal oxides such as TiO2, ZnO, Nb2O5 and SnO2, etc., with different morphologies including nanoparticles, nanorods, nanopods, nanoneedles, etc., for moderate DSSC performance. Feasibility of other metal oxides including WO3 (nanorods) and Bi2O3 (nanoplates) in DSSCs has been recently addressed by our group. There is no doubt that TiO2 is the dominant photoanode material and its resulting DSSC performance has so far reached to the highest power conversion efficiency (η%) value of 12.3%. However, TiO2-based DSSCs still suffer from several unavoidable limitations due to the high electron recombination rate which is related to the low electron mobility and transport properties. In contrast to TiO2, ZnO has also been extensively explored in DSSC applications due to its much higher electron mobility (>200 cm2 V−1 s−1) and nearly similar band gap energy (∼3.2 eV). Nevertheless, ZnO-based DSSCs also suffer from chemical instability in acidic electrolytes and slow electron-injection kinetics from dye to ZnO photoanode due to the formation of an insulating surface agglomeration layer. Alternatively, tin oxide (SnO2) can be a good choice as it is an n-type and wide band gap semiconductor (3.6 eV) with excellent optical and electrical properties. Its high conductivity, high electron mobility, and high stability under long-term UV-radiation are advantageous. On the contrary, when it is combined with the iodide/tri-iodide redox couple (I−/I3−), the open circuit voltage (Voc) is fairly low. The smaller Voc values of SnO2-based DSSCs could be due to the 300 mV positive shift in its conduction band edge (with reference to the TiO2 band position). A significant improvement in Voc (0.48 to 0.67 V) and η% (from 1.2 to 5.1%) is achieved by covering the mesoporous SnO2 with a thin shell of ZnO. In short, SnO2-based DSSCs have demonstrated less success than TiO2 and ZnO-based DSSCs. In principle, SnO2 photoanodes could achieve a similar or even better DSSC performance if the interfacial problems which are mentioned above can be resolved. Possible strategies to optimize such interfacial problems of SnO2 photoanode are surface modification (e.g. core–shell nanoparticles with shells consisting of TiO2, ZnO, Al2O3 and MgO) or conversion.

Various approaches have been adopted to develop SnO2 photoanodes with specific morphology for the purpose of improving DSSC performance on account of excess dye loading, light harvesting and direct transportation, such as nanofibers, nanowires, nanoflowers, nanoparticles, nanorods, and hallow microspheres, etc. Up till now, various physical and chemical methods including spray pyrolysis, sol–gel, thermal plasma, pulsed-laser, hydrothermal, wet chemical, microwave-assisted synthesis, and electrodeposition, etc., are being undertaken to synthesize SnO2 photoanodes in various phases and forms for DSSC application. Electrospray deposition (ESD), one of the eco-friendly and scalable chemical methods, has received remarkable attention due to its simplicity and uniqueness in producing nanostructures of metal oxides/chalcogenides. In ESD, highly atomized charged droplets from solution or suspension are generated and after a series of solvent evaporation–droplet fission cycles, the resultant particles get deposited onto the substrate at constant temperature. The experimental conditions such as the distance between metal capillary and substrate, temperature, and applied voltage can be tailored to control the crystallite shape, size, and surface morphology of desired products. Moreover, the ESD technique is simple, non-toxic, cost-effective as well as excellent for controlling the surface morphology and stoichiometry through a wide range of precursors. The major advantages of this method include fine, uniform, self-dispersive and highly wettable atomized droplets which can reduce material consumption with an extremely low level of waste. The spray precursor solution is generated by electrohydrodynamic force. The deposition of atomized charged aerosol takes place by an applied electric field between metal capillary and grounded substrate. In literature, the precursor solution was atomized in different spray modes depending on applied voltage, flow rate, and physical properties of the precursor. Basically, ESD technique has been classified into two major categories, dripping mode and spray mode (includes the cone jet mode). The cone jet mode is most frequently used in deposition processes to obtain surface uniformity over a wide range. Furthermore, it is now well-accepted that a photoanode for high-performance DSSCs requires not only a high surface area for light harvesting but also a densely packed microstructure for fast electron transportation. Thus, the most urgent challenge now is how to modify available photoanode materials which would be chemically stable, possessing moderate Voc, excellent electron mobility, and superior photocurrent etc., for considering in DSSCs application.
In the present investigation, we report a facile chemical synthesis and DSSCs application of SnO2 photoanodes, obtained at different distances between metal capillary and substrate via electrospray method. While synthesis of photoanodes, the precursor solution was prepared by dissolving tin(IV) chloride pentahydrate in ethanol solvent which was then sprayed onto pre-cleaned FTO coated glass substrate. In the first stage, effect of distance between the metal capillary and the substrate on physicoelectrochemical propertied was investigated. As-synthesized photoanodes were air annealed to remove the unwanted impurities and to increase the crystallinity in addition to inter-crystallite contacts. A DSSCs performance and the spraying distance connection was confirmed. Thin layer of TiO2 was applied using a simple and cost-effective wet chemical method to reduce interfacial recombination trapping centres of SnO2 photoanode. Electron life time, estimated from electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analysis, of TiO2-coated SnO2 photoanode was increased due to reduced charge transfer resistance, and the power conversion efficiency was increased by several orders of magnitudes. The presence of TiO2 surface layer was initially confirmed by means of various physical measurement tools. Current density–voltage (J–V), EIS, voltage decay and Mott–Schottky measurements were carried out for knowing the effect of surface layering on the charge transportation rate.

Transparent and conducting pieces of FTO-coated glass substrate were used for synthesising SnO2 photoanodes. The FTO substrates (15 Ω, TEC 8, Pilkington glass) were cut into several pieces of 2.5 × 4.0 cm2 and ultrasonically cleaned with the distilled water (20 min), acetone (20 min) and iso-propanol (20 min). The stock solution was prepared by dissolving 0.12 M tin(IV) chloride pentahydrate (98%, Aldrich) in an ethanol (99.5%, Aldrich) which was stirring for 1 h to make a clear solution. The SnO2 photoanodes were obtained through an electrospray system (NNC-ESP 200T; Korea) for which the precursor solution was pumped by a syringe pump (NORM-JECT; Luer Lock; Hheke Sass Wolf, Germany) at the tip of a stainless-steel needle (27 G; 13 mm) via a metallic capillary. During every deposition step, a pre-cleaned FTO-coated glass substrate was placed onto the horizontal plate connected to a heater whose temperature was varied by a temperature controller (TZ4M, Autonics). The distance between the tip of the metallic capillary and the grounded substrate was increased from 4 to 8 cm with a step of 2 cm as our system has 8 cm as a maximum limit. During photoanode synthesis process, a high direct current voltage of 10 kV was applied between the metallic capillary and grounded substrate to atomize the precursor solution into fine charged-droplets. The solution was sprayed through the pump onto the heated substrate, and the flow-rate was maintained to 15 μl min−1. The substrate temperature was kept constant to 250 °C during all depositions. After every deposition process, the photoanodes were annealed at 600 °C for 2 h. In second part, for obtaining TiO2 thin layer onto SnO2 photoanode for optimum performance, the chemicals used were titanium(IV) chloride (99%, Aldrich) and thiourea (99%, Aldrich). Two ml titanium(IV) chloride was mixed in 20–30 wt% hydrochloric acid and distilled water was added into it to make 0.1 M TiCl4 solution. To this, 0.1 M thiourea was added slowly while stirring. A transparent solution with a reddish-yellow colour was obtained after vigorous stirring for 30 min at room temperature. The resulting solution was then refluxed for 1 h in a controlled temperature oil bath preheated at 50 °C. Previously obtained SnO2 photoanode of optimum performance was transferred into a jar containing the resulting TiCl4 solution, and then the jar was sealed to avoid thermal evaporation, if there is any, of solution and put it into oven maintained at 70 °C for about 2 h. Finally, TiO2-coated SnO2 photoanode was washed with de-ionized water for several times to remove any residue and then annealed at 450 °C for 1 h. After annealing, the substrate was immersed into 0.03 mM N719 dye solution (ethanol + acetonitrile) for 24 h to adsorb the dye molecules. Surface digital photoimages of SnO2 and TiO2 decorated (obtained at 8 cm) photoanodes obtained at different metallic capillary and the grounded substrate distances were collected with a field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, Nova nano SEM200-FEI). The high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) and energy dispersive X-ray measurements were performed using a FEI TECNAI G2 20 S-TWIN equipped with a LaB6 cathode and a GATAN MS794 P CCD camera. The micrographs were obtained at an acceleration voltage of 200 kV. Both SnO2 and SnO2–TiO2 photoanodes were removed from the supporting substrate with a sharp-edged scalpel blade and the powders suspended in ethanol separately were pipetted onto a Formvar/carbon, 200 mesh TH, copper grids before HRTEM measurements. The structures of SnO2 and SnO2–TiO2-coated photoanodes were confirmed from the X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra (XRD-6000, Shimadzu, Japan) with Cu-Kα radiations (λ = 1.542 Å). Diffraction patterns were recorded from 20° to 80° along 2θ with a 2° min−1 scan-speed. The structural analysis was additionally performed using a Raman Shift measurement (RENISHAW, Invia Raman Microscope UK) for corroborating the formation of SnO2 and presence of TiO2 over SnO2. The laser beam (λ = 532 nm) was focused on the photoanode by a lens to produce a spot. The spectra of all photoanodes were measured from 200 to 1600 cm−1. For X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis, a surface-sensitive quantitative spectroscopic technique, spectra of the photoanodes were acquired with PHI 5000 VersaProbe (Ulvac-PHI) under high vacuum conditions (6.8 × 10−8 pa), using a monochromatic Al Kα X-ray source (1486.6 eV). The data were collected from a spot-size of 100 × 100 μm2. The carbon 1s peak (284.6 eV) was used for internal calibration as a reference. UV-vis absorption spectra were recorded using a Varian Cary 5000 spectrophotometer instrument. The dye loaded photoanodes with each of 0.25 cm2 area were illuminated from the FTO-side with simulated sunlight from a 150 W xenon lamp (Sun 2000 solar simulator, ABET Technologies, USA) equipped with an air-mass filter A.M. 1.5G with a corrected intensity of 1 sun (100 mW cm−2) at the photoanode surface. To make cell, active cell area (0.25 cm2) was covered using non-conducting epoxy resin on both sides. The J–V spectra on different photoanodes were obtained with the help of a Keithley 2400 source meter. The EIS and Mott–Schottky analysis were recorded on IviumStat Technologies, Netherland where the frequency range was varied from 150 kHz to 0.1 Hz. Impedance parameters were obtained by fitting the obtained curves using Z-view software. For Mott–Schottky analysis 0.1 M Na2SO4 in distilled water electrolyte was used in presence of a three-electrode configuration. Platinum plate was used as a counter electrode, Ag/AgCl as reference electrode, and SnO2 and SnO2–TiO2 as working electrodes i.e. photoanodes. The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were measured using a xenon lamp recorded without bias under illumination with respect to a calibrated Melles-Friot silicon diode where, the excitation wavelength was changed (MsScience K3100 Spectral IPCE measurement system and Polaronix K102 Signal Amplifier).


In the ESD technique, it is believed that the precursor solution is generated by electro-hydrodynamic forces. Increasing distance between metal capillary and substrate causes moderate change in the force acting on the droplets. The size distribution of the primary droplets which developed in ESD is known to be narrow, or mono-dispersive. The properties of the precursor solution such as conductivity, viscosity, dielectric constant, and surface tension play critical role in growth mechanism. In a normal ESD process, solvent evaporates near to the surface of heated substrate and solute present in the droplets is deposited as crystallites onto the substrate surface. After increasing the distance between metal capillary and substrate solvent which is present in solute take more time to evaporate and generate small sized crystallites. The particle generation mechanism in ESD process is shown in sketched diagram of ESI, Fig. S1. The particle size is mainly depending on the droplet size and an amount of solute present in each droplet. In addition, surface condition of the substrate play important role in surface morphology evolution process. During electrospray process, the layer becomes porous, dense, or gel when the surface is kept dry, partially wet, or completely wet, respectively.


The FE-SEM images of SnO2 photoanodes deposited at 4, 6, and 8 cm distances are shown in panels (a–c) of Fig. 1. The cross-section measurement is also provided for confirming the average thickness of a particular photoanode (as inset of each figure). The surface texture of SnO2 photoanode synthesized at 4 cm distance revealed densely-packed nanobeans (Fig. 1a) with average-sectional length i.e. thickness of 9.95 μm. At 6 cm distance (Fig. 1b), the crystallite size became infinitesimally smaller compared to 4 cm and the average thickness was 9.89 μm. When the substrate distance was increased to 8 cm (Fig. 1c), in addition to smaller crystallites relatively bigger nanobeans were seen. Presence of two morphologies i.e. island and particle would facilitated combined benefit of excess light scattering and enhanced dye molecules adsorption due to which superior performance compared to those of only island-like photoanodes was anticipated. We presumed that the size of nanobeans played an important role in increasing the active surface area of electrode (9.82 μm). In short, with increase in spraying distance the surface appearance and average thickness were altered. It is reported that if the distance between metal capillary and substrate is less, the evaporation rate of solvent also becomes less and develops relatively large sized crystallites. The change in droplets size with deposition distance is reported by Rietveld et al. In the present case, long traversing paths i.e. 8 cm might have produced crystallites of relatively smaller sizes. Fig. 1(d) presents the XRD spectra of SnO2 photoanodes synthesized at 4, 6 and 8 cm metal capillary and substrate distances, respectively. All SnO2 photoanodes were tetragonal in crystal structure (JCPDS no. 880287). In case of SnO2 photoanode, the (110) reflection plane intensity had confirmed the degree of crystallinity. The XRD spectrum of SnO2 photoanode obtained at 4 cm was exhibiting more crystallinity compared to 8 cm photoanode. Crystallite-size (estimated from the Scherrer's formula) was decreased from 25 to 23 nm, which was not a remarkable change when distance was increased from 4 to 8 cm. No characteristic peaks of impurities, such as elemental Sn or other phases of SnO2 including SnO, Sn2O3, Sn3O4 and Sn5O6 were noticed, indicating EDS method produces only pure rutile SnO2 crystal structure with given inputs.


Fig. 2(a) presents the absorbance spectra of N-719 dye-loaded SnO2 photoanodes. There was slight difference in light harvesting ability due to difference in photoanode morphology. The SnO2 photoanode deposited at 8 cm distance showed relatively higher optical density and carrying excess adsorbed dye molecules (0.47 × 10−7 mol cm−2) compared to 4 cm (0.43 × 10−7 mol cm−2) and 6 cm (0.40 × 10−7 mol cm−2) synthesized SnO2 photoanodes. All photoanodes were subjected to J–V measurements whose results, in terms of short-circuit current density (Jsc), Voc, fill factor (ff) and η% are summarized in Table 1. On account of morphology, crystallinity and crystallite-size, all photoanodes (∼10 micron thickness) explored considerable variation in DSSCs results. The least η% value was assigned to SnO2 photoanode synthesized at 4 cm i.e. 1.09% followed by 6 cm i.e. 1.31% and the best value was for photoanode deposited at 8 cm i.e. 1.66%. With increase in distance from 4 to 8 cm, the power conversion efficiency was magnified about double which was certainly not due to any synergic effect. Power conversion efficiencies for photoanodes prepared at 4 and 6 cm distances were comparable to the values reported elsewhere.

Sr. no.
Capillary to substrate distance (cm)
Jsc (mA cm−2)
Voc (V)
ff
η (%)
1
4
4.87
0.42
0.52
1.09
2
6
5.70
0.43
0.52
1.31
3
8
5.70
0.51
0.56
1.66
Interestingly, with increase in distance between metallic capillary and substrate there was no significant change in Jsc however, change in Voc value [Fig. 2(b)] was definitely non-ignorable. In literature, it is reported that size and morphology of SnO2 photoanode plays significant role in improving the Voc value. We attributed this effect as a mixture of higher and smaller sizes of SnO2 crystallites in photoanode synthesized at 8 cm in contrast to electrodes obtained at 4 and 6 cm distances where only relatively bigger crystallites were obtained. Our curiosity to know the performance even at higher distances was hindered by the instrument limit. The Voc-decay measurement was operated to understand what exactly happened in third i.e., 8 cm photoanode where the DSSCs performance was superior to that of others. Fig. 2(c) provides a continuous reading of the lifetime as a function of Voc at high-voltage resolution. The electron lifetime was calculated using the formula; τn = −(kT/e)(dVoc/dt)−1, where kT is the thermal energy, e is the positive elementary charge, and dVoc/dt is the decaying rate of Voc. As seen in Fig. 2(d), two SnO2 photoanodes i.e. synthesized at 4 and 6 cm were having relatively shorter electron lifetime figures compared to photoanode synthesized at 8 cm. Due to high Voc, the electron lifetime was significantly higher for 8 cm SnO2 photoanode compared to other. Electron life time values obtained in the present work and that of others are tabulated in Table 2.
Synthesis method
Morphology
Life time
Ref.
Hydrothermal method
Nanotubes
12.8 ms
55
Hydrothermal method
Nanosheets/nanoparticle
7.17 ms/5.78 ms
56
Hydrothermal method
Nanorods/nanoparticle
7.54 ms/2.55 ms
31
Electrospray method
Nanocrysallites
16.1 ms
Present work
Fig. 3(a) displays the EIS spectra of all SnO2 photoanodes. The first semicircle in high frequency range corresponds to charge transfer resistance of the redox reaction of I−/I3−at platinum (Pt)/electrolyte whereas, second semicircle in the low frequency range corresponds to the charge transfer interactions at photoanode/dye/electrolyte interface. It is seen that series resistance (Z′ value at 0 Z′′) values were different for different SnO2 electrodes which could be assigned to difference in; (a) morphology, (b) crystallinity, and (c) amount of dye adsorbed. Due to lower crystallinity and smaller crystallite size, the SnO2 photoanodes synthesized at 4 and 6 cm distances show relatively lower series resistances to that of 8 cm electrode. Moreover, diameter of second semicircle corresponds to Rct value was decreased indicating faster charge carrier rate in the later case than the former (discussed later). In Nyquist measurement, last semicircle at the low-frequency region (in the mHz range) corresponds to the Nernst diffusion of the electrolyte. Photoanodes prepared at 4 cm and 6 cm distances demonstrated considerable enlargement of the mid-frequency semicircles along with a featureless low-frequency semicircles. This might be related to higher Rct of both photoanodes, which were in agreement with the lower Voc and ff values compared to third photoanode. This could be due to enhanced dye adsorption; could favour for more photoelectrons generation compared to other photoanodes. The IPCE spectra for all three photoanodes are shown in Fig. 3(b). The IPCE curves were analogous to the absorption and J–V measurements. The DSSCs comprising SnO2 photoanode (8 cm) exhibited a maximum IPCE of ∼28% at 530 nm, concurring with the trend observed in J–V. The improvement in IPCE performance was due to enhanced charge-generation efficiency, inhibition of electron recombination, and higher dye loading.

The SnO2 photoanode (for which the DSSCs performance was optimum) was employed in rest studies. It is widely accepted that surface treatment boosts the DSSCs performance of photoanode. In the present case, SnO2 photoanode was covered with TiO2 layer using a wet chemical method. The FE-SEM images as seen in Fig. 4(a and b) present the difference in surface appearance before and after TiO2 layering process. It was corroborated that after TiO2 coating both average crystallite size and thickness (insets) were increased (∼65–100 nm and ∼9.82–10.2 μm). As mentioned above, a thin layer of TiO2 coating on SnO2 crystallites might alter their chemical properties, forming compact layer structure, enabling excess dye absorption, and faster injection efficiency of photo-excited electrons into semiconductors. Fig. 4c and d present the typical HR-TEM images of scratched powders from respective photoanodes. Practically due to interlinking problem we were unable fix an exact dimension of individual crystallite. The interplanar distance of 0.33 nm corresponding to the plane (110) was confirming the formation of rutile SnO2 once again. Inset of each figure confirms SAED pattern with irregular diffraction spots indicating crystallites were polycrystalline in nature, contrast to diffuse amorphous and spotted single crystalline patterns. Elemental mapping through EDX analysis is shown in Fig. S2 indicating Sn atoms were uniformly distributed throughout the mapping area. The HR-TEM image of SnO2–TiO2 photoanode is shown in the Fig. 4(d). Existence of light and dark spots was supporting the presence of two separate structures and morphologies. The inset shows the SAED pattern of SnO2–TiO2. The positions of circular rings confirmed the rutile phase of TiO2 deposited onto the polycrystalline SnO2 whereas, a set of rings in TiO2 revealed random orientation of diffraction from different planes of the nanocrystallites. Randomly placed dim spots due to oxygen vacancies were considerably reduced after TiO2 coating. The EDX analysis in Fig. S3 indicates both Sn and Ti elements were belong to SnO2 and TiO2. Both were uniformly distributed throughout the product suggesting TiO2 was well-penetrated into SnO2 matrix even though thickness was not significantly improved. The Cu peaks were also appeared due to the copper substrate used while scanning.

Fig. 5(a) shows the XRD patterns for both SnO2 and SnO2–TiO2 photoanodes. All diffraction peaks were indexed and matched well with a tetragonal rutile structure of SnO2 (JCPDS no. 880287). The XRD peaks belong to TiO2 were newly appeared at 2θ = 27.36°, 36.08°, 41.15°, and 56.64°. These positions were assigned to tetragonal rutile TiO2 crystal structure (JCPDF no. 870920) supporting the presence of TiO2 structure in addition on SnO2. Secondly and noticeably, after coating the peak intensities were reduced and broaden, indicating TiO2 structure could be less crystalline than SnO2. To corroborate the presence of TiO2 onto/within SnO2, the Raman shift measurement was conducted [Fig. 5(b)]. A unit cell of the typical rutile structure of SnO2 contains two Sn4+ ions and four O2− ions. These Raman shifts obtained at 632, 771, and 475 cm−1 were consistent with the A1g, B2g, and Eg vibration modes, respectively. A1g (632 cm−1) and B2g (771 cm−1) were related to the expansion and contraction vibration modes of Sn–O, while Eg was linked to the vibration of oxygen. The oxygen plane was supporting that SnO2 photoanode exhibited the tetragonal rutile structure. For SnO2–TiO2 photoanode, three bands of Eg (236 cm−1), Eg (446 cm−1), and A1g (611 cm−1) assigned to rutile structure of TiO2, were obtained. Once again, Raman shift measurement confirmed the presence of TiO2 on SnO2 surface. To investigate the changes in the surface composition and chemical states of SnO2 after TiO2 coating, the XPS spectra was collected. The Fig. 6(a) shows the XPS peaks of the SnO2 at 486.2 and 494.6 eV corresponding to Sn 3d5/2 and Sn 3d3/2, which were closely matching to the values reported for SnO2. However, a clear difference was apparent for the O1s spectrum with characteristic peak at 530.2 eV. The peak was asymmetric in SnO2–TiO2 photoanode indicating the presence of the physically adsorbed oxygen whose binding energy is close to 529.8 eV. After TiO2 coating, O1s peaks were shifted toward the lower binding energy side (Fig. 6b). The negative shift of binding energy from 530.1 eV to 529.8 eV was due to electronic interaction changes suggesting that the TiO2 was coated onto the SnO2 crystallite and exhibited overall oxygen deficiency. The XPS peaks of the TiO2 at 458.7 and 464.2 eV were due to Ti 2p3/2 and Ti 2p1/2 (Fig. 6c) supported that there was a good coupling between SnO2 and TiO2.
Fig. 7(a) shows the optical absorption spectra of the SnO2 and SnO2–TiO2 photoanodes (after dye loading). The spectra clearly show the enhancement in optical density in SnO2–TiO2 (1.12 × 10−7 mol cm−2) photoanode compared to that of only SnO2 (0.47 × 10−7 mol cm−2) photoanode confirming a better light-scattering/light-harvesting ability in previous case than in later. The characteristic J–V curves measured under 1 sun conditions are given in Fig. 7(b) and the obtained electronic parameters are summarized in Table 3. The Voc value for SnO2–TiO2 photoanode DSSCs (0.62 V) was much higher than only for SnO2 photoanode (0.51 V). As seen in Fig. 7(b), DSSCs fabricated with SnO2 photoanode demonstrated Voc of 0.51 V, Jsc of 5.70 mA cm−2, and ff of 0.56, resulting in η% of 1.66%, whilst the DSSCs-based on SnO2–TiO2 photoanode confirmed 0.62 V, 16.95 mA cm−2, 0.53, and 5.69% values. The change in Jsc and Voc figures compared with the performance of the DSSCs-based on pure SnO2 photoanode was remarkable. To investigate the plausible reasons for increased Jsc and Voc values in SnO2–TiO2 photoanode we compared the dye adsorption amounts and shift in conduction band position.
Sr. no.
Photoanode
Adsorbed dye (10−7 mol cm−2)
Jsc (mA cm−2)
Voc (V)
ff
η (%)
1
SnO2
0.47
5.70
0.51
0.56
1.6
2
SnO2–TiO2
1.12
16.95
0.62
0.53
5.6
The significant enhancement in photovoltaic performance was mainly attributed to slower recombination rate caused by surface passivation of sub-band-edge surface states which was again proved in EIS study. The conduction band-edge of SnO2 was 0.4 V more positive than TiO2. Thus, the electrons injected into TiO2 from the dye would be readily injected into the SnO2, allowing fast electron transportation to the current-collecting surface. TiO2 layer could have formed an energy barrier and thereby advancing electrons to travel toward the current collecting surface. These factors would have resulted in considerable reduction in recombination rate, leading to improved Voc and the power conversion efficiency. The differences of these photoanodes were further studied using voltage-decay measurement from which electron life was estimated. The SnO2–TiO2 photoanode exhibited a much slower Voc decay rate indicating much slower recombination rates and higher electron life time than only SnO2 photoanode [Fig. 7(c)].
From the Voc decay rate, the photoelectron recombination lifetime (τn) was calculated using above relation. While the dependence of τn on Voc was found to be linear for both photoanodes indicating the absence of the surface traps. The electron lifetime curve was shown in Fig. 7(d). Electron life time in the TiO2–SnO2 photoanode was higher compared to SnO2 photoanode. The primary reason was longer electron lifetime due to the formation of energy barrier with TiO2 coating, advancing the electrons to flow toward the current collecting surface and preventing the electrons from flowing in the opposite direction. Secondly, traps between SnO2 crystallites could be effectively filled by TiO2 nanocrystallites and would have generated continuous paths for electrons transportation.
Using EIS measurement, additional information and deeper understanding of the interfacial reactions for obtained enhanced performance in SnO2–TiO2 photoanode were investigated. Fig. 8(a) shows the Nyquist plots for DSSCs-based on SnO2 and SnO2–TiO2 photoanodes. Area acquired in the mid-frequency semicircle was larger for SnO2 photoanode compared to that of SnO2–TiO2 photoanode, supporting enhanced recombination resistance, which basically resulted due to higher recombination rate at the photoanode/dye/electrolyte interface. The Z-view curve fitting parameter is shown in Table 4. Here, the electron lifetime, estimated from the maximum angular frequency of the impedance semicircle arc at middle frequencies, was in accordance to the relation; τr = 1/2πƒmax, where ƒmax is the maximum frequency of the mid frequency peak. The longer electron lifetime enabled TiO2–SnO2 photoanode (4.94 Hz) to demonstrate higher overall DSSCs efficiency compared to SnO2 photoanode (9.84 Hz).
Sr. no
Photoanode
Rs (Ω cm2)
R1 (Ω cm2)
R2 (Ω cm2)
1
SnO2
17.1
2.81
52.96
2
SnO2–TiO2
16.6
2.14
24.47
In Fig. 8(b) broad IPCE curves as a function of wavelength are displayed. For SnO2 photoanode, the maximum IPCE value at 540 nm was ∼28% which was increased to ∼55% after TiO2 coating. Increase in IPCE value was over entire wavelength range i.e. 300–750 nm. Due to absorption maximum wavelength of rutile TiO2, second peak shoulder was appeared ∼375 nm for SnO2–TiO2 photoanode. The improvement of IPCE after TiO2 coating was due to increased dye molecules adsorption. To support this result, the effect of TiO2 coating on band position of SnO2 photoanode was investigated using Mott–Schottky analysis. The Mott–Schottky plots were obtained using the equation reported elsewhere. The intercept was used to calculate the flat band potential (Efb). The calculated Efb values for respective SnO2 and SnO2–TiO2 photoanodes were 0.81 and 0.72 V vs. Ag/AgCl. As shown in [Fig. 8(c and d)], the Efb was negatively shifted after TiO2 coating. A negative shift of Efb suggests an “away shift” from the reduction–oxidation potential that eventually enhances the Voc.

In summary, a simple and low-cost electrospray deposition method was employed to synthesize SnO2 photoanodes at 4, 6 and 8 cm metal capillary-substrate distances and further envisaged in DSSCs application. By simply varying metal capillary-substrate distance, the surface morphology, the structure and the optical density, etc., were considerably tailored. At 8 cm metal capillary-substrate distance the crystallite sizes of product were relatively smaller. The tetragonal rutile phase of synthesized SnO2 was confirmed from the X-ray diffraction and Raman shift measurements. The power conversion and incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiencies in SnO2 photoanodes were different in all cases. After TiO2 coating, DSSCs performance and IPCE values of SnO2 photoanode were incremented from 1.6% and ∼28% to 5.6% and ∼55% due to enhanced dye amount with large surface area and inhibiting electron recombination centres. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurement demonstrated comparable electron life time values for pristine SnO2 which was (in our case) improved due to reduction in recombination rate after TiO2 coating. Moreover, the negative shift in flat band potential confirmed from Mott–Schottky measurement corroborated enhanced charge percolation and transportation of photoelectrons towards the current-collecting substrate with much greater ease.


The authors acknowledge the support from the Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST) institutional program. Authors wish to note a sincere record of referee's scientific comments and technical suggestions.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Electrospray experimental sketch diagram S1 and supplementary figures of EDX mapping (Fig. S1 and S2). See DOI: 10.1039/c4ra02679a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014