 DOI: 10.1039/C3NR05494B
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4211-4216


Juntao
Zhang
,

Meng
He
,

Nianqing
Fu
,

Jianye
Li
* and 

Xiong
Yin
*

National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: yinx@nanoctr.cn

State Key Laboratory of Advanced Metallurgy, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China. E-mail: jyli@ustb.edu.cn

Key Laboratory of Photochemistry, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China

Received
16th October 2013
, Accepted 29th January 2014
First published on 30th January 2014
Highly branched ZnO (HBZ) nanostructures were prepared on titanium (Ti) foil using a facile, one-step vapor confined chemical vapor deposition technique. The as-prepared ZnO layer showed a good connection with the Ti foil even after 50 bending cycles, and the resultant HBZ/Ti electrode possessed high bendability. The HBZ/Ti electrode was composed of four different layers, including a highly branched ZnO layer, a ZnO compact layer, a Ti–Zn alloy layer and Ti foil. The good adhesion of the as-prepared ZnO layer to Ti foil was ascribed to the formation of a Ti–Zn alloy layer and a ZnO compact layer during the growth process. A flexible dye-sensitized solar cell was assembled using the D149-sensitized HBZ/Ti as a photoanode, and a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.3% was achieved with an open-circuit photovoltage of 0.664 V, a short-circuit current density of 7.53 mA cm−2, and a fill factor of 0.66 measured under rear-side illumination (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2). The power conversion efficiency of the device remained at 92% of the initial value even after 50 bending cycles. These results indicate that the vapor confined chemical vapor deposition method which does not necessarily use any catalyst or seed is a facile, one-step approach to obtain highly branched ZnO nanostructures with high bendability on Ti foil. The tight bonding between the highly branched ZnO layer and Ti substrate by a Ti–Zn alloy layer and a ZnO compact layer makes the vapor confined CVD method very attractive for the preparation of high-performance flexible photoanodes.

According to the charge generation mechanism, photovoltaic cells can be divided into two categories: p–n junction solar cells and exciton solar cells. Among exciton cells, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs), also known as Grätzel solar cells, present the highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) up to 12.3% after two decades of endeavor. To date, DSCs are still attracting interest due to their various advantages, including easy fabrication, low cost and relatively high PCE. A typical liquid-state DSC with a sandwich structure is composed of a dye-sensitized mesoporous semiconductor photoanode, a liquid electrolyte containing a triiodide/iodide couple and a counter electrode. Compared to the counterparts fabricated on the FTO glass, flexible DSCs possess the features of light-weight, easy transportation and roll-to-roll production, which make them more cost-effective. As for conductive substrates used in the flexible DSCs, metal foils are more promising than plastic conductive substrates, such as PEN-ITO and PET-FTO, because metal foils can endure the high temperature annealing process which is beneficial for the cell performance. Among the tested metals, such as stain-less steel, silver, copper and titanium (Ti), the Ti substrate has aroused great attention due to its high conductivity comparable with FTO glass and superior corrosion resistance to iodine used in the electrolyte of DSCs. In addition, the easily self-formed TiO2 compact layer on the Ti sheet will reduce the dark current of the device, and subsequently benefit the device performance. Furthermore, the DSC devices based on Ti foil present good long-term stability during a 1000 hour light soaking test under one sun illumination. This kind of flexible DSCs presented a PCE of 7–8% with a Ru dye-sensitized TiO2 photoanode on Ti foil measured under rear-side illumination (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2).

Zinc oxide (ZnO) has a band structure similar to that of TiO2, and its electron mobility is 2–3 orders of magnitude higher than that of TiO2, so it is considered as an excellent alternative to TiO2 which is the most commonly used photoanode material in DSCs. Additionally, a ZnO film can be readily fabricated with extreme diverse morphologies, including 1D nanowires, 2D and 3D nanostructures due to the ease of crystallization under mild conditions. This unique property of ZnO may provide another promising means for improving the device performance. To obtain a high PCE, not only a high surface area for adequate dye loading but also a tailored microstructure for light harvesting and fast electron transport are desired for the as-synthesized photoanode. Though fast carrier transport is achieved in the 1D nanowire arrays, the ZnO photoanodes based on nanowire arrays present a low PCE, mainly due to the insufficient dye loading. Compared to 1D ZnO nanostructure photoanodes, the device based on 2D ZnO nanostructures, such as, nanosheets, presented a high PCE up to 6.06%, resulting from the high dye-loading and perfect electron transport properties among the structure. Recently, 3D branched ZnO nanostructures have attracted much attention since they involve direct pathways for carrier transport, a high surface area for dye loading, a good light scattering effect and less grain boundaries. ZnO nanoforests were prepared by the hydrothermal method and applied in DSCs, resulting in an efficiency of 2.6%, five times higher than that of DSCs based on upstanding ZnO nanowires. Caterpillar-like branched ZnO nanostructures were obtained by combining the electrostatic spinning and hydrothermal method. The resultant ZnO photoanode showed a PCE of 5.2% for liquid-state DSCs. Most commonly used techniques to fabricate 3D ZnO nanostructures involve solution processes and multiple steps with the participation of catalysts or seeds. In addition, the crystallinity of ZnO fabricated in the solution process needs to be further improved. The as-prepared ZnO microstructures can be slightly damaged when the solvent was removed due to surface tension of solvents. It is well-known that chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is a facile and effective approach to produce high-purity, high-performance ZnO nanostructures. The resultant ZnO nanostructures showed good crystallinity because they were prepared at certain high temperatures.
The previously reported Ti-based ZnO photoanodes were all prepared using the solution methods. To the best of our knowledge, 3D branched ZnO nanostructures on Ti foil fabricated via the vapor deposition method for flexible DSC photoanodes have not yet been reported. In addition, the cohesion between the as-prepared semiconductor layer and the flexible substrate is very important for high-performance flexible solar cells. Flexible ZnO solar cells on metal foil with good mechanical stability and flexibility are rarely reported.
Herein, we report a facile, one-step chemical vapor deposition method to prepare highly branched ZnO nanostructures with high crystallinity. And we found that the as-prepared branched ZnO nanostructures are tightly bonded with a titanium foil substrate, which makes it promising as a potential photoanode for flexible DSCs. XRD and EDS line scan profiles indicated that the Ti–Zn alloy layer and the ZnO compact layer were responsible for the tight connection between Ti foil and branched ZnO nanostructures. Even after dozens of bending, ZnO is still firmly adhered to Ti foil. Using HBZ/Ti as a photoanode, a flexible D149-sensitized solar cell was assembled and demonstrated a PCE of 3.3% under rear-side illumination. The PCE of the device remained 92% of the initial value even after 50 times of bending.
Although a record PCE as high as 7.5% has been achieved on a rigid DSC based on ZnO nanoparticles, the best performed rigid DSC based on branched ZnO nanowires only showed a PCE of 5.2%. Flexible ZnO-based devices usually show much inferior performance. Yin et al. reported a plastic DSC based on ZnO nanoparticles with a PCE of 3.76%, which might be the best among the ZnO-based flexible devices. For ZnO-based flexible DSCs using metal foils/meshes as the substrates of photoanodes, PCEs ever reported in the recent publications are in the range of 1.78–2.7%. So the PCE of 3.3% demonstrated by our devices may represent the highest performance among the ZnO-based flexible DSCs using a metal foil/mesh as the substrates of photoanodes.

Highly branched ZnO nanostructures were prepared using the vapor confined chemical vapor deposition technique. A small quartz tube with one sealed end was adopted to confine vapor during the growth process. The schematic cross-sectional profile of the experimental setup is shown in Fig. 1. The zinc powder was placed at the bottom of the sealed end, and the Ti foil was put at the open end of the tube. The distance between zinc powder and Ti foil was about three centimeters. Prior to usage, Ti foil was etched using hydrogen fluoride aqueous solution and then polished with a sandpaper. Ar (100 sccm, standard-state cubic centimeter per minute) and O2 (1.0 sccm) were used as a carrier gas and a reactive gas, respectively. The reaction was performed under an ambient atmospheric pressure. The furnace temperature was increased from room temperature to 650 °C at a heating rate of 20 °C min−1. Then, the furnace was held at 650 °C for 30 minutes. Finally, the furnace was naturally cooled down to room temperature. After the facile deposition process, lots of white floccules were observed on the Ti foil. The as-prepared samples were characterized using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi S-4800) and an X-ray powder diffractometer (XRD, D/MAX-TTRIII (CBO), Cu Kα). A line scan profile was recorded with an energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) attached to the SEM.


The flexible D149-sensitized HBZ/Ti photoandoe was fabricated as follows: the as-prepared HBZ/Ti electrode was first heated at 85 °C for 30 minutes. Then, the electrode was immersed into D149 dye solution (0.3 mmol L−1) at room temperature for two hours. The photoanodes were rinsed with anhydrous acetonitrile and kept in the dark before assembling the DSC device. The plastic counter electrodes were prepared by sputtering Pt on the PEN-ITO (15 Ω sq−1, Kintec, Hong Kong) substrate using a sputtering coater (Denton DESK II). Flexible DSCs were assembled by sandwiching the flexible D149-sensitized photoanode, liquid electrolyte and plastic Pt-coated PEN-ITO counter electrode with a 60 μm thermal sealing film (DuPont Surlyn). The composition of the liquid electrolyte is 0.5 M tetrabutylammonium iodide, 0.001 M LiClO4, 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine and 0.1 M I2 in 3-methyoxypropionitrile. The photovoltaic measurement was conducted with an Oriel AM 1.5G solar simulator (Newport, model 91160A) with an air mass filter and a Keithley unit (model-2400). Simulated light of AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) was illuminated from the plastic Pt counter electrode of the DSC device (rear-side illumination). The light intensity was calibrated with a standard silicon solar cell (Oriel, SRC-1000-TC).


Ti foil can be easily oxidized under an oxygen atmosphere at high temperature. In order to overcome this drawback in the traditional technique, a small quartz tube with one end sealed was adopted in our study. As shown in Fig. 1, the open end of the small quartz tube was placed downstream so that oxygen cannot readily access the Ti foil. In such a way, the Ti foil was protected from oxidation during the CVD process in the study, as evidenced by the absence of the TiO2 or TiOx phase in the XRD pattern of the as-prepared samples (for detail see Discussions below). Therefore, the unique flexibility of Ti foil can be well maintained, even after the CVD process. After the fabrication process, a layer of white floccules was deposited on the Ti foil. The mechanical stability of the as-prepared films was investigated by the concave and convex bending test. The as-prepared film on the Ti foil can withstand 50 bending cycles without any damage (Fig. 2a). The results indicate that the as-prepared products were firmly bonded with the metal substrate, with strong adhesion to the substrate and excellent mechanical strengths, which will benefit the stability of the flexible photoanode used in the DSCs.

The components of the final product synthesized in the CVD process were identified using XRD measurements. A typical XRD pattern of the as-prepared sample on the Ti foil is shown in Fig. 3 (curve A). The dominant phase was identified to be wurtzite-type ZnO (ICDD PDF no. 75-0576). Some residual reflections were attributed to Ti metal according to ICDD PDF no. 65-3362. The reflection intensity of the Ti metal was much weaker than that of wurtzite-type ZnO, in accordance with the fact that the Ti foil was entirely covered by the ZnO layer.
Besides the reflections of ZnO and Ti metal, there were still two very weak peaks to be identified in the powder pattern. To suppress the interference from the reflections of ZnO, we scratched the ZnO layer and collected the powder diffraction data again (shown as curve B in Fig. 3). After scratching the covered ZnO layer, the reflection intensity of wurtzite-type ZnO dramatically decreased, while the signals from other phases were significantly enhanced. Two peaks at 38.821 and 39.640° in 2θ are supposed to result from the Ti–Zn alloy with reference to EDS measurements. The reflection at a lower angle may be assigned to the TiZn2 alloy phase (ICDD PDF no. 65-3575) while the one at a higher angle is probably due to TiZn3 (ICDD PDF no. 65-3262). Due to the complexity of the Ti–Zn system and the very limited information provided by the XRD pattern, these two peaks cannot be identified unambiguously. In addition, no peaks of any TiOx and TiO2 was found in the XRD pattern, confirming that the Ti foil was effectively prevented from oxidation during the process of vapor confined chemical vapor deposition.
The morphology of the as-prepared ZnO nanostructures on Ti foil was characterized using scanning electron microscopy. Top-view SEM images with different magnifications for the as-prepared ZnO layer are shown in Fig. 4. The highly branched ZnO nanostructures were obtained on the Ti foil (Fig. 4a and b). The constitutional unit in the ZnO layer is a highly branched ZnO nanostructure (Fig. 4c). The length of the branches was about 1–2 μm and the thickness of the branch was about 20 nm (Fig. 4d). The cross-sectional view of the sample is also displayed in Fig. 5. It is clear that ZnO layers with different morphologies were grown on the Ti foil (Fig. 5a). The top layer was ZnO networks composed of highly branched ZnO nanostructures of different stack densities (Fig. 5b and c), and the bottom layer was a ZnO compact layer composed of tightly stacked ZnO column crystals (Fig. 5d). The thicknesses of the highly branched ZnO layer and the ZnO compact layer were 60 μm and 10 μm, respectively. The highly branched ZnO nanostructures grew on the tightly stacked ZnO column crystals, and the connection between two layers was tight through the denser branched ZnO layer (Fig. 5c). The ZnO compact layer may act as the seeds for the growth of the highly branched ZnO.
The cross-sectional image of the interface between the ZnO compact layer and Ti foil is displayed in Fig. 5e. According to the XRD results, Ti–Zn alloys might exist in the products. EDS line scan analysis was then conducted at the interface between the Ti foil and ZnO compact layer to further confirm the existence of the alloy layer and investigate its distribution. As shown in Fig. 5f, the concentration of Ti, Zn and O elements varied along the line across the interface. The interfacial area between the ZnO compact layer and Ti foil can be roughly divided into three zones based on the element distribution. In the upper zone, the Zn element showed the highest concentration, while the signal of Ti was approaching to the background. In the bottom area, Ti dominated while Zn and O were negligible. In the middle part, Ti and Zn elements were the predominant components. Hence, the three layers from top to bottom can be labelled as “ZnO”, “Ti–Zn” and “Ti” layer within the selected zone, respectively. It indicated that the alloy layer might exist between the ZnO compact layer and Ti foil. EDS point analyses were also carried out at the interfacial area to achieve spectra of better quality and confirm the line scan results. As revealed by results shown in Fig. 5g and h, grains rich in both Zn and Ti exist indeed at the interfacial area between the ZnO compact layer and Ti foil, though phases identification cannot be made clearly due to limited information. Therefore, the structure of the as-prepared HBZ/Ti samples can be schematically described as the diagram shown in Fig. 5i. The four layers from top to bottom in the as-prepared sample are the highly branched ZnO networks, ZnO compact layer, Ti–Zn alloy layer and Ti foil.
A growth mechanism is suggested to explain the formation of the resultant HBZ/Ti with four different layers. According to the phase diagram of the Ti–Zn system, a liquid Ti–Zn alloy can be easily formed above about 500 °C in the Zn-rich part, while the liquid Ti–Zn alloy will solidify when the temperature is below 400 °C. In our study, a small one-end sealed tube was used to conduct vapor confined CVD. The one-end sealed tube in the study not only prevented Ti foil from oxidation, but also provided the Zn-rich atmosphere during the growth process. When the temperature of the furnace reaches 500 °C, the one-end sealed tube is full of Zn vapor because the melting point of Zn is about 420 °C. Hence, liquid Ti–Zn alloy film will appear on the surface of Ti foil. At the same time, the zinc vapor can react with oxygen at 500 °C in our experiment, and thus produce ZnO nanoparticles during the process. The resultant ZnO nanoparticles will also suffuse the tube, and some of them will be deposited and embedded into the liquid Ti–Zn alloy film. The embedded ZnO nanoparticles will act as the seed for the following growth of ZnO column crystals. The growth of ZnO column crystals on the Ti–Zn alloy film can be catalysed by the liquid Ti–Zn alloy by means of a V–L–S mechanism. The resultant ZnO column crystals stack tightly to form the ZnO compact layer. Liquid Ti–Zn alloy catalysts do not stay on the top of column crystals, but they still remain at the bottom, connecting the ZnO compact layer and Ti foil, as shown in Fig. 5f. When the liquid Ti–Zn alloy film is fully covered by the ZnO compact layer, the growth of the ZnO compact layer will be ceased. After that, highly branched ZnO nanostructures start to grow on the surfaces of ZnO column crystals via a V–S mechanism and they interlace with each other to form the ZnO networks eventually. The ZnO column crystals can also work as the seeds for the growth of highly branched ZnO nanostructures. The excellent connections among the four layers benefit the flexibility and mechanical stability of the as-prepared HBZ/Ti electrode.
The flexible solar cell was fabricated with D149-sensitized HBZ/Ti as a photoanode, Pt-coated PEN-ITO as a counter electrode and a liquid electrolyte. The photograph of the flexible D149-sensitized HBZ/Ti photoanode is present in Fig. 2b, showing high flexibility. The schematic configuration of a flexible DSC based on HBZ/Ti and its photocurrent density–voltage characteristic curve (upper blue curve) is shown in Fig. 6. The device was measured under rear-side illumination of simulated solar light of 100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5). A PCE of 3.3% was obtained, with an open-circuit voltage of 0.664 V (Voc), a short-circuit photocurrent density of 7.53 mA cm−2 (Jsc) and a fill factor of 0.66 (FF). The PCE of the device after 50 bending cycles remained 92% of the initial value, namely 3.05%, with a Voc of 0.656 V, a Jsc of 7.05 mA cm−2, a FF of 0.66. These results indicate that the as-prepared HBZ/Ti photoanode shows good mechanical stability and flexibility with high power conversion efficiency. As discussed above, the as-prepared ZnO film on Ti possess a large amount of branches with a large surface area, which can provide much sites for dye absorbing, when the ZnO film is sensitized in a dye solution. In addition, the photo-generated carriers in the device can quickly transport through the interlaced branches within the networks with very few recombination loss. Moreover, the porous structure of networks also allows plentiful light to penetrate into the photoanode. Therefore, the as-prepared ZnO network would confine the light effectively, and thereby improve the utilization of illumination light. These factors may lead to the high power conversion efficiency for the flexible HBZ/Ti solar cells. It should be noted that the iodide and triiodide contained in the liquid electrolyte can also absorb light in the rear-side illumination model, which can decrease the PCE of the device. These results demonstrate that the vapor confined CVD is a facile, effective approach to synthesize highly branched ZnO nanostructures on Ti foil with good mechanical stability and flexibility, and high power conversion efficiency as well.

Highly branched ZnO nanostructures have been deposited on Ti foil via a facile one-step vapor confined chemical vapor deposition method without any catalyst or seed. The resultant HBZ/Ti electrode contained four different layers: a highly branched ZnO layer, a ZnO compact layer, a Ti–Zn alloy layer and Ti foil from top to bottom. The HBZ/Ti possessed good mechanical stability and flexibility measured in the concave and convex bending test. A power conversion efficiency of 3.3% was obtained for a flexible D149-sensitized HBZ/Ti solar cell, measured under rear-side illumination (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2). After 50 bending cycles, the PCE of the resultant device remained 92% of its initial value. The tight bond between ZnO and Ti foil by the Ti–Zn alloy layer and the ZnO compact layer, with great flexibility, makes the vapor confined CVD method practical for high-performance flexible photoanode preparation.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant nos 21103032, 21071016, and 51272049) and the Major State Basic Research Development Program of China (973 Program) (no. 2011CB932702).


† These authors contributed equally to this article.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014