 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA06084G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18275-18284


Qiuju
Liu
,

Yanan
Zhao
,

Yinxing
Ma
,

Xuan
Sun
,

Wenqi
Ge
,

Zhuliang
Fang
,

Hua
Bai
*,

Qingyong
Tian
*,

Bin
Fan
* and 

Tongyi
Zhang
*

College of Materials, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, P. R. China. E-mail: baihua@xmu.edu.cn

Suzhou GCL Nano Co., Ltd., Suzhou, 215028, P. R. China. E-mail: tianqingyong@gcl-power.com; fanbin@gcl-power.com

Materials Genome Institute of Shanghai University, Shanghai Materials Genome Institute, Shanghai University, Shanghai, 200444, P. R. China. E-mail: zhangty@shu.edu.cn

Received
7th June 2019
, Accepted 11th July 2019
First published on 11th July 2019
A simple and reliable method of preparing high-quality perovskite layers is essential for the high photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells. Here, a new low-boiling-point solvent system composed of methylamine solution in ethanol and tetrahydrofuran is designed for methylammonium lead iodide precursor solutions. Concentrated methylammonium lead iodide precursor solutions with a concentration of 2.1 M are obtained, and smooth and compact methylammonium lead iodide films with an area of up to 600 cm2 are prepared directly by one-step spin-coating or blade-coating the precursor solution at room temperature. The rapid evaporation of the solvent and strong interaction between methylamine and methylammonium lead iodide lead to a high crystal nucleus density and intermediate-free crystallization path, and consequently result in a compact and smooth film. The high-quality methylammonium lead iodide films show excellent photovoltaic performance in conventional mesoporous solar cells with efficiencies of 20.0% (0.1 cm2) and 15.6% (10 cm2). Because of the low cost and ease of operation, the solvent system developed in this work is promising both in the laboratory and for future industrialization.

Organometal trihalide based perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have received much attention in recent years because of their low cost and excellent photovoltaic performance. With a certified efficiency of 24.2%, PSCs have reached a performance level that is approaching commercial monocrystalline silicon solar cells. One of the attractions of PSCs is their solution-based fabrication process. The perovskite layer is usually prepared by coating and drying a precursor solution on the substrate, and this process is expected to be energy efficient and has lower equipment requirement in future industrialization. The key to solution-based film-deposition techniques is controlling the morphology of the prepared perovskite film. A compact and smooth perovskite film with full coverage is critical to achieving sufficient light harvesting and decreasing the shunting loss. Unfortunately, when the precursor solution is dried, an intermediate-dominated crystallization pathway usually leads to rough and discontinuous perovskite layers composed of large and separated crystals. Therefore, various techniques were developed to control the morphology of the perovskite film, such as antisolvent crystallization, vacuum-assisted solution processing, and methylamine post-treatment. These methods have been shown to vastly improve film quality, and allow for the formation of smooth and compact films with increased surface coverage.

Although there is a significant improvement in the morphology control of the perovskite film, the current film formation techniques are still far from satisfactory. These methods involve additional treatments during or after drying and are often very sensitive to operation. Besides, most of the effective methods are designed to work with spin-coating, and is difficult to apply to the fabrication of large-area films. For example, for the most widely used film-formation method, anti-solvent crystallization, its effect largely depends on the amount of the anti-solvent and the timing when the antisolvent is introduced. From a practical point of view, especially for the purpose of large-area module production, a simple and robust film fabrication method is highly desired.
Solvent engineering is a promising and facile strategy for improving the morphology of perovskite films. By using different solvents, such as N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO),N-methylpyrrolidone (NMP), γ-butyrolactone (GBL), acetonitrile,N,N-dimethylacetamide (DMAC), hexamethylphosphoramide (HMPA), 2-methoxyethanol (2ME), and their mixtures, the physical properties of the solution and the interactions between solvent and the perovskite precursor were tuned, and consequently, the morphology of the perovskite crystal can be changed remarkedly. Recently, methylamine have been used as an effective additive to increase the solubility of perovskites in some solvents, and tune the morphology of the prepared films because it has a strong interaction with both methylammonium and lead ions. However, as a gas, methylamine is difficult to handle, especially for large scale production. Here in this study, we design a new mixed solvent system comprising of two low-cost and commercially available chemicals, methylamine solution in ethanol (ME) and tetrahydrofuran (THF), as solvents for the precursor solution of CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3). The THF–ME (TME) mixed solvent can dissolve MAPbI3 in a high concentration (>2 M), and more importantly, it evaporates rapidly and promote the fast nucleation and crystallization of MAPbI3. Therefore, a smooth MAPbI3 film can be obtained from the solution of MAPbI3 in TME by direct spin-coating or blade-coating at room temperature. Without any post-treatment, the spincoated MAPbI3 film provides a high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 20.0% on a 0.1 cm2 device, and the PCE maintains 15.6% when the device is enlarged to 10 cm2.

Ethanol is not a good solvent for MAPbI3. When MAPbI3 crystals were exposed to ethanol, they did not dissolve but turned into a yellow precipitate after ultrasonic treatment (Fig. 1A). The color change implies that ethanol can enter the lattice of the MAPbI3 crystals, via hydrogen bonds with MA ions or coordination with Pb2+ ions, but the interaction is not strong enough to completely dissociate MAPbI3. However, MAPbI3 shows high solubility in ME (containing 30 wt% methylamine). The photograph of the solutions of MAPbI3 in ME with different concentrations is shown in Fig. 1A. A clean, transparent MAPbI3 solution in ME can be quickly prepared with a maximum concentration of 1.55 M. Obviously, methylamine efficiently increases the solubility of MAPbI3 in ethanol. We used ultraviolet-visible absorption (UV-Vis, Fig. 1B) spectra and dynamic light scattering (DLS, Fig. 1C) measurements to investigate the solution of MAPbI3 in ME and to compare it with the solution in DMF, the most widely used solvent for the MAPbI3 precursor solution. The absorption peak at 330 nm of the solution is attributed to 1S0 → 3P1 transition (A band) of lead(II) ions, probably in PbI3(NH3CH3)3−. As a comparison, in DMF the same transition of PbI3(DMF)3− produces an absorption peak at a longer wavelength of 350 nm because of the weaker coordination of nitrogen atoms in DMF. The hydrophilic and bulky methyl groups on methylamine increase the solubility of coordinated Pb2+ in ethanol. DSL measurement on the solution of MAPbI3 in ME reveals that the average particle size increases with the concentration. At low concentrations, a small particle size of 1 nm suggests a nearly complete disassociation of MAPbI3 in ME, while at high concentrations, large aggregates form. The particle sizes in ME are larger than that in DMF at the same concentration, showing a weaker dissolving capacity of ME to MAPbI3.

Interestingly, when the concentration of MAPbI3 in ME exceeds 1.55 M, phase separation occurs, leading to two layers of immiscible solutions. Both layers of liquid are MAPbI3 precursor solutions, because they were converted into pure MAPbI3 after evaporation of the solvent (Fig. S1). This phase separation shows that MAPbI3 and ME can form a complex, which is immiscible with ME itself. The concentrations of top and bottom layers were measured to be 0.65 M and 2.1 M, respectively, and the viscosity of the bottom solution is around 63 mPa s, an order of magnitude higher than that of the top solution (4 mPa s, Fig. S2). Such a phase separation is fatal to the preparation of MAPbI3 films. We found that, because of the high viscosity of the solution and the high vapor pressure of the solvent, the bottom solution dried quickly before it could be spread into a flat liquid film by spin-coating. As a result, the spin-coated film made from the bottom solution has an undulating surface (Fig. 1D left). Even the initial concentration of the MAPbI3 solution is not high enough to cause phase separation; during the spin-coating the concentration will increase along with the evaporation of the solvent, and phase separation will occur inevitably, leading to a rough film (Fig. 1D right). The SEM images (Fig. 1E and F) show that the film prepared from the ME solution is uneven, while in some regions the MAPbI3 film is over 4-micrometer thick, and in other regions the substrate is completely exposed. However, close observation reveals that in the regions covered by MAPbI3 films, the crystal grains are uniform and tightly arranged. The morphology suggests that although the phase separation of the ME solution results in undulating films, the fast evaporation of ME is conducive to the formation of closely packed MAPbI3 crystal grains.
To suppress the phase separation of the solution of MAPbI3 in ME, we introduced a second component THF to the solvent, to adjust the interaction between the solvent and MAPbI3. THF is a common solvent in organic synthesis with relatively low toxicity, and its low boiling point of 66 °C and high vapor pressure of 19.3 kPa at 20 °C lead to fast evaporation at room temperature. THF cannot dissolve MAPbI3, but it does not significantly reduce the solubility of MAPbI3 in ME (Fig. 2A). Furthermore, THF can eliminate the phase separation of the solution of MAPbI3 in ME. When the volume ratio of THF to ME is 0.9:1, the mixed solvent THF–methylamine–ethanol (TME) can dissolve 2.1 M MAPbI3 without any phase separation (Fig. 2A). The UV-Vis spectra of the solutions of MAPbI3 in TME with different THF:ME volume ratios are shown in Fig. 2B. With the increase of the THF volume fraction from 0:1 to 1.1:1, the absorption band corresponding to PbI3(NH3CH3)3− red-shifted by 20 nm. However, DLS measurement (Fig. 2C) shows that THF has a little effect on particle size distribution, and the radius of colloids is 1–2 nm for all the solutions. Therefore, the size effect contributes little to the red-shift in the absorption spectra. Since THF is a weak ligand of Pb2+ ions, it may not substitute the strong ligand methylamine and iodine ions to coordinate with Pb2+. We speculate that THF suppresses the phase separation by reducing the polarity of the MAPbI3 enriched phase, and increasing its miscibility with ethanol. The polarity decrease also results in the red-shift of the absorption spectra.
By using the solutions of MAPbI3 in TME, we developed an effective strategy to produce high-quality perovskite films via one-step direct spin-coating without any post-treatment. The TME solutions dry very fast under spin-coating, and black films are formed after ∼2 s. Fig. 2D shows the SEM images of spincoated MAPbI3 films prepared from the 0.6 M solutions with different THF:ME volume ratios. With low THF volume fraction, the MAPbI3 films have obvious undulations, like those found on the film prepared from the ME solution, suggesting the occurrence of phase separation during spin-coating. With the increase of THF, the undulations on MAPbI3 films gradually disappear, and when the volume ratio of THF:ME is 0.9:1, a highly uniform MAPbI3 film is obtained, indicating that the phase-separation is suppressed by THF. With increased THF volume ratios, cracks will appear on the surface of the films, possibly because the too fast evaporation generates large stress in the film. A close observation on the film reveals a compact arrangement of large MAPbI3 crystals (Fig. 2E and F). The average size of the crystal is 400 ± 100 nm, larger than that of the films prepared by the anti-solvent method. Meanwhile, the root-mean-square roughness of the MAPbI3 films was measured to be 21.5 nm for a 5 μm × 5 μm area (Fig. 2G). Therefore, the crystallized film shows a good mirror effect, as shown in Fig. 2H. Previously, MAPbI3 films with a smooth surface and large crystal size could be prepared by using additives, such as some ionic liquids, bidentate halogenated additives and sulfur-containing compounds, which were difficult to remove from the film. Some other techniques require additional equipment to control crystallization conditions, such as heating the substrate or introducing vacuum. In our method, the high-quality films are prepared by a facile one-step spin-coating process at room temperature, without the use of any anti-solvent or post-treatment, which demonstrates the advantage of TME as a solvent system for fast preparation of MAPbI3 films.
One attractive merit of the TME solution is that it can be used to prepare large-area MAPbI3 films with the blade-coating method. As shown in Video S1, the TME solution quickly dried and turned brown two seconds after it was spread on the substrate, and no intermediate phase was observed. Fig. 3A shows the image of a 600 cm2 MAPbI3 film, which shows a translucent appearance and mirror-like surface. The SEM image reveals a uniform and compact surface, without any defects or pinholes, while the crystal grain size is comparable to that of the spin-coated film (Fig. 3C–E). The solution of MAPbI3 in DMF was taken as a control system, and compared with the TME solution. While the MAPbI3 film crystallized very fast from the TME solution without any obvious intermediate phase (Video S2), the drying of the DMF solution at room temperature was much slower, and crystallization occurred stepwise. The solution on the substrate first became turbid and then a brown film formed (Video S3). Only after a long time or being heated at 80 °C, the brown film could completely transform into a black MAPbI3 film. The SEM image reveals a rough film with low coverage and large needle-like crystals (Fig. 3B). This morphology is consistent with those in previous reports, and such films are not suitable for photovoltaic devices. The above comparison demonstrates that TME is an excellent solvent for a blade-coating technique. The ability to fabricate large-area MAPbI3 films via one-step blade-coating at room temperature is highly desirable for future industrialization.
An optical microscope was used to observe the crystallization of MAPbI3 during blade-coating, and to reveal the mechanism of the formation of the compact MAPbI3 film from the TME solution. As shown in Fig. 3F and G, during crystallization, the MAPbI3 crystal grains cover parts of the substrate, and the other area of the substrate is bare. The island-shaped grains on the substrate confirm the Volmer–Weber growth of MAPbI3 crystals in both solutions. In the Volmer–Weber mode, small nuclei first form on the substrate, and then grow into larger islands, because the sum of the surface free energy of the MAPbI3 film and the interfacial free energy is larger than the surface free energy of the substrate. Although the growth modes of MAPbI3 crystals from two solutions are the same, there is a huge difference in the morphology of the obtained films. Fig. 3F shows that in the DMF solution there is only a small amount of crystal nuclei, from which needle-like one-dimensional (1D) crystal grains grew radially. These crystals, which are believed to be the MAPbI3·DMF intermediates, cannot completely cover the substrate. For the MAPbI3 solution in TME (Fig. 3G), much more nuclei were found, and the crystal grains grow continuously in two-dimension (2D). The high nuclear density and 2D growth of the MAPbI3 grain in TME together result in a smooth and compact MAPbI3 film.
The above two characteristics leading to a high-quality MAPbI3 film are related to the physical and chemical properties of TME. The fast evaporation of TME can cause a sharp increase in the concentration of the MAPbI3 solution. Consequently, the solution reaches a critical supersaturation state in a short time, and a large number of crystal nuclei are formed, while for the MAPbI3 solution in DMF, its concentration increases slowly because of the low evaporation speed of DMF. The crystal growth will compete with nucleation, consume the supersaturated ions in the solution and suppress nucleation. Therefore, fewer nuclei were formed at in the DMF solution. Furthermore, TME suppresses the formation of 1D solvated MAPbI3 intermediate crystals. At room temperature, crystallization from many solvents, such as DMF and DMSO, usually leads to solvated intermediates. These intermediates prefer 1D growth, and cannot cover the substrate completely. When converted to MAPbI3, they will produce a discontinuous MAPbI3 film with low surface coverage (Fig. 3H). Therefore, the room temperature crystallization of MAPbI3 from those solvents is intermediate-dominated. Anti-solvents and hot substrates are reported to suppress the formation of the solvated intermediates and increase the surface coverage. Here we did not observe any similar intermediate phase during crystallization from the solution in TME, showing that crystallization follows a direct path. The possible reason is that the complex between MAPbI3 and methylamine, the strongest ligand to Pb2+ in TME, is a liquid, and thereby no solid intermediate is formed in TME. Since no 1D intermediate crystals are involved, the 2D growth of MAPbI3 crystal grains produces a compact and uniform film (Fig. 3H). Similar smooth films were obtained by treating the MAPbI3 film with methylamine gas. However, compared with methylamine gas, our TME solvent is easier to handle and to scale up to large area devices.
The quality of the MAPbI3 films prepared from the TME solution was evaluated using XRD, UV-Vis and photoluminescence spectra. The X-ray diffraction pattern of an as-prepared MAPbI3 film (Fig. 4A) shows only the characteristic peaks of a tetragonal perovskite crystal structure, indicating that a highly crystalline MAPbI3 film forms during spin-coating, without any residual solvated intermediate phase or precursor. In the UV-Vis and photoluminescence spectra (Fig. 4B) there is a characteristic absorption onset and steady-state photoluminescence (excited using a 520 nm laser) peak at approximately 780 nm, which originated from the recombination of the excitons and free carriers. The better crystalline quality of MAPbI3 films can decrease the competition of nonradiative recombination and results in a significant gain in the photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells. Fig. 4C shows comparison of the time-resolved photoluminescence decays for MAPbI3 films prepared from the TME or DMF solution. Fitting the decay curves with a biexponential function gives the averaged fluorescence lifetime of the MAPbI3 films. For the MAPbI3 film prepared from the TME solution, the average lifetime (τ) is 148 ns, longer than that of the film prepared from the DMF solution (81 ns). The long fluorescence time reveals few defects in the MAPbI3 films obtained through this new mixed solvent system.
The photovoltaic performance of the devices based on these MAPbI3 films prepared from TME was tested. We fabricated perovskite solar cells with an active area of 0.1 cm2 and the typical mesoporous-scaffold structure FTO/compact TiO2 (c-TiO2)/mesoporous TiO2 (mp-TiO2)/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/Ag. The device structure is shown in the Fig. 5A inset, and the thickness of c-TiO2, mp-TiO2, MAPbI3, spiro-OMeTAD, and MoO3 layers, and the silver cathode is 60 nm, 200 nm, 650 nm, 200 nm, 10 nm, and 100 nm, respectively. The photovoltaic performance is summarized in Table 1. Fig. 5A shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the best-performing solar cells measured via reverse and forward bias scan. Under AM 1.5 sunlight the champion device reaches the highest PCE of 20.02% with a short circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), and fill factor (FF) of 23.86 mA cm−2, 1.09 V, and 0.77, respectively. This PCE is comparable with those of the devices with mesoporous structures fabricated by anti-solvent or vacuum-assisted crystallization. 30 days of monitoring indicates that the device has good long-term stability (Fig. S3). It is noted that the devices show negligible hysteresis in their J–V curve, indicating few trapped states in the MAPbI3 layer and good interfacial contact. The corresponding incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) (Fig. 5B) has a broad plateau higher than 85% over the entire visible range of 350 to 760 nm, with a maximum value of 94.1%, indicating the efficient absorption of incident light and collection of photogenerated charges. The integrated Jsc is calculated to be 23.39 mA cm−2 and in good agreement with that obtained from the J–V curve. A 400 second steady-state test reveals that the Jsc and PCE at the maximum power point (MPP) are quite stable (Fig. 5C). Moreover, the simplicity of our film formation method and the high quality of the film ensure high reproducibility of the device. The PCE statistics over 35 cells from different batches of the experiments give a narrow efficiency distribution from 19.26% to 20.02% (Fig. 5D).
Area/cm2
Type

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)
FF
PCE (%)
0.1
Average
23.70 ± 0.2
1.08 ± 0.1
0.75 ± 0.02
19.59 ± 0.5
Forward
23.84
1.09
0.76
19.75
Reverse
23.86
1.09
0.77
20.02
1.35
Average
23.64 ± 0.2
1.08 ± 0.1
0.68 ± 0.02
17.68 ± 0.5
Forward
23.81
1.09
0.68
17.65
Reverse
23.84
1.09
0.70
18.17
10
Average
4.75 ± 0.01
5.11 ± 0.02
0.63 ± 0.01
15.14 ± 0.5
Forward
4.75
5.13
0.62
15.10
Reverse
4.76
5.13
0.64
15.62
In order to demonstrate the feasibility of using the TME solution to prepare large area solar cells we prepared other two types of devices with larger active areas of 1.35, and 10 cm2, respectively. The 10 cm2 module was fabricated on a 5 × 5 cm2 FTO substrate by spin-coating, and 5 sub-cells each with an area of 2 cm2 were connected in series (Fig. 5E and F inset). When the device area was increased from 0.1 to 1.35 cm2, the Jsc and Voc remain the same, and slightly lower FF lead to the highest PCE of 17.68% (Table 1 and Fig. S4). The J–V curves of reverse and forward bias scans of the champion 10 cm2 module are presented in Fig. 5F. The highest PCE of 15.62%, with Jsc, Voc, and FF of 4.76 mA cm−2, 5.13 V, and 0.64, respectively, is achieved in the reverse scan, and also the module shows a negligible hysteresis effect. Compared with small area devices, the drop in the PCE mainly comes from a lower FF. The large series resistance in this device should be one of the principal reasons for the low FF, as indicated by the small slope of the J–V curve between the maximum power point and the open circuit voltage point. The value of 15.62% is among the highest PCEs of the devices with the area around or larger than 10 cm2, and it implies that the large MAPbI3 film prepared from TME is highly uniform and defect free. Considering that the fabrication of the MAPbI3 film is performed at room temperature without any addition post-treatment. We believe that this method will be attractive for future industrial production.

We report a new low-boiling-point mixed solvent system composed of ME and THF as solvents for the MAPbI3 precursor solution. The strong coordination of methylamine to Pb2+ makes MAPbI3 highly soluble in a mixture of methanol and THF, and a high solubility of 2.1 M is achieved. The fast evaporation of the mixed solvent produces a high crystal nucleus density, while the unique interaction between methylamine and MAPbI3 avoids the formation of the solvated intermediate crystal. Therefore, by simply spin-coating or blade-coating the precursor solution in the mixed solvent, smooth, compact, and pure MAPbI3 films are prepared at room temperature without any additional treatment. Large area and high-quality MAPbI3 films up to 600 cm2 are obtained with our solvent. A high power conversion efficiency of 20.0% is achieved on a standard mesoporous structure device with good reproducibility. A medium size module with an active area of 10 cm2 prepared by blade-coating also shows a high power conversion efficiency of 15.6%. This work establishes a simple and efficient method of fabricating high-quality perovskite films, and since both ME and THF are commercially available and low-cost chemicals, the mixed solvent TME shows excellent potential in the future large-scale industrial production of perovskite modules. Because the dissolution and crystallization of perovskites in TME depend on the interaction between methylamine and methylammonium, TME is not directly suitable for other kinds of perovskites containing formamidine or cesium ions. One of the future studies is to extend the application of TME or other similar mixed solvents to perovskites with blend cations.


All reagents were used as received without further purification. PbI2 and spiro-OMeTAD were obtained from Merck KGaA. Lithium bis(trifluoromethane) sulfonimide salt (Li-TSFI, 99.95%), Tetrahydrofuran (THF) and chlorobenzene were purchased from Alfa Aesar. Titanium(IV) isopropoxide (99.999%) was purchased from Aldrich. Methylamine ethanol solution (30 wt%, ME) and 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) were the products of Aladdin. CH3NH3I was prepared according to a reported procedure.

To prepare MAPbI3 crystals, CH3NH3I and PbI2 were mixed and dissolved in GBL (1.23 M) as the precursor solution, and after the solution was heated at 100 °C for 24 h, plenty of small crystals were formed. The above crystallization process was carried out in a fresh precursor solution with the small crystals as seeds. Large crystals were collected after for 24 h.
The MAPbI3 solutions in TME were prepared by dissolving a certain amount of MAPbI3 crystals in TME with different volume ratios of THF:ME, under ultrasonic treatment at the ambient temperature. The practical concentration was then determined from the practical volume of the solution.

The solution of MAPbI3 in TME (0.6 M) was deposited onto the mesoporous TiO2/FTO glass substrate (300 mm × 400 mm), and was coated by a home-built blade-coater at a constant rate of 150 mm s−1. The distance between the blade and the substrate was 0.3 mm. The MAPbI3 films were obtained after the solution was dried at room temperature.


Fluorine-doped Tin Oxide (FTO) glass substrates with a dimension of 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm were patterned by laser etching. The substrates were sequentially washed in ultrasonic baths of acetone, distilled water and ethanol, and then dried with high-purity nitrogen flow. A 10 min ultraviolet-ozone treatment was performed before device fabrication to eliminate the residual organic contaminant on the substrates. To fabricate compact TiO2 layers, 1 mL titanium(IV) isopropoxide was mixed with 5 mL 2-methoxyethanol and 0.5 mL ethanolamine to prepare the precursor solution, which was then stirred at 80 °C for 2 h and coated on FTO glass by spin-coating under 3000 rpm for 30 s in air. The substrate was dried on a hot plate at 120 °C for 10 min, and then annealed at 500 °C for 30 min. After cooling to room temperature, a ∼300 nm thick mesoporous TiO2 film was deposited on the compact TiO2 layer by spin-coating of the TiO2 paste (Dyesol DSL18NR-T) with ethanol (1:5, mass ratio), followed by heating at 500 °C for 30 min. The MAPbI3 solution in TME was then spin-coated onto the TiO2-covered substrate at 2000 rpm for 30 s to fabricate the MAPbI3 layer. The HTL layer was deposited on the MAPbI3 film by spin-coating the spiro-OMeTAD solution (80 mg mL−1 containing 17.5 μL Li-TFSI/acetonitrile (520 mg mL−1) and 28.5 μL TBP) at 3000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, 10 nm MoO3 and 100 nm Ag were thermally evaporated under a pressure of 1 × 10−7 mbar. All device fabrication steps and measurement were carried out in an N2-purged glove box (<0.1 ppm O2 and H2O).

For the 10 cm2 module, each layer was deposited following the same procedure as described above except that laser scribing patterning processes were used to separate individual cells and construct the series electrical connection. As shown in Fig. 5E, the FTO substrate was first divided into sub-cells with a 1064 nm laser (P1). After deposition of MoO3 and prior to deposition of the top electrode, 532 nm laser scribing was employed to etch the MAPbI3 layer and expose the bottom electrode of the neighbor sub-cell (P2). The module was completed by dividing the module by 532 nm laser scribing (P3).

Apparent viscosity was measured on an ARES-G2 rheometer (TA Instruments, US). Optical microscopic images were obtained using a BX53 polarizing microscope (Olympus, Japan) equipped with a DXM1200 charge-coupled device (CCD) camera (Nikon, Japan). SEM images were recorded on a SU-70 scanning electron microscope (Hitachi, Japan). Steady fluorescence spectra were recorded on a Fluoromax 4 spectrometer (HORIBA, Japan) with excitation at 520 nm. The time-resolved fluorescence spectra were measured on an FLS980 spectrometer (Edinburgh Instruments, UK), with peak emission at 780 nm. UV-Vis spectra measurements were performed using a UV-2700 spectrophotometer (Shimadzu, Japan). DLS measurements were carried out on a Nano ZS Zetasizer (Malvern, UK). J–V measurement of the solar cells was performed using a Keithley 2400 source meter and 300 W collimated xenon lamp (Newport) calibrated with the light intensity to 100 mW cm−2 under simulated AM 1.5G illumination by a certified silicon solar cell. IPCE was measured on a computer-controlled IPCE system (Newport) containing a xenon lamp, a monochromator, and a Keithley multimeter. The system was calibrated with a certified silicon solar cell and the IPCE data were collected in the DC mode. All the above measurements were carried out at room temperature.


There are no conflicts to declare.


H. B. acknowledges the financial support of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21774104) and the Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province, China (2018J06015).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional figures as described in the main text. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta06084g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019