 DOI: 10.1039/C8TC03573C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 11943-11950


Cristina
Cebrián


Université de Lorraine, CNRS, L2CM 1 Boulevard François Arago – BP 95823, F-57000 Metz, France. E-mail: cristina.cebrian-avila@univ-lorraine.fr

Received
19th July 2018
, Accepted 15th October 2018
First published on 16th October 2018
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) constitute a remarkable class of organic compounds that exhibit a large palette of electronic and optical properties. During the last decade, particular interest has been devoted to these PAHs driven by their successful application in organic electronics. Controlled heteroatom-doping of PAHs (Het-PAHs) offers additional possibilities for property modulation, rendering these derivatives very appealing for the development of high performing materials. In this article, we report a newly emerging class of materials based on a N-PAH class known as ullazine. Briefly covering different synthetic methodologies, their properties will be highlighted with special attention to their current fields of application, mostly in solar energy conversion, although there is great promise for this type of Het-PAH-based material.

Cristina Cebrián

Cristina Cebrián is an Assistant Professor at the University of Lorraine (France). She studied Chemistry at the University of Castilla-La Mancha (Spain), where she also received her PhD in 2011 under the supervision of Prof. A. Díaz-Ortiz and Dr P. Prieto. During her doctoral studies, she made short stays in the groups of Prof. F. P. Cossío (University of the Basque Country, Spain) and Prof. L. De Cola (University of Münster, Germany). After a post-doctoral fellowship in De Cola's group (2012–2013) between the University of Münster and the University of Strasbourg (Institut de Science et d’Ingénierie Supramoléculaires, France), she obtained her current position at the UL in 2013. Her research interests include the synthesis of organic and organometallic materials for optoelectronics and solar energy conversion, with special attention to sustainable synthetic approaches and challenging photoactive systems based on non-toxic and alternative metals.

Traditionally viewed as chromophores, the development of heteroatom-doped polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (Het-PAHs) is attracting renewed attention due to their easily tunable properties in comparison with their parent PAH congeners. Het-PAHs can be regarded as small cut-offs of heteroatom-containing graphene with a non-zero bandgap that endows them with semiconducting properties. Their properties are tuned by varying the number of rings and their geometrical arrangement. More importantly, the fascination for Het-PAH stems from the additional possibilities of electronic structure modification attained by the controlled introduction of heteroatoms within the compounds, resulting in modified physicochemical, optical, electrochemical and structural properties. Indeed, contrary to the doping of graphene layers, the step-wise construction of these polycyclic systems containing well-defined heterocyclic units allows for a precise heteroatom doping at the atomic level, i.e. in heteroatom type, content and position.

Another interesting feature of Het-PAHs is their extended sp2-hybridized framework, which plays a pivotal role in molecular organization. The close interplay of the interactions among π-electronic clouds, dipole moments and heteroatom contacts, among others, results in a subtle control of the molecular organization, creating excellent scaffolds to obtain self-assembled materials.
Up to now, nitrogen has been the most common doping element in PAH-based compounds (N-PAHs) since it allows for property modulation without disruption of the structure. Interestingly, opposite effects can be attained depending on the nature of the N atom. For instance, pyridinic-type N atoms typically confer electron-accepting properties while pyrrolic-type N atoms, on the contrary, lead to electron enriched compounds. Furthermore, peripheral imines constitute donor coordination sites, opening the door to organometallic complexes with interesting electronic and photophysical properties. As a result, N-PAH-based materials keep gathering considerable interest owing to their potential applications in molecular electronics.
In the last five years, the number of reports dealing with derivatives of indolizino[6,5,4,3-ija]quinoline, also known as ullazine, has experienced a sudden increase, having first been described in 1982 (compounds 1, Fig. 1). The successful application of ullazine-based photosensitizers in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) has subsequently fostered the development of new synthetic methods to obtain more sophisticated ullazine derivatives. Furthermore, in-depth characterisation studies of these novel materials are just beginning to shed light on alternative applications. Thus, we will herein present these very recent results, firstly briefly describing the basic features of the ullazine system. Then, an overview of the current available synthetic designs will be given as well. The following sections will be devoted to (potential) fields of application for ullazine-based materials, such as photosensitizers for solar cells (Section 3), charge-transporting materials for organic field-effect transistors (Section 4) and open-shell systems (Section 5). Finally, we will discuss the future outlook of this class of N-doped materials.

Ullazine derivatives belong to the family of the cyclazines. This term was initially proposed by Boekelheide et al. when they reported the synthesis of pyrrolo[2,1,5-cd]indolizine (2) in 1958. Interestingly, this compound possesses a 10 π-electron conjugated system in the periphery, which confers it with aromatic character. They proposed the word cyclazine to generally designate “a conjugated, unsaturated cycle held planar by three covalent bonds to an internal nitrogen atom”. In Fig. 1, some of the most representative examples of cyclazines are depicted. It is worth noting that this class of compounds constitutes an elegant manner to achieve planar annulenes of different sizes upon bridging the conjugated system by the central N atom. As a result, cyclazines can present either aromatic or antiaromatic character and have acted as models to fully understand aromaticity.

From an electronic point of view, ullazine is isoelectronic with pyrene. However, in contrast to the apolar nature of the latter, ullazine presents a noticeable participation of an ionic mesomeric structure in the ground-state electronic description (Fig. 1). Indeed, an aromatic [14]annulene can be identified in the periphery for the ionic structure, justifying its important weight in the molecular description of the ground state. Therefore, ullazine can be regarded as an intramolecular donor–acceptor system, which is at the origin of the particular appeal of ullazine derivatives.
Furthermore, oxidation is readily observed for this Het-PAH due to its electron-donor nature conferred by the pyrrolic moiety. Interestingly, Gerson and Metzger found that the obtained radical cations for ullazines 1a–d were persistent, even for several days. Even more surprising was the fact that these compounds led also to radical anions with a non-negligible persistence.

Following the recent synthetic interest for ullazine derivatives, multiple strategies for structural modification are currently available (Fig. 2). In almost all cases, the synthesis of the ullazine scaffold can be achieved starting from N-phenylpyrroles and, as a function of the selected method, different substitution patterns can be obtained. Moreover, post-functionalization is also possible. The electron-rich character of the ullazine system makes it prone to react with electrophilic reagents, position 5 being mostly favoured. Thus, the structural versatility attained so far in the synthesis of ullazine derivatives has turned it into a valuable building block for material fabrication.

The presence of additional heteroatoms has also been reported. As shown in Fig. 2, additional pyridinic-like nitrogen atoms can be incorporated at variable positions on the molecular periphery. Even a bis-BN ullazine has been reported very recently, with BN-doped PAH possessing high interest in organic electronics because of the introduction of polarity without disruption of the carbon framework.
Additionally, ullazine derivatives with π-extended conjugated systems have been described as well (Fig. 3). Notably, the 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition independently developed by the groups of Feng and Müllen and that of Ito and Nozaki is of particular importance for the easy access to large Het-PAHs such as 5–9.

Regardless of their organometallic or metal-free nature, DSSC photosensitizers generally comprise a donor–π–acceptor (D–π–A) structure. Among the advantages of this configuration, the presence of low-energy charge-transfer (CT) electronic transitions is of utmost importance. Indeed, the charge separation induced upon photoexcitation of the molecule greatly favours the subsequent electron injection into the semiconductor (SC) conduction band (CB) if corresponding electronic energy levels are properly placed. Particularly for all-organic dyes, D–π–A designs also lead to bathochromically shifted absorptions in comparison to localized transitions, further improving solar light harvesting.

To date, ullazine structural motifs have mostly been used for the engineering of novel photosensitizers for solar-cell fabrication purposes. The prominent electron-rich character of these derivatives can be exploited as the donor component. Nevertheless, as previously stated, the presence of the internal pyrrolic nitrogen within the conjugated framework promotes an intramolecular CT (ICT) resonance structure, intrinsically constituting both the donor and acceptor counterparts.
Delcamp, Grätzel and co-workers first reported ullazine-based sensitizers for DSSCs. After a straightforward, easily scalable synthesis of the ullazine core, grafting groups were introduced at different positions, namely 5 (JD21, JD25, JD29 and JD30), 4 (JD26) and 6 (JD32) (Fig. 4a). Thus, six novel dyes were obtained with varying donors and π-spacers. Most compounds exhibited an ICT absorption band almost extending throughout the whole visible spectrum. The presence of either alkoxy or triarylamine groups increased the molar absorptivity values (2.8, 3.3 and 2.4 × 104 M−1 cm−1 for JD21, JD25 and JD29, respectively) with respect to alkyl-substituted JD30 (1.2 × 104 M−1 cm−1). Introduction of the cyanoacrylic anchoring group at the 4-position leads, however, to a noticeable decrease of the ICT absorption in comparison to the 5-substituted dyes. This result was attributed to the reduced planarity of the so-obtained chromophore, which was nicely supported by computational calculations. In the case of JD32, the ullazine core was modified at the 6-position, adding both the cyanoacrylic moiety and a thiophene ring as π-spacer. Nevertheless, the presence of a nodal plane at the frontier molecular orbitals (MOs) results in almost negligible electronic communication between the ullazine core and the acceptor unit. As a consequence, no distinguishable ICT band was discerned for JD32. Suitable redox properties prompted their evaluation within a DSSC scheme. Except for JD32, all dyes showed a broad incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) covering from the UV to the red part of the spectrum, with peak values of ca. 70–95% (Fig. 4b). The broadened IPCE bands compared to the solution-state absorption revealed the presence of dye aggregation within the device. As expected, the introduction of flexible chains had a positive effect on the Voc due to the protecting effect of the semiconductor surface towards electronic recombination with electrolyte. Dye JD21 showed the best performance, attaining a remarkable power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 8.4% together with a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 15.4 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 730 mV and fill factor (FF) of 0.75.
In spite of the good efficiencies achieved, several problems are associated with the widely employed liquid electrolytes within this type of photovoltaic device. Among them, leakage, evaporation of the solvent, flammability and corrosion issues are the most significant. Therefore, the development of solid-state electrolytes such as p-type semiconducting polymers has progressively gained great interest. In this context, the promising results obtained with ullazine-based dyes encouraged the same authors to test their 5- and 4-substituted photosensitizers (JD21, JD25–27, JD29 and JD30) in a solid-state DSSC (ssDSSC) selecting 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-MeOTAD) as the hole transporting material (HTM). Compared to their solution spectra, the absorption spectra of the dyes adsorbed onto TiO2 exhibited modified features, with different ICT band shapes and hypsochromically-shifted maxima. These results revealed dye loading as a critical parameter for the final device performance. In this regard, compound JD29 bearing triphenylamine-type donors afforded the highest dye coverage. But, except for JD29, the dye coverage values reflected the steric hindrance exerted by the flexible alkyl/alkoxy chains well. In this regard, less encumbered dyes such as JD21 or JD30 were adsorbed to a higher extent. Evaluation of the photovoltaic performance of the fabricated ssDSSCs gave efficiencies in the range of 2.11–4.95%, with JD29 giving the best results. The good performance of JD29 was mainly attributed to its high Voc as a result of the good dye coverage. Indeed, recombination rates between TiO2 and spiro-MeOTAD were minimized together with an upward shift of the CB probably obtained as the result of a dipole moment effect exerted by adsorbed molecules. Additional improvement of these devices was achieved by fabricating a co-sensitized ssDSSC by using both JD29 and D35 dyes, the latter allowing a better light harvesting, thus obtaining an increased PCE of 5.40%.
Tan and co-workers synthesized a new series of photosensitizers based on a 5-substituted ullazine core with the incorporation of different π-spacers and acceptor units (Fig. 5). According to their study, the impact of the anchoring group is clearly more pronounced. In fact, compound QD1 that possesses a cyanoacrylic acid led to a bathochromically shifted ICT band when compared to QD2 and QD3, which respectively had phenylethylene and thiophene ethylene π-spacers along with carboxylic acid as the anchoring group. Impressive differences in the behaviour of QD1 with respect to QD2–QD3 were observed during device operation. QD1 yielded a peak IPCE value of 80% at 520 nm while values of 20% at 466 nm and 19% at 464 nm were achieved by QD2 and QD3, respectively. The higher efficiency of QD1 was ascribed to a notable Jsc value of 12.28 mA cm−2 arising from better charge generation and transport.
A different approach was proposed by Mathew and co-workers (Fig. 6a). These authors combined this unit with an ullazine moiety as a donor group, thus synthesizing the ullazine–porphyrin dyad SM63. Evaluation of the effect of the ullazine donor group was done by selecting a reference compound, namely LD14-C8, which possessed a 4-dimethylaminophenyl group instead. Prominent modification of the optical properties was observed for SM63. The Soret band appeared to be drastically deformed into two bands with the Q-band being shifted towards lower energies. As confirmed by cyclic voltammetry, these changes were explained by an effective increase in the electronic conjugation in the dyad SM63. However, the lower symmetry of SM63 as well as a slightly bent structure with respect to LD14-C8 led to a concomitant reduction of the molar absorptivity of the Soret band. DSSCs with double layer TiO2 photoanodes fabricated for both dyes generated efficiencies of 7.35 ± 0.13% (Jsc = 14.43 ± 0.27 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.70 ± 0.01 V, and FF = 0.73 ± 0.01) and 8.45 ± 0.16% (Jsc = 15.72 ± 0.26 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.73 ± 0.02 V, and FF = 0.74 ± 0.01) for SM63 and LD14-C8, respectively (Fig. 6b and c). SM63 particularly suffered from aggregation, which was partially controlled by addition of chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) and the use of less polar adsorption solvents. But, the still non-negligible degree of aggregation resulted in detrimental quenching of excited states and, ultimately, in lower Jsc values. Nevertheless, the larger harvesting of green (550 nm) and red (>700 nm) light undoubtedly demonstrates the great potential of the strong donor ullazine moiety for the development of panchromatic sensitizers.
As previously stated, typical modification of ullazine derivatives via aromatic electrophilic substitutions takes place preferentially at the 5-position and, to a lesser extent, at the 4-position. In order to properly address the effects of the acceptor placement at the ullazine scaffold, Nazeeruddin and co-workers reported very recently a simple, elegant and selective synthesis of different regioisomers, 2-, 4-, 5- and 6-substituted ullazine-containing D–A sensitizers. The localisation of the dihexylmalonate acceptor moiety had a distinct impact on the opto-electronic properties of the dyes. All derivatives showed similar electronic absorption features, i.e. two sets of bands. Those appearing at high energies corresponded to π → π* transitions, while the nature of the lower-energy ones would be better ascribed to an admixture of both π → π* and ICT. The relative percentage of the CT component varied according to the substitution. Ullazine D–A dyes with the acceptor moiety at the 4- and 6-position showed narrower, structured bands in the 350–425 nm region. In contrast, broader and less structured bands were observed for those 2- and 5-substituted, being bathochromically shifted as well. The trend for the CT efficiency can be established as follows: 5- > 2- > 4- > 6-substitution. In consequence, the 5-substituted compound possessing the larger ICT component was subsequently embodied in a perovskite solar cell as a dopant-free HTM. The best devices exhibited a modest PCE value of 13.08% (Jsc = 18.47 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.054 V, and FF = 0.671) for this kind of photovoltaic device. Nevertheless, the here-described protocols do allow the easy synthesis of tailor-made ullazine-based photosensitizers, giving access to a fine-tuning of their properties, which turns them into appealing materials for organic electronics.

Due to their semiconducting properties, (Het-)PAHs are ideal candidates for the fabrication of organic field-effect transistors (OFETs). Continuous research in this field is motivated by the application of this technology in the development of flexible displays, stretchable devices, sensors, electronic paper, and so forth. To date, there is a large number of p-type semiconductors based on small molecules and polymers, with charge mobilities well comparable to that of polycrystalline silicon. However, their n-type counterparts have been less developed, exhibiting lower charge mobilities and poor device stabilities in air.

Among the different synthetic strategies for the preparation of suitable n-channel materials, the introduction of electron-withdrawing groups is widely employed. In this regard, Klauk, Müllen, Li and co-workers have very recently described the synthesis of a set of carbonyl-/dicyanomethylene-functionalized π-extended ullazines 10–12 (Fig. 7a). These compounds nicely exhibited two reversible reduction waves that can be ascribed to either the carbonyl group or the dicyanomethylene moiety. One oxidation wave was also observed, which was attributed to the central nitrogen atom. Estimated LUMO energies from the electrochemical data were of ca. −4 eV, which prompted the authors to test the performance of bis(dicyanomethylene)-substituted 12a and 12b as n-semiconductors in thin-film transistors (TFTs). Following a bottom-gate, top-contact architecture, the fabricated devices gave electron mobilities up to 0.02 and 0.06 cm2 (V s)−1 for compounds 12a (Fig. 7b and c) and 12b (Fig. 7d and e), respectively. Performance after 30 months in air was satisfactory for compound 12a, still attaining an electron mobility of 0.006 cm2 (V s)−1, while the device embedding compound 12b proved to be genuinely stable. Alternatively, the introduction of both carbonyl and dicyanomethylene groups had a clear auxochromic effect, reaching molar absorptivity values of 80000 M−1 cm−1 for orange-red absorbing 12. As a result, this new family of functionalized π-extended ullazines 10–12 showed appealing properties as both n-type semiconductors and colorants.

Control over the frontier orbital energy levels allows a precise modulation of the electronic and photophysical properties of any material, playing a key role in practical applications. Among the different synthetic approaches, extension of the π-conjugated system is an efficient common strategy. In this regard, construction of (Het-)PAHs provides an excellent platform for property fine-tuning, along with appealing features for supramolecular arrangements.

Unfortunately, handling of large (Het-)PAHs becomes very difficult due to solubility and stability issues. As for the stability, on increasing the size of this type of systems, the relative energy between closed-shell (CS) and open-shell (OS) electronic configurations is reduced, resulting in more eminent di(multi)radical character. Nevertheless, these features have been receiving a great deal of attention for the last few decades owing to potential applications in organic electronics, spintronics, nonlinear optics and energy storage. Phenalenyl radical is the smallest PAH exhibiting a persistent OS. Embedding this moiety into larger structures constitutes a common strategy to obtain original OS materials. Moreover, addition of heteroatoms such as O or N, jointly with extended π-conjugated structures and/or bulky substituents, contributes to the stabilisation of the radical species. Very recently, Berger, Feng and co-workers investigated the electronic ground state ullazine derivatives 9a–c whose core resulted from the combination of 9a-azaphenalene and perpendicularly-oriented naphthalene (Fig. 3). All three compounds presented different conformers in solution, presenting a preponderant CS singlet ground state with a weak diradical character for some geometries. These π-extended ullazines showed appealing optical features, presenting broadband absorption covering the large part of the visible spectrum and emission in the red region. It is worth mentioning the facile generation of radical cation species upon oxidation with AgSbF6, preparing 9a˙+, 9b˙+ and 9c˙+ (with SbF6− as counteranion) in 84%, 79% and 71% yield, respectively. Close inspection of the oxidation process was undertaken by UV-vis absorption and in situ spectroelectrochemistry. Generation of radical cations led to the appearance of a bathochromically shifted band into the near infrared part of the spectrum (Fig. 8a, e.g.9a˙+ formation). Interestingly, additional characterisation using in situ electron paramagnetic resonance showed a broad signal for both 9a˙+ (Fig. 8b) and 9c˙+, with a hyperfine structure and a g-factor of 2.0025 and 2.0024, respectively. DFT calculations revealed that the spin density is localized over the full π-core (Fig. 8c). As for 9a, generation of the radical anion 9a˙− (broad signal with hyperfine structure, g-factor = 2.0026) was also possible despite its irreversible character (Fig. 8d and e). In this case, the spin density is localized preferentially at the benzoisoindole moiety together with the acetylene-TIPS substituent (Fig. 8f). The promising results of these examples of π-extended ullazine derivatives open the door for the preparation of other systems with stronger OS characters and unique properties.

The search for materials with novel properties and enhanced performances plays a key role in the development of advanced real market technologies. Organic materials offer very appealing features compared to their inorganic counterparts such as easier fabrication processing, lightweight, possibility of deposition on a large variety of supports (rigid to flexible plastics to metal foils) and thin-film formation, for instance. (Het)-PAH-based materials have been widely studied and occupy a prominent place due to their rich molecular designs and unique properties. In this article, the most recent research studies on ullazine-based materials have been highlighted. While most of the N-doped PAH derivatives contain pyridinic-like nitrogen atoms, ullazine has at the central position of its π-conjugated system a pyrrolic nitrogen. As a consequence, an interesting intramolecular charge-separated character appears upon delocalisation of the lone pair of the nitrogen atom, which has been successfully exploited for the development of photosensitizers for solar energy conversion. Moreover, apart from allowing a fine-tuning of the electronic, optical and structural properties, the incorporation of nitrogen atoms into large conjugated systems indeed facilitates the formation of ionic and radical species. In this regard, the first examples of ullazine-based materials exhibiting challenging n-type charge-transport properties have been presented. Stable radical ions have been demonstrated as well, remarkably upon both oxidation and reduction.

However, although great attention has been paid so far to synthetic methodologies, proper characterisation studies of ullazine-based derivatives still remain scarce, and many questions concerning their potentialities are to be addressed in the near future. For instance, there are no studies concerning the impact of the disk-shaped structure along with its polarized π-system on the supramolecular arrangement, a critical parameter for the development of efficient organic semiconductors. Therefore, the door is wide open for future research works that will certainly uncover appealing features for the development of new (multi)functional materials with improved performances for advanced applications, in particular in the field of organic electronics and solar energy harvesting.

There are no conflicts to declare.


The author of this article is indebted to CNRS and the French Ministry of Research for financial support. The author would also like to thank Dr P. C. Gros, Dr S. Hesse and Dr P. Pierrat for fruitful collaborations. Dr Matteo Mauro is also acknowledged for valuable discussions.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018