 DOI: 10.1039/C4CP04902K
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 4937-4944


Huiyun
Wei
,

Jiangjian
Shi
,

Xin
Xu
,

Junyan
Xiao
,

Jianheng
Luo
,

Juan
Dong
,

Songtao
Lv
,

Lifeng
Zhu
,

Huijue
Wu
,

Dongmei
Li
,

Yanhong
Luo
,

Qingbo
Meng
* and 

Qiang
Chen
*

Key Laboratory for Renewable Energy, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing Key Laboratory for New Energy Materials and Devices, Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: qbmeng@iphy.ac.cn; Fax: +86-10-8264-9242; Tel: +86-10-8264-9242

Laboratory of Plasma Physics and Materials, Beijing Institute of Graphic Communication, Beijing 102600, P. R. China. E-mail: lppmchenqiang@hotmail.com

Received
27th October 2014
, Accepted 27th November 2014
First published on 2nd December 2014
An ultrathin AlOx layer has been deposited onto a CH3NH3PbI3 film using atomic layer deposition technology, to construct a metal–insulator–semiconductor (MIS) back contact for the hole-transporting material-free perovskite solar cell. By optimization of the ALD deposition cycles, the average power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the cell has been enhanced from 8.61% to 10.07% with a highest PCE of 11.10%. It is revealed that the improvement in cell performance with this MIS back contact is mainly attributed to the enhancement in charge collection resulting from the electron blocking effect of the AlOx layer.

Organolead halide perovskites have shown great potential as light harvesters for solar cells due to their superb optical and electrical properties. From the liquid-type to the solid-state, the perovskite solar cell (PSC) had experienced a rapid development in the last five years, and power conversion efficiencies (PCE) of over 17% have been achieved. Currently, high efficiency PSCs are all based on the hole transporting material (HTM), which can facilitate hole transport and collection while blocking the electron transfer. In view of decreasing cost and simplifying the cell structure, HTM-free PSCs have also been developed. With an Au electrode, the PCE of the cell has been promoted to in excess of 10% as a result of optimising the perovskite film deposition. Meanwhile, the introduction of the carbon electrode has led to enhancements in the charge collection and transport at the back contact, and a high PCE of 12.8% was achieved. Promising prospects have been shown for the HTM-free PSC, however, the PCE of this cell type needs to be further improved to make it competitive with the HTM-based cell and the other mature solar cell technologies.

With regard to the HTM-free PSCs, besides the deposition of high quality perovskite films, interface engineering and design are also effective approaches to enhance the device performance by improving the charge collection and suppressing surface recombination. According to our previous works, photo-induced carriers at the back contact region cannot be efficiently collected in the HTM-free PSC without an effective back surface field (BSF). Without the HTM, the semiconductor CH3NH3PbI3 may make direct contact with the Au electrode, forming a metal–semiconductor (M–S) interface. For an unmodified M–S interface, series charge recombination can occur due to interfacial defects. Meanwhile, photo-induced free electrons may also transfer into the metal electrode because the minor carrier diffusion length is comparable or even larger than the thickness of the absorber in the perovskite solar cell. Moreover, an energy barrier for hole transport usually exists at this M–S interface due to a low Fermi energy level in CH3NH3PbI3. Thus, to the HTM-free PSCs, back contact and recombination are likewise the key barriers to improving the cell performance. To avoid the negative influence mentioned above, some modifications have been made to the M–S interface. For example, the small organic molecule with a wide bandgap, TPB(N,N,N′,N′-tetraphenyl-benzidine), was introduced to the perovskite interface to enhance the PCEs of HTM-free PSCs. Recently, Snaith and his colleagues have also made a modification to the perovskite/HTM interface with organic iodopentafluorobenzene (IPFB), achieving a stable output PCE of 15%. Besides organic molecules, inorganic compounds, such as Al2O3, MgO, MoO3, can also effectively modify the interfaces between semiconductors and metal electrode or liquid electrolyte.
The introduction of ultrathin insulator Al2O3 film to the CH3NH3PbI3/Au interface has been proved to be effective in increasing the cell performance in our lab. In this respect, the influence of ultrathin AlOx film thickness on the metal–insulator–semiconductor (MIS) back contact for the perovskite cell has been further investigated. Meanwhile, the working mechanism of this MIS back contact has been systematically clarified. With this MIS back contact, the internal quantum efficiency (IQE) of the cell in the long wavelength region is enhanced significantly, leading to an increase in photocurrent. It is revealed that different ALD deposition cycles have a remarkable influence on interfacial carrier transfer, and 5 cycles ALD of AlOx is shown to exhibit the best cell performance. Finally, the average PCE of the HTM-free PSC with an Au electrode has been enhanced from 8.61% to 10.07%, and a PCE exceeding 11% has also been achieved with this interfacial modification. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE), impedance spectra (IS), transient photoluminescence (PL) and photovoltage, and analysis based on semiconductor physics have been employed to clarify the influence of this MIS back contact and mechanism behind this enhancement in the PCE. It is revealed that the ultrathin AlOx can act as an effective electron blocking layer to enhance charge collection in this HTM-free cell.

PbI2 (99%) and dimethylformide (DMF, 99.7%) were purchased from Aldrich and Alfar Aesar, respectively. CH3NH3I was synthesized as described in the literature. Fluorine-doped tin oxide conducting glass (FTO, Pilkington, thickness 2.2 mm, sheet resistance 14 Ω per square) was used as a substrate for the solar cells. Before use, FTO glass was first washed with mild detergent, rinsed with distilled water several times and subsequently with ethanol in an ultrasonic bath, finally being dried under an air stream. AlOx films were deposited with Al(CH3)3 [trimethylaluminum (TMA)] and H2O as the precursors. The carrier gas in the viscous flow reactor was N2 (ultrahigh purity).


All of the experiments were carried out under ambient conditions with a humidity of about 25%. The compact TiO2 layer was spin-coated onto the FTO and heated at 500 °C for 30 min. The mesoporous TiO2 layer composed of 20 nm-sized particles was subsequently deposited by using a screen-printing technique, which was first dried at 80 °C for 30 min, and then sintered at 500 °C for 30 min. Afterwards, the films were immersed into 25 mM TiCl4 at 70 °C for 40 min and then sintered at 500 °C for 30 min.

The CH3NH3PbI3 layer was deposited by a modified two-step deposition method as described previously. Firstly, the solution of 1.2 M PbI2 dissolved in DMF was spin-coated onto a TiO2 film at a speed of 2000 rpm for 60 s, and then heated at 90 °C for 2 min to remove the DMF solvent. After cooling to room temperature, the film was spin-coated with the PbI2 solution for a second time to increase the amount of PbI2 and obtain a relatively smooth film. After being dried at 90 °C for another 2 min and then being allowed to cool, the films were immersed in a solution of CH3NH3I (10 mg mL−1) with 2-propanol as the solvent for 120 min, and rinsed thoroughly with 2-propanol. Finally, the TiO2–CH3NH3PbI3 film was heated at 90 °C for 45 min in air on a hotplate.

The ultrathin AlOx insulating layer was deposited onto the CH3NH3PbI3 film with the use of ALD technology in a viscous-flow ALD reactor, which has been described in other publications. Briefly, TMA and H2O were used as precursor gases, and high-purity N2 was used as a carrier gas for the precursors. TMA and H2O were alternately entrained in the N2 carrier flow using gas switching valves, and the N2 carrier gas pressure was about 0.1 Torr. The deposition temperature was kept at 100 °C over the entire deposition process to obtain high quality AlOx films. During the deposition process, the exposure times of TMA and H2O were set at 0.3 s and 0.05 s per cycle, respectively, and pumping gas times of 10 s and 30 s were required for purging the excess TMA and H2O, respectively. Varied numbers of ALD cycles were carried out to deposit the AlOx ultrathin films. For comparison, a batch of control samples which were put in the reactor chamber (0.1 Torr, 100 °C, N2 flow) without any precursor were also prepared.


The surface morphology of the FTO–TiO2–CH3NH3PbI3 film was characterized using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, FEI XL30S-FEG). The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) data was obtained using an ESCALab250 electron spectrometer from Thermo Scientific Corporation with monochromatic 150 W Al Kα radiation. The current–voltage (I–V) performance of the cells was measured by an additional voltage from a Keithley 2602 system sourcemeter together with a sunlight simulator (Oriel Solar Simulator 91192, AM 1.5 100 mW cm−2) calibrated with a standard silicon reference cell. The solar cells were masked with a black aperture to define the active area of 0.08 cm2 and measured in a lab-made light-tight sample holder. The current of the cell was recorded every 5 mV with a delay time of 0.1 s for each step, which is approximately equal to a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. Monochromatic incident photo-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) was measured with a lab-made IPCE spectrometer with wavelengths ranging from 350 nm to 850 nm. UV-Vis absorption and transmittance spectra were measured with a UV-Vis spectrophotometer (UV-2550, SHIMADZU) with wavelengths ranging from 350 nm to 850 nm. Impedance spectra (IS) for the solar cell were measured on a ZAHNER IM6e electrochemical workstation in the dark with the frequency ranging from 0.1 to 105 Hz and a perturbation amplitude of 10 mV. Transient photoluminescence (PL) spectra were obtained on a PL Spectrometer (Edinburgh Instruments, FLS 900), and excited with a picosecond pulsed diode laser (EPL-445, 0.8 μJ cm−2, 1 MHz) at 445 nm. Transient photovoltage was measured with a pulsed Nd:YAG laser (Brio, 20 Hz) at 532 nm and a nanosecond resolved digital oscilloscope (Tektronix DPO 7104).


The scheme of a CH3NH3PbI3–TiO2 heterojunction solar cell with the MIS back contact is depicted in Fig. 1(a), where an ultrathin AlOx insulating layer was introduced between CH3NH3PbI3 and Au to avoid their direct contact. The cross-sectional scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the cell without an Au electrode is shown in Fig. 1(b). The mesoporous TiO2 film with a thickness of about 500 nm can be clearly seen, where the pores have been completely infiltrated with the CH3NH3PbI3 crystals. Over the TiO2 layer, a dense CH3NH3PbI3 capping layer with a thickness of about 300 nm can also be clearly seen. Moreover, with the SEM image, it can be seen that CH3NH3PbI3 crystals inside the TiO2 pores and in the capping layer connect tightly with each other, which is of benefit for charge transport throughout the cell. It is worth noting that due to the dense CH3NH3PbI3 capping layer and a complete infiltration inside the TiO2 pores, the diffusion of CH3NH3I inside the TiO2 layer is ultra-slow at room temperature, leading to a long immersion time being required for the complete conversion of PbI2 into CH3NH3PbI3 in our experiment. Although an AlOx layer has been deposited onto the CH3NH3PbI3 film, it is too thin to be observed in this SEM image. To check whether the AlOx had been successfully deposited with five ALD cycles, XPS was applied to investigate the elemental composition of the film. Fig. 2(a) shows the full XPS spectrum of the TiO2–CH3NH3PbI3–AlOx film with a binding energy ranging from 0 to 1200 eV. The Al 2p peak located at 75.18 eV is shown in Fig. 2(b), implying the existence of aluminum on the CH3NH3PbI3 film. However, the peak was slightly shifted towards a higher binding energy compared to that observed in stoichiometric Al2O3 at 74.60 eV. Thus, the aluminum coating on the perovskite film is present more in the form of AlOx. Meanwhile, an interaction between aluminum and the under-coordinated iodide may also influence the binding energy of Al 2p.

The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the cells where AlOx was deposited onto the CH3NH3PbI3 film for various numbers of ALD cycles are shown in Fig. 3. For ALD-1 cells (not shown), no J–V difference can be observed from the ALD-0 cells, implying little AlOx has been deposited on the perovskite film from only one cycle of deposition. By further increasing the number of ALD cycles from zero to five, the photovoltaic performance of the cell has been significantly improved with enhancement in short-circuit current density (JSC) and open-circuit voltage (VOC), as shown in Fig. 3(a). However, when AlOx was deposited for six or seven cycles, a significant decrease in VOC and fill factor (FF) of the cell can be observed. For the J–V characteristics of ALD-6 (and 7) cells, a slight bend near VOC can be observed, as shown in Fig. 3(b), indicating an S-shaped feature. It can thus be inferred that the holes are blocked with respect to transport from CH3NH3PbI3 to the Au electrode due to the relatively thick AlOx insulating layer. The statistical results of JSC, VOC, FF and PCE from a batch of ninety solar cells are given in Fig. 4(a)–(d), respectively. For ALD-0 cells, the average PCE is about 8.61% with an average JSC of 15.02 mA cm−2, VOC of 885 mV, and FF of 0.643. After ALD-AlOx treatment of the TiO2–CH3NH3PbI3 film, the average PCE is enhanced to 10.07% with an average JSC of 17.10 mA cm−2, average VOC of 918 mV and average FF of 0.643. It can be clearly seen that the enhancement in JSC makes a greater contribution to the improvement of PCE. With this ALD modification on the M–S back contact, the highest efficiency of the cell is promoted to 11.10% with a JSC of 17.62 mA cm−2, VOC of 921 mV and FF of 0.684, as shown in Fig. 5(a). An integral current density of 16.56 mA cm−2 can be obtained from the IPCE (Fig. 5(b)) of this cell, basically in agreement with the J–V result. To investigate whether the ALD condition but not the deposited AlOx layer contributes to the enhancement in cell performance, a group of cells which were put in the ALD chamber (0.1 Torr, 100 °C, N2 flow) for the same time with ALD-5 samples without any release of the precursors were prepared. It has been found that the cell performance cannot be improved just by subjecting the samples to the ALD condition, but in fact is slightly decreased as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). It is also worth noting that the J–V hysteresis has not been enhanced by the AlOx deposition, as shown in Table S1 (ESI), which implies that the improvement of cell performance cannot be due to carrier accumulation and capacitance effects arising from swept measurement. Therefore, the introduction of the AlOx layer can indeed improve the cell performance, especially by increasing the JSC. To investigate the working mechanism of this MIS back contact, analysis based on IPCE, IS, PL and photovoltage, and theory of semiconductor physics will be made in the following section.
The IPCE spectra of the cells in Fig. 3 are given in Fig. 6(a) and the light harvesting efficiency (LHE) of the cell is given in Fig. S2 (ESI). For the ALD-3 cell, IPCE in the long-wavelength region is enhanced compared to the ALD-0 cell, which implies that the charge generated close to the back contact of the cell can be collected more effectively. For the ALD-5 cell, IPCE in the whole visible wavelength region is enhanced, thus leading to a significant improvement in JSC. IPCE is not just an assisting measurement for the accurate determination of JSC, but is also effective for investigation of the charge generation, transport and collection of a cell. The mechanism of charge loss in a cell can also be studied with IPCE. For a single-heterojunction cell without BSF, a serious charge transfer from semiconductor absorber layer to back electrode as well as serious minor carrier recombination usually exist, decreasing the charge collection in the deep region of the cell (IPCE in long-wavelength region). An effective BSF is one of the key factors for high-efficiency solar cells such as Si and Cu(In, Ga)Se2 cells. However, in contrast to HTM-based cells, no BSF has been applied into the HTM-free perovskite solar cell. Thus, IPCE in the long wavelength region is usually much lower than that in short wavelength region, as can be seen in Fig. 6(a). Interestingly, with the MIS back contact, charge collection in the deep region of the cell has been significantly increased, as shown by the normalized IPCE in Fig. 6(b). Thus, electron transfer from CH3NH3PbI3 to the Au electrode or charge recombination has been suppressed with the MIS back contact. To clarify what makes the greater contribution to the enhancement in charge collection and thus the cell performance, transient PL, photovoltage and IS measurements were carried out.
Transient PL was applied to investigate charge recombination in the CH3NH3PbI3 film and several groups of samples have been measured to get a reliable average PL lifetime. A double exponential function was used to fit the PL results and the longer lifetime is listed in Table 1. It can be found that no influence on the PL lifetime of the CH3NH3PbI3 film has been exerted by the introduction of the AlOx layer. Thus, it can be inferred that the charge recombination in the back contact region has not been suppressed with this MIS back contact. To confirm this speculation, transient photovoltage of the cells was also measured, fitting results with double exponents with short lifetime (a) of about 50 μs and long lifetime (b) of about 1000 μs, which are shown in Fig. 7. No difference in the recombination lifetime of the cell can be distinguished from the transient photovoltage measurement. Therefore, it can be concluded that the enhancement in cell performance mainly originates from the suppression of electron transfer from CH3NH3PbI3 to the Au electrode with the MIS back contact.
Cell
PL lifetime (ns)
1
2
3
4
Average value
ALD-0
176.69
173.04
153.39
162.43
166.39
ALD-3
159.68
166.10
165.24
155.07
161.52
ALD-5
164.27
154.56
162.30
176.14
164.32
IS is an effective measurement of the charge transfer properties of a cell and has been widely used in the study of PSCs.Fig. 8(a) gives the Nyquist plots of the ALD-5 cell and the fitting results from the IS results with one RC element as the equivalent circuit. In the frequency ranging from 105 Hz to 0.1 Hz, one typical semicircle can be distinguished from the Nyquist plots, which can be assigned to the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 interface. Interestingly, no difference in charge transfer resistance (Rct) can be found, either, from the fitting results for the ALD-0 to ALD-5 cells, as in Fig. 8(b), which implies that the MIS back contact with an ultrathin AlOx layer has not influenced the charge transfer properties at the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 interface. However, a significant increase in Rct is observed when the AlOx layer becomes thicker, which seems to conflict with the J–V results if just considering an ideal model. In nanometer-scale semiconductor devices, the interfaces can usually be coupled together if severe charge accumulation occurs and the IS can hardly give accurate information on interfacial charge transfer. Although the working mechanism of the MIS back contact in this cell cannot be clearly clarified with IS results, the sudden increase in Rct for the ALD-6 and ALD-7 cells implies a voltage sharing effect in this cell. Thus, the J–V characteristics of the cells will be analyzed in detail in the following discussion.
For the HTM-free PSC, a single heterojunction model can be employed to describe the charge transfer property of the cell. With this ideal model as depicted in Fig. 9(a), the J–V characteristics in darkness can be written as
(1)
where
J0 is the inverse saturated current density of the heterojunction, RS is the series resistance, A is the ideality factor of a single heterojunction ranging from 1 to 2, KB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the absolute temperature. With this equation and J–V results of the cells in dark (Fig. 3), the intrinsic parameters of this heterojunction cell are deduced, as given in Table 2. The cell without AlOx deposition shows a normal ideality factor of 2.02 with a small RS of 1.42 Ω cm2 and a relatively small J0 of 3.09 × 10−6 mA cm−2, agreeing with the published results and the ideal model. For ALD cells, the RS increases gradually as expected due to addition of the insulating AlOx layer. Meanwhile, the J0 has also been slightly changed. Interestingly, the ideality factor exhibits a significant change from 2.02 to about 2.63, beyond the range of a single heterojunction, indicating a series connection of two or more diodes. For example, the ideality factor of a multijunction GaAs solar cell is 3.27, much larger than that of the single junction GaAs cell (1.51). Considering the MIS structure, a new diode can appear in the cell, as depicted in Fig. 9(b). For an MIS tunneling diode, the current characteristics can also be described with eqn (1). Thus, when taking the charge transfer through both the photoanode and the back contact into consideration, the current density–voltage characteristics of the cell in dark can be derived as

(2)
where the subscript numbers 1 and 2 are assigned to photoanode and back contact, respectively. It can be clearly seen that the ideality factor of the cell can be increased when the charge transfer property is determined by both the TiO
2/CH3NH3PbI3 and the CH3NH3PbI3/Au interfaces. With eqn (2), the J20 of the back contact can also be calculated, which is also listed in Table 2. As can be seen, with the ultrathin AlOx layer, the electron transfer from CH3NH3PbI3 to Au has been significantly suppressed with a J20 decreased to 10−6 mA cm−2.

ALD cycles

R
S (Ω cm2)

A


J
0 (mA cm−2)

J
10 (mA cm−2)

J
20 (mA cm−2)
0
1.42
2.02
3.09 × 10−6
3.09 × 10−6
—
3
2.69
2.71
8.10 × 10−6
3.09 × 10−6
1.55 × 10−4
5
13.07
2.58
2.90 × 10−6
3.09 × 10−6
2.35 × 10−6
7
12.31
2.63
2.26 × 10−6
3.09 × 10−6
0.85 × 10−6
Spiro
—
3.1
3.40 × 10−7
3.09 × 10−6
6.09 × 10−9
In the back contact region of the cell without BSF, no depleted electric field exists for the fast extraction of photo-induced electrons, and the free electrons are mainly collected by a diffusion mechanism. When light arrives from the FTO side, carriers are induced in the CH3NH3PbI3, transported and collected by electrodes of the cell. At a depth x of the CH3NH3PbI3 absorber, carrier generation can be described as
(3)
where
R is the reflection of the cell, α is the light absorption coefficient and Q is the spectral distribution of the sun. It can be demonstrated that charge generation decreases gradually when depth x increases. Thus, a distribution of initial photo-induced electron density (n) in the CH3NH3PbI3 layer appears where n decreases with G if the absorber is so thick that the free electrons have to travel a long distance to be collected. Just considering carrier diffusion, electron density and transport in the absorber layer can be described as

(4)
where
Un is the carrier recombination velocity, and Dn is the electron diffusion coefficient. Obviously, due to the decrease in n when x increases, Jn < 0, which means that free electrons can diffuse toward the back contact spontaneously. A widely-known steady-state diffusion equation can be deduced from eqn (4) and electron transfer characteristics at the back contact determine the boundary condition for this diffusion equation. In a semiconductor, the free electron density can be described as n = n0[exp(eV/KBT)−1], where n0 is the electron density of thermal equilibration and V is the voltage at this semiconductor. For the M–S based perovskite solar cell, no designed BSF exists at the back contact, and free electrons can transfer toward the Au electrode without any blocking. Thus, no voltage can be applied at this M–S interface, and nM–S = n0. For an interface where electron transfer is limited, a voltage sharing effect arises and n > n0. For the MIS back contact, the free electrons diffusing spontaneously toward the back contact can be blocked by the ultrathin AlOx layer as the J20 in Table 2 shows, and accumulate at the MIS interface, thus significantly increasing n. Considering the steady-state diffusion equation and the boundary condition for the different back contacts, the distribution of electron density can be depicted as shown in Fig. 10. It can be seen that with electron blocking, electron density at the back contact interface increases and thus significantly decreases the gradient of electron density. Electron diffusion to the back contact can be significantly suppressed, thus leading to enhancement in charge collection by the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 interface. We think that this is the mechanism for the MIS back contact in our work. It is worth noting that the MIS back contact can only perform very well in the cell with a thick absorber, as shown in Table S2 (ESI). By decreasing the thickness of the CH3NH3PbI3 absorber, the photo-induced electrons can be more effectively collected by the TiO2 layer.

According to the ideality factors listed in Table 2, the electron blocking effect indeed occurs with the MIS back contact. Thus, the improvement of cell performance in our work can be attributed to the suppression of electron transfer from CH3NH3PbI3 to the Au electrode and enhancement in charge collection with the MIS back contact. For the HTM-based PSC, free electrons can hardly transfer into the HTM due to the energy structure and electron state in the HTM, leading to a distribution of free electron density as in Fig. 10, where the gradient of electron density as well as J20 at the perovskite/HTM interface is ultra-small. Meanwhile, photo-induced holes in the perovskite absorber can be neutralized fast with electrons from the HTM. This is one of the key factors for the high efficiency in the HTM-based PSC. Dr Kamat has also calculated the ideality factor of the HTM-based cell, with values of 5.0 for Spiro-OMeTAD and 2.7 for CuI, both of which exceed the ideal range of a single heterojunction and indicating the existence of a diode at the perovskite/HTM interface. Thus, a large ideality factor is needed to achieve the high efficiency of a cell. Although the MIS back contact with the ultrathin AlOx layer can increase the ideality factor, J0 of the cell has still not been significantly suppressed as in Table 2, which indicates that the electron blocking ability of the AlOx layer is weaker than that of the HTM. Meanwhile, the AlOx layer can also block electron transfer from the Au electrode to the valence band of the CH3NH3PbI3, decreasing cell performance and causing the S-shaped J–V feature observed for the ALD-6 and ALD-7 cells. Therefore, we will try to find a low-cost and easily-deposited film which can effectively block electron transfer unidirectionally in our future work.

Ultrathin AlOx has been deposited onto the CH3NH3PbI3 film with ALD technology, constructing an MIS back contact for the HTM-free PSC. With this MIS back contact, the average PCE of the cell has been enhanced from 8.61% to 10.07% with the highest PCE of 11.10%. According to IPCE measurements, it has been found that the charge collection ability of the cell in the long-wavelength region is significantly enhanced by the presence of this MIS back contact. Charge recombination in the CH3NH3PbI3 close to the back contact has been demonstrated to not be influenced by this AlOx layer, according to transient PL and photovoltage measurements. IS and analysis of J–V characteristics have been employed to investigate the charge transfer properties of the cell. It is thus found that the ultrathin AlOx can obviously increase the ideality factor of the cell, indicating the existence of a diode at the MIS back contact. Therefore, it can be concluded that the AlOx layer can act as an electron blocking layer to suppress electron transfer from CH3NH3PbI3 to the Au electrode. It has also been semi-quantitatively demonstrated that this electron blocking effect can enhance charge collection in the cell by considering carrier diffusion in the absorber layer. Finally, the improvement in cell performance resulting from the presence of the MIS back contact is mainly attributed to the enhancement in charge collection, resulting from the electron blocking effect of this AlOx layer.


This work was supported by the National Key Basic Research Program (973 project, No. 2012CB932903 and 2012CB932904), Beijing Science and Technology Committee (No. Z131100006013003), NSFC (No. 51372270, 51372272, 11474333, 91233202 and 21173260) and the Knowledge Innovation Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The J–V characteristics of the perovskite solar cells without and with treatment in ALD chamber, LHE spectrum of ALD-0 and ALD-5 solar cells, photovoltaic parameters of perovskite solar cells under forward and reverse bias, photovoltaic performance of the cells with different thicknesses of absorber. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cp04902k
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015