 DOI: 10.1039/C2TA00693F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2030-2038

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Byoungchoo
Park
*,

Young
Chan Kim
 and 

Soo Hong
Yun


Department of Electrophysics, Kwangwoon University, Seoul 139-701, Korea. E-mail: bcpark@kw.ac.kr; Fax: +82 2943 3208; Tel: +82 2940 5237

Received
13th October 2012
, Accepted 28th November 2012
First published on 29th November 2012
We herein report on a highly simple and efficient all-solution-processed inverted polymer solar cell (PSC), which consists of a bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) photovoltaic (PV) layer with a low-temperature, water-processable electron-collecting layer (ECL) made of a hybrid poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) and cesium carbonate (Cs2CO3) compound. For the BHJ PV layer of poly(3-hexylthiophene):phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT:PCBM) with the hybrid PEO:Cs2CO3 ECL and a solution-coated anode of silver nanoparticles (NPs), it was found that a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of around 2.5% could be achieved for PSCs fabricated entirely from solution in air at a low processing temperature below 150 °C, using the inverted structure on a glass substrate. This excellent PV performance may be attributed to efficient photo-generated charge-carrier collection, due to the suitable work function of the hybrid PEO:Cs2CO3 ECL used. Moreover, even for a fully solution-processed flexible inverted PSC on a plastic substrate, a relatively high PCE of 1.3% was obtained. The use of this hybrid ECL in all-solution-processable inverted PSCs could be of considerable benefit in the development of cost-effective and highly efficient all-solution- and roll-to-roll processed inverted PSCs.

Recent studies of efficient polymer solar cells (PSCs) have generated intense research interest, following pioneering work on the photo-induced electron transfer from donor conjugated polymers to fullerene acceptors. The major advantages of PSCs are related to their low environmental impact, mechanical flexibility, low weight, and the low costs associated with the high-speed solution-coating and printing processes used in their fabrication, such as the roll-to-roll (R2R) technique. Among the PSC technologies reported to date, one of particular relevance to the efficiency of the polymer photovoltaic (PV) layer is the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) structure, which is composed of interpenetrating channel-like domains of separated donor polymer and fullerene acceptor phases within the composite PV layer. Using this BHJ structure together with various advances in materials and processes, many researchers have shown significant improvements in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs, which can now be as high as 6–8% under AM 1.5 (AM = air mass) illumination. Based on such improvements of PSCs, the mass production of PSCs has also been tested and demonstrated using the R2R methods.

There has also recently been an increased level of interest in BHJ PSCs that use an inverted device structure, in which the charge-collecting nature of the electrodes is reversed. In these devices, a stable transparent conducting oxide such as indium-tin-oxide (ITO) is used as the cathode, and a high-work-function metal is used as the anode, which provides long-term stability and flexibility in the design and fabrication of advanced PSCs. To develop high-performance inverted PSCs, various modifications to the electrodes have been investigated, including the introduction of appropriate charge-collecting layers between the PV layer and the electrodes to increase the built-in potential and to decrease the contact resistance. Several materials have been suggested to modify the anode; these have been demonstrated for use as efficient hole-collecting layers (HCLs), and include polymer films of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(4-styrenesulphonate) (PEDOT:PSS), and metal-oxide layers of MoO3, V2O5, or WO3, all of which attempt to match the work function of the anode used with the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of the donor polymer. Of these, PEDOT:PSS and MoO3 layers have been successfully and widely used. Similarly, to match the work function of the ITO cathode with the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of the acceptor, several materials have also been investigated for use in electron-collecting layers (ECLs), such as solution-processable poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), poly(fluorene)-based conjugated polymers, ethoxylated polyethylenimine, alkali metal compounds including cesium carbonate (Cs2CO3), and metal oxides including titanium oxide (TiOx) and zinc oxide (ZnO). For example, solution-processed ZnO ECLs have been adopted in inverted PSCs, and PCEs of up to 3% have been reported for inverted PSCs consisting of poly(3-hexylthiophene):phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT:PCBM) PV layers with solution-processed ZnO ECLs and vacuum-evaporated metal anodes.
Meanwhile, solution-processable conductive inks such as (modified) PEDOT:PSS solutions or silver (Ag) nanoparticle (NP) dispersions have also been reported in the formation of conductive electrodes in ambient atmospheres without the use of a vacuum-evaporation process. Using such solution-coatable conductive inks, all-solution-processed PSCs have been developed, and these days PCEs for all solution-processed inverted PSCs with ZnO ECLs with a P3HT:PCBM PV layer are typically around 1.0–3.0%. Such preparations of all-functional layers in (inverted) PSCs using all-solution-processing methods offer several clear advantages, such as R2R processing, flexibility, and reduced cost, compared to conventional vacuum-deposition methods. Moreover, fully water-processable PSCs have also recently been proposed, using water-processable metal oxide ECLs, polymer PV layers, and metal inks to develop environmentally friendly processes. However, despite the foregoing achievements, metal oxide (ZnO and TiOx) ECLs cannot easily be applied to PSCs on flexible plastic substrates because the formation of metal-oxide ECLs requires sintering temperatures in excess of 300 °C. Although solution-processed metal-oxide NP layers can be prepared at relatively low temperatures, their properties depend strongly on particle size, and it can be difficult to control the thickness of the layer precisely. Thus, relatively little progress has been made to date in the development of simple, low-temperature, all-solution-processable inverted PSCs; such progress is important for the high-throughput (R2R) process required for efficient inverted PSCs with large surface areas. In view of continued difficulties in the formation of efficient ECLs at low temperatures, further research on new materials to replace the high temperature-processing ZnO is required to achieve the simple and reliable fabrication of efficient all-solution-processable inverted PSCs.
To obtain the desired performance of all-solution-processable flexible inverted PSCs, it is essential to use water/alcohol-processable materials for ECLs formed in air at low temperatures, because any mixing of the subsequently deposited organic-solvent soluble PV layer and thermal damage to the flexible plastic substrate must be minimized. Fortunately, it has also recently been shown that in polymer light-emitting diodes (PLEDs) and inverted PSCs, a hybrid thin layer of Cs2CO3 mixed with PEO (PEO:Cs2CO3) is a potential candidate for a water-processable electron-transporting or electron-collecting layer processed at relatively low temperatures. Thus, by applying the hybrid PEO:Cs2CO3 layer as an ECL for all-solution-processable inverted PSCs, it may be possible to achieve inverted PSCs processed entirely from solution in air at low temperature. We therefore focused our research on fully solution-based preparation at low temperature to fabricate all the functional layers including the ECL, the PV layer, and the anode, all of which are of key importance to all-solution- or R2R processed inverted PSCs.
In order to extend the scope of the practical applications of the hybrid PEO:Cs2CO3 ECL in inverted PSC devices, we herein report our investigation of the fabrication of simple and efficient all-solution-processable inverted BHJ PSCs, via the introduction of the ECL of the hybrid PEO:Cs2CO3 with a silver anode formed using an alcohol-processable Ag NP ink. Using data obtained from a Kelvin probe, we have found that a hybrid PEO:Cs2CO3 composite layer is an excellent candidate for an ECL that has a work function suited to the LUMO level of the PCBM acceptor. As a result, we show that the introduction of the PEO:Cs2CO3 ECL into all-solution-processed inverted PSCs results in a fairly good PV performance, leading to encouraging PCEs of 2.5% for the P3HT:PCBM PV layers. Moreover, even on flexible substrates, the PCEs achieved were as high as 1.3% for the flexible inverted P3HT:PCBM PSCs, demonstrating the possibility of fabricating efficient all-solution-processed flexible inverted PSCs in air at temperatures below 150 °C.

P3HT (1-material Chemscitech Inc.), PCBM (Nanostructured Carbon Inc.), Cs2CO3 (Sigma-Aldrich), PEO ((CH2CH2O)n, molecular weight: average Mv 100000, Aldrich), PEDOT:PSS (Clevios PVP. Al 4083, H. C. Starck Inc.), silver nitrate (AgNO3, Sigma-Aldrich), poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP, Mw 40000, Sigma-Aldrich), zinc acetate-2-hydrate (Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O, Sigma-Aldrich), 2-methoxyethanol (CH3OCH2CH2OH, Sigma-Aldrich), and ethanolamine (Sigma-Aldrich) were used as received from the manufacturers.


The device structure studied for the inverted PSCs on glass (or plastic) substrates and the chemical structures of the PV materials used are shown schematically in Fig. 1. The all-solution-processed inverted PSCs on glass substrates were fabricated using a sandwich-like configuration, with an ITO (thickness: 80 nm, 30 ohm per square) cathode modified using a hybrid PEO:Cs2CO3 ECL and a solution-coated anode of Ag NPs (s-Ag anode). Before the formation of functional layers, the ITO substrate was ultrasonically cleaned using detergent, deionised water, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol, sequentially. Contaminants on the surface of the ITO were removed using UV-ozone treatment. In order to fabricate an ECL, a mixed solution of PEO and Cs2CO3 in distilled water was spin-coated on the ITO substrate (3000 rpm). The mixing ratio of the PEO and Cs2CO3 solution was 0.100:0.075 wt% (PEO:Cs2CO3). After coating, the PEO:Cs2CO3 layer was baked at 150 °C for 20 min. The thickness of the PEO:Cs2CO3 layer was about 10 nm, which was monitored using ellipsometry. A blended solution of P3HT (2.40 wt%) and PCBM (1.76 wt%) in a solvent of 1,2-dichlorobenzene was then spin-coated on the PEO:Cs2CO3 layer and annealed at 120 °C for 3 min to form the P3HT:PCBM PV layer. The PV layer had a thickness of about 220 nm. It should be noted that the solvent of 1,2-dichlorobenzene does not dissolve the PEO and Cs2CO3 in the underlying ECL, both because of their low solubilities in 1,2-dichlorobenzene and because of the speed of the coating process. To form a HCL, a ca. 40 nm thick PEDOT:PSS layer doped with surfactant was bar-coated on the PV layer. In order to form a homogeneous HCL on the PV layer, the doping surfactant used here was poly(oxyethylene tridecyl ether), and the doping ratio of the surfactant in the PEDOT:PSS solution was 0.07 wt%. Then, in order to fabricate an s-Ag anode, an Ag NP ink, prepared by reducing AgNO3 using a PVP stabilizer in ethanol solution, was deposited on the PEDOT:PSS HCL by means of a simple doctor-blade coating method (ca. 1 μm thick). The thickness of the s-Ag anode was adjusted by controlling the amount of Ag NP dispersion deposited on the PEDOT:PSS HCL. The sheet resistance of the s-Ag anode was measured at about 0.3 ohm per square using a four-point probe. After forming the s-Ag anodes, the inverted P3HT:PCBM PSCs were annealed at 150 °C for 10 min to induce the crystallization of the PV layer (i.e., post-thermal annealing). Thus, the device structure consisted of the sequence [ITO cathode/PEO:Cs2CO3 ECL/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS HCL/s-Ag anode] (the sample PSC) and the sample PSCs were therefore prepared entirely in ambient atmospheres without the use of a vacuum process. The active area of the fabricated device was 3 × 3 mm2. For comparative purposes, we also fabricated a reference PSC using an Ag anode prepared using a vacuum-evaporated Ag anode (thickness: 100 nm, e-Ag anode) on the PEDOT:PSS HCL at a deposition rate of 0.05 nm s−1 under a base pressure below 2.7 × 10−4 Pa with the structure [ITO cathode/PEO:Cs2CO3 ECL/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS HCL/e-Ag anode] (the reference PSC). Apart from the differences in the Ag anodes described, the reference PSC was fabricated using exactly the same method as that used for the sample PSC. For further comparison, we also fabricated a PSC with the structure [ITO cathode/ZnO ECL/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS HCL/s-Ag anode] (the comparative PSC), with a ZnO ECL prepared using the sol–gel process with a ZnO precursor. The ZnO precursor was prepared in a manner similar to that described in previous experiments. Zinc acetate-2-hydrate was used as the source of zinc. 2-Methoxyethanol and ethanolamine were used as the solvent and stabilizer, respectively. The concentration of zinc acetate-2-hydrate was 5 wt% and the precursor solution was mixed thoroughly for 2 hours at 60 °C by magnetic stirring. The precursor solution was spin-coated on the ITO glass substrate and the coated ZnO precursor layer was then dried using a heating plate at 300 °C for 10 min to evaporate the solvent and remove organic residuals. After that, the precursor film was placed in a furnace and annealed in an ambient atmosphere at a temperature of 450 °C for 60 min in order to crystallise the thin ZnO film (thickness: ca. 90 nm). Next, a thin Cs2CO3 electron-selective buffer layer (thickness: ca. 5 nm) was also spin-coated on top of the ZnO ECL using a solution of Cs2CO3 dissolved in 2-ethoxyethanol (0.4 wt%). Apart from the differences in the ZnO ECL described, the comparative PSC was fabricated using exactly the same method as that used for the sample PSC. We also fabricated a comparative reference PSC using the structure [ITO cathode/ZnO ECL/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS HCL/e-Ag anode] (the comparative reference PSC), with a ZnO ECL and an e-Ag anode prepared using a vacuum-evaporation process. Apart from the differences in the ZnO ECL described, the comparative reference PSC was fabricated using exactly the same method as that used for the reference PSC.

Next, in order to fabricate a fully solution-processed inverted P3HT:PCBM PSC on a flexible plastic substrate, we used an ITO-coated flexible polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate (ITO: 100 nm, 60 ohm per square, Aldrich). Apart from the preparation of the ITO-coated PET substrate, all the process parameters were fixed throughout the fabrication of the sample PSC on the glass substrate, as described above.

The surface roughness and topographic properties of the surfaces of the functional layers fabricated were characterised using atomic force microscopy (AFM, Nanosurf easyscan2 FlexAFM, Nanosurf AG Switzerland Inc.). The work functions of the ITO, PEO:Cs2CO3, and Ag NP layers were determined using a Kelvin probe (Scanning Kelvin Probe 5050, KP Technology). The optical properties of the functional layers were also investigated using a Cary 1E (Varian) UV-vis spectrometer. The PV performance of the PSCs fabricated was measured under an illumination intensity of 100 mW cm−2 generated by an AM 1.5G light source (Newport, 96000 Solar Simulator). The photocurrent characteristics were measured using a source meter (Keithley 2400). The illumination intensity was determined using a reference PV cell (Bunkoh-keiki, BS-520). The incident photon-to-current collection efficiency (IPCE) spectra were measured using an IPCE measurement system (Titan Electro-optics Co., QE-IPCE 3000).


We first consider the AFM 3D topographic images of the surfaces of the functional layers prepared on the flat substrates. Fig. 2 shows scanned AFM images of 10 × 10 μm2 areas of the PEO:Cs2CO3 (Fig. 2(a)), P3HT:PCBM (Fig. 2(b)), PEDOT:PSS (Fig. 2(c)), and Ag NP layers (Fig. 2(d)). The surfaces of the PEO:Cs2CO3 layer and the P3HT:PCBM layer were fairly smooth, with root mean square (rms) roughnesses of 1.3 and 6.8 nm, respectively. The surface morphology of the P3HT:PCBM PV layer shown in the figure was almost identical to that of the P3HT:PCBM layer on the PEO:Cs2CO3 layer, which indicates that the introduction of a PEO:Cs2CO3 ECL into an inverted P3HT:PCBM PSC has hardly any effect on the surface morphology of the P3HT:PCBM PV layer. In comparison, a quite smooth surface with an rms surface roughness of ∼1.4 nm was observed for the hole-collecting PEDOT:PSS layer. In contrast, the Ag NP layer may be seen to have a relatively rough surface with an rms roughness of about 24.7 nm. However, the AFM image of the Ag NP layer shows that the Ag NPs were interconnected without cracks. Therefore, although the Ag NP layer has a relatively rough surface, when a layer of Ag NP thicker than 1 μm is fabricated, the surface roughness does not influence the conductivity of the Ag NP layer. This result also implies that the use of a thick Ag NP film as an anode in inverted PSCs may yield a high performance and good reproducibility of the PSCs.

In order to anticipate the current flows of the charge-carriers in the sample PSC, our next step was to investigate the energy levels of the functional layers in the PSC. We used a Kelvin probe to measure the work functions of the functional layers of the ITO, PEO:Cs2CO3, and Ag NP layers; this is known to be an effective method of monitoring the work function. The average values of the measured work functions of the ITO, PEO:Cs2CO3, and Ag NP films were 5.1, 4.5, and 4.1 eV, respectively. It is notable that the work function of the PEO:Cs2CO3 layer is nearly identical to that (4.5 eV) of the conventional ECL of ZnO. The energy band diagram of the sample PSC (Fig. 3), based on the work functions obtained, shows that the hybrid PEO:Cs2CO3 layer can provide good energy level matching of the work function of the ITO cathode (5.1 eV) to the LUMO level of the PCBM acceptor (3.7 eV). This energy level alignment of the PEO:Cs2CO3 layer not only increases the built-in potential between the ITO cathode and the s-Ag anode, but also improves the extraction of the photo-generated charge-carriers from the P3HT:PCBM PV layer. It may therefore be expected that introducing a hybrid PEO:Cs2CO3 layer as the ECL may result in a high PV performance of an all-solution-processed inverted PSC.

In order to investigate the possible use of the PEO:Cs2CO3 layer as an ECL in the fabrication of all-solution-processed inverted PSCs ([ITO cathode/PEO:Cs2CO3 ECL/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS HCL/s-Ag anode]), we next observed the PV performances in the current density-versus-voltage (J–V) characteristics of a number of sample PSCs. Fig. 4(a) shows the representative dark J–V characteristics of the PSCs studied here. It is clear from the figure that the inverted PSCs investigated had good rectification ratios, and good coverage of the functional layers was therefore apparent. However, the all-solution-processed sample PSC with the s-Ag anode showed clear differences in current flow compared with that of the reference PSC prepared using the e-Ag anode. The sample PSC showed leakage currents similar to those of the reference PSC for negative voltages. However, relatively low current flows were observed in the regime dominated by space-charge-limited currents for the all-solution-processed sample PSC tested than for the reference PSC, indicating a decrease in charge transport and an increase in series or contact resistance. It may also be seen that the diffusion-current-dominated regime was shifted slightly towards a lower forward bias for the sample PSC, implying that the built-in potential may also be slightly lower. These dark J–V characteristics imply a slightly inferior but comparable PV performance of the sample PSC compared to that of the reference PSC. In addition, similar behaviours in terms of dark J–V characteristics were also observed for the comparative PSC and the comparative reference PSC with the conventional ZnO ECL, as shown in Fig. 4(a). However, it may be seen that for the sample PSC the current flows in the regime dominated by space-charge-limited current are much higher than those for the comparative PSC, while the leakage current flows for the sample PSC are lower than those for the comparative PSC, implying more efficient flows of the free charge-carriers in the sample PSC than in the comparative PSC.

We now consider the J–V characteristics under illumination, as shown in Fig. 4(b). Although the sample PSC prepared using the PEO:Cs2CO3 ECL and the s-Ag anode was fabricated fully in air, the figure clearly shows that open-circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), and short-circuit current density (JSC) of the sample PSC were comparable to those of the reference PSC prepared using a vacuum-evaporation process. The PV performance and characteristics extracted from the illuminated J–V characteristics of the inverted P3HT:PCBM PSCs studied are summarised in Table 1. The values shown are the averages and standard deviations obtained from more than ten individual PSCs on independent substrates. As shown in the table, the reference PSC prepared using the PEO:Cs2CO3 ECL and the e-Ag anode showed a fairly good PV performance, with a VOC of 0.60 V, a JSC of 10.9 mA cm−2, and an FF of 45.6%. This corresponds to a PCE of 3.0%, which is comparable to the typical value (3.1–3.7%) of conventional inverted P3HT:PCBM PSCs prepared using vacuum-evaporated metal anodes. Interestingly, the all-solution-processed sample PSC with the PEO:Cs2CO3 ECL and the s-Ag anode prepared in air clearly showed comparably good PV performance; a VOC of 0.53 V was achieved, with a JSC of 9.8 mA cm−2, and an FF of 47.5%, giving a PCE of 2.5%. It is notable that this average PCE value of the sample PSC is slightly higher than that (2.3%) of the all-solution-processed normal-structured (non-inverted) P3HT:PCBM PSCs that contain the s-Ag cathode and the P3HT:PCBM PV layer with the hole-collecting PEDOT:PSS layer on an ITO glass substrate. This fairly good performance of the all-solution-processed inverted sample PSC may be attributed to the improved collection of electrons at the cathode, as a result of the introduction of the PEO:Cs2CO3 ECL, which may cause built-in potential and reduce the contact resistance.
PSCs
ECL/anode

V
OC, V

J
SC, mA cm−2
FF%
PCE%

R
S, Ω cm2

R
SH, kΩ cm2

a Average values obtained from at least ten devices.

Sample
PEO:Cs2CO3/s-Ag
0.53 ± 0.04
9.8 ± 1.0
47.5 ± 3.1
2.5 ± 0.1
12.8 ± 3.3
1.4 ± 0.4
Reference
PEO:Cs2CO3/e-Ag
0.60 ± 0.01
10.9 ± 0.3
45.6 ± 1.5
3.0 ± 0.1
10.4 ± 3.6
2.8 ± 1.0
Comparative
ZnO/s-Ag
0.59 ± 0.01
8.9 ± 0.6
40.9 ± 3.4
2.1 ± 0.1
22.7 ± 5.5
0.9 ± 0.4
Comparative reference
ZnO/e-Ag
0.59 ± 0.02
9.7 ± 0.4
43.0 ± 3.1
2.4 ± 0.1
13.5 ± 4.4
1.5 ± 1.1
In comparison, as shown in Table 1, the comparative reference PSC prepared using the sol–gel-processed ZnO ECL and the e-Ag anode also showed a good PV performance, with a VOC of 0.59 V, a JSC of 9.7 mA cm−2, and an FF of 43.0%, corresponding to a PCE of 2.4%. This PCE value of the comparative reference PSC is comparable to the typical values of conventional inverted P3HT:PCBM PSCs composed of a ZnO ECL. However, it should be noted that the PCE of the comparative reference PSC is somewhat lower than that of the reference PSC prepared using the PEO:Cs2CO3 ECL. On the other hand, the comparative PSC with the sol–gel-processed ZnO ECL and the s-Ag anode had a reasonable PV performance, with a VOC of 0.59 V, a JSC of 8.9 mA cm−2, and an FF of 40.9%, corresponding to a PCE of 2.1%. This PCE value of the comparative PSC is also somewhat lower than that (2.5%) of the sample PSC prepared with the PEO:Cs2CO3 ECL. It is thus clear that the PEO:Cs2CO3 layer could be a potential candidate for an ECL for efficient all-solution-processable inverted PSCs, in place of the conventional high-temperature-processed ZnO ECL.
Next, in order to estimate the device performance in terms of the series resistance RS, and the shunt resistance RSH, of the inverted PSCs studied here, we also deduced the average values of these resistances from the J–V curves, by determining the slopes of the forward and reverse bias, where the J–V curve becomes linear for the inverted PSCs studied (see Table 1). As shown in the table, the average RS of 12.8 Ω cm2 for the sample PSC prepared using the PEO:Cs2CO3 ECL is much lower than that (22.7 Ω cm2) of the comparative PSC prepared using the ZnO ECL. This low value of RS, together with the relatively high JSC of the sample PSC, indicates that the photo-generated electrons in the P3HT:PCBM BHJ PV layer can be transported efficiently through the PEO:Cs2CO3 ECL and into the ITO cathode. It is also clear from the table that the average RSH of 1.4 kΩ cm2 for the sample PSC is higher (within the deviation seen) than that (0.9 kΩ cm2) of the comparative PSC. This value of RSH, together with the high FF of the sample PSC, may be ascribed to the reduced hole–electron recombination loss at the interface between the ECL and the PV layer. Similar behaviours in RS and RSH are also observed for the reference PSC and the comparative reference PSC consisting of the e-Ag anodes, as shown in Table 1. These results clearly indicate that the PEO:Cs2CO3 ECL in the all-solution-processed inverted PSCs provides more efficient electron-collecting characteristics than the conventional ZnO layer.

We also assessed the PV performance of the all-solution-processed inverted P3HT:PCBM PSCs by measuring the IPCE spectra. The IPCE spectra of the inverted PSC devices studied are shown in Fig. 5. Each inverted PSC shows the well known IPCE spectral shape of its P3HT:PCBM PV layer, all of which are in good agreement with the UV-vis optical absorption spectral shape of the PV layer (the dashed curve in the figure), indicating that the photocurrents are generated mainly by dissociated excitons produced by absorbed photons in the P3HT donor. The crystalline ordering of P3HT after thermal annealing can be confirmed by the pronounced vibronic absorption peaks (ca. 600 nm). It should be noted that the IPCE spectra of the P3HT:PCBM PV layer of the sample PSC are nearly identical to those of the comparative PSC in the wavelength region of visible light, but the IPCE of the sample PSC in the UV wavelength region of 300–400 nm is higher than that of the comparative PSC. Similar behaviours are also seen for the IPCEs of the reference and comparative reference PSCs. These high IPCEs in the short wavelength region below 400 nm for the sample (reference) PSC with the PEO:Cs2CO3 ECL may be caused by lower UV-light absorption of the PEO:Cs2CO3 layer compared to the ZnO layer, which causes UV-light of high intensity to be transmitted through the PEO:Cs2CO3 ECL. Thus, light absorption in the UV wavelength region into the PV layer becomes relatively strong, which can generate excess charge-carriers, resulting in high IPCEs for the sample (reference) PSC in the short wavelength region. It should also be noted that the all-solution-processed inverted sample PSC shows a maximum IPCE of ca. 54% at ca. 510 nm, which is lower than that (71% at 550 nm) of the reference PSC prepared using the e-Ag anode. Similar IPCE characteristics are also observed for the comparative PSC and the comparative reference PSC consisting of the ZnO ECLs, as shown in Fig. 5. These relatively lower IPCEs of the sample and comparative PSCs than those of the reference and comparative reference PSCs may be related to the optical properties of the s-Ag anodes used in the sample and comparative PSCs.

In order to investigate the difference between the optical characteristics of the Ag anodes used, we measured the reflectances of the s-Ag film (RsAg) and the e-Ag film (ReAg), formed on fused quartz substrates. The spectral ratio of reflectance for the s-Ag film with respect to that of the e-Ag film, RsAg/ReAg, is shown in Fig. 6. The average value of the ratio RsAg/ReAg was about 58% over the whole range of wavelengths investigated (350–700 nm), and began to decrease as the wavelength of the incident light increased. This result indicates that only about 58% of the photons were reflected back to the active PV layer from the s-Ag anode. This reduced number of reflecting photons was absorbed into the PV layer, generating a reduced number of charge-carriers, leading to a low IPCE for the sample PSC. To confirm this result, we also estimated the ratio of the IPCEs (dotted curve) for the sample (IPCES) and reference PSC (IPCER), as shown in Fig. 6. Here, the average IPCE ratio, IPCES/IPCER, is about 63% over the whole wavelength region (350–700 nm) and began to decrease as the wavelength of the incident light increased, similar to RsAg/ReAg. The slightly higher value (∼5%) of IPCES/IPCER than RsAg/ReAg may be due to the additional light absorption of the scattered photons back to the active PV layer from the rough s-Ag film surface. Similar behaviours of the ratio of the IPCEs were also observed for the comparative and comparative reference PSCs (not shown). It is therefore clear that one may increase the IPCE and PV performance by further increasing the reflectance of the s-Ag anode used in all-solution-processable inverted PSCs.

Finally, in order to verify the device performance and investigate the processability of fabrication of the all-solution-processed inverted PV devices, we also fabricated 20 × 18 mm2 inverted P3HT:PCBM PSCs using the PEO:Cs2CO3 ECL and the s-Ag anodes on flexible ITO-coated PET substrates. Fig. 7 shows the characteristics of the all solution-processed flexible inverted PSC fabricated. As shown in Fig. 7(a), a fairly good PV performance was observed, with a VOC of 0.42 ± 0.02 V, a JSC of 9.4 ± 1.1 mA cm−2, and an FF of 32.2 ± 4.3%. These results correspond to a PCE of 1.3 ± 0.1%, which is as high as those reported to date for all-solution-processed flexible P3HT:PCBM PSCs prepared using the inverted structure. This PV performance of the flexible sample PSC is comparable to that of the flexible reference PSC with the e-Ag anode (dotted curve), showing a VOC of 0.58 ± 0.01 V, a JSC of 9.0 ± 0.8 mA cm−2, and an FF of 34.6 ± 2.8%, corresponding to a PCE of 1.8 ± 0.1%. However, the PV performance of the VOC, FF, and PCE of the flexible device on the PET substrate is lower than that of the PSC fabricated on the glass substrate. The decrease in the PV performance could be due to the large contact resistance of the ITO cathode on PET, compared to the ITO on glass. The large contact resistance of the ITO on the PET is mainly due to the low conductivity of the ITO, which is in turn due to a lack of sufficient heat treatment of the ITO layer on the PET substrate in the production process, to minimize thermal damage to PET. The low conductivity (or high resistivity) of the ITO on PET increases the contact (series) resistance, resulting in a decreased FF. Thus, the drop in device performance in terms of VOC and FF can be addressed by increasing the conductivity of the ITO layer on the flexible substrate. The IPCE spectra of the flexible inverted sample PSC studied are shown in Fig. 7(b). The flexible inverted PSC also shows the similar optical absorption spectral shape of the P3HT:PCBM PV layer. It should be noted that while the IPCE spectral shape of the flexible sample PSC is similar to that of the sample PSC on the glass substrate in the visible light wavelength region, the spectral shape of IPCE of the flexible PSC in the UV wavelength region of 300–400 nm is lower than that of the sample PSC on the glass substrate. This result may be due to the stronger UV-light absorption of the PET substrate compared to the glass substrate. It should also be noted that the flexible sample PSC on the PET substrate shows a maximum IPCE of ca. 46% at ca. 540 nm, which is lower than that (54% at 510 nm) of the sample PSC on the glass substrate. This relatively lower IPCE of the flexible sample PSC than that of the sample PSC on the glass substrate may originate in the UV-light absorbing property of the PET substrate and the low conductivity of the ITO on the PET substrate, as mentioned above. A photographic image of the fabricated flexible inverted PSC is shown in the inset of Fig. 7(b), which also shows the ease of fabrication of all-solution-processed flexible inverted PSCs using the PEO:Cs2CO3 ECL. It is therefore clear that the introduction of the PEO:Cs2CO3 ECL can lead to the simple fabrication of flexible inverted PSCs using an all-solution-process in air at low temperature.

Although the overall performance characteristics of the flexible PSCs fabricated using all-solution-processes are somewhat lower than those of PSCs on ITO-coated glass substrates, the above results clearly demonstrate that the use of PEO:Cs2CO3 ECLs offers the possibility of the rapid fabrication of all-solution-processable inverted PSCs at lower temperature compared with the use of conventional ZnO layers. It is further noted that the results obtained in this study can also be combined with the use of new technologies related to ITO-free PSCs instead of conventional ITO-based devices. All the results presented here indicate that water-processable hybrid PEO:Cs2CO3 ECLs show considerable promise for the simple fabrication of flexible, large-area inverted PSCs using high-throughput R2R manufacturing, which could potentially be used for future mass production of low-cost organic PV electronic systems.

In summary, we have herein reported on the use of a rapid solution processable hybrid electron-collecting PEO:Cs2CO3 layer at low temperature in the fabrication of all-solution-processable inverted PSCs. Experiments using a Kelvin probe demonstrated that the PEO:Cs2CO3 layer is an excellent candidate for the ECL in all-solution-processable inverted PSCs. The successful realisation of a fairly good PV performance of all-solution-processable inverted PSCs on a glass substrate has been demonstrated through the application of the PEO:Cs2CO3 ECL. Using a P3HT:PCBM PV layer, we obtained a VOC of 0.53 V, a JSC of 9.8 mA cm−2, an FF of 47.5%, and a PCE of 2.5%, all of which are higher than those of an inverted PSC obtained using the conventional ZnO ECL. This PV performance is mainly attributed to the efficient charge-carrier collection caused by selecting a suitable work function of the PEO:Cs2CO3 layer with respect to the LUMO level of the PCBM acceptor. Moreover, since the processing temperature can be kept below 150 °C throughout the fabrication process, our inverted PSC can be manufactured on a flexible PET substrate. The PCE reached 1.3% for the P3HT:PCBM PV layer in this case. Our findings show an effective approach to the fabrication of all-solution-processed inverted polymer-based PV devices, and pave the way for the fabrication of cost-effective and printable flexible inverted PSCs.


This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MEST) (2012R1A2A2A01015654), and by the Converging Research Center Program through the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (2012K001303), by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) Grant funded by the Korea Government (MEST) (20100029416), and by Kwangwoon University (2013).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013