 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA08947C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3012-3021


Xianyong
Zhou
,

Yong
Zhang
,

Weiguang
Kong
,

Manman
Hu
,

Luozheng
Zhang
,

Chang
Liu
,

Xiangnan
Li
,

Chunyue
Pan
*,

Guipeng
Yu
,

Chun
Cheng
* and 

Baomin
Xu
*

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong Province 518055, China. E-mail: chengc@sustc.edu.cn; xubm@sustc.edu.cn

College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan Province 410083, China. E-mail: panchunyue@sina.com

Received
11th October 2017
, Accepted 8th January 2018
First published on 10th January 2018
A delicate control of crystallization and morphology of perovskite absorbers is critical to obtain high performance hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Here, we have developed a novel crystallization strategy which involves hydration water induced intermediate phase formation under heat assisted spin-coating processing (HASP) to manipulate the morphology and grain size of perovskite films, and thus it can avoid the use of toxic and volatile antisolvents used in conventional one-step solution processes to make PSCs. During HASP, impressive morphological evolution of films occurs with the formation of CH3NH3PbI3·xH2O perovskite intermediate phases. With ingenious control of the crystallization kinetics, highly crystalline perovskite films with fewer defect states and high carrier lifetimes are obtained. The corresponding PSCs exhibit a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 19.12% with a stabilized power output efficiency of 18.89% at the maximum power point, which is a 70% enhancement compared to that of conventional one-step process based PSCs. Furthermore, the PSC fabricated by the HASP method achieved a PCE of 15.47% with an active area of 1.2 cm2. Moreover, the flexible PSCs fabricated by the HASP method achieved a record efficiency of 14.87% with negligible hysteresis for PEDOT:PSS-based flexible inverted PSCs. Our work opens up a new avenue for morphology and crystallization control through hydration water induced intermediate phase formation under HASP, which paves the way toward further enhancing the device performance of perovskite solar cells.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have received broad interest in both the academic and industrial sectors in the past eight years due to their low fabrication cost, high efficiency and ease of processability. In terms of photovoltaic performance, the highest certified power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of perovskite solar cells have risen to 22.1% in single-junction devices. The dramatic increase of efficiency has been mainly attributed to the perfecting of the perovskite film quality to be pin-hole free, uniform, and smooth with larger crystal grains. Engineering the dynamic crystallization of the perovskite from precursors is considered to be the most crucial factor for perovskite film quality, which gives rise to a variety of strategies to govern the nucleation and crystal growth of the perovskite films. Organic-cation displacement, antisolvent engineering, and intramolecular exchange have been developed to yield the desired morphologies of the perovskite. Among these strategies, antisolvent engineering is a representative of the “one-step” solution process that turns out to be an effective method for fabricating good-performing PSCs. However, the antisolvent is usually dropped on the center of the substrate, creating a radial gradient over-saturation and spatially inhomogeneous nucleation of the perovskite, which are unfavorable for large-area solar cell fabrication and device reproducibility. In addition, the most commonly used antisolvents, such as chlorobenzene (CB) and toluene are toxic and harmful to the environment and operators in manufacturing and scientists in the lab, hampering industrial application of PSCs. For the scalable fabrication of PSCs, antisolvent engineering is currently far from perfect. Hence it is crucial to develop alternative scalable processes to prepare perovskite films. Generally, the preparation of perovskite precursor solutions is conducted in an anhydrous environment. However, recent studies discovered that moisture could assist the perovskite grain growth, leading to a better device performance. Wu et al. reported the use of H2O as an additive in PbI2/DMF solution to prepare a full-coverage, good-quality PbI2 film on a PEDOT:PSS coated ITO substrate. A high-quality MAPbI3 film was then formed by adding MAI/IPA on the top of PbI2 using a two-step spin coating method. The resulting inverted cell reached a high efficiency of 18%. This implies that the introduced water molecule is beneficial to the perovskite crystallization process of the two-step process using PbI2 as the lead source. Unfortunately, the first attempt of adding liquid water to perovskite precursor solution which was prepared with methylammonium iodide (MAI) and lead chloride at a molar ratio of 3:1 and dissolved in dimethylformamide (DMF) did not boost the performance of the one-step processed PSCs. These seemingly inconsistent experimental results implied that the role of the water molecule in the perovskite crystallization process still remains unclear. Recently, lead acetate (PbAc2) has been introduced as a new budget-friendly, promising lead source for highly efficient PSCs without using antisolvents. For instance, Zhang et al. have reported using methylamine iodide (MAI) and lead acetate at a molar ratio of 3:1 dissolved in DMF solvent to fabricate smooth CH3NH3PbI3 thin films by a one-step solution process. Zhu et al. have further reported that the incorporation of methylamine bromide as an additive into the lead acetate based CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite precursor solution enabled controllable ultrasmooth films and a device efficiency exceeding 18%. The results of the above studies are based on anhydrous lead acetate as the lead source. Recently, Zheng et al. have reported lead acetate trihydrate (PbAc2·3H2O) as a new lead source to fabricate MAPbI3 films, but the device efficiency is only 9.5%. On decreasing the content of hydration water in the perovskite precursor solutions, the PCEs of devices increased gradually to 12.3%. When the precursor solution contains only anhydrous lead acetate, the PCE of devices is only 9.3%. This implies that an appropriate content of hydration water is beneficial to improve the performance of PSCs. However, the specific role of hydration water is not very clear in the one-step perovskite crystallization process. It is crucial to further understand the underlying mechanism and adopt a new crystallization strategy to improve the performance of PSCs.

In this paper, we have developed a novel crystallization strategy which involves hydration water induced intermediate phase formation under a heat assisted spin-coating process (HASP) to manipulate the morphology and grain size of perovskite films, and thus high performance PSC devices can be obtained using a one-step perovskite crystallization process with hydrous lead acetate as the lead source. On using the HASP method to fabricate perovskite precursor films with different contents of hydration water in the precursor solutions, impressive film morphological evolution occurs with the formation of CH3NH3PbI3·xH2O perovskite intermediate phases and a suitable evaporation state of the by-products H2O, MA·Ac and DMF, which induces rapid orderly crystallization at an appropriate temperature. We observed that the crystallization kinetics is obviously changed due to the formation of perovskite intermediate phases, yielding highly crystalline perovskite films with fewer defect states and longer carrier lifetimes. The perovskite solar cells with the reconstructed films exhibit the highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) of up to 19.12% under 1 sun AM 1.5G irradiation, which is a 70% enhancement compared to that of the conventional one-step process based PSCs. Also, the perovskite solar cells fabricated with HASP show negligible hysteresis behavior and a stabilized power output efficiency of 18.89% obtained at the maximum power point. In addition, we have fabricated large area PSCs by the HASP method, the efficiency of the cell device with a 1.2 cm2 active area has reached 15.47%. Hence, the present study demonstrates up-scaling potential for the assembly of modules in solar cells. Moreover, the flexible PSCs fabricated by the HASP method have achieved a record efficiency of 14.87% with negligible hysteresis reported so far for PEDOT:PSS-based flexible inverted PSCs and a remarkable power per-weight of 25.20 W g−1. At the same time, we tested the stability of the prepared rigid devices. For the HASP-treated rigid cells, we can see that over 80% of the initial PCEs remained after about 20 days in air (30% humidity) without encapsulation and after 60 days when vacuum sealed.

The proposed strategy includes three major steps as shown in Fig. 1a. First, the perovskite precursor solution containing 3MAI:PbAc2·3H2O in DMF was prepared and kept at different temperatures from 70 to 95 °C with an interval of 5 °C, respectively. Secondly, the hot precursor solution was spin-coated onto the substrate which was pre-heated at 90 °C (according to the experiment of the substrate temperature we have explored before, it is ideal that it is 90 °C, and when the precursor solution temperature continues to rise to 100 to 120 °C, due to the too fast evaporation state of H2O, MA·Ac and DMF, the quality of the perovskite film gets worse) to form a light brown intermediate complex film. Finally, the complex film was annealed at 90 °C for 10 min to obtain a controllable ultrasmooth and large-grain perovskite layer. Compared to the conventional one-step process (abbreviated as CP in this paper, where the precursor solution and substrate were maintained at room temperature, see details in the Experimental section), significant changes in the film color were observed during the HASP, typically, as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). Before thermal annealing, the homogeneous intermediate complex films prepared by the HASP method gradually show a light brown color with the precursor solution temperature increasing from 80 °C to 85 °C. When the precursor solution temperature reaches 95 °C, the intermediate complex films prepared by the HASP method become a non-uniform light brown film before thermal annealing. After annealing at 90 °C for 10 min, the homogeneous intermediate complex films are transformed into a smooth, compact and highly crystalline perovskite layer with a bright dark brown color after gradually losing remnant water molecules, but the non-uniform intermediate complex films are converted into rough and fogged low-quality films. In contrast, the intermediate complex films prepared by the CP method show a light yellow color before thermal annealing, and then are transformed into a perovskite layer with a dark brown color after thermal annealing. The film formation mechanism is closely related to the content of hydration water in lead acetate. When MAI and PbAc2·xH2O (where x ≠ 0) are mixed at a molar ratio 3:1, the white powder immediately turns yellow, as shown in Fig. 1b, while no color change was observed in the case of x = 0. The composition of the yellow powder may be CH3NH3PbI3·xH2O and by-products MA·Ac and H2O (including a small amount of reactants).

The approximate content of hydration water in the CH3NH3PbI3·xH2O complex was estimated by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) in a dynamic nitrogen stream. The TGA results of 3MAI:PbAc2·3H2O are shown in Fig. S2 (ESI). Two inflection points can be seen from the TGA curve, one at about 70 °C and the other one at about 85 °C, which correspond to the change of the weight loss mechanism. That is, the mechanisms of weight loss are different when the temperature is below 70 °C, between 70 and 85 °C, and above 85 °C. In our experiment, solid MAI and PbAc2·3H2O were first mixed thoroughly at a molar ratio of 3:1 under a nitrogen atmosphere at room temperature. At this point, the reaction between MAI and PbAc2·3H2O occurs and generates the products including CH3NH3PbI3·xH2O and by-products MA·Ac and (3 − x)H2O (which we also call as extra isolated water), and the weight ratio of total water content to the entire mixture is the theoretical value, 6.3 wt% (3H2O/(PbAc2·3H2O + 3MAI) = 0.063). During the TGA measurement, the weight loss at 60 to 70 °C mainly corresponds to the loss of the extra isolated water, because this part of water is the easiest to lose. At 70 to 85 °C, the weight loss mainly comes from the hydration water in CH3NH3PbI3·xH2O and the remaining extra isolated water. The TGA result shows that about 3.1 wt% loss occurs up to 70 °C, which accounts for about half of the total water content. Hence, we can speculate that an intermediate phase with a possible composition of CH3NH3PbI3·xH2O (0 ≤ x ≤ 1.5) is formed after the reaction between MAI and PbAc2·3H2O. When the temperature is above 85 °C, the weight loss in TGA mainly comes from the water generated by the decomposition of MA·Ac (MA·Ac decomposes and produces H2O and N-methylacetamide, the latter has a boiling point of 204 °C).
The formation of the CH3NH3PbI3·xH2O intermediate complex was further confirmed from X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) patterns (Fig. 1c and d). The conversion rate of the CH3NH3PbI3·xH2O complex was monitored using UV-vis spectra in Fig. S3 (ESI). We characterized the spin-coated films before and after thermal annealing, respectively. Fig. 1c depicts the XRD patterns of the CH3NH3PbI3·xH2O intermediate phase film with a similar thickness before thermal annealing. The films showed peaks at both 14.1° and 28.6°, corresponding to the (110) and (220) faces of the perovskite tetragonal crystal as illustrated in previous work. The appearance of perovskite peaks suggests that the precursors were directly converted into the perovskite tetragonal structure. However, as compared with the films prepared using anhydrous lead acetate through the CP method, the films with hydration water prepared by the CP method show three new peaks at 11.83°, 12.51° and 26.6°, and the films with hydration water fabricated by the HASP method have three new peaks at 8.8°, 10.83° and 26.6°. This indicates that the presence of hydration water induces the crystallographic orientation of the perovskite, and the crystal orientation of the film prepared by HASP is different from that of the CP-prepared film. The appearance of the peaks at 26.6° and lower diffraction angles are attributed to the formation of a CH3NH3PbI3·xH2O intermediate phase. All these peaks disappeared after conversion into the perovskite films with annealing on a hot plate (Fig. 1d). Upon annealing at 90 °C for 10 min, the CH3NH3PbI3·xH2O intermediate phase transforms into a smooth, compact and highly crystalline perovskite layer by losing remnant water molecules. Fig. 1d depicts the XRD patterns of the CH3NH3PbI3·xH2O intermediate phase film with a similar thickness after thermal annealing. The XRD peaks after thermal annealing for the perovskite film prepared from 3MAI:PbAc2·3H2O precursor solution by the HASP method show the strongest and sharpest diffraction peak from the (110) plane, whereas the perovskite film from the CP method exhibits the weakest XRD intensity. Since all the measurements are performed using the same parameters and all the perovskite films are of similar thickness, the results from XRD further confirm the improvement of crystallinity for the perovskite film prepared with 3MAI:PbAc2·3H2O precursor solution by the HASP method. These results clearly show that hydration water induced perovskite intermediate phase formation under HASP conditions is an effective crystallization strategy to produce fewer defects and a highly crystalline perovskite film. It is worth mentioning that the intermediate phase obtained by HASP in the presence of hydration water is unprecedented in the literature. Thus, our work opens up a novel mechanism to convert the precursor films into perovskite.
Based on the above results, we propose a thin film growth mechanism as shown in Fig. 1e. Six species including Pb2+, Ac−, MA+, I−, H2O, and DMF coexisted in the perovskite precursor solution. When the precursor solution was pre-heated at 80–85 °C, the hot precursor solution was spin-coated onto the substrate which was pre-heated at 90 °C to form a light brown homogenous intermediate complex film (Fig. S1, ESI). The homogenous intermediate complex film mainly including CH3NH3PbI3·xH2O, MA·Ac and residual DMF was annealed at 90 °C to obtain a controllable, ultrasmooth and large-grain perovskite layer. Here, a suitable evaporation state of H2O, MA·Ac and DMF at appropriate temperature which induced grain growth and suppressed the nucleation process is speculated to be responsible for forming the large-grain and compact perovskite film at that specified temperature. As the temperature of the precursor solution further increased, the quality of the perovskite film gets worse, which may be due to the too fast solvent evaporation and the bad diffusion state of H2O, MA·Ac and DMF. Since the boiling point of water and the decomposition temperature of MA·Ac (85–97 °C) are lower than that of DMF (bp 153 °C), when the temperature of the precursor solvents is at a higher level (>90 °C), the above-mentioned preferred evaporation state is broken. The rates at which water runs out increase, associated with the decomposition of the MA·Ac, the remaining DMF and by-product N-methylacetamide (bp 204 °C) will govern the crystallization of the perovskite and result in poor film quality. At a lower temperature (<70 °C), the evaporation of H2O, MA·Ac and DMF occurred at a slow rate. The remaining excess H2O, DMF and MA·Ac will hinder the crystallization of the perovskite and result in poor film quality containing numerous pinholes and small grains.
The above mechanism can be further verified by Fig. 2 that depicts the top-view scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of the perovskite films prepared using the HASP method from the 3MAI:PbAc2·3H2O precursor solution pre-heated at different temperatures from 70 °C to 95 °C. It was found that the film formation process is highly dependent on the temperatures of the perovskite precursor. A pin-hole free compact perovskite film with a grain size over 400 nm is obtained when the temperature of the precursor solution reaches 80–85 °C.

Fig. 3a and b show the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of perovskite films prepared from 3MAI:PbAc2·3H2O precursor solutions by the CP and HASP methods, respectively. Compared to the perovskite film prepared by the HASP method, the perovskite film prepared by the CP method possesses numerous pinholes and cracks, which may cause serious current leakage and charge recombination in PSCs. To investigate the effect of film quality on device performance, we fabricated a device with the configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PC61BM/BCP/Ag, as shown in Fig. 3c. The corresponding cross-sectional FIB-SEM image of the HASP based device is depicted in Fig. 3d. Fig. 3e shows the current density–voltage curves of the devices. The HASP based device shows a PCE of 18.62% with an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.02 V, a fill factor (FF) of 0.74, and a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 24.67 mA cm−2. The CP based device shows a PCE of only 9.31% with a Voc of 0.96 V, an FF of 0.60, and a Jsc of 16.16 mA cm−2. The much lower device performance of the CP based device than that of HASP based device is ascribed to the much poor perovskite film quality.
Although HASP can significantly increase the efficiency of the PSCs, the current device prepared from 3MAI:PbAc2·3H2O precursor solutions with a PCE of 18.62% still has room for further optimization. As mentioned in the Introduction section, the content of hydration water in the precursor solution has an important impact on the performance of the final PSCs fabricated by the CP method. This inspired us to optimize the HASP to further improve the device performance. Herein before, we observed that the pre-heating temperature considerably influences the PbAc2·3H2O-based perovskite film formation in the HASP. An optimized pre-heating temperature of 85 °C is used for further studies. Here, we try to deliberately tune the hydration water amount in the 3MAI:PbAc2·xH2O precursor to further improve the device performance by preparing 3MAI:PbAc2·xH2O/DMF precursor solutions with different x values (0, 1.5, 2.5, 2.8, and 3). Fig. 4 depicts the SEM images of resultant perovskite films prepared from the different contents of hydration water in precursor solutions. It is found that the content of hydration water has a large impact on the morphology of the perovskite films in the HASP. The precursor solutions without hydration water gave a non-continuous film with large voids, as shown in Fig. 4b. In contrast, continuous and homogenous perovskite films composed of the largest polyhedron-like grains with full coverage of the substrate were obtained when x equals 2.8 (Fig. 4e). It is generally believed that most of the trap states locate at grain boundaries. Thus, larger grain size means fewer grain boundaries, and it could be expected that the 3MAI:PbAc2·2.8H2O based perovskite film possesses a much smaller trap-density than that of the perovskite thin films prepared with other x values. This is expected to be beneficial to suppress the non-radiative charge carrier recombination and ultimately helps to enhance the efficiency of the cell device. To further verify the advantage of the HASP over the CP, we also prepared a perovskite thin film using the CP with 3MAI:PbAc2·2.8H2O precursor solution. As shown in Fig. 4a, the perovskite film prepared by the conventional CP possesses numerous pinholes and cannot fully cover the substrate. Furthermore, the grain size of the HASP yielded perovskite films can reach hundreds of nanometers, which is substantially larger than those prepared by the CP method. This result highlights the validity of HASP for high quality perovskite thin films. It is worth pointing out that the optimized hydration water content here (x = 2.8) is much higher than previously reported work (x = 1.5), which could be attributed to the totally different experimental conditions. In the previous work, all the experiments were conducted at room temperature, which has a lower evaporation rate of water and thus lower optimized hydration water content. The relatively higher experimental temperature in this work induces faster evaporation of water and hence the optimized water content is also higher.
With 3MAI:PbAc2·2.8H2O precursor solution as the optimized object, we also rechecked the influence of preheating temperatures on the resultant thin films. Fig. S4 depicts the SEM images of perovskite films prepared from 3MAI:PbAc2·2.8H2O containing precursor solutions at different pre-heating temperatures by the HASP. It was found that the grain size of the perovskite film first increases and then decreases with the increase of the pre-heating temperature of the precursor solution. The largest grain size was obtained with the precursor solution pre-heating temperature at 85 °C. Under this condition, the evaporation rate of H2O, MA·Ac and DMF reaches a perfect state, resulting in a pin-hole free perovskite film with better uniformity, larger crystal grains, and full coverage of the substrate.
In order to further inspect the uniformity of the HASP-treated 3MAI:PbAc2·2.8H2O perovskite film over large areas, we performed atomic force microscope (AFM) measurements to examine the surface roughness of the film in a 10 μm × 10 μm area. A typical AFM topography of the perovskite film is illustrated in Fig. 5a. The grain size observed in the AFM image is consistent with that seen in the SEM image in Fig. 4e. Additionally, the AFM image shows the root mean square roughness value of 12.2 nm, indicating the promising scalability of the HASP technique with respect to the morphological control of perovskite thin films. It is demonstrated that the HASP enables the expeditious and well-controlled removal of solvent, boosting rapid crystallization of a material that consists of a Lewis acid–base type adduct which represents the perovskite precursor phase by suitable evaporation of H2O, MA·Ac (byproduct, dissolved in water) and DMF at the appropriate temperature. Upon thermal annealing with appropriate temperature, the HASP produces highly oriented crystalline perovskite films with excellent electronic quality. Furthermore, the HASP allows continuous deposition of large-scale perovskite films. Particularly, the HASP can control the content of hydration water of the perovskite precursor and suitable evaporation of H2O, MA·Ac and DMF at the appropriate temperature, which enables a smooth and uniform perovskite film with a high degree of crystallinity.
X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were also conducted to characterize the crystallinity of the as-prepared perovskite thin films with similar thickness prepared from different ratios of hydration water of precursor solutions. As shown in Fig. 5b and S5 (ESI), the perovskite films after annealing show a similar crystal structure, and apparent phase change is not observed. Regardless of the CP or the HASP method, all the films preserved the tetragonal phase, with the main characteristic peaks located at 14.1° and 28.6°, corresponding to the diffractions from the (110) and (220) planes, which is consistent with the reported results. The perovskite films mainly grow preferentially along the direction perpendicular to the (110) lattice plane. However, the XRD intensity changes with the content of the hydration water. The perovskite film prepared from 3MAI:PbAc2·2.8H2O precursor solution by the HASP method shows the strongest and sharpest diffraction peak from the (110), whereas the perovskite film from the CP method exhibits the weakest XRD intensity. These results suggest that the crystallinity of the perovskite is significantly enhanced for the perovskite film prepared using 3MAI:PbAc2·2.8H2O precursor solution by the HASP method. A similar variation can be observed from the absorption spectra, as shown in Fig. 5c and S6 (ESI). The perovskite film prepared from 3MAI:PbAc2·2.8H2O precursor solution by the HASP method shows the highest light absorption in the range of 400–800 nm, which is consistent with the XRD results. Since all the measurements are performed using the same parameters and all the perovskite films are of similar thickness, the results from XRD and absorption spectra further confirm the improvement of crystallinity for the perovskite film prepared from 3MAI:PbAc2·2.8H2O precursor solution by the HASP method. In other words, the strategy of the hydration water induced intermediate phase formation under the HASP conditions can significantly improve the perovskite morphology and meanwhile the crystalline quality of the perovskite films.
Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements of the perovskite band-gap emission at 760 nm allow us to derive quantitative information on the dynamics of carrier recombination in the perovskite films. As shown in Table 1 and Fig. 5d (Table S1 and Fig. S7, ESI), the perovskite film prepared from 3MAI:PbAc2·2.8H2O precursor solution by the HASP method shows a slow PL decay (blue triangles) correlated with mono-exponential characteristics both at short and long time scales, and the carrier lifetime reaching the maximum of 125 ns. In contrast, the PL intensity decreases dramatically in the first 40 ns for the perovskite film prepared by the CP from 3MAI:PbAc2·2.8H2O precursor solution or HASP from 3MAI:PbAc2 precursor solution after being excited by a 470 nm laser. The fast PL decay in a short time scale (<40 ns) could be attributed to the deep trap center assisted Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination of the charge carriers at the grain boundaries as studied by previous reports. These results further demonstrate that an appropriateamount of hydration water and a HASP treatment are of vital importance for high-quality perovskite films with a reduced area of grain boundaries where deep-trap centers abound.
Sample
3MAI:PbAc2·2.8H2O by CP
3MAI:PbAc2 by HASP
Lifetime (ns)
33
39
Sample
3MAI:PbAc2·2.8H2O by HASP
3MAI:PbAc2·3H2O by HASP
Lifetime (ns)
125
110
We used the above HASP based perovskite films as light absorbers to fabricate PSCs by employing the planar structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/Perovskite/PC61BM/BCP/Ag at low temperature (<140 °C), and the resultant performances are given in Fig. S8 and Table S2. In order to further verify the advantage of the HASP strategy, we used the optimum hydration water proportion of the perovskite precursor (3MAI:PbAc2·2.8H2O) to prepare perovskite films by the HASP method and CP method, respectively, and finally prepared solar cell devices. The J–V curves are measured under simulated AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2. All devices were prepared from the same batch. J–V curves of the best cells for different fabrication parameters are shown in Fig. 6a. The best CP cell gave a PCE of 11.28% corresponding to a Jsc of 18.16 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.90 V, and an FF of 0.69. The HASP perovskite device has a Jsc of 25.00 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.02 V, and an FF of 0.75, reaching a PCE of 19.12% under standard AM 1.5 solar illumination. This significant improvement of efficiency for the HASP device is attributed to the incorporated high-quality perovskite films. Particularly, the reduced carrier losses at the interface due to SRH recombination could suppress the current leakage and eventually enhance the open circuit voltage (Voc) of the PSCs. Fig. S9 (ESI) shows the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) over the spectral range from 300 to 800 nm. The measured Jsc is well consistent with the integrated Jsc of 23.8 mA cm−2 estimated from IPCE in Fig. S9. It is noted that the maximum IPCE reaches over 95%, which is mainly due to the high charge extraction properties of the adduct-induced MAPbI3 and in part due to light reflection by the back Ag electrode. The HASP technique achieved much higher IPCE values than the CP method, and the integrated Jsc values are consistent with the Jsc values in J–V measurements. We also investigated the hysteresis effect in the J–V measurements of the device. As shown in Fig. 6b and d, the device shows a negligible hysteresis effect in different scan directions and at different scan rates, respectively. Despite the controversy in the generation mechanism of hysteresis, it is widely accepted that for a highly-crystallized perovskite film with a few deep carrier trap centers, the admirable interface properties favor highly efficient charge transport and collection, achieving hysteresis-free PSCs. In our case, the enlarged perovskite crystal size and improved crystalline quality help to eliminate hysteresis by reducing the overall bulk defect density and suppressing charge trapping during solar cell operation. Moreover, the steady-state measurements of Jsc and PCE extracted at the maximum power point (MPP) are shown in Fig. 6c, which confirmed the stability of device parameters extracted from the J–V curves. Tables S3 and S4 (ESI) provide statistical data on the PV metrics of the PSCs, which are used to check the reproducibility of cells fabricated by the HASP method. The average PCE for 10 CP devices is 10.36 ± 0.93% with a Jsc of 17.9 ± 0.28 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.86 ± 0.04 V and FF of 0.64 ± 0.05. For the HASP devices, the average PCE reaches 18.23 ± 0.91% with an average Jsc of 24.40 ± 0.68 mA cm−2, Voc of 1.02 ± 0.02 V, and FF of 0.73 ± 0.02. As shown in Fig. 6e, HASP greatly improved device performance and reproducibility compared to the CP method. Furthermore, we characterized the air stability of the devices fabricated with 3MAI:PbAc2·2.8H2O precursor solution by the CP and HASP methods. As shown in Fig. 6f, the HASP cell retained over 80% of the initial PCEs after 20 days in air (30% humidity) without encapsulation, and after 60 days with encapsulation. In contrast, only about 54% of the initial PCEs was retained after 10 day conservation for the CP device without encapsulation. This could be because of the fact that the HASP method reduced lattice vacancies and the overall bulk defect density, thus retarding the penetration of undesirable H2O or O2 molecules into vacant sites. This suggests that the stability of the perovskite photoactive layer has been improved by the proposed method in this work.
We also employed the above high quality HASP perovskite thin films in large area PSCs with an active area of 1 × 1.2 cm2. As shown in Fig. 7a, the PSC device shows a Jsc of 22.98 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.99 V, and an FF of 0.68, delivering a PCE of 15.47% under standard AM 1.5 solar illumination. We also examined the hysteresis effect of our large area cells fabricated by the HASP method. The PCE difference between the reverse and forward scan is as small as 1% in absolute PCE values, reflecting negligible hysteresis. By taking advantage of this technique, we have further fabricated flexible PSCs utilizing ITO/PEN as the conductive transparent electrode and substrate. Fig. 7b shows the J–V curves of the flexible PSCs and the photograph of a flexible PSC. The best flexible PSC exhibits a Voc of 0.95 V, a Jsc of 22.68 mA cm−2, and an FF of 0.69, corresponding to a PCE of 14.87%, which is the highest PCE of the PEDOT:PSS-based flexible inverted PSCs so far. In addition, our flexible PSCs show a remarkable power-per-weight of 25.20 W g−1 (the detailed calculations are presented in Table S5, ESI). Furthermore, in comparison to the previous studies toward PEDOT:PSS based flexible inverted PSCs, our cells are more efficient and stable (see Table 2). This implies that high-performance and lightweight PSCs can also be obtained through the hydration water induced formation of the intermediate phases under HASP conditions. Nevertheless, compared to the high-efficiency flexible PSCs with a regular structure, the PCE value reported here is still lower, indicating that there is still room to improve the performance of these inverted-flexible PSC based PEDOT:PSS.
Solar cell configuration

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)
Power-per-weight (W g−1)
Ref.
PET/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3−XClX/PC61BM/Ca/Al
17.19
0.99
0.72
12.25

45

PET/ITO/PEDOT:PSS(PEI:HI)/CH3NH3PbI3−XClX/PC61BM/LiF/Al
19.01
1.07
0.68
13.83

46

PET/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3−XClX/PC61BM/Cr2O3/Cr/Au
17.6
0.96
0.77
13.30
23.01

47

PET/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PC60BM/Ca/Al
14.98
0.92
0.49
6.80

48

PEN/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/BCP/Ag
22.68
0.95
0.69
14.87
25.20
This work
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/C60/BCP/Ag
23.32
0.87
0.75
15.22

34

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/C60/BCP/Ag
25.00
1.02
0.75
19.12
This work

In summary, we have demonstrated that the crystallization strategy of the hydration water induced intermediate phase formation under HASP is an effective method to manipulate crystallization and control the morphology of the perovskite absorber for highly efficient perovskite solar cells. This novel method is effective to fabricate perovskite thin films with a pure and stable crystal phase at a relatively low annealing temperature, yielding uniform and compact perovskite thin films with excellent optoelectronic properties. Ultimately, the best PCE of 19.12% was achieved in the inverted planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells based on the HASP fabrication method, and a stabilized output efficiency of 18.89% was obtained at the MPP, which is a 70% enhancement compared to that of the conventional one-step process based PSCs. Moreover, a PCE as high as 15.47% was achieved for the final PSCs with an active area of 1.2 cm2 in single-junction devices. The optimized device showed negligible J–V hysteresis. In addition, the flexible PSCs fabricated by the HASP method achieved a record efficiency of 14.87% with negligible hysteresis reported so far for PEDOT:PSS-based flexible inverted PSCs, and a remarkable power per-weight of 25.20 W g−1. Furthermore, the hydration water presence together with HASP simplifies the device fabrication steps and avoids the use of toxic antisolvents, which opens a new approach to the scalable fabrication of PSCs in the near future. It is worth mentioning that the intermediate phases obtained by HASP together with the presence of hydration water is unprecedented in the literature. Thus, our work opens up a novel mechanism to convert the precursor films into perovskite, and a new avenue for morphology and large-grain control, which paves the way toward further enhancing the device performances of perovskite solar cells.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (Grants No. 2016YFA0202400 and 2016YFA0202404), the Peacock Team Program from Shenzhen Science and Technology Innovation Committee (Grant No. KQTD2015033110182370), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21376272), and the startup funding from the Southern University of Science and Technology (Grants No. 25/Y01256112 and 25/Y01256212).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta08947c
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018