 DOI: 10.1039/C9TC00331B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 3226-3230


Linna
Zhu
*,

Jing
Xu
,

Yahan
Shan
,

Cheng
Zhong
,

Xiaosheng
Tang
,

Dan
Long
,

Yongping
Zhang
 and 

Fei
Wu
*

Chongqing Key Laboratory for Advanced Materials and Technologies of Clean Energy, School of Materials & Energy, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, P. R. China. E-mail: lnzhu@swu.edu.cn; feiwu610@swu.edu.cn

Department of Chemistry, Hubei Key Lab on Organic and Polymeric Optoelectronic Materials, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China

Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Technology and Systems (Ministry of Education) College of Optoelectronic Engineering Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, China

Received
18th January 2019
, Accepted 13th February 2019
First published on 16th February 2019
In this work, for the first time benzophenone and dipyridyl ketone were introduced as the core structure to synthesize two new D–A–D type molecules, namely BP-DC and PT-DC, and they were applied as hole transport materials in conventional perovskite solar cells. TGA and DSC show excellent thermal stability of both materials. Cyclic voltammetry measurements indicate that the energy levels of the two new materials match well with the valence band of perovskite materials. Compared to the benzophenone-cored BP-DC, the central dipyridyl ketone unit in PT-DC brings about stronger molecular interaction and better film quality. Moreover, PT-DC shows higher hole mobility than BP-DC. Photoluminescence quenching at the perovskite/PT-DC interface is more effective than that at the perovskite/BP-DC interface. Consequently, the PT-DC-based devices achieve a high efficiency of 18.27% with negligible hysteresis effect, higher than the performance of the BP-DC-based device (16.70%).

The organic–inorganic metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have aroused extensive attention in the past few years. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has increased from 3.8% to 23.7%, owing to the broad and intensive light absorption, low exciton binding energy, high charge carrier mobility, and long charge diffusion length of the perovskite materials. In general, the device structure consists of a conductive glass, electron transporting layer (ETL), perovskite photoactive layer, hole transporting layer (HTL) and counter electrode. Among them, hole transport materials (HTMs) are critical for achieving highly efficient PSCs. The function of HTMs is to extract photo-generated holes from the perovskite layer and transport them to the counter electrode, while also providing effective contact and avoiding unwanted recombination losses at the interface.

There are many types of HTMs, including organic small molecules, conjugated polymers, inorganic materials, etc. Among them, the organic small molecules have been widely studied because of their convenient synthetic procedures, low costs, and facile structural modification. The most typical organic small molecule-based HTM is spiro-MeOTAD (2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphe-nyl)amino]-9,9-spirobifluorene). However, spiro-MeOTAD has intrinsic defects such as tedious synthetic and purification procedures. Thus it is imperative to develop new HTMs which are easy to prepare with high efficiency.
While designing organic HTMs, the choice of core groups is crucial. Many units have been reported as core groups, such as triphenylamine, carbazole, biphenyl, etc. In general, the electron-donating units are usually introduced to maintain suitable energy levels of HTMs, and it is not common to introduce electron withdrawing groups as the core structure. However, one attractive advantage of introducing electron withdrawing groups as the core structure is that the charge-transporting properties of the HTMs could be improved, due to the enhanced molecular interactions. Studies show that strong molecular interactions are beneficial for obtaining satisfactory PCEs. For example, Li et al. have reported a new molecule (BTPA-TCNE) using tricyanovinylene as the core group, and the PSCs using BTPA-TCNE as the HTM show a PCE of 17%. In our previous work, the HTMs F22 and F33 with bipyridine as the core unit showed high PCEs of 17.71% and 18.48%, respectively. Also, D–A–D type HTMs with benzothiadiazole as the core group were also reported to show decent hole transport properties.
In this work, diaryl ketone derivatives (benzophenone and dipyridyl ketone) were firstly introduced as the core structure to synthesize new HTMs. Diaryl ketone was used because its electron-withdrawing feature may enhance the molecular interactions. 2,7-p-Methoxydiphenylamine-substituted carbazole was introduced as the peripheral group. Two new HTMs were synthesized: bis(4-(2,7-bis(bis(4-methoxyphenyl)amino)-9H-carbazol-9-yl)phenyl)methano-ne (BP-DC) and bis(6-(2,7-bis(bis(4-methoxyphenyl)amino)-9H-carbazol-9-yl)pyridin-3-yl)methanone (PT-DC). Their chemical structures are shown in Scheme 1. Both of the two molecules are synthesized by simple chemical reactions and are easily purified. Compared to the benzophenone-cored BP-DC, PT-DC shows a slightly lower HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital) level due to the stronger electron-withdrawing pyridine unit. Moreover, the PT-DC film is more condense and smooth, and it exhibits a higher hole mobility of 6.15 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 compared to BP-DC (2.09 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1). As a result, planar PSCs using PT-DC as the HTM exhibit a higher PCE (18.27%) than those using BP-DC (16.70%).

The detailed synthetic procedures for BP-DC and PT-DC are shown in the ESI (Scheme S1). The structures of BP-DC and PT-DC were fully characterized by 1H NMR, 13C NMR and HRMS measurements (Fig. S1–S6, ESI). The UV-vis absorption spectra of BP-DC and PT-DC in CH2Cl2 solution are shown in Fig. 1(a). The absorption spectra of the two compounds are quite similar, with a maximum absorption wavelength of 383 nm, and an absorption onset of 432 nm. The optical bandgap of BP-DC and PT-DC estimated from the onset of the absorption spectra is about 3.00 eV.

The energy levels of the new HTMs were measured by cyclic voltammetry (CV) together with the optical bandgap (Fig. S7, ESI). We use the first oxidation peak to calculate the HOMO level, and the corresponding LUMO (the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital) level is calculated based on the HOMO level and the bandgap. The electronic properties are shown in Table 1. The HOMO energy levels of BP-DC and PT-DC are measured to be −5.23 eV and −5.29 eV, respectively. The LUMO energy levels of BP-DC and PT-DC are −2.23 eV and −2.29 eV, respectively. As described in Fig. 1(b), the HOMO levels of the two HTMs are slightly higher than the valence band of the perovskite layer (MAPbI3−xClx, −5.44 eV), indicating that both molecules have suitable energy levels, which ensures efficient hole extraction from the perovskite layer to the HTL, meanwhile preventing unwanted electron transfer from the perovskite layer to the Ag electrode. PT-DC has a lower HOMO level than BP-DC, which should be ascribed to the stronger electron-withdrawing ability of pyridine than that of the benzene ring, thus leading to a deeper HOMO level. Subsequently, we used the space charge limitation of current (SCLC) method to measure the hole mobility of the two HTMs (Fig. S8, ESI). The hole mobility of BP-DC is 2.09 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, and that of PT-DC is 6.15 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. PT-DC has a higher hole mobility than BP-DC, indicating that the PT-DC might be more favorable for hole transporting than its analogue BP-DC.
HTMs

E
HOMO
 [eV]

E
LUMO
 [eV]
Hole mobility [10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1]

E
g [eV]

a 
E
HOMO was obtained from the first oxidation curve in CV.
b 
E
LUMO was obtained by ELUMO = EHOMO + Eg, Eg was calculated from the onset of the absorption spectra.
c Hole mobility was measured with doped HTMs using the SCLC method.

BP-DC
−5.23
−2.23
2.09
3.00
PT-DC
−5.29
−2.29
6.15
3.00
Thermal stability is closely related to the practical applications of hole transport materials, and thus DSC and TGA measurements are conducted, and the results are shown in Fig. S9 (ESI). The thermal decomposition temperatures (Td) of BP-DC and PT-DC measured by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) are 461 °C and 462 °C, respectively. The glass transition temperatures (Tg) of BP-DC and PT-DC measured by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) are 153 °C and 162 °C, respectively. The thermal properties indicate that the two new compounds have excellent thermal stability, and are suitable to be applied in photovoltaic devices.
To further demonstrate the relationship between the molecular structure and properties, we used density functional theory (DFT) to calculate the optimized configuration of the two molecules and the molecular frontier orbital distribution. As shown in Fig. 2, the LUMOs of the two HTMs are mainly located on the central carbonyl group and the adjacent aromatic rings. The HOMOs are distributed on the carbazole and p-methoxydiphenylamine moieties. Besides, in BP-DC, the dihedral angle between one of the central benzene rings and the adjacent carbazole is 131°. In the PT-DC molecule, the dihedral angle between one of the central pyridine rings and the adjacent carbazole is 145°. As shown in Fig. 2, both molecules have a twisted molecular structure which is advantageous for improving the solubility and facilitates the solution processing.
To evaluate the device performances of PSCs incorporating BP-DC and PT-DC as HTMs, a normal planar device architecture of FTO/compact TiO2/perovskite/HTM/Ag was prepared. The schematic diagram of the device structure studied in this work is shown in Fig. 3(a). As shown in Fig. 3(b), cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy images of the device with the PT-DC-based HTM are provided, and a clear interface boundary was observed, indicating that the perovskite layer is sandwiched between the TiO2 compact layer and the HTM layer. To further investigate the film quality of the two new HTMs, the top view SEM images of the BP-DC and PT-DC films on top of the perovskite layer were used. From Fig. 3(c and d), the BP-DC shows a relatively rough film morphology, while the PT-DC film exhibits a much smoother surface. AFM images of BP-DC and PT-DC films on the perovskite layer were also obtained, and the roughness values of the BP-DC and PT-DC films were 21.6 nm and 13.1 nm, respectively. The smooth surface will result in better interfacial contact between the perovskite material and the metal electrode, thus facilitating charge transport.
The photovoltaic characteristics of planar perovskite solar cells using BP-DC or PT-DC as HTMs were measured under AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2 simulated light illumination. The statistics of the photo-voltaic parameters, including the short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and PCE are shown in Fig. S10 (ESI) and the detailed data are summarized in Table 2. The device with the BP-DC-based HTM exhibited a PCE of 16.7% (Voc = 1.04 V, Jsc = 21.21 mA cm−2, and FF = 0.76). The device with the PT-DC-based HTM achieved a PCE of 18.27% (Voc = 1.06 V, Jsc = 21.70 mV cm−2, and FF = 0.79). For PT-DC, its HOMO level is reduced due to the stronger electron-withdrawing ability of pyridine, leading to a slightly higher Voc value of the PT-DC-based device. In addition, the strong electron-withdrawing core unit in the PT-DC results in enhanced molecular interaction, which is beneficial for charge transporting. Moreover, the PT-DC has a higher hole mobility than the BP-DC. Therefore, these factors together result in high photocurrent density and fill factor for the PT-DC-based device, which ultimately leads to a higher PCE. In comparison, a control device using spiro-OMeTAD was employed and it showed a lower efficiency of 16.93%. As we all know, hysteresis exists in conventional PSCs with a planar configuration. The hysteresis effect of PSCs using BP-DC or PT-DC as HTMs was investigated by scanning the J–V curves in different directions (Fig. 4(c)), and also by scanning at different delay times (0, 100, 200 and 500 ms) (Fig. S11, ESI). From Fig. 4(c), the PT-DC-based device shows a less hysteresis effect than the BT-DC-based one. A similar trend was observed from J–V curves scanned at different delay times. It is known that the hysteresis effect arises from the unbalanced transportation of the electron and holes at the interfaces. Therefore, our newly designed PT-DC HTM with decent hole mobility could well balance the electron and hole transport at different interfaces, thus leading to quite low hysteresis. While the BP-DC with lower hole mobility still leads to significant hysteresis. The variation of Jsc in the devices based on different HTMs is further confirmed by the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum shown in Fig. 4(b), wherein the integrated Jsc values (20.03 mA cm−2 for the BP-DC-based device and 20.36 mA cm−2 for the PT-DC-based device) are consistent with those obtained from the measured J–V curves (Table 2). In addition, a high response exceeding 80% was observed at the wavelengths ranging from 450 nm to 750 nm, as shown in Fig. 4(b).
HTMs

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
The data in parentheses depict the average values for each parameter, which were evaluated based on 20 devices.
BP-DC
1.04 (1.03 ± 0.02)
21.21 (20.94 ± 0.29)
0.76 (0.73 ± 0.03)
16.70 (15.65 ± 0.82)
PT-DC
1.06 (1.05 ± 0.02)
21.70 (21.42 ± 0.34)
0.79 (0.77 ± 0.03)
18.27 (17.24 ± 0.85)
Spiro-OMeTAD
1.07 (1.05 ± 0.02)
20.74 (20.44 ± 0.31)
0.76 (0.74 ± 0.03)
16.93 (15.94 ± 0.67)
The PCE histogram is shown in Fig. S14 (ESI), denoting the reproducibility of the fabricated devices. The average PCE values measured from 20 devices using BP-DC and PT-DC were 15.65 ± 0.82 and 17.24 ± 0.85, respectively, suggesting that the devices using BP-DC and PT-DC as HTMs show excellent reproducibility. In addition, the stabilized PCE (BP-DC: 16.47%; and PT-DC: 18.09%) and photocurrent (BP-DC: 19.61 mA cm−2; and PT-DC: 20.22 mA cm−2) of the champion device at the maximum power point were further evaluated as shown in Fig. 4(d), and the results reveal that the PCE and Jsc values of the two devices remain constant during 2000 s.
Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra and time-resolved PL (TRPL) decay curves were used to determine charge carrier dynamics and hole extraction capabilities at the perovskite/HTM interface. From Fig. 5(a), the steady-state PL spectrum shows that both materials can effectively quench the fluorescence emission of the perovskite. From the inset of Fig. 5(a), PT-DC shows a more pronounced quenching effect than BP-DC, indicating that the dipyridyl ketone-based HTM can more effectively extract holes from the perovskite layer. The TRPL spectrum is shown in Fig. 5(b). For perovskite films without the HTM layer, a relatively long PL life time is observed. However, the deposition of the hole transporting layer significantly reduces the PL lifetime. The fitted fluorescence lifetimes of perovskite, perovskite/BP-DC and perovskite/PT-DC films are 220 ns, 16 ns, and 10 ns, respectively. The high fluorescence quenching efficiency and the accelerated PL decay confirm that the new HTMs have excellent hole extraction ability, and PT-DC is superior to BP-DC in this respect.
The stability of PSCs is related to their practical applications. It has been reported that the stabilities of PSCs have a close relevance to the hydrophobicity of the HTMs. From Fig. 6(a), the doped PT-DC film shows a water contact angle of 86.3°, which is close to that of BP-DC (88.9°). The hydrophobic HTL keeps moisture away from the perovskite film, which is beneficial to improve the device stability. The stability tests of PSCs based on PT-DC and BP-DC were measured in a N2 atmosphere-filled glove box. A similar trend in photovoltaic performances was observed for the two HTM-based devices. The changes in the photovoltaic parameters of the PT-DC-based device are shown in Fig. 6(b). After 30 days, the values of Voc and Jsc didn’t show a significant decrease. The FF declines to 85% of the original value, and the PCE is reduced by nearly 20%. It can be seen that in a N2 environment, the performance of the device remains for 30 days.

In conclusion, we synthesized two new HTMs BP-DC and PT-DC with benzophenone and dipyridyl ketone as the core structures, respectively. The electron-withdrawing core structure could enhance the molecular interactions and facilitate charge transport. The two compounds show excellent thermal stability. Their optical properties and electrical properties were also studied. PT-DC shows a deeper HOMO level, better hole extraction and hole transporting ability, and a higher hole mobility than BP-DC. As a result, the device performances show that the PT-DC-based device has a decent PCE value of 18.27%, higher than that of the device using BP-DC as the HTM (16.70%). Moreover, the PT-DC-based device shows little hysteresis effect. Therefore, diaryl ketones are suitable as core groups for the synthesis of a D–A–D type HTM, and bipyridyl ketone is more favorable compared to benzophenone in this system.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The work described in this paper was partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51703183, 51873160), and the authors also acknowledge support from the “Project supported by Basic research and the Frontier Exploration of Chongqing Municipal Science and Technology Commission (cstc2018jcyjAX0568)”


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details of synthetic procedures and characterizations, and device fabrication. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc00331b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019