 DOI: 10.1039/C9SE00266A
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 2246-2259


Bart
Vermang
*,

Guy
Brammertz
,

Marc
Meuris
,

Thomas
Schnabel
,

Erik
Ahlswede
,

Leo
Choubrac
,

Sylvie
Harel
,

Christophe
Cardinaud
,

Ludovic
Arzel
,

Nicolas
Barreau
,

Joop
van Deelen
,

Pieter-Jan
Bolt
,

Patrice
Bras
,

Yi
Ren
,

Eric
Jaremalm
,

Samira
Khelifi
,

Sheng
Yang
,

Johan
Lauwaert
,

Maria
Batuk
,

Joke
Hadermann
,

Xeniya
Kozina
,

Evelyn
Handick
,

Claudia
Hartmann
,

Dominic
Gerlach
,

Asahiko
Matsuda
,

Shigenori
Ueda
,

Toyohiro
Chikyow
,

Roberto
Félix
,

Yufeng
Zhang
,

Regan G.
Wilks
 and 

Marcus
Bär


IMEC Division IMOMEC – Partner in Solliance, Wetenschapspark 1, 3590 Diepenbeek, Belgium. E-mail: bart.vermang@imec.be

Hasselt University – Partner in Solliance, Martelarenlaan 42, 3500 Hasselt, Belgium

EnergyVille, Thorpark 8320, 3600 Genk, Belgium

ZSW, Meitnerstrasse 1, 70563 Stuttgart, Germany

Institut des Matériaux Jean Rouxel (IMN), Université de Nantes, CNRS, 2 rue de la Houssinière, 44322 Nantes, France

TNO – Partner in Solliance, High Tech Campus 21, 5656 AE Eindhoven, The Netherlands

Midsummer AB, Elektronikhöjden 6, 175 43 Järfälla, Sweden

Department of Electronics and Information Systems (ELIS), Ghent University, Technologiepark Zwijnaarde 15, 9052 Gent, Belgium

Department of Solid State Sciences, Ghent University, Krijgslaan 281-S1, 9000 Gent, Belgium

Electron Microscopy for Materials Science (EMAT), University of Antwerp, Groenenborgerlaan 171, 2020 Antwerp, Belgium

Department Interface Design, Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie GmbH (HZB), Hahn-Meitner-Platz 1, 14109 Berlin, Germany

International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan

Research and Services Division of Materials Data and Integrated System (MaDIS), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan

Synchrotron X-ray Station at SPring-8, National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), 1-1-1 Kouto, Sayo-cho, Hyogo 679-5148, Japan

Research Center for Advanced Measurement and Characterization, National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), 1-2-1, Sengen, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0047, Japan

College of Physical Science and Technology, Xiamen University (XMU), Xiamen, 361005, China

Energy Materials In-Situ Laboratory Berlin (EMIL), Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie GmbH (HZB), Albert-Einstein-Str. 15, Berlin, 12489, Germany

Department of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91058 Erlangen, Germany

Helmholtz-Institute Erlangen-Nürnberg for Renewable Energy (HI ERN), 12489 Berlin, Germany

Received
29th April 2019
, Accepted 12th June 2019
First published on 14th June 2019
This work reports on developments in the field of wide band gap Cu2ZnXY4 (with X = Sn, Si or Ge, and Y = S, Se) kesterite thin film solar cells. An overview on recent developments and the current understanding of wide band gap kesterite absorber layers, alternative buffer layers, and suitable transparent back contacts is presented. Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 absorbers with absorber band gaps up to 1.7 eV have been successfully developed and integrated into solar cells. Combining a CdS buffer layer prepared by an optimized chemical bath deposition process with a 1.36 eV band gap absorber resulted in a record Cu2ZnGeSe4 cell efficiency of 7.6%, while the highest open-circuit voltage of 730 mV could be obtained for a 1.54 eV band gap absorber and a Zn(O,S) buffer layer. Employing InZnOx or TiO2 protective top layers on SnO2:In transparent back contacts yields 85–90% of the solar cell performance of reference cells (with Mo back contact). These advances show the potential as well as the challenges of wide band gap kesterites for future applications in high-efficiency and low-cost tandem photovoltaic devices.

World-record single-junction solar cell efficiencies of monocrystalline silicon–wafer (Si) and thin-film (TF) solar cells are 26.7% and 22.9%, respectively, thus approaching their theoretical (Shockley–Queisser) limit of 30% under standard illumination conditions. One approach to increase the efficiency of solar cells above this limit is the construction of tandem devices. A tandem device consists of two solar cells: a wide band gap (EG) solar cell (in which the photovoltaically active absorber material has an optical band gap of 1.5–2.0 eV) harvests the high-energy photons and a small band gap solar cell (in which the absorber has a band gap of 1.0–1.5 eV) harvests the low-energy photons. This approach can lead to theoretical efficiencies of up to 44% under 1-sun illumination.

With a band gap of 1.1 eV, Si–wafer-based devices are the ideal bottom cell candidate, but many prominent top cell candidates have issues related to abundancy, toxicity, stability, or cost. Therefore, we consider kesterite-based devices as potential top cells for tandem device applications, because Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4-type kesterite solar cells are stable, made out of abundant and non-toxic components, and already achieve relatively high performance. Depending on the [S]/([S] + [Se]) composition, the band gap of the kesterite absorber can be tuned between 1.0 and 1.5 eV. Highest efficiencies for Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4-based devices are achieved when absorbers with band gaps between 1.1 and 1.2 eV are employed, which is too low for efficient (top) tandem solar cell applications. However, (partially) replacing tin atoms with silicon or germanium atoms has the potential to result in kesterite absorbers with band gaps even above 1.5 eV. This work aims to give an overview on the recent development and current understanding of (i) these wide band gap kesterite absorber layers, (ii) alternative (non-toxic) buffer layer candidate materials, and (iii) suitable transparent back contacts (TBCs) allowing tandem configuration. A summary of recently published results is complemented with new experimental findings and a theoretical study of the efficiency potential of devices based on wide band gap kesterite absorbers. Thus, the paper aims at covering all aspects of deploying kesterite wide-band gap absorbers as top cells in tandem solar cell applications in order to identify inherent bottlenecks that may limit device performance and present generally valid optimization approaches and first results to lay the foundation and pave the way for future more detailed studies that undeniably have to follow.

First, we give an overview of the absorber layer formation, in which two main approaches are applied, i.e. sequential evaporation (Section 2.1.1) and solution-based deposition (Section 2.1.2). The first approach (respective samples are henceforth called → EVAP-sample) is more convenient to study different metal components and is, therefore, used to investigate the replacement of Sn atoms with Si or Ge in EVAP-Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 absorber layers; while in the second approach (→ SOL-sample), the focus is on the replacement of Sn with Ge and the optimization of the involved wet chemistry. Note that there will inherently be variations in properties of the kesterite absorbers deposited by the different methods (i.e., using sequential evaporation or solution-based deposition), however the findings that are presented in the manuscript – while not exactly transferrable – mainly relate to universally relevant conditions that will arise in cell production regardless of the absorber deposition method.


The polycrystalline absorber layers are fabricated using a two-step vacuum-based approach; see Fig. S1. Soda lime glass (SLG) substrates of 1.3 mm thickness are used, on which a 150 nm-thick Si(O,N) diffusion barrier is first deposited, followed by a 400 nm-thick Mo layer. The thin Si(O,N) diffusion barrier is deposited in order to avoid the diffusion of elements from the glass substrate into the absorber. Early tests have shown that the evaporated absorber quality is better if this diffusion barrier is added. On top of this substrate, a multilayer of different metals is deposited using a Pfeiffer PLS 500 evaporation system. For accurate layer thickness control, a quartz microcrystal balance is used. This metal multilayer is then annealed in an Annealsys As-One 150 rapid thermal annealing system that is equipped with a 10% H2Se (diluted in N2) gas line and a 100% H2S gas line. This way, the layers are selenized or sulfurized under a continuous flow of H2Se or H2S. During this selenization/sulfurization step, a polycrystalline layer is formed with typical grain sizes in the order of 0.5 to 1 μm.


We have used metal layer stacks, including Si, to explore the possibility of fabricating EVAP-Cu2ZnSiSe4, –Cu2Zn(Si,Sn)Se4, –Cu2SiSe3, –Cu2SiS3, –Cu8SiSe6, and –Cu8SiS6 layers. Unfortunately, the Si appears to be largely unreactive at processing temperatures below 600 °C, which is the maximum temperature allowed for SLG substrates. Only EVAP-Cu8SiSe6 and EVAP-Cu8SiS6 could be produced in a reliable way, without significant presence of secondary phases, leading to polycrystalline absorber layers with high-intensity photoluminescence (PL) peaks at energies of 1.35 (for EVAP-Cu8SiSe6) and 1.84 eV (EVAP-Cu8SiS6). However, no functioning solar cells could be fabricated with these absorber layers, as the doping seemed to be too high (in the order of 1018 cm−3 or higher), and the minority carrier lifetime seemed to be lower than 0.2 ns, leading to functioning diodes but no photocurrent. One observation that could also explain the absence of any photoactivity is the formation of SiO2 during absorber processing. Fig. 1 shows hard X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (HAXPES) survey spectra of an EVAP-Cu8SiS6 sample before (black) and after (red) sulfurization treatment. Upon sulfurization, the O and Na (most likely diffused from the SLG substrate) contents increase. The inset shows the region of the Si 2s and S 2p core level lines compared to reference positions of silicon compounds. The Si 2s line of the sulfurized layer stack shifts to higher binding energies compared to the Si 2s peak before sulfurization. The comparison with the reference positions indicates the conversion of Si–Si into Si–S2 and/or Si–O2 bonds. The fact that the S 2p line can only be clearly observed on a magnified (×25) scale together with the high O 1s intensity for the sample after sulfurization, however, suggests that the surface region of the sulfurized sample has mainly a SiO2 character, which would prevent efficient charge carrier transport.


For the fabrication of polycrystalline EVAP-Cu2ZnGeSe4 layers, we have used 180 nm of Ge, 125 nm of Zn and 170 nm of Cu as starting layers. These layer thicknesses were chosen in order to end up with a Zn-rich and Cu-poor composition of the absorber layer, with Cu/(Zn + Ge) = 0.9 and Zn/Ge = 1.05. This metal stack was then selenized for 15 minutes in a continuous flow of H2Se at a temperature of 460 °C. The resulting absorber layer is polycrystalline with a typical grain size in the order of 500 nm. Fig. S2 shows a cross-section scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of a finished solar cell stack, exemplifying the grain morphology of the absorber as well as the other layers of the solar cell stack. A Bragg Brentano X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurement of a finished absorber layer on a Mo back contact clearly shows the Cu2ZnGeSe4 peaks with a small contribution of a ZnSe secondary phase, as a small shoulder of the main Cu2ZnGeSe4 peaks at angles around 27.3 and 45.3 degrees, shown in Fig. 2. Due to the Zn-rich nature of the absorber layer, the presence of ZnSe secondary phase has to be expected. Cu2−xSe and GeSe2 secondary phases cannot be identified within the accuracy of the XRD measurements. Also note that the peaks of the ternary phase Cu2GeSe3 overlap with the main peaks of the Cu2ZnGeSe4 phase completely, making it impossible to distinguish these phases by XRD. To visualize the secondary phases, cross-section energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) elemental maps of the absorber were acquired in scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) mode, shown in Fig. 3. The observed regions of elemental inhomogeneities are attributed to ZnSe – which seems to be present in large amounts at the top surface of the absorber – and Cu2GeSe3/Cu2−xSe phases – which are present more at the grain boundaries and at the backside Mo interface. Some of the absorbers were lift-off in order to record Raman spectra near the EVAP-Cu2ZnGeSe4/Mo interface. Both sides (front absorber and at the back side, i.e. near the back contact) were analyzed. At the front Cu2ZnGeSe4 side (as published in ref. 29), only Cu2ZnGeSe4 is clearly detected, but presence of Cu2GeSe3 and Cu2−xSe cannot be excluded as their Raman peaks overlap with Cu2ZnGeSe4. At the back side only 2H-MoSe2 related peaks are observed. Time and energy resolved photoluminescence measurements (not shown) reveal a PL peak at an energy of about 1.36 eV, with a decay time in the order of 2 ns. The band gap of this absorber is thus too small to be employed as a top cell of tandem devices. However, due to the high throughput of the evaporation process route/equipment, a large number of respective EVAP-Cu2ZnGeSe4 samples are available and were thus (for practical reasons and to allow for good statistics) chosen for most of our optimization efforts with respect to the absorber surface treatment (see Section 2.2.1), the buffer layer (see Section 2.2.2), and the TBC (see Section 2.4).


The SOL-Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 absorbers were deposited in a two-step process as schematically drawn in Fig. S3. A metal salt solution was deposited onto a Mo-coated SLG substrate by doctor-blade coating with subsequent drying on a hot plate. Different solvents, metal salts and chalcogen sources have been evaluated in a previous manuscript. Here, the chemical composition of the absorbers is Cu/(Zn + Ge) = 0.7 and Zn/Ge = 1.0 which is slightly more Cu-poor than the EVAP-Cu2ZnGeSe4 layers. The chemical and electronic structure of respective SOL-Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 absorbers and, in particular, the impact of the absorber formation by annealing in Se-atmosphere has been monitored by lab-based soft X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and synchrotron-based HAXPES. The XPS measurements were performed in the off-synchrotron analysis chamber at EMIL in ultra-high vacuum (base pressure < 5 × 10−10 mbar) employing a non-monochromatized Mg Kα (1253.56 eV) X-ray tube (PREVAC RS40B1) as excitation source. The photoelectrons were detected by a Scienta Omicron Argus CU electron analyzer. HAXPES was measured at beamline BL15XU at SPring-8 using an excitation energy of 6 keV and a Scienta R4000 electron analyzer (see for more details on the experimental setup; same measurement conditions apply for the data shown in Fig. 1). Fig. 4 shows the XPS S 2p/Se 3p (left panel) and HAXPES shallow core level (right panel) spectra of a SOL-Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 sample prepared from a solution of Cu–, Zn- and Ge-oxides in water and ammonium thioglycolate. Upon selenization, a clear Se 3d signal in the shallow core level region and the Se 3p core level dominating the S 2p/Se 3p energy region can be observed. The fit of the spectrum with S 2p and Se 3p doublets (see top spectrum in Fig. 4 – left panel) reveals the presence of at least two Se species, and two S species – where the secondary (S) peak most likely indicates the presence of S–Ox and Se–Ox (with x ≥ 3). The presence of Se–Ox is also indicated by the high-binding energy shoulder of the Se 3d line in the shallow core level region (and depicted in the right panel of Fig. 4). Quantifying the fit results yields a (surface) [S]/([S] + [Se])-ratio of approximately 0.1, significantly lower than the bulk composition of 0.3. The chemical environment of S in the absorber precursor layer (i.e., before selenization) is also rather complex – as indicated by the broad S 2p spectrum with a low binding energy shoulder (in the bottom spectrum in Fig. 4 – left panel), which significantly deviates from the expected spectral shape of a S 2p doublet (see blue fit component on the top spectrum). The shallow core level photoemission lines additionally reveal that the selenization process impacts the Zn/Cu ratio (the Cu 3p line intensity is significantly increased) and the chemical bonding environment of Ge (see inset of Fig. 4 – right panel). Presumably, oxidized Ge is converted to form Ge–Se bonds upon selenization. Finally, the location of the valence band maximum at 0.2 (±0.1) eV (below the Fermi level), indicated by the arrow in Fig. 4 (right panel), is in agreement with a p-type doped material, which can generally be observed for these kinds of absorbers.

To fabricate solar cells, CdS buffer layers are deposited by chemical-bath deposition (CBD) followed by a sputtered ZnO and ZnO:Al layer. Although the band alignment of Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 with CdS is believed to be non-ideal, in a direct comparison with potential alternative buffer layer candidate materials a CdS buffer was found to result in the highest efficiencies. The morphology of a SOL-Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 absorber with CdS buffer can be seen in the cross-section transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image displayed in Fi. S4(a). It shows two distinct layers within the SOL-Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4: larger grains on top and smaller grains at the bottom. Note that the CdS layer on top of the absorber is only 50 nm thick and therefore hard to identify in this image. All elements are for the most part homogeneously distributed within the absorber layer; therefore, only the distribution of Zn signal is shown in Fig. S4(b), where some brighter spots in the large-grain layer can be seen, which we interpret as indication for the presence of a Zn(S,Se)2 secondary phase. Additionally, the signal of carbon residues that arise from thiourea is displayed in Fig. S4(c). Here carbon is only present in the small-grain layer, whereas the large-grain layer is mostly carbon-free. With a higher magnification (not shown), an amorphous layer covering the Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 particles can be seen. The distribution of Cd [Fig. S4(d)] shows that, in contrast to other investigations of kesterite absorbers with a CBD-processed CdS buffer, no major diffusion of Cd into the absorber layer can be detected.
Our standard solution-based deposition approach results in SOL-Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 absorber material with a band gap of around 1.5 eV. For application in tandem solar cells, a slightly higher absorber band gap would be advantageous. One possible means to increase the band gap would be a partial or complete cation substitution, e.g., Si for Ge, Ag for Cu, or Ba for Zn. However, a more complicated phase diagram is expected when using additional elements, and so we focus on increasing the band gap by tuning the anion composition (i.e., the [S]/([S] + [Se])-ratio), a well-established method for Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 absorbers. In general, the anion composition can be controlled (i) in the metal salt solution and/or (ii) during the annealing process. It is used in slight excess to ensure that enough S is present to form the kesterite phase during the drying step on a hot plate. If one would like to lower the band gap of the SOL-Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 absorber, thiourea could partly or completely be replaced by selenourea to decrease the [S]/([S] + [Se])-ratio or fabricate S-free SOL-Cu2ZnGeSe4 absorbers. However, further increasing the amount of thiourea would only lead to excess chalcogen that cannot be incorporated into the kesterite lattice (and also more residual carbon and nitrogen) and does, therefore, not lead to an increase of the [S]/([S] + [Se])-ratio and thus absorber band gap. Therefore, we focus on increasing the [S]/([S] + [Se])-ratio during the annealing step, following approach (ii). The most obvious procedure would be to anneal the sample in the simultaneous presence of Se and S. However, the boiling point of S is 445 °C, considerably lower than the annealing temperature of 550 °C, and thereby does not allow a constant S supply during the annealing. Therefore, GeS is used as an additional sulfur source, which is expected to release S into the gas phase via the following reaction:
GeS(s) + Se(g)  GeSe(s) + S(g)
To allow for fine-tuning of the absorber band gap, the amount of GeS was varied between 0 and 100 mg. As a result, S is incorporated into the kesterite lattice, as can be seen from the shift of the 112-reflection in the XRD patterns displayed in Fig. 5. Using Vegard's law the [S]/([S] + [Se])-ratio can be estimated based on this data, revealing that it varies in a range between 0.27 and 0.50. However, the peak shape of the 112-reflections slightly changes with the amount of GeS. Starting from 40 mg (resulting in an absorber with a band gap of 1.67 eV), a shoulder at higher diffraction angles is visible, indicating the coexistence of an orthorhombic phase that is known to occur for high [S]/([S] + [Se])-ratios in Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 absorbers.
To evaluate the influence on the solar cell performance, the current density–voltage [i.e., J(V)] characteristics of the best solar cells from SOL-Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 absorbers with external quantum efficiency (EQE)-derived band gaps of 1.5, 1.6 and 1.7 eV (corresponding to [S]/([S] + [Se])-ratios of 0.27, 0.39, and 0.50, respectively) are compared in Fig. 6; the corresponding cell parameters are listed in Table 1. As expected, the short-circuit current density (JSC) decreases with increasing absorber band gap. The open circuit voltage (VOC) increases considerably from 617 to 683 mV when the absorber band gap is increased from 1.5 to 1.6 eV, but decreases for the 1.7 eV absorber. The fill factor (FF) shows a slight decrease with absorber band gap, and efficiency reducing from 6.0 to 2.7%. The loss in VOC for devices based on absorbers with a band gap larger than 1.6 eV represents the most crucial loss in this sample series, which might be linked to the above-mentioned coexistence of a kesterite and an orthorhombic phase. However, the band alignment between absorber and buffer layer might also become severely performance limiting, especially for solar cells based on 1.7 eV band gap Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 absorbers. To make these absorbers viable for application as top cells for tandem configurations, significant efficiency enhancements are required (see discussion below). In order to achieve this improvement of wide band gap kesterite solar cell efficiencies, an optimization of all layers in the TF layer stack, especially the buffer/absorber interface, has to be performed (see Section 2.2).

E
G (eV)
1.5
1.6
1.7
Eff. (%)
6.0
3.6
2.7

V
OC (mV)
617
683
669

J
SC (mA cm−2)
18.0
11.9
10.3
FF (%)
54.1
44.1
39.7

For the absorber layers discussed in Section 2.1, two paths toward optimization of performance were pursued: (i) selective etching of the ZnSe secondary phases (mentioned in Section 2.1.1.2) was successfully carried out and the impact on the final solar cell properties was determined (as discussed in Section 2.2.1). (ii) The CdS buffer layer deposition was optimized, and the employment of alternative buffer layers evaluated (as discussed in Section 2.2.2). Due to its better availability this work – unless stated otherwise – was done on evaporated EVAP-Cu2ZnGeSe4 absorbers.


Various absorber characterizations techniques reveal the presence of ZnSe at the surface of EVAP-Cu2ZnGeSe4 kesterites prepared by the two-step process of evaporating metal layers in vacuum with subsequent selenization of the layer stack (detailed in Section 2.1.1.2). The presence of secondary phases at the absorber/buffer interface is usually reported to have a deleterious effect on the efficiency of the resulting solar cells. To prevent this, a (selective) chemical etching process for ZnSe is included as part of the standard procedure to prepare efficient solar cells. To find the proper etching procedure, we identified two previously reported etching strategies: (i) acidic etching with hot HCl, and (ii) an oxidation route at room temperature with KMnO4 in a sulfuric acid medium. Raman spectroscopy with an excitation wavelength of 458 nm allows detection of even small traces of ZnSe due to the resonant measurement conditions (i.e., excitation energy is close to the band gap of ZnSe, ≈2.7 eV), hence, (resonant) Raman spectroscopy was used as the main characterization tool to aid in determining the optimal experimental etching conditions (temperature, concentration, duration) that result in a ZnSe-free EVAP-Cu2ZnGeSe4 surface. For approach (i), this means etching with a 12 wt% HCl solution, see Fig. 7. For approach (ii), a 2 minute etch at room temperature in an aqueous solution of 1 mol L−1 KMnO4 in 1 mol L−1 H2SO4 is sufficient to effectively remove ZnSe. Ultimately, the HCl etching was chosen as the standard etching procedure based on practical arguments (parameter control, processing, and solution stability). The optimized HCl etching conditions used in standard solar cell manufacturing have been determined to be: 15 min etching in a 12 wt% HCl solution at a temperature of 80 °C.

Solar cells were prepared based on EVAP-Cu2ZnGeSe4 absorbers (from the same batch) grown on Mo coated Si(O,N)/SLG, followed by CBD of CdS buffer layer, sputtering of an i-ZnO/ZnO:Al window bi-layer and finalized by e-beam deposition of Ni/Al/Ni grids for the front contact. Two absorbers served as references (i.e., not etched) and three were HCl treated at 60, 70, and 80 °C. Resonant Raman spectra confirm that only the untreated references contain ZnSe at the surface. The effect of this etching procedure on VOC, FF, and EQE are presented in Fig. 8 and 9. The VOC of the cells prepared with untreated references are in the range of 500–550 mV, which corresponds to 45–50% of the maximum achievable VOC (VOC,max) for such an absorber band gap (i.e., PL peak at 1.36 eV). In comparison, high-efficiency Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 solar cells typically achieve 55–60% of VOC,max. The lower VOC observed here with Ge-kesterite solar cells is suspected to partially originate from a non-ideal buffer/absorber interface (allowing for charge carrier recombination). The presence of ZnSe on the surface of the absorber (or at the buffer/absorber interface) may explain the losses. This explanation is supported by the fact that VOC is significantly improved for solar cells for which the EVAP-Cu2ZnGeSe4 absorber underwent prior HCl etching (resulting in a ZnSe free absorber surface), reaching around 55% of VOC,max. Despite this significant VOC improvement, solar cells prepared with HCl-treated absorbers result in lower efficiencies due to a dramatic FF loss and an EQE drop at longer wavelength (usually ascribed to a reduced collection length).
To determine the origin of the FF and collection length losses after HCl etching, surface characterization by HAXPES has been performed at the HiKE endstation equipped with a Scienta R4000 electron analyzer and located at the BESSY II KMC-1 beamline at HZB, using an excitation energy of 2.1 keV. The HAXPES survey spectra of an as-deposited (i.e., not etched; black spectrum) and a HCl etched EVAP-Cu2ZnGeSe4 sample (red spectrum) are shown in Fig. 10. All Cu2ZnGeSe4-related photoemission and Auger lines can be observed, as expected. In addition, signals related to oxygen (O 1s), carbon (C 1s), and for the as-deposited EVAP-Cu2ZnGeSe4 also cadmium (Cd 3d) can be observed. The presence of oxygen and carbon can be attributed to a surface contamination layer formed due to the (short) air exposure of the samples. The significant increase of the C 1s line upon HCl etching is most likely related to additional contamination during the etching procedure. The presence of cadmium on the as-deposited sample is ascribed to cross contamination from CdS/EVAP-Cu2ZnGeSe4 samples that have been transported in the same sample box. Due to these varied and significant states of surface contamination, we deliberately refrain from attempting to quantify the HAXPES data but rather discuss them qualitatively. The HAXPES survey spectrum of the as-deposited EVAP-Cu2ZnGeSe4 sample is dominated by Zn and Se signals. Upon HCl etching, the Zn- and Se-related signals are significantly reduced, and the Cu/Zn ratio is enhanced, in good agreement with the Raman results discussed above, i.e. the presence of a ZnSe (surface) phase before etching and its removal upon HCl-treatment. The inset of Fig. 10 shows the related detail spectra of the Se 3d3/2 and 3d5/2 spin–orbit split doublet, having a separation between 0.8 and 0.9 eV. The spectral shape of the Se 3d line significantly changes upon HCl etching. For the HCl-etched EVAP-Cu2ZnGeSe4 sample, the peak shape is attributed to the presence of (at least) two species. The main species (indicated with “M” in the inset; also dominating the spectrum of the as-deposited EVAP-Cu2ZnGeSe4 sample) is ascribed to a selenide, i.e., to selenium in a Cu2ZnGeSe4 and/or ZnSe environment – based on the comparison of the Se 3d data with ref. 12. Based on this data it is not possible to unambiguously differentiate between ZnSe and Cu2ZnGeSe4. The low-intensity secondary species (indicated with “S” in the inset) that is responsible for the additional high-binding energy spectral intensity can most likely be explained by oxidized selenium (SeOx, x ≥ 3). However, note that due to the large spread of binding energy values found in published ref. 12, the presence of a germanium selenide binary phase (with Ge being in an oxidation state >2+) and/or formation of Se–C bonds (in-line with the increased C signal) can also not be ruled out as an explanation for the high-binding energy Se 3d contribution. Whether and how this second Se species affects the chemical environment of additional Cu2ZnGeSe4 elements and/or the electronic structure of the absorber and how this is related to the observed solar cell characteristics is the topic of ongoing research. Work on the device level is in progress with the goal of developing a wet-chemical treatment to remove the HCl-etch induced formation of the second Se species in order to recover the FF and collection length, while keeping the VOC gain resulting from HCl etching.

The most widely used buffer layer for Cu chalcogenide thin film solar cells is CdS prepared by CBD. This preparation process results in a highly defect-rich material, also containing oxygen (OH) and carbon impurities. Some of the properties of CBD-grown CdS (e.g. composition, defect nature, structure) depend on the experimental deposition parameters (concentration of the precursors, temperature of the chemical bath, etc.). Consequently, the CBD-CdS recipe needs to be adjusted for each absorber material for optimal solar cell performance. Hence, we empirically tuned the experimental parameters of the CdS deposition on the evaporated EVAP-Cu2ZnGeSe4 absorbers. We observe a VOC increase with increasing deposition duration, accompanied with a decrease of FF and JSC after a critical duration. More details about the buffer layer optimization, which resulted in a new record efficiency of 7.6% for Cu2ZnGeSe4 based solar cells, can be found in ref. 29.

Although it is the most-used buffer material for kesterite solar cells, CdS has a quite low optical band gap energy (2.4 eV) and high absorption coefficient for a material that would ideally be transparent. Consequently, there is a loss in current due to absorption of solar radiation in the CdS is in the range of 1–2 mA cm−2. In case of a potential kesterite/Si tandem configuration, this loss would manifest in a 4 to 14% relative decrease of the theoretically achievable JSC. Moreover, another important prerequisite to reach high efficiency is an ideal buffer/absorber interface that allows for lossless charge carrier transport without barriers for charge carriers and preventing high-rate charge carrier recombination routes. In order to systematically optimize the buffer/kesterite interface, we prepared solar cells based on wet-chemical deposited (see Section 2.1.2) 1.5 (±0.05) eV band gap SOL-Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 absorbers (prepared according to the solution approach discussed in detail in Section 2.1.2) and different buffer layer materials. The five different buffer materials used were: sputtered (“rf”) Zn(O0.6,S0.4), CBD-Zn(O,S), CBD-CdS, atomic layer chemical vapor deposited (ALCVD) In2S3, and co-evaporated (“co-evap.”) CdIn2S4. A detailed discussion can be found in ref. 17, briefly: compared to the CdS reference, In2S3 and Zn(O0.6,S0.4) buffers have a higher transmission, i.e., less absorption in the buffer layer (in the 350–500 nm wavelength range), as shown in Fig. 11. Solar cells with Zn(O0.6,S0.4) buffers also yield higher VOC values. For these devices, a higher activation energy of the dominant recombination process was also derived (compared to the CdS reference), strongly suggesting a more preferable electronic structure of the buffer/SOL-Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 interface. The sputtered-Zn(O0.6,S0.4) buffered solar cells, however, achieve a lower overall efficiency, mainly due to reduced FF and JSC, as presented in Table S1. We speculate that those losses originate from the nature of the deposition method, as all vacuum deposited buffer layers suffer from similar JSC and FF losses, compared to solution-prepared CdS. For that reason, we also investigated wet-chemically deposited Zn(O,S) buffers. With CBD-Zn(O,S) buffers, SOL-Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 based solar cells achieve similar FF and JSC values as the CdS reference, but lower VOC values. A tentative explanation for this observation is the different composition of CBD-Zn(O,S) and sputtered-Zn(O0.6,S0.4) buffers: certainly the O/S ratio, which determines the optical band gap of the Zn(O,S) material, can be different and the CBD-Zn(O,S) buffer may also contain oxide, hydroxide (OH), and/or carbon impurities, which can also have an impact on the optoelectronic properties. Additional work is in progress to optimize the CBD-Zn(O,S) buffer aiming at combining the good JSC and FF values with the high VOC that is obtained when sputtered-Zn(O0.6S0.4) is used as a buffer.

Numerical simulations were carried out using the SCAPS software to determine the best device design for Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4-based top cells in a tandem configuration, with a focus on suggesting suitable TBCs. The parameters used in the simulations are listed in Table S2. Most of the parameters related to the absorber material, such as thickness, doping concentration, band gap, and absorption coefficient, were extracted from (our own) electrical and optical measurements. Parameters related to MoSe2 and MoO3 were taken from literature, and those related to CdS and ZnO:Al layers are already available in the SCAPS software. Two configurations were tested in the simulations: Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 substrate or superstrate solar cells, as shown in Fig. S5. In the standard configuration [substrate, Fig. S5(a)], a thin layer of MoSe2 was inserted in the model between the Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 absorber layer and the Mo contact. The presence of MoSe2 layer at the absorber/Mo interface was previously reported for Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (ref. 33) and Cu2ZnSnSe4 (ref. 34) TF solar cells. It was shown to be beneficial for TF solar cells performance if its thickness is controlled to avoid detrimental effects on series resistance. The improvement of the solar cell performance is mainly due to a reduction of the barrier height and better charge carrier collection at the interface between the absorber and the Mo contact if MoSe2 is present. For tandem cells, the Mo back contact needs to be replaced by a TBC, see Fig. S5(b). However, most of the transparent conductive oxides (TCOs) used in solar cells have a low work function (4.7–4.9 eV) and thus – if Anderson's rule holds true for these complex heterojunctions – may not result in a preferable energy level alignment with the Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 absorber layer when used as back contact. In this case, the use of an intermediate layer, such as a thin MoSe2 or MoO3, can mitigate this issue. MoOx was successfully used in superstrate configuration as an interfacial layer between a transparent SnO2:In (ITO) back contact and Cu(In,Ga)Se2 absorbers and was shown to also be a good interfacial layer for the Cu2ZnSnSe4 based solar cells (applied either as a layer between the absorber and the Mo contact to improve the back contact properties or as a primary back contact).

Fig. S6 shows the J(V) curves calculated for different device configurations. The solar cell parameters are given in Table 2. For the Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 substrate configuration (a), the calculated J(V) curve is based on series resistance and shunt resistance values of 4.7 and 365 Ω cm2, respectively. These resistances have been extracted from the J(V) curve of one of the most efficient EVAP-Cu2ZnGeSe4 substrate solar cells (5.4% power conversion efficiency). In the configurations (b)–(d), the J(V) curves were calculated after the (simulated) optimization of the absorber doping concentration (1016 cm−3) and of the values for series and shunt resistance (Rs ≤ 0.5 Ω cm2; Rsh ≥ 800 Ω cm2). In case of a superstrate with TBC [configuration (c)], the low solar cell performance is due to a strong reduction of the VOC caused by the low work function of ZnO:Al (AZO). The best configuration for superstrate solar cell was obtained by considering a thin “buffer layer” of MoO3 between the absorber and a TCO back contact (d). It should be noticed that an ITO back contact acts also as a Na barrier. If insufficient Na content limits the device performance, however, Na needs to be deliberately added in a controlled way, e.g. by means of post-deposition treatment.
Solar cell parameters
Cell configurations
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Back contact
MoSe2/Mo
MoSe2/Mo
TCO
MoO3/TCO

a Results from device simulation employing optimized parameters (see Table S2).


V
OC (mV)
553
572
287
1000

J
SC (mA cm−2)
19.70
20.00
17.60
22.00
FF (%)
56.30
71.00
65.54
67.90
Eff. (%)
6.22
8.14
3.31
15.00

TBCs for potential use in the wide band gap Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 kesterite top cell of a four terminal photovoltaic tandem cell with a c-Si bottom cell have been studied. In addition to the electronic structure considerations in the previous section, the back contact must be transparent for photons with an energy below the band gap of the absorber layer and stable under its processing conditions. Independent of the processing route [evaporation-based (see Section 2.1.1) or solution-based (see Section 2.1.2)], the kesterite absorber is formed by high-temperature annealing of the precursor layer stack in H2Se and/or H2S atmosphere. It is expected that this selenization/sulfurization will be the most critical processing step that the TBC has to withstand. H2Se is a more powerful reducing agent than is H2S, and so we focus on the impact of annealing in H2Se atmosphere on the optoelectronic and chemical properties of the TBCs in the following. The most widely used TCOs: ITO, AZO, and SnO2:F (FTO) – were selected for exposure tests. It is assumed that the S-containing atmosphere during annealing required to achieve the [S]/([S] + [Se]) composition necessary for the desired higher absorber band gap will have similar effects.

In order to simulate the impact of H2Se exposure during a Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 deposition process, the optical and chemical properties of the selected TCOs have been tested before and after exposure to a 20 sccm H2Se flow for 15 min at various treatment temperatures (400 and 450 °C). A first screening showed that ITO had the highest likelihood for yielding working devices but would require a protective top layer (to make it more stable during absorber processing). Furthermore, our SCAPS simulations (see Section 2.3) of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 devices had shown that employing ITO instead of Mo (which is the standard back contact for single-junction devices) would result in an efficiency drop of 60 rel.% (see Table 2). The same simulations showed that this deterioration may be fully prevented by using an additional MoO3 interlayer between ITO and absorber resulting even in an efficiency gain of 80 rel.% (see Table 2). Hence, thin sputtered MoO3 layers applied on top of a 135 nm-thick sputtered ITO before absorber deposition – as protection layer and for improved energy level alignment – were first explored. However, MoO3 is significantly reduced upon H2Se exposure; in Section 2.4.1, we explore alternative protective layers.

In this section, the effectiveness of Al2O3, InZnOx (IZO), and TiO2 as protection of ITO during selenization/sulfurization is explored. The study is conducted by means of H2Se exposure tests at 400 °C and 450 °C (i.e., annealing temperatures relevant for absorber formation), as well as by experiments on the device level. The top layers were deposited by means of atmospheric pressure spatial atomic layer deposition (S-ALD, plasma enhanced for IZO).


Al2O3 is known to be an excellent passivation and barrier (i.e., protective layer) material of high chemical stability; it is however electrically insulating. IZO and TiO2 are candidates for forming more conductive protective layers. In order to determine the minimum thickness for being a sufficient protective top layer and to test if such a thickness would yield a working device, a set of Al2O3 (1–30 nm), IZO (1–120 nm), and TiO2 (2–60 nm) layers of different thicknesses were deposited by means of S-ALD on ITO coated SLG substrates. The absorption spectra (derived from reflectance and transmittance) shown in Fig. 12 suggest that the decrease of ITO transmittance (i.e., increase of absorption) induced by H2Se exposure could (to some degree) be prevented with a > 2 nm Al2O3 (not shown), >30 nm IZO, or >60 nm TiO2 top layer. However, the TiO2 layers are less effective at temperatures of 450 °C and higher [see Fig. 12(c)]. After H2Se exposure at 450 °C, the average absorption for an 135 nm-thick ITO layer with a 30 nm-thick IZO and 60 nm-thick TiO2 protective layer is 8 and 18%, respectively, in the near infra-red regime (between 750 nm and 1100 nm).

HAXPES was used for chemical structure analysis of the IZO/ITO back contact configuration and its changes upon H2Se exposure in order to probe the deterioration of ITO and the protection mechanism of IZO. Note that same measurement conditions apply as for the HAXPES data shown in Fig. 1 and 4. The Sn 3d XPS spectra of a bare ITO sample and ITO samples with either a 10 or a 30 nm protective IZO top layer before and after H2Se treatment at 450 °C are shown in Fig. 13. Before the H2Se treatment, for the bare ITO and 10 nm IZO/ITO sample, Sn resides in a chemical environment best described by a combination of ITO, SnO, and SnO2. However, note that asymmetric core level lines are generally found for (highly conductive) ITO and are generally attributed to final-state effects. No Sn signal is observed for the 30 nm IZO/ITO sample, due to insufficient probing depth and complete coverage of the ITO by the IZO. (The inelastic mean free path of the Sn 3d photoelectrons excited with 6 keV photons in In2O3 is around 7 nm). After H2Se treatment, the spectral intensity of the Sn 3d line is significantly redistributed, indicating that the chemical environment of Sn has changed; SnSe and/or SnSeOx are likely present. Furthermore, the Sn 3d intensity increases after the H2Se treatment for the 10 nm IZO/ITO sample, suggesting either that Sn diffuses into the IZO layer and/or the degree of ITO coverage decreases. If the protective layer does not completely cover the ITO, it will not prevent the chemical reaction between ITO and H2Se, the evidence of which is the formation of Sn–Se bonds. Additional HAXPES data suggest a significant chemical interaction between IZO and H2Se, implying that IZO acts as a sacrificial agent to protect ITO from H2Se. Note that additional measurements on TiO2/ITO test structures (not shown) reveal a different protection mechanism: TiO2 is largely unaffected by H2Se annealing.

EVAP-Cu2ZnGeSe4-based devices were manufactured on sputtered ITO/SLG substrates with S-ALD deposited Al2O3, IZO, and TiO2 protective layers. As references, similarly prepared devices with a standard Mo back contact on a Si(O,N)/SLG substrate were also fabricated and tested. A CBD-CdS buffer and a sputtered i-ZnO/AZO bi-layer emitter was used as the front window. The (5 × 5 cm2) EVAP-Cu2ZnGeSe4 cell stack samples were finished by applying a Ni/Ag grid for local J(V) measurements. Table 3 depicts measured J(V) parameters of the champion cells. As stated earlier, an Al2O3 thickness above 2 nm is needed for an effective H2Se protection of ITO. However, the 3 nm thick Al2O3 layer used here already reduces the cell performance dramatically due to its insufficient conductivity. This issue could be overcome by using a perforated Al2O3 layer, which (through the formed point contacts) allows sufficient charge carrier transport while also acting as a passivation and barrier layer. Devices with an ITO back contact with or without either a 30 nm TiO2 or IZO protective top layer function better, yielding efficiencies of about 85–90% of that of reference cells with a Mo back electrode. The lower efficiencies likely result from a higher sheet resistance of the back contact and a presumably less ideal energy level alignment at the absorber/back contact interface compared to the Mo back electrode. The combination of ITO back electrode with TiO2 protection layer results in a higher VOC than an ITO back electrode with or without IZO protection layer, but not in a higher JSC value – finding an explanation for this observation is a subject of ongoing discussion.

Back contact
Protective top layer
Effmax (%)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (mV)
FF (%)
ITO
None
3.6
19.9
487
37.6
ITO
IZO (30 nm)
4.0
27.1
471
31.2
ITO
Al2O3 (3.5 nm)
0.8
9.3
364
23.9
ITO
TiO2 (30 nm)
4.3
17.3
600
41.3
SiON/Mo
None
4.7
18.6
600
42.3

Fig. 14 depicts the absorption (derived from reflectance and transmittance) for a complete EVAP-Cu2ZnGeSe4 solar cell layer stack on a 60 nm TiO2 protected ITO back electrode. The absorption of the complete cell stack for energies directly below EG (Cu2ZnGeSe4) is 65% for 60 nm TiO2/ITO and 55% for 30 nm IZO/ITO (not shown) back contacts. These values are higher than the sum computed from the absorption of the individual layers (i.e., back contact after H2Se exposure, absorber, and front window), as illustrated in Fig. 14 for the 60 nm TiO2/ITO back contact. This may be due to slightly varying absorber layer deposition and/or selenization process conditions, annealing-induced formation of species at the absorber (precursor)/TBC interface, or internal reflections and higher absorption of the front window when deposited on the actual (rough) absorber layer. In order to reduce the optical losses in a complete device, more analysis of the composition and morphology of the layers and their interfaces in the cell stack will be needed. To reduce near-infrared absorption due to free charge carriers in both the highly-doped back and front contact, more effort is required to develop transparent materials with high mobilities and reasonable charge carrier densities.

The bottom cell in a tandem configuration will only receive the illumination transmitted through the top cell, and so a good transmission at hν < than the top cell absorber band gap is crucial for the top cell structure to successfully be employed in tandem configurations, as discussed in the previous section. A thin top cell combined with a TBC is generally used to assure this. To investigate the effect of the top cell transparency on the performance of the bottom cell (c-Si), we calculated the efficiency of the bottom cell as a function of the light transmitted through the top cell, as shown in Fig. 15. The bottom cell is modeled as a 25% efficient silicon cell with rear locally diffused contacts (PERL technology) and Lambertian light trapping. For the tandem cell, a four-terminal mechanically stacked configuration is considered. In Fig. 15, the efficiency of the c-Si bottom cell under the absorbing 1.5 eV band gap Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4-based cell is shown as a function of top cell transmission. Furthermore, the total efficiency of the tandem configuration assuming a top cell efficiency of 8, 15, and 22% is shown. In the case of a Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4(1.5 eV)-based top cell of 8% efficiency (i.e., a performance level similar to the one reached as a result of joint research efforts of this consortium, see Section 2.2.2), a transparency higher than 80% is required to achieve a total tandem device efficiency that is higher than the efficiency of the c-Si bottom cell alone (25%, horizontal dashed line in Fig. 15). In case the efficiency of the top cell can be increased to 15% (a performance level that seems feasible based on our device simulation in Section 2.3, see Table 2), a transparency above 50% is sufficient for viable tandem application. Finally, for a 22% efficient top cell (a performance level that has been shown for other polycrystalline chalcogenide-based absorbers) respective tandem devices would reach efficiencies >25% with even more relaxed top cell transparency requirements.

A maximal transparency of approximately 40% for a real-world Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4/TBC layer stack was shown in this contribution (see Fig. 15 and discussion in Section 2.4.1.2); there is a realistic potential to increase this to 60% if chemical reactions at the interfaces and/or internal reflections can be minimized. Hence, wide band gap kesterites might very well represent a material class that may be used as absorber in tandem device top cells if further significant advancements in cell performance (8 → 15%) and transmission (40 → 60%) are achieved. Based on the progress presented in this paper (compare status 2015 and 2018 indicated as ❶ and ❷ in Fig. 15), it indeed seems feasible to reach the realistic performance scenario (❸ in Fig. 15) if optimization efforts continue.

Absorbers in which Sn had been substituted by Si did not result in functioning solar cells; most likely due to too high doping (in the order of 1018 cm−3) and/or the formation of SiO2 at the absorber surface. However, Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 absorbers with band gaps above 1.5 eV have been successfully developed and integrated into solar cells. Typically, ZnSe is present in large amounts on the top surface of these absorbers; it is shown here that this impurity can be selectively removed with chemical etching: (i) with 12 wt% HCl at a temperature of 60–85 °C, and (ii) in 1 M KMnO4/1 M H2SO4 aqueous solution. The standard CBD-CdS has been optimized, resulting in a record efficiency of 7.6% for EVAP-Cu2ZnGeSe4 based solar cells (with Mo back contact). In2S3, Zn(O,S), and CdIn2S4 alternative buffer layers were also tested, where the highest VOC and presumably the best electronic buffer/absorber interface structure could be obtained with sputtered Zn(O,S).

The solar cell performance of substrate/superstrate Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 solar cells with TBC for tandem application was simulated using SCAPS to evaluate various configurations and identify performance-limiting factors. It was found that when low work function, TCO-based, TBCs (like ITO) are used, an “interlayer” is required to reduce the blocking barrier at the absorber/TCO interface, ideally achieving an Ohmic contact. The device simulation suggests MoOx as an ideal interlayer candidate material for Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 superstrate cells for tandem applications. MoOx is, however, unstable under real-world absorber processing conditions; the use of an alternative, stable material causes the majority of respective (transparent) cells to be still limited by a low VOC.
ITO was shown to be a well-performing candidate for a TBC, but it requires a protective top layer (i.e., Al2O3, IZO, or TiO2) if it is to remain transparent after exposure to the Se (and/or S) atmosphere needed for the absorber deposition process. ITO back contacts with a protective layer of 30 nm-thick IZO or 60 nm-thick TiO2 have an average absorption of 8 and 18%, respectively, in the near infra-red regime. The efficiency of solar cells using an ITO with IZO or TiO2 protective layers achieves 85–90% of the performance of reference cells with Mo back contact (at a maximal transparency of 40%).
In summary, Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 absorbers with potential for future application as top cell in tandem configurations have been developed. Different optimization routes mostly addressing the buffer/absorber interface have been suggested and proven to be effective to advance device performance. In order to make wide band gap kesterites a prime candidate absorber material for the top cell in tandem devices, similar approaches are crucially needed extending the efforts to all aspects of the complete cell stack, tackling interface and bulk properties in order to improve cell efficiency and transmission. In order to accomplish this challenge, it is proposed to focus future research on increasing the solar cell performance before addressing the transparency of these solar cell devices.

There are no conflicts to declare.


This project has received funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Program under grant agreement No. 640868. The synchrotron radiation experiments were performed at the SPring-8 beamline BL15XU with the approval of the NIMS Synchrotron X-ray Station (Proposals 2016A4600, 2016B4601, and 2017A4600) and at BESSY II with the approval of HZB. B. Vermang has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme (grant agreement no. 715027).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9se00266a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019