 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA06735B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16913-16919


Xingyao
Liang
,

Wenzhe
Li
,

Jiangwei
Li
,

Guangda
Niu
 and 

Liduo
Wang
*

Key Lab of Organic Optoelectronics & Molecular Engineering of Ministry of Education, Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. E-mail: chldwang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn; Fax: +86 10 62795137; Tel: +86 10 62788802

Received
6th August 2016
, Accepted 25th September 2016
First published on 26th September 2016
Interfacial engineering is an important method to achieve compact and smooth high-quality perovskite films in a one-step method. In this work, we first demonstrate that lead monoxide (PbO) as an interfacial modification material could convert to perovskite crystal seeds and induce the growth of the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx absorber layer. The introduction of the perovskite crystal seeds resulted in a dramatically enhanced coverage and a large grain size of the perovskite films. The PL lifetime measurements verified reduced trap states of the perovskite thin films and enhanced charge transfer at the TiO2/perovskite interface. With a high quality perovskite thin film, the planar perovskite solar cell showed a remarkably improved power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 17.03%. Moreover, the device with PbO as an interfacial layer exhibited superior UV-stability, maintaining 60% of the initial PCE under intensive UV irradiation for 180 min while the control device was almost exhausted.

Recently, organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs), typically with methylammonium lead halide (MAPbX3, X = halogen) as light absorbers, have achieved high efficiency and drawn much attention. The unique merits of the perovskite material include a high absorption coefficient, suitable bandgap and excellent charge carrier transport properties. Remarkably, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) has been improved rapidly from 3.8% to 22.1% in the past several years.

To achieve a high performance PSC, the quality of the perovskite thin film is important, including the features of pinhole-free, smooth, dense and well-defined crystallinity. Among the reported preparation technologies, the one-step method, with a precursor solution of PbCl2 and MAI, is widely used to construct the p–i–n planar PSCs. Through a slow conversion of the intermediate phase, the one-step method could provide perovskite thin films with high crystallinity and a large grain size. However, during the conversion process, the growth of the perovskite crystals is difficult to control, leading to low quality thin films with a rough surface and poor coverage, which tremendously limits the extraction and transfer of the photon-generated carriers. To address this issue, many approaches have been developed to improve the perovskite thin film quality, such as interfacial engineering, solvent engineering and additive-assisted preparation. Interfacial engineering, among all these solutions, not only improves quality and interface conditions, but also provides controllable manipulation with abundant materials to choose from, like CsBr, Cs2CO3 and so on. The methods for the fabrication of the modification layer include the solution process and thermal evaporation method. These reports claimed that through interfacial engineering, the heterogeneous nucleation process could induce accumulated nucleation centres, leading to the dense stacking of the perovskite crystals and an improved film coverage. However, since the lattice mismatch between perovskite and the modifying materials inevitably exists, an intrinsic lattice distortion and internal stress at the interface could have great impact on the crystallization process and, in the long run, the stability issue, yet a thorough study with an in-depth insight is still lacking.
The technology of using crystal seeds to induce crystal growth is commonly used in single crystal preparation. The natural lattice match contributes to an oriented growth of crystals; therefore single crystals with a large size are obtained. Despite the advantage in the easy preparation of large-size perovskite crystals, the seed-induced growth of perovskites normally shows excellent carrier transport properties, attributed to reduced trap density. In this regard, the perovskite thin film formed by single crystals could exhibit excellent photovoltage performance as previously reported, and thus a directly induced growth by the perovskite crystal seeds as interfacial modification is preferred. One of the biggest problems for implanting perovskite crystal seeds as interfacial modification is that they can completely dissolve in the precursor solvent, N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF). Hence, it is desirable to seek for a lead source that is insoluble in DMF and could be converted into perovskite crystal seeds at the first stage of perovskite growth. Huang and co-workers reported a direct conversion of CH3NH3PbI3 from electrodeposited PbO by reacting with MAI solution, achieving a smooth and dense perovskite film by an environmentally friendly method that could control the pollution of lead. It is inspiring that with the insolubility of PbO, the interfacial engineering of perovskite crystal seeds could be realized.
Herein, we first demonstrated a method of inducing perovskite thin film growth directly by the perovskite crystal seeds. The introduction of the perovskite crystal seeds was achieved through PbO as an interfacial layer, which was prepared by the decomposition of lead acetate. The crystal-seed-induced oriented growth therefore contributes to dense and smooth perovskite thin films with extremely high orientations and reduced trap states. We further explored the detailed inductive effect of PbO on perovskite film growth. Finally, both the efficiency and the stability toward UV light of PSCs were remarkably improved with PbO as an interfacial layer. This work provides a new insight for preparing high quality perovskite thin films by an extended interfacial engineering method and paves the way to achieve both high efficiency and stable PSCs.

Firstly, the fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) (YINGKOU OPV TCH NEW ENERGY CO, LTD, OPV-FTO22-7) was etched with 2 mol L−1 HCl and zinc powder and then cleaned consecutively in 2% Hellmanex™ detergent, deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol. Devices were made up of fluorine-doped tin oxide coated glass (Pilkington, 7 Ω cm−1). An electronic abstraction layer of compact TiO2 was deposited by spin-coating a mildly acidic solution of titanium isopropoxide in ethanol (the concentrations of titanium isopropoxide/2 M HCl/ethanol = 254 μL/34 μL/2 mL) at 2000 rpm for 60 s, which was subsequently annealed in air at 500 °C for 30 min.


The PbO modification layer was obtained by spin-coating a solution of 50 mg mL−1 (except otherwise detailed) Pb(Ac)2·3H2O (Sigma-Aldrich) dissolved in water/DMF (2:1/v:v) in air, directly on the TiO2 compact layer at 2000 rpm for 45 s, and then annealing for 1 h at 350 °C in air. The thickness of the PbO films is about 30 nm, which is shown in Fig. S1.


The non-stoichiometric precursor solution was made by mixing MAI (Dyesol) with PbCl2 (Sigma-Aldrich, 268690-250 G) at a molar ratio of 3:1 in DMF at 35 wt% to achieve the perovskite layer, which was spin-coated from a room temperature solution on the substrate at room temperature in a nitrogen-filled glovebox at 2000 rpm for 45 s. And then the films were left to dry at room temperature in the glovebox for 15 minutes, to allow slow solvent evaporation prior to any annealing. A hole-transporting layer was then prepared by spin-coating a 0.8 M solution of 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) in chlorobenzene, which had additives of 30 mol% lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide and 80 mol% 4-tert-butylpyridine. Spin-coating was employed at 2000 rpm for 45 s. Then the devices were left overnight in air. Finally, 50 nm gold electrodes were thermally evaporated under a vacuum of 10−5 Torr, at a rate of 0.2 Å s−1.


X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded with a Smart LAB instrument with Cu Kα beam (λ = 1.54 Å). The IR-spectra were obtained by using a UATR TWO FI-IR spectrometer (Perkin Elmer, USA). The time-resolved photoluminescence decay spectra of the perovskite film were measured at 780 nm and excited with a 525 nm excitation laser via a fluorescence spectrophotometer (FV1200, LSCM-FLIM/FCS). The UV-vis absorption spectra of perovskite films were recorded by using a Hitachi U-3010 spectroscope. The UV aging test was performed by using a UV resource MEJIRO GENOSSEN-MUA-165. The SEM images were collected using a field-emission SEM (JEOL JSM-7401F). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was conducted by using a PHI 5300 ESCA Perkin-Elmer spectrometer and the data were referenced to C1s in inorganic carbon (284.80 eV). The AFM images were collected by using a scanning probe microscope (SPA-400, Seiko Instruments, Japan). The current density–voltage (J–V) curves were obtained with a 2400 Series SourceMeter (Keithley Instruments) under simulated AM 1.5 sunlight 100 mW cm−2 irradiance generated by using an thermo oriel 91192-1000 simulator, with the intensity correction with an VLSI standards incorporated PN 91150V Si reference cell. The deviation was calculated to be less than 1%. The active surface of solar cells was 0.090 cm2 applying a metal aperture mask.


Lead acetate was used to convert to lead monoxide on planar thin compact TiO2 by annealing at 350 °C for 1 hour. DMF and water were used as co-solvents to dissolve Pb(Ac)2. The corresponding PbO was denoted as PO-x, x represents the amount (mg) of Pb(Ac)2·3H2O in 1 mL solvent.

Firstly, we carried out the modifier with a high Pb(Ac)2·3H2O concentration of 500 mg mL−1 to confirm the transformation of lead acetate at the surface of the TiO2 compact layer. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern was recorded and is shown in Fig. 1a. The XRD pattern showed peaks at 28.50°, 31.39°, 35.71°, 45.02° and 54.58°, assigned to (101) (110) (002) (220) and (211) planes of PbO (JCPDS no. 35-1482). Further, we performed X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurement for the modifier with a low concentration of 50 mg mL−1, as shown in Fig. S2. The XPS results reveal the presence of the PbO compound with Pb–O binding energy. It is noted that PbO was produced successfully on c-TiO2. Fig. 1b displays the Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) absorption of the PO-50 film before and after the annealing process at 350 °C. After annealing, the wide peak at 2500–3000 cm−1 disappeared, indicating a complete transformation from lead acetate modifier to PbO as an interfacial layer.
In this work, we prepared the perovskite layer according to the traditional one-step method with mixed PbCl2 and MAI compounds. The XRD pattern of the origin perovskite film is consistent with the previously reported results, where the diffraction peaks at 14.05°, 25.80°, 28.20°, 33.00° and 43.50° are assigned to (110), (202), (220), (210) and (314) planes, respectively. The spectra are normalized by the FTO peaks at 26.25° and 37.48°. Compared with the pristine films, the XRD pattern shows disappearance of (202) and (210) diffraction peaks. Moreover, in Fig. 2b, the relative peak intensity ratio of (110)/(314), (220)/(314) increased by 41% and 34%. The above results indicated that a highly oriented growth of the perovskite thin film with PbO as an interfacial layer was achieved. Additionally, the perovskite film with PbO modification layer shows stronger diffraction intensity in (110) and (220) and flusher baseline, indicating an enhancement of crystallinity.
To investigate the effect of PbO as an interfacial layer on the morphology of the perovskite layer, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were taken and are shown in Fig. 3. For the control perovskite film, apparent pin-holes could be seen, even with a grain size of over 1 micrometer. Pin-holes in the perovskite thin film are widely acknowledged to cause severe carrier recombination and deteriorate the efficiency of the device, because of the direct contact between the electron and hole selective layers. Meanwhile, the density of pinholes can immensely affect the absorbance. When PbO as an interfacial layer was applied, a nearly full coverage of the perovskite grains was obtained for various modifier concentrations. Moreover, when the modifier concentration is increased, the grain size of the perovskite thin film was significantly enlarged to an average value of 10 micrometers, as can be seen from the high-magnification inset images, respectively. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was then used to compare the surface roughness of the perovskite thin films (Fig. S3). For the pristine perovskite film without PbO as an interfacial layer, the root-mean-square (RMS) roughness was measured to be 27.8 nm. In contrast, the RMS roughness value for the film prepared with PO-50 modification decreased to 17.9 nm. The decrease of surface roughness confirmed a smooth perovskite thin film with PbO as an interfacial layer (Fig. S2). We have provided the side view SEM images of the whole devices in Fig. S4. Compared with control perovskite, the PO-50 and PO-100 perovskite films were more uniform with larger grain sizes, which is consistent with the results of AFM. Combined with the XRD results, we conclude that the introduction of PbO as an interfacial layer into the planar perovskite can improve both the film uniformity and the perovskite crystallinity, which are the two key prerequisites for high performance perovskite solar cells. Furthermore, Fig. S5 displays the evolution of the absorbance of perovskite thin films with modification of PbO. Compared with the control perovskite thin film, the PO-50 film with a dense layer and large grain sizes exhibits stronger absorbance between 500 and 760 nm wavelengths, which supports the above morphology results following the rules concluded in previous reports.
The effect of PbO as an interfacial layer on charge carrier transport dynamics was further investigated by the time resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements. We performed TRPL measurements for the perovskite active layers with and without PbO as an interfacial layer, and fitted the decay curves with a bi-exponential decay function. As shown in Fig. S6 and Table S1, compared with the control perovskite film, the average PL lifetime of the film with the presence of PbO as an interfacial layer remarkably increased from 5.87 to 16.89 ns, indicating a retarded PL decay process and a reduced nonradioactive recombination process. This is consistent with a high quality perovskite thin film with fewer defects. And we believe that both a high coverage and large grain size contribute to this improvement. We further studied the electron injection dynamics at the perovskite/TiO2 interface. A clear electron quenching process is observed when the TiO2 layer is added. Compared with the control perovskite layer, the charge carrier quenched much faster when PbO as an interfacial layer was applied, with the τfast that corresponds to the electron quenching pathway decreasing from 0.418 to 0.285 ns (Fig. 4). A high carrier extraction efficiency, associated with a faster electron quenching process, is always preferred for effective carrier collection. Thus, the decreased PL lifetime strongly supports a faster electron extraction at the perovskite/TiO2 interface, attributed to the high crystallinity and oriented growth of the perovskite thin film with PbO as an interfacial layer.
The mechanism of the PbO introduction thin film formation was further studied. We have demonstrated above that high crystallinity perovskite thin films with full coverage, large grain size and fewer defects could be obtained, which were prepared with PbO as an interfacial layer. Then we proceeded to explore the inducting effect of PbO as an interfacial layer. As shown in the previous reports, PbO is able to convert to MAPbI3via reacting with MAI in solution or the solid state. In order to study the possible mechanism, we spin-coated the perovskite precursor on the PbO layer and dried it at room temperature in the glovebox for 1.5 h; the films were used to detect the intermediate state. The XRD results are shown in Fig. 5a. With PbO modification, the XRD pattern showed the (004) and (224) planes of perovskite, while the pristine perovskite film only exhibited diffraction peaks of the PbI2 phase. We conclude that the PbO at the interface could transfer to the thin perovskite phase, which would serve as the crystal seeds further inducing perovskite growth.
With the formation of the perovskite crystal seeds from PbO as an interfacial layer, the preferential oriented growth of the perovskite thin film is induced. We show the schematic illustration of the PbO-induced perovskite film growth in Fig. 5b. At the first stage, PbO reacts with MAI in the precursor solution and transforms into perovskite, which acts as perovskite crystal seeds. Secondly, the perovskite crystal seeds induce oriented growth of the perovskite thin film due to the same lattice constant. In the end, a compact and smooth MAPbI3−xClx thin film is obtained via solvent evaporation. It is worth noting that except for the obtained high orientation, the crystallization rate of the perovskite film is accelerated with PbO as an interfacial layer.
We have tested the effects of PO-x modifier concentration on the device performance and found that PO-50 is the optimized concentration to serve as the modification layer (Fig. S9). The statistical data of photovoltaic parameters for the control and PO-50 modified devices are shown in Fig. 6a. And the J–V curve of the champion device is displayed in Fig. 6b, with an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.02 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 21.96 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 76% and a PCE of 17.03%. Compared with the pristine device, the VOC, JSC and FF were all increased, which was attributed to the significantly improved perovskite film quality with PbO as an interfacial layer. Compared with the control device, the ratio of forward to reverse scan efficiency from J–V curves for the PO-50 device has been increased from 50.5% to 89.76%. And we have shown the J–V curves including forward and reverse scans in Fig. 6b. It also verified the importance of high-quality perovskite thin films for the device performance. In addition, the PSC with PO-50 modification showed a stabilized power output of 15.2%. In addition, we have tried to fabricate devices with different thicknesses of the PbO modification layer via vapor deposition. But due to the poor crystallinity of PbO obtained from the thermal evaporation method, we could not get the high quality perovskite films so that the devices performed much worse than the devices fabricated via solution-processed PbO modification. The PCEs of devices based on different thicknesses of PbO are listed in Table S2.
We further exhibited the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) curves of the electron-only devices with/without the PbO modification layer. The device structures are FTO/c-TiO2/perovskite/PCBM/Ag and FTO/c-TiO2/PbO/perovskite/PCBM/Ag. Fig. S9 especially depicts the difference of the charge transport properties, wherein the trap filled limited voltage has reduced from 1.07 V to 0.19 V under the modification of the PbO layer. It is indicated that the film quality has been immensely improved and the defect density was curbed by the PbO modifier.
The thickness of the PbO layer would influence the charge carrier transport mobility and dynamics. On one hand, considering the effect of the PbO layer, we demonstrated the electrochemical impedance spectrum (EIS) to explore the charge transport, recombination, and accumulation of charges of the perovskite-based mesoscopic devices. As shown in previous reports, the apparent electron lifetime τ (τ = RCE × C) in the high frequency region displayed an exponential decrease with increased applied bias as shown in Fig. S10. Compared with the control device, the τ of devices with the PbO modifier shows obvious boosting, e.g. PO-100 device. It is indicated that the perovskite films have a longer recombination lifetime with the increase of PbO thickness. On the other hand, from the J–V curves of devices with PO-50 and PO-100 modification layers, the series resistance (RS) differed and the PO-100 showed a higher RS, as shown in Fig. S11. The result indicated that the PO-100 layer was too thick for efficient charge transport. Besides, the high quality films with the properties of high crystallinity and a large grain size are a prerequisite for obtaining outstanding PCE performance, which have been studied in previous extensive research. In conclusion, both the thickness of the PbO layer and the perovskite grain size all have exerted effects on device performance.
Meanwhile, we studied the UV stability of devices in ambient air (T = ∼42 °C, RH = ∼40%) under 364 mW cm−2 UV light. The PCE was measured every 15 minutes and is shown in Fig. 6d. For the PO-50 device, the PCE maintained nearly 60% for 180 minutes while the PCE of the device without PO-50 modification dropped to near zero. The improved UV stability is mainly ascribed to a stable perovskite film, which is well-oriented and has larger grains lacking traps. With PbO as an interfacial layer, we could obtain high-quality perovskite thin films with high crystallinity and reduced traps, thus leading to the robust absorber layers even under intense UV light.

In conclusion, we obtained high-quality perovskite thin films with PbO as an interfacial layer. PbO as the modification layer will convert into perovskite crystal seeds in the precursor solution, thus directly inducing the oriented growth of the perovskite thin films. An appropriate amount of PO-50 for modification not only achieved a full coverage of the perovskite layer with a large grain size, but also increased the carrier extraction efficiency at the perovskite/TiO2 interface, confirmed by the TRPL measurements. Finally, the champion PSC with PO-50 modification showed a PCE of 17.03%, with significantly improved stability toward UV irradiation.


The authors appreciate the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant no. 51273104 and 91433205.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: XPS spectra of the PO-50 film on c-TiO2. AFM image of the perovskite film w/ and w/o the PO-50 modification layer. UV-vis absorption of the perovskite film w/ and w/o the PO-50 modification layer. TRPL of the perovskite film on glass w/ and w/o the PO-50 modification layer. Table of fitting parameters for the time-resolved PL measurements. Dark current of the perovskite film w/ and w/o the PO-50 modification layer. Device performance of different modifier concentrations. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta06735b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016