 DOI: 10.1039/C3CC49853K
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 4364-4367


Xiaojia
Zheng
,

Dongqi
Yu
,

Feng-Qiang
Xiong
,

Mingrun
Li
,

Zhou
Yang
,

Jian
Zhu
,

Wen-Hua
Zhang
* and 

Can
Li
*

State Key Laboratory of Catalysis, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, and Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy, Dalian 116023, China. E-mail: whzhang@dicp.ac.cn; canli@dicp.ac.cn

Graduate University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China

Received
30th December 2013
, Accepted 5th February 2014
First published on 5th February 2014
Anodized TiO2 nanotubes were decorated by II–VI semiconductor nanofilms via atomic layer deposition (ALD) and further employed as photoanodes of semiconductor nanofilm sensitized solar cells (NFSCs) exhibiting superior photovoltaic performance.

TiO2 is a typical transition metal oxide semiconductor with high chemical stability, strong photocatalytic activity and high photoelectric performance, which render it an excellent material for solar energy conversion in photocatalysis and solar cells. Since the success in the growth of ordered TiO2 nanotubes (NTs), made by a simple electrochemical anodization of a titanium metal sheet, such one-dimensional (1D) nanostructured materials have been widely investigated for their growth, properties, functionalization and applications benefiting from their strong light scattering effects and improved charge collection. Quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSCs) have exhibited great promise in developing clean and sustainable energy. As the light harvester of these devices, semiconductor QDs display a characteristic tunable band gap, high extinction coefficient, large intrinsic dipole moments, possible multiple exciton generation (MEG) effect, hot electron effect,etc. These virtues make QDSCs appear very attractive in the next generation of solar cells. Despite the fact that both QDSCs and dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) work in a similar way, the performance of QDSCs lags significantly behind their DSSC counterparts. The performance limitation of QDSCs may be attributed to a number of factors, such as a high charge recombination with a redox couple at the electrode/electrolyte interface, slow hole transfer kinetics, and low catalytic activity of the counter electrode. Moreover, the partial coverage of QDs on the surface of TiO2 means a small junction area, leading to a low current density and high charge recombination at the naked interface of the electrode and the electrolyte; this is an important energy loss pathway that deteriorates the performance of the resultant photovoltaic devices. These shortcomings could be overcome by using semiconductor nanofilms (NFs) in lieu of QDs to cover the entire TiO2 surface. In such cases, the junction area between the semiconductor sensitizer and the TiO2 electrode could be enlarged significantly, and the direct contact between TiO2 and the electrolyte could also be avoided. As a consequence, the charge recombination between the TiO2 electrode and hole species in the electrolyte could be blocked more efficiently by NFs than QDs. Solar cells with a superior performance could thus be expected by using semiconductor NFs as the light harvester. ALD is an ideal tool to grow conformal films that are firmly attached to the surface of the porous electrodes with a high level of control. Though widely used in the growth of ultrathin films of metal oxides, ALD has rarely been used in the fabrication of metal sulfides and selenides for solar cells. In this work, ordered TiO2 nanotubes (NTs), fabricated by electrochemical anodization, were employed as model substrates to be decorated by semiconductor NFs; the staggered CdS/CdSe NFs were successfully fabricated onto the surfaces of TiO2 NTs via atomic layer deposition (ALD), resulting in core–sheath heterostructures. Moreover, the band gaps of the staggered CdS/CdSe NFs were systematically tuned by varying ALD cycles. The semiconductor-sensitized solar cells were finally fabricated in a liquid-electrolyte sandwiched configuration. Compared to the controlled quantum dot-sensitized solar cells fabricated by the classic successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) approach (defined as SILAR-QDSCs), the performance of the semiconductor nanofilm-sensitized solar cells made via ALD (ALD-NFSCs) was significantly improved due to the remarkably improved photocurrent and the significantly decreased charge recombination. A power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 4.56% was obtained for the ALD-NFSC device, an increase of 57.8% compared to the control SILAR-QDSC device (2.89%).


Fig. 1a and b present the top view and cross-section view SEM images of the sample TiO2 NT/CdS/CdSe NF. The resulting nanotubes exhibit open pores and a smooth surface, indicative of the formation of the continuous film without pore blockage occurring. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) analysis confirmed the presence of Cd, S and Se elements in these areas (Fig. S2, ESI). TEM images of the TiO2 NT/CdS/CdSe sample clearly show a super thin coating on the surface of the TiO2 NTs (Fig. 1c). The HRTEM image in Fig. 1d shows a lattice spacing of 0.35 nm in the left part of the image, corresponding to the (101) plane of anatase TiO2. The 0.24 nm lattice fringes in the middle range of this image can be attributed to the (102) plane of the hexagonal phase of CdS, while the 0.22 nm fringes in the right part of the image are in line with the (110) plane of the hexagonal phase of CdSe. The XRD data in Fig. S3 (ESI) present further evidence of the formation of CdS and CdSe for these samples. These results demonstrate that uniform CdS/CdSe NFs have been successfully formed intimately and uniformly around the TiO2 NTs by ALD, resulting in core–sheath heterostructured composites.
ALD has been demonstrated to be a powerful tool in growing oxide films with high accuracy. It is of great interest in band gap tailoring within the quantum confinement dimension to control the growth of semiconductor NFs. To check whether ALD is suitable for fabrication of a II–VI film with such properties, the films with 200 cycles of CdS deposition and various cycles (200, 600, 1000, 1400 and 1800 cycles) of CdSe deposition were decorated onto the TiO2 NTs via ALD. Fig. 2a presents the UV-vis absorption spectra of these samples, showing the absorption onsets red-shifting progressively upon the increase of CdSe deposition. Therefore, the band gaps of the resulting NFs are highly tunable due to the quantum confinement effect, benefiting from the high level of control in film thickness via ALD. It is known that CdSe is a direct band gap semiconductor with a band gap of 1.74 eV for a bulk material. In this work, Tauc plots of (αhν)2versus hν are used to estimate the band gap of the CdSe films with various ALD cycles. The NFs with band gaps of 1.76, 1.81, 1.91, 1.97 and 2.00 eV were obtained. They are correspondingly denoted as B1.76, B1.81, B1.91, B1.97 and B2.00 for simplicity. Therefore, II–VI semiconductor nanofilms within the quantum confinement dimension have been fabricated via ALD in a highly controlled way.
The semiconductor-sensitized photovoltaic devices were then fabricated using the TiO2 NT/CdS/CdSe NFs as the photoanodes, Cu2S as the counter electrodes, and an aqueous solution containing 1 M S, 1 M Na2S·9H2O and 0.1 M NaOH in Milli-Q ultrapure water as the redox electrolyte solution, in a sandwiched fashion by inserting a hot-melt Surlyn film (Meltonix 1170-60, 60 μm, Solaronix SA) as a spacer. Methanol was intentionally missing in the electrolyte solution since it could act as a sacrificial electron donor to induce an erroneously high current density.Fig. 2c shows the photovoltaic performance of these solar cells, and the corresponding photovoltaic data are presented in Table S1 (ESI). It was found that the short circuit current (Jsc) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the solar cells were gradually improved with the decreasing band gaps of the TiO2 NTs/CdS/CdSe films, which are attributed to the extended light harvesting and enhanced light utilization. However, too much CdSe deposition (sample B1.76 in this work) causes the device performance to deteriorate, likely because of the heavy charge recombination within CdSe itself, arising from the increased CdSe/CdSe grain boundaries. To help understand this phenomenon, the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of these cells was measured over a range of wavelengths from 400 to 800 nm (Fig. 2d). The inset of the IPCE spectra of these solar cells shows progressive and obvious red-shifts with the decreasing of the band gaps of TiO2 NTs/CdS/CdSe films, matching well with the absorption spectra (Fig. 2a). These results indicate the important influence the varied band gaps of TiO2 NTs/CdS/CdSe NFs have on the photovoltaic performance. The B1.81 device presents the best performance with a Jsc of 11.54 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.47 V and a fill factor (FF) of 49.26%, yielding a PCE of 2.70%.
To further assess the applicability of the semiconductor NFs as the light harvester in sensitized solar cells, the photovoltaic devices were fabricated in a configuration of classic quantum dot-sensitized solar cells. For comparison purposes, the control device consisting of CdS/CdSe quantum dots as the sensitizer was also prepared by the classic SILAR approach to functionalize the TiO2 NTs according to a reported process, showing an absorption spectrum that matched well with the ALD-made sample (Fig. 3a). It is well-known that carrier scattering and recombination through surface defects may significantly compromise the electronic and optoelectronic properties of photoelectric devices, and the surface passivation of the QDs with ZnS can greatly enhance the performance of the QDSCs using CdS/CdSe as the sensitizers. The surface of QDs made by SILAR was therefore passivated by 2 cycles of ZnS via the classic SILAR approach, while the ALD-formed NFs were passivated by ZnS also, via an ALD process for comparison purposes. The photovoltaic characteristics of the resulting SILAR-QDSC device and the ALD-NFSC device, both subjected to ZnS passivation, are presented in Fig. 3b, and the parameters, including Jsc, Voc, FF, and PCE are summarized in Table 1. Comparatively, both devices show a very similar fill factor of ∼50%, while the ALD-NFSC device displays a slightly higher Voc of 0.52 V than the SILAR-QDSC device with a Voc of 0.49 V. It is notable that the ALD-NFSC device exhibits a significantly larger Jsc of 17.59 mA cm−2 than the SILAR-QDSC device with a Jsc of 11.72 mA cm−2, showing an improvement of 50.1%. A PCE of 4.56% was achieved for the ALD-NFSC device, out-performing the 2.89% PCE for the SILAR-QDSC device, with an enhancement of ∼57.8%. This is also significantly superior to the best results shown for TiO2 NTs-based QDSCs in the reported literature. Therefore, these results demonstrate the potential of semiconductor-sensitized solar cells by adopting new techniques in fabricating the light harvester with new structures, such as the NFs in this study.
Sample

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
SILAR-QDSC
0.49
11.72
50.31
2.89
ALD-NFSC
0.52
17.59
49.82
4.56
To gain insight into the high Jsc of the ALD-NFSC device, the IPCE was recorded for the two cells and shown in Fig. 3c. In spite of the high similarity in light absorption (Fig. 3a), the ALD-NFSC device clearly exhibits an enhanced response spanning the entire spectral region relative to the SILAR-QDSC device. The maximum IPCE of 85% for the ALD-NFSC device is reached, with only ∼55% for the SILAR-QDSC device. A high IPCE suggests that solar light can be efficiently converted to electrons, which is responsible for the significantly larger photocurrent density of the ALD-NFSC device than that of the SILAR-QDSC device. Another possible explanation for the larger Jsc of the ALD-NFSC device is that formation of the NF around TiO2 NTs leads to a larger junction area between the semiconductor absorber and the TiO2 NTs than the SILAR-QDSC device. Importantly, it is this junction that mainly contributes to the photocurrent generation in solar cells, and a larger junction area would hence be favorable for yielding a larger photocurrent. Moreover, ALD enables good interactions between the deposition layer and the substrate, resulting in an efficient and rapid charge transfer through the coupled semiconductors, and the grain boundaries (as recombination centers) could also be minimized in comparison with the aggregated QDs. Therefore, a significantly higher IPCE and a larger Jsc are obtained for the ALD-NFSC device than the SILAR-QDSC device.
The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) spectra represent the intrinsic interfacial charge transfer and charge transport kinetics in the sensitized photovoltaic system, and the semicircles in the Nyquist plots correspond to a middle frequency area (usually in the 1–100 Hz range) to reflect the charge transfer resistance at the electrode/electrolyte interface. Due to the same mechanism for the ALD-NFSC and SILAR-QDSC in this study, EIS was studied to assess the charge transfer and transport kinetics for both devices. Qualitatively, the semicircle for the ALD-NFSC electrode is much larger than that of the SILAR-QDSC electrode (Fig. 3d), indicating a larger electron transfer resistance at the TiO2-NF/electrolyte interface than at the of the TiO2-QD/electrolyte interface. Relative to the SILAR-QDSC electrode, the CdS/CdSe NF on the TiO2 NTs for the ALD-NFSC electrode could block, much more efficiently, the charge recombination at the interface of the electrode and electrolyte due to the fact that a portion of the surface of TiO2 NTs was in direct contact with the electrolyte solution for the SILAR-QDSC electrode (Fig. S4 and S5, ESI). This can be efficiently avoided for the ALD-NFSC device since the semiconductor nanofilms themselves could act as a blocking layer between the electron and hole species in the electrolyte solution. Moreover, the passivation of surface states of the CdSe film by ZnS made by ALD should be much better than that made via the double SILAR process, which cannot make a uniform distribution of the ZnS. Therefore, the recombination through the interface of the photoanode and the electrolyte was suppressed much more effectively by the ALD-NFs than the SILAR-QDs. This is an important reason that a higher IPCE was obtained for the ALD-NFSC device than the SILAR-QDSC device in this study.
In summary, anodized TiO2 nanotubes were used as the model substrate in growing staggered CdS/CdSe nanofilms by atomic layer deposition, resulting in core–sheath heterostructured TiO2 NT/semiconductor nanofilms. The band gaps of the staggered CdS/CdSe nanofilms were tailored in the range of 1.76–2.00 eV due to the high tunability of ALD in growing semiconductor films. The staggered CdS/CdSe nanofilm-functionalized TiO2 NTs were further employed as photoanodes to fabricate nanofilm-sensitized solar cells. In comparison with the control CdS/CdSe quantum dot-sensitized solar cells made by SILAR, the formation of the nanofilm significantly boosted the performance of the photovoltaic devices due to the remarkably improved photocurrent and the significantly decreased charge recombination. A PCE of 4.56% was achieved for the NFSC device, which is significantly superior to the controlled QDSC device with a PCE of 2.89% and outperforms all other QDSCs based on TiO2 NTs photoanodes, demonstrating the potential of semiconductor nanofilms as light harvesters in sensitized solar cells.
We acknowledge the “Hundred Talents Program”, the Chinese Academy of Sciences and the National Science Foundations of China (Grant No. NSFC 20873141) for the financial support.
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional experimental details and data are included. See DOI: 10.1039/c3cc49853k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014