 DOI: 10.1039/D1EE02124A
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5903-5910


Jinzhao
Qin
,

Zhihao
Chen
,

Pengqing
Bi
,

Yang
Yang
,

Jianqi
Zhang
*,

Ziyun
Huang
,

Zhixiang
Wei
,

Cunbin
An
,

Huifeng
Yao
,

Xiaotao
Hao
*,

Tao
Zhang
,

Yong
Cui
,

Ling
Hong
,

Chenyu
Liu
,

Yunfei
Zu
,

Chang
He
* and 

Jianhui
Hou
*

Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Polymer Physics and Chemistry, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: hjhzlz@iccas.ac.cn; hechang@iccas.ac.cn

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, P. R. China

School of Physics, State Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250100, P. R. China. E-mail: haoxt@sdu.edu.cn

Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing, 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: zhangjq@nanoctr.cn

Received
9th July 2021
, Accepted 6th September 2021
First published on 27th September 2021
For all small-molecule-based organic solar cells (SM-OSCs), it is very challenging to obtain a nanoscale bicontinuous network structure in the active layers, so their power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) still lag behind those of the polymer-based OSCs. In this work, highly efficient SM-OSCs based on a ternary bulk heterojunction (BHJ) layer of B1:BO-2Cl:BO-4Cl were constructed. Ternary cells with the three different BO-2Cl:BO-4Cl weight ratios exhibit higher PCEs than those of B1:BO-2Cl- and B1:BO-4Cl-based binary cells. The results obtained from the transient absorption, time-resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy and device physics analysis reveal that the ternary cell with the optimal composition (B1:BO-2Cl:BO-4Cl = 1:0.5:0.5 in weight ratio) exhibits faster charge transfer processes, suppressed geminate and non-geminate charge recombination, lower energetic disorder, and higher and more symmetric carrier mobilities than the two binary cells. The transmission electron microscopy measurement results reveal that the nanoscale bicontinuous interpenetrating network with a hierarchical branched structure can be fully evolved in the BHJ layer with the optimal ternary composition. As a result, the optimal ternary cell exhibits a PCE of 17.0% (certified to be 16.9%) and a fill factor of 0.78, which are the highest values obtained for SM-OSCs.

In recent years, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of organic solar cells (OSCs) has increased rapidly with the development of new material systems and device engineering. Compared with polymer solar cells, the all-small-molecule OSCs (ASM-OSCs) demonstrate low batch-to-batch differences and can more accurately express the relationship between the structure and performance due to the utilization of active layer materials possessing definite chemical structures. However, for ASM-OSCs, morphology regulation and optimization still face great challenges. Herein, we realized a fully evolved nanoscale bicontinuous interpenetrating network structure in the bulk heterojunction active layer by constructing B1:BO-2Cl:BO-4Cl ternary organic solar cells. Consequently, the ternary solar cells yield a PCE of 17.0%, owing to faster hole and electron transfer, suppressed geminate and non-geminate charge recombination, lower energetic disorder and enhanced carrier mobilities.


Bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells (OSCs) have attracted much attention due to their outstanding advantages in the fabrication of large-area flexible solar panels via a low-cost solution processing method. The typical BHJ active layers in OSCs consist of the organic electron donors and acceptors. In order to achieve efficient carrier generation and transport so as to realize excellent photovoltaic performance, the BHJ layers should not only meet the requirements for optoelectronic properties, but also need to form the ideal phase separation morphology. For instance, a nanoscale phase separation between the donor and acceptor is needed to provide sufficient interfaces for exciton dissociation and suppress geminate recombination; the donor and acceptor must form their own continuous phases, and further construct a bicontinuous interpenetrating network structure, which is essential for the hole and electron transport; what is more, the crystallinities and phase purities of the donor and acceptor should also be seriously considered. Generally speaking, small molecule and polymeric semiconductors can be employed in the BHJ layers. In comparison with polymers, small molecules have the great advantage of highly tunable optoelectronic and morphological properties by molecular design and low batch-to-batch synthetic variation due to their well-defined chemical structures. Therefore, great efforts have been devoted to promoting the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of small-molecule OSCs (SM-OSCs). However, it is difficult to obtain a bicontinuous network in SM-OSCs using a solution coating process, which limits the improvement of their PCEs. At present, in state-of-the-art OSCs which are based on polymer donors and small molecule acceptors, PCEs over 18% have been realized, while the highest PCEs of SM-OSCs are still below 16% and it is very challenging to further improve the PCEs.

Morphology control of the BHJ layers has been recognized as the key to improving the photovoltaic performance of SM-OSCs, and great efforts have been devoted to modulating the morphological characteristics of the BHJ layers, leading to significant improvements in the PCE. For instance, Lu et al. realized a PCE of 13.6% by designing a series of small molecule donors and optimizing the phase separation size and crystallinity in the BHJ layers; Zhang et al. alleviated the phase separation effect and improved the domain purity of the DRTB-T:IDIC-based BHJ layer by utilizing PC71BM as the third component, resulting in a PCE of 10.48%; Zhou et al. added PC71BM into the BTR:NITI-based BHJ layer to balance the crystallization and phase separation and achieved a PCE of 13.63%; most recently, Li et al. enhanced the crystallinity of the ZnP-TBO:6TIC-based BHJ layer by adopting 4TIC as the third component, and realized a PCE of 15.88%, the highest value obtained for the SM-OSCs. From the point of view of photovoltaic characteristics, it is very hard to simultaneously realize high FF and short circuit current density (JSC) in SM-OSCs, which limits further improvement of the PCE. From the aspect of morphology control, although these works successfully demonstrated that the phase separation, domain purity and crystallinity can be effectively modulated, the formation of the bicontinuous interpenetrating network is still a big problem.
In this contribution, we constructed highly efficient SM-OSCs based on a ternary BHJ layer of B1:BO-2Cl:BO-4Cl. B1 is a small molecule donor; BO-2Cl and BO-4Cl are small molecule non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs). By differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements, we confirmed that BO-2Cl and BO-4Cl form an alloy-like phase. For the binary cells based on B1:BO-2Cl and B1:BO-4Cl, the PCEs are 13.7% and 15.2%, respectively, while the optimal ternary cell shows a significantly enhanced PCE. We systematically analyzed the reasons for the enhanced PCE of the ternary cell. Since the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels of the BO-2Cl:BO-4Cl alloys are between those of BO-2Cl and BO-4Cl, the open circuit voltages (VOCs) of the ternary cells are between those of the B1:BO-2Cl- and B1:BO-4Cl-based binary cells. By measuring the temperature dependent zero-field mobility, we found that the energetic disorder of the ternary cell is significantly smaller. The results obtained from the transient absorption (TA) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectroscopies demonstrate that the hole and electron transfer rates are faster in the ternary cell. The morphological measurements by grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) reveal that the face-on dominated molecular orientation with strong π–π interaction and the nanoscale bicontinuous phase separation can be simultaneously formed in the ternary blend. Benefiting from these favorable characteristics, the PCE of the best ternary cell reaches 17.0%, which is the highest value obtained for SM-OSCs.

The chemical structures of B1, BO-2Cl and BO-4Cl are shown in Fig. 1a. As a donor material, the absorption spectrum of the B1 film shows an onset of 700 nm, corresponding to an optical band gap (Eoptg) of 1.77 eV, which is complementary to those of BO-4Cl and BO-2Cl. In comparison with BO-4Cl, less chlorine substituents are used in the end groups of BO-2Cl, resulting in the weakened intramolecular charge transfer effect. As a result, the Eoptg of BO-2Cl is slightly larger than that of BO-4Cl. In electrochemical cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements, BO-2Cl shows a HOMO level of −5.61 eV and a LUMO level of −3.69 eV, which are obviously higher than those of BO-4Cl. More importantly, as the chemical structures of BO-2Cl and BO-4Cl are very similar, the miscibility between them will be very good and they may tend to form an alloy-like phase when blended together.

We carried out DSC measurements to prove the formation of the alloy phase in the BO-2Cl:BO-4Cl blend in which a representative weight ratio of 1:1 is employed. As shown in Fig. 1b, the blend shows a sharp endothermic process at 279.2 °C in DSC measurements, which is different from that of the two ingredients, and such a phenomenon was used as an indicator of the alloy-like phase in the blend. As shown in Fig. 1c, d and Fig. S1, S2 (ESI), the absorption and photoluminescence (PL) spectra, HOMO and LUMO of this blend film are between those of the neat films of BO-2Cl and BO-4Cl. We carried out the GIWAXS measurements to investigate the crystallinity of BO-2Cl:BO-4Cl and the two neat films. As shown in Fig. S3 (ESI), the molecular orientation as well as the characteristic scattering patterns of the two neat films are quite similar, except that the π–π distance in BO-4Cl is slightly smaller than that in BO-2Cl (3.59 versus 3.63 Å). For the blend, the π–π distance is 3.63 Å. Moreover, there are three diffraction peaks for BO-2Cl and one peak for BO-4Cl in the range of q < 0.5 Å−1, whereas two diffraction peaks are observed in the blend. Therefore, an alloy-like composite is formed in the blend, and the basic properties of the blend are between those of BO-2Cl and BO-4Cl.
Initially, the B1:BO-2Cl- and B1:BO-4Cl-based binary cells and the ternary cells based on B1:BO-2Cl:BO-4Cl were fabricated by adopting a device architecture of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/PNDI-F3N-Br/Ag. The thickness of the active layers is approximately 100 nm. For all of the cells, the overall donor:acceptor (D/A) weight ratio is 1:1. The detailed fabrication procedures of the cells are provided in the ESI. The current–density–voltage curves are shown in Fig. 2a and the detailed photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table 1. The B1:BO-2Cl-based binary cell yields a PCE of 13.7% with a VOC of 0.86 V, a JSC of 21.87 mA cm−2 and an FF of 0.73, and the B1:BO-4Cl-based binary cell yields a PCE of 15.2% with a VOC of 0.82 V, a JSC of 25.39 mA cm−2 and an FF of 0.73. In comparison with the B1:BO-4Cl-based binary cell, although the VOC of the B1:BO-2Cl-based cell is higher, the PCE is obviously lower due to its limited JSC. As shown in Fig. 2b for the external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves of the cells, the outstanding JSC of the B1:BO-4Cl-based cell should be ascribed to its relatively broader photo-response range and higher EQE.
Device

V
OC [V]

J
SC [mA cm−2]
FF
PCE

μ
h × 10−3 [cm2 V−1 s−1]

μ
e × 10−3 [cm2 V−1 s−1]

μ
h/μe

a The values are the calculated current densities using EQE curves.
b The average PCEs are calculated from more than 10 independent cells.

B1:BO-4Cl 1:1
0.82
25.39 (24.56)
0.73
15.2 (15.0 ± 0.1)
2.2 ± 0.43
0.69 ± 0.13
3.2
B1:BO-4Cl:BO-2Cl 1:0.7:0.3
0.83
25.70 (24.78)
0.76
16.2 (16.0 ± 0.2)
1.6 ± 0.18
1.1 ± 0.20
1.5
B1:BO-4Cl:BO-2Cl 1:0.5:0.5
0.84
26.05 (25.31)
0.78
17.0 (16.7 ± 0.2)
2.5 ± 0.38
1.9 ± 0.34
1.3
B1:BO-4Cl:BO-2Cl 1:0.3:0.7
0.85
25.41 (24.50)
0.74
16.0 (15.8 ± 0.1)
1.8 ± 0.25
0.75 ± 0.15
2.4
B1:BO-2Cl 1:1
0.86
21.87 (20.88)
0.73
13.7 (13.4 ± 0.3)
1.2 ± 0.27
0.47 ± 0.07
2.6
By introducing BO-2Cl as the third component into the B1:BO-4Cl binary cell, we found that with increasing BO-2Cl content, i.e., when the weight ratio of BO-2Cl:BO-4Cl changes from 0.3:0.7 to 0.5:0.5 and then to 0.7:0.3, the VOC gradually increases, while the maxima of JSC and FF are obtained at the weight ratio of 0.5:0.5. As a result, the ternary cells with a composition of 1:0.5:0.5 for B1:BO-2Cl:BO-4Cl give much higher PCEs than those of the two types of binary cells, and for the best ternary cell, a PCE of 17.0% is recorded, with a VOC of 0.84 V, a JSC of 26.05 mA cm−2 and an FF of 0.78. As shown in Fig. 2c and Fig. S4 (ESI), the best cell was certified to have a PCE of 16.9% by the National Institute of Metrology (NIM), which is the highest value obtained for SM-OSCs.
To reveal the origin of the improved VOC in the ternary cell, we analyzed the radiative and non-radiative energy losses of the cells according to the established method. First, the energy gaps (Egs) of the cells are determined according to the intersections of the normalized EQE and electroluminescence (EL) spectra of the corresponding cells, as shown in Fig. S5 (ESI). To calculate the energy losses in detail, we tested the highly sensitive-EQE and electroluminescence quantum efficiency (EQEEL) of the binary and optimal ternary cells, and the detailed curves and results are shown in Fig. S6 and Table S1 (ESI). The radiative energy losses caused by the absorption above Eg (ΔE1) in all three cells are 0.26 eV, and the radiative energy losses caused by the absorption below Eg (ΔE2) are calculated to be between 0.06 and 0.10 eV. The non-radiative energy loss (ΔE3) of the ternary cell is 0.22 eV, which is between those of the two binary cells. Therefore, the overall energy losses of the three cells are very similar, and the higher VOC of the ternary cell than the B1:BO-4Cl cell is due to its larger Eg and lower non-radiative energy loss. As shown in Fig. 2b, the optimal ternary cell shows almost the same response range as that of the B1:BO-4Cl-based binary cell, while the EQE of the ternary cell is obviously higher in the range from 520 to 900 nm, which contributes to its higher JSC.
As the ternary cell shows a distinctly higher FF of 0.78, which is the main reason for its outstanding PCE, we studied the charge recombination in the cells. Referring to the previous work, the bimolecular recombination and the geminate recombination can be estimated using the power-law relations of JSC ∝ Iα and VOC ∝ nkT/q ln(I) as a function of incident light intensity, where k, T and q are the Boltzmann constant, temperature in Kelvin and elementary charge, respectively. As shown in Fig. 2d and e, α and n of the optimized ternary cell are 0.98 and 1.17, respectively, which are closer to 1 than the corresponding values of the two binary cells, indicating that the bimolecular and geminate recombination is effectively suppressed in the ternary cell. We further investigated the trap-assisted recombination in the cells. As shown in Fig. 2f for transient photocurrent measurement under a 200 μs light-emitting diode pulse, the ternary cell shows a faster turn-off dynamics than the binary cells, implying that less charge is trapped in the ternary cell.
We measured the hole and electron mobilities (μh and μe) of the binary and ternary blends using the space-charge-limits-current (SCLC) method (Fig. S7, ESI). As shown in Fig. 2g and Table 1, for the two binary blends based on B1:BO-2Cl and B1:BO-4Cl, the μhs are more than two times higher than their μes. Compared to the two binary blends, the μhs of the ternary blends are quite similar, while their μes are significantly improved. For the optimal ternary blend, the μh and μe are very symmetric, which is the main reason for the well-restrained bimolecular recombination.
In order to gain more insights into the enhanced electron transport capability of the optimal ternary blend, we evaluated the electron energetic disorder (σe) of the optimal ternary blend and compared it with those of the two binary blends. The electron energetic disorder is estimated by temperature-dependent electron transport measurements using the Gauss disorder model (GDM) as shown in eqn (1),
(1)
where
k, T, μ0, β, F and μ∞ are the Boltzmann constant, Kelvin temperature, zero-field mobility, Poole–Frenkel slope, applied electric field and the y-intercept from the plot of μ0versus (1000/T)2. Fig. 2h shows the zero-field mobilities of the films as a function of the ambient temperature and the linear fit to the experimental data (Fig. S8, ESI). The calculated σe values for the B1:BO-2Cl, B1:BO-4Cl and the ternary blends are 72, 66 and 52 meV, respectively. In GDM, the charge carriers are transported through a molecularly disordered material by hopping through the Gaussian distributed density of states (DOS). As shown in Fig. 2i, the higher μe for the ternary cell can be ascribed to the lower energetic disorder and the narrower DOS. Therefore, the much higher FF of the ternary cell can be attributed to the lower geminate and non-geminate recombination.

TA spectroscopy was performed to investigate the detailed dynamics of hole transfer in the B1:BO-2Cl and B1:BO-4Cl binary blends and the optimal B1:BO-2Cl:BO-4Cl ternary blends. To reduce the exciton–exciton annihilation, the pump fluence was maintained at a low level of ∼2 μJ cm−2. The pump was set at 850 nm to selectively excite the acceptor molecules. For the binary films (Fig. S9, ESI), BO-2Cl exhibits the ground state bleaching (GSB) signals at approximately 650 and 736 nm, and two excited-state absorption (ESA) signals at approximately 900 nm and 1400 nm; BO-4Cl shows the GSB signals centered at 660 and 758 nm and the ESA signals at 900 and 1450 nm. The ESA bands at 900 nm originate from the localized exciton, and the bands at 1450 nm can be attributed to the delocalized charge transfer state that triggers the hole transfer. We investigated hole transfer dynamics of the ternary film with the TA characterization, as shown in Fig. 3a and b. The fast-rise of acceptor GSB bands at 650–750 nm, the localized exciton signal at 900 nm and the charge transfer state signal at 1300–1500 nm can be directly distinguished. Since the TA features of the neat donor and acceptors show inevitable overlapping (Fig. S10, ESI), the donor GSB signals in the blend films are extracted at 613 nm for a clear comparison. Fig. 3c shows the kinetics of the hole transfer channel. The acceptor excitons are generated immediately after the excitation and transfer to the intermediate charge transfer state within a timescale of less than 0.5 ps. Meanwhile, the donor GSB signal exhibits a slow accumulation with the peak value at approximately 3 ps. We further compared the dynamics of the charge transfer state bands and the donor GSB signals as shown in Fig. 3d and e, respectively. For the ternary film, the intermediate charge transfer state possesses a fast decay lifetime of 7.8 ps in contrast to 14.6 ps and 9.3 ps in the B1:BO-2Cl and B1:BO-4Cl films, respectively. Correspondingly, the B1 GSB signal in the ternary film shows a fast increase for 0.16 ps. This value indicates that the two blend films incorporated with BO-4Cl have a faster hole transfer dynamics compared to the B1:BO-2Cl-based blend, and the cooperation of BO-2Cl and BO-4Cl in the ternary film can effectively promote the hole transfer.
The electron transfer dynamics were investigated through TRPL spectroscopy. First, we measured PL spectra of the binary films and the optimal ternary film, and the normalized spectra are shown in Fig. S11a (ESI). The peaks centered at 705 nm can be attributed to the emission from B1 molecules, and the peaks located at 900 nm are from BO-2Cl and BO-4Cl. Of note, the relative PL intensity at 705 nm quenches obviously from the B1:BO-2Cl to B1:BO-4Cl films, and the ternary film exhibits the lowest intensity. This finding indicates that the electron transfer dynamics from the donor to acceptors are quite different in the three blends. The corresponding TRPL decay profiles of the blends and the neat B1 film are shown in Fig. S11b (ESI). The decay curves under the excitation pulse at 400 nm were probed at 705 nm. The results were fitted by exponential functions and the fitting parameters are summarized in Table S2 (ESI). The B1 exciton in the neat film has the slowest decay kinetics with an average lifetime (τm) of 259 ps. When blended with BO-2Cl and BO-4Cl, the PL lifetimes of B1 decrease to 132 ps and 84 ps, respectively. In the ternary film, the B1 PL lifetime further reduces to 60 ps. These results indicate that BO-4Cl is favorable for the electron transfer in the blend films rather than BO-2Cl, and the coexistence of the two acceptors in the ternary blend can accelerate the electron transfer. Putting the TA and TRPL results together, the faster photo-induced charge transfer occurs in the optimal ternary blend, which contributes to the lower geminate recombination and is one of the reasons for the outstanding FF of the corresponding cell.
The crystallinity and molecular orientation of the blend systems were also examined by GIWAXS (Fig. 4a–d). The neat B1 film shows an edge-on dominated orientation, with the lamellar scattering peaks (100), (200) and (300) in the out-of-plane (OOP) direction and a π–π stacking peak at 1.72 Å−1 in the in-plane (IP) direction, corresponding to a π–π distance of 3.65 Å (see Fig. S12, ESI). In the B1:BO-2Cl blend film, an annular (100) scattering pattern attributed to the lamellar packing of B1 is observed in the low q range (q = 0.32 Å−1), implying a lower ratio of face-on orientation. In the B1:BO-4Cl blend film, the (100) scattering patterns can only be observed in the IP direction, indicating that the face-on molecular orientation of B1 is more dominating in the B1:BO-4Cl blend film than in the B1:BO-2Cl blend film. This indicates that the B1 and the BO-4Cl molecules have a relatively stronger interaction as compared to the BO-2Cl counterpart. As is known, the face-on orientation is favorable for charge transport across the BHJ blends, which explains the higher hole and electron mobilities of the B1:BO-4Cl film than those of the B1:BO-2Cl film. As shown in Fig. 4b, the whole 2D-GIWAXS image of the ternary blend film is very similar to that of the B1:BO-4Cl blend film. Therefore, we are able to conclude that although the feed ratios of BO-2Cl and BO-4Cl in the optimal ternary blend film are equal, BO-4Cl plays a main role in the molecular packing of the optimal ternary blend film.
We used atomic force microscopy (AFM) and TEM to study the phase separation morphologies of the blend films. As shown in the AFM images (Fig. S13, ESI), the three blend films based on B1:BO-2Cl, B1:BO-2Cl:BO-4Cl and B1:BO-4Cl show very smooth surfaces with root mean square roughness values below 1 nm. As shown in Fig. 4e–g for the TEM images, the dark and bright regions can be distinguished in the three blend films, indicating that phase separation occurs in bulk. As the elemental compositions of the donor and the acceptors are quite similar, the bright and dark regions might be attributed to either the donor or the acceptor domain, respectively. For the B1:BO-2Cl blend film, the dark and bright regions are quite large and the boundary between them is blurred; such a phase separation morphology may cause insufficient charge separation and strong charge recombination. For the B1:BO-4Cl blend film, the bright and dark regions are much smaller than those in the B1:BO-2Cl blend film and the boundary becomes clear; what is more, an irregular mosaic-like pattern forms in the whole image. The phase separation morphology of the B1:BO-4Cl film is good for charge separation in terms of the phase size but unfavorable for carrier transport because the bicontinuous network has not fully evolved. For the optimal ternary blend film as shown in the TEM image of Fig. 4f, the boundary is very sharp and the dark and bright regions form a bicontinuous interpenetrating network structure. As shown in Fig. S14 (ESI), the branched hierarchical structures can be clearly observed for the dark regions, which makes the distances between the dark and bright regions below a few tens of nanometers. Clearly, the phase separation morphology in the ternary blend film is not only ideal for efficient charge separation but also favorable for carrier transport. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first time to observe such a fully evolved nanoscale bicontinuous network structure in SM-OSCs, which is the main reason for the outstanding FF of the optimal ternary cell.

In summary, we realized a nanoscale bicontinuous network structure in the all-small-molecule-based BHJ layers and fabricated highly efficient SM-OSCs. An alloy-like composite can be formed by blending two acceptors, BO-2Cl and BO-4Cl, which have similar chemical structures, and the basic properties of the alloy-like blend are between the two acceptors. For the ternary SM-OSCs based on B1 and the two acceptors, enhanced PCEs can be achieved. Morphological studies reveal that the favorable nanoscale bicontinuous interpenetrating network structure can be fully evolved in the BHJ layer with the optimal ternary composition. As a result, the ternary cell exhibits faster hole and electron transfer processes, suppressed geminate and non-geminate charge recombination, lower energetic disorder, as well as higher and more symmetric carrier mobilities than the two binary cells based on B1:BO-2Cl and B1:BO-4Cl. Therefore, the optimal ternary cell exhibits a PCE of 17.0% (certified to be 16.9%) and an FF of 0.78, which are the highest values obtained for SM-OSCs. Our results demonstrate that the fully evolved nanoscale bicontinuous networks observed in the highly efficient polymer-based OSCs can also be formed in SM-OSCs, and with further improvement in the material design and device engineering, the SM-OSCs can realize even higher PCE values.


J. H. and C. H. conceived the idea and designed the experiments. J. Q. performed the fabrication, measurement, and analysis of the devices. Y. C. and L. H. helped in the study of device data. J. Z. and Z. W. conducted the GIWAXS measurements and data analysis. T. Z. and C. L. provided AFM images. H. Z. carried out DSC measurements. Y. Y. conducted the TEM measurements. H. Y. and Y. Z. helped in absorption and energy level measurements. C. A. helped to supply the donor material. X. H., Z. C., and P. B. conducted the TA and TRPL measurements and data analysis. J. Q., C. H., J. Z., X. H., and J. H. prepared the manuscript. All authors discussed and commented on the manuscript. J. H. supervised the project.


There are no conflicts to declare.


C. H. thanks the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (No. 21734008, 51873217). J. H. acknowledges the financial support from the NSFC (No. 5703228 and 51773047). J. Q. acknowledges the financial support from NSFC (No. 51773047). X. H. acknowledges the Major Program of the Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province (ZR2019ZD43). Y. C. thanks the Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (2019BMS20005).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee02124a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021