 DOI: 10.1039/C6CP02600A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 15791-15797


Zhaolai
Chen
,

Xiaohang
Du
,

Gan
Jin
,

Qingsen
Zeng
,

Fangyuan
Liu
 and 

Bai
Yang
*

State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials, College of Chemistry, Jilin University, Changchun, 130012, P. R. China. E-mail: byangchem@jlu.edu.cn

Received
19th April 2016
, Accepted 13th May 2016
First published on 17th May 2016
Hybrid solar cells (HSCs) based on aqueous polymers and nanocrystals are attractive due to their environmental friendliness and cost effectiveness. In this study, HSCs are fabricated from a series of water-soluble polymers with different highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) levels and nanocrystals with different Fermi levels. We demonstrate that the working principle of the aqueous-processed HSCs follows a p–n junction instead of a type-II heterojunction. The function of the polymer is to provide an interface dipole which can improve the build-in potential of the HSCs. Subsequently, the aqueous-processed HSCs are optimized following a p–n junction and an improved PCE of 5.41% is achieved, which is the highest for aqueous-processed HSCs. This study will provide instructive guidelines for the development of aqueous-processed HSCs.

The limited resources of fossil fuels and the world-wide growing energy demand have caused a requirement for inexpensive renewable energy sources, which has stimulated scientific research into efficient, low-cost photovoltaic devices. Polymer–fullerene solar cells (PSCs) are regarded as the most promising candidates because of their light weight and mechanical flexibility, and the potential for low-cost production. One limiting factor of these solar cells is that the fullerene acceptor shows a negligible photo-absorption contribution. Therefore, inorganic nanocrystals with an adjustable absorption property are proposed to replace fullerene and fabricate polymer–nanocrystal HSCs. Potential advantages of the inorganic nanocrystals include high carrier mobility, superior structure stability and facile exciton dissociation. In the past decade, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of HSCs has been improved progressively by optimizing the device structure and designing novel materials. Recently, HSCs based on water-soluble polymers and nanocrystals have been developed as they can provide energy in an environmentally friendly way.

In general, type-II heterojunctions are believed to be the working principle for bulk heterojunction (BHJ) HSCs due to their similarity to PSCs. In this case, the open-circuit voltage (Voc) should be determined by the energy difference between the conduction band (CB) of the nanocrystals and the HOMO level of the polymers. Recently, Ma et al. and You et al. showed that the Voc was independent of the HOMO level of the polymer in HSCs with a double-layer structure. A Schottky junction was believed to be formed between the nanocrystals and their corresponding electrode. In fact, for HSCs with a BHJ structure, in addition to the type-II junction between the polymer and nanocrystals, a junction between the nanocrystals and electrode also exists. Therefore, it is interesting to discuss which junction determines the working principle of HSCs with a BHJ structure.
In this study, HSCs are fabricated from water-soluble polymer and nanocrystals. The investigation into the dependence of the Voc on the HOMO level of the polymer and the Fermi level of the nanocrystals shows that the aqueous-processed HSCs follow a p–n junction instead of the type-II junction. Subsequently, the aqueous-processed HSCs are optimized following a p–n junction and an improved PCE of 5.41% is achieved.

CdTe nanocrystals were prepared according to our previous study. In a typical synthesis, 0.28 mL of aqueous NaHTe (2/3 M) solution was injected into 12.5 mM of N2–saturated CdCl2 solution in the presence of mercaptoethylamine (MA) in the pH range of 5.70–5.74. The molar ratio of Cd/MA/Te was set as 1:2.4:0.2. The resultant precursor solution was refluxed for 60 min to maintain the growth of the CdTe nanocrystals. After that, the nanocrystal solution was concentrated and centrifuged at 6000 rpm for 5 min with the addition of isopropanol to remove ligands and superfluous salts. Subsequently, the nanocrystals were dried in a vacuum oven and then dissolved in water.


The precursors of poly(p-phenylenevinylene) (PPV) and its derivatives were synthesized based on Wessling polymerization processes. Take PPV as an example: p-dichlorobenzene was reacted with tetrahydrothiophene (molar ratio of 1:4) in methanol at 50 °C for 20 h. The product was purified by precipitating the condensed solution on cold acetone. The obtained product was dissolved in methanol (0.3 M) and an equal amount of NaOH was added dropwise at 0 °C under N2. After that, the polymerization process was maintained for 1 h. The aqueous solutions of the polymer precursors were dialyzed in the refrigerator for one week.


The ITO substrate was cleaned using chloroform, acetone, isopropanol and ethanol before drying under a N2 flow. Next, the ITO substrate was immediately coated with a TiO2 precursor at a speed of 2000 rpm. Afterwards, the samples were annealed in air at 450 °C to convert the TiO2 precursor into anatase-phase TiO2. The active layer was fabricated by spin-coating the aqueous solution at a speed of 700 rpm for 60 s in ambient conditions, and subsequently annealed at the desired temperature in the glove box. For the CdTe nanocrystal layer, the annealing time is 5 min; for the blending layer, the annealing time is 30 min. This process was repeated to obtain the desired thickness. Finally, a 5 nm MoO3 film and a 60 nm Au electrode were evaporated on top of the active layer through a mask at a pressure below 10−5 Torr, leading to an active area of 5 mm2.


Current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured by a computer-controlled Keithley 2400 source meter measurement system under 100 mW cm−2 illumination with an AM 1.5G filter. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was recorded under illumination of monochromatic light from a xenon lamp using a monochromator (Jobin Yvon, TRIAX 320). The transient absorption (TA) setup consisted of 400 nm pump pulses doubled from 800 nm laser pulses (∼100 fs duration, 250 Hz repetition rate) generated from a mode-locked Ti:sapphire laser/amplifier system (Solstice, Spectra-Physics) and broadband white-light probe pulses generated from a 2 mm-thick wafer. The TA data were collected by a fiber coupled spectrometer connected to a computer. The energy band value was measured in an integrated ultrahigh vacuum system equipped with a multitechnique surface analysis system (VG ESCALAB MK II spectrometer) for ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). UPS was measured with a He(I) (21.2 eV) line using a negative bias voltage applied to the samples in order to shift the spectra from the spectrometer threshold. The contact angles were measured with a commercial contact angle system (DataPhysics, OCA 20) at ambient temperature.



Fig. 1a shows the device configuration of the aqueous-processed HSCs in which ITO is the cathode and Au is the anode. The possible working junctions in these devices and the corresponding theoretical Voc are illustrated in Fig. 1b. Two possible working junctions exist in the devices: one is the polymer–nanocrystal type-II junction and the other is the nanocrystal-TiO2 p–n junction. If the type-II junction is the working junction, the Voc should be determined by the difference between the CB of the nanocrystals and the HOMO level of the polymer. If the p–n junction is the working junction, the Voc should be determined by the difference between the Fermi level of the nanocrystals and TiO2.

In order to make a sound comparison, polymers with different HOMO levels and nanocrystals with different Fermi levels are selected. Fig. 2a shows the chemical structure of the polymers and their precursors: PPV, poly(methoxy-1,4-phenylenevinylene) (MPPV) and poly[2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene] (MEHPPV). As shown in Fig. 2b, the introduction of alkoxy slightly broadens the absorption range and narrows the bandgap. The HOMO energy level is measured by the UPS characterization (Fig. 2c and d) and the Fermi level is determined by the difference between the incident photon energy (21.2 eV) and the high binding energy onset which is the intersection of the baseline with the tangent line of the spectra. The HOMO level is determined by the sum of the Fermi level and the low binding energy onset. Therefore, the HOMO levels of PPV, MPPV and MEHPPV are determined as −5.68 eV, −5.28 eV and −5.05 eV, respectively. CdTe nanocrystals are frequently used in aqueous-processed HSCs. CdTe is usually p-type due to the existence of a Cd2+ vacancy during annealing. The introduction of Se into the CdTe nanocrystals may reduce the Cd2+ vacancy due to the stronger interaction between Cd and Se.Fig. 2e shows the UPS results of the annealed TiO2, CdTe, CdTe0.9Se0.1 and CdTe0.6Se0.4 films. The Fermi level of TiO2 is −4.12 eV which is close to its conduction band. This indicates that TiO2 has highly n-type doping. Besides, the Fermi level of the nanocrystals experiences an upwards shift as the Se content increases.
In general, high-efficiency HSCs are obtained with a low polymer content (3–6 wt%) which is quite different from the polymer–fullerene solar cells. Therefore, the polymer/nanocrystal ratio adopted in this study is low, which is similar to our previous study. In this case, the main photo-absorption of the aqueous-processed HSCs is contributed from the CdTe nanocrystals. Fig. S1 (ESI) shows the atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of the CdTe nanocrystal layer and the polymer–CdTe nanocrystal hybrid films coated on ITO. The PPV–CdTe and MPPV–CdTe hybrid films show a uniform CdTe nanocrystal phase and polymer phase, and the corresponding root-mean-square (RMS) values are 6.701 nm and 5.485 nm, respectively. In contrast, the MEHPPV–CdTe hybrid film shows a serious phase separation and obvious cracks with an RMS value of 22.859 nm. Fig. 3a shows the fluorescence spectra of the pure polymer and polymer–nanocrystal blend films. The fluorescence quenching of the polymer with the addition of the CdTe nanocrystals provided evidence of electron transfer from the polymer to the CdTe nanocrystals. Fig. 3b shows the transient absorption (TA) decay spectra of pure CdTe nanocrystals and polymer–nanocrystal blending films excited at 800 nm and detected at 825 nm which corresponds to the interband transition of CdTe. In comparison with the reference quartz/CdTe, the TA decay spectra of the polymer–nanocrystal blends exhibit an accelerated decay rate which implies the occurrence of hole transfer from the CdTe nanocrystals to the polymer. As the HOMO level of the polymer shifts upwards, the TA spectra exhibit a distinctly accelerated decay rate, which means an increased hole transfer yield occurs. The fluorescence and TA spectra show that the aqueous-processed polymer–nanocrystal blends exhibit the characteristic charge transfer of the type-II junction. Fig. 3c shows the J–V curves of the aqueous-processed HSCs with different polymers under 1 Sun of simulated AM 1.5G solar radiation. Despite the different HOMO levels of the polymer, similar Voc values in the range of 0.56–0.60 V are obtained. Inserting one pure CdTe nanocrystal layer between the TiO2 and blending layers can lower the leakage current, thus slightly increasing the Voc to be in the range of 0.60–0.66 V (Fig. 3d). The independence of the Voc on the HOMO level of the polymer implies that the type-II junction should not be the main working junction in aqueous-processed HSCs.
Since the aqueous-processed HSCs do not follow the type-II junction, the p–n junction between the nanocrystals and TiO2 may play a dominant role. To confirm this, the polymer is fixed and combined with the nanocrystals with different Fermi levels. Fig. 4a shows the J–V curves of the aqueous-processed HSCs with different nanocrystals. The introduction of Se reduces the difference of Fermi levels between the nanocrystals and TiO2, thus decreasing the build-in electric field (Vbi) and Voc of the devices. To measure the Vbi, capacitance–voltage analysis is conducted in the dark at a frequency of 1000 Hz (Fig. 4b). The Vbi can be calculated based on the Mott–Schottky equation:
1/C2 = 2(Vbi − V)/(A2qεrε0N)
where
C is the capacitance, V is the applied voltage, A is the device area, q represents the elementary charge, εr is the relative dielectric constant, ε0 is the permittivity of vacuum, and N is the net doping density. The intercept of the fitted line with the horizontal axis represents the Vbi. From the plot, it is clear that the Vbi also decreases with an increase of Se content, which is consistent with the change of Voc. The dependence of Voc on the Fermi level of the nanocrystals indicates that the p–n junction should be the working junction in aqueous-processed HSCs.

As shown in Fig. 3d, the HSCs exhibit distinctly higher Voc than the pure CdTe nanocrystal solar cells. This phenomenon may be attributed to the interface dipole formed between the polymer and nanocrystals. To confirm the formation of the interface dipole, UPS characterization of the polymer with different thicknesses on the CdTe nanocrystals is conducted and MPPV is selected as the example. The thickness of the MPPV films is controlled by the concentration of the solution and measured by UV-visible absorption spectra. MPPV films with a thickness of larger than 5 nm can be precisely measured by the profilometer. Through using larger thicknesses as a reference, the small thickness can be obtained according to Lambert–Beer law by measuring the absorbance. As shown in Fig. 5a, a very thin MPPV film (0.2 nm) can obviously change the work function of the CdTe nanocrystal film. As the thickness of MPPV increases, the work function increases gradually. This indicates the formation of an interface dipole pointing from the CdTe nanocrystals to MPPV. However, it's worth noting that the dipole should counteract itself in the polymer–nanocrystal blend as the direction of the dipole is irregular. In principle, the Vbi can be strengthened when the interface dipole is in line with the electrical field of the p–n junction. Therefore, we assume that an MPPV-rich domain may exist on the surface of the hybrid blend film due to the large difference of surface energy between the polymer and the nanocrystals. To confirm this point, the vertical distribution of the components in the blending film is monitored by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) depth profiling. As the Cd and Te peaks in the XPS spectra are from the CdTe nanocrystals and the C peak is mainly from MPPV, the MPPV/CdTe ratio can be evaluated by measuring the content of the three elements. Fig. 5b presents the element content versus the etching time for the 80 nm MPPV–CdTe film on a silicon substrate. The content of C element is high at the top surface. As the etching time increases, the content of C element decreases dramatically and subsequently remains constant. As a consequence, the MPPV-rich domain should exist on the surface of the hybrid blend film while the internal MPPV is distributed homogeneously. Considering that MPPV and the CdTe nanocrystals exhibit different hydrophilicity, a contact angle measurement is adopted to further confirm the existence of the superficial MPPV-rich domain. As shown in Fig. 5c–e, the contact angles of the MPPV, CdTe, and MPPV–CdTe films are 96°, 61° and 97°, respectively. The similar hydrophilicity of the MPPV–CdTe and MPPV films implies that the main component on the surface of the MPPV–CdTe film is MPPV, which is consistent with the XPS result.
To confirm that the interface dipole is mainly contributed by superficial MPPV, HSCs with a double-layer structure are fabricated. Adjusting the thickness of MPPV will change the coverage of MPPV on the CdTe nanocrystal film, which may influence the interface dipole and thus the Voc. Fig. 5f shows the J–V curves of the HSCs with different thicknesses of MPPV. When the thickness of MPPV is 26 nm, the CdTe nanocrystal film can be completely covered. In this case, the interface dipole effect is obvious and the Voc is 0.66–0.68 V which is higher than the BHJ structure. When the thickness is decreased to 6–12 nm, the coverage decreases and the Voc drops to 0.60–0.64 V which is comparable to the BHJ structure. When the thickness is only 3 nm, the interface dipole effect is weak and the Voc is only about 0.56 V which is just slightly higher than the pure CdTe nanocrystal solar cells. The relationship between Voc and the thickness of the MPPV film confirms that the increase of Voc is mainly contributed by the interface dipole induced by the superficial MPPV. Besides, it is worth noting that the fill factor (FF) of the double-layer HSC increases as the thickness of MPPV decreases, which is due to the superior hole reception of MoO3 over MPPV. When the CdTe nanocrystal film is completely covered, the contact between the CdTe nanocrystals and MoO3 is impeded. The low hole transfer yield from the CdTe nanocrystals to MPPV will cause the accumulation of the hole at the CdTe/MPPV interface, thus causing the S-shaped curve. As the thickness of MPPV decreases, the decreased coverage of MPPV will increase the contact area between the CdTe nanocrystals and MoO3, thus improving the hole injection efficiency and the FF.
Based on the above-mentioned analysis, the working principle of the aqueous-processed HSCs is illustrated in Fig. 5g. The type-II junction and p–n junction coexist in the aqueous-processed HSCs and the latter plays a dominant role. In the depletion region close to the cathode, carrier drift is effective due to the existence of an electrical field. In the neutral region close to the anode, the carrier transport is relatively low. Upon light excitation, carrier self-separation will occur in the CdTe nanocrystals. In the pure CdTe nanocrystal layer, both the electron and the hole will be transported by the CdTe nanocrystals. In the blending layer, the hole of the CdTe nanocrystals will partly transfer to the polymer, and the excitons generated in the polymer will diffuse into the interfaces and then separate into the free electron and the hole. Therefore, both the polymer and CdTe nanocrystals participate in the hole transport and the CdTe nanocrystals participate in the electron transport alone. In the polymer–nanocrystal blend, the polymer exists in two forms. The first one is the superficial polymer which can increase the Voc by introducing an interface dipole. The other one is the inner polymer which can increase the carrier lifetime by accepting the hole from the CdTe nanocrystals. In view of the interface dipole, the existence of the polymer on the upper region of the active layer is enough. In view of the carrier lifetime, the polymer should penetrate into the whole active layer. However, the low hole mobility of the polymers may compromise the effect of the improved carrier lifetime, which will be discussed later in this study. Therefore, the optimal solar cells are fabricated through constructing the active layer with a vertical component distribution. The active layer is fabricated by a combination of the pure nanocrystal layer and the polymer–nanocrystal blending layer during the multi-layer process.
Since the working principle of the aqueous-processed HSCs is similar to the all-inorganic nanocrystal solar cells, the optimization of the two devices should be similar. Our previous study shows that the performance of the CdTe nanocrystal solar cells correlated intimately with the annealing temperature and film thickness. Therefore, the impact of these two factors on the aqueous-processed HSCs is investigated. First, the annealing temperature of the pure CdTe nanocrystal layer is optimized and the annealing temperature of the blending layer is fixed at 300 °C. Fig. 6a displays the corresponding J–V curves. As the annealing temperature increases from 300 °C to 350 °C, the FF increases slightly while the Voc and short-circuit current density (Jsc) remain constant. The increase of the FF can be attributed to the increased carrier mobility of the CdTe nanocrystals. As the annealing temperature increases from 350 °C to 400 °C, the device performance presents a negligible change. This implies that the device performance is limited by the polymer–nanocrystal layer.
For the optimization of the blending layer, the annealing temperature of the CdTe nanocrystal layer is fixed at 400 °C. As shown in Fig. 6b, the device performance decreases with an increase of annealing temperature, especially when the annealing temperature increases from 350 °C to 400 °C. Since the mobility of the CdTe nanocrystals increases, the reduced performance may be attributed to the decrease of polymer property. The hole mobility of MPPV annealed at different temperatures is measured by the space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) method (Fig. 6c). The hole-only device structure is ITO/MPPV/MoO3/Au. The carrier mobility is calculated according to eqn (1):
J = 9ε0εrμ(V − Vbi − Vr)2/8L3
(1)
where
ε0 is the permittivity of free space, εr is the dielectric constant of MPPV, μ is the hole mobility, V is the applied voltage, Vr is the voltage drop due to contact resistance and series resistance across the electrodes, Vbi is the built-in voltage, and L is the film thickness. The hole mobilities of MPPV annealed at 300, 350 and 400 °C are 8.32 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1, 1.14 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 2.37 × 10−7 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. Besides, no reduction of the present hole transfer yield is observed using TA decay characterization (Fig. 6d). When the annealing temperature is 300 °C, the hole mobility of MPPV is slightly lower than that of the CdTe nanocrystals and MPPV assists the hole transport, thus increasing the FF and device performance. Despite the increase of the hole mobility of the CdTe nanocrystals by elevating the annealing temperature, the hole mobility of MPPV decreases, thus hindering the hole transport and decreasing the device performance.

Based on the above-mentioned results, the improved carrier lifetime induced by the hole transfer is beneficial for the device performance when the difference of the hole mobility between MPPV and the CdTe nanocrystals is slight. However, the improved carrier lifetime will be compromised when the hole mobility of MPPV is too low to transport the holes effectively. The occurrence of the hole transfer is adverse for the device performance at higher annealing temperatures. In this case, reduced hole transfer from the CdTe nanocrystals to the polymer may be preferred.

Fig. 7a and b show the dependence of the FF and PCE of PPV, MPPV and MEHPPV HSCs on annealing temperature for the blending layer, respectively. The increase in annealing temperature leads to the decrease of device performance for both PPV and MEHPPV HSCs, which is similar to the MPPV HSCs. Obviously, the performances of the three devices show different decrease rates when changing the annealing temperature. As the HOMO level of the polymer increases, more holes are transferred from the CdTe nanocrystals to the polymer. In this case, more holes can't be transported to the electrode due to the low hole mobility of the polymer at higher annealing temperatures. Therefore, the device performance of the MEHPPV HSCs shows the most obvious dependence on the annealing temperature. This result shows that the processing method of the active layer limits the improvement of the aqueous-processed HSCs. High annealing temperature is required to promote the growth of the CdTe nanocrystals to reduce trap states and grain boundaries. However, relatively lower annealing temperature is required to ensure effective hole transport by the polymer.
After investigating the relationship between the device performances and annealing temperature, the optimal annealing temperatures for the CdTe nanocrystal layer and blending layer are fixed at 350 °C and 300 °C, respectively. After further optimizing the thickness of the CdTe nanocrystal layer, a champion device is obtained of PPV HSCs which display a PCE of 5.41% with a Voc of 0.657 V, Jsc of 18.4 mA cm−2 and FF of 0.447 (Fig. 8a). This PCE is the highest for aqueous-processed HSCs. Fig. 8b shows the corresponding EQE spectrum which presents a wide photoresponse. The EQE spectrum shows peak values of 70% and a broad band conversion efficiency exceeding 50% at wavelengths less than 750 nm. Finally, a stability test under inert condition is performed. As shown in Fig. S2 (ESI), the PCE of the devices decreased slowly and over 80% of its original value is retained after 75 days in storage, which implies a good device stability for our aqueous-processed HSCs.

In conclusion, the relationship between the Voc and the HOMO level of the polymer or the Fermi level of the nanocrystals indicates that the working junction in the aqueous-processed HSCs is a p–n junction instead of a type-II junction. The existence of the superficial polymer provides an interface dipole which is in line with the Vbi of the p–n junction. Therefore, the HSCs show an increased Voc compared to the nanocrystal solar cells. The dependence of the device performance on annealing temperature shows that the processing method limits the development of the aqueous-processed HSCs. This study provides instructive guidelines for the development of aqueous-processed HSCs.


This work was financially supported by the National Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant No. 51433003, and the National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program) under Grant No. 2014CB643503.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: AFM images of the CdTe nanocrystal layer and the polymer–CdTe nanocrystal hybrid films, stability test of the HSCs. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp02600a
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016