 DOI: 10.1039/D2DT03357G
(Paper)
Dalton Trans., 2023, 52, 81-89


Zi
Wang
,

Yuyu
Liu
,

Linjie
Li
,

Shufang
Gao
,

Desheng
Zhu
,

Xiangxiang
Yu
,

Shubo
Cheng
,

Dingshan
Zheng
 and 

Yan
Xiong
*

School of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Yangtze University, Jingzhou 434023, PR China. E-mail: xiongyan1215@163.com; Fax: +86716 8060942; Tel: +86 13986709366

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, PR China

Received
17th October 2022
, Accepted 28th November 2022
First published on 29th November 2022
A semiconductor oxide composite consisting of ZnO nanorods (NRs) and ZnO inverse opal (IO) was fabricated and used in the photoanode of quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs). Using polystyrene spheres 500, 800, 1000, and 1500 nm in diameter as the IO template, ZnO composites and corresponding QDSSCs with ZnO IOs of different pore sizes were fabricated. The oxide composite prepared with ZnO IOs of different pore sizes showed similar micro-morphologies; however, the photovoltaic performance of the QDSSCs based on these composites varied greatly. The QDSSCs based on the ZnO composite achieved high power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of more than 6%, and the maximum PCE was 7.26% when the ZnO IO pore diameter in the composite was 800 nm. This resulted in very high PCE values for the QDSSCs using CdS/CdSe quantum dot sensitizers. With further interface modifications of NH4F and ZnS, the QDSSC achieved an even higher PCE value of 11.38%. Subsequently, the effects of ZnO IO pore size in the composite on QDSSC performance were investigated.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have attracted significant attention due to their advantages of abundant raw material sources, low cost, and ease of processing. By replacing the organic dyes with semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) in sensitizers, quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) exhibit unique advantages due to the quantum size effect, multi-exciton effect, large absorption coefficient, and easy matching of energy levels between the electron donor and the acceptor materials of QDs. QDSSCs have sandwich-like structures that mainly consist of a photoanode, electrolyte, and counter electrode. The photoanode is mainly composed of a transparent conducting oxide (TCO) substrate, such as fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass, with an overlying semiconductor oxide film such as TiO2 and ZnO, which adsorbs a sensitizer, i.e., QDs. The polysulfide electrolyte operates as a redox couple, and the counter electrode, generally copper chalcogenide, serves as a reduction catalyst.

DSSCs and QDSSCs based on ZnO nanostructures exhibit significantly higher electron mobility than both TiO2 and ZnO bulk films, and have recently attracted increasing attention. ZnO nanorod (NR) arrays have demonstrated significant applications in DSSCs and QDSSCs. ZnO NR arrays can provide a higher interfacial area and faster electrical pathways for the transport of electrons to increase the effective light trapping and power conversion efficiency (PCE). However, the PCE of solar cells based on ZnO NRs are still at a relatively low level. The insufficient internal surface areas of these nanostructures are considered one of the key factors limiting energy conversion efficiency. To improve the surface area without sacrificing electron transport efficiency, various novel branched structures, including tree-like, tetrapod and nanoflower shapes, and NR/nanoparticle composite films, have been employed as the photoanode of QDSSCs. The photocurrent density and efficiency of these cells have been largely increased due to the enriched surface area for better dye loading and light harvesting. ZnO inverse opal (IO) electrodes with an ordered periodic mesoporous structure are useful for QDSSCs because of the better penetration of the electrolyte compared to conventional nanoparticulate structures. Moreover, these structures can enhance the light-harvesting efficiency and improve electron transport compared to conventional electrodes, due to their fully three-dimensionally connected structure. Most significantly, the pore size can be easily controlled over a range of several hundred nanometers by using different sizes of colloidal particles in the colloidal crystal template. Accordingly, the photovoltaic performance of QDSSCs can be effectively improved by controlling the colloidal particle size in the colloidal crystal template.
In this work, we improved upon the contributions made in past studies by developing photoanodes based on ZnO NR and ZnO IO composites with different pore sizes for use in QDSSCs with cadmium sulfide (CdS) and cadmium selenide (CdSe) QD sensitizers. CdS/CdSe QDs are considered a classical co-sensitization system. When the pore diameter of ZnO IO in the composite photoanode changed from 500 to 1500 nm, the corresponding solar cells exhibited good but varying photovoltaic performances. A maximum PCE value of 7.26% was achieved when the pore diameter of ZnO IO was 800 nm, resulting in a very high PCE value for QDSSCs using CdS/CdSe sensitizers without any complicated modification or structural design processes. The physical and photovoltaic properties of the photoanodes and resulting QDSSCs were investigated based on their ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra, X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns, current density–potential (J–V) characteristics, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images, and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) results. Higher PCEs were attributed to the improved absorption intensity and the charge transfer resistance at the interface inside the cells; thus, resulting in higher photocurrent. With further interface modifications of NH4F and ZnS, the QDSSC achieved an even higher PCE value of 11.38%. For further investigation, conventional DSSCs with rubidium-based organic dyes were fabricated based on the same semiconductor oxide composite, and the J–V characteristics and microcosmic appearance were analyzed.

Isopropyl alcohol, methanol, ethanol, acetone, nitric acid, zinc acetate, ammonia, diethanolamine, and Triton X-100 were obtained from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China). Cadmium nitrate tetrahydrate (Cd(NO3)2·4H2O ≥ 98.0%), sodium sulfide nonahydrate (Na2S·9H2O ≥ 98.0%), selenium (Se ≥ 99.5%), sodium sulfite (Na2SO3 ≥ 98.0%), cadmium sulfate hydrate (CdSO4·8/3H2O ≥ 99.0%), nitrilotriacetic acid (C6H9NO6 ≥ 99.0%), sulfur (S), potassium chloride (KCl ≥ 99.5%), nitrilotriacetic acid, and potassium hydroxide (KOH ≥ 85.0%) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (St Louis, MO, USA). The conducting FTO glass, cis-bis(isothiocyanato)bis(2,2-bipyridyl-4,4-dicarboxylato) ruthenium(II) bis-tetrabutylammonium (N719) ruthenium dye, LiI, I2, 1-propyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide, and 4-tert-butylpyridine were acquired from Yingkou OPV Tech New Energy Co. Ltd (Yingkou, China). Polystyrene (PS) latex microspheres (2.5 wt% dispersion in water) were purchased from Beijing Deke Daojin Science and Technology Co., Ltd (Beijing, China). All chemicals were reagent grade and used as received without further purification.


Liquid phase deposition techniques were used to prepare the ZnO IO films using polystyrene (PS) sphere templates, as reported in the literature. A 0.1 wt% aqueous solution of monodisperse PS spheres (500, 800, 1000, and 1500 nm in diameter) with 0.003 wt% polyoxyethylene (5) nonylphenyl ether (IGEPAL CO-520) surfactant was subjected to sonication for 30 min, and then the conductive FTO-coated glass was cleaned by sonication. Subsequently, the clean FTO glass was immersed in the PS sphere dispersion solution and placed in an oven at 55 °C until evaporated. After evaporation, the PS sphere templates were seeded with ZnO by soaking the films in a 5.257% (w/v) ethanol solution of diethanolamine (DEA) and 9.175% (w/v) water solution of zinc acetate for 10 s. After soaking, the films were allowed to dry. The substrate was then heat-treated in the air at 500 °C for 10 min, leaving behind the IO structure.


An ethanol solution containing 0.1 M of zinc acetate was first prepared and stirred at 50 °C. Diethanolamine with an equal molar ratio of zinc ions was added dropwise to the above solution and stirred continuously to obtain ZnO sol. The ZnO NRs were fabricated on top of the three-dimensional ZnO IO film. First, a layer of ZnO seeds was spin-coated on the IO film at 3000 rpm for 20 s with the ZnO sol. Then, the deposited seed layer was dried on a hot plate at 150 °C for 10 min. To obtain a seed layer with a sufficient thickness, this process was repeatedly performed following annealing at 500 °C for 2 h. The ZnO NRs were then hydrothermally grown in the precursor solution at 90 °C for 90 min, where the precursor solution was composed of 0.1 M zinc acetate and 0.3 M ammonia. After removal from the solution, the samples were repeatedly rinsed with deionized (DI) water to eliminate any salt remaining on the film. Finally, the film was annealed at 500 °C for 2 h, and the composite structure of ZnO NR and IO was obtained.


To fabricate the CdS QDs, the ZnO-coated FTO glass was first dipped into an ethanol solution containing 0.1 M Cd(NO3)2 for 1 min and rinsed with ethanol. The film was then dipped for another 1 min into 0.1 M Na2S methanol solution and rinsed with methanol. This two-step dipping process was regarded as one successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) cycle, and the incorporated amount of CdS could be increased by repeating the assembly cycles. A total of 12 SILAR cycles were performed, and the glass was then air-dried.

Next, CdSe QDs were deposited on top of the CdS-coated glass by using the chemical bath deposition (CBD) method, where CdSe QD deposition was achieved with nitriloacetate as the complex and selenosulfate as the Se source. First, for the Se source, aqueous Na2SeSO3 was freshly prepared by refluxing 0.2 M Se powder in an aqueous solution of 0.5 M Na2SO3 at 70 °C for approximately 5 h. Nitrilotriacetic acid and KOH were then mixed to prepare the K3NTA solution, and a solution was prepared by mixing 80 mM CdSO4, 160 mM K3NTA, and 80 mM Na2SeSO3. To promote CdSe QD adsorption, the electrodes were adsorbed with the CdS QDs were placed in the solution at 30 °C in the dark for 4 h.

A Cu2S film was used as the counter electrode of the QDSSCs. A thin layer of brass was successively cleaned with DI water and ethanol, and after air-drying, it was dipped into a 1 M HCL solution for 10 min. The brass was then dipped into a water and methanol (1:1 by volume) solution containing 0.1 M of Na2S, 0.1 M of S, and 0.2 M of KCl for 10 s to generate Cu2S on the surface.


The QD-sensitized ZnO film was used as the photoanode of the QDSSCs, where the electrolyte consisted of 0.1 M Na2S, 0.1 M S, and 0.2 M KCl in a water and methanol (1:1 volume) solution. This solution was then injected between the photoanode and counter electrode through the siphonic effect.

For the DSSCs, the ZnO composite coated FTO glass was immersed in a 0.5 mM N719 ethanol solution for 24 h, and the counter electrode consisted of Pt-coated FTO glass. The electrolyte, consisting of 0.3 M LiI, 0.6 M 1-propyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide, 0.05 M I2, and 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine in acetonitrile, was injected between the photoanode and counter electrode through siphoning.
The photovoltaic performances, namely, the short circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and PCE (η) of the solar cells were measured. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the cells were measured using a Keithley 2450 source meter under a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 using a solar simulator (Newport, 911023A). The forward sweeping rate was 7 mV s−1. The incident photon-to-charge current conversion efficiency (IPCE) was measured by a photo modulation spectroscopic setup (Zolix, Solar Cell Scan 100), and the optical absorption spectra of the photoanodes were measured using a spectrophotometer (PERSEE, TU-1900). The morphology of the semiconductor oxide was analyzed using field-emission SEM (MIRA3). The EIS measurements were obtained using an electrochemical workstation (CorrTest, CS 350H), and the XRD patterns were recorded with an X-ray diffractometer (Empyrean, PANalytical). A profiler (KLA-Tencor) was then used to test the thicknesses of the films.

The SEM images of the ZnO film are shown in Fig. 1, where Fig. 1a shows the cross-section of the ZnO IO fabricated with PS spheres 800 nm in diameter, indicating that a highly ordered framework with air holes was obtained. Fig. 1b presents the cross-section of pure ZnO NRs prepared on the FTO substrate, and dense and very long NRs grow on the glass. The SEM images of the ZnO composite are shown in Fig. 2. The ZnO-NR was coated on the ZnO IO, which was prepared with PS spheres of different sizes. Fig. 2a and b present the surface of the ZnO composite prepared with PS spheres 500 and 800 nm in diameter, respectively. The cross-sections of the ZnO composite films prepared with PS spheres 500, 800, and 1500 nm in diameter are shown in Fig. 2c, d, and e, respectively, indicating that the ZnO NRs were uniformly coated on the IO surfaces. This typical morphology is expected to be favourable for the deposition of QDs and preventing of electrolyte blockage in the photoanode. The ZnO composites prepared with PS spheres of different sizes had a similar appearance. In the ZnO-NR-modified IO film, many pores originated from the IO structure, which was expected to be favorable for the deposition of QDs and electrolyte infiltration.

The thickness of the ZnO IO film was in the range of 35–40 μm, and after coating with a ZnO NR layer, the ZnO composite film showed an increased average thickness of 45 μm. XRD analysis was conducted to investigate the compositions of the composite. The XRD patterns of the ZnO composites prepared with PS spheres of different diameters are shown in Fig. 3. The diffraction peaks were observed at 2θ angles of 31.98°, 33.84° and 35.13° corresponding to the crystal planes of (100), (002) and (101), respectively (JCPDS 36-1451), indicating the hexagonal wurtzite structure of ZnO.
The UV-visible spectra of the ZnO composite prepared with PS spheres of different sizes were measured and are shown in Fig. 4, indicating that the absorption intensities were slightly different. Among these, the ZnO composite prepared with the 800 nm PS spheres was the highest. To further explore the energy band of the ZnO composite, the plot of (Ahν)2 (where A is the absorption intensity) with respect to hν is presented as an inset in Fig. 4. As can be seen, the band gap (Eg) of the ZnO composite was estimated to be within 3.2–3.3 eV, which is consistent with the values of other published works. There was a slight difference among these band gaps, and the order of band gaps of the ZnO composite prepared with PS spheres of different diameters was as follows:
Eg (500 nm) < Eg (1000 nm) < Eg (1500 nm) < Eg (800 nm).
The photovoltaic parameters of the QDSSCs based on the ZnO composite are listed in Table 1, where the ZnO IOs of the ZnO composite in the photoanode were fabricated with different pore sizes, and the J–V curves are shown in Fig. 5. The QDSSCs achieved high PCEs of more than 6%, resulting in very high PCE values for the QDSSCs using CdS/CdSe sensitizers without any complicated modification or structural design processes. High cell efficiencies could be attributed to the high photocurrent. For most of the typical QDSSC devices, the Jsc value is from several to more than ten mA cm−2. In this study, the QDSSCs based on the ZnO composite had a high Jsc value, of >26 mA cm−2, and high PCE values. Specifically, when the pore diameter of ZnO in the composite was 800 nm, the corresponding QDSSC achieved a maximum PCE value of 7.26%. The open-circuit voltages of the devices were close, and three of them were 0.55 V, except for the 1000 nm diameter ZnO IO-based device. The higher PCE value of the 800 nm diameter ZnO-IO-based device was attributed to its higher photocurrent, and its short circuit current density (Jsc) was 32.83 mA cm−2, which was the highest among the solar cells. These higher values reveal more QD loading and light harvesting, and lower energy loss. When the pore diameter of the ZnO IO in the ZnO composite changed from 500 to 1500 nm, the cell performance also varied. With an increasing pore size of ZnO IO, the photocurrent and cell efficiency first increased, then became the highest when the pore diameter was 800 nm, and then decreased. The photovoltaic characteristics are consistent with the light harvesting ability of the photoanode.
Pore diameter of the ZnO IO in the ZnO composites (nm)

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

η (%)
FF
500
0.55
28.36
6.53
0.42
800
0.55
32.83
7.26
0.40
1000
0.52
27.61
6.28
0.44
1500
0.55
26.00
6.16
0.43
It should be noted that, the high efficiency of the cells was ascribed to the combination of ZnO IO and ZnO NR. In our previous study, QDSSCs based on pure ZnO IO obtained a PCE value of 6.07%. In this work, the photoanode based on pure ZnO NR was also fabricated, and the highest PCE was 4.08%, with Jsc and Voc values of 21.60 mA cm−2 and 0.54 V, respectively. The J–V curve is shown in Fig. 5. As can be seen, the Voc value is close to that of the QDSSCs based on the ZnO composite, but the photocurrent is much lower. The ZnO NRs were prepared via the hydrothermal method, and when the hydrothermal synthesis time was prolonged from 2 to 3 h, there was not much improvement in the cell efficiency. The composite of ZnO IO and ZnO NR effectively improved the morphology and function of the photoanode.
The IPCE plots of the QDSSCs with different ZnO IO pore sizes in the photoanodes are shown in Fig. 6, indicating that the IPCE spectra were consistent with the corresponding absorption spectra. This was consistent with what was mentioned above, where the 800 nm diameter ZnO-IO-based ZnO composite led to higher absorption compared to the IO film with different sizes. Specifically, the 800 nm diameter ZnO IO-based QDSSC obtained the highest IPCE value in the wavelength range of 350 to 600 nm and achieved the maximum value of 70% at 480 nm.
Although they had a similar micromorphology, for the ZnO composites prepared with ZnO IOs of different sizes, we found that the ZnO IO pore size did have an impact on the photovoltaic performance of the as-prepared QDSSC devices. The effects of ZnO IO size on the QDSSC performance were explored by further using EIS measurements. The Nyquist plots of the QDSSCs fabricated with photoanodes based on ZnO IO films of 4 different pore sizes obtained over a frequency range from 0.1 to 105 Hz under the illumination of 100 mW cm−2 at room temperature are shown in Fig. 7a. Two semicircles appeared in the Nyquist curves, where the larger semicircle that appeared over the middle frequencies represented impedance at the oxide/QD/electrolyte interface. The smaller semicircle that appeared at high frequencies represented the redox impedance of the electrolyte/counter electrode interface. The semicircles in the Nyquist plots were represented by the equivalent circuit model shown in the inset in Fig. 7a. The equivalent circuit was composed of series resistance Rs, with a charge transfer resistance of Rct1 at the electrolyte/counter electrode interface, a charge transfer resistance of Rct2 at the oxide/QD/electrolyte interface, and chemical capacitances of CPE1 and CPE2. The values of Rs, Rct1 and Rct2 obtained from the fitting process are listed in Table 2. Among all of the samples, the QDSSCs prepared with ZnO IO pore diameters of 800 and 1000 nm had lower Rs, Rct1, and Rct2 values. Among these, the 1000 nm diameter-ZnO-IO device had the lowest Rs value (1.248 Ω), while the 800 nm ZnO-IO achieved the lowest Rct (0.420 and 3.382 Ω). The ZnO IO is the bottom layer of the ZnO composite, and its morphology had an impact on the photoelectric conversion process inside the solar cells. For the porous ZnO IO film, various pore sizes would lead to various ZnO densities, subsequently resulting in different loadings of the ZnO NRs and QD sensitizer, infiltration of the electrolyte, and charge carrier pathways. Eventually, the PCE of the QDSSCs would be different, and the QDSSCs prepared with ZnO IOs of appropriate pore sizes would achieve higher optoelectronic performance. These results were in agreement with the photovoltaic characteristics.
Pore diameter of ZnO IO in ZnO composite (nm)

R
s (Ω)

R
ct1 (Ω)

R
ct2 (Ω)

τ (ms)
500
1.420
0.386
3.475
3.60
800
1.284
0.356
3.469
1.19
1000
1.275
0.470
5.352
7.28
1500
0.999
0.614
3.937
9.20
The Nyquist plots of the QDSSCs are shown in Fig. 7b. The lifetime (τ) of the injected electrons in the photoanode is related to the position of the mid-frequency peak fmax, which is defined as follows:
τ = 1/2πfmax,
where
fmax is the peak frequency among the mid-frequency peaks. The τ values are listed in Table 2. As can be seen, when the pore diameter of ZnO IO in the composite increases from 500 nm to 800 nm, the electron lifetime decreases. Then the electron lifetime increases with the increase in the IO pore size when the pore diameter is greater than 800 nm. For the QDSSCs that were prepared using ZnO IO with a pore diameter of 1500 nm, the electron obtains a long lifetime of 9.20 ms. However, the electron lifetime of the QDSSCs prepared using ZnO IO with a diameter of 800 nm was the shortest among all the samples. As it is well known, the device efficiency is a balanced result of multiple factors. Although the electron lifetime of the 800 nm diameter-ZnO-IO device was not long enough, other positive factors effectively improved its performance, and the comprehensive action of various factors resulted in the highest PCE value.

The photovoltaic performances of the QDSSCs based on the ZnO composite could be further improved through interfacial modification with NH4F and ZnS, as described in the literature. By configuring the FTO/semiconductor oxide/NH4F/CdS/CdSe/ZnS/sulfur-based electrolyte/Cu2S, the QDSSCs prepared with 800 nm ZnO-IO achieved a high cell efficiency value of 11.38%, where the J–V curve is shown in Fig. 5. The Jsc and Voc values were 38.52 mA cm−2 and 0.67 V, respectively. As seen in Fig. 5, due to surface passivation, the photocurrent and Voc are much higher than that of the QDSSCs without interface modification, which results in higher PCE.
QDSSCs and DSSCs have similar device structures, especially in the photoanode, and the photoanode of a DSSC usually has a TCO glass/oxide semiconductor/dye configuration, where the QDSSC can usually be obtained by replacing the dye with QDs. For these two solar cells, improvements in the photoanode of one often apply to the other. In this work, DSSCs based on the ZnO composite of ZnO NRs and IO were fabricated, and the sensitizer consisted of N719 ruthenium dye, which is the most commonly used dye in DSSC devices. ZnO IO was prepared with PS spheres 800 nm in diameter. However, the expected improvements were not achieved, and a PCE value of only 2.3% was obtained, with Jsc and Voc values of 6.07 mA cm−2 and 0.61 V, respectively. As reported, the ready agglomeration of the ruthenium complexes in the nanostructured ZnO film limited the PCE of ZnO-based DSSCs. The SEM image of the ZnO composite surface is shown in Fig. 8a, and an image of the ZnO composite film after being dipped in N719 solution for 24 h is shown in Fig. 8b. Compared to the un-sensitized ZnO composite, a large number of agglomerations formed on the surface of the dye-sensitized ZnO film. This type of structural optimization based on ZnO-nanostructures was only suitable for QDSSCs, or DSSCs using the organic dyes of other systems.

In this work, an oxide composite consisting of ZnO NRs and ZnO IO was proposed for use in the photoanodes of QDSSCs, and the effects of ZnO IO pore size in the composite on the performance of the QDSSCs were investigated. Although the composite samples prepared with ZnO IO of different pore sizes showed similar micromorphology, the photovoltaic performance of the QDSSCs based on these composites varied greatly. Pores of various sizes in the porous ZnO IO film led to varied ZnO densities and subsequently resulted in different loadings of the ZnO NRs and QD sensitizer, infiltration of the electrolyte, and charge carrier pathways. Thus, the ZnO composites based on ZnO IO films with various pore sizes showed varied absorption intensities and varied charge transfer resistance at the interface inside the cells, thus resulting in varied photocurrent and PCEs. The QDSSCs based on the ZnO composite achieved maximum cell efficiencies of 7.26% when the ZnO IO pore size in the composite was 800 nm. This resulted in very high PCE values for the QDSSCs using CdS/CdSe sensitizers without any complicated modification or structural design processes. With further interface modification of the NH4F and ZnS, QDSSC achieved an even higher PCE value of 11.38%. Additionally, the device performance varied with the specific configuration of the photoanode. The ZnO composite oxide did not work in the N719 dye-based DSSCs, and poor PCEs were obtained due to the agglomerations that formed on the dye-sensitized ZnO film surface.


Z. Wang and Y. Liu were responsible for the fabrication and characterizations of QDSSCs; L. Li, S. Gao and S. Cheng contributed to this work by preparing the photoanode and the counter electrode. Z. Wang, Y. Liu, D. Zhu, X. Yu and D. Zheng contributed to the investigation. The results obtained including UV-visible spectra, J–V curves, SEM images, EIS and XRD analysis were interpreted and analyzed, and the concepts and design for the experiment were planned and discussed by Z. Wang, Y. Liu and Y. Xiong. All authors gave final approval for publication.


The authors declare no competing interests.


This work was supported by the Grants no. 11904032 from the National Natural Science Foundation of China, no. T2020008 from the Science Foundation of Educational Commission of Hubei Province of China.


† Zi Wang and Yuyu Liu contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023