 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA06970K
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24036-24044


Yan
Guo
,

Xiong
He
,

Xin
Liu
,

Xin
Li
* and 

Leilei
Kang
*

MIIT Key Laboratory of Critical Materials Technology for New Energy Conversion and Storage, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China. E-mail: lixin@hit.edu.cn

State Key Lab of Urban Water Resource and Environment, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150090, China

Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian 116023, China. E-mail: leikang@dicp.ac.cn

Received
19th July 2018
, Accepted 7th November 2018
First published on 7th November 2018
Facile fabrication and high performance are crucial for the commercialization of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). As an efficient and promising electron-transporting material, ZnO has attracted much attention recently, while the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of ZnO-based PSCs is still inferior to that of TiO2-based PSCs. In this work, we demonstrate that the Au nanorod (NR) suspension spin-coated at the interface between the electron transport layer (ETL) and the perovskite layer provides both plasmon enhancement and solvent annealing effects. Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) offers strong light absorption over almost the whole visible-light range. Meanwhile, plasmon-induced hot electrons transferring from Au NRs to the ZnO film result in reduced trap-state density, restrained charge recombination, and efficient electron transport in the ETL, which could suppress photocurrent hysteresis to some extent. Interestingly, the introduction of N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), which is originally used for dispersing Au NRs, yields a high-quality perovskite film. As a result, the PCE of our champion cell with the structure of FTO/ZnO/Au NRs/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au surges to 16.51% from 14.47%. Moreover, the devices show an excellent environmental stability, where the average PCEs can be maintained at about 90% of their original value after storing for as long as two months (>1400 h) under air conditions. Notably, the fabrication of PSCs was totally conducted under ambient air without control of oxygen and humidity, which would help in industrial production. This work provides a new approach to substantially improve the quality of perovskite and ETL films for air-processed high-efficiency PSCs.

Since the pioneering work in 2012, all-solid state perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been attracting considerable attention due to their superior efficiency, low cost and compatibility with roll-to-roll fabrication. Hitherto, the reported highest certified efficiency of PSCs has reached 22.7%, which is nearly comparable to that of commercial polycrystalline silicon solar cells. PSCs have been considered as one of the most promising candidates for the next generation photovoltaic technology. However, some paramount issues, such as the hysteresis effect, instability, and cost inefficiency, have not yet been fully resolved for commercial applications. It is thus desirable to devote significant efforts to obtaining high-efficiency PSCs with reduced manufacturing cost.

Light management is one of the basic tasks required in photoelectric devices to acquire highly efficient PSCs. Effective regulation of the incident light by the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) of plasmonic nanostructures should be a fascinating strategy. Plasmonic nanostructures can not only act as scattering centers to increase the effective optical path length but also behave as subwavelength antennas to enhance the absorption rate of incident light due to the plasmonic near-field coupling. Actually, the contributions of the SPR effect in PSCs are not confined to enhance the absorption of incident light. Metal oxides, such as TiO2, ZnO and SnO2, are commonly used as electron transport materials in planar PSCs due to the properties of blocking holes and transferring electrons. However, the electron transport layer (ETL) generally suffers from relatively poor electron transfer ability, charge recombination and accumulation at the ETL/perovskite interface, which results in current–voltage hysteresis and degradation of device performance. Introduction of plasmonic nanostructures is regarded as one of the efficient approaches to address these problems, because plasmon-induced hot electrons transferring to the conduction band of the ETL could speed up the electron transportation. For these reasons, Au@SiO2 nanoparticles (NPs) were first incorporated into a mesoporous Al2O3 layer by the group of Snaith to improve the performance of meso-superstructured PSCs. Afterwards, several studies have shown that the device performance can be improved by incorporation of metal NPs in PSCs. For instance, Shapter' and Lei's groups have, respectively, introduced Au and Au@Ag NPs into the ETL and demonstrated that the SPR of metal NPs could direct an admirable enhancement in light absorption. It is well known that the shapes, sizes and materials of nanostructures are closely related to the photoelectric properties of the device. Therefore, various plasmonic nanostructures were successively introduced to realize efficiency enhancement. For example, Ginting and co-workers integrated Au nanostars into the hole transport layer (HTL), in which an improved efficiency was obtained owing to the assistance of SPR. Nevertheless, the most used plasmonic nanostructures in PSCs are metal NPs which are usually embedded into the interior of the films. Few studies focused on the influence of SPR on interfaces, where the SPR effect plays a better role in extracting carriers with lower mobility. Moreover, metal nanorods (NRs) possessing exclusive advantages for photovoltaic performance are rarely employed in PSCs. Also, most of the studies on plasmonic effects in PSCs are limited to the mesoporous structured TiO2 as the ETL. Investigations related to planar heterojunction PSCs are also very few. Studies on applying Au or Ag NPs in PSCs are summarized in Table S1. Therefore, rational design of plasmon enhanced planar heterojunction PSCs still has a large space for further improving the performance of the device.
Obtaining a high-quality perovskite film is still a main challenge in the fabrication of high-efficiency PSCs, especially ZnO-based devices, since the ETL as an underlayer can produce huge impacts on the morphology and crystallization quality of the perovskite. The surface properties of the ZnO film could cause severe thermal decomposition of the perovskite film, which can be accelerated by residual organic chemicals on the surface of the ZnO film, as illustrated by Kelly and co-workers. Moreover, for most preparation techniques of ZnO-based PSCs, the low temperature and short time used in the annealing process would limit the formation of a continuous film with large granular crystals. Obviously, it is not easy to obtain highly efficient ZnO-based PSCs. Actually, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of ZnO-based PSCs is far inferior to that of TiO2-based PSCs even though the electron mobility of ZnO is much better than that of TiO2. Recently, we have reported a method of achieving a stable ZnO/CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) bilayer by removing undesirable chemical species on the ZnO surface with aging treatment. To improve the quality of the perovskite film many effective methods have been developed. The solvent annealing process is one of the viable routes, which prompts the grain growth and recrystallization of small-scale crystals. The above studies have shown that the plasmonic effect and solvent annealing process can result in enhanced PSC efficiency. However, this synergistic effect accomplished via a one-step operation has not yet been developed for high-efficiency PSCs to the best of our knowledge. Therefore, it is expected that the combination of plasmonic and solvent annealing effects may offer a new chance to further improve the performance of ZnO-based PSCs. Furthermore, most of the state-of-the-art PSCs require an inert atmosphere and complex processing to achieve high efficiency, which is a key limitation on industrialization. So seeking an air-processing strategy is of great significance. However, because of the poor ambient stability of MAPbI3, developing air-processed PSCs is still a challenging issue owing to the decomposition of perovskite materials. Without an inert atmosphere and humidity control, fabrication of efficient and stable PSCs under ambient conditions is also expected to be achieved by optimization of the device structure, manipulation of morphology engineering, design of new precursor and interfacial materials, modification of solution-processing methods, and so on.
Taking the above into consideration, herein, we prepared PSCs with the structure of FTO/ZnO/Au NRs/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au introducing Au NRs at the interface between the ETL and the perovskite layer under ambient conditions. The characteristic of our work is one-step integration of plasmon enhancement with the solvent annealing effect for air-processed high-performance PSCs. As a result, the champion device demonstrates an efficiency as high as 16.51%, which is 14.1% higher than that of the control device (14.47%). In addition, the devices with Au NRs display an excellent environmental stability, where the average PCEs can be still maintained at about 90% of their original value after storing for as long as two months (>1400 h) under air conditions. Meanwhile, the devices with Au NRs demonstrate a good photo-stability, whose average PCEs can be maintained at about 71% of their initial value after 300 min of illumination. Notably, all of the fabrication and measurement procedures were carried out under air conditions. Various powerful characterization techniques, such as X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES), photoluminescence (PL) mapping, Hall effect measurement, and scanning Kelvin probe microscopy (SKPM), were employed to unravel the underlying mechanisms. The results suggest that such an excellent performance is mainly derived from the enhanced light absorption, superior electron mobility, reduced interfacial charge accumulation, and improved crystallinity of the perovskite film. This effective synergistic strategy is expected to offer a new pathway for fabricating high-performance PSCs under ambient conditions.

On the basis of our previous work, Au NR assisted planar heterojunction PSCs with the structure of glass/FTO/ZnO/Au NRs/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au were fabricated under air conditions (denoted as Au NR–ZnO-based PSCs), in which Au NRs with different aspect ratios were dispersed into the interface between the ZnO and MAPbI3 layers to optimize the SPR effect in PSCs. For comparison, devices without Au NRs were also prepared, under the same preparation conditions (labelled ZnO-based PSCs). The details of the fabrication method are depicted in the Experimental section of the ESI. The configuration and corresponding cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of a complete Au NR–ZnO-based PSC are shown in Fig. 1a, where well-aligned boundaries for different layers can be clearly observed. Meanwhile, the associated elements were also confirmed by EDS line scan (Fig. S1). However, it is difficult to find the Au NRs owing to the limited distribution. Therefore, we have further recorded the top view SEM image to investigate the state of Au NRs in the following discussions. Thicknesses of the Au NR decorated ZnO layer, MAPbI3 layer, spiro-OMeTAD layer and Au electrode are measured to be about 90, 410, 280 and 60 nm, respectively.

Since reproducibility is crucial for practical applications, a total of 50 devices of Au NR–ZnO-based PSCs and ZnO-based PSCs were assembled under air conditions. The statistical distributions of short-circuit current density (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) are summarized in Fig. S2.Table 1 lists the average and champion values together with their associated standard deviations. It can be clearly seen that the JSC, VOC, FF and PCE of Au NR–ZnO-based PSCs are all much better than those of ZnO-based PSCs. The average PCE value of Au NR–ZnO-based PSCs (14.54%) is increased by 19%, compared with the 12.23% for the control devices. To further reveal the disparity, the champion devices in both of them were extracted as models in the following research. Fig. 1b and c display the photocurrent density–photovoltage (J–V) curves of the champion Au NR–ZnO-based PSC and ZnO-based PSC in the forward and reverse scanning directions, respectively. By incorporating Au NRs the PCE was immensely boosted from 14.47% (JSC = 20.58 mA cm−2, VOC = 1.021 V, and FF = 68.86%) to 16.51% (JSC = 22.52 mA cm−2, VOC = 1.026 V, and FF = 71.45%), which should be a decent result for PSCs using ZnO as the ETL under ambient conditions. It is worth noting that the hysteresis effect was obviously inhibited by introducing Au NRs into the system of ZnO-based PSCs, where the hysteresis index was decreased from 0.19 to 0.11 according to eqn (1) in the ESI.
Type

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Champion ZnO-based PSCs (reverse and forward)
18.89 ± 0.98
0.992 ± 0.018
65.58 ± 2.37
12.23 ± 1.04
20.58/20.25
1.021/0.950
68.86/59.57
14.47/11.46
Champion Au NR–ZnO-based PSCs (reverse and forward)
20.53 ± 0.84
1.010 ± 0.013
69.26 ± 2.03
14.54 ± 0.98
22.52/22.28
1.026/1.019
71.45/65.19
16.51/14.80
Obviously, the incorporation of Au NRs should be responsible for this remarkable improvement. Herein, Au NRs with different aspect ratios were synthesized by tuning the amount of HCl added to the system. As shown in Fig. S3, highly crystalline Au NRs with different aspect ratios have been successfully synthesized. Their average aspect ratios as well as the corresponding standard deviations are summarized in Table S2. To prepare Au NR–ZnO-based PSCs, equivalent volumes of the above prepared Au NRs were mixed and dispersed into DMF, forming a stable Au NR suspension. And then the suspension of Au NRs was decorated onto the surface of a ZnO film by the spin-coating deposition method. As shown in Fig. 2a, the ZnO film is composed of closely packed ZnO nanoparticles. After spin-coating Au NRs at a low speed, Au NRs were homogeneously anchored onto the surface of the ZnO film, as evidenced by the top view SEM image and the corresponding EDS mapping of the ZnO/Au NR film (Fig. 2b–d). It has been reported that Au NRs with different aspect ratios would absorb light at different wavelengths, which was also corroborated in our experiment (Fig. S4). Moreover, the gaps formed by the aggregation of Au NRs would dramatically enhance the plasmonic effect and alter the absorption wavelength. Randomly aggregated Au NRs can be found over the ZnO film (inset of Fig. 2c). It can be inferred that Au NRs with different aspect ratios and aggregations should absorb a broad range of light together. As expected, almost all of the visible light (500–800 nm) can be absorbed by the ZnO/Au NR film, while the ZnO film is absolutely transparent within the visible wavelength range (Fig. 2e). The light absorption enhancement is undoubtedly favourable for increasing the photocurrent density.
Generally, low mobility of the electrons is the main obstacle for the effective separation of photo-induced electrons and holes in the case of spiro-OMeTAD as the HTL. The charge accumulation caused by imbalanced interfacial charge transfer would result in low VOC and severe hysteresis. The enhancement of electron mobility is undoubtedly beneficial for balancing the mobility of the charge carriers, leading to a modified electrical performance. In addition to the improvement of light absorption, the transition of hot electrons from Au NRs to ZnO may increase the electron mobility in the ZnO layer. To verify this contribution, the conductivity measurement was performed for the FTO/ZnO/Au electrode and FTO/ZnO/Au NR/Au electrode under dark and illumination conditions. It is imperative to point out that the thicknesses of both ZnO films are identical. The results show that the conductivity of the Au NR decorated ZnO film is almost identical to that of the bare ZnO film under dark conditions (Fig. 3a). Under working conditions, as expected, the conductivity of the ZnO/Au NR film is improved to a much better level than that of the ZnO film, even though both of them are enhanced (Fig. 3b). This result fully reveals that the introduction of Au NRs has indeed modified the mobility of photoelectrons.
The steady-state PL stemming from the recombination of photoinduced electrons and holes was recorded to investigate the injection process of hot electrons between Au NRs and the ZnO film. The PL spectra of the bare Au NRs and ZnO/Au NR film were excited using a 532 nm CW laser. For comparison, the PL response of the ZnO layer was also measured. Compared with the bare Au NRs, the PL intensities of Au NRs located on the surface of the ZnO film are almost negligible owing to the PL quenching by ZnO (Fig. S5). To visualize the PL results, the corresponding PL mapping images were further recorded. The optical images in the insets of Fig. 4a and b are helpful in locating the Au NRs. It is clearly found that the brightness of the PL mapping image of Au NRs deposited on the ZnO film is much lower than that of the bare Au NRs. The PL quenching caused by ZnO indicates the occurrence of charge transfer from Au NRs to the ZnO film. The electronic state of the conduction band of ZnO can be revealed by the XANES of the Zn K-edge. Because the conduction band of ZnO mainly consists of the Zn4s and Zn4p, the Zn K-edge absorption originates from the transition from 1s to 4p orbitals. Thus, the increase of electron density in the conduction band would restrain the Zn K-edge absorption, resulting in a lower XANES intensity. The relative difference in XANES intensity (ΔI/I0) is plotted in Fig. 4c. The XANES intensity of ZnO/Au NRs in the dark is slightly stronger than that of bare ZnO, which can be rationalized that the electrons continuously transfer from ZnO to Au during the alignment process of Fermi levels. In contrast, an obvious decrease was observed when ZnO/Au NRs was irradiated by a xenon lamp, further suggesting that a large amount of hot electrons were injected from Au NRs to the conduction band of ZnO. If so, the surface potentials of ZnO films with and without Au NRs would also be different. Thus, SKPM tests were carried out. As shown in Fig. 4d, the surface potential of Au NRs anchored ZnO is lower than that of bare ZnO before the light illumination due to the sensitive response of Au NRs to natural light. After illuminated by xenon lamp for 5 min, more hot electrons from Au NRs would transfer into the ZnO layer, resulting in a lower surface potential. Based on the above results, the schematic illustration of the hot electron transition mechanism is depicted in Fig. 4e. In this scenario, hot electrons generated from the SPR of Au NRs would be excited to a higher energy level and subsequently injected into the conduction band of the adjacent ZnO film, overcoming the Schottky barrier between Au NRs and ZnO. In contrast, the hot electrons in the case of bare Au NRs are prone to recombining with the holes, exhibiting strong PL. The increase of the charge carrier density in ZnO would preferentially patch up the trap state of ZnO, elevate its Fermi level and reduce the work function of ZnO, whilst resulting in an improvement of the transportation of electrons as well as built-in potential. Higher built-in potential and lower energy barrier favour a better VOC. These apparently decipher why VOC can be enhanced and hysteresis can be restrained after integrating Au NRs (Table 1).
Highly efficient PSCs are strongly dependent on high-quality perovskite films for which crystallization, morphology, and grain boundary play pivotal roles. It was proposed that grain boundaries formed among different crystal grains hinder the transition of photo-generated carriers. Therefore, a large number of grain boundaries lead to the shorter lifetime of photo-generated carriers, resulting in worse performance. It is of great interest to find that the perovskite film covering the ZnO/Au NR layer shows larger perovskite grains and more compact but fewer boundaries compared to the one coated on the bare ZnO layer, as characterized by SEM and atomic force scanning probe microscopy (AFM) (Fig. 5a–f). The improvement of the perovskite film was also evidenced by the variation of hydrophobicity. As shown in the insets of Fig. 5a and d, the contact angle of the perovskite layer deposited on the ZnO/Au NR film slightly increases from 16.7° to 21.2° owing to the denser grains and fewer defects. Undoubtedly, the high-quality perovskite films afford structural stability for high performance devices. It seems that the solvent annealing effect of DMF introduced by spin-coating Au NRs is the reason for this improvement. To verify our statement, the same amount of DMF solution as that of the Au NR case was spin-coated onto the ZnO layer before depositing the perovskite layer. As shown in Fig. S6, the perovskite films on the with and without DMF processed ZnO layer are very distinct in morphology. Upon the pretreatment with DMF, the obtained perovskite layer shows a relatively larger crystal and fewer boundaries. The result confirms that the improved film quality must be induced by the existence of DMF on the ZnO layer. In the traditional spin-coating process, it is hard to form a homogeneous perovskite film, caused by fast evaporation of polar solvents. Although the post solvent-vapor treatment has been reported to be an effective way to solve this problem, complex control and skilled experimental techniques are required. In our case, DMF solution was introduced simultaneously during the Au NR deposition process, which is supposed to retard the rapid growth of perovskite crystals by wetting the ZnO film. Upon thermal annealing, the formed moist atmosphere increases the flowability and diffusion length of perovskite precursors, driving the reaction of MAI and PbI2 to a larger extent. Moreover, the DMF vapour prolongs the growth period of perovskite grains, which could also be helpful for large grains.
The crystallinities of perovskite films were further tested by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. For the XRD patterns shown in Fig. 6a, the assignments of diffraction peaks are listed in Table S3, which can be ascribed to the tetragonal perovskite structure. The striking variations are the intensity increases of (110), (220) and (310), indicating that a better crystallinity can be achieved through the addition of the Au NR suspension (Fig. 6b). Using the intensity of (224) as the standard, the intensity ratios of (110)/(224), (220)/(224) and (310)/(224) were quantified (Fig. 6c). One can see that the tendency of the intensity ratios of (110)/(224), (220)/(224) and (310)/(224) is well consistent with that of (110), (220) and (310) peak intensities. We suggest that the existence of DMF on the ZnO film would reduce the surface energy of the (110), (220) and (310) planes, accounting for a relatively larger perovskite crystal in the presence of Au NRs. In addition, the two weak peaks of PbI2 manifest a low content of PbI2, the passivation effect of which can suppress the recombination of the charge carriers. PL spectra were also utilized to examine the quality of perovskite films. As shown in Fig. 6d, the PL intensity of the perovskite film on ZnO/Au NRs is stronger than that on ZnO. This result demonstrates that non-radiative decay can be restrained, originating from less defects in the perovskite film in the ZnO/Au NR case. Upon careful analysis, a slight blue shift from 769 nm to 766 nm can be observed, which is responsible for the decreasing trap density with respect to a lower photocurrent hysteresis. PL mappings, spanning 40 μm × 40 μm, were performed to evaluate the quality of perovskite layers (Fig. 6e and f). It is clear that the perovskite layer on the ZnO/Au NR film is more uniform. Hall effect measurements were performed to further investigate the influence of perovskite morphology on the electrical properties. The corresponding structural diagrams of the devices used for tests are presented in Fig. S7. The results show that both of the MAPbI3 films are p-type. After introducing the Au NR suspension, the hole mobility increases from 26 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 43 cm2 V−1 s−1, while the hole concentration decreases from 2.40 × 1016 cm−3 to 3.09 × 1015 cm−3. The larger grains, better crystallinity and fewer boundaries can offer a reasonable explanation for this improved mobility. Meanwhile, the reduction of hole concentration indicates that the defects in the perovskite film deposited on the DMF wetted ZnO layer are also decreased.
We have further studied the time-dependent stabilized photocurrent and output power of the PSC devices by monitoring the photocurrent under a constant voltage bias at the maximum power point. The photocurrent density and PCE of the champion Au NR–ZnO-based PSC are more stable than those of the champion ZnO-based PSC upon 300 s of continuous illumination, demonstrating a better working stability (Fig. 7a). Moreover, the saturation time of Au NR–ZnO PSCs is shorter, indicating a weaker hysteresis. This well agrees with the results of J–V curves measured in reverse and forward directions (Fig. 1b and c). The incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the champion Au NR–ZnO-based PSC and ZnO-based PSC are shown in Fig. 7b, in which the IPCE is enhanced over almost the whole wavelength range absorbed by the perovskite layer. Also, the integrated JSC values of Au NR–ZnO-based PSCs and ZnO-based PSC from the IPCE spectra are 18.40 and 20.71 mA cm−2, respectively, approaching the JSC values from the J–V curves. Furthermore, the absorption spectra of MAPbI3 coated on the ZnO and ZnO/Au NR films were measured (Fig. S8). It is clear that the MAPbI3/Au NRs/ZnO exhibits stronger absorption over a broad range than the control film. For clarity, we calculated wavelength-dependent enhancement factors of the IPCE (ΔIPCE) and absorption (Δabsorbance) in Fig. 7c. Meanwhile, we recorded the electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) in the dark to investigate the charge extraction and recombination process (Fig. 7d). According to the equivalent circuit (inset) the EIS were fitted using ZView2 software, giving the relative parameters (Table S4). One can find that the transfer resistance (RCT) decreases from 62.15 Ω to 33.41 Ω. The reduction of charge transfer resistance can be ascribed to the synergy of plasmonic and solvent annealing effects, realized just by adding the Au NR suspension.
The long-term stability of PSC devices is a long-sought goal for commercial applications. Unfortunately, MAPbI3 is quite sensitive to moisture and oxygen in ambient air due to its hygroscopic nature, which tends to hydrolyze the perovskite. The degradation of the perovskite will affect the environmental stability of PSCs. Not surprisingly, the devices made by our strategy showed a long-term air stability, as confirmed by their good moisture resistance during the fabrication. The devices without the specific encapsulation were stored under ambient conditions with about 40% relative humidity at 25 °C. As shown in Fig. S9, the performance of the ZnO-based PSC devices decreases to 83% of their initial value after two months (>1400 h). However, the average PCEs of Au NR–ZnO-based PSCs can be still maintained at about 90% of their original value after storing for the same period. For the sake of comparison, the relevant values were normalized and are summarized in Tables S5 and S6. One can see that the superiority of the Au NR–ZnO-based PSCs is overwhelming in terms of every performance parameter (Fig. S10). The photo-stability of PSCs without encapsulation was also tested under continuous illumination in an ambient environment (relative humidity ∼ 50% and room temperature ∼ 25 °C). The changes of normalized JSC, VOC, FF, and PCE as a function of illumination time are depicted in Fig. S11, while the detailed parameters are summarized in Tables S7 and S8. Particularly, the Au NR–ZnO-based device retains 70.98% of its initial efficiency, whereas the control device retains only 50.35% after 300 min of illumination. These results suggest that the Au NR–ZnO-based device has a good stability under both ambient atmosphere and continuous illumination. The excellent stability of PSCs can be attributed to the synergistic effects of plasmon enhancement and solvent annealing. The solvent annealing treatment could induce a high-quality perovskite film, leading to the moisture-proof ability, due to the shielding effect of the as-prepared perovskite films with denser crystal grains and less pinholes. Both theoretical and experimental studies show that ion migration and interfacial charge accumulation within perovskite-based devices are major reasons for the origin of the device hysteresis and degradation. Ionic displacement has adverse effects on the behavior and stability of the device. The grain boundary was proved to be a main ion migration channel. In our case, the fabricated perovskite films with a large crystal size and compact grain boundaries could suppress ion movement and desorption from the MAPbI3 crystal, avoiding poor structural and environmental stability. The similar grain boundary engineering has been reported to obtain stable PSCs. In addition, poor interfacial charge transfer induced charge accumulation at the interface could lead to the distortion of the crystal structure of the perovskite and result in the degradation of PSC performance. As mentioned above, plasmon generated hot electrons injected from Au NRs to ZnO improve the mobility of the ETL and balance charge transport, giving rise to the increased stability.

Under ambient conditions, we successfully fabricated Au NR-mediated PSC devices, in which Au NRs were placed at the interface between the ZnO and perovskite layers. The synergetic effects of plasmon enhancement and solvent annealing were realized via a facile one-step method. As a result, a surge of the efficiency occurs from 14.47 to 16.51%, meanwhile promoting the air stability and photo-stability. This ought to be an excellent result for ZnO-based planar PSCs under ambient conditions. Upon careful analysis, the contributions of enhanced light absorption and hot electron injection coming from the SPR of Au NRs and the high-quality perovskite film resulting from solvent annealing using DMF were confirmed unequivocally. Au NR aggregates enhance the visible light absorption of PSCs by plasmonic near-field coupling. And the mobility of charge carriers can be balanced through modifying the trap state of ZnO by hot electron injection. In addition, the high-quality perovskite film with a lager grain size and fewer grain boundaries guarantees the stability of PSC devices. Our findings would boost the development of designing air-processed high-efficiency PSCs and manufacturing techniques on a large scale.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51579057, 51779065) and the State Key Laboratory of Urban Water Resource and Environment, Harbin Institute of Technology (2016DX07).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, Fig. S1–S11 and Tables S1–S8. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta06970k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018