 DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01071A
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2168-2176

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Keyou
Yan
,

Yongcai
Qiu
,

Wei
Chen
,

Min
Zhang
 and 

Shihe
Yang
*

Nano Science and Technology Program, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong

Department of Chemistry, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong. E-mail: chsyang@ust.hk

Received
20th January 2011
, Accepted 12th March 2011
First published on 21st April 2011
We report the development of a novel double layered photoanode for dye sensitized solar cells made of highly crystalline TiO2 octahedral nanocrystals and agglutinated mesoporous TiO2 microspheres. The underlayer of nanooctahedra serves as a transparent photoanode for copious and strong dye adsorption on the smooth (101) surfaces and for facilitated electron transport. Although the nanooctahedra are extremely small, our synthetic route has ensured a well-faceted crystalline shape with sharp edges and smooth surfaces, resulting in a 7.61% power conversion efficiency, much higher than that of P25 (5.76%). Separately, the overlayer of hierarchical TiO2 mesoporous microspheres plays the multiple roles of efficient light scattering, dye absorption and electrolyte permeation. Especially noteworthy is the agglutination of the microspheres through our 3D necking process, which has yielded an electron diffusion coefficient five times that of the P25 network and four times that of the nanooctahedra network. This is a significant breakthrough in DSSCs, which ensures that the photogenerated electrons in the overlayer can be effectively transported through such highway-like paths and ultimately collected at the FTO electrode. Therefore, in this double layered photoanode we have taken into consideration a number of disparate factors aimed at enhancing the overall DSSC performance. Drawing on the judicious combination of materials synthesis and engineering of nano-architectures and interfaces, solar cells based on this double layered structure have achieved 8.72% power conversion efficiency even with simple device fabrication procedures, showing promise as a new photoanode design for high efficiency dye sensitized solar cells.

One of the core elements of a dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) is the mesoscopic porous photoanode. Among current challenges is how to design such photoanodes with multiple performance features being optimized: efficient light harvesting and charge collection. This work has at least two contributions to offer to the development of the photoanode. The first is the successful synthesis of two different nanostructures: TiO2 nanooctahedra and agglutinated mesoporous microspheres, and the second is the use of these nanostructures as building blocks for carving out a novel double layered photoanode for DSSCs. In this photoanode construct, one layer is made of the highly crystalline TiO2 nanooctahedra, mainly for primary light absorption and charge collection, and the other consists of agglutinated mesoporous TiO2 microspheres for serving the additional functions of light scattering and electrolyte permeation. In such a double layered photoanode we have considered various factors that can affect the DSSC performance, yielding a power conversion efficiency of 8.72% with our simple fabrication procedure. This paves the way for further development of DSSCs using the double layer strategy fuelled by nanomaterials innovation.


During the past decade, dye sensitized solar cell (DSSC) has drawn intense attention as a potentially major low cost energy resource of the future, which is renewable, carbon-free, and clean. Nanocrystalline TiO2, SnO2 and ZnO have been the main photoanode materials for developing high performance DSSCs. In general, high specific surface area, fast electron transport and a large light scattering effect are desirable properties for a well performing photoanode, but these features do not always go together in a single material with a given structure. For example, although one-dimensional (1D) TiO2 and ZnO, such as nanotubes, nanorods, and nanowires, have been regarded as ideal materials for direct electron transport, their insufficient dye adsorption and light scattering still keeps the performance of the corresponding DSSCs lagging behind those made of mesoporous nanoparticle photoanodes. More discouragingly, a recent report revealed that the electron mobility of titania nanotubes was as low as that of mesoporous nanoparticle films due to the existence of exciton-like trap states in the titania nanotubes arising from the fluorine involved in the processing conditions. As a result, the mesoporous particle-based photoanodes are still the workhorse in DSSC research and the closest to practical application.

The porous electrode is normally made of anatase TiO2 nanocrystallites ∼20 nm in diameter, to ensure a large internal surface area for loading large amounts of dye molecules. Because such a film is usually rather transparent resulting in the transmittance of a significant portion of the visible light, a second layer of anatase particles 200–400 nm in diameter was often used by researchers to scatter the transmitted light back for enhancing the light harvest, which has proven effective for boosting photovoltaic efficiencies. In such a double layered structure, there are still some hitherto unsolved problems which merit attention. First, for the underlayer consisting of nanocrystals, defects, especially surface defects and grain boundaries, are quite common, which could greatly hinder electron transport, inflict recombination, and thus limit the DSSC performance. Second, the overlayer only serves to enhance light scattering but contributes little to the direct light harvest. Recently, we developed a double layer structure made up of a smaller nanospindle layer to optimize the roughness factor for efficient dye-adsorption and a larger nanospindle aggregate layer for both back scattering light and loading dye molecules. In spite of the reasonable photovoltaic efficiency achieved with this double layer structure, there is still plenty of room for improvements for both layers on such unsettled problems as the less than perfect crystallinity and charge transport of the underlayer and the inadequate dye adsorption capacity of the overlayer.
Herein, we establish two new nanostructures at different size scales for the double layered photoanode mentioned above. While the underlayer is made of highly crystalline, stable (101) surface bound TiO2 nanooctahedra about 17 nm in size which we have first synthesized in this work, the overlayer is built from agglutinated hierarchical mesoporous TiO2 microspheres about 350 nm in diameter obtained from our modified synthesis, see Scheme 1. The highly crystalline TiO2 nanooctahedra served for copious and strong dye absorption and for facilitated electron transport when assembled into a mesoporous film photoanode. The overlayer of hierarchical TiO2 mesoporous microspheres agglutinated by 3D necking played multiple roles for efficient light scattering, dye absorption, electron transport and electrolyte penetration. Although similar mesoporous microsphere films were reported previously, our modified film fabrication allowed the agglutination of the TiO2 mesoporous microspheres with each other by 3D necking during the film formation, thus greatly enhancing the inter-microsphere connectivity, facilitating electron transport, and yielding an electron diffusion coefficient five times that of the P25 control film, a significant breakthrough for the improvement of DSSCs. Therefore, the photogenerated electrons in the overlayer can be briskly transported through the agglutination-formed highways and collected efficiently at the FTO. Excellent DSSC performance has been obtained with up to ∼8.72% power conversion efficiency (PCE), and important parameters that influence cell performance have been identified.

All solvents and reagents, unless otherwise stated, were of analytically pure quality and used as received. P25 was from Hepta Chroma Solar Tech. Tetrabutyl titanate was from Alfa Aesara. N719 dye (bis-tetrabutylammonium cis-bis(isothiocyanato)bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato)ruthenium(II)), 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide and guanidinium thiocyanate were purchased from Suzhou Chemsolarism, China. tert-Butyl alcohol, acetonitrile, valeronitrile, sodium hydroxide, and hydrogen chloride were from Sigma Aldrich. Ethyl cellulose and terpineol were from Kermel.


The hydrogen titanate nanotubes were prepared as in our previous work. 5 mL hydrogen titanate suspension containing 100 mg hydrogen titanate was re-dispersed in 60 mL of water and ethanol (v/v = 1:1), followed by vigorous stirring for 30 min, and then 0.25 g bicarbonate ammonium was added and the stirring was continued for another 30 min. Afterward, the mixture was sealed in a Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave with a capacity of 100 mL and maintained at 180 °C for 10 h. After the autoclave was cooled to room temperature naturally, a white product was collected by successive centrifugation and washing with ethanol 3 times.


A typical procedure for the microspheres preparation (with a normal addition sequence of reagents) was performed as follows: 1 mL tetrabutyl titanate was added to a 100 mL beaker containing a 45 ml ethanol solution of oleylamine (1 mL). 30 ml solution of isometric H2O and ethanol was then added dropwise under vigorous stirring. After continuous stirring for another 2 h, a white precipitate was centrifugally collected, washed with excess ethanol, and kept for hydrothermal treatment and characterization. Hydrothermal treatment was carried out by a similar procedure to that reported in the literature. In brief, the precipitates obtained above from 4 runs combined were dispersed in a mixture of 80 mL ethanol and 40 mL DI water. To this suspension, 1 mL concentrated aqueous ammonia solution was added dropwise under stirring, and the resulting suspension was transferred to 200 mL autoclave and then kept at 160 °C for 20 h.


For the preparation of mesoscopic TiO2 layers with microspheres and nanooctahedra, viscous pastes were prepared by the following procedure. To an ethanol suspension containing 1.0 g of TiO2, a mixture of ethyl cellulose (0.3–0.4 g) and terpineol (5 mL) was added. The solvent was then evaporated at 80 °C. Then the paste was heated above 130 °C until the color changed from white to sandy beige. Then several drops of terpineol were added to facilitate the subsequent film formation. The as-prepared TiO2 paste was coated onto an FTO substrate using the doctor-blade method. The coated films were baked at 200 °C for 30 min and subsequently calcined at 500 °C for 30 min. After cooling down to 80 °C, the TiO2 films were dye loaded by immersing into a mixed acetonitrile/tert-butyl alcohol solution (1:1 in volume) containing 5 × 10−4 M N719 dye for 24 h.

These dye-loaded electrodes were assembled into solar cells with Pt-sputtered FTO counter electrodes and acetonitrile/valeronitrile (85:15, volume ratio) electrolyte containing 0.6 M 1,2-dimethyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide, 0.03 M I2, 0.1 M guanidinium thiocyanate, and 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine by using 60 adhesive tape (Scotch brand). We determined the adsorbed dye amount by immersing the films in 1 mM NaOH solution (water/ethanol, 1:1, volume ratio) and monitoring the desorbed dye concentration by UV-vis spectroscopy. The light source (Oriel solar simulator, 450 W Xe lamp, AM 1.5 global filter) was calibrated to 1 sun (100 mW cm−2) using an optical power meter (Newport, model 1916-C) equipped with a Newport 818P thermopile detector. J–V characteristics curves and intensity modulated photocurrent/photovoltage spectra (IMPS/IMVS) were measured by the Zahner Zennium C-IMPS system. IPCE was measured on the basis of a Jobin-Yvon Triax 190 monochromator. The photoanode film area for the DSSC performance test was typically 0.25 cm2.

Morphologies of the nanomaterials were directly examined on a JEOL6700F SEM at an accelerating voltage of 5 kV. TEM observations were carried out on a JEOL 2010F microscope operating at 200 kV. BET surface areas and pore size distributions of the film samples were characterized using a Coulter SA 3100 surface area analyzer. The samples for BET characterization were obtained by scratching the as-prepared films off the conductive glass substrates. XRD of the film samples on glass slides was characterized using a Philips high resolution X-ray diffraction system (model PW1825). Diffused reflectance spectra were taken on the same film samples using a Perkin-Elmer UV/vis spectrophotometer (model Lambda 20). The film thickness was determined by a Tencor Alpha-Step 200 surface profiler system.


The highly crystalline nanooctahedra were prepared by hydrothermal treatment of hydrogen titanate nanotubes in isometric water and ethanol with the help of ammonium bicarbonate. For the preparation of hydrogen titanate nanotubes, we used the method of Kasuga et al. (see the Experimental section for details). We have previously demonstrated the precipitation of size-varied anatase titania nanospindles from hydrogen titanate nanotubes with methylamine and found that isometric water and ethanol solvents were conducive to the formation of better crystallinity and larger sized nanospindles than isometric water and glycol owing to the high pressure conditions entailed with ethanol. In the present work, we adopted the isometric water and ethanol solvent system to maintain the high pressure conditions but chose ammonium bicarbonate to precipitate small sized and well-faceted anatase titania nanocrystals. To our delight, under these moderately alkaline conditions, the as-prepared particles are uniform and have a well defined shape of nanooctahedra exposing their stable (101) facets, as can be seen in Fig. 1. From the high resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) image in Fig. 1(b), even the smallest nanooctahedra, e.g., <10 nm, have a perfect shape with sharp edges and distinct, omnidirectional lattice fringes, suggesting high crystallinity. The fringe periods of 3.5 Å and 4.8 Å in Fig. 1(b) are in conformity with the lattice spacings of the (101) and (002) planes of anatase TiO2, respectively. The nanooctahedra measure 10 nm to 25 nm in size judging from the large-area TEM image in Fig. 1(a), consistent with the estimated average size of ∼17 nm by applying the Scherrer equation to the broadened (101) diffraction line (see S1 of the ESI). Conceivably, the added ammonium bicarbonate could play dual roles in forming the titania nanooctahedra. First, hydrolysis of ammonium bicarbonate would create weak alkaline conditions in the solution, which could neutralize the hydrogen titanate tubes and gradually precipitate titania nanocrystals. Second, both ammonia and carbonate anions from ammonium bicarbonate can adsorb on nanocrystal surfaces, impinging on the nanocrystal growth. According to previous theoretical and computational studies, C- and N-terminated (101) surfaces are much more stable than C- and N-terminated (001) surfaces. Therefore, the presence of ammonium bicarbonate would suppress the growth of the (101) surfaces much more than that of the (001) surfaces. As a result, the (101) surfaces have survived the growth, leading to the observed octahedral shape of the titania nanocrystals. In order to verify such surface capping structures, we fell back on infrared spectroscopy. Indeed, as can be seen in Fig. S2 (ESI), we observed a peak at 1380 cm−1, characteristic of the carbonate group (CO2−3), and another two peaks at 1635 cm−1 and 3440 cm−1, a signature of the primary amine group (–NH2), testifying to the C- and N-terminated structures of the nanooctahedra, respectively.

The hierarchical mesoporous microspheres were prepared by a sol–gel process followed by hydrothermal treatment, which is similar to the methods reported previously but with simple modifications (see the Experimental section). During the sol–gel process, amorphous precursor microspheres were produced by using oleylamine as a morphology-directing agent. When 30 mL of an isometric solution of H2O and ethanol was added dropwise, hydrolysis of tetrabutyl titanate occurred, and the resulting Ti(OC4H9)4−x(OH)x was then attached to the hydrophilic head of oleylamine forming micelles. This organic–inorganic composite of Ti(OC4H9)4−x(OH)x–oleylamine micelles aggregated into microspheres, which could be dispersed by continuous stirring. Fig. 2a shows an SEM image of the amorphous microspheres, ∼450 nm across on average; at this step of synthesis, the microsphere surfaces were quite smooth without noticeable pores or crystalline features. Shown in Fig. 2(b) are the corresponding microspheres after hydrothermal crystallization; the mean size became smaller, ∼350 nm, due to the volume shrinkage, but the spherical shape has been maintained without breakage in plain sight. More importantly, connected mesopores have emerged in these microspheres thanks to the crystallization process. From the TEM and HRTEM images in Fig. 2(c), one can find that the microspheres are made of interpenetrating spindly nanocrystals and mesopores, opening the possibility of facile dye loading/adsorption onto the microspheres in large amounts. The SAED pattern in Fig. 2(d) can be readily indexed to the titania anatase phase, corroborating the conclusion that the mesoporous microspheres are a highly crystalline anatase framework. Actually, both the nanooctahedra and the hierarchical microspheres exist in the anatase phase without detectable impurities as judged from the XRD pattern (JCPDS card no. 21–1272), shown in Fig. S1 of the ESI. In short, both the hydrogen titanate and the amorphous microsphere precursors have indeed transformed into the anatase phase of TiO2.
The highly crystalline TiO2 nanooctahedra with the exposed stable (101) surfaces should be advantageous for constructing DSSC photoanodes because they can ensure strong and dense dye adsorption and can offer good planar contacts (instead of grain boundaries) between the nanocrystals after calcination, resulting in enhancement of both light harvest and electron transport. In parallel, the hierarchical mesoporous TiO2 microspheres can be used to enhance light scattering, electrolyte permeation, as well as dye adsorption and electron transport. As such, we built double layer electrodes using these two materials. In order to improve the inter-microsphere connection, we developed a technique to agglutinate the microspheres together through a putative necking mechanism. Briefly, in the paste preparation process, we added an excess amount of ethyl cellulose, about 1.5 times what is normally used, to increase the viscosity of the paste (see the Experimental section for details). After removal of ethanol at 80 °C, the paste was subsequently heated to above 130 °C under stirring until the color changed from white to sandy beige, hinting at partial carbonization of the ethyl cellulose. This procedure has allowed the ethyl cellulose solution to penetrate and intersperse between the microspheres, and the subsequent partial carbonization assisted the joining and agglutination between the microspheres. During the following calcination step for film formation, the inter-microsphere agglutination was consolidated and fastened, as can be seen in Fig. 3(a) with a top view image of the microspheres film. Further improvement of both the inter- and the intra-microsphere connections was accomplished by the subsequent post-TiCl4 treatment, similar to procedures used previously by Sauvage et al. and by Yu et al. but with organic sol. Careful observation revealed that the agglutination was attained by necking between microspheres in three dimensions (3D necking) during the film formation, as shown in Fig. 3(b). Fig. 3(c) shows the cross-sectional view SEM image of a 10 + 6 μm double layered film. Clearly, the connection between the two layers is also quite good; the two layers are in conformal attachment with no sign of delamination. Close examination of a fractured surface on the top of the film shows that some of the microspheres have been shredded into pieces (see Fig. 3(d)), reflecting the high strength of the inter-microsphere linkages comparable to that of the inter-nanocrystal linkages within the microspheres.
For the sake of comparison, four different photoanodes were prepared (see Fig. S4 in the ESI): (1) a single layer (10 μm thick) of standard Degussa P25 TiO2, (2) a single layer (10 μm thick) of the TiO2 nanooctahedra, (3) a single layer (10 μm thick) of the hierarchical TiO2 microspheres, and (4) double layers of the TiO2 nanooctahedra (10 μm thick) and the hierarchical TiO2 microspheres (6 μm thick). Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface areas of these four films have been measured and are presented in Table 1. Of note, the surface areas of the films made by the nanooctahedra (95.01 m2 g−1) and microspheres (87.78 m2 g−1) are nearly twice that of the film derived from P25 (49.58 m2 g−1), and the surface area of the double layered film is 90.08 m2 g−1, clearly lying between those of the nanooctahedra and microspheres. The pore size distributions of the three single layered films and the double layered film determined from their N2 absorption/desorption isotherms are shown in Fig. 4(a). One can see that the films of the hierarchical microspheres and the nanooctahedra show narrow pore size distributions centered at 16.46 nm and 24.29 nm, respectively, based on the BJH desorption curves. The narrow peak widths suggest that the regularly sized nanoparticles are well organized in the microspheres and nanooctahedra film. It should be mentioned that although the BJH desorption method can give an exact pore size distribution in the nanometre range, it can't reveal the sizes of the inter-microsphere pores. In light of that, we attempted to analyze the BJH adsorption results and found that the pores of the inter-microspheres are distributed in the size range of 120–180 nm (see Fig. S3 of the ESI). As expected, the double layer film displays a broad pore size distribution spanning the range of pore sizes of the microspheres and nanooctahedra, characterized by their two salient peaks of 16.46 nm and 24.29 nm, respectively, derived from the BJH desorption results. As a reference, the pores in the P25 film are widely distributed, which is reasonable considering the irregular shape and disparate size of the constituent particles. Nevertheless, the pores of all these films still appear suitable for dye adsorption and electrolyte permeation, thereby attaining reasonable performance.
Films/DSSCs
Thickness/μm

V
oc/V

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF (%)
PCE (%)
BET/m2 g−1

P25
nanoparticles

10
0.730
13.27
59.4
5.76
49.583
Nanooctahedra
10
0.744
15.25
67.1
7.61
95.011
Microspheres
10
0.758
16.50
61.4
7.67
87.780
Double layer
10 + 6
0.740
18.18
64.8
8.72
90.080

UV-vis
diffuse reflectance spectra of the four bare TiO2 films are shown in Fig. 4(b), which reflect their different light scattering/transmittance capabilities. Comparatively, the nanooctahedra-derived photoanode film presents little diffuse reflectance and thus high transparency in the entire UV-vis range. This would cause the unabsorbed light to penetrate through the film without being back scattered to enhance light absorption. In contrast, the other three photoanode films exhibit high diffuse reflectance in the visible range of 400–500 nm, but a distinctly rapid decline in light scattering was observed for the P25 film in the wavelength range from 500 to 800 nm. Overall, the reflectances of the films made of the bare microspheres and the double layers film are much higher than that of the P25 film in the wavelength range from 500 to 800 nm, pointing at the key role of the hierarchical microspheres in the two films in dominating the light scattering behavior. Hence, such a light scattering overlayer would maximize the use of light in the range of 600–800 nm, and thus would enhance the photon to electricity conversion efficiency.

After dye loading, DSSC cells were assembled from the four photoanodes listed in Table 1 and then subjected to measurements of current density (J)–voltage (V) characteristics under illumination of AM 1.5 simulated sunlight with a power density of 100 mW cm−2. Fig. 5(a) shows the J–V curves of these solar cells, and the resultant photovoltaic parameters are collated in Table 1. Two observations are noteworthy. First, the nanooctahedra- and microsphere-derived photoanodes display much higher photon to electricity conversion efficiencies than that made of P25, mainly due to the larger amount of dye loading arising from the larger surface area. Specifically, the 10 μm thick TiO2 film photoanodes made of nanooctahedra and microspheres, respectively, garnered short-circuit current densities (Jsc) of 15.25 and 16.5 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltages (Voc) of 0.744 and 0.758 V, and fill factors (FF) of 67.1% and 61.4%, leading to overall power conversion efficiencies (PCE) of 7.61% and 7.67%. However, the 10 μm thick TiO2 film photoanode made of P25 nanoparticles attained a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 13.27 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.73 V, and fill factor (FF) of 59.4%, leading to an overall power conversion efficiency (PCE) of only 5.76%. Second, the DSSC made of the double layer of nanooctahedra and microspheres outperformed the other three cells mentioned above, with a higher Jsc (18.18 mA cm−2), Voc (0.74 V), FF (64.80%), and thus a higher PCE of up to 8.72%. As will be discussed below, the enhanced Jsc can be understood as a result of the increased amount of dye loading and the added light scattering overlayer, as well as the improved charge collection efficiency due to the use of the unique, high quality single-crystalline nanooctahedra and the hierarchical microspheres.

In order to better understand the different photovoltaic performances of the four DSSCs, incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were collected and are shown in Fig. 5(b). Notably, the IPCE spectra of all four cells with the N719 dye display a maximum at about 535 nm. As a reference, the DSSC made of P25 has the lowest IPCE value of the DSSCs, which is explicable mainly P25 nanoparticles having the lowest BET surface area. The DSSCs made of a single layer of the nanooctahedra and the microspheres separately present a similar IPCE profile with only the exception that in the wavelength ranging from 600 nm to 800 nm, the IPCE values of the microsphere-based cell are somewhat higher than those of the nanooctahedra-derived cell. On the basis of our BET and diffuse reflectance results, the similar IPCEs in the wavelength range of 300–800 nm are mainly attributed to the comparable BET surface areas, and the somewhat higher IPCEs in the wavelength range of 600–750 nm are owed to the much more efficient light scattering of the microspheres. Compared to single layered nanooctahedra, the double layered DSSC possesses higher IPCE values in the whole visible wavelength range, clearly attributable to the photocurrent generated by the microspheres in the overlayer. The globally increased IPCEs, especially in the wavelength ranging from 300 nm to 600 nm, and the corresponding photovoltaic performance enhancement indicate that the generated electrons in the overlayer can also be collected efficiently. Viewed closely, the IPCE curve of the double layered DSSC is much more protuberant in the long wavelength region (600–750 nm) than that of the octahedra-based cell, indicating the synergy of the two layers in enhancing the cell performance. While the high transparency of the nanooctahedra layer should allow the passage of the unabsorbed light into the microspheres overlayer and the subsequent photocurrent generation in the overlayer, the strong light scattering of the microspheres overlayer is capable of reflecting the light back to the octahedra underlayer, effectively increasing the optical length of the photoanode and giving rise to the more protuberant IPCE curve.

To gauge the dynamics of charge transport and charge recombination of the four kinds of cells, we resorted to intensity modulated photocurrent/photovoltage spectroscopy (IMPS/IMVS). In these studies, we used a diode laser light source with variable intensities at 536 nm, a wavelength close to the absorption peak of N 719 dye as well as the peak values of the IPCE spectra. Fig. 6 represents the main results in the form of the electron diffusion coefficient (, τt denotes electron transport time) and electron lifetime (τr) as a function of short-circuit photocurrent (Jsc). Clearly recognized are the power law dependences of the electron diffusion coefficient (Dn) and τr on Jsc, which are in accordance with the well-known trapping–detrapping model customarily used to describe electron transport/recombination in DSSCs. On the whole, the small variation of the slopes of the four cells is commonly thought to arise from the different backbones and porosities of the corresponding photoanode films. Notably, whereas τr appears to be insensitive to the morphology of our photoanode films, Dn depends very much on the morphology.

Despite the much more connective junctions of the nanooctahedra film than the P25 film according to our BET results, the Dn curve of the nanooctahedra-derived DSSC still lies above that of the P25-derived DSSC, indicating faster electron transport of the former than that of the latter. This can be accounted for by the high crystallinity and uniformity of the TiO2 nanooctahedra film already divulged above by XRD and TEM, which would boost both the interior conductivity and interfacial conductivity though the (101) planar contacts between nanocrystals. For the mesoporous TiO2 microspheres film, the Dn curve lies even higher, actually much higher (5 times), hinting at its excellent electron transport properties. This significant improvement of electron transport can be understood by invoking two basic causes. The first is related to the close packing of grains arising from the crystal intergrowth within the microspheres, resulting in the very good interior contacts between the constituent nanoparticles. The second is our success in agglutinating the mesoporous hierarchical microspheres by the 3D necking, as illustrated by Fig. 3a, b, which builds a sort of highway to facilitate electron transport. One can not overestimate the importance of this feature of agglutinated microspheres for the double layered structure (as thick as 10 + 6 μm) to collect charge efficiently. Previously, related work by other groups obtained electron diffusion coefficients of microspheres films only comparable to those of P25 films. However, the Dn values of our microspheres film are 5 times higher than those of the P25 film, clearly ascribable to the 3D necking. For the DSSC with the double layered photoanode, the Dn curve lies between those of the single layered nanooctahedra and the single layered microspheres. An interesting question is why the Dn values of the double layered photoanode are higher than those of the single layered nanooctahedra. By carefully observing the nanostructures of the single layer nanooctahedra and the double layer film obtained from the subsequent overlayer deposition, one can find that the subsequent bladed microspheres in the overlayer fill up the chinks in the nanooctahedra underlayer (see Fig. S5 in the ESI). This saw-tooth-type joint between the two layers may explain the higher Dn values of the double layered photoanode than those of the single layered nanooctahedra.
Next, we move on to discussing the recombination times in the four DSSCs. Although the nanooctahedra (17 nm) and the nanocrystals (18 nm) within the microspheres are much smaller than the P25 particles (30 nm) resulting in many more connective junctions, the τr curves (see Fig. 6(b)) of the microspheres and nanooctahedra films lie only slightly below that of the P25 film in the low Jsc region. Extrapolating to the high Jsc region, the τr curves of the microspheres and nanooctahedra films would lie above that of the P25 film. This result is presumably ascribable to the more defects in P25 than in microspheres and nanooctahedra. In addition, the little difference between the τr curves of the microspheres and nanooctahedra films may be explained by a trade off between the high crystallinity and low connectivity of the nanooctahedra, and between the high connectivity and low crystallinity of the microspheres. Therefore, given, among others, the much larger surface areas of the nanooctahedra and microspheres films, which allow larger amounts of dye loading than that of the P25 (see Table 1), the slightly decreased τr has not yet toppled the performance of the cells as a whole.
To weigh the charge transport and recombination properties in combination, electron diffusion length is apparently a more meaningful parameter, which can be obtained by using the formula . The calculated electron diffusion lengths for the four photoanodes are shown in Fig. 7 as a function of Jsc. Several points merit attention. First, the agglutinated network of nanocrystalline microspheres by 3D necking has a longer electron diffusion length than the particulate films composed of the nanooctahedra and P25 building blocks, obviously attributable to the agglutination by 3D necking. Second, although the electron diffusion length of the nanooctahedra film is not particularly long, it is much less sensitive to light intensity (which is proportional to Jsc) than that of the P25 film, thanks to the higher crystallinity of the nanooctahedra. Third, the double layered film possesses an electron diffusion length which lies between those of the single layer nanooctahedra and microspheres. As mentioned above, this is likely a result of the embedding of the microspheres from the overlayer surface into the small chinks on the underlayer surface, which would form inter-digitated surface bonds.
To better understand the dynamics of electron transport/recombination in the titania network, electron transfer between the counter electrode and electrolyte, and I−3 diffusion in the electrolyte under working conditions, further studies were carried out with electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) under one-sun illumination (100 mW m−2 AM 1.5). Fig. 8 shows the Nyquist plots under the open-circuit condition for the DSSCs. In general, three semicircles extending from total series resistance (Rs) can be recognized and fitted according to an equivalent circuit model (see the inset in Fig. 8), where the finite diffusion element is also represented by the shunt resistance and low frequency constant phase element (CPE). The semicircle in the high frequency region (105–102 Hz) represents the impedance corresponding to charge transfer at the counter electrode (R1), while those in intermediate frequencies (102–10 Hz) and the low-frequency region (10–0.1 Hz) give information on the impedance at the TiO2/electrolyte interface (R2) related to the charge transport/recombination and finite diffusion of the electrolyte (R3), respectively. The fitted data are put together in Table 2, which reveal several features. First, by combining Table 1 and Table 2, one can find that a smaller Rs is associated with a higher FF, which is expected for a solar cell. Second, the R1 values for the DSSCs are all similar, simply because the counter electrodes were all obtained by the sputtering technique in nearly the same way. Third, the R2 value of the nanooctahedra film is a bit smaller than that of the P25 film. Here, R2 is commonly thought to be mainly determined by the charge recombination resistance, with partial contribution from transport resistance. Two factors can be invoked to explain the lower R2 value of the nanooctahedra film: a larger surface area (nearly twice that of the P25 film) resulting in a smaller recombination resistance and a more faceted nanocrystalline surface giving rise to a smaller transport resistance. We also found that the R2 value of the microspheres film is smaller than that of the nanooctahedra film, and the R2 value of the double layered film lies below those of the microspheres and nanooctahedra films. Finally, from the values of R3, one sees appreciably higher diffusion coefficients of I−3 ions in the nanooctahedra film and especially the microsphere film than that of the P25 film. This suggests that the hierarchical TiO2 pore structure, with large, connected inter-microsphere pores 120–180 nm in size, permits efficient diffusion of I−3 ions.
DSSCs

R
s/Ω

R
1/Ω

R
2/Ω

R
3/Ω

P25
nanoparticles

25.7
2.92
11.5
8.78
Nanooctahedra
17.0
2.80
9.18
8.35
Microspheres
23.7
2.81
7.67
4.84
Double layer
20.0
3.17
7.18
5.50

In summary, we have developed a novel double layer TiO2 photoanode consisting of highly crystalline nanooctahedra and agglutinated hierarchical microspheres for high performance DSSCs. This development builds on our successful synthesis of uniform, highly crystalline TiO2 nanooctahedra and the ability to agglutinate the hierarchical mesoporous TiO2 microspheres with a wet necking method. The transparent underlayer made of the highly crystalline nanooctahedra with high specific surface areas is not only good for light absorption, arising from dense and strong dye adsorption, and transmission, but also favorable for electron transport. The overlayer made of the mesoporous hierarchical microspheres can serve as a bifunctional material to enhance light scattering and photoinduced electron injection/transport. Furthermore, the agglutination of the hierarchical microspheres during the film formation yielded an electron diffusion coefficient five times that of the P25 film, which ensures that the generated electrons in the overlayer can be collected efficiently at the FTO. In all, in this double layered photoanode we have considered various factors important to improve the performance of DSSC. With this novel, integrated architecture for DSSCs, we have attained PCEs of >8.72% using our simple fabrication procedure which is by no means optimized yet. Moreover, our preparation techniques for the TiO2 nanooctahedra and microspheres are simple and easy to scale up with low cost. Therefore this novel double layered structure is a promising replacement for the traditional double layer photoanodes made of nanoparticles and microcrystals.


This work was supported by the HK-RGC General Research Funds (GRF No. HKUST 604809 and 605710).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional XRD patterns of TiO2 nanooctahedra and hierarchical microspheres; FTIR spectra showing the as-prepared nanooctahedra; pore distribution of microspheres by BJH adsorption; photographs of the four TiO2 films; SEM images showing cracking defects of a mesoporous single layered nanooctahedra film. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee01071a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011