 DOI: 10.1039/D1TC02357H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 14749-14756


Boxin
Wang
,

Shiqing
Bi
*,

Jiyu
Zhou
,

Nafees
Ahmad
,

Dongyang
Zhang
,

Yuan
Zhang
 and 

Huiqiong
Zhou
*

CAS Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: zhouhq@nanoctr.cn

Center of Materials Science and Optoelectronics Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China

School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Yulin University, Shaanxi Province, Yulin 719000, P. R. China

School of Chemistry, Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Biomedical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, P. R. China

Received
22nd May 2021
, Accepted 20th September 2021
First published on 1st October 2021
Perovskite solar cells (PSC) have undergone rapid development in recent years due to their excellent photovoltaic performance. To attain desirable crystallization in perovskites, thermal annealing is widely adopted, although this does simultaneously introduce unfavourable degradation channels via the formation of defects. Here, we propose an illumination-assisted room-temperature process to replace traditional thermal annealing. We show that, using this strategy, similar power conversion efficiencies to those obtained with thermal annealing were obtained. Avoiding the negative effects that are induced by thermal treatment of the materials, the room-temperature-processed devices exhibit an impressive shelf stability, with no obvious degradation after 166 days. The results demonstrated in this work provide the opportunity to achieve room-temperature-annealed PSCs without compromising their stability toward the realistic application of PSC-based photovoltaic techniques.

In the past few decades, organic–inorganic hybrid lead halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted widespread attention due to their unique properties such as their low binding energy, long carrier lifetime, long carrier diffusion distance and strong absorption. So far, a state-of-the-art power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 25% has been reported. This efficiency is already competitive with thin film solar cells that are based on commercial polysilicon or copper indium gallium selenide and cadmium telluride. The critical barriers that impede the realistic application of PSCs are the stability and difficulties in maintaining lab-based efficiencies for large-scale device production.

In perovskites, thermal annealing (TA) is essential for chemical transformation and crystallization with an increased domain size in the perovskite films. In addition, TA plays an important role in the method of perovskite film modification via specific film-coating procedure or surface passivation. In the study by Seok et al., solvent engineering based on DMSO–GBL mixed solvents using an anti-solution process was proposed, which, coupled with TA, led to obtaining high-quality perovskite films. In the widely used two-step spin-coating method, TA was applied to realize the concurrent diffusion and reaction between the PbI and MAI components. Based on TA, a couple of post-treatment methods have been designed to further improve the perovskite film quality. Examples are of the proposed vacuum flash-assisted solution process or PEAI salt-based surface passivation. Although TA exerts visible modification of the perovskite film quality and crystallization, defects, either electronically or structurally, could be introduced in the process of TA, e.g., via the evaporation of MA+ or I− or the introduced pinholes and mechanical stress. These adverse effects pose a potential threat to the stability and efficiency of PSCs.
To solve these problems, attempts to replace TA with alternative approaches have emerged for the regulation of crystallization in perovskites. Qiao et al. reported for the first time that perovskite films could grow and crystallize freely in ambient air at room temperature without thermal treatment. Park et al. investigated the effect of a natural drying process after diethyl ether immersion instead of TA. Zhang, Eslamian et al. introduced a new preparation method using ultrasonic substrate vibration post-processing technology. While these approaches demonstrated the potential to achieve high-quality perovskite thin films without TA, we note that the impact of these TA-free process methods on the significant figure of merit, i.e., stability, is often neglected.
In this work, we propose a room-temperature (RT) processing strategy for the preparation of high-quality perovskite thin films. We investigated the key impacts of the proposed process method on the crystallization in perovskite solids and device characteristics by focusing on understanding the relationship between the crystallization time and the device performance. With the RT process, efficient perovskite devices with long-term stability were obtained. In addition, we analysed the reasons for the extraordinary stability of the devices prepared via the RT process.

In this study, we chose the architype MAPbI3 perovskite as the photo-absorber. The TA-based preparation methods for the perovskite film were used as reported in previous studies (details are given below in the Experimental section). In short, after spin-coating the perovskite precursor solutions, the as-spun MAPbI3 wet films were heated at 75 °C for 2 min and 90 °C for 4 min; for the RT processing, the as-spun perovskite wet films were kept in an N2-purged glove box (temperature = 27–32 °C, O2 ≤ 0.01 ppm, and H2O ≤ 0.01 ppm) with different storage time intervals. The schematic of the TA- and RT-based processes is shown in Fig. 1. With the RT process, the colour of the as-spun perovskite wet films changed from transparent to yellow in half an hour and then slowly turned completely black in 24 h. Of note, the colour difference between the TA- and RT-processed films (after 24 h) was almost invisible to the naked eye (Fig. S1, ESI).

To understand the evolution of crystallization in MAPbI3 through the RT process, we performed absorption spectroscopy and X-ray diffractometry (XRD) measurements on the MAPbI3 films at different storage time intervals (i.e., 0 h, 24 h, 48 h, 72 h, 96 h, 120 h, 144 h, and 168 h). As can be seen, the as-spun perovskite wet film does not exhibit the featured perovskite absorption peaks until 24 h (Fig. 2a). The absorption peak intensity of shows regular changes, increasing with the storage time up to 144 h and then decreasing afterward. This behaviour points to crystallization in MAPbI3 tending to be enhanced upon increasing the RT process time. The absorption spectra of the TA- and RT-processed MAPbI3 films are comparatively shown in Fig. S2a (ESI) We cannot see any obvious difference except for a slight enhancement around 400–500 nm in the annealed sample. Further insight is gained from the XRD results (Fig. 2b). The XRD peaks at 14.4°, 28.8°, and 32.2° are assigned to the (110), (220) and (110) crystallographic planes, respectively. The absence of any peak shift and new peaks in the XRD patterns suggest that the crystal structures formed in these RT-processed films (except for 0 h) are almost the same. For the main (110) diffraction peak, there are no significant changes in the full width at half maximum (FWHM) with increasing the RT processing time (the FWHM is 0.126° for 96 h, 0.127° for 120 h, 0.126° for 144 h, and 0.127° for 168 h). We further investigated the strength of the main (110) and (210) XRD peaks with prolonging the RT process time. As seen from the results (Fig. S2b, ESI), the intensities of both peaks increase with increasing the time from 96 h to 144 h and then they start to decrease after 144 h. This is indicative of the development of the perovskite phases within ∼144 h, with the MAPbI3 decomposition beyond the optimal process, likely caused by the effects of solvents or ambient light in the storage environment. The results of XRD are consistent with the increased absorption (Fig. 2a), both pointing to the enhanced crystallinity with appropriate elongation of the RT processing time. Finally, we compared the XRD spectra of the RT-processed sample (144 h) with those based on TA treatments. As shown in Fig. S2c (ESI), there is no significant change in the peak position and FWHM. Interestingly, in the RT perovskite films, the ratios of the primary (110) plane to the remaining XRD peaks were found to increase significantly compared with the ratios based on the annealed films. This suggests that the crystals are adapted with the growth in the (110) plane. The combined results show that in the absence of TA, MAPbI3 could form the basic perovskite structure in the first 24 hours and experiences a self-reparation process until 144 h.
Based on our findings, we tried to fabricate a complete perovskite solar cell using the RT process. Fig. 3a shows the device structure of ITO/PTAA/perovskite/PC61BM/C60/BCP/Ag. PTAA has been proved to be a suitable candidate for the hole-transporting layer (HTL) in PSCs. The p–i–n device configuration was adopted since it helps to reduce the hysteresis effect and processing temperature, which facilitate our analysis. With the device optimization, we turned to the best photovoltaic characteristics, as shown in Fig. 3b (the corresponding device parameters are summarized in Table 1). The open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current (Jsc) and fill factor (FF) show an increasing tendency with the processing time (up to 144 h), followed by a decrease afterward, leading to a peak PCE of 18.05%. The dependence of the cell parameters on the processing time agrees well to that of the crystallization (as indicated by the UV–vis spectra and XRD results). The Jsc value obtained from integration of the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra (see Fig. 3c) is in good agreement with the values obtained from the current density–voltage curves, with a deviation of less than 5%. Meanwhile, the hysteresis also decreases with the processing time (see Fig. S3, ESI), indicating that charge trapping or ion migration (both can cause hysteresis) may be mitigated with the enhanced crystallization. We also compared the best photovoltaic performance with and without TA (see the results in Fig. S4, ESI). The annealed device delivered a Jsc value of 21.66 mA cm−2, a Voc value of 1.08 V, and an FF value of 79.71%, leading to a PCE value of 18.65% (reverse scan). The RT-processed device yielded a Jsc value of 20.76 mA cm−2, a Voc value of 1.09 V, and an FF value of 79.75% with an ultimate PCE value of 18.05% (reverse scan). The comparable PCE value (>18%) evidences the suitability of the RT process for preparing efficient PSCs. Fig. 3d–g show the statistics of the cell parameters based on the two processing methods. We are confident that the effect of annealing on Voc is similar to that without TA (the Voc values are between 1.06 and 1.09 eV) and the average value of the RT devices is slightly higher. It should be noted that the FF of the RT device displays a wider distribution, despite the similar values of the highest FFs. We consider that it is probably due to the failure of precise control of the crystallization, given that the entire RT process is self-remedied with low external driving forces.

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
IPCE (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
48 h
0.25
8.49
—
26.63
0.56
72 h
1.01
6.68
—
64.58
4.33
96 h
1.03
13.95
13.61
71.56
10.28
120 h
1.08
19.09
18.41
77.59
16.00
144 h
1.09
20.76
19.71
79.75
18.05
168 h
1.07
17.79
17.24
72.86
13.87
Annealing
1.08
21.66
20.77
79.71
18.65
The long-term stability of PSCs is of enormous importance for meaningful applications. In this context, we compared the stability of the optimal devices based on the two process methods, through monitoring the PCE as a function of the device storage time under a nitrogen atmosphere (T = 27–32 °C, O2 ≤ 0.01 ppm, and H2O ≤ 0.01 ppm). As shown in Fig. 3h, after storage under N2 in the dark for 1500 h, the devices with the annealing processing maintain around 90% of their initial PCE values, while the devices without annealing maintain 100% PCE values. In addition, to accelerate aging, the two batches of devices were stored at 85 °C for 250 h, and the devices with the annealing processing maintained around 80% of their initial PCE, while the devices without annealing maintained their 100% PCE (Fig. 3i). The results demonstrate the improved device stability using the proposed RT process. We also note that the device without TA treatment shows an increase of the PCE with storage. By contrast, the TA-processed device exhibits a monotonic decay with time. It is impressive that this contrast in the stability can be observed that after a shelf-storage of 166 days, and that 100.9% of the initial efficiency is maintained for the RT-processed devices, whereas only 83.9% of the initial PCE was retained for the annealed devices (Fig. S5, ESI). This prominent stability (with the RT process) motivated us to conduct further studies to understand the mechanisms behind this, as will be discussed in later sections.
As a first assessment of the charge trapping that impairs the device efficiency and stability, we looked at the charge recombination kinetics in these PSCs based on light intensity-dependent photovoltage measurements. The recombination type is generally revealed by the slope (in the units of thermal voltage, kBT/q) of the Voc–light intensity characteristics. For a slope greater than unity, defect-mediated Shockley–Read–Hall recombination is indicated. As can be seen in Fig. 4a, the Voc–light intensity curves of the RT-processed devices show slope values of 2.57 kBT/q (96 h), 1.96 kBT/q (120 h), 1.48 kBT/q (144 h) and 1.55 kBT/q (168 h). The slope gradually decreases with the increase of crystallization time (from 96 to 144 h), indicating that the SRH recombination is gradually decreased over time. The slope is related to the quality of the film, and the trend changes are consistent with the XRD and J–V curves. It should be pointed out that none of these devices shows a slope close to the thermal voltage. This seems to indicate that there are still certain defects in the perovskite layers that cause the occurrence of SRH recombination. In addition, the FF, PCE and Jsc results are shown in Fig. S6 (ESI).
We further performed impedance spectroscopy to understand the transport properties in these solar cells. Fig. 4b shows the Nyquist plots of impedance under AM1.5 G solar irradiation under short-circuit conditions. The impedance was fitted with equivalent circuit modelling (ECM) using single-RC components (see the fitting results in Table S2, ESI). It is apparent that the value of the series resistance (Rs) does not change significantly with the RT processing time, and all are comparable to the Rs of the TA-processed device. The results provide an indication that the RT perovskite films have interface properties comparable to those of the annealed perovskite film. We observe a decrease in the radius of the semicircle arc as the processing time is increased from 96 to 144 h for the RT devices. This tendency can point to a more rapid transit time for charge carriers. Moreover, the chemical capacitance, related to the charge carrier density under illumination, was found to increase with the processing time as well (with the outlier point in the 168 h-process cell) and be maximized in the device processed for 144 h. The increased chemical capacitance can result from the mitigated SRH recombination with the boosted charge transport. This behaviour agrees fully with the trend of Jsc in the corresponding devices.
As is known, both charge recombination and extraction depend directly on the transport properties. Therefore, we further investigated the charge recombination kinetics through transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements. Fig. 4c shows the TPC decay kinetics of various RT devices under short-circuit conditions. The charge extraction time (τext) was determined based on a mono-exponential decay model. Under the same set of conditions, the τext values for the RT devices were determined to be 94.02 ± 0.57 ns, 70.83 ± 0.38 ns, 55.72 ± 0.24 ns, and 76.33 ± 0.49 ns for the crystallization time periods of 96, 120, 144, and 168 h, respectively. These observations clearly indicate that lengthening the crystallization time is highly beneficial for expediting charge extraction toward the scenario in the annealed devices (see Table S2, ESI). We believe that the improved charge extraction ability can decrease the interfacial charge accumulation, which is beneficial for increasing Jsc.
We further compared the TPC decay traces of the optimal devices with and without TA. As shown in Fig. S7 and Table S2 (ESI), a slightly slower charge extraction was found in the RT device compared with that of the TA-based cell. To further promote charge extraction and ultimate efficiencies, solvent additive engineering in conjunction with the RT process may be of help, which will call for further study.
Then, we provided further intuitive evaluation of the impact of the non-annealing process time (i.e., 96, 120, 144, and 168 h) on the film quality of MAPbI3. Fig. S8 and S9 (ESI) show top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of MAPbI3. As can be seen, there are no clear differences among these perovskite films. The variation in the quality of the films with the lengthened crystallization time was validated using steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra (Fig. 5a), where the highest peak intensity was observed in the 144 h treated sample, revealing the enhanced film quality. The photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the perovskite films that were crystallized for 144 h without thermal annealing and with annealing show similar intensities (Fig. S10, ESI).
Based on the results so far, the performance of the RT devices is closely connected to the time for crystallization, leading to the modified film quality with suppressed charge trapping. Regarding the superior stability in the 144 h-treated device, in contrast to the more reduced stability in the TA-based device, we consider the reasons to be as follows: there are comparable numbers of grain boundaries present in the optimal perovskite films without and with TA that provide faster ion migration channels; however, the density of under-coordinated ions is different and is reduced in the RT film. As a result, the extent of ion migration will be favourably decreased and will benefit an improved shelf-stability. To affirm this hypothesis, we calculated the mass percentage and stoichiometric ratio of I/Pb for both MAPbI3 films based on energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS; see Fig. 5b). Importantly, in the RT film, the I/Pb ratio (2.79) increases toward the theoretical stoichiometric value, whereas a smaller I/Pb ratio (2.45) was found in the TA-treated sample. This result strongly suggests that under-coordinated ions become fewer with the RT process. We speculate that the crystallization process at room temperature can warrant a reduction in the evaporation of volatile MAI, and thus a higher structural integrity.
In addition, it is known that internal stress is caused by a difference in the thermal expansion coefficients of the different components in the PSCs upon cooling. These residual stresses in perovskite films provide a significant driving force for degradation, which is tensile and can exceed 50 MPa in magnitude. In addition, the larger residual stresses are consistent with an increased formation temperature. In this work, prolonging the crystallization time of formation of the perovskite film at room temperature could lead to low stress values in the devices, which is of benefit for the long-term device stability.
Based on the combined data, it is favorable that the internal stress generated in the crystallization process or the ion migration in crystallized MAPbI3 films is minimized, which aided by the reduced crystallization temperature and prolonged crystallization time. As a consequence, the overall strength and uniformity of the perovskite films is increased, thus giving a higher stability. Future efforts on this topic may be directed to seeking more effective RT processes toward the preferred orientational growth for high-performance perovskites.

In summary, we report an effective strategy for the preparation of high-quality MAPbI3 perovskite thin films without post-thermal annealing. By optimizing the crystallization time, we obtained the highest efficiency of 18.05% in the RT devices with satisfactory crystallinity, which is on a par with that obtained by thermal treatment. Under the optimal conditions, the RT devices show an excellent shelf-stability, without any degradation in the PCE after 166 days of storage. The combined results of TPC, XRD, EDS, SEM, and PL measurements provide solid evidence that, in the optimal RT-based films, favourable stoichiometric I/Pb ratios are maintained, with which the migration of under-coordinated ions can be mitigated to boost the stability. Benefitting from the low-temperature and prolonged crystallization conditions, the volatilization of MAI and the internal stresses in operational devices can be reduced simultaneously, which acts as a key advantage for increasing the stability. Given the effectiveness of the proposed processing method on the stability, more novel methodologies are urgently needed to reduce the performance gap between RT-treated devices and the state-of-the-art values obtained based on the high-temperature crystallization process. This work provides a new route for the fabrication of perovskite solar cells with high efficiency and stability.


All the chemicals and reagents were obtained from chemical companies and were used as received without any further purification. Dimethylformamide (DMF) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), chlorobenzene, acetonitrile, PbI2 (Sigma), and CH3NH3I (Dyesol) were used as received. PTAA was provided by Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Corp. PC61BM/BCP/C60 were purchased from Lumtec (Taiwan).


The ITO/glass substrate was cleaned by successive sonication using a detergent, deionized water, acetone and isopropyl alcohol, and then dried under a nitrogen flow. Then, the ITO substrates were treated with O2-plasma for 15 min. PTAA solution (1.5 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene) was spin-coated onto ITO at 5000 rpm for 30 s. After thermal annealing at 100 °C for 10 min in a glove box filled with N2, the perovskite precursor solution was prepared by dissolving CH3NH3I and PbI2 (1:1, 1.40 M) in 1 mL of the mixed solvent of DMF and DMSO (with a volume ratio of 4:1). Perovskite films were fabricated using anti-solvent methods at 400 rpm for 3 s and 4800 rpm for 30 s. In addition, the anti-solvent chlorobenzene (CB, 200 μL) was added on the substrate at 14 s after spin-coating started. Then, the films were crystallized by keeping them in a glove box filled with N2 for different periods of time (i.e., 96 h, 120 h, 144 h, and 168 h). The normal annealed films were placed on a hotplate at 75 °C for 2 min and 90 °C for 4 min to form the perovskite films. Then, PCBM solution (12.5 mg mL−1 in CB) was spin-coated onto all the differently treated perovskite films at 400 rpm for 3 s and 4800 rpm for 30 s. Then, the substrate was transferred to a vacuum chamber. 20 nm C60, 8 nm BCP and 100 nm Ag were deposited by thermal evaporation using a metal shadow mask. The device area was 4 mm2.


The current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics of MAPbI3 solar cells and single carrier devices were recorded using a Keithley 2400 Source meter under a nitrogen environment. The MAPbI3 solar cells were tested under irradiation using a solar simulator calibrated with a standard Si cell and single carrier devices were tested in the dark. The irradiation intensity was adjusted using an optical wheel filter and determined according to the current reading of the calibration cell. EQE spectra were measured using an EnliTech external quantum measurement system (QE-R3011) in the spectral range of 300–850 nm. Impedance spectroscopy of CH3NH3PbI3 solar cells was measured under Voc with a nitrogen environment and the data were analysed by using the ZView 2 program.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2017YFA0206600), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21922505, 21773045, and 21905245), the CAS Instrument Development Project (No.YJKYYQ20190010) and the Strategic Priority Research Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences (No. XDB36000000). Y. Zhang acknowledges financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21875012 and 21674006).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc02357h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021