 DOI: 10.1039/C4TC00301B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 6290-6300


Antonios M.
Douvas
*,

Maria
Vasilopoulou
,

Dimitra G.
Georgiadou
,

Anastasia
Soultati
,

Dimitris
Davazoglou
,

Nikolaos
Vourdas
,

Konstantinos P.
Giannakopoulos
,

Athanassios G.
Kontos
,

Stella
Kennou
 and 

Panagiotis
Argitis


Institute of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology (INN), National Center for Scientific Research “Demokritos”, 15310 Aghia Paraskevi, Athens, Greece. E-mail: adouvas@imel.demokritos.gr; Fax: +30 210 6511723; Tel: +30 210 6503231

Department of Chemical Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, 15780 Athens, Greece

Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Patras, 26504 Patra, Greece

Received
13th February 2014
, Accepted 23rd May 2014
First published on 23rd May 2014
Reduced molybdenum peroxides with varying degrees of reduction were synthesized following a modified sol–gel peroxo method and the respective films were employed as anode interfacial layers in organic optoelectronics applications, such as organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs) and organic photovoltaics (OPVs). The degree of reduction was controlled through both the synthesis route and the thermal treatment protocol of the obtained films. The films were thoroughly investigated with a variety of spectroscopic, diffraction, and electron microscopy methods (UV-Vis, FT-IR, XPS, UPS, Raman, XRD, SEM, and TEM). These films were found to be considerably sub-stoichiometric with a relatively high content of hydrogen. When they were used as anode interfacial layers in OLED and OPV devices, high efficiencies and adequate temporal stability were achieved. The enhanced hole injection/extraction properties of the reduced molybdenum peroxide films were attributed to the improved charge transport facilitated through the gap states present in these materials.

Transition metal oxides (TMOs) and their molecular analogues, polyoxometalates (POMs), have been extensively used in a wide variety of applications ranging from catalysis to molecular electronics and organic optoelectronic devices. More specifically, in organic electronic devices, such as organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs) and organic photovoltaics (OPVs), TMOs have been widely used as charge selective interfacial layers between the electrodes and the active polymeric layer to enhance charge transport from/to the electrodes. Thus, tungsten (WO3), molybdenum (MoO3), vanadium (V2O5) and nickel (NiO) oxides have been mainly used as hole transport layers (HTLs), whereas TiO2, ZnO and ZrO2 have been used as electron transport layers (ETLs). For those applications, however, the current trend is to synthesize TMO films using solution-based methods owing to lower cost and more convenient implementation in an industrial process, as compared with vacuum deposition-based methods (such as thermal vacuum evaporation, laser vapor deposition, etc.).

Especially for molybdenum oxide – one of the most popular materials for use as an anode interlayer in organic optoelectronic devices – four main wet chemistry-based synthetic methods have been hitherto reported in the literature. The first method is based on an acidified aqueous dispersion of ammonium molybdate leading to the formation of MoO3 films, though with considerable surface roughness. The second route is based on MoO3 nanoparticles dispersed in xylene along with a block copolymer, followed by treatment with oxygen plasma and thermal annealing at relatively high temperature (200 °C) of the MoO3 films. The third method is based on MoO2(acac)2 (acac = acetylacetonate) precursors, which undergo hydrolysis and condensation to Mo2O5(OH)2(H2O)4 and in a limiting case to [Mo6O19]2− clusters leading finally to the formation of MoOx films. Finally, the fourth route is based on a sol–gel method involving dissolution of MoO3 in hydrogen peroxide, and then dispersion with polyethylene glycol and 2-methoxyethanol, resulting in smooth MoO3 films after high temperature (275 °C) thermal treatment.
Three weak points can be discerned in the above solution-based synthetic methods for molybdenum oxides films, which may ultimately decrease their hole-transporting efficiency when they become part of an organic optoelectronic device. The first point is the inadequately homogeneous surface of molybdenum oxide films that are usually formed. The second point is the high temperature thermal treatment along with additional process steps (such as oxygen plasma treatment) that are generally needed after spin coating of the precursor solution. The third and most critical point is that the majority of the aforementioned synthetic routes aim to the formation of oxidized MoO3 films (a requirement that is usually interrelated to the high temperature thermal treatment). However, as it has been reported in the recent literature, solution-processed hydrogen molybdenum bronze films and hydrogen vanadium bronze films exhibit higher hole-transporting efficiency than their corresponding oxidized films when used as anode interfacial layers in bulk heterojunction (BHJ) OPVs. Similar results have also been reported recently by our group for oxygen deficient hydrogen molybdenum bronze films deposited by thermal vacuum evaporation. In that case, the superior hole transporting efficiency of the hydrogen molybdenum bronzes was attributed to their favourable energy level alignment with the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the organic semiconductor owing to the introduction of gap states near the Fermi level without a significant decrease of molybdenum oxide's work function. Furthermore, we showed recently that solution-processed hydrogen molybdenum bronzes resulted in improved power conversion efficiency and stability when they were used as anode interfacial layers in BHJ OPV devices. However, no detailed characterisation of the properties of the obtained material (defined as hydrogen molybdenum bronzes) was presented in that work.
In this article, we aim to make a clear correlation between the exact synthesis route and the subsequent processing conditions with the optoelectronic, crystalline and morphological properties of the obtained films. It is shown that the degree of reduction, stoichiometry and, consequently, the electronic characteristics of the synthesized films can be precisely tuned both through simple modifications in the solution synthesis and also by applying specific film annealing protocols. To this end, a combination of spectroscopic, diffraction and electron microscopy characterization techniques (UV-Vis, FT-IR, Raman, ellipsometry, XPS, UPS, XRD, SEM, and TEM) were employed to provide insight into the properties of the obtained material. Finally, OLED and OPV devices were fabricated to highlight the importance of controlling the exact material composition in optoelectronic applications. It was found that the devices implementing as anode interfacial layers reduced molybdenum peroxide films, which were thermally treated at relatively low temperature, demonstrated enhanced efficiency and adequate stability. Therefore, it could be substantiated that solution-processed reduced molybdenum peroxide films constitute a viable choice for large area, low-cost organic optoelectronic devices.

The Mo peroxide films were synthesized through a modified previously reported sol–gel peroxo method. The initial peroxo route was introduced by Kurusu, but it was established and subsequently modified by Kudo et al. to synthesize stoichiometric molybdenum peroxides. Recently, it has been combined with the sol–gel process to obtain more homogeneous films, while keeping at the same time the advantages of a solution-based synthesis method, i.e. composition control, large area deposition and low cost. In the present work, MoO3 powder is dissolved in H2O2 rich (31%) aqueous solution under reflux at 80 °C. Subsequently, polyethylene glycol (PEG) is mixed with the molybdenum peroxide solution for the adjustment of the homogeneity/viscosity of the initial solution. Up to this stage, the solution exhibits a clear yellow colour, an indication that the synthesized molybdenum peroxide is in a fully or nearly stoichiometric oxidation state. Then, 2-methoxyethanol (2ME) is added to promote the reduction of the synthesized molybdenum peroxide (after having removed the excess of H2O2) and turning therefore the solution colour into blue. It will be shown that the amount of added 2ME is critical, since it may promote the reduction of molybdenum peroxide in the precursor solution. Therefore, oxidized (ox) or reduced (red) Mo peroxides can be formed by controlling the amount of 2ME. Films are then spin-coated on different substrates from the synthesized solutions and subjected to various annealing protocols to produce fully oxidized or reduced molybdenum peroxides depending on the type of the solution (ox/red) and the annealing temperature, as discussed below. More details on the exact synthesis procedure and film preparation are given in the Experimental section.


The reduction of oxidized molybdenum peroxide films can be easily monitored using UV-Vis absorption spectroscopy through the appearance of a new band in the visible/near IR region in the reduced films.Fig. 1 and 2 depict the absorption spectra of 100 nm thick Mo peroxide films, before and after thermal treatment, in order to compare the effect of thermal annealing in films derived by two slightly different synthetic routes. In Fig. 1, the initial product of the synthetic route followed was an oxidized (ox) Mo peroxide film, which was reduced only after being thermally treated. The second process (Fig. 2) involved the addition of an excess amount of 2ME in the solution, which resulted in the formation of a reduced (red) Mo peroxide film, and then the effect of further annealing was studied. In both cases, the reduced films were reoxidized after annealing at high temperatures.

More specifically, Fig. 1a depicts the UV-Vis/NIR absorption region of an ox-Mo peroxide film, which was annealed from RT up to 130 °C. The first observation is that the non-treated film and the one treated at temperatures up to 60 °C are completely transparent below ∼500 nm. Furthermore, the band at 356 nm in the oxidized state, which is assigned to the peroxo (O–O) group, gradually decreases in intensity and red-shifts to 375 nm. This is the first indication that the thermal reduction of the ox-Mo peroxide film proceeds through the reduction of the peroxo group. Upon thermal annealing of the ox-Mo peroxide film at 100 °C, a new broad band at 778 nm appears, which blue-shifts by ∼20 nm (to 757 nm) when further annealed at 130 °C. That band is attributed to the intervalence charge transfer (IVCT, MoV → MoVI) band indicating that the Mo peroxide film is thermally reduced. Furthermore, upon thermal treatment at T ≥ 100 °C, a new big shoulder at ∼305 nm appears, whereas the shoulder at ∼225 nm increases in intensity (see the inset in Fig. 1a). Both of these bands have been ascribed to charge transfer (CT) bands of the Mo6+O2− bond with the 305 nm shoulder being indicative of octahedrally coordinated Mo ions, whereas the 225 nm band indicative of both tetrahedrally and octahedrally coordinated Mo ions. Thus, it seems that the thermal reduction of the ox-Mo peroxide film at 130 °C is possibly accompanied by a tetrahedral-to-octahedral change in the coordination of Mo ions.

Fig. 1b shows that upon further increase of annealing temperature at T ≥ 160 °C, the IVCT band gradually decreases in intensity and red-shifts. The latter changes indicate that the (thermally) reduced Mo peroxide film is gradually being thermally reoxidized at T ≥ 160 °C, whereas at 230 °C it has been almost completely reoxidized in accordance with the literature. It is also noteworthy that the peroxo group does not reform upon thermal reoxidation of the (thermally) reduced Mo peroxide film. That finding indicates that the thermal reduction of the peroxo group in ox-Mo peroxide films is irreversible.
A similar thermal reoxidation was observed in a Mo peroxide film formed by a reduced solution (i.e. with the addition of excess of 2ME) and the spectra are shown in Fig. 2. In particular, the red-Mo peroxide film shows that the characteristic IVCT band considerably blue-shifted, i.e. 757 → 728 nm (Fig. 2a), indicating that it is possibly much more reduced than in the previous case of thermal reduction of ox-Mo peroxide films. Moreover, the characteristic peroxo band at 367 nm vanishes (Fig. 2a), indicating that the reduction of ox-Mo peroxide in solution proceeds here also through the reduction of the peroxo group. Upon thermal treatment of the red-Mo peroxide film at 200 °C, the IVCT band significantly red-shifts (i.e. 728 → 787 nm; Fig. 2b), indicating that the film has been completely reoxidized at T > 200 °C. Analogous observations have also been made during thermal treatment of ox/red-Mo peroxides in solution (ESI, Fig. S1).

FT-IR spectroscopy was performed to investigate the chemical bonds between molybdenum, oxygen, carbon and other atoms present in the synthesized materials and to study the structural changes in Mo peroxide films induced by reduction through either the solution synthesis route or the thermal treatment of films. Initially, an ox-Mo peroxide film, as obtained from the synthesis route, presents the following peaks (spectrum (1), Fig. 3): (a) a broad band at 2877 cm−1 and a shoulder at 2930 cm−1 attributed to symmetric and antisymmetric stretching vibration of CH2 groups of PEG, respectively. (b) A strong broad band at 1099 cm−1, ascribed to stretching vibration of both C–OH and C–O–C groups of PEG. (c) Two strong peaks at 983 and 955 cm−1, attributed possibly to two stretching modes (symmetric and antisymmetric) of terminal MoO bonds indicating the presence of a MoO2 (OMoO) group similar to the one observed in dioxomolybdenum(VI) complexes. (d) A strong band at 919 cm−1, attributed to the stretching vibration of the peroxo group (O–O), although slightly red-shifted (10–15 cm−1) in comparison with molybdenum peroxo complexes and vanadium peroxo complexes reported in the literature, possibly because of intermolecular H-bonding interactions. (e) A weak band at 802 cm−1, attributed to Mo–O–Mo bridges, indicating that a small percentage of Mo–O–Mo bridges exist in the initial Mo peroxide film. (f) Two bands at 633 and 520 cm−1, attributed possibly to symmetric and antisymmetric stretching modes of the Mo(O2) peroxo group, respectively. Those bands are also significantly shifted (30–40 cm−1) to lower and higher energy respectively, possibly because of intermolecular H-bonding interactions of peroxo groups. (g) Infrared peaks, attributed to water (ESI, Fig. S2a and b), indicate that coordinated water molecules mostly exist in the Mo peroxide film, whereas a small percentage of adsorbed water molecules is also present. From the above FT-IR and UV-Vis results, the structure of Mo peroxide compounds synthesised in the present work could be written as: MoO2(O2)·H2O or, generally, MoO3·H2O2·H2O, dispersed in PEG.

Upon annealing an ox-Mo peroxide film from RT to 220 °C (spectrum (2), Fig. 3) the following infrared changes are observed: (a) almost vanishing of the PEG vibration bands at 2930, 2877, and 1099 cm−1 indicating that PEG is removed upon heating. (b) Disappearance of the peroxo group bands at 919, 633, and 520 cm−1 giving clear evidence that the peroxo group is destroyed upon thermal treatment. These results are in agreement with the previous UV-Vis absorption findings showing that the thermal reduction of an ox-Mo peroxide film proceeds mainly through the reduction/destruction of the peroxo group and that during thermal reoxidation of the film at a higher temperature (T > 130 °C), the peroxo group does not reform. (c) Vanishing of one of the two MoO stretching mode bands (preferably the symmetric stretching mode band at 983 cm−1), resulting in the formation of a broad MoO stretching band with intermediate position (967 cm−1). (d) The weak band of Mo–O–Mo bridges at 802 cm−1 slowly vanishes and a very broad band at ∼852 cm−1 appears, indicating that Mo–O–Mo bridges possibly form during annealing of the film. (e) Two new bands at 679 and 563 cm−1 appear during thermal treatment possibly coming from the corresponding bands of the peroxo group (at 633 and 520 cm−1 respectively), indicating that possibly new Mo–O–Mo bridges form as a result of peroxo groups' cleavage. The gradual decrease of the number of MoO stretching bands (from 2 to 1) in combination with the increase of Mo–O–Mo bridges observed upon annealing of an ox-Mo peroxide film in spectra (1) and (2) suggests progressive change in configuration (possibly from tetrahedral to octahedral) of Mo ions up to 220 °C. (f) Finally, the number of coordinated water molecules in the Mo peroxide film seems to progressively increase, especially upon heating at a high temperature (T ≥ 170 °C; ESI, Fig. S2a and b).
Analogous structural changes to those observed during the thermal reduction of an ox-Mo peroxide film were also detected in a red-Mo peroxide film (i.e. reduced through the synthesis route) and the IR spectra are also presented in Fig. 3. In brief, by comparing the spectra (3) and (1) (Fig. 3), the following changes are observed: (a) significant decrease of the peroxo group bands at 917, 633, and 517 cm−1 and formation of two new bands at 673 and 565 cm−1 indicating that the reduction in solution (red-Mo peroxide) proceeds also through reduction/destruction of the peroxo group, and (b) the appearance of a shoulder at 1123 cm−1 indicates that PEG is affected by the reduction of Mo peroxide in solution (possibly PEG is also oxidized in solution). The structural changes that were observed during thermal treatment of the red-Mo peroxide film are also depicted in Fig. 3 (see spectrum (4) and Discussion in the ESI). It is noteworthy that both films obtained at the end of thermal treatment (i.e. at 220 °C) seem to be molybdenum trioxide regardless of the initial film that was formed (compare spectra (2) and (4), Fig. 3).
Similar results were obtained by using Raman spectroscopy during thermal treatment of ox/red-Mo peroxide films (ESI, Fig. S3). Further characterisation (crystal structure, optical properties, surface and bulk morphology) of the above films as a function of annealing temperature is presented in the ESI (Fig. S4–S7).

Next, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis of films deposited from either the oxidized or the reduced solution and annealed at different temperatures was performed in order to investigate the chemical composition of the outermost film layers. In the wide scan spectra (not shown), no appreciable charging effects were observed and only carbon, oxygen and molybdenum related signals were detected on the films' surface. The presence of carbon may be due to surface contamination but it might be also related to incomplete decomposition (such as PEG) of the precursor solution.

Despite the presence of contaminants, for the films deposited from the oxidized solution and heat treated at 220 °C (Fig. 4a and Table 1), the Mo 3d surface signal was typical of Mo in the VI oxidation state. In fact, the Mo 3d5/2 and Mo 3d3/2 binding energy (BE) values at 232.7 (FWHM = 1.40 eV) and 235.8 eV (FWHM = 1.47 eV) can be attributed to molybdenum cations being at the highest oxidation state (Mo6+) in accordance with the literature. It is evident that in this case the film exists almost exclusively as MoO3. In the case of films deposited also from the oxidized solution and heat treated at a lower temperature (i.e. at 170 °C; Fig. 4b), the energy peaks were lower and broader than before. The lower and broadened energy peaks were associated with the lower oxidation state of the Mo cations, which tends to result in lower BE. From the deconvolution of these peaks it was proven that a new doublet appeared at 231.4 eV (FWHM = 1.45 eV) and 234.6 eV (FWHM = 1.50 eV) with a spin–orbit split of 3.2 eV, which was attributed to Mo 3d5/2 and Mo 3d3/2, respectively, of Mo cations at a lower oxidation state (Mo5+). The percentage of the Mo5+ oxidation state to the total Mo cations (Mo5+/Mo5+/6+) was estimated to be ∼20%.
Mo peroxide formula
Synthesized solution

T
 (°C)
Mo5+/(Mo5+/6+) (%)
Peroxo + OH/Ototal (%)

W
F
 (eV)
VBM (eV)

a Oxidized or reduced Mo peroxide in the precursor solution.
b Temperature of film thermal treatment.
c Results obtained from Mo 3d XPS spectra.
d Results obtained from O 1s XPS spectra.
e Results obtained from UPS spectra.

MoO3
Ox
220
0
17
5.6
3.0
HxMoO2.9
Ox
170
20
21
5.3
3.0
HxMoO2.75
Red
220
27
29
5.3
3.0
HxMoO2.45
Red
170
31
42
5.2
2.7
For films deposited from the reduced (blue) solutions and thermally treated at 220 °C, the Mo 3d signal resulted more broadened towards lower BEs (Fig. 4c), again suggesting the presence of Mo oxidation states lower than VI. Indeed, deconvolution of the latter spectrum allowed identifying the presence of two distinct doublets as in the case of the ox-Mo peroxide film annealed at 170 °C, attributed to Mo species being at 6+ and 5+ oxidation states. In that case, the percentage of Mo5+ cations was estimated to be ∼27% of the overall Mo states. Finally, when the red-Mo peroxide film was thermally treated at 170 °C (Fig. 4d), the Mo 3d peaks were further decreased and broadened evidence for further reduction of the Mo species. The percentage of Mo5+ cations was estimated to be ∼31% of the overall Mo states, whereas no evidence for the existence of the lowest oxidation states Mo4+ was obtained.
The O 1s peaks of the XPS spectra of the above films are also presented in Fig. 5. All films present a broad peak which is further broadened to higher BEs for those deposited from the reduced solutions. Deconvolution of this peak allowed to identify the presence of an intense peak at 530.8 eV, which can be attributed to the O 1s binding energy of Mo–O bonds, and of two smaller broad peaks at 531.6 and 532.3 eV. Regarding the origin of these peaks, they can be assigned to hydroxyl (–OH) and to peroxo groups, respectively, bound to Mo atoms, while the former peak may have a contribution from adsorbed water molecules. The relative intensity of this peak is quite large and becomes larger in the films obtained from the reduced solution and/or heat treated at lower temperatures, which argues against surface contamination and represents rather strong evidence of stable Mo-peroxide bonds. From the Mo 3d and O 1s XPS spectra the materials’ stoichiometry was estimated and is presented in Table 1.

Next, the UPS photoemission spectra of ox/red-Mo peroxide films were analyzed (Fig. 6). The UPS spectrum of an ox-Mo peroxide film annealed at 220 °C is structureless with a single peak indicating an amorphous (defect-free) MoO3 film (Fig. 6a and Table 1). The valence band of MoO3 consists mainly of O 2p orbitals with a maximum (VBM) at ∼3.0 eV below the Fermi level as expected for a fully stoichiometric Mo oxide (right panel). The high binding energy cut-off of MoO3 is 15.6 eV, corresponding to a work function (WF) of 5.6 eV, a value which is very close to the values reported in the literature for solution prepared MoO3 films. Thus, the ionization energy (IE) is estimated to be 8.6 eV. When an ox-Mo peroxide film was annealed at a lower temperature (i.e. 170 °C; Fig. 6b) the VBM was practically constant at ∼3.0 eV below the Fermi level, whereas the high BE cut-off increased (at 15.9 eV) resulting in a WF value of 5.3 eV. It is noteworthy that in this case, the formation of a broad set of gap states near the Fermi level, located at ∼2.2 eV, can be observed. Those gap states may be attributed to intervalence electrons transferred to the initially empty Mo 4d orbitals of the antibonding π* band near the Fermi level during the thermal reduction of peroxo groups. Similar results concerning the VBM and WF (∼3.0 and 5.3 eV, respectively) were also obtained, when a red-Mo peroxide film was thermally treated at 220 °C (Fig. 6c). The only difference in that case is the significant increase in the density of occupied gap states located at ∼2.2 eV, near the Fermi level, indicating that molybdenum oxide is further reduced. Finally, when a red-Mo peroxide film was annealed at 170 °C (Fig. 6d) a considerable decrease in both VBM and WF (∼2.7 and 5.2 eV, respectively), accompanied by a further increase of the density of gap states located near the Fermi level, was observed.


After having established a direct correlation of the preparation conditions of the Mo peroxide films with their electronic structure and physical properties, those Mo peroxide films were employed as anode interlayers in OLEDs. The fabricated device structure was ITO/Mo-peroxide/F8BT (emissive layer)/PW12/Al, where PW12 is 12-phosphotungstic acid (H3PW12O40), a polyoxometalate (POM) previously reported by our group as a highly efficient electron injection/extraction layer (EIL/EEL) in OLEDs and OPVs, which can be cast from alcohol-based solvents, that are orthogonal with regard to the polymeric layer underneath. Reference devices based on poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT-PSS) for hole injection were also fabricated for comparison purposes.

In Fig. 7a, the current density–voltage–luminance (J–V–L) and in Fig. 7b, the current efficiency–voltage characteristics for devices with an optimized thickness of 20 nm Mo-peroxide film or 40 nm PEDOT-PSS as the anode interlayer and a ∼2 nm thin polyoxometalate (PW12) as the cathode interlayer are shown. The main results are summarized in Table 2. In the device based on the ox-Mo peroxide film (MoO3, thermally processed at 220 °C), an overall low light emission (the peak luminance was 7000 cd m−2 at current density equal to 1800 A m−2) and device efficiency (3.9 cd A−1) is observed. Slightly higher efficiency (4.2 cd A−1) is obtained for the material processed from the oxidized solution that was thermally treated at 170 °C (namely HxMoO2.9).
Anode interfacial layer

V
turn-on (V) (at 10 cd m−2)

J
max (A m−2)

L
max (cd m−2)
Max. current efficiency (cd A−1) [at voltage]
MoO3
2.7
1800 (±0.5)
7000 (±0.5)
3.9 (±0.2) (5.0 V)
HxMoO2.9
2.6
2500 (±0.5)
10500 (±0.5)
4.2 (±0.2) (5.0 V)
HxMoO2.75
2.6
3200 (±0.5)
34000 (±0.5)
10.6 (±0.2) (4.5 V)
HxMoO2.45
2.6
3400 (±0.5)
37000 (±0.5)
10.9 (±0.2) (4.5 V)
PEDOT-PSS
2.6
2300 (±0.5)
9200 (±0.5)
4.0 (±0.2) (4.5 V)
On the other hand, for the devices incorporating reduced Mo peroxide films, high peak current densities and luminances are obtained. The device with the reduced HxMoO2.75 (thermally treated at 220 °C) reaches luminance values up to 34000 cd m−2 and current densities of 3200 A m−2. As a result, the peak current efficiency rises to 10.6 cd A−1, representing a more than 100% improvement relative to the device with the ox-Mo peroxide interlayer. Moreover, the device with the highest degree of reduction and hydrogen content, namely HxMoO2.45 (i.e. red-Mo peroxide heated at 170 °C), exhibits a slightly increased performance with efficiency reaching 10.9 cd A−1. Note that the reference device with PEDOT-PSS at its anode interface exhibits luminance values up to 9200 cd m−2 and current densities of 2300 A m−2, resulting in a maximum current efficiency of 4 cd A−1.
The efficiency enhancement of the devices using Mo-peroxides, and especially the reduced ones at the anode interface, can be explained as follows: as discussed above these materials exhibit a work function (WF) of the order of 5.2–5.6 eV which is sufficient enough to reduce the barrier for hole injection from the metallic anode to the organic active layer (namely F8BT having an ionization energy IE in the order of 5.0 eV) through the formation of an interfacial dipole with its positive pole pointing towards the anode contact. However, WF alone cannot explain the efficiency enhancement. For instance, the device based on ox-MoO3 with the higher WF values exhibits poor performance in comparison with the devices based on red-Mo peroxides. To explain this, we have to take into account that fully stoichiometric metal oxides are wide band-gap semiconductors, adding a large series resistance to the device. In contrast, the red-Mo peroxides exhibit occupied gap states near the energy level of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the active layer and thus may facilitate hole transport. The increased performance of devices based on the red-Mo peroxides may thus be attributed to the large density of occupied gap states near their Fermi level.
Furthermore, the stability of the devices operating in air was tested in a period of 700 hours. Fig. 7c depicts that all the Mo peroxide film-based devices showed better stability when compared with the device using a PEDOT-PSS layer for hole injection. This is a very promising result, making those materials attractive candidates for future industrial implementation, since the temporal stability is an important issue in organic optoelectronic devices.

For an in-depth understanding on how the Mo-peroxide’s chemical composition affects the device operation and supports our argument about the enhanced hole transport within the device, we next fabricated hole only devices. To this end, we replaced the PW12/Al cathode with a simple Au electrode, which causes a large barrier for electron injection/extraction to/from the LUMO of F8BT from/to the electrode. Therefore, the resulting current is expected to be dominated by holes. In Fig. 8, the corresponding dark J–V characteristics of devices with the structure ITO (anode)/Mo-peroxide (20 nm) or PEDOT-PSS (40 nm)/F8BT (70 nm)/Au (cathode) are shown in a semi-log scale. From the J–V characteristics, it is evident that the hole current density for the devices with the red-Mo peroxide layers is about one order of magnitude higher than the corresponding current in the devices with either the ox-Mo peroxide or the PEDOT-PSS layer. Most significantly, the devices with the red-Mo peroxide layers show space-charge limited current (SCLC) behaviour, as verified by the overlap of the experimental data with the calculated J–V characteristics using the equation J = 9εoεrμV2/8L3 (where J is the current density, V is the applied voltage, εoεr is the dielectric permittivity, μ is the carrier mobility, and L is the thickness of the F8BT active layer) of the SCLC model at low applied voltages. From Fig. 8, it can also be seen that the hole mobility is increased in devices with the red-Mo peroxide layers. The formation of an ohmic contact at the anode interface, which highly facilitates hole injection/transport, can also be deduced and attributed to the energy level alignment due to both the formation of a favourable interfacial dipole and the occupation of gap states near the device Fermi level.


To further highlight the impact of the above findings on the operation of organic electronic devices, OPV cells incorporating ox/red-Mo peroxide layers as hole-selective interlayers were fabricated. The device architecture was ITO/Mo-peroxide (20 nm)/active layer (100 nm)/PW12 (5 nm)/Al. The active layer was based on the bulk heterojunction blend of the P3HT polymer donor and the PC71BM fullerene acceptor. In Fig. 9a, the current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics of the OPV devices under AM 1.5G illumination are presented. It is evident that the incorporation of Mo peroxide layers induces large improvement in short-circuit current density (Jsc) from 8.3 mA cm−2 for the devices with the ox-MoO3 anode interlayer to 10.2 and 10.4 mA cm−2 (25% improvement) for the devices with the reduced HxMoO2.75 and HxMoO2.45 peroxide layers, respectively (the maximum recorded and mean values of devices' operational characteristics are summarized in Table 3). Similarly, the fill factor (FF) is improved from 0.52 to a maximum of 0.58 and the open-circuit voltage (Voc) increases from 0.59 V to 0.66 V in the devices with the reduced Mo-peroxide layers. As a consequence, a high PCE of 3.9% and slightly higher of 4.0% was estimated for the devices based on the reduced HxMoO2.75 and HxMoO2.45 peroxides, respectively. Again, the devices with the red-Mo peroxide films exhibit the largest increase in performance, probably due to the increase of the density of occupied gap states, as discussed above.

Anode interfacial layer

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)

a Data and statistics based on 24 cells of each type. Numbers in bold are the maximum recorded values.

MoO3

8.3 (7.95 ± 0.25)

0.59 (0.57 ± 0.02)

0.52 (0.51 ± 0.026)

2.6 (2.4 ± 0.18)
18
HxMoO2.9

8.8 (8.61 ± 0.2)

0.63 (0.61 ± 0.02)

0.55 (0.54 ± 0.021)

3.1 (3.0 ± 0.14)
15
HxMoO2.75

10.2 (10.14 ± 0.10)

0.66 (0.65 ± 0.01)

0.58 (0.58 ± 0.014)

3.9 (3.8 ± 0.11)
5
HxMoO2.45

10.4 (10.32 ± 0.16)

0.66 (0.65 ± 0.01)

0.58 (0.57 ± 0.014)

4.0 (3.9 ± 0.13)
4
The above findings are further supported by the dark current versus voltage characteristics presented in Fig. 9b. It can be clearly seen that the device with the Mo peroxide layers processed from the reduced solution exhibits a larger turn-on voltage (in the range of 0.55–0.65 V) relative to that with the Mo peroxide layers processed from the oxidized solution (0.45–0.55 V). This implies that the built-in potential (Vbi) across the device, which is the voltage responsible for exciton dissociation and the upper limit for the attainable Voc, is increased upon the insertion of the Mo peroxide layer. In addition, a large increase of the diode forward current and a small suppression of the reverse current after the incorporation of the Mo peroxide films are observed. This proves that the introduction of these layers creates a highly conductive path for hole-extraction, which can also explain the enhanced FF of these devices.

Fig. 9c compares the incident photon-to-current collection efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the above devices. The devices with the MoO3 and HxMoO2.9 layers show the typical spectral response of P3HT:PC71BM blends with a maximum IPCE of ∼57% and 59%, respectively, which are consistent with previous studies for P3HT:PC71BM devices exhibiting similar short-circuit currents and overall external quantum efficiencies. For the devices with the reduced HxMoO2.75 and HxMoO2.45 interlayers, the results demonstrate an enhancement of ∼25% (reaching maximum values of ∼78% at the wavelength of 510 nm in both cases) in the IPCE over the entire spectral region, where the photoactive layer absorbs. These values are correlated with the corresponding enhancements in short-circuit currents measured in the red-Mo peroxide based devices relatively to the ox-Mo peroxide based device. The increased IPCEs in the devices incorporating such red-Mo peroxide layers are mainly attributed to corresponding enhanced extraction rates through the occupied gap states of those layers, which are not present in the ox-Mo peroxide. Thus, it is evident that a direct correlation between the Mo peroxide composition/electronic structure and the device performance can be accomplished.

Reduced molybdenum peroxide films with varying reduction degrees were synthesized using a modified sol–gel peroxo method with the critical steps being the addition of an appropriate amount of 2-methoxy ethanol to the precursor solution and the annealing of deposited films in a broad temperature range. Those films were then characterized in detail and finally used as anode interfacial layers in organic optoelectronics applications, such as F8BT based-OLEDs and OPVs based on P3HT:PC71BM as the photoactive layer. From spectroscopic measurements it was found that the reduction of molybdenum peroxides both in solution (during the synthesis route after the addition of an excess of alcohol) and in films (during annealing) proceeds mainly through the reduction of the peroxo group. The gradual removal of PEG during the thermal treatment of the Mo peroxide films was also evidenced. The chemical composition of the surface of each Mo peroxide film was determined by XPS based on Mo 3d and O 1s core level spectra and showed that a higher degree of reduction can be obtained through the addition of an appropriate amount of alcohol during synthesis, whereas fine tuning of the stoichiometry can be made by decreasing the film annealing temperature. Finally, it was found that when solution-reduced Mo peroxide films were used as anode interfacial layers, a significant improvement of OLED and OPV device characteristics was achieved. This is due to the enhancement in charge transport induced by the occupation of gap states in the reduced Mo peroxide films.


Ox/red molybdenum peroxide films were synthesized by modifying the sol–gel peroxo route proposed by Lin. In detail, 3 g of molybdenum oxide powder (99%, Panreac) was dissolved in 20 mL of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2, 31%, Merck). The solution was refluxed at 80 °C for 2 h and then cooled to room temperature (RT) for 24 h. The MoO3 powder was completely dissolved and a clear yellow solution was obtained. Subsequently, polyethylene glycol (PEG, Mn 400, Merck) was added in a varying volume ratio of MoO3-sol:PEG (optimal ratio, 1:0.25) in order to improve the film forming properties due to better homogeneity of the resultant solution. The solution was refluxed at 70 °C for 0.5 h and then cooled to RT. Next, 2-methoxyethanol (2ME, 98%, Ferak Berlin) was added in a varying volume ratio of MoO3-sol:2ME (1:1, 1:2, 1:3, 1:4, and 1:6; optimal ratio: 1:3), the solution was refluxed at 60 °C for 0.5 h and then cooled to RT. The resultant solutions displayed intense blue colour for increased contents of 2ME after having evaporated the excess of H2O2. The molybdenum peroxide solutions were spin coated on the substrate at a spinning rate of 1500–6000 rpm for 40 s giving approximately 20–200 nm thick films (optimal thickness for device operation is approximately 20 nm). Prior to that step, spin coating of 2ME (at ∼6000 rpm) was found to improve adhesion and quality of Mo peroxide films. Coated Mo peroxide films were heated on a hot plate at 60–360 °C for 5–15 min. The heat treatment was performed in air since there was no indication that oxygen affects the reduction of Mo compounds.


For both OLED and OPV fabrication, glass/indium tin oxide (ITO) substrates (20 Ω cm−1) were used as anode electrodes. The substrates were ultrasonically cleaned with a sequence of solutions/solvents (0.026 M aqueous solution of tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH), water, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol, for 15 min each). In OLEDs, on top of the ox/red-Mo peroxide film, a ∼70 nm thick emissive layer (EML) of the green-emitting copolymer, poly[(9,9-dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl)-co-1,4-benzo-{2,1,3}-thiadiazole] (F8BT, American Dye Source) was spin coated from a chloroform solution (6 mg mL−1) and thermally treated at 80 °C for 10 min. Then, a thin electron injection/transport layer (EIL/ETL) of polyoxometalate (POM, 12-tungstophosphoric acid, H3PW12O40, Sigma-Aldrich) was spin-coated from a methanol solution (10 mg mL−1). Subsequently, a 150 nm thick Al cathode layer was deposited in a dedicated thermal evaporator under a high vacuum of 10−6 Torr. Reference devices were also prepared with poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT-PSS, Heraus) as anode interfacial layer. The active area of the fabricated devices was 0.1256 cm2. In OPVs, the active layer was a ∼100 nm thick film of a blend (1:0.8 wt% ratio) of poly(3-hexyl thiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT, 98% RR, Mw 54000–75000, Rieke Metals) and [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM, Sigma-Aldrich), spin-coated from a chloroform solution (10 mg mL−1) and annealed at 135 °C for 10 min.


UV-Vis absorption spectra of (ox/red) molybdenum peroxides in solution and films, along with polymer films, were obtained on quartz cuvettes (with 1 cm path length) and quartz slides (2 × 2 cm2), respectively, using a Perkin-Elmer UV-Vis Lambda 40 spectrophotometer. FT-IR transmittance spectra of Mo peroxide films were obtained on silicon wafers (at 4 cm−1 resolution and 128 scans) using a Bruker Tensor 27 FT-IR spectrometer with a DTGS detector. Chemical analysis of all Mo peroxide films was performed by XPS measurements in an ultra-high vacuum VG ESCALAB210. The spectra were obtained after excitation using Mg Kα (1253.6 eV) radiation of a twin anode in a constant analyzer energy mode with a pass energy of 30 eV. All binding energies were referred to the C 1s peak at 284.8 eV and to the O 1s peak at 530.2 eV of the surface adventitious carbon and oxygen, respectively. The Mo-peroxides' stoichiometry was estimated using the XPS-measured Mo 3d core levels, respectively, and the corresponding O 1s core-level spectra. To this extent, the areas under the photoemission peaks were integrated by fitting the O 1s and Mo 3d spectra with asymmetric Gaussian–Lorentzian curves. The peroxo and –OH groups versus total oxygen content were estimated by fitting the O 1s core levels. The raw data, after a Shirley background subtraction, were fitted by a non-linear least squares routine using peaks with a mix of Gaussian–Lorentzian shape. The error is estimated at ±10% in all the XPS-derived atomic percentages. The valence band spectra of the metal oxides were evaluated after recording the UPS spectra of about 10 nm thick films deposited on an ITO substrate. For the UPS measurements, the He I (21.22 eV) excitation line was used. A negative bias of 12.28 V was applied to the samples during UPS measurements in order to separate sample and analyzer high binding energy (BE) cut-offs and estimate the absolute work function value from the high BE cut-off region of the UPS spectra. The analyzer resolution is determined from the width of the Au Fermi edge to be 0.16 eV. Regarding the UPS measurements, because the high intensity UV photons used for UPS measurements may alter the surface of films, a certain protocol for the measurement of the work function was adopted: first the core levels and work function of the sample were measured using the low intensity X-rays, then the work function was measured using UPS, and finally the core levels and work function were measured again using XPS to verify that the samples remained unaffected. The thickness of both Mo peroxide and active polymer films was measured using an Ambios technology XP2 profilometer.


Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the OLED devices were measured with a Keithley 2400 source-measure unit. Luminance and electroluminescence (EL) spectral characteristics were recorded with an Ocean Optics USB 2000 fiber optic spectrophotometer, assuming a Lambertian emission profile (for luminance measurements). For the stability measurements the devices were stored in nitrogen between measurements. Current density–voltage characteristics of the fabricated solar cells were measured with a Keithley 2400 source-measure unit. Cells were illuminated with a Xe lamp and an AM 1.5G filter to simulate solar light illumination conditions with an intensity of 100 mW cm (1 sun), as was recorded with a calibrated silicon photodiode. Incident photon-to-current efficiencies (IPCE) were measured on an Autolab PGSTAT-30 potentiostat, using a 300 W Xe lamp in combination with an Oriel 1/8 monochromator for dispersing the light in an area of 0.5 cm2. A Thorlabs silicon photodiode was used for the calibration of the IPCE spectra. Film preparation and device measurements were performed in air.


This research was co-financed by the European Union (European Social Fund – ESF) and Greek national funds through the Operational Program “Education and Lifelong Learning” of the National Strategic Reference Framework (NSRF) – Research Funding Program: ARCHIMEDES III. Investing in knowledge society through the European Social Fund.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: (1) UV-Vis monitoring of ox/red Mo peroxides in solution, (2) FT-IR changes in water content during thermal treatment of ox/red Mo peroxide films, (3) FT-IR changes during thermal treatment of a solution-reduced Mo peroxide film, (4) Raman study of ox/red Mo peroxide films, (5) XRD characterization of ox/red Mo peroxide films, (6) optical characterization of ox/red Mo peroxide films using spectroscopic ellipsometry, and (7) morphological characterization of ox/red Mo peroxide films using SEM/TEM. Fig. S1–S7. See DOI: 10.1039/c4tc00301b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014