 DOI: 10.1039/C6CP07364F
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 4607-4617


Ankita
Kolay
,

P. Naresh
Kumar
,

Sarode Krishna
Kumar
 and 

Melepurath
Deepa
*

Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, Sangareddy, Kandi-502285, Telangana, India. E-mail: mdeepa@iith.ac.in

Received
27th October 2016
, Accepted 10th January 2017
First published on 10th January 2017
Charge transfer at the TiO2/quantum dots (QDs) interface, charge collection at the TiO2/QDs/current collector (FTO or SnO2:F) interface, and back electron transfer at the TiO2/QDs/S2− interface are processes controlled by the electron transport layer or TiO2. These key processes control the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of quantum dot solar cells (QDSCs). Here, four TiO2 morphologies, porous nanoparticles (PNPs), nanowires (NWs), nanosheets (NSHs) and nanoparticles (NPs), were sensitized with CdS and the photovoltaic performances were compared. The marked differences in the cell parameters on going from one morphology to the other have been explained by correlating the shape, structure and the above-described interfacial properties of a given TiO2 morphology to the said parameters. The average magnitudes of PCEs follow the order: NWs (5.96%) > NPs (4.95%) > PNPs (4.85%) > NSHs (2.5%), with the champion cell based on NWs exhibiting a PCE of 6.29%. For NWs, an optimal balance between the fast photo-excited electron injection to NWs at the NW/CdS interface, the high resistance offered at the TiO2 NW/CdS/S2− interfaces to electron recombination with the oxidized electrolyte or with the holes in CdS, the low electron transport resistance in NWs, and low dark currents, yields the highest efficiency due to directional unhindered transport of electrons afforded by the NWs. For NSHs, electron trapping in the two dimensional sheets, and a high electron recombination rate prevent the effective transfer of electrons to FTO, thus reducing short circuit current density significantly, resulting in a poor performance. This study provides a deep understanding of charge transfer, transport and collection processes necessary for the design of efficient QDSCs.

The photovoltaic performance of quantum dot solar cells (QDSCs) is limited by two main factors, namely, the charge recombination at the electrode/electrolyte interface, and the transport of photogenerated electrons through the nanostructured photoanode architecture. The latter issue can be circumvented by the modification of TiO2 morphology, which can play a pivotal role in enhancing power conversion efficiency (PCE) by directing charge separation and by providing unhindered pathways for fast electron injection to the current collector. In this work, four different TiO2 morphologies, porous nanoparticles (PNPs), nanowires (NWs), nanosheets (NSHs) and mesoporous nanoparticles (NPs), were studied as TiO2 scaffolds for QDSCs.

Previous studies show that nanotube arrays with their oriented, one-dimensional tubular structures and high surface area-to-volume ratios prove to be superior nanostructures for separating and directing electrons to the collecting electrode surface. Directionality in the system enhances charge-collection efficiency by promoting faster electron transport and by slowing recombination. In this context, it has been shown that inverse opal TiO2 electrodes with large interlinked pores allow increased permeation of quantum dots within the TiO2 layer, as well as better penetration of the redox couple. TiO2 nanotube based cells sensitized with CdSe QDs gave an efficiency of 1.8%, while TiO2 inverse opal based solar cells with the same sensitizer gave an efficiency of 3.1%.
Earlier, cells with aligned anatase TiO2 nanowire arrays with smooth and branched architectures, co-sensitized with CdS/CdSe, showed a high PCE of 4.20%, 30% greater than that shown by its smooth counterpart. The enhanced photovoltaic performance of the hierarchical TiO2 nanowires was attributed to the long electron lifetime, effective electron injection and improved charge collection efficiency, consequences of the branched nanowire architecture. Similarly, in previous reports, hyper-branched TiO2, TiO2 nanorod arrays, and nano-bamboo-type tubes yielded higher efficiencies in dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) compared to particulate TiO2. A layer-by layer assembly of hyperbranched hierarchical tree-like titania nanowires (underlayer), branched hierarchical rambutan-like titania hollow submicrometer-sized spheres (intermediate layer), and hyperbranched hierarchical urchin-like titania micrometer-sized spheres (top layer) when employed in DSSCs resulted in a PCE of 11.01%.
In another report, CdS nanorods were deposited over TiO2 nanowires, wherein the nanowires were grown by chemical vapor deposition and the nanorods by a chemical vapor transport method. The ensuing cell fabricated with this TiO2@CdS heterostructure photoanode, the I2/I− redox couple as the electrolyte and a transparent Pt film as the counter electrode yielded a PCE of 1.5%. A three-dimensional flower-like TiO2 structure grown on a one-dimensional array of TiO2 nanorods, prepared by a double step hydrothermal route, was sensitized with CdS/CdSe/ZnS QDs and used as a photoanode. The resulting cell with a CuS counter electrode gave a PCE of 2.715%. Hierarchical TiO2 spheres were synthesized by a solvothermal method, and co-sensitized with CdSe/CdS QDs, which in turn were electrodeposited over TiO2. The cell showed ultra-fast electron transport, and 98% electron collection efficiency, which resulted in a high PCE of 4.81%.
It is evident from the above survey that TiO2 structure controls PCEs of both QDSCs and DSSCs. However, an elaborate analysis on how charge transport across interfaces in a solution processed cell varies on going from one morphology to the other, and how these factors affect PCEs has been done before only in one study, indicating that there is enough scope to take this further. In an earlier study, the effect of TiO2 architecture, and the effect of the method of deposition of CdSe QDs (chemical bath deposition (CBD) versus successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR)) on PCEs was studied. The effect on open circuit voltage (VOC) (which in turn is controlled by the surface areas of the morphologies), and on understanding how the electron-recombination and injection kinetics are controlled by the growth methods were studied in detail. In their work, the authors used three commercially available nanoparticulate morphologies, two hollow fibers and one inverse opal structure for TiO2. Here, we used different morphologies: wires, porous nanoparticles, and nanosheets. Further, CdS is used instead of CdSe, and structural analysis by Raman and XRD studies, dark current variations with voltage and photovoltage decay were not shown in their work.
Here, we investigate how (a) the shape of the TiO2 nanostructure steers the photogenerated carrier transport to the current collector and (b) how charge injection at the TiO2/CdS interface, charge transfer at the TiO2/CdS/FTO interface, and back electron transfer at the TiO2/CdS/S2− interface are influenced by the TiO2 nanostructure type, and how these factors impact QDSC efficiencies. Such a study that probes and attempts to provide a fundamental understanding of these phenomena is expected to be invaluable for developing efficient QDSCs in future.

The field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) images of the different TiO2 morphologies are presented in Fig. 1. Images of TiO2 PNPs (Fig. 1a–c) show the presence of TiO2 spheres, 200–600 nm in diameter, which are composed of nanoparticles of TiO2, and separated by 20–40 nm sized pores. The pores are useful for electrolyte penetration during cell operation. The micrographs of the TiO2 NWs (Fig. 1d–f) reveal a mesh like morphology composed of a compactly packed interconnected three dimensional network of mingling TiO2 nanowires. TiO2 NSHs (Fig. 1g–i) appear as crinkled continuous sheets, extending over several microns. The diaphanous nature of the individual sheets is visible particularly in Fig. 1i. The images of a TiO2 NP film (Fig. 1j–l) show the film to be porous and comprising of interlinked particles of TiO2 with indefinite shapes. In this morphology, the particles do not appear as discrete entities; the particles appear to be fused together. At the same time, there are pores with a large variance in their sizes (∼10–300 nm) between the linked particles. These images reveal that each morphology used in this study for anchoring the CdS QDs is different from the other. There are no major similarities between the four morphologies used in this work and therefore differences in their photovoltaic properties can be correlated with their morphological differences.

The absorption spectra of the different TiO2 morphologies and of films of CdS QDS anchored to the morphologies are shown in Fig. 2a and b. The band gaps of TiO2 are estimated from their absorption edges, and they are found to be 3.16, 3.65, 3.7 and 3.6 eV for TiO2-NPs, PNPs, NWs and NSHs respectively (Fig. 2a). The absorption edges of PNPs, NWs, and NSHs are blue-shifted compared to NPs, and this is possibly a size (or dimension) and morphology effect, as NPs not only show a large distribution in particle sizes, but they also aggregate when deposited as films over substrates. The TiO2/CdS films show an additional absorption band in the visible region, spanning from 350 to ∼520 nm, due the band-edge excitation of CdS (Fig. 2b). Steady state fluorescence and fluorescence decay spectra of pristine CdS QD/glass and the TiO2/CdS films (supported on different TiO2 morphologies) are shown in Fig. 2c and d. Six layers of CdS were deposited on each of the TiO2 films by the SILAR method to enable comparison of the spectral data. Under an excitation wavelength (λex) of 370 nm, all films show a broad emission peak spanning from 400 to 700 nm, with a λmax at ∼515–525 nm corresponding to the band-edge emission of CdS (Fig. 2c). The CdS emission peak is quenched by the TiO2 nanostructures in the following order: NWs ≈ NSHs > PNPs > NPs in the TiO2/CdS films. The quenching is attributed to the photo-excited electron transfer from the conduction band (CB) of CdS to the CB of TiO2. Further confirmation is obtained from the emission decay analysis (Fig. 2d, and Table S1, ESI), which also follows the same trend, with the average excited electron lifetime (〈τ〉) being the longest for TiO2(NPs)/CdS compared to the other sensitized films. The following trend: CdS (4.77 ns) > NPs/CdS (1.18 ns) > PNPs/CdS (1.14 ns) > NSHs/CdS (1.13 ns) > NWs/CdS (0.55 ns) is observed. The emission decay plots (Fig. 2d) recorded at a fixed emission wavelength of 515 nm were fitted into bi-exponential functions based on χ2 values. The emission average life times and fitted parameters are tabulated in Table S1 (ESI). Excited electron depopulation is the fastest for CdS tethered to TiO2 NWs. The 1-D mode for electron propagation through the NWs affords rapid current collection by FTO (SnO2:F). PNPs and NSHs are similar in terms of their ability to accept electrons from CdS, and NPs lag behind, possibly due to large variance in particle sizes and shapes, which prevents a uniform fast electron injection.
More insight into this was obtained from diffuse reflectance spectra of the TiO2 morphologies (Fig. 3). In the visible region, the reflectance is highest for the TiO2 NWs and varies between ∼90–94%, followed by TiO2 PNPs (∼86–88%), and TiO2 NSHs (∼84–86%). In a previous report on TiO2 NPs, very high diffuse reflectances in the range of 97–99.5% were achieved; our values are slightly lower. Here, the TiO2 NPs show maximum variation in reflectance as %R increases from 62 to 91%, when wavelength increases from 400 to 800 nm. The PNPs and the NSHs have comparable effective surface areas of ∼102 and ∼112 m2 g−1 (Fig. S1 and Table S2, ESI) which is reflected in their comparable diffuse reflectance profiles over the visible region. However, surprisingly, although the NWs have a much smaller BET (Brunauer–Emmett–Teller) surface area (∼62 m2 g−1), they show the highest diffuse reflectance in the visible region. Generally: (i) the greater the effective surface area, the higher the scattering of light, and the greater the magnitude of diffuse reflectance, and (ii) a smaller TiO2 crystallite size implies more light scattering and therefore the diffuse reflectance would be higher. On comparing the XRD patterns or full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the prominent peaks for the four morphologies (Fig. 4a), it is observed that the PNPs are most crystalline, for the peaks have the lowest FWHMs, and the NWs are the least crystalline. The crystallite size variation is as follows: PNPs > NPs > NSHs > NWs. The sizes are calculated using Scherrer's formula, D = kλ/βcosθ, where D is the crystallite size in nm, k is a dimensionless factor of ∼0.9, β is the FWHM, λ is the wavelength of the impinging X-ray, and θ is the Bragg's angle in degrees. From the peak corresponding to the (101) plane, the D values are 11.6, 9.5 and 6.3 nm, respectively, for PNPs, NPs and NSHs. This peak is almost non-existent in the pattern of NWs, and since the degree of crystallinity appears to be least for this morphology, it follows that the crystallite sizes will be the smallest. For NWs, the smaller crystallite size advantage offsets the surface area disadvantage, and therefore %R is the highest. For PNPs, the large surface area effect outweighs the crystallite size effect, and consequently, the %R is high. The NPs show the least diffuse reflectance in the bulk of the visible region, possibly due to (a) the large variation in particle shapes and dimensions, (b) large crystallite size, and (c) a low effective surface area. These studies thus give credence to the above claim of slow electron injection from CdS to TiO2 NPs.

The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of NPs, PNPs, NSHs and NWs (Fig. 4a) show peaks at inter-planar spacings (d) of 3.53, 2.38, 1.89, 1.67 and 1.48 Å, at 2θ = 25.23°, 37.76°, 48.04°, 55.0° and 62.6° which correspond to the (101), (004), (200), (211) and (213) planes of the tetragonal anatase structure of TiO2 (PDF (powder diffraction file) # 89-4203). While the NPs and PNPs show distinctive sharp peaks, the NSHs and NWs are semi-crystalline, as the peaks overlay broad humps, characteristic of some amorphicity. Further, peaks at 2θ = 27.8° and 36° are also observed due to the (110) and (101) planes of rutile TiO2 in almost all patterns, which align with d values of 3.2 and 2.49 Å, as per PDF # 89-4920, indicating that mixed phases prevail. The peaks are probably also broadened due to the mixed crystallinity, and the existence of phase equilibrium between anatase and rutile.

The Raman spectra of the TiO2 morphologies are compared in Fig. 4b. Three sets of peaks are common to the Raman spectra of PNPs, PNPs, and NSHs (Fig. 4b). The peaks at 143, 195, and 639 cm−1 correspond to the Eg modes, a peak at 396 cm−1 corresponds to the B1g mode and another peak at 517 cm−1 is a doublet of the A1g and B1g modes. The lowest-frequency Eg mode at 143 cm−1 is found to be the most intense of all the observed modes in anatase TiO2 NPs. The Eg, B1g and A1g peaks are ascribed to the symmetric stretching mode and symmetric- and anti-symmetric – bending vibrations of O–Ti–O in TiO2. PNPs show additional Eg and A1g rutile modes at 447 and 612 cm−1. NWs show an anomalous spectrum, for the anatase and rutile modes are weaker compared to the NSHs, PNPs and NPs, and an additional unassigned band is seen at 279 cm−1, which is not observed for the remaining three structures. The similarity in overall XRD and Raman profiles observed for NWs is also noteworthy, for the broadness of the peaks in both plots is an indicator of a higher degree of amorphicity prevalent in the same compared to the remaining three morphologies.
The TiO2-NSHs and NWs were synthesized by a previously reported alkali-hydrothermal process. For both NSHs and NWs, NaOH was used, but for NSHs, additionally, an alkaline surfactant, tetra n-propyl ammonium hydroxide (TPAOH) was also used. In this method, when TiO2 particles are treated with a strong alkali (NaOH and TPAOH or sole NaOH) at an elevated temperature, layered titanates are first formed and they further exfoliate under hydrothermal conditions to yield titanate NSHs. Simultaneously, the Ti–O–Ti bonds break, and dangling bonds of Ti4+- and [Ti–O–]2− also result. These are immediately charge compensated by OH− ions and Na+ and TPA+ ions respectively. In the absence of TPAOH, the sheets roll up to yield the more stable nanowires (NWs), but in the presence of TPAOH, the surfactant–titanate sheet interactions are such that the surface energy of the sheets is reduced, and they become stable. Upon washing with acid, the titanate-NWs and NSHs are converted to TiO2-NSHs and NWs. The reason for their predominantly amorphous nature is that the crystal structure (anatase) of TiO2 is composed of TiO6 octahedra, which share vertices and edges to build a 3D framework. However, when TiO2 is subjected to the strong alkali treatment (as in the cases of NSHs and NWs), the Ti–O–Ti bonds are broken, and stable amorphous titanates are formed, which are converted to the corresponding amorphous oxides.

QDSCs were assembled with NP/CdS, PNP/CdS, NSH/CdS and NW/CdS films serving as photoanodes, a 0.1 M Na2S solution (3:7 v/v ratio of water:methanol) as the redox electrolyte and carbon fabric glued to a glass substrate as the counter electrode. A para-film was used as the spacer, and the cells were illuminated from the rear-side. Current density (J) versus voltage (V) plots obtained under 1 Sun irradiance (100 mW cm−2) are shown in Fig. 5a. Solar cell parameters for champion cells are summarized in Table 1, and average and individual values for 5 cells with a given TiO2 morphology are provided in Table S3 (ESI). In order to establish that methanol does not induce any current doubling effect, J–V characteristics of two cells, each with a TiO2 NP/CdS photoanode and a C-cloth as the counter electrode, but with a 0.1 M Na2S solution in MeOH:water (7:3) in one case and with a 0.1 M Na2S solution in water in the other case are measured and compared (Fig. S2 and Table S4, ESI). The JSC for the cell with an aqueous electrolyte (14.49 mA cm−2) is comparable with that of the cell with MeOH (14.64 mA cm−2). However, the VOC of the cell with MeOH in the electrolyte is greater than that of the cell with an aqueous electrolyte. The lower viscosity of the water–methanol mixture compared to the aqueous solution allows better penetration of the electrolyte in the TiO2/CdS film, which improves charge separation, especially hole transfer, and thus VOC. Therefore, the MeOH based electrolyte is used in this study.

Photoanode

V
OC (mV)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF

η
champion (%)

η
avg. (%)
TiO2 NSH/CdS
963
5.839
0.47
2.682
2.509
TiO2 PNP/CdS
857
16.439
0.38
5.401
4.854
TiO2 NPs/CdS
978
14.645
0.38
5.557
4.949
TiO2 NW/CdS
978
14.856
0.43
6.288
5.959
NWs are the best performers among the four morphologies. The PCEs of the champion cells follow the following order: NWs (6.29%) > NPs (5.55%) > PNPs (5.4%) > NSHs (2.6%). Albeit slightly lower, the average PCEs also follow the same trend. The average short-circuit current density (JSC) and fill factor (FF) values are higher for NWs, in comparison to NPs and PNPs. The open-circuit voltage (VOC, average) is highest for NWs (959 mV), closely followed by NPs and NSHs (944 and 943 mV), and then PNPs (886 mV). However, NSHs show the lowest average JSC of 5.5 mA cm−2, whereas the remaining three cells deliver average JSC values in excess of 13 mA cm−2. Surprisingly the average FF is the highest for NSHs (0.48). The high VOC and FF of NSHs could be due to the fact that charge separation, i.e., electron injection to NSHs from the conduction band of CdS is efficient and the chemical capacitance (discussed in the next section) is also large. But the low JSC stems from electron trapping in the defect states of NSHs and inefficient electron transfer to FTO, and is perhaps also compounded by electron loss via trapping in the two-dimensional sheets. Impedance studies also help in understanding the reasons for low JSC in NSH based cells. For PNPs and NPs, the performances are comparable, owing to similarity in their morphologies – nanoparticulate porous morphology, which maximizes (i) CdS loading during photoanode preparation and (ii) electrolyte permeation during cell operation.
IPCE versus wavelength plots for TiO2 morphology/CdS based cells are shown in Fig. 4b. The IPCE plots reveal maximum IPCE values for the TiO2 PNP/CdS cell (∼70–82% in the 400–480 nm wavelength range). The cells with TiO2 NWs and TiO2 NPs show slightly lower values, with IPCE maxima of 77 and 75% respectively. All four cells show high IPCEs in the 400–480 nm wavelength region. Thereafter, IPCE decreases gradually with wavelength and has negligible values above 550 nm. The JSC (for champion cell) and the average JSC are the highest for the cells with TiO2 PNPs; correspondingly, the IPCE values are also the highest for this cell, in comparison to the cells with the other morphologies. Short-circuit current densities are also determined from the IPCE plots, by using the relation: , where Pλ is the incident light irradiance at a given wavelength, impinging upon the cell. Integration of the product of IPCEλ and Pλ over wavelength yielded the JIPCE values. The values deduced from the IPCE curves are: 15.97 (TiO2 PNPs) > 14.4 (TiO2 NWs) > 14.1 (TiO2 NPs) > 5.7 (TiO2 NSHs) mA cm−2. The values are close to the JSC values obtained from the J–V plots and are compared in Table S5 (ESI). The reasons for high JSC and high IPCEs (or JIPCE) achieved for the cells with TiO2-PNPs, NWs, and NPs are the higher recombination resistance at TiO2/CdS/S2− interfaces and lower electron transport resistances compared to TiO2 NSHs. Previously, a high IPCE of ∼60% was obtained for TiO2 nanorod/CdS cells, and the champion cell gave a PCE of 1.88%, and a JSC of 6.25 mA cm−2. In another study on TiO2 NP (P-25 based)/CdS based cells (where 12 SILAR cycles in Cd(Ac)2 and Na2S baths were used for CdS deposition), a maximum IPCE of ∼80% was reached, and the cell showed a PCE of 2.15%. Our efficiency values (particularly for the cell with TiO2 NWs) are higher compared to literature values of PCEs, due to higher VOC values, and due to high IPCEs in the 400–480 nm wavelength span.
To explain the VOC trend, photovoltage (normalized) decay plots were recorded in the dark, once a stable value was reached under a white light irradiance of 22 mW cm−2 (Fig. 4c). The photovoltage decay time span is proportional to VOC, for this span reflects the charge build-up in the photoanode, which in turn is a measure of the in-built potential, and is also a measure of how slow back electron transfer to the oxidized species of the redox couple is. We find that the photovoltage decay times follow the order: NWs (1.39 s) > NPs (0.64 s) > PNPs (0.4 s) ≈ NSHs (0.33 s). The highest average VOC obtained for NWs is accounted for. However, while the decay times of PNPs and NSHs are comparable, the average VOC values differ by 57 mV, which does not match with the decay trend. This aspect is not clear at the moment.
The NWs are the frontrunners, they provide an optimal balance between less obstructive one-dimensional electron transport afforded by their shapes, and rapid electron transfer to FTO thereby reducing back electron transfer, and enhancing VOC, JSC and FF. The performance trend, astoundingly, also contradicts the behavior expected from the surface area and porosity trends. The best performers, NWs and NPs are characterized by surface areas of 62 and 64 m2 g−1, compared to 102 and 112 m2 g−1 for PNPs and NSHs (Fig. S1 and Table S2, ESI). Pore volume is also the highest for NSHs (0.42 cm3 g−1) and relatively lower for NWs and NPs (0.23 and 0.2 cm3 g−1). These studies imply the possibilities of highest CdS loading over NSHs and better electrolyte permeation, which are also reflected in high VOC and FF. However, these advantages are clearly offset by the fast electron transport to FTO – and low recombination with holes or electrolyte – in NWs/CdS, which permit more efficient electron transfer to FTO compared to NSH/CdS/FTO. Dimensional and directional properties of TiO2 decidedly govern carrier collection more than surface area or porosity.

Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) are recorded at different forward biases ranging from −0.3 V to −0.7 V under dark conditions to elucidate the mechanism of the enhanced photovoltaic performance for the TiO2 NW/CdS photoanode (in particular) based cell. Similar measurements have been performed in the past for both DSSCs and QDSCs. EIS parameters such as chemical capacitance Cμ, recombination resistance Rrec, electron transport resistance, Rt, and dark current for the different morphology photoanode cells were determined from their corresponding Nyquist curves using a transmission line circuit, which is described in detail in earlier reports. Variation of Cμ, Rrec, and dark current as a function of applied bias and Nyquist plots (under −0.4 and −0.7 V) are shown in Fig. 6. Cμ is a measure of the electron density in the CB of TiO2, and is said to rise exponentially, when TiO2 has a measurable conductivity.Rrec reflects the charge-transfer resistance at the TiO2/sensitizer/electrolyte interfaces (related to the recombination of electrons in TiO2 with acceptor species in the electrolyte and/or sensitizer). Since Rrec is inversely proportional to the recombination rate, a greater Rrec value implies reduced charge recombination rate in TiO2/QD cells. All Nyquist plots show two skewed semi-circles, the one at high frequencies has a smaller diameter, and it is followed by an incomplete distorted large arc in the intermediate to low frequency range. We find that Cμ increases slightly with applied negative bias for a given TiO2/CdS film (Fig. 6a). The Cμ values, at low negative potentials, are high for TiO2 PNPs, followed by NSHs, NWs and NPs. But at −0.7 V, NPs and PNPs have comparable Cμ, and NWs have a lower Cμ. Among the four morphologies, Rrec values are highest and comparable for NPs and NWs in the −0.3 to −0.5 V range. At −0.6 and −0.7 V, they are higher for NWs (Fig. 6b). Rrec values are the least for NSHs and for PNPs, they are higher than that of NSHs. Resistance to electron (from CB of TiO2)-hole (VB of CdS) recombination at the TiO2/CdS interface, and to electron (from CB of TiO2)-oxidized electrolyte species recombination at the (TiO2/CdS)/S2− interface is the least for NSH morphology, which aligns well with the lowest JSC and as a consequence the lowest PCE observed for the cell with NSHs. PNPs, NWs and NPs have higher Rrec values than NSHs, which again is in agreement with the much higher JSC values and PCEs obtained for these cells. The dark current performance of NSHs again concurs with the Rrec behavior (Fig. 6c). The dark currents of PNPs, NWs, and NPs are comparable and lower in the −0.3 to −0.7 V range, whereas it is higher for NSHs over the entire applied bias range. Since the association of electrons in the CB of NSHs with the oxidized electrolyte species or with the holes in the VB of CdS is not well-suppressed (as per the Rrec trend), in the case of NSHs, the dark currents are larger for NSHs.

A 45° line observed at higher frequencies (as part of the first skewed arc) corresponds to the electron diffusion through the TiO2 film. The length of this line corresponds to one-third of the transport resistance, Rt/3. The transport resistance, Rt, relates to the electron conductivity σ, and film thickness, L, as Rt = L/σ. At more negative potentials, the Fermi level in TiO2 approaches the lower edge of the CB, and both Rt and Rrec become smaller due to the increasing electron density. The Rt magnitudes for PNPs, NWs, NPs, and NSHs are 0.81, 0.81, 0.83, 0.98 Ω cm2 at −0.7 V and 1.13, 1.14, 1.15, 1.18 Ω cm2 at −0.4 V, which indicates that the lower the transport resistance, the more facile the electron transport and transfer to FTO. Rt values are again lower and comparable for PNPs, NPs, and NWs, and relatively higher for NSHs at the applied bias extrema. The one-dimensional nature of the NWs and their well-interconnected morphology, and the interlinked nanoparticulate morphologies of PNPs and NPs allow facile electron propagation and higher JSC values are realized for these cells. The higher resistance offered by NSHs to electron transport and transfer to the collector is again reflected in the lower JSC obtained for this cell. This is possibly due to electron trapping in the continuous sheets. Furthermore, the electron lifetime, τ, is calculated using the equation: τ = Rrec × Cμ, and the τ values for the NW, NP, and PNP based cells are much larger than that of NSH based cell at −0.4 V. Longer electron lifetime implies a lower recombination rate, and improves the charge collection efficiency of the cell. For the sake of clarity, a direct comparison of Nyquist plots of the cells with the four morphologies at forward biases of −0.4 and −0.7 V is provided in Fig. 6d and e, and the extracted parameters are summarized in Table 2.
Morphology

R
t (Ω cm2) (−0.7 V)

R
t (Ω cm2) (−0.4 V)

R
rec (Ω cm2) (−0.7 V)

R
rec (Ω cm2) (−0.4 V)

C
μ (F cm−2) (−0.4 V)

τ (ms) (−0.4 V)
NWs
0.81
1.14
142.88
512.3
0.00111
568.21
NPs
0.83
1.15
76.9
505.4
0.000870
439.50
PNPs
0.81
1.13
78.48
322.80
0.001703
549.86
NSHs
0.98
1.18
75.8
295.3
0.00124
365.85
XRD and Raman data show that the NWs and NSHs appear to have a very high degree of amorphicity, relative to PNPs and NPs. This study delineates that semi-crystalline TiO2 is best at transferring electrons to FTO, and has the least tendency compared to crystalline-NPs and PNPs with predominant anatase phases to lose electrons to the intra-gap traps and defect states in TiO2. Scheme 1 summarizes the different electron transfer modes in the films.

Fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) glass with sheet resistance 25 Ω cm−2 was purchased from Pilkington and cleaned sequentially in soap solution, 10% HCl solution, 10% NaOH solution, distilled water and acetone/ethanol (v/v 1:1). TiO2 nanoparticles (NPs) (P-25) were a free gift from Evonik. Titanium chloride (TiCl4), Triton X-100, cadmium acetate [Cd(CH3COO)2], sodium sulfide (Na2S), sodium hydroxide (NaOH, 99%), hydrochloric acid, ammonia, acetonitrile, methanol and ethanol were purchased from Merck; acetyl acetone, anatase TiO2 powder, and titanium(IV) isopropoxide (TIP, 97%) were acquired from Sigma Aldrich; tetra n-propyl ammonium hydroxide (TPAOH, 40%) and tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS, 98%) were bought from Alfa Aesar. Carbon fabric (sheet resistance ∼10 Ω cm−2) was procured from Alibaba Pvt. Ltd Ultra-pure water with a resistivity of ∼18.2 MΩ cm was obtained through a Millipore Direct-Q3 UV system.


1 g of anatase TiO2 was placed in a Teflon-lined autoclave of 50 mL capacity, which was filled with 40 mL of 10 M NaOH. The autoclave was then sealed in a stainless steel tank and heated at 160 °C for 24 h without any disturbance. After the autoclave cooled to room temperature, the sample was washed several times with dilute HCl aqueous solution, absolute ethanol, and DI water. It was then centrifuged and dried at 60 °C overnight to collect the final product.


0.1 g of anatase TiO2 powder and 8 g of TPAOH were added to 10 mL of 10 M NaOH aqueous solution under stirring. After 30 minutes, the mixture was transferred to a 100 mL Teflon container, sealed in a stainless autoclave and then treated in an air-flow electric oven at 130 °C for 24 h. After the autoclave cooled to room temperature, the precipitate was collected by centrifugation, and washed with water and ethanol. The sample was then dried in an 80 °C oven to procure the final product.


A mixture of ethanol (10 mL), DI water (∼1 M, ∼180 mL) and ammonia (∼0.2 M, ∼37.8 mL) was stirred for 5 minutes, and TEOS (∼0.2 M, ∼462 mL) was added to the resulting solution. The reaction was allowed to proceed for 24 h. The colloidal solution formed was subjected to high-speed centrifugation to obtain silica particles following the Stober method, which were then washed with ethanol three times and dried in an oven at 100 °C for 2 h. The as-prepared SiO2 nanoparticles were added to a solution of 3.6 mL of TIP, 18 mL of ethanol and 6 mL of acetonitrile. The reaction proceeded via a sol–gel coating process for 6 h at 4 °C. The resulting SiO2@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles (CSNPs) were isolated by centrifugation, and washed with ethanol and DI water. This was followed by calcination at 600 °C for 6 h, and re-dispersion in 20 mL of DI water. Chemical etching of the CSNPs was performed by adding an aqueous solution of NaOH (2.5 M, 3.5 mL) to the re-dispersed solution, and stirring for 6 h. The TiO2 PNPs thus formed were separated by centrifugation and washed with ethanol and DI water to obtain the final product.


TiO2 paste made of TiO2 NPs (0.3 g, P-25, free gift from Evonik) dispersed uniformly in a clear solution of acetylacetone (1.5 mL), ultrapure water (8.5 mL) and Triton X-100 (20 mg) was applied over cleaned FTO-coated conducting glass plates by the screen-printing technique. The as-fabricated TiO2 plates were heated at 60 °C for 30 min, and then annealed at 500 °C for another 30 min. Another layer of TiO2 was applied using the steps detailed above, followed by heating and annealing. The TiO2-coated FTO substrate was then immersed in an aqueous TiCl4 (40 mM) solution for 30 min at 70 °C, followed by washing in distilled water and annealing at 500 °C for 30 min.

The TiO2 sample (NWs or PNPs or NSHs) was made into a paste in a mortar and pestle by adding the required amounts of acetylacetone and Triton X-100. The paste was then applied as a single layer on the active area of the FTO plate, heated at 60 °C for 30 min and then annealed at 500 °C for another 30 min.
0.1 M cadmium acetate and 0.1 M sodium sulfide, taken in two separate beakers and dissolved in methanol, were used as the cadmium and sulfide precursors, respectively, for CdS QD deposition over the TiO2 film. A given TiO2 film (NPs or NWs or PNPs or NSHs based) was initially immersed in the cadmium precursor for 2 min, rinsed in methanol to remove excess ions, and then dried in a hot air oven at 60 °C. The same film was then immersed in the sulfide precursor solution for 2 min followed by rinsing in methanol. This constitutes one SILAR cycle. Five more SILAR cycles were performed and the resulting film was labelled as a TiO2/CdS film. In this manner, TiO2 NSH/CdS, TiO2 PNP/CdS, TiO2 NP/CdS and TiO2 NW/CdS films were obtained.

A field emission scanning electron microscope (Carl Zeiss Supra 40 FE-SEM) was used for imaging the morphology of the films. Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area analysis and Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) pore size and volume analysis were performed using a Micromeritics ASAP 2020 Quantachrome instrument under nitrogen at 77.3 K, after degassing at 300 °C for 3 h. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained on a PANalytical, X'PertPRO instrument with Cu-Kα (λ = 1.5406 Å) radiation. Raman spectra were recorded on a Bruker Senterra dispersive Raman microscope spectrometer, with 532 nm laser excitation. Fluorescence spectra were measured using a Horiba Fluoromax-4 spectrometer. The time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) method with a Horiba Jobin Yvon data station HUB functioning in the TCSPC mode was used for studying emission decay. The excitation source was a nano LED, pulsed at 370 nm with a 1 MHz repetition rate, and the pulse duration was 1.3 ns. A Ludox solution (colloidal silica) was used to acquire the instrument response function (IRF) which is referred to as prompt. The idea behind the prompt measurement is to eliminate the time evolution with the instrument's contribution, the lifetime is assumed to be zero for measurement of an ultrafast process (e.g. Raman or Rayleigh scattering by solvent molecules or by dissolved colloidal silica particles), so the observed decay time is attributed to the delayed response in the excitation and detection of the instrument. Horiba Jobin Yvon DAS6 fluorescence decay analysis software was used to fit the model function (bi-exponential decays) to the experimental data. Absorption spectra were recorded on a UV-VIS-NIR spectrophotometer (T90+ of PG Instruments). Current versus potential (I–V) data of QDSCs were measured using a LOT-Oriel solar simulator coupled with a Metrohm Autolab PSTAT302N. The light source was a 150 W Xenon arc lamp, which delivered a collimated output beam of 25 mm diameter through an Air Mass 1.5 filter, and provided a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (1 Sun). The spatial uniformity of irradiance was confirmed by calibrating with a 2 cm × 2 cm Si reference cell and re-affirmed with a Newport power meter. Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were recorded on an Autolab PGSTAT 302N equipped with a frequency response analyser and a NOVA 1.9 software, under an ac amplitude of 20 mV over the frequency range of 1 MHz to 0.1 Hz. External quantum efficiency (EQE) plots were recorded using a Quantum Efficiency Measurement System, Oriel IQE-200™ capable of measurements compliant to ASTM E1021-06. The light source was a 250 W quartz tungsten halogen lamp; the monochromator path length was 1/8 M spot and the size was 1 mm × 2.5 mm rectangular at focus.


The role of TiO2 morphology, the most widely used electron transport layer in DSSCs and QDSCs, is investigated in this work, in terms of how the interface furnished by a given morphology affects the cell performance. The solar cell responses for champion cells and average values for TiO2/CdS cells based on different TiO2 morphologies conformed to the following trend: NWs > NPs > PNPs > NSHs. The NW based champion cell delivered an exceptionally high PCE of 6.29%, as opposed to 2.6% produced by its NSH based counterpart. This 2.4 times increment in PCE is surprisingly independent of the surface area and porosity offered by the morphology (as NSHs have significantly higher values!), but is largely dependent on the efficacy of the charge transport and transfer processes. The NSH/CdS electrode is unable to transfer electrons as efficiently to FTO as the NW/CdS electrode does; thus a low JSC and an abysmal PCE result for the former. Compared to NPs, PNPs undergo faster recombination, but they offer a larger effective surface area (so, higher CdS infiltration), giving both morphologies similar boost in photovoltaic performance, resulting in similar trends in PCEs. The anomalous structural aspects of NWs that allow maximum charge injection from CdS, and direct photoexcited carriers to FTO, with minimum loss via recombination with the electrolyte or via trapping in defect states, result in a remarkable performance that shows that by engineering each component in QDCSs, unexpectedly high values for efficiencies can be attained.


Financial support from the Solar Energy Research Initiative – Department of Science & Technology (DST/TM/SERI/2K12-11(G)) is gratefully acknowledged. The authors (PNK and AK) thank UGC for the grants of senior and junior research fellowships.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp07364f
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017