 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA00129D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 5032-5039


Xingshuai
Lv
,

Wei
Wei
*,

Cong
Mu
,

Baibiao
Huang
 and 

Ying
Dai
*

School of Physics, State Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials, Shandong University, 250100 Jinan, PR China. E-mail: weiw@sdu.edu.cn; daiy60@sdu.edu.cn

Received
5th January 2018
, Accepted 19th February 2018
First published on 21st February 2018
GeSe has emerged as an appealing photovoltaic material due to the desirable electronic and optical properties as well as being an earth-abundant constituent element. We systematically explore for the first time the contact properties of bilayer GeSe with commonly used back electrode metals in detail, such as the geometric features, electronic properties, Schottky barrier, tunneling barrier, and band alignment. Our results reveal that the metals investigated, especially Au, Pt, and Ni, show great potential in forming favorable contacts with GeSe due to a low Schottky barrier and tunneling barrier. More importantly, we find that when a SnS monolayer is superimposed with GeSe layers, the combined system can be used as an effective solar cell material with type-II heterostructure alignment. The power conversion efficiency is predicted to be as high as ∼18%, which is comparable or even higher than that of previously reported solar cells. Our results not only provide microscopic insights into the characteristics between layered GeSe and metals, but also pave the way for further experimental improvements of GeSe thin-film solar cells.

A high conversion efficiency of sunlight into electricity is of great importance for applications in energy production. Currently, cadmium telluride (CdTe) and copper indium gallium diselenide (CIGS) have been best-developed as absorbers. However, because of the toxicity of Cd and scarcity of Te and In, next-generation absorber materials used in thin-film photovoltaics are receiving a growing amount of interest. Copper zinc tin sulfoselenide (CZTSSe) is one of the most intensively explored materials in this field, currently demonstrating a maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 12.6%. However, both theoretical and experimental results have revealed several considerable issues within CZTSSe, most of which result from Cu–Zn and Sn–Zn antisite disorder and a narrow phase stability range. For example, they include a nonidentified complex multinary phase diagram currently compromised by empirically established experience, lattice defects, a narrow phase stability field, difficulty in controlling the stoichiometry and phase purity. These challenges greatly limit the photovoltaic properties and the device efficiency of CZTSSe.

The arrival of two-dimensional (2D) crystals offers a number of opportunities for high-performance solar cells beyond traditional three-dimensional materials. A promising absorber candidate should consist of earth-abundant and nontoxic elements and retain the intriguing optical and electronic properties suitable for high-performance photovoltaics. In this aspect, germanium monoselenide (GeSe) fulfills the criteria and thus could be a promising candidate as a photovoltaic absorber for the following key reasons: (1) the constituent elements of Ge and Se are earth-abundant and low-toxic in nature, which is superior to conventional CdTe. (2) The GeSe monolayer exhibits high carrier mobility (4032.64 cm2 V−1 s−1) and a proper direct band gap (1.59 eV), giving rise to desirable optical properties for photovoltaic application.
Recently, Xue et al. proposed a rapid thermal sublimation (RTS) strategy to fabricate GeSe thin-film solar cells and the experimental results show a PCE of 1.48%. As shown in Fig. 1a, like CdTe thin-film solar cells, the fabricated GeSe solar cells possess a representative device structure: front electrode/n-type layer/p-type layer/back electrode. Transparent conducting films such as ITO are used as the front electrode and Au thin films are used as the back electrode, which can be expressed as ITO/CdS/GeSe/Au. In such a solar cell device, finding efficient 2D donor and acceptor materials with both a suitable direct bandgap and high carrier mobility is still a great challenge, which could significantly affect the PCE of GeSe solar cells. More importantly, a finite Schottky barrier usually appears at the interface between GeSe and the metal layers, which could lower the carrier transfer efficiency between GeSe and the metals. Therefore, decreasing the Schottky barrier height (SBH) to form low-resistance GeSe–metal contacts is one of the greatest challenges because a high Schottky barrier could reduce the performance of thin-film solar cells. Unfortunately, the SBH does not exclusively relate to the work function of the metals and the band structure of the semiconductor while the complex interface reconstruction, appearance of surface states, and Fermi level pinning (FLP) may largely influence the SBH. Hence, it is highly difficult to comprehensively understand the nature of the interfacial properties between the GeSe and metal layers. It is also important to select more suitable metals and optimize the contact configurations to maximize the performance of GeSe thin-film solar cells. However, to the best of our knowledge the interfacial properties of multilayer GeSe on metals remain unknown.
In this article, we systematically explore the interfacial properties between a GeSe bilayer and common metals (Au, Ag, Al, Cu, Pt, and Ni) based on first-principles calculations for the first time. The inner GeSe layer always undergoes metallization when in contact with the metal electrodes, due to the formation of chemical bonds. As a result of the metallization of the inner GeSe layer, a p-type Schottky barrier forms between GeSe and Au, Ag, Al, Cu, and Pt with a significantly low SBH varying from 0.05 to 0.32 eV, and an ohmic contact arises between GeSe and Ni. It is also found that these interfaces have low or even no tunneling barrier, which is another important characteristic of a semiconductor–metal contact. It is highly interesting that our designed GeSe/SnS vertical heterostructure indicates a PCE as high as 18%. Such a high PCE is due to an appropriate band alignment, promoting the separation of carriers, as well as high electron mobility that ensures fast carrier transport. Our results provide an in-depth understanding of the interfacial characteristics of GeSe–metal contacts in few-layer systems.

In this work, electronic-structure calculations were carried out using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP). Electron–electron interactions were treated in the framework of generalized gradient approximation (GGA) with the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) scheme as the exchange-correlation functional. The energy cutoff was set to 450 eV, and 10−5 eV was chosen for the energy break criterion. The atomic positions were fully optimized until the maximum force on each atom was less than 0.01 eV Å−1. Van der Waals (vdW) interactions were taken into account by the empirical correction scheme of Grimme (DFT + D2). Since DFT-GGA calculations underestimate the band gap of semiconductors, we employed the more accurate GW approximation to calculate the band structure of the GeSe monolayer. In the one-shot G0W0 calculations, quasiparticle energies were obtained on the basis of DFT-GGA wave functions. The energy convergence criterion and cutoff energy were 10−8 eV per atom and 100 eV, respectively. We used the maximally localized Wannier function as implemented in the WANNIER90 package to interpolate the quasiparticle band structures, where the s/p orbits of Ge and Se atoms were chosen for the initial projections. To prevent spurious interactions between periodic images a vacuum buffer space of at least 15 Å was added.


In respect to the GeSe monolayer (as shown in Fig. 1b), the lattice constants are a = 4.22 Å and b = 3.94 Å, and the Se–Ge bond length is 2.54 Å, which agree well with the values reported in previous studies. The GeSe monolayer shows semiconducting properties with a direct band gap of 1.08 eV based on the PBE method, with both the valence band maximum (VBM) and the conduction band minimum (CBM) residing at the same high-symmetry point in the Brillouin zone (BZ). On the basis of the G0W0 approximation, as shown in Fig. 1c, the band gap of GeSe increases from 1.08 to 1.45 eV. It is interesting to note that the dispersion relationship of the band structure is also affected by the choice of exchange-correlation approximation, in particular the G0W0 approximation slightly changes the band dispersion relationship of the GeSe monolayer.

Considering the fundamental physical properties (melting point and electrical and thermal conductances) as well as the chemical properties (stability and toxicity) of all metals, we used Au, Ag, Al, Cu, Pt, and Ni as substrates to construct an interface with the GeSe multilayer. According to convergence tests performed in previous studies, four atomic metal layers can represent a real substrate. In our models, as shown in Fig. 1d, we fix the lattice constant of metals and adjust the lattice constant of GeSe to match the metals. A 2 × 1 GeSe cell matches 1 × 3 (110) surfaces of Au, Ag, Al, and Pt, while a 1 × 2 GeSe cell matches the √3 × 3 (111) surfaces of Cu and Ni. The corresponding mismatches of lattice constants are 1.5–5.2%, as given in Table 1. GeSe mainly interacts with the metal atoms of the top two layers, so the metal atoms of the bottom two layers and the cell shape are fixed. We considered all the possible stacking configurations with high symmetry and the most stable structures of multilayer GeSe–metal contacts are depicted in Fig. 2. It is shown that the pristine structure of the GeSe bilayer is well preserved on Au, Ag, Al and Cu, but the first GeSe layer is seriously destroyed on the Pt and Ni electrodes.
Metal

ε (%)

d
GeSe–M (Å)

E
b (eV)

W
M (eV)

W (eV)

Φ
SB (eV)
ΔV (eV)

w
B (Å)

T
B (%)
Au
3.2
2.28
1.71
4.98
4.92
0.09h
0.18
0.35
72.3
Ag
3.6
2.34
1.08
4.22
4.15
0.32h
0.36
0.40
87.2
Al
2.7
2.60
0.78
4.14
4.22
0.25h
0.13
0.12
93.5
Cu
4.5
2.39
1.50
4.76
4.81
0.12h
0
0
100
Pt
1.5
1.46
2.89
5.42
5.47
0.05h
0
0
100
Ni
5.2
1.89
2.35
5.05
5.04
0
0
0
100
The binding energy (Eb) per interfacial Ge or Se atom of the GeSe–metal contact is defined as
Eb = (EG + EM − EG–M)/N
where
EG, EM, and EG–M are the energies for the freestanding GeSe, the clean metal surface, and the combined system, respectively, and N is the number of interfacial Ge or Se atoms. The equilibrium interface distance dG–M is defined as the average distance from the innermost metal surface to the innermost GeSe layer in the direction perpendicular to the interface, as shown in Fig. 1d. In terms of the binding energy and the interface distances, the GeSe–metal interfaces can be classified into two categories. The first category, consisting of the GeSe–Au, –Ag, –Al, and –Cu interfaces, indicates relatively weaker bonding between GeSe and the metal surface, with a smaller binding energy of 0.78 < Eb < 1.71 eV and larger interlayer distance of 2.28 < dG–M < 2.60 Å. The second category, consisting of the GeSe–Ni and –Pt interfaces, shows otherwise relatively stronger bonding. Regarding GeSe–Pt, the binding energy and interlayer distance are 2.89 eV and 1.46 Å, respectively, while in the case of GeSe–Ni they are 2.35 eV and 1.89 Å. In comparison with other semiconductor–metal contacts, such as graphdiyne–metal, the binding energy of the GeSe–metal is obviously larger which indicates that nonplanar GeSe is more active than graphdiyne and MoS2.


To further understand the coupling feature between GeSe and the metals, we extracted the band structures of the first GeSe layer (orange lines) and the second GeSe layer (cyan lines) away from the band structures of the composite systems (gray lines), as shown in Fig. 3. In comparison with the band structure of pristine GeSe, the band structure of the first GeSe layer is seriously destroyed when deposited on all of the considered metal electrodes, suggesting strong bonding between the first GeSe monolayer and these metals. The Fermi level (EF) always crosses the bands derived from the first GeSe layer, leading to a metallization of the first GeSe layer. The band hybridization between GeSe and Pt and Ni electrodes is more intense than those with Au, Ag, Al, and Cu electrodes, a fact in line with their bonding strength. By contrast, the band shapes of the second GeSe layer are preserved in all systems, and the band gaps are almost all preserved except for those associated with the GeSe–Ni contact. Therefore, the metal electrodes mainly interact with the first GeSe layer while the other layers are nearly intact.

In Fig. 4, density of states (DOS) for the GeSe bilayer adsorbed onto the metals is given. We can see that GeSe states are distributed around the Fermi level at all interfaces, which is typical behavior associated with metallization. In respect to GeSe–Ni and –Pt systems, more states exist around the Fermi level compared to other systems. The different degrees of hybridization can be understood by the different degrees of d-orbital occupation in the metals. Al has empty d-orbitals and Au, Ag, and Cu have fully filled d-orbitals, therefore it is hard for them to form strong covalent bonds with the contacted GeSe. Meanwhile Ni and Pt have partially filled d-orbitals, which leads to a larger binding energy with GeSe than those of other metals.

As shown in Fig. 1d, Schottky barriers may exist at either of the two different interfaces in GeSe solar cells: one is between the first GeSe layer and the metal (interface B), and the other one is between the second and the first GeSe layer (interface D). However, according to the band structure and DOS analysis, the strong interactions between GeSe and the metals result in metallization of the first GeSe layer, and therefore, the Schottky barrier is absent at interface B and only exists at interface D.

The absolute band position is an important parameter to evaluate the SBH in semiconductor–metal interfaces. It is well-known that DFT of single-electron theory cannot give accurate band gaps and therefore cannot give the absolute band position for a pristine semiconductor. In low-dimensional materials, the many-electron effects are significantly enhanced and, therefore, must be taken into account to accurately estimate the band structure of 2D semiconductors. A feasible method to obtain reliable band edge positions of a semiconductor is the first-principles many-electron GW approximation, which treats the electron–electron correlation effects properly. According to previous research, we assume that the change of the VBM (CBM) with respect to the Fermi level is in proportion to the GW energy corrections, thus EGWc and EGWV can be obtained as follows:
where
EGWg is the band gap of GeSe obtained after GW corrections, and EF, EDFTC, EDFTV, and EDFTg are the Fermi level, CBM, VBM, and band gap of GeSe obtained through DFT calculations, respectively. Such a correction scheme has been successfully used to obtain the absolute band edge position in previous studies. Actually, Yang et al. found that the absolute band edge energies for monolayer dichalcogenides given by the direct GW method are quite similar with the results from the above equations.

The Schottky barrier can be estimated by employing the lineup method, which is defined as the difference between the Fermi energy of the contacted systems and the VBM/CBM energy in an isolated GeSe monolayer. It should be pointed out that corrections induced by the interface dipole potential to the VBM/CBM energy are taken into account. In the case of free-standing GeSe, as shown in Fig. 5a, the calculated ionization potential and electron affinity after GW corrections are 4.47 and 3.02 eV, respectively. As listed in Table 1, GeSe and Au, Cu, and Pt form a quasi-ohmic contact with ΦSB of 0.09, 0.12, and 0.05 eV for holes, respectively, consolidating the previous experiments that Au could be well applied as an electrode in GeSe thin-film solar cells due to the low SBH. It should be noted that the SBH of a GeSe–Au system is much lower than that of other semiconductor–Au systems, such as CdTe–Au (0.44 eV), phosphorene–Au (0.21 eV) and InSe–Au (0.64 eV). Therefore, the lower SBH demonstrates the superior application potential of GeSe for thin-film solar cells. For GeSe contacted with Ag and Al, the ΦSB values for holes are 0.32 and 0.25 eV, respectively. Surprisingly, ohmic contact is formed between GeSe and Ni, exhibiting great potential in the application of a back electrode among these metal candidates.
The tunneling barrier, which is characterized by its width and height, is another important characteristic for a semiconductor–metal contact. As illustrated in Fig. 2, we explored the effective potential for GeSe–metal contacts, and the tunneling barrier height (ΔV) was calculated as the difference between the vdW gap (Φgap) and the potential energy of GeSe (ΦGeSe). The bonding interfaces of Au, Ag and Al have a low tunneling barrier height ΔV of 0.18, 0.36 and 0.13 eV, respectively. Whereas, the bonding interfaces of Cu, Ni and Pt have no tunneling barriers, indicating a high electron injection efficiency and thus low contact resistance. We use a square potential barrier to estimate the real potential barrier. The tunneling probability TB is defined as
where
m is the mass of the free electron, ħ is the reduced Planck’s constant, and ΔV and wB represent the height and width of the square potential barrier as shown in Fig. 2. The results listed in Table 1 clearly show that GeSe–Au, –Ag, and –Al contacts have tunneling probabilities of 72.3%, 87.2%, and 93.5%, which are much higher than those of other semiconductor–metal interfaces. In particular, the tunneling probability is 100% for GeSe–Cu, –Pt, and –Ni interfaces. Such a high tunneling probability value can largely promote charge transfer and thus enhance the device performance. According to the Schottky barrier and tunneling barrier above, we can classify these contacts into three types, as shown in Fig. 5b–d. The first one is between GeSe and Au, Ag, and Al (type 1), where both a Schottky barrier and tunneling barrier exist at the interface. The second one is between GeSe and Cu and Pt (type 2), where only a Schottky barrier exists. The last one is between GeSe and Ni (type 3), where neither a Schottky nor tunneling barrier is present at the interface.


For high-quality photovoltaic cell devices, direct band gaps of ∼1.2–1.6 eV and a high carrier mobility are required. PCE largely depends on the band alignment between donor and acceptor materials. Therefore, selectivity of electron-donor and electron-acceptor semiconducting materials for photovoltaic cells is extremely important. In terms of the direct band gap and high carrier mobility, SnS monolayers seem to be a very promising donor material for solar cells. In experiments, 2D GeSe and SnS atomic crystals were fabricated by liquid-phase exfoliation. In addition, a type-II GeSe/SnS heterobilayer with a suitable direct gap and broad absorption spectrum for photovoltaic applications was explored. Therefore, we propose a GeSe/SnS-based photovoltaic system as shown in Fig. 6a. Owing to the close lattice constants, the heterobilayer is built by unit cells containing eight atoms in total, which induces a very small lattice mismatch. Fig. 6b and c show the optimized GeSe/SnS heterostructure. The equilibrium distance between GeSe and SnS is calculated to be 2.91 Å, which is consistent with previous studies. In addition to the heterostructures of the SnS monolayer and the GeSe monolayer, we also considered the heterostructures of a SnS monolayer and a GeSe bilayer. As can be seen from Fig. 6d and e, both monolayer GeSe/SnS and bilayer GeSe/SnS heterostructures exhibit semiconducting characteristics with direct band gaps of 1.38 and 1.35 eV, respectively. In both cases, the CBM and VBM lie along the X–Γ direction, and the CBM of SnS is higher than that of GeSe while the VBM of GeSe is lower than that of SnS. This thus confirms the type-II band alignment between GeSe and SnS, which indicates that the excited electrons and holes are confined in different layers and there is an effective separation of photogenerated carriers. According to the study by Scharber et al., the PCE (η) of monolayer and bilayer GeSe/SnS heterostructures can be described as
where 0.65 is the fill factor (
βFF), P(ħω) is taken to be the AM1.5 solar energy flux (expressed in W m−2 eV−1) at the photon energy ħω, Edg is the band gap of the donor material, and the term Edg − ΔEC − 0.3 is an estimation of the maximum open circuit voltage Voc. The integral in the numerator is the short circuit current Jsc in the limit of 100% external quantum efficiency (EQE), and the integral in the denominator is the incident solar radiation (Psolar = 1000 W m−2).

As shown in Fig. 6f and g, the PCE of the constructed photovoltaic systems based on GeSe/SnS heterostructures is as high as ∼18%, which is much larger than the best certified efficiency of organic solar cells (11.7%) and comparable to that of phosphorene/MoS2 (16–18%) and that of recently predicted g-SiC2-based systems (12–20%).

In summary, we have investigated the interfacial properties between bilayer GeSe and Au, Ag, Al, Cu, Pt, and Ni electrodes using first-principles calculations. Strong interactions occur between GeSe and the considered metal surfaces which destroy the band structure of the first GeSe layer. Low Schottky barriers and tunneling barriers are found between GeSe and these metals. Moreover, the predicted PCE for AB-stacked GeSe/SnS heterostructures can be as high as ∼18%, rendering GeSe a promising candidate in flexible photovoltaic devices because of the efficient absorption of solar energy and the type-II heterostructure alignment. This work reveals the interfacial properties between GeSe and metals, and demonstrates that GeSe can be a promising choice, widening the application of photovoltaic devices.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work is supported by the National Natural Science foundation of China (No. 11404187, 11374190 and 21333006), the Taishan Scholar Program of Shandong Province and the Young Scholars Program of Shandong University (YSPSDU).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018