 DOI: 10.1039/D0TA02813D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 18659-18667


Soonil
Hong
,

Geunjin
Kim
,

Byoungwook
Park
,

Ju-Hyeon
Kim
,

Junghwan
Kim
,

Yusin
Pak
,

Jehan
Kim
,

Sooncheol
Kwon
* and 

Kwanghee
Lee
*

Heeger Center for Advanced Materials, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 61005, Republic of Korea. E-mail: klee@gist.ac.kr; kwansc@gist.ac.kr

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 61005, Republic of Korea

Research Institute for Solar and Sustainable Energies, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 61005, Republic of Korea

Photo-electronic Hybrids Research Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul 02792, Republic of Korea

Sensor System Research Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul 02792, Republic of Korea

Pohang Accelerator Laboratory, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang 37673, Republic of Korea

Received
11th March 2020
, Accepted 24th May 2020
First published on 26th May 2020
‘Sol–gel’-processed transition metal oxide (TMO) thin films sandwiched by an organic photoactive layer and metal electrodes have proven to be a versatile interlayer for photovoltaics with long-term stability on the laboratory scale; however, chemical defects and dewetting (or shrinkage) processes during sol–gel synthesis on top of the photoactive layer often cause performance variations, impeding the development of large-area photovoltaic modules. Here, we demonstrate that a low surface energy difference at the organic interface allows long-range diffusion of metal ion precursors to promote continuous chemical synthesis associated with oxo-bridge formation. Using high-resolution Auger electron spectroscopy, we confirm that the resultant TMO thin film on top of the suitable surface has a defect-free and continuous metal–oxygen network (MON) with a high oxygen/metal ratio. Our findings can be applied to obtain organic/perovskite photovoltaic modules having long-term stability, approaching an efficiency of 4.2%/14.5% and maintaining over 80% of their initial efficiency for up to 1500 hours/2000 hours with an area of 10.8 cm2/9.06 cm2.

Printable organic and metal-halide perovskite photovoltaics adapted with a metal–insulator–metal configuration have recently emerged as a promising technology for the realization of next-generation renewable energy sources because of their various advantages, such as low-cost manufacturing and large-area printing. With the considerable work done in developing photoactive materials, interfacial materials, morphology control and device architecture, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of organic and perovskite photovoltaics at the laboratory scale has approached 17.4% and 25.2%, respectively, which seem to be an acceptable level for the photovoltaic market. However, the performance of organic and perovskite photovoltaics can be degraded significantly by the diffusion of reactive species (i.e., H2O and O2) into the devices and photooxidation. Moreover, photovoltaics with a large-area module architecture are scaled up, high-level oxygen and moisture permeation is becoming an increasingly critical bottleneck to be solved prior to commercialization.

As an alternative to the typical approaches, versatile interface engineering using ‘sol–gel’-processed transition metal (i.e., titanium) oxide (TMO) interlayers from an atomic-level mixture of a metal alkoxide precursor solution has recently been developed due to the outstanding optical, electronic and lifetime-enhancing properties of TMOs. For example, TMO thin films bridging the gap between the photoactive layer and electrodes function as an optical spacer to enhance light harvesting within the photoactive layers and as a hole blocker to prevent undesirable charge recombination loss, resulting in an approximately 30% improvement in the PCE of the photovoltaics. In particular, because the metal alkoxide precursors start to form a metal–oxygen gel network because of moisture causing first hydrolysis and then subsequent polycondensation, the metal–oxygen gel network in the TMO interlayer physically covers the photoactive layer to limit the permeation of H2O and O2 and even scavenges H2O and O2 from the photoactive film. Thus, the formation of well-connected metal–oxygen gel networks in the TMO interlayer on top of the entire photoactive layer has been desired to ensure large-area photovoltaics with long-term stability in various applications.
In reality, however, the sequential reactions (i.e., hydrolysis and condensation) in ‘sol–gel’ synthesis are often limited by the mass transport of the TMO precursors, most of which originates from surface energy differences. The imperfect chemical reactions may produce different types of gel morphologies with undesirable defect sites (or pinholes), which can cause poor physical coverage of the photoactive layer, potentially influencing oxygen/water permeability and device stability. Although many efforts have been devoted to clarifying such atomic-scale reactions of TMO precursors in the form of chemical analogues, very little is known about the actual nanomorphology of TMOs and its impact on device characteristics. Therefore, understanding the relationship among surface energy, sol–gel synthesis and device stability would be crucial, particularly for the development of large-area organic and perovskite photovoltaic modules with long-term stability.
Here, we report for the first time the experimental observation of nanoscale metal–oxygen gel morphologies in solution-processed titanium suboxide (TiOx) thin films (t ∼ 15 nm) on top of photoactive materials with different surface free energies. By employing high-resolution Auger electron spectroscopy (HR-AES) measurements for 2-dimensional (2-D) chemical composition mapping and depth profiling analysis, we found that the formation of dis-/continuous metal (here, titanium)-oxygen networks (MONs) can be achieved by high/low surface free energy differences, respectively. We successfully demonstrated that compared with their discontinuous counterparts, continuous MONs in TiOx formed by favorable surface energy better physically covered the photoactive layer without being disconnected by undesirable defects (or pinholes) and thus further improved device performance and stability in large-area organic photovoltaic (OPV) modules (an efficiency of 4.2% and a T80 lifetime of 1500 hours) as well as large-area perovskite photovoltaic (PPV) modules (an efficiency of 14.5% and a T80 lifetime of 2000 hours) with an area of 9.06 cm2.

A three-necked flask was heated at 120 °C for 2 hours to remove water and oxygen, and the flask was cooled to room temperature (RT) under nitrogen conditions (N2). Next, titanium(IV) isopropoxide (Ti[OCH(CH3)2]4, Aldrich, 99.999%, 2 mL), 2-methoxyethanol (CH3OCH2CH2OH, Aldrich, 99.9+%, 10 mL) and ethanolamine (H2NCH2CH2OH, Aldrich, 99+%, 1 mL) were added to the flask, and the reaction mixture was stirred for 1 hour. Subsequently, the solution was heated at 120 °C for 1 hour. The resulting gel-type material was cooled to RT and was diluted with methanol at 1:250 (v/v).


The high-purity semiconducting polymers P3HT and PCDTBT were purchased from 1-Material, Chemscitech, Inc., QC, Canada, and were used as received. The average Mw of P3HT and PCDTBT was 48 and 83 kg mol−1, respectively. The high-purity fullerene derivatives PC61BM and PC71BM were purchased from Nano-C and were used as received. To obtain a blend solution of P3HT and PC61BM, we directly added 10 mg of P3HT and 9 mg of PC61BM to a 19 mg mL−1 solution in chlorobenzene, resulting in a final P3HT:PC61BM blend ratio of 1:0.9 (weight by weight, w/w). To obtain a blend solution of PCDTBT and PC71BM, We directly added 4 mg of P3HT and 16 mg of PC61BM to a 20 mg mL−1 solution in ortho-dichlorobenzene (O-DCB), resulting in a final PCDTBT:PC71BM blend ratio of 1:4 w/w. The prepared solutions were subsequently stirred in the dark at 45 °C for more than 2 hours and used without any filtration. For the PPV modules, PTAA solution was initially prepared by dissolving PTAA (EM-Index) in toluene (Sigma-Aldrich) at a concentration of 2 mg mL−1. Poly[(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] (PFN) (1-Material) was dissolved in anhydrous methanol (Sigma-Aldrich) at concentrations of 0.25 mg mL−1. CH3NH3PbI3 solution was prepared by dissolving PbI2 (99.9985%; Alfa Aesar) and CH3NH3I3 (dyesol) powder (molar ratio, 1.5:1.45) in a mixed solvent of anhydrous N,N-dimethylformamide/dimethylsulfoxide (volume ratio, 88:12; Sigma-Aldrich). PC61BM solution for the perovskite devices was prepared by dissolving PC61BM (Nano-C) in CB (Sigma-Aldrich) at a concentration of 35 mg mL−1.


The patterned ITO/glass substrates were prepared with a cleaning process using detergent and then ultrasonicated in deionized water, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol for 20 minutes each. For the fabrication of the OPV modules, AI 4083 PEDOT:PSS solution was spin-coated on top of UV/ozone-treated patterned ITO glass substrates (the stripe width is 13 mm, and the gap width is 1 mm). Then, P3HT:PC61BM and PCDTBT:PC71BM solutions were spincoated at 2000 rpm for 100 s and at 2500 rpm for 300 s, respectively. The diluted TiOx precursor was spin-coated at 5000 rpm for 20 s to form a 15 nm thin layer, and the remaining layers were patterned with a knife to establish the series connection. Finally, the fabrication of the OPV modules was completed by thermal evaporation of the Al electrode under vacuum with a pressure of 10−6 Torr. For the fabrication of the PPV modules, the PTAA solution was spin-coated on top of a UV/ozone-treated patterned ITO glass substrate (the stripe width is 1 cm, and the gap width is 0.1 mm) at 3000 rpm for 20 s and then annealed at 100 °C for 3 minutes. Sequentially, PFN solution as a compatibilizer was spin-coated at 1500 rpm for 20 s, and perovskite precursor solution was spin-coated at 2800 rpm for 60 s. During the spin-coating of the perovskite precursor solution, diethyl ether was added dropwise after 12 s and then annealed at 60 °C for 1 minute and 100 °C for 10 minutes in a glove box filled with N2 gas. As an electron transport layer, PC61BM solution was spin-coated at 1500 rpm for 40 s and annealed at 80 °C for 3 minutes. Diluted TiOx precursor was spin-coated at 3000 rpm for 20 s to form a 15 nm thin layer and annealed at 100 °C for 10 minutes, and then the remaining layers were patterned with a knife to establish the series connection. Finally, the fabrication of PPV modules was completed by thermal evaporation of the Cu electrode under vacuum with a pressure of 10−6 Torr.


The current–voltage (I–V) characteristics were recorded using an IviumSoft apparatus with simulated AM 1.5 illumination (100 mW cm−2) via a solar simulator (Abet Technologies Sun 3000) under normal air conditions. 2-D elemental mapping (25 μm × 25 μm) and depth profile analysis of the ‘sol–gel’-processed TiOx thin films on top of organic semiconductors were performed using a HR-AES equipped with ion gun at an acceleration voltage of 10 kV. The contact angles were measured using a contact angle analyzer (P-300 Touch, Surface Electro Optics).


The TiOx precursor solution can be prepared simply by mixing atomic-scale powder (or solution) reactants, which provide a special advantage in producing amorphous thin films (<15 nm) on top of organic semiconductor films from chemically homogeneous reactants (for more details, see Materials and method and Fig. S1). However, the homogeneous precursor solution may not ensure a homogeneous and continuous reaction during the ‘sol–gel’ synthesis because those reaction processes are readily influenced by a surface energy difference between the TiOx layer and contact layer. For example, a strong hydrophobicity of organic semiconductor films induces a high surface energy difference at the TiOx solution/organic semiconductor heterointerface since the TiOx precursor containing oxygen atoms typically is soluble in polar solvents such as methanol (Fig. 1a). In such cases, the TiOx precursor solution on top of the organic film should dewet and shrink during the initial ‘sol’ synthesis from the moisture-induced hydrolysis to form titanium–hydroxyl bonds via the following step:

Ti(OR)4 + nH2O → Ti(OR)4−n(OH)n + nROH
(1)
where Ti is titanium, O is oxygen, H is hydrogen, and R is a carbon-based alkyl chain. However, the unreacted starting materials, the diffusion of which is blocked due to the undesirable dewetting and shrinking, also remain. Then, the consequent polycondensation process leads to a 3-dimensional (3-D) metal–oxygen–metal bond to produce ‘discontinuous metal oxygen networks’ with defects or pinholes (hereafter discontinuous MONs). In contrast, a low surface energy difference between the TiO
x precursor solution and organic film can be induced by weak hydrophobicity of the organic semiconductors incorporated with permanent or induced dipole moments (Fig. 1b). The favorable surface energy may improve the reactant diffusion toward the edge of adjacent particles during hydrolysis and condensation, resulting in a continuous metal–oxygen network without disconnection by defects or unreacted area (hereafter a continuous MON).

To confirm the dependence of the formation of MONs with gel morphology in TiOx thin films on the surface free energy of different organic semiconducting layers, we obtained titanium (Ti) and oxygen (O) element maps of the TiOx layer on top of (i) poly-3-hexylthiophene (P3HT, surface energy (γs) ∼26.9 mN m−1), (ii) poly[N-9′-heptadecanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)] (PCDTBT, γs ∼ 29.5 mN m−1), (iii) [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM, γs ∼ 38 mN m−1), and (iv) [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM, γs ∼ 39 mN m−1) thin films by employing HR-AES. In this HR-AES study, we used an ultrafine electron beam (d < 10 nm) to scan the confined area (25 μm × 25 μm) in order to induce the transition of an electron filling in an inner-shell vacancy in an atom, which causes the emission of very low-energy electrons, often termed the ‘Auger effect’ (for more details, see Fig. S2). The detection of very low-energy electrons provides the advantage of short data acquisition times, which significantly increase surface sensitivity and accuracy compared to those of other spectroscopy-based imaging techniques, such as X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS). The Ti and O element maps of the TiOx layer on a neat P3HT film show some areas where titanium and oxygen coexist throughout the network film, implying that those elements chemically interact with each other to form a metal–oxygen (i.e., Ti–O–Ti) polymer network (Fig. 2a). However, those MONs seem to be disconnected by many regions with a low intensity (<5) where Ti and O are present. In addition, the large portion of low-intensity regions for Ti and O elements in the corresponding frequency of occurrence (histogram) further supports the idea that the empty regions can be attributed to the undesirable dewetting and shrinking process during the ‘sol–gel’ synthesis under the high surface energy difference between the P3HT and TiOx films (γs ∼ 53 mN m−1). In contrast, we found that the Ti and O elements disperse uniformly throughout the network film on top of a neat PCDTBT film, where the corresponding histograms of Ti and O elements are distributed toward higher intensity than that of its P3HT counterpart (Fig. 2b). This phenomenon can be attributed to the relatively high surface energy of PCDTBT, presumably due to the electron donor/acceptor-type configuration in its chemical structure and the consequent presence of a dipole moment. Interestingly, the Ti and O element maps on top of fullerene derivatives such as PC61BM and PC71BM, which have higher surface energy than that of typical organic polymers, show that Ti and O disperse more uniformly with a high density, signifying the formation of continuous MONs throughout the entire TiOx film (Fig. 2c and d, respectively). In addition, the corresponding Ti and O histograms are also distributed toward much higher intensities. Therefore, these results clearly indicate that the mass diffusion of reactants can be limited or improved by the surface energy difference at the organic/TiOx heterointerface, leading to the formation of discontinuous or continuous MONs, respectively.
We expected that the ‘sol–gel’ synthesis of the TiOx interlayer on top of the polymer donors/fullerene acceptor bulk heterojunction (BHJ) film can also be influenced by the surface energy difference, thereby providing distinct morphological and compositional variations. We investigated the distribution of Ti in the TiOx film on top of two optimized BHJ films, (i) P3HT:PC61BM (1:1 weight by weight (w/w)) and (ii) PCDTBT:PC71BM (1:4 w/w), as shown in Fig. 3a and b, respectively. Because the surface energy of the P3HT:PC61BM BHJ film was much higher than that of the PCDTBT:PC71BM film, which was determined by contact angle measurements, we expected the formation of discontinuous MONs in the TiOx layer on top of the P3HT:PC61BM BHJ film (Fig. S3). Indeed, we found that Ti with a low intensity was found in the P3HT:PC61BM film, implying that the formation of a network structure is insufficient to cover the whole surface of the BHJ film (see also the corresponding histogram of the Ti element in the inset of Fig. 3a). Furthermore, depth profile analysis of the corresponding film for all other elements indicates a high compositional ratio of carbon but a low compositional ratio of oxygen at the surface of the TiOx layer, suggesting that many alkoxy groups in the TiOx precursors may not be hydrolysed and thus would remain as unreacted species in the case of unfavorable surface energy. However, Ti on top of the PCDTBT:PC71BM film is fully distributed throughout the entire film; the corresponding Ti histogram shows the high distribution shifted toward high intensity. Furthermore, depth profile analysis showed the low compositional ratio of carbon and high compositional ratio of oxygen at the surface, which is the complete opposite to the trend observed in the P3HT:PCBM case. This result implies that the multiple hydrolysis reactions result in the product (OH)3Ti–O–Ti(OH)3, which eventually crosslinks to form continuous MONs at a favorable surface energy.
To clarify the impact of the formation of dis-/continuous MONs in the TiOx interlayer on the large-area photovoltaic device efficiency and operational stability, we employed a series connection architecture for OPV modules with P3HT:PC61BM (1:1 w/w) and PCDTBT:PC71BM (1:4 w/w) BHJ photoactive layers, as shown in Fig. 4a. These modules had three conventional-type subcells where the photoactive layers and additional charge transport layers are sandwiched by an indium tin oxide (ITO) cathode and a silver (Ag) anode. For the charge transport layer in the module architecture, we introduced poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) as a hole transport layer and a TiOx layer as an electron transport layer between the photoactive layer and the contact electrodes. The organic photoactive layers were patterned in stripes onto a prepatterned PEDOT:PSS/ITO anode (width = 13 mm and blank offset = 1 mm), and then the TiOx precursor solution was deposited on top of the photoactive film to form the TiOx thin film with dis-/continuous MONs. The series connections between adjacent subcells were consequently made by direct contact of stripe-patterned Ag cathodes (width = 13 mm and blank offset = 1 mm) with the blank offset of the PEDOT:PSS/ITO anodes, leading to a monolithic module with a high geometric fill factor of ∼77% (for a photograph of the complete module with the optimized film thicknesses, see Fig. 4b).
The current–voltage (I–V) and current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the large-area P3HT:PC61BM and PCDTBT:PC71BM photovoltaic modules with/without the TiOx interlayer were determined with a precalibrated solar simulator under standard illumination conditions (Air Mass 1.5), as shown in Fig. 4c and d, respectively (for details, see Table S1 and Fig. S4). We clearly confirmed that the TiOx interlayer bridging the gap between the large-area photoactive layers and metal electrode improves the light harvesting, the energy level alignment and thus the device performance. For example, the P3HT module with the TiOx interlayer showed a PCE of 2.28% with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.88 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 2.38 mA cm−2, and an FF of 49%; this PCE is more than 20% higher than that of the P3HT module without the TiOx interlayer (PCE of 1.76% with a Voc of 1.68 V, a Jsc of 2.10 mA cm−2, and an FF of 50%). With the introduction of the TiOx layer, not only the increase of a Jsc by optical spacer effect, the Voc is significantly increased due to favorable energy level alignment and reduced contact resistance as shown in Fig. S5. Similar trends were found in the PCDTBT modules. Although there was no noticeable difference in Voc between the PCDTBT modules with and without the TiOx interlayer, the significant increase in Jsc leads to an increase in the overall performance in the PCDTBT module with the TiOx interlayer compared to the PCDTBT module without the TiOx interlayer. These results strongly supported the idea that the TiOx interlayer can be used as an optical spacer and efficient electron transport layer for highly efficient photovoltaic modules regardless of the formation of dis-/continuous MONs, which is typically demonstrated in a single-cell device at the laboratory scale (Fig. 4e and S6).
In parallel to the optoelectronic characteristics described above, we also investigated the shelf lifetime of the P3HT and PCDTBT modules with and without the TiOx interlayer by monitoring the change in PCE as a function of time up to 1500 hours (Fig. 4f). The PCDTBT module without the TiOx interlayer showed a relatively higher stability than that of the P3HT module (without a TiOx layer), which is mostly inherent from the low-lying highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of PCDTBT (∼5.5 eV). For example, the device lifetime of the PCDTBT module maintained over 80% of their initial efficiency and measured to be T80 = 220 hours, which was an 83% longer than that of the P3HT module (T80 = 120 hours), although both modules showed an abrupt decrease in device efficiency during the initial operation, often termed ‘burn-in loss’. Interestingly, however, the TiOx interlayer did function as a lifetime-enhancing layer for the PCDTBT module, whereas this did not seem to be the case for P3HT; T80 = 1500 hours was achieved in the PCDTBT module with the TiOx interlayer, which is an order of magnitude higher than that of the P3HT module with TiOx interlayer (T80 = 130 hours). Moreover, there was no noticeable burn-in loss in the PCDTBT module with the TiOx interlayer. These results could suggest that the formation of continuous MONs in the TiOx interlayer at a favorable surface energy efficiently prevents the permeation of reactive oxygen and moisture into the photoactive layer, thereby improving the device lifetime of the OPV modules. Additionally, we modified surface energy of the P3HT:PC61BM layer by an introduction a PFN interlayer as an compatibilizer using dipole moment characteristics, which increases the surface energy of the photoactive layer, thus more continuous metal oxygen networks in TiOx are formed resulting in increase of the lifetime (Fig. S7 and S8).
We expect that the proposed concept of continuous MONs in the TiOx layer at the favorable surface energy can considerably extend the device lifetime of a planar-type p–i–n structured PPV module system that has three subcells consisting of ITO/poly(triarylamine) (PTAA)/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/TiOx/Ag (Fig. 5a). In the PPV modules, we patterned the ITO and Ag electrodes with stripes having more delicate blank offsets than those of the OPV modules, and a very high geometrical FF of 94.1% was achieved. Then, we introduced the TiOx interlayer on top of the PC61BM electron transport layer, where the induced dipole moment of PC61BM can facilitate a favorable surface energy and the formation of continuous MONs in the TiOx interlayer (Fig. 5b). As shown in Fig. 5c and Table S2, the PPV module with the TiOx interlayer exhibits a high module PCE of 14.5% considering its high geometrical FF of 94.1% in a large area of 9.06 cm2, which performs better than the PPV without the TiOx interlayer (module PCE of 13.7%) (see also Certificated performance of the PPV module, Fig. S9). In perovskite photovoltaic devices, only an increase in the FF leads to an increase in the overall module PCE. Because most incoming light can be absorbed by the perovskite photoactive layer and PC60BM (t ∼ 500 nm and t ∼ 60 nm, respectively), it is reasonable to conclude that the TiOx interlayer on the PPV modules does not act as an optical spacer in the same way as in the OPV modules presumably due to their rough surface morphology of perovskite film. Nevertheless, the PPV modules without the TiOx interlayer maintained 50% of their initial module PCE, while the PPV modules with the TiOx interlayer showed a further enhanced module lifetime (80% of their initial efficiency after 2000 hours) (Fig. 5d). The degradation in device performance without the TiOx interlayer was mainly associated with the reduction in Jsc and FF (Fig. S10). These results clearly indicated that the TiOx precursor solution was successfully deposited on top of the favorable PCBM electron transport layer, which leads to continuous MONs forming in the TiOx interlayer and thus higher efficiency and longer lifetime in the PPV modules.

Using HR-AES analysis, we successfully detected the formation of dis-/continuous MONs in TiOx on top of various organic semiconducting layers. Because the HR-AES measurement of the TiOx interlayer provided surface-sensitive 2-D mapping and depth profile analysis that revealed the ultrafine distribution of Ti and O throughout the TiOx film, we found that the formation of MONs in the TiOx layer is critically determined by the surface energy difference between the organic semiconductor and TiOx interlayer, offering an in-depth understanding of the correlation among surface energy, sol–gel synthesis and large-area device stability. Consequently, we succeeded in forming defect-free and highly densified MONs in the TiOx interlayer on the organic and PPV modules with favorable surface energy, and these MONs prevent the permeation of surrounding moisture and oxygen into the photoactive layer, resulting in further improved efficiency and prolonged T80 module lifetime up to more than 2000 hours. Our achievements can pave the way for elucidating the atomic-scale reactions of metal oxide precursors under various processing parameters and developing large-area electronic applications for commercialization.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This research was supported by the Global Research Laboratory Program of the National Research Foundation (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (NRF-2017K1A1A2013153), the Young Researchers Program of the NRF funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (NRF-2018R1C1B6006177), the Basic Science Research Program through the NRF funded by the Ministry of Education (2018R1A6A3A01012738), and the ‘GRI (GIST Research Institute)’ Project through a grant provided by GIST in 2020. This work was also supported by the internal program of the Korea Institute of Science and Technology (Project No. 2E29510). We thank the Heeger Center for Advanced Materials (HCAM) and the GIST-ICL international collaboration R&D center at Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST) of Korea for assistance with the device fabrication and characterization.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta02813d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020