 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA03600K
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15017-15020


Yuhang
Liu
,

Shangshang
Chen
,

Guangye
Zhang
,

Philip C. Y.
Chow
 and 

He
Yan
*

Department of Chemistry, Energy Institute and Hong Kong Branch of Chinese National Engineering Research Center for Tissue Restoration and Reconstruction, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China. E-mail: hyan@ust.hk

Received
26th April 2017
, Accepted 14th June 2017
First published on 15th June 2017
We report a wide bandgap polymer PvBDTffBT based on a new building block: a vertical-benzodithiophene (vBDT) unit. Compared to traditional BDT based polymers, the vBDT unit in PvBDTffBT is connected via the phenyl group instead of the thiophene unit. Such modification leads to stronger torsion between the vBDT unit and the adjacent thiophene, which increases the bandgap of the polymer and introduces significant changes in the film morphology. When blended with a state-of-the-art narrow-bandgap small molecular acceptor (ITIC-Th), we find that this polymer modulation strategy significantly improves the photovoltaic performances from 3% to over 8%.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs) have attracted intense research interest as an alternative technology to convert solar energy into electricity. The key advantages of PSCs include low-cost fabrication, mechanical flexibility and the capability of processing through industrial-scale roll-to-roll printing methods. Over the past few years, the highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has significantly increased to over 12%. Although fullerene derivatives are widely considered to be the ideal electron-accepting materials in PSCs due to their high mobilities and isotropic charge transporting abilities, they are nevertheless limited by relatively high production cost and instable blend morphologies. Consequently, PSCs based on non-fullerene, especially small molecule acceptors (SMAs) have been developing at a rapid pace. Some of the most successful SMAs to date are IDT-based molecules developed by Zhan's group and Hou's group. These IDT-based SMAs exhibit high charge carrier mobilities, optimized energy levels and favorable film morphologies when blended with donor polymers to achieve high PCEs. However, until now most IDT-based blends that exhibit high PCEs are blended with low-bandgap donor materials. Given that IDT-based SMAs also have relatively low bandgaps, these blends only absorb limited light in the medium wavelength region of the solar spectrum. To further enhance the efficiency of non-fullerene PSCs, it is necessary to develop wider bandgap materials to match with the state-of-the-art low-bandgap SMAs.

Here we report the synthesis and photovoltaic applications of a wide bandgap polymer, named PvBDTffBT, based on a novel vertical-benzodithiophene (vBDT) unit. The BDT unit is a common building block for donor polymers used in highly efficient PSC blends. The large co-planar structure endows BDT with strong π–π stacking and high charge carrier mobility (in the order of 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1). Typically, BDT based polymers are synthesized by connecting the two 2-positions on the thiophenes, resulting in low-bandgap polymers with a coplanar structure and strong π–π stacking. Alternatively, PvBDTffBT is connected via the phenyl group instead of the thiophene unit, and this vertical-BDT building block is referred to as vBDT. The chemical structure of PvBDTffBT is shown in Fig. 1a.
We find that the introduction of the vBDT unit leads to several key modifications in the polymeric properties which is important for solar cell applications. First, the electron-donating effect was efficiently weakened since the benzene moiety is more electron-deficient than the thiophene, leading to a wider bandgap. Second, the single bond between the BDT unit and the nearby thiophene form a six-membered ring with increased ring strain, and thus the large co-planner structure of PvBDTffBT is partially twisted. Making use of these properties of PvBDTffBT, when combined with low-bandgap SMAs, highly efficient non-fullerene solar cells with PCE up to 8.3% are achieved. A linear BDT based conjugated polymer named PBDTffBT is also synthesized for comparison (Fig. 1b shows the chemical structure). The optical and electrochemical characteristics as well as the solar cell performances of these two polymers are systematically studied.
The synthesis procedure of PvBDTffBT includes a chemical reduction reaction of quinone-benzodithiphene into aromatic BDT, followed by copolymerization with the di-tin reagent of difluorobenzothiadiazole. Theoretical calculations on PvBDTffBT and PBDTffBT show that the dihedral angle between the BDT unit and the nearby thiophene of PBDTffBT is only ∼19° (Fig. 1d), proving that PBDTffBT has more of a coplanar structure. Combined with the strong electron-donating nature of the BDT unit, when copolymerized with the electron-deficient difluorobenzothiadiazole, a relatively low bandgap polymer could be achieved. On the other hand, for PvBDTffBT, the calculated dihedral angle between benzene and the nearby thiophene is evaluated to be 51°. The nearly three times increase in the dihedral angle indicates that the PvBDTffBT is much more twisted than PBDTffBT.
The UV-vis absorption spectra of PvBDTffBT in solution and as thin films are shown in Fig. 2a. The absorption peak of PvBDTffBT is located at ∼570 nm with an onset at ∼640 nm. The optical bandgap of PvBDTffBT obtained from the UV-vis spectrum is estimated to be ∼1.94 eV, which is ∼0.15 eV larger than that of PBDTffBT. Recent work on non-fullerene solar cells has proved that the complementary absorption between the donor and the acceptor is critically important to achieve high short-circuit current density (JSC). Since the main absorption of PvBDTffBT locates between 400 nm and 600 nm while ITIC-Th absorbs most strongly at 550–760 nm, a complementary absorption between the pair of materials we employ is clearly demonstrated. Our previous reports strongly indicated that the temperature-dependent aggregation behaviour is beneficial for morphological control to achieve an ideal morphology and thus high photovoltaic efficiency. Fig. 2a shows the temperature-dependent UV-vis absorption for the PvBDTffBT solution (0.2 mg mL−1 in dichlorobenzene) at various temperatures ranging from 30 °C to 100 °C. When the solution is heated to high temperatures, e.g. 100 °C, the UV-vis absorption spectrum exhibits a significant blue shift; upon cooling of the solution, the absorption red shifts and at room temperature, the solution absorption closely resembles the thin film absorption. Such reversible aggregation–disaggregation proves that PvBDTffBT belongs to the family of polymers with a temperature-dependent aggregation behaviour.
The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) levels of PvBDTffBT and PBDTffBT are calculated using the onsets of the CV curves, and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels are deduced using the HOMO levels and the optical bandgaps. The results are summarized in Table 1. The HOMO and LUMO levels of ITIC-Th are also compared and, as shown in Fig. 2b, it is observed that the LUMO offsets of PBDTffBT and ITIC-Th are only ∼0.16 eV, while that of PvBDTffBT is ∼0.37 eV. The donor–acceptor energetic offset is typically associated with providing the driving force for separating photo-generated excitons in PSCs. The higher LUMO offset between PvBDTffBT and ITIC-Th may lead to better charge separation and thus higher photocurrent of the corresponding PSC devices.
Polymer

λ
max
 [nm]

λ
onset
 [nm]
LUMO [eV]

E
g,opt
 [eV]
HOMO [eV]

μ
h [cm2 V−1 s−1]

a Obtained from the film absorption data.
b Measured by cyclic voltammetry.
c Estimated based on the film absorption onset.
d Calculated by using the LUMO and Eg,opt.

PvBDTffBT
570
640
−3.56
1.94
−5.50
6.1 × 10−5
PBDTffBT
585
695
−3.77
1.78
−5.55
6.8 × 10−5
The charge carrier mobilities of PvBDTffBT and PBDTffBT are evaluated using the space charge limited current (SCLC) model with a device structure of ITO/ZnO/active layer/Ca/Al. The mobility values are summarized in Table 1. Both hole mobilities of PvBDTffBT and PBDTffBT are estimated to be in the order of 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1. The slight reduction in the hole mobility of PvBDTffBT is likely due to the more twisted structure (Table 2).
Polymer

V
OC [V]

J
SC [mA cm−2]
FF
PCE [%]
PvBDTffBT
0.93 ± 0.009
15.20 ± 0.11
0.56 ± 0.02
8.10 ± 0.19
PBDTffBT
0.95 ± 0.018
5.04 ± 0.36
0.62 ± 0.02
3.11 ± 0.06
To demonstrate the potential applications of PvBDTffBT, PSC devices based on PvBDTffBT with a device structure of ITO/ZnO/PvBDTffBT:ITIC-Th/V2O5/Al are fabricated. All the devices were encapsulated in a glovebox and measured under ambient conditions under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G simulated solar illumination. A state-of-the-art non-fullerene acceptor, ITIC-Th, is used in combination with the polymer PvBDTffBT. The detailed J–V parameters are summarized in Table 1 with typical J–V plots shown in Fig. 2c. A PCE of 8.3% with an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.93 V, a JSC of 15.3 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 58% is achieved for the devices with PvBDTffBT:ITIC-Th. Solar cells based on PBDTffBT are also fabricated for comparison. Compared to the PSCs based on PvBDTffBT, both the FF and the VOC of PBDTffBT based devices are slightly higher, while the JSC of PBDTffBT based devices is much lower. The significant efficiency difference is related to the difference of the JSC of these PSCs. Due to the fact that the same SMA is used in both devices, the difference in VOC can be attributed to the different HOMO levels between the polymers. As mentioned above, the more coplanar structure of PBDTffBT gives rise to a slightly higher hole mobility, which can be used to partially explain the slightly enhanced FF of PBDTffBT based devices.
The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the devices was measured and the results are shown in Fig. 2d. It is clear that the EQE of PvBDTffBT based PSCs is much higher than that based on PBDTffBT, and thus the photocurrent of PvBDTffBT based PSCs is much higher than that based on PBDTffBT. In addition to UV-vis and EQE, we also performed a series of photoluminescence (PL) quenching experiments of the PBDTffBT and PvBDTffBT based blend films, the results of which are shown in Fig. 3a and c. It is clear that the PvBDTffBT:ITIC-Th blend film shows higher quenching efficiency than the PBDTffBT:ITIC-Th blend film. The PL quenching efficiencies are estimated to be 96% and 81%, for the PvBDTffBT and PBDTffBT based systems, respectively. The higher PL quenching efficiency of PvBDTffBT indicates a more efficient exciton dissociation process, which is consistent with the larger LUMO–LUMO offset between the donor and acceptor in the PvBDTffBT:ITIC-Th blend film (∼0.37 eV) than that between PBDTffBT and ITIC-Th (∼0.16 eV). However, in addition to the larger charge separation driving force, it is highly likely that the overall lower PL quenching and lower JSC in the PBDTffBT:ITIC-Th are related to the blend morphology. We use atomic force microscopy (AFM) to characterize the surface morphology of the PvBDTffBT and PBDTffBT based blend films. The 2D AFM pattern (1 × 1 μm) of PvBDTffBT:ITIC-Th and PBDTffBT:ITIC-Th blend films is shown in Fig. 3b and d. The results indicate that reasonably small domains (∼40 nm) are formed in the PvBDTffBT:ITIC-Th blend film, which is critically important for efficient charge separation between the donor and the acceptor of the PSCs. On the other hand, due to the large coplanar structure of PBDTffBT, the aggregation tendency of PBDTffBT is stronger than that of PvBDTffBT and thus, excessively large domains (>100 nm) are formed in the PBDTffBT:ITIC-Th blend film.

In conclusion, we demonstrate a novel conjugated polymer based on a vertical BDT building block, PvBDTffBT, which has a wider bandgap than the comparative linear BDT based conjugated polymer, PBDTffBT. When blended with the benchmark SMA (ITIC-Th), the PvBDTffBT:ITIC-Th blend film exhibits a more complementary absorption than the PBDTffBT:ITIC-Th blend film, which results in higher JSC. In addition, due to the more twisted backbone of PvBDTffBT, the aggregation tendency of PvBDTffBT is significantly reduced compared to that of PBDTffBT. As a result, the PvBDTffBT based blend film is able to form domains with optimal sizes that are ideal for exciton separation and current generation. Furthermore, the deeper LUMO level of PvBDTffBT may lead to a larger driving force for charge separation. The combination of these reasons results in much improved photocurrent and thus a higher PCE (up to 8.3%) for the PvBDTffBT based PSCs. Since small molecule based electron acceptors have demonstrated great potentials to replace fullerene derivatives in next-generation PSCs, our results make the vertical BDT unit a promising building block for synthesizing new conjugated polymers compatible with high-performance SMAs.


The work described in this paper was partially supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program project numbers 2013CB834701 and 2014CB643501), the Hong Kong Research Grants Council (project numbers T23-407/13 N, N_HKUST623/13, 16305915, 16322416 and 606012), HK JEBN Limited, HKUST president's office (Project FP201), the National Science Foundation of China (#21374090) and the Hong Kong Innovation and Technology Commission (ITC-CNERC14SC01 and ITS/083/15). We especially thank the Shen Zhen Technology and Innovation Commission for the support through projects (20170065).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Materials and methods. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta03600k
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017