 DOI: 10.1039/C3RA42614A
(Communication)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 16308-16312

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Yong
Li
,

Shaohua
Li
,

Lu
Jin
,

James B.
Murowchick
 and 

Zhonghua
Peng
*

Department of Chemistry, University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri 64110, USA. E-mail: pengz@umkc.edu; Fax: +1-816-235-2290; Tel: +1-816-235-2288

Department of Geosciences, University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri 64110, USA

Received
29th May 2013
, Accepted 17th July 2013
First published on 19th July 2013
A thin layer of water-soluble carbon nanoparticles, prepared by a simple, efficient and scalable high energy ball milling technique, is applied as an interfacial layer between TiO2-coated ZnO nanorod arrays and P3HT, leading to hybrid solar cells with the highest photocurrent ever reported for ZnO nanorod arrays/P3HT-based devices.

Hybrid solar cells (HSCs) composed of heterojunctions of inorganic semiconductor nanomaterials and organic conjugated polymers are one of the most promising photovoltaic technologies for the production of low-cost, renewable, and environmentally clean energy. Two broad types of HSCs, namely the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells and the ordered heterojunction solar cells, are being actively explored. By virtue of preformed vertically oriented semiconductor nanostructures such as nanorods, nanotubes, nanowires, etc., ordered heterojunction devices are superior in terms of charge transport, structural stability, and topology/morphology control to those BHJ devices in which the semiconductor nanomaterial and the conjugated polymer domains are isotropically and randomly distributed.

Among ordered heterojunction solar cells, devices based on ZnO nanorod arrays and poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) are among the most extensively studied. Unfortunately, the best device efficiency reported thus far is around 0.76%, significantly lower than those of BHJ solar cells. The efficiency of ZnO nanorod arrays/P3HT based solar cells is mainly limited by their low photocurrent which is less than 3.0 mA cm−2 in most cases. This is believed to be due to their poor interfacial quality that is not favorable to electron injection. To help facilitate electron injection across the heterojunction, researchers have explored capping the ZnO nanorods with small conductive molecules, dyes, or a thin TiO2 layer with moderate success. Modulating the surface properties of ZnO nanorods using small organic molecules or dyes can be problematic because ZnO can catalyze and thus accelerate their photodegradation. Coating ZnO nanorods with a thin layer of TiO2 is an appealing approach. However, the TiO2/P3HT interface, although known to readily split P3HT excitons, may not be optimal as P3HT possesses no functional groups which can bind to and interact strongly with the TiO2 surface. In this contribution, we report an effective interface engineering approach on TiO2-coated ZnO nanorod arrays using highly photostable carbon nanoparticles (CNPs) for the fabrication of HSCs with dramatically enhanced photocurrent.
CNPs have gathered tremendous attention in recent years because of their many appealing attributes, such as high elemental abundance, low intrinsic toxicity, excellent water solubility, and superior thermal, chemical, and photostability. More importantly, CNPs show exciting new properties such as strong excitation-dependent emission and/or up-converted photoluminescence induced by the quantum confinement and edge effects. While CNPs have been extensively investigated as bioimaging and photocatalytic materials, their applications in photovoltaic devices remain very rare and using CNPs for surface engineering in solar cells has not yet been reported. As an interfacial layer between TiO2 and P3HT, CNPs have a number of unique and attractive features. First, CNPs typically contain many surface carboxylic acid groups which are known to bind strongly to the TiO2 surface. In the meantime, the predominantly graphitic sp2-hybridized C structure of CNPs ensures strong electronic coupling between the CNPs and P3HT backbone. Thus, the CNP-interfacial layer can serve as a “double-sided tape” which binds strongly to TiO2 on one side and P3HT on the other. Second, CNPs are known to be both excellent electron donors and acceptors and photoinduced electron transfer in or out of CNPs can be very efficient. Thus, the CNP interfacial layer can effectively shuttle photogenerated electrons from P3HT to TiO2. Third, CNPs absorb strongly in the UV region with a long tail extending to the visible range and emit down-converted luminescence that can be harvested by P3HT, providing complementary solar spectral coverage and utilization. Fourth, the compatible CNP/P3HT interface may facilitate P3HT's infiltration deep into the nanorod arrays which is another critical factor for device performance. Finally, the CNP layer increases donor/acceptor interfaces and decreases the effective inter-rod distance, both of which are beneficial for exciton dissociation. Our results indeed show that the devices with a CNP interfacial layer exhibit the highest photocurrent ever reported for ZnO nanorod arrays/P3HT based devices, validating the application potential of CNPs in HSCs.
CNPs can be prepared by a variety of methods, including laser ablation of graphite, electrochemical oxidation of graphite, combustion soot of candles or natural gas, thermal or hydrothermal decomposition of precursors, microwave pyrolysis, and so on. In the present work we explored a new simple, efficient and scalable approach to nonpassivated CNPs using high-energy ball-milling (HEBM) of graphite powders. Specifically, graphite powders were subjected to HEBM for 40 h and were then surface-oxidized using nitric acid to render CNPs water soluble. The resulting CNPs were characterized by multiple techniques. As shown in Fig. 1a–b, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image shows that quasi-spherical (and some peanut-shaped) CNPs are obtained. The majority of them have a diameter around 40–60 nm. Typical XRD pattern of the CNPs (Fig. 1c) shows a broad (002) peak centered at ∼25°, which is very close to that of electrochemically synthesized graphene quantum dots. The FTIR spectrum of the CNPs (Fig. 1d) shows characteristic vibrational bands at 3350, 1575, 1424 and 1335 cm−1, corresponding to O–H, CO, CC, and C–O stretchings, respectively. These results confirm the partial oxidation of graphitic CNPs to form hydrophilic –COOH groups.
The absorption and fluorescence emission spectra of the aqueous CNP solution are also shown in Fig. 1. The brownish solution shows an absorption maximum around 208 nm and a long tail extending to 600 nm (Fig. 1e), which is consistent with the spectra of CNPs prepared by other methods. The CNP solution is moderately fluorescent and the emission wavelengths as well as the intensities are excitation wavelength dependent (Fig. 1f), which is typical for CNPs. The intense down-converted emission occurs in the spectral range of 450–650 nm which falls right in the absorption region of P3HT film and is thus harvestable by P3HT.
The electrochemical property of the CNPs in aqueous solution was investigated using cyclic voltammetry (CV). As shown in Fig. 1g, a quasi-reversible redox process in the negative potential region is observed. Referenced to K4Fe(CN)6, the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy level of the CNPs was determined to be −4.00 ± 0.02 eV, which is reasonably close to the LUMO level of CNPs prepared by electrochemical routes.
The fabrication of CNP-mediated ZnO–TiO2 nanoarrays/P3HT HSCs started with the preparation of TiO2-coated ZnO nanorod arrays following a previously published procedure. In brief, vertically oriented ZnO nanorods of roughly 800 nm in length and 80–100 nm in diameter with inter-rod spacing up to 200 nm as confirmed by SEM images (see Fig. S1 in the ESI) were grown hydrothermally on an ITO glass slide coated with a ZnO seeding layer of ∼150 nm in thickness. A thin layer of TiO2 was then coated onto the ZnO nanorods through a sol–gel process. As shown in Fig. 2a, SEM images indicate a thin layer of TiO2 (several tens of nanometers thick) wrapped around ZnO nanorods. Note that inter-rod spacing, although narrowed, is still clearly visible.
TiO2-coated ZnO nanorod (referred to as ZnO–TiO2 thereafter) arrays were then treated with the aforementioned CNPs by simply dipping the slides into the CNP solution. As shown in Fig. 2b, a thin layer of CNPs was uniformly attached to the surface of TiO2. The grafting of CNPs onto the TiO2 surface reduces further the inter-rod distance, making the CNP-modified ZnO–TiO2 (referred to as ZnO–TiO2–CNP thereafter) more suitable for HSC applications. Furthermore, the introduction of CNPs onto the TiO2 surface has significantly changed the surface energy of the inorganic framework, providing a more compatible interface to facilitate the full infiltration of P3HT. This is confirmed by comparing the SEM images of the ZnO–TiO2/P3HT heterojunctions with or without the CNP layer. As seen in Fig. 2d, a densely packed and fully-infiltrated P3HT phase and an intimate contact between the organic and the inorganic components were realized in the presence of the CNP layer, both of which are demanding requirements for high-performing HSCs. The heterojunction without the CNP layer (Fig. 2c) on the other hand has clearly less polymer coverage on top and shorter penetration in depth as free space between nanorods is still clearly visible.
After the deposition of Au on top of the P3HT layer, solar cells with the new device structure as shown in Fig. 3a were thus fabricated. The energy level diagram of the solar cells is shown in Fig. 3b. The LUMO level of the CNPs (−4.00 ± 0.02 eV) is perfectly aligned with both the LUMO level of P3HT (−3.2 eV) and the conduction band edge of TiO2 (−4.2 eV), which ensures the possibility of both efficient exciton dissociation at the P3HT/CNP interface and efficient electron extraction. In such a device, P3HT acts as electron donor, the CNP layer acts as electron acceptor, while the ZnO–TiO2 works as electron collector and transporter.

Fig. 3c shows the absorption spectra of the fabricated films. Absorption spectra are the actual absorbance of the films without normalization. Compared with the ZnO–TiO2 nanoarray film, the CNP-coated film exhibits stronger absorption over the entire UV-vis spectral range. After the P3HT coating, the characteristic absorption peaks of P3HT can be obviously identified. It is noted that the absorption of P3HT is more prominent in ZnO–TiO2–CNP than in ZnO–TiO2. This is consistent with the observations from SEM images shown in Fig. 2c,d.

Fig. 3d shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the ZnO–TiO2/P3HT and ZnO–TiO2–CNP/P3HT solar cells. The open circuit voltage (VOC), short circuit current density (JSC), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE, η) of the two types of cells are compared in Table 1. Without any interfacial treatment, the ZnO–TiO2/P3HT solar cells performed poorly, showing much lower VOC and JSC than those of our recently reported equivalent solar cells in which the TiO2 surface was treated by regioregular poly[3-(3-carboxypropyl)thiophene-2,5-diyl] before the coating of P3HT. With the CNP interfacial layer, however, the HSCs showed significantly improved performance. In particular, an impressive JSC of 8.69 mA cm−2 was obtained, which is two to three times higher than the best JSC ever reported on similar device structures. Although the devices show a surprisingly and disappointingly low VOC of only 0.22 V, the devices still show PCEs of up to 0.68%. It should also be noted that CNP-coating significantly increases the percentage of working devices. Over 80 individual cells with area of 0.14 cm2 were fabricated with 5 cells on each slide which were defined by the top electrode. Without CNP-coating, more than half of the cells were nonfunctional (shorted). With CNP-coating, over 90% of the cells were functional and gave consistent cell performance. This result is consistent with what was observed in Fig. 2 where for the ZnO–TiO2–P3HT devices, P3HT did not form a top layer which fully covers the nanoarrays. Significant shorting of the devices is thus expected. After CNP coating, on the other hand, a dense top P3HT layer with effectively infiltrated roots was formed, making a majority of the devices functional.
Nanoarray

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF

η (%)
ZnO–TiO2
0.05
1.20
0.33
0.02
ZnO–TiO2–CNP
0.22
8.69
0.36
0.68
As mentioned earlier, the CNP interfacial layer may help enhance JSC in multiple ways. In addition to increased donor–acceptor interfacial areas, shorter exciton diffusion path (due to narrower infiltrated P3HT strips), stronger interacting heterojunctions, the ability of CNPs to shuttle electrons freely among CNP networks and across CNP/TiO2 interfaces which has been demonstrated on a photocatalytic CNP/TiO2 nanocomposite, may also play an important role. The reabsorption of CNPs' down-converted emissions by P3HT is another factor which cannot be neglected. It should be noted that some CNPs have been reported to exhibit up-converted emissions which can be harvested by TiO2. This is less likely to happen in the present case due to the existence of CNP/P3HT interfaces.
The VOC of the devices is surprisingly low. Theoretically, the VOC of heterojunction solar cells is directly related to the energy level difference between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of the donor and the LUMO level of the acceptor which is, referring to the energy level diagram shown in Fig. 3b, 1.2 eV. This corresponds to a large theoretical VOC of ∼0.9 eV. Many factors of course such as nanomorphology, donor/acceptor ratio, polymer packing order, moisture/oxygen exposure etc., can affect the realization of the theoretical VOC in real devices. Both the ZnO–TiO2/P3HT and ZnO–TiO2–CNP/P3HT solar cells showed high dark current density (Fig. 3d) which may account at least partly for their low VOCs since VOC is known to be dependent on the dark saturation current of the cells. The relatively broad size distribution of our ball-milled CNPs may also contribute to the low VOC since the energy levels of CNPs are known to be size- and structure-dependent. We are currently exploring approaches to sort the CNP sizes and study how the size and size distribution of CNPs affect the device performance. There is reason to be optimistic that the VOC of CNP-mediated HSCs can be significantly increased. After all, BHJ solar cells based on P3HT/CNPs blends (such as graphene oxide quantum dots) are routinely above 0.6 V.
In summary, we have shown that CNPs with average sizes around 40–60 nm can be prepared by a simple and scalable HEBM technique. The aqueous soluble CNPs can be utilized as an interfacial layer between TiO2-coated ZnO nanorod arrays and P3HT polymer, forming close and intimate contacts with both TiO2 through carboxylic acid binding and P3HT polymer presumably by way of π–π interaction. As a result, the infiltration of P3HT into the space among nanorod arrays and the formation of top P3HT cover layer are both improved. The resulting HSCs showed the highest photocurrent ever reported among ordered heterojunction HSCs based on ZnO nanorod arrays and P3HT. The VOC though is far from satisfactory. Using CNPs with narrower size distribution may hold the promise of overcoming this hurdle. While that remains to be seen, the concept of using aqueous soluble CNPs as an interfacial layer to improve the device performance of HSCs is clearly validated. Carbon is an abundant element in the Earth's crust and many of its allotropes and derivatives including fullerenes, carbon nanotubes, graphenes, etc., have played leading roles in the revolution of the organic-based photovoltaics. We expect that our finding can further the advancement of CNPs in photovoltaic applications, and will motivate other researchers to explore further in the very field and achieve commercializable HSCs.
This research was supported by the National Science Foundation (DMR 0804158) and the Army Research Office (W911NF-10-1-0476).
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details and SEM image of ZnO nanorods. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ra42614a
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013