 DOI: 10.1039/C4TC00308J
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 5730-5746


Wouter
Dierckx
,

Wibren D.
Oosterbaan
,

Jean-Christophe
Bolsée
,

Wouter
Maes
,

Dirk
Vanderzande
* and 

Jean
Manca


Hasselt University, Campus Diepenbeek, Institute for Materials Research (IMO-IMOMEC), Wetenschapspark 1, B-3590 Diepenbeek, Belgium

IMO-IMOMEC, Wetenschapspark 1, B-3590 Diepenbeek, Belgium. E-mail: dirk.vanderzande@uhasselt.be

Received
14th February 2014
, Accepted 11th May 2014
First published on 16th May 2014
Semiconducting poly(3-alkylthiophene) nanofibers show remarkable optical and electrical properties, and because of their high aspect ratios they are perfectly suited to serve as organic quasi one-dimensional charge carriers. Hence, they offer interesting perspectives for next generation printable optoelectronic applications. This feature article provides an overview of the current state of the art regarding the preparation and characterization of poly(3-alkylthiophene) nanofibers, and a discussion on nanofiber-based optoelectronic applications, i.e. organic field-effect transistors and bulk heterojunction organic solar cells. In addition, current shortcomings and points of attention for future development are identified.
Wouter Dierckx
Wouter Dierckx received his BSc in Physics from Hasselt University (Belgium) in 2008, after which he entered the Erasmus Mundus Master of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology at the KU Leuven (Belgium) and TU Delft (The Netherlands). He received a joint MSc degree in Nanoscience in 2010. He is currently working as a PhD researcher at the Institute for Materials Research (IMO-IMOMEC) of Hasselt University in the field of organic materials for nanoelectronic applications and energy conversion.
Wibren D. Oosterbaan
Wibren Oosterbaan received his BSc and MSc degrees in Chemistry from Utrecht University (The Netherlands) in 1993 and 1996, respectively. In 2002, he completed a PhD in Chemistry, which was funded by the NWO, in the same university under the guidance of Prof. L. W. Jenneskens. In the period April 2004 to September 2012, he worked in Belgium as a postdoctoral researcher for the Limburgs Universitair Centrum (5 months), Imec Leuven (2 years), and Hasselt University (6 years), respectively. He is broadly interested in organic electronics with a focus on structure–property relationships.
Jean-Christophe Bolsée
Jean-Christophe Bolsée obtained his diploma as a Civil Engineer in Physics from the University of Liège (Belgium) in 2002. Between 2002 and 2006, he was a Test Engineer in the Centre Spatial de Liège, working on the development of optical co-phasing demonstrators and performing high vacuum low temperature optical and mechanical tests on ESA Planck Satellite reflectors (primary and secondary). In 2006, he started working as an electrical reliability engineer at the Institute for Materials Research (IMO-IMOMEC) of Hasselt University, where in 2008 he got the opportunity to start a PhD in the field of macroscopic and nanoscale charge transport in poly(3-alkylthiophene)s. After finishing this project in 2011, he is currently working as a Research and Development Engineer at Solvay (Brussels, Belgium).
Wouter Maes
Wouter Maes obtained his PhD in Chemistry at the KU Leuven in 2005 under the supervision of Prof. W. Dehaen, working on the synthesis and application of dendrimers. After that, he has been working as a Postdoctoral fellow of the Fund for Scientific Research – Flanders (FWO) in the same laboratory, focusing on porphyrinoids and (hetera)calixarenes. Postdoctoral stays were conducted in Paris (Prof. E. Rose) and Oxford (Prof. H. Anderson). He was appointed Assistant Professor at Hasselt University in 2009 and became Associate professor in 2014. He is currently heading the research group Design & Synthesis of Organic Semiconductors (DSOS), mainly studying small molecule and polymer materials for organic photovoltaics.
Dirk Vanderzande
Dirk Vanderzande finished his PhD in 1986 under the supervision of G. Hoornaert (KU Leuven). He moved to Hasselt University in 1987, was appointed Assistant Professor in 1992 and after being appointed Associate Professor in 1995, he became Full Professor in 2000. Since October 2010 he has been appointed as the Director of the Institute for Materials Research (IMO-IMOMEC), a joint research institute of UHasselt and IMEC vzw in the field of advanced materials at the University Campus of Diepenbeek. His research focuses on the chemistry of conjugated polymers to be used as semiconductors in thin film devices, e.g. organic solar cells.
Jean Manca
Jean Manca is a Full Professor in Experimental Physics at Hasselt University (Belgium) and head of the research group ‘Organic & Nanostructured Electronics & Energy Conversion’ (ONE2) at the Institute for Materials Research (IMO-IMOMEC). The key activities of the ONE2 group consist of the study of morphological and electro-optical properties of organic and nanostructured materials, the development and characterization of novel generation solar cells and electro-optical applications, and the exploration of novel concepts and material systems for energy conversion.

Throughout the years, the increasing demand for easily processable materials for the low-cost fabrication of flexible and light-weight devices stimulated extensive fundamental research efforts towards the integration of organic semiconductors in optoelectronic applications. Among the various organic semiconducting material classes, poly(3-alkylthiophenes) or P3ATs, as depicted in Fig. 1, have received considerable attention because of their good processability, favourable optoelectronic properties and ability to form crystalline structures, e.g. self-assembled nanofibers, from solution via strong π–π interactions along their longitudinal axis. As such, they have become model systems in the field of organic electronics. In the context of this feature article, it is important to highlight that the presence of crystalline P3AT nanofibers in the active layer of organic optoelectronic devices has been found critical to reach high performance levels. An important milestone in this development was provided by Ihn et al., who demonstrated that P3ATs may crystallize in poor solvents in the form of nanofibers, which form a stable dispersion. This invention opened the way for alternative processing methods to achieve high active-layer crystallinity without thermal post-treatment processes.

This feature article provides an overview of the current state of the art of P3AT nanofiber production, characterization and device applications, and is divided into four sections. The first part focuses on P3AT nanofiber dispersions produced via the ‘marginal’ and mixed solvent approaches, as well as a method using a ‘good’ solvent. Furthermore, electrospinning is discussed as a suitable method to produce continuous, long nanofibers, which can directly be captured and directed onto a substrate of choice. These methods were chosen because they yield pure nanofibers via simple low-cost procedures, which can easily be translated to large-scale industrial production. The term (nano)fiber is used throughout this article to refer to both the continuous, ‘endless’ fibers as produced via electrospinning, as well as the shorter fibers, often referred to as whiskers, that form via self-assembly in solution. The second part deals with the integration of P3AT nanofibers in organic field-effect transistors (FETs), for which nanofibers are very promising because of their micrometer-sized length in combination with a nanometer-sized cross-section and high hole mobility along the fiber direction. The third section is then reserved for solar cell applications, for which the ability to form thermally stable nanostructured bulk heterojunction (BHJ) polymer–fullerene blends with built-in high mobility charge carrier pathways and large interfacial area for charge separation is particularly appealing. In the last part some prospects concerning further integration of P3AT nanofibers in optoelectronic devices are provided.

From an industrial point of view this approach is most appealing because of its low cost and potential for mass production. In a first step, a certain amount of the P3AT material is dissolved in a ‘marginal’ solvent – good enough to dissolve the polymer at elevated temperatures but poor enough to initiate polymer aggregation at room temperature – while stirring at elevated temperatures (50–80 °C for P36T). The polythiophene material is completely dissolved when an orange transparent solution is obtained. The temperature at which this happens depends on different solution parameters and should be determined first by a stepwise heating protocol. In the next step, the solution is cooled down to room temperature, mostly at a rate of about 20–25 °C h−1, to decrease the solubility of the polymer and hence induce aggregation, i.e. nanofiber formation, observed as a transition from an orange to a dark red or purple solution. As illustrated in Fig. 2, fiber formation can be confirmed by the evolution of the UV-Vis absorption spectrum after cooling the solution to room temperature. Immediately after cooling, one single absorption band around λ = 450 nm is observed, typical for the π–π* transition of well-dissolved polythiophene chains. After 4 hours of storage, in the absence of ambient air and light, a vibrational finestructure with additional absorption bands, typically at λ = 525, 550 and 610 nm, can be seen. These vibrational features are related to the presence of crystalline nanofibers. The intensity decrease of the absorption band at 450 nm after 4 hours of storage was used to estimate the nanofiber yield in solution. However, fitting the UV-Vis spectrum of the pristine polymer solution with the spectra obtained from the pure fiber fraction and the well-dissolved polymer fraction provides a more reliable way of determining the fiber yield. For a 1 wt% solution of P36T in p-xylene the spectrum stops evolving after 48 hours of storage and is reported to remain the same for more than a month without the formation of precipitates. As a result, fiber formation was concluded to be complete and, more importantly, the fibers were found highly stable. A similar solution stability was observed by Oosterbaan et al., but the stabilization process was seen to extend with elongating alkyl side chain length.

The mechanism behind the fiber formation was reported to follow a two-step process, consisting of a coil-to-rod transformation of the polymer chains followed by crystallization of the polymer backbones and the alkyl side chains. In order for this process to occur, the loss of conformational entropy suffered by the polymer chains has to be energetically compensated by the cooperation of the π–π interactions along the polymer backbones and the van der Waals interactions of the alkyl side chains. With the main driving force for solution self-assembly provided by the π–π interactions, the fibers grow quasi one-dimensionally, with their longitudinal axis along the π–π stacking direction and the alkyl chains perpendicular to this axis. A schematic illustration of the internal fiber structure is given in Fig. 3. The nanofiber production process is evidently strongly affected by the P3AT alkyl chain length and parameters such as solvent quality, cooling rate, polymer concentration, regioregularity, and molecular weight. Separation of the nanofibers from the well-dissolved polymer by centrifugation and subsequent determination of the molecular weight distribution by gel permeation chromatography (GPC) revealed some extent of fractionation, with the higher molecular weight chains incorporated in the nanofibers and the lower molecular weight species being well-dissolved. Fractionation likely occurs due to the fact that for smaller polymer chains, the cooperative interactions are not large enough to overcome the entropic energy loss, thus preventing crystallization. The lower molecular weight boundary for P3AT nanofiber formation was estimated to correspond to ∼60–70 monomer units, roughly the length an extended polymer chain needs to possess to span the width of a nanofiber. Schwarz et al. modelled a 0.05 wt% solution of P36T in anisole, similar to the one prepared by Samitsu et al., at a temperature of 293 K to study the dynamics of fiber formation in a stepwise fashion using coarse-grained simulations. In a first step, diffusive motion of the polymer chain segments is needed to bring them close enough to interact with each other. A stable nanofiber nucleus is formed whenever the number of monomers within the interacting chain segments exceeds the critical number of ∼80 and polymer chain aggregation, i.e. nanofiber formation, can proceed. If, however, less than roughly 80 monomers interact with each other, the chain segments are ripped apart again by thermal motion. The model therefore revealed a critical aggregate width of ∼80 monomers for stable nanofiber formation, consistent with the experimentally determined lower molecular weight boundary. Furthermore, the model confirmed the predominant nanofiber growth along the π–π stacking direction and enabled us to determine the inter-lamellar spacing, the π–π stacking distance and the nanofiber width, taking into account a reasonable statistical error. Besides confirming experimentally accessible structural features, the model also provided information that could not be resolved experimentally. Individual polymer chains were found to loop back within the same lamellar plane such that segments of the same polymer chain lie within the same lamella. Because of a certain bending rigidity, they do not enter adjacent π–π stacking planes. Modelling also resolved a certain degree of internal nanofiber disorder in the form of internal polymer chain loops. Ideally, these loops would only be present at the edges of a nanofiber.
When preparing P36T nanofibers from solution for the active layer of organic solar cells, the choice/quality of solvent appears to have a large influence on solution stability, as polymer precipitation was identified for concentrations above 0.05 wt% in cyclohexanone, while this was not the case in p-xylene. To use these solutions reliably for organic photovoltaic (OPV) active layers, precipitation should be avoided in the concentration range of 0.5–3 wt%, as otherwise the required active layer thickness of ∼100 nm cannot be achieved consistently. As a result, p-xylene is preferred as the fiber production solvent.
Although the solvent choice is crucial for nanofiber formation, finding one single solvent that suits nanofiber formation for a whole range of P3ATs seemed rather impossible. Nevertheless, anisole was proven to be suitable for the fiber formation of P3ATs with A = 4, 6, 8 and 10, allowing systematic investigation of the effect of alkyl side-chain length (A) on the formation of nanofibers and their morphological, optical and electrical properties. Regarding the P34T solution, it has to be pointed out that partial polymer precipitation occurred, even at temperatures above 70 °C, due to the limited solubility offered by the shorter side chains. Therefore, the solution had to be filtered, reducing the original polymer concentration. The marginal difference between the Hildebrand solubility parameters δ of each of the polymers and the solvent was in this case held responsible for the compatibility of anisole with fiber formation in solution. Although a cooling rate of 25 °C h−1 was consistently maintained, no tremendous change in nanofiber characteristics was observed when the cooling rate was (drastically) increased. The same holds for varying the polymer concentration, i.e. no significant changes were observed within the range of 0.005–0.5 wt%. On the other hand, the polymer regioregularity did influence the fiber formation significantly, as regiorandom P3HT failed to form nanofibers. This was explained by the fact that the random orientation of the alkyl side chains effectively prevents crystallization of the polymer backbones and side chains.
Looking beyond nanofiber production, to their integration in the active layers of optoelectronic devices, specific solvent requirements nevertheless have to be taken into account. In view of device preparation, Oosterbaan et al. tested fiber formation of P3ATs in several solvents. They were aiming for a fiber yield of over 50% in the concentration range of 0.3–1 wt% to obtain sufficiently thick active layers, i.e. >20 nm, and this without the occurrence of gelation or polymer precipitation. Secondly, for the preparation of solar cells the solvent has to be a good solvent for the fullerene acceptor as well. The limited availability of δ values for P3ATs in the range of A = 3–9 (and even for some solvents) limited the usability of the Hildebrand solubility parameter. It was, however, found that the solvent refractive index, related to the dispersive term δD in the Hansen solubility parameter concept and known for all solvents, could aid in the solvent selection process (Fig. 4).
During a recent study dedicated to controlling the microstructure of P36T nanofibers, the large impact of solvent quality on the final nanofiber crystalline quality was stressed once again and ascribed to three separate effects. The first effect is polymer fractionation. For a better solvent, only longer (higher molecular weight) chains, which can fold back on themselves upon crystallizing in the (100) direction of the fiber, are incorporated in the nanofibers. As such, the number of chains and chain ends that need to be incorporated to reach the equilibrium fiber thickness of about 5 nm is reduced. The second effect is the increase in the radius of gyration, Rg. When using a better solvent, the polymer chains have more freedom to move and find their lowest energy conformation during nanofiber formation, as in this case their interaction with the solvent molecules is more favoured. The third effect controlled by solvent quality are the formation kinetics. The favourable interactions between polymer chains and solvent molecules in a good solvent slow down the polymer chain aggregation kinetics, giving the chains more time to find the lowest possible energy position. The overall result is a decrease in the number of incorporated defects and hence an increase in crystalline quality. Within this study, toluene afforded the highest crystalline quality for a solution containing 0.1 wt% of P36T.
Using toluene as a solvent, P36T nanofibers possessing a high level of intrachain order have been prepared by Niles et al. Their internal structure was characterized as being the J-type, having side chains adopting an edge-on packing (type I), minimizing the amount of torsional backbone disorder. Photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy measurements on these J-type fibers revealed a link between temperature and pressure-induced chain repacking and a change in electronic coupling. By increasing the pressure or decreasing the temperature, the hexyl side chains change their packing from edge-on (type I) to interdigitating (type II) (Fig. 5). This forces the thiophene rings in the polymer backbone to loose their planar conformation and hence increases the amount of torsional and intrachain disorder. This structural reorganization was linked to a red-shifted PL of the well-dispersed nanofibers and a decrease in the 0–0/0–1 PL ratio. The transition is, however, reversible since the system returns to its original state whenever the pressure is decreased or the temperature is increased to its initial value. Additionally, using transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS) the ultrafast excited state relaxation and recombination of both excitonic and polaronic species was studied. An order of magnitude difference in relative interchain charge transfer between H- and J-type nanofibers was inferred from the ratio of the initial formation of intrachain species, i.e. polaron-pairs, to interchain species, i.e. delocalized polarons. This effect was solely attributed to a change in intrachain order, which could uniquely be induced in native J-type P36T nanofibers via a temperature or pressure-controlled switch.
Tapping mode AFM measurements were performed to determine the morphology of P3AT nanofibers after solution deposition on a SiO2/Si substrate. Fiber lengths were always found to be in the micrometer range, while the cross-section of the fibers showed nanometer-sized dimensions. Moreover, for P3AT (A = 4, 6, 8, 10) fibers produced from anisole, the width and height were found to increase slightly with increasing alkyl chain length (A), although another study performed on P3AT (A = 3–9) nanofibers produced with different solvents could not confirm this correlation. However, quantitatively, the measured values did not really differ much, since in the former study average heights and widths were 3–4 and 24–27 nm, respectively, while in the latter study they were found to be 2–10 and 20 ± 5 nm, respectively.
To rule out the possibility that the nanofibers present on the SiO2/Si substrate only formed during deposition from anisole solution and hence were not present before in solution, UV-Vis absorption measurements were conducted on the heated solutions, on the solutions cooled down to room temperature before and after passing through a 0.20 μm polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) filter, and on a thin film of P3AT nanofibers deposited on a SiO2/Si substrate. The absorption spectra of the heated (orange transparent) solutions and that of the filtrate were both similar to the absorption spectra of P3ATs in chloroform, a good solvent for alkylated polythiophenes. Hence, both the heated solution and the filtrate contained well-dissolved P3AT. The spectrum of a thin film of P3AT nanofibers resembled that of the cooled solution before filtering. This led to the conclusion that the fibers in the thin films as observed by AFM were already present in solution and did not just form upon solution deposition. Berson et al. came to a similar conclusion when comparing the absorption spectra obtained from a film containing P36T nanofibers with the spectrum of a stable P36T nanofiber solution in p-xylene.
Information on the crystalline structures of P3AT nanofibers was obtained from X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns and selected area electron diffraction (SAED), revealing a type I crystallographic structure with extended polymer backbones along the c-axis, forming stacks along the fiber axis or b-axis, and the alkyl chains oriented mainly along the a-axis (Fig. 3). An exception to the type I structure was found in the structure of P37T, with a small contraction in the a-direction and a small expansion in the b-direction (type I). With the help of the Scherrer equation (FWHM(2θ) = 0.9λ/ξcosθ; λ is the wavelength of irradiation, ξ the crystallite size, and θ the incidence angle), the coherent domain size or crystallite size in the direction of a fiber, ξ100, and perpendicular to the fiber, ξ010, could be extracted from the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of their corresponding peaks in the XRD spectra. For both parameters, an increase was observed with increasing alkyl side chain length, pointing to the importance of the alkyl side chains for stabilization of the nanofibers as to form crystalline structures.
High molecular weight P3AT nanofibers coexist in solution with entangled polymer chains, for which a coil-to-rod transformation is hindered. In an attempt to overcome these entanglements, ultrasonication of fiber solutions prior to film deposition was introduced and tested for different molecular weights and sonication times using P36T nanofiber solutions in p-xylene. After ultrasonication, both the crystalline content of the solution and the crystallinity of its corresponding thin film increased, and large scale amorphous aggregates were no longer present in the films. However, it was most effective for large molecular weight P36T, because of the higher degree of entanglements. Importantly, it did not damage the polymer, as the original nanofiber solution could be re-obtained after re-dissolving and re-formation of the polymer fiber solution. The optimal oscillation time appeared to be 4 minutes, presenting a trade-off between the reduction of chain entanglements and aggregates on the one hand and nanofiber scission, as observed from AFM measurements, on the other hand.

In the mixed solvent approach a certain amount of a ‘bad’ solvent is added to a well-dissolved solution of P3AT to induce polymer chain aggregation. This approach was used by Li et al. to improve crystallinity in pure P36T as well as composite P36T–[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) (1:1, w/w) films by forming ordered fiber precursors in solution prior to thin film deposition. They started off with a well-dissolved solution of pure P36T (8.0 mg mL−1), either in o-dichlorobenzene (ODCB) or chloroform, to which n-hexane, a bad solvent for P36T, was slowly added via titration (∼0.2 mL min−1 per 1 mL ODCB or chloroform) while gently stirring the solution to avoid local high concentrations of hexane. The optimal hexane–ODCB (v/v) ratio to reach homogeneous thin films during device fabrication appeared to be 1:2. Subsequently, the solutions were aged and only after the desired ageing time PCBM was added and the solution was stirred for another 3 hours to fully dissolve PCBM. Adding hexane induced a colour change of the solution from yellow brown to dark brown accompanied by the appearance of a vibrational structure in the UV-Vis spectrum, related to the formation of P36T nanofiber precursors. The vibrational feature became more pronounced with ageing time and stabilized after 18 hours. At this point, precursor formation in solution was considered to be complete and the solution reached an equilibrium state. Nevertheless, for homogeneous film formation, the ageing time was set at 16 hours. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and SAED on thin films spin-coated from aged solutions confirmed the presence of nanofibers with micrometer length and nanometer cross-section, enhancing the film crystallinity as compared to the films deposited from solutions without hexane. Although the difference in crystallinity upon adding hexane was much larger when using chloroform as a starting solvent, a significant increase in film crystallinity could still be obtained, even for a slowly evaporating starting solvent as ODCB. This observation was done both for pure P36T as well as for its composite system with PCBM. For the composite system, the increased crystallinity was additionally confirmed with XRD, revealing an increased (100) diffraction intensity for the films deposited from the aged composite hexane–ODCB solution as compared to the unannealed and annealed (150 °C for 15 min) films from the unaged composite ODCB solution. Therefore, they concluded that their approach was effective in increasing the crystallinity of pure P36T and composite P36T–PCBM films. Adding PCBM only after P36T aggregation was induced, prevented interference of the small PCBM molecules with the self-crystallization of P36T. To test the relevance of this approach for electronic applications, the pure P36T film conductivity was measured using a 2-probe method. Setting out the film conductivity as a function of the solution ageing time revealed a clear increasing trend with an order of magnitude difference between the film spin-coated from a 16 hours aged hexane–ODCB solution and the one from an unaged pure ODCB solution.

The mixed solvent approach was also applied to a well-dissolved P36T solution in chloroform with an initial polymer concentration of 0.0005 wt%. Different solvents were tested, but the non-solvent acetonitrile (MeCN) appeared to be most effective in inducing P36T nanofiber formation. Only 30 vol% of MeCN was sufficient to obtain a strongly red-shifted UV-Vis spectrum with a clear vibrational structure. Grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) measurements on spin-coated films provided a second confirmation with an increasing (100) and decreasing (010) diffraction intensity. While the former points to a better lamellar stacking, the latter points to more in-plane oriented thiophene rings. The minimum amount of MeCN necessary for fiber formation depends on the polymer concentration and increases when the P36T concentration increases from 0.5 to 1.0 wt%. Nevertheless, adding more than 5 vol% is not beneficial as AFM showed the dominance of large aggregates in the film structure. The optimal amount appeared to be around 3.3 vol% MeCN added to a solution of 0.5, 0.7 or 1.0 wt% P36T. The nanofibers grow larger during long-term storage of the solution (ageing) after adding the non-solvent.
In another case, this approach was applied to produce P36T nanofibers in a P36T–PCBM (1:1) solution at a concentration of 25 mg mL−1 with the intention of directly using it to form the nanostructured active layer of organic BHJ solar cells. To this end, P36T and PCBM were first dissolved in chlorobenzene (CB) (1 mL) upon stirring for 14 hours under the nitrogen atmosphere. Next, cyclohexanone (500 μL) was added to the CB solution and this mixture was aged for 2 hours while stirring. UV-Vis absorption measurements confirmed the formation of nanofibers in solution in the presence of PCBM, while from GIXD it was deduced that the nanofibers in thin films grew further under mild thermal annealing (for 5 min at 80–100 °C).
Only recently, an excitonic coupling analysis was conducted on a whole range of P36T aggregates formed in binary solvent mixtures to assess the correlations between the structural order within the P36T aggregates formed and the identity of the poor solvent used to induce aggregation. The authors concluded that an analysis based on the Hansen solubility parameters could not reliably predict the amount of structural order, related to the excitonic coupling, present in the P36T aggregates formed in each binary solvent mixture. To formulate their conclusions on the aggregation processes involved, they had to fall back on a basic thermodynamic and kinetic analysis of the interactions between the solvent on the one hand and the P36T backbone and side chains on the other hand. The different steps in the aggregation process revealed to be consistent with previously reported theoretical simulations, i.e. planarization of the backbone in a first step followed by π–π stacking of the polymer chains to form crystal nuclei. As a final step, the hexyl side chains reorganize. Furthermore, it is pointed out that additional investigations using more rigorous analysis methods are underway to correlate P36T aggregation, excitonic coupling and solvent properties.

Under mild conditions and slight oversaturation P36T nanofibers have been shown to grow in solution (0.01 wt% P36T dissolved in refluxing chloroform while stirring). The solution was aged in the dark at 20 ± 2 °C for 1 week. Fiber formation in solution was again inferred from a yellow to red colour transition and the appearance of a vibrational structure in the UV-Vis absorption spectrum. Nanofiber dimensions were determined by AFM after deposition on a Si wafer by dipping the wafer in the solution for 1 min followed by dipping in pure chloroform for another minute. This last step ensured that only ordered nanofibers adsorbed from solution were visualized and that well-dissolved P36T, otherwise forming a disordered top layer, is washed away. The nanofiber length was found to be more than 10 μm, whereas their width and height were around 40 and 1.6 nm, respectively. The latter matches the lamellar spacing in P3AT nanofibers as measured by Samitsu et al. and Oosterbaan et al., confirming that the nanofibers are of monolayer thickness. The whole process of monolayer fiber formation was related to a small oversaturation of the high molecular weight fraction under mild conditions, inducing a slow crystallization process of this fraction, while the lower molecular weight fraction remained well-dissolved. In this way, the slow crystallization rate of the high molecular weight fraction enabled the polymer chains to take on the energetically most favourable position as to obtain thermodynamic stability. The van der Waals interactions between the side chains are in this case not strong enough to overcome the favourable interactions of the side chains with the chloroform molecules, and consequently fiber growth in the side chain direction does not occur and the fibers remain of monolayer thickness. These monolayered fibers provide an efficient route to study the interplay between the (modified) dielectric surface and the edge-on oriented P36T polymer chains in nanofiber structures, which is observed to be an important factor determining the corresponding FET properties.


In this method, an electric field is applied between a polymer solution and a collector electrode to pull the polymer solution through a micrometer-sized nozzle, forming an elongated solution jet travelling to the collector electrode (Fig. 6). On its way towards the electrode the solvent evaporates, forcing the polymer chains to pack together, forming a fiber of which the diameter and cross-sectional uniformity depend on the polymer molecular weight and concentration and the electrical conductivity of the solution. A prerequisite for a polymer to be electrospun is that it needs to form enough chain interconnections in solution to make it sufficiently viscous. Without this, it is impossible to form a uniform solution jet upon electrospinning. As a result, studies on regioregular P3AT nanofibers produced via electrospinning have been scarce, since its relatively rigid conjugated backbone and the steric hindrance from the alkyl side chains make it somewhat less flexible as compared to e.g. polystyrene (PS) and poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) (although persistence lengths are not that different), and therefore somewhat hinder chain interconnection. Nevertheless, the lack of viscosity could be compensated for by the fast crystallization inherent to P3ATs. Unfortunately, fast crystallization appeared to be problematic as well, as it led to frequent blocking of the nozzle during the spinning process, disturbing the uniform solution jet and resulting in the formation of beads along the fibers. This problem was surmounted using a coaxial nozzle to electrospin a concentrated solution (11–13 wt%) of high molecular weight regioregular P36T (87 kg mol−1, 95% regioregularity) dissolved in chloroform at 50 °C. The polymer solution was supplied through the inner nozzle and an additional small amount of chloroform was added through the outer nozzle. As such, the crystallization of P36T could be delayed and this prevented the nozzle from being blocked during the process. With the coaxial nozzle, a continuous solution jet was guaranteed and uniform fibers with average diameters of 500 nm were formed, as revealed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images. Blending P36T with high molecular weight poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL), which is highly viscous, in various ratios, allowed production of uniform nanofibers without the use of a coaxial nozzle. Afterwards, PCL could be removed from the fibers by selectively dissolving it with trifluoroethylene (TFE). In this way, connectivity of the P36T phase throughout the nanofibers was revealed. The reason for this is that during electrospinning the isolated P36T domains, originally present in the polymer blend of PCL and P3HT, are elongated by the strong shear forces resulting from the high electric field applied, forming short P36T fibrils. Coming out of the nozzle, solvent evaporation drives these fibrils together, forming an interconnected P3HT phase within the mixed-polymer fiber. As an additional advantage, the nanofiber diameter could be further reduced to about 30 nm by selectively removing PCL. Unfortunately, the P3HT phase did not retain the same uniformity as the pristine mixed-polymer fiber. Attempted studies on the crystalline structure of the fibers using high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) have been unsuccessful so far.

The internal structure of the electrospun P36T fibers has, however, been successfully studied using a 10–12 wt% P36T solution in chloroform. The solution was stirred at a temperature of 60 °C to dissolve the polymer completely, followed by 30–45 minutes of resting to initiate gelation, as seen by a colour transformation from red-orange to opaque dark red. Due to this gelation the viscosity becomes high enough to form fibers by electrospinning. Structural analysis with polarized Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) revealed the polymer chains to be oriented parallel to the fiber axis. During the electrospinning process, the collector electrode was rotated and this was seen to result in a red-shift in the PL spectrum, attributed to a denser packing of the polymer chains due to the added stretching force on the fibers. Polarized PL provided additional proof for the alignment of the polymer chains parallel to the fiber axis, opposite to the fibers produced from self-assembly, where the polymer chains are oriented perpendicular to the fiber axis, as shown in Fig. 3.

One of the initial reports on FET structures used for electrical characterization of single and discrete sets of P36T nanofibers was made by Merlo and Frisbie in 2003. For a single P36T nanofiber they found a longitudinal mobility μL = 0.06 cm2 V−1 s−1 and a current modulation ION/IOFF = 103. The onset voltage largely increased from −26 to −73 V for successive voltage sweeps, indicative of pronounced interface trap effects associated with a large surface-to-volume ratio. Samitsu et al. later on studied the effect of alkyl chain length on the longitudinal mobility of individual P3AT (A = 4, 6, 8, 10) nanofibers using dilute (0.01 wt%) solutions in an anisole–chloroform (4:1 v%) mixture spin-coated on a SiO2/Si bottom-gate-bottom-contact (BGBC) FET substrate. The narrow gap of 250 nm between the drain and source electrode was easily bridged by individual nanofibers to form the transistor channel. Values for single P3AT fibers varied between μL = 0.033 and 0.064 cm2 V−1 s−1, comparable to the values obtained by Merlo et al. and Bolsée et al. Most importantly, μL was found to be independent of the alkyl chain length, in accordance with the similar π–π stacking along the longitudinal fiber axis, as outlined in Section 2.1.

The longitudinal mobility along a P34T nanofiber prepared according to the method developed by Oosterbaan et al. was extracted using a conducting AFM (C-AFM) based transistor setup of which a schematic illustration can be found in Fig. 7. In this approach, nanofibers were drop-cast from a dilute (0.001 wt%) solution in p-xylene onto a SiO2/Si substrate prepatterned with a 10 nm platinum drain electrode on top of a 2 nm titanium adhesion layer and passivated with a self-assembled monolayer of hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS). The electrode was kept as thin as possible to prevent nanofiber disruption. The PtIr5 tip of the C-AFM was used as a mobile source electrode, allowing careful selection of a single nanofiber having one of its ends in contact with the drain electrode, while the other end lies free on the substrate surface. The free end is then contacted with the C-AFM tip. With the C-AFM operating in the spectroscopy mode, the AFM tip remains stationary on the free end of the nanofiber such that transfer and output characteristics of a single P34T nanofiber FET can be measured (Fig. 8). From the transfer characteristics, the average longitudinal mobility appeared to be μL = 0.07 ± 0.03 cm2 V−1 s−1. The similarity with μL = 0.06 cm2 V−1 s−1 obtained by Merlo et al. for a single P36T fiber suggested that the longitudinal mobility of P3AT nanofibers is independent of the alkyl chain length. This conclusion was consistent with the findings of Samitsu et al. The threshold voltage, VT, was close to zero, so no severe electron or hole trapping took place, indicating a highly crystalline internal fiber structure. Importantly, this setup allowed determination of the maximum current density the nanowires can withstand, Jmax = 20 kA cm−2. Moving the conducting AFM tip to a position where the nanofiber was on top of the Pt/Ti electrode, a nanofiber sandwich structure was obtained with the tip as the top electrode and the Pt/Ti as the bottom electrode (Fig. 7). With this sandwich structure current–voltage characteristics in the direction perpendicular to the fiber axis were measured. Fitting these curves with the Mott–Gurney law for space charge limited current (SCLC) transport, the transversal mobility, μT, was estimated to be in the range of 10−5–10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1. Unfortunately, due to a lack of control over the contact force and contact diameter, a better accuracy than one order of magnitude could not be achieved. μT decreased with increasing alkyl chain length, which could be related to a reduced charge hopping efficiency from one polymer chain to the other. The thickness of the fiber was independent of the alkyl chain length, ruling out a possible thickness-related decrease of μT. Comparing μT and μL, a large mobility anisotropy was seen with μT being 3–4 orders of magnitude smaller than μL and depending on the alkyl chain length, whereas μL appeared to be alkyl-chain-length independent.

Nanofibers produced via electrospinning have been used to fabricate single P36T nanofiber FETs with a BGBC or a bottom-gate-top-contact (BGTC) configuration (Fig. 9). The nanofiber FETs presented clear p-channel behaviour under negative gate bias. Device parameters such as field-effect mobility, μFET, threshold voltage, VT, and current modulation, ION/IOFF, were subsequently extracted from the transfer characteristics in saturation. Liu et al. found values μFET = 0.03 cm2 V−1 s−1, VT = 5.5 V and ION/IOFF = 103 in a vacuum, while González et al. obtained μFET = 0.0004 cm2 V−1 s−1, VT = 12 V and ION/IOFF = 7 in a vacuum, and Lee et al. got μFET = 0.017 cm2 V−1 s−1, VT = 12 V and ION/IOFF = 102 for devices characterized in air. All of these results are inferior as compared to the best values obtained from P36T thin film FETs, i.e. μFET = 0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1 and ION/IOFF ≥ 105. The large surface-to-volume ratio facilitates the take-up of oxygen and moisture during electrospinning under ambient conditions, resulting in unintentional doping of the fibers, causing a high IOFF and positive VT. The number of interface defects acting as hole scattering sites increases as well and effectively limits the hole mobility. Nevertheless, devices were fabricated in a straightforward way and the mobility measured by Liu et al. approached the μL obtained by Samitsu et al. and Bolsée et al. At this point one may, however, wonder whether the comparison with solution self-assembled nanofibers is justified, since there are indications that the internal structures of both types of nanofibers are different and as such also the optical and electrical properties can be expected to differ. For a better understanding and comparison of the optoelectrical properties of electrospun nanofibers, a detailed systematic study on their internal nanostructure is required.

Single nanofiber-based FETs have also been produced with nanofibers originating from the electrospinning of P36T blended with PCL in different ratios (80:20 and 50:50). All FETs demonstrated clear p-channel behaviour, but their performance degraded with increasing PCL content in the blend. Performance parameters in saturation were μFET = 0.0012 cm2 V−1 s−1, VT = 16 V, ION/IOFF = 10 and μFET = 0.00047 cm2 V−1 s−1, VT = 30 V, ION/IOFF = 40 for a PCL content of 20 and 50%, respectively. Device parameters were inferior as compared to pure P36T thin film FETs due to unintentional oxygen doping and uptake of moisture during electrospinning. Furthermore, a higher PCL content in the electrospinning blend interferes more with the crystallization of P36T into large elongated domains, effectively reducing the device performance of the 50% PCL blend. With respect to pure P36T fibers, the incorporation of PCL also introduces an additional interface, accompanied by extra defects within the device. The mixed P3HT–PCL fibers were incorporated in a truly flexible FET device fabricated on a gold-patterned methacrylated polyethylene terephthalate (PET) film with a UV-cross-linked hydrogel gate dielectric and a poly(3,4-ethylenedioxy-thiophene)–poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT–PSS) gate electrode. The number of fibers in the channel could be controlled reasonably well, with a maximum deviation of 2, enabling extraction of a linear relationship between the maximum ON-current flowing through the device and the number of fibers forming the channel. Under saturation conditions, the average device parameters were μ = 2 cm2 V−1 s−1 and ION/IOFF = 105 for devices operating in air. Most importantly, the devices remained stable after a few days of storage under ambient conditions. The improvement in device parameters could only partially be attributed to the large capacitance of the hydrogel gate dielectric. Also here, extra information concerning the internal crystalline structures of the nanofibers would be desirable for further clarification.
Regarding the fabrication of flexible electronic devices, electrospun nanofibers based on blends of P36T–P310T (89/11%, w/w) have shown to be highly compatible with the corresponding roll-to-roll production processes of bendable, rollable or wearable devices that need to withstand multiple stress cycles. Fully flexible FETs were fabricated in an inert atmosphere by depositing a single electrospun nanofiber between gold electrodes on a prepatterned PET substrate, followed by doctor blading of a 1.3 μm thick PMMA gate dielectric and drop casting of a PEDOT–PSS gate electrode. AFM images confirmed that one single nanofiber, with a submicrometer diameter and a smooth homogeneous surface, bridged the gap between the source and the drain electrode. By bending the flexible substrate with a bending radius Rb = 5 mm, 28 different FET structures were subjected to a repeated tensile strain in the direction of the charge carrier flow, i.e. parallel to the nanofiber longitudinal axis. The magnitude of the tensile strain, ε, was calculated to be 1.7%, using ε = D/2Rb, with D the substrate thickness. Devices were then characterized before, during and after bending. Neither in the output characteristics nor in VT, significant changes were detected. Additional confirmation of device stability could be inferred from the charge carrier saturation mobility under unstressed conditions, showing a slight initial decrease after the first few bending cycles and stabilization after about 100 cycles. Furthermore, the devices could withstand up to 1000 repeated cycles of bending and relaxing. The observed change in mobility during the first few bending cycles was ascribed to a rearrangement of the conjugated polymer and the PMMA dielectric layer, resulting in a better contact of the fiber and an improved channel–dielectric interface under the influence of the applied tensile stress.

A large difference between the FET mobilities of nanofiber films and spin-coated films of well-dissolved P3ATs (A = 4–9) has been observed and this has been related to a change in molecular ordering and orientation at the polymer–dielectric interface. On the one hand, μFET is independent of alkyl chain length for P3AT nanofiber (NF–P3AT) films, while it decreases with increasing alkyl chain length for films of well-dissolved P3ATs in chlorobenzene (CB–P3AT). However, UV-Vis spectroscopy did not reveal any variation in photophysical aggregation, i.e. competition of inter- and intrachain exciton interactions, of CB–P3AT thin films for various alkyl chain lengths, just as it did not show any difference for NF–P3AT thin films. Nevertheless, the crystallinity was generally found to be higher in the NF–P3AT films as compared to the corresponding CB–P3AT films, except for P34T, for which both layers were found to possess more or less the same crystallinity. Bulk information obtained from TEM and SAED supported the UV-Vis observations on the similar crystalline structure in all NF–P3AT films. On the other hand, for CB–P3AT films, the perpendicular orientation of the thiophene rings relative to the substrate was seen to disappear with increasing alkyl chain length. Polymer orientation at the dielectric–polymer interface was further investigated using near edge X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy (NEXAFS), a technique able to determine the average thiophene tilt angle at the interface. For the NF–P3AT films, the thiophene rings along the P3AT backbone took on a more or less perpendicular (edge-on) orientation relative to the interface, again independent of the alkyl chain length. This preferred orientation was also present in a CB–P34T film, but it disappeared with increasing alkyl chain length for the other CB–P3AT films. Summarizing the results, μFET was clearly correlated with bulk and interface orientation of the polymer chains, with the latter being largely influenced by the alkyl chain length. Therefore, the connection between alkyl chain length and μFET seems not to occur through the intrinsic mobility, but rather through an influence of the alkyl chain length on the polymer chain interface orientation.μFET of NF–P3ATs is insensitive to the alkyl chain length because the well-organized stable internal microstructure is already formed in solution prior to deposition. In a preceding study, the interfacial influence on μFET was studied by comparing a NF–P3AT/SiO2 interface with an NF–P3AT/air interface. Here, the conclusion was that only a small fraction (1.8 to 5%) of wrongly oriented, i.e. face-on, P3AT chains could still significantly reduce μFET. In the case of P35T, μFET was seen to go down one order of magnitude when switching from an air to a SiO2 interface. These results highlight the importance of interfacial interactions in obtaining high performance P3AT FETs.

The effect of alkyl chain length on the FET parameters has also been studied for single layers consisting of interconnected P3AT (A = 4–10) nanofibers, having a film thickness comparable to the nanofiber thickness of 3–4 nm. Device parameters were found to be μFET = 0.01 cm2 V−1 s−1, VT ∼ 10 V and ION/IOFF = 2 × 104, for different P3AT nanofiber networks, independent of the alkyl side chain length. In comparison with FETs from solutions of well-dissolved P3ATs, μFET was larger for the nanofiber networks and the difference between the well-dissolved films and the network films increased with increasing side chain length. Hence, the results were consistent with the findings of Oosterbaan et al. and indicative of a similar well-ordered internal nanofiber structure with very little defects incorporated. Furthermore, μFET of a nanofiber network appeared to be 3 to 6 times smaller than μL of a single nanofiber FET, suggesting the existence of a transport barrier between the different nanofibers. A higher mobility activation energy, Ea, for the fiber network supported this reasoning. Ea was extracted from the Arrhenius behaviour of the mobility versus temperature plots. The alkyl side chains between the different nanofibers are possibly acting as an insulating barrier for the charge carrier transport within a nanofiber network.
The above mentioned μFET difference between networks and single nanofibers was not observed by Bolsée et al. They reported a μL = 0.07 ± 0.03 cm2 V−1 s−1 for a single P34T nanofiber and μFET = 0.05 ± 0.01 cm2 V−1 s−1 for a network of P34T nanofibers. Their results were supported by the relation Rbp < 0.1 RNF, found between the intrinsic length-dependent nanofiber resistance, RNF, and the resistance related to an intersection of nanofibers referred to as a bridging point, Rbp. This qualitative relation was obtained after numerous C-AFM-based (Fig. 7) measurements on FETs containing just one bridging point within their channel. Conclusively, Rbp was neglected with respect to RNF and the presence of ‘tie-molecules’ at nanofiber intersections was held responsible for this (Fig. 10). These tie-molecules are polymer chains that physically and electrically interconnect different crystalline domains and hence different nanofibers in the case of intersections. A polydispersity of 2.1 and hence the presence of ‘longer than average’ chains in addition to a molecular weight higher than the minimum value required for chain folding to occur, were two arguments favouring the presence of tie-molecules.
Modification of the dielectric surface with a self-assembled monolayer (SAM) of either octyltrichlorosilane (OTS) or HMDS did not improve the performance of nanofiber-based FETs, like it did for FETs of well-dissolved P3ATs. Once more, this results from the stable internal P3AT nanofiber structure prior to deposition. Nevertheless, one kept looking for a suitable surface treatment and recently a self-assembled monolayer of perfluorodecyltrimethoxysilane (FAS) effectively improved the performance of P36T nanofiber FETs. With an additional dodecylthiol treatment of the electrode surface, the μFET of individual nanofibers went up one order of magnitude from 0.056 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 0.68 cm2 V−1 s−1. While the FAS treatment neutralizes charge traps resulting from impurities on the insulator surface and the damage generated during sputter deposition, the electrode surface modification leads to a better contact between the Pt electrodes and the nanofibers. To understand the molecular origin of the SAM influence on FET performance, Guo et al. deposited their monolayer nanofibers on three different types of modified Si/SiO2 substrates using the dip-coating procedure mentioned in Section 2.1. The first substrate possessed a bare SiO2 surface, while the other two were treated with HMDS and trichloro-(1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyl)silane, referred to as C6H13 and C6F13, respectively. AFM topography images confirmed the presence of nanofibers on the C6F13 and SiO2 surfaces, while they were absent on the C6H13 surface. The nanofibers were, however, more abundant on the C6F13 surface. Consequently an increasing attractive interaction between the nanofibers and the surface was observed in the order C6H13, SiO2 and C6F13. With the surface energy decreasing in the order SiO2, C6H13 and C6F13, the observed trend could not be correlated with a decreasing surface energy. Instead, the increased attractive interaction was attributed to the increasing electron-withdrawing ability (in the same order), as confirmed by Raman spectroscopy. This technique showed the presence of a P36T related signal with an intensity going down in the same order as the amount of adsorbed fibers was observed to go down by AFM. Additionally, it uncovered an electron transfer for C6F13, but not for SiO2, proposing a stronger attractive interaction for the former. Due to the monolayer thickness of the deposited nanofibers, this technique could now directly assess the interfacial layer between the nanofibers and the FET dielectric and determine its structure and interactions. Since the structure of the interfacial layer is expected to be independent of the nanofiber thickness, the obtained results can be generalized to multi-layered nanofibers.
Regarding the deposition techniques employed to fabricate FETs, Bielecka et al. compared spin-coating with spray-coating and concluded that spray-coated FET films were inferior as compared to spin-coated films. Their conclusion was based on two observations. First, by examining the UV-Vis spectra and the AFM data of the FET films, a lower crystallinity and shorter fiber length were observed for spray-coated films. Second, hole mobility measurements revealed a certain degree of fiber orientation in the spin-coated films, due to the centrifugal force acting on the nanofibers. As a result, the hole mobility increased whenever the fibers were oriented parallel to the FET channel direction. Fiber orientation was inferred from a bimodal distribution in the mobility histogram extracted from measurements performed on different spin-coated FETs. The lower mobility peak corresponded to a perpendicular average nanofiber orientation with respect to the FET channel, while the higher mobility peak corresponded to a parallel average orientation. For the spray-coated samples only one peak in the mobility histogram was observed and correlated with no orientational preference.
Kim and co-workers blended preformed P34T nanofibers with different amounts of polystyrene (PS), an insulating polymer possessing excellent mechanical properties. Inherent to their high aspect ratio, the nanofibers only had to make up 0.5 wt% of the total amount of polymer, i.e. P34T and PS, to obtain a measurable conductivity in the active FET layer. Below this concentration, the nanofibers were unable to form percolating pathways throughout the PS matrix. An optimal value of 20 wt% of P34T relative to the total polymer amount was found and related to a trade-off between minimizing interfiber boundaries limiting the charge transport and maximizing the number of nanofibers forming the FET channel. However, probably the most important result was the observed increase in environmental stability coming from the protection against unintentional oxygen doping offered by the PS matrix to the incorporated P34T nanofibers. This was seen as a reduction in VT.
Lu et al. studied blends of preformed P34T nanofibers with different amounts of flexible insulating polymers (PS and PMMA). Particularly focusing on the electrical conductivity of the blend films, they found 5–8 times improvement in electrical conductivity, from 3 × 10−4–6 × 10−4 S cm−1 for pure P34T fiber films to 2 × 10−3–3 × 10−3 S cm−1 for P34T-fiber–PS (40:60, w/w) films. Upon increasing the fraction of PS, the conductivity of the blend film became comparable to the pure P34T fiber film at a concentration of 10 wt% P34T. Similar results were observed for fiber blends with PMMA. Since the charge carrier concentration in the fibers was not altered, the increased electrical conductivity could solely be inferred from an increase in charge carrier mobility. Upon increasing the amount of PS in the blend, the dipolar moment of the surrounding environment of each nanofiber decreases and therefore the charge carrier mobility within the blend increases.

After standard solution deposition via techniques such as spin-coating, dip-coating or drop-casting, the active layer blend nanomorphology in an organic photovoltaic cell is often, as in the case of P36T–PCBM active layers, not sufficiently phase-separated and crystalline, and post-deposition techniques like solvent and thermal annealing have to be applied to improve these features. These post-deposition treatments increase the device production costs and complexity and are not always compatible with industrial demands. Thermal annealing, for example, is typically performed at ∼140 °C and therefore incompatible with flexible substrates like PET, having a glass transition temperature of ∼75 °C. On the other hand, solvent annealing applied on an industrial scale involves risks of intoxication and explosion. These drawbacks can be circumvented by using preformed crystalline organic building blocks, e.g. P3AT nanofibers. In addition, the P3AT nanofibers produced by solution self-assembly possess a diameter comparable to the exciton diffusion length (10–20 nm) in P36T, a low percolation threshold concentration and a high surface-to-volume ratio, making them even more suitable as electron donor materials for the active layer of BHJ OPVs. BHJ organic solar cells require an active layer containing one-dimensional charge carrier highways together with a large nanometer-scale donor–acceptor interface. Blends of preformed P36T nanofibers and PCBM were found to be easily processable as active layers, affording a reasonable improvement in power conversion efficiency (PCE) without the need for post-deposition annealing. This is a direct consequence of the fibers being already preformed in solution. A pictorial view of a nanofiber-based BHJ organic solar cell is provided in Fig. 11.

From AFM topography and phase images, the addition of PCBM to a P36T fiber solution in p-xylene was seen to fill up the gaps present in pristine nanofiber films after deposition on glass. The film root mean square (rms) roughness therefore approached the 11 Å rms roughness of an annealed amorphous P36T–PCBM film. The impact of polymer concentration, P36T-nanofiber–PCBM ratio and percentage of fiber content in solution on OPV performance was systematically investigated by changing one of these parameters at a time. Device performance, as characterized by the short-circuit current (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF) and PCE, was averaged over six different devices. The best performing solar cells were obtained from a 1 wt% solution of P36T-nanofiber–PCBM (1:1.1) in p-xylene with a 75% fiber content relative to the total amount of P36T, giving an active layer thickness of around 80 nm. The related six solar cells had an average PCE of 3.6%, much higher than the 0.65% for a (non-annealed) amorphous P36T–PCBM solar cell using the same starting material. Since the VOC did not change much, the improvement could mainly be attributed to an improved JSC due to the presence of nanofibers forming one-dimensional hole pathways and providing a large interface for efficient exciton dissociation. This was confirmed by Douhéret et al., who electrically characterized a nanofiber P36T–PCBM blend using high-resolution C-AFM and used it to estimate the local hole mobility in the blend. A small amount of amorphous P36T (25%) nevertheless appeared to be necessary to intimately mix the crystalline nanofibers and the fullerene. The ratio of amorphous versus nanofibrillar P36T in solution was controlled by mixing different amounts of well-dissolved low molecular weight P36T with pure fibers. In another approach, the temperature dependence of the P36T solubility in a marginal solvent was employed to change the ratio of well-dissolved versus nanofibrillar P36T in solution. In contrast to the method reported by Berson et al., this protocol does not alter the overall molecular weight distribution of the polymer in the final blend, thus eliminating any molecular weight dependence of the OPV performance. Fiber solutions were prepared by dissolving 0.7 wt% of P36T in p-xylene at an elevated temperature of 70 °C for 30 min, followed by cooling down to room temperature according to the method proposed by Oosterbaan et al. Subsequently, PCBM was added in a 1:1 ratio and the solution was stirred for 48 hours at room temperature to get a good mixing. The solution was heated in a stepwise manner to different temperatures between 37 and 50 °C and left to stabilize at each temperature for 30 min, after which it was spin-coated to form the BHJ OPV devices. The I–V characteristics were compared at different temperatures and correlated with varying solution nanofiber content via UV-Vis spectroscopy, previously confirmed to be a reliable route for fiber content determination in solution. The solution fiber content was seen to change drastically from 60 to 14% when the temperature went up from 37 to 50 °C. However, the PCE followed a rather parabolic trend with a peak at 45 °C, corresponding to a fiber content of 42%. The same trend was observed for JSC, while the VOC increased with temperature and the FF did not show a clear trend as a function of temperature. Using TEM and SAED, the observed trends were correlated with the active layer nanomorphology. At lower temperatures, up to 41 °C, PCBM needles were observed in the active layer and under the influence of Ostwald ripening the larger needles grew at the expense of the smaller ones with increasing solution temperature. With increasing temperature, also an increasing small amount of well-dissolved PCBM was observed in the regions between the P36T fiber needles. Above 41 °C, no needles were observed anymore and a better intermixing of PCBM with the P36T nanofibers was obtained. The improved intermixing leads to more efficient charge carrier separation and hence increased JSC and PCE. Nonetheless, the decrease in fiber content and the related P36T crystallinity resulted in JSC and PCE going down above 45 °C because of a reduction in hole mobility. The optimal temperature of 45 °C can therefore be seen as a trade-off between intimate mixing of the active layer components and a good charge carrier transport resulting from sufficient fiber content.
The increase in VOC with decreasing fiber content observed by Bertho et al. was further investigated by Vandewal et al. and correlated with an increase in the energy of the intermolecular charge transfer states (ECT) in the P36T-nanofiber–PCBM solar cells. Fourier-transform photocurrent spectroscopy (FTPS) data were fitted in their low energy part following a procedure developed before by the same group. A mathematical relation between ECT and the P3AT fiber mass fraction (f) relative to the total amount of P3AT in the blend was found for A = 4, 5 and 6: ECT = E0CT − 0.2f valid for 0.1 < f < 0.9. In addition, VOC correlated with ECT according to VOC = ECT/q − 0.6V. The relation was explained by the shift of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of P3AT towards the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of PCBM, which is known to occur with increasing fraction of crystalline P3AT in the active layer. Since ECT is directly related to the energy difference between the P3AT HOMO level and the PCBM LUMO level, increasing f decreases ECT and consequently also VOC.
A different approach was introduced by Li et al., who used the mixed solvent approach to induce P36T nanofiber precursor formation in a composite P36T–PCBM solution in ODCB before the addition of PCBM (as pointed out in Section 2.1). The resulting phase segregation in the corresponding thin films took on nanometer dimensions, instead of the micrometer dimensions often observed after post-deposition annealing of films deposited directly from well-dissolved P36T–PCBM solutions in ODCB. The improved phase segregation control, increased electrical conductivity and increased light absorption were held responsible for the increase in JSC (from 1.47 to 6.00 mA cm−2), FF (from 0.46 to 0.52) and PCE (from 1.08 up to 3.9%) of solar cells fabricated from aged solutions. To verify the reproducibility of their approach, they conducted OPV performance measurements on multiple devices and reported an average PCE of 3.3%. In comparison, a 15 min thermal annealing at 150 °C of devices fabricated using well-dissolved P36T–PCBM solutions in ODCB only yielded an average PCE of 3.1%.
A more or less similar approach towards well-controlled microstructural order in a P36T-nanofiber–PCBM active layer film was proposed by Kim et al. For solvent or thermal annealing after spin-coating from a well-dissolved P36T–PCBM solution, it was hard to reach an optimal nanoscale BHJ morphology since P36T crystallization interferes with PCBM aggregation and vice versa. Therefore, Kim and co-workers introduced a two-step process to separate the fiber formation from PCBM diffusion. This approach effectively prevented interference of the two distinct processes such that each one of them could be effectively directed to reach the optimal final state. The mixed-solvent method was used to directly produce P36T nanofibers in a 2.5 wt% solution of P36T–PCBM (1:1) in chlorobenzene upon adding cyclohexanone. However, nanofiber formation was not yet complete in solution and an additional mild annealing step (after spin-coating) was needed to obtain fully developed stable P36T nanofibers. Different temperatures were tested and from GIXRD no further increase in film crystallinity was observed for temperatures above 120 °C. Moreover, even a decomposition of P36T crystalline domains was seen at higher temperatures. TEM confirmed that the additional mild annealing was necessary to obtain well-developed PCBM domains within the nanofiber matrix. More importantly, TEM also confirmed the importance of the two-step process as a whole, since neither the preformed nanofibers nor the mild thermal annealing could on its own induce sufficient nanoscale phase separation in the P36T–PCBM thin films. The two-step process applied to OPV devices resulted in an increased performance with a PCE going up from 0.79%, for P36T and PCBM well dissolved in chlorobenzene, to 3.76% and 4.04% for the two-step process with mild annealing at 80 and 100 °C, respectively. The OPV performance improvement came mainly from an increase in JSC due to an increase in photoabsorption and a balanced charge transport. The charge transport balance originated from the crystalline P36T–PCBM nanomorphology in the active layer and was confirmed by measuring the hole and electron mobility via the SCLC method (on hole-only and electron-only devices). Due to the presence of charge carrier percolation pathways throughout the active layer, the device layer thickness could be increased from 150 up to 300 nm without compromising the charge carrier collection efficiency.
As outlined above, after dissolving P3AT at elevated temperature in a marginal solvent, nanofiber growth is induced by cooling down the solution to room temperature. After the solution has reached room temperature, it is aged such that nanofiber growth can still proceed. The influence of ageing on OPV performance was studied by Kim et al. Blend solutions of P36T nanofibers and well-dissolved PCBM molecules were prepared in dichloromethane (DCM). DCM is a marginal solvent, providing limited solubility for P36T at room temperature, while maintaining a relatively high solubility for PCBM. The solution was aged for different periods of 12–72 hours for which the extent of fiber formation and hence the crystallinity was seen to increase according to a more pronounced vibrational structure and increased absorption in the UV-Vis spectrum. The influence of the ageing time on the photovoltaic performance was then investigated and an optimal period of 60 hours was found. The increase in PCE was correlated with a similar increase in JSC, which on its turn was related to a higher photoabsorption, a more balanced charge carrier transport and a higher exciton dissociation efficiency. The increase in photoabsorption could be attributed to the red-shifted enhanced vibrational structure and larger absorption intensity relative to amorphous P36T. Therefore, a better spectral overlap with the solar emission spectrum is obtained. The balance in charge carrier transport, as observed from hole and electron mobility measurements using the SCLC method, was attributed to an increased hole mobility due to a larger degree of π–π stacking and hence a higher level of hole delocalization, inherent to nanofiber formation. Although for an ageing time of 72 hours the nanofibers became even bigger, solar cell performance became worse, explained by an overgrowth of the nanofibers.
In view of the investigation of the relation between the solvent used for nanofiber fabrication and the corresponding solar cell performance, p-xylene was compared with anisole, a solvent known to afford highly reproducible results concerning nanofiber fabrication (see Section 2.1). Although an improvement in crystallinity was observed when switching to anisole, the PCE decreased from 2 to 1.5%. The improved crystallinity resulted in a higher JSC because of a better photoabsorption and higher hole mobility. Unfortunately, however, it also caused a reduction of both FF and VOC. The former was caused by an imbalance in hole and electron transport, making charge transport space-charge-limited, whereas the latter resulted from a shift of the HOMO level of P36T closer to the LUMO level of PCBM. Despite the lower PCE, the high reproducibility of the results for fibers produced from anisole solutions stimulated further attempts to balance the hole and electron transport. Different small amounts of CB were added to the anisole solution to control the ratio of well-dissolved P36T relative to P36T fibers. The optimal amount of CB was found to be around 10%, as this resulted in the highest crystallinity and also the highest PCE of 2.3%. Adding CB was seen to favourably influence both JSC and VOC relative to the pure anisole system. The improvement of JSC resulted from a better photoabsorption and hole mobility due to a further increase in crystallinity, while the higher VOC was proposed to result from a better organization of PCBM at the interface with the nanofibers.
Since it was reported that PCBM can easily diffuse to form micrometer-sized aggregates at temperatures well within the operation window of outdoor OPVs, research has also focused on the thermal stability of the active layer nanomorphology. In view of this, Li et al. applied nanofibers in P36T–PCBM solar cells to obtain a nanoscale phase separation which could withstand a high level of thermal stress. Regioregular P36T was used in a 1:1 ratio with PCBM to obtain a 0.7 wt% solution in a solvent mixture of tetraline (Tet) and xylene (Xyl) in a 1:1 volume ratio. The marginal solvent approach was then applied to obtain P36T fibers thoroughly mixed with well-dissolved PCBM in solution after 5 days of solution ageing. Wide angle X-ray diffraction (WAXD) experiments, UV-Vis absorption spectra and AFM measurements all confirmed the presence of well-developed P36T nanofibers both in solution and in films. PCBM filled up the gaps in between of the nanofibers in the latter. Compared to films spin-coated from solutions containing well-dissolved P36T–PCBM in either Tet–Xyl (1:1) heated to 70 °C, o-dichlorobenzene (ODCB) or chloroform (CF), the nanofibers gave (as expected) a higher crystallinity and a larger hole mobility. All samples were then subjected to a thermal annealing at 150 °C for 15 hours to investigate their thermal stability, as deduced from the diffusion of PCBM into micrometer-sized clusters via optical microscopy images. The most stable sample is then the one showing the least and smallest PCBM clusters. Remarkably, the thermal stability appeared to be closely related to the crystallinity of the pristine films prior to annealing. The films prepared from the Tet–Xyl mixture showed the highest stability, inherent to their high crystallinity. Additional confirmation came from comparison of the UV-Vis spectra before and after annealing for 15 hours at 150 °C. The spectra for the films prepared from CF, ODCB and heated Tet–Xyl all showed strong evolution towards a more phase separated structure, i.e. P36T crystallization and PCBM aggregation. In contrast, films prepared from Tet–Xyl solution containing preformed P36T nanofibers did not show any evolution in their UV-Vis spectra, as they were able to retain their internal structure. Inherent to their reduced diffusional mobility, the nanofibers can effectively form a network that can withstand high temperature annealing and confine the PCBM diffusion. Concerning the OPV performance, the P36T nanofiber sample gave a larger PCE of 3.37% as compared to PCEs of 0.51 and 0.98% for the CF and ODCB samples, respectively. In addition, it possessed a higher thermal stability with a PCE decrease to 80% of its initial value after 160 hours at 150 °C. At the same time, the PCEs of the CF and ODCB samples were already strongly degraded to less than 50% of their initial value. Table 1 provides an overview of the performance of the P36T nanofiber-based OPV devices mentioned in this section.
P36T-fiber–PCBM
Solvent
Film Thickness (nm)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
PCE (%)
Ref.
1:1.1

p-Xylene
80
10.0
0.59
0.58
3.4

5

10:8
Anisole + 10% CB
110 ± 5
10.13
0.53
0.42
2.29

9

1:1

p-Xylene
90
9.67
0.61
0.55
3.15

68

1:1
DCM
81
9.51
0.59
0.58
3.23

73

1:1
Tet–Xyl (1:1, v/v)
100–120
10.82
0.6
0.52
3.37

75


All solution self-assembly approaches take advantage of the strong π–π stacking interactions between the polymer chains to grow P3AT nanofibers with high hole mobility, originating from the π–π stacking direction and hence the hole delocalization along the nanofiber longitudinal axis. Furthermore, fiber formation in solution, prior to deposition, enables the polymer chains to obtain their lowest energy conformation, such that the nanofibers end up with a fully relaxed and therefore intrinsically stable internal structure. Although the production process is influenced by many different parameters, some very reliable fiber fabrication methods are available to date.

Having cross-sections in the nanometer range and lengths of a few micrometers, P3AT nanofibers are well suited to be applied as preformed building blocks in BHJ organic photovoltaics. Moreover, no post-deposition thermal annealing is necessary to reach high PCEs, opening up the possibility for the use of PET substrates, as required for flexible OPV. The preformed nanofibers also render the layer morphology independent of the deposition technique, increasing the freedom to choose the most suitable deposition method for industrial applications. Last but not least, nanofibers incorporated in the active layer of BHJ OPVs can increase the thermal stability of the devices by providing a stable network that prevents PCBM from forming micrometer-sized clusters during high temperature treatment. This still requires further confirmation though, since it was not consistently observed. Another inconsistency concerns the addition of PCBM to the active blend before or after nanofiber growth, as this might influence the P36T chain mobility in solution.
In addition to organic solar cells, also field-effect transistors can benefit from the incorporation of nanofibers. Specifically related to FETs, the nanofiber layers appear to be much less sensitive to the dielectric surface. Some fundamental insights could be obtained from single nanofiber FETs, revealing large mobility anisotropy and providing an estimation of the maximum current density a single nanofiber can withstand. These results are surely interesting and important for device engineers. Due to the large charge anisotropy, a film of nanofibers oriented parallel to the substrate could possess a high drain-to-source current with a limited undesired bulk current. Further fundamental results could be obtained from monolayer nanofibers enabling the direct examination of the interfacial interaction between a dielectric and a nanofiber film. The extracted results provide engineers with valuable information towards dielectric surface engineering for high performance organic FETs. So far, nanofibers of monolayer thickness have only been fabricated with P36T, so it might be worthwhile to try to produce fibers of monolayer thickness for a whole range of P3ATs to study the possible alkyl-chain length dependency of interfacial interactions. The monolayer fibers can also assist in the quest for the optimal dielectric surface treatment minimizing interfacial traps and other processes limiting the interfacial charge carrier mobility. For further improvement of FET performance, work should also be conducted on the alignment of the nanofibers in the direction of the channel.
Because of their increased absorption relative to films deposited from well-dissolved P3AT solutions, P3AT nanofiber films are not only promising for implementation in OPV, but also in organic photodetectors and phototransistors, opening up new areas for device-related research. For a better understanding of the optoelectronic properties, structural models of P3AT nanofibers (like the coarse-grained model) should be coupled with more sophisticated electronic models, enabling the active layer nanomorphology to be designed more target-specific. With respect to direct future applications, a particular concern should also be the improvement of the environmental stability of these devices by using insulating polymer layers to shield them from the detrimental influence of oxygen and moisture.
Electrospun nanofibers have been directly captured and aligned onto a device substrate in a controlled way, revealing a simple way to produce organic FETs in a straightforward manner. Although some promising results have been already achieved with electrospun nanofiber FETs, little efforts have been done so far to relate the electrical characteristics with the specific internal nanofiber morphology. Future studies should therefore aim at correlating electrical results obtained from FETs with the internal structure of the electrospun nanofibers, in the same way as it has been done for nanofibers produced via solution self-assembly. The development of a model for the internal fiber morphology is essential for a further in-depth discussion regarding the interpretation of the optoelectronic data. Although fabrication of nanoelectronic devices might benefit from the high level of control over the number of deposited electrospun nanofibers, the diameter of the electrospun nanofibers is still at least one order of magnitude larger as compared to the solution self-assembled nanofibers. To compete with solution self-assembled nanofibers in the field of device size reduction, additional efforts should be undertaken to reduce the fiber diameter, while avoiding the loss of uniformity along the fiber length as was observed in the past. In addition, one should aim at electrospinning in an inert or at least dark environment to limit the uptake of moisture and oxygen.

This work was supported by the Interreg project Organext, the Special Research Fund (BOF) of the UHasselt and the Fund for Scientific Research – Flanders (FWO, Belgium) by the projects G.0415.14N and GA.013.13N. We also acknowledge the UHasselt and the FWO for the sabattical leave funding for J. Manca.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014