 DOI: 10.1039/C2NR11532H
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1248-1253

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Zhibin
Lv
,

Jiefeng
Yu
,

Hongwei
Wu
,

Jian
Shang
,

Dan
Wang
,

Shaocong
Hou
,

Yongping
Fu
,

Kai
Wu
* and 

Dechun
Zou
*

Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Key Laboratory of Polymer Chemistry and Physics of Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China. E-mail: dczou@pku.edu.cn

BNLMS, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China. E-mail: kaiwu@pku.edu.cn

Received
18th October 2011
, Accepted 11th December 2011
First published on 25th January 2012
A type of highly efficient completely flexible fiber-shaped solar cell based on TiO2 nanotube array is successfully prepared. Under air mass 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) illumination conditions, the photoelectric conversion efficiency of the solar cell approaches 7%, the highest among all fiber-shaped cells based on TiO2 nanotube arrays and the first completely flexible fiber-shaped DSSC. The fiber-shaped solar cell demonstrates good flexibility, which makes it suitable for modularization using weaving technologies.

Green energy is the foundation for the sustainable development for humankind and solar power, as the greenest energy source, is the most likely to meet the global energy demand. The energy power directly irradiated from the sun to earth greatly exceeds the current energy demand of humans (13 TW), which implies that instating solar cells with 10% photoelectric conversion efficiency (PCE) on 0.1% of the earth's surface can meet the global energy demand. However, the main bottlenecks for the large-scale application of solar cells are high cost and low photoelectric conversion efficiency. At present, the best commercial solar cell is the silicon-based solar cell. Such p–n junction solar cells, as one of the first-generation solar cells, have many problems including high manufacturing cost as well as rigid and cumbersome types of installation. Second-generation solar cells represented by CuInGaSe2 thin-film cells can greatly reduce the cost of solar cells, but still cannot support large-scale application. Moreover, In, Ga, Cd, and other materials used by such solar cells are either in limited supply or are poisonous. In the past two decades, third-generation solar cells such as dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) and bulk-heterojunction organic solar cells have attracted more extensive attention from researchers for their low cost, high efficiency, and great potential. Nowadays, the photoelectric conversion efficiency of DSSC has exceeded 12%. Moreover, organic bulk-heterojunction solar cells have also exceeded 7% PCE.

To improve further the conversion efficiency of third-generation solar cells is still important to meet its requirements for daily application. Nanostructured semiconductors broaden the design of third generation solar cells to improve their performance. One dimensional (1-D) nanomaterials such as nanowires, nanotubes, and nanorods are used to produce highly efficient solar cells. Highly efficient solar cells include typical 1-D nanomaterials such as TiO2 nanotubes prepared by anodic oxidization of titanium foil, ZnO nanowire from solution synthesis, and nanotubes and silicon nanowires. Compared with bulk materials, 1-D nanomaterials have high specific surface area and facilitate charge transport. The researchers applied 1-D TiO2 nanotube and ZnO nanowire to DSSC and found that the mobility of electrons in 1-D nanomaterials is higher than that of traditional nanoparticles by several orders of magnitude. Hence, 1-D nanomaterials show great potential for producing highly efficient PV devices.
Fiber-based photoelectron devices such as electroluminescent diodes, solar cells, electrochromic devices, supercapacitors, field effect transistors, and integrated circuits have aroused great interests among researchers in recent years. Fiber-shaped electronic devices can replace the conventional planar-structure based devices and can be woven into fabrics; hence, they show great potential in multifunctional fibers and electronic fabrics, which also points out new directions in many fields. Fiber-shaped solar cells, as one of the fiber-shaped electronic devices, has been recently given much attention. In comparison with flat solar cells, fiber-shaped cells have advantages such as use of ITO-free metal substrate with low resistance and flexibility, low dependence on angle of incident light, and weaving capability. Moreover, fiber-shaped cells are easier for light condensation design than traditional flat cells. According to theoretical predictions, the module efficiency of the device can reach 17% by integrating multilayer fiber-shaped solar cells. At present, the fiber-shaped solar cell with the highest efficiency is the DSSC fiber-shaped solar cell produced by TiO2 nanoparticles and the efficiency of 5 cm-long fiber-shaped cells has exceeded 7%. Regrettably, the efficiency of fiber cells produced by ZnO nanowires, TiO2 nanotubes, and other 1-D materials is not quite satisfactory. For example, the efficiency of 2 cm-long fiber-shaped DSSCs based on TiO2 nanotubes is lower than 5% and the highest PCE of 2 cm-long fiber-shaped DSSC is 5.84%. On the other hand, previous fiber-shaped cells are not suitable for weaving because they are too short, not encapsulated, or encapsulated by rigid materials resulting in loss of flexibility. Therefore, previous fiber-shaped cells are not completely flexible and cannot be woven in the real sense. The woven fiber-shaped cells must solve the following problems: (1) The final product of fiber-shaped cells must be fiber-shaped and long enough; (2) while the flexibility of fiber-shaped cell is guaranteed, the functional film must possess enough mechanical strength to prevent it from breaking off during weaving, bending or under friction. In view of the above problems, we successfully fabricate a completely flexible and weavable dye-sensitized fiber-shaped solar cell, for which a photoanode with TiO2 nanotube arrays is prepared by anodic oxidization, then a transparent and flexible capillary is adopted to encapsulate the solar cell. To our knowledge, it is the most highly efficient fiber-shaped solar cell (nearly 7%) based on TiO2 nanotube arrays so far and it demonstrates complete flexibility to date among all the reported fiber-shaped solar cells, showing great potential in applying it to woven fiber-shaped cells.


Ti wire (Alfa Aesar) is subjected to supersonic treatment in acetone and ethanol for 10 min. Subsequently, the titanium wire is used as the anode and the platinum sheet is used as the cathode. The Ti wires are anodized under constant voltage (60 V) and temperature (30 °C). The electrolyte is comprised of ethylene glycol, water, and ammonium fluoride (mass ratio = 91.7:8:0.3). Film thickness of the TiO2 nanotube array can be controlled by the electrolysis time. After electrolysis, deionized water is used to rinse away the ions on the anodized Ti wire. After drying, the anodized Ti wire is immersed in 2 M TiCl4 solution bath at 70 °C for 30 min. Afterwards, the solution is taken out and sintered for 30 min at 450 °C in air. The Ti wire is placed into the N719 (RuL2(NCS)2:2TBA, L = 2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid, TBA = tetrabutylammonium) ethanol solution (3 × 10−4 M) for 24 h of sensitization after the temperature drops to approximately 100 °C. Lastly, it is taken out and rinsed with anhydrous alcohol to obtain the dye-sensitized photoanode.


First, the photoanode with platinum wire (diameter: 40 μm) is spirally wound. The cell body is then inserted into a flexible, transparent, and plastic capillary tube filled with electrolyte. Afterwards, the electrodes are led out from one end of the capillary tube, and the two ends of the capillary are sealed with sealing glue to prevent evaporation of the electrolyte. The electrolyte used in the experiment is made up of 0.5 DMII (1,3-dimethyl-3-imidazolium iodide), 0.05 M I2, 0.05 M LiI, 0.5 M TBP (4-tert-butylpyridine), and 0.05 M GuSCN (guanidine thiocyanate) in acetonitrile solution.


The simulated sunlight source is YSS-50A (Yamashita DESO, Japan). The light intensity is 100 mW cm−2 using a standard silicon cell to calibrate. Keithley 2000 is used to acquire the IV (current–voltage curves) data and the photo-current response curve. During the test, the entire cell is exposed to the simulated sunlight source without any mask. The cell area is calculated by multiplying the projected area of photoanode and effective length of fiber-shaped cell. The Hitachi S-4800 scanning electron microscope (SEM) is used to get the morphology of the nanostructure. In the dye adsorption test, the sensitized photoanode is immersed into an ethanol/aqueous solution of 0.01 M NaOH (volumetric ratio = 1:1) for dye desorption. Ultraviolet visible spectroscopy is used to examine the content of the dye. Solartron 1250 is used to test the AC impedance.



Fig. 1 is a set of SEM photos of the photoanode surface morphology. Fig. 1(a) shows the surface topography of the titanium wire before electrolysis and the SEM photograph after 30 h of anodic oxidation. After anodization, the Ti wire is covered by a layer of TiO2 nanotube arrays with a diameter that is almost constant because the TiO2 nanotube grows inwards along with the wire center. Fig. 1(b) is a side view photo of the TiO2 nanotube array on a titanium wire. The length of the TiO2 nanotubes can be controlled by the anodic oxidation time. The length of TiO2 nanotube is almost directly proportional to the anodization time (ESI). Fig. 1(c) shows the top view of a 1-D ordered array of TiO2 nanotubes on a Ti wire. The inset figure is a partial enlargement of Fig. 1(c). Fig. 1(d) shows the surface topography of TiO2 nanotube array after TiCl4 solution treatment. After treatment, the TiO2 nanotube surface is covered by a tier of TiO2 nanoparticles. The TiO2 nanotube acquired by anodic oxidation method is in anatase crystal form (see the XRD data in the ESI).


Fig. 2(a) shows an actual optical photo of a completely flexible fiber-shaped solar cell, which is rolled up into a coil, demonstrating good flexibility. Fig. 2(b) shows an optical microscopic photo of a fiber-shaped solar cell to illustrate its detailed inner structure. The counter electrode is wound uniformly around the photoanode. They are encapsulated in the flexible and plastic capillary filled with electrolyte. The two electrodes of the solar cell are led out from one end of the capillary tube, then sealed by the sealing glue, as shown in Fig. 2(a), whose effective length is about 24 cm (ESI).
Devices A and B are prepared first (the photoanode of device A is not treated by TiCl4, but device B is treated with TiCl4) to examine the influence of TiCl4 treatment on the performance of the devices. Fig. 3(a) shows the J–V curves of devices A and B. For device A, open circuit voltage (Voc) = 0.536 V, short circuit current (Jsc) = 12.44 mA cm−2, fill factor (FF) = 0.476, power conversion efficiency η = 3.18%. For device B, Voc = 0.672 V, Jsc = 14.68 mA cm−2, FF = 0.662, η = 6.53%. Device B shows much greater open circuit voltage, short circuit current, and fill factor than device A. The great improvement of fiber-shaped solar cell B is mainly because the TiO2 nanotube array film is treated with TiCl4. As shown in Fig. 1(a) and (c) of the article and Fig. 4(a) of the ESI, the TiO2 nanotube array has many defects on its surface and has poor connection between the TiO2 nanotubes, which cause greater transmission resistance for electrons. As shown in Fig. 1(d) in the article and Fig. 4(b) in the ESI, the TiO2 nanotube array after TiCl4 treatment is covered with a rough layer of TiO2 nanoparticle, which gets rid of a portion of defects on the TiO2 nanotube surface and fills the gap among the nanotubes to bind them together to create less hindered charge carrier transport channels. All these strengthened the charge carrier mobility and reduce the electron transmission resistance of TiO2 nanotubes, which can be further proved by the electrochemical impedance in Fig. 3(b). All the impedance data are acquired under AM 1.5G when the devices A and B are at forward voltage bias (Vbias = −Voc). From left to right, the first arc represents the interface between counter electrode and electrolyte; the second arc represents the interface between TiO2 and electrolyte. The sketch inserted shows the circuit equivalent adopted for data fitting. Rs represents the transmission resistance of the conducting substrate and the interface between the conducting substrate and TiO2 nanotube. Rct,WE represents the charge transmission and recombination resistance at the interface between TiO2 and electrolyte. Rct,CE represents the transmission resistance between the counter electrode and electrolyte. W represents impedance for the diffusion of electrolyte. In Fig. 3(b), device B has a similar Rs to device A. However, the Rct,WE and Rct,CE of device B are much smaller. Compared with device A, device B, whose photoanode has been treated with TiCl4, has much smaller transmission resistance (Rct,WE and Rct,CE.) at the interface. Thus, after the TiCl4 treatment, device B has higher open circuit voltage and fill factor. With regards to a renewable electrochemical system, the open circuit voltage meets the following:
(1)
where
Iinj is the photocurrent injected to the TiO2 from the exited dye; ncb is the photoelectron density of the conductive band; and ket is the reaction constant of reaction

I−3 + 2ecb(TiO2) → 3I−
(2)
where I
−3 can enter into tiny cavities inaccessible to dye molecule. As the film thickness grows, the number of such a locus increases and the reaction constant ket of reaction (2) increases, as well as the charge recombination. According to eqn (1), they can result in the drop of Voc and affect the efficiency of the device. The dark current curve shows that device B has smaller dark current under the same condition, which also indicates that device B after TiCl4 treatment has a smaller ket. It means that the main charge combination reaction (2) becomes less intensive after TiCl4 treatment than without TiCl4 treatment. That is because the TiCl4 treatment can prohibit charge recombination at the TiO2/electrolyte interface. According to eqn (1), the TiCl4 treatment resulting in smaller ket (less charge combination) helps improve the open circuit voltage. It agrees with the impedance data results. The TiCl4 treatment can prohibit charge recombination at the TiO2/electrolyte interface. According to eqn (1), the TiCl4 treatment helps improve the open circuit voltage. Hence, device B has a higher open circuit voltage than device A. Fig. 3(c) shows the relationship between the amount of dye adsorption on the photoanode before and after TiCl4 treatment and the film thickness of TiO2 nanotube array. Fig. 3(c) shows that the photoanode treated by TiCl4 improves dye adsorption, especially under large film thickness, and increases the short-circuit current and the surface roughness of TiO2 nanotube (as shown in Fig. 1(d)). TiCl4 treatment can reduce the transmission resistance of TiO2 nanotube films, reduce the recombination of electrons, and improve the dye adsorption as well as cell performance. Hence, after the TiCl4 treatment, device B has better performance.

The influence of TiO2 film thickness on the performance of fiber-shaped solar cells is also examined. Fig. 3(d) shows the J–V curves of the fiber-shaped solar cells with TiO2 film thicknesses of 12, 18, 26, 35, and 44 μm, respectively. As the film thickness grows, the short-circuit current density increases from 9.14 mA cm−2 at 12 μm to 15.46 mA cm−2 at 35 μm. However, when the film thickness further grows to 44 μm, the short-circuit current density drops to 14.38 mA cm−2. The Voc follows the same changing pattern as Jsc. The Voc reaches a maximum value of 0.670 V at 35 μm as well. At the same time, the fill factor remains almost unchanged. Correspondingly, the photoelectric conversion efficiency increases gradually from 3.97% at 12 μm to 6.72% at 35 μm, and then slightly drops. Such a changing trend is formed because the short circuit current increases with the dye adsorption. The number of charge recombination sites and the charge transmission resistance inside the photoanode increase as the film thickness increases, which reduces the life span of electrons and the lower quasi Fermi level of TiO2. When the TiO2 film is thicker than the diffusion length of electrons and penetration length of photons, it can cause a serious drop in electron collection efficiency, represented by lower short-circuit current and photoelectric conversion efficiency.
Different from fiber-shaped solar cells reported in the past, our fiber-shaped cells have better flexibility. Fig. 4(a) shows the J–V curves of the same fiber-shaped solar cell under different bending radii (R). R = inf means that the curvature radius is infinitely great (curvature 1/R = 0), i.e. the solar cell is not bent. Fig. 4(b) summarizes the relationship between the performance parameters in Fig. 4(a) and curvature 1/R. Fig. 4(b) shows that the performance of fiber-shaped solar cell drops as the final curvature radius R gets smaller (curvature 1/R gets bigger). However, the PCE of this flexible solar cell bent at R = 1 cm can still be maintained at above 90% of that under a no-bending condition (R = inf), with Voc = 0.663 V, Jsc = 14.57 mA cm−2, FF = 0.648, PCE = 6.25% and Voc = 0.673 V, Jsc = 14.68 mA cm−2, FF = 0.661, PCE = 6.53%, respectively. Fig.4(c) shows the relationship between the J–V curves of the device and the bending times when the bending radius R = 2 cm. Fig. 4(d) summarizes the relationship between the performance parameters and the bending times in Fig. 4(c). In Fig. 4(d), as the bending times increases Voc and FF slightly drop from 0.680 V and 0.661 at the beginning to 0.661 V and 0.621 after bending for the 1000th time. However, as the bending time goes up, the Jsc and PCE obviously decline from 15.42 mA cm−2 and 6.93% at no bending to 12.17 mA cm−2 and 5.02% after the 1000th time, respectively. the Jsc and PCE obviously drop as the bending times increases. The Jsc of the solar cell after bending for 1000 times drops to 80% of that of no bending, and correspondingly the PCE drops to 73% of the initial value. Hence, the solar cell can withstand repeated bending. However, the bending can damage the photoactive layer of the electrode, which cannot be completely avoided and leads the decline of solar cell performance. Selecting suitable materials, like a more flexible substrate, can improve the bending performance of cells.

A highly efficient, flexible and woven fiber-shaped solar cell was prepared by choosing and optimizing suitable materials. We further discuss the influence of TiCl4 solution treatment, TiO2 film thickness, and cell bending on the performance of fiber-shaped solar cell. One major feature of a fiber-shaped solar cell is that it can allow the application of the weaving process for module integration. For weaving, a fiber-shaped solar cell must have better photovoltaic performance, flexibility, and adequate mechanical performance. Our fiber-shaped solar cell has achieved these advantages; it can be woven into three-dimensional solar cell modules with different shapes suitable for producing power supplies for portable devices or a power suit. Moreover, it can be woven into curtains, tents, and bags. Such energy cloths can become a power supply for woven electronic devices made up of electroluminescent devices, sensors, and field-effect transistors. Moreover, we can use several units of fiber-shaped solar cells with monochromatic absorption spectrum (one solar cell that absorbs only a part of the sunlight spectrum, such as red, green, and blue light) to realize full-spectrum absorption by suitable weaving and spatial arrangement. Through the optimization of materials, such as light absorption layer, electrode, transmission layer, and Prague coating, it is theoretically estimated that the photoelectric conversion efficiency of such cells can reach 17%. The three-dimensional light collection capability of fiber-shaped solar cell modules is particularly suitable for use in a photovoltaic “house”, such as gauze windows or curtains, which can make use of both direct outdoor sunlight and scattered indoor reflection. Hence, it has great potential for extensive applications.


TiO2 film thickness (μm)

V
oc/V

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF
PCE (%)
12
0.652
9.14
0.666
3.97
18
0.650
10.25
0.687
4.58
26
0.655
15.28
0.641
6.42
35
0.670
15.46
0.648
6.72
44
0.664
14.38
0.652
6.22

This work is jointly supported by MOST (2011CB933300, 2009CB929403, 2011CB808702) and NSFC (50833001, 20973004), China.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2nr11532h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012