 DOI: 10.1039/C5NR00788G
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 10459-10464


Shuai
Jiang
,

Xiong
Yin
,

Juntao
Zhang
,

Xiaoyang
Zhu
,

Jianye
Li
* and 

Meng
He
*

CAS Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing, 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: mhe@nanoctr.cn

University of Science & Technology, Beijing, 100083, P. R. China. E-mail: jyli@ustb.edu.cn

Received
3rd February 2015
, Accepted 8th May 2015
First published on 11th May 2015
Vertical MoS2 nanosheets with both large specific surface areas and sharp, active edges are strongly desirable due to their potential applications as catalysts, sensors and field emitters. Nevertheless, the growth of vertical MoS2 nanosheets is still a challenge and has rarely been reported. In this contribution, vertical ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets were grown on diverse substrates via a facile chemical vapor deposition method using CS2 as the sulfur precursor. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first time that CS2 has been applied as the sulfur source for the CVD growth of MoS2. In comparison with sulfur powder, the conventional sulfur source, CS2, can be imported in the growth chamber by a carrying gas, which provides considerable convenience for controlling growth parameters. Vertical MoS2 nanosheets presented a comparable catalytic activity to Pt on triiodide reduction and were used as efficient counter electrodes in dye-sensitized solar cells.

Ultrathin molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) nanosheets, which consist of only one or a few molecular layers, have intrigued substantial research interest in the past few years due to their unique physical and chemical properties and promising perspectives in a variety of fields such as electronics, optoelectronics, catalysis, and photovoltaics. Great efforts have been devoted to the synthesis of MoS2 atomic layers, and the growth of monolayers or few-layer flakes with basal planes being bonded to the substrates, which are suitable for electronics and optoelectronics applications, has been demonstrated by several groups. On the other hand, for catalysis and sensor applications, ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets grown vertically on the substrate are more desirable because they have more accessible surface area in comparison to basal bonded molecular layers. More importantly, both computational and experimental results have demonstrated that the edges of MoS2 nanosheets are catalytically active sites for many electrochemical reactions. Therefore, ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets grown vertically on the substrate exposing much more active edges are preferred in catalysis applications. However, two dimensional MoS2 nanosheets tend to lie horizontally on the substrate, and the growth of vertical MoS2 nanosheets has been rarely reported. In this contribution, we demonstrate the ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets that have been grown vertically on diverse substrates via chemical vapor deposition (CVD).

In the CVD growth of mono or few-layered MoS2 flakes, elemental sulfur is generally used as the raw material. The morphology and quality of MoS2 flakes are considerably sensitive to the growth parameters, such as the concentration of sulfur vapor and the instances at which the sulfur vapor is introduced into the growth chamber. Solid state powder of sulfur has to be introduced into the chamber before the growth and then heated during the growth process to release sulfur vapor. In such a system, it is not trivial to control the initiation and ending of the evaporation of sulfur. In some cases, sulfur powder loaded in the growth chamber has to be moved quickly into or out of the high-temperature zone of the furnace to initiate or terminate the reaction. Moreover, the concentration of sulfur vapor in the growth chamber is determined by both the loading amount and heating temperature of sulfur and can hardly be controlled directly in the growth. In this study, we used CS2 instead of sulfur powder as the sulfur source, which was stored outside the growth chamber and imported into the chamber by a carrying gas. CS2 has been extensively applied as a sulfurizing agent in the preparation of sulfides from oxides. However, to the best of our knowledge, it is the first time that it has been applied as the sulfur source in the CVD growth of MoS2 nanostructures. CS2 has many advantages over sulfur powder in the growth of MoS2 nanostructures. In comparison with sulfur powder, it can be imported into the growth chamber by a carrying gas and does not have to be loaded in the chamber prior to the growth; thus, controlling the initiation and termination of growth as well as adjusting the concentration of sulfur vapor in the growth process becomes much more convenient.
MoS2 nanostructures have been applied as counter electrodes (CEs) for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) to catalyze the reduction of I3− to I−. However, to the best of our knowledge, MoS2 nanostructures grown via CVD method have not been applied as CEs for DSCs. In this study, vertical MoS2 nanosheets were grown on a graphite foil via CVD method and then utilized as low-cost CEs for DSCs. The device demonstrated decent power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 7.18%, which is comparable to that of a conventional one that applies a Pt/FTO CE (7.59%). The MoS2 based flexible DSC presented a PCE of 4.32%, which is only slightly inferior to that of the flexible device with a plastic sputtered Pt CE (4.86%).

The experimental setup for the growth of MoS2 nanostructures is illustrated in Fig. S1a; it consists mainly of a tubular furnace equipped with a quartz tube of 1 inch, a flow-meter to control the rate of the carrying gas, and a vessel to load liquid CS2. Two 3-way valves were used to control the flow path of carrying gas. The carrying gas can flow into the growth chamber directly or flow into the liquid CS2 first and then carry CS2 vapor into the growth chamber, depending on the status of the 3-way valves. Before the growth, molybdenum trioxide (MoO3) powder was first loaded in a quartz boat and then placed at the central zone of a tubular furnace. A substrate, which might be a piece of Si wafer, quartz glass, or graphite foil, was placed upon MoO3 powder to collect the growth products. Before heating, the whole system was evacuated with a rotary pump and purged with Ar flow alternatively for three times to expel oxygen. Subsequently, the furnace was heated to the reaction temperature (690–750 °C) at the rate of 10 °C min−1 under the ambient pressure of flowing Ar. MoO3 powder was held at the reaction temperature for a while before the introduction of CS2. The holding time varied from 3 to 12 minutes, depending on the reaction temperature. CS2 vapor was introduced into the growth chamber by Ar flowing at 200 sccm (standard-state cubic centimeter per minute) after the deposition of pale yellow MoO3 at the downstream inner surface of the quartz tube was observed. Vertical MoS2 nanosheets were grown on the substrate in a few minutes, resulting from the reaction between MoO3 vapor and sulfur released by CS2. Residual CS2 in the exhaust gas was first trapped in a cold trap and then further absorbed by an aqueous solution of NaOH outside the furnace. After the growth, the furnace was turned off, and the growth chamber was naturally allowed to cool to room temperature in the flowing Ar.


Products of CVD growth were characterized using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, Hitachi S-4800), a transmission electron microscope (TEM, FEI Tecnai F20 G2 U-twin) and an atomic force microscope (AFM, Veeco Metrology, Nanoscope III A). The TEM sample was prepared by ultrasonically treating the silicon wafer on which the vertical MoS2 nanosheets have been grown in ethanol and subsequently drop-casting onto lacy carbon-supported TEM grids. The vertical nanosheets were peeled from the growth substrate by ultrasonic treatment in ethanol and then spin-coated on a clean Si substrate to be characterized by atomic force microscopy (AFM). AFM measurements were performed in tapping mode under ambient conditions. Commercial silicon tips with a nominal spring constant of 40 N m−1 and resonant frequency of 300 kHz were used in the experiments.


The DSCs in this study were fabricated by following the procedures established in a previous report. The photoanodes were fabricated by doctor-blading TiO2 paste on a FTO glass and subsequent sintering at 450 °C. The photoanodes were then immersed into N719 dye solution for sensitization. The sensitized photoanode and the CE, which were separated by a hot-melt Surlyn film and liquid electrolyte, were then clipped tightly to form a solar cell. The plastic TiO2 electrode was prepared using the electrophoretic deposition technique and sensitized with D149 dye. The sensitized plastic TiO2 electrodes were assembled with the corresponding flexible counter electrodes to fabricate flexible devices.

The CV measurement was carried out on a CHI660E potentiostat. The J–V curves of the DSCs were plotted under AM 1.5 G illumination (100 mW cm−2) using a Keithley 2420 digital source meter. EIS spectra were recorded in the frequency range from 0.1 to 105 Hz and were fitted using the ZView software. More details of device fabrication and characterization are given in ESI.

During the synthesis process of vertical MoS2 nanosheets, CS2 was thermally decomposed to release sulfur at the reaction temperature. Moreover, MoO3 was sublimated to produce vapor. The vapor of MoO3 and sulfur reacted with each other and vertical MoS2 nanosheets were then grown on the substrate under appropriate conditions. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the products obtained in a typical growth run are presented in Fig. 1. In the marginal area of the substrate, patches of MoS2 lying on the substrate were observed (shown in Fig. 1a). In the central area of the substrate, vertically grown ultrathin nanosheets were obtained, as shown in Fig. 1d and e. In the intermediate annular area between the marginal and central region, ridge-like structures, as shown in Fig. 1b, were observed. The ridge-like structure indicated the mechanism of the growth of vertical MoS2 nanosheets. The ridge-like structures were assumed to result from the impingement of adjacent MoS2 patches and the subsequent upturning growth of the edges the patches. Such ridge-like structures are believed to initiate the growth of vertical MoS2 nanosheets (Scheme S1b). Adjacent to the region where the ridge-like structures were observed, sparse vertical nanosheets were observed when the field of view moves towards the center of the substrate (Fig. 1c). In the central zone of the substrate, densely packed vertical nanosheets were observed, as shown in Fig. 1d and e. A cross-sectional SEM image presented in Fig. 1f shows that vertical nanosheets with a height of about 1.5 μm develop from the underlying MoS2 layers. It is noteworthy that the morphology shown in Fig. 1a and b was only observed in a rather limited marginal region with a width of about 0.1 mm, while the densely packed vertical nanosheets grew in an area up to 20 × 10 mm2. The diameter of the quartz tube used to grow MoS2 nanosheets in this study is 1 inch. It is highly possible that vertical nanosheets can be grown homogenously in a broader area when a larger furnace and quartz tube are adopted.

CS2 imported into the growth chamber can readily decompose and release sulfur at the reaction temperature, as described in eqn (1).
CS2 (g) → CS2−x (g) + xS (g)
(1)
Then, the released sulfur may react with MoO3 according to eqn (2) when sufficient sulfur is available.
2MoO3 (s/g) + 7S (g) → 2MoS2 + 3SO2 (g)
(2)
When the supply of sulfur is deficient, MoO3 may react with sulfur as described in eqn (3).
2MoO3 (s/g) + S (g) → 2MoO2 + SO2 (g)
(3)
The control on the concentration of sulfur and MoO3 vapor in the growth chamber is of vital importance to grow the nanostructures of MoS2. If CS2 was imported into the growth chamber before or during the heating process, no or very less vapor of MoO3 would be available to react with sulfur. Instead, sulfur reacts with MoO3 powder directly, and MoS2 particles are observed in the boat, while no products are deposited on the substrate. To deposit MoS2 nanostructures on the substrate, MoO3 has to be heated up to 690–750 °C and held at this temperature for a while before importing CS2 into the chamber. The optimized holding time for the growth of vertical MoS2 nanosheets varies from 3 to 12 minutes depending on the temperature. The higher the temperature, the less time is needed to reach the desired concentration of MoO3 vapor. In these experiments, the appearance of pale yellow MoO3 deposited on the upper inner surface of the downstream quartz tube was considered as an indicator for the appropriate concentration of MoO3 vapor. When MoO3 was held at the reaction temperature for a prolonged time, too much MoO3 vapor was generated, and the reaction described in eqn (3) took place, resulting in the appearance of violet MoO2 in the product. As shown in Fig. S1a, MoO2 nanoplates were observed in the central zone of the substrate, where the concentration of MoO3 vapor should be the highest. Due to the decreased concentration of MoO3 vapor, a mixture of MoO2 nanoplates and vertical MoS2 nanosheets was observed in the intermediate zone (Fig. S1b), while vertical MoS2 nanosheets dominated the marginal region of the substrate (Fig. S1c). On the contrary, when the holding time was too short, insufficient MoO3 vapor was available to grow the vertical MoS2 nanosheets, and only triangle or hexagonal MoS2 nanosheets lying on the substrate were observed. Interestingly, in contrast with the holding time, the reaction time appeared to have little effect on the morphology and dimension of MoS2 nanosheets, as evidenced by the fact that the reaction time ranging from 5 to 60 minutes resulted in nearly identical products. The vertical MoS2 nanosheets can also be deposited on other substrates. SEM images of the products grown on graphite foil are shown in Fig. S2.
The vertical nanosheets were also characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). A bright field image is shown in Fig. 2a. The nanosheets are very transparent under the illumination of an electron beam, even much more transparent than the supporting carbon film of the TEM grid, indicating the ultrathin nature of the nanosheets under investigation. Selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern (Fig. 2b) confirms that the nanosheets are well crystallized MoS2 with the c axis being normal to the sheet. The reflection spots are considerably weak, which is consistent with the fact that the nanosheets are very thin. A typical high resolution TEM (HRTEM) image of the MoS2 nanosheet is presented in Fig. 2c. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) characterization was performed to measure the thickness of the nanosheets. The thickness of the nanosheet shown in Fig. 2d was determined to be 0.84 nm according to the cross-sectional profile. Considering that the thickness of the MoS2 monolayer is 0.65 nm, the nanosheet shown in Fig. 2d was believed to be a monolayer of MoS2. Thickness measurements were made on several nanosheets and most of them showed a thickness of less than 1 nm.
The vertical MoS2 nanosheets grown on a conductive graphite foil were applied as CEs for DSCs to catalyze the reduction of triiodide. The digital image of the as-prepared MoS2/graphite foil is shown in Fig. S3. The MoS2/graphite electrode was studied with cyclic voltammetry (CV). The CV measurements were conducted in an acetonitrile solution containing I2, LiI and LiClO4 at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. For comparison, CV curves of the Pt electrode and blank graphite foil were also measured under the same conditions. As shown in Fig. 3a, similar CV curves with one pair of oxidation/reduction peaks were observed for both Pt and MoS2/graphite electrode, whereas no typical peaks were obtained for the blank graphite foil electrode within the scanning range. The oxidation/reduction peaks can be assigned to the reaction in eqn (4) as follows:
I3− + 2e− → 3I−
(4)
The redox current density of triiodide in the graphite foil electrode is very low, indicating poor electrocatalytic activity on the triiodide reduction. The current density increased when vertical MoS2 nanosheets were grown on the graphite foil. The similar high cathodic and anodic peaks were observed for MoS2/graphite and Pt electrodes, suggesting that the MoS2/graphite electrode was comparable to Pt CE in catalyzing the reduction of triiodide. The enhanced electrocatalytic activity of MoS2/graphite CE in comparison with blank graphite foil can be attributed not only to the superior electrocatalytic activity of MoS2, but also to the considerable surface area of vertical MoS2 nanosheets grown on the graphite foil. These results demonstrated that the vertical MoS2 nanosheets can be applied as alternative CE material for Pt for DSCs.
The electrodes mentioned above were further assembled with N719-sensitized TiO2 photoanodes to form devices. The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves of devices with three different CEs were plotted under the illumination of AM 1.5 G 100 mW cm−2 and presented in Fig. 3b. The corresponding photovoltaic parameters for each type of device are summarized in Table 1. The reference DSC device with Pt CE presented an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.735 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 15.84 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 0.65 with an overall power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 7.57%. The DSC containing MoS2/graphite CE exhibited a Jsc of 15.64 mA cm−2, a FF of 0.67 and a Voc of 0.685 V, leading to a PCE of 7.18%. However, the device using a blank graphite foil as CE showed a Voc of 0.445 V, a Jsc of 11.62 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.63, resulting in a PCE of 3.26%. The performance of the device applying the MoS2/graphite CE is comparable to that of the reference cell with a conventional Pt CE and much superior to that of the device using the blank graphite foil as CE.
Counter electrode

V
oc/V

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF
PCE/%

R
ct1/Ω

a 
V
oc: Open-circuit photovoltage.
b 
J
sc: Short-circuit photocurrent density.
c FF: Fill factor.
d PCE: Power conversion efficiency.
e 
R
ct1: Charge-transfer resistance.

Graphite
0.445
11.62
0.63
3.26
15.70
MoS2/graphite
0.685
15.64
0.67
7.18
8.05
Pt
0.735
15.84
0.65
7.57
6.35
Electrochemical impedance spectrum (EIS) was measured for each device under light illumination. The corresponding Nyquist plots are shown in Fig. 3c, and the equivalent circuit used to fit the data is presented in Scheme S2. In general, the EIS of a DSC presents three characteristic semicircles in the scanning frequency range between 100 kHz and 0.1 Hz. The high-frequency semicircle is attributed to the charge-transfer resistance at the interface of the counter electrode and the liquid electrolyte (RCT1). The middle frequency semicircle is related to charge transfer and recombination at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interfaces (RCT2). The low-frequency semicircle is ascribed to the Nernst diffusion of redox couple within the electrolyte (ZN). In addition, the value of RS, which is defined as the substrate resistance, is directly related to the ohmic resistance of the electrolyte and sheet resistance of substrate used in the study. Only two arcs are observed for DSCs with Pt and MoS2 CE, as shown in Fig. 3c. The third arc for Nernst diffusion is not obvious and is overlapped by RCT2. This is mainly due to the low viscosity of the liquid electrolyte used in the study. In the case of blank graphite CE, three arcs are observed in the plot, and the appearance of ZN can be ascribed to the diffusion of the redox couple in the graphite. The corresponding fitted values of RCT1 are also summarized in Table 1 with values of RS and RCT2 listed in Table S1. The device with Pt CE showed the smallest RCT1 value (6.35 Ω). The value of RCT1 decreased from 15.70 to 8.05 Ω with the incorporation of MoS2 on the graphite foil. Because RCT1 is considered as the charge-transfer resistance at the interface of the counter electrode and the liquid electrolyte, it implies that the catalytic performance was enhanced by introducing MoS2 nanosheets on the graphite foil. Results of CV, photovoltaic performance and EIS measurements consistently demonstrated that MoS2/graphite was comparable with Pt in catalyzing the reduction of triiodide and could be applied as efficient CE for DSSCs; MoS2 nanosheets should play a key role in catalyzing the reduction of triiodide because the blank graphite foil presented a much inferior performance.
MoS2/graphite CEs, which have demonstrated superior catalytic performance in rigid devices, can also be applied in flexible DSCs due to the flexibility of the graphite foil. The flexible MoS2/graphite CE was assembled with a plastic D149-sensitized P25 TiO2 photoanode to fabricate a flexible DSSC. The flexible device with the MoS2/graphite CE presented a PCE of 4.32% with a Voc of 0.648 V, a Jsc of 10.58 mA cm−2 and FF of 0.63. For comparison, a flexible device with a sputtered Pt ITO/PEN CE was also assembled and analysed. The corresponding photovoltaic parameters are 0.684 V (Voc), 10.60 mA cm−2 (Jsc), 0.67 (FF), and 4.86% (PCE). J–V curves of both flexible devices are shown in Fig. 3d. The comparable photovoltaic performance of both flexible devices indicated that the MoS2/graphite CE was a promising alternative for the plastic sputtered Pt ITO/PEN CE to be applied in flexible DSCs.

In summary, vertical ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets were grown on diverse substrates via a facile CVD method. The vertical growth of two dimensional MoS2 nanosheets was thought to be initiated by impingement between the adjacent MoS2 patches lying on the substrate. The product of CVD growth sensitively depends on the concentration of sulfur and MoO3 vapor in the chamber. In this study, CS2 was applied as a source of sulfur in the CVD growth of MoS2 nanostructures for the first time, which greatly facilitated the preparation by enabling the convenient control on the initiation, termination and amount of sulfur supply. The vertical nanosheets are very thin, and at least some of them are monolayers of MoS2. Vertical MoS2 nanosheets grown on a bendable graphite foil were applied as CEs for both rigid and flexible DSCs, which showed superior catalytic performance for the reduction of triiodide. PCEs achieved by the rigid and flexible DSSCs applying MoS2/graphite CE are 7.18% and 4.32%, respectively, comparable with 7.57% and 4.86%, which were obtained on regular rigid and flexible devices with Pt CEs, respectively.


This work was financially supported by the Major State Basic Research Development Program of China (973 Program) (grant no. 2011CB932702) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 21071016, 21103032 and 51272049).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details of device fabrication and characterization, SEM images and schematic illustrations, equivalent circuit and fitted parameters of EIS. See DOI: 10.1039/c5nr00788g
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015