 DOI: 10.1039/C9CP06291B
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 3691-3701


Chuanqing
Li
,

Kai
Jiang
,

Jinchun
Jiang
,

Zhigao
Hu
*,

Aiyun
Liu
,

Gujin
Hu
,

Wangzhou
Shi
 and 

Junhao
Chu


Department of Physics, Shanghai Normal University, Shanghai 200234, China

Key Laboratory of Polar Materials and Devices (MOE) and Technical Center for Multifunctional Magneto-Optical Spectroscopy (Shanghai), Department of Electronic Engineering, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China. E-mail: zghu@ee.ecnu.edu.cn; Fax: +86-21-54345119; Tel: +86-21-54345150

Received
21st November 2019
, Accepted 9th January 2020
First published on 13th January 2020
Herein, we firstly present the (K,Bi)(Nb,Yb)O3 inorganic ferroelectric photovoltaic (FPV) film, in which a nearly ideal bandgap of ∼1.45 eV in the center of the solar spectrum and the co-existence of oxygen vacancies as well as ferroelectric polarization were confirmed. Furthermore, a novel cell structure is successfully fabricated by combining charge-transporting TiO2 nanoparticles, the perovskite sensitizer and a light-absorbing oxide hole p-type NiO conductor to realize a 1 V open circuit voltage, which can be increased to 1.56 V by adjusting the test bias near the coercive voltage. Additionally, under simulated standard AM 1.5G illumination, a fill factor of 86% and a power conversion efficiency of 0.85% are achieved via oxygen vacancy electromigration and polarization switching modulation. It is shown that the obtained power conversion efficiency is one to three orders of magnitude higher than those of pure BiFeO3 and Pb(Zr,Ti)O3. The enhanced PV effects are well elucidated using the transformation from a Schottky-like barrier to Ohmic contacts caused by polarization switching and oxygen vacancies. Building upon the above studies, deep insights into the bandgap tunability and PV effects in ferroelectric films with high oxygen vacancy concentration are provided and will facilitate a new versatile route for exploring high PV performance based on inorganic ferroelectric films.

Inorganic ferroelectric (FE) perovskite solar converters based on the KNbO3-based light-absorber family have triggered intense attention because of their many unique advantages of low cost, stability, bandgap (Eg) tunability, reversibly switchable photocurrent and above-bandgap open circuit voltages. One prominent feature of inorganic FE films is that, under illumination, the depolarization field promotes the desirable separation of photon-generated carriers. Interestingly, the direction of the short-circuit PV current is reversibly switchable under applied electric voltage pulses and is always opposite to the diode forward direction. This, together with their ultraviolet-visible-infrared spectral absorption, above-bandgap open circuit voltages, charge recombination tuning, etc., has aroused a new upsurge in research into the potential of inorganic FE solar cells to improve efficiencies beyond the maximum value of the conventional p–n junction cells. Previously reported inorganic FE materials, i.e. BiFeO3 (BFO), Pb(Zr,Ti)O3 (PZT) and BaTiO3 (BTO) have bandgaps of ∼2.7 eV, ∼3.6 eV, and ∼3.5 eV, respectively, which exceed the value of 1.5 eV in the center of the solar spectrum, and this makes them unsuitable for solar cells due to their poor sunlight absorption capabilities. It is known that two different transition metal–oxygen bonds at the B sites and a reduction in the electronegativity difference substantially lower the Eg of oxide materials. Thus, tailoring two different metal cations at the perovskite B sites has become a promising and versatile route to developing solar energy converters with higher power conversion efficiency (PCE). Pascual-Gonzalez and co-workers found a narrowing from 3.2 to 2.2 eV for 95%KNbO3–5%BiYbO3 ceramics compared to pure KNbO3 (KN). At present, the lowest known Eg for an inorganic FE oxide is about 1.39 eV, obtained for (KNbO3)1−x(BaNi1/2Nb1/2O3−δ)x (x = 0.1) solid solutions. Recent reports have demonstrated that this material can absorb three to six times more solar energy than the current inorganic FE oxides, and has a higher photocurrent density than those of previously reported FE materials. However, device-quality KNbO3-based films have proved difficult to synthesize by physical and chemical deposition methods. Therefore, the real potential of FE KNbO3-based films in PV applications needs to be further explored.

Here, we realize a new strategy to develop light absorption layers for promoting efficient inorganic FE solar cells by exploiting the inherent properties of (K,Bi)(Nb,Yb)O3 (KNBY) films. This strategy uses deionized water as the growth medium, which forms nucleation sites and thus leads to effective crystallization of KNBY films without affecting the ferroelectric properties. KNBY crystallizes with two different cationic species in the perovskite A and B sites, the ferroelectricity can be driven by the Bi3+ and Nb5+ ions, and Eg can be tuned by introduction of the rare-earth Yb3+. The simultaneous occurrence of the above two mechanisms indicates the successful fabrication of semiconducting inorganic FE KNBY films with optimal ferroelectricity and optical absorption for solar energy conversion applications. Moreover, we systematically explored the FPV and rectification effects based on inorganic KNBY as an oxide FE absorber in mesoporous-type solar cells. Subsequently, under standard AM 1.5G illumination, a PCE of ∼0.85% for KNBY solar cells is achieved, which is one to three orders of magnitude higher than those of pure BFO and PZT. This finding provides an alternative method for developing high efficiency ferroelectric solar cells.

Firstly, stoichiometric quantities of potassium acetate [K(CH3COO), 99%] and niobium ethoxide [Nb(CH3CH2O)5, 99.9%] were mixed in ethanol and refluxed for 24 h to form a homogeneous KNbO3 (KN) solution. Then, a mixture of ethanol and acetic acid (volume ratio 4:1) containing ytterbium nitrate pentahydrate [Yb(NO3)3·5H2O, 99.99%] and bismuth nitrate pentahydrate [Bi(NO3)3·5H2O, 99.99%] in a molar ratio of 1:1 was prepared by stirring at 70 °C for 2 h. The KNbO3–5%BiYbO3 [(K,Bi)(Nb,Yb)O3, abbreviated as KNBY] precursor was synthesized by mixing the above KNbO3 and BiYbO3 solutions. The choice of the above composition was motivated by previous work reported in ref. 4. Finally, a hydrolytic process was performed by adding a 3 M deionized water solution in methanol, in which the water:alkoxide molar ratio was 3:10. The methanol, ethanol and acetic acid solvents were dried by distillation over calcium hydride.


Fluorine-doped SnO2 glass (FTO) was cleaned sequentially in deionized water, acetone, isopropanol, and ethanol utilizing an ultrasonic instrument. A compact TiO2 (c-TiO2) layer with a thickness of about 40 nm was spin-coated onto FTO (3000 rpm, 30 s) and sintered at 450 °C for 45 min. The c-TiO2 precursor solution was prepared using titanium isopropoxide and HCl as raw materials. When it had cooled to room temperature, a diluted TiO2 paste (Dyesol 30NR-D) with a mass ratio of TiO2:ethanol = 1:1.5 was spin-coated on the c-TiO2 layer at 2000 rpm for 30 s and sintered at 500 °C for 1 h, leading to the formation of a mesoporous TiO2 (m-TiO2) layer. The KNBY solution was spin-coated on the m-TiO2 layer at 2500 rpm for 30 s. The wet film was dried by rapid thermal annealing at 320 °C for 8 min. The above process was repeated twelve times. Then, the films were sintered at 560 °C for 30 min. After recrystallization treatment, a NiO solution was spin-coated on the KNBY layer three times, and pre-annealed at 300 °C for 5 min. The NiO precursor with 0.1 M concentration was prepared by dissolving nickel(II) acetate tetrahydrate [Ni(CH3COO)2·4H2O, 98%] and monoethanolamine in ethanol. After cooling to room temperature, the samples were sintered at 500 °C for 30 min. Finally, 50 nm thick Au electrodes were sputtered on top of the NiO layer to ensure a square cell area of 0.01 cm2.


The crystal structures of the KNBY films were examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) with Cu Kα radiation (D/MAX-2550 V, Rigaku Co.). Raman scattering analysis was carried out with a micro-Raman spectrometer with a spectral resolution of 0.65 cm−1 (Jobin-Yvon LabRAM HR Evolution). A Nd:YAG laser with a wavelength of 532 nm was used as the excitation source. Absorption spectra were obtained using an ultraviolet-visible-near infrared (UV-vis-NIR) spectrophotometer (Cary500, USA Varian) equipped with an integration sphere. Piezoelectric force microscopy (PFM) was carried out using a scanning probe station (Bruker Dimension Icon, USA). Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy characterization was performed using monochromatized He I radiation at 21.22 eV (UPS, AXIS Ultra DLD). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy of the devices were carried out using a scanning electron microscope (JEOL JSM-7800F). The power output was analyzed utilizing simulated standard AM 1.5G illumination (Sol 3A solar simulator, Newport Orial). The current density–voltage curves for the KNBY solar cells were recorded using a Keithley 2400 sourcemeter.


Because of the different hydrolysis rates of the individual metal compound components, the synthesis of multicomponent crystalline films by precipitation and phase separation using the chemical solution method (CSD) is very difficult. However, the co-existence of ethoxide and methoxide in precursors and the process of hydrolysis could effectively solve the above problem. It has been demonstrated that bonding of the metals to oxygen unifies the hydrolysis rates.Fig. 1a provides the reaction process parameters, such as deionized water and hydrolysis temperature (0 °C). Note that a high-density OH− ion layer adhered on the substrate is favourable to the formation of a large number of nanoparticles, which act as nucleating sites for nanometre-sized KNBY crystals, as shown in Fig. 1b. The nanoparticles are like seeds and subsequently grow by progressive incorporation of KNBY precursor, forming a three-dimensional KNBY film of stacked nanoscale particles (Fig. 1c). The crystallization behavior of the KNBY films was characterized by XRD and Raman spectroscopy, as shown in Fig. 1d and Fig. S1 (ESI). Typical single peaks are observed for the pure KN and doped KNBY films. The single peaks for the KNBY films are more asymmetric than those of the KN films, suggesting lattice distortion due to rare-earth Yb3+ introduction. It can also be seen that the preferred (111) orientation for KNBY replaces the (110) orientation of the KN sample. The lattice parameters for KN and KNBY films in the orthorhombic (Amm2) phase are presented in Table 1. The probable chemical states of the as-grown KNBY films were confirmed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), as can be seen from Fig. S2 (ESI). From the ratios of the peak intensities in the XPS spectra of the KNBY films, as shown in the inset of Fig. 1e, we estimated that oxygen vacancies (VO) are also present in the films at a level of more than 35%, which further confirmed that the Nb-containing ferroelectric materials have a high tolerance for oxygen vacancies. Finally, the corresponding high resolution TEM images (Fig. 1e and f) show that the d-spacings are about 0.318 and 0.403 nm. These are in accordance with the (111) and (110) planes of the KNBY films. The perfect lattice fringe shows the high quality of the crystal films.


a (Å)

b (Å)

c (Å)
KN
5.7114
5.7091
4.0082
KNBY
5.6989
5.7130
4.0154


Fig. 2a and b show the structural diagrams of planar- and mesoporous-type KNBY solar cells, which are denoted as Au/p-type NiO/KNBY/c-TiO2/FTO and Au/p-type NiO/KNBY/m-TiO2/c-TiO2/FTO, respectively. TiO2 is one of the most successful electron-transport materials (ETMs). The electron mobility of TiO2 is ca. 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, and it is commonly used in dye-sensitized solar cells and FE perovskite solar cells due to its high compatibility with oxide hole-transporting layers. Herein, the use of the c-TiO2 layer enabled electron-transport. The m-TiO2 layer ensured efficient crystallization of the perovskite and electron injection because it could provide a large interfacial contact area. Similarly, p-type NiO possesses high oxide hole mobility, good stability, easy processability, and a suitable Fermi level for hole extraction, which makes it the best choice for transporting holes in the KNBY PV devices.

In Fig. 2c, the cross-sectional SEM image for the planar-type solar cell distinctly exhibits sequentially stacked growth of FTO (∼360 nm), c-TiO2 (∼40 nm), KNBY (∼1 μm), and NiO (∼60 nm), accompanied by clear interfaces between the different layers. Nevertheless, the cross-sectional SEM image of mesoporous-type KNBY solar cells demonstrates that a mesoporous layer with a thickness of about 1.9 μm was grown on top of the c-TiO2 film, as shown in Fig. 2d. A typical EDX spectrum is depicted in Fig. S3 (ESI), in which the Sn Lα, Ti Kα, Bi Mα, Ni Kα, and Au Mα peaks are easily identified. For these two devices, the distribution of each element can also be investigated using the elementary EDX line scans, as shown in Fig. 2e and f. For the planar-type device, the well defined interfaces are evidenced by the sharp changes in Sn Lα, Ti Kα, Bi Mα, Ni Kα, and Au Mα profiles at the boundaries. In contrast, for the mesoporous-type device, the profiles of Bi Mα and Ni Kα show a similar line shape to that of Ti Kα. Moreover, this result can also be obtained from the EDX mapping (Fig. 2g). That is to say, the KNBY and p-type NiO precursors can uniformly enter the pores of the m-TiO2 nanoparticles. Note that only the CSD method is currently able to achieve such a uniform mesoporous nanocomposite.

The UV-vis-NIR absorption spectrum of the KNBY film is shown in Fig. 3a. It is found that the onset edge of absorption is close to ∼1 eV. The optical bandgap of the KNBY films is evaluated from the absorption spectrum using the Tauc plot method. The corresponding equation can be defined as (αE)1/n ∝ A(E − Eg). Here α, E, and A represent the absorption coefficient, photon energy (hν), and photon-energy-dependent constant, respectively. For direct bandgap transitions, the power-law exponent n = 1/2, and for an indirect allowed transition, n = 2. According to the fitting of the Tauc model, as shown in Fig. 3b, the absorption data of the two kinds of transition are well described at around Eg. For a direct allowed transition (the left panel of Fig. 3b, corresponding to I), the Eg value is extracted by extrapolating (αE)2 to 0. Similarly, for an indirect bandgap (the right panel of Fig. 3b, corresponding to II), the Eg value is obtained by extrapolating (αE)1/2 to 0. The Eg discrepancy between the two distinct plots is about 0.3. Currently, there is no information about the transition nature of KNBY films. Considering the uncertainty constraints deduced for the two transition types, it is reasonable to assign the value of Eg as the following, with an uncertainty value of ±0.15 eV (= 0.3/2 eV): Eg = 1.45 ± 0.15 (eV). Thus, KNBY possesses a suitable bandgap for enhancement of photocurrent generation. The obvious NIR absorption is attributed to oxygen vacancies derived from Yb3+ doping in the perovskite B site, which is similar to Pb(Ti1−xNix)O3−x solid solutions.

To further demonstrate the ferroelectric properties of the KNBY absorption layers, piezoelectric force microscopy (PFM) was carried out. Fig. 3c and d show the PFM topography and phase images, which reveal a strong contrast between bright and dark areas, clearly suggesting the presence of upward and downward oriented domains, respectively. This finding reveals the presence of spontaneous polarization across the as-grown KNBY thin films with a thickness of ∼300 nm. In order to investigate the switching capability, similar to the treatment of 0.275BaTiO3–0.725BiFeO3, the KNBY film was polarized at selected locations on the sample surface by applying a DC tip bias during the scanning process. In Fig. 3e and f, it is apparent that a sharp 180° change in the PFM phase coupled with a dip in the PFM amplitude occurs at a coercive voltage (VC) with a magnitude of ±7.5 V. This suggests that the coercive field for the KNBY film is 250 kV cm−1. This demonstrates that the KNBY film has promising ferroelectric properties. The highly polarizable KNBY film and the reversibility of the ferroelectric domains are beneficial for enhancing PV performance through a large external applied field, which can be confirmed by Fig. S4 (ESI).
Building upon the PFM studies, the asymmetric switchable PV response was described in terms of the following energy bands. Here, the characteristic energy levels of KNBY were first extracted from the ultraviolet photoelectron spectra (UPS), including the work function ϕ (or the Fermi level, Ef), the conduction-band minimum (EC), and the valence-band maximum (EV), as shown in Fig. S5 (ESI). The work function was estimated using the relation ϕ = 21.22 eV (He I) − Ecutoff. The ϕ for KNBY, TiO2 and p-type NiO are 4.8 eV, 4.6 eV and 5.0 eV, respectively. Additionally, based on the above information, an energy level diagram for each layer in the KNBY solar cell was constructed. The electron affinities of TiO2 and p-type NiO were taken as 4.3 and 1.8 eV, respectively. The work functions of FTO and Au are 4.4 and 5.2 eV, respectively. As shown in the energy level diagram (Fig. 3g), the band edge positions of the p-type NiO, KNBY, and TiO2 are well matched for the effective transport of photocarriers.

In order to investigate the device characteristics, the PV performances of the planar- and mesoporous-type solar cells are characterized and compared in Fig. 4a–d. Dark J–V curves were examined to obtain information about the electronic nature of the two contacts relevant to the p-type NiO/KNBY/c-TiO2 and p-type NiO/KNBY/m-TiO2 heterojunction cells. Weak current rectification was observed in the dark J–V curves. Under simulated AM 1.5 irradiation, the p-type NiO/KNBY/m-TiO2 device shows a better PV effect than the p-type NiO/m-TiO2 and p-type NiO/KNBY/c-TiO2 heterojunctions. That is to say, (i) photocarriers can also be produced in the m-TiO2 and p-type NiO layers due to the UV component of solar radiation, but the rectification behavior should be negligible; (ii) for the planar-type p-type NiO/KNBY/c-TiO2 heterojunction, only the photocarriers near the KNBY/TiO2 and KNBY/p-type NiO interfaces can be collected by the two terminal electrodes, and (iii) for the mesostructured p-type NiO/KNBY/m-TiO2 heterojunction, the photon-generated electron–hole (e–h) pairs in the KNBY absorbers can be effectively separated and injected into m-TiO2 and p-type NiO, respectively, and finally collected by the two terminal electrodes.Fig. 4c and d show the J–V curves measured under reverse scan from +1.2 V to −0.3 V, +3 V to −0.3 V and +9 V to −0.3 V. It is clear that, on increasing the scan voltage from +1.2 V to +3 V, the short-circuit current density (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), power conversion efficiency (PCE), and fill factor (FF) increase from 0.08 mA cm−2 to 0.2 mA cm−2, 1.02 V to 1.52 V, 0.056% to 0.199%, and 66% to 77%, respectively. If the applied voltage continues to increase, the PV performance of the cells can be further enhanced. To avoid device breakdown and photocurrent reversal, the maximum scanning voltage (Vm) was carefully controlled below 9 V, which is near VC. At an applied voltage near VC, a boost in JSC ≈ 0.63 mA cm−2 and PCE ≈ 0.85% was observed due to the migration of VO and ferroelectric polarization, both of which induce additional band bending and better charge separation. Compared with recent reports for KNbO3–AFeO3 (A = Bi3+ or La3+) ceramics with current and voltage of 0.115 mA and 0.075 V for KNbO3–BiFeO3 and 0.19 mA and 0.035 V for KNbO3–LaFeO3, the KNBY solar cells have the largest values for current and voltage among KNbO3-based materials, which can be recognized as a new breakthrough in inorganic FE perovskite solar cells. We summarized the PV parameters of the inorganic FE materials with the best FPV properties in Table 2. Moreover, the KNBY mesostructured solar cells were placed in an air atmosphere for a period of time to measure their stability, as shown in Fig. S6 (ESI). Under a reverse scan from +8 V to −0.3 V, the value of PCE for the KNBY device only slightly decreased after 30 days, and even after 60 days, more than 78% of its PCE was maintained, proving the superior stability of the lead-free ferroelectric solar cells.

Device architecture

V
OC (V)

J
SC (μA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

FTO/TiO

2

/KNBY/p-type NiO/Au


1.56


630


86


0.85

This work
FTO/BFO/ITO
0.63
130
∼33
0.0273
ITO/BFO/Pt
−0.1
−2.54
−25
0.0125
Pt/BFO/Pt
16
120
−25
0.168
FTO/TiO2/BFO/p-type NiO/Au
0.67
510
55
0.19
FTO/BFO/ZnO NRs/PEDOT:PSS/AZO
0.52
1340
−25
0.17
Graphene/BFO/Pt
0.2
2800
−25
0.14
SRO/BFO/ITO
0.85
1300
−33.3
−0.128
ITO/NiO/BFO/ZnO/Al
0.41
570
41.8
0.098
NSTO/BFO/Au
0.04
6000
−36
−0.03
NSTO/BFCO/ITO
0.84
20600
47
8.1
NSTO/BFCO/ITO
0.74
990
13
6.5
Si(001)/MgO/NSTO/SRO/BFCO/ITO
0.52
13800
38
2.65
Ag/KBiFe2O5/Ag
9.1
15
−25
0.853
Ag/a-Si/PZT/ITO
1.28
2560
34
1.25
Ag/PZT/ITO
1.62
50
37
0.011
ITO/h-LuMnO3/Pt
−0.71
520
29.8
0.11
Pt/KNBF/Pt
0.075
0.115
—
—
Pt/KNLF/Pt
0.035
0.19
—
—
Additionally, under illumination, the hopping characteristics of the photocurrent curves for planar and mesostructured KNBY solar cells are extracted in the voltage scanning range from +1.2 V to −0.3 V (Fig. 4b and c). This hopping phenomenon in the photocurrent curves can be attributed to the unstable electromigration of VO caused by recombination with hopping electrons and diffusion of VO at low scanning voltage. These hopping characteristics could be mitigated by using high scanning voltage with the mesostructured PV device, as shown in Fig. 4d. As mentioned above, to ensure that the sample is not broken down, the maximum scanning voltage should be controlled near the VC. Fortunately, the KNBY films have a large VC of 7.5 V. To clearly explain the above conclusion, a schematic of the reduction in indirect recombination induced by the increased scanning voltage is presented in Fig. 5: (i) electron recombination inside the perovskite film severely reduces the electron extraction efficiency at the electrode (Fig. 5a), (ii) the large applied voltage on the perovskite film can effectively suppress these electron traps and markedly reduce the interior charge recombination (Fig. 5b and c), (iii) a relatively large number of electrons are generated due to the accumulation of VO on the KNBY side of the KNBY/m-TiO2 interface with high applied voltage, and (iv) these electrons can be effectively transported to the FTO electrode because of the short traveling distance and thus the low probability of e–h recombination. Therefore, the corresponding large depolarization field promotes the desirable separation of photon-generated carriers, thus boosting the JSC and FF of the ferroelectric PV device.

Because oxygen vacancies are present in the KNBY ferroelectric layer, it is reasonable to regard KNBY films as n-type semiconducters. Previous reports have proved that Bi0.9Sr0.1FeO3−δ polycrystalline films with high VO concentration, reversibly switchable behaviour and PV effects can be observed due to the electromigration of VO under an electric field much lower than its coercive field. The structures formed by VO are supposed to pin the domain wall. Thus, at low scan voltage, the reversibly switchable PV effects are not only influenced by the polarization field in the KNBY films. As shown in Fig. 6a and Fig. S7 (ESI), upon increasing the initial bias voltage of forward (reverse) scans from −1.2 V (+1.2 V) to −9 V (+9 V), the J–V curves continue moving upwards. Moreover, a linear forward scan from −1.2 V to +1.2 V has a similar performance to the reverse scan from +1.2 V to −1.2 V. Compared with the J–V curves of the forward scans from −5 V to +5 V and −9 V to +9 V, the J–V curves for the reverse scans from +5 V to −5 V and +9 V to −9 V for the KNBY devices show significant hysteretic behavior. As an example, for the forward scan from −5 V to +5 V, the photocurrent signal has an evident decreasing tendency. However, for the reverse scan from +5 V to −5 V, the photocurrent signal first increases and then decreases, which leads to a higher FF than that of the forward scan (Fig. 6b). Additionally, during the reverse scan, besides JSC, a boost in VOC and PCE can be observed (Fig. 6c–e). These different characteristics of PV effects in the KNBY devices and the hopping nature of the J–V curves in the various reverse scanning processes can be explained well by a transformation of the Schottky barrier to Ohmic contacts caused by polarization switching and VO electromigration. Detailed physical mechanisms will be discussed in the following.



Fig. 7a shows that an n+–n and a p–n junction are formed at the TiO2/KNBY and p-type NiO/KNBY interfaces, respectively, in KNBY solar cells. On the basis of Fig. 3g, one can predict an Ohmic contact at the m-TiO2 and KNBY interface accompanied by downward band bending, and a Schottky contact at the p-type NiO and KNBY interface with upward band bending since ϕTiO2 (4.6 eV) < ϕKNBY (4.8 eV) < ϕNiO (5.0 eV). The energy band diagram for the p-type NiO/KNBY/m-TiO2 heterojunction before applying the scanning voltage is described in Fig. 7a (lower panel). The downward band bending on the KNBY side of the TiO2/KNBY interface induces the establishment of an Ohmic-type contact featuring an electron-rich antibarrier region. In contrast, the upward band bending on the ferroelectric KNBY side of the p-type NiO/KNBY contact is accompanied by the appearance of an electron depletion region, conforming to a resistive Schottky-type contact. Note that the oxygen vacancies are distributed homogeneously inside the KNBY grains. Under this condition, only the electron transport layers (ETLs) and hole transport materials (HTMs) play a key role in the modulation of the KNBY energy bands at the interface regions.

To explore the importance of the polarization and electromigration of VO, various scanning processes, including different directions and ranges of bias voltage, were applied during the J–V measurement, as shown in Fig. 7b and c. Under illumination, the bias voltage was applied to the top Au electrode, and the bottom FTO electrode was grounded. The maximum value of the applied bias voltage during the voltage scan is close to that of VC, and can be defined as Vm. Scans from −Vm to +Vm and +Vm to −Vm are recorded as forward and reverse scans, respectively. Based on the above conditions, we reveal that the modulated interface band structure derives from the total built-in electric field induced by dp and VO in the KNBY layer. Under forward scanning, the dipoles in the KNBY ferroelectric are aligned with negative ferroelectric charges at the KNBY/TiO2 interface, and an equal quantity of positive ferroelectric charges are located at the KNBY/p-type NiO interface. Moreover, it has been reported that the high concentration of VO at the interface can reduce the barrier height of the n-type KNBY films. Hence, the directions of dp and VO are opposite to the direction of the intrinsic field (bi1 + bi2). This results in a remarkable reduction in the barrier height, and even induces a transformation from a resistive Schottky-type contact at the KNBY/p-type NiO junction to an Ohmic-type contact. In this case, which involves positive charges and VO at the KNBY/p-type NiO interface, and negative charges at the TiO2/KNBY interface, the depletion regions in the KNBY layer would become narrower at both sides and vanish even when the sum of dp and VO is large enough to offset bi1 + bi2. Subsequently, large Vm makes the original widths of the depletion regions of Wbi1 − Wp1 and Wbi2 − Wp2 (only ferroelectric polarization exists in KNBY films) become Wp1 + WVO1 − Wbi1 and Wp2 + WVO2 − Wbi2 (high VO concentration and ferroelectric polarization coexist in KNBY films), respectively. The inverted net built-in field, dp + VO − bi1 − bi2, can drive the photon-generated electrons to the p-type NiO side and holes to the TiO2 side. Therefore, only high-energy photocarriers overcome such a high barrier and can be collected by the electrodes.
Under the reverse scan, on the contrary, the negative ferroelectric charges in KNBY at the KNBY/p-type NiO interface and the positive ferroelectric charges in KNBY at the KNBY/TiO2 interface result in dp and VO being in the same direction as bi. This not only enhances the degree of band bending but also promotes the expansion of depletion regions in the KNBY layer on both sides. The updated widths of the depletion regions become Wbi1 + Wp1 + WVO1 and Wbi2 + Wp2 + WVO2 (Fig. 7c). As a result, under the reverse scan, the driving forces either send more electrons to the TiO2/KNBY side or push more holes to the KNBY/p-type NiO side. Thus, the enhanced degree of band bending in turn leads to an improved PV performance. Overall, compared to the forward scan, the reverse scan should offer a larger PV output induced by dp, VO and bi being in the same direction. The above energy band modulation mechanism is also supported by the J–V hysteretic behavior in Fig. 6a.

To quantify the effect of polarization and VO on photocurrent, the reversibly switchable photocurrent properties of FE materials must be considered. Additionally, Yi and co-workers found that there are two contributions to the photocurrent, diffusion current (diffusion) and drift current (drift). On the one hand, as shown in Fig. 7a, the total field bi causes the separation of photo-generated e–h pairs. On the other hand, electrons are effectively generated near the polarization maximum due to the low bandgap of defect states induced by VO. diffusion and drift for the original and scanned samples are shown in Fig. 7a–c. Obviously, when the KNBY samples are scanned with −Vm (small), the direction of diffusion is opposite to that of drift. Thus, the overall photocurrent should be given by diffusion − drift. However, when the samples are scanned at −Vm (large), the PV effect is reversed due to the transformation of a resistive Schottky-type contact to an Ohmic-type contact on the KNBY/p-type NiO side and an Ohmic-type contact to a resistive Schottky-type contact on the KNBY/TiO2 side, as well as the two currents having the same direction. In this case the overall photocurrent should be summed up as diffusion + drift. Thus, a large JSC can be detected under a large forward scan. Meanwhile, it is confirmed that the direction of the photocurrent can be independent of the polarization direction when the interface band structure engineering induced by VO is large enough to offset that induced by polarization. Similarly, when the KNBY samples are scanned at +Vm, because of the short travelling distance of the photo-generated electrons, a low probability of recombination of e–h and a large diffusion can be predicted. Moreover, the direction of diffusion is also the same as that of drift, originating from the barrier height at the KNBY/p-type NiO junction. This is similar to forward scanning at a large bias voltage. Whereas, under a reverse scan, the direction of dp is always the same as that of bi, which leads to a higher barrier height than for the forward scan. Therefore, the value of drift is larger than that observed for forward scanning. Thus, the values of JSC are larger than those obtained in the forward scan, even if the forward scan and the reserve scan have the same values of scan bias voltage. In terms of the above photocurrent analysis, the switchable polarization and the electromigration of VO caused by scan bias voltage are very crucial for quantifying the photocurrent in FPV devices.


In summary, a novel class of inorganic ferroelectric photovoltaics has been presented, and a nearly ideal bandgap of ∼1.45 eV and the co-existence of oxygen vacancies and ferroelectric polarization have been demonstrated in the CSD deposited rare-earth modified perovskite (K,Bi)(Nb,Yb)O3 thin films. According to the bias voltage-dependent J–V responses, the mesostructured p-type NiO/KNBY/m-TiO2 heterojunction solar cells show an optimum VOC of 1.56 V, FF of 86%, and PCE of ∼0.85%, which is one to three orders of magnitude higher than those of traditional undoped BiFeO3 and Pb(Zr,Ti)O3. Furthermore, it is found that the switchable photovoltaic effects dominate over the transformation of the Schottky-like barrier to Ohmic contacts derived from polarization switching and VO electromigration. By tuning the bandgap, controlling carrier recombination, and designing device architectures, the fascinating interface band modulated effects can be used for engineering and discovering optimal ferroelectric film-based solar cells with improved efficiency.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (Grant No. 2017YFA0303403 and 2018YFB0406500), the Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61674057 and 61227902), the Projects of Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (Grant No. 18JC1412400, 18YF1407200, and 18YF1407000), and the Program for Professor of Special Appointment (Eastern Scholar) at Shanghai Institutions of Higher Learning and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cp06291b
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2020