 DOI: 10.1039/C2CP24047E
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 5284-5288

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Wei-Yang
Chou
*,

Jay
Chang
,

Chia-Te
Yen
,

Yi-Sheng
Lin
,

Fu-Ching
Tang
,

Shyh-Jiun
Liu
,

Horng-Long
Cheng
,

Steve
Lien-Chung Hsu
 and 

Jen-Sue
Chen


Department of Photonics, Advanced Optoelectronic Technology Center, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan. E-mail: weiyang@mail.ncku.edu.tw; Fax: +88662095040; Tel: +886 6 2757575 65282

Department of Physics, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan

Department of Greenergy, National University of Tainan, Tainan 700, Taiwan

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan

Received
19th December 2011
, Accepted 20th February 2012
First published on 20th February 2012
The efficiency of small-molecule solar cells critically depends on the match of the junction of the donor and acceptor semiconductors used in these devices to create charged carriers and on the mobility of individual components to transport holes and electrons. In the present study, a 2% efficient bilayer organic solar cell consisting of a p-type semiconductor, pentacene, and an n-type semiconductor, N,N′-diheptyl-3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic diimide (PTCDI-C7), is fabricated. The morphology of PTCDI-C7 interestingly follows pentacene due to the matched surface energy of these two active layers and the easily deposited PTCDI-C7 monomers on an inclined plane of the pentacene grains. This condition results in the low trap states in the PTCDI-C7 film and at the pentacene/PTCDI-C7 interface for the enhancement of exciton dissociation and carrier transport compared with the photoactive layer comprised of pentacene and N,N-ditridecyl-3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic diimide (PTCDI-C13). The detailed exciton and carrier transport mechanisms are investigated using time-resolved photoluminescence and X-ray diffraction spectroscopy.

The need for renewable energy sources has motivated scientific research on the production of flexible, efficient, and low-cost organic solar cells (OSCs). An outstanding advantage of OSCs compared with inorganic photovoltaic devices is their use of organic materials, which enables the manufacture of flexible devices, including OSCs, organic thin-film transistors, organic complementary metal oxide semiconductors, and organic memory devices, on low-cost and light-weight flexible substrates like PET or PC films. To achieve the requirement of low-cost production processes in flexible electronics, the flexible devices need common active materials. When power, memory, logic, driving, and display devices are integrated together on a flexible substrate, all devices with the same active materials, including n- and p-type organic semiconductors, contribute to the development of an easy circuit design and the reduction of production processes and costs. However, the carrier mobility of most organic semiconductors, such as small molecules or polymers, used in photovoltaic devices is insufficient for driving and memory devices. High carrier mobility n- and p-type organic semiconductors are needed for flexible electronics. Aside from the fact that the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of photovoltaic devices is substantially limited by the carrier mobility of organic semiconductors, the match between n- and p-type active materials crucially determines the charge separations at the p–n junction. Therefore, the donor/acceptor interface formed by matching active materials can enhance exciton dissociation and carrier transport within the active layer, resulting in expectation of high-performance OSCs.

In this contribution, a high-performance OSC is demonstrated using matching active materials, pentacene and N,N′-diheptyl-3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic diimide (commonly called PTCDI-C7), which form an ideal interface to enhance exciton dissociations and carrier transport. In revealing the matching effect of active materials, PTCDI-C7 is replaced by N,N′-ditridecyl-3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic diimide (PTCDI-C13) to fabricate an OSC for comparison. The PCE of OSCs affected by the interface of the p–n junction is investigated by X-ray diffraction (XRD), atomic force microscopy (AFM), UV-visible absorption, time-resolved photoluminescence (TR-PL), and Raman spectroscopies. Interestingly, the surface morphology of PTCDI-C7 follows that of pentacene, resulting in OSC's PEC achieving about 2%.

The active materials used in OSCs include pentacene (99.9% purity) as an electron donor and PTCDI-C7 or PTCDI-C13 as an electron acceptor. Pentacene was purchased from Aldrich, whereas PTCDI-C7 and PTCDI-C13 were synthesized by us. The acid–base neutralization reaction consisting of amine (n-heptylamine or tridecylamine) and 3,4,9,10-perylene tetracarboxylicdianhydride was used to form the PTCDI-C7 and PTCDI-C13 in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidine heated to 220 °C for 1 h. After the reaction, PTCDI-C7 and PTCDI-C13 were purified three times using N,N-dimethylformamide and methanol, and then the solvent of the solution was removed in a vacuum oven at 60 °C for 3 h. The molecular structures of PTCDI-C7 and PTCDI-C13 were verified by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Both the hole transporting layer, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS, 1.7 wt% water solution, CLEVIOS™ P VP AI 4083), and the electron transporting layer, bathocuproine (BCP) were also purchased from Aldrich.


OSCs were fabricated on ITO-coated glass substrates which were cleaned using acetone and 2-propanol followed by de-ionized water in order to remove any organic contamination. The sheet resistance of the ITO anode was 15 Ω □−1 and had dimensions of 2 × 1.5 cm2. For increasing the surface energy of the ITO anode, the ITO surface was treated with oxygen plasma (Drytek Megastrip 6) at a power of 50 watts for 3 min. The hole transport layer, a 60 nm-thick PEDOT:PSS layer, was spin coated on ITO anodes from a 1.7 wt% water solution. The spin-coated PEDOT:PSS substrates were thermally baked at 150 °C for 30 min to remove the solvent completely. Then the active layers of the OSCs were constructed by thermally evaporating a bilayer heterojunction of pentacene/PTCDI-C7 or pentacene/PTCDI-C13 deposited on the PEDOT:PSS surface at a deposition rate of approximately 0.3 Å s−1. Finally, an electron transport layer made of BCP and a silver/aluminium (Ag/Al) cathode were deposited by vacuum evaporation through a shadow mask, giving an active device area of 6 mm2. The base pressure during vacuum evaporation was 2 × 10−6 Torr. The complete structure of the OSCs was ITO (170 nm)/PEDOT:PSS (60 nm)/pentacene (45 nm)/PTCDI-C7 or PTCDI-C13 (45 nm)/BCP (8 nm)/Ag (10 nm)/Al (70 nm), as shown in Fig. 1.


The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the OSCs were measured in a dark glove box filled with nitrogen gas under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G solar illumination using an Oriel solar simulator calibrated by a standard Si photodiode detector (XP102C). A source meter (Keithley 2400) was used to record the output current and voltage of the solar cells. The surface morphology of the active layers in the OSCs was analyzed by an AFM (XE-100, Park). For investigating the mechanism of carrier transport, TR-PL spectroscopy was performed on the PTCDI-C7 and PTCDI-C13 films grown on the pentacene surface to measure the lifetime of the photo-induced carriers.


The geometry of the PTCDI-C7 or PTCDI-C13 monomer was first optimized using density functional theory (DFT) at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level of theory. This frozen monomer geometry was then used for the single point energy (SPE) calculations of the dimers. The total SPEs of these dimers were studied by DFT at the same basis set. For the embedded-cluster calculations, the positions of the surrounding molecules and embedded molecule were fixed by freezing their coordinates according to the lattice parameters of various polymorphic structures, including the virtual transition states. Next, the geometry of the embedded molecules was relaxed in order to obtain the stabilized (optimized) structures in the presence of surrounding molecules using the Coulomb attenuating method (CAM-B3LYP) with the 6-31G(d) level of theory. Electronic transition energies were calculated using time-dependent DFT. All calculations were performed using the Gaussian suite of programs.


Several PTCDI derivatives were tested in OSCs. The junction of PTCDI-C7 and pentacene was found to give the best OSC performance. Fig. 2 shows the J–V characteristics of the OSCs, comparing the PTCDI-C7/pentacene and PTCDI-C13/pentacene active layers. Six individual cells with each type of active layer were fabricated to ensure reproducibility. Under illumination with 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G simulated solar light, the PTCDI-C7/pentacene-based device delivers an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.38 V, a short-circuit current (JSC) of 9.88 mA cm−2, and a fill factor of 52.3%, resulting in a calculated PCE of nearly 2.0%. For the purpose of comparison, the electrical performance of the OSC with the PTCDI-C13/pentacene active layer is included in Table 1. Although the PTCDI-C7/pentacene-based device has a slight decrease in VOC, the JSC substantially increases, mainly as a result of decreasing cell series resistance (RS). From an analysis of the J–V curves using the model proposed by Ishibashi et al., the RS of the PTCDI-C7/pentacene- and PTCDI-C13/pentacene-based devices is 10 and 39 Ω cm2, respectively.

Donor film of OSC

J
SC/mA cm−2

V
OC/V
FF (%)
PCE (%)
PTCDI-C7
9.88
0.38
52.3
2.0
PTCDI-C13
2.17
0.41
39.0
0.3
For investigating the mechanism of OSC-performance improvements further, an analysis of the absorption in the active layer is performed on the two devices, which were without blankets of the PCB layer and Ag/Al electrode. In Fig. 3(a), the absorption spectra of the PTCDI-C13/pentacene- and PTCDI-C7/pentacene-based heterojunctions show a slight difference, indicating that the absorption of the two devices is almost the same. Pentacene/PTCDI-C7- and pentacene/PTCDI-C13-based heterojunctions show strong absorption in the energy range of 1.8 eV to 2.6 eV. The absorption spectra of PTCD-C7 and PTCDI-C13 are shown in Fig. 3(b) when the absorption of pentacene is eliminated from the spectra of Fig. 3(a). PTCDI-C7 and PTCDI-C13 show a significant absorption in the range of 2.3 eV to 2.8 eV with peaks at 2.37, 2.53, and 2.71 eV corresponding to the lowest band gap transition energies of a monomer obtained by quantum chemical calculation under consideration of molecules with long-range ordering. When the peak intensity at 2.37 eV is normalized to unity, the peak intensity at 2.53 eV of PTCDI-C7 is evidently higher than that of PTCDI-C13, suggesting that higher ratio monomers existed in the PTCDI-C7 film. The PTCDI dimer is easily formed while thermally depositing the PTCDI film. Fig. 3(b) shows a broadened dimer-induced peak located at the range of 2.0 eV to 2.3 eV in the absorption spectrum of PTCDI-C13, which comprises inter and intramolecular transition energies in a PTCDI dimer. The theoretical calculation peaks of a dimer located at 2.0 eV [labeled with red and black solid lines in Fig. 3(b)] are almost the same for the PTCDI-C7 and PTCDI-C13 dimers. However, the dimer-induced peaks are hardly observed in the PTCDI-C7 absorption spectrum, indicating that the monomer dominated the PTCDI-C7 film.
AFM and contact angle measurements were conducted on two pentacene/PTCDI-C7 and pentacene/PTCDI-C13 OSCs to investigate further the observed PCE differences. For the two samples, the AFM results [Fig. 4(a)] show the surface morphology of pentacene, PTCDI-C7, and PTCDI-C13. The morphology of the pentacene film exhibits a dendritic grain, which is a typical case for pentacene growing on PEDOT:PSS film. Evidently, the images of the n-type photoactive layers display enormous difference between PTCDI-C7 and PTCDI-C13, especially in the surface grain type, where PTCDI-C7 morphology follows that of pentacene. Moreover, the PTCDI-C7 grain is extremely larger than the PTCDI-C13 grain. This phenomenon can be attributed to the easy growth of PTCDI-C7 monomers on an inclined plane of pentacene grains and a good match in the surface energy of PTCDI-C7 (44.6 mJ m−2) and pentacene (45.1 mJ m−2).
To quantify the interface parameters of the p–n junction, XRD analyses of the photoactive layers were carried out. Fig. 4(b) shows the XRD spectra of the pentacene/PTCDI-C7 and pentacene/PTCDI-C13 heterojunction films in which the first pentacene diffraction peak at the 5.7° corresponding “thin-film phase” with a vertical periodicity of 1.54 nm is the same for the two films and normalized to unity. The difference of the first diffraction peaks of PTCDI-C7 (at 4.5°) and PTCDI-C13 (at 3.4°) was due to the length of alkyl groups. The Williamson–Hull method [eqn (1)] was used to analyze the film characteristic parameters of PTCDI-C7 and PTCDI-C13.
(1)
The expression of
eqn (1) is a combination of the Scherrer equation for size broadening and the Stokes and Wilson expression for strain broadening. The value of η is the microstrain in the crystallites, the value of L represents the size of the crystallites. In the eqn (1), β is the line broadening at half the maximum intensity in radians, θ is the Bragg angle, λ is the X-ray wavelength, and K is the Scherrer constant. The constant K is typically close to unity and ranges from 0.8 to 1.39. Here, K = 1 was used in this case. Thus, when we plot β cos(θ) vs. sin(θ), a straight line with slope and intercept can be obtained. This slope and intercept were denoted by η and L, respectively. The calculated microstrain corresponds to the local strain at the contact points between pentacene and the PTCDI crystal grains. When the PTCDI film is deposited on the pentacene surface, the effect of the microstrain can affect the crystal structure of PTCDI, resulting in defects and trap states. The results are summarized in Table 2. Compared with PTCDI-C13, PTCDI-C7 is excellent in terms of microstrain and crystallite size, indicating that there are fewer trap states within the PTCDI-C7 film and at the pentacene/PTCDI-C7 interface which contribute to the enhancement of carrier transport and exciton dissociation in relative OSCs. This result agrees with the conclusion of the AFM analysis. Moreover, a higher (002) peak intensity in the PTCDI-C7 spectrum is observed, unequivocally demonstrating a long-range molecular ordering along the direction perpendicular to the substrate in the PTCDI-C7 film that can effectively improve charged carrier transport.

Pentacene/donor film
Time-resolved PL
X-ray diffraction

τ
1/ns

τ
2/ns
Microstrain (%)
Crystallite size/nm
PTCDI-C7
0.59
1.97
0.4
43.31
PTCDI-C13
1.11
4.50
3.6
3.67
The use of PL spectroscopy is quite common in investigating the microstrain in a crystalline film because many crystalline films suffer from microstrain, resulting in a noticeable peak shift in the PL spectrum. The PL spectra of the PTCDI-C7 and PTCDI-C13 thin films grown on crystalline ITO and pentacene surfaces are shown in the upper and lower panels of Fig. 5, respectively. The lowest band gap transition energy at 1.81 eV is almost the same for the PTCDI-C7 and PTCDI-C13 films on the ITO substrate. However, the transition peaks of the PTCDI-C7 and PTCDI-C13 films deposited on the pentacene surfaces exhibit blue shifts of 27 and 59 meV, respectively, suggesting that the PTCDI-C13 film suffered from a larger microstrain due to the mismatch between PTCDI-C13 and pentacene. Additionally, compared with the PTCDI-C7 spectrum, the peak intensity of the PTCDI-C13 spectrum above the lowest band gap transition energy obviously increases, indicating that these transition energies arise from isolated molecular states in the amorphous region. In other words, the PTCDI-C13 film has a higher degree of amorphous phase than PTCDI-C7. This result corresponds well with the AFM measurements.
More detailed carrier transport analyses were conducted on the pentacene/PTCDI-C7 and pentacene/PTCDI-C13 films by TR-PL spectroscopy. TR-PL was operated at the peak wavelength (680 nm) of the PL spectrum for the PTCDI-C7 and PTCDI-C13 films. The purpose was to obtain information on the charge transfer dynamics in which the time-dependent signals were dominated by the PTCDI due to the very weak pentacene luminescence. Fig. 6 shows the TR-PL spectra of the PTCDI-C7 and PTCDI-C13 films. The two spectra can be fitted by the following double-exponential function:
y = A1e−1/τ1 + A2e−1/τ2 + y0
(2)
where
τ1 and τ2 are the short and long lifetimes of excitons, respectively; A1 and A2 represent the fractions of excitons decaying in the two pathways; and y0 is the background of the TR-PL spectrum. The fitting results are summarized in Table 2. Both short and long lifetimes of the PTCDI-C7 film are significantly smaller than those of the PTCDI-C13 film, indicating that there is easier charge separation at the interface between pentacene and PTCDI-C7 than that between pentacene and PTCDI-C13. Moreover, the exciton rapidly transfers to the junction surface of pentacene and PTCDI-C7, which leads to an enhancement in exciton dissociation efficiencies and charge transport. In contrast, the unmatched pentacene and PTCDI-C13 result in an unfavorable morphology [see Fig. 4(a)] of PTCDI-C13, leading to low exciton transport and degradation in exciton dissociation efficiency at the junction interface.


In summary, a small molecule-based organic solar cell with a power conversion efficiency of about 2.0% was achieved using matched photoactive materials, pentacene and PTCDI-C7. When the heterojunction photoactive layer was made of pentacene and PTCDI-C7, the surface morphology of PTCDI-C7 interestingly follows pentacene, resulting in low trap states and microstrain in the PTCDI-C7 film and at the pentacene/PTCDI-C7 interface. The effect of matched photoactive materials enhances charge transport and exciton dissociation at the interface of the heterojunction, which are proven by the investigation using absorption, X-ray diffraction, and time-resolved PL measurements. Therefore, the performance of organic solar cells is crucially determined by the match of photoactive materials that can be applied not only to small molecule-based OSCs but also to polymer-based OSCs. Further improvement can be anticipated through co-evaporation of pentacene and PTCDI-C7, which contributes to an increase in the contact area of the heterojunction.


The authors would like to thank the National Science Council of the Taiwan for financially supporting this research under Contract No. NSC 99-2112-M-006-014-MY3, and NSC 99-2627-E-006-001.


This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012