 DOI: 10.1039/C7CC01400G
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 4100-4103


Seongseop
Kim
,

Inyoung
Jeong
,

Jongkook
Hwang
,

Min Jae
Ko
 and 

Jinwoo
Lee
*

Department of Chemical Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang, 37673, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jinwoo03@postech.ac.kr

Department of Chemical Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul, 04763, Republic of Korea

Received
22nd February 2017
, Accepted 21st March 2017
First published on 21st March 2017
We report the simple synthesis of macro- and mesostructured Nb2O5 that have functional submicrometer-sized particles (macrodomain) embedded in mesoporous frameworks (nanodomain). Resol can macrophase-separate by self-polymerization and co-assemble with niobia sol into mesostructured frameworks. The resultant materials increase the power conversion efficiency due to light-scattering capability of submicrometer-sized particles.

Multiple length-scale materials from the nano- to micrometer scale combine the benefits of different length scales: macrostructures strengthen the mechanical properties, while nanostructures provide main functionalities. Among the various multi-length scale architectures, mesopore integrated-hierarchical structures show promise for applications in catalysis, drug delivery, and energy storage and conversion. The introduction of ordered mesostructures provides a regular pore geometry, a high specific surface area, and a large pore volume, complementing the textural properties of macro-building blocks (e.g., microparticles, microfibers, micromolding, and nanosheets). The advantages of mesostructures include (i) large uptake of active species such as drugs, catalysts, and organic dyes, (ii) numerous active sites on a large surface area, (iii) size selectivity to certain molecules due to pore sizes, and (iv) easy accessibility for guest molecules (i.e., facile mass transport).

The synthesis of multi-length scale structures that integrate mesopores generally relies on a stepwise approach: the preparation of macroscale templates, then the introduction of ordered mesostructures by using precursor/nanoscale template solution. However, controlling subsequent growth of mesostructures on macro-templates is a difficult task that requires an appropriate choice of synthesis conditions. For example, most inorganic precursors are highly reactive toward hydrolysis and condensation, so if their reactivity is not controlled, ill-defined large precipitates form. In addition, judicious control of surface chemistry between the precursor and each template is necessary; this process requires various chemical treatments such as surface modification, pH control, and charge matching. For these reasons a direct and simple one-pot approach to synthesize mesopore-integrated macro/nano-structures is highly desirable.
A block copolymer (BCP) microphase separates in a size of tens of nanometers. The cooperative assembly of BCPs with functional molecules leads to the formation of ordered mesoporous materials. However, these BCP blends generally show a complicated phase behavior which often results in the segregation of large domains with a size of hundreds of nanometers or even micrometers (i.e., macrophase separation). Macrophase separation commonly occurs due to the unfavourable enthalpic interactions (weak interaction between the precursor and the BCP) and the reduced entropy of mixing (size limit). To date, most research has focused on avoiding macrophase separation because it frequently hinders the self-organization of BCP, thereby resulting in poorly ordered mesoporous structures. Macrophase-separated domains are usually regarded as valueless components that should be minimized or removed.
In a different perspective, the exploitation of macrophase separation can provide a direct access to multiple length-scale materials, i.e., macrophase separation can be a versatile tool to control macrostructures without using any additional macrotemplates. In addition, segregated macrodomains in BCP blends can provide additional functions that are not available in conventional mesostructures. Herein, we demonstrated that macrophase separation can be useful both in material design and in practical applications. We reported one-pot fabrication of functional macrodomain (FM)-embedded mesoporous Nb2O5 (FM-Nb2O5) which is composed of well-dispersed submicrometer-sized particles in mesoporous frameworks. This multifunctional nanostructure was fabricated by exploiting the interplay of micro- and macrophase separation in blends of BCP and precursors (both organic and inorganic). FM-Nb2O5 was used as a photoelectrode for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). Mesoporous frameworks with a high specific surface area (105 m2 g−1) and large pores (31.4 nm) contributed to high dye loading and facile electrolyte penetration, respectively. Submicronmeter-sized particles (∼500 nm) enhanced the light-harvesting capability. Compared with mesoporous Nb2O5, FM-Nb2O5 improved the reflectance and efficiency of the photoanode owing to submicron particles, which improved light scattering.
Phenolic resin (resol) was synthesized by the reaction of phenol with excess formaldehyde under alkaline conditions. Resol has multiple hydroxyl groups and methylol groups, which exhibit hydrophilicity to allow co-assembly with amphiphilic BCPs by hydrogen bonding. Resol can also form metal chelate complexes by the coordination of the oxygen lone pairs to transition metal precursors. Furthermore, resol can be self-polymerized into thermosetting resin if heat is applied or an acid catalyst is added.
Inspired by these properties of resol, we prepared a BCP–organic–inorganic blend that contains resol as an additive to induce macrophase separation, poly(ethylene oxide)-block-poly(styrene) (PEO-b-PS) as a structure directing agent, and niobium ethoxide (Nb(OEt)5) as a Nb2O5 source in tetrahydrofuran (THF), followed by slow addition of concentrated HCl (Fig. 1a). Strong acid (i) hydrolyzes Nb(OEt)5 to hydrophilic niobia sol for favourable mixing with the PEO block, and (ii) can initiate resol polymerization, thereby inducing macrophase separation. Niobia sol and resol interact with the PEO block by hydrogen bonding, and also produce resol–Nb complexes by chelating. These precursors comprise both segregated particles and mesoporous walls during dual-phase separation. Along with solvent evaporation at 40 °C, macrophase separation occurs between the (resol–Nb/PEO-b-PS)-rich domain and the (overpolymerized resol–Nb)-rich domain (Fig. 1b). Some of the resol begins to polymerize with the increase of acidity; polymerizing resol–Nb complexes segregate from the BCP-phase to form submicrometer-sized resol–Nb macrodomains (Fig. 1d lower). Meanwhile, the (resol–Nb/PEO-b-PS)-rich domain starts to organize mesoporous frameworks by the microphase separation of BCP (Fig. 1e). Annealing the sample and pyrolyzing BCPs and resol yield FM-Nb2O5 with a well-retained structure (Fig. 1c).
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) observations showed unique structures of FM-Nb2O5. After solvent evaporation at 40 °C, the as-made FM-Nb2O5/C composite exhibited submicrometer-sized particles with mesoporous structures; this observation indicates that macrodomains were formed before thermal curing at elevated temperature (Fig. 2a). Subsequent annealing at 100 °C led to further condensation of niobia sol and resol molecules, thereby fixing the FM structure without structural transition (Fig. 2b).
The FM-Nb2O5/C composite was obtained after carbonization at 700 °C under Ar, as shown by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Macrodomains with sizes of 200–500 nm were clearly embedded in mesoporous frameworks (Fig. S1a, ESI). The Nb2O5/C composite retained the well-developed FM structure throughout the entire surface (Fig. S1b, ESI). To directly show component elements of the functional macrodomains, we used electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) to examine the distributions of Nb, C, and O in the FM-Nb2O5/C composite (Fig. 2c–f); they were uniformly distributed in both the macrodomain and the mesoporous domain. This distribution indicates that some of the niobia sol macrophase separate together with overpolymerized resol by the interaction between resol and Nb species (i.e., chelation). The submicrometer-sized Nb2O5 particles (macrodomains) were well maintained without structure deformation after carbon removal by calcination at 450 °C (Fig. 2g and h).
The chelation of Nb species by resol is a key factor to form functional macrodomains. The oxygen lone pairs on phenyl groups and aryloxide groups of resol can donate electrons to Nb species, thereby forming resol–Nb chelate complexes. The chelation between resol and Nb species was investigated using UV-Vis spectroscopy (Fig. 3). The free resol as a ligand showed UV absorptions at wavelengths λ = 236 nm and 276 nm, which are attributed to the π → π* transition of the aromatic rings. The addition of Nb precursor solution in the resol solution led to the appearance of a new intense band at λ = 264 nm, which may be assigned to a ligand-to-metal charge transfer (LMCT) transition for octahedrally coordinated Nb(V), indicating resol chelated Nb. The band at appeared λ = 287 nm is attributed to the ligand π → π* transition in resol. Therefore, the chelating bonds induced the resol–Nb complexes, even after the cross-linking of resol, and resulted in the formation of macrodomains composed of resol/Nb2O5 composites.
The X-ray diffraction (XRD) of FM-Nb2O5 showed well-defined diffraction peaks of the orthorhombic phase (Fig. S2a, ESI). The average crystallite size was calculated to be approximately 16.2 nm using the Debye–Scherrer equation. The small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) patterns of FM-Nb2O5 showed a primary peak with higher-order reflections at angular positions of √4 and √7; these indicate the reflection of the 2-D hexagonal lattice (p6mm symmetry) (Fig. S2b, ESI). The N2 physisorption isotherm of FM-Nb2O5 showed a type-IV curve with a sharp capillary condensation near P/P0 = 0.9 and a H1-type hysteresis loop, which indicates a large-pore mesoporous material with a hexagonal structure. The specific surface area was 105 m2 g−1, and the pore size was 31.4 nm (Fig. S2c, ESI).
For comparison, we prepared mesoporous Nb2O5 (m-Nb2O5) without the use of resol additives; the other synthesis conditions were identical to those for FM-Nb2O5. In the absence of resol, only the ordered mesoporous structures were clearly observed (Fig. S3a and b, ESI). The SAXS pattern of m-Nb2O5 showed reflections of the 2D hexagonal structure (Fig. S3c, ESI). The XRD pattern indicated an orthorhombic phase and an average crystallite size of 16.5 nm (Fig. S3d, ESI). The as-prepared m-Nb2O5 had a specific surface area of 83 m2 g−1 and a pore size of 32.7 nm (Fig. S3e, ESI).
A part of resol acted as a porogen for small pores. The region occupied by resol was converted to small pores after calcination; this process explains why FM-Nb2O5 has higher specific surface area than m-Nb2O5.
FM-Nb2O5 was evaluated as a multi-functional working electrode (WE) material for DSSCs. For DSSCs to have a high power conversion efficiency (PCE), the WE must have (i) a high surface area for high dye loading, (ii) sufficient porosity for dye binding space and efficient electrolyte diffusion, and (iii) a light-scattering function that lengthens the light pathway to achieve high light harvesting. We prepared pastes using FM-Nb2O5 or m-Nb2O5, then fabricated Nb2O5 films onto a FTO glass by using the doctor-blade method followed by sintering at 500 °C for 30 min. The resulting FM-Nb2O5 and m-Nb2O5 films were 12 μm thick (Fig. S4a and b, ESI).
We compared the reflectance of FM-Nb2O5 and m-Nb2O5 to determine the light scattering effect of FMs. Diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) clearly showed that FM-Nb2O5 has higher diffuse reflectivity than m-Nb2O5 in the visible and near-infrared spectral range (400–800 nm) (Fig. 4a), probably because FM-Nb2O5 incorporates submicrometer-sized particles (Fig. 2h). In addition to this light-scattering function, FM-Nb2O5 with a higher surface area (105 m2 g−1) than m-Nb2O5 (83 m2 g−1) can adsorb 1.3 times more N719 dye than can m-Nb2O5 (Fig. S5 and Table S1, ESI).
Current density–voltage (J–V) curves were obtained from DSSCs made with FM-Nb2O5 and m-Nb2O5 WEs (Fig. 4b and Table S1, ESI). The FM-Nb2O5-based DSSC exhibits a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 4.57 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.73 V and a fill factor (FF) of 0.82, achieving a PCE of 2.75%. Compared to these values, the m-Nb2O5-based DSSC had almost the same Voc and FF but much lower Jsc. The higher light-scattering capability and higher dye loading of FM-Nb2O5 than those of m-Nb2O5 contribute to the difference in Jsc, and resulted in the higher PCE in the former cell. The incident-photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the two devices and the normalized IPCE spectra (Fig. S6, ESI) clearly confirmed that the DSSC based on FM-Nb2O5 exhibits an improved light harvesting efficiency over the whole spectral range of visible light (350–750 nm) compared with the m-Nb2O5 based DSSC, due to the scattering effect and high dye loading of dual function of FM-Nb2O5.
To enhance the light harvesting of DSSCs, an additional scattering layer composed of submicrometer-sized large particles is commonly introduced. However, these large particles do not produce much photocurrent due to their very low surface area. In contrast, FM-Nb2O5 has both high surface area and good light scattering. Therefore, we applied FM-Nb2O5 as a scattering layer by additionally coating it on a transparent mesoporous TiO2 film (m-TiO2) composed of 25 nm TiO2 particles. For comparison, we also prepared a pristine m-TiO2 WE and a conventional scattering layer (SL-TiO2) coated on a m-TiO2 WE. The pristine m-TiO2 film and FM-Nb2O5 upper layer had the same thickness of 12 μm (Fig. S4c, ESI). The SL-TiO2 film was 4 μm thick on the m-TiO2 film, which was 12 μm thick (Fig. S4d, ESI), and consisted of large TiO2 particles that were nonporous and several hundred nanometers in size (inset of Fig. S7, ESI). DRS (Fig. S8, ESI) indicated that the (m-TiO2 + FM-Nb2O5) WE was more reflective than the m-TiO2 WE due to light scattering by FM-Nb2O5. Although the (m-TiO2 + SL-TiO2) WE was more reflective than the (m-TiO2 + FM-Nb2O5) WE, the low surface area of SL-TiO2 led to very low dye adsorption compared to FM-Nb2O5 (Fig. S5 and S9, ESI).

J–V curves (Fig. 4c) of the three DSSCs (m-TiO2 film only; m-TiO2 with FM-Nb2O5; and SL-TiO2 bilayer) all showed similar Voc and FF, but the DSSC with a (m-TiO2 + FM-Nb2O5) WE had much higher Jsc than did the m-TiO2 WE and (m-TiO2 + SL-TiO2) WE based DSSC, and therefore the best PCE of 7.99% (Table S2, ESI). The IPCE spectra (Fig. 4d) indicated that the (m-TiO2 + SL-TiO2) WE based DSSC has higher IPCE values at long wavelengths (660–800 nm) than do the (m-TiO2 + FM-Nb2O5) WE due to the higher reflectance of SL-TiO2. However, the significant increase of IPCE for the (m-TiO2 + FM-Nb2O5) WE device over a wide range (350–660 nm) was attributed to the dual function of FM-Nb2O5, which also has both a good light scattering effect and a high surface area, so this device had the highest Jsc among the DSSCs, as shown in J–V curves (Fig. 4c).
In this work, we have demonstrated a novel and simple method to synthesize mesoporous Nb2O5 in which macrodomains develop. The ability of resol to chelate Nb enables the formation of resol–Nb complexes, involved in macrophase separation. Under highly acidic conditions, overpolymerized resol segregated with chelated Nb species from the BCP-phase to generate functional Nb2O5 macrodomains of ∼500 nm. The remaining niobia sol and resol were incorporated into the PEO block by hydrogen bonding, thereby organizing mesoporous frameworks by the microphase separation of BCPs. When used as a working electrode material of DSSCs, functional macrodomain-embedded mesoporous Nb2O5 shows increased PCE and Jsc due to the light-scattering ability of submicrometer-sized particles and high dye loading. This research tries a new approach to utilize the useless domain as the functional particle and opens up fascinating potential for the design of multi-length scale structured inorganic materials.
This research was supported by C1 Gas Refinery Program and the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (2015M3D3A1A01065440 and 2016R1A4A1010735). SAXS measurements were carried out on the 4C SAXS beamline at Pohang Light Source II.
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cc01400g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017