 DOI: 10.1039/C6TC04944C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 842-847


Xiang
Fang
,

Yihui
Wu
,

Yongting
Lu
,

Yue
Sun
,

Shuai
Zhang
,

Jing
Zhang
,

Wenhua
Zhang
,

Ningyi
Yuan
* and 

Jianning
Ding
*

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center of Photovolatic Science and Engineering, Jiangsu Province Cultivation base for State Key Laboratory of Photovoltaic Science and Technology, Changzhou University, Changzhou, 213164, Jiangsu, China. E-mail: dingjn@cczu.edu.cn; nyyuan@cczu.edu.cn

Micro/Nano Science and Technology Center, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, 212013, China

Sichuan Research Center of New Materials, Institute of Chemical Materials, China Academy of Engineering Physics, 596 Yinhe Road, Shuangliu, Chengdu 610200, Sichuan, China

Received
13th November 2016
, Accepted 13th December 2016
First published on 13th December 2016
One of the main issues for high-performance perovskite solar cells (PSCs) is the fabrication of high-quality perovskite films. However, a thermal annealing process is generally required for a high crystallinity film via a typical solution-based method, which may result in inhomogeneous nucleation, and is time-consuming. Herein, we investigate the effects of different solvents on the morphology and the crystallinity of perovskite films systematically and further develop a solvent-technique for uniform perovskite films without the need for annealing. N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) has been adopted as a high-boiling-point solvent and a complexant, combined with the commonly used N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) or dimethylacetamide (DMAc), to improve the quality of perovskite films and enhance the corresponding device performance. PSCs fabricated from DMAc/NMP co-solvents using the post-annealing process show the best power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 17.38%, which is about 10% improvement compared to that of the device based on DMF/dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) or DMAc/DMSO co-solvents. Notably, 17.09% efficiency has been achieved even without any post-annealing process for the device based on DMAc/NMP co-solvents. However, only 3.81% efficiency can be obtained for the device based on DMAc/DMSO co-solvents under the same conditions. The observed phenomenon is mainly due to the fact that the NMP-included solvents can induce an instant crystallization once the anti-solvent drips on the films at room temperature (RT). Our study may provide a new approach to prepare high-quality perovskite films at RT, which would simplify the fabrication procedures and reduce the cost of efficient PSC manufacture.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites, which are some of the most promising light absorbers, have attracted significant attentions due to their unusual properties including a high extinction coefficient, ambipolar charge transport, a long charge-carrier diffusion length and broad band light absorption. Since the first perovskite sensitized solar cells were reported in 2009 by Miyasaka et al., numerous excellent works have been written on perovskite solar cells (PSCs). The key point in manufacturing high-efficiency PSCs is the fabrication of high-quality perovskite films with dense surfaces and excellent crystallinity. Pinhole-free and uniform perovskite films can prevent direct contact between the electron transport and hole transport layer and thus reduce the probability of charge recombination, while the high crystallinity perovskite film facilitates fast transportation and separation of charge carriers. Various preparation methods such as one-step spin-coating, two-step sequential deposition, vacuum thermal evaporation and vapor-assisted solution reaction have been adopted for manufacturing perovskite films. Among these techniques, one-step spin-coating is the most widely used method due to its simplicity and low cost. Many efforts have been made to control the morphology of perovskite films by one-step deposition. In particular, Cheng et al. reported an anti-solvent washing process and successfully obtained relatively flat and uniform methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) films by drop-casting chlorobenzene during spin-coating. Seok et al. introduced dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) into the solvent and proposed that a CH3NH3I (MAI)–PbI2–DMSO intermediate phase would be formed during the treatment of anti-solvent so as to reduce the volume expansion caused from PbI2 to MAPbI3. Recently, several research groups have investigated the effect of mixed solvents on the morphology of perovskite films. The obtained results indicate that the solvent type has a significant effect on both the morphology and the crystallinity of the perovskite. However, a thermal annealing stage is always required to achieve the complete crystallization of the films, which will induce inhomogeneous nucleation and consume time and cost, making them less suitable for industrial applications. Therefore, the development of a novel way for fabricating high-quality perovskite films without any post-annealing treatment can be potentially beneficial for the commercialization of solar cells.

In this regard, several groups have attempted to develop a new method to prepare high-quality perovskite thin films at room temperature (RT) (seen in Table S1, ESI). Duvey et al. prepared heating-free perovskite films by immediately taking the spin-coated films outside in air with a relative humidity of 40%, and the highest PCE of 16.83% was obtained from the perovskite films kept for 5 hours in air. Li et al. reported a water–vapor and mixed-solvent–vapor annealing method to fabricate perovskite films at RT. However, an annealing process is still needed in these experiments, which is time-consuming. Han et al. introduced an anti-solvent assisted approach by applying ethyl acetate to induce instant crystallization and obtained a PCE of 15.58% with annealing-free perovskite films.
Herein, we have studied the effect of the mixed solvents on the properties of MAPbI3 films deposited via one-step spin-coating and first fabricated annealing-free perovskite films simply by utilizing appropriate precursor solvent. DMSO or N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) has been used as a high-boiling-point solvent and a complexant, while N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) or dimethylacetamide (DMAc) as a low-boiling-point solvent. The results indicate that besides enhancing the crystallinity of MAPbI3 films, the mixed solvents including NMP can lead to an instant crystallization of the films without the post-annealing process, which is quite different from the traditional perovskite deposition techniques (generally requiring thermal annealing at about 100 °C to release the residual solvents and promote the crystallization of perovskite). The annealing-free perovskite films made from DMAc/NMP not only show a uniform morphology and high crystallinity, but also give a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 17.09%, while only an efficiency of 3.81% can be obtained for the device made from DMAc/DMSO co-solvents under the same conditions. Moreover, the NMP-based annealing-free perovskite films exhibit a better performance in technological compatibility.

It has been found to be critical to select appropriate solvents for dissolving halide perovskites, which play an important role in deciding the morphology and the quality of the perovskite films. In this work, the following four kinds of co-solvents are used, DMF/DMSO, DMAc/DMSO, DMF/NMP and DMAc/NMP. The spin-coating processes for the preparation of perovskite thin films are shown in Fig. 1. For the samples prepared from DMF/DMSO and DMAc/DMSO, the gray film cannot be observed until annealing at 100 °C for 5 min. However, in the case of DMF/NMP and DMAc/NMP based precursor solutions, a dark brown film appears immediately after toluene is dripped onto the film and is maintained with or without post-annealing treatment. These results indicate that the post-annealing treatment is necessary for DMSO included co-solvents to remove residual solvent and promote crystallization, while NMP included solvents can substantially volatilize through toluene extraction and lead to fast nucleation and growth of perovskite crystals.


Fig. 2 shows the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the perovskite films fabricated from different co-solvents. The low-magnification SEM image of MAPbI3 films based on DMF/DMSO co-solvent (Fig. 2a) displays clusters of round grains with multiple pinholes. A similar morphology with smaller cluster sizes and reduced pinholes can be observed for the case of DMAc/DMSO co-solvent (Fig. 2b). When DMF/NMP or DMAc/NMP is used, the MAPbI3 surface becomes uniform, smooth and pinhole-free (Fig. 2c and d), which can be attributed to the instant crystallization induced by the co-action of NMP and toluene. NMP can be quickly extracted through toluene dropping, indicating a drastic decrease in MAPbI3 solubility under supersaturation conditions to accelerate the perovskite nucleation and crystallization. It is reported that rapid nucleation can enhance the homogeneous nucleation, thereby uniform and dense films can be obtained. Fig. 2e–h show the high-resolution SEM images of perovskite films. It can be seen that the NMP-based MAPbI3 crystals have better crystallinity than those based on DMSO solvents. The cross-sectional SEM images of perovskite films deposited on mesoporous TiO2 layers are shown in Fig. 3, revealing similar thicknesses of perovskite films made from the above four kinds of co-solvents. These images confirm the better crystallinity of NMP-based MAPbI3. In addition, the morphology of the MAPbI3 layer is much more relevant to the type rather than the ratios of the adopted solvents as shown in Fig. S1, ESI.
To further investigate the effect of solvents on the morphologies of perovskite films, atomic force microscopy (AFM) was performed to characterize the surface of the films, as shown in Fig. S2, ESI. Obviously, the perovskite film obtained from DMF/DMSO or DMAc/DMSO exhibits a rough and clustered surface while the film prepared from DMF/NMP or DMAc/NMP appears more smooth and uniform, which is in good agreement with the results of the SEM images. The corresponding values of the root mean-square roughness of the films are 47.4, 50.3, 13.5 and 14.3 nm, respectively.

Fig. 4a displays the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the obtained perovskite films. The major diffraction peaks at 14.2°, 28.5°, and 31.9° are attributed to (110), (220) and (310) crystal planes of MAPbI3, respectively. It is notable that the major peaks of the perovskite films obtained from NMP-containing solvents exhibit stronger intensities than the films fabricated from DMSO-containing solutions, indicative of better crystallinity. The UV-vis absorption spectra of the prepared perovskite films (Fig. S3, ESI) reveal that the sample made from DMAc/NMP has the strongest light absorption in the range of visible light. The energy level alignments of MAPbI3 films made from different co-solvents are determined by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) (Fig. S4, ESI). The work function values associated with Fermi levels (EF) are measured to be about 4.2 eV and 4.3 eV for both NMP-based and DMSO-based perovskite films. And the position of the valence band maximum (VBM) is at 1.2 eV below EF for all the samples. Fig. S4c (ESI) shows the energy level structure of the as-prepared perovskite films. The time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) decay curves are obtained to analyze the average PL lifetimes for the perovskite films prepared from different solvents (Fig. 4b). They are fitted with the bi-exponential function R(t) = A1exp(−t/τ1) + A2exp(−t/τ2), where τ1 is the fast transient component representing the surface properties and τ2 is the slow component resulting from the bulk properties.A1 and A2 are the constants representing the contributions of the fast and slow components, respectively. The NMP-based perovskite films show larger values of τ1 and τ2, which indicated a lower number of surface states and bulk traps existing in the bulk. The average lifetimes τ for the obtained perovskite films calculated via the formula τ = (A1τ1^2 + A2τ2^2)/(A1τ1 + A2τ2) are equal to 56.1, 55.4, 72.6 and 70.2 ns, respectively, corresponding to the above-mentioned co-solvents. The longer PL lifetime means the reduced recombination in the MAPbI3 perovskite films and would further lead to an improved PCE. Therefore, the selection of high boiling solvent plays a more important role in affecting the crystallization and properties of perovskite films.
Finally, we investigate the photovoltaic performance of the perovskite films based on different solvents. The configuration of FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au was adopted for our devices. The MAPbI3 thin films are prepared from the above-mentioned co-solvents with or without annealing at 100 °C for 5 min and 40 PSCs are fabricated under each condition. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the PSCs are determined in air under an AM 1.5G solar simulator with a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2. Fig. 4c shows the best performance curves of the prepared PSCs with reverse scan and the corresponding parameters are summarized in Table 1. It can be seen that the PSCs based on the widely used solvents, DMF/DMSO, exhibit the lowest PCE of 15.83%, with a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 21.11 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.01 V and a fill factor (FF) of 74.10%. While the DMAc/NMP-based device achieves the highest PCE of 17.38% (about 10% improvement compared to the DMF/DMSO based device) and shows comprehensive improvements in all the photovoltaic parameters (Jsc = 22.39 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.03 V and FF = 75.38%). DMF/NMP has a very close performance to DMAc/NMP. The average PCE of devices based on DMF/DMSO, DMAc/DMSO, DMF/NMP, and DMAc/NMP is 15.54, 15.61, 16.73 and 16.86%, respectively. The enhanced performance of NMP-included co-solvents is related to the uniform and dense perovskite films with high crystallinity, which results in higher light absorption and larger PL lifetimes. Fig. S5, ESI, shows the external quantum efficiencies (EQEs) of the fabricated PSCs. The Jsc value calculated from the EQE is 20.67, 20.81, 21.48 and 21.57 mA cm−2 corresponding to the above-mentioned co-solvents, which are very close to the values measured from J–V curves. Fig. 4d shows the PCE distribution histograms and reveals the highly reproducibility of PSCs. The J–V characteristics of forward scan curves are given in Fig. S6, ESI. It can be seen that all devices fabricated from different co-solvents show little hysteresis phenomena. Taking the above results into consideration, a conclusion can be made that DMAc/NMP co-solvent is the best choice for preparing perovskite solar cells and therefore it will be selected for further investigation.
Co-solvent

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
Eff (%)
DMF/DMSO
21.11
1.01
74.09
15.83
DMAc/DMSO
21.38
1.01
74.27
16.04
DMF/NMP
22.07
1.03
75.60
17.21
DMAc/NMP
22.39
1.03
75.38
17.38
In consideration of the fact that the perovskite films turn brown immediately after the toluene dripping when NMP based solvents were adopted, we speculate that NMP can induce instant crystallization of perovskite without the post-annealing process. DMAc/DMSO based perovskite films were also fabricated under the same conditions for comparison. The J–V characteristics of PSCs without post-annealing are shown in Fig. 5a. The device based on DMAc/NMP co-solvent exhibits a PCE of 17.09%, with a Jsc of 22.10 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.03 V and an FF of 75.11%, which are very close to the level of the annealed one. In contrast, in the case of DMAc/DMSO, only 3.81% efficiency can be achieved. It is speculated that the post-annealing process is necessary to release DMSO and realize the complete crystallization. Otherwise, there will be a mass of MAI-PbI2-DMSO intermediate phase existing in the film. However, when NMP was adopted as the high-boiling-point solvent, the perovskite crystallizes immediately after the toluene dripping and a uniform and dense film can be formed, and the corresponding SEM images are given in Fig. S7, ESI. The XRD measurement is adopted to verify this conjecture. Fig. 5b shows the XRD patterns of perovskite films based on different co-solvents without any post-annealing process, and the inset shows their photographs. It can be seen that all the main diffraction peaks of annealing-free perovskite based on DMAc/NMP are indexed to the perovskite structure indicative of the complete crystallization of MAPbI3. However, the film based on DMAc/DMSO shows diffraction peaks at low angles of 6.6°, 7.2° and 9.2°, which can be attributed to the existence of the MAI-PbI2-DMSO intermediate phase. In fact, the MAI-PbI2-DMSO intermediate phase is unstable and the DMSO species evaporate from the film surface very slowly, leading to an inhomogeneous nucleation and crystallization. The described process is illustrated by their photographs shown in Fig. S8, ESI. Moreover, the long-term stability of the PSCs made from DMAc/NMP co-solvents without the post-annealing process is shown in Fig. S9 ESI, as well as the annealed ones made from DMAc/NMP and DMAc/DMSO. All the devices maintained over 75% of their initial PCE after being kept in air with 40% RH for 500 hours, indicating the competitive stability of the annealing-free perovskite films compared with the annealed ones.
To obtain a further insight into the crystallization process, we characterize the annealing-free perovskite films before toluene dripping for comparison. It can be seen that the sample derived from DMSO solvent exhibits the same diffraction peaks as the one with toluene dripping (Fig. S10, ESI), which indicates the formation of the MAI-PbI2-DMSO intermediate phase (either in solution or during spin-coating). Most importantly, the anti-solvent does not change the intermediate phase without post-annealing. As for DMAc/NMP based precursor solution, the film shows diffraction peaks at an angle of 8.4°, which is an unreported compound and related to the intermediate phase formed from DMAc/NMP. We consider that MAI and NMP have intercalated into the PbI2 lattice to produce a similar intermediate phase (MAI-PbI2-NMP) as MAI-PbI2-DMSO. Notably, the perovskite phase is observed to coexist with MAI-PbI2-NMP. And the perovskite phase will be formed completely via further anti-solvent treatment at RT (Fig. 5b). A plausible mechanism of the crystallization and the formation of perovskite films with different high-boiling-point solvents is proposed on the basis of the above obtained results. As shown in Fig. 5c, PbI2 and MAI are initially dissolved in the utilized solution. As we know, PbI2 is a layered material and interlayer spaces can be intercalated by other molecules due to their weak bonding between adjacent planes. Therefore, an intermediate phase forms during spin-coating via the evaporation of DMAc. However, after toluene drop-casting, different crystallization kinetics can be observed. In the case of DMAc/DMSO co-solvents, excessive DMSO species are removed by toluene treatment to produce a light-colored thin film, which is ultimately transformed into a pure MAPbI3 crystalline layer after annealing at 100 °C for 5 min. However, when the DMAc/NMP co-solvent is used, NMP molecules can be quickly extracted by toluene, leading to instant nucleation and the growth of perovskite crystals. Hence, the annealing process, which is crucial for DMAc/DMSO-based perovskite thin films, seems to be omissible for the case of DMAc/NMP based films.

In summary, we have systematically investigated the co-solvent effects on the crystallization of MAPbI3 perovskite films and further developed a solvent-technique for high quality perovskite films without any post-annealing process. Compared with DMSO, NMP-included co-solvents can form more uniform and dense perovskite films with higher crystallinity. The DMAc/NMP based device shows the highest PCE of 17.38%, which corresponds to a 10% improvement with respect to the devices based on DMF/DMSO or DMAc/DMSO. Moreover, the use of NMP can induce instant nucleation and crystallization of MAPbI3 at room temperature. The corresponding device shows a very close level (17.09% efficiency) to the annealed device, which is much higher than that of the device (3.81% efficiency) based on DMSO. These observations may provide an effective way to fabricate high-quality perovskite films at room temperature and consequently facilitate the manufacturing of more efficient and cost-effective perovskite devices.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant no. 51272033, 51572037, and 51335002), the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions, and the Natural Science Foundation of the Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions of China (Grant no. 14KJA430001 and EEKJA48000).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, SEM, AFM, stability images, UPS spectra, J–V curves and EQE spectra. See DOI: 10.1039/c6tc04944c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017