 DOI: 10.1039/D2TA03437A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 14989-14999


Zihui
Liang
,

Yuchen
Hou
,

Yidong
Ming
,

Zhaoyang
Wei
,

Shashank
Priya
,

Kai
Wang
* and 

Congcong
Wu
*

Key Laboratory for the Green Preparation and Application of Functional Materials, Hubei Key Laboratory of Polymer Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Hubei University, Wuhan 430062, China. E-mail: ccwu@hubu.edu.cn

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Penn State, University Park, PA 16802,, USA. E-mail: kqw5449@psu.edu

Received
28th April 2022
, Accepted 17th June 2022
First published on 20th June 2022
Controlling the temporal window of processing is vital for optimizing nucleation and crystal-growth. This is not only crucial to ensure a high-quality film for module application, but also important to the general compatibility of various deposition techniques. So far, controlling the crystallization either in an ultrafast (<10 s) or relatively slower (≫100 s) process has been reported in two major precursor ink systems, while a temporal gap (from 10 to 100 s) remains where multiple deposition techniques such as spin-coating would need to deliver an optimized larger-area film. Here we report a paradigm ink using a high donor number (DN) solvent such as dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) as an additive to a volatile non-coordinative solvent system, where the lone electron pair at the sulfinyl group can bond with the perovskite intermediate in the precursor ink. This bonding along with the low vapor pressure of DMSO reduces the supersaturation rate, eventually leading to a finely controllable solidification process from seconds to hundreds of seconds. As a result, using this ink we obtained a 15 cm2 minimodule with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 17.12%, and an ultra-small area-dependent efficiency drop (ADED) of −0.12% cm−2 (vs. −1.30% cm−2 for a reference ink).

Halide perovskite (PVK) photovoltaics (PVs) have attracted immense attention that has shifted from academia to industry, which requires the shifting of manufacturing from a small-area cell to a large-area module level. So far, a wide range of deposition techniques including doctor blading, slot-die coating, spray coating, and inkjet printing have been proposed to match this transition. However, different manufacturing techniques will need a wide range of temporal windows for processing, depositing, and optimizing not only the perovskite film itself but also its interface with different functional buffer layers in the device. This will require a universal perovskite ink, with a wide temporally tunable processing window, working as a general platform to test all the different manufacturing techniques. Furthermore, industrial level manufacturing also includes additional figures-of-merit, besides the high quality and performance requirements, and also high reproducibility, which is strongly related to batch-to-batch ink processing and would significantly impact the final productivity, manufacturing cost, and the fabrication tolerance for evaluating the process effectiveness and product yield rate. So as to successfully shift towards the industrial level, full-temporal-control of the processing-window and high reproducibility are of great importance. If both can be addressed at the material level, for example simply by optimizing the ink composition, there would be great ease in delivering high-quality industrial PVK module products.

In principle, the processing window can be defined by the solidification process from the as-deposited wet solution membrane to the polycrystalline dry film, including nucleation, crystal growth, and refining/ripening. The initial nucleation is triggered by supersaturation—a state in which the liquid (solvent) contains more dissolved solids (solute) than can ordinarily be accommodated at a specified temperature. Such supersaturation can originate from solvent evaporation. Thus, the vapor pressure or the boiling point (b.p.) of the precursor solvent is crucial to control the speed of the crystallization or the temporal volume of the processing window. Following this scenario, so far there have been mainly two types of precursor ink systems reported and widely used. One is the high boiling point (b.p.) and polar aprotic solvent-based system, using dimethylformamide (DMF, b.p. of 153 °C), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, b.p. of 189 °C), and N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP, b.p. of 202 °C), accompanied by an indispensable thermal-annealing to evaporate the solvent and/or various post-treatments to expedite the solvent removal. Due to the slow evaporation rate of the solvent, this nonvolatile ink usually requires a longer time (from minutes to hours) to dry the perovskite film, leading to relatively lower reproducibility and uniformity owing to the uncontrollable anti-solvent processing and even residual solvent issue within the film. Another type of ink system uses volatile solvents (of lower b.p., such as acetonitrile and ethanol, b.p. of 82 °C and 78 °C, respectively) with the assistance of amine molecules to disperse the perovskite intermediate within the ink. This type of ink usually displays a nonionic feature where the quick evaporation of the solvent molecules can lead to a fast crystallization within a few seconds. Hence, the ultrafast (volatile ink) and slower (nonvolatile ink) processes provide separate processing windows with a width of either a few seconds or at the hour level, respectively, leaving a temporal gap between them, i.e., an unexplored regime from seconds to hundreds of seconds (minutes-level), where many manufacturing techniques such as spin-coating and meniscus-coating can fit in.
Here, we report a paradigm ink system covering this range to provide the supplementary temporal window for manufacturing high-quality perovskite films for large-area PVK module applications. Prior studies have revealed that DMSO can coordinate with the lead atom in PbI2, which slows down the crystal growth rate in those nonvolatile inks and optimizes the crystal. Here, using DFT (density-functional theory) calculations we find that this strong coordinative interaction also exists between the sulfinyl functional group from DMSO and the lead atom from the perovskite intermediate state in the volatile ink system. This guides us in using DMSO as a molecular additive to modulate the evaporation rate of the original volatile solvent and eventually tune the processing window to the range of 10 s to 100 s, filling the missing temporal gap existing in the state-of-the-art inks. This not only allows sufficient time to cast high-quality films but also prevents wasting time in unnecessarily executing the whole process. As a result, we obtained a highly reproducible small area cell (with an active area of 0.10 cm2) with efficiency over 19% and a minimodule (with an active area of 15 cm2) having efficiency of 17.12%, with an area-dependent-efficiency-drop (ADED) of −0.12% cm−2. This is about one magnitude smaller than that of −1.30% cm−2 using a reference ink. Such a small drop of efficiency upon up-scaling and the supplementary gap filling of the processing time-window can provide a new avenue towards future industrialization of the large-area perovskite PV technique.

In perovskite crystallization, solvent–solute coordination plays an important role and thus the choice of solvent can lead to a big difference in the final film quality. Prior studies have revealed that Gutmann's donor number (DN), which describes the Lewis basicity of the processing solvent, can be a good index to quantify the coordination between the solvent and the Pb2+ center of the lead halide precursor. Solvents with a smaller DN interact weakly with the Pb2+, favoring complexation between lead and iodide and facilitating perovskite crystallization. By contrast, a solvent with a larger DN coordinates strongly with the Pb2+, tending to form ionized species instead of facilitating crystallization. The stronger the solvation and ionization, the slower the crystallization. In parallel, the boiling point of the solvent also affects the crystallization speed by controlling the concentrating rate through solvent evaporation. As soon as a threshold concentration is reached, supersaturation occurs and will trigger the crystal nucleation. Hence, the quicker the solvent evaporates, the faster the crystallization occurs. Both the DN and b.p. of the solvents are key figures-of-merit determining the speed and ease of the perovskite crystallization. Fig. 1a(i) shows the plot between DN and b.p. of prior reported solvents for the perovskite precursor. Higher b.p. solvents are difficult to evaporate at room temperature and thereby exhibit a slower process to reach supersaturation. In particular, when DMF, DMSO, or NMP is used as the solvent, the wet solution membrane needs tens of minutes to dry and requires the assistance of thermal annealing to initiate the crystallization. In addition, a larger DN solvent tends to coordinate between lead and the solvent and this results in strong solvation, leading to the formation of free ions of the precursors (Fig. 1a(ii), where the ink is of an ionic nature). This solvent–solute coordination will compete against the solute–solute bond formation between lead and iodide. And additional thermal energy or kinetic mechanisms will be needed to push the reaction to proceed along the direction of favoring the perovskite formation. Overall, this process can take up to minutes to hours in time-scale (i.e., ≫ 100 s) to complete and needs assistance from a supplementary procedure such as anti-solvent processing, post-annealing, vacuum assistance,etc. By contrast, another type of ink system using volatile solvents has been reported very recently. This ink system relies on low b.p. solvents such as acetonitrile (ACN), tetrahydrofuran (THF), and ethanol (EtOH) with the presence of amine molecules to form a liquified perovskite intermediate (Fig. 1a(iii), where the perovskite intermediate is in a short-range ordered state without mobile ions in the solution), which is then dispersed into these low b.p. solvents and eventually exhibits a nonionic feature. The volatile nature as well as the nonionic feature of the ink enables a fast crystallization process and even at room temperature the whole process can be completed within a few seconds (e.g., <10 s). However, between 10 s and 100 s, there is an unexplored temporal gap, which the above-mentioned inks can barely cover (Fig. 1a(i)). It should be noted that many deposition techniques such as spin-coating and meniscus-coating have a processing time that falls within this gap. Developing a precursor ink with a time window of 10 s to 100 s is thereby important to satisfy these manufacturing techniques.

In order to fill this gap, adding high DN and high b.p. solvent molecules into the volatile ink can be one of the solutions. The high DN nature of the solvent molecules makes them strongly coordinate with the perovskite intermediate in the volatile system and the high b.p. nature can slow down the process towards supersaturation. We then select DMSO as the additive molecule due to its high DN and high b.p. of 29.8 and 189 °C, respectively. In addition, ACN and DMSO possess relatively high dipole moments (i.e., 3.96 debye for DMSO and 3.92 debye for ACN) and similar dielectric constants (i.e., 46.70 for DMSO and 36.71 for ACN), indicating similar short-range dipole–dipole interactions when approaching an exotic atom. This implies that by introducing the DMSO into the ACN-based ink system, the original equilibrium and dynamical properties of the ink system itself will not be significantly affected due to the similar dielectric attributes between ACN and DMSO. Upon this baseline, an extra attraction is expected to occur between DMSO and the lead atom from the solute. We then used density-functional theory (DFT) calculations to verify the hypothetical coordination between DMSO and the perovskite intermediate. Fig. 1b(i) shows a model of DMSO at close distance to a cluster of perovskite intermediates (a prior reported short-range ordered state), with geometric optimization (calculated using the CASTEP module). Then we calculated the total free energy difference of the molecules before and after molecular contact, or the chemical adsorption energy of DMSO on the intermediate cluster surface, i.e., E(chemical adsorption energy) = E(DMSO–cluster) − E(DMSO only) − E(cluster only) = −0.52 eV. The negative sign indicates that the adsorption is energetically favorable and such an interaction is even stronger than the typical hydrogen bond (∼0.24 eV).Fig. 1b(ii) displays the electron density difference mapping image of the DMSO–CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) cluster. It can be seen from the result that after DMSO adsorption, the electron clouds surrounding Pb become more negative owing to the donating nature of the DMSO Lewis base that donates its lone electron pair to form a dative bond with the perovskite cluster. This adsorption can also be confirmed by examining the density of states (DOS) of Pb from the perovskite cluster and O from the DMSO before and after adsorption. Fig. 1b(iii) compares the sum DOS of Pb and O before and after the adsorption. Both Pb and O have shown an obvious difference in DOS, indicating a strongly affected lattice environment upon this interaction. More detailed DOS spectra can be seen in Fig. S1, where most obvious changes come from the outermost orbitals of 6s and 6p of Pb and 2p of O. Therefore, by using DFT, we anticipate that DMSO can bond with the perovskite intermediate cluster, which will slow down the crystallization process and extend the processing window to a certain degree.
From the perspective of solvent evaporation, the mechanism of controlling the processing window can also be understood by the change of the vapor pressure of the binary solvent, which subsequently altered the equilibrium and dynamical properties at the liquid–air interface. ACN has a vapor pressure of 9.71 kPa at room temperature, while DMSO has a smaller pressure of 0.06 kPa under the same conditions. Introducing DMSO into ACN can significantly influence the dynamics at the liquid–air interface. We performed a Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulation to quantify such changes. Fig. 1c shows the results. Briefly, on increasing the global volume concentrations of DMSO (XDMSO) in the ACN/DMSO mixtures from 0 to 1/50, 1/40, 1/30, 1/20, and 1/10, the vapor pressure of this binary solvent decreases monotonously. This result shows that the overall solvent evaporation rate can be obviously slowed by adding DMSO, thus synchronously resulting in a slower nucleation rate.
From the perspective of crystallization theory, the change in the processing time window can be interpreted by the LaMer model. As shown in Fig. 1d, the concentration increases with the evaporation of the solvent, the fluctuation of which plays a critical role in determining the crystallization kinetics. When it arrives at the concentration of minimum supersaturation (Cmin), the perovskite ink begins to nucleate, in which nuclei form, coupled with the crystal growth. Along with the consumption of the solute for nucleation, the concentration decreases and when it is below Cmin, nucleation stops, and the equilibrium shifts to crystal growth, where solutes diffuse to the surface of nuclei for growing the crystals. And when the concentration decreases below the solubility concentration (Cs), the whole crystallization process reaches completion and the time taken to reach the end of crystallization defines the processing time window. Compared with the pristine ACN solvent (orange color curve), the binary solvent (blue color curve) with a decreased vapor pressure has a lower rate of solvent evaporation, and the time needed to reach Cmin is longer than that for the pure ACN (tb1 > ts1), which is reflected by the increased nucleation time with the increase of DMSO ratio. In the crystal growth region, the solutes diffuse to the nucleus for crystal growth. In the ACN–DMSO binary solvent system, the DMSO forms chemical bonding with the Pb2+ ion through the Lewis acid–base interaction, which reduces the ionic diffusion rate as well as the crystal growth rate; therefore, the binary solvent has a longer time for the crystal growth (tb2 > ts2). The prolonged nucleation time and crystal growth time lead to the extension of the processing window for the binary solvent compared with the pristine ACN system.
In order to verify the processing window extension by using the binary solvent system, we prepared six ink samples with different DMSO volume ratios of 0, 1/50, 1/40, 1/30, 1/20, and 1/10. The processing window is evaluated by visually monitoring the evolution of the perovskite ink droplet and measuring the transition time from the liquid droplet to the solid-state film. As shown in Fig. 2a, the droplet of perovskite ink with pure ACN began to nucleate at the 8th second and the crystallization was completed at the 10th second, exhibiting a processing window of 10 s. The addition of the DMSO solvent results in an extension of the processing window. It is noticed that the perovskite ink with 1/50 DMSO displayed a processing window of 12 s. And the processing window of 1/40 and 1/30 DMSO was augmented to 32 s and 40 s, respectively. On further increasing the DMSO ratio to 1/20 and 1/10, the excessive nonvolatile solvent altered the characteristics of the vapor pressure, which made the ink unable to crystallize at room temperature, as illustrated in Fig. S2. Therefore, the processing windows of 1/20 DMSO and 1/10 DMSO cannot be measured at room temperature. The controllable processing window can be further confirmed by the spin coating of the perovskite inks, which exhibited an increasing crystallization duration with the increment of the DMSO ratio upon spin coating, as illustrated in Movie S1. The processing windows of drop casting and spin coating are summarized in Fig. 2b, and show a similar trend of slower crystallization at a higher DMSO ratio for both methods.
The easy evaporation attribute of the volatile ink enables the simplification of manufacturing. To demonstrate this, we employed a simple one-step method for thin film fabrication. Fig. 2c shows the scanning electron microscope (SEM) images examining the morphological changes under variable processing windows. When using the pure ACN as the solvent, the perovskite layer showed an average crystal grain size of ca. 300 nm. The small grain size is due to the high nucleation rate caused by the fast solvent evaporation. On prolonging the processing window, the grain size increased to ca. 500 nm for the 1/50 ink and ca. 550 nm for the 1/40 ink, respectively, which can be ascribed to the decreased vapor pressure, leading to the reduced nucleation rate. Meanwhile, for 1/30 and 1/20 inks, the grain size decreased compared with the prior two samples, and this mainly relates to the crystal growth region, where DMSO molecules form the adduct with Pb2+, which impedes the ionic diffusion needed for growing the crystals. Noticeably, the 1/10 ink produced a porous dendritic structure, where large columnar dendrites consisting of small grains were formed, due to inhomogeneous nucleation and localized anisotropic growth induced by the excessive nonvolatile DMSO constituent. Fig. 2d displays the cross-sectional SEM images to analyze the perovskite interface. The perovskite layers of 0, 1/50, 1/40, and 1/30 inks showed a compact interface with the electron transport layer (ETL) and exhibited an identical thickness of ca. 630 nm. However, when inducing a higher concentration of DMSO, the morphological structure of the perovskite interface became disarrayed. The 1/20 ink showed a compact top surface, but a porous interface was formed due to the inhomogeneous nucleation. Consistent with the top surface morphology, the 1/10 ink generated a porous dendrite structure throughout the entire film. The disordered crystals are related to the formation of excessive DMSO–Pb adducts, which retards the nucleation and leads to inhomogeneous crystal growth.
Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was performed to illustrate the influence of the DMSO additive on the chemical bonding of the perovskites, as shown in Fig. 3a. The perovskite layers prepared with different DMSO ratios showed identical patterns, where the N–H stretching band is around 3200 cm−1, and C–H stretching is in the range of 2800–2950 cm−1, indicating that different processing windows result in the same chemical environment for the perovskites. In addition, we found that the processing window coordinator DMSO can be entirely removed after the annealing process, evidenced by the absence of absorption bands of DMSO molecules. Meanwhile, we measured the FTIR spectra of the perovskite layers without post-annealing, as shown in Fig. S3. Without annealing, the room temperature prepared perovskite layers with 1/50, 1/40 and 1/30 DMSO inks showed a negligible trace of DMSO, while perovskite layers with 1/20 and 1/10 DMSO inks showed the characteristic SO stretching band at 1012 cm−1, which implies that the appropriate concentration of DMSO does not have much influence on the room temperature crystallization feature of the volatile solvents.
To illustrate the effect of the ink processing window on the crystal structure of the perovskite layer, we measured the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of different samples, as shown in Fig. 3b. The pure ACN solvent generates a typical tetragonal phase of MAPbI3 with the (110) plane located at 11.4°. Noticeably, the perovskite fabricated with the ink based on the ACN ink showed a preferred crystal orientation along the [110] direction, as indicated by the relatively higher diffraction intensity of the (110) planes. The crystal orientation can be evaluated using the diffraction intensity ratios of different planes. Here we used the intensity ratio of I(110)/I(112) to quantitatively assess the degree of orientation. As shown in the XRD patterns of Fig. S4, the intensity ratio of the conventional ink is 11.56, while the ratio of ACN ink is increased to 60.06, implying a strong preferred orientation. The distinctive preferred orientation arises from the self-assembly behavior of the perovskite intermediates, which stack along the favorable crystal direction. Upon the addition of the DMSO, the crystal orientation was further enhanced, with (110) and (220) peaks predominating in the pattern. Compared with the ACN ink (DMSO ratio = 0), the (110) peak intensity of the 1/50, 1/40, and 1/30 inks is 4.31, 6.78, and 12.19 times higher, respectively. The high crystal orientation is attributed to the extended crystal growth period that facilitates the crystallographic alignment of the planes. However, when the DMSO ratio increased to 1/20, the intensity ratio of I(110)/I(112) decreased to 2.21, implying randomly orientated crystals, and the 1/10 ink exhibited a low crystallinity with the presence of impurity. This tendency is consistent with the morphological analysis, that the excessive DMSO leads to the formation of a high concentration of DMSO–Pb adduct, which inhibits the crystallization by retarding the nucleation and growth of the crystals. To elucidate the effect of the additive DMSO on the room temperature crystallization features of the perovskite ink, the XRD patterns of the perovskite layers prepared at room temperature were measured and compared, as shown in Fig. S5. The perovskite layers fabricated with 0, 1/50, 1/40, and 1/30 inks showed identical diffraction patterns with the annealed layers, and additionally, retained the preferred crystal orientation. By contrast, as indicated by the XRD patterns, the room temperature synthesized layers with 1/20 and 1/10 inks cannot fully be crystallized due to excessive DMSO–Pb adducts. And the corresponding photographs are shown in Fig. S6. The results indicate that the ink with a controllable processing window induced by the appropriate concentration of DMSO can generate a high-quality perovskite layer, and simultaneously, retain the room temperature synthesis features.
To study whether the controllable processing window has an impact on the non-radiative charge recombination of perovskites, we measured the steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) spectra of these samples, as shown in Fig. 3c and d. All the samples displayed an emission at ca. 780 nm, consistent with the UV-vis absorption threshold, as shown in Fig. S7. The perovskite layers synthesized with 1/50 and 1/40 inks exhibited almost identical emission intensities to those with the ACN ink, implying that the DMSO ratio below 1/40 has a negligible impact on the trap density. When DMSO increased to 1/30, the emission intensity began to decline and decreased with the increase of the DMSO ratio. Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) was performed to calculate the charge carrier lifetime by fitting the TRPL spectra using a bi-exponential function, as given in eqn (1):
(1)
(2)
where
τ1 and τ2 are the slow and fast carrier decay lifetimes, A1 and A2 are the corresponding decay amplitudes, and B is a constant, respectively. The average carrier lifetime τave can be calculated using eqn (2). The τave is 420 ns, 441 ns, 446 ns, 293 ns, 273 ns, and 161 ns, respectively for the perovskite prepared with 0, 1/50, 1/40, 1/30, 1/20, and 1/10 DMSO ratios. Consistent with the PL emission intensity, the lifetimes remained almost the same for the 0, 1/50, and 1/40 inks, and when DMSO reached 1/30, the lifetime declined, further confirming that the processing window coordinator DMSO with a ratio lower than 1/30 has no strong impact on the non-radiative charge recombination. The further increased DMSO may lead to an imperfect interface or induce crystal defects that would cause radiative recombination.

To study the dependence of photovoltaic performance on the ink processing window, we fabricated lab-scale perovskite solar cells (PSCs) with an n–i–p architecture, displaying an active area of 0.10 cm2. Fig. 3e shows the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics, and the photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table S1. The 0, 1/50, and 1/40 DMSO inks exhibited the same open circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.17 V, and the 1/30 and 1/20 DMSO inks showed a VOC of 1.13 V, while the 1/10 DMSO ink showed a much-decreased VOC of 0.84 V. The VOC trend agrees with the charge carrier lifetime, which began to decline from the ratio of 1/30 due to the growing trap defect density. The discrepancy of the short circuit current density (JSC) is not as much as that of VOC. The JSC of 0, 1/50, and 1/40 DMSO inks is in the range of 21 mA cm−2, and that of 1/30, 1/20, and 1/10 DMSO inks is in the range of 20 mA cm−2. For the fill factor (FF), the 0, 1/50, 1/40, and 1/30 DMSO inks showed almost the same FF of ∼0.76, while 1/20 and 1/10 DMSO inks exhibited a decreased FF of 0.65 and 0.54, respectively. The decreased FF is mainly attributed to the porous interface and the dendritic structure, which seriously hinder the carrier transport. As a result, the PCEs for 0, 1/50, and 1/40 DMSO inks are nearly identical at 19.14%, 19.10%, and 19.06%, respectively. The further increase of the DMSO ratio results in a decreased PCE, which is 17.12%, 14.89%, and 9.18% for 1/30, 1/20, and 1/10 DMSO, respectively. To conclude, the incorporation of DMSO may compromise the small cell efficiency due to either the residual DMSO strongly interacting with Pb and thus inhibiting the completion of conversion to the perovskite lattice or the generation of unwanted pores within the film due to the modulated crystallization. When an appropriate amount of DMSO is added, crystallization optimization predominates and results in high crystal orientation and high uniformity for the perovskite film. As illustrated in Fig. 3f, the 0, 1/50, and 1/40 DMSO inks exhibited comparable PCE but a tunable processing window, which has the potential to meet the specifications for industrial manufacturing and is expected to deliver a greater module efficiency compared to the control counterparts.
To examine its up-scalability to a module device, we then applied our ink and fabricated the PVK module with a monolithic series interconnection. The module uses identical materials for different layers, i.e., FTO/TiO2 compact and mesoporous layer/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au. Fig. 4a displays the schematic cross-sectional design showing the layout of a 2 × 2 cm2 minimodule, where 4 sub-cells are interconnected in series with each having an active area of 0.94 cm2 (and total active area of 3.76 cm2). In order to realize such a module configuration, we used a UV picosecond laser scribing setup to execute a set of laser processes, i.e., P1, P2, and P3, that are similar to those in CIGS solar modules. Briefly, the P1-scribe isolates the conductive substrate by removing the lines of FTO; the P2-scribe is implemented before depositing the top electrode, which removes the lines of multiple layers of TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD; the P3-scribe isolates the top electrode between adjacent sub-cells to complete the monolithic series interconnections. The P1–P2–P3 scribing regions are referred to as the dead area which does not contribute to the photocurrent, while the rest of the region is regarded as the active area for generating the photovoltaic output. We first fabricated a 2 × 2 cm2 PVK minimodule with 4 interconnected sub-cells, which showed an active area of 3.76 cm2 as displayed in the photograph in Fig. 4a. The minimodule fabricated using the ink with the shortest processing window (DMSO ratio = 0) exhibited an unwanted “helix” pattern at the center of the film, which is mainly due to the fast evaporation of the solvent, resulting in an inhomogeneous spread of the wet film. This leads to an inhomogeneous film surface of the perovskite, which is expected to induce multiple interfacial issues when in contact with the top spiro-OMeTAD hole transfer layer. As a result, the minimodule using the ink with DMSO ratio = 0 showed a low PCE of 14.25%, with a VOC of 4.25 V, short circuit current (ISC) of 21.76 mA, and FF of 57.8%, corresponding to a maximum output power (Pmax) of 53.6 mW (Fig. 4b). Compared to its small cell photovoltaic parameters, there is a big discrepancy in the FF (57.8% for the module vs. 76.0% for the cell), which is due to the poor transport and the poor film quality nature of the large-area perovskite film cast from the ink with DMSO ratio = 0 (“helix” in the photo of Fig. 4b). To solve the uniformity issue when fabricating a large dimension film, we used the 1/50 DMSO ink, denoted as ACN–DMSO1/50, that has an identical photovoltaic performance to the ACN ink, but possesses a longer processing window to ensure the homogeneous spread of the ink on the substrate. As a result, by using the ACN–DMSO1/50 ink, the minimodule showed a PCE of 18.27%, with a VOC of 4.11 V, ISC of 21.75 mA, FF of 76.9%, and Pmax of 68.7 mW (Fig. 4c). The much-improved PCE is mainly due to the increased FF, which implies the high uniformity of the perovskite that can deliver better transport behavior as well as a beneficial interface securing less carrier loss under higher voltage conditions.
To further test the film uniformity cast from the ACN–DMSO1/50 ink at a larger scale, we also fabricated a 4 × 4 cm2 module. Fig. S8 exhibits the photograph of the 4 × 4 cm2 perovskite film, which showed a shiny and mirror-like surface, suggesting a macro-scale uniformity throughout the substrate. To specifically verify the microstructure homogeneity, we separated the perovskite film into 9 subregions and examined the SEM images, respectively. The 9 subregions exhibited identical morphologies with dense surfaces and showed a comparable grain size to the small-scale perovskite film. Fig. 4d shows the module configuration, where there are 8 sub-cells interconnected in series, defining a total active area of 15.04 cm2. Based on the 4 × 4 cm2 perovskite film, we used identical materials as charge transfer layers and electrodes and fabricated the 4 × 4 cm2 PVK module (Fig. 4e), which exhibited a VOC of 8.76 V, ISC of 42.23 mA, FF of 69.6%, Pmax of 257.5 mW, and PCE of 17.12%, as shown in Fig. 4f. In addition, we plotted the dependence of efficiencies on the active areas, as shown in Fig. S9. This ink has low sensitivity to aperture area, exhibiting a small area-dependent efficiency drop (ADED) of −0.12% cm−2 in comparison to −1.30% cm−2 for the reference ink. The large ADED of the reference ink is a result of poor film uniformity during upscaling of the module area, which limits the overall module performance via multiple mechanisms such as large series resistance, Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) recombination losses, and losses due to unwanted lateral transport interference, etc. By contrast, the DMSO-incorporated film can lead to a different crystallization process owing to the chemical interaction between Pb and DMSO in the precursor ink, which leads to a highly uniform film morphology and eventually benefits the larger area module devices with less PCE loss and better performance.

Here we report a paradigm ink of ACN–DMSO, prepared by using a high DN molecule, DMSO, as an additive to an ACN-based volatile solvent to tailor the vapor pressure of the binary solvent system. The tunable vapor pressure predominantly affects the crystallization dynamics of the perovskite, and thus leads to a controllable processing window for the perovskite crystallization. As a result, considering the prior existing temporal gap in the processing window of using the state-of-the-art inks (either ultrafast crystallization of <10 s or the slower one needing ≫100 s), we developed this ACN–DMSO ink that can fill the gap. In addition, by applying it to a solar cell, we successfully realized upscaling of the lab-sized cell towards the module device with high PCE consistency, displaying a small area-dependent efficiency drop of −0.12% cm−2, i.e., efficiency drops very mildly from 19.10% on a 0.10 cm2 small cell, to 18.27% on a 3.76 cm2 minimodule, and to 17.12% on a 15.04 cm2 module. Overall, through systematic exploration of materials chemistry and crystallization theory, we developed this ACN–DMSO that can address the above-mentioned temporal gap issue of the processing window. The corresponding high persistence of PCE upon module-area upscaling can lead to an important avenue towards the future implementation of PVK modules.


Perovskite ink was prepared by liquifying the perovskite crystals via the methylamine (CH3NH2, MA) interaction. Specifically, MAPbI3 crystals were placed in a vial containing methylamine solution and kept idle overnight. The black MAPbI3 crystals turned into a clear yellow liquid perovskite intermediate upon interaction with MA. Then, ACN with different DMSO ratios (volume ratio DMSO/total) of 0, 1/50, 1/40, 1/30, 1/20, and 1/10 was added into the liquified perovskite to form a clear solution.


A compact TiO2 layer was spin-coated on a cleaned FTO substrate at 2000 rpm for 20 s using a mildly acidic titanium isopropoxide solution and then heated at 150 °C for 10 min. Mesoporous TiO2 was then spin-coated on the compact TiO2 layer at 6000 rpm for 30 s by using a TiO2 solution containing TiO2 paste (18NR-T), α-terpineol and ethanol (TiO2:α-terpineol:ethanol = 1:3:1.5 wt%), which was then annealed at 500 °C for 1 h. The perovskite thin film was deposited by spin-coating the perovskite solution onto the TiO2 layer at 4000 rpm for 30 s, and then annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. Next, the spiro-OMeTAD solution was spin-coated on the perovskite layer at 4000 rpm for 20 s. Lastly, 80 nm of gold was evaporated on top of spiro-OMeTAD as electrode over an active area of 0.10 cm2.


For each system, the program PACKMOL was used to randomly place 600 molecules within a cube. The length of the z-axis was then tripled to leave an empty space on both sides of the liquid for the vapor phase. All simulations were performed using LAMMPS. Each system was equilibrated by running a 1 ns isothermal–isobaric (NPT) ensemble simulation at 1 atm. The average volume was computed over the final 0.6 ns and then used to set the volume of subsequent canonical ensemble (NVT) production runs. Force field parameters for DMSO and ACN were taken from the work of Semino et al. Temperature and pressure were maintained using the Nosé–Hoover thermostat and extended Lagrangian approach. Short-range intermolecular forces were computed using a cutoff distance of 12 Å, while the long-range nature of the electrostatic forces was treated by implementing the particle–particle particle–mesh technique.


The perovskite module was fabricated with a UV laser micromachining instrument (OpTek Systems MM2500). For the minimodule fabrication, a 3 × 3 cm2 FTO substrate was used, and the nominal active area was defined to be 2 × 2 cm2. The minimodule contains 4 sub-cells, with each cell having nominal dimensions of 0.5 × 2 cm2. After substrate cleaning, the P1 laser scribing process was performed to separate the FTO substrate and define the bottom electrode. Following this, the compact/mesoporous TiO2 layer, perovskite and spiro-OMeTAD layer are successively deposited onto the substrate using the static spin-coating method. Then, a P2 laser scribing process was performed to separate the TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD layer. Following the deposition of an 80 nm Au layer, a P3 laser scribing process was performed to separate the Au layer and define the top electrode. The larger 4 × 4 cm2 module was fabricated via a similar process. It was made from a 5 × 5 cm2 FTO substrate, and the module contains 8 sub-cells with each cell having nominal dimensions of 0.5 × 4 cm2.


Absorption spectra were obtained using an ultraviolet-visible (UV/vis) spectrometer (UV-3600, Shimadzu, Japan). The Fourier-transformed infrared (FTIR) spectra were obtained using an FTIR spectrometer (Nicolet-iS50). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) of the perovskite films was performed using an X-ray diffractometer (Akishima-shi, Tokyo, Japan) with Cu Kα radiation. The top and cross-sectional images of the perovskite films were recorded using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (Jeol JEM 6510LV). The steady-state and transient PL spectra were obtained on a PL spectrometer (FluoTime 300, PicoQuant). For photovoltaic performance measurements, the J–V curves of the PSCs were measured under simulated AM 1.5G (one sun) illumination using a solar simulator (Oriel, model 91192-1000) and a source meter (Keithley 2400, USA).


The authors declare no competing interests.


C. W. acknowledges the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 62004064). L. Z. acknowledges the support from the Key Program for Intergovernmental S&T Innovation Cooperation Projects of National Key R&D Program of China (2019YFE0107100). Z. W. acknowledges the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51903075). The unfunded collaborative work of Y. C., S. P., and K. W. was supported through the International Institute of Biosensing (IIB), headquartered at Penn State University.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta03437a
‡ Equal contribution.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022