 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA09433K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24560-24568


Kisu
Lee
,

Jungwon
Kim
,

Haejun
Yu
,

Jong Woo
Lee
,

Chang-Min
Yoon
,

Seong Keun
Kim
 and 

Jyongsik
Jang
*

School of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Seoul National University, 1 Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jsjang@plaza.snu.ac.kr; Fax: +82 2 888 1604; Tel: +82 2 880 7069

Department of Chemistry, Seoul National University, 1 Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea

Received
29th September 2018
, Accepted 14th November 2018
First published on 15th November 2018
Carbon electrode-based perovskite solar cells (PSCs) without hole transport materials (HTMs) are regarded as a promising alternative architecture to realize low-cost, stable photovoltaics. However, poor hole transport and severe charge recombination at the interface of perovskite and carbon layers degrade the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of carbon-based PSCs. Here we report on an innovative method to post-treat a carbon electrode with phenylethylammonium iodide (PEAI), for the growth of a two-dimensional (2D) perovskite at the interface between the perovskite and carbon layers. The resulting ultrathin PEA2PbI4 layer formed within the perovskite/carbon interface improved the poor perovskite/carbon contact. The favorable conduction and valence energy levels of the 2D perovskite interlayer greatly suppressed interfacial charge recombination, which stems from the absence of an HTM. Using our fabrication method, the average PCE of devices was boosted from 11.5% to 14.5% with minimal hysteresis loss, and a maximum PCE of 15.6% was achieved. Moreover, the PEAI-treated devices showed excellent ambient stability. The dual protection of the hydrophobic carbon and 2D perovskite layers enabled the device to retain 92% of its initial PCE after 1000 h of exposure to ambient conditions (relative humidity: 40 ± 5%). The thermal stability of the devices was also enhanced, showing no efficiency loss after thermal testing at 150 °C, due to suppressed ion migration.

Organic–inorganic metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted considerable attention, being among the most promising photovoltaic technologies due to their ideal bandgap, high absorption coefficient, and long-range ambipolar carrier diffusion. A typical perovskite has a three-dimensional (3D) ABX3 structure, in which A is an organic or inorganic cation (CH3NH3 (MA), CH(NH2)2 (FA), or Cs), B is a divalent metal (Pb), and X is a halide anion (Cl, Br, or I). With tremendous developments in processing, compositional, and interfacial engineering methods, PSCs have achieved a certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 20%. However, their instability under humid and thermal conditions is a major barrier to practical implementation.

Two-dimensional (2D) perovskites with bulky organic cations, such as n-butylammonium (BA), phenylethyl ammonium (PEA), or ammonium valeric acid (AVA), have excellent ambient and thermal stabilities due to their hydrophobic nature and high ion migration barrier. The introduction of a 2D perovskite into a 3D perovskite lattice has been proposed as an effective engineering method to improve PSC stability. However, direct mixing of an organic cation spacer limits device efficiency, as randomly incorporated 2D perovskite segments hinder charge transport from domain to domain due to their insulating nature. To resolve this dilemma, several groups have recently demonstrated a strategy to fabricate a 3D/2D bi-layered perovskite for a highly efficient and stable device. A bulky organic cation is deposited on a pre-formed 3D perovskite surface to induce in situ growth of a 2D perovskite layer. This methodology improves not only the stability but also the photovoltaic performance, due to the reduced number of surface trap states and suppressed charge recombination by the optimum band alignment of the 3D/2D bi-layered structure.
Although dimensional engineering of perovskites has greatly enhanced the stability of perovskite absorbers, degradation originating from the hole transport material (HTM) and metal electrode (e.g., Au and Ag) has yet to be resolved. The most commonly used HTM 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD), with a hygroscopic lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl)imide (Li-TFSI) dopant, seriously compromises the ambient and thermal stabilities of PSCs. Metal electrode corrosion by diffused halogen ions also causes device degradation.
A carbon electrode-based PSC without an HTM is an ideal architecture for realizing a low-cost, stable device. There are two types of carbon-based devices: a fully printable device with a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/compact TiO2 (c-TiO2)/mesoporous TiO2 (mp-TiO2)/Al2O3 or ZrO2/carbon architecture, and a paintable carbon-based device with an FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/perovskite/carbon architecture. Fully printable PSCs are usually fabricated by drop-casting the perovskite precursor solution onto sequentially deposited TiO2/Al2O3 or ZrO2/carbon layers. In this method, the complex structure and high-temperature sintering of mesoporous multilayers increase the fabrication cost and time. In contrast, the paintable carbon electrode is simply deposited onto FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/perovskite at low temperature. This architecture can be constructed on highly crystalline perovskite films, as employed herein, and has great potential for achieving high PCE. However, due to the absence of an HTM, severe charge recombination at the perovskite/carbon interface deteriorates device efficiency. Poor contact between the perovskite and subsequently deposited carbon layers also negatively affects the hole transport process. These disadvantages must be addressed to improve the PCE of carbon-based PSCs.
In this work, we report a method for interfacial growth of a 2D perovskite between perovskite and carbon layers, to improve both the PCE and stability of painted carbon electrode-based PSCs. Phenylethylammonium iodide (PEAI) treatment on the carbon electrode was used to create a 2D perovskite interlayer (PEA2PbI4) via a reaction with excess PbI2 in the pre-deposited perovskite layer. The 2D perovskite interlayer provided better contact at the perovskite/carbon interface and considerably reduced charge recombination due to its suitable energy levels. In addition, the hydrophobic nature and suppressed ion migration of the 2D perovskite enhanced device stability against moisture and heat. Despite the great interest in low-dimensional perovskites, the use of 2D perovskites in carbon-based PSCs has been rarely reported. Recently, Grancini et al. employed a 3D/2D mixed perovskite by incorporating an AVA organic cation spacer in a perovskite precursor; the resulting carbon-based PSC was highly stable, with a maximum PCE of 12.9%. We introduced a 3D/2D bi-layered perovskite in a carbon-based PSC via PEAI post-treatment, a simple and reproducible process. Our carbon-based PSC with PEAI treatment achieved a maximum PCE of 15.6%, compared with 12.2% for a control device without treatment, and demonstrated superior ambient and thermal stabilities compared with control and conventional Au-based devices.


Fig. 1a shows a schematic diagram of the procedures used for carbon electrode deposition and interfacial growth of the 2D perovskite layer. To fabricate a carbon-based PSC, compact TiO2, mesoporous TiO2, and 3D perovskite layers were processed using conventional methods that employ spiro-OMeTAD and Au. We used a triple-cation perovskite (Cs0.05MA0.16FA0.79Pb(I0.84Br0.16)3) for high efficiency and stability; its composition contained excess PbI2 (3 mol%) to passivate the grain boundary and induce growth of larger crystalline grains. The 3D perovskite film was prepared using a one-step solvent engineering method, as described in previous reports. Carbon conductive paste, composed of graphite and carbon black, was deposited onto the 3D perovskite film using a screen-printing method to form a 70 μm-thick carbon electrode (Fig. S1). For interfacial growth of the 2D perovskite layer, 10 mg mL−1 of PEAI solution in isopropanol (IPA) was dropped onto the carbon electrode. Before spin coating, the sample was set aside for 30 s to allow the solution to permeate through the carbon to the 3D perovskite/carbon interface. PEAI reaching the 3D perovskite surface reacted with excess PbI2 in the 3D perovskite, leading to in situ growth of PEA2PbI4 as a 2D perovskite interlayer. The interfacial growth of the 2D perovskite is expected to provide better contact between the perovskite and carbon layers, thereby improving hole transport by bridging the voids at the interface. Fig. 1b shows a field emission-scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) image of the as-fabricated PSC cross-section. An energy band diagram of the device and the charge transport behavior that occurs by employing the 2D perovskite interlayer are shown in Fig. 1c. Typically, the 2D perovskite has a higher valence level and wider band gap than the 3D perovskite, as illustrated in the figure. In particular, Cho et al. reported that PEA2PbI4 has valence level coherence with a triple-cation perovskite for favorable hole transport, and higher conduction levels to block electron flow. The effect of this band alignment will be discussed in later sections.

Elemental mapping using a field-emission electron probe microanalyzer (FE-EPMA) was carried out to confirm PEAI permeation through the carbon electrode following PEAI treatment (Fig. 2a). We detected carbon and iodine elemental signals from the cross-section of the fabricated device treated with PEAI. In the perovskite layer region underneath the carbon electrode, a weak carbon signal and a strong iodine signal were detected, shown in blue and red, respectively, in the figure. A strong carbon signal and a weak iodine signal were measured over the entire carbon electrode, implying PEAI permeation.
To verify the presence of the 2D perovskite interlayer, perovskite films were investigated after peeling the deposited carbon electrode by immersing the sample in chlorobenzene. FE-SEM images in Fig. 2b show the changes in morphology of the 3D perovskite surface following PEAI treatment on the carbon electrode. The pristine 3D perovskite film was densely packed, with 200–400 nm crystallites. We also observed carbon black particles that could not be removed by washing. Distinct grain boundaries were evident in the image. In contrast, the perovskite film after PEAI treatment was fully covered by the 2D perovskite and exhibited a smoother surface morphology with passivated grain boundaries. This possibly indicates that surface defects in the 3D perovskite film decreased via interfacial growth of the 2D perovskite. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were collected from the perovskite films. Both samples exhibited typical diffraction peaks corresponding to the α-phase of FAPbI3, and a peak at 12.7° corresponding to excess PbI2, as shown by the XRD patterns in Fig. S2. In the enlarged pattern shown in Fig. 2c, a pronounced peak at 5.4° appeared for the PEAI-treated sample, which is ascribed to the (002) crystal plane of PEAI2PbI4. Furthermore, it is noteworthy that the peak intensity of PbI2 diminished with PEAI treatment owing to the reaction of PbI2 with PEAI. This clearly shows the formation of PEA2PbI4 from PbI2 in the 3D perovskite layer via PEAI treatment on the carbon electrode. Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) measurements were conducted to confirm the presence of a 2D perovskite interlayer, and to analyze the PL properties. The samples were prepared on a glass substrate to eliminate the quenching effect by TiO2, which tends to extract excited electrons. Given the high absorption coefficient of the perovskite layer at an excitation wavelength of 430 nm, the light penetration depth was only about 100 nm. Thus, most charges were generated near the top or bottom surface, depending on the excitation direction. In Fig. S3, the samples were excited from the glass side; there was little difference between the two spectra. When excited from the top surface of the perovskite film (Fig. 2d), the spectrum corresponding to the PEAI-treated sample exhibited a characteristic PEA2PbI4 peak at 510 nm, indicating 2D perovskite formation on the top surface. Additionally, considering the short light penetration depth, the relatively small peak of the 2D perovskite compared with the peak of the 3D perovskite (at 760 nm) implies that the newly formed 2D perovskite layer was extremely thin, as it grows in the gap between the 3D perovskite and carbon layers. Taken together, these results provide convincing evidence for interfacial growth of the 2D perovskite at the 3D perovskite/carbon interface with PEAI treatment.
We next investigated the effects of interfacial growth of the 2D perovskite on carbon-based PSC performance. Current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the control (without PEAI treatment) and PEAI-treated devices are presented in Fig. 3a; the extracted photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. The carbon-based PSC fabricated using pristine 3D perovskite exhibited a PCE of 11.86%. After PEAI treatment, the PCE increased to 14.90%, with improved photovoltaic parameters. Apart from efficiency improvement, it is notable that J–V hysteresis was also mitigated by the PEAI treatment (PCErev–fwd = 1.02%) compared with that of the control device (PCErev–fwd = 1.96%). Previous studies have reported that the hysteresis behavior of PSCs originates primarily from ion migration and subsequent accumulation at the interfaces of the perovskite and contacting layers. Because low-dimensional perovskites have a high ion migration barrier, our device with a 2D perovskite interlayer effectively blocked the ion migration pathway and showed less hysteresis behavior.
Device
Scan direction

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Control
Forward
0.97
20.26
0.50
9.90
Reverse
0.99
20.35
0.59
11.86
PEAI-treated
Forward
1.02
20.97
0.65
13.88
Reverse
1.04
21.12
0.68
14.90
To highlight the effect of PEAI post-treatment on the deposited carbon electrode, we fabricated comparable devices with methyl ammonium iodide (MAI) post-treatment on the carbon electrode and PEAI pre-treatment on the bare 3D perovskite surface before carbon deposition. J–V curves for the devices are displayed in Fig. S4. MAI treatment on the carbon electrode, instead of PEAI, increased the PCE from 11.72% to 12.80%, demonstrating improved perovskite/carbon contact via the additional 3D perovskite growth. However, only the fill factor (FF) improved, and the enhancement of its efficiency was limited. We applied the PEAI solution (10 mg mL−1) directly to the 3D perovskite to form a 2D perovskite capping layer, followed by deposition of the carbon electrode. As shown in Fig. S4b, the 2D perovskite layer formed by PEAI pre-treatment improved the open-circuit voltage (VOC) and FF by reducing charge recombination; however, this enhancement was inferior to that obtained by the post-treatment on carbon in the proposed approach. This indicates that our method has the synergistic effects of bridging the gap at the perovskite/carbon interface and inducing optimum band alignment, thus minimizing charge recombination.
The J–V curve of the best-performing device with PEAI treatment is shown in Fig. 3b; this device has a PCE of 15.66% with a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 21.44 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.07 V, and a FF of 0.68. We fabricated 25 devices of each type. The statistical distributions of the PCE and parameters are given in Fig. 3c and S5. The average PCEs of the control and PEAI-treated devices were 11.53% and 14.54%, respectively. In particular, VOC was the most improved parameter; thus, the steady-state VOC was measured to validate this enhancement. As shown in Fig. 3d, the stabilized VOC values for the control and PEAI-treated devices were 0.99 V and 1.03 V, respectively. The incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra shown in Fig. S6 support the enhancement of JSC by PEAI treatment. The spectrum of the PEAI-treated device showed a high external quantum efficiency (EQE) of over 85% in the range of 450–750 nm; the integrated JSC was 21.56 mA cm−2, which was higher than that of the control device (20.54 mA cm−2). The steady-state output of the PEAI-treated device was monitored at a maximum power voltage (0.785 V). A stabilized photocurrent density of 18.65 mA cm−2 and stabilized PCE of 14.64% were achieved immediately, which then remained stable over 300 s under illumination (Fig. 3e). This result is in good agreement with the J–V curve and shows the reliability of the device, supporting a low hysteresis effect. In addition, we measured the performance of the device for a larger active area of 1 cm2. As shown in Fig. 3f, the device exhibited a PCE of 10.05% with a JSC of 21.33 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.03 V, and a FF of 0.45.
Direct current conductivities (σ0) for pristine and PEAI-treated carbon were obtained from I–V characteristics (Fig. S7) using the equation I = σ0Ad−1V, where A is the active area and d is the thickness of the carbon. The calculated conductivities showed a value of 9.2 S cm−1, indicating no change in the conductivity of carbon by PEAI incorporation. Therefore, we conjectured that the improvement in device performance originates solely from the perovskite/carbon interface. Specifically, the interfacial growth of the 2D perovskite layer provides better perovskite/carbon contact by bridging the gap in the interface. More importantly, the well-matched valence band level and higher conduction band level of the 2D perovskite enable faster hole transport and less charge recombination at the perovskite/carbon interface.
To validate our hypothesis, we performed time-resolved PL decay measurements. The PL decay curves were fitted with a bi-exponential decay function; the fitted parameters are summarized in Table S1. The average PL lifetime (τavg) was estimated from two time components (τ1 and τ2), based on the equation in Table S1.Fig. 4a shows the decay curves of the samples after peeling away the carbon electrode, similar to the procedure used prior to steady-state PL measurements. τavg increased from 81.7 to 95.2 ns with PEAI treatment. The increase in the PL lifetime indicates that the 2D perovskite interlayer efficiently eliminated the trap states at the 3D perovskite surface by passivation, ultimately reducing non-radiative recombination. Conversely, upon contact with the carbon electrode, the PEAI-treated sample showed a greatly shortened τavg (36.9 ns) compared with that of the control sample (41.3 ns) without PEAI treatment (Fig. 4b). This dramatically quenched PL lifetime is attributable to more efficient hole transport via the favorable alignment of energy bands.

V
OC as a function of light intensity (Fig. 4c) gives details of the recombination processes. Slopes in the semi-logarithmic plots for the devices without and with PEAI treatment are calculated to be 1.94kT/q and 1.49kT/q, respectively (where k is Boltzmann's constant, T is the absolute temperature, and q is the elementary charge). A slope value close to kT/q suggests dominant bimolecular recombination and minor trap-assisted recombination in the device. The decrease in the slope value with PEAI treatment implies that trap-assisted recombination was reduced by passivation and the pore-filling effects of the 2D perovskite interlayer. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were conducted to further characterize the interfacial charge transport and recombination dynamics of the devices. Fig. S8 presents Nyquist plots in the frequency range from 1 MHz to 1 Hz under 1 sun illumination at different bias ranging from 0 V to 1.0 V. Two main arcs were apparent in the plots. The first arc at high frequency typically corresponds to charge transport processes in the HTM or at the HTM/electrode interface. However, in our sample, it corresponds to the hole transport process at the perovskite/carbon interface. The arc at low frequency is related to interfacial charge recombination. The results were fitted using an equivalent circuit model, as shown in the figure. The fitted parameters are summarized in Fig. 4d and Table S2. The reduced charge transport resistance (RCT) of the PEAI-treated device indicates less resistive energy loss during charge transport through the perovskite/carbon interface and the carbon electrode itself. This should lead to a higher FF for the PEAI-treated device consistent with J–V characteristics. In contrast, the PEAI-treated device exhibited increased charge recombination resistance (RREC). Despite the absence of an HTM, the higher conduction energy level of the 2D perovskite interlayer than that of the 3D perovskite effectively prevented electron diffusion into the carbon electrode, and contributed to a remarkable enhancement of VOC.
To test its stability, we compared our PEAI-treated device with a conventional PSC, fabricated as an FTO/TiO2/3D perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au structure. Its J–V curve and parameters are shown in Fig. S9.Fig. 5a shows the long-term stability of the non-encapsulated devices stored under ambient conditions (temperature: 25 °C; relative humidity: 40 ± 5%). The PCE of the conventional device was 18.92% at the beginning, but gradually declined over 1000 h to 13.11%, 69% of the initial performance. The conventional device can suffer from degradation, induced by both a hygroscopic dopant (Li-TFSI) in the HTM and an unstable HTM/Au interface. However, carbon-based PSCs are free from those hazards and the perovskite layer is protected by a hydrophobic carbon electrode. The control carbon-based device showed a smaller degradation in efficiency, from 12.20% to 9.90%, retaining 81% of its initial performance. Strikingly, the efficiency of the PEAI-treated device decreased only slightly, to 92% of its initial performance (from 15.07% to 13.82%), thereby demonstrating outstanding ambient stability. It is because the 2D perovskite incorporating hydrophobic cations provided secondary protection against moisture invasion.
We examined the thermal stability of our device (Fig. 5b), by periodically checking the performances of three devices heated at 100 °C and 150 °C. During heating at 100 °C, both carbon-based devices maintained their performance, or even showed enhanced efficiency, due to the strengthened perovskite/carbon interface. However, the conventional device became severely degraded by the thermal diffusion of ions from the perovskite to the HTM. In addition, the electrical properties of spiro-OMeTAD degraded due to void generation near the HTM/Au interface as a result of the thermal stress. As the temperature increased to 150 °C, the relative efficiency of the control carbon-based device gradually decreased to 85%. According to the previous report, thermal decomposition is initiated at 127 °C in a triple-cation perovskite due to the formation of mobile ions and volatilization, especially involving MA and I ions. However, our PEAI-treated device maintained a high relative efficiency of 102% even after the test at 150 °C. The 2D perovskite interlayer suppressed the ion migration triggered by thermal stress due to its high ion migration barrier. It passivated the 3D perovskite surface and grain boundaries where thermal decomposition usually begins. Additionally, the remaining PEAI in the carbon electrode, as confirmed by EPMA mappings, should suppress thermal decomposition. Consequently, the results demonstrated that our method to post-treat the carbon electrode with PEAI is an effective way to ameliorate the ambient and thermal stabilities of PSCs.

In summary, we demonstrated a novel strategy to engineer interfaces in carbon electrode-based PSCs by introducing interfacial growth of 2D perovskite. PEAI solution post-treatment on the carbon electrode simultaneously improved the photovoltaic performance and stability of carbon-based PSCs. The formation of a 2D perovskite layer between the 3D perovskite and carbon layers was shown systematically by structural and optical changes. The synergistic effect of the superior perovskite/carbon contact and reduced interfacial charge recombination resulted in a high PCE, of up to ∼15.66%, with mitigation of hysteresis behavior. Furthermore, the PEAI-treated devices exhibited greatly improved ambient and thermal stabilities. Our device retained 92% of its initial efficiency over 1000 h of exposure to ambient conditions at a relative humidity of 40 ± 5%. In the thermal stability test, no efficiency loss was observed after heating to 150 °C. The present work suggests a new approach to improve the efficiency and stability of carbon electrode-based devices by an interfacial and dimensional engineering method.


If not otherwise noted, all reagents and solvents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used without further purification. FTO (7 Ω sq−1) coated glass was purchased from Wooyang GMS. Methylammonium bromide (MABr, CH3NH3Br), formamidinium iodide (FAI, CH(NH2)2I), phenethylammonium iodide (PEAI, C6H5C2H4NH3I) and TiO2 paste (30 NR-D) were purchased from GreatCell Solar. Lead iodide (PbI2, 99.9985%) and carbon black (Super P conductive) were purchased from Alfa Aesar. Carbon paste (FTU-16, ≤20 Ω sq−1) was purchased from the Asahi Chemical Research Laboratory.


FTO glass substrates were etched with 2 M HCl and Zn powder to form the electrode patterns. The patterned FTO substrates were ultrasonically cleaned in deionized (DI) water, acetone and isopropyl alcohol for 30 min, sequentially. To deposit a compact TiO2 layer as a hole-blocking layer, a mildly acidic solution of titanium(IV) isopropoxide in ethanol was spin-coated onto the substrate at 3000 rpm for 30 s and heated at 150 °C for 10 min in ambient air. The compact TiO2 layer coated substrate was then sintered at 500 °C for 60 min in a muffle furnace. After cooling to room temperature, a mesoporous TiO2, which was prepared by diluting TiO2 paste in ethanol (at a weight ratio of 1:3.5), was spin-coated on the compact TiO2 layer at 3000 rpm for 30 s. The substrate was annealed at 150 °C for 10 min and sintered at 500 °C for 60 min. To obtain Li-doped TiO2, Li-TFSI solution (15 mg mL−1 in acetonitrile) was coated on the mesoporous TiO2 layer by spin-coating at 3000 rpm for 30 s. Lithium doping on the mesoporous TiO2 was conducted to improve VOC by decreasing recombination centers. The treated substrate was heated at 150 °C for 10 min, followed by sintering at 500 °C for 30 min. The triple cation perovskite (Cs0.05MA0.16FA0.79Pb(I0.84Br0.16)3) precursor solution was prepared by mixing FAI (1 M), PbI2 (1.1 M), PbBr2 (0.2 M), MABr (0.2 M), and CsI (0.06 M) in a mixed solvent of DMF:DMSO (at a volume ratio of 4:1). The prepared solution was stirred at 60 °C for 2 h and filtered with a 0.45 μm PTFE syringe filter before use. The perovskite precursor solution was cast onto the substrate and spin-coated in two steps at 1000 and 5000 rpm for 10 and 23 s, respectively. During the second step, 180 μL of chlorobenzene was dropped on the spinning substrate at 10 s prior to the completion of the process. After the entire spin-coating process, the substrate was immediately placed on a 100 °C hot plate and annealed for 45 min to crystallize the 3D perovskite. To deposit a carbon electrode, the carbon paste mixed with carbon black (2 wt%) and chlorobenzene was screen-printed on the 3D perovskite layer and cured at 100 °C for 10 min. This depositing procedure was conducted three times successively. A digital photograph of the fabricated device is provided in Fig. S10.


FE-SEM images of surface morphology and cross-section of the device and FE-EPMA spectra were obtained from JSM-6701F (JEOL Ltd) and JXA-8530F (JEOL Ltd), respectively, which are installed at the National Center for Inter-University Research Facilities (NCIRF) at Seoul National University. XRD patterns of the perovskite films were measured using SmartLab (Rigaku). Steady-state photoluminescence spectra were measured using an LS-55 fluorescence spectrometer (Perkin-Elmer). Time-resolved photoluminescence decay profiles were measured under exposure to a 405 nm pulsed laser (PicoQuant). The J–V characteristics of the PSCs were measured using an I–V tracer (MP-160; Eko Instruments) under standard AM 1.5 G (100 mW cm−2) illumination from a 500 W xenon lamp, calibrated with a KG5-filtered Si reference cell (K801; McScience Inc.). The active area of the fabricated device was 0.132 cm2. The IPCE spectra were characterized using a K3100 Solar Cell IPCE System (McScience Inc.) without bias light. Stabilized power output, open circuit voltage (VOC) and electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) of the PSCs and I–V characteristics of the carbon electrode were measured using the Zive Lab equipment (WonA Tech). The active area for EIS measurements was 0.132 cm2 and the EIS spectra were fitted by an equivalent electrical circuit using the Z-view analyst software (ZMAN).


There are no conflicts to declare.


This research was supported by the Global Frontier R&D Program of the Center for Multiscale Energy System funded by the National Research Foundation under the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, Korea (NRF-2012M3A6A7054855 and NRF-2012M3A6A7054861).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Cross-sectional FE-SEM image of the carbon electrode, XRD patterns of the perovskite films (whole pattern), steady-state PL spectra of the perovskite films excited from the glass side, J–V characteristic comparison for carbon-based PSCs with MAI treatment and those with PEAI pre-treatment, distribution of photovoltaic parameters, IPCE spectra of the devices, I–V characteristics of carbon electrodes w/o and with PEAI treatment, J–V characteristics of a conventional PSC, EIS spectra and parameters of the devices, a digital photograph of the PSC, and time-resolved PL decay parameters. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta09433k
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018