 DOI: 10.1039/D0TC03438J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 16577-16583


Suri Babu
Akula
,

Chaochin
Su
*,

Yogesh S.
Tingare
,

Hui-Ching
Lan
,

You-Jing
Lin
,

Yi-Ting
Wang
,

Yu-Chen
Jheng
,

Xiang-Ching
Lin
,

Yu-Chi
Chang
 and 

Wen-Ren
Li
*

Department of Chemistry, National Central University, Chung-Li, 32001, Taiwan. E-mail: ch01@ncu.edu.tw

Institute of Organic and Polymeric Materials/Research and Development Center for Smart Textile Technology, National Taipei University of Technology, Taipei, 10608, Taiwan. E-mail: f10913@mail.ntut.edu.tw

Received
20th July 2020
, Accepted 27th October 2020
First published on 27th October 2020
Two dipolar molecules based on a thieno-imidazole core, AI109 and AI112, were developed to study the effect of imparting polarity on the hole transport properties in inverted perovskite solar cells (PSCs). These hole transport materials (HTMs) exhibit comparable optoelectronic properties but distinct film morphology and charge transport characteristics. Besides, the new materials with very low concentrations (1 mg mL−1) are able to form smooth and continuous films. The PSCs based on AI109 and AI112 without any dopants and additional interlayers have achieved increased power conversion efficiencies of 13.32% and 13.42%, respectively, compared to those of the standard HTMs, 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N′-di-p-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene [Spiro-OMeTAD, (11.62%)] and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate [PEDOT:PSS, (12.01%)]. The excellent hole mobility and the superior film morphology of the AI-HTMs account for their higher efficiencies.

Organometallic halide perovskites of formula ABX3 (A: cations, B: Pb, and X: halides) draw great attention from scientific communities due to their excellent physical and optoelectronic properties. During the past few years, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been studied extensively and great progression has been made in terms of power conversion efficiency (PCE). PSCs are classified into conventional (n–i–p) and inverted planar (p–i–n) architectures. Although the rigorously processed conventional PSCs produce high efficiencies, inverted PSCs offer low-temperature (<150 °C) and solution processability along with negligible hysteresis which made them appealing. Apart from compositional optimization of perovskites of inverted PSCs, interfacial fine-tuning plays a crucial role in enhancing their efficiencies and long-term stabilities. In inverted PSCs, the interface properties between the perovskite layer and the hole transport layer are critically dependent on the hole-transporting material (HTM). Various types of HTMs such as inorganic, polymeric, and organic small-molecule HTMs have been studied in inverted PSCs. While showing good device stability, inorganic HTMs fell short of the achievable PCE due to their relatively low intrinsic conductivity and surface defects and their usage is discouraged by the rigorous processing conditions. Polymeric HTMs, for example poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) doped with poly(styrenesulfonate), suffer the long-term instability and deteriorated conversion efficiency due to the intrinsic acidity and hydrophilic nature. Therefore, there is a considerable interest in improving the device performance of inverted PSCs by replacing the polymeric and inorganic HTMs with dopant-free organic small molecules which are advantageous due to their high purity, tunable molecular functionalization, and photo-electronic properties.

Numerous organic molecules were developed for PSC applications. Among them, the majority of organic HTMs for inverted PSCs reported are of donor–π–donor (D–π–D) template. Whereas, dipolar chromophores such as donor–acceptor (D–A) or donor–acceptor–donor (D–A–D) templates can generate significant charge separation in the ground state and potentially self-dope through increased electron delocalization. Additionally, a longer conjugation possibly improves the electronic coupling between molecules and may enhance the device performance. However, such chromophores are rarely reported to function as efficient HTMs for inverted PSCs. In inverted PSC, the HTM being a substrate beneath the perovskite layer influences the perovskite film formation. The thinner HTM layer with shorter pathways has also proved to improve the carrier balance between the perovskite and HTM layers, and thus efficiency. An ideal HTM should not interfere with the top perovskite film formation if it re-dissolves in perovskite precursor solvents. In addition, a suitable HTM is expected to show great thermal stability, high transparency in the visible region, and excellent hole mobility and conductivity. Organic molecules comprised of D–π–D–π–D with mid-terminal acceptor resulting a bird like template have not been investigated for application in PSCs and the effect of increased polarity towards one end on the hole transporting character is worthy to be pursued.
In this study, we developed two organic small molecules AI109 and AI112 based on a thieno-imidazole core for dopant free hole transport applications in inverted PSCs. As shown in Fig. 1, the bird like structure of the new AI molecules was achieved by attaching OMe-TPA-thiophene (4,4′-dimethoxy-4′′-thiophene triphenylamine) donor wings on either side of the thiophene in the central thieno-imidazole core and two different acceptor functionalities (dicyanovinylene and 1-(4-cyanomethyl)benzonitrile) were then introduced into the imidazole, conceiving the tail parts to investigate their effects of polarity and conjugation length on the performance of PSCs. The donors are favorable for carrier transportation through improved charge delocalization and intermolecular stacking, while the thiophene moieties can passivate the potential charge traps via Pb–S interaction. Also, the three thiophene moieties in a row might provide strong adhesion and enhanced interfacial coupling between HTM and perovskite via the thiophene–iodine interaction. The rich endowment of the electron donation from both the donor wings and the pulling effect of acceptor in the tail are expected to induce significant charge separation, thereby improving the performance. Owing to their longer conjugation with dipolar characteristic, the new HTMs are believed to be suitable substrates for growing large grain and pinhole-free perovskite active layers.

Synthesis of AI-HTMs were accomplished in a facile protocol using well known reactions as shown in Scheme 1. Condensation of aldehyde 1 with compound 2 afforded compound 3 which was further treated with HClaq to yield aldehyde 4. The Stille coupling of tin-compound 5 with intermediate 6 in the presence of palladium catalyst produced the dinitro compound 7 which was then reduced to the corresponding diamine 8 using iron (Fe) and NH4Cl in 73% yield. Under different reaction temperature and time, cyclization of diamine 8 with the intermediates 9 and 4 in the presence of Na2S2O5 offered the HTMs AI109 and AI112, respectively. Detailed experimental procedures were presented in the ESI. The known compounds 1, 5, 6, and 9 were prepared following reported procedures and the new intermediates and final compounds were well characterized by standard techniques.

The absorption spectra of AI109, AI112, and Spiro-OMeTAD in chlorobenzene were displayed in Fig. S1 (ESI) with their data summarized in Table S1 (ESI). Despite an additional phenyl ring at its acceptor site, the absorption maximum of AI112 was slightly blue shifted, which might be due to the weakening of D–A push–pull effect. Absorption properties of AI-HTMs, PEDOT:PSS, and Spiro-OMeTAD in film state were presented in Fig. 2a. The spectra of AI-HTM films showed broad and slightly blue shifted absorption bands compared to those in the solution spectra, which could be attributed to H-aggregation formation in solid state. Transmittance spectroscopy was also carried out to reveal the photon transmitting ability of the new AI-HTMs. Fig. 2a shows higher transmittance values for AI109 and AI112 than those of the PEDOT:PSS and Spiro-OMeTAD, and reached above 95% in the entire absorption range of 400–800 nm which demonstrates that the AI-HTMs are suitable for inverted PSC applications. The UV-vis spectra (Fig. 2b) showed the absorption of the perovskite films cast onto the new HTMs were increased which might bestow an enhancement in light harvesting of the PSCs based on AI-HTMs.
The electrochemical properties of AI-HTMs were evaluated by employing cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements (Fig. S2, ESI), and the corresponding data are summarized in Table S1 (ESI). Fig. 3a illustrates the energy levels of AI-HTMs and other components of PSC. As shown, the highest occupied molecular orbital energy levels of AI-HTMs ensure an efficient hole transport from perovskite to the hole contact, while the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital energy levels are higher enough for an effective blocking of undesired transfer of electrons from the perovskite to the indium-doped tin oxide (ITO) glass. Thermal stabilities of these HTMs were investigated using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). A comparable glass transition temperatures (Tg) at 161 and 159 °C were recorded on the DSC curves of AI109 and AI112, respectively, as displayed in Fig. S3a and b (ESI). The TGA data (Fig. 3b) showed that the decomposition temperatures (Td, at 5% weight loss) for AI109 and AI112 are 390 and 382 °C, respectively, which are comparable to that of Spiro-OMeTAD. These results indicate that the AI-HTMs are thermally stable for PSC fabrication.
An HTM with appropriate wettability will enable grain boundary migration in grain growth, affording a high-quality perovskite film. The contact angles of water droplets on the HTM films were measured (Fig. 4a–d insets) and the surface hydrophobicity was compared. Top view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of MAPbI3 films deposited on HTMs are shown in Fig. 4a–d. It is indicative from the SEM images that the MAPbI3 crystallites grown on new AI-HTMs are of larger grain size with less grain boundaries and pinholes. Particularly, the HTM AI112 with an appropriate wettability apparently facilitates reaction in the perovskite precursor solutions to form pure and pinhole free crystallites with good qualities when compared to PEDOT:PSS and Spiro-OMeTAD. In addition, the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of MAPbI3 spin-coated on HTMs films were presented in Fig. S4 (ESI). The sharp and clean peaks corresponding to MAPbI3 crystals on AI109 and AI112 suggest the high purity and crystallinity of the perovskites.
The new HTMs were tested for their performance in p–i–n inverted planar PSCs with the simple MAPbI3 perovskite composition. PSCs utilizing new HTMs were processed at low temperatures (<110 °C) and the performance parameters were recorded under standard AM 1.5G solar radiation (100 mW cm−2). The thickness of HTM effects the charge carrier balance between the perovskite and HTM layers and hence different concentrations of AI109 (0.5–2.5 mg mL−1) in chlorobenzene were explored to optimize the thickness by using the configuration of ITO/AI-HTM/MAPbI3/PCBM/Ag. Table S2 in the ESI, presents the performance metrics for the PSC devices using various concentrations of AI109. The solar cells with different concentrations of AI109 delivered open circuit voltage values (Voc, 0.92–0.98 V), short circuit current densities (Jsc, 16.24–17.74 mA cm−2), and the fill factor (FF, 61.03–67.39) within a certain range. However, the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of the PSCs based on the various concentrations of AI109 were in the range of η = 10.02–10.62% and seem little affected by the thickness of the deposited HTM. AI109 with the optimal concentration of 0.95 mM (1 mg mL−1) was able to form smooth film on ITO substrate and provided sufficient reaction space for larger grain perovskites, and the corresponding PSC device achieved the highest efficiency of 10.62% with Jsc (16.47 mA cm−2), Voc (0.98 V) and FF (65.49). Hence, PSCs coated with AI-HTMs of lower concentrations (1 mg mL−1) were chosen for the efficiency comparison studies.
Having had the HTM concentration optimized, inverted PSCs based on AI-HTMs without any dopant and inter layers were fabricated by using device configuration of ITO/AI-HTM/MAPbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag and their photovoltaic performances were compared with those of PEDOT:PSS and Spiro-OMeTAD. The PSCs based on PEDOT:PSS and Spiro-OMeTAD were fabricated following the reported literature. While the devices based on AI-HTMs were composed using low concentration solutions (1 mg mL−1) of AI109 (0.95 mM) and AI112 (0.88 mM) in chlorobenzene. Note that HTM solutions of at least 10 mg mL−1 were needed to reach the best efficiencies for Spiro-OMeTAD based devices. Cross section SEM images of the PSCs based on AI-HTMs are shown in Fig. S5a and b (ESI). Owing to the low concentration solution, the AI-HTM layers atop of ITO substrates are thin and faint as displayed in Fig. S5a and b (ESI). Fig. 5a and b shows the J–V curves and external quantum efficiencies (EQE) with integrated Jsc values of the solar cells, while Table 1 summarizes their performance parameters with the best and average efficiencies. The PSC of standard small molecule, Spiro-OMeTAD recorded the lowest PCE of 11.62% whereas the device based on polymer HTM PEDOT:PSS reached 12.01%. However, the highest efficiencies of 13.32% and 13.42% were achieved for the cells based on AI109 and AI112, respectively. The short circuit current densities of the PSCs based on AI109 and AI112 were reached to 18.50 and 19.47 mA cm−2 respectively, resulting the enhancement in the performance of AI-devices which might be due to the good morphology properties and hole transporting abilities of AI-HTMs. The corresponding EQE spectra from 400 to 750 nm of devices comprised of AI109, AI112, PEDOT:PSS, and Spiro-OMeTAD show higher photon utilization around 80% for the new AI-HTMs. The integrated current densities of AI109, AI112, PEDOT:PSS, and Spiro-OMeTAD calculated from EQE spectra are 19.30, 19.95, 18.59, and 16.35 mA cm−2, respectively which are in good agreement with the experimental Jsc values obtained from J–V measurement. To further confirm the performance of AI-HTMs, the steady-state output current was measured at the maximum power point. As illustrated in Fig. 5c, stabilized Jsc of 17.4 mA cm−2 and 18.1 mA cm−2 for PSCs of AI109 and AI112, respectively at 0.83 V showed nearly no decline up to 1000 s indicated that the device worked properly under actual working conditions. Furthermore, good reproducibility of efficiencies for the devices based on AI-HTMs was demonstrated in Fig. S6a and b (ESI). Especially, the efficiency histogram of AI112 shows that 50% of the 40 PSC devices recorded PCE higher than its average efficiency.
HTM
Additives

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF

η (%)
Average η (%)

a The average efficiencies were obtained from 40 PSCs based on each HTM.

PEDOT:PSS
None
0.86
16.95
82.45
12.01
11.54
Spiro-OMeTAD
None
0.96
16.31
74.10
11.62
10.55
AI109
None
0.92
18.50
78.08
13.32
11.63
AI112
None
0.91
19.47
76.15
13.42
11.98
The hole mobility of a HTM plays a prominent role in achieving high cell efficiency. Devices of ITO/HTM/Au architecture were fabricated to measure the hole mobilities of different HTMs using space charge limited current (SCLC) technique. In Fig. 6a, the AI-HTMs exhibited superior hole mobilities when compared to PEDOT:PSS and Spiro-OMeTAD. The hole mobilities of the new HTMs might be related to a favorable molecular arrangement resulting from the dipolar character and intermolecular interactions of the AI-HTMs, ensuring superior charge transport properties. Further, steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) were measured for pristine perovskite film on ITO glass and the perovskite films on different ITO/HTM layers as displayed in Fig. 6b and Fig. S7 (ESI) to elucidate the higher efficiency and improved Jsc of AI-HTMs. When the HTM was introduced, the PL response of pristine perovskite film was significantly quenched in the order of Spiro-OMeTAD < PEDOT:PSS < AI109 < AI112. The substantial PL quenching of AI112 implies its greater hole extraction ability compared to other HTMs. TRPL spectra of the HTMs shown in Fig. S7 (ESI) confirm the above results.
Device stability is a key factor to the practical application of any HTM. Therefore, we investigated the durability of the AI-based PSCs and the obtained data are shown in Fig. S8 (ESI). The devices fabricated with AI109 and AI112 retained 60% and 80%, respectively, of original PCE for 300 h, whereas Spiro-OMeTAD based device retained almost 45% of its PCE within the same time window. These findings suggest that the new AI-based HTMs are much stable HTM candidates than Spiro-OMeTAD.

In summary, the design and synthesis of two thieno-imidazole based dipolar HTMs (AI109 and AI112) and their effect of imparting polarity on the hole transporting properties in dopant-free inverted PSCs were demonstrated. The new HTMs display similar optoelectronic and thermal properties but different film morphology and charge transport characteristics. In addition, formation of smooth and continuous HTM films as suitable growing substrates for perovskite active layers, with very low concentrations of HTM solutions, was exhibited. Consequently, the inverted PSCs fabricated with AI-HTMs using the simplest device structure have delivered the superior power conversion efficiencies when compared to those of the cells based on standard donor type of HTM, Spiro-OMeTAD and polymeric HTM, PEDOT:PSS. The enhanced performances of AI-HTMs are attributed to their superior morphology and charge transport properties as revealed by the SEM, PL spectra, and SCLC studies. In due course, the study of acceptor strength–property relation by introducing appropriate functionalities might boost the charge transfer characteristics, improve film morphologies, and shed some light on the development of acceptor based HTMs for inverted PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We thank the Ministry of Science and Technology, ROC, for financial support (grants: MOST 107-2113-M-027-004 and MOST 108-2113-M-008-012). The assistance from Professor Ja-Hon Li, Taipei Tech Photonic technology lab. for PL measurements is highly appreciated.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental procedures, device fabrication details, solution absorption spectra, CV curves, DSC curves, efficiency histograms, TRPL data, and 1H and 13C NMR spectra (PDF). See DOI: 10.1039/d0tc03438j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020