 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA03540K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14864-14875


Chen
Wang
,

Sining
Yun
*,

Qingyang
Fan
,

Ziqi
Wang
,

Yangliang
Zhang
,

Feng
Han
,

Yiming
Si
 and 

Anders
Hagfeldt


Functional Materials Laboratory (FML), School of Materials Science and Engineering, Xi'an University of Architecture and Technology, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710055, China. E-mail: alexsyun1974@aliyun.com; yunsining@xauat.edu.cn

School of Information and Control Engineering, Xi'an University of Architecture and Technology, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710055, China

Laboratory of Photomolecular Science, Institute of Chemical Sciences & Engineering, Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne, Lausanne 1015, Switzerland

Received
3rd April 2019
, Accepted 22nd May 2019
First published on 22nd May 2019
Developing a high-performance catalyst and establishing a catalytic mechanism for understanding the catalytic activity are crucial to new generation photovoltaic technology. In this work, we present a feasible and general route to synthesize a bio-based porous carbon (BPC) supported ZnNb2O6 hybrid catalyst with a unique network structure, providing an effective means for electron transport between the electrode and the external circuit. Benefitting from the synergistic effect of ZnNb2O6 and BPC, a photovoltaic device assembled with the nanohybrid yields a power conversion efficiency of 8.83%, which is superior to that of pristine ZnNb2O6-based and conventional Pt-based cells (7.15% and 7.14%). Systematic electrochemical evaluations of the hybrid catalysts exhibit promising stability for practical application in photovoltaics. Contraposing the two vital functions of the counter electrode catalyst, collecting electrons and catalyzing I3− reduction, we propose a general strategy to understand the potential catalytic mechanism from the band structure and surface adsorption by using first-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations. The theoretical investigations clearly indicate that the splendid catalytic performance originates from the zero band-gap of surface metal atoms and the surface chemical adsorption interaction between I3− and exposed metal atoms. The proposed general strategy in this work for synthesizing a hybrid material with a unique network structure and understanding the catalytic mechanism of the electrocatalyst can guide the design of expected catalytic nanohybrids applied in various energy fields.

Solar energy technology is a pretty prospective, green, affordable, and renewable energy way to address environmental problems caused by conventional fossil energy. Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), which are photovoltaic devices used to convert solar energy into electricity, have attracted considerable attention as alternatives to traditional photovoltaic devices because of their environment-friendly properties, simple preparation, wide availability, low cost, and high power conversion efficiency (PCE). A typical DSSC is composed of fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass, a dye coated TiO2 anode, an electrolyte, and a counter electrode (CE) catalyst. As an important component of DSSCs, the CE catalyst is crucial for collecting electrons from the external circuit and reducing I3− in the electrolyte. Pt as an outstanding catalyst provides a splendid electrocatalytic ability for DSSCs, sequentially endowing the DSSC with a glorious PCE. However, the use of Pt limits the commercial application of DSSCs because of its high cost and scarcity, and Pt is susceptible to corrosion by a redox couple. These limitations are not conducive to the fabrication of cost-effective and long-term stable DSSCs. Therefore, seeking economical Pt-like catalysts has become a hotspot for DSSCs.

On the basis of the functions of a CE catalyst, two strategies are proposed to address the limitations. First, using Pt-like materials with a similar catalytic activity replaces Pt; secondly, optimizing the electron transport of these catalytic materials by modifying their structures improves the catalytic activity. For the first strategy, transition metal compounds (TMCs) such as oxides, sulfides, selenides, and nitrides, as the representatives of Pt-like catalytic materials, have been investigated because of their abundant resources, considerable catalytic activity and low cost. Their impressive catalytic activity in DSSCs can be attributed to their similar electronic structures to Pt. Meanwhile, Nb-based TMCs have aroused much attention in the study of supercapacitors, photocatalysis, energy storage, and solar cells. In the photovoltaic field, Nb-based compounds used as photoanodes achieved a satisfactory photovoltaic performance as compared with TiO2, and they as CE catalysts have achieved commendable PCE values. Controllable NbSe2 nanosheets as a catalyst in DSSCs have achieved a PCE of 7.34%, and the cell with a Nb3.49N4.56O0.44 electrode has also obtained an excellent photovoltaic performance (6.39%). On the other hand, the use of ternary and multiple TMCs has attracted much attention due to the synergetic effect of different metal elements, which results in superior PCE values to those of monometallic compounds. This indicates that exploring polymetallic compounds as a substituent of Pt catalysts has become the main trend with respect to TMC catalysts.
Although TMCs as Pt alternatives have impressive electrocatalytic activity, their electron transport capacity is relatively inferior. Therefore, another strategy is to focus on improving the electron transport capacity of these TMC catalysts. In this context, the combination of high electrocatalytic TMCs and excellent conductive materials into one material is an effective solution. Among the various kinds of good conductor materials applied in DSSCs, such as carbon, metals, and alloys, carbon materials hold considerable appeal, not only because of their good electrical conductivity, but also because of their large specific surface area, good electrocatalytic activity, chemical stability and low cost. Meanwhile, carbon materials are also preferable substrates to support other functional TMCs for enhancing particle dispersion, thereby exposing more catalytic sites.
In the past 20 years, various carbonaceous materials, such as carbon black, three-dimensional (3D) single-walled carbon nanotubes, graphene, helical carbon nanofibers, and others, as CEs in DSSCs have been investigated and showed promising applications. Kim et al. have investigated the film thickness effect on the final efficiency of a carbon black-based cell and confirmed that a thickness of 9 μm obtained the best power conversion efficiency of 7.2%. A 3D single-walled carbon nanotube/graphene aerogel has been prepared by the Ma group and used as a counter electrode in a solar cell, exhibiting an excellent efficiency of 8.31% compared to Pt. Due to the high electrical conductivity and electrocatalytic activity of graphene nanoplates, they have been widely researched, and the highest power conversion efficiency is 9.4% reported by Kavan et al., which is based on a cobalt electrolyte.
Considering the large-scale use for future commercialization, low-priced and high-performance carbon materials are greatly desired. In recent years, biomass-derived carbon materials have attracted considerable attention in new energy fields because of their renewability, extensive sources, porous structure, high specific surface area and chemical stability. A 3D squamous self-supporting carbon framework constructed from densely porous carbon nanosheets was fabricated from tremella and applied in a supercapacitor, further showing a high specific capacitance of 585.1 F g−1 at a current density of 0.2 A g−1 in 2 M H2SO4. Similarly, interconnected honeycomb-like porous carbon derived from plane tree fluff exhibited a high charge storage capacity with a specific capacitance of 493 F g−1 in 2 M H2SO4 in a three-electrode system at a current density of 0.2 A g−1. Our group has successfully synthesized various bio-based carbon materials by using different biomass resources, such as corn cob, sawdust, walnut shell, waste carton, pomelo peel, sunflower stalk, aloe peel, acorn shell, and others. Among them, bio-based porous carbon (BPC) derived from aloe peel was considered as an optimal CE catalyst due to its unique porous network structure and superior electrical conductivity, which can facilitate the collection and transfer of the electrons and redox couple, thus ensuring the accessibility of reactive molecules. Many TMC loaded carbon materials exhibit better photovoltaic performance than pristine TMCs or carbon materials. Likewise, these bio-based carbon materials are also expected to combine with TMCs and achieve superior performance as CE catalysts in DSSCs.
On the strength of the excellent electrocatalytic activity of polybasic TMCs and the preferable electronic transport properties of carbon materials, we combined the two superior properties into one material and synthesized high-efficiency and low-cost BPC supported Nb-based bimetallic oxide (ZnNb2O6/BPC) with a unique network structure through a facile and general chemical method. Results show that ZnNb2O6 and ZnNb2O6/BPC as catalysts in DSSCs exhibit extraordinary photovoltaic performance with PCEs of 7.15% and 8.83%, respectively, higher than that of Pt catalysts (7.14%). Meanwhile, the ZnNb2O6/BPC hybrid shows superior catalytic activity and modified chemical stability for I3− reduction compared with pristine ZnNb2O6 and BPC. Based on first-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculation, we propose a general strategy that provides a clear understanding of the catalytic mechanism of CE catalysts with superior performance in DSSCs.

In the present work, we developed a facile and general strategy to synthesize bio-based porous carbon supported TMCs, as illustrated in Scheme 1. The expected products were obtained using the proposed route. First, aloe peel waste was used as the raw material, and BPC with a network structure was prepared through hydrothermal carbonization, KOH activation, and pyrolysis carbonization. Then, the BPC was dispersed in ethanol solution, and mixed with another ethanol solution containing two metal salts (NbCl5 and Zn(NO3)2·6H2O). This process enabled metal precursors to be adsorbed effectively on the porous net construction of BPC. Subsequently, the mixed solution was transferred to a Teflon-coated stainless-steel autoclave followed by hydrothermal treatment at 240 °C for 12 h. Finally, the dried nanoparticle was annealed under inert gas protected conditions, which led to the formation of a bio-based porous carbon supported bimetallic oxide (ZnNb2O6/BPC). The proposed approach was proven to be general and feasible for the fabrication of BPC supported transition metal compounds (binary, ternary, quaternary, or multicomponent compounds). Additional experimental details are described in the ESI.


The counter electrode was prepared as follows: 200 mg of composite catalyst powder and 6 g ZrO2 pearl were dissolved in 6 mL of isopropanol and stirred for 4 h. The resulting mixture was then sprayed onto a fluorine-tin-oxide (FTO) glass substrate with an airbrush (TD-128, Tiandi, China). Subsequently, the substrate coated with various catalysts (BPC, ZnNb2O6, and ZnNb2O6/BPC counter electrode films) was sintered under a N2 atmosphere at 400 °C for 30 min in a tube furnace to obtain the expected BPC, ZnNb2O6 and ZnNb2O6/BPC counter electrodes. For comparison, a Pt electrode was prepared through pyrolyzing an FTO glass substrate coated with H2PtCl6 isopropanol solution under an air atmosphere in a tube furnace which was performed at 500 °C for 30 min.

A 12 μm thick layer of 20 nm-sized TiO2 film was loaded on the FTO conducting glass substrate by the screen printer technique. The obtained TiO2 anode was sintered at 500 °C for 30 min in air. After cooling to 80 °C naturally, the above TiO2 films were immersed in a brown reagent bottle with N719 dye (Solaronix SA, Switzerland) solution for 24 h to obtain the dye-sensitized TiO2 photoanode.
A sandwich DSSC was assembled with a dye-sensitized TiO2 photoanode, a CE (ZnNb2O6/BPC, ZnNb2O6, BPC or Pt electrode), and a redox electrolyte. The redox electrolyte was composed of 0.06 M LiI, 0.03 M I2, 0.6 M 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide, 0.5 M 4-tert-butyl pyridine, and 0.1 M guanidinium thiocyanate with acetonitrile as the solvent. The as-assembled cells with an active area of 0.196 cm2 were used for the photovoltaic performance test. A symmetrical dummy cell was fabricated by using two identical CEs, filled with an electrolyte similar to that used for fabricating the DSSCs. The as-fabricated symmetrical cells were used in the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and Tafel polarization tests. Please consult our previous literature for more details on the fabrication of photovoltaic cells and symmetrical cells.

The surface morphologies of different counter electrode materials were observed by using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, JSM-6700F, JEOL, Japan). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded by using an automated X-ray powder diffractometer (D/Max 2200, MDI, America). Tafel polarization tests and cyclic voltammetry (CV) were conducted with a CHI 602E electrochemical analyzer (Chenhua, Shanghai, China), in which Pt served as the counter electrode, the as-prepared Nb-based electrode served as the working electrode and Ag/AgCl served as the reference electrode. The electrolyte for CV analysis contained 0.1 M LiClO4, 10 mM LiI and 1 mM I2 in argon-purged acetonitrile solution. The photocurrent–voltage (J–V) performance of the DSSC was evaluated by using a Keithley 2400 digital source meter with the irradiation of 100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5G) from a solar simulator (Oriel 94023A, Newport, America). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) data were obtained at frequencies ranging from 100 mHz to 1 MHz, using a CHI 660E electrochemical workstation (Chenhua, Shanghai, China). The EIS spectra were fitted with an appropriate equivalent circuit by using Z-view software. For the repeat EIS measurement, the devices were firstly subjected to CV scanning from 0 to 1 V and then from −1 to 0 V with a scan rate of 100 mV s−1, followed by 20 s relaxation at 0 V, and subsequently the EIS measurement was performed at 0 V from 0.1 Hz to 500 kHz. The successive electrochemical measurements were repeated 10 times, as illustrated in previous papers.


The bulk cleaved Nb surface (110) for ZnNb2O6, the Zn surface (100) for ZnNb2O6, and the Pt surface (111) for ZnNb2O6, and the vacuum region were all kept more than 15 Å apart to minimize the interactions between adjacent slabs. We investigated the electronic properties of ZnNb2O6 in the Pbcn phase, the (110) surface of ZnNb2O6, the (100) surface of ZnNb2O6, bulk Pt, and the (111) surface of Pt based on density functional theory utilizing the Cambridge Serial Total Energy Package (CASTEP) code with the Vanderbilt ultrasoft pseudopotential. The Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno (BFGS) minimization scheme was adopted for the geometry optimization including that of ZnNb2O6 in the Pbcn phase, the (110) surface of ZnNb2O6, the (100) surface of ZnNb2O6, bulk Pt, and the (111) surface of Pt. For all the geometry optimization, an exchange–correlation functional with a cut-off energy of 420 eV and 460 eV was set in this work, respectively. Appropriate k-point grids, 3 × 7 × 8 for ZnNb2O6 in the Pbcn phase, 4 × 4 × 1 for the (110) surface for ZnNb2O6, 6 × 2 × 1 for the (100) surface for ZnNb2O6, 10 × 10 × 10 for bulk Pt, and 12 × 12 × 1 for the (111) surface of Pt, were used in the Brillouin zone with the Monkhorst–Pack method, respectively. The maximum stress, the self-consistent convergence of the total energy, the maximum force on the atom, and the maximum ionic displacement were within 0.02 GPa, 5 × 10−6 eV per atom, 0.01 eV Å−1 and 5 × 10−4 Å, respectively. The exchange and correlation were approximated by the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) within Perdew, Burke and Ernzerhof (PBE). The 1 × 2 × 1 supercell of the (110) surface for ZnNb2O6 and the 2 × 2 × 1 supercell of the (100) surface of ZnNb2O6 in the Pbcn phase were adopted for the adsorption models.



Fig. 1a and b show the crystalline-phase structure of the fabricated powder sample, which is monitored through XRD. The XRD pattern of bio-based porous carbon in Fig. 1a reveals two broad peaks at 25.5° and 43.7°, corresponding to the (002) and (101) crystal planes of a typical graphitic structure. The characteristic peaks of the sample in Fig. 1b can be assigned to JCPDS card no. PDF#37-1371, indicating that the expected product ZnNb2O6 is obtained. Additional details can be found in the ESI. In addition, the diffraction peaks of ZnNb2O6 and graphitic carbon can also be observed apparently in Fig. 1b, and no extra peaks are observed. This result confirms that the target product ZnNb2O6/BPC prepared by our proposed fabrication route has been successfully synthesized. The following morphology characterization will further confirm and support the presence of ZnNb2O6 and BPC in the hybrid. Furthermore, the Raman spectra of BPC, ZnNb2O6, and ZnNb2O6/BPC are presented in Fig. 1c. Compared with ZnNb2O6, the ZnNb2O6/BPC nanohybrid shows two relatively obvious peaks at 1352 cm−1 and 1580 cm−1, corresponding to the D and G bands of BPC, respectively. This finding indicates that the BPC has been combined with ZnNb2O6 to form a nanohybrid successfully. In addition, as observed from Fig. 1d–f, the specific surface area has increased from 21.932 m2 g−1 of ZnNb2O6 to 140.174 m2 g−1 obtained by the combination of BPC and ZnNb2O6. The enhanced specific surface area can produce more catalytic sites for I3− reduction, which is favorable for high catalytic activity.

To further examine the surface compositions of the as-synthesized samples, XPS measurement has been employed, and the high-resolution spectra are presented in Fig. 2. For the high-resolution Zn 2p XPS spectrum (Fig. 2e), the two strongest characteristic peaks located at 1021.68 eV and 1045.38 eV, which are consistent with Zn 2p3/2 and Zn 2p51/2, manifesting the presence of Zn2+. Two characteristic peaks centered at 207.32 eV and 209.90 eV, representing 3d3/2 and 3d5/2 spin–orbit peaks of Nb, respectively, are shown in the high-resolution XPS scan of the Nb 3d spectrum (Fig. 2f), indicating that the Nb element exists in the form of Nb5+ in the ZnNb2O6/BPC nanohybrid. Moreover, the O 1s spectrum in Fig. 2g displays three obvious peaks centered at 530.68 eV, 531.58 eV, and 532.58 eV, corresponding to Nb–O, Zn–O, and O2−, respectively, which has confirmed the formation of ZnNb2O6. As observed from the C 1s spectrum (Fig. 2h), the divided three peaks located at 284.62 eV, 285.32 eV, and 289.10 eV correspond to CC, C–N/C–O–C, and C–O, respectively, and the C–N/C–O–C and C–O peaks reveal the presence of numerous functional groups, which can promote the wettability of the nanohybrid electrode and improve the adsorption of electrolyte ions in the photovoltaic cell. Based on all the as-obtained XPS results, it can be concluded that BPC has been successfully introduced into ZnNb2O6 to form the ZnNb2O6/BPC nanohybrid.
The surface morphologies of the nanohybrid were investigated through a FESEM. Fig. 3a clearly shows that the 3D network structure of BPC is formed, in which abundant pores randomly appear, and pore size presents multilevel distribution ranging from 200 nm to 4 μm. The formation of the unique BPC structure is attributed to the special carbonaceous tissue of aloe peel and the fabrication means used in this work. Partial aggregation of the bimetallic oxide ZnNb2O6 nanoparticles can be found in Fig. 3b, which is not beneficial to the exposure of active sites in catalyst surfaces, thereby weakening the catalytic capability of the nanoparticles. As observed from Fig. 3c, ZnNb2O6 nanoparticles are distributed onto the surfaces and pores of BPC, and the ZnNb2O6/BPC hybrid has better dispersibility compared with pristine ZnNb2O6. FESEM results once again confirm the presence of ZnNb2O6 and BPC in the hybrid, which is in good agreement with the XRD result of ZnNb2O6/BPC. This finding indicates that BPC provides a superior substrate for ZnNb2O6, in which the ameliorative dispersion of ZnNb2O6 can release more catalytic sites. In addition, the distinctive 3D network structure of the nanohybrid provides an efficient path for electron transport at the interface of the catalyst and electrolyte, and makes the electrons accessible for I3− reduction, thus making the redox reaction more sufficient.
Based on the above analysis, we can identify that ZnNb2O6/BPC has been synthesized successfully. However, as for the traditional TMC loaded on carbonous materials nanohybrids, carbon support materials (graphene, carbon nanotube) in the nanohybrids generally possess high cost and rigorous preparation condition (more details can be found in Table S2 in ESI). By contrast, employing the abundant and widely available aloe peel waste as the carbon source to prepare carbon materials immensely reduces the cost. More importantly, the obtained porous network framework is similar to that of mesoporous carbon. All these advantages make the as-synthesized ZnNb2O6/BPC nanohybrid a great potential catalyst, which is expected to achieve an excellent performance in the following photovoltaic and electrochemical measurements.


Fig. 4a shows the J–V characteristic curves with different catalysts. The cell based on the ZnNb2O6 catalyst yields a substantially higher PCE of 7.15% than devices based on Pt and BPC, which is mainly attributed to a high short circuit current density (Jsc) of 14.60 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.73 V and a fill factor (FF) of 0.67. Compared with the Nb-based monometallic oxide (PCE of NbO2: 5.62%) prepared in our previous work, the bimetallic oxide ZnNb2O6 can really gain a more considerable PCE. In addition, the PCE value of ZnNb2O6-based cells can be further enhanced by combining the bimetallic oxide with a BPC support, and reaches 8.83% in cells with a ZnNb2O6/BPC nanohybrid catalyst. As shown in the J–V plot, a quick decrease of Jsc in the J–V plot has occurred. This can be mainly attributed to the electrolyte diffusion limitation in the ZnNb2O6 cathode, in which only a few pores exist. The optimization approach for solving the electrolyte diffusion limit in pores at the cathode is to introduce the highly conductive BPC material into ZnNb2O6 to form a nanohybrid, in which the porous structure can sufficiently improve the interfacial charge transfer resistance, thus avoiding the mass transport limitation of Jsc. After optimization, the Jsc (19.12 mA cm−2) of the device based on ZnNb2O6/BPC catalysts is obviously higher than those of the cells with ZnNb2O6 (14.60 mA cm−2). This condition manifests that the superior electrical conductivity and porous properties of BPC dramatically improve the electron transport efficiency of the ZnNb2O6/BPC nanohybrid. The excellent photovoltaic performance also means the outstanding electrocatalytic activity of catalysts, which will be confirmed in the subsequent electrochemical tests.

Systematic electrochemical measurements, including CV, Tafel polarization, and EIS, are conducted to estimate electrochemical activity. As shown in Fig. 4b, all the CV curves of different electrodes exhibit typical peroxidation–reduction peaks, and the relative positive pairs are due to the oxidation and reduction of I−/I3−; I3− + 2e−  2I− (corresponding to the lower-potential peak), which evidently occurs in the process of electrode catalytic reaction under testing conditions, is the main reaction emphasized in this work. The most related parameters of the CV experiment are the peak current density (Ip) and peak-to-peak separation (ΔEp), which are commonly used to assess the electrocatalytic activity of catalytic materials. The ΔEp value of ZnNb2O6 is 0.631 V, whereas the ΔEp value of ZnNb2O6/BPC is 0.456 V. The ΔEp started to decrease after introducing BPC into ZnNb2O6, indicating that I3− is reduced more readily after forming a nanohybrid. The increase in Ip is in the order of ZnNb2O6 < Pt < ZnNb2O6/BPC, suggesting that the reduction reaction at the nanohybrid/electrolyte interface is faster than that of ZnNb2O6. Obviously, the introduction of BPC into ZnNb2O6 results in a remarkable improvement in electrocatalytic activity.
Furthermore, Tafel polarization tests are performed to investigate catalytic kinetics, which is related to the interfacial charge-transfer properties of the I−/I3− redox couple occurred under a symmetric cell configuration (electrode/electrolyte/electrode). As shown in Fig. 4c, the intersection of the vertical axis and cathodic branch can be regarded as the limiting current density (Jlim). The other significant parameter is the exchange current density (J0), which can be estimated from the slopes of the measured curves. The magnitudes of J0 and Jlim of ZnNb2O6/BPC both obviously increase, indicating that the ZnNb2O6/BPC electrode has a good catalytic activity and a larger diffusion coefficient in the electrolyte at the same potential. This characteristic may be ascribed to the adequate contact between the ions in the redox couple electrolyte and the ZnNb2O6/BPC electrode; on the other hand, ZnNb2O6/BPC makes the charge transport easier.
EIS is conducted to compare the electrocatalytic activity of different catalysts. Fig. 4d shows the Nyquist plots of symmetrical cells assembled with two identical electrodes. As shown in the equivalent-circuit diagram, the relevant parameters fitted in Z-view software are listed in Table 1. The semicircle in the high-frequency domain is related to the charge-transfer process at the electrolyte/electrode interface, which represents the charge-transfer resistance (Rct), while the second semicircle in the low-frequency domain is referred to the Nernst diffusion impedance (ZN) of the iodide redox shuttle. The intercept on the horizontal axis reflects the series resistance (Rs), which mainly represents the adhesion between the CE film and conductive substrate. The Rct value of ZnNb2O6/BPC is 6.50 Ω cm2, which is lower than that of ZnNb2O6 (10.19 Ω cm2) and BPC (10.22 Ω cm2). This result suggests that ZnNb2O6/BPC possesses better electrocatalytic activity for I3− reduction compared with those of ZnNb2O6 and BPC, which is in accordance with the results of the CV and photovoltaic measurements. ZnNb2O6/BPC exhibits an evidently lower ZN value (4.67 Ω cm2) than Pt (6.15 Ω cm2). A smaller ZN value can benefit I− diffusion in the electrolyte, thus promoting catalytic performance. Besides, a higher Rs value (12.78 Ω cm2) of nanohybrid-based catalyst reflects a relatively poorer charge transfer in the films compared with Pt (7.45 Ω cm2), which depends on the interparticle contact. However, this fact is not decisive of the final photovoltaic performance, because the photovoltaic device can be affected by many factors such as specific surface area, particle size, porosity, film thickness, morphology feature, and cohesiveness.
Catalysts

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)

R
ct (Ω cm2)

R
s (Ω cm2)

Z
N (Ω cm2)
ΔEp (V)

I
p (mA cm−2)

a 
J
sc: short-circuit current density; Voc: open-circuit voltage; FF: fill factor; PCE: power conversion efficiency; Rct: charge-transfer resistance; Rs: ohmic internal resistance; in most cases, Rs can also be considered as series resistance; ZN: Nernst diffusion impedance; ΔEp: peak-to-peak separation; Ip: peak current density.
b The photovoltaic parameters are averaged from the obtained results for at least three cells.

Pt
15.77
0.70
0.65
7.14 ± 0.01
2.32
7.45
6.15
0.307
−2.439
BPC
14.12
0.71
0.65
6.52 ± 0.01
10.22
13.99
11.42
0.847
−4.698
ZnNb2O6
14.60
0.73
0.67
7.15 ± 0.01
10.19
28.04
8.75
0.631
−2.220
ZnNb2O6/BPC
19.12
0.71
0.65
8.83 ± 0.01
6.50
12.78
4.67
0.456
−3.692

The electrochemical stability of photovoltaic devices is a highly crucial issue in actual applications. Herein, various measurements, such as dark current–voltage, multiple-cycle successive CV, and repeated EIS, were exploited to assess the electrochemical stability comprehensively. The corrosion or dissolution of the catalyst can significantly impair the overall performance of photovoltaic cells. The dark current–voltage test is a method for estimating the preliminary electrochemical stability and verifying the occurrence of a chemical reaction between CEs and electrolytes. As illustrated in Fig. 4f, no abnormal difference is observed in the onset of the dark current curves of all samples, indicating that the four catalytic materials can exhibit sturdy and steady catalytic properties in the corrosive electrolyte.

Multi-cycle successive CV scanning is commonly utilized to estimate the initial electrochemical stability of CE catalysts. The CV tests of 100 cycles for ZnNb2O6/BPC are shown in Fig. 5c, which exhibits a better overlap after an entire circulation compared with ZnNb2O6, BPC and Pt, indicating that the nanohybrid ZnNb2O6/BPC catalyst has better electrochemical stability in the I−/I3− electrolyte system. The relationships between cycle times and redox current density are displayed in Fig. 5e–h. With the increase in cycle times, the values of redox current density based on a ZnNb2O6/BPC electrode have no observable change as compared with the other three samples. This result further provides direct evidence for the electrocatalytic stability of the ZnNb2O6/BPC catalyst. Additionally, the shedding phenomenon of all four catalyst electrode films on the surface of the FTO substrate is not observed when the photographs of all four catalyst electrodes before and after successive CV scanning are compared. This result further elucidates that corrosion or dissolution of the ZnNb2O6/BPC catalyst in the I−/I3− system would not occur and the tested sample could stably catalyze I3−.
The repeat-EIS test is another method to examine the electrochemical stability. From the repeated EIS measurements shown in Fig. 6, an obvious variation can be found in the Rct values of ZnNb2O6 and BPC catalysts. The increasing Rs and Rct can be mainly ascribed to poor activity, as confirmed by the CV, EIS and Tafel tests, which damages the electrochemical stability of CEs. In addition, the structure with few pores and a small specific surface area (21.932 m2 g−1) in the ZnNb2O6 catalyst causes an electrolyte limitation effect, further resulting in the increase in the Rct value. For the BPC CE, the inferior adhesion between the catalyst and FTO substrate glass leads to inferior stability in the corrosive electrolyte. By contrast, the ZnNb2O6/BPC electrode has a negligible change compared with the Pt electrode from the 1st to the 10th scanning, indicating the stable electrochemical performance of the nanohybrid. On the one hand, the introduction of BPC provides the nanohybrid with an enhanced electron transport ability, which is reflected by the obvious improvement of Jsc (19.12 mA cm−2 of ZnNb2O6/BPC and 14.60 mA cm−2 of ZnNb2O6); on the other hand, the obtained porous network framework makes the electrolyte molecule accessible to the increased active sites caused by the improved dispersion of nanoparticles in the ZnNb2O6/BPC catalyst. Based on all the electrochemical measurement analyses, these results elucidate that the proposed strategy could evidently improve catalytic performance and chemical stability, thus further positively influencing photovoltaic efficiency and potential commercial application.

An excellent catalyst must have superior electrical conductivity and catalytic activity. To explore the intrinsic origin of the excellent performance of hybrid catalysts based on the two required functions of counter electrode catalysts, namely superior electron transport capability (conductivity) and catalytic activity, we propose a general strategy to deeply understand the two aspects by employing first-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculation. First, the investigation of the band structure is a significant way to analyze the electronic properties of the catalytic material, which reflects the electron transport capability of the catalysts. The density of states (DOS) of bulk ZnNb2O6 is illustrated in Fig. 7a, which shows a wide band gap of 3.492 eV. This finding indicates that the ZnNb2O6 catalyst has no electrical conductivity, which does not agree with the outstanding photovoltaic performance of those cells with ZnNb2O6. To further understand the inconsistency between the experiment and calculation, we calculate the DOS of the surface Zn and Nb atoms. As illustrated in Fig. 7c and d, the DOS of the Zn and Nb atoms on the (100) and (110) surfaces is non-zero at the Fermi energy level (Ef), signifying that surface Zn and Nb atoms reveal glorious metallic features similar to Pt, and ZnNb2O6 can readily conduct electricity in the same way as Pt metal. As concluded from the calculation results, the favorable electron transport feature from the zero band gap of (100) and (110) surfaces of the metal atoms in ZnNb2O6 facilitates the redox couple reaction process, thus contributing to superior catalytic properties and outstanding photovoltaic performance.

I− is generated from the induced bond elongation by extracting charges from the catalyst in the decomposition of molecular I3− into three ions. The interfacial behavior of the I3− complex determines the capability of electron exchange during the redox reaction. Thus, molecular I3− is considered in first-principles DFT calculation to further investigate the impact of interface status for the redox reaction, which is set on the lattice plane (100) and (110) models for geometry optimization. As illustrated in Fig. 8, the results indicate that the molecular I3− complex is effectively chemisorbed on the exposed Zn and Nb atoms. Chemisorption provides a direct and efficient path (no need to pass through the liquid electrolyte) for charge transport required by the reduction reaction. Moreover, the I–I bond length after structure optimization is elongated to 1.790 Å and 3.442 Å due to the intense interaction of I3− and surface metal atoms. The elongation of the I–I bond also means that the dissociation of the I3− complex on the sites of surface metal atoms is more conductive. The longer the I–I bond is, the more activated the I3− is. Thus, the first-principles DFT results manifest that the surface metal atoms of the ZnNb2O6 material are beneficial for I3− dissociation, thereby causing the corresponding ZnNb2O6 cell to exhibit excellent catalytic activity and photovoltaic performance. For the function of BPC, besides providing more active area (BET surface area of 506.990 cm2 g−1), BPC can supply superior electrical conductivity and a unique porous network structure. In addition, it is also an excellent substrate to support ZnNb2O6 and thus improve the dispersion of nanoparticles. Thus, the combination of ZnNb2O6 and BPC is a feasible and efficient strategy to prepare high-performance composite electrocatalysts.

In summary, we present a general strategy that can be used to synthesize bio-based carbon supported bimetallic oxides. The proposed method is facile and versatile, thus greatly improving the dispersion of bimetallic oxide nanoparticles and electron transport with the introduction of a 3D network structure. The proposed synthetic strategy adequately utilizes the synergistic effect of different components, such as highly active ZnNb2O6 nanoparticles and an outstanding BPC conductive substrate structure in the ZnNb2O6/BPC nanohybrid. As a catalyst, the as-prepared nanohybrid ZnNb2O6/BPC in photovoltaic cells shows an impressive PCE of 8.83%, which is higher than that of pristine ZnNb2O6 (7.15%) and conventional Pt electrodes (7.14%). The systemic investigations on the electrochemical behavior of the ZnNb2O6/BPC catalyst manifest its outstanding catalytic properties and electrochemical stability for I3− reduction. We also proposed a general strategy based on first-principles DFT theoretical calculation to understand the catalytic mechanism of the catalyst. Using this strategy, the surface Nb and Zn atoms in ZnNb2O6 show excellent metallic properties and can act as catalytic sites; moreover, extremely elongated I–I bonds caused by surface metal atoms and I atoms under chemical adsorption conditions are beneficial to the process of I3− reduction, which results in the superior catalytic properties and photovoltaic performance of these cells with ZnNb2O6. The electronic structure and surface adsorption of catalytic materials based on the proposed general strategy can provide a general route to design electrocatalysts and understand the intrinsic catalytic mechanism in new generation photovoltaic technology and other catalytic fields.


There are no conflicts to declare.


Financial support from NSFC (51672208), the National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFB1502902), the Key Program for International S&T Cooperation Projects of Shaanxi Province (2019KWZ-03), and the Sci-Tech R&D Program of Shaanxi Province (2010K01-120, 2011JM6010 and 2015JM5183) is greatly acknowledged. The project was partly sponsored by SRF ((2012)940) for ROCS, SEM. Y. X. Song (School of Microelectronics, Xidian University, China) is thanked for allowing to use the CASTEP code in Materials Studio.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta03540k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019