 DOI: 10.1039/C6NR06862F
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 19945-19972


Jonas G.
Croissant
*,

Xavier
Cattoën
,

Jean-Olivier
Durand
,

Michel
Wong Chi Man
 and 

Niveen M.
Khashab
*

Smart Hybrid Materials Laboratory, Advanced Membranes and Porous Materials Center, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal 23955, Saudi Arabia. E-mail: niveen.khashab@kaust.edu.sa

Institut Néel, Université Grenoble Alpes and CNRS, Grenoble, France

Institut Charles Gerhardt Montpellier UMR-5253 CNRS-UM2-ENSCM-UM1cc, 1701 Place Eugène Bataillon, F-34095 Montpelliercedex 05, France

Received
30th August 2016
, Accepted 4th November 2016
First published on 7th November 2016
Organic–inorganic hybrid materials garner properties from their organic and inorganic matrices as well as synergistic features, and therefore have recently attracted much attention at the nanoscale. Non-porous organosilica hybrid nanomaterials with a high organic content such as silsesquioxanes (R-SiO1.5, with R organic groups) and bridged silsesquioxanes (O1.5Si-R-SiO1.5) are especially attractive hybrids since they provide 20 to 80 weight percent of organic functional groups in addition to the known chemistry and stability of silica. In the organosilica family, silsesquioxanes (R-SiO1.5) stand between silicas (SiO2) and silicones (R2SiO), and are variously called organosilicas, ormosil (organically-modified silica), polysilsesquioxanes and silica hybrids. Herein, we comprehensively review non-porous silsesquioxane and bridged silsesquioxane nanomaterials and their applications in nanomedicine, electro-optics, and catalysis.
Jonas G. Croissant
Dr Jonas Croissant is a post-doctoral researcher at the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (Saudi Arabia) and UCLA. He received his Ph.D. from the École Nationale Supérieure de Chimie de Montpellier (France) in 2014 under the supervision of Profs. Jean-Olivier Durand and Michel Wong Chi Man. He was awarded the Ballard Chemistry Foundation as well as the Société Chimique de France Languedoc Roussillon doctoral thesis awards. His research interests include the design and applications of organosilica nanocomposites.
Xavier Cattoën
Dr Xavier Cattoën was born in 1978 in Poitiers (France). He graduated from ENS Cachan and then completed his Ph.D. in 2004 under the supervision of Prof. G. Bertrand and Dr D. Bourissou in Toulouse. After a post-doctoral stay at ICIQ in Tarragona (Spain) in M. A. Pericàs’ group, he joined the CNRS in 2007 at the ICG Institute (Institut Charles Gerhardt Montpellier), and then moved to the Néel Institute in Grenoble in 2013 where he is developing structured hybrid materials for applications in biophotonics.
Jean-Olivier Durand
Dr Jean-Olivier Durand graduated from the Ecole Nationale Supérieure de Chimie de Paris in 1990 and obtained his Ph.D. in organic chemistry with Prof. J. P. Genêt in 1993. He conducted postdoctoral studies with Prof. W. Oppolzer at the University of Geneva (Switzerland). After two other postdoctoral studies in Rennes (Prof. Le Corre) and Paris (Dr M. Larchevêque), he was appointed a CNRS researcher in 1996 at the Laboratoire de Chimie Moléculaire et Organisation du Solide, Institut Charles Gerhardt Montpellier. His research interests include the development of mesoporous silica nanoparticles for photodynamic therapy and drug delivery.
Michel Wong Chi Man
Dr Michel Wong Chi Man studied at the University of Montpellier (France) before completing an AvH Postdoctoral Fellowship at the University of Heidelberg (Germany). Currently he is a CNRS Research Director working at the ICGM (Institut Charles Gerhardt Montpellier) and has also been serving on the Board of the ISGS (International Sol–Gel Society) since 2011. He is an expert in organosilicon and hybrid silica chemistry and over the past two decades he has developed pioneering work on bridged silsesquioxanes (BSQ) producing significant scientific advances in this field. He was the first to report right- and left-handed helical BSQ and self-structured BSQ at the nanoscale. He has also developed BSQ for application in several fields: catalysis, optics, and separation chemistry.
Niveen M. Khashab
Dr Niveen M. Khashab received her B.Sc. from the American University of Beirut in 2002 and her Ph.D. from the University of Florida, Gainesville in 2007 with Alan Katritzky. She conducted postdoctoral studies with Sir J. Fraser Stoddart in UCLA and Northwestern University from 2007 to 2009. She then joined the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, and was promoted to Associate Professor in 2016. She was awarded the L'Oréal-UNESCO Women in Science award of 2017 for the Africa & Arab States. Her major interests include hybrid materials, stimuli responsive systems, controlled release and delivery applications, and self-assembly.

Hybrid materials are well-known to uniquely garner properties from their organic and inorganic components in a synergistic way. Organosilica hybrids obtained by sol–gel processes have attracted particular attention owing to their ability to control the processability of the materials via the chemistry of silica and combine it with highly tunable organic properties. The pursuit of nanoscaled organosilica hybrids is of great interest for many applications such as nanomedicine, separation, catalysis and opto-electronics due to new properties available at the nanoscale and novel behaviors between nanomaterials and their surrounding media.

Various types of organosilica composite nanomaterials were thus designed, and they may be distinguished in the following four categories: mesoporous organosilica, non-porous organosilica, periodic mesoporous organosilica, and non-porous silsesquioxane NPs (Fig. 1). Mesoporous organosilica NPs could be prepared by co-condensation of a silica source (e.g. tetraethoxysilane (TEOS)) with a mono or a bridged organoalkoxysilane in a templated aqueous solution which affords NPs with functional pores (Fig. 1A and B). Non-porous organosilica NPs are prepared in a similar manner in the absence of structure directing agents (Fig. 1C), or can be prepared by post-functionalizing silica NPs (Fig. 1D). The latter two strategies have been applied to design organosilica nanocomposites with low to intermediate organic contents on the order of 1 to 30 weight percent, which limits their properties and applications. The doping of silica with organic moieties could also be done without covalent alkoxysilane linkages. This comes from the synthetic challenge to maintain the porosity and the compositional homogeneity at higher organic contents. On the other hand, organosilica nanocomposites with much higher organic contents (typically 30–70%) could be designed via sol–gel processes of mono or bridged organoalkoxysilane without a silica source (Fig. 1E–H). In the presence of structure directing agents, the condensation of bridged alkoxysilane may lead to periodic mesoporous organosilicas (PMOs, also called mesoporous bridged silsesquioxanes), while in their absence non-porous (though not always) silsesquioxanes are obtained from mono or bridged-organoalkoxysilanes (Fig. 1H and G). We recently reviewed comprehensively mesoporous bridged silsesquioxane NPs. A few years ago, reviews have been published on bulk silsesquioxane materials. Silsesquioxane NPs obtained from mono-alkoxysilylated organosilanes were reviewed in 2005 by John Hay et al. The present review focuses on the state of the art of nanoscaled non-porous silsesquioxanes and bridged silsesquioxanes with a comprehensive survey of their syntheses and applications. Note that polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxanes (POSS) which are silsesquioxane polyhedra nanodots are not described since they form another wide field of research. The frontier between these materials is, however, narrow since trimethoxyorganosilanes can form POSS, and POSS can be fragmented to prepare various silsesquioxanes. Mesoporous POSS materials and POSS-bridged silsesquioxane hybrid materials were also reported. For the purpose of this review we will describe silsesquioxanes with at least one dimension below 1000 nm. A few polydisperse nano/micro-particles requiring size optimizations are also presented since their concepts are relevant to the field.

Herein, we differentiate on the one hand silsesquioxane (SQ) NPs prepared from mono-organoalkoxysilane precursors (Fig. 2A), and on the other hand bridged silsesquioxane (BSQ) NPs prepared from bis- (n = 1) or multi-organoalkoxysilane (n ≥ 1) precursors (see Fig. 2B). Most reported BSQ NPs were, however, synthesized from bis-organoalkoxysilanes. Chlorosilanes and organoalkoxysilanes with methoxy, propoxy, and isopropoxy leaving groups were also used for sol–gel processed materials, though organotriethoxysilanes are usually preferred since they generate ethanol by-products and have a lower reactivity which allows a greater synthetic control to tailor the nanostructures. Both nanomaterials are obtained via hydrolysis and condensation reactions under acidic, basic, or fluoride catalysis. The resulting materials differ in the interconnectivity of the siloxane network, which is bridged by organic moieties in the case of BSQ NPs. In terms of properties, compared to organosilicas, the organic repetitive units of SQ and BSQ allow the tunability of the porosity, thermal and mechanical stabilities, refractive index, optical clarity, chemical resistance, hydrophobicity and dielectric constant. BSQ materials are generally more likely than SQ materials to have a molecular periodicity via hydrogen bonding or π–π stackings between bridging units, which may or may not be desirable for a given application. However, since the thermal, chemical, and mechanical stabilities of such materials are related to the degree of the siloxane entanglement, BSQ materials are generally more stable than SQ materials for a given organic moiety, though synthetic conditions may affect the textural properties of the materials (meso-, nano-pores) and in turn modify their stability. Such considerations are particularly important for the kinetics of the particle degradation and for the diffusion of molecules as discussed in section 3. BSQ materials are also more likely to be mesoporous than SQ materials with templating agents or additives.

Historically, bulk SQ materials were already studied and patented in the 60s and 70s, but the controlled synthesis of BSQ nanomaterials was only achieved in the year 2000 by Brinker and Loy via an evaporation-induced self-assembly method. From 2006 onwards, Shea and co-workers then published many pioneering studies on BSQ NPs. The advances in the controlled syntheses of SQ and BSQ NPs with various sizes, morphologies, and organic constituents are reviewed in section 2.

Since the first elaborations of SQ nanomaterials, a wide variety of compositions have been investigated as shown in Fig. 3 displaying saturated and unsaturated alkyl chains, phenyl, aminopropyl, as well as larger and more complex structures listed with increasing size. Besides, SQ NPs have been designed with various morphologies such as spherical, hollow, core–shell, and Janus NPs. In the following sub-sections SQ nanomaterials are classified according to their morphologies, and their syntheses are briefly discussed.


Several modifications of the Stöber sol–gel route have been employed to prepare monodisperse SQ nanospheres. In 2003, Arkhireeva and Hay designed methyl (1, see numbering in Fig. 3), ethyl (2), vinyl (3), and phenyl (7) SQ nanospheres with sizes ranging from 60 to 180 nm. The silicon–carbon bonds remained stable during the hydrolysis–condensation of organoalkoxysilanes and the authors measured low surface areas (<100 m2 g−1) with mesopores (2–4 nm) arising from the steric effects of the organic groups. They later managed to tune the nanomaterial sizes from 300 to 3 nm with methyl and vinyl bridges leading to highly monodisperse particles (Fig. 4A and B). Higher porosities could be obtained with benzethonium chloride surfactants. In another study, a systematic assessment of the influence of seven different organic groups on the syntheses and properties of SQ NPs was described. Nearly monodisperse 100 to 400 nm nanospheres were synthesised with methyl (1, see Fig. 4C), ethyl (2), vinyl (3), pentyl (5), octyl (6), phenyl (7), and aminopropyl (8) groups. Rhodamine B-doped NPs were also prepared to study the influence of the organic groups on the optical properties and the doping efficiencies. Methyl (1) SQ NPs enabled the highest doping while the aggregation of the dye was less favored with vinyl NPs and led to the highest yield in rhodamine emission. Mercaptopropyl (10) SQ NPs were first prepared by Nakamura and Ishimura from mercaptopropyl-trimethoxysilane. They then investigated the influence of methoxy and ethoxy leaving groups finding similar kinetics for the formation of NPs via the Stöber method, and they also prepared NPs from (3-mercaptopropyl)methyldimethoxysilane at higher ammonia concentration. The same group later prepared epoxy (17) SQ NPs from the sol–gel process of 2-(3,4-epoxycyclohexyl)ethyltrimethoxysilane in different reaction mixtures, affording 100 to 1500 nm spherical particles. Mercaptopropyl (10) SQ NPs doped with fluorescein-aminopropyl (29) SQ NPs were prepared in aqueous ammonia. Larger phenyl (7) SQ particles of 400 nm in diameter and incorporating fluorescent dansylamide derivatives (22) were recently described by Loy et al. in order to prepare hybrid membranes by thermal sintering of NPs on a ceramic support. The Stöber method was also used recently to synthesize silsesquioxane nanocrystals for the first time. Until that report, SQ NPs were mostly disorganized, but lowering the condensation of vinyl (3) SQ NPs allowed the π–π stacking of the vinyl groups which generated fluorescence in 2 to 6 nm large nanocrystals by quantum confinement.

Non-hydrolytic sol–gel methods were later reported to prepare spherical particles of 100 nm to 2 μm in diameter by reacting organotrichlorosilane precursors in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), which was used both as a solvent and as an oxygen donor in the absence of a catalyst. Through this approach various SQ NPs were obtained with methyl (1), ethyl (2), and phenyl (7) groups, though the materials were aggregated on quite large scales. Mercaptopropyl (10) SQ NPs with propyldisulfide functions were obtained via self-condensation in DMSO as well.
An emulsion synthesis was developed by Prasad and co-workers for the preparation of various SQ NPs (typically with vinyl groups) and organically-doped SQ NPs, often called “ormosil” for organically-modified silica. The method is based on the Aerosol-OT surfactant (AOT: sodium bis(2-ethylhexyl)-sulfosuccinate) in the non-polar core of AOT/1-butanol/water micelles. By this process, they prepared vinyl (3) and iodopropyl (14) SQ nanospheres of 30 nm. Kong et al. prepared vinyl (3) SQ NPs in a reverse emulsion reaction, then modified surface vinyls into carboxylic acid upon addition of KMnO4, and eventually pegylated the SQ particles through the formation of carbamate linkers. Kong and co-workers synthesized SQ NPs from N-(3-trimethoxy-silylethyl)-ethylenediamine (leading to 15) through a miniemulsion process using sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS) as an emulsifier, and obtained 100 nm spherical particles. Several SQ NPs with physically-encapsulated photosensitizers in their core were prepared. One example was reported using AOT/DMSO/water emulsions to stabilize photoactive molecules in DMSO, and then form the physically-doped vinyl (3) SQ NPs. Vinyl (3) or aminopropyl (8) SQ NPs were physically-doped with Nile red dyes to act as optical probes. Propyl (4) SQ NPs were also used to encapsulate two-photon absorbers.
Inspired by the reproducibility and applicability of the miniemulsion method for SQ nanospheres, multiple SQs were mixed to form multifunctional NPs. The nanomaterials were composed of one or more short groups (mercaptopropyl, vinyl, etc.) to guide the nanoscale condensation and to provide hydrophobic properties with the organosilica matrix, and in some cases, longer and more functional groups were also mixed for the target application. Bifunctional hydrophobic SQ NPs with methyl (1)/propyl (4) and, or propyl (4)/octyl (6) SQ compositions were prepared via an emulsion polymerization under alkaline conditions in a SDS/water mixture at 35 °C. Bifunctional SQ NPs could be obtained by physical doping of specific molecules, but the covalent linkage was often preferred to prevent the leakage of the doping agents after an extended period of time. Mono-alkoxysilylated chlorin (30) and rhodamine B (28) were thus covalently incorporated into vinyl (3) SQ NPs. Typically, a mixture of AOT and 1-butanol co-surfactant was used to form micelles in water, dyes or drugs were added, and the addition of the SQ precursor (vinyl, amino-propyl, mercaptopropyl, etc.) triggered the particle formation at room temperature. The resulting nanomaterials were monodisperse and their sizes were tuned according to the amount of organosilanes added. Importantly for biomedical applications, non-aggregated 20 to 30 nm NPs were reproducibly obtained. Multiple organic functions were also incorporated into a single 20 nm SQ system with vinyl (3), aminopropyl (8), and a near-infrared (NIR) fluorophore (32) for biomedical applications (see section 3.1). The covalent incorporation of naphthalenyl-vinylenepyridine (23) into vinyl (3) SQ NPs was similarly carried out for analysing linear and nonlinear optical properties. Highly pegylated (24–27) vinyl (3) SQ NPs doped with the IR755-dye (31) SQ NPs were also prepared in one pot according to this synthesis. More biocompatible nanomaterials endowed with a stealth behavior were obtained via pegylation.
Hydrofluoric acid catalysis was used to prepare ultrasmall 2 to 4 nm SQ NPs from N,N-di(2,3-dihydroxypropyl)(aminopropyl)-triethoxysilane thus affording a tretraol branched (18) SQ NPs. The synthesis was performed in a methanol/water mixture at room temperature for 2 h. The authors identified partial intermolecular cyclization within the silsesquioxane structure, which probably accounted for the restricted extent of the particle growth.

SQ nanomaterials with hollow internal cavities are also desirable for many applications and have hence been synthesized using sol–gel science by template and non-template syntheses. In 2003, Koo et al. first prepared monodisperse 450 nm hollow phenyl (7) SQ NPs without a template via a two-step method in an aqueous solution (see Fig. 5). The mechanism of the formation of the hollow structure was discovered to be a self-templating synthesis based on the dissolution of non-condensed organoalkoxysilanes inside growing particles upon ethanolic washing. Besides, the thickness of the shells could be precisely tuned from 75 to 165 nm, simply by decreasing the sol–gel reaction time, which lowered the extent of the condensation. Conversely, the absence of washing led to dense SQ NPs.

The hard template approach is nonetheless generally preferred for its wider applicability. Ha and co-workers produced fluorinated (12) hollow SQ NPs via polystyrene beads as a hard template further coated with polyvinylene-pyrrolidone and then a silsesquioxane layer. The use of the polymer template, subsequently dissolved by the addition of ammonia, allowed the preparation of monodisperse 200 nm hollow SQ NPs. Trifluoropropyls were maintained and provided an interesting framework for various applications. The same group recently extended this approach to prepare trifluoropropyl (12), phenyl (7), vinyl (3), and methyl (1) SQ hollow NPs (Fig. 6). Cage-like methacryloxy-propyl (16) SQs were also copolymerized with styrene to controllably produce hollow SQs, after etching of the polystyrene cores.

Müller et al. prepared 30 to 40 nm SQ-glycopolymer hybrid nanomaterials from the 4 nm tetra-hydroxyalkyl branched aminopropyl (18) SQs. First, they mixed four equivalents of 2-bromo-2 methylpropionyl bromide to modify the SQ alcohol functions in order to make the resulting (19) SQ NPs a macroinitiator for atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP). Second, they conducted the ATRP with large sugar bearing methacrylate monomers to design the core–shell nanomaterials.

Several hydrophobic small NPs (<5 nm) were also encapsulated into the SQ framework for the design of multifunctional nanoplatforms. Quantum dots composed of CdSe/CdS/ZnS as well as magnetic Fe3O4 nanospheres were incorporated inside vinyl (3) SQ NPs by an emulsion method conducted at room temperature for 20 h. The encapsulation of gold NPs along with two dyes (fluorescein and malachite green isothiocyanate) inside mercaptopropyl (10) SQ NPs was performed for multimodal imaging.
A number of SQ-polymer hybrid latex nanomaterials were recently developed, reminiscent of the polystyrene hard template previously highlighted. These approaches were inspired by a pioneering study involving the design of silica–polystyrene core–shell NPs obtained via the silica coating of methacryloxy(propyl)trimethoxysilane to initiate the polystyrene copolymerization. The group of Li designed polystyrene@SQ, SQ@poly(styrene-butyl acrylate-fluorinated acrylate), and polymethacryloxy-SQ@polyacrylate core@shell nanocomposites. Typically, γ-methacryloxypropyl (16) SQ cores or shells are grown in water or water–ethanol mixtures under basic or acidic catalysis at moderate temperatures (50 to 80 °C) for several hours. Vinyl SQ NPs were also used to co-polymerize onto preformed polystyrene spheres in order to design SQ-polystyrene hybrid latex particles.
Yolk–shell silica@mercaptopropyl (10) SQ NPs were recently synthesized by selective etching of the silica cores (Fig. 7A) previously described for PMO NPs and silica@silica nanorattles. The resulting yolk–shell framework allowed the incorporation of palladium NPs to afford elegant nanoreactors. The hybrid composition of the nanomaterials was demonstrated by the combination of electron microscopy and elemental mapping techniques (Fig. 7B).

Mesoporous silica nanospheres asymmetrically-capped with phenyl (7) SQs were described by the group of Kuroda. A dispersion of 30 nm mesostructured silica spheres was first prepared in an aqueous CTAB template, then mixed with phenyltriethoxysilane, and stirred at 80 °C for 12 h at pH 8.2. The nanomaterials were finally dialyzed in order to remove the surfactant. The size of the phenyl (7) SQ phase could be increased by the amount of organoalkoxysilane added to the NP dispersion.


BSQ nanomaterials have been reported mainly from bridged organoalkoxysilanes constituted of two alkoxysilyls, and a few examples involved more than two alkoxysilyls (see Fig. 8, the numbering follows the size of the bridges). The variety of the organic bridging units range from simple alkyl and alkene (I–III), aromatic (IV–VII), or alkylamine (VIII–X) groups to polyaromatic conjugated groups such as coumarin dimers (XXIX), chlorins (XXXI, XXXII), and tetra-clicked diphenylbutadiene (XXXVII) and porphyrins (XXXX–XXXXIII). In the following sub-sections, BSQ nanomaterials are classified according to their morphologies, and their syntheses are briefly discussed.


An original evaporation-induced self-assembly (EISA) method was first reported by Brinker and Loy to produce non-aggregated BSQ NPs with a spherical morphology. They used dilute homogeneous ethanolic solutions of the precursors with various surfactants and hydrochloric acid solutions. They obtained multi-lamellar vesicular BSQ NPs with 2,3-butadienylene (III) bridging groups, and mesoporous phenylene (IV) BSQ NPs.

The first ‘chimie douce’ method involved the design of coumarin dimer (XXIX) based BSQ NPs by Shea and co-workers. The nanospheres were obtained under acidic sol–gel conditions in a water/tetrahydrofuran mixture leading to NPs with sizes in the range of 50 to 100 nm. The same group later reported the sol–gel reaction of the o-nitrobenzyl-N,N-bis(trimethoxysilylpropyl)carbamate precursor in a water/propanol mixture to prepare the corresponding (XVI) BSQ particles of 200 nm in diameter. Monodisperse propyldisulfide-based (XI) BSQ NPs of 200 nm were reported in basic water/ethanol at 80 °C by Durand et al.
Reverse microemulsion reactions were also performed to synthesize BSQ NPs. The controlled syntheses of various monodisperse NPs with dipropyl-bipyridinium-based (XV) and alkyldiamine-based (X) BSQ NPs were achieved via water-in-oil emulsions in acidic water and cyclohexane. Cis-platin-based (XXII) BSQ aggregated NPs were prepared in an ammonium hydroxide-catalyzed sol–gel polymerization involving an anionic reverse microemulsion composed of the AOT surfactant and hexane. A reverse microemulsion method was also applied to construct gadolinium-based (XXVI) BSQ NPs. The reaction medium involved an aqueous mixture of the Triton X-100 surfactant, 1-hexanol, cyclohexane (100 mL), with ammonium hydroxide catalyst and was stirred for one day at room temperature. Vivero-Escoto et al. also prepared chlorin-based (XXXI, XXXII) BSQ NPs.
Modified Stöber syntheses were also used for the preparation of BSQ nanospheres. Shea et al. fabricated various alkylene (I, II), phenylalkylene (IV, V), and alkylamine-based (IX) BSQ nano or microparticles (see Fig. 9A and B). The average particle sizes were systematically controlled between 20 nm and 1.5 μm by adjusting parameters such as the 1-propanol content. Two competitive mechanisms were proposed, the “monomer addition” consisting of the growth of seeds with remaining monomers in solution, and the “chemical aggregation” which described the growth of particles through the aggregation of seeds (Fig. 9C). The rough surface of NPs suggests that the latter mechanism was favored (Fig. 9B).
Loy et al. recently investigated the non-hydrolytic formation of silica and BSQ NPs. Using a method involving formic acid (4–8 equivalents) in toluene or toluene/tetrahydrofuran solutions, they successfully prepared polydisperse 500 to 1500 nm phenylene (IV) BSQ NPs, and aggregated ethylene (I) and bis(propyl)tetrasulfide-based (XI) BSQ NPs. A non-hydrolytic sol–gel method involving a mixture of bis-silylated bipyridine, DMF and trichloride lanthanides (TbCl3, EuCl3) at 100 °C produced nano- and micron-sized (XX) BSQ particles aggregated on large scales.

The group of Khashab recently reported the design of hollow and non-hollow BSQ NPs via a nitrophenylene bridge derivative (XVIII) (Fig. 10). The preparation of para-xylylene-bridged (V) periodic mesoporous organosilicas and the related hollow spherical nanoparticles was reported. Interestingly, the internal cavity of the latter hollow BSQ spheres could be adjusted by simply changing the relative amount of the xylene swelling agent.


Tetrasilylated lysine-based (XXXVIII) BSQ NPs with a hollow ring-like morphology were recently developed. The silane precursor was dissolved in DMF, then added to a solution of CTAB/H2O/NH3, and stirred for 2 h at 50 °C. The dimensions of the nano-objects were 220 nm in diameter and a cross-section of about 50 nm. The hollow feature was removed in the absence of the CTAB template, which supported the key role of CTAB ammonium groups with the silanes. On the other hand, lower and higher volumes of water produced nanofibers and nanospheres, respectively. These facts suggested the essential role of the lysine precursor concentration, coupled with its intra and intermolecular interactions, in the formation of hollow ring-like BSQ particles.


The anisotropic growth of BSQ nanomaterials appears to be mainly directed by the self-assembly of bridging units via hydrogen bonds or aromatic–aromatic interactions. The direction for the anisotropic assembly was thus strongly influenced by structural geometry characteristics such as chirality. Studies involving the self-assembly of organic bridges via the H-bonding driving force were reported via bis-urea-functionalized organosilyl precursors. Moreau and co-workers described the control of the morphology of diaminocyclohexane (XIX with n = 1) BSQ materials with hollow tube or spherical shapes (Fig. 11). The organo-bridged bis(triethoxy)silane, prepared as (R,R; S,S) enantiopure forms or as a racemic mixture, was hydrolyzed in basic ethanolic solution (pH 12) for 6 days at 80 °C. Interestingly, the pure enantiomeric compounds led to 2 ± 12 μm long and 300 to 1500 nm wide rectangular hollow rods with 100 nm thicknesses, while the racemic mixture led to spherical objects under similar conditions.

Using a similar synthetic method they later could obtain much downsized BSQ nanotubes of tris-(propylureido)benzene-based (XXXVI), which were 1–3 μm long and 40–100 nm wide, along with monodisperse microparticles. The structure and hydrophobicity of the BSQ precursor were responsible for the variation of the final shape of the nanomaterials. It was observed that higher aqueous contents in water/ethanol solutions lead to faster kinetics and lower solubility of the trisilylated precursor, thus favoring the self-assembly of the moieties and the generation of tubular nanostructures. The condensation of the bis-silylated triazine, in the presence of cyanuric acid complexing three triazine moieties via H-bond, produced BSQ (XXV) aggregated in wire-like morphologies. Another example of BSQ NRs was described by Wu et al. with (XXIII) bithiazole bridges. The materials were obtained in a water/ethanol mixture under reflux, affording 900 nm wide and 3 μm long objects. Interestingly, the shape of the particles was changed when the sol–gel process was carried out in the presence of the nickel (XXIII) and lanthanide (XXIV) ions complexing the bithiazole bridges. The latter one led to aggregated nanospheres of about 200 nm. The change in the morphology may have arisen from a loss of self-assembly upon the ion complexations due to the ligations of lanthanides with carbonyls.
Long bis(propylurea)alkyl-based BSQ materials were also reported by various groups. In these cases, intermolecular van der Waals forces may also have contributed to the self-assembly, though to a minor extent. Moreau and co-workers prepared bis(propylurea)dodecylene (XXXIV) BSQ lamellar materials which consisted of thin plates up to 1–2 μm large, 3–5 μm long, and 50–100 nm thick. The fabrication in acidic aqueous solution involved the intermolecular urea H-bond directed self-assembly of the BSQ organic linkers.
Hammer and co-workers designed a silicon-based organically-bridged nanomaterial similar to BSQ with a general formula of O0.5(CH3)2Si-R-Si(CH3)2O0.5, (XXVIII) with perylenediimide R bridges (Fig. 12A). Upon the variation of the concentration of the sol–gel catalyst, various morphologies were reported such as 200 nm × 15 μm nanowires and 200 nm × 9 μm nanorods (Fig. 12B and C). The structure was rigid despite the lower siloxane crosslinking, which could be ascribed to the self-assembly of aromatic moieties.
Chiral BSQ nanofibers were also designed via the use of chiral BSQ NP precursors (Fig. 13A–H). Chiral BSQ with bis(propylurea)cyclohexylene (XIX) bridges were prepared with right-handed and left-handed helical nanofiber morphologies. The nanofibers were 15 μm long and a few hundred nanometers wide and the helical handedness could be controlled via the choice of the (R,R) or the (S,S)-diamino-cyclohexane core (Fig. 13A and B). The particles were polydisperse spheres of 300 nm to 2 microns. Interestingly, modifying the structure of the bridges (XIX) with alkyl spacers (n = 3, 4, 5, 10) between each urea group and the cyclohexane resulted in 15 μm long chiral microfibers of 500 to 2000 nm in diameter for short alkyl lengths (n = 3, 4), and plate-like stacked structures for longer spacers (n = 5, 10). The self-assembly of a large bridges, possessing two urea and two amide functions separated with central alkylene segments of 9 or 12 carbons (XXXIV) with chiral (DD or LL) functionalities guiding the handedness, was also used to prepare chiral nanofibers (Fig. 13C–F). The synthesis was performed in 1,4-dioxane with a HCl catalyst and led to polydisperse nano- and micro-fibers. Interestingly, the helical handedness of the bundles followed an odd–even effect according to the number of carbons of the central alkylene segments. The dodecyl derived (XXXIV) BSQ fibers notably depicted both superoleophilic and superhydrophobic properties. This strategy was extended to a similar bridge with a biphenyl spacer (XXXV) to design right- of left-handed BSQ helicoidal nanofibers (Fig. 13G and H).
The self-assembly of the chiral gelator was employed as a soft template for the preparation of organic–inorganic nanofibers and nanotubes (Fig. 13I–M). The group of Yang designed a so-called “sol–gel transcription method” with chiral gelator self-assembled templates. Chiral SQ/BSQ nanotubes and nanoribbons were obtained with a gelator involving the stepwise formation of aminopropyl (8) SQ and phenylene (IV) BSQ under stirring at 0 °C for 10 minutes, static growth at 0 °C for 1 day, and then for 4 hours at 80 °C. The APTES silane was used as a co-templating agent. The same approach was also extended to 4,4′-biphenylene (VII) BSQ nanoribbons with the transfer of the chirality of gelator 12K. Nanoribbons were synthesized in water (Fig. 13I and J) while nanotubes were obtained in a water/ethanol solution (Fig. 13K). A higher ethanol content induced the formation of left-handed tubular ribbons with chiral aromatic ring packings, according to circular dichroism measurements. Impressively, the chirality was probed at both the nano and angstrom scales. While the nanoribbons displayed left-handedness at the nanolevel, the aromatic stacking was of left- or of right-handedness as a function of the self-assembly of the gelator. Biphenylene (VII) BSQ chiral nanotubes and single-layered nanoribbons were also fabricated via an anionic chiral gelator (Fig. 13L and M). The pyrolysis of these nano-objects was recently reported leading to carbonaceous tubular nanoribbons and single-layered nanoribbons respectively after silica removal through HF treatment. Interestingly the tubular nanoribbons exhibited optical activity while the single-layered ones did not as shown by circular dichroism spectra. Note that the same group further described various chiral mesoporous phenylene (IV) BSQ NPs.

Fluorescent BSQ core silica shell NPs were prepared by Tang et al. with either tetraphenylethene (XXVII) or silole (XXX) derivatives. The procedure first involved the sol–gel synthesis of (XXVII or XXX) BSQ cores by ammonium hydroxide catalysis in an ethanol/water mixture at room temperature for 3 h, followed by silica coating via TEOS to form the core–shell nanosystem. Monodisperse nanospheres of 60, 175, and 250 nm in diameter were obtained for the tetraphenylethene-based core, and 45, 200, and 270 nm NPs for the silole one, via the variation of the TEOS and catalyst concentrations.

Diphenylbutadienylene derivative-based (XXXVII) BSQ NPs, and the associated gold core BSQ shell (Au@BS) and gold-decorated BSQ (BS@Au) NPs were recently reported (Fig. 14). As shown by TEM and SEM micrographs the NPs were of 100 to 200 nm with 15 nm gold NPs. Au@BS was prepared according to a modified one-pot synthesis of a gold core mesoporous silica shell involving the in situ nucleation of gold nanocrystals followed by the coating of BSQ in a water/ethanol mixture with a sodium hydroxide catalyst. The timing of the addition of the BSQ precursor was crucial to avoid the aggregation of gold cores. On the other hand, BSQ NPs could be prepared and then mixed with freshly prepared gold NPs to decorate their surface without additional capping agents.

Despite the fact that SQ and BSQ nanomaterials have very diverse properties, several general features characterize them and account for their increased biomedical applications. First, like mesoporous silica NPs, the size, morphology, and surface functionalization of SQ and BSQ nanomaterials are controllable by materials chemists, as shown by the variety of syntheses presented in section 2. Second, the combination of organic and inorganic chemistries to elaborate novel organosilyl precursors and their corresponding SQ and BSQ hybrid NPs fosters interdisciplinary collaborations for the design and biological applications of nanosystems with unprecedented properties. Third, the unique high organic content of SQ and BSQ NPs (20–80 wt%) can be used for theranostic purposes and thus provide NPs applicable at much lower doses than that of silica or organosilica analogs. For instance, SQ or BSQ NPs mainly composed of photosensitizers are very effective for photodynamic therapy (PDT), while the efficiency of photosensitizer-doped silica is limited by the doping threshold. Fourth, the amorphous hybrid organosilica framework generally (though not always) leads to low cytotoxicity below 100 mg mL−1 for both SQ and BSQ NPs with various organic fragments, as reported for mesoporous organosilica NPs.

Furthermore, several in-depth biological studies on specific SQ NPs highlighted their potential for nanomedicine. For instance, the biodistribution and clearance of 20 nm pegylated vinyl (3) SQ chemically doped with the NIR dye DY776 (32) SQ was investigated by the group of Prasad. One day after the injection of SQ NPs in mice, the free NIR dye was mainly biodistributed in the intestine, the liver, and the kidney, while NPs were mainly found in the liver. After 360 hours, the clearance of the nanomaterial was evidenced (Fig. 15A), which opens promising biomedical applications with very low NP bio-accumulation, hence limiting potential side-effects. Additionally, Mancin et al. showed that serum proteins absorbed on the surface of non-PEGylated SQ NPs which prevented their aggregation in saline solutions. Conversely, pegylated NPs benefitted so-called “stealth” behavior against the phagocytic capture by human macrophages, which promises slower blood clearance, though the group of Nakamura recently identified ‘pegylated-resistant’ macrophages. Gunawardena and co-workers showed that 20 nm vinyl (3) SQ doped with rhodamine B (28) and conjugated with transferrin proteins fed to Drosophila had no effect on viability, and penetrated into living brains and neurons. According to their findings, SQ NPs were found in the cytoplasm (and not the nucleus) of the neuronal cell body without inducing aberrant neuronal death or interfering with normal neuronal processes (Fig. 15B–F). These biological investigations thus support the potential of small-sized SQ and BSQ NPs for brain-related nanomedicine.

Due to the versatility of organic components that could be linked to SQ and BSQ NPs, several strategies have been explored to endow the particles with imaging capabilities. The first approach involved the application of SQ NPs with short organic hydrophobic moieties, such as methyl and vinyl groups, to serve as vehicles for physically entrapped dyes into SQ NPs. One of the earliest examples of bioimaging via SQ-based NPs was reported with vinyl (3) bridges. In this work, SQ NPs were doped with Nile red dyes and a large two-photon conjugated molecule, in order to generate Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) upon two-photon-excited (TPE) fluorescence-imaging in the NIR. He et al., described a similar strategy with nile red-doped amino-propyl (8) and vinyl (3) SQ NPs which were then pegylated and functionalized with apo-transferrin or folic acid. Indocyanine green-doped methyl (1) SQ NPs functionalized with antibodies were applied for photoacoustic imaging. The covalent attachment of rhodamine B (23) SQ within vinyl (3) SQ NPs functionalized with transferrin targeting moieties was also reported.

Another approach was the use of luminescent semiconducting quantum dots inside SQ NPs. Multifunctional SQ NPs were prepared with a vinyl (3) framework encapsulating both quantum dots (CdSe/CdS/ZnS) and iron oxide (Fe3O4) NPs for magnetically-guided TPE-imaging of cancer cells. The SQ coating has the advantage to prevent the aggregation of these cores, as well as the rapid dissolution of iron oxide.
The SQ frameworks of the previous designs allowed the formation of nanoscaled particles with controlled non-aggregated morphologies with the encapsulation of NPs or hydrophobic species for bio-imaging. These approaches have the advantages of the relative simplicity of synthesis since the sol–gel precursors are commercially available and afford reproducible monodisperse small-size SQ NPs containing physically entrapped hydrophobic cargos. This approach is nonetheless limited since the entrapment content will generally reach only a few weight percent, and uncontrolled leakage of cargos cannot be excluded with this methodology. The covalent grafting was thus used to overcome this challenge, and higher contents of fluorescent moieties were usually garnered into BSQ NPs.
One elegant strategy for imaging applications with BSQ NPs was to take advantage of the surprising phenomenon of aggregation-induced emission (AIE). The aggregation of fluorophores generally leads to the decrease or the complete quenching of their fluorescence, except in the case of molecules prone to AIE such as silole and tetraphenylethene derivatives. Tang and co-workers synthesized tetraphenylethene (XXVII) as well as silole (XXX) BSQ@SiO2 NPs as biosensors and intracellular bioimaging probes, thanks to BSQ composed of AIE-sensitive aromatic bridges (Fig. 16A). The AIE feature of BSQ@SiO2 NPs was demonstrated upon UV exposure, while the silole and tetraphenylethene precursors and bare silica NPs did not fluoresce (Fig. 16B and D). The core–shell particles were monodisperse, tunable in diameter, stable in aqueous solution, and were applied to image HeLa cancer cells. Qian et al. recently reported the doping of the TTF fluorophore (2,3-bis(4(phenyl(4(1,2,2-triphenylvinyl)phenyl)amino)phenyl)fumaronitrile) into vinyl (3)-aminopropyl (8) SQ NPs for AIE two-photon imaging of HeLa cells.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) via BSQ NPs was described with a remarkable example of particles containing gadolinium(III) diethylenetriamine pentaacetate-disulfide (XXVI) bridges. These BSQ nanospheres were also pegylated and functionalized with anisamide to provide stealth behavior and an increase of cellular internalization. The BSQ particles carried 50 wt% of the Gd(III) complex, which was three times higher than that of mesoporous silica NPs. The disulfide groups endowed the BSQ NPs with a redox-actuated delivery mechanism of Gd(III) complexes (Fig. 17A). The relaxivities were measured with a 3 tesla magnetic resonance scanner on a per Gd basis. BSQ NPs showed r1 and r2 values of 13.1 and 28.6 mM−1 s−1, respectively. The relaxivities of the functionalized BSQ-PEG and BSQ-PEG-anisamide nanomaterials, however, respectively decreased to 8.4 mM and 5.9 mM−1 s−1 for r1, and to 33.0 and 7.0 mM−1 s−1 for r2 (Fig. 17B and C). The results were attributed to the inhibition of the interactions between Gd centers and surrounding water molecules due to steric hindrances caused by the surface modifications. The MIR-active NPs were then applied for in vitro imaging and 90% of the Gd chelates were released in solution after two days.
Biodegradable BSQ biomedical nanoprobes were recently reported by Khashab et al. The BSQ design involved enzymatically-cleavable oxamide bridges (XIV) (Fig. 17D). The extensive oxamide coverage allowed a progressive degradation of 100 nm NPs upon the addition of trypsin enzymes which led to 10 to 50 nm particle fragments after 48 h. The nanomaterial was also chemically-doped with fluorescein SQ, and applied as an optical bio-probe for HeLa cancer cells (Fig. 17E and F).

Photodynamic therapy (PDT) applications have been described via SQ and BSQ nanomaterials physically or chemically encapsulating photosensitizers able to induce the generation of reactive oxygen species, such as singlet oxygen (1O2), upon appropriate irradiation. Landmark studies on PDT via SQ NPs doped with photosensitizers were reported by Prasad and co-workers. The first involved a photosensitizer, the Photochlor® used for another phase II clinical trials. Photosensitizers were physically entrapped into monodisperse vinyl (3) SQ NPs of 30 nm which generated 1O2 upon laser irradiation at 650 nm for 10 min with a fluence of 1.4 mW cm−2, and caused nearly 90% of cancer cell killing. The first example of a TPE-PDT with organosilica NPs was also reported via vinyl (3) SQ NPs doped with 2hν fluorophores generating FRET towards entrapped photosensitizers. The same group later reported the covalent encapsulation of chlorin photosensitizer (30) SQ via co-condensation with the vinyltriethoxysilane. He et al. doped protoporphyrin IX photosensitizers or IR-820 NIR fluorophores into vinyl (3)-aminopropyl (8) SQ NPs for direct TPE-PDT in vitro or in vivo imaging of the brain in mice. The NPs could also target the subcutaneously xenografted tumor in mice for NIR imaging for 24 hours. Importantly, NPs were fully cleared after 10 days. In order to increase the PDT efficiency in single NPs, particles entirely composed of a two-photon photosensitizer (XXXVII) based on diphenylbutadiene photoresponsive groups were prepared for two-photon-excited photodynamic therapy (TPE-PDT).

Interestingly, the two-photon cross section of the chromophore was enhanced from 100 GM in the precursor to 140 GM in BSQ NPs, and gold-BSQ core–shell NPs provided even higher values of about 260 GM (Fig. 18). These properties were correlated by exalted TPE-fluorescence imaging and enhanced TPE-PDT for gold-BSQ NPs on cancer cells. This photosensitizer was also used for TPE-PDT in PMO NPs combining drug delivery.
Following these results, biodegradability was conferred to the BSQ nanospheres, which were applied for TPE-PDT and imaging. Two types of photoresponsive NPs were evaluated: diphenylbutadiene (XXXVII) or zinc tetraphenyl-porphyrin (XXXVIII) bridges (see Fig. 19), while the biodegradability was provided by propyldisulfide (XI) bridges. Hence, the addition of 2 mM of the mercaptoethanol reducer caused the degradation of NPs (Fig. 19A–D). These materials could be used for both TPE-fluorescence imaging and for TPE-PDT (Fig. 19E, F and G respectively). Using a similar approach, the synthesis of a tetrakis(carboxyphenylene)porphyrin silane tetra-functionalized with disulfides (XXXXI, and a control without disulfides: XXXXII) was performed for the delivery of the photosensitizers and for an efficient one-photon-actuated PDT in cells. One of the most advanced PDT in vivo therapy performed via organosilica NPs was recently reported via BSQ NPs by Hayashi et al. in a nanosystem combining photothermal therapy. Monodisperse 50 nm spherical particles incorporating tetraalkoxysilylated porphyrin (XXXXIII) BSQ and iodopropyl (14) SQ groups were prepared (Fig. 20A and B). The relative quantum yield of the production of 1O2 was enhanced via the external heavy atom effect of iodine affording a higher yield (0.85) than that of photosensitizers currently used in clinics (0.3 to 0.77). The increase of the PDT efficacy via iodine atoms had been previously demonstrated in vitro with iodopropyl (14) SQ NPs containing the HPPH photosensitizers, but unlike this study the porphyrins had both higher PDT and PTT efficacies. The solution temperature elevation was even higher than that of gold nanorods, and the NPs were more photostable than the latter ones. In vivo studies were performed on mice with tumors of diameter 250 mm3, and irradiation was carried out with a diode laser at 650 nm with a fluence of 5 mW cm−2 for 20 min (22 mm spot size, a total of 6 J cm−2). Impressively, mice injected with NPs had tumor growth ten times lower than that of control ones and survived for 10 weeks (Fig. 20C and D). These NPs were also applied for x-ray computed tomography and fluorescence dual-modal imaging.

Both SQ and BSQ NPs have been designed and applied for cargo release and delivery applications. Two general pathways were investigated for these applications. The first approach is relatively rare and consists of surface-loaded BSQ NPs. An elegant example was reported by Shea et al. with BSQ NPs composed of bis-propylamine bearing nitrophenylene (XVI) groups. These particles were negatively-charged with a diameter of 260 nm, and their charge could be reversed upon UV irradiation through the photocleavage of nitrophenylene groups affording bispropylammonium at neutral pH. This feature was utilized to complex the surface with negatively-charged smaller silica NPs upon light actuation (Fig. 21A and B), or to release positively-charged plastic antibodies adsorbed onto the surface of BSQ NPs (Fig. 21C).

The most common pathway for cargo release and delivery applications of non-porous SQ and BSQ NPs, however, is the internal loading of cargos via one-pot syntheses or pro-drug design of latent ‘drug-bridges’. The former was recently studied by the group of Prasad with vinyl (3) SQ nanomaterials loaded with doxorubicin anticancer drugs for a sustained-release for two weeks. The driving force of the loading of drug cargos was the hydrophobicity of vinyl groups. This concept was also used for loading of ruthenium-tris-(2,20-bipyridyl)dichloride dyes. The drawback of these nanosystems is that the release of cargos is not controlled.
The release or delivery of cargos encapsulated inside SQ or BSQ NPs with strong interactions or covalent linkage was hence investigated. In an original approach, hydrogen bonding was used to enable the release of small molecules. In a first example, cyanuric acid was loaded within BSQ polydisperse particles based on triazine moieties hydrogen-bonded to cyanuric acid through a triple donor–acceptor–donor pattern (XXV) (Fig. 22). In a second example, the same strategy was used with a prodrug containing three 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) moieties. The material successfully released the prodrug at pH ≤ 5.5, which was itself active against MCF-7 cancer cells. Unfortunately, the material could only be obtained as a gel, which prevented any evaluation of the potential activity against cancer cells. Bringing those systems to the nanoscale would therefore be very promising for application in nanomedicine. BSQ bearing oxaliplatin derived (XXII) bridges were synthesized for autonomous delivery in cancer cells. The system showed nearly 25 wt% of drug loading. Another advantage of these BSQ NPs was the presence of silanol and carboxylic acid groups upon which PEG and targeting ligands were grafted. Superior cell killing was measured when compared to free oxaliplatin against four cancer cell lines and the targeting improved the efficacy of the therapy. The same group later extended this strategy to the delivery of cisplatin.

An impressive study was reported with various highly monodisperse vinyl (3) SQ NPs loaded with porphyrin for optically-tracked DNA delivery. Amino-grafted SQ NPs were able to electrostatically bind both plasmid and genomic DNA while preventing their enzymatic degradations. In order to track the delivery of DNA, they monitored the fluorescence of the porphyrin, which played the acceptor role in a FRET mechanism involving another dye acting as a donor intercalated into DNA strands. SQ NPs were found to deliver DNA into the cytoplasm, and subsequently diffuse into nuclei. This strategy was then applied in mice for gene delivery and expression in the brain. SQ NPs did not induce any observable toxicity four weeks after transfection. Several groups later reported studies via SQ nanosystems for the delivery of DNA in the brain.

The delivery of DNA was recently reported via BSQ NPs by the group of Khashab. Unlike the previous SQ NPs, the use of BSQ allowed the controlled delivery of DNA upon light actuation. The BSQ contained positively-charged nitrophenylene (XVIII) bridges, and upon irradiation, the photochemical production of neutral imine groups caused a charge reversal as the resulting surface was now governed by silanolates (Fig. 23A). Hence, plasmid DNA bound NPs without further chemical modifications and could be released on demand via a light stimulus (Fig. 23B–D). The nanosystem delivered DNA in cancer cells as shown by the expression of green fluorescent proteins.

Applications in optoelectronics were mostly reported on BSQ nanomaterials with specific organic bridges. The interest given to this area of research arose from a wide array of aromatic functional groups which can be engineered between stable siloxane networks. Various UV-sensitive materials were reported such as photodeformable BSQ NPs based on photocleavable coumarin dimer (XXIX) bridges, or SQ NPs bearing methoxycinnamamide (20) and dimethylaminobenzamide (21) groups. More complex bridges and advanced applications were also investigated, and we review in this section the publications on photoluminescence, photovoltaics, and electrochromism.


Thin films (<100 nm thick) of bridged silsesquioxanes incorporating europium(III) ions are particularly interesting for application such as luminescent solar concentrators. Among the numerous BSQs investigated, picolinamides and ureido-bipyridine-based structures have given particularly good results, as they feature a high density of strong ligands able to efficiently harvest light. Recently, Gan et al. reported the design of BSQ particles of nano- and micro-meter sizes composed of bispropylurea-bipyridylene (XXI) bridges complexing either Eu3+ or Tb3+ ions (Fig. 24A and B). The spherical particles could be precipitated on a plate and irradiated with UV light to emit a red or a green color according to the type of ions (Fig. 24C–E). Interestingly, using a 2:1 (XXI)/EuCl3 ratio, the Eu loading in bulk BSQ can reach 11 wt%, a value that is also expected in thin films. The precise structures of the Eu(III) complexes in such materials have not been elucidated to date, though the remarkably high quantum yield values and the particular Eu3+ environment detected when the 6,6′-isomer of (XXI) was used suggest a cage-like structure in this case (Fig. 25). Interestingly, a remarkable blue shift in the excitation spectra and a strong increase in the excited state lifetime of the Eu3+ ions and in the emission quantum yield are usually found when going from the bulk powder to the thin films using similar compositions. Differences in the nanostructure of the material (such as the cluster size and porosity) occurring because of the very fast gelation during spin-coating may produce such increases in performances. Owing to the elevated refractive index of the coatings induced by the high content in europium ions, the 50 nm films are able to guide light to the edges of a glass substrate, which confers them promising application as luminescent solar concentrators for photovoltaic cells (Fig. 25).

Interestingly, BSQ rectangular micro- and nano-plates (500 nm to 2 mm in diameter) were obtained with a β-diketone (XVII) bridge in the presence of EuCl3·6H2O or NdCl3·6H2O. The material displayed intense luminescence with high monochromatic purity in the red spectral region with Eu3+ ions or in the NIR region with Nd3+ ions.

Organosilica nanomaterials incorporating perylenediimide semiconducting bridges (XXVIII) were recently reported. The synthesis of 120 nm nanospheres with the sol–gel perylenediimide precursor and a small fraction of TEOS is depicted in Fig. 11A, providing a 70 wt% organic content as estimated by thermogravimetry. The nanomaterial was blended with polythiophene:perylene diimide (P3HT/PDI) and then applied for bulk heterojunction photovoltaics between a typical indium tin oxide–poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (ITO/PEDOT:PSS) anode and a calcium–aluminium cathode (see Fig. 26A). The performances of the heterojunction could be improved threefold by the optimization of the P3HT blend in the devices, affording an efficiency of 1.56%. The current–voltage curves of the devices showed enhancement of the current density for the annealed sample at 150 °C (Fig. 26B). The device had an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.53 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 6.88 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.42. The electronic properties of the solely derived perylenediimide alkoxysilane materials with nanowire and nanorod morphologies (Fig. 12) were also reported. The nanomaterials were processed into thin films and the photovoltaic measurements were performed (Fig. 26C and D). The nanowires depicted a higher Voc than that of the nanorods with a FF of 0.42 and a Jsc of 1.8 mA cm−2. However, the power conversion efficiency was only of 0.96 and 0.26% for the nanowires and the nanorods, respectively, which may have arisen from poorer self-organization of perylenediimide groups. This investigation thus highlights the role of the morphology of the BSQ nanomaterials in the photovoltaic performances.


Electrochromic materials which can change color upon oxidation or reduction through an electric potential have become abundantly applied in an era when work and leisure are increasingly accompanied by display devices. In this arena of research, processability of materials is a key factor in developing commercial devices. BSQ materials are here advantageous for the multiple processes and final morphologies readily available via sol–gel science. Though several studies have been reported on the POSS type of SQ, the only study on BSQ was reported a few years ago by Shea and Heflin. In their study, a high-contrast solid-state electrochromic device was prepared via viologen (XV) BSQ NPs deposited by a layer-by-layer (Lbl) assembly process onto ITO electrodes. The Lbl assembly involved the subsequent deposition of positively-charged BSQ NPs and negatively-charged poly[2-(acrylamido)-2-methylpropanesulfonic acid] (PAMPS) as counter ions affording a 20 or 40 bilayer film of BSQ NPs/PAMPS (Fig. 27A). The nanomaterials packed onto the 20 bilayers with 900 nm thick films could be readily observed via SEM (Fig. 27B), and were then sandwiched with another electrode coated with polyaniline (PANI)/PAMPS for electrochromic testing. The cyclic voltammetry analysis was performed on the BSQ NP/PAMPS film which displayed a deep-purple color upon the first reduction scan between −0.7 and −0.9 V (monocationic radicals), and then changed to pale yellow (dicationic radicals) upon potentials higher than −0.9 V, to finally recover the original transparent state when fully oxidized (Fig. 27C). The same results were reported with the sandwiched device which could be switched on and off with an unprecedentedly high contrast (∼45% at 633 nm, Fig. 27D). This study highlights how the electrochromic properties of BSQ bridges could be applied for display devices.


SQ and BSQ nanomaterials have also been studied as heterogeneous nanocatalysts. BSQ precursors often lead to periodic mesoporous organosilica which have also been applied extensively for catalytic applications. In this section, the application of non-porous SQ for catalysis is discussed. Various metal-supported SQ NPs were used for catalytic applications.

Gold-supported SQ nanorattles were elaborated and tested for the classic hydrogenation reaction of 4-methoxy-nitrobenzene to 4-methoxy-phenylamine, as a model reaction to assess their catalytic activity. Ha et al. used original cyanopropylene (13) hollow SQ doped with 1.5 wt% of gold NPs (Fig. 28A) to carry out the hydrogenation with high efficiencies. Reaction yields of the order of 98% were obtained with a decrease to 93% after 5 cycles (Fig. 28B). The SQ framework exclusively based on cyanopropylene pending groups allowed the grafting of numerous 2 to 5 nm gold NPs per hollow SQ nanoreactor and provided high catalytic properties.
Palladium-supported silica-SQ nanorattles were also applied by Huo et al. for multiple catalytic processes. The hydrogenation reaction of 4-methoxy-nitrobenzene was initially demonstrated with the mercaptopropyl (10) SQ-Pd composition with high activities maintained for five cycles (Fig. 29A and B). Then, the oxidation of thiol groups was performed to generate sulfonated (11) SQ acidic nanocatalysts. Sulfonated SQ nearly quantitatively converted benzaldehyde dimethyl acetal into benzaldehyde, while the reaction did not occur with thiolated SQ. The multi-step reaction of 2-(2-aminophenyl)-1H-benzimidazole from 2-nitrobenzaldehyde and 1,2-phenylenediamine could also be performed with sulfonated SQ-Pd NPs (Fig. 29C). The first step of the reaction is catalyzed by the SO3H group and the second occurs inside the nanorattles via Pd NPs. Quantitative conversions were continuously obtained for five cycles as supported by the values of turnover frequencies (TOF), and the final yields ranging from 97 to 86% (Fig. 29D).

Various hollow silsesquioxane NPs were used for the removal of the benzophenone water contaminant. Monodisperse methyl (1), vinyl (3), trifluoropropyl (12), and phenyl (7) SQ NPs obtained via a hard template with a size of 180 nm, a shell thickness of 30 nm, and low porosities of about 20–30 m2 g−1 were mixed with waste water and the efficiencies of the pollutant adsorptions were quantified by UV-VIS spectroscopy. Efficiencies of 95 and 82% were respectively obtained for methyl and trifluoropropyl-based particles while 56 and 19% were obtained for phenyl- and vinyl-based SQ, respectively. These results mainly followed the hydrophobicity of the particles, as shown by the water contact angle data, with the exceptions of the phenyl which was attributed to a high content of surface silanol groups.


In this review, we presented an overview of the syntheses and applications of non-porous silsesquioxane nanomaterials. We distinguished silsesquioxanes (R-SiO1.5, with R organic groups) and bridged silsesquioxanes with two (O1.5Si-R-SiO1.5) or more silicon connectivities. We highlighted the high organic content of such nanomaterials in the broader organosilica NP family, and their resulting unique structures and properties. Both types of materials generally have higher thermal stability and mechanical stability than that of organically-doped silica NPs. Furthermore, the nature and high content (20 to 80 wt%) of the organic functions of silsesquioxanes and bridged silsesquioxanes provide properties inaccessible to organosilica NPs. Bridged silsesquioxanes can be used owing to their ability to promote the self-assembly of organic units for applications requiring molecular periodicity, though the fabrication of long range order is still challenging. While nano-sized silsesquioxanes are mainly employed as structural units that carry dopants, such as fluorophores, bridged silsesquioxanes are usually designed so that the organic group bridging the siliceous domains brings the targeted functionality.

A wide array of syntheses of bridged and non-bridged silsesquioxanes has been reported with about seventy different alkoxysilanes affording particles of spherical, core–shell, and hollow morphologies via soft and hard templates. The main challenges for the synthesis of bridged and non-bridged silsesquioxanes include the limited number of silane precursors which are commercially available, and the difficulty in obtaining monodisperse non-aggregated particles, owing to the high reactivity of the alkyl(trialkoxy)silanes and to the self-assembling propensity of the large organic groups. This can lead to anisotropic morphologies such as nanorods, nanofibers, and nanowires thanks to intra- and inter-molecular interactions. In terms of functionality, most silsesquioxanes were designed with small functional groups (methyl, vinyl, phenyl, etc.) while bridged silsesquioxanes have organic fragments of varied sizes from phenyl to polyaromatic and porphyrin bridges. Larger species were also incorporated into non-bridged silsesquioxanes via chemical or physical doping but the resulting content (up to 20 wt%) is thus much lower than that attainable with bridged ones (up to 80%).
Application-wise, silsesquioxanes are mostly obtained from commercially available precursors, and can be doped in one pot affording monodisperse non-aggregated 10 to 50 nm particles, which are especially attractive for biomedical applications. Biodegradable, pro-drug, or photodynamic therapy nanosystems are on the other hand available and more advanced via bridged silsesquioxanes. Applications in optoelectronics were mostly reported via bridged silsesquioxanes with polyaromatic organic units with voltaics, photoluminescence, and electrochromism properties. Thanks to their high organic content and hydrophobicity, silsesquioxanes were applied for heterogeneous catalysis and metal-supported heterogeneous catalysis, typically via hollow or nanorattle NPs containing gold nanodots, though mesoporous bridged silsesquioxanes are more desirable for catalytic applications. Many applications of silsesquioxanes and bridged silsesquioxanes have recently begun to be explored in nanomedicine, but applications in other fields are still in their infancy. The remarkable control of the synthesis and composition of such particles thus offers a vast field of research for the years to come.

This work was supported by the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016