 DOI: 10.1039/C9TC05465K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 1642-1648


Shasha
Zhang
,

Shaohang
Wu
,

Rui
Chen
,

Weitao
Chen
,

Yuqian
Huang
,

Zhichun
Yang
 and 

Wei
Chen
*

Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Luoyu Road 1037, Wuhan, 430074, China. E-mail: wnlochenwei@mail.hust.edu.cn

Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Nanobiomechanics, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, Guangdong, China

Received
6th October 2019
, Accepted 18th December 2019
First published on 19th December 2019
In the past decade, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have experienced a rapid development with the goal of achieving both high efficiency and high stability. Avoiding the use of unstable methylammonium, formamidinium-based perovskites, with better thermal stability and lower band gap, have became promising candidate absorbers. However, the methylammonium-free PSCs usually show inferior PCEs, which is closely related to the crystalline quality of these perovskites. In this study, we propose a formamidine-assisted fast crystallization (FAAFC) method to regulate the nucleation and improve the crystallization by using an FA-containing chlorobenzene antisolvent. It was found that RbCsFAPbI3 films prepared using the FAAFC method have a preferred orientation, larger crystal size and less grain boundary and traps. As a result, their inverted PSCs exhibit much better photovoltaic performance and stability compared to with the control method, achieving a PCE of 20.58% and <10% degradation after 500 h illumination.

Organic–inorganic metal hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs), because of their high-power conversion efficiency (PCE) and facile fabrication processing, have attracted considerable attention in the past decade. Perovskites share the chemical formula ABX3, where A is a monovalent cation, such as MA+, FA+, Cs+, and Rb+, B is typically Pb2+ and Sn2+, and X is a halide anion, such as I−, Br−, or Cl−. Methylammonium (MA+) was initially commonly used in the A site, but the stabilities of MA-based perovskites were reported to be unsatisfactory under long-term light-soaking or heat stress, even in an inert environment at a moderate temperature of <85 °C. Besides, containing MA in the mixed-cation perovskites, the long-term stability remain a key risk factor. Saliba et al. reported completely different stabilities of MA-containing and MA-free perovskite films: after heating at 130 °C for 3 h, MA-containing perovskites displayed strong degradation, while MA-free perovskites were much more stable. Thus, perovskites with more stable cations have been developed in recent years.

Formamidinium (FA+), with a larger radius, is a promising substitute for MA+ due to its better thermal stability and red-shift absorption spectrum. However, pure cubic FAPbI3 (α-FAPbI3) is structurally unstable due to the relatively large size of FA and the induced higher tolerance factor. When exposed to moisture, phase transition happens easily from black α-FAPbI3 to yellow δ-FAPbI3. Utilizing the hydrophobic properties of 2D materials, constructing 2D or 2D/3D stacking structures has been reported to be effective for achieving better moisture stability. Besides, incorporating ions with a smaller radius, such as Br− at the X site, or inorganic cations, such as Cs+, Rb+, has also been demonstrated to be effective to suppress the formation of the unwanted yellow phase (δ-FAPbI3). In spite of the improvement in the structural stability, incorporating Br− will increase the band gap, leading to an undesirable blue-shift of the light absorption spectrum, which is not conducive to achieving high efficiency. In contrast, incorporation at the A site has little effect on the band gap because the top of the valence band and the bottom of the conduction band are formed by the 5p orbitals of the I and 6p orbitals of Pb. Thus, FA-based perovskites based on mixed cations, like CsFA, RbFA, and RbCsFA, have been fabricated and used in high-efficiency and stable PSCs. Nevertheless, currently, FA-based PSCs have achieved the highest certified PCE of 23.48%, using 40 mol% MACl additives, while the reported highest PCE of PSCs without MA in the whole fabrication is less than 21%, keeping a certain gap with the most efficient PSC with the PCE above 25%. Thus, it would be very significant to develop high-quality FA-based perovskites to further improve the efficiency of their PSCs.
Adding additives in the precursors is a common strategy to improve perovskites’ crystalline quality. A series of additives, ranging from acids, like HI and HCl, polymers, like polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA), to halides, like MACl, FACl, CsCl, and methylenediammonium dichloride (MDACl2), have been used to improve the morphology and crystallinity of FA-based perovskites. As reported, the additive method usually works by regulating the nucleation process and the crystal growth: especially, a regulated nucleation is critical to achieve high-quality perovskite crystals. For example, McMeekin et al. found that adding an acid could reduce the density of nucleation sites, leading to a prolonged crystal growth period and an increased grain size. Yan et al. showed that excess organic components in the precursor solution could tune the size and shape of the coordination colloid, leading to accelerated nucleation and enhanced coverage of the perovskite. Besides, Xie et al. triggered homogeneous nucleation to obtain high-quality FA-based perovskite film with large grains and high crystallinity, and Zhao et al. utilized perovskite seeds acting as nuclei to facilitate the crystallization of FA-based perovskites. Thus, simple and effective methods for regulating the nucleation process for substantially improving the crystallinity of MA-free perovskites must be welcomed by researchers.
In this work, a formamidine-assisted fast crystallization (FAAFC) method is proposed to fabricate high-quality FA-based perovskite films by regulating the nucleation process. Unlike conventional methods involving the introduction of additives in precursors, we improved perovskite crystallization by using the FA-containing chlorobenzene antisolvent to achieve the homogeneous nucleation. It was found that RbCsFAPbI3 films prepared with the FAAFC method had the preferred orientation and large crystal size with less grain boundaries in the vertical direction. As a result, their inverted PSCs exhibited much better photovoltaic performance and stability compared to that with the control method, achieving a PCE of 20.58% and <10% degradation after 500 h illumination.


Fig. 1a illustrates the step-by-step process of fabricating RbCsFAPbI3 films with the FAAFC method. The mixed RbI/CsI/FAI/PbI2 precursor solution was first spin-coated on the substrate, then an immediate drop-casting of FA-containing chlorobenzene (FA-CB) was conducted. The FA-CB was obtained by introducing FA gas into the antisolvent CB for 20 min, where the FA gas was formed by the reaction between C3H8N2O2 and NaOH at 130 °C (Fig. S1, ESI). After annealing, a well-crystalline RbCsFAPbI3 film could be formed. Here, in order to illustrate the influence of FA in CB, samples prepared with pure CB as the antisolvent were denoted as the control sample for comparison with the sample.

After the drop-casting of CB, the FAAFC films turned to black immediately, much faster than the control samples (Fig. S2, ESI). This phenomenon indicates that FA can assist the fast crystallization of this FA-based perovskite. As reported, the basic N atom with the lone electron pair could interact with the PbI6-octahedra. Thus, it is highly likely that FA in CB may be beneficial for the quick formation of small perovskite crystals according to the following reaction formula, just like in a similar way for the MA gas in the fabrication of high-quality MAPbI3:
FA+ + Pb2+ + 3I− + xFA → FAPbI3·xFA → FAPbI3 + xFA↑
(1)
Then, the fast-formed FAPbI
3 crystals can act as the uniform nuclei, facilitating perovskites’ homogeneous crystallization and growth, as illustrated in Fig. 1b. According to the LaMer mechanism, there is an “effectively infinite” nucleation rate; after this point, almost no nucleation occurs. Thus, the fast nucleation in the initial stage can lead to less crystal nuclei and homogeneous crystallization for the FAAFC films. In contract, the slower homogeneous nucleation process for the control sample leads to a competition between the homogeneous nucleation (upper surface) and heterogeneous nucleation (substrate surface), and not to uniform nucleation and crystalline growth.

X-ray diffraction (XRD) was conducted to compare the crystalline structure of the control and FAAFC perovskite films. As seen in Fig. 2a, the FAAFC film had an obvious preferential [001] orientation, while the control film did not. The preferential orientation of the FAAFC samples may result from the FAPbI3 nuclei. According to the orientated attachment mechanism, crystals will rotate and have contact with each other until the crystallographic orientation match or until a twin match occurs. Here, the FAPbI3 nuclei may act as the structural models inducing the next growth along its preferred orientation with the lowest interfacial energy, just like with the crystal seeds in the other literature. Using the full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) of the (001) reflection, we calculated the crystallite size according to Scherrer's equation. The dimension increased from 56 nm for the control sample to 88 nm in the case of the FAAFC sample, indicating an increased crystallinity and grain size for the FAAFC perovskite. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of perovskite films prepared with the control method and the FAAFC method are shown in Fig. 2b. As seen, the perovskite film fabricated by the control antisolvent method presented a dense morphology; however, the particle sizes were inhomogeneous, with many small gains existing on the surface. As Fig. 1b illuminates, the nonuniform particle size of the control sample originated from the inhomogeneous nucleation. In contrast, using the FAAFC method, benefiting from the fast-homogeneous nucleation, an obviously increased grain size and uniform morphology could be observed, indicating the improvement of the crystalline quality. Here, it should be noted that, the purpose of the FAAFC method is the fast-homogenous nucleation rather than the introduction of more nucleation centres in the whole crystalline process, since more nucleation centres always lead to a small grain size.
The UV-vis spectra of the RbCsFAPbI3 perovskites with the control method and the FAAFC method are shown in Fig. S3, ESI. As seen, both perovskites presented the absorption edge at ∼820 nm, consistent with the other work. The FAAFC sample had a slightly enhanced absorbance at the wavelength below 790 nm and a steeper absorption edge compared to the control one, indicating a better film quality. As is known, the absorption edge steepness usually indicates the crystallinity of a film since trap-induced band tails will make a shallow slope. Here, the Urbach energy (EU) was extracted from the curves of lnα ∼ E according to the following equation to quantitatively describe the band tails, as seen in Fig. 3a,
(2)
where
α0 is a constant. The corresponding Eu was reduced from 71.0 meV for the control film to 63.9 meV for the FAAFC film, which demonstrates that improved crystallinity was achieved by the FAAFC film, with less localized trap-states in the band gap.

The space-charge-limited current measurement (SCLC) analysis was conducted to quantitatively evaluate the trap densities of the FAAFC and control films. From Fig. 3b, three regions could be found: the linear Ohmic region at low voltages, the trap-filled limit (TFL) region with sharp-rising currents, and the trap-free Child's region at high voltages. The onset voltage after the Ohmic region is defined as the TFL voltage, denoted as VTFL, which has a relationship with the trap density (Ntrap) according to the equation below:
(3)
where
ε0 is the vacuum permittivity and ε is the dielectric constant of the perovskite, d is the film thickness, and e is the elementary charge. The trap densities for the control and the FAAFC films were calculated to be 1.76 × 1016 cm−3 and 6.67 × 1015 cm−3, using ε = 46.9. The reduced trap density with the FAAFC method indicated the increase in crystallinity. The carrier mobility μ could be extracted from the TFL region according to the equation:

(4)
where
J is the current density at voltage V. The mobility for the control and the FAAFC films were calculated to be 5.65 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 S−1 and 2.69 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 S−1, respectively, comparable with the value of FA-based perovskites reported in other works. The much-improved mobility indicates the reduced traps and grain boundaries in the FAAFC films.

Steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) analyses were further implemented. Consistently, a blue-shift of the PL peak position was observed for the FAAFC sample (Fig. 3c), indicating the decrease in trap states near its band edge. Furthermore, the FAAFC sample presented a smaller FWHM of the PL peak, indicating its better crystallinity. From the time-resolved PL in Fig. 3d, the PL lifetimes were extracted by fitting with a bi-exponential decay function F(t) = A1exp(−t/τ1) + A2exp(−t/τ2). The estimated average lifetime τa = (A1τ1 + A2τ2)/(A1 + A2) was calculated to be 118 ns for the control film, and 219 ns for the FAAFC sample (Table S1, ESI), indicating a largely reduced non-radiative recombination in the FAAFC film. This result again provides experimental evidence of the decreased number of defects in the FAAFC perovskite film, in good agreement with the SCLC results.
Then, we put the high-crystalline quality perovskite films prepared using the FAAFC method into devices with an inverted structure of FTO/Li+-doped NixMg1−xO (NiMgLiO)/RbCsFAPbI3/(6,6)-phenyl C 61 butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM)/bathocuproine (BCP)/Ag. The cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the devices based on the control perovskite and perovskite prepared using the FAAFC method are shown in Fig. 4a. For the control sample, small grains existed in the perovskite film and were packed in the vertical direction, leading to grain boundaries inferior for charge transfer. In contrast, a single crystal grain standing along the vertical direction was formed using the FAAFC method, without grain boundaries. This result could be attributed to the vertically downward growth process due to the FA-assisted crystallization. In this process, with the help of FA in the antisolvent, FAPbI3 crystals can be formed fast. The fast-homogeneous nucleation leads to uniform growth from the top to the bottom, resulting in the vertical morphology with single, large-sized crystallites within the film, just like from the effects of the perovskite seeds in Zhao et al.'s work.Fig. 4b shows the J–V curves for solar cells based on the control and FAAFC RbCsFAPbI3 films and the statistical performance is presented in Fig. S4, ESI. As seen, with the improved crystalline quality using the FAAFC method, the photovoltaic performance was largely enhanced. The control PSC displayed a PCE of 16.81% for the forward scan with a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 21.60 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.036 V and a fill factor (FF) of 0.751, and a PCE of 17.18% for the reversed scan with a JSC of 21.29 mA cm−2, VOC of 1.043 V and fill factor (FF) of 0.774. The stabilized power output of 17.02% was achieved within 300 s (Fig. 4c). With the FAAFC perovskite, a PCE of 20.33% for the forward scan with a JSC of 23.10 mA cm−2, VOC of 1.099 V and fill factor (FF) of 0.801, and a PCE of 20.58% for the reverse scan with a JSC of 23.02 mA cm−2, VOC of 1.102 V and fill factor (FF) of 0.811 were achieved, with a stabilized power output of 20.51%, showing an increase of ∼20% compared to the control. Furthermore, the FAAFC device presented less hysteresis thanks to the high perovskite film quality and the advantageous inverted device structure. The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra (Fig. 4d) showed that the average efficiency of the FAAFC device was about 6–7% higher than for the control one, indicating the improved quality of the perovskite absorber, which leads to the enhanced JSC value. On the other hand, the largely increased VOC and FF of the FAAFC device were mainly due to the reduced recombination according to the above discussed optical and electrical results.
The long-term stability was further examined. Both PSCs presented excellent thermal stability at 85 °C in N2 (Fig. S5, ESI), which was as well as expected and consistent with others’ reported work on MA-free PSCs. Usually, the phase stability under long-term light-soaking is the main issue to be resolved for this kind of PSC. Thus, here, we tested the long-term stability under a continuous light-soaking condition (white light LED with a UV filter, with the light intensity calibrated to achieve the same JSC from the PSCs as that for 1 sun AM 1.5G solar irradiation) during MPP tracking, as seen in Fig. 4e. The PSC based on the FAAFC perovskite showed excellent stability, with less than 10% degradation after 500 h illumination, while the PCE of the control device had a much quicker decline in the first 100 h, and decayed to about 30% of the initial PCE after 500 h. The enhanced light stability of the FAAFC device may be attributed to the higher crystallinity and improved phase stability of the perovskite. From the photovoltaic parameters in Table S2, ESI, it could be found that the main decay of the PCE came from the decrease in JSC for the FAAFC device, while all the parameters, including JSC, VOC and FF, decreased for the control one, indicating the degradation of the whole device.

Fluorinated tin oxide (FTO)-coated glass (TEC-15, Nippon Sheet Glass Co., Japan) was sequentially cleaned with detergent, deionized water, alcohol and acetone under sonication. After drying, a p-type NiMgLiO compact layer (∼20 nm thick) was deposited by spray pyrolysis. After cooling, the glass was immediately placed in a N2-filled glovebox. The perovskite precursor solution was prepared by dissolving FAI (99%, Sigma-Aldrich), PbI2 (99%, TCI), RbI (99%, Sigma-Aldrich) and CsI (99%, Sigma-Aldrich) stoichiometrically (RbI:CsI:FAI = 5:10:85) in a mixed solvent of DMF (Sigma-Aldrich) and DMSO (Sigma-Aldrich) with a volume ratio of 4:1. The perovskite films were fabricated through an antisolvent-induced crystallization technique. Specifically, the precursor solution (60 μL) was spin-coated on the NiMgLiO/FTO substrate at 6000 rpm for 60 s. After the first 15 s, the substrate was quickly dripped with 0.5 mL of antisolvent. The control perovskite film was deposited using pure chlorobenzene (CB) as the antisolvent. For the FAAFC method, FA-containing chlorobenzene (FA-CB) was used. The FA-CB was obtained by introducing the FA gas into CB. The FA gas was formed by the reaction between C3H8N2O2 (20 g) and NaOH (7.84 g) at 130 °C, and the FA gas was dried and introduced into CB (50 mL) for 20 min to form the FA-saturated CB antisolvent. After deposition, the perovskite films were annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. Next, 70 μL of PCBM solution was spin-coated at a rotation speed of 5000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, 5 nm of BCP and 90 nm of Ag electrode were thermally evaporated under high vacuum (<5 × 10−4 Pa).


SEM images were obtained on a Nova Nano 450 scanning electron microscope (FEI Co., The Netherlands). XRD characterization was performed on an Empyrean X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (PANalytical B.V. Co., The Netherlands). The UV-Vis spectra were measured on a Lambda 950 spectrophotometer (PerkinElmer Co., USA). Steady-state PL was measured using a Horiba Jobin Yvon system with an excitation laser beam at 532 nm. Transient PL were recorded with a time-correlated single photocounting system (PicoHarp 300, PicoQuant GmbH). A solar simulator (Oriel, model 9119) with an AM 1.5G filter (Oriel, model 91192) was used to give an irradiance of 100 mW cm−2. The light intensity was precisely calibrated with a standard Si photodiode detector. The active area of each solar cell was determined to be 0.09 cm2 by a black metal mask. The IPCE was measured on a Newport IPCE system (Newport, USA). The long-term light-soaking test was measured using a CHI1000c multi-channel electrochemistry workstation (Chenhua, Co., China) in a N2-filled glovebox with a white light LED with a UV filter. The light intensity was calibrated to achieve the same JSC from the PSCs as for 1 sun AM 1.5G solar irradiation.


In summary, we propose a formamidine-assisted fast crystallization (FAAFC) method to prepare high-quality FA-based perovskite films, in which the perovskite crystallization was improved by using an FA-containing chlorobenzene antisolvent to induce crystallization, and RbCsFAPbI3 films with the preferred orientation and large crystal size were prepared. The high crystalline quality with reduced trap density and grain boundaries was demonstrated by a series of characterizations, such as SEM, XRD, UV-vis, PL and SCLC measurements. When applied to the high-quality FA perovskite film in inverted-structure PSCs, a PCE of 20.58% was achieved. The features of high crystallinity, single-grain vertical morphology and MA-free content make the PSCs show long-term light-soaking stability, with less than 10% decline after 500 h. The present FAAFC method provides an easy strategy to fabricate high-quality FA perovskites and to build highly efficient and stable FA-based inverted PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


S. Zhang and S. Wu contributed equally to this work. This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51672094, 51861145404, 51822203), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation Grant (2016M602286), the Self-determined and Innovative Research Funds of HUST (2016JCTD111, 2018KFYRCPY003), Shenzhen Science and Technology Innovation Committee (JCYJ20170307165905513, JCYJ20180507182257563), and Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (2017A030313342). The authors thank Analytical and Testing Center of Huazhong University Science and Technology for the sample measurements here are no conflicts to declare.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc05465k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020