 DOI: 10.1039/C3NR01868G
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7493-7498

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Lijun
Yang
,

Wallace Woon-Fong
Leung
* and 

Jingchuan
Wang


Department of Mechanical Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong, HKSAR. E-mail: mmwleung@polyu.edu.hk; Fax: +852 23654703; Tel: +852 27666670

Received
15th April 2013
, Accepted 14th June 2013
First published on 19th June 2013
Dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) offer the potential of being low-cost, high-efficiency photovoltaic devices. However, the power conversion efficiency is limited as they cannot utilize all photons of the visible solar spectrum. A novel design of a core–shell photoanode is presented herein where a thin shell of infrared dye is deposited over the core of a sensitized TiO2 nanofiber. Specifically, a ruthenium based dye (N719) sensitized TiO2 nanofiber is wrapped by a thin shell of copper phthalocyanine (CuPc). In addition to broadening the absorption spectrum, this core–shell configuration further suppresses the electron–hole recombination process. Instead of adopting the typical Förster resonance energy transfer, upon photons being absorbed by the infrared dye, electrons are transferred efficiently through a cascade process from the CuPc to the N719 dye, the conduction band of TiO2, the FTO electrode and finally the external circuit. Concurrently, photons are also absorbed by the N719 dye with electrons being transferred in the cell. These additive effects result in a high power conversion efficiency of 9.48% for the device. The proposed strategy provides an alternative method for enhancing the performance of DSSCs for low-cost renewable energy in the future.

Over the last few decades, the dye sensitized solar cell (DSSC) has become one of the most efficient and stable excitonic solar cells. An important feature of this device is the utilization of a photosensitizing dye that harvests light and generates excitons for the solar cell. To achieve a high power conversion efficiency (PCE) based on an I−/I3− redox coupling system which is competitive with conventional silicon solar cells, the DSSC must absorb as much as 80% of the solar spectrum with the wavelength between 350 and 900 nm. Conventional ruthenium based dyes exhibit a relatively broad absorption spectrum which is advantageous; however their molar extinction coefficients (5000–20000 M−1 cm−1) are low, therefore it is difficult to improve the PCE of the device using these dyes. Despite organic dyes, such as metallophthalocyanines (MPcs), showing higher molar extinction coefficients (100000 M−1 cm−1), they have a narrow absorption bandwidth. Dye cocktails or co-sensitization have been proposed to obtain complementary visible light to extend the absorption spectrum and extend the light absorption; however, there has been only limited success to date. This is probably due to (i) an inferior electron injection efficiency caused by intermolecular interactions between the two dyes; and (ii) a limited surface area of the photoanode for adsorbing more than one dye. Considerable effort has been made to tackle these problems. One solution is to separate the adsorption sites on TiO2 for the two different dyes, which means reserving an appropriate location or site for each dye; however, this approach is difficult to realize. Recently, Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) was used in DSSCs to enhance light harvesting. Here an unattached, highly luminescent donor dye was dissolved in the electrolyte solution to absorb high-energy photons and efficiently transfer energy to the anchored near-infrared acceptor dye. Unfortunately, the I3− in the electrolyte partially quenched the fluorescence of the donors, thereby limiting further improvement.

In the present investigation, we demonstrate that an ultra-thin layer of a near-infrared dye, copper phthalocyanine (CuPc), deposited on the exterior or periphery of ruthenium based dye (N719) sensitized TiO2 nanofibers, can harvest complementary visible light thereby extending the absorption spectrum. The excited electrons in the CuPc molecules are injected into the N719 dye and are subsequently passed onto the TiO2 nanofibers. This further broadens the absorption bandwidth of the DSSC covering nearly the entire spectrum of visible solar irradiation.

As depicted in Fig. 1, there are two routes for charge generation and transfer in this system. Upon illumination, the N719 molecules are excited and an electron–hole pair is created. Electrons are injected into the conduction band (CB) of the TiO2 photoanode as in conventional practice. In this novel design, CuPc can concurrently absorb a near-infrared photon and create an electron–hole pair, i.e. an exciton. The exciton diffuses to the interface between the CuPc and N719 molecules and dissociates due to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level at the interface. The electrons transfer initially to the LUMO of the N719 and inject subsequently into the CB of the TiO2. This completes the cascade charge transfer process.

The present novel photoanode design has several advantages. Firstly, the one-dimensional TiO2 nanofibers maintain fast charge transport properties and can scatter incident light. Secondly, the surface roughness and porosity of the nanofibers favor the deposition of primary and secondary dyes on the photoanode. Thirdly, the introduction of a second dye (CuPc) in the form of an ultra-thin layer, which externally coats/shields the N719 sensitized TiO2 nanofiber photoanode, can extend the absorption bandwidth. This eliminates the competition of the second dye (CuPc) with the first dye (i.e. N719) for the anchored sites of TiO2, which heretofore has been a limiting factor of conventional co-sensitization. Fourthly, two dyes are spatially and energetically organized to achieve electron transfer from the outer- to the inner-dye layer, while holes transfer in reverse from the inner- to the outer-dye layer. This configuration increases the separation distance between the injected electrons traveling along the CB of the TiO2 and the oxidized dye species (the holes), thereby suppressing the recombination process in the device (Fig. 1b). The structure of CuPc and N719 can be seen, respectively, in Fig. 1c.
A layer of CuPc (30 nm thickness) was deposited on the sensitized TiO2 nanofiber by thermal evaporation with a low evaporation rate (∼0.5 Å s−1). Fig. 2a shows the morphology of the N719 sensitized TiO2 nanofiber, while Fig. 2b and c show the morphology of the sensitized TiO2 nanofiber coated with 30 nm CuPc. Both the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images, in Fig. 2b and c respectively, suggest that the CuPc is not simply a superficial film/coating on the entire photoanode, but that it takes the form of a shell structure wrapping the core made of the N719 sensitized TiO2 nanofiber. It is worth noting that the CuPc coating cannot penetrate across the entire nanofiber mat depth-wise. Despite this, the high porosity and permeability of the TiO2 nanofiber mat enables deposition of the CuPc relatively deep into the mat as can be seen in Fig. 2d and e, forming the core–shell structure, Fig. 2c. Fig. 2d and e are respectively the cross-sectional SEM image of the TiO2 nanofiber mat coated with CuPc and a line scanning element mapping of the mat. Carbon is selected to identify the CuPc (C32H16CuN8) as it consists of many carbon atoms, while Ti is selected to identify TiO2 in the nanofiber mat. The result in Fig. 2e indicates that the CuPc (represented by C) can penetrate deeply into the TiO2 nanofiber mat. This novel core–shell structure photoanode is distinctly different from the traditional approach where the co-sensitizers are made up of two different semiconductors or a semiconductor-insulator configuration to reduce the recombination process.

Fig. 3a shows the absorption spectra of various sensitized photoanode configurations, respectively: N719/TiO2, CuPc/TiO2 and CuPc/N719/TiO2. The absorption bandwidth of the N719 sensitized TiO2 is in the range from 400 nm to 550 nm. Upon introducing the CuPc shell layer, the absorption spectrum of the device has been broadened to the near-infrared range.
Furthermore, the photoluminescence (PL) emission spectra corresponding to CuPc, N719, TiO2, N719/TiO2 and CuPc/N719/TiO2 are shown, respectively, in Fig. 3b. There is no evident emission peak for CuPc and N719 in the wavelength ranging between 330 nm and 800 nm. The emission spectrum of the TiO2 nanofiber film is around 420 nm, which is mainly attributed to the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs in the TiO2, which can be seen in Fig. 4a. (Another peak, at about 470 nm, is induced by the equipment, which can be ignored.) It is interesting that after sensitization by the N719 dye, the emission intensity of the TiO2 nanofiber film is reduced. As is well known, the electron–hole pair recombination in TiO2 competes with the electron injection–hole transport. This suggests that electrons are transferred effectively from the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the N719 to the CB of the TiO2 and concurrently holes transfer from the valence band (VB) of the TiO2 to the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the N719. As a consequence, the number of electron–hole pairs in the TiO2 is reduced in the N719/TiO2 system, thus the PL intensity is also reduced (Fig. 4b).
On the other hand, the emission intensity of the N719/TiO2 system is enhanced with the introduction of CuPc, which suggests that the charge generation and transfer mechanism is as follows. Photons are absorbed by the CuPc upon illumination and excited electrons are transferred directly to the N719, and subsequently to the CB of the TiO2, while holes transfer from the VB of the TiO2 to the HOMO of the N719, and subsequently to the HOMO of the CuPc. When CuPc is introduced to the N719/TiO2 system, the concentration of electrons in the CB of the TiO2 is increased, and the recombination rate is likewise higher. In comparison with the N719/TiO2 system, CuPc/N719/TiO2 shows a higher PL emission as depicted in Fig. 3b. With increasing electron–hole pair recombination, the electron injection–hole transport rate is also increased as discussed, contributing to a higher performance of the solar cell.
Given that there is no overlap between the absorption spectrum of N719 and the emission spectrum of CuPc, the FRET process according to Förster theory, cannot be observed in our N719 sensitized TiO2 core, CuPc shell device.

Fig. 5 shows the photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the DSSC ,with and without the CuPc layer (30 nm) respectively, under AM1.5 (100 mW cm−2) illumination; and the related performance data are tabulated in Table 1. The thickness of the photoanode in these devices was maintained at 13 ± 1 μm. The open-circuit voltage (Voc) remained nearly constant, independent of the presence/absence of CuPc (see Table 1). The device sensitized with only N719 has a PCE of 6.39%, while the PCE for the device with the addition of the 30 nm CuPc shell to the sensitized TiO2 nanofiber core escalated up to 9.48%, which represents a dramatic 48% increase. This is primarily attributed to an increase in the short circuit current density (Jsc) and the fill factor (FF).
30 nm CuPc
Without CuPc
% Change 

J
sc (mA cm−2)
21.12
14.97
41.08

V
oc (V)
0.74
0.75
−1.33
FF (%)
60.65
56.91
6.57
PCE (%)
9.48
6.39
48.36

R
s (Ω cm2)
2.34
10.07
−76.76

R
p (Ω cm2)
641.5
414.8
54.65
In contrast, as shown in Fig. S1 a reference device with a photoanode of just CuPc/TiO2 was found to have extremely low Jsc and PCE, respectively 0.67 mA cm−2 and 0.18%. It is known that CuPc with multiple and symmetrical carboxyl groups is easy to synthesize which is advantageous. However it is difficult to adopt CuPc to sensitize TiO2 because electrons cannot inject directly from the CuPc into the CB of the TiO2, hence, the device with the CuPc/TiO2 photoanode reveals a disappointingly low PCE. On the other hand for our novel configuration, the improved performance (as evident from the high Jsc) realized through introducing the CuPc shell to the sensitized TiO2 nanofiber core, was due to the cascade charge transfer from the CuPc through the N719 to the CB of the TiO2. In our device, this is the second of the two routes for charge generation and transfer besides the primary route from N719 to TiO2. As can be seen, besides harvesting light the N719 also functions as a charge carrier or transport channel connecting the CuPc and TiO2.
Besides harvesting light, introducing the CuPc shell in the photoanode can further reduce the recombination. Electron transport properties can be investigated by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Fig. 6 shows the EIS of a DSSC with and without CuPc (30 nm) under AM1.5 (100 mW cm−2) illumination. Three semi-circles are observed in the measured frequency from 10−1 to 106 Hz (Fig. 6), which represent, respectively, the charge transport resistance at the Pt-counter electrode/electrolyte (first semi-circle), the charge transfer resistance at the interface of the photoanode/dye/electrolyte (second semi-circle), and the diffusion process of I3− in the electrolyte (third semi-circle). It can be seen that the device with the CuPc shell shows a lower charge transfer resistance; in other words, charge transport through the photoanode is enhanced and electron recombination is reduced. This conclusion is also supported by the value of the two resistances as determined from the J–V curves as follows. From the J–V curve, Rs (series resistance) and Rp (parallel resistance) can be calculated and are listed in Table 1. The resistance Rs arises from the internal resistance and resistive contacts in the device, while Rp arises from the leakage of the current in the device. With the CuPc shell, Rs decreases by a factor of 4.3 yet Rp increases by 55%, implying that the CuPc shell renders the device more efficient.
To provide further insight into the mechanism of the enhanced Jsc, the normalized external quantum efficiency (EQE) is examined in the two wavelength regimes: 350 to 400 nm and 550 to 800 nm as depicted in Fig. 7a. The increase of the EQE is attributed to the introduced CuPc shell that absorbs photons in these regions for additional charge generation. As shown in Fig. 7b, the normalized EQE enhancement, i.e. Δ normalized EQE, was calculated based on the difference between the normalized EQE of the device with and without CuPc. The Δ normalized EQE has three peaks at 355, 570 and 700 nm, corresponding respectively to 0.4, 0.23, and 0.37 enhancements in the normalized EQE. These peaks almost match those in the absorption spectrum of CuPc of 370, 600 and 700 nm respectively.
It is known that I3− in the electrolyte is a “prefect quencher”. The excited state of the outermost shell of the CuPc, which is exposed to the electrolyte, is therefore quenched (Fig. S2). As such, an appropriate CuPc shell should have a thickness of more than the exciton diffusion length (about 15 nm) to compensate for the quenching effect. In our tests, different thicknesses of CuPc shell were tested from 20 to 40 nm for optimizing the performance of our device. The morphology (as shown in the SEM images) and respective photovoltaic properties (PCE, Jsc, Voc, and FF) of these photoanodes are shown, respectively, in Fig. S3 and Fig. 8. The Voc for all the devices remains nearly constant at 0.73 ± 0.02 V. The FF is maintained at 60% when the thickness of the CuPc layer is less than 30 nm, thereafter it decreases to 54% when the CuPc thickness is increased to 40 nm. The maximum efficiency of 9.48% together with the highest Jsc is achieved when the CuPc layer thickness is at 30 nm. On the other hand, a poor performance is obtained when the CuPc thickness is either above, or below, this optimal thickness. With the increasing thickness of the CuPc in the photoanode, under solar irradiation more electrons are generated and transferred to the TiO2 photoanode via the N719 resulting in an enhanced performance. However, when the thickness of the CuPc exceeds the combined exciton diffusion length and the quenching layer thickness, the excess CuPc incurs an extra resistance for hole transport thereby retarding N719 regeneration (see Fig. S4).

TiO2/PVP composite nanofibers were first electrospun on FTO glass (15 Ω per square) from a precursor solution which contained titanium isopropoxide (TIP, 1.2 g) polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP, 1 g), acetic acid (1 g) and ethanol (30 mL). A voltage of 70 kV was applied over a collector distance of 19 cm. TiO2 nanofibers were obtained after calcination at 450 °C for 2 h. The obtained nanofibers were peeled off from the FTO glass and transferred to another FTO glass with an ultra-thin adhesive layer (TiO2 paste, 13 nm). The photoanode was obtained after calcination at 450 °C for 2 h. The prepared TiO2 nanofiber photoanode was first treated with an aqueous solution of TiCl4 (40 mM) at 60 °C for 15 min. After treatment, the film was washed with ethanol and dried in vacuum at 80 °C, and subsequently it was immersed in a solution of 0.3 mM N719 in absolute ethanol at 55 °C for 24 h. Prior to loading into a vacuum chamber, the N719 sensitized photoanode was washed with ethanol to remove any “unanchored” dye. The CuPc was deposited on the N719 sensitized TiO2 nanofiber photoanode using thermal evaporation under a reduced pressure of less than 1 × 10−6 Torr at a deposition rate of approximately 0.5 Å s−1. To maintain uniformity, the target surface was rotated during deposition. A 6 MHz gold crystal monitor was used to determine film thickness and deposition rate.


The absorption spectra of the N719/TiO2, CuPc/TiO2 and CuPc/N719/TiO2 photoanodes were measured by an Agilent Varian Cary 4000UV/VIS/NIR spectrophotometer. Photoluminescence (PL) data was measured at room temperature using an Edinburgh FLSP920 spectrophotometer with an incidence and detection angle of 45°. The emission spectra were measured at an excitation using a 325 nm monochromatic filter and an increment of 1 nm was adopted for data collection.


Platinum-sputtered FTO glass was used as the counter electrode. The counter electrode and dye anchored TiO2 photoanode were assembled into a sandwich prototype with a hot-melt film (Surlyn, DuPont, 25 μm). The internal space of the cell was filled with a liquid electrolyte, which consisted of a mixture of 0.6 M 1-methy-3-propylimidazolium iodide (PMII), 0.05 M LiI, 0.05 M I2, and 0.5 M 4-tert-butyl pyridine (TBP) in acetonitrile. The prepared DSSC device was subject to an illumination of AM1.5 G 100 mW cm−2 from a solar simulator ABET SUN 2000 with power density calibrated by a silicon reference cell (NIST). The performance of the DSSC device was monitored by a power meter (Keithley 2400 digital source meter) throughout the testing. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) values were measured with an EQE system equipped with a xenon lamp (Oriel 66902, 300 W), a monochromator (Newport 66902), a Si detector (Oriel 76175_71580) and a dual-channel power meter (Newport 2931_C).


In conclusion, the results presented herein demonstrate the viability of our novel photoanode with a core–shell nanofiber structure in DSSCs. The core TiO2 nanofiber sensitized with one dye (N719), and the shell made from a second dye (CuPc), have complementary absorption that broadens the absorption spectrum for the DSSC device. The surface roughness and porosity of the semiconductor nanofiber allow favorable deposition of the dyes while the one-dimensional nanofibers further facilitate electron transport. Realizing a more efficient DSSC device beyond that which has already been accomplished herein as a viable renewable energy solution is possible providing that a more favorable dye than CuPc can be identified.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr01868g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013