 DOI: 10.1039/C9QM00112C
(Research Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 1357-1364


Jiaxu
Yao
,

Hui
Wang
,

Pang
Wang
,

Robert S.
Gurney
,

Akarin
Intaniwet
,

Pipat
Ruankham
,

Supab
Choopun
,

Dan
Liu
* and 

Tao
Wang
*

State Key Laboratory of Silicate Materials for Architectures, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, 430070, China. E-mail: dliu@whut.edu.cn; twang@whut.edu.cn

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, 430070, China

Smart Energy and Environment Research Unit, School of Renewable Energy, Maejo University, Chiang Mai 50290, Thailand

Department of Physics and Materials Science, Faculty of Science, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai 50200, Thailand

Received
21st February 2019
, Accepted 6th May 2019
First published on 7th May 2019
A photoactive layer with efficient charge transport and low charge recombination is critical to prepare perovskite solar cells with high efficiency and superior stability. We demonstrate that the incorporation of an effective additive 1,3-diaminoguanidine monohydrochloride (DAGCl) in the MAPbI3 film can increase the perovskite grain size and reduce trap density, consequently increasing the carrier lifetime and reducing charge recombination. This leads to an improvement in maximum power conversion efficiency from 19.1% to 20.3% as well as increased lifetime, with an inverted device structure of glass/ITO/PolyTPD/MAPbI3/PC61BM/ZrAcac/Ag.

Organic–inorganic hybrid halide-based perovskite solar cells (PSCs) emerged as a new technology for energy production in 2009, attracting extensive research interests as the frontrunner for potential next generation photovoltaic devices. PSCs display promising potential towards commercialization due to their low cost of fabrication via solution processes, large-scale manufacturing on flexible substrates, and high power conversion efficiencies (PCE).

The ability of the absorber layer to harvest sunlight, and generate and extract charge carriers is important to achieve high device performance. To achieve this, new types of perovskite materials are constantly being explored, e.g. all-inorganic perovskites and 2D perovskites. These new perovskite absorbers show great potential in terms of environmental stability, but the device efficiencies have been found to be inferior compared to their hybrid organic/inorganic counterparts. Improving the crystal quality and minimizing the trap density of organic/inorganic hybrid perovskites has been demonstrated to be an effective way to prepare PSCs with high efficiency and superior stability. To that end, numerous approaches have been explored to obtain high quality perovskite films, including solvent annealing, anti-solvent treatments, and hot substrate casting. Furthermore, it is reported that additive engineering during the perovskite solution casting process is an efficient means of modulating the crystallization dynamics to improve charge transport and optical properties via morphology control. A range of additives, including polymers, metal and organic halide salts, solvents and nanoparticles, have been reported in the literature. The morphology can be effectively manipulated with the presence of these additives, including moderation of surface uniformity, grain size, and width of grain boundaries. The strong interaction between additives and perovskite is thought to reduce the trap density and degree of charge recombination.
Several additives containing bulky cations have been introduced to form 2D/3D hybrid perovskite solar cells, and have shown great potential in morphology modulation, defect passivation and stability improvement. For example, tetrabutylammonium (TBA) iodide was added with methylammonium iodide (MAI) to form mixed and larger cation perovskites which showed improved hydrophobicity and higher moisture stability. A mixed passivation treatment was reported, using a mixture of bulky organic ammonium iodide (iso-butylammonium iodide, iBAI) and formamidinium iodide (FAI) to enhance both efficiency and stability, with the champion device achieving a stabilized PCE of 21.7%. In a recent report, one type of perovskite solar cell modified by FACl and subsequently passivated by 1-adamantylamine hydrochloride achieved a best PCE of 21.2%. Guanidinium salts have been used in PSCs to form mixed-cation perovskite or hybrid perovskite containing the 2D structure, but few work has explored them as additives to modulate morphology and passivate traps in 3D perovskite solar cells. In this work, organic halide salt 1,3-diaminoguanidine monohydrochloride (DAGCl) was first investigated as an additive in an MAPbI3-based precursor solution to obtain the high quality of perovskite film during a two-step perovskite deposition process. Enhanced grain size was observed with the presence of an optimum amount of DAGCl, leading to increased carrier lifetime and the reduction of trap density and carrier recombination. With an inverted device structure of glass/ITO/PolyTPD/MAPbI3/PC61BM/ZrAcac/Ag, we demonstrate a champion PCE of 20.3% over 19.1% of the reference device.

Lead(II) iodide (PbI2, 99.99%) was purchased from Xi’an polymer Ltd (Xian, China). Methylammonium iodide (MAl) was synthesized according our previous method. Poly[N,N′-bis(4-butylphenyl)-N,N′-bisphenylbenzidine] (PolyTPD) and phenyl-C60-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) were purchased from Luminescence Technology. Zirconium acetylacetonate (ZrAcac) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (USA). All solvents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received. The additive DAGCl (1,3-diaminoguanidine monohydrochloride) was purchased from Aladdin (China).


Pre-patterned ITO glass was sequentially cleaned by ultrasonication in deionized water, ethanol, acetone and isopropyl alcohol for 10 min each, and further treated with ultraviolet-ozone for 10 min to remove any organic contaminants. A PolyTPD layer was deposited by spin-coating a 1.8 mg ml−1 CB solution at 3000 rpm and subsequently annealing at 110 °C for 10 min. The perovskite layer was deposited through a two-step sequential deposition method. The precursor solution of the first layer was prepared by dissolving PbI2:MAl (1.3 M:0.3 M) and different concentrations of DAGCl (wt% of MAI) in the solvent mixture made of anhydrous DMF and dimethyl sulfoxide (9:1, v/v), which was then spin-coated onto PolyTPD at 6000 rpm for 15 s. Immediately following this, the second step is the deposition of MAl (0.2 M in isopropanol) on top of the previous layer by spin coating at 3700 rpm for 45 s. The precursor film was then annealed at 100 °C for 30 min to convert to perovskite. The PCBM layer was then cast on by spin coating from a 15 mg ml−1 CB solution at 1000 rpm for 30 s. A ZrAcac interlayer was then deposited by spin coating at 5000 rpm for 30 s from its 1 mg ml−1 methanol solution. A 100 nm Ag layer was then deposited via thermal evaporation at high vacuum to finish the device fabrication.


The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of devices were measured in ambient conditions under simulated sunlight (100 mW cm−2) using a Newport 3A solar simulator, and the light intensity was calibrated with a silicon solar cell certified by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL, China). J–V characteristics were recorded using a J–V sweep software developed by Ossila Ltd (UK) and a Keithley (USA) 2612B source meter unit. The devices were masked with a metal aperture to accurately define the test area on each pixel and to eliminate the influence of any edge effects. The morphology patterns were obtained by SEM (Hitachi S4800, Japan). GIWAXS measurements were obtained using the beamline BL14B1 at the Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility in China. The steady-state PL spectra were obtained by a PL microscopic spectrometer (Flex One, Zolix, China) using a 532 nm CW laser as the excitation source. The absorption spectra of the perovskite were obtained by using a UV-vis spectrophotometer (Hitachi U-3900H, Japan). Impedance, capacitance–voltage and IMVS measurements were obtained using a ModuLab XM electrochemical workstation (AMETEK, UK), and the tests were performed under a series of voltages with the amplitude of 10 mV, in the frequency range from 1 MHz to 100 Hz, under 1 sun illumination. Equivalent circuit simulations were fitted using the software package ZView (Scribner, USA). EQE was measured with an EQE system (Zolix, China) equipped with a standard Si diode. The monochromatic beam was generated from a 150 W xenon lamp.


We herein fabricated planner heterojunction PSCs employing the inverted structure of glass/ITO/PolyTPD/MAPbI3/PC61BM/ZrAcac/Ag, as depicted in Fig. 1a. The MAPbI3 perovskite layer was prepared following an optimized two-step method detailed in our previous work. The DAGCl additive (see chemical structure in Fig. 1b) was introduced in the PbI2:MAl (1.3 M:0.3 M) solution which was spin cast onto the PolyTPD layer as the first step (see Fig. 1c), and then covered with a spin cast MAI layer to form perovskite upon thermal annealing at 100 °C for 30 min. A zirconium acetylacetonate (ZrAcac) interfacial layer was incorporated between the PCBM and Ag layers to reduce the contact barrier between them.

The device performance was evaluated by current–voltage (J–V) measurements with both reverse and forward scans under simulated AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2, and the device metrics are summarized in Table 1. The best performing J–V curves of the reference and best-performing devices are shown in Fig. 2a, in which the reverse and forward scans display negligible hysteresis in our perovskite solar cells. The reference device, i.e. without the presence of the DAGCl additive, gave a maximum PCE (PCEmax) of 19.1% from the forward scan. Varying the DAGCl content from 0.3 to 1.2 wt% in the precursor solution has different effects on the device performance. It was found that a small quantity (0.3 wt%) of DAGCl as additive in the perovskite layer can improve the PCEmax from 19.1% to 19.8%, and the device with 0.6 wt% of additive achieved a PCEmax of 20.3%. The average fill factor (FF), open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current (Jsc) increased from 78.2 ± 1.7%, 1.02 ± 0.01 V, 22.8 ± 0.4 mA cm−2 for the reference cell to 80.6 ± 1.2%, 1.05 ± 0.01 V and 23.1 ± 0.3 mA cm−2 respectively in the device with the presence of 0.6 wt% DAGCl. When the additive content was further increased to 1.2 wt%, the excessive DAGCl decreased the PCEmax from 20.3% to 18.3%. An optimum DAGCl content was therefore determined to be 0.6 wt% through these device studies. For the reference device, and the device incorporating 0.6 wt% DAGCl, the stabilized power outputs reached 19.1% and 20.1% respectively by applying an external bias near the maximum power point (MPP) as shown in Fig. 2b. This confirms a significant performance improvement in accordance with our J–V measurements. Fig. 2c shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves for the reference device and device with 0.6 wt% DAGCl over the spectral range 300 to 900 nm, with the integrated Jsc values from the EQE spectra calculated as 21.4 and 21.8 mA cm−2, respectively. The calculated Jsc values are only ∼6% less that the Jsc values measured from our J–V sweep measurements, thus confirming the validity of our J–V scans. Statistical charts of PCEs, shown in Fig. 2d, demonstrate the consistency and repeatability of the observed enhanced performance upon the addition of 0.6 wt% DAGCl. We also stored the devices, without any encapsulation, in ambient conditions with an average humidity of around 50%, and tested them regularly to obtain the storage lifetime of devices. As shown in Fig. S1 (ESI), the PCE of the device with 0.6 wt% DAGCl maintained 80% of its initial value over a storage period of 20 days, whilst the reference device dropped to 70% of its initial PCE. This supports that the addition of an optimum amount of DAGCl helps to improve the long-term stability of our perovskite solar cells.
DAGCl content
Scan direction
PCE (PCEmax)
FF (%)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
0 wt%
FS
18.2 ± 0.7 (19.1)
78.2 ± 1.7
22.8 ± 0.4
1.02 ± 0.01
RS
18.1 ± 0.7 (19.0)
77.9 ± 1.8
22.6 ± 0.4
1.02 ± 0.01
0.3 wt%
FS
18.9 ± 0.9 (19.8)
79.0 ± 1.7
23.0 ± 0.3
1.04 ± 0.01
RS
18.8 ± 0.9 (19.7)
78.8 ± 1.8
23.1 ± 0.3
1.04 ± 0.01
0.6 wt%
FS
19.5 ± 0.7 (20.3)
80.6 ± 1.2
23.1 ± 0.3
1.05 ± 0.01
RS
19.1 ± 0.9 (20.2)
80.3 ± 1.3
23.1 ± 0.4
1.05 ± 0.01
1.2 wt%
FS
17.9 ± 0.6 (18.3)
77.6 ± 1.8
21.7 ± 0.7
0.97 ± 0.02
RS
17.7 ± 0.7 (18.1)
77.1 ± 1.9
21.8 ± 0.8
0.95 ± 0.02
The morphology of these perovskite films was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and is shown in Fig. 3a–d. The average grain size of the pristine perovskite was around 300 nm, increasing slightly after the addition of DAGCl and reaching ca. 420 nm when the content of DAGCl was 0.6 wt%. The grain size distributions for these two materials were calculated using large-area SEM images (Fig. S2a and b, ESI) and plotted in Fig. S2c (ESI), showing that the grain size distribution increases when 0.6 wt% additive is present. To explain this increase in size, we suggest that the amine units of the DAG cation (CH8N5+), a type of Lewis acid, have a tendency to form hydrogen bonds with iodine species between adjacent crystalline grains, which effectively enhances the grain size. A compact, well-crystallized perovskite with larger grain size will facilitate charge transport and suppress charge recombination, effects that will positively enhance the device efficiency as confirmed by the device efficiency study outlined above. However, the presence of excessive DAGCl will in fact hinder the continuous growth of perovskite grains due to steric hindrance, and reduced grain size was obtained when 1.2 wt% DAGCl was introduced in the perovskite precursor as shown in Fig. 3d. These smaller grains with the presence of more grain boundaries will reduce the charge mobility and provide more sites for charge recombination due to a large density of charge traps in these grain boundaries This explains why the PCEmax was reduced from 20.3% to 18.3% when the DAGCl content was increased from 0.6 wt% to an excessive amount of 1.2 wt%.
The size of the organic DAG cation is larger than the methylammonium cation (CH3NH3+) of perovskite, and is even bigger than the commonly used guanidinium cation (CH6N3+) which has been used as an additive to disrupt the 3D MAPbI3 perovskite structure. We expect that the DAG cation only enhances the interactions between adjacent crystalline grains and passivates grain boundaries, but will not be incorporated into the perovskite crystal lattice. To confirm this, we used grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) to characterize the perovskite films. The 2D GIWAXS patterns of the pristine perovskite film and those incorporating different amounts of DAGCl are shown in Fig. 3e–h, with the 1D profiles in the out-of-plane direction are plotted in Fig. 3i. Despite the variation in grain sizes, these perovskite films display rather similar diffraction rings, with the tetragonal phase (110), (220) and (310) diffraction peaks located at qz values of 1.3, 2.5 and 2.7 Å−1 respectively, in line with literature reports of 3D MAPbI3. The presence of a very small proportion of DAG (CH8N5+) did not form any 2D and quasi-2D nanostructures according to the above GIWAXS measurements. We also provided the conventional XRD of perovskite films containing different contents of DAGCl in Fig. S3a (ESI). Similar to the GIWAXS measurements, the intensities of the characteristic peaks of perovskite started to reduce when the content of DAGCl is 1.2 wt% or more, suggesting that the excessive amount of DAGCl has negative effect on the reaction of MAI and PbI2 to form MAPbI3. When the MAI component was completely replaced by DAGCl, XRD spectra in Fig. S3b (ESI) confirm that perovskites has not been formed, in either as-cast or thermally-annealed films. The absorption spectra of these films (Fig. 3j) show that the absorption is largely unchanged in the wavelength range from 500 to 800 nm. However, the absorption ability was strongest in the wavelength range from 400 to 500 nm with the addition of 0.6 wt% of DAGCl, and we tentatively attribute this to the improved perovskite crystal grains. The PL spectra of these films are shown in Fig. 3k, with a primary peak observed at 780 nm. The intensity of the PL spectrum gradually increased with the addition of DAGCl until it reached the optimized content of 0.6 wt%, after which the spectrum intensity reduced with the presence of excessive DAGCl. These changes correlate well with the grain size changes as a function of DAGCl concentration. The smaller grain size formed with or without the presence of excessive DAGCl therefore contributes to more PL quenching in those perovskite films.
In order to obtain a deeper understanding of how the additive improves device performance, we have studied the charge carrier recombination dynamics in our perovskite devices. The light intensity dependence of Voc for devices with and without DAGCl is shown in Fig. 4c. We obtained the light ideality factor (nid,l) by fitting the semilogarithmic plot of Voc as a function of light intensity. The device with 0.6 wt% DAGCl had a lower ideality factor of 1.62 kT q−1 compared o 1.89 kT q−1 in the case of reference device, implying the presence of less trap-assisted recombination than the reference device. This could be related to the larger grain size of the perovskite layer as described above. Fig. 4a shows the capacitance vs. applied bias plots for two devices that were measured in dark conditions at 10 kHz. The first stage of capacitance in the low forward bias region maintains a constant plateau, but after the knee voltage at ca. 0.8 V, there is exponential growth of the capacitance. The reduction of device capacitance with the addition of DAGCl is a result of less traps and defects concentrating at the interfaces after grain size modulation. Furthermore, a Mott–Schottky plot is shown in Fig. 4b, from which the build-in potential (Vbi) can be obtained from the intersection of the slope and x-axis. The Vbi of the device with 0.6 wt% DAGCl was slightly improved from 0.94 V (of the reference device) to 0.99 V, in line with the improved Voc as summarized in Table 1. The space charge density of the device is inversely proportional to the slope of the slant line, and therefore the DAGCl-modified device (slope = 7.6 × 105) contains less space charge accumulation compared to the reference device (slope = 6.1 × 105).
Detailed insights into the charge transport and recombination properties of these devices were further evaluated via impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements (Fig. S4, ESI), tested under 1 sun illumination in the frequency range between 100 Hz and 1 MHz. We obtained and plotted the series resistance (Rs, Fig. 5a) and recombination resistance (Rrec, Fig. 5b) by fitting the data with the equivalent circuit model shown in Fig. 5b. It was found that Rs decreased after the addition of DAGCl, suggesting better interfacial contact. Moreover, the Rrec value increased, which indicates a reduced tendency of charge recombination with optimal DAGCl content.
We further evaluated the charge lifetime of devices via intensity modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS) measurements, tested under a small-amplitude modulation at the open-circuit condition. In Nyquist plots, separate arcs are observed in the high and low frequency regions, each suggestive of different recombination processes. In our previous work, we attributed the arc in the high frequency region to relate to the dominant charge recombination process in the perovskite layer. Hence, the high-frequency region Nyquist plots, alongside Bode plots of devices with/without 0.6 wt% additive are shown in Fig. S5 (ESI). We can obtain the carrier lifetime (τn), plotted in Fig. 5c, by τn = 1/ωn, where ωn is the peak frequency in the Bode plot in Fig. S5a (ESI). The τn of the device with 0.6 wt% DAGCl is always longer than the reference device under the range of light intensities tested. We attribute this enhanced carrier lifetime to the increased grain size of perovskite induced by the addition of 0.6 wt% DAGCl.
We also fabricated electron- and hole-only devices to determine the trap densities for the different devices, with the obtained dark J–V curves shown in Fig. 6. The J–V curve can be divided into three regions: the Ohmic region (black fit line), the space-charge limited current region (green and purple fitted lines) and the trap-filling limited region. The trap-filling limited voltage (VTFL) is visible in Fig. 6 as the intersection of the linear fits of the ohmic and space-charge limited current regions. The trap density can be obtained from VTFL = entL2/2εε0, where nt is the trap density, L represents film thickness, ε is taken as 32 from literature reports, and ε0 is the relative dielectric permittivity (8.854 × 10−12 F m−1). We found that the electron and hole trap densities of DAGCl-modified device were 2.2 × 1016 and 2.4 × 1016 cm−3 respectively, which were much lower than the values of the reference device (2.9 × 1016 and 3.4 × 1016 cm−3). In order to exclude the passivation effect of PCBM on electron-only devices, we also fabricated the devices using an n-type semiconductor PDI2 to replace PCBM to check the change of electron trap densities. The trap density extracted from Fig. S6 (ESI) is consistent with the values obtained from the PCBM-based devices. The lower trap density of DAGCl-modified device is in line with its reduced charge recombination concluded from our impedance testing.

We have demonstrated that the incorporation of the additive DAGCl into the perovskite precursor solution can regulate the grain size and trap density in MAPbI3 perovskite films, consequently influencing device efficiency and lifetime. A maximum device PCE of 20.3% has been achieved for our inverted MAPbI3 solar cell incorporating 0.6 wt% DAGCl in the perovskite layer, whilst also attaining superior storage lifetime. Reduced trap density, increased carrier lifetime and reduced charge recombination have been demonstrated in the optimized DAGCl-modified perovskite solar cells. We correlate these improvements in device performance with the increase in grain size from around 300 nm in pristine perovskite to around 420 nm with 0.6 wt% DAGCl. The amine moieties of the DAG cation (CH8N5+), a Lewis acid, can form hydrogen bonds with the excess iodine species between adjacent crystalline grains to moderate grain size and passivate defects. However, an excess amount of DAGCl (over 0.6 wt%) will disrupt the continuous growth of MAPbI3 due to spatial steric hindrance, leading to decreased grain size and a reduction of device performance. Our study unravels the mechanism by which this promising new additive can be used to control the perovskite morphology to prepare high efficiency solar cell devices with improved lifetimes.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We acknowledge funding support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51861145101), and the National Research Council of Thailand (NRCT 49/2561).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9qm00112c
This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2019