 DOI: 10.1039/C3RA47188H
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 7655-7659

Yu-Kuei Hsu*,
Hung-Hsun Lin,
Jan-Rung Wu,
Mei-Hsin Chen*,
Ying-Chu Chen and 
Yan-Gu Lin

Department of Opto-Electronic Engineering, National Dong Hwa University, Hualien, Taiwan. E-mail: ykhsu@mail.ndhu.edu.tw; meihsinchen@mail.ndhu.edu.tw; Fax: +886-3-8634180; Tel: +886-3-8634196

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Institutfür Anorganische Chemie, Engesserstraße 15, D-76131 Karlsruhe, Germany

National Synchrotron Radiation Research Center, Hsinchu 30076, Taiwan

Received
5th December 2013
, Accepted 9th January 2014
First published on 10th January 2014
Heterostructural p-Cu2O/n-ZnO solar cells are fabricated by the consecutive electrochemical deposition of an n-ZnO nanorod layer, followed by a p-Cu2O layer on a transparent conductive substrate. The growth parameters, growth temperature and time of applied potential, which determine the crystalline structure and film thickness of Cu2O, are fine-tuned to investigate their effects on the performance of heterojunction solar cells. From XRD and SEM analyses, the best crystalline quality and the optimum Cu2O film thickness are accomplished at the potential of −0.4 V and the growth temperature of 60 °C for 10 min. In addition, the electrolyte concentration plays an important role in the optical absorbance of Cu2O film, which significantly exhibits two-time enhancement as adjusting the CuSO4 concentration of 0.4 M to 0.02 M. The best performance of the heterojunction cell is able to achieve the conversion efficiency of 0.33% with Voc, Jsc, and FF being 0.15 V, 7.03 mA cm−2, and 0.33, respectively. Hence, this study demonstrates that the proposed strategy to improve the solar cell performance realized by electrochemical deposition has the potential to produce cheap and environmentally friendly solar cells.

The urgent requirement for clean and sustainable energy technologies has invigorated research on many photovoltaic systems with increasing emphasis on balancing cost and performance, as well as environmental concerns. Based on these criteria, there has been a renewal of interest in solar cells based on cuprous oxide (Cu2O) as the active layer because this metal-oxide semiconductor shows many important characteristics useful for solar cell production. These characteristics of Cu2O include p-type conducting nature, low raw material cost, a direct energy gap (2.1 eV), nontoxicity, long-term stability, and it is amenable to low-cost scalable fabrication processes. However, the fundamental limitations of Cu2O, one of the earliest semiconductors being studied, have not been overcome. In particular, regarding the difficulty in fabricating n-type Cu2O, homojunctions remain a barrier to the realization of Cu2O-based solar cells due to the self-compensation mechanism and/or the low solubility of the doping impurities, i.e. the n-type dopants are significantly self-compensated by native ionic defects. Therefore, the efforts to improve Cu2O solar cell performance could perhaps focus on heterojunction devices. More recently, n-type metal-oxide semiconductors/p-Cu2O heterojunction solar cells have been pursued, especially p-Cu2O/n-ZnO. Although Shockley–Queisser theoretical value of the power conversion efficiency of Cu2O-based solar cells is about 18%, the highest efficiency of electrodeposited p-Cu2O/n-ZnO devices reported is 1.28%. However, this efficiency is still much lower than the theoretical limit. Further investigation devoted to this adsorption layer of Cu2O is thus required for better understanding of its material properties and improving the efficiency gap.

Cu2O thin films can be synthesized by various techniques, such as sputtering, vacuum evaporation, hydrothermal method, electrochemical deposition and direct oxidation of Cu sheets, in which the electrodeposition process is a non-vacuum, simple and ultra-low cost approach, and is an attractive approach in the highly competitive solar panel market when such devices can be further improved. Up to now, the electrodeposited p-Cu2O/n-ZnO solar cells have attracted more attention. It was also pointed out that the electrical and optical features of the p-Cu2O/n-ZnO heterojunction strongly depended on the electrochemical deposition condition, such as applied potential, deposition temperature and property of electrolyte, which affected the photovoltaic performance, speculating that there was possibility of enhancing the photovoltaic performance. According to our knowledge, the detailed investigation on optimizing the electrodeposition conditions for Cu2O layers is still rare. Herein, the low-temperature electrochemical construction of a p-Cu2O/n-ZnO heterojunction solar cell was demonstrated that the photovoltaic performance was sensitively dependent on the applied potential, deposition temperature and concentration of electrolyte.

In a typical electrodeposition process, a piece of Pt foil and a standard silver/silver chloride electrode (Ag/AgCl) were used as the counter and reference electrode respectively. The indium-tin oxide (ITO) coated glass as substrates were used as the working electrode. ITO-coated glass was cleaned with an acetone and rinsed with deionized water before use. All the reagent was of analytical grade and used without further purification. For the growth of ZnO nanorods, aqueous solution containing 0.1 M KCl with different concentration of ZnCl2 was used as electrolytes. H2O2 was used as oxygen source. Electrodeposition was performed with an electrochemical analytical instrument (CHI 627D). The applied potential was operated at −0.7 V versus Ag/AgCl for 30 min. and the solution temperature was controlled at 80 °C. Two different concentration of aqueous solution were used for forming Cu2O layers, including (1) 0.4 M copper sulfate hydrate and 3 M lactic acid and (2) 0.02 M copper sulfate hydrate and 0.3 M lactic acid. Both solution pH was adjusted to 11 with 1 M NaOH aqueous solution. Various plating potentials were maintained at −0.3 to −0.6 V versus Ag/AgCl for different growth temperatures to obtain large and continuous Cu2O grains on the ZnO nanorod substrate. Finally, the substrates were rinsed with water, dried with air and quickly transferred into a thermal evaporator for the deposition of the gold top contact with an area of 0.25 cm2 and a thickness of 100 nm.


The morphology of p-Cu2O/n-ZnO cells were examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JEM-4000EX), and the structure of the samples were analyzed using X-ray diffractometer (XRD, Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.1506 nm). The performance of the devices was obtained with a home-made solar simulator. The light source of a 150 W Xe lamp with an AM 1.5 filter was used, and the intensity of the illumination at the sample position was determined to be 100 mW cm−2. The I–V data were obtained with a Keithley 2400 Source Meter. In addition, a 150 W Xe lamp equipped a monochromator was used as the excitation light source to obtain the monochromatic light for incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency measurement.


First, the different potentials for electrochemical construction of Cu2O thin film were analyzed by XRD, as shown in Fig. 1, before the fabrication of heterojunction device. The diffraction peaks from the samples at applied potentials of −0.3 V, −0.4 V, −0.5 V, and −0.6 V for 10 min, were identified as cubic-phase (JCPDS card no. 78-2076) of Cu2O, beside the peaks of ITO substrate. In addition, the strongly (111)-preferred crystal orientation of deposited Cu2O films was found under these plating potentials. It was also worth noting that the half width at full maximum (FWHM) of the (111) peaks from all samples also changed with plating potentials. According to Scherrer's relation, the mean size of crystal grains in the Cu2O film with plating potentials of −0.3 V, −0.4 V, −0.5 V, and −0.6 V were estimated 49.1, 50.8, 46.4, and 44 nm, respectively. The result indicated that the optimum potential of −0.4 V can achieve better Cu2O thin film, and was also kept the same for the following experiments.

Fig. 2 shows a cross-section SEM image of the heterostructure with Cu2O film plating on ZnO nanorods at the potential of −0.4 V for distinct growth time. The film on top of ITO was the ZnO nanorods grown by electrodeposition, and the plating condition was kept the same for sequent Cu2O film growth; meanwhile, the height of ZnO nanorods was approximate 1.1 μm. The alkaline solution (pH = 11) used for growing Cu2O film did not obviously erode the ZnO nanorod or degrade its quality. In addition, it should be noted that the cell structures in Fig. 2 had ZnO nanorods be embedded inside Cu2O films, which had large grains and were continuous. When the growth time was performed for 5 min, 10 min, 20 min, and 30 min, the thickness of Cu2O film was estimated as 1.04 μm, 1.62 μm, 2.93 μm, and 3.58 μm, respectively. Clearly, the thickness of film increased with increasing growth time, but the increment in the thickness was not a linear function as growth time approximately owing to the poor conductivity of Cu2O films. In addition, there was no void between the grains, indicating that good gap-filling was achieved; meanwhile, a lack of voids was essential for good devices, because defects and/or residues of plating chemicals could be trapped inside them.
The photovoltaic current density–voltage (I–V) curves of Cu2O/ZnO heterojunctions for different growth time of Cu2O film under an AM 1.5 solar simulator are shown in Fig. 3a and the corresponding characteristic parameters of the measured solar cells are summarized in the inset of Fig. 3a. The Cu2O/ZnO film heterojunction cell prepared by depositing a Cu2O layer for 5 min showed rather low photovoltaic conversion efficiency (PCE) of 0.19% with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.22 V, short circuit current density (Jsc) of 2.65 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 0.37. As the growth time increased to 10 min, the Cu2O/ZnO heterojunction cell exhibited the optimum PEC of 0.29% with Voc, Jsc, and FF being 0.31 V, 3.47 mA cm−2, and 0.28, respectively. The improved Jsc and Voc can be ascribed to the increase of Cu2O layer thickness, resulting in enhanced light absorption and reduced leakage current, respectively. When the growth time exceeded 10 min, Voc almost kept the same, but Jsc decreased. This was because that the gradually enlarged thickness of Cu2O layers going beyond the minority carrier diffusion length increased the recombination loss and decreased the Jsc, as well as PEC. The almost same value of Voc may indicate that no surface defect was introduced into the interface during the increasing thickness of Cu2O layer. In addition, the effect of different growth time on the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra is shown in Fig. 3b. Generally, the onsets of EQE for all samples were about 620 nm, which were consistent with the band gap of approximately 2 eV. An appreciable shoulder observed at the wavelength between 520 nm and 650 nm was due to the direct forbidden transition nature of Cu2O. As the wavelength below 380 nm, the sharp decrease of EQE resulted from the absorption of ZnO. Because the incident light firstly passed through the ZnO NRs, and then reached the Cu2O film when EQE was performed. Obviously, at the growth time of 10 min, EQE reached a maximum value of 48% at the wavelength of 420 nm. It also indicates that the Cu2O/ZnO cell at the growth time of 10 min display the optimum optoelectronic conversion property. From the evolution of Cu2O layer thickness, the optimum Cu2O thickness of approximate 1.6 μm for Cu2O/ZnO heterojunction cells can achieve the better carrier collection under the considering light absorption and carrier transport loss.
Fig. 4a–d displays the cross-section SEM of a Cu2O/ZnO cell with various growth temperatures of Cu2O layer at the potential of −0.4 V for 10 min. Clearly, the thickness of Cu2O layer increased with increasing growth temperature, and the values were estimated as 1.067, 1.628, 2.169, and 2.725 μm for the growth temperature of 50 °C, 60 °C, 70 °C, and 80 °C, respectively. The factor can be ascribed to the acceleration of growth rate by arising temperature. Besides, the effect of growth temperature on the crystal structure of Cu2O layer was also analyzed by XRD, as shown in Fig. 4e. Although all samples illustrated the preferred orientation of (111) diffraction peak, the peak ratio of (111)/(200) slightly decreased with increasing growth temperature. This can be probably ascribed that the higher temperature not only enhances the growth rate of Cu2O layer, but also enlarge the poly-crystalline degree of Cu2O film. Meanwhile, this effect also affected the mean size of crystal grains in the Cu2O film, which reduced from 52 to 44 nm as the growth temperature increased from 60 °C to 80 °C according to Scherrer's relation. Therefore, based on the consideration of both orientation degree and film thickness of Cu2O, the cell at growth temperature of 60 °C obviously exhibited the optimum PEC, as shown in Fig. 4f.

Before examination of the parameters of potentials, growth temperature and time for the synthesis of Cu2O films, the electrolyte plays an important role in Cu2O solar cells. In 2010, Choi et al. revealed that the junction morphology of Cu2O homojunction solar cells can be fine tuned by the manipulation of electrolyte concentration; meanwhile, as the concentration of CuSO4 was adjusted to 0.02 M, the PEC of Cu2O homojunction solar cells was significantly enhanced 2.5 times in comparison to that of 0.4 M CuSO4 electrolyte. Herein, the effect of the CuSO4 concentration on the performance of Cu2O/ZnO heterojunction solar cells was analyzed. Fig. 5a shows the photovoltaic current density–voltage curves of Cu2O/ZnO heterojunctions for different growth time of Cu2O film in the electrolyte of 0.02 M CuSO4 at the potential of −0.4 V and temperature of 60 °C. When the growth time below 10 min, Cu2O films were failed to get the performance of cells due to incomplete and discontinuous film formation. But, significantly, at the growth time of 10 min, the Cu2O/ZnO cell exhibited the optimum PEC of 0.33% with Voc, Jsc, and FF being 0.15 V, 7.03 mA cm−2, and 0.33, respectively. As the growth time further increase, the decreases in PEC and Jsc were found and the reason can be ascribed to the influence of crystalline structure, which was supported by XRD data, as shown in Fig. 5b. From the fitting of FWHM of (111) peak, the grain size in Cu2O film slightly decreased as the growth time increased. The optimum grain size of Cu2O film was achieved the 62.3 nm, which is better than that from high concentration of Cu precursor. Meanwhile, the thickness of Cu2O film also increased and the complete coverage of thin film was accomplished, as shown in Fig. 5c–d. This gradually getting thicker film may suppress the leakage current and slightly improve the Voc value. In addition, it is worth notice that the significantly enhanced Jsc of 7.03 mA cm−2 was achieved in the solution of 0.02 M CuSO4. This ultra-high photocurrent may be ascribed to the optical property of Cu2O film. Fig. 6 shows the absorption spectra of two Cu2O films with the same thickness in the electrolytes of 0.4 M and 0.02 M CuSO4. Both samples showed the similar onset wavelength of 620 nm, which indicates the band-gap energy of approximate 2 eV. This result was also consistent with the finding from EQE. Obviously, the film from low concentration exhibited stronger absorbance in the wavelength region of 300–500 nm, which may result from the low impurity environment in the solution of 0.02 M CuSO4 and further improve the better crystal quality. This feature also plays an important role in the enhanced Jsc and PEC of Cu2O/ZnO heterojunction cell.


In summary, the electrodeposited p-Cu2O/n-ZnO heterojunction solar cells were successfully fabricated. Under the consideration of the effects on the applied potential, growth temperature and time, the performance of p-Cu2O/n-ZnO cells can achieve the PEC of 0.29% with Voc, Jsc, and FF of 0.31 V, 3.47 mA cm−2, and 0.28, respectively, at the potential of −0.4 V and the temperature of 60 °C for 10 min in the electrolyte of 0.4 M CuSO4. However, these resulted parameters strongly involved in the crystalline property and the carrier diffusion length (∼430 nm) of Cu2O films according to the analyses of XRD and SEM. Furthermore, the influence of electrolyte concentration on cell performance revealed the improved PEC of 0.33% and remarkable Jsc of 7.01 mA cm−2 in the solution of 0.02 M CuSO4, owing to the significant enhancement of absorbance of Cu2O films. Our study suggests that those growth parameters of Cu2O film are not only promising for p-type active layer, but also offer a new opportunity to develop photoelectrochemical materials for light harvesting devices.


The authors would like to thank the National Dong Hwa University and the National Science Council of the Republic of China, Taiwan, for financially supporting this research under contract no. NSC 101-2221-E-259-011.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014