 DOI: 10.1039/C9TC03895G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 12572-12579


Kai-Ting
Huang
,

Chien-Chung
Shih
,

Bing-Huang
Jiang
,

Ru-Jong
Jeng
,

Chih-Ping
Chen
 and 

Wen-Chang
Chen
*

Department of Chemical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan. E-mail: chenwc@ntu.edu.tw

Institute of Polymer Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan

Advanced Research Center for Green Materials Science and Technology, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan

Department of Materials Engineering, Ming Chi University of Technology, New Taipei City 243, Taiwan

Received
18th July 2019
, Accepted 17th September 2019
First published on 17th September 2019
In this study, we first revealed green materials – poly-lysines (poly-L-lysine and poly-L-lysine blend poly-D-lysine) – as electron-extraction layers (EELs) in organic photovoltaics (OPVs). The distinct configurations of poly-lysine enantiomers were verified by conducting zeta potential analysis, and their work function (WF)-tuning capabilities for indium tin oxide (ITO) were affirmed by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). These two poly-lysine groups, with different arrangements of the amino groups that built up different surface dipoles on the ITO substrate, altered the surface energy and WF of ITO. Poly-L-lysine optimized the WF of ITO for efficient carrier transport in the OPV device, in the electron transporting layer-free OPV devices, and we observed a high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 10.01% in the device configuration of ITO/interlayer/BHJ/MoO3/Ag. As the first examination of poly-lysine enantiomers for OPVs, we provided the WF-tuning functions – increasing polarity as an interfacial dipole is formed at the corresponding interface, and discovered a promising interfacial material possessing high efficiency and benefitting from a long-term stability to perform in a stable PCE with about 80% of its original PCE remaining after continuous heat and light treatment for 400 hours.

Technological deployment of organic photovoltaics (OPVs) requires enhancements in device light-conversion efficiency and extended lifetime while keeping material costs low. As the demonstrated power conversion efficiency (PCE) has reached over 15%, OPVs have great potential for commercialization. To further improve the performance, the embedding of universal interfacial layers can be an excellent solution without the change of the components of the state-of-the-art active layer materials.

Playing a significant and unique role, the interfacial layer has been adopted as a permanent requirement due to a large barrier and back diffusion between the active layer and the metal electrode. Many advances in interfacial materials have been successfully developed, including conjugated and non-conjugated organic materials, organic and inorganic hybrid materials, polyelectrolytes, and self-assembled layers. It has been demonstrated that an ideal interfacial layer can break the limited open circuit voltage (VOC) and suppress the leakage current of devices. In addition, the embedding of interlayers changes the surface status (surface energy and work function) of substrates, which alters the morphology of active layers and facilitates carrier extraction, thereby increasing the device performance.
As more and more interest focuses on the interface study, great research efforts are devoted to exploring new materials with all the desired properties. Biomaterials and natural compounds have particular advantages in that they are environmentally friendly and exist naturally in living things, and so they can contribute sustainably to green electronics. For instance, Zhu et al. have lately utilized highly transparent wood composites to develop green, disposable optoelectronic devices. More recently, studies regarding the utilization of DNA, chitosan, and cellulose as the interlayer in OPVs have also sprouted. However, DNA cannot withstand a high annealing temperature and glucose-based polymers are generally insoluble or only partially soluble in water or common organic solvents, which thus impose great challenges when fabricating high-quality films.
There are bio-based materials for OPVs that have not yet been discovered – enantiomers (chiral compounds: L-lysine and D-lysine) which are mirror images of each other, having an α-amino acid with positive charge. Except for their plane-polarization of light, enantiomers basically have identical chemical and physical properties. As a matter of fact, in recent decades, these materials have been proved to possess different characteristics especially in the fields of medicine and biology. For instance, one of them can be represented as a more active isomer, while the other one might be contributing to side-effects, displaying toxicity, or acting as an antagonist. This is because living creatures are also chiral, and the combination of chiral and chiral compounds may cause some configuration changes leading to a totally opposite phenomenon. In the last few years, the main advances in the development of enantiomeric materials have been accomplished and the effects of enantiomer functionality could be discovered precisely. Poly-lysine is a biomaterial with the ability to be produced from natural materials, and it is usually used in medicine and food preservative industries. However, the effect of the two enantiomers on the electrical performance of the organic electronics has not been explored, as far as we know.
In this study, we first attempt to use these enantiomers as an electron-extraction layer (EEL) for OPVs. A number of research studies have been dedicated to understanding the underlying mechanisms of work function (WF) tuning by interfacial materials. They have showed that the magnitude of ΔWF strongly correlates with their ionic functionalities, which would result in varied dipole formations and directions at the interfaces. Various polymers with side chains containing polar moieties have been studied, such as amines, phosphates, and alkoxy groups. For poly-lysine enantiomers (poly-L-lysine and poly-D-lysine) – with the same structural formula and molecular weight – their deposition behavior (the arrangements of amino groups) is found to have a connection between the ionic functionality and WF tuning. It has been demonstrated that the change of the dipole density on the surface is directly proportional to surface potential. That is, if the higher polarity is caused by the dipole formation in the interface, this can be verified through getting a higher surface potential value and altering the corresponding surface energy-levels. In this study, we find simply depositing the poly-lysine on top of indium tin oxide (ITO) can efficiently alter the surface energy and the WF of ITO. The net dipoles built up at the poly-lysine/ITO interface lead to an efficient electron extraction and improvement in OPV performance. We carefully fix the controlled variables and propose that the primary function of the change of polarity is the key factor adjusting the ITO WF through the arrangements of the amino groups. Two groups using poly-lysine enantiomers, poly-L-lysine and poly-L-lysine blend poly-D-lysine, indicate that increasing the polarity is the critical factor leading to high degrees of vacuum-level shifting for an efficient interfacial layer (Fig. 1).


Fig. 2 shows the surface potential of poly-lysine enantiomers measured by a zeta potential analyzer (Fig. S1, ESI). The prepared concentrations are 0.1, 0.5, and 1 g mL−1 for poly-L-lysine, respectively named as 0.1PLL, 0.5PLL, and 1PLL, while 1 g mL−1 poly-L-lysine blend poly-D-lysine is named as PLL + PDL. As the concentration of poly-L-lysine increases, the polarity would in theory increase due to the higher density of amino groups with a positive charge. The surface potentials of 0.1PLL, 0.5PLL, and 1PLL are 36.0, 50.5, and 60.7 mV, respectively. However, the PLL + PDL surface potential is 30.7 mV, which is even lower than that of 0.1PLL. By applying the surface potential analysis as mentioned, we confirm that the deposition of poly-lysine enantiomers on ITO is varied between them because of the arrangements of amino groups turning into different polarity levels. The different arrangement behavior altering the surface properties of the substrate is consistent with our observation on their surface energies.

The film samples for the transmittance measurements were coated on quartz glass by following the same procedure as that employed for the fabrication of the OPV devices. After coating of poly-lysine films, there is no absorption at wavelengths from 300 to 800 nm for both the studied films, revealing their high transparency. Fig. 3 shows the optical transmittance spectra of poly-L-lysine and poly-L-lysine blend poly-D-lysine and they transmitted almost 100% of the incident light in the region from 250 to 800 nm. Such a property is able to minimize their parasitic absorption of the BHJ layer to maximize the resulting photocurrent when serving as interlayers in OPVs. The surface structures of the ITO substrate, the ITO/poly-L-lysine sample, and the ITO/poly-L-lysine + poly-D-lysine sample and the subsequent BHJ coating on top of their surface were characterized by AFM (Fig. 4 and Fig. S2, ESI). As shown in Fig. 4, the ITO surface exhibits a large surface roughness of 4.02 nm. After covering by poly-L-lysine and poly-L-lysine blend poly-D-lysine, the surface roughness is decreased to be 2.51 and 2.56 nm, respectively. This manifests their passivation effect to reduce the surface roughness of ITO substrate. The topography of the ITO/poly-lysine samples is insignificantly different, verifying that the incorporation of these two enantiomers had the same effect on surface structure.
The surface energy of poly-lysine enantiomers was determined by the contact angle, and the results for ITO, poly-L-lysine, and poly-L-lysine blend poly-D-lysine are shown in Table 1 and Fig. 5. There are two kinds of liquids used to drop on the surface of substrate, water and oil (diiodomethane). As shown, the contact angles of ITO for water and oil, respectively, are ∼100° and ∼55°, appearing to be quite hydrophobic. The water and oil contact angles of poly-L-lysine are ∼41° and ∼22° while those of poly-L-lysine blend poly-D-lysine are ∼7° and ∼16°, respectively. The surface properties of these samples were evaluated by the Wu model to obtain the surface energy (γtotal) from the sum of dispersive (γdispersive) and polar (γpolar) components. The values of γtotal of ITO, poly-L-lysine, and poly-L-lysine blend poly-D-lysine are 34.89, 72.73 and 85.16 mN m−1, respectively. Compared with the ITO, we observe an increase in γtotal value for these poly-lysine samples. Interestingly, these two poly-lysine groups show large differences in their surface energies on the ITO substrate in spite of their nature of having an identical chemical structure. This change in hydrophobic/hydrophilic properties of the substrates can form various interfaces and determine optoelectronic properties of the OPV devices. Poly-L-lysine blend poly-D-lysine is very hydrophilic and it results in incompatibility between interlayer and organic active layer consequently. Relatively hydrophobic poly-L-lysine ideally enables a sequential active layer to be successfully deposited on top of this interlayer. Therefore, poly-L-lysine is not only beneficial for the multilayer construction during OPV fabrication but also favorable for the formation improving the interfacial compatibility with the BHJ layer.
Water angle
Oil angle
Polar
Dispersive
Surface energy
ITO
100.53
54.70
1.79
33.09
34.89
Poly-L-lysine
41.04
22.14
25.54
47.19
72.73
Poly-L-lysine + poly-D-lysine
6.97
15.76
36.24
48.93
85.16
After the exciton dissociation within the active layer of OPV, ideally, the holes will be collected at the anode while electrons will be extracted at the cathode due to the built-in electrical field created by the distinct WF. Between the light-harvesting active layer and the charge-collecting electrode, the interlayer with proper charge selectivity is able to highly prevent free carriers from reaching the opposite electrodes. It was supposed that the poly-lysine EEL caused the WF of ITO to decrease by forming net dipoles at the interface in this study. To understand the WF tuning by the interfacial materials, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was conducted to study the evolution of the WF for poly-L-lysine and poly-L-lysine blend poly-D-lysine EEL coated ITO substrates (Table S1, ESI). As the obtained UPS results show in Fig. 6, upon using the poly-L-lysine blend poly-D-lysine EEL, the WF shift is similar to the ITO pristine WF (5.12 eV). After depositing 0.1PLL, 0.5PLL, and 1PLL on the ITO surface, its pristine WF is reduced to 5.09, 5.02, and 4.22 eV, respectively. Notably, the poly-L-lysine EEL shows the biggest shifts in WF and the largest WF shift is observed in the ITO/1PLL group. This indicates that poly-L-lysine can better induce the dipole formation at the EEL/electrode interface, which is consistent with the observed variation in surface potential as discussed earlier. This UPS result successfully affirms not only the distinct nature between the two groups of poly-lysine enantiomers but also the WF-tuning capability of poly-L-lysine as a result of forming an interfacial dipole at the corresponding interface.

The corresponding J–V characteristics are presented in Fig. 7 and Fig. S3, ESI and the relevant photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 2. As shown, for the fullerene-based PTB7-th:PC71BM BHJ system, the control device without using any EEL had a very poor PCE, mainly owing to the low open-circuit voltage (VOC). In order to have a fair comparison, a commonly used polymeric EEL, polyethylenimine (PEI), was employed to fabricate a reference device in parallel with the studied poly-lysine device. PEI is also an aliphatic amine rich polymer, which can form a surface dipole moment between electrode and the amine groups. Encouragingly, when using poly-L-lysine as the EEL, it yielded a much improved PCE of 7.29 ± 0.12% along with a greatly improved VOC of 0.75 ± 0.02 V and fill factor (FF) of 0.60 ± 0.01. Such improvement showed that poly-lysine is an efficient interlayer material having an even higher PCE than that of commonly used PEI. As for the other group of poly-L-lysine blend poly-D-lysine, its derived device only delivered a mediocre PCE of 5.26 ± 0.11% with a much reduced VOC of 0.60 ± 0.01 V and FF of 0.55 ± 0.03. The result proved once again that it is the key point of the varied arrangements of the amino groups between poly-L-lysine and poly-L-lysine blend poly-D-lysine. In addition, the WF-tuning function has shown that increasing polarity strongly correlates with the magnitude of ΔWF by the interfacial materials. To explore the general applicability of these poly-lysine enantiomer EELs, the non-fullerene-based PBDBT:ITIC and PBDB-T-2Cl:IT-4F BHJs were also examined. In the comparison of the PTB7-th:PC71BM blend, this system was subjected to thermal treatment, which allowed us to have a better understanding for poly-lysine materials. More details of the designed EEL in long-term stability will be discussed later. The PBDBT:ITIC devices using the poly-L-lysine EEL similarly possessed a higher PCE of 7.39 ± 0.07% with a higher VOC of 0.84 ± 0.01 V and FF of 0.53 ± 0.01 compared to the device made from the poly-L-lysine blend poly-D-lysine EEL. For the PBDB-T-2Cl:IT-4F OPV, the poly-L-lysine devices reached the best PCE of 9.86 ± 0.09% with the increased VOC of 0.85 ± 0.01 V, FF of 0.60 ± 0.01 and short-circuit current (JSC) of 19.77 ± 0.13 mA cm−2.

Interlayer EEL
Active layer system

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE%

a The average value is based on 12 devices. The value in parentheses is the best efficiency.

No EEL
PTB7-th:PC71BM
0.30 ± 0.04
14.91 ± 0.35
0.46 ± 0.05
1.97 ± 0.26 (2.10)
PEI
0.74 ± 0.02
16.08 ± 0.14
0.59 ± 0.01
6.88 ± 0.10 (6.99)
Poly-L-lysine + poly-D-lysine
0.60 ± 0.01
16.13 ± 0.10
0.55 ± 0.03
5.26 ± 0.11 (5.34)
Poly-L-lysine
0.75 ± 0.02
16.75 ± 0.13
0.60 ± 0.01
7.29 ± 0.12 (7.48)
Poly-D-lysine
0.74 ± 0.01
16.6 ± 0.14
0.60 ± 0.01
7.28 ± 0.11 (7.44)
Poly-L-lysine + poly-D-lysine
PBDBT:ITIC
0.71 ± 0.01
16.33 ± 0.11
0.51 ± 0.02
5.82 ± 0.09 (5.91)
Poly-L-lysine
0.84 ± 0.01
16.80 ± 0.12
0.53 ± 0.01
7.39 ± 0.07 (7.49)
Poly-D-lysine
0.84 ± 0.01
16.70 ± 0.14
0.52 ± 0.01
7.28 ± 0.10 (7.43)
Poly-L-lysine
PBDB-T-2Cl: IT-4F
0.85 ± 0.01
19.77 ± 0.13
0.60 ± 0.01
9.86 ± 0.09 (10.01)
To track the influence of the poly-lysine enantiomer EELs as a function of aging time in long-term stability, Fig. 8 presents the thermal and photo stability of the derived OPVs based on the PBDBT:ITIC system with encapsulation. As shown in Fig. 8a, the device without using any EEL had an apparent decrease for the later heating time after 200 hours. It is observed that 60% of initial PCE is retained after annealing at 60 °C for 400 hours in the case of the control ITO device. For the devices using poly-L-lysine and poly-L-lysine blend poly-D-lysine EELs, both of the studied devices possessed a better thermal stability. The stable PCE remained with about 80% of their original PCE after annealing at the same temperature for 400 hours. The results suggest that the studied interfacial layer plays an important role in OPV devices. As mentioned earlier, it not only minimizes undesired charge recombination by adjusting the WF, but also avoids the stability problem caused by the mutual diffusion from the direct contact between the light-harvesting active layer and the charge-collecting electrode. By incorporating the interlayer, the active layer is protected from diffusion of the surrounding oxygen and moisture through the grain boundaries in the metal electrode, which in turn degraded the organic active materials.
Most of the studies agree that it is quite sensitive to its surface features for solar cell. However, being under light is likely to make the morphology change or degrade certain chemical structures and consequently cause dysfunction of the device. As one of the main targets to be evaluated, the long-term photo stability of the poly-lysine-based device is shown in Fig. 8b. The control device without using any EEL shows a dramatic decrease of PCE after being under continuous illumination (1 sun) just for 24 h. In striking contrast, the devices using poly-L-lysine blend poly-D-lysine and poly-L-lysine EELs, respectively, retained 80% and 70% of their initial PCE value after being exposed to the light condition of one sun for 400 hours. The poly-lysine-based device is beneficial not only for an improved thermal stability but also for a much-enhanced photo-stability. Through these long-term stability tests, the merit of introducing an interlayer is thus confirmed. Moreover, it is clearly proved that poly-L-lysine and poly-L-lysine blend poly-D-lysine EELs are ideal interfacial materials in the field.

In summary, we incorporated a green material, poly-lysine, applied as an EEL in OPVs and it was designed to correlate the function of WF tuning with the polarity. The chemical structure of these enantiomers was used to tune the WF shift by various arrangements of the amino groups of the poly-L-lysine and poly-L-lysine blend poly-D-lysine. The surface energy results suggested that the hydrophobic characteristic of poly-L-lysine was favorable for improving the interfacial compatibility with the BHJ layer. The higher surface potential of poly-L-lysine compared to that of poly-L-lysine blend poly-D-lysine indicated its arrangements of amino groups tended to have a strong polarity, as confirmed by UPS. It further showed the WF-tuning capability of poly-L-lysine as a result of forming an interfacial dipole at the corresponding interface. As the first example to introduce green poly-lysine serving as an EEL, the OPV performance significantly enhanced both in the fullerene-based and non-fullerene-based BHJs and possessed the best PCE of 10.01% with the increased VOC of 0.85 V, FF of 0.60 and JSC of 19.77 mA cm−2 in the PBDB-T-2Cl:IT-4F system. These results clearly manifested the general applicability of the promising poly-L-lysine material. Moreover, the poly-lysine-based device exhibited not only an improved thermal stability but also a much enhanced photo stability. This study highlighted the merits of using poly-lysine enantiomers as EELs. It proved that the WF-tuning functions could be enhanced by increasing polarity, while possessing high efficiency and benefitting long-term stability to be an ideal interfacial material of OPVs.


The polymer donors, PTB7-Th and PBDB-T, were purchased from 1-Material (Canada), and ITIC was purchased from Luminescence Technology Corp. PBDB-T-2Cl and IT-4F were purchased from Solarmer. Poly-L-lysine, poly-D-lysine, PC71BM (99.5%), molybdenum(VI) oxide (MoO3), and anhydrous solvents, including tetrahydrofuran (THF), chlorobenzene (CB), and 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO, 97%), were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.


The inverted OPVs were fabricated in the device configuration of ITO glass/w/or w/o interlayers/BHJ/MoO3/Ag. The ITO glass substrate was first cleaned using an ultrasound bath in sequence with detergent, deionized water, isopropyl alcohol, acetone and isopropyl alcohol each for 15 min. After solvent cleaning, the substrate was dried by N2 flow, and treated with plasma for 15 min. The EEL solutions for poly-L-lysine and poly-L-lysine blend poly-D-lysine were prepared by dissolving 1 g mL−1 in deionized water. The interlayer (∼10 nm) was deposited onto the ITO substrates by a spin-coating method at 1000 rpm for 1 min and heating at 120 °C for 10 min. All the following steps were done inside a glovebox filled with nitrogen for solution preparation and device fabrication. For the fullerene-based BHJ, the precursor solutions were dissolved (PTB7-Th:PC71BM in 1:1.5 weight ratios) in CB with DIO additive (CB/DIO = 97/3, v/v). The other active layer system was the NFA-based BHJ to dissolve PBDB-T:ITIC in 1:1 weight ratios in CB with DIO additive (CB/DIO = 99.5/0.5, v/v). All these precursor solutions were vigorously stirred at 60 °C for 8 h in a N2 glovebox. The optimized thickness of these active layers is around 100 nm. Finally, an 8 nm-thick MoO3 layer and a 100 nm-thick Ag layer were thermally deposited in sequence under high vacuum (<10−6 Torr) to complete the top electrode, and the active area of the device was 10 mm2.


Transmittance spectra were recorded using a UV-HITACHI U-4100 UV-vis spectrophotometer. The atomic force microscopy (AFM) images were obtained using a MultiMode AFM system with a Nanoscope 3D controller (Digital Instruments) in a tapping mode. The spring constant of the silicon cantilevers (Nanosensor PPP-SEIHR) was 15 N m−1 and the resonant frequency was 130 kHz. The surface energy was analyzed by measuring the contact angle between the liquid drop and the surface of the substrate. The image was shot by a camera and the contact angle was calculated by an image analysis system. The surface potential (zeta potential) was measured by a Malvern ZetaSizer instrument. The current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the experimental OPVs were recorded using a computer-controlled Keithley 2400 source measurement unit (SMU) under AM1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2 illumination by a Newport LCS-100 simulator. The illumination intensity was calibrated using a Si photo-diode detector with a KG-5 filter. UPS was measured by electron spectroscopy for chemical analysis using an ULVAC-PHI PHI 5000 Versaprobe II system with a He I (21.22 eV) light source.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors appreciate the financial support provided by “Advanced Research Center for Green Materials Science and Technology” from the Featured Area Research Center Program within the framework of the Higher Education Sprout Project by the Ministry of Education (108L9006) and the Ministry of Science and Technology in Taiwan (MOST 108-3017-F-002-002).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc03895g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019