 DOI: 10.1039/D1SE01211H
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 5994-6003


Gururaj P.
Kini
*,

Mritunjaya
Parashar
,

Vivek Kumar
Shukla
 and 

Ranbir
Singh
*

Department of Chemical Engineering, Konkuk University, 120 Neungdong-ro, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul 05029, Republic of Korea

Department of Applied Physics, School of Vocational Studies and Applied Sciences, Gautam Buddha University, Greater Noida, U.P. 201312, India

School of Computing and Electrical Engineering (SCEE), Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Mandi, Mandi, Himachal Pradesh 175005, India. E-mail: raviravi82@gmail.com

Received
8th August 2021
, Accepted 5th October 2021
First published on 5th November 2021
Attributed to the capability of hole-transporting materials (HTMs) in facilitating commercialization of perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) with high-performance, superior device reproducibility, and long-term stability, exploration of new low-cost HTMs has become more likely inevitable for their future growth. In this contribution, two new diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP)-based small molecules, namely, DPP-Th and DPP-Se, with different chalcogenophenes (sulfur (S) or selenium (Se)) as a central donor unit and two DPP units as terminal acceptor cores were synthesized and tested as HTMs in PVSCs. The impact of the variation of chalcogenophenes on the crystallinity, optical, and electrochemical properties of HTMs and subsequently on the photovoltaic properties in PVSCs was systematically investigated. Endowed by the insertion of selenophene, DPP-Se demonstrated bathochromic absorption spectra, slightly higher highest occupied molecular orbital energy level, higher crystallinity with decreased π–π stacking, and improved hole mobility (μh), hence favoring efficient charge transport in PVSCs than its DPP-Th counterpart. Consequently, optimized planar PVSCs based on MAPbI3 with Li-TFSI as dopant and DPP-Th and DPP-Se as HTM achieved a remarkable power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 14.69% and 16.83%, respectively. Moreover, these PVSCs with pristine DPP-Se and DPP-Th as HTMs displayed superior stability under ambient temperature and thermal stress conditions and lower synthetic cost, contrasting with the reference spiro-OMeTAD studied in parallel. In conclusion, these results reveal the effectiveness of these design tactics for developing low cost, easily scalable, efficient organic small molecule HTMs for PVSC applications.

Among the emerging solution-processed solar technologies, metal halide perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) have drawn significant attention and are widely explored because of their substantial benefits, such as high absorption coefficient, long diffusion length, low cost, good mechanical flexibility, semitransparent nature, and large-scale roll-to-roll printing capability. Recently, extensive research efforts in perovskite device physics and the rapid development of light-absorbing perovskite layers with tunable crystallinity and morphology have been devoted, providing ultrahigh efficiency of over 25%. The hole transport layer (HTL) is considered to be one of the critical components of PVSCs, which plays a vital role in charge transport and extraction by minimizing charge recombination and thus having a direct influence on PVSCs cost, efficiency, and stability. Usually, hole-transporting materials (HTMs) used in PVSCs can be classified into two types, namely, inorganic (metal oxides) and organic (polymeric and organic-small-molecule (SM)) HTMs. The organic HTMs exhibits distinct advantages such as good solution-processability, tunable crystallinity, and morphology over inorganic HTMs (which usually show low intrinsic conductivity and higher surface defects), thus offering superior interfacial contact, suppressed surface defects, and passivation effect in PVSCs. On the other hand, SM-HTMs exhibit concise chemical structures, high purity, and good repeatability than their polymeric counterparts, and hence emerged as the first choice as HTMs among organic HTMs. Over the years, a large number of new SM-HTMs were reported with different building blocks; among them, 2,2,7,7-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)-amino]-9,9-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) is considered as the benchmark HTM for the mesoporous and n–i–p planar PVSCs yielding power conversion efficiency (PCE) of up to 25.17%. However, spiro-OMeTAD suffers from a few intrinsic disadvantages such as high synthesis cost and low hole mobility (μh ∼ 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1) owing to its symmetric globular structure hindering close π–π stacking, tendency to crystallize at 85 °C, low conductivity (10−8 S cm−1) and requires deliquescent dopants to boost PCE. These disadvantages hamper its practical applications as a candidate for commercial PVSCs. Thus, ideal SM-HTMs with good processibility, facile synthesis, good thermal stability, high glass transition temperature, and suitable energy levels matching with perovskite absorber is highly desirable for large-scale production of PVSCs.

The diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) acceptor unit is progressed as the most reliable acceptor unit in organic semiconductor research over the years due to its unique features such as conjugated bicyclic structure, good photochemical stability, extended absorption, and high carrier mobilities in resulting molecules, and therefore exclusively used to design various organic polymers and SMs for organic solar cells (OSCs) or organic thin-film transistors (OTFTs). Moreover, the carbonyl groups on DPP units are also helpful in passivating traps of perovskite films. However, apart from the few exceptions, DPP-based SMs were rarely tested as HTMs for PVSCs. Our group has previously reported a series of highly crystalline DPP-based SM as HTM in PVSCs and realized PCEs over 14% to 20%, suggesting that developing HTMs based on DPP would be a rational and promising strategy. Besides, it is well known that the flexibility of varying the molecular structures of organic semiconductor materials via atomic substitution, varying conjugation length, alkyl chains, and/or cores or bridges are widely used strategies to tailor energy levels and molecular packing and absorption spectrum, thereby affecting charge-carrier and photovoltaic properties of HTMs. Among these, the use of chalcogenophenes (sulfur (S), oxygen (O), or selenium (Se)) to produce highly efficient new π-conjugated materials has gained widespread prominence in the field of organic semiconductors over the years attributed to their favorable optoelectronic properties and high μh. In particular, subtle modifications of thiophene with more electron-donating selenophene proved to simultaneously endow a more planar backbone, longer effective conjugation length, and higher charge carrier mobility owing to the higher quinoidal population of selenophene and stronger intermolecular Se–Se interactions or selenium–aromatic interactions. As a consequence of these beneficial properties, various new selenophene-based organic molecules have been reported with red-shifted absorption and higher crystallinity relative to corresponding thiophene-based counterparts, thereby boosting the charge-carrier properties and short circuit current density (JSC) in corresponding OSCs or OTFT devices. Interestingly, efficient selenium-based HTMs were rarely explored in PVSCs. Thus, a new HTM named as DPP-Se has been synthesized by coupling central selenophene moiety with adjacent DPP units with acceptor–donor–acceptor (A–D–A type) molecular structure (Scheme 1) and compared with control thiophene counterpart (DPP-Th) to elucidate the advantageous effects of incorporation of selenophene in PVSCs.
In this article, we report two new easily scalable HTMs based on A–D–A molecular design for PVSCs, namely 6,6'-([2,2':5′,2′′-terthiophene]-5,5′′-diyl)bis(2,5-dioctyl-3-(thiophen-2-yl)-2,5-dihydropyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-dione) (DPP-Th) and 6,6′-(selenophene-2,5-diylbis(thiophene-5,2-diyl))bis(2,5-dioctyl-3-(thiophen-2-yl)-2,5-dihydropyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-dione) (DPP-Se), which were synthesized by introducing different chalcogenophenes (thiophene or selenophene, respectively) as central “D” core and DPP as terminal “A” units to understand the effect of chalcogens. The introduction of selenophene enabled red-shifted absorption and enhanced intermolecular interactions with shorter π–π stacking, leading to increased charge-carrier mobility in DPP-Se. As a result, the planar PVSCs using DPP-Se as HTM attained a reasonable PCE of 13.51%, which is superior to DPP-Th-based PVSCs (12.02%). Furthermore, the addition of lithium (bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide) (Li-TFSI) dopant greatly favored hole transportation and charge extraction due to effective passivation, hence further improving PCEs up to 14.69% and 16.83%, respectively, for DPP-Th and DPP-Se. Finally, in comparison with the reference spiro-OMeTAD, both HTMs displayed relatively comparable photovoltaic performance and higher stability, thus emphasizing their potentials in PVSCs.

The synthesis of new HTMs is straightforward and is shown in Fig. 1. Starting from the 3,6-di(thiophen-2-yl)-2,5-dihydropyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-dione, the mono brominated DPP intermediate (M1) was prepared through simple two steps with overall yields > 70%. The monomers M2 and M3 were synthesized according to the previously reported procedures. Then, Stille coupling reactions between M1 + M2 and M1 + M3 were conducted to synthesize DPP-Th and DPP-Se with yields over 75%. The detailed synthesis and the characterization of the HTMs are given in ESI. Both the materials showed good solubility in organic solvents such as chloroform, chlorobenzene, etc., and good film-forming ability. As the cost of the HTMs is one of the crucial factors for the commercialization of PVSCs, the rough synthesis cost of newly synthesized HTMs was estimated following the previously reported models, which are given in ESI. The estimated synthesis cost of 1 gram DPP-Th and DPP-Se is found to be 226$ and 241$, respectively, which are much cheaper than that of reference spiro-OMeTAD (∼475$ per g).

Firstly, by employing the density functional theory (DFT) at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level, the structure–property relationship and Frontier molecular orbitals (FMO) of the two HTMs were estimated, and the corresponding simulated results are displayed in Fig. 2. Though both DPP-Th and DPP-Se demonstrated highly planar structures, DPP-Th showed high backbone planarity and comparatively smaller dihedral angle between the central Th and adjacent DPP core due to the smaller size of the Th vs. Se (θ2/θ3 = 7.39°/10.71° and 14.85°/13.37°, respectively for DPP-Th and DPP-Se). Moreover, the electrostatic surface potential (ESP) suggests that both HTMs had a continuous negative ESP along the planar π-conjugated main chain with negative charges mainly concentrated on carbonyl groups; hence, they presumed to passivate Pb-atoms in perovskite films by acting as a Lewis base. Besides, the Frontier energy levels calculated from the DFT calculations of the HTMs are shown in Fig. 2c and d. The modification of Th to Se led to the marginal variation in the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels, which corresponds well with the experimental results discussed below.
The influence of different chalcogenophenes on the optical parameters of HTMs was elucidated by measuring the UV-vis absorption spectra of HTMs in solution and solid-state, as illustrated in Fig. 3a and b and Table 1. Both HTMs exhibit weak π–π* transitions at 400–500 nm and broad and intense absorption profiles in the 500–800 nm region due to intramolecular charge transfer. As expected, DPP-Se displayed a bathochromic shift in the absorption profiles with corresponding absorption maxima (λmax) of 622 and 633 nm in both solution and film states, respectively, to the DPP-Th counterpart (616 and 622 nm). This change is attributed to the higher electron-donating ability of selenophene and increased intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) effect compared to thiophene, as reported previously. The corresponding optical bandgap (Eoptg) determined from the absorption onset was found to be 1.52 and 1.50 eV, respectively for DPP-Th and DPP-Se.
HTM

λ
max (nm), solution

λ
max (nm), film

λ
onset (nm), film

E
optg
 (eV)

E
onsetox
 (V)
HOMO (eV)
LUMO (eV)

a 
E
optg = 1240/λonset, eV.
b Obtained from CV curves.
c HOMO and LUMO energies of HTMs estimated with equations: EHOMO = −[Eonsetox (vs. Ag/AgCl) − E1/2 of Fc/Fc+ (vs. Ag/AgCl)] − 4.8 (eV) (measured E1/2 of Fc/Fc+ (vs. Ag/AgCl) = 0.46 eV) and ELUMO = Eoptg − EHOMO.

DPP-Th
616
622
812
1.52
0.81
−5.15
−3.63
DPP-Se
622
633
823
1.50
0.78
−5.12
−3.62
Then, cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements of HTMs in the thin film state were used to study the effect of chalcogenophenes on the HOMO and LUMO energy levels of the HTMs using Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode (Fig. 3c). From the equation, HOMO = −[Eonsetox (vs. Ag/AgCl) − E1/2 of Fc/Fc+ (vs. Ag/AgCl)] − 4.8 (eV), the HOMO energy levels of DPP-Th and DPP-Se were estimated to be −5.15 and −5.12 eV, respectively, which is well-matched with the valence band energy of perovskite materials: therefore assuring effective hole injection and transport at each interface. Likewise, these HTMs showed LUMO of −3.63 and −3.62 eV, respectively, calculated from the equation LUMO = Eoptg − EHOMO. These results were attributed to the higher electron-donating ability of selenophene over thiophene; DPP-Se showed slightly high-lying HOMO and LUMO energy levels among the series.
To further validate the utilization of new DPP-Th and DPP-Se as HTMs, these were incorporated in n–i–p-type PVSCs having a device architecture of glass/ITO/SnO2/perovskite (MAPbI3)/HTM/Au (Fig. 4a). The current density versus voltage (J–V) curves and the relevant photovoltaic parameters (JSC, open-circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF)) for the corresponding PVSCs are shown in Fig. 4b and Table 2, respectively. The PVSCs with DPP-Se displayed the best PCE of 13.51% with related photovoltaic parameters, i.e., JSC of 21.70 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.96 V, and FF of 63.37%. In contrast, DPP-Th-based devices only showed a PCE of 12.02% with JSC of 20.53 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.93 V, and FF of 61.42%. Clearly, DPP-Se outperformed DPP-Th in all photovoltaic parameters, which could be ascribed from the higher crystallinity and excellent hole extraction and transport efficiency caused by the higher μh of DPP-Se. Moreover, the addition of Li-TFSI dopant significantly improved the PCE of DPP-Th w/Li-TFSI and DPP-Se w/Li-TFSI PVSCs to 14.69% and 16.83%, respectively, which is in agreement with previous reports. The detailed optimization of the various Li-TFSI concentrations and their statistical data for the fabricated PVSCs are given in Fig. S1 and Table S1, respectively. The enhanced JSC in DPP-Se-based PVSCs is because Se is a highly photoconductive π-spacer, which greatly enhances crystallinity and absorbance, eventually increasing the current density and mobility in the device. In addition, the variation in the JSC values with the variation in the chalcogenophene was further substantiated by the incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra presented in Fig. 4c. Here, the DPP-Se PVSCs exhibit the highest IPCE values in the 400–750 nm region over DPP-Th PVSCs, thus justifying the higher JSC value for DPP-Se PVSCs. Furthermore, charge recombination, crystallinity, and morphology were precisely studied to correlate variation in the PVSCs efficiency caused by the insertion of selenophene. The devices with DPP-Se showed the lowest Rs and maximum RSh values, which also justifies the superior PV properties of the respective PVSCs.
HTM

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

R
S (Ω cm2)

R
Sh (Ω cm2)
Hole mobility (μh) (cm2 V−1 s−1)
DPP-Th
0.93
20.53
61.42
12.02
25.74
2532.5
2.02 × 10−4
DPP-Se
0.96
21.70
63.37
13.51
22.35
4149.7
3.73 × 10−4
DPP-Th w/Li-TFSI
1.00
22.08
66.53
14.69
24.23
3282.6
2.48 × 10−4
DPP-Se w/Li-TFSI
1.02
22.18
74.42
16.83
16.69
7283.5
4.08 × 10−4
The recombination losses in these devices were studied qualitatively by measuring the J–V curves under various incident light intensities in the range of 0.8–100 mW cm−2. Typically, the JSC of the devices follows a power-law relationship with the incident light intensity (I) such that JSC ∝ Iα, where the α value, i.e., slope of the log–log plot of JSCvs. I can be obtained by fitting the curves in Fig. 4d. Usually, α < 1 indicates the presence of bimolecular recombination. The extracted α values for DPP-Th, DPP-Se, DPP-Th w/Li-TFSI, and DPP-Se w/Li-TFSI PVSCs were 0.977, 0.991, 0.979, and 0.991, respectively. Thus, these results indicate the presence of minimal bimolecular recombination in DPP-Se-based devices. Meanwhile, information about the trap-assisted recombination losses was obtained from the relationship between VOC and I, which is obtained from the equation; , where β is a coefficient, K is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature in Kelvin, and q is the elementary charge. The value of the coefficient β usually ranges between 1 and 2. The β value of 1 indicates the absence of trap-assisted recombination, whereas β > 1 suggests trap-assisted recombination. Thus, from Fig. 4e, the β values of 1.75, 1.57, 1.44, and 1.23 for DPP-Th, DPP-Se, DPP-Th w/Li-TFSI, and DPP-Se w/Li-TFSI devices suggest that the extent of trap-assisted recombination was lesser in DPP-Se based devices. Overall, the recombination results shown that both the bimolecular and trap-assisted recombination processes were minimal in DPP-Se-based PVSCs, which subsiquently aiding their improved performance over DPP-Th PVSCs. Besides, the charge collection efficiency of the HTMs was studied to investigate the variations in JSC values of the devices, as shown in Fig. 4f. The free charge-carrier collection probability (P) is then calculated from the ratio of photocurrent density (Jph) to saturation current density (Jsat). The Jsat values were extracted from the Jphvs. effective voltage (Veff) curves where Jph enters the saturation current regime. Thus, at JSC point, the calculated P values for DPP-Th, DPP-Se, DPP-Th w/Li-TFSI, and DPP-Se w/Li-TFSI PVSCs were 97.3, 98.5, 99.15, and 99.55, respectively. The difference in P values suggests DPP-Se has a superior charge extraction than DPP-Th, which could be originating from the difference in crystallinities of HTMs. P improved significantly with the addition of dopant Li-TFSI in DPP-Se, which supports the device performance of PVSCs. Moreover, photoluminescence (PL) spectra (Fig. S2) for the perovskite films with different HTMs shows the PL peak intensities in the order DPP-Th > DPP-Se > DPP-Th w/Li-TFSI > DPP-Se w/Li-TFSI. Thus, both DPP-Se and DPP-Se w/Li-TFSI showed superior PL quenching, suggesting more efficient charge transfer than DPP-Th-based devices.
The 2D-grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurements were performed to investigate the crystallinity and packing parameters in these HTMs. Fig. 5 displays the in-plane (IP) and out-of-plane (OP) profiles of GIWAXS images, and the corresponding packing parameters are summarized in Table S2. Both HTMs showed a semi-crystalline nature suggested by the pronounced arc-shaped (100), (200), and (010) diffraction peaks. In contrast, the lack of π-stacking diffraction peaks along OP directions suggests that both molecules exhibit preferential edge-on molecular orientation to the substrate. Modification of thiophene to selenophene did not cause significant variation in the lamellar spacing (100) along both directions, which is predominantly governed by the alkyl side chains on the DPP units. On the other hand, DPP-Se, displayed more intense higher molecular ordering (200 or 300) and decreased π–π stacking distance along the OP direction (3.65 and 3.63 Å, respectively for DPP-Th and DPP-Se), thus suggesting it has higher crystallinity than DPP-Th. These results indicate the insertion of selenophene inducing more significant molecular ordering and stronger π–π stacking interactions. As shown in the previous reports, shorter π–π stacking between cofacially stacked molecules will enhance the charge carrier mobilities by increasing the charge hopping between adjacent molecules. Consequently, DPP-Se showed higher charge carrier mobilities in PVSs devices than DPP-Th (discussed below).
To correlate the molecular packing and crystallinity effects on the μh of HTMs, hole-only devices with the architecture of glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/HTMs/Au were fabricated. The μh were estimated using SCLC technique by fitting the dark J–V curves with the Mott–Gurney equation as shown in Fig. S3. The results summarized in Table 2 suggests that the μh in HTMs improved in the following order: 2.02 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 (DPP-Th) < 2.48 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 (DPP-Th w/Li-TFSI) < 3.73 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 (DPP-Se) < 4.08 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 (DPP-Se w/Li-TFSI). Thus, ascribed from the higher crystallinity and tighter π–π stacking of DPP-Se, corresponding PVSCs exhibit higher μh values, and it was further improved with the addition of the Li-TFSI dopant, agreeing well with photovoltaic results. Fig. 6a–d shows the FE-SEM images of HTM films deposited over the perovskite layer to examine the morphology of HTMs over the perovskite layer. All the HTM films exhibit full surface coverage over the perovskite film without any noticeable defects/pinholes. In addition, the cross-sectional FE-SEM images of the PVSCs in Fig. 6e–h have shown thicknesses of 20 nm, 410 nm, 40–60 nm, and 90 nm for the SnO2 electron transport layer (ETL), perovskite layer, HTL, and Au electrode, respectively.
The operational stabilities of the fabricated PVSCs were investigated by monitoring JSC and VOC under continuous one sun illumination (100 mW cm−2) as shown in Fig. 7a and b. The normalized JSCvs. time curve (Fig. 7a) indicates that DPP-Se PVSCs stabilize quickly after initial degradation. The results for these devices were comparable to that of reference spiro-OMeTAD PVSCs (Fig. S4). Similarly, the normalized VOCvs. time curve (Fig. 7b) shows that the VOC of the DPP-Se PVSCs stabilizes very quickly with time and thus suggesting both HTMs have comparable operational stabilities with spiro-OMeTAD. Meanwhile, thermal stabilities of PVSCs (without encapsulation) were examined by keeping the devices at 90 °C for 50 h under ambient conditions (relative humidity (RH) = 48%) (Fig. 7c). Though both HTMs demonstrated relatively similar performances to spiro-OMeTAD PVSCs, interestingly, they displayed better stabilities than the reference spiro-OMeTAD. As indicated in previous reports, the stability of new HTMs could be ascribed from factors such as good thermal stability and hydrophobicity. Hence, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and contact angle measurements of newly synthesized HTMs were tested to determine the difference in these stability trends (Fig. 8). Evidently, both DPP-Th and DPP-Se displayed good thermal stability with onset decomposition temperatures (the temperature corresponding to 5% weight loss) of 414 and 404 °C (Fig. 8a), respectively, suggesting their high tolerance to temperature variation.
In Fig. 8b–f, the contact angles between the water droplet and the HTMs coated on the glass/ITO/SnO2/perovskite substrates were recorded to assess the moisture resistance of new HTMs against reference spiro-OMeTAD. Here, the contact angles increased in the order of 69.8° (spiro-OMeTAD) < 85.5° (DPP-Th w/Li-TFSI) < 85.6° (DPP-Th) < 86.4° (DPP-Se w/Li-TFSI) < 86.9° (DPP-Se). Thus, both DPP-Th and DPP-Se-based devices with or without Li-TFSI demonstrated significantly higher contact angles than reference spiro-OMeTAD counterparts, which suggests newly synthesized HTMs have higher hydrophobicity than spiro-OMeTAD. Meanwhile, the addition of Li–TSFI additive caused a slight decrease in contact angle values for both HTMs, which agrees well with the hygroscopic nature of Li-TFSI. Furthermore, these results were consistent with the stability and GIWAXS results, where, attributed to the enhanced crystallinity with a shorter π–π stacking distance of DPP-Th and DPP-Se, displaying higher hydrophobic character than spiro-OMeTAD (where the orthogonal structure of the central spirofluorene along with propeller-like triphenylamine side chains greatly hinders close π–π stacking, causing a larger intermolecular distance) and aided higher stability in the corresponding PVSCs by effectively preventing moisture penetration in the device.

In summary, two novel A–D–A-type crystalline HTMs, namely, DPP-Se and DPP-Th, with DPP derivatives as the acceptor units and with different chalcogenophenes (sulfur (S) or selenium (Se)) as central donor unit were successfully synthesized with straightforward facile synthesis method for use in PVSCs. The effect of insertion of selenophene on molecular properties and their application in PVSCs were studied in-depth by various characterization methods. The variation of the central chalcogen from thiophene to selenophene has a marginal effect on the optical and electrochemical properties but a prominent effect on molecular orientation, film morphological, and photovoltaic properties in PVSCs. Thus, optimized MAPbI3 based PVSCs with Li-TFSI as dopant and DPP-Se as HTM demonstrated an excellent PCE of 16.83% and outperformed the DPP-Th PVSCs (PCE = 14.69%). It has been discovered that improved PCEs of DPP-Se-based PVSCs were attributed to the combined effects of high crystallinity, enhanced hole mobility of 4.08 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, excellent film morphology favoring improved passivation effect, and lower charge recombination compared to its DPP-Th analog. More interestingly, both these new HTMs materials displayed higher thermal stability and significantly lower cost compared to reference spiro-OMeTAD. Thus, this study emphasizes the chalcogen effects on HTMs and paves the way for developing new HTMs based on this approach.


There are no competing financial interests or conflicts to declare.


R. S. wishes to thank the Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB), New Delhi, for the prestigious Ramanujan Fellowship 2020 (grant no. RJF/2020/000005).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1se01211h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021