 DOI: 10.1039/C7NR06632E
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 17731-17736


Yong-Jin
Noh
,

Yu-Jin
Choi
,

Ji-Ho
Jeong
,

Seok-Soon
Kim
,

Kwang-Un
Jeong
* and 

Seok-In
Na
*

Professional Graduate School of Flexible and Printable Electronics and Polymer Materials Fusion Research Center, Chonbuk National University, Deokjin-dong 664-14, Jeonju-si, Jeollabuk-do 561-756, Republic of Korea. E-mail: nsi12@jbnu.ac.kr

Polymer Materials Fusion Research Center, Department of Polymer Nano Science and Technology, Chonbuk National University, Deokjin-dong 664-14, Jeonju-si, Jeollabuk-do 561-756, Republic of Korea. E-mail: kujeong@jbnu.ac.kr

Department of Nano and Chemical Engineering, Kunsan National University, Kunsan, Jeollabuk-do 753-701, Republic of Korea

Received
6th September 2017
, Accepted 1st November 2017
First published on 1st November 2017
We present an efficient and stable interfacial material based on a water-soluble perylene diimide derivative functionalized with ionic and methacrylate groups (abbreviated as PDIM), which can be stabilized by the photo-polymerization of diacrylate groups at both ends of the side chain in the PDIM. The characteristics of the photo-cross-linked PDIM films were examined using absorption spectra, cyclic voltammetry, work function, and surface morphology. The feasibility of the photo-cross-linked PDIM films as a novel electron transporting layer (ETL) in polymer solar cells (PSCs) was also investigated. The PTB7-Th:PC71BM-based PSC using the PDIM as the ETL achieved the excellent power conversion efficiency of 9.44% similar to the conventional polyethylenimine ethoxylated (PEIE) and better than ZnO. Furthermore, the PSC with the PDIM films exhibited a similar lifetime to that of the PEIE-based device. This approach suggests that the photo-cross-linked PDIM film could be regarded as a promising interfacial material for fabricating highly efficient PSCs.

Bulk-heterojunction-based polymer solar cells (PSCs) have attracted significant attention as a next-generation power device in third-generation photovoltaics due to their numerous advantages such as low cost, light weight, flexibility, and solution processability. In general, the PSC is composed of a transparent electrode, a donor, an acceptor, a metal electrode, and electron or hole interfacial layers, and the device structure is categorized either as a conventional PSC or an inverted PSC. Compared with the conventional structure, the inverted PSC has been considered for the fabrication of an efficient and stable device due to the use of nonacidic anodic or cathodic interlayers and air-stable metal electrodes such as silver (Ag) and gold (Au). To achieve high efficiency and a stable device, the interfacial layer in PSCs has been considered as a key component because its impact on the device characteristics such as stability, open-circuit voltage (VOC), short-circuit current (JSC), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE) is high. For these reasons, efforts are being made to develop various interfacial layers.

In inverted PSCs, the conjugated polymer and small molecule materials have recently been incorporated as electron transporting layers to replace the metal oxides owing to their advantageous properties such as a favorable interfacial dipole formation suitable for matching the work functions between the active layers and the electrodes, good solubility in various solvents to allow stacking of multilayers by the solution process, and easy modification of physical and chemical properties by changing the side chains. Compared with the polymer materials, small-molecule materials could have more advantages such as an easy preparation process and a precise molecular weight to enable low-cost fabrication and a more reliable cell-efficiency. In particular, among the various small molecules, perylene diimide-based materials exhibit several advantages such as photochemical stability, high electron affinities, easy functionalization, easy synthesis, and excellent water solubility for environmentally friendly manufacturing processes. However, although the perylene diimide-based materials can be good candidates as the ETLs in PSCs, they have several disadvantages such as insufficient film quality, low solubility, and poor solvent-resistance for the solvent of the active layer, which could induce poor efficiency and stability in the devices. More importantly, poor solvent-resistance to induce a solvent-induced-erosion during a solution-based multilayer-device fabrication process can be one of the major limiting factors regarding the use of interlayers, and thus, to overcome this problem, the application of a thermal or photo-cross-linkable material with a strong solvent-resistance for the active layer solvent can be a promising approach. Until now, approaches for the use of such photo-cross-linking-based perylene diimide derivatives as interfacial materials and the research on their effects on solar-cell performances have been non-existent.
In this manuscript, we present an efficient and stable interfacial material based on a water-soluble perylene diimide derivative functionalized with ionic and methacrylate groups (abbreviated as PDIM), which was synthesized in our previous work. To enhance the solubility of aqueous solution and induce cross-linking reaction, amine–bromine ionic and photo-polymerizable methacrylate groups are introduced at both ends of the side chain of the PDIM. We also investigated the characteristics of the photo-cross-linked PDIM films using absorption spectra, cyclic voltammetry, work function, and surface morphology, and we employed the photo-cross-linked PDIM films as a novel cathode interface layer in PTB7-Th:PC71BM-based PSCs. The inverted PTB7-Th:PC71BM-based PSC with the PDIM exhibited a remarkable improvement in efficiency compared with the PSC without the ETLs. Its performance is highly comparable to that of the reference polyethylenimine ethoxylated (PEIE) or better than the zinc oxide (ZnO), widely used as a well-established ETL to obtain high-efficiency PSCs. Furthermore, the PSC with the PDIM films exhibited similar lifetime to that of the PEIE-based device. These results demonstrated that the photo-cross-linked and water-solution processed PDIM can be sufficient to serve as a novel interlayer for fabricating excellent PSCs.

Fig. 1a shows the device-configuration and molecular structure of the PDIM. The PDIM film undergoes cross-linking via ultraviolet (UV) irradiation (365 nm) for 5 min. As shown in Fig. 1b, the absorption of the photo-cross-linked PDIM films before and after chlorobenzene (CB) washing was not changed, indicating that the solvent resistance of the photo-cross-linked PDIM film is excellent for the generally used solvent of the photoactive layers in PSCs. Also, to confirm the levels of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO), the electrochemical properties of PDIM were investigated using a cyclic voltammogram (CV) as shown in Fig. S1. From the CV, the HOMO and LUMO levels of PDIM are −5.96 and −3.75 eV, respectively. From the low-lying HOMO, it is believed that the PDIM film can be sufficient to block the hole carriers from various donor-polymers.
To directly examine the possibility of the use of PDIM as the interfacial layers in PSCs and the effects of the PDIM-film thicknesses on the device parameters such as the VOC, JSC, FF, and PCE, various PSCs with different thicknesses were prepared, because the ETL thickness could be a basic and prerequisite condition for the optimization of the PSC performance, corresponding to the following points: if the ETLs are too thin, it might be difficult to fully cover the ITO electrodes, which could result in insufficient contact between the electrode and active layers. On the other hand, if the ETLs are too thick, it might be difficult to move the charge from the active layer to the electrode, and it may also be difficult to capture a large number of photons in the active layers due to the decreased transmittance of the thicker ETL films, as there is an optimum interlayer thickness for the improvement of the cell efficiency. The average thicknesses of the PDIM film prepared with concentrations of 1, 3, 5, 7, and 10 mg ml−1 PDIM solution dissolved in water were approximately 1.5, 2.5, 3.5, 5, and 6.5 nm, respectively. Therefore, as shown in Fig. S2 plotted using ∼20 devices, when the thickness of PDIM increased from 1.5 nm to 6.5 nm, the VOC showed little change, except for the device with the 1.5 nm PDIM, while the photo-cross-linked PDIM film with a thickness of 3.5 nm produced better average FF and JSC than those in the thinner and thicker PDIM films. The photo-cross-linked PDIM film at a thickness of 3.5 nm therefore provided the best average PCE (9.24%). The obtained excellent efficiency demonstrates that the newly used cross-linked PDIM film is sufficient for use as an efficient electron transporting material in PSCs. For more detailed studies on the function of the PDIM ETL in solar devices, the PSCs without the interfacial layer and with the optimized PDIM film were further studied. Fig. 2 shows the data of the representative J–V curve, the external quantum efficiency (EQE), and the internal quantum efficiency (IQE). As shown in Fig. 2a, the PSC without the interfacial layer showed an FF of 51.34%, a JSC of 15.47 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.54 V, and a PCE of 4.30%, which could be attributed to the poor energy-level mismatch at the electrodes/active layers for ohmic contact. On the other hand, the PDIM showed an excellent device performance with an FF of 70.04%, a JSC of 16.88 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.80 V, and a PCE of 9.44%. As shown in Fig. 2b, the EQE spectrum of the PDIM-based device increased more at the visible region than the PSC without the interfacial layer, which agreed with the increased JSC values of the PDIM-based PSC obtained by the J–V curve. Also, the integrated JSC values calculated from the EQE data are well-matched with the JSC of the J–V curves within an error of nearly 4%. In addition, as shown in Fig. 2c, the IQE spectra showed a similar enhancement trend to that of the EQE data, indicating that the enhanced EQE and JSC values are mainly due to the enhanced IQE. This implies that considering that the IQE is the ratio of the collected charge to the absorbed photons in PSCs, the photo-cross-linked PDIM film can efficiently collect and transfer the charges from the active layer to the electrode.
To understand why the photo-cross-linked PDIM increased the device parameters, various film properties such as the work function (WF), surface morphology, and series resistance (Rs) and shunt resistance (Rsh) were evaluated as shown in Fig. 3. The WF was measured and calculated by the onset of the UPS data in the secondary electron cutoff region, as shown in Fig. 3a. The WF of the ITO is 4.58 eV, whereas the photo-cross-linked PDIM film on the ITO exhibited a decreased WF value of 3.89 eV, probably due to the interfacial dipole formation of PDIM with N+ and Br− ions. This smaller WF of the photo-cross-linked PDIM film on the ITO electrode can increase the built-in potential in the device, leading to a higher VOC values in the PDIM-based PSCs compared with the PSC without the interfacial layer. In addition, as shown in Fig. 3b and c, the root-mean-square (rms) of the bare-ITO is 5.01 nm, while the rms value of the photo-cross-linked PDIM with 5 mg ml−1 was decreased to 2.88 nm. More notably, a smaller WF-mismatch at ITO/PC71BM is more suitable to provide better ohmic contact and charge collection and the uneven surface could cause a charge trap and the recombination. Therefore, favorably changed WF and surface-morphology with the use of PDIM could be responsible for the enhanced PSC-performances shown in Fig. 2. These trends are well matched with Rs and Rsh; the Rs and Rsh values of the device without the photo-cross-linked PDIM are 4.22 and 300.8 Ω cm2, respectively, while the Rs and the Rsh of the PDIM-based PSC were improved up to 2.88 and 1199 Ω cm2, respectively. These results could demonstrate the possibility of PDIM-based PSC as a novel candidate for ETLs to guarantee high efficiency PSCs.
To objectively and directly prove the value of the photo-cross-linked PDIM as ETLs in the PSCs, we compared the PDIM-based PSCs with the devices with ZnO and PEIE that are commonly used as representative interfacial layers based on metal oxide and polymer materials. As shown in Fig. 4a, the cell-efficiency of the PDIM-based PSC is very similar to that of the PEIE-based device and better than that of the ZnO-based device; the VOC, JSC, FF, and PCE of the PSCs with ZnO and PEIE were 0.81 V and 0.80 V, 15.56 mA cm−2 and 16.26 mA cm−2, 68.66% and 70.25%, and 8.60% and 9.18%, respectively. Similarly, as shown in Fig. 4b and c, the PSC with the photo-cross-linked PDIM also showed comparable EQE and IQE spectra to those of the PEIE-based device and better EQE and IQE spectra than those of the device with ZnO. The integrated JSC values calculated from EQE data are within an error of nearly 3.5% in comparison with the JSC values measured from the J–V curves. Here, when considering that the favorable WF to the LUMO level of acceptor, the smooth surface morphology, and high transmittance of electron transporting materials can result in ohmic and uniform contacts between the active layers and electrodes and better photon absorption in the photoactive layers, leading to better charge transport and collection in solar devices, the cell-performances of PDIM similar to PEIE and better than ZnO could be attributed to the different individual film characteristics such as WF, transmittance, and surface morphology; as shown in Fig. S3, the WF and transmittance values of ZnO (3.94 eV and 87%), PEIE (3.96 eV and 87%), and PDIM (3.89 eV and 85%) show no significant difference, while the rms of the ZnO film (16.90 nm) showed a relatively rough surface morphology compared with those of the PEIE (4.65 nm) and PDIM (2.88 nm) films, thus supporting the lower FF and PCE shown in the ZnO-based device. These observations concur with the VOC dependence on the incident light-intensity (Plight), to provide information about the degree of recombination in solar cells, as shown in the inset of Fig. 4c; the slopes of VOCversus ln(Plight) in the ZnO-, PEIE-, and PDIM-based devices were 1.60, 1.13, and 1.18kT/q, respectively. Considering that the slopes for the PDIM and PEIE were nearly approaching ∼1kT/q whereas the ZnO resulted in a higher slope and a stronger VOC dependence on the Plight, it could be reasonably assumed that in the PDIM and PEIE devices, there could be little contribution from the trap-assisted recombination whereas the ZnO PSCs suffer from more significant trap-assisted recombination to be induced probably due to more trap states at the interfaces of the ZnO-based PSCs. More importantly, considering that the outstanding device-characteristics of PDIM are quite comparable to the well-established reference PEIE or better than the conventional ZnO, it was believed that the PDIM can effectively function as ETLs in PSCs instead of conventional materials for achieving high-efficiency PSCs.
To verify the potentiality of PDIM as a novel cathode interfacial layer, the lifetimes of the PSCs were further investigated in compliance with the air-exposure time and the ISOS-D-1 protocol. As shown in Fig. 5, during the initial 4300 min when the PSCs were stored under air ambient conditions after the PSC fabrication, the VOC of the PSC with PDIM did not show a significant change, while the FF and JSC decreased, resulting in lower PCEs. After the initial 4300 min, the cell-efficiency decreased at a slower rate, and 87% of the original PCE value of the device with PDIM was retained after the PSCs had been stored for 10000 min under ambient conditions. Furthermore, as shown in the inset of the PCE data in Fig. 5, it is worth noting that the device-lifetime of PSC with PDIM is fairly comparable to that of the device with PEIE and somewhat better than that of the ZnO-based device. The aforementioned results demonstrate that PDIM films can be an effective ETL in PSCs to simultaneously enhance cell-efficiency and lifetime.

In conclusion, a water-soluble and photo-polymerizable perylene diimide derivative tapered in amine–bromine ionic and methacrylate groups at the ends of the side chain was investigated as a novel cathode interlayer in inverted PSCs. The characteristics of the photo-cross-linked PDIM films were studied using absorption spectra, cyclic voltammetry, work function, and surface morphology. Their effectiveness as electron transporting layers on polymer solar cells was also investigated. The PTB7-Th:PC71BM-based PSC using PDIM as ETLs showed an excellent PCE of 9.44% comparable to the device with PEIE and better than the device with ZnO. Moreover, 87% of the original PCE value of the PDIM-based PSC was retained after the PSCs had been stored for 10000 min under ambient conditions. This approach could be important for facilitating the development of the PDIM-based PSC as a novel candidate for ETLs to fabricate high efficiency and stable PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This paper was supported by the Pioneer Research Center Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning (MSIP) (NRF-2013 M3C1A3065528), the Korea Electric Power Corporation (KEPCO) under the project entitled by “Development of Semi-Transparent Perovskite Solar Cells for BIPVs” (CX72170050), the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning of the Republic of Korea and the Institute of Information and Communications Technology Promotion of Korea (R7520-16-0010), Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (MSIP) (NRF-2016R1D1A1B04933887), and BRL (2015042417) of Korea.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr06632e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017