 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA00092K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8501-8507


Xiaoyu
Zhang
,

Yu
Zhang
*,

Long
Yan
,

Changyin
Ji
,

Hua
Wu
,

Yu
Wang
,

Peng
Wang
,

Tieqiang
Zhang
,

Yiding
Wang
,

Tian
Cui
,

Jun
Zhao
 and 

William W.
Yu
*

State Key Laboratory on Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China. E-mail: yuzhang@jlu.edu.cn; wyu6000@gmail.com

College of Material Science and Engineering, Qingdao University of Science and Technology, Qingdao 266042, China

State Key Laboratory of Superhard Materials, College of Physics, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China

Department of Chemistry and Physics, Louisiana State University, Shreveport, LA 71115, USA

Received
6th January 2015
, Accepted 3rd March 2015
First published on 23rd March 2015
Thin active layers in solar cells normally have lower defect density with easier procedure and lower cost than thick ones. PbSe nanocrystal (NC)-based solar cells with thin layers were fabricated using a ligand exchange procedure. An optical spacer was confirmed to be effective in improving the distribution of light field in the devices, which could enhance the photon absorption of the thin active layers. Meanwhile, the transportation of electrons and holes was balanced and optimized by tuning the particle size and the layer thickness, which demonstrated a high short-circuit current of 32.2 mA cm−2 and a 1 sun power conversion efficiency of 4.12%. Besides, the devices with smaller PbSe NCs preserved the high efficiency for tens of hours, which is different from previous studies using large NCs.

Colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs) have been widely employed in optoelectronic applications due to their low cost and tunable electronic and optical properties. Since the pioneering work of Sargent and coworkers, a variety of semiconductor NCs have been investigated in photovoltaic fabrication, such as PbSe, PbS, CdTe, CdSe and Bi2S3 NCs. Among colloidal semiconductor NCs, lead chalcogenide NCs have been widely investigated in photovoltaics due to their strong light absorption coupled with large Bohr radius (46 nm for PbSe and 20 nm for PbS) which assists in charge delocalization and leads to high carrier mobility. p-Type PbSe NCs have the mobility as high as 0.3 cm2 V−1 s−1, and an even higher electron field-effect mobility of 10 cm2 V−1 s−1 has been reported by introducing excess lead through thermal evaporation. Beyond the impressive high mobility, PbSe NCs are also well-known due to the multiexciton generation (MEG) or carrier multiplication (CM). Nozik and coworkers have demonstrated a peak external quantum efficiency (EQE) around 114% in a 1,2-ethanedithiol (EDT) and hydrazine treated PbSe NC solar cell, with definitive proof that MEG occurred in NCs. Encouraging results of PbS NC-based devices have been achieved recently with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 8.5%, while the air stable PbSe NC-based solar cell demonstrates a PCE exceeding 6%.

Ligand exchange is an efficient strategy for reducing the inter-particle distance and enhancing carrier transportation, and much progress have been achieved in developing new strategies to obtain improved surface passivation, including atomic and hybrid organic–inorganic ligand passivation. The PbSe NC film becomes conductive after the EDT treatment through ligand exchange, and the treated film is firstly employed in a solar cell fabrication in a layer-by-layer (LBL) dip-coating manner. Normally, an active layer (200 to 300 nm) of colloidal NC-based solar cells is constructed in sequential LBL steps (beyond 10 steps) involving the repetitive deposition of an oleic acid (OA)-capped NC layer, followed by solid-state ligand exchange and solvent washing for each step. The solvent washing is wasteful, and a scalable solvent will be needed particularly when a roll-to-roll process is employed. So far, nearly all the PbSe NC-based solar cells with good performance have been relying on this strategy for active layer fabrication, which is obviously tedious and wasteful.
A thinner active layer needs less fabrication cycles, shorter production duration, and less materials; meanwhile, fewer traps are generated which will induce fewer recombination of the photo-generated carriers. Normally, the thickness of a thin active layer is below the effective diffusion length of the exciton. As a result of the enhanced charge-carrier extraction and improved carrier transportation, the fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) will be improved. Investigation on polymer photovoltaic devices has proved that high efficiencies can be achieved in the devices with different thicknesses of active layers such as the poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and methanofullerene [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) blend. With a P3HT:PCBM 1:1 weight-ratio blend, PCE of 4%, 4.4%, and 3.7% were achieved for 63 nm, 175 nm, and 225 nm thick active layers, respectively. However, as the active layer becomes thinner, the absorption of photons decreases. To solve this problem, an optical spacer (ZnO) was inserted between the active layer and the aluminum electrode in this work. By tuning the thickness of the PbSe and ZnO NC layers, the PCE and short circuit current of devices were significantly improved.

PbSe NCs were synthesized by modifying previously reported methods. All manipulations were carried out in a water and oxygen free environment. Specific temperature and reaction time for a series of particle sizes are reported in Table S1. Lead(II) oxide (Aladdin, 99.99%, 0.892 g), oleic acid (Alfa Aesar, 90%, 5 mL) and 1-octadecene (ODE) (Alfa Aesar, 90%, 12 mL) were loaded into a three necked flask with a temperature couple control finger, a reflux condenser, and a septum. After 10 min nitrogen flow to replace the air, the flask was heated to 180 °C. The solution became colorless in an hour. For the synthesis of 2.88 nm nanoparticles, 8 mL of 1.0 M trioctylphosphine–Se were injected into the reaction flask swiftly at 88.8 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere. The reaction temperature dropped to 73.6 °C and kept it on. The color of the mixture changed from nearly transparent to dark brown, indicating the formation of PbSe NCs. 50 mL methanol was injected into the reaction flask quickly to quench the reaction after 3.5 min. After centrifugation, a mass of anhydrous ethanol was added and centrifugal purified again for 10 min at 5000 rpm. The NC layer was mixed with 2 mL octane, excessive butyl alcohol was loaded in and then the NCs were isolated by centrifugation as a powder.


The ZnO NCs were synthesized using our previously reported procedure. A mixture of 0.4403 g zinc acetate (Aldrich, 99.99%) and 30 mL modified ethanol was loaded into a 250 mL three-neck flask. After 10 min nitrogen flow, the three-neck flask was heated with stirring until the mixture boiled. The zinc acetate powder completely disappeared and the solution became colorless and transparent after 30 min. Then, the three-neck flask was cooled to room temperature naturally and the solution turned into a white turbid solution simultaneously. 0.2 g of sodium hydroxide (Alfa Aesar, 98%) in 10 mL denatured ethanol was injected into the flask swiftly and the stirring was continued for 4 h. A series of purification operation procedures were then carried out. Typically, 5 mL ZnO NC solution was loaded into a 50 mL centrifuge tube and hexane was added to full. After centrifugation the precipitate was dissolved in 3 mL ethanol. The purification was executed once again with hexane and the finally obtained ZnO NCs were dissolved in 3 mL ethanol and stored in a nitrogen filled glove box.


Patterned ITO coated glass was cleaned with soap, deionized water, ethanol, chloroform, acetone, and isopropanol successively, and then was treated in UV-ozone for 15 min. A layer of PEDOT:PSS (∼40 nm thick) was spin-coated on ITO and annealed for 10 min at 150 °C in air. The PbSe film was spin-coated on PEDOT:PSS in a N2 glovebox. Details of the LBL PbSe NC film deposition are given in the ESI. A ZnO NC film was deposited over the EDT treated PbSe active region by spin coating, and was annealed at 90 °C for 30 min in the glovebox. The devices were completed by vacuum deposition of an Al cathode (100 nm thick) in a high-vacuum chamber (background pressure: ∼1 × 10−6 Torr). The active area of the devices was 4 mm2 as defined by the patterned electrodes. Current–voltage characteristics of the solar cells in the dark and under simulated 1 sun illumination were measured using a Keithley 2612B source meter. 50 points were collected every 100 mV, with a scanning speed of 200 mV s−1. The scanning direction was from −0.5 V to +0.5 V. The light intensity from the solar simulator was determined using a calibrated single-crystalline silicon reference cell.


PbSe NCs of six different sizes were synthesized and used in this study, with sizes varying from 1.7 to 3.7 nm. Transmission electron microscope (TEM) images of PbSe NCs were taken using a FEI Tecnai F20 microscope as shown in Fig. 1a. High-resolution TEM micrographs of the PbSe NCs (Fig. S1) show that these NCs are single crystals without detectable stacking faults or crystal defects. The absorption spectra of PbSe NCs are shown in Fig. 1b, and the colors of spectra curves are the same as the colors of scale bars in the TEM images, corresponding to the different particle sizes. A relationship between the first absorption peak position and particle size for large PbSe NCs has been determined by Yu et al., while a good agreement with the relationship was found for the NCs with smaller particle sizes, as shown in Fig. 3c. This agreement indicates that the previously reported equation (see the ESI) of particle size versus the first excitonic absorption peak position for PbSe NCs could be further extended to the ultra-small size range.


Fig. 2a shows the cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image taken with a JEOL JSM-7500F system. We adopted the standard device structure, where a transparent indium tin oxide (ITO) electrode served as an anode and aluminum as a cathode. Devices were fabricated by sequentially spin-coating the solutions of poly(ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS), PbSe NCs in octane, and ZnO NCs in ethanol. As shown in the schematic energy diagram of Fig. 2b, the conductive polymer PEDOT:PSS has a highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of ∼−5.0 eV and a lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of ∼−3.4 eV. Cyclic voltammetry was adopted to measure the energy levels of PbSe NCs, with detailed information given in the ESI. The energy levels of PbSe NCs with different diameters are summarized as shown in Fig. S12. Among all the different-sized PbSe NCs employed here, the 1.7 nm NCs owned the highest LUMO of −4.05 eV, which is much lower than the PEDOT:PSS LUMO. So the PEDOT:PSS functions as an appropriate hole transport layer (HTL) for not only facilitating the collection of holes from NCs, but also blocking the electron transport at the NC/HTL interface and consequently providing the increased exciton separation efficiency at the NC region.
We employed a 60 nm thick PbSe NC film as the photoactive layer for the optical field distribution study, which is well below the effective exciton diffusion length of about 100 nm. The absorption spectra of the NCs in octane used here are shown in Fig. 3b. Actually, the excitonic solar cell with 40–50 nm thickness of active layers has been studied, and showed a 1 sun PCE of 3.4%. However, the photon absorption of the active layer in their device is limited due to the thin active layer, and the inconvenience is that the rectification and photovoltage are only observed after the UV photodoping of the ZnO layer. Improvements were made for better device performance. The insertion of a layer of zinc oxide or titanium oxide as an optical spacer for enhancing the light absorption is widely employed in polymer photovoltaic cells, and some NC solar cells. In our device structure, the ZnO NC film is far more of an efficient electron acceptor, a hole blocking layer, and an electron transport layer (ETL); due to the introduction of the ZnO layer, the optical field distribution changed, and enhanced photon absorption of the active layer was achieved.
The effect of the ZnO NC film thickness on the optical properties of the EDT treated PbSe NC film is illustrated in Fig. 3a. ZnO NCs with a particle size of 2 nm were employed to fabricate the optical spacer, so that a compact layer could be obtained even for the very thin films (below 10 nm). A TEM image of the ZnO NCs is shown in Fig. S2. After the EDT treatment, an obvious enhancement of the photon absorption was found in the PbSe NC layer. Absorption spectra of devices with different thicknesses (0, 10, and 30 nm) of ZnO NC films are shown in Fig. 3a. The total absorption by the active layer (including the doubled path length in the active layer as a result of reflection from the aluminum electrode) was measured in reflection geometry as illustrated in Fig. S14. The ZnO NC film was transparent in the range of solar spectra; however, when comparing devices with the same PbSe NC film thickness, an enhancement in absorption was observed in those with ZnO NC films. Notably, a film covered with a 10 nm ZnO NC layer absorbed more photons than the one with a 30 nm layer, which was in accord with the calculation results (Fig. S6) based on an optical admittance analysis by SETFOS software. The ZnO layer redistributes the light intensity within the active layer by changing the optical interference between the incident light and the light reflected from the aluminum electrode; this is the reason why with appropriate thickness of the ZnO film, an enhancement in the active layer absorption is observed.
Devices with different thicknesses of the ZnO layer and without the optical spacer were fabricated, in order to find out the relationship between the photovoltaic performance and the thickness of the ZnO film, with their current density–voltage behavior shown in Fig. 3c. The experimental results supported the enhanced device performance upon insertion of an optical spacer, as expected from the modeling results. With the insertion of the ZnO film (10 nm), the JSC and FF increased from 9.3 mA cm−2 and 25.5% to 18.7 mA cm−2 and 34.7%, respectively. A serious leakage current at the negative bias in the device without ZnO was observed, whereas it was insignificant in the device with ZnO according to the J–V characteristics in the dark. A rectification factor of above 100 (between −0.4 V and +0.4 V) was achieved in the device. Two factors could be summarized for the decrease in efficiency of the device with a 30 nm ZnO NC layer, including the reduction of the absorbed photons and an unbalanced charge-carrier transport.

Fig. 4 shows representative J–V curves of solar cells fabricated using PbSe NCs with different sizes. The average device parameters of different-sized PbSe NC based devices are summarized in Table 1, and histogram distribution diagrams of battery efficiency with different-sized PbSe NCs are given in Fig. S13. The thickness of the PbSe NC layer was optimized from 20 to 80 nm, and some of the device J–V curves are shown in Fig. S8. All cells here employed a ZnO NC layer of about 10 nm, with their J–V measurements taken in air. While the band energy of NCs varied from 1.1 to 1.5 eV, the open-circuit voltage increased linearly from 0.16 to 0.45 V, but a decrease occurred for the NCs with a bandgap of 1.76 eV. This reduction in VOC is mostly related to the increased charge recombination of films of very small NCs, due to the larger surface area of small dots and more interparticle hops per unit length. The short circuit current changed along with the NC size as well, and a highest JSC was achieved for the 1.35 eV NCs. For devices with large size PbSe NCs, the LUMO of PbSe NCs and ZnO NCs were too close to form an excitonic solar cell, which induced a small JSC. In cells with the small PbSe NCs, the loss of current may be attributed to the reduced absorption in the red and infrared regions of the solar spectrum, and the decreased mobility of the small PbSe NC film. Meanwhile, just as we expected, the devices' FF improved and was higher than that reported for PbSe/ZnO heterojunction solar cells, originating from the decrease in trap densities and the efficient charge carrier transport through the thin PbSe NC film. As a result, through the fine control of the device structure, well performing solar cells were obtained.
NC diameter (nm)
First exciton energy (eV)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−1)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
3.7
1.10
0.16
7.0
0.25
0.3
3.3
1.27
0.27
10.9
0.40
1.2
2.9
1.35
0.31
25.5
0.42
3.2
2.6
1.42
0.40
18.4
0.46
3.6
2.3
1.50
0.45
13.8
0.49
3.1
1.7
1.76
0.41
13.1
0.46
2.5
The characterization of the device's J–V curves presented totally different results in air and nitrogen. The air exposure leads to a substantial increase in photocurrent. The devices had a slight increase in VOC and JSC only when kept for a long time in nitrogen (2 to 3 days), but a really huge improvement in photocurrent can be obtained for the short time air exposure. Fig. 5 shows the best performing device (peaks around a bandgap of 1.42 eV) with VOC of 0.40 V, JSC of 22.6 mA cm−2, FF of 0.46, and PCE of 4.12%. The highest JSC of 32.2 mA cm−2 was obtained from the NCs with a bandgap of 1.35 eV.
It is so amazing that such a large photocurrent is achieved from a solar cell with such a thin active layer. Besides the improved charge transport and reduced charge-carrier recombination which are benefits from the thin film, more complex changes are hidden behind the enlarged JSC. Fig. S9 presents the test details of about 300% improvement of JSC from 8.1 to 32.2 mA cm−2 in about 10 min air exposure (with discontinuous illumination), along with increased VOC and decreased FF. As the first exciton peak of the air exposed EDT-treated film progressively blue-shifts with time, it implies that the optical bandgap is becoming larger gradually along with the higher LUMO and lower HOMO. The higher LUMO will bring a better electron injection from NCs to electron acceptors, while the lower HOMO will enlarge the value of VOC. This is the reason why an increased VOC was observed. At the same time, the EDT treated film switches from ambipolar to p-type behavior from air exposure, and becomes 1500–5000 times more conductive. In the p–n model, it is possible for two regions to exist in the PbSe layer, as shown in Fig. S11. Along with the PbSe film switching its behavior to p-type, the exciton diffusion region will become thinner, as the dead zone will be enlarged. This is really harmful for devices with thick active layers (ordinarily beyond 200 nm), because the wider dead zone will bring more recombination of excitons before they are separated. But for the very thin active layers, no such negative effect exists because the film thickness is far below the exciton diffusion length. The designed structure keeps devices working well under air exposure, together with the increased optical bandgap and carrier mobility of the active layer, which results in the large short circuit current. However, the underlying physics of the system is complex and there are a number of other variable factors; so further detailed investigation on NC surface trap states, Fermi level changes, exciton separation and recombination before and after air exposure will be carried out soon.
Although the best performing device was obtained through air exposure in this work, the cells with large NCs lost efficiency rapidly in air. Fig. 6a displays the efficiency and FF decay test of a device with the NC peak at 1.27 eV. Poor stability was observed and half of the efficiency was lost in only 5 min. But as shown in Fig. 6b, for NCs peaking at 1.42 eV, the device keeps efficiency for tens of hours. A similar phenomenon has already been observed in PbS NC solar cells, for the significant difference in the degree of sulfur-rich surface exposure in small particles compared to large ones. Despite the device failing to perform steadily, it still showed great potential as cells with ultra-small NCs. Studies on encapsulation of the fabricated device at different air exposure times to find optimal conditions for keeping the device performing steady and stable are under way.
In summary, well performing PbSe NC solar cell devices with thin photoactive layers were fabricated successfully. A compact ZnO NC layer with the particle size of 2 nm was used to improve the light-harvesting (the experiment results agreed well with the calculation), to increase the charge collection efficiency, to serve as a blocking layer for holes, and to reduce the recombination rate. With the help of air exposure, so far the highest PCE of 4.12% and the highest JSC of 32.2 mA cm−2 have been achieved. Meanwhile, cells with smaller NCs showed better stability. The successful thin film photovoltaics will help to simplify the production process, shorten the fabrication time, and drop the production cost.

This work was financially supported by the National 863 Program (2011AA050509), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61106039, 51272084, 61306078, 61225018, and 61475062), the National Postdoctoral Foundation (2011049015), the Jilin Province Key Fund (20140204079GX), the Taishan Scholarship, the Shandong Natural Science Foundation (ZR2012FZ007), the State Key Laboratory on Integrated Optoelectronics (IOSKL2012ZZ12), and NSF (1338346).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta00092k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015