 DOI: 10.1039/C6CP03396B
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 27083-27089


P.
Gao
,

K. T.
Cho
,

A.
Abate
,

G.
Grancini
,

P. Y.
Reddy
,

M.
Srivasu
,

M.
Adachi
,

A.
Suzuki
,

K.
Tsuchimoto
,

M.
Grätzel
 and 

Mohammad Khaja
Nazeeruddin
*

Group for Molecular Engineering of Functional Materials, Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Rue de l'industrie 17, CP 440, CH-1951 Sion, Switzerland. E-mail: mdkhaja.nazzeruddin@epfl.ch

Laboratory of Photomolecular Science, Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1015-Lausanne, Switzerland

Aisin Cosmos R&D Co LTD, Show room No 8, Block-D, HUDA Complex, Tarnaka, Hyderabad, India

Aisin Cosmos R&D Co LTD, 2-36, Hachiken-cho, Kariya City, Japan

Received
18th May 2016
, Accepted 4th July 2016
First published on 5th July 2016
A new Zn(II) phthalocyanine (Pc) based low bandgap HTM is introduced for perovskite solar cells. Steady state and time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) measurements indicated an evenly matched hole extraction efficiency between sym-HTPcH and spiro-OMeTAD. On account of the low film quality and resulting high recombination, Zn(II) Pc normally cannot work as an effective HTM. We adopted insulating Al2O3 for the infiltration of sym-HTPcH to form a hybrid interfacial buffer layer, affording perovskite solar cells (PSCs) with an average PCE value of up to 12.3%, which is a significant improvement with respect to the control cell without the meso-Al2O3 layer (4.21%) and is the highest value ever reported for Zn(II) phthalocyanine based devices under AM1.5G standard conditions. A hysteresis test revealed that our device structure with the new HTM exhibited a balanced charge extraction behaviour.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have created excitement among the photovoltaic research community after the seminal work of Miyasaka, followed by solid-state perovskite solar cells where the power conversion efficiency was increased from 3.7% to 9.7%. Several groups have demonstrated that the methylammonium lead triiodide (MAPbI3) perovskite concomitantly acts as a light absorber, and an electron and hole transporter in both mesoscopic networks and planar heterojunctions. The perovskite absorber layer can be deposited using a broad range of techniques, and the band gap can be tuned by using various cations and anions. There are several perovskite solar cell device architectures, but the highest reported efficiency over 20% is based on the n–i–p structure, where the perovskite is an intrinsic semiconductor, with TiO2 as an electron acceptor (n-type layer), and polytertiary aryl amine polymer (PTAA) or spiro-OMeTAD as the hole transporter (p-type layer). The drawback of using PTAA polymers for solar cell applications is their reproducibility, and low purity due inherently to their mass distribution and difficult characterization. For decades, small organic molecule 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) has been used as a hole transporting material in solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells, and recently in perovskite solar cells, yielding a power conversion efficiency of over 21%. Nevertheless, spiro-OMeTAD is relatively expensive and limits the long-term stability of its perovskite solar cell device under light and heat soaking conditions. A series of new HTMs have been reported to address the stability issue.

Phthalocyanines (Pcs) have attracted much attention for their applications in the field of organic electronics and in particular as a light absorber in dye-sensitized solar cells and a hole injection layer in organic light emitting diodes. Pcs are highly stable and can be even sublimed. Metal complexes of Pcs, in particular Zn(II) complexes (ZnPcs), have been thus widely investigated as photosensitizers in DSCs. However, the tendency of Pcs to form aggregates on the metal oxide semiconductor surface and the lack of directionality in the excited state have limited their use in dye-sensitized solar cells as absorbers. Nevertheless, an appropriate aggregation behaviour is a blessing to use as a hole transporting material (HTM) to transport charges efficiently from a perovskite absorber. In addition, Pcs are photochemically and electrochemically stable compounds, which adds additional values for their use as HTMs. At the end of 2014, Kumar et al. reported the first non-substituted Cu(II)–phthalocyanine based HTM deposited by vacuum deposition for solid state PSCs and a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 5.0% was achieved. To solve the solubility problem, Sfyri et al. employed Cu(II)–methyl phthalocyanine as the HTM in PSCs giving a maximum efficiency of 5.2%. Seok and his colleagues used Cu(II) tert-butyl phthalocyanine as the HTM and demonstrated the fabrication of composite perovskite based PSCs, which yielded an efficiency of 15.2%. Zn(II)–phthalocyanine is another Pc analogue featuring more shifted absorption compared with Cu(II)–phthalocyanine in most common solvents. Our group reported the first PSCs with easily soluble Zn(II) octa(2,6-diphenylphenoxy) phthalocyanine as the HTM with a PCE of 6.7% at the beginning of 2015. These studies proved that the highest occupied molecular orbitals (HOMOs) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals (LUMOs) of Pcs are well aligned with the perovskite absorber for use of Pcs as HTMs. In this work, we report the synthesis and characterization of a new symmetrical Zn(II) phthalocyanine linked with 5-hexyl-2-thiophene groups at peripheral positions (sym-HTPcH). The electrochemical behaviour, absorption and thermal properties of the new phthalocyanine were investigated by cyclic voltammetry (CV), UV-Vis and TGA (DSC) measurements. In the end, the photovoltaic properties of the titled phthalocyanine were evaluated by using it as the HTM for PSCs with pure MAPbI3 as the absorber. A traditional device geometry yielded comparable poor performance (4.2%) to other reported Zn(II) phthalocyanines. To solve this problem, a layer of insulating meso-Al2O3 is introduced to form a hybrid interfacial buffer layer with sym-HTPcH. After this successful device engineering, the obtained PCE of 12.8% under AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2 at reverse scan represents the highest efficiency reported for MAPbI3 based PSCs using sym-HTPcH as HTM. We believe that a much higher efficiency can be reached when the composite perovskite is used as the absorber instead.

The synthetic route for the preparation of sym-HTPcH is shown in Scheme 1 (detailed experimental procedures are provided in the ESI). Compound 3 was prepared through the Suzuki reaction between 4-iodophthalonitrile and 2-(5-hexylthiophen-2-yl)-4,4,5,5-tetramethyl-1,3,2-dioxaborolane catalysed by Pd(PPh3)4. Then symmetrical substituted Zn(II) phthalocyanine, sym-HTPcH, was prepared by the cyclo-tetramerization reaction of 4-(5-hexylthiophen-2-yl) phthalonitrile in pentanol in the presence of zinc acetate and DBU in a yield of 11.8%. The product was purified by column chromatography and the structure was fully characterized by 1H NMR and mass spectrometry and the thermal properties were characterized by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). Sym-HTPcH showed excellent thermal stability and started to decompose above 400 °C (Fig. S1, ESI). DSC results (Table 1 and Fig. S2, ESI) show a Tg and Tm respectively of 59 °C and 176 °C, which are significantly lower than those of spiro-OMeTAD.

HTM

λ
abs [nm] (ε [M−1 cm−1])
HOMO (eV)

E
opt.gap
 (eV)
LUMO (eV)

T
g
 (°C)

T
m
 (°C)

a Determined by E1/2 = (Eanodicmax + Ecathodicmax)/2 of the first redox potential in solution-based cyclic voltammetry (CV) with ferrocene as an internal standard.
b LUMO = HOMO + Eopt.gap.
c Determined at the UV absorption onset.
d Determined by DSC.



Sym-HTPcH

365, 630 (53, 951), 700 (2, 92, 309)
−5.19
1.72
−3.43
59
176

Spiro-OMeTAD


309, 389
−5.07
2.98
−2.09
125
248
As expected, the substituted Zn(II) phthalocyanine showed adequate solubility in most organic solvents for characterization purposes. As shown in Fig. 1, the UV/Vis absorption of sym-HTPcH in THF exhibits three intensive bands at 365, 630 and 700 nm, which correspond to B and Q bands, respectively. Therefore, sym-HTPcH displays a deep green colour in both solution and the solid state (Eg = 1.72 eV). The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy level of sym-HTPcH was measured by cyclic voltammetry (CV; Fig. S3, ESI) and is reported in Table 1. Like the reported Pc derivatives, the energy levels of the new sym-HTPcH match closely with those of the perovskite, ensuring smooth charge transfer. The redox parameters are summarized in Table 1. The HOMO of sym-HTPcH (−5.19 eV) was estimated to be slightly (0.12 eV) lower than that of spiro-OMeTAD (−5.07 eV), but higher than that of CH3NH3PbI3 (−5.43 eV). It is worth noting that given the low bandgap of sym-HTPcH, typical type-II band alignments between TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbI3/sym-HTPcH are observed and should ensure efficient hole and electron selective extraction at their interfaces.
The hole transfer efficiency at the perovskite/Zn(II) phthalocyanine interface is monitored for the first time via the optical properties of a thin film of perovskite/sym-HTPcH by means of photoluminescence (PL) continuous wave (CW) and time-resolved measurements. Fig. 2 shows the comparison between the perovskite/sym-HTPcH interface with respect to the standard perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD and the pristine perovskite film. The samples have a comparable thickness of 300 nm leading to similar absorption profiles (see Fig. 2a). This enables us to retain a constant density of absorbed photons for all three samples. The CW PL spectra of the perovskite films interfaced with sym-HTPcH and spiro-OMeTAD show a dramatic quenching (note that the two spectra have been multiplied by 10 for a clearer visualization) of around 22- and 25-fold, respectively (Fig. 2b). The PL quenching is reasonably attributed to the efficient hole transfer that happens at the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD and perovskite/sym-HTPcH interfaces. To dynamically monitor this process, we investigated the time-resolved PL (Fig. 2c). The pristine perovskite film shows a long-living decay fitted with a monoexponential time constant above our time window, in agreement with what was observed in the literature. On the other hand, the PL decays at the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD and perovskite/sym-HTPcH interfaces exhibit a similar trend, consisting of a fast component of less than 1 ns (with a predominant amplitude in the perovskite/spiro sample) and a long living one of around 15 ns. The quenching observed indicates an efficient hole transfer happening within 1 ns, ultimately limited by our instrument resolution. This behaviour also suggests that the sym-HTPcH molecules work as an efficient hole transfer material, similar in function to spiro-OMeTAD.
In order to demonstrate the new sym-HTPcH as a HTM in perovskite-based solar cells (PSCs), we prepared devices with the traditional configuration of FTO/c-TiO2/meso-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/sym-HTPcH/Au as reported previously. The resulting performance with lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl) imide (LiTFSI) and 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) as additives and tris(2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tert-butylpyridine)–cobalt(III) tris(bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl) imide) as a dopant is shown in Fig. 3a and Table 2 as a 0.796 VOC, an 8.13 JSC, an FF of 0.657, and a 4.21% PCE. This poor result is comparable to the previously reported efficiency which we could attribute to the possibility of shunt paths between the perovskite and the gold electrode due to the scant solubility of sym-HTPcH in device fabrication solvents deteriorating the thickness and continuity of the HTM layer. The corresponding cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of a typical device is shown in Fig. 3c. It has been reported that the Al2O3 buffer layer significantly reduces the recombination paths by forming a ‘rigid’ barrier by inhibiting the formation of direct contacts between the gold electrode and the perovskite. Therefore, to prove the concept we furthered fabricated a device with a configuration of FTO/c-TiO2/meso-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/meso-Al2O3/sym-HTPcH/Au. Shown in Fig. 3d is a cross-sectional SEM image of the typical cell with a hybrid interfacial buffer layer. About ∼100 nm of meso-Al2O3 was deposited on top of the perovskite capping layer and infiltrated by the HTM as indicated by the blue colour. A gold layer with a rough surface was coated atop. Generally clear interfaces in the device structure are observed. In Fig. 3b we report the plots of photocurrent density versus photovoltage (J–V) of the devices for both sym-HTPcH and spiro-OMeTAD. The related parameters are summarized in Table 2. Taking the reverse scan (forward bias (FB) to short circuit condition (SC)) curves as an example, the sym-HTPcH based device exhibited a 0.988 V open circuit voltage (VOC), a 17.2 mA cm−2 short circuit current (JSC), a fill factor (FF) of 0.74, and 12.8% power conversion efficiency (PCE) under 1 sun conditions. This is the highest value ever reported for a Zn(II) phthalocyanine-based device, which is more than three times higher than the PCE of devices with a traditional structure. The all-round improvement in the photovoltaic parameters especially the FF (>0.7) suggests an advantage of introducing the hybrid interfacial buffer layer of meso-Al2O3/sym-HTPcH, which minimizes the potential shunting paths.
HTM
Scan direction

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
PCE (%)
Light intensity (mW cm−2)


Sym-HTPcH (neat)
FB to SC
8.13
0.796
0.657
4.21
101.2


Sym-HTPcH (Al2O3)
FB to SC
17.2
0.988
0.74
12.8
97.7
SC to FB
17.1
0.983
0.70
11.8
Average
17.15
0.986
0.72
12.3

Spiro-OMeTAD

FB to SC
20.3
1.02
0.74
15.7
97.7
SC to FB
20.3
1.03
0.73
15.3
Average
20.3
1.025
0.735
15.5
We assume that the insulating meso-Al2O3 functions as a skeleton for the infiltration of organic HTMs and further together they become a hybrid interfacial buffer layer between the perovskite and the metal contact. In addition, the Al2O3 nanoparticles can block any possible shunt paths between sym-HTPcH and TiO2 by filling the potential pinholes on the perovskite layer. In Fig. 4a, we schematically show how the possible shunt paths can be blocked by the Al2O3 buffer layer. The absence of an effective buffer layer could be the reason for the low PCEs reported to date for perovskite solar cells with Zn(II) Pc as the HTM. The two-fold blocking effects of the hybrid buffer layer have been highlighted by the dashed yellow arrows in Fig. 4b, a plot of the relative energy diagram versus vacuum. A device made with spiro-OMeTAD was also fabricated as a reference. The devices have been prepared and tested at the same time, using identical fabrication conditions. The complete details of the device preparation are given in the Experimental section.
At the same time, the spiro-OMeTAD based reference device exhibited a 1.02 V VOC, a 20.3 mA cm−2JSC, an FF of 0.74, and a 15.7% PCE in the backward scan direction (Fig. 3b). According to the HOMO level differences in Table 1, the theoretical photovoltage of perovskite solar cells based on sym-HTPcH should be 120 mV higher than that of spiro-OMeTAD. However, a discrepancy of 32 mV lower VOC was observed for sym-HTPcH. This result implies that sym-HTPcH may have less electron-blocking ability compared to that of spiro-OMeTAD due to the low lying LUMO level calculated according to the CV study (Table 1) and therefore the charge recombination will be prominent. The antagonistic contribution of electron-blocking and hole-exaction leads to a relatively low VOC for sym-HTPcH. Althrough in our study the performance of the sym-HTPcH device is worse than that of spiro-OMeTAD under the same conditions, it is the highest value ever reported for Zn(II) phthalocyanine based HTMs. Compared with TT80 based devices, the much increased VOC and FF could be due to the effective blocking effect of the hybrid interfacial buffer layer as illustrated in Fig. 3d and 4.
We note that the J–V characteristic of PSCs may show a hysteretic behaviour, which makes it ambiguous to estimate the actual PCE. To show the impact of the hysteresis on our device performances, we reported the J–V traces of PSCs collected by scanning the applied voltage at 0.01 V s−1 from forward bias (FB) to short circuit (SC) and vice versa (Fig. 3b and Table 2). A slight hysteresis is observed with the new HTM. From Table 2, the forward scan of the sym-HTPcH based device showed a 0.983 V VOC, a 17.1 mA cm−2JSC, an FF of 0.70, and an 11.8% PCE, thereby yielding an average power conversion efficiency of 12.3%, which is still almost two-fold the result based on TT80. On the other hand, a negligible hysteresis effect is observed with the spiro-OMeTAD based device, which exhibited a 1.03 V VOC, a 20.3 mA cm−2JSC, an FF of 0.73, and a 15.3% PCE, thereby yielding an average power conversion efficiency of 15.5%. These results support the reliability of our devices and prove the necessity of the insulating buffer.

In conclusion, we designed and synthesized a new Zn(II) phthalocyanine based low bandgap HTM with 2-alkyl thiophene substitutions for perovskite solar cells. The comparable hole extraction behaviour of sym-HTPcH to spiro-OMeTAD was evaluated by photoluminescence (PL) continuous wave (CW) and time-resolved measurements. On account of the adoption of a hybrid interfacial buffer layer made of insulating Al2O3 and sym-HTPcH, the perovskite solar cells (PSCs) showed an average PCE value of up to 12.3%, which is the highest value ever reported for Zn(II) phthalocyanine based devices and almost matches the PCE of devices with spiro-OMeTAD (15.5%) under AM1.5G standard conditions. A hysteresis test revealed that our device structure with the new HTM exhibited an almost balanced charge extraction behaviour. Therefore, this work demonstrated that Zn(II) phthalocyanine can be a promising HTM alternative to spiro-OMeTAD when the device structure is appropriately designed. We believe that a much higher efficiency can be achieved when the composite perovskite is used as the absorber instead.


All solvents and chemicals were purchased from Aldrich, Acros, Alfa, Merck, Lancaster and TCI and used as-purchased without further purification. Thin-layer chromatography (TLC) was conducted with Merck KGaA precoated TLC Silica gel 60F254 aluminium sheets. Unless otherwise specified, all reactions were carried out under argon. 1H NMR spectra were recorded on a Bruker 400 spectrometer at 400 MHz. Electrospray Ionization (ESI) Mass Spectrometry spectra were recorded on a Jeol JMS 700 double-focusing spectrometer. UV-vis spectra were measured on a Jasco V-530 double beam spectrophotometer and a LAMBDA 950S 150 mm InGaAs SPHERE SYSTEM for solution and film measurement. Time-resolved PL experiments were performed using a spectrophotometer (Gilden Photonics) with a pulsed source at 460 nm (Ps diode lasers BDS-SM, pulse with <100 ps, from Photonic Solutions, approx. 1 mW power, 20 MHz repetition rate, approx. 500 μm spot radius) and the signal was recorded at 760 nm by the Time Correlated Single Photon Counting detection technique with a time resolution of 1 ns. The samples were encapsulated to prevent any oxygen effects; the measurements have been performed under ambient conditions. Monoexponential and bi-exponential fittings were used to analyse the PL decay signal. CV experiments were performed using a Biologic SP200 potentiostat. All measurements were carried out at room temperature under argon with a conventional three-electrode configuration that consisted of a glassy carbon working electrode, a platinum counter electrode, and a platinum reference electrode. TGA and DSC measurements were performed on a Universal TA instrument. Differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) measurements were conducted using a Bio-Logic SP200 potentiostat in a deoxygenated 0.1 M dichloromethane solution of NBu4PF6 under a nitrogen atmosphere. A glassy-carbon working electrode and a platinum wire as counter and reference electrodes were used. Measurements were carried out using ferrocene as an internal standard. The oxidation potential of ferrocene was positioned at 0.7 V versus the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) potential, so the oxidation potentials of HTMs were determined versus the NHE.


Devices were fabricated on fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass substrates. The substrates were cleaned sequentially with Hellmanex and isopropanol in an ultrasonic bath for 30 min, then washed with acetone and finally by UV/ozone surface cleaning for 15 min. A 30 nm TiO2 compact layer was deposited on FTO via spray pyrolysis at 450 °C from a precursor solution of titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) in anhydrous ethanol. After the spraying, the substrates were kept at 450 °C for 5 min, then they were left to cool down to room temperature. A mesoporous TiO2 layer was deposited by spin coating for 20 s at 4000 rpm with a ramp of 2000 rpm s−1, using a 30 nm particle paste (Dyesol) diluted in ethanol to achieve a 150 nm thick layer. After the spin coating, the substrate was immediately dried at 100 °C for 10 min and then sintered again at 500 °C for 30 min, under dry air flow. Upon cooling to room temperature, the perovskite layer was deposited in a nitrogen-filled glovebox by spin coating the perovskite precursor solution. The latter was prepared by dissolving a stoichiometric amount (1:1 molar ratio) of lead iodide and methyl ammonium iodide in dimethylsulfoxide at a concentration of 1.1 M of each component. The spin coating program includes two steps, first at 1000 rpm for 10 s with a ramp of 200 rpm s−1, then at 6000 rpm for 30 s with a ramp of 2000 rpm s−1. 10 s before the end of the spin-coating program, chlorobenzene was gently added dropwise on the spinning substrate for 2 s using an automatic dispenser. The substrate was then heated at 100 °C for 1 h on a hotplate in a nitrogen-filled glovebox. For the device prepared using HTPcH, we deposited a thin alumina mesoporous layer directly on the top of the perovskite layer. This layer was prepared by spin coating a colloidal dispersion of <50 nm Al2O3 nanoparticles at 2 wt% in isopropanol at 2000 rpm. The HTPcH solution was prepared by dissolving the molecules in chlorobenzene at a concentration of 30 mM, with the same doping composition as we used for the spiro-OMeTAD solution. The HTM layer was finally deposited by spin coating from the solution at 4000 rpm for 20 s with a ramp of 2000 rpm s−1. Finally, 80 nm of gold was deposited via thermal evaporation under high vacuum, using a shadow masking method to pattern the electrodes.


Current–voltage characteristics were measured in air under AM 1.5 simulated sunlight using a potentiostat (Keithley). The light intensity was measured for calibration using an NREL certified KG5 filtered Si reference diode. The solar cells were masked with a metal aperture of 0.16 cm2 to define the active area. The current–voltage curves were recorded by scanning at 0.01 V s−1 from forward bias to short circuit and vice versa, without preconditioning the device with bias voltage or light before starting the scan.


This work was supported by the European Union Seventh Framework Programme [FP7/2007-2013] under grant agreement no. 604032 of the MESO project, the Swiss National Science foundation under NRP 70, grant No. 407040_154056, and AA has received funding from the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme for research, technological development and demonstration under grant agreement no. 291771.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp03396b
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016