 DOI: 10.1039/D3SE00081H
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2023, 7, 2349-2356


Longbo
Wang
,

Jian
Xiong
,

Dongjie
Wang
,

Yiwen
Chen
,

Yang
Zhang
,

Chenshu
Wu
,

Zheling
Zhang
,

Jing
Wang
,

Yu
Huang
 and 

Jian
Zhang
*

Engineering Research Center of Electronic Information Materials and Devices (Ministry of Education), Guangxi Key Laboratory of Information Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Guilin University of Electronic and Technology, Guilin, 541004, China

School of Chemistry, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, 510275, China. E-mail: jianzhang@guet.edu.cn

Received
19th January 2023
, Accepted 27th February 2023
First published on 20th April 2023
Full-printed mesoscopic perovskite solar cells (MPSCs) have great potential in commercial applications because of their screen-printing process and excellent stability; however, the defect and filling issues in MPSCs still limit device performance. Here, an efficient passivation strategy with potassium hexafluorophosphate (KPF6) as an additive is proposed to overcome the above issues. The properties of the films and the corresponding performances of MPSCs with KPF6 are systemically investigated. The results show the crystallinity, defect issues, filling of the perovskite in the mesoporous structure and hydrophobicity of the MPSCs are all improved with KPF6 introduction, which results in the inhabitation of non-radiative recombination loss, and raises the photoelectric performance and stability. With the KPF6 additive in the MPSCs, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the champion devices reached 15.39%, which is significantly raised by ∼10% against that of the control devices (14.16%). The unencapsulated MPSCs with KPF6 maintain 95% of their initial PCE after 50 days stored in air (25 ± 5 °C @ 50 ± 5% RH), while the MPSCs without KPF6 only maintain 80% of their initial PCE. This work provides an effective passivation strategy to improve the PCE and stability of MPSCs.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are expected to become one of the promising candidates to replace silicon-based photovoltaic technology. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) has increased from the initial 3.8% to 25.7% after only about ten years development. Furthermore, the perovskite materials have a tunable band gap, high absorption coefficient, low density of defect states, high carrier mobility and large carrier diffusion radius, which will help the future industrialization of PSCs. Although the organic–inorganic perovskite materials have outstanding application advantages, there are several limitations due to their inherent properties. First, they are highly sensitive to water, heat and light, which can smoothly result in material decomposition and device failure. Second, the low-temperature solution procedure may result in an enrichment of the many defects on the surface and grain boundaries. Third, efficient PSCs are usually prepared under dry nitrogen conditions, such as in nitrogen-filled glove boxes, which makes the preparation process complex, increases the cost and is not conducive to large-scale production. An efficient and simple way to overcome these problems is required for the application of the PSCs.

To simplify the device fabrication process and promote the commercial application of PSCs, Han et al. developed fully-printed mesoscopic perovskite solar cells (MPSCs) with the device structure FTO/compact-TiO2/mp-TiO2/mp-ZrO2/mp-carbon (“mp” is the abbreviation for “mesoporous”). In addition to the low cost and large processable area, these printable MPSCs exhibit an excellent stability under ambient conditions or light illumination conditions. However, many defects exist in each mesopore layer because it is very difficult for perovskite active materials to fill mesopore layers densely and uniformly, which leads to a serious recombination loss. Besides, the defects in the grain boundaries and the surface of the grains are inevitable because the polycrystalline perovskite is prepared by a low-temperature solution process. Up to now, additive engineering can improve the perovskite mesoporous filling and perovskite film quality by adjusting the crystallization behavior and passivation defects, thus improving the device performance. This is one of the most effective ways to improve the performance and stability of MPSCs.
In the field of fully printed MPSCs, many additives are introduced to overcome the disadvantages of the MPSCs, among which additive molecules with specific function groups, such as amino groups (–NH3), carbonyl groups (–CO), and so on, have been reported widely. Hou et al. used aminoguanidine chloride as an additive to prepare MPSCs to improve the defects and filling issue. The perovskite crystals were cross-linked by the lone pair electrons of the nitrogen atoms in the amino group through hydrogen bond interaction (N–H/I) of the ammonium iodide end group, which improved the perovskite filling in the mesopore. The defect density is reduced, and the open-circuit voltage (VOC) of the device is increased to more than 1.0 V. Although ammonium guanidinium chloride improves the performance of the device to some extent, the stability problem of the device becomes worse because of the hygroscopicity of the amino group. Also, Yang et al. prepared MPSCs using octyltrimethylammonium chloride (OTAC) as an additive. The longer alkyl chain of OTAC can improve the hydrophobicity of the device and correspondingly improve the device stability, while the existence of long alkyl chains is, to a certain extent, detrimental to the filling of the mesopores. Recently, Liu et al. used D-sorbitol hexaacetate (DSHA) containing a carbonyl group as an additive, and the wettability and diffusivity of perovskite precursor solution was enhanced, which greatly raised the filling of perovskite material in the mesoporous pore layer. The carbonyl of the DSHA can react with uncoordinated Pb2+ and reduce those defects, resulting in a relatively higher PCE of 14.33%. The introduction of DSHA improves the PCE and stability of MPSCs to some extent, but its higher cost is disadvantageous to industrialization. According to the above statements, it is still a big challenge to realize low cost, defect passivation, filling improvement and stability enhancement at the same time.
Recently, F-atom hexafluorophosphates were widely studied in planar perovskite as an interface modification material, such as: Bi et al. used potassium hexafluorophosphate (KPF6) as an interface material to embellish the SnO2/perovskite interface. Their results show that PF6− improves the interface contact by chemically linking SnO2-ETL and the perovskite layers through hydrogen bonds with perovskite and coordination bonds with ETL. After KPF6 interface modification, the quality of the perovskite films improved and the interface defect was effectively passivated. The PCE of the device improved from 19.66% to 21.39% after with this introduction of the KPF6 interface. Furthermore, Cai et al. use pseudohalide salt CsPF6 as an additive to passivate the defects of PSCs. Since the radii of Cs+ ions are close to those of FA+, PF6− and I− ions, they can be easily doped into perovskite thin films to blunt the bulk defects, surface defects and grain boundary defects in the thin films, so as to raise the photovoltaic performance and stability of the PSCs. In addition, the F-atoms of the hexafluorophosphates as additives have the potential to enhance the hydrophobicity and regulation of the crystallization behavior of the perovskite material in theory because of the small size, many electrons in the outer layer and closely arranged fluorine atoms, and also that it can influence the crystallization process of perovskites.
In this paper, we use KPF6 as an additive in MPSCs for the first time, and its impact on the perovskite films and the performance of MPSCs is systemically investigated. The results show that the crystallinity, defects and hydrophobicity of the perovskite films and mesoporous filling issue are all improved with KPF6, which results in an improvement of the device performance and stability. The high PCE of 15.39% is achieved in the MPSCs with KPF6 introduction based on MAPbI3 active material, which is enhanced by 10% above that of the control MPSCs. MPSCs with KPF6 can maintain 95% of its initial PCE after 50 days of exposure in air (25 °C @ 50 RH%), while the control MPSCs without KPF6 only maintain 80% of their initial PCE under the same exposure condition.


Fig. 1a is the structure diagram of MPSCs and Fig. 1b is the cross-section scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of the MPSCs prepared in this work. As shown in Fig. 1a and b, the mp-TiO2 layer, mp-ZrO2 layer and mp-carbon layer are all prepared by a screen printing process. The mp-TiO2 layer is an electron collection and transmission layer. The mp-ZrO2 layer is an insulating spacer layer that prevents direct contact between the electron transport layer and the carbon electrode, thus preventing carrier recombination. The mp-carbon layer serves as the counter electrode (CE) and has the function of collecting holes.Fig. 1c shows the energy level diagram of MPSCs showing the generation of electron–hole pairs in the perovskite under illumination, where holes are transferred from the perovskite to the carbon electrode and electrons are injected from the perovskite layer to the mp-TiO2 layer and then respectively transferred to the corresponding electrode. Fig. 1d shows the ball-and-stick model of KPF6, which includes the two main function groups of K+ and PF6−.

The passivation effect of KPF6 on the perovskite films was investigated by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Fig. 2a shows the full XPS spectrum of the perovskite films, and the F signal is observed after KPF6 introduction. From Fig. 2b and c, we see that both the Pb 4f orbital and the I 3d orbital shift to a higher binding energy after the addition of KPF6 compared with that of the control perovskite film, indicating an interaction between KPF6 and perovskite. That interaction is related to the defect passivation with the addition of KPF6 and thus will eliminate the trap-assisted non-radiative recombination loss. The presence of KPF6 in the annealed perovskite films is further demonstrated by the significant F 1s observed in Fig. 2d.
The effect of KPF6 on the surface morphology of the perovskite films was investigated; SEM and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) was carried out to investigate the perovskite films without and with KPF6 (1.0 mol%) samples prepared by one-step spin coating on FTO/mp-TiO2 substrates. Fig. 3a and b show the top view SEM of the perovskite films without and with KPF6, respectively. From Fig. 3a, the perovskite crystals are clearly observed, the perovskite films are not dense and the coverage is very low, which may result in an inferior charge transport and feeble light harvesting ability. With the addition of KPF6, smoother and more condense perovskite films are finally obtained, which facilitate light absorption and charge transport as well as the enhancement of the PCE. The cross-section of the MPSCs are also tested by SEM and the results shown in Fig. S1. It can be observed that the MPSCs without KPF6 have some obvious holes, which shows the perovskite cannot efficiently fill into the mesoporous layers. After the KPF6 introduction, the holes in the MPSCs disappeared, which may be attributed to the filling issues being improved by KPF6. The cross-section element distribution (C, Zr, Ti, Sn, I, Pb, P, F and K) of the MPSCs with KPF6 was examined using EDS and the result is shown in Fig. S2.
There is a clear delamination and uniform distribution of elements in each layer of the MPSCs, which further proves that KPF6 can improve the filling degree of perovskite in the mesopores. Furthermore, it has been reported that the interstitial occupation of K in the perovskite lattice can increase the ion migration barrier, thereby significantly suppressing the magnetic hysteresis of MPSCs. At the same time, K+ can passivate the defects at the perovskite grain boundaries, thereby inhibiting the non-radiative recombination and corresponding improvement in the MPSCs performance. The above statement shows the KPF6 has a great potential to overcome the filling issues that are a common problem in MPSCs.
The improvement of the perovskite film quality is also demonstrated by the results of ultraviolet absorption spectroscopy (UV-vis, Fig. 3c). Compared with the perovskite films without KPF6, the UV absorption of the perovskite films increased significantly with the molar ratio of KPF6 increased from 0 mol% to 1.0 mol%. The strongest light absorption of the perovskite films was obtained at a molar ratio of KPF6 of 1.0 mol%. The absorption of the perovskite films decreased slightly when the percent molar ratio of KPF6 reached up to 1.5 mol%. We speculate that this may be because excess KPF6 may damage the crystallization of the perovskite films which is similar to the results reported by Liu use a MACl additive. The stronger light absorption at an optimal KPF6 concentration indicates that the introduction of KPF6 will raise the quality of the perovskite films and may benefit an improvement in the light harvest efficiency of the MPSCs.
We performed an X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis of the perovskite films with different concentrations of KPF6 added. As shown in Fig. 3d, the films with KPF6 added have similar diffraction peaks to those of the control perovskite films and no new characteristic peaks appear, indicating that the addition of KPF6 does not affect the crystal structure of the perovskite. The intensities of the (110) and (210) XRD peaks of the perovskite films with the addition of KPF6 are significantly increased and the perovskite with 1.0 mol% KPF6 additive has the highest XRD diffraction intensity. That intensity enhancement confirms that the appropriate amount of KPF6 additive is beneficial to the crystallization of perovskite. Moreover, it is worth noting that the (110) diffraction peak moved toward a smaller angle (inset in Fig. 3d) with the addition of KPF6 above 1.0 mol% KPF6 additive. That blue XRD shift may be attributed to the partial substitution of I− by PF6− according to Zhang's work. The partial substitution of I− by the larger-ionic-radius PF6− causes the lattice of the perovskite to expand, the stress distortion in the films is inhibited, the recombination of carriers is effectively restrained, the charge transfer loss is reduced, and the phase separation is restrained. Second, we calculated the energy bandgaps (Eg) of the perovskite films with and without a KPF6 additive and the results are shown in Fig. S3.Eg is 1.58 eV for the control perovskite films without the KPF6 additive, while it is 1.57 eV for the films with KPF6. The change of Eg may further confirm that PF6− compensated for part of the I− vacancy and was incorporated into perovskite lattice. Fig. S3 shows the effect of adding KPF6 on the energy level and the results are plotted in Fig. S3(d), from which we can see that the maximum value of the valence band (VB) was raised from −5.50 eV to −5.34 eV after the addition of KPF6, and the higher VB indicates a better energy level match between the perovskite and the carbon electrodes prepared by introducing the appropriate amount of KPF6.
To further investigate the impact of the KPF6 additive on the charge transport and the defect states of the perovskite films, steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra were carried out. Fig. 4a and b shows the PL spectra of the perovskite films on glass/mp-ZrO2 and FTO/mp-TiO2 substrates, respectively. Since the glass is non-conductive, the carriers are only trapped by defects, so the PL intensity is inversely proportional to the defect density of state. The perovskite films with KPF6 have a higher PL intensity at the glass/mp-ZrO2 substrates, which may be attributed to the defect passivation or crystallinity enhancement of the perovskite films by the KPF6 additive. When the perovskite is on the FTO/mp-TiO2 substrates, a strong quenching is observed in the perovskite films with the KPF6 additive, which is ascribed to an efficient charge transport from the perovskite to mp-TiO2. Fig. 4c and d shows the TRPL spectra of the perovskite films on glass/mp-ZrO2 and FTO/mp-TiO2 substrates, respectively. The TRPL can be fitted with a double exponential decay function shown in eqn (1) and the average decay time (τave) was calculated according to eqn (2). The specific parameters of the fit are shown in Tables S1 and S2.
y = A1e(−t/τ1) + A2e(−t/τ2)
(1)
(2)
The τave values for the perovskite with and without the KPF6 additive upon glass/mp-ZrO2 substrates are 19.03 ns and 11.81 ns, respectively. The longer τave is related to elimination of the defects. The τave values for the perovskite with and without the KPF6 additive upon FTO/mp-TiO2 substrate are 10.21 ns and 14.56 ns, respectively. Since the FTO substrate is conductive, the carrier lifetime characterizes the charge extraction rate. Thus, the short τave means the charge transport efficiency is enhanced by the KPF6 additive. The above improvement can be attributed to the coordination between PF6− and uncoordinated Pb2+ and the passivation of ionic defects in the grain boundaries by K+ ions, thus improving the film quality, suppressing non-radiative complexation, and accelerating the charge extraction rate. In addition, we can observe a slight red shift of the PL peak position in Fig. 4a and b. According to previous reports, this may be attributed to the enhanced dielectric domain-limiting effect associated with the introduction of K+.
The perovskite film was measured by scanning Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM), and the effect of KPF6 on the surface potential of the perovskite film was studied. Fig. 5a and b shows the surface potential distribution of perovskite films without and with KPF6. Fig. 5c shows the random local line scan (solid line in Fig. 5a and b) potential distribution of the KPFM plot. The addition of KPF6 increased the surface potential from −313 mV to −239 mV, an increase that may be attributed to the passivation of the perovskite films defects by KPF6 according to previous reports.Fig. 5d and e shows the atomic force microscope (AFM) images of the perovskite films. It is can be seen that the grain size of the devices with the addition of KPF6 has increased by a certain extent compared with that in the control films without the additive, which is related to the regulation of crystallization behavior and function of the KPF6 additive, and is consistent with the XRD and SEM observations.
For further research on the effect with KPF6 on the MPSC performance, the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the MPSCs with different molar percentages of KPF6 were measured under AM1.5G illumination with a light intensity of 100 mW−2 and the photovoltaic performance parameters of MPSCs are summarized in Table 1. From Table 1, the MPSC performance is enhanced with the KPF6 concentration increased from 0 to 1.0 mol%, while it decreases as the concentration of KPF6 is up to 1.5 mol%. The optimal percent molar ratio of KPF6 is 1.0 mol%. The average PCE of the device improved by about 11%, and PCE improved from the control of 13.72% to 15.28% with a 1.0 mol% KPF6 addition. In addition, the statistical results of the MPSC PCEs are shown in Fig. S4. From Fig. S4, we can obviously see that the MPSCs with 1.0 mol% KPF6 have a narrower histogram distribution than that of the control device, indicating that the addition of KPF6 can improve the repeatability of MPSCs.
KPF6 (mol%)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Best PCE (%)
0
0.91 ± 0.01
23.22 ± 0.75
65.34 ± 1.85
13.72 ± 0.44
14.16
0.5
0.91 ± 0.01
23.84 ± 0.05
66.76 ± 1.09
14.45 ± 0.14
14.59
1.0
0.93 ± 0.01
24.32 ± 0.10
67.35 ± 0.80
15.28 ± 0.11
15.39
1.5
0.93 ± 0.01
23.92 ± 0.11
66.89 ± 0.78
14.80 ± 0.18
14.98

Fig. 6a shows the J–V curves for the control device and the champion device with 1.0 mol% KPF6, and the performance parameters are shown in the inset. VOC is increased from 0.91 V to 0.93 V, short-circuit current (JSC) is increased from 23.75 mA cm−2 to 24.31 mA cm−2, fill factor (FF) is increased from 65.63% to 68.12%, and the resultant PCE increased from 14.16% to 15.39%. Fig. 6b shows the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the MPSCs without and with 1.0 mol% KPF6. The integrated JSC values are 20.86 mA cm−2 and 22.26 mA cm−2 for the MPSCs without and with 1.0 mol% KPF6, respectively, which agrees with values obtained from the J–V curves and the deviation is within 9%. From the IPCE, the increase in JSC is due to the enhanced light resting in the 400–800 nm band. The JSC increase is attributed to the enhanced absorption and the quality of the perovskite films. In addition, the MPSCs with the 1.0 mol% KPF6 additive achieve the highest IPCE, close to 93%, which further confirms that the charge transport and extraction is efficient with KPF6 addition. The stable power output of the KPF6 device under continuous illumination was also measured and the result shown in Fig. 6c; a steady current output of 21.52 mA cm−2 and PCE of 15.28% at a constant voltage of 710 mV were achieved, which shows that the performance of the MPSCs is reliable. Fig. 6d shows the J–V curves of the MPSCs based on forward and reverse sweeps. We can see that the hysteresis effect of the device with the addition of KPF6 is significantly suppressed, which can be ascribed to the effective passivation of defects by KPF6. Fig. 6e shows the electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) of the devices without and with KPF6. The data were measured at a bias voltage of −0.8 V; the EIS reflects the carrier transport and recombination at the interface in MPSCs. There is only one circle that exists in both impedance spectra, which represents the charge transport resistance between the perovskite layer and the electron transport layer. It is can be seen that the transport resistance is significantly reduced from 3644 Ω to 1139 Ω (Table S3) due to the addition of KPF6 which effectively passivates the defects of the perovskite films and thus changes the charge transport kinetics.
To evaluate the MPSC stability, the PCE of the unencapsulated MPSCs were continuously monitored during storage for 50 days in air (25 ± 5 °C @50 ± 5% RH). As shown in Fig. 6f, the unencapsulated MPSCs with KPF6 stayed upwards of 95% of the initial PCE after 50 days of exposure in air, while the control devices only maintained less than 80% of their initial PCE under the same exposure conditions. The moisture stability enhancement may relate to the hydrophobicity of the carbon electrode surface. Thus, the hydrophobicity of the carbon electrode surface was tested, and the results are shown in Fig. S5. The water contact angle of the carbon electrode surface gradually increases with the increase of KPF6 concentration, which indicates the hydrophobicity of the devices is enhanced by KPF6. Thus, the improved environmental stability of the devices with KPF6 is attributed to the hydrophobicity enhancement by KPF6.

In summary, an efficient passivation strategy with KPF6 as an additive to MAPbI3 MPSCs is proposed. The crystallinity, defect issue, the filling of perovskite in the mesoporous structure and the hydrophobicity of the MPSCs are all improved with KPF6 introduction, which results in the inhabitation of non-radiative recombination loss, and raises the photoelectric properties and stability. A higher PCE of 15.39% is achieved, which is significantly improved, by ∼10%, compared with that of the control MPSCs (14.16%). The unencapsulated MPSCs in air (25 ± 5 °C @ 50 ± 5% RH) with KPF6 maintained 95% of the initial PCE after 50 days, while the MPSCs without KPF6 only maintained 80% of the initial PCE. Therefore, the work provides an effective passivation strategy to improve the PCE and stability of MPSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors acknowledge the sponsorship from the Natural Science Foundation of Guangxi and Guilin [2019GXNSFGA245005, 2021GXNSFBA075026], [AA21077018], [20210101-1], the National Natural Science Foundation of China [61774050], and the Innovation Project of Guangxi Graduate Education [JGY2022115, YCSW2022262]. Prof. Jian Zhang thanks the Bagui Scholars Program of Guangxi for its support. D. J. Wang thanks the support from the Fund of Guangxi Key Laboratory of Information Materials [221042-Z]. J. Xiong thanks the support from the Innovation Project of Guangxi Graduate Education [JGY2022115]. L. B. Wang and Y. W. Chen acknowledge the support of the Innovation Project of the Guangxi Graduate Education [YCSW2022262]. The authors also thank the Guangxi Collaborative Innovation Center of Structure and Property for New Energy and Materials for providing various characterizations and measurements.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3se00081h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023