 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA01128C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3977-3982

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Sung Ho
Kang
,

In Taek
Choi
,

Min Soo
Kang
,

Yu Kyung
Eom
,

Myong Jong
Ju
,

Ji Yeoun
Hong
,

Hong Seok
Kang
 and 

Hwan Kyu
Kim
*

Global GET-Future Lab. and Department of Advanced Materials Chemistry, Korea University, Sejong 339-700, Korea. E-mail: hkk777@korea.ac.kr; Fax: +82 44 860 1739; Tel: +82 44 860 1493

Department of Nano & Advanced Materials, Jeonju University, Chonbuk 560-759, Korea

Received
16th November 2012
, Accepted 21st January 2013
First published on 11th February 2013
A series of push–pull structured (D–π–A) porphyrin dyes with an electron-donating group (EDG) attached at the meso-position (HP, EHOP and HOP) were designed and synthesized for use as sensitizers in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). The nature of the EDG exerts a significant influence on the spectral, electrochemical and photovoltaic properties of these sensitizers. The absorption bands of these porphyrin dyes are broadened and red-shifted upon introduction of alkoxy chains to the electron-donating groups at the meso-position opposite to the anchoring cyanoacrylic acid group. Electrochemical studies showed that the first oxidation occurred at a potential greater than that of the I−/I3− redox couple. Attachment of alkoxy chains to the electron-donating group at the meso-position in the porphyrin sensitizer could prevent electron recombination and induce easy electron injection, resulting in enhanced efficiency of the DSSC. Among the sensitizers, the highest performance of the DSSC fabricated with HOP and PTZ1 as the co-absorbent was 7.6%, which was higher than that of the DSSC with HOP only by a factor of 2.9.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have been widely regarded as next-generation photovoltaics for providing electricity at lower expense and with more diversity. Although an overall light-to-electricity energy conversion efficiency over 11% has been established with a ruthenium-based sensitizer, the limited resources and the environmental issues concerning ruthenium usage make it necessary to seek alternative dyes. In this context, a variety of organic dyes using inexpensive metals or without using metals have been prepared for DSSCs. Among them, porphyrins are one of the most widely studied sensitizers for DSSCs because of their strongly absorbing Soret bands (400–450 nm) and moderately absorbing Q bands (550–600 nm). In fact, push–pull porphyrins with an electron-donating diarylamino group at the meso-position and an electron-withdrawing carboxyphenylethynyl anchoring group at the opposite meso-position have exhibited remarkably high η values of up to 11.9% with a cobalt-based redox electrolyte, and a system co-sensitized with an organic dye (Y123) boosted the cell performance to η = 12.3%. Very recently, our previous report demonstrated that the broadness and red shift of the absorption bands and easy intra-molecular charge separation of Zn(II)-porphyrin dye can be achieved by an efficient D–π–A structure containing a bis(3,3-dimethylfluorenyl)amine electron donating moiety and a cyanoacrylic acid anchoring group linked through a phenylene bridge, which eventually improved on the good cell performance of DSSCs. In the same study, we also demonstrated that both VOC and JSC were dramatically enhanced by the co-adsorption of multi-functional co-adsorbent HCA1 with Zn(II)-porphyrin dye, due to the efficient retardation of charge recombination. On the basis of our preceding work on porphyrin dyes for DSSCs, we have designed and synthesized three types of novel Zn(II)-porphyrin sensitizers containing a diphenylamine derived electron donor moiety at the meso-position opposite to the anchoring cyanoacrylic acid group. These Zn(II)-porphyrin sensitizers are push–pull porphyrins containing diphenyl amine-derived electron-donating groups with a long alkoxy or alkyl group at the meso-position for dye insulation and a strongly electron-withdrawing cyanoacrylic acid anchoring group at the opposite meso-position linked through a phenylene conjugation bridge. In this study, in an effort to develop novel Zn(II)-porphyrin sensitizers possessing highly efficient properties, we report the first synthesis, as well as the optical, electrochemical and photovoltaic properties of push–pull Zn(II)-porphyrin dyes containing diphenylamine derived electron donor moieties at the meso-position and a strongly electron-withdrawing cyanoacrylic acid anchoring group at the opposite meso-position linked through a phenylene π-conjugation bridge for DSSCs (Fig. 1).


As shown in Fig. 1, the new porphyrins (denoted as HP, EHOP and HOP) were based on the molecular structure of the D–π–A structured diphenylamine (DPA)-substituted Zn(II)-porphyrin (DPA–Zn-P) with additional hexyl (H), ethylhexyloxy (EHO) and hexyloxy (HO) groups in the DPA position opposite to the anchoring cyanoacrylic acid group. Using electron-donating or -withdrawing groups to tune the photophysical properties of a porphyrin has been well-documented by Therien and co-workers. A theoretical screening by Grätzel and co-workers showed that porphyrin sensitizers in a suitable donor–acceptor fashion might create a highly efficient porphyrin sensitizer. Alkoxy groups are considered to be stronger electron-donating groups than alkyl groups, and can also prevent the approach of the electrolyte to the TiO2 surface. It thus decreases the I3− concentration in the vicinity of TiO2, resulting in the improved VOC of the DSSCs. Here, we designed and synthesized the three types of porphyrins (HP, EHOP and HOP) with hexyl, ethylhexyloxyl and hexyloxy groups in the electron-donating group.


Fig. 2 shows the UV-visible absorption and fluorescence spectra of HP, EHOP and HOP sensitizers in THF, and their optical properties are summarized in Table 1. As shown in Fig. 2, HP, EHOP and HOP sensitizers exhibit typical porphyrin absorption characteristics. Strong Soret bands are found in the higher energy region, whereas weak Q bands are found in the lower energy region. Their absorption maxima, attributed to transitions, were seen in the range of 415–420 nm for the Soret bands and 550–630 nm for the Q bands. Upon incorporating the alkoxy chains into the electron donating group, the Soret bands of EHOP and HOP were more broadened and stronger than that of the HP sensitizer, and the Q bands red-shifted from 617 nm to 630 and 632 nm for EHOP and HOP, respectively (Table 1). Alkoxy chains have a stronger electron donating effect than alkyl chains, which was seen in the low band-gap in EHOP and HOP. Moreover, the molar absorption coefficients (105 M−1 cm−1) of the Soret bands of porphyrins ranged from 0.9 to 2.2, fulfilling one requirement for a dye usable in a DSSC, whereas those (103 M−1 cm−1) of the Q(0,0) band were in the range of 6.1–11.1. The molar extinction coefficients of EHOP and HOP were much higher than that of HP. For the fluorescence spectra (Fig. 2b), major emission bands were observed at 662, 702 and 697 nm for HP, EHOP and HOP, respectively. The emission spectra of EHOP and HOP red-shifted from that of HP and were similar to the trend of the Q band absorption spectra. The electrochemical properties of all porphyrin sensitizers were investigated by cyclic voltammetry (CV) in water-free THF containing 0.1 M TBAPF6 as the supporting electrolyte at room temperature (see Fig. S2), and their electrochemical properties are summarized in Table 1. All porphyrin sensitizers exhibited reversible waves for the first oxidation peaks, corresponding to the HOMO energy level of the dye, at higher potentials than that of the I−/I3− redox couple (ca. 0.35 V vs. NHE), indicating an effective regeneration of the oxidized state. The zero–zero excitation energies (E0–0) from the band edge of the normalized absorption spectra shown in Fig. 2b were calculated to be 1.90 eV for HP, 1.84 eV for HOP and 1.83 eV for EHOP. The lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels of all porphyrin sensitizers were determined using the expression of LUMO = HOMO − E0–0; their energy levels are summarized in Table 1.
Dye
Absorption λmax/nm (ε/M−1 cm−1)
Emission λmax/nm

E
OX/V (vs. NHE)

E
0–0/V (vs. NHE)

E
OX − E0–0/eV
HP
417 (90560), 566 (6700), 617 (6100)
662
0.97
−0.93
1.90
EHOP
419 (227533), 570 (9043), 630 (11709)
702
0.78
−1.06
1.84
HOP
419 (209584), 571 (8762), 632 (10732)
697
0.78
−1.05
1.83
To assist in the qualitative understanding of the electrochemical behavior of all porphyrins, we performed density-functional theory (DFT) calculations to investigate the structures and charge transfer properties employing Becke's three parameterized Lee–Yang–Parr (B3LYP) exchange correlation functional and 6-31G* basis sets using a suite of Gaussian 09 programs.Fig. 3 shows an energy-level diagram of the porphyrins, co-absorbents and I−/I3− redox couple, comparing the HOMO/LUMO of each porphyrin with the conducting band (CB) of TiO2. The LUMO levels of all porphyrins were above the CB level of TiO2. As shown in Fig. 3, the molecular orbital shapes of HP, EHOP and HOP show a very similar charge transfer distribution, i.e., the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of all porphyrins had very similar shapes. These conditions indicate that the LUMO levels of all porphyrins should be capable of injecting electrons into the CB of TiO2. The porphyrins showed a sharp and intense Soret absorption band at about 400–450 nm and a few moderately intense Q absorption bands at about 500–650 nm. One drawback of porphyrin dyes used for DSSCs is the relatively weak IPCE spectrum in the large gap between the Soret and Q bands that decreases the light-harvesting efficiency. Moreover, the planar structural feature of porphyrins might facilitate the formation of dye aggregates that significantly decrease the efficiency of electron injection. To effectively suppress dye aggregation for DSSCs, as in our previous study, co-absorbents such as CDCA, HCA1 and PTZ1 were used (see Fig. S4 and S6). Both VOC and JSC were dramatically enhanced by the co-adsorption of the multi-functional co-adsorbent HCA1 with the Zn(II)-porphyrin dye, due to the efficient retardation of charge recombination arising from the prevention of π–π stacking, light harvesting in shorter wavelength regions and a hole conducting function through a redox cascade process. Also, PTZ1, which was recently developed through the modification of HCA1, was used for preventing π–π stacking of dyes; its detailed functions as a co-absorbent in DSSCs will be reported in the near future.

Fig. 4 shows the UV-visible absorption and the IPCE spectra, and the J–V curves of dye-only and dye/co-absorbent (PTZ1) adsorbed TiO2 films with no coated scattering layer; the rest are presented in Fig. S3. To clearly see both Soret and Q bands in these spectra, only small amounts of the porphyrins were allowed to adsorb onto the TiO2 films. In addition, the intensities of the absorption bands are normalized to fit two spectra, revealing that the Soret and Q bands of the EHOP and HOP absorbed TiO2 films were slightly broadened from those of the HP spectrum (Fig. 4a). The thin-film samples show much broader absorption than their solution counterparts because of strong intermolecular interactions between the molecules aggregated on the TiO2 surface.
The thin-film samples showed broader absorption than their solution counterparts because of strong intermolecular interactions between the molecules aggregated on the TiO2 surface. The adsorbed amounts for each dye showed a trend increasing from HP, EHOP to HOP. As observed from the broader UV-vis absorption spectra of EHOP and HOP, compared to those of HP (Fig. 4a and Table 2), this likely originated from a greater dye loading amount and higher molar extinction coefficient relative to HP itself, which is advantageous for light harvesting and thus results in higher power conversion (Fig. 4b and c). In general, when the dye with co-absorbents such as CDCA and HCA1 was co-adsorbed onto the TiO2 film, the deprotonation of the carboxylic acid group in the dye induced less dye adsorption onto the TiO2 surface, owing to the electrostatic repulsion of negatively charged carboxylic acid groups. Moreover, the lesser dye adsorption with PTZ1 than HCA1 and CDCA co-adsorption might be mainly attributed to the larger molecular size of PTZ1.
Dye
Dye adsorbed amount [10−7 mol cm−2]

J
SC [mA cm−2]

V
OC [mV]
FF [%]

η [%]

a The amount of the dye adsorbed on the TiO2 surface (film thickness 14 μm) was estimated spectroscopically by desorbing the dye with a 0.1 M solution of NaOH in 1:1:1 (vol%) EtOH–THF–H2O.
b PTZ1 was used as the co-adsorbent.

N719
—
16.7
701
73.6
8.6
HP
1.79
4.9
546
74.3
2.0
EHOP
2.45
9.6
548
68.9
3.6
HOP
2.67
11.8
617
65.1
4.7
HP + PTZ1
1.11
10.9
593
76.6
5.0
EHOP + PTZ1
1.31
13.4
632
72.2
6.1
HOP + PTZ1
1.65
15.9
678
70.3
7.6

Fig. 4b and c show the spectra for the efficiency of conversion of an incident photon to current (IPCE) and the corresponding J–V curves for the DSSCs with dye only and dye/PTZ1 (as a co-adsorbent), respectively. The photovoltaic performance is summarized in Table 2; the remaining data are presented and summarized in Fig. S3 and Table S1. The photovoltaic performance of the DSSC fabricated with HP only was obtained with a short circuit current (JSC) of 4.9 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 546 mV, a fill factor (FF) of 74.3% and an overall conversion efficiency (η) of 2.0%. On the other hand, the overall conversion efficiencies of the DSSCs fabricated with EHOP and HOP were increased up to 3.6 and 4.7%, respectively. This was likely due to a greater light harvesting effect through the increased amount of adsorbed dye and the molar extinction coefficient, as judged from the higher and broader IPCE spectra than those of the DSSC fabricated with HP (Fig. 4b). Moreover, EHOP and HOP with alkoxy groups in the electron donating group can prevent the approach of the electrolyte to the TiO2 surface. This decreases the I3− concentration in the vicinity of TiO2, resulting in improved VOC of the DSSCs.
In particular, the dramatically increased IPCE value of the DSSC based on HOP/PTZ1, even with a lower amount of adsorbed dye on the TiO2 film, compared to that with HOP alone can be explained in two ways. First, scattering by TiO2 nanoparticles increases the photocurrent for weak absorption in that region (500–600 nm) and, moreover, PTZ1 increases the IPCE value by preventing the aggregation of dyes. Among the co-absorbents used in this study, only PTZ1 effectively breaks the π–π stacking between the dye molecules. Thus, the IPCE spectra of the DSSCs fabricated with PTZ1 as the co-absorbent compared to each dye alone (HP, EHOP and HOP) increased in the entire spectral range.
The higher IPCE values obtained for DSSC devices with the co-absorbent indicate an effective increase in electron injection, light harvesting and electron-collection efficiency of the device. The highest power conversion efficiency of the DSSC fabricated with PTZ1 as the co-absorbent was 7.6%, which was higher than that of the DSSC fabricated with HOP only by a factor of 2.9.
The suppression of π–π stacking is advantageous for light harvesting since π–π stacked aggregates can lead to inefficient electron injection, as shown in the IPCE and J–V curves of the DSSCs with dye only and those with PTZ1 as the co-absorbent (Fig. 4b and c). To further characterize the electron transport and recombination effect for the chemical structure of the HP, EHOP and HOP sensitizers and different co-absorbents used, we measured electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) under dark conditions at a forward bias of ∼0.6 V. The impedance spectra of the DSSCs with dye only and dye/PTZ1 are shown in Fig. 5, and the rest are presented in Fig. S4. According to the time constant of the different impedance components in a DSSC, the separated semicircles are shown in the complex plane following the related characteristic frequency range in which the arcs at high frequency, middle frequency and low frequency correspond to the redox reaction at the counter electrode, electron transport and recombination competition at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte and diffusion within the electrolyte solution, respectively. The ohmic series resistance (RS) of the device includes the resistance of the substrates, electrolytes, electrical contact and wiring of a DSSC (the inset in Fig. 5b). The maximum frequencies (ωmax) from the Bode plots of the DSSCs with HP, EHOP and HOP only were 180, 23 and 7 Hz; those of the DSSCs with the co-absorbent PTZ1 were greatly reduced to 16, 11 and 4 Hz, respectively (Fig. 5b and d). Since ωmax is inversely associated with the electron lifetime (τe): τe = 1/(2πf), the decreased ωmax indicates a reduced rate of the charge-recombination process of the DSSCs, with HP, EHOP and HOP in that order. From the EIS results, it is clear that the charge recombination rate is the rate-determining step of the DSSC in terms of device performance, since HP, EHOP and HOP DSSCs with or without co-absorbents decreased the charge recombination rate and resulted in an improvement of the device performance, in that order. From these results, we can conclude that charge recombination of the DSSCs with dye only is faster than that of the DSSCs with co-absorbents (CDCA, HCA1 and PTZ1). This insulating molecular layer effectively inhibits back electron transfer from the TiO2 to I3− ions and gives a higher VOC.
Furthermore, the photovoltaic performance was evidently reflected by the charge collection efficiency (ηcc) derived from ηcc = (1 + Rtr/Rrec)−1 or ηcc = (1 + τt/τr)−1. The fitted results from the Nyquist plots of the DSSCs with dye only and with dye/PTZ1 are presented in Fig. 6a and b. Their EIS parameters calculated from the equivalent circuit shown in Fig. 6c are summarized in Table 3, and the rest are presented in Fig. S5 and Table S2. The electron transport time (τt = CμRt) observed for the DSSC with HOP was slightly slower than those of the DSSCs with HP and EHOP, whereas its electron lifetime (τr = CμRrec) was significantly increased compared to the DSSCs with HP and EHOP. In the DSSCs with HP, EHOP and HOP, the charge collection efficiencies were calculated to be 78, 79 and 92%, respectively. Eventually, a DSSC fabricated with HOP could demonstrate greatly improved device performance.
Dye
Co-absorbent

R
t
/Ω

R
rec
/Ω

C
μ/mF

τ
t/ms

τ
r/ms

η
cc


a Charge transport (Rt) was obtained from the equivalent circuit shown in Fig. 6c.
b Recombination resistance (Rrec) was obtained from the equivalent circuit shown in Fig. 6c.
c DSSC with HP shows Gerischer-type impedance to inefficient collection of electrons which occurred when substantial electrons recombined back with I3− before these are even collected by the back electrode.
d Calculated from the EIS spectrum at a forward bias of −0.55 V.

HP
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
EHOP
—
48.0
73.7
0.52
25.0
38.3
0.61
HOP
—
25.4
151.4
0.62
15.70
93.9
0.86
HP
PTZ1
10.2
27.4
0.74
7.55
20.28
0.73
EHOP
PTZ1
6.9
43.3
0.74
5.10
32.04
0.86
HOP
PTZ1
6.1
210.3
0.79
4.82
166.1
0.97
Among the DSSCs with PTZ1 as the co-absorbent, the electron transport time of the DSSC with HOP was the fastest and its electron lifetime was the longest, so its charge collection efficiency was 98%. The charge collection efficiency of the DSSCs fabricated with CDCA and HCA1 as co-absorbents also showed higher values than that of the DSSCs with dye only (see Fig. S5 and Table S2). As a result, a DSSC with HOP/PTZ1 could significantly improve the device performance.

In this study, a series of push–pull structured (D–π–A) porphyrin dyes with an electron-donating group (EDG) attached at the meso-position (HP, EHOP and HOP) were designed and synthesized for use as sensitizers in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). Their optical, electrochemical and photovoltaic properties were investigated. The nature of the EDG exerts a significant influence on the spectral, electrochemical and photovoltaic properties of these sensitizers. The absorption bands of these porphyrin sensitizers were broadened and red-shifted upon introduction of alkoxy chains to the electron-donating groups at the meso-position opposite to the anchoring cyanoacrylic acid group, which could prevent electron recombination and induce fast electron injection, resulting in enhanced DSSC performance. Electrochemical studies showed that the first oxidation occurred at a potential greater than that of the I−/I3− redox couple, indicating effective regeneration of the oxidized state. The highest performance of the DSSC fabricated with HOP and PTZ1 as the co-absorbent was 7.6%, which was higher than that of the DSSC fabricated with HOP only by a factor of 2.9.


This work was supported by the New Renewable Energy R&D Program (Project No. 20123010010070) of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) grant funded by Korea government Ministry of Knowledge Economy (MKE) and by the Converging Research Program through the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (2012K001287).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta01128c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013