 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA09626C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 571-582


Mahmoud E.
Farahat
,

Packiyaraj
Perumal
,

Widhya
Budiawan
,

Yang-Fang
Chen
,

Chih-Hao
Lee
* and 

Chih-Wei
Chu
*

Nanoscience and Technology Program, Taiwan International Graduate Program, Academia Sinica, Taiwan

Research Center for Applied Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan. E-mail: gchu@gate.sinica.edu.tw

Central Metallurgical Research and Development Institute (CMRDI), P.O. Box: 87, Helwan, Cairo 11421, Egypt

Department of Physics, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan

Department of Engineering and System Science, National Tsing-Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan. E-mail: chlee@mx.nthu.edu.tw

College of Engineering, Chang Gung University, Tao-Yuan 333, Taiwan

Received
7th November 2016
, Accepted 17th November 2016
First published on 17th November 2016
Cyclopentyl methyl ether (CPME), a green solvent, can be used to replace toxic halogenated solvents in the production of efficient molecular solar cells. With CPME alone as the processing solvent, a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.13% was achieved when using a two-dimensional conjugated small molecule (SMPV1) as the donor and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) as the acceptor to form the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic photovoltaic (OPV) device. This low PCE arose from the low solubility of PC61BM in this green solvent. Accordingly, toluene (Tol) was introduced in various amounts as a co-solvent for CPME. The greater solubility of PC61BM in these mixtures led to significant improvements in the short-circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF) of the device, achieving a PCE of 7% after processing in the optimized green solvent mixture of CPME:Tol (60:40). Furthermore, thermal annealing (TA), at 80 °C for 10 min, of the active layers processed from the 60:40 green solvent mixture enhanced the PCE to 8.10%—the highest ever reported for a molecular solar cell processed from a green solvent mixture. Large-area devices fabricated this way, having areas of 1 and 5.5 cm2, exhibited PCEs of 6.20 and 3.73%, respectively. The morphological changes that occurred when applying the co-solvent and TA played key roles in achieving such high PCEs for molecular solar cells processed from green solvent mixtures—a promising step toward the upscaling of OPVs.

Because of their light weight, low cost, flexibility, and solution-processability, organic photovoltaics (OPVs) are among the most attractive candidates for use in clean and cost-effective energy production technologies. Over the past decade, research in OPVs has developed steadily such that they have reached the threshold power conversion efficiency (PCE) needed for commercialization. Both polymer- and molecule-based solar cells have achieved PCEs greater than 10% for single-junction cells. Unfortunately, most of the high efficiencies reported for both polymer and molecular OPVs have been achieved after processing using toxic halogenated solvents (e.g., chlorobenzene and chloroform). The need for hazardous processing solvents remains a big obstacle affecting the upscaling of OPVs prepared through large-scale coating techniques (e.g. roll-to-roll coating). These solvents are not favored for sustainable development because of the undesirable procedures necessary for their production, use, and waste processing. Moreover, they are strictly banned for mass production in industrialized countries having strict environmental health and safety regulations. Therefore, finding greener alternatives for the efficient processing of OPVs, similar to the efficiencies obtained using halogenated counterparts, remains a challenge for the industrial commercialization of OPVs. In addition, solvents having medium-temperature boiling points are favored to simplify device fabrication. In this regard, great efforts have been devoted to developing efficient OPVs processed from eco-friendly solvents. Although halogen-free solvents have been reported as reliable replacements for toxic solvents in the production of polymer solar cells, few such studies have been reported for molecular OPV counterparts.

Recently, the environmentally friendly solvent 2-methylanisole was used to achieve one of the highest PCEs reported for a single-solvent polymer solar cell: 9.6%. Combining common hydrocarbon solvents with 1-phenylnaphthalene as a solvent additive has led to the highest reported PCE (11.7%) for a polymer solar cell fabricated from halogen-free solvents. The use of several other halogen-free solvents, including anisole, xylenes, toluene (Tol), derivatives of N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), and trimethylbenzene (TMB), has been reported for the preparation of efficient polymer solar cells. Halogen-free solvent mixtures—including toluene:indane and o-xylene:indane, carbon disulfide:acetone, and acetophenone:mesitylene—have also been tested for the fabrication of polymer solar cells. In contrast, only a few reports have appeared describing the use of such solvents in the production of small molecule-based OPVs. For example, Bazan et al. achieved a PCE of 5% after processing X2:PC61BC8, a small molecule-based blend, from the green solvent 2-methyltetrahydrofuran (2-MeTHF). Using green solvent formulations of benzaldehyde and mesitylene, molecular solar cells incorporating the small molecule N(Ph-2T-DCN-Et)3 and PC71BM achieved PCEs of up to 3.7%, higher than that achieved using chlorobenzene (3.4%). Tetrahydrofuran (THF) has also been used as a processing solvent for small-molecule devices, reaching PCEs as high as 2.65% after production without a solvent additive and 4.96% after incorporating chloronaphthalene (a toxic halogenated solvent additive). Recently, our group has achieved the highest reported PCE for molecular solar cells processed from eco-friendly solvents: 7%.
The morphological properties of the active layer blend (e.g., donor crystallinity, phase separation, material miscibility, and domain size) have a great impact on OPV device performance. Bi-continuous interpenetrating networks with suitable domain sizes can favor exciton dissociation and charge transport and, hence, improve device performance. Therefore, regardless of whether the processing solvent is halogenated or non-halogenated, morphological control of the active layer plays a crucial role in determining OPV device performance. Thermal annealing (TA), solvent additives, solvent vapor annealing, and solvent mixtures are all common strategies for tuning morphologies of the active layers in OPVs. The solubility of organic materials (polymers, small molecules, and fullerenes) in a given solvent is a key issue affecting the efficiency of OPV devices. For greener solvent mixtures, solubility remains a major challenge that must be overcome for their wider implementation in OPV fabrication. Several reports have appeared describing the impact of molecular solubility on the performance of both polymer and molecular OPVs. Because of their lower molecular weights and well-defined structures, small molecules generally have solubilities in these solvent mixtures that are much better than those of their polymeric counterparts. This phenomenon provides strong motivation for moving toward small molecules in the production of OPVs. In particular they are more likely to be soluble in a wider variety of greener solvent mixtures.
In this study, we used cyclopentyl methyl ether (CPME) as a green solvent for the processing of efficient molecular solar cells. CPME was first introduced as a green alternative to ethereal solvents [e.g., THF, dioxane (carcinogenic), and 1,2-dimethoxyethane]. Because of its environmental friendliness, CPME has been considered as one of the most promising green solvents for use in OPV fabrication. Unfortunately, similar to 2-MeTHF, organic materials, especially fullerenes, have low solubility in CPME. Bazan et al. overcame the low solubility of [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) in 2Me-THF by synthesizing a new fullerene derivative presenting a longer alkyl chain to enhance the solubility of the acceptor material. In this present study, we have employed solvent mixtures to enhance the solubility of PC61BM and, thereby, fabricate efficient molecular OPV devices without the need for complicated chemical syntheses. Here, we used Tol, a halogen-free solvent, as the co-solvent to improve the solubility of PC61BM. Using SMPV1, a two-dimensional conjugated small molecule, as the donor and PC61BM as the acceptor, and fabricating from CPME alone as a green solvent, we obtained an OPV displaying a low PCE of 3.13%. We then examined the effects of incorporating various amounts of Tol as a co-solvent in green solvent mixtures (CPME:Tol). Initially, increasing the content of Tol in the solvent mixture increased both the short-circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF), leading to a PCE of 7% for the optimized green solvent mixture of CPME:Tol (60:40). Further increasing the Tol content in the solvent mixture decreased the device performance. Subsequently, we applied TA at various temperatures. The devices thermally annealed at 80 °C for 10 min displayed further improvements in their values of both Jsc and FF, with the optimal device displaying a PCE of 8.10%. Thus, using this green solvent mixture, we achieved device performance similar to that reported by Yang Yang et al. when using SMPV1 as the donor, PC71BM as the acceptor, and chloroform as the processing solvent. To the best of our knowledge, the PCE of greater than 8% reported herein is the highest ever achieved for a small molecule-based OPV fabricated using a green solvent mixture. Table S1 (ESI) provides a partial list of the halogen-free solvents and mixtures that have been reported for the preparation of devices based on small molecules, with device performance data provided for comparison.

The low-bandgap small molecule SMPV1 (purity: >99.9%) was obtained from Luminescence Technology (Lumtec). PC61BM was purchased from Solenne b.v. The conducting polymer blend poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/polystyrenesulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) was obtained from Clevios PVP 4083. CPME and Tol were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Green solvent mixtures were prepared containing 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50% (v/v) of Tol. In experiments to optimize the donor concentration, concentrations of SMPV1 of 10, 15, and 20 mg mL−1, at an SMPV1:PC61BM blend ratio of 1:0.75, were prepared in the 60:40 green solvent mixture in experiments to optimize the donor concentration. In experiments to optimize the donor/acceptor ratio, solutions having SMPV1:PC61BM ratios of 1:0.5, 1:0.75, and 1:1 were also prepared in the 60:40 green solvent mixture. All solutions were heated at 60 °C with continuous stirring in a glove box for 3 h prior to device fabrication.


Devices were fabricated on 0.1 cm2 pre-patterned indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates (sheet resistance: <10 Ω per square) with the conventional device structure ITO/PEDOT:PSS/SMPV1:PC61BM/Ca/Al. Prior to device fabrication, the ITO-coated glass substrates were cleaned using standard procedures: sonication in detergent, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol; rinsing in deionized (DI) water; and treating with UV/ozone for 15 min. The solution of PEDOT:PSS was passed through a 0.45 μm syringe filter onto the clean substrates, which were then spin-coated (4000 rpm, 60 s) and annealed in air for 30 min at 130 °C, forming a thin film of 40 nm thickness. The blend solution was then spin-coated at various speeds for 60 s within a glove box filled with N2. All the devices prepared in this study were processed from warm solutions at 60 °C to avoid the technical problem of agglomeration that occurred after the blend solutions were cooled. The active layers were thermally annealed at various annealing temperatures inside a glove box filled with N2. Finally, the Ca (20 nm) and Al (80 nm) cathode was deposited through thermal evaporation in a vacuum chamber (6 × 10−6 Torr). For large-area (1 and 5.5 cm2) devices, the same fabrication process was followed with special ITO patterning, different from that of the small-area devices.


The photovoltaic performance of each device was measured inside a glove box filled with N2 under simulated AM 1.5 G illumination (100 W cm−2) using a Xe lamp-based solar simulator (Thermal Oriel 1000 W). The light intensity was calibrated using a mono-silicon photodiode featuring a KG-5 color filter (Hamamatsu). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra were recorded using a QE-R apparatus (Enlitech) operated in AC mode. The devices were encapsulated within a glove box filled with N2 prior to removal for the EQE measurements. Absorption spectra of the films were measured using a Jacobs V670 UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer. The reflectance of the devices were measured using a Hitachi U4100 UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer. The internal quantum efficiencies (IQEs) were calculated from the EQE data and absorption data [extracted from the reflection spectrum using the expression “100 − R(%)”]. A Bruker Innova atomic force microscope (Digital Instrument NS 3a controller equipped with a D3100 stage) was used, in the tapping mode, to observe the surface morphologies of the active layers. For transmission electron microscopy (TEM; JEM 2100F), the active layer on the PEDOT:PSS substrate was removed by dipping in DI water and then a holey carbon-coated copper grid (Ultrathin Carbon Type A, 300 mesh, copper; TED Pella) was used to hold the film, which was dried in a vacuum. For steady-state photoluminescence (PL) measurements, the samples were excited optically by using a Q-switched fourth-harmonic Nd:YAG laser (266 nm, 3–5 ns pulse, and 10 Hz) beam, which was focused to a diameter of approximately 500 μm using a Jobin Yvon iHR550 imaging spectrometer system. For time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements, the excitation source was a Ti–sapphire mode-locked laser (Coherent, Mira 900) with a repetition rate of 76 MHz and a pulse width of 120 fs. The TRPL signals were coupled through a time-correlated single photon counting (Pico Harp 300) system with a time resolution of approximately 10 ps. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded at room temperature using a Bruker D8 X-ray diffractometer (2θ range: 2–20°) equipped with a diffracted beam monochromator set for Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.54056 Å). X-ray reflectivity was measured at beamline 13A of the National Synchrotron Radiation Research Center, Taiwan, with an incidence X-ray energy of 12 keV. The hole and electron mobilities in a hole-only device (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/SMPV1:PC61BM/MoO3/Ag) and an electron-only device (ITO/ZnO/SMPV1:PC61BM/Ca/Al), respectively, were determined by fitting the dark-current density–voltage (J–V) curves to the space-charge limited current (SCLC) model.



Scheme 1 displays the device architecture and the chemical structures of the materials and solvents used in this study: SMPV1 as the donor, PC61BM as the acceptor, CPME as the green processing solvent, and Tol as a halogen-free co-solvent. Because of their low solubilities in this green solvent, we first examined the solubility of a variety of fullerenes in CPME to select the best possible candidates for device fabrication. For visual inspection, Fig. S1 (ESI) presents images of 10 mg of PC61BM, PC71BM, and indene-C60 bisadduct (ICBA) dissolved in 1 mL of CPME. After stirring and heating for 3 h at 60 °C, both PC61BM and ICBA displayed acceptable solubility, whereas PC71BM exhibited very poor solubility. Accordingly, we examined the device performance when implementing PC61BM and ICBA as acceptors and SMPV1 as the donor. For the device prepared using PC61BM as the acceptor dissolved in CPME only, the PCE reached 3.13% [Fig. 1(a) and Table 1]; this value was only 0.75% when using ICBA (Fig. S2 and Table S2; ESI). Based on these results, we chose PC61BM as our acceptor for further optimization. Because the solubility of PC61BM in Tol is 15.6 mg mL−1, we used Tol as a halogen-free co-solvent for CPME to form CPME:Tol green solvent mixtures providing greater PC61BM solubility. Fig. S3 (ESI) displays the photovoltaic characteristics of a device prepared from SMPV1:PC61BM in Tol only; the PCE was 5.22%. Next, we tested CPME:Tol green solvent mixtures containing various amounts of Tol (10, 20, 30, 40, and 50%; v/v) to determine the optimal ratio. Initially, increasing the Tol content in the solvent mixture led to progressively greater device performance.

CPME:Tol [volume ratio]

J
sc [mA cm−2]

V
oc [V]
FF [%]
PCE [%]

R
s [Ω cm2]

R
sh [kΩ cm2]

a Average values calculated from over 10 devices are provided in parentheses.

CPME
6.47
0.94
51.47
3.13 (3.02)
12.78
0.68
90:10
8.88
0.96
51.97
4.43 (4.29)
9.90
0.94
80:20
10.35
0.95
56.14
5.52 (5.38)
7.58
1.23
70:30
11.20
0.96
61.48
6.61 (6.44)
6.63
1.83
60:40
11.96
0.96
60.97
7.00 (6.89)
6.12
1.74
50:50
11.41
0.95
62.09
6.73 (6.61)
5.87
1.96

Fig. 1(a) and Table 1 present the photovoltaic characteristics of devices processed using the various green solvent mixtures. The optimal performance was that obtained after processing in the CPME:Tol solvent mixture at a volume ratio of 60:40. Significant increases occurred in the values of both Jsc and FF after the incorporation of Tol as a co-solvent in CPME. The value of Jsc increased from 6.47 mA cm−2 when processing in CPME only to 11.96 mA cm−–2 when using the 60:40 solvent mixture; the FF accordingly increased from 51.47 to 60.97%; these synergistic improvements in the values of both Jsc and FF led to the PCE increasing correspondingly from 3.13 to 7%. In contrast, the open-circuit voltage (Voc) increased only slightly, from 0.94 V when processing in CPME to 0.96 V when processing in the 60:40 green solvent mixture. Further increasing the Tol content in the solvent mixture to 50% led to decreases in the values of Jsc (to 11.41 mA cm−2) and the PCE (to 6.73%). We attribute the initial significant and progressive enhancements in the values of both Jsc and FF primarily to the improved solubility of PC61BM after incorporating Tol as a co-solvent in the green solvent. Previous studies have revealed a similar dependence of device parameters on the fullerene solubility. For comparison, we also examined the effect of Tol as a co-solvent when using SMPV1:ICBA blends (Fig. S2 and Table S2; ESI). We observed a trend similar to that of the SMPV1:PC61BM blends, but with a much lower optimized PCE of 1.4%, mainly resulting from improvements in the values of Jsc and FF, confirming that PC61BM was the superior acceptor. We also observed a progressive decrease in the series resistance (Rs), accompanied by a progressive increase in the shunt resistance (Rsh), as a result of the enhanced solubility of PC61BM (Table 1). Thus, using Tol as a co-solvent to enhance PC61BM's solubility led to the suppression of the leakage current, thereby improving the FF. Fig. 1(b) displays the EQE spectra of devices processed under the same conditions mentioned above. Compared with the spectra of the devices processed from CPME alone, the devices processed from the green solvent mixtures containing various amounts of Tol exhibited significant increases in their peak intensities near 360 nm, attributable to the presence of PC61BM. The peak intensity underwent a progressive increase upon increasing the Tol content in the solvent mixture, consistent with the enhanced solubility of PC61BM. The EQE peak intensity of the devices processed from the 60:40 solvent mixture reached 66% at 550 nm, compared with 28% for the devices processed from CPME only. The optimized device also provided IQEs [Fig. S4 (ESI)] higher than those obtained with the preparation using the other volume ratios. The enhancement in IQE occurred at both long and short wavelengths, attributable to the presence of PC61BM. This finding suggests that the excitons generated were harvested more efficiently after processing in the optimized green solvent mixture, thereby leading to the greater PCE.

Fig. 1(c) presents UV-Vis absorption spectra of the active layers processed from CPME, Tol, and their solvent mixtures. The absorption spectra of active layers processed from different solvents can provide information regarding the molecular ordering of their components. A significant red-shift, combined with the appearance of vibronic peaks at 577 and 630 nm, has been reported as a clear indication of the positive impact of CPME, as the processing solvent (relative to Tol), on the molecular order of SMPV1. On the other hand, the use of Tol led to a pronounced increase in the intensity of the PC61BM peak near 360 nm when compared with that of the same peak observed for CPME. The intensity of the PC61BM peaks increased progressively upon increasing the amount of Tol in the green solvent mixture, confirming the enhanced solubility of PC61BM after adding Tol as a co-solvent. In addition, we observed a clear, progressive increase in the intensities of the vibronic peaks at 577 and 630 nm upon increasing the Tol content to 40%. A further increase in the Tol content to 50% in the solvent mixture decreased the intensities of these vibronic peaks, suggesting a negative effect of Tol on the crystallinity of SMPV1. The optimized performance occurred when using the 60:40 CPME/Tol green solvent mixture because of a combination of effects: CPME enhancing the crystallinity of SMPV1 and Tol enhancing the solubility of PC61BM. The improved crystallinity of SMPV1 and the solubility of PC61BM are consistent with the progressive enhancements in the values of both Jsc and FF observed when using the green solvent mixtures. Fig. S5 (ESI) displays the crystalline structures of the active layers processed from CPME, Tol, and their solvent mixtures, as characterized using XRD. The crystallinity of SMPV1 in the active layers processed from CPME was higher than that in those processed from Tol, consistent with the UV-Vis absorption spectra. The strong (100) reflection peak at a value of 2θ of 4.22° indicates the stronger tendency of SMPV1 to self-assemble when processed from CPME, relative to that from Tol. The SMPV1 molecules sustained their crystallinity upon initially increasing the Tol content in the solvent mixture, possibly because of the dominant effect of CPME in the solvent mixture. When the Tol content in the solvent mixture reached 50%, the crystallinity of SMPV1 decreased, consistent with our previous observations.
To investigate the surface morphological changes that occurred when varying the green solvent mixture, we recorded (Fig. 2) atomic force microscopy (AFM) height images (tapping mode). Active layers processed from CPME [Fig. 2(a)] featured crack-like rough features with a root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 3.4 nm. These rough features might have been due to the aggregation of PC61BM, because of its low solubility in CPME, having a negative impact on the device performance. Incorporating Tol as the co-solvent decreased the feature sizes progressively, forming a uniform and smooth active layer having an RMS roughness of 1.06 nm for the active layer processed from the 60:40 solvent mixture [Fig. 2(e)]. A smoother active layer having an RMS roughness of 0.84 nm was obtained when processing from the green solvent mixture containing 50% Tol [Fig. 2(f)]. We attribute this smoothing trend mainly to the enhanced solubility of PC61BM, resulting in smaller aggregates and favorable phase separation. For BHJ solar cells, a certain degree of phase separation is required in the active layers. Severe phase separation or high intermixing of phases does not favor good charge separation and the formation of bicontinuous interpenetrating networks for efficient charge transport. Thus, obtaining aggregates of the optimized size (not very large and not very small; ideally 20–30 nm) is a key factor for achieving high-performance BHJ OPVs. For this reason, we observed progressive improvements in the values of both Jsc and FF upon increasing the amount of Tol as the co-solvent in the green solvent mixture. The optimized green solvent mixture (60:40) achieved the optimal aggregate size and favored phase separation, leading to the highest PCE. We also used X-ray reflectivity to confirm the smoothening effect after the incorporation of Tol (Fig. S6 ESI). For these measurements, we cast active layers onto silicon wafers from CPME alone and from the 60:40 green solvent mixture. The latter was much smoother (1.7 nm on the top surface) than the former (4.1 nm). This greater roughness reveals that the PC61BM agglomerates had larger sizes, consistent with our AFM observations. In addition, the density of the thin film formed in the absence of the co-solvent (CPME alone) was 10% higher than that prepared in the presence of the co-solvent (green solvent mixture). The active layer of the former was 3% thicker than that of the latter, indicating that the viscosity of the thin film prepared with the co-solvent was lower.
To further understand the effect of Tol as a co-solvent on the photovoltaic performance, we used TEM to probe the bulk morphologies of active layers processed from CPME and various green solvent mixtures. Fig. 3(a) reveals that the active layer processed from CPME alone exhibited an uneven distribution of large PC61BM-rich domains (dark regions) in an SMPV1-rich matrix (light gray). This result is consistent with the AFM images obtained under the same conditions, confirming the limited solubility of PC61BM in CPME. These domains would not favor efficient exciton separation, due to the poor number of percolation pathways arising from PC61BM aggregation. Inefficient exciton separation and charge transport within these active layers led to lower values of Jsc and FF. Incorporating Tol as a co-solvent [Fig. 3(b)–(f)] in the green solvent mixtures led to a trend of decreasing phase separation upon increasing the fullerene solubility, potentially explaining the observation of smaller dark regions (PC61BM-rich domains): PC61BM was intermixed more uniformly with SMPV1, suppressing the formation of large pure domains in the active layers. As a result, the number of interfaces for exciton dissociation increased dramatically, and the sufficient number of carrier transport pathways between SMPV1 and PC61BM led to significant enhancements in the values of Jsc and FF. Similar to the behavior observed in the AFM images, the TEM images in the insets to Fig. 3 (higher magnification) reveal a progressive decrease in the domain sizes, confirming the refining effect of Tol as a co-solvent in the green solvent mixture.
We recorded steady-state PL and TRPL characteristics to further investigate the effect of the various green solvent mixtures on the charge dynamics. We performed PL experiments to gain insight into the nanoscale morphology and molecular miscibility of the SMPV1:PC61BM active layers processed from the various green solvent mixtures. The PL spectra of the active layers of neat SMPV1 (processed from CPME) and SMPV1:PC61BM (processed from various green solvent mixtures) were measured under excitation from a 266 nm laser beam [Fig. 4(a)]. We also measured the samples under the light from a green laser with excitation at 532 nm, and the trend was similar to that obtained with the 266 nm laser beam (Fig. S7, ESI). The neat SMPV1 film exhibited strong emissions in a relatively wide PL emission spectral range from 640 to 750 nm, with an emission peak at 710 nm. The PL spectra of SMPV1:PC61BM active layers exhibited progressive quenching upon increasing the Tol content in the green solvent mixture, consistent with more efficient charge transfer in the active layers processed from the green solvent mixtures, due to the existence of smaller phase-separated domains. This behavior also confirmed the better molecular miscibility arising from enhanced PC61BM solubility after the incorporation of Tol. In addition, this result is consistent with both the AFM and TEM data, that is, progressive decreases in the domain sizes upon increasing the content of Tol in the green solvent mixture. TRPL spectroscopy revealed the exciton dynamics of the SMPV1:PC61BM active layers prepared under the various processing conditions. We measured TRPL spectra of the active layers processed from various green solvent mixtures by monitoring the emission at 710 nm under excitation with the 266 nm laser beam. In Fig. 4(b), the TRPL of the active layers processed from the various green solvent mixtures was quenched progressively upon increasing the Tol content in the mixture. This observation, which is consistent with the PL spectra in Fig. 4(a), confirms that charge transfer occurred efficiently from the donor to the acceptor after incorporating Tol. The lifetime excitons of the neat SMPV1 film were 1.28 ns; it decreased to 1.09 ns for the SMPV1:PC61BM blend films processed from the green solvent CPME; incorporating Tol as a co-solvent at various contents further decreased the lifetime, reaching 0.48 ns for the film prepared from the 60:40 solvent mixture. Thus, the charge transfer kinetics increased progressively upon increasing the Tol ratio in the mixture, indicative of enhanced intermixing in the active layer as a result of the enhanced solubility of PC61BM.
TA is a widely used strategy for processing efficient OPV devices. It induces enhanced molecular mobility within the active layer, enabling rearrangement of the donor and fullerene phases. Therefore, phase separation, order, and crystallinity in a molecular active layer should improve after TA. We examined the performance of the active layers processed from the optimized green solvent mixture ratio (60:40) and optimized SMPV1 concentration (Fig. S8 and Table S4; ESI) under various annealing temperatures. The device performance was affected significantly by the annealing temperatures (60, 80, 100, or 120 °C for 10 min) relative to that of devices prepared without thermal annealing [Fig. 5(a)]. Improvements in the values of both Jsc and FF occurred upon increasing the annealing temperatures to 100 °C. The maximum values of Jsc and FF were 12.72 mA cm−2 and 67.03%, respectively, at the optimal TA temperature of 80 °C, leading to a PCE of 8.10% (Table 2). This PCE is the highest ever achieved from a molecular solar cell processed from a green solvent mixture. The values of Jsc and FF both dropped significantly (to 10.84 mA cm−2 and 58.13%, respectively) upon increasing the annealing temperature to 120 °C. In addition, we observed a slight decrease in the value of Voc (to 0.93 V) at the same annealing temperature (Table 2). Fig. S9 and Table S5 (ESI) reveal that the optimal duration of TA at a fixed temperature of 80 °C was 10 min. In addition, Fig. S10 and Table S6 (ESI) reveal that the optimal donor/acceptor ratio under the previously optimized conditions was 1:0.75. We attribute the significant improvements in the values of both Jsc and FF after TA mainly to significant changes in the morphologies of the blended active layers. Upon increasing the TA temperature to 80 °C, a decrease in the value of Rs was accompanied by an increase in the value of Rsh, consistent with the enhanced FFs. Further increases in temperature decreased the FF, due to increases in the value of Rs and decreases in the value of Rsh. Fig. 5(b) presents the corresponding EQE spectra of devices that had been processed at various TA temperatures. The EQE spectrum of the device prepared at the optimized TA temperature (80 °C) featured a maximum peak of 72% at 550 nm and a wide photoresponse from 300 to 750 nm. The EQE enhancement was most pronounced at wavelengths in the range from 400 to 700 nm, mainly attributable to the enhanced absorption of the SMPV1 donor in the active layer as a result of the enhanced crystallinity. Moreover, the IQE spectra in Fig. S11 also exhibit higher intensities in the donor region, consistent with more efficient exciton harvesting in this region. Interestingly, devices annealed at 80 °C also exhibited EQE and IQE enhancements at wavelengths in the region 350–400 nm, originating mostly from PC61BM. Thus, TA could also induce PC61BM mobility out of the SMPV1 donor phase, thereby enabling a sufficient number of interpenetrating networks for improved charge carrier transport and leading to higher values of Jsc and FF. This explanation is correlated with the different Tol contents in the green solvent mixtures resulting in improved PC61BM solubility and mobility during film formation, leading to enhanced values of Jsc and FF.
Temperature

J
sc [mA cm−2]

V
oc [V]
FF [%]
PCE [%]

R
s [Ω cm2]

R
sh [kΩ cm2]

a Average values calculated from over 10 devices are provided in parentheses.

Without TA
11.96
0.96
60.97
7.00 (6.89)
6.12
1.74
60 °C
12.34
0.95
64.32
7.54 (7.42)
3.23
2.17
80 °C
12.72
0.95
67.03
8.10 (7.93)
2.86
2.38
100 °C
12.13
0.94
63.32
7.22 (6.97)
3.12
2.12
120 °C
10.84
0.93
58.13
5.86 (5.73)
7.28
1.39

Fig. 5(c) displays the absorption spectra of the active layers processed at various TA temperatures. The spectra of the thermally annealed active layers were considerably different from those of the active layers prepared without annealing. Significant and progressive increases in the absorption intensities of the SMPV1 vibronic peak at 582 nm and the PC61BM peak at 342 nm occurred upon increasing the annealing temperature. The role of Tol in the improved performance after TA is clearly evident when comparing the UV-Vis absorption spectra (Fig. S12, ESI) of the active layers processed using the various green solvent mixtures, with and without TA (80 °C and 10 min). The spectra of the active layers processed from the Tol blend solution after TA featured significant red-shifting and increases in the SMPV1 vibronic peak intensities at 582 and 637 nm, compared with those of the same film without TA. In addition, the intensity of the PC61BM peak (ca. 342 nm) increased for the thermally annealed active layers coated with the green solvent mixtures, compared with that of the film prepared without TA. This observation confirms that TA could also induce PC61BM mobility out of the SMPV1 donor phase to result in better phase separation and morphology. We attribute the increases in the optical absorption intensities after TA mainly to the enhanced aggregation and crystallinity of the materials in the blend film. The significant effect of TA on the molecular packing and degree of crystallinity was also confirmed through conventional XRD analysis (Fig. S13; ESI). TA led to higher peak intensities, indicating a higher degree of crystallinity. The strong (100) reflection diffraction peak at a value of 2θ of 4.22°, attributable to the packing of SMPV1, indicates its greater tendency for crystallinity upon increasing the TA temperature. Although the crystallinity increased after TA at 120 °C, the performance deteriorated, possibly because of the overgrowth of SMPV1 crystallites and PC61BM aggregates.
To examine the effect of the TA temperature on the morphology of the active layer, we again employed AFM to probe the surface morphological changes in the blended films (Fig. 6). TA at temperatures above 80 °C resulted in significant changes in the surface morphology. Active layers prepared without TA [Fig. 6(a)] had an RMS roughness of 1.06 nm, while the thermally annealed active layers exhibited nodular features [Fig. 6(f)] with increased RMS roughness upon increasing the temperature. The RMS roughness of the active layer annealed at the optimal TA temperature (80 °C) increased to 2.25 nm [Fig. 6(c)]. Consistent with the UV-Vis absorption spectra and XRD analysis, AFM topographical images [Fig. 6(e)] revealed overgrown domain sizes in the active layers annealed at 120 °C, explaining the decline in device performance after applying these conditions.
We also recorded PL and TRPL spectra to study the effect of TA at various temperatures on the charge dynamics [Fig. S14(a) and (b); ESI]. We measured the PL spectra of SMPV1:PC61BM active layers (processed at various TA temperatures) under the excitation with a 266 nm laser beam [Fig. S14(a); ESI]. The active layer was also subjected to excitation under the light from a green laser at 532 nm, with similar trends [Fig. S14(c); ESI]. Consistent with the AFM images, the PL intensity of the SMPV1:PC61BM active layers increased upon increasing the TA temperature, indicating that the domains in the active layers grew accordingly. Thus, TA provided the opportunity to reach a degree of phase separation and domain sizes favorable for optimal charge transfer. In addition, the optimal molecular miscibility of SMPV1 and PC61BM was reached at the optimal TA temperature of 80 °C. We measured the TRPL spectra of the active layers processed at various annealing temperatures by monitoring the emission at 710 nm under excitation with a 266 nm laser beam. In Fig. S14(b) (ESI), the emission lifetime at 710 nm increased gradually upon increasing the TA temperature, reaching 0.57 ns for the active layer processed at the optimal TA temperature (80 °C), relative to a value of 0.48 ns obtained without TA. From this TRPL analysis, we speculate that the optimal lifetime for efficient charge transfer was obtained after TA at 80 °C.
Charge carrier mobilities under different fabrication conditions have been investigated using the space-charge limited current (SCLC) model. A high charge collection efficiency—and, consequently, a high FF—requires balanced charge carrier mobilities. Fig. S15(a) and (b) with Table S7 (ESI) present the J–V characteristics of electron- and hole-only devices prepared using green solvent mixtures with various Tol contents. After fitting of the dark current to the SCLC model, we obtained electron and hole mobilities for CPME only devices of 3.22 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 1.08 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, with a charge carrier mobility ratio (μe/μh) of 2.98. After using Tol as a co-solvent with different amounts, (μe/μh) decreased to reach 1.13 for a 60:40 ratio, and exhibited much more balanced charge transport properties. Thermal annealing application further enhances the charge carrier mobilities with more balanced carriers close to 1 under the optimized thermal annealing temperature of 80 °C shown in Fig. S16(a) and (b) with Table S8 (ESI).
Because our main goal is commercialization of OPV technology, we must be able to transfer such technology from the laboratory to a realistic larger-scale industrial process. Here, we fabricated large-scale devices having active areas of 1 and 5.5 cm2 by following the same conditions that we had used for small-area (0.1 cm2) processing. Under the optimized conditions of both the co-solvent and TA, active layers were cast from warm solution (60 °C) through spin-coating on ITO followed by deposition of Ca/Al as the top electrode. Fig. 7(a) and (b) display the photovoltaic characteristics and EQE spectra, respectively, of these large-area devices. For the device having the active area of 1 cm2, the PCE reached 6.20% with a value of Jsc of 10.17 mA cm−2, a value of Voc of 0.94 V, and an FF of 64.85%. Increasing the active area to 5.5 cm2 decreased the FF to 47.00%, leading to a PCE of 3.73%, with slight decreases in the values of Voc (to 0.93 V) and Jsc (to 8.54 mA cm−2). Although spin-coating and electrode deposition under vacuum are not favored for large-area OPV fabrication, these results are encouraging for further engineering using our green conditions to fabricate large-area devices. Because our solution must be cast at 60 °C (warm solution), we are now preparing a setup to keep our solution warm while applying other types of large-area fabrication techniques (e.g., slot-die coating). Notably, the highest PCE reported previously for a molecular solar cell fabricated through roll-coating on a flexible large area (1 cm2) under ambient conditions is 1%. Therefore, we believe that our green approach has an excellent chance of significantly improving the performance of large-area devices.

The green solvent CPME is a new candidate for replacing toxic halogenated solvents in the production of efficient molecular solar cells. With CPME alone as a green processing solvent, we achieved a device PCE of 3.13% when employing SMPV1 as the donor material and PC61BM as the acceptor. Because of its low solubility in CPME, we combined various amounts of Tol as a co-solvent with CPME to enhance the solubility of PC61BM, without the need to synthesize new fullerene derivatives. We observed significant improvements in the values of both Jsc and FF when using Tol as a co-solvent for the green solvent CPME. We achieved a PCE of 7% when processing with the optimized green solvent mixture [CPME:Tol; (60:40)]. Using Tol as the co-solvent enhanced the solubility of PC61BM, leading to favorable phase separation and the formation of efficient interpenetrating networks that improved charge transfer. Applying TA was a powerful way to enhance the active layer morphology: we measured a PCE of 8.10% for the device processed using the optimized green solvent mixture and subsequent TA at 80 °C for 10 min. This PCE is the highest ever reported for a molecular solar cell device processed from a green solvent mixture. We also fabricated large-area devices—having areas of 1 and 5.5 cm2—and displaying PCEs of 6.20 and 3.73%, respectively. This study should pave the way toward replacing the toxic halogenated solvents commonly used in the fabrication of molecular solar cells with green solvents—an important step toward scaling up the production of organic solar cells.


We thank the Taiwan Ministry of Science and Technology (102-2221-E-001-029-MY2), the Center for Sustainability Science of Academia Sinica, Taiwan (AS-103-SS-A02), and Academia Sinica, Taiwan (Career Development Award 103-CDA-M01), for financial support; and NanoCore, the Core Facilities for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology at Academia Sinica, Taiwan, for technical support. X-ray beam time was supported by the National Synchrotron Radiation Research Center.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta09626c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017