 DOI: 10.1039/D1TA07617E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 25567-25575


Xiu
Gong
*,

Ting
Wang
,

Guilin
Yin
,

Qiong
Peng
,

Yanli
Chen
,

Xu
Wang
,

Xiaosi
Qi
*,

Yurong
Jiang
,

Zonghao
Liu
,

Yan
Shen
 and 

Mingkui
Wang
*

College of Physics, Guizhou Province Key Laboratory for Photoelectrics Technology and Application, Guizhou University, Guiyang 550025, China. E-mail: xgong@gzu.edu.cn; xsqi@gzu.edu.cn

College of Big Data and Information Engineering, Guizhou University, Guiyang 550025, China

Henan Key Laboratory of Photovoltaic Materials, Henan Normal University, Xinxiang 453007, China

Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, School of Optical and Electronic Information, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430074, China. E-mail: mingkui.wang@mail.hust.eud.cn

Received
5th September 2021
, Accepted 25th October 2021
First published on 26th October 2021
The electron transport layer (ETL) plays a critical role in charge extraction and perovskite thin film growth in planar n–i–p heterojunction perovskite solar cells. Herein, we modulated the nucleation and growth rate of CsPbI3 crystals by using a Mo doping strategy to synthesize high-quality SnO2 crystals as an ETL nano-film in n–i–p heterojunction perovskite solar cells. We revealed that such a nano-film with low surface energy and high roughness induced by Mo doping provides seed-like nucleation sites for CsPbI3 inorganic perovskite growth, leading to improved perovskite film morphology. The charge extraction at the ETL/perovskite interface is also enhanced due to the improved energy level alignment. As a result, a high power conversion efficiency of 17.41% can be achieved under one sun irradiation for a planar n–i–p heterojunction structured CsPbI3 solar cell by using this novel Mo–SnO2 ETL. This work provides a simple pathway to simultaneously modulate CsPbI3 inorganic perovskite crystallization and interfacial charge extraction in planar heterojunction perovskite devices.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are regarded as next generation thin-film photovoltaic technology owing to their super power conversion efficiency (PCE), low cost, and simple fabrication process. Recently, CsPbI3 inorganic perovskites have demonstrated promising potential for high-efficiency PSCs with the advantages of thermodynamic stability and suitable band gap among inorganic perovskites. In the last few years, PCEs of CsPbI3 PSCs have been increased to over 20% by optimizing thin-film growth and phase stability of the CsPbI3 absorber. To obtain high quality CsPbI3 film, several optimizing strategies, such as organic cation surface termination and doping or alloying, have been employed to control the distortion degree of the crystal structure and passivate defects of CsPbI3. Furthermore, the bottom contact layer plays a critical role in the subsequent deposition of perovskite thin films, which directly affects the growth and phase stability of CsPbI3. For example, Steele and co-workers discovered that the use of substrate clamping and biaxial strain could make black-phase CsPbI3 thin films stable at room temperature. Recently, Chen et al. used (adamantan-1-yl)methanammonium as a soft template to squeeze the space for CsPbI3 crystal growth. Benefitting from the strong steric effect offered by the soft template, the nucleation rate of CsPbI3 increased by nearly two orders and regulated the growth rate during the annealing procedure to eventually obtain high-quality CsPbI3 film with micrometer-scale grains. These studies indicated the control of nucleation and growth of CsPbI3 crystals during the crystallization process, and crystal distortions and texture play a significant role in the formation of high-quality and stable CsPbI3 film. Noticeably, the underlying electron-transporting layers (i.e., ETLs) in contact with the perovskite film strongly affect its morphology and crystal quality. Therefore, understanding the microstructure of the underlying ETLs in perovskite photovoltaics is of paramount importance for the subsequent perovskite deposition and enhancement of device efficiency and stability.

Generally, PSCs with excellent surface morphology and remarkable crystallinity can be obtained by modulating the underlayer microstructure and controlling the growth of the perovskite, such as well-distributed mesoporous TiO2, N-doped ZnO nanosheets, or WS2 nanoflakes, as a seeding underlayer for subsequent perovskite film growth, which have been successfully employed in PSCs. These microstructure underlayers with a nanoporous structure or vertical sheets are expected to benefit the infiltration of the perovskite precursor, inducing fast heterogeneous nucleation, and then lead to anomalous grain growth during high-temperature annealing for crystallization. Therefore, fast nucleation and further grain coarsening growth facilitated by sufficient crystal nucleus is considered critical for the preparation of uniform and dense perovskite layers. Furthermore, the underlying ETLs are required to efficiently extract the photogenerated charges from perovskite absorbers for high-efficiency PSCs. Therefore, a suitable ETL should possess well-matched energy bands and superior electron mobility and conductivity to accelerate carrier extraction and transport while facilitating the deposition of high-quality perovskite film.
Thus far, almost all CsPbI3 PSCs with high PCE are based on high-temperature (over 500 °C) processed TiO2 ETLs (Table S1). In comparison, low-temperature (<200 °C) processed ETL candidates like TiO2, ZnO, and SnO2 have exhibited superior performance in planar PSCs and have even been applied in flexible photo-electronics fields. For instance, SnO2 with a wider optical bandgap (3.6–4.0 eV), higher electron mobility, and better stability to UV radiation have been extensively investigated as ETLs in PSCs. Surface modification and/or addition of additives into SnO2 are necessary to reduce the widely observed hysteresis in perovskite devices, which are caused by the inefficient electron transfer at the SnO2/perovskite interfaces due to the residual trap defects that inevitably originated from the low-temperature synthesized SnO2 environment. In addition, doping high-valence metal ions into the SnO2 ETL is also used as an effective strategy for the improvement of the interface state and electronic properties of SnO2, thereby facilitating electron transfer at the ETL/perovskite interface. For example, the carrier transport abilities and photoelectricity properties can be improved by adding Sb5+ into SnO2, leading to suppressed hysteresis and increased device photovoltaic performance. Doping could also improve charge transfer at the ETL/perovskite interface by manipulating the morphology of the ETL. For example, low-temperature synthesized Y3+ doping of the SnO2 ETL promotes the formation of well-aligned and homogeneously distributed SnO2 nanosheet arrays, ensuring a high infiltration of perovskite and improved electron transfer. Yet the relationship between the ETL microstructure and the subsequent film growth has not been explored in detail.
Molybdenum (Mo) has several oxidation states up to Mo6+. It is expected that the conductivity, optical transparency and microstructure of SnO2 can be improved with Mo doping because Mo provides two extra free electrons to the SnO2 lattice, which has been proven in electronic devices. In this work, we report the synthesis of low-temperature Mo-doped SnO2 nanocrystals by an in situ hydrothermal method as an ETL for efficient n–i–p planar-heterojunction CsPbI3 PSCs. Further investigation on the effect of the microstructures of the Mo-doped SnO2 ETL on the morphology and crystallization of CsPbI3 inorganic perovskites reveals that doping Mo into SnO2 nanocrystals improved the charge extraction ability and energy level alignment at the perovskite/SnO2 interface. The champion cell using Mo–SnO2 ETLs achieves a PCE of 17.41%, an open-circuit voltage of 1.11 V, a short-circuit current density of 19.69 mA cm−2, and a fill factor of 79.62%.

SnO2 nanocrystals (NCs) with various Mo doping concentrations (0–1 at%) were synthesized by the hydrothermal method.Fig. 1a and b present the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of well-dispersed Mo–SnO2 NCs with size of 5–7 nm. A clear lattice spacing of 0.335 nm, corresponding to the (110) facet of rutile SnO2, can be observed in the high-resolution TEM image of Mo–SnO2 NCs. Fig. 1c presents the corresponding XRD patterns of Mo–SnO2 which can be indexed to tetragonal rutile SnO2 (JCPDS #71-0652). In comparison with the SnO2 NCs, the Mo–SnO2 film with a low doping ratio exhibits a higher diffraction peak, indicating a slight increase of crystallinity. As for those samples with high doping ratios, at 0.7 at% and 1 at%, for example, a broadened diffraction peak was observed when compared with that of pristine SnO2 (Fig. S1), which indicates a small crystallite size and/or poor crystallinity. This could be caused by the suppression of long-range order formation due to the introduction of excessive heterogeneous atoms (Mo atoms) into the host lattice. Moreover, no additional diffraction peaks ascribed to Mo or Mo oxides were observed, indicating an ignorable disruption of Mo atoms in the SnO2 lattice structure. Fig. S2 shows the energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) mapping of Mo-doped SnO2 film or NCs, further indicating the homogeneous distribution of Mo element. We further performed X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) characterization of the SnO2 films without and with 0.5 at% Mo6+ doping (Fig. S3). The high-resolution Mo 3d spectrum shows two peaks at binding energies of 232.37 eV and 235.42 eV attributed to Mo 3d5/2 and Mo 3d3/2 of Mo6+ in Mo–SnO2 NCs (Fig. 1d). The characteristic peaks of Sn 3d at 486.89 and 495.23 eV shifted to higher binding energies of 487.25 and 195.72 eV in the 0.5 at% Mo6+ doped sample (Fig. S3c), presumably due to the change of electron cloud density surrounding Sn atoms caused by Mo occupying the Sn position. This can be attributed to the partial substitution of Sn4+ ions by Mo6+ ions considering the comparable radii of Sn4+ and Mo6+ ions (0.69 and 0.65 Å, respectively).


Fig. 2(a–e) present the top-view scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of Mo–SnO2 films with variable Mo doping ratios. An island-film composed of nanoparticles varying in size appears in the sample of ITO/SnO2 (Fig. 2a). In contrast, the uniformity of Mo–SnO2 nanoparticles was significantly improved, which may be attributed to the growth induced by incorporating Mo6+ ions. The Mo–SnO2 films with a low doping ratio exhibited uniform and compact film coverage with well-grained nanocrystals. As Mo concentration increases, however, the size of nanocrystals constructing the Mo–SnO2 film gradually becomes smaller, which agrees well with the XRD observation of the gradual decrease of crystallinity of the SnO2 film with Mo6+ doping (Table S2). A similar phenomenon has been previously reported. The microstructure of the Mo–SnO2 films deposited on the ITO substrates was further explored with atomic force microscopy (AFM) characterization. As depicted in Fig. S4, both samples with and without 0.5 at% Mo-doping showed a significant difference in root-mean-square (RMS) roughness. The compact Mo–SnO2 film exhibits a conformal mesoporous-like structure with an RMS roughness of 8.52 nm at 0.5 at% Mo doping, which is double that of the pristine SnO2 (RMS = 4.05 nm). With increasing Mo-doping concentration, the roughness decreases gradually, which is associated with the grain size of the Mo–SnO2 underlayer. The mesoporous-like structure may be ascribed to the clusters of nanocrystals during the annealing process and/or multiple spin-coating preparation processes. The corresponding 3D image of Mo–SnO2 shown in Fig. S5 clearly exhibited the conformal pyramidal-like surface of the mesoporous-like structure.

CsPbI3 film was prepared according to the method reported by Wang et al. In this recipe, DMAI is used as an effective volatile additive, which helps the formation of β-CsPbI3 inorganic perovskite at a relatively low temperature. Nevertheless, some small pinholes are observed within the β-CsPbI3 film, and further surface modification is required to improve PCE, such as application of methyl ammonium chloride (MACl) and phenyltrimethylammonium chloride (PTACl) passivators recently reported in the literature. Herein, we attempted to improve the properties of the CsPbI3 thin film by introducing a Mo-doped SnO2 microstructure by manipulating the crystallization process of the CsPbI3 perovskite film. Fig. 2f–j present the SEM images of CsPbI3 films deposited on these Mo–SnO2 underlayers with different Mo ratios. Multiple pinholes are clearly observed in the CsPbI3 film deposited on the noncontinuous island films of SnO2 (Fig. 2f). Noticeably, the perovskite films on Mo–SnO2 underlayers present similar morphologies and textures, but slightly different grain sizes. When the CsPbI3 films are deposited on Mo–SnO2 ETLs with 0.5 at% Mo doping, full-coverage and pinhole-free perovskite morphologies are achieved, as shown in Fig. 2i. The average grain size of the perovskite film based on a SnO2 ETL with 0.5 at% Mo doping increased from ∼537 to ∼825 nm compared to the perovskite films/SnO2 ETL (see granularity statistics in Fig. S6). This means that the conformal pyramidal-like underlayer yields larger perovskite grain sizes than the flat underlayer.

Effective regulation of nucleation sites and control of crystal growth are regarded as the most crucial factors for high-quality perovskite thin films. According to classical nucleation theory, only when the particle radius r > the critical crystal nucleus r* can the particle exist stably and continue to grow. Then these stable nuclei gradually grow and evolve into a networked microstructure, finally forming a thin film (Fig. S7a). At this moment, sufficient nucleation sites are certainly required for achieving a compact film with complete coverage over the underlying substrate. The free Gibbs energy for heterogeneous nucleation can be expressed as follows.
ΔGheterogenerous = ΔGhomogeneous × f(θ)
(1)
where
f(θ) = (2–3cosθ + cos3θ)/4 and θ (0 < θ < π/2) is the contact angle of the precursor. The parameter f(θ) (0 < f(θ) < 1) decreases with θ. Therefore, a smaller contact angle leads to a reduced energy barrier for heterogeneous nucleation, thereby assisting the nucleation process. Compared to SnO2, 0.5 at% Mo6+ doping shows the smallest contact angle (23.4°, Fig. S8), resulting in the wettability interface for the perovskite, which means that the Mo6+ doping can increase the nucleating rate and prevent the formation of coarse grains. Moreover, the small contact angle of the substrate provides low surface energy, which may contribute to the fabrication of high-quality films with a dense structure. Hence, the surface Mo–SnO2 with a mesoporous-like structure provides sufficient heterogeneous nucleation sites to promote the rapid nucleation of CsPbI3, as depicted in Fig. S7b, which makes the as-prepared perovskite film more compact.

In the grain growth process, based on the theory of Ostwald ripening, the high-temperature annealing process drives the migration of the grain boundaries, resulting in the growth of large grains assisted by dissolution and diffusion of numerous small granules (see dashed yellow lines in Fig. S7a). The volatile DMAI, it should be noted, driving the migration of the grain boundaries may yield inevitable holes in the film, as illustrated in Fig. S7c. Hence, to obtain a dense perovskite film, it is vital to ensure sufficient surface driving force and nucleation sites, that is, numerous small granules diffusing around the grains. Meanwhile, inevitably the grains in the embedded film formed by the sufficient nucleation sites derived from rough surfaces yield many reentrant edges, thereby promoting the fast grain growth and expansion (i.e., anomalous grain growth), as illustrated in Fig. S7b. This anomalous grain growth process induced by the sufficient nucleation sites and mesoporous-like structure of the Mo–SnO2 underlayer, with the temperature increasing and DMAI volatilization, reduce surface energy-driven merging of any residual granules to large grains, leading to the sudden increase of grain size in the embedded film, as observed in the SEM measurements (Fig. 2h). Here, this growth of grains can be further elaborated by the change of the solution concentration – that is, the LaMer mechanism – representing the formation of larger crystals, as long as the concentration of solution is greater than the saturated concentration of solute. During the grain growth process, the level of the concentration of solution is maintained through the evaporation of the solvent and the volatilization of DMAI, which concentrates the perovskite precursor solution and thus accelerates the continuous growth of grains. Thus, by using a rapid heterogeneous nucleation and the anomalous grain growth based on sufficient nucleation sites, the Mo doped SnO2 nano-film providing efficient seed-like sites could promote the formation of a compact perovskite layer with large grains. The perovskite coated on the Mo–SnO2 ETLs with 0.5 at% Mo doping exhibits a larger grain size, better crystallinity (Fig. S9) and full surface coverage, allowing for minimizing the negative impact of oxygen or moisture and improving the long-term stability of the corresponding films and devices.
We further carried out density functional theory (DFT) calculations to understand the heterogeneous growth of CsPbI3 molecules on the Mo–SnO2 and SnO2 substrates. Fig. S10 shows a side view of the optimized geometrical structures for a simplified heterostructure of ETLs and perovskite established by calculating its adhesive energies. The modeling results indicate that the CsBr/PbI2 and PbI2/CsBr configurations, when attached onto the SnO2 substrates, show the lowest adhesive energies of −1.14 and −2.50 eV, respectively. In contrast, on the Mo–SnO2 underlayer, the values of adhesive energy increased to −3.18 and −2.54 eV, respectively, indicating that the relatively easy nucleation of CsPbI3 crystals on the Mo–SnO2 underlayer allows the formation of a more stable perovskite film during the self-assembly process of CsPbI3 molecules. Bader charge calculation was performed to further analyze the electron transfer nature at the ETL/perovskite heterostructure. As illustrated in Fig. 3, the isosurfaces in yellow and blue indicate the accumulation and depletion of charge density in the system, respectively. In comparison, a larger yellow area was observed at the SnO2/perovskite interface, while the yellow region extended into the Mo–SnO2 layer and turned green at the Mo–SnO2/perovskite interface. This result clearly reveals electron transfer from the perovskite into Mo–SnO2 ETLs. From Bader charge calculation, the charge transfer from the Mo–SnO2 molecule to the I atoms of the CsPbI3 crystal structure is 0.038e (Fig. 3b), while a smaller charge transfer of 0.008e is found at the SnO2/perovskite interface. These results are consistent with the larger adsorption energy of Mo–SnO2 as illustrated in Fig. S10. The larger adsorption energy mainly results from stronger charge transfer ability and the tight interaction between Mo–SnO2 and the precursor molecule of CsPbI3.

As shown in Fig. S11 and Table S3, the conductivity of SnO2 increases with the Mo6+ doping ratio up to 0.5 at% and then decreases gradually with more Mo6+ doping, which might have occurred due to the increased scattering of impurity ions caused by further Mo6+ doping. An increased conductivity of the ETL (Mo–SnO2 with 0.5 at% Mo6+) favors reducing the series resistance (Rs) for Mo–SnO2 ETL-based PSC devices. It is well known that Rs in the devices is closely related to output current (J) with the following eqn (2)

(2)
where
Is, IL, k, q, and T are the diode saturation current, current source, Boltzmann constant, elementary charge, and temperature, respectively. The devices based on the Mo–SnO2 ETL with 0.5 at% Mo6+ possess decreased series resistance Rs, which means an increase of J based on eqn (2). Therefore, we selected SnO2 doped with 0.5 at% as an ETL for PSC device fabrication during the following experimental studies. The Mo–SnO2 film with 0.5 at% Mo6+ doping is denoted as Mo5–SnO2 for clarity and brevity. Furthermore, the electron mobility of Mo5–SnO2 was estimated to be 0.75 cm2 V−1 s−1 using the space charge-limited current method (Fig. S12), significantly larger than that of the SnO2 (0.28 cm2 V−1 s−1). The improvement in electron mobility and conductivity provides effective charge transport of Mo–SnO2, which reduces charge accumulation at the ETL/perovskite interface and thus suppresses hysteresis of the PSCs. The ITO glass covered with the pristine SnO2 and Mo5–SnO2 films also exhibited good optical transmittance in the visible light range (Fig. S13), which is beneficial for subsequent perovskite light harvesting. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was employed to detect the influence of the band alignment of the ETL and perovskite after Mo doping (Fig. S14). The Fermi level (EF) of SnO2 and Mo5–SnO2 was calculated to be −4.03 and −3.99 eV (versus vacuum), respectively. The corresponding valence band maximum (EVB) was found to be −8.16 and −7.95 eV, respectively. Therefore, the conduction band minimum (ECB) of SnO2 and Mo–SnO2 was evaluated to be −4.34 and −4.13 eV, respectively. An uplifted ECB of Mo–SnO2 would reduce the band offset at the ETL/perovskite interface under illumination.

Photovoltaic experiments were conducted to evaluate the performance of Mo5–SnO2 ETL-based devices using the planar heterojunction architecture of ITO/ETL/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au. The schematic illustration of the device fabrication process is shown in Fig. 4a. Fig. 4c shows the photocurrent–voltage (J–V) curves of CsPbI3 PSCs using different ETLs under AM 1.5 G conditions (100 mW cm−2), and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. The contrast device based on the pristine SnO2 substrate exhibits a PCE of 15.02% with a lower Voc of 1.04 V, Jsc of 18.85 mA cm−2, and FF of 76.63%. In comparison, the optimum Mo5–SnO2-based PSC yields a high Voc of 1.11 V, FF of 79.62%, and a Jsc of 19.69 mA cm−2, as well as a PCE of 17.41%. Further increasing the Mo doping ratio in SnO2 leads to a decline in the devices' efficiency (Fig. S15 and Table S4). The enhanced PCE could be attributed to the effective electron extraction and high-quality perovskite film caused by the Mo interfacial optimization of SnO2-based ETLs. Fig. 4d shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum of the corresponding PSCs. The integrated photocurrents of 19.57 and 18.78 mA cm−2 are obtained by calculating the EQE spectrum for the devices using SnO2 and Mo5–SnO2, respectively. The enhancement of EQE is consistent with the larger grains of CsPbI3 film based on Mo5–SnO2, indicating that the high-quality compact film favors light absorption (Fig. S16). The devices using Mo5–SnO2 exhibited high reproducibility in PCE (the inset of Fig. 4c). Furthermore, a small photocurrent hysteresis effect in different scan directions was observed in devices using Mo5–SnO2 (Fig. S17). The hysteresis index decreased from 0.054 to 0.015 compared to devices based on SnO2 (Table S5), owing to less charge accumulation at the Mo5–SnO2/perovskite interface as demonstrated by the Bader charge calculation. To precisely study the impact of Mo5–SnO2 ETLs on device stability, ageing tests were performed on the best-performing encapsulated Mo5–SnO2-based devices and control devices under ambient conditions (humidity ≈ 50 RH%), as shown in Fig. S18. In contrast, the Mo5–SnO2-based devices exhibited 85% retention of the initial efficiency after 500 h, while the SnO2-based devices retained only 75% of the initial value. The results demonstrate that the Mo5–SnO2-based PSCs have superior stability, which can be ascribed to the effectiveness of the stable heterostructure of Mo5–SnO2/CsPbI3.
Device

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
SnO2
Average
18.42 ± 0.43
1.00 ± 0.03
75.67 ± 0.86
14.26 ± 0.76
Max
18.85
1.04
76.63
15.02
Mo–SnO2 (0.5 at%)
Average
19.33 ± 0.36
1.09 ± 0.02
79.08 ± 0.54
16.98 ± 0.42
Max
19.69
1.11
79.62
17.41
To investigate the charge extraction and transfer processes of the perovskite/Mo5–SnO2 interface, the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra were measured. As illustrated in Fig. 5a and b, the perovskite/Mo5–SnO2/ITO yielded a stronger PL quenching effect, demonstrating that the Mo5–SnO2 ETL has a higher electron extraction capacity. By a biexponential fitting to the PL decay, the PL lifetimes were determined to be 52.67 and 6.01 ns for the perovskite/SnO2/ITO, respectively, corresponding to τ1 and τ2. Generally, τ1 (slow decay component) reveals the radiative recombination of free charge carriers caused by traps in the bulk, and τ2 (fast decay component) is attributed to charge carrier quenching of the interface. In comparison, when the perovskite is deposited on Mo5–SnO2, both τ1 and τ2 were shortened to 43.93 ns and 3.45 ns, with a decrease of 16.59% and 42.59%, respectively, indicating more efficient electron extraction and few defects within the Mo5–SnO2-based perovskite film. Subsequently, electron-only devices with a configuration of ITO/ETLs/perovskite/PCBM/Ag were fabricated to precisely evaluate the trap density of the perovskite film deposited on SnO2 and Mo5–SnO2 ETLs. The calculated Nt of the perovskite film based on Mo5–SnO2 substrates was 4.96 × 1015 cm−3, which was lower than that (7.43 × 1015 cm−3) of the pristine SnO2-based devices. The decreased Nt is related to the pinhole elimination and crystallinity promotion in the perovskite film.
Electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was conducted to further explore the electronic processes at the ETL/perovskite interface. The resulting frequency analysis shows two semicircles in the Nyquist diagram. The first arc in the high-frequency region is related to the carrier transport process at both electrode interfaces of the devices. The second arc in the intermediate frequency region is assigned to the carrier recombination process at the different interfaces within the devices from which the inner recombination resistance (Rct) can be obtained. For metal electrodes, due to the small transfer resistance (RCE) at high frequencies (rapid charge transfer), the two arcs are usually merged into a compressed semiarc as shown in Fig. 5d. Fig. 5d shows the Nyquist plot results of the devices using different ETLs measured at open circuit under illumination. EIS data were fitted using the equivalent circuit model as shown in the inset of Fig. 5d. In contrast, a lower series resistance (RS) is obtained for the Mo5–SnO2 based device (Fig. 5e), indicating that the modification with Mo is efficient in improving charge transportation. The lower RS might be attributed to the augmented short-circuit current and fill factor of the devices using the Mo5–SnO2 ETL. Furthermore, the Mo5–SnO2-based PSC presents a larger recombination resistance (Rct) compared with SnO2-based PSCs (Fig. 5f), suggesting that the interfacial charge recombination process is slower in the former.

In summary, we have demonstrated a simple solution-processed effective ETL acting as a growth substrate to prepare high-quality CsPbI3 film, and an optimized amount of Mo6+ doped into the pristine SnO2 film provides sufficient nucleation sites, thus facilitating the CsPbI3 nucleation and crystalline growth. As a result, a pinhole-free CsPbI3 film with fewer defects is obtained and the device based on this high-quality perovskite film exhibits a high efficiency of over 17%. The high performance of such PSCs can be attributed to the advantages afforded by the deposition of the perovskite on the Mo–SnO2 ETL, including good crystallinity, larger grain size, improvement of electron extraction ability, and well-matched energy levels, leading to remarkable increases in Jsc and Voc. The Mo doped SnO2 offers a significant possibility to search for high-quality ETL alternatives possessing improved perovskite crystal growth with prospects for high-performance PSCs. This work provides a promising route to control CsPbI3 inorganic perovskite crystallization and to optimize the interfaces for large-scale application of perovskite-based optoelectronic devices.


The etched ITO glass was cleaned using detergent, acetone, ethanol and DI water separately in an ultrasonic bath for 15 min each, and then dried with nitrogen. The ITO substrates underwent an O2 plasma treatment for 5 min before they were used for spin-coating the Mo-doped SnO2 ethanol solution. A Mo–SnO2 ETL with 50 nm thickness was prepared by spin coating a Mo-doped SnO2 solution with different Mo doping ratios at 4000 rpm for 30 s and annealing at a temperature of 100 °C for 30 min in air. This procedure was repeated for two times to control the film thickness, achieving Mo–SnO2 films with variable Mo doping ratios (0, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, and 1 at%). After cooling to room temperature, the samples were treated again with O2 plasma treatment for 5 min and transferred into a glovebox for perovskite deposition. A 0.9 M CsPbI3 perovskite precursor solution was prepared by dissolving CsI, PbI2, and DMAI (1:1:1.2) in DMF. Then, 35 μL of perovskite precursor was dripped onto the SnO2 layer and spin-coated at 3000 rpm for 30 s. 72.3 mg mL−1 spiro-OMeTAD (Lumtec) solution in chlorobenzene with 28.8 μL TBP and 17.5 μL Li-TFSI/acetonitrile (520 mg mL−1) was spin-coated on the perovskite films at 4000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, a 100 nm gold (mask area of 12.25 mm2) counter electrode was thermally deposited under vacuum at 2 × 10−6 Torr.

The details of the characterization of materials and devices are provided in the ESI.

X. G. conducted the device fabrication and prepared the manuscript. T. W. and G. Y. synthesized the materials and measured the device performance. Q. P. performed the DFT calculations. Y. C. and Y. J. performed the TEM, SCLC, and SEM measurements. X. Q and X. W. helped with data analysis. Z. L. and Y. S revised the manuscript. M. W. guided and supervised the whole study. All authors contributed to the discussion.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors acknowledge financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 22005071 and 21975088), the Natural Science Special (Special Post) Research Foundation of Guizhou University (no. 2020-13), the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2019YFE0101300), the National Natural Science Foundation of China Major International (Regional) Joint Research Project (No. 51961165106), and the cultivation programs of the Research Foundation of Guizhou University (no. 2019-64).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta07617e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021