 DOI: 10.1039/D2CP02201J
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2022, 24, 18896-18904


Cong
Zhang
,

Xingtian
Yin
*,

Yuxiao
Guo
,

Haixia
Xie
,

Dan
Liu
 and 

Wenxiu
Que
*

Electronic Materials Research Laboratory, Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education & International Center for Dielectric Research, Shaanxi Engineering Research Center of Advanced Energy Materials and Devices, School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, Shaanxi, P. R. China. E-mail: xt_yin@mail.xjtu.edu.cn; wxque@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Received
15th May 2022
, Accepted 19th July 2022
First published on 1st August 2022
Due to their low cost, tunable band gap and excellent thermostability, all-inorganic halide perovskites CsPbX3 (X = Br, I) have become a kind of promising photovoltaic material. However, compared to the organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells, the performance of CsPbX3 solar cells still needs to be improved. In this work, for the first time, we applied the sol–gel derived amorphous InGaZnO4 film as electron transport layers (ETLs) in CsPbX3-based devices. In these devices, the carbon electrode deposited by screen printing replaced the unstable hole transport layer and the expensive metal electrode to obtain hole transport free carbon-based devices, which significantly simplifies the preparation process and reduces the production cost. With the application of amorphous InGaZnO4 films, devices show a relatively high power conversion efficiency (9.07%) and excellent thermal stability. Compared with the reported CsPbX3 devices using SnO2 or TiO2 ETLs, the performance of amorphous InGaZnO4 based devices has been significantly improved. This work provides a promising route to prepare highly thermally stable all-inorganic perovskite solar cells using a-IGZO films.

Due to their low cost, tunable band gap and outstanding optical-electrical properties, perovskite thin films have been widely used in photoelectric devices in recent years: e.g., solar cells, lasers, photodetectors, and light-emitting diodes. The development of perovskite based solar cells (PSCs) is particularly remarkable. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of single-junction PSCs has increased from 3.8% to 25.5%, and the champion PCE of the perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell has already exceeded 29%. Nevertheless, the instability of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites (OIHPs) at elevated temperature or humidity severely limits their practical application, which is mainly caused by the volatility and hygroscopicity of organic cations, such as CH3NH3+ (MA+) and CH3(NH2)2+ (FA+). Compared with OIHPs, all-inorganic halide perovskites (AIHPs) are more stable at high temperatures, which makes them compatible with commercial solar cell packaging technologies, thus they have attracted widespread attention over the world. Due to their appropriate ion radius, Cs+ ions are used to substitute the organic cations at the A site in the ABX3 structure of perovskite. Among the CsPbIxBr3−x group, the value of x can tune the band gap and stability of the perovskites: one extreme is CsPbBr3, which is a widely studied all-inorganic perovskite material with excellent environmental stability. However, the large band gap (∼2.3 eV) seriously limits its absorption of incident light. The other extreme is CsPbI3, which has a narrow band gap (∼1.73 eV) and can absorb more incident sunlight, but it can only exist stably at high temperature (>300 °C, otherwise, it will change from the black perovskite α-phase to the yellow non-perovskite β-phase). Therefore, a trade-off between band gap and stability must be considered, and mixed halide perovskites such as CsPbIBr2 and CsPbI1.2Br1.8 are frequently employed.

With the increasing attention on all-inorganic PSCs, more and more device performance improvement strategies have been proposed, and the performance of all-inorganic PSCs still needs to be further improved. The main improvement strategies can be divided into two categories: one is the optimization of the perovskite layer, including the exploration of new deposition methods and the doping or mixing of perovskite films; the other is the optimization of carrier transport layers, which is the study of the hole transport layer (HTL) and the electron transport layer (ETL) suitable for CsPbX3 thin films. For the HTL, Spiro-OMeTAD and copper(II) phthalocyanine (CuPc) are often selected because of their easy fabrication and favorable band alignment with CsPbX3. However, due to the high cost and negative impact on the device stability of Spiro-OMeTAD, hole transport free carbon-based devices have attracted extensive attention. These kinds of devices not only greatly reduce the production cost, but also improve the environmental stability of the devices. As for the ETL, a variety of crystalline wide bandgap semiconductors including SnO2, TiO2, ZnO and In2O3 have been employed. In 2020, for example, devices based on compact TiO2 (c-TiO2) ETLs usually showed a PCE in the range of 6.55% to 8.60%. The more complex c-TiO2/mesoporous TiO2 (m-TiO2) double layer ETL also show a similar PCE up to 8.25%. While the modification of the c-TiO2/CsPbIBr2 heterojunction interface using CsBr clusters can improve the PCE to 10.71%. As a common ETL material, SnO2 can only obtain a highest PCE of 4.36% or 4.73% in carbon-based CsPbIBr2 solar cells, but the surface passivation of the SnO2 layer with SnCl2 can improve the champion PCE to 7%. Therefore, research on novel ETLs that match the energy band of the CsPbX3 layer is still a widely investigated topic.
In this paper, we try to employ sol–gel derived amorphous InGaZnO4 (a-IGZO) thin films as the ETL for hole transport free CsPbI1.2Br1.8 solar cells with carbon electrodes. A-IGZO thin films which originate from the doping of ZnO thin films have been frequently employed as the channel material in the field of thin film field effect transistors (TFTs). The unique advantage of a-IGZO films is that although IGZO films usually exist as amorphous oxides due to the doping of In3+ and Ga3+, they still exhibit electrical properties comparable to those of crystalline oxide films. For amorphous oxide films, they are not disturbed by the destruction of long-range ordering, so they can still maintain excellent uniformity and electrical performance at high temperatures, which is beneficial to the improvement of the thermal stability of the devices. In addition, amorphous oxides do not have inter-lattice voids, so they are suitable for flexible devices and large-scale preparation, which is in line with the development direction of perovskite solar cells. The excellent electrical performance of a-IGZO thin films benefits from the high-speed electron transport channel formed by the outermost electrons of In3+, which is hardly affected by the lattice disorder. Therefore, a-IGZO thin films can take into account the advantages of crystalline and amorphous oxides, and can simultaneously meet the requirements of all-inorganic perovskite solar cells for the electrical properties and thermal stability of the ETL. As a result, our device exhibits the champion PCE of 9.07%, and this value can be maintained without degradation even after being stored in a glovebox at 85 °C for up to 89 hours, which demonstrates its long-term thermal stability. Compared with devices with SnO2, c-TiO2 or c-TiO2/m-TiO2 ETLs, the PCE and thermostability of the a-IGZO based device are greatly improved. Considering that a-IGZO thin films with large area and good uniformity can be deposited by a variety of mature methods, the successful application of a-IGZO thin films in CsPbX3-based solar cells will play an important role in the preparation of large-area, high-performance and high-stability solar cells.

All materials and reagents, including indium nitrate hydrate (In(NO3)3·4.5H2O, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd), gallium nitrate (Ga(NO3)3, kaerma), zinc acetate dehydrate (C4H6O4Zn·2H2O, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd), ethylene glycol monomethyl (C3H8O2, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd), ethanolamine (C2H7NO, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd), cesium iodide (CsI, Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Corp.), lead bromide (PbBr2, Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Corp.), and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, Alfa-Aesar) were used as received without purification.

Glass-ITO substrates with a sheet resistance of ∼15 Ω s g−1 were purchased from Yingkou OPV tech new energy Co., Ltd. Conductive carbon paste was obtained from Shanghai MaterWin New Materials Co., Ltd.

Etched glass-ITO substrates were ultrasonically treated in deionized water, acetone and ethanol for 15 min successively, and preserved in ethanol. All substrates were dried with nitrogen and treated with UV-ozone cleaner for 15 min before use.

A-IGZO thin films were prepared by the sol–gel method. Zinc acetate dihydrate, gallium nitrate hydrate and indium nitrate hydrate were dissolved in ethylene glycol monomethyl in proportion, and ethanolamine was added as the stabilizer. The solution was stirred on a hot plate at 70 °C for 1 hour and stirred overnight at room temperature. The prepared precursor solution was filtered with a 0.22 μm syringe filter and spin-coated on the ITO glass substrates at 4000 rpm for 30 s. The deposited wet films were baked on a hot plate at 120 °C for 10 min and then annealed at different temperatures (250–450 °C) for 3 h in a muffle furnace. To deposit the CsPbI1.2Br1.8 films, CsI (0.5196 g), PbBr2 (0.6606 g) and PbI2 (0.0922 g) were first dissolved in DSMO (2 ml) at room temperature to prepare the precursor, which was then spin coated on different substrates at 1500 rpm for 20 s and 5000 rpm for 60 s. Subsequently, the films were baked at 35 °C and 280 °C for 15 s and 10 min, respectively. Then, the carbon electrodes were deposited by screen printing the commercial carbon paste, followed by baking at 120 °C for 15 min to dry the solvent in the carbon paste.

XRD analysis was employed to characterize the crystalline properties by using a D/max-2400 XRD spectrometer (Rigaku, Japan) with Cu Ka radiation. The absorption spectra of the samples were obtained by a JASCO V-670 UV-vis-NIR spectrometer. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was carried out on an ESCALAB Xi+ system (Thermo Fisher, USA). The surface and cross-section morphologies of the samples were characterized by an SEM (JSM-6390, JEOL Inc., Japan). AFM was carried out with an Innova AFM (Santa Barbara, CA USA) in tapping mode. The J–V curves measurements of the devices were conducted in air using a PVIV-201V I–V Station (Newport Oriel), while the illumination source was pre-calibrated by using a Si reference cell system (91150 V, Newport). A Qtest Station 1000ADX system (Growntech. Inc.) was employed to measure the EQE spectra of the devices. Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were recorded using a CHI660E electrochemical workstation (Chenhua, China).



Fig. 1(a) shows the XRD patterns of a-IGZO films coated on ITO glass substrates with different annealing temperatures, in which the XRD pattern for the bare ITO glass substrate is also included for comparison. It can be seen that all the diffraction peaks belong to the ITO substrate, and no obvious characteristic peak for crystalline IGZO can be observed no matter what the annealing temperature is, indicating that a-IGZO thin films exhibit an excellent ability to maintain an amorphous state in a wide annealing temperature range. This shows the most fundamental difference between the a-IGZO film and mainstream ETL materials (SnO2, c-TiO2, ZnO, etc.): the annealing process is not limited by the minimum crystallization temperature of materials, which provides the possibility for the development of low-temperature processes and flexible devices. Since the incident light enters the device from the side of the ETL, the transmittance of the ETL in the visible region directly affects the absorption of the incident light for the device. As shown in Fig. 1(b), the a-IGZO films with different annealing temperatures have a very similar transmittance spectrum to that of bare ITO glass, except for a slight shift of peak valley for the samples annealed at 350 °C and 450 °C, which should be ascribed to the change of surface morphologies for the different samples. All the samples exhibit transmittance above 80% in most visible light regions, which benefits the utilization of incident light in the device.

The electrical properties of a-IGZO films are mainly determined by the high-speed electron transmission channel formed by the overlapping of the 5s orbits of the outermost electrons of In3+ ions, which is not affected by the lattice disorder. Therefore, the content of In3+ ions will affect the electrical properties of the a-IGZO film directly. By means of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), we analyzed the elemental composition of the deposited a-IGZO films, and the elemental ratio of In, Ga, Zn and O is presented in Table 1. The a-IGZO film annealed at 250 °C has the lowest In content of 6.63%. As the annealing temperature increases, In content increases rapidly to 10.90% (350 °C) at first and then decreases slightly to 10.29% (450 °C). In addition, the content of oxygen vacancy defects also affects the electron transport ability of the a-IGZO films.Fig. 1(c) shows the O1s XPS spectra and their peak fitting curves. In a-IGZO films, O1s can be divided into fully bonded oxygen atoms in the M–O–M lattice (530.1 eV) and oxygen atoms near oxygen vacancies (531.5 eV). The ratios of the integrated area for the peaks at 531.5 eV and 530.1 eV are 1.16, 0.96, and 0.86 for the samples annealed at 250 °C, 350 °C and 450 °C, respectively, which indicates that the content of oxygen vacancy defects in the a-IGZO films increases with the increase of annealing temperature. Besides, an additional peak at 533.3 eV is also observed for the 250 °C annealed a-IGZO film, which should be ascribed to the residual organic components from the precuror. In order to visually characterize the electrical properties of a-IGZO thin films with different annealing temperatures, we have prepared thin film field effect transistors (TFTs, the device structure diagram is shown in Fig. S1(a), ESI) with a-IGZO thin films as active layers and plotted the I1/2DS–VGS curves, from which the field effect mobility of the film can be derived. As shown in Fig. S1(b) (ESI), the slopes of the I1/2DS–VGS curves in the saturation region of a-IGZO TFTs with different annealing temperature active layers (250, 350, 450 °C) are 0.93, 4.34 and 2.83 (× 10−6), respectively. It can be seen that the field effect carrier mobilities of the a-IGZO films annealed at 350 and 450 °C are significantly higher than that annealed at 250 °C, and the film annealed at 350 °C has the best electrical properties. The results of this test corroborate the above analysis of the XPS data. Fig. 1(d)–(i) show the SEM images and corresponding 3d-AFM images for a-IGZO films annealed at different temperatures. The average root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of ITO glass used in this work is about 3–5 nm. After the deposition of a-IGZO films, the surfaces become smoother due to the filling of valleys among ITO grains. Since the annealing temperature affects the formation of a-IGZO films, we obtained the smallest root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 1.893 nm on the sample annealed at 350 °C, which is consistent with the morphology shown in the SEM images.
Annealing temperature (°C)
In proportion (%)
Ga proportion (%)
Zn proportion (%)
O proportion (%)
250
6.63
37.85
13.13
42.39
350
10.90
31.60
10.78
46.72
450
10.29
32.69
9.49
47.54
In this work, CsPbI1.2Br1.8 films were deposited by a preheating assisted one-step spin-coating method. Fig. 2(a)–(c) show the SEM images of the CsPbI1.2Br1.8 films deposited on a-IGZO with different annealing temperatures. It is obvious that the employed deposition process basically avoids the appearance of pin-holes, which results in CsPbI1.2Br1.8 films with high surface coverage and good uniformity. No obvious morphology difference can be seen from the CsPbI1.2Br1.8 films deposited on different a-IGZO films. The crystal structure of the CsPbI1.2Br1.8 thin film was analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD). As shown in Fig. 2(e), the diffraction peaks at 15.5°, 21.8°, 30.8° and 37.8° correspond to the (100), (110), (200) and (211) crystal planes of the CsPbI1.2Br1.8 perovskite respectively. Compared with the CsPbI1.2Br1.8 films deposited on 250 °C and 450 °C annealed a-IGZO films, the film deposited on 350 °C annealed a-IGZO films exhibits a higher diffraction intensity, indicating better crystallinity. Fig. 2(d) shows the absorption spectra for the different films, where no obvious difference can be observed for the different samples, indicating a similar absorption in the visible region. The absorption edges of the CsPbI1.2Br1.8 films are ∼600 nm, corresponding to an optical band gap of ∼2.07 eV, which is consistent with previous reports.
The deposited perovskite films were employed to fabricate hole transport layer free solar cells with a structure of ITO/a-IGZO/CsPbI1.2Br1.8/C. Fig. 3(a) and (b) present the cross-sectional SEM images of the device. The carbon electrode is uniform with an average thickness of ∼10 μm. The CsPbI1.2Br1.8 absorber with a thickness of ∼230 nm is in close contact with the carbon electrode. The energy band alignment diagram of the device shown in Fig. 3(c) proves that the a-IGZO/CsPbI1.2Br1.8 interface can extract the photogenerated electrons efficiently, which confirms the rationality of the device design. Fig. 3(d) shows the PCE distribution of devices with different a-IGZO films measured under AM 1.5 simulated sunlight, where each set of data was obtained from 8 devices. We obtained the highest average PCE of 8.41% on the devices based on the a-IGZO film annealed at 350 °C, which should be attributed to their favorable electrical properties and surface morphology. Since the a-IGZO film annealed at 250 °C not only contains organic residuals, but also has lower conductivity due to the low In3+ ion content and low oxygen vacancy defect density, the resulting devices exhibit the lowest average PCE of 5.57%. This can be further explained by the electrochemical impedance spectrum (EIS) characterization shown in Fig. 3(e), and the simplified equivalent circuit model is shown as the inset. Although the series resistance (Rs) and electron transport resistances (Rtr) are similar for the devices based on 350 °C and 450 °C annealed a-IGZO films, the former has a much larger carrier recombination resistance (Rrec, 1331 vs. 456.9 Ω), leading to the reduced recombination of photo-generated carriers. The device based on the 250 °C annealed a-IGZO film has the largest Rs and Rtr among them, which are consistent with its relatively poor electrical properties revealed by the XPS analysis, hence leading to the poorest device performance.

Fig. 4(a) exhibits the J–V curve for the champion device using the 350 °C annealed a-IGZO film as the ETL. It exhibits an impressive PCE of 9.07%, together with an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.23 V, a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 13.60 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.54. It is noticed that these parameters are very close to the performance for the device with a structure of ITO/a-IGZO/CsPbI1.2Br1.8/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au, as demonstrated by the J–V curve and EQE spectrum shown in Fig. S2 (ESI). Besides, a comparison of the device performance parameters is also provided in Table S1 (ESI). The main performance parameters of carbon-based CsPbIBr2 devices reported in the last two years are listed in Table S2 (ESI). It can be seen that our a-IGZO ETL is in the second place in the table. The corresponding external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum and integral current density as a function of wavelength are presented in Fig. 4(b). The generation of photocurrent starts at 600 nm, which is consistent with the absorption starting point of the UV-vis absorption spectrum of the CsPbI1.2Br1.8 film. In order to explore the thermal stability of the device, we put 11 devices on an 85 °C hot plate in a glove box, and tested their performances over time. The average normalized PCEs for the devices over time are shown in Fig. 4(c). It can be seen that the devices show excellent thermal stability, and the PCEs even increase slightly after being kept at 85 °C for 89 hours. Fundamentally, the excellent thermal stability of the device benefits from the thermal stability of the CsPbI1.2Br1.8 films deposited according to the process employed here, and the design of HTL free and the selection of a-IGZO ETL further enhance the thermal stability of the device. The HTL free design avoids the use of complex organic hole transport materials, and the carbon electrodes prepared using a screen printing method have a stable performance under baking. With its unique amorphous structure, the a-IGZO thin film will not deteriorate its uniformity and electrical properties due to the influence of temperature on the lattice gap. For the phenomenon that the device performance is slightly improved during the long-term annealing process, we make the following explanation: for all-inorganic perovskites, long-time baking may improve the device performance in two aspects, one is to improve the quality of the film, the other is to optimize the interface contact. This phenomenon has also been reported in other carbon-based all-inorganic solar cells. However, because this process takes too long and the improvement range is too small, it has no practical significance to improve the performance of the device, so we have not explored this phenomenon more deeply. These results suggest that the thermal stability of the a-IGZO-based CsPbI1.2Br1.8 device is much better than that of SnO2-based CsPbI1.2Br1.8 solar cells and a-IGZO-based MAPbI3 devices in the literature.

In summary, this work uses sol–gel derived a-IGZO films as ETLs for CsPbI1.2Br1.8 solar cells for the first time, and reports a kind of hole transport layer free carbon-based all-inorganic perovskite solar cells with high efficiency, high thermal stability and low production costs. Experimental results demonstrate that the a-IGZO thin film annealed at 350 °C exhibits favorable electrical properties and surface morphology for the device application, based on which the champion PCE of 9.07% is achieved. Besides, the a-IGZO thin film-based CsPbI1.2Br1.8 solar cell exhibits excellent thermal stability, with no PCE degradation after the 89 hour thermal stability test at 85 °C. This work demonstrates a promising alternative for ETLs to fabricate high efficiency CsPbX3 solar cells with outstanding thermal stability.


All data that support the findings of this study are included within the article (and any supplementary files).


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


This work was funded by the Natural Science Foundation of Shaanxi Province (2020JZ-04) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61774122). The SEM work was conducted at the International Center for Dielectric Research.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cp02201j
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2022