 DOI: 10.1039/C0JM01049A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7800-7806

Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical Terms


Shun-Wei
Liu
,

Chih-Chien
Lee
,

Chi-Feng
Lin
,

Jia-Cing
Huang
,

Chin-Ti
Chen
* and 

Jiun-Haw
Lee
*

Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan 11529, Republic of China. E-mail: cchen@chem.sinica.edu.tw; Fax: +886 2 27831237; Tel: +886 2 27898542

Department of Electronic Engineering, National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taipei, Taiwan 10607, Republic of China

Graduate Institute of Photonics and Optoelectronics, Department of Electrical Engineering, Taipei, Taiwan 10617, Republic of China. E-mail: jhlee@cc.ee.ntu.edu.tw

Received
15th April 2010
, Accepted 23rd June 2010
First published on
5th August 2010

A stable exciton-blocking layer (EBL) with rigid ball-like 4-hydroxy-8-methyl-1,5-naphthyridine aluminium chelate (AlmND3) has been newly developed for organic photovoltaics (OPVs) based on a double-heterostructure of pentacene/C60/EBL. Unlike the common EBL materials, such as tris-(8-hydroxyquinoline)aluminium (Alq3) and bathocuproine (BCP), AlmND3 exhibits a relatively high electron mobility (∼10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 at the electric field of 6.4 × 105 V cm−1) and a wide band gap energy (∼3.3 eV) in addition to a high glass transition temperature (Tg ∼ 194 °C). Having such EBL between active region (pentacene/C60) and the metal cathode, pristine device performances were comparable with those of BCP-based OPV due to its high mobility and wide band gap energy. Moreover, due to its significantly higher Tg than that of BCP, an extended lifetime performance was observed for AlmND3-based OPV, compared with the BCP-based OPV aged at the elevated temperature of 75 °C.

Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) have attracted much attention because of their ease of fabrication, low-cost production, and mechanical flexibility. Since the first report on a double-heterostructure (DH) by Peumans and coworkers in 2000, OPVs with power conversion efficiency (ηPC) as high as 2.4% ± 0.3% under AM1.5 illumination have been achieved. Such a device structure consists of an organic donor–acceptor (D–A) heterojunction of copper phthalocyanine (CuPc)–fullerene (C60), and an exciton-blocking layer (EBL) of bathocuproine (BCP) inserted between the acceptor material and the metal cathode. In recent years, several studies have demonstrated that the introduction of organic functional EBL in OPVs can enhance the device performance significantly. Examples include bathophenanthroline (BPhen), tris(8-hydroxy-quinolinato)aluminium (Alq3), CuPc, bipyridyl-substituted oxadiazole, and tris(acetylacetonato)ruthenium (Ru(acac)3). Such EBLs prevent the active layer from being damaged in the vacuum thermal-deposition process of the metal electrode. It also increases the built-in electric field and eliminates the metal-induced charge-transfer state of C60 in exciton quenching. Furthermore, with optimized layer thickness, EBL can be used as the optical spacer, greatly enhancing the light absorption at the D–A interface and hence the efficiency of the devices. Although BCP's high electron mobility (∼10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 at electric field of 6.4 × 105 V cm−1) effectively reduces the serial resistance and blocks the excitons (large band gap energy of 3.5 eV and low HOMO energy level of 6.5 eV below the vacuum level), it is prone to crystallization in the solid state which impairs device lifetime. To improve the reliability of devices, Song and coworkers have shown that the lifetime of CuPc/C60/EBL OPVs can be significantly extended more than 20 times when Alq3 is used as EBL. The improved device lifetime has been attributed to the Alq3 EBL with rigid ball-like structure, high glass transition temperature (Tg ∼ 175 °C), and its stable amorphous phase, which is expected to be more effective in protecting C60 from damage. Unfortunately, the ηPC of OPV with an Alq3 EBL is far from satisfactory because of its low electron mobility (∼10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1 at electric field of 6.4 × 105 V cm−1) and its relatively small band gap energy (2.8 eV). In our previous work, an Alq3 derivative, tris(4-hydroxy-8-methyl-1,5-naphthyridinate)aluminium (AlmND3), was synthesized and characterized for the application as an organic light-emitting diode (OLED). We have demonstrated that AlmND3 is a high performance material for nondopant deep blue OLEDs because of its wide band gap energy, high electron mobility, and high morphological stability as well. With properties like these, AlmND3 is perfectly suitable for an EBL in OPV for achieving high efficiency and long lifetime.

Herein, we report three EBL-containing OPVs, Device A (Alq3 as the EBL), Device B (AlmND3 as the EBL), and Device C (BCP as the EBL). We used pentacene/C60 as D–A active heterojunction to illustrate our purpose (Fig. 1). Upon thermal aging at 75 °C for 1 h, atomic force microscopy (AFM) reveals that the BCP thin film has become aggregated and rough compared with the amorphous and smooth ones obtained for AlmND3 or Alq3. Such changes in thin film morphology result in the rugged interface directly affecting the device efficiency and stability. As the required features for EBL materials in OPVs, a wide band gap energy (∼3.3 eV), efficient electron transport property (∼10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 at an electric field of 6.4 × 105 V cm−1), and high Tg (∼196 °C), warrant high performance OPVs based on AlmND3 as a new EBL material.

Energy level as well as charge carrier mobility of the EBL are two important parameters for small molecular OPVs in terms of the ηPC.Fig. 1 shows the chemical structure and energy level diagram of pentacene, C60, and three different EBL materials, BCP, Alq3, and AlmND3. Here, the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy of materials was determined from ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy measurements. The lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy was determined as the lowest photoexcitation state energy from the on-set absorption energy in the absorption spectra of the material in the solid state. The determined band gap energies of the EBLs are 2.8 eV, 3.3 eV, and 3.5 eV for Alq3, AlmND3, and BCP, respectively. Thus, an estimation for the LUMO energy of each EBL material can be obtained by subtracting the peak energy of optical absorption from the HOMO energy. We note that the LUMO energy levels obtained in this manner are much lower than the vacuum level because of the binding energy of the exciton created by optical excitation. Compared with another technique, our values of energy gap and LUMO energy level for Alq3 are rather similar to those reported perviously. The LUMO energy level determined by HOMO energy level plus optical band gap is valid for a relative comparison of the energy levels of a given set of organic materials. Wide band gap EBLs, such as BCP and AlmND3, can block excitons passing through. Low HOMO energy level EBLs, such as BCP and AlmND3 can prevent hole carrier from transporting to the cathode. In Fig. 1, the LUMO energy level of each EBL is sufficiently high to block an electron. However, the ready collection of charge carriers in the device suggests that the electron transport across such EBL mainly occurs via damage-induced defect sites during the deposition of the metal electrode.


Fig. 2 shows the absorption coefficients (α) of the three EBL thin films on a quartz substrate. The absorption coefficients of pentacene and C60 are also shown in the figure. Compared with BCP and Alq3, the AlmND3 thin film has relatively low absorption coefficients in the solar spectrum from 400 to 800 nm. The absorption of AlmND3 peaks in the UV region at 340 nm (α = 0.41 × 105 cm−1). It is also important to note that the AlmND3 thin film shows an on-set energy in the UV region at around 375 nm, giving an optical band gap energy of Eg = 3.3 eV (see Fig. 1). These spectroscopic results suggest that the AlmND3 EBL does not affect the photocurrent generated at the D–A active region and it is ideal to serve as an EBL as well as an optical spacer in maximizing optical field at the D–A heterojunction in OPVs.

Electrical characteristics of a standard device (ITO/pentacene/C60/EBL/Al) incorporating three different EBL materials of Alq3 (Device A), AlmND3 (Device B) or BCP (Device C) were analyzed under simulated AM 1.5G solar with illumination intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (Fig. 3a) and in the dark (Fig. 3b). The adjusted photocurrent (being subtracted from the dark current shown in Fig. 3b) is also shown in the inset of Fig. 3a for comparison. The data of short-circuit current (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), shunt resistance (RSH), series resistance (RS), and ηPC are summarized in Table 1. As evident from the data, the device performance (JSC, VOC, and FF) of AlmND3 OPV (Device B) is very similar to that of BCP OPV (Device C). The same ηPC, 1.27%, has been determined for OPVs having either AlmND3 or BCP as the EBL. Both efficiencies are much higher than that of Device A (Alq3 as EBL) (ηPC 0.65%). We attribute the relatively high ηPC obtained for AlmND3—or BCP—based OPV to the reduced RS and the elevated RSH, where the high electron mobility and the good hole blocking ability (low HOMO energy level) of the EBL are necessary.

Device, EBL

J

SC
/ mA cm−2

V

OC
/ V

FF/ %

R

SH
/ Ω cm2

R

S
/ Ω cm2

η

PC
/ %

a Values can not be accurately determined due to relatively flat current density curves.

A, Alq3
5.43
0.39
30
170
32.69
0.65
(1.26)
(0.40)
(26)
(—)
 (—)
(0.14)
B, AlmND3
6.18
0.40
51.2
520
9.55
1.27
(4.03)
(0.40)
(33)
(207)
(56.4)
(0.56)
C, BCP
6.01
0.40
52
630
7.88
1.27
(0.1)
(0.40)
(29)
 (—)
(—)
(0.01)
Regarding the function of the EBL, Peumans and Forrest have demonstrated exciton diffusion blocking and preventing PV layer from damage due to the cathode metal deposition in double-heterostructure OPVs. The similar functions of the EBL have been shown for Alq3 by Song et al. These results have illustrated that the introducing of the EBL between PV layers and the cathode is quite important for small molecular OPV to enhance the device efficiency. AlmND3 is a potentially effective EBL because of its large band-gap energy and high electron mobility similar to that of BCP. The spectral dependence of the incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) of the standard device with three EBL materials (Device A Alq3, Device B AlmND3, and Device C BCP) measured under lower light intensities is plotted in Fig. 4.
The Device C shows the typical photocurrent response of pentacene layer with a maximum IPCE of 35% at 664 nm and 36.4% at 460 nm, accordant with results in literature. Such photocurrent responses are quite similar in all three devices. Checking the wavelength at the visible absorption maximum at 464 nm of C60 (Fig. 2), we observed very similar IPCE values of 36 and 37% for the Device B and Device C, respectively, but a significantly different IPCE value of ∼30% for Device A. Clearly, excitons generated in the pentacene layer have a similar contribution to the photocurrent in all three devices; excitons generated in the C60 layer have less of a contribution in Device A due to the exciton diffusion loss to adjacent Alq3 EBL. This is consistent with the fact that both BCP and AlmND3 EBLs have a larger band gap energy than Alq3 EBL. In the three OPV devices studied herein, we can reasonably assume that the heterostructure between C60 and the EBL contributes little to the exciton dissociation due to the unfavorable alignment of the energy levels: the LUMO level of EBL is too high to accept an electron and the HOMO level of C60 is too low to accommodate a hole. On the other hand, BCP and AlmND3 have a similarly high electron mobility that possibly facilitates electron transport through the EBL. These assumptions are accordant with the increased Jsc of the AlmND3- or BCP-based devices compared with that of Alq3-based device. We note the degree of gap states of the EBL induced by cathode metal deposition possibly affects the conductivity of different EBLs. However, due to the difficulty in the preparation of such samples for time-of-flight (TOF) photocurrent examination, this hypothesis was not immediately verifiable.
By TOF photocurrent measurement, BCP and AlmND3 have relatively high electron mobility (μe) of about 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is significantly higher than μe ∼ 8 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1 of Alq3 at the same electric field of 6.4 × 105 V cm−1 (Fig. 5). The low carrier mobility of the EBL may impair the OPV performance due to the inadequacy of the photogenerated electron being transported to the cathode. In terms of electron mobility, AlmND3 and BCP have much better performance than the well known electron transporting Alq3. This is consistent with the fact that the OPV with the Alq3 EBL has the lowest dark current in the forward bias flat band region out of the three devices (see Fig. 3b). On the other hand, at a bias of 0 V, JSC is reduced by 11% from 6.18 mA cm−2 in Device B and C to 5.43 mA cm−2 in Device A as shown in Fig. 3a. In contrast, at a bias of −1 V, the photocurrents are rather similar in each device (7.0 ± 0.2 mA cm−2). The changing slope in the forward bias region of the photocurrent or dark current of Alq3 EBL (Device A) may be the result of poor hole blocking performance of the materials, vide infra. We compared the adjusted photocurrent for each of the EBLs at 0.5 to −1 V (see the inset of Fig. 3a). The different voltage dependence of the photocurrent implies that Alq3 has more electron deep traps than BCP or AlmND3, which is detrimental to the photocurrent of devices.
As it is well known in the equivalent model of OPV,RSH may account for the charge-recombination loss or current leakage near electrode; RS is inversely proportional to the conductivity, i.e. the carrier mobility of the specific charge transport property in the respective medium. One can note that RSH and RS of Device B and C are quite similar, i.e. (RSH, RS) = (520, 9.55 Ω cm2) and (630, 7.88 Ω cm2), respectively. On the other hand, RSH and RS of Device A is 170 and 32.69 Ω cm2, respectively, which are quite different from those of Device B and C. This is one of detrimental factors leading to the low FF observed for Device A. Compared with Device A, Device B and C have a 10 times lower dark current in the reverse bias region as shown in Fig. 3b, which can not be simply explained by the low electron mobility of the Alq3 EBL. As shown in Fig. 1, the HOMO energy levels of Alq3, AlmND3, and BCP are 5.8, 6.4, and 6.5 eV, respectively. Since the HOMO energy level of C60 is 6.2 eV, there is an energy barrier (0.2–0.3 eV) for hole transport in C60/AlmND3 or C60/BCP interface. For the C60/Alq3 interface, there is no substantial energy barrier because the HOMO energy level of Alq3 is higher than that of C60. Therefore, the elevated dark current before the flat band forward bias region of Device A is mainly due to the hole leakage current from the D–A interface to cathode. Exactly the same reason causes the significantly low RSH of the Alq3 EBL (see Device A data in Table 1). The hole blocking properties of EBL also show in the rectification ratio of these devices. In a range of −1 to 1 V, the ratio increases from 102 in Device A to greater than 104 in Device B or C (Fig. 3b). Once again, the small rectification ratio of Device A is mainly due to the elevated reverse-bias dark current, which is consistent with the significantly small RSH (because of hole leakage current) found for Alq3 EBL OPV. Certainly, both electron mobility and HOMO energy level of an EBL material can impact the J–V characteristics, FF, RS, and RSH of OPVs, which is in agreement with the shallow HOMO energy level and low electron mobility of Alq3 relative to those of either AlmND3 or BCP.

In order to address the stability issue of OPVs, the three devices (Device A, B, and C) were thermally aged under open circuit conditions in the dark at elevated temperature. As shown in Fig. 6a, the thermally aged OPVs all show inferior performance when compared with pristine OPVs. Device C has a very small JSC of 0.1 mA cm−2 after thermal aging (see Table 1). On the contrary, there is only moderate decrease of JSC in Device B (see Fig. 6a, Table 1) and the corresponding ηPC falls by less than 50%, the smallest among the three devices. Therefore, either Device A or Device C show much more downgraded performance than Device B at elevated temperature. Such electrical characteristics (diminished JSC and constant VOC) lead to a decreasing RSH, an increasing RS, and hence a relatively small FF.


Fig. 6b shows the deterioration of the normalized ηPC of the three devices over a period of 72 h. Following standard test conditions (STC), the half-lifetime (t1/2) of Device B is 72 h, which is better than the 40 h of Device A and significantly longer than the 12 h of Device C. Further control of lifetime stability test indicates that it is the BCP EBL (not O2 or H2O from ambient sources) which is responsible for the deterioration of OPV performance. Fig. 7a shows the device lifetime of the OPVs, either with or without BCP, under STC. It clearly shows that the t1/2 of the device without an EBL remains mostly unchanged for several days as compared to the device with BCP. However, in ambient conditions (high moisture containing air) without thermal treatment, the control devices, with and without BCP EBL, all show very little ηPC decay within 72 h of the test period (Fig. 7b).
Our OPV thermal aging tests demonstrate that the replacement of BCP with AlmND3 effectively improves the device lifetime without compromising the OPV’s performance. We note that the high Tg of the EBL material of AlmND3 (196 °C) and Alq3 (175 °C) may reduce thermal-induced crystallization or aggregation at elevated temperatures. The crystalline nature or morphological instability of BCP impairs the performance of devices, which will be demonstrated further in the next section. On the other hand, morphologically more stable AlmND3 is believed to be more effective in blocking the diffusion of the Al electrode, which is considered as another advantage for increasing device lifetime. It has been previously demonstrated that the downgraded device performance originates from the instability of the C60/EBL/Al multi-interface structure, and the damage is due to the metal-atom diffusion into C60 and parasitic exciton quenching at the C60/cathode interface.

In order to get more insights into the degradation of the C60/EBL/Al interface under aging conditions, we have probed the morphology changes of the three EBL materials at elevated temperatures. Fig. 8 shows the AFM images of the three EBLs (Alq3, AlmND3, and BCP) on real devices (ITO/pentacene/C60/EBL/ultra thin Al). For a scanning area of 1 × 1 μm2, the extracted average root-mean-square (RMS) surface roughness of the real devices of Alq3 EBL, AlmND3 EBL, and BCP EBL is 6.2 ± 0.1, 6.0 ± 0.1, and 6.25 ± 0.1 nm, respectively. This simply means that all three EBL thin films in real devices have similar surface morphology (roughness) before any thermal aging treatment. However, RMS surface roughness of BCP EBL after thermal aging is quite different from the rest and they are 6.8 ± 0.2 (Alq3), 6.4 ± 0.01 (AlmND3), and 14.7 ± 0.5 nm (BCP), respectively. Since a rough surface morphology of EBL may weaken their adhesion onto C60 or Al cathode, the thermal aging is expected to cause some damage to the ohmic contact at the interface and hence to shorten device lifetime. In addition, unbalanced hole/electron carrier ratio of the device may rise and a decrease in ηPC can be expected.

At elevated temperatures, the increasing crystallization or aggregation of BCP can be indirectly manifested in the absorption spectra of BCP thin film. Compared with the nearly unchanged absorption spectra of AlmND3 or Alq3, the absorption spectrum of thermally aged BCP is quite different from the pristine one (see Fig. 9). After thermal aging, the absorption shoulder at 322 nm of BCP becomes much more pronounced and the absorption is extended more to longer wavelengths. The extended longer wavelength absorption spectrum and the enlarged shoulder of the absorption band are indicative of close molecular contact (ππ interaction) that is ascribed to molecular aggregation. Therefore, we may conclude that the short lifetime of Device C can be primarily attributed to the morphological instability of the EBL, of which molecular aggregation is the adverse nature of BCP. Finally, similar to the observation of Alq3, we can expect that AlmND3 is less susceptible than BCP to the damage from moisture and air, which is another advantage for the lifetime of AlmND3 as EBL in OPVs.

In summary, we have fabricated and characterized a stable organic double-heterostructure OPV, employing AlmND3 as a new EBL material. AlmND3 has a wide band gap energy (∼3.3 eV), high electron mobility (∼10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 at electric field of 6.4 × 105 V cm−1), and little change on the surface morphology at elevated temperature (75 °C). The prolonged OPV lifetime has been demonstrated and it is mainly attributed to the high Tg (196 °C) and hence morphological stability of AlmND3. Unlike Alq3, AlmND3 has a prolonged OPV lifetime without compromising the OPV electrical performance. Our studies have inferred that the degradation of the interface in the multilayer structure of C60/EBL/Al impairs OPV performance. We are now in the process of testing AlmND3 as the optical spacer in enhancing the ηPC of OPVs with prolonged lifetime.


Pentacene and C60 were purchased from Uni-Onward Corp. Whereas BCP and Alq3 were available commercially (Aldrich), AlmND3 was synthesized in the laboratory according to a literature procedure. All materials mentioned above were purified by gradient sublimation prior to use.


The TOF device samples have a configuration of glass/ITO (100 nm)/EBL (∼1 μm)/semi-transparent Ag (20 nm). In the TOF measurements, 5 ns Nd:YAG laser pulsed dye laser at 300 nm was chosen to maximize the optical absorption of each EBL film. The laser beam was directed through the samples from the Ag side to create photoexcited carriers. The excitation power density was set at ∼1.6 W cm−2 to avoid space-charge effect. The instrumental response time was kept much shorter than the transit time. The transient photocurrent was recorded by measuring the voltage across a 50 Ω resistor with a 1 GHz digital oscilloscope (LC574 AM, LeCroy). The transit time, tT, was taken from the intersection of two clear straight lines in the double-logarithmic plot of the transient photocurrent profile. The carrier mobility μ is given by μ = D/tTE, where D is the thickness of the organic layer and E is the applied electric field. The detection of transient photocurrent signal is similar to the one described in ref. 40. In particular, the electron mobility of Alq3 film under electric field of 80 V μm−1 is very close to the one determined by photoinduced electroluminescence in which the film thickness are below 200 nm, indicating the impurity problem for the thick film (∼1 μm) in our cases is insignificant.


The devices are fabricated on precleaned ITO glass with a sheet resistance of 30 Ω/sq. After solvent cleaning, the substrates were treated with UV-Ozone. Our device structure consists of a 40 nm thick polycrystalline pentacene (as donor material) and a 50 nm thick C60 (as acceptor material). Three different materials, BCP, Alq3, and AlmND3, were inserted between C60 and Al cathode as EBL (10 nm) in this study. Organic layers and Al electrode were sequentially deposited on the ITO substrate through a shadow mask, giving an active device area of 0.2 cm2. The evaporation rates of the organic and metal layers were controlled to be 0.1 nm s−1 by individual quartz-crystal monitor and were calibrated by a series of the thickness measurements of the each layer with a surface profiler (Veeco Dektak 150). Subsequently, current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of OPVs were measured in the dark and under AM 1.5G solar illumination from a class A solar simulator (Oriel 300 W), controlled by a programmable source meter (Keithley 2400). The light intensity was calibrated using a Si photodiode (PVM 172; area = 3.981 cm2) from Nation Renewable Energy Laboratory. For the incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurement, a AM 1.5G solar simulator was used to generate the bias light. A monochromator (Newport Model 74100), which was calibrated with a National Institute of Standards and Technology calibrated photodiode and chopped at 250 Hz, was used to select the wavelengths between 400–750 nm for illuminating the OPV. The photocurrent from the OPV was measured through the lock-in amplifier (Signal Recovery 7265), which was in turn referenced to the chopper frequency. To confirm the IPCE data, the AM 1.5G spectrum was then used to obtain Jsc and the estimated error was ∼4% compared with the current density measured under solar simulator illumination. All electrical measurements were carried out in air.


Except for the very thin Al top cathode, we used the real OPV structure, i.e. ITO/pentacene (40 nm)/C60 (50 nm)/EBL (10 nm)/Al (10 nm), for EBL surface morphology characterization. The surface property of the pristine or thermally aged OPVs were determined by AFM (Non-contact mode; Park system XE-100). The absorption coefficients (α) of the three EBL thin films on the quartz substrates were measured with a spectrophotometer (Jasco V-630). The spectral measurements herein were carried out in an air environment. In the absorption spectroscopy of the thermally aged EBL thin films, for the prevention of absorption interference from other materials, the absorption spectra were record on bare quartz substrates that were cleaned (by sonication in acetone, methanol, and deionized water) in advance of the thermal vacuum deposition of EBL material.


The exact temperature inside the OPV cell was measured using a dummy cell containing a thermocouple. A standard test condition (STC) similar to ours has been previously defined by Kroon et al. An accelerated test of device degradation was conducted at higher temperatures to differentiate the device stability. The sealing material usesd was the epoxy resin (EXC345; Everwide Chemical Co.) and the glass substrate was used to encapsulate the cell in a nitrogen-filled glove box. In our previous work, the high reliability blue organic light-emitting devices based on such encapsulation process have been demonstrated for applcation to mass production. Therefore, we can confirm that the aging tests were carried out in air and no loss of device performance was observed right after the sealing process. This means that the decrease in the conductivity of materials due to oxygen uptake can be neglected in our experiment.


This work was partially supported by Academia Sinica and the National Science Council of Taiwan (Grant No. NSC-98-2221-E-011-025) and special thanks to Mr Wei-Po Tung, Precision International Corp., for the assistance in solar cells characterization.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010