 DOI: 10.1039/D1TA10185D
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 3321-3329

Yong Ryun Kim
,
Juae Kim,
Heejoo Kim*,
Hyungcheol Back,
Geunjin Kim,
Ayeong Gu,
Chang-Yong Nam,
Ju-Hyeon Kim,
Hongsuk Suh* and 
Kwanghee Lee*

Research Institute for Solar and Sustainable Energies (RISE), Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST), Gwangju 61005, Republic of Korea. E-mail: klee@gist.ac.kr

Department of Chemistry, Chemistry Institute for Functional Materials, Pusan National University (PNU), Busan 46241, Republic of Korea. E-mail: hssuh@pusan.ac.kr

Graduate School of Energy Convergence, Institute of Integrated Technology, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST), Gwangju 61005, Republic of Korea. E-mail: heejook@gist.ac.kr

Division of Advanced Materials, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), Daejeon 34114, Republic of Korea

Heeger Center for Advanced Materials (HCAM), Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST), Gwangju 61005, Republic of Korea

Centre for Functional Nanomaterials, Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL), Upton, New York 11973, USA

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 61005, Republic of Korea

Received
28th November 2021
, Accepted 19th January 2022
First published on 2nd February 2022
Despite the outstanding role of conjugated polyelectrolytes in organic solar cells, the use of conjugated polyelectrolytes in perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has rarely been reported due to instability issues of the material itself under operating conditions. Herein, an efficient and stable inverted perovskite solar cell (p–i–n) was fabricated by introducing an amine-containing carbazole-based conjugated polyelectrolyte (CzNBr) with a simple and room temperature solution process as a cathode buffer layer (CBL) at the underlying layer of a metal electrode in PSCs. Promisingly, this approach allows not only modification of the work function of the metal electrode, yielding improved charge extraction properties, but also detainment of the migrating ionic defects of the perovskite layer induced by the metal electrode, resulting in robust stable PSCs. Ultimately, it exhibits a significant enhancement of both the efficiency (20.28%) and stability of PSCs based on methylammonium lead triiodide (MAPbI3); nonencapsulated PSCs maintained 80% of their initial efficiency (T80) under continuous heating at 85 °C for 1000 hours and 50 cycles of thermal cycling tests (from −25 to 85 °C). The excellent charge extraction and detainment of ionic defects with the CzNBr layer enable the demonstration of highly stable and efficient PSCs to prove the huge potential of this new type of CBL in applications. Furthermore, our results open up new possibilities for CPEs in PSCs in terms of their performance to demonstrate easily processed highly efficient and stable PSCs.

Metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been regarded as the next generation photovoltaic technology satisfying market demands due to their recently achieved high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 25%. Despite this encouraging result, however, there are still challenges for successful commercialization of PSCs. Under accelerated ageing tests with external stimuli, including moisture, heat, or light illumination, the PCE of PSCs significantly decreased due to the instability of the adjacent layer of PSCs. Apart from the detrimental effects induced by external stimuli, the initial degradation in PSCs began at the charge transport layer (CTL)/top metal electrode interface. The inherent ionic defects of the perovskite layer, particularly both iodide ions (I−) and methylammonium ions (CN−), which have low formation and migration activation energies, migrate easily towards the adjacent CTL (e.g., phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM)) after the deposition of metal electrodes (e.g., Ag or Cu), forming a thin insulating layer (e.g., AgI or CuI). As a result, charge extraction properties at the CTL/metal interface of PSCs are reduced even under inert conditions, and the metal electrode deteriorates with increasing ageing time. Therefore, reducing the chemical interaction between the inherent ionic defects and the CTL or the top electrode is essential for highly stable PSCs.

Typical ways to solve this issue are constructing 2D/3D heterostructures of the perovskite layer and modifying CTLs. The 2D/3D heterostructure, which is formed by casting various organic passivators on the surface of the perovskite layer, directly passivates the inevitable ionic defects present along the grain boundaries (GBs) or on the surface of the perovskite layer and the degradation path by obtaining a pinhole-free perovskite layer and forming the hydrophobic nature of the perovskite layer. Alternatively, modifying CTLs is an easy approach for enhancing the stability of PSCs by forming a robust interfacial barrier: the introduction of a cathode buffer layer (CBL) between the electrode and CTL or a multilayered CTL structure. Since this barrier effectively obstructs the outward diffusion of inherent ionic defects from the perovskite layer and inward diffusion of metal ions from the metal electrode at the CTL/metal interface in inverted PSCs (I-PSCs), degradation at the interface of PSCs can be prohibited without compromising the PCE. There have been several efforts to develop the interlayers in I-PSCs, such as vacuum processed multilayered interfacial barriers composed of BCP/Cr/Cr2O, BCP/bismuth, AZO/SnOx and ALD-AZO. Such approaches enable the formation of a relatively denser film, thereby creating a complicated pathway for the diffusion of inherent ionic defects from the perovskite layer to the metal electrode and vice versa. However, since the advantage of PSCs is a possibility for solution process, such as roll-to-roll (R2R) fabrication, these approaches with a vacuum process cannot be applied to the solution processed PSCs. Furthermore, the multiple stacked PSCs suffer from a lower PCE (<20%) due to the thick film form of CTLs. Therefore, it is important to develop a simple and solution-processable CBL with an ultrathin film form for highly stable and efficient PSCs.
Conjugated polyelectrolytes (CPEs) composed of π-conjugated backbones with pendant ionic functional groups are a promising interfacial layer for PSCs due to their several advantages, including the ultrathin film form, enhancement of charge extraction/injection at the interface by modifying the energy level of the metal electrode, and solution processability. By tailoring the ionic functional group, CPEs can enhance the stability of PSCs by passivating the ionic defects. Although several reports have shown the enhanced stability of PSCs with CPEs, dramatic improvements have been obtained in the air stability of PSCs. Therefore, achieving the stability of PSCs under harsher conditions, including thermal stress or photoillumination, remains a practical challenge. Thus, enhancing the interaction between CPEs and ionic defects can be a promising approach to solve these issues. Recently, it was reported that amine-containing metal oxides inhibit chemical interactions by pairing with ionic defects, thereby prohibiting the degradation of PSCs. This result implies that a CBL including amine functional groups may further increase the stability of PSCs under the conditions of harsher accelerated ageing tests.
In this work, we demonstrated highly stable I-PSCs by incorporating a novel amine-containing CPE as the CBL. To ensure the stability of the CBL itself, we designed a CPE based on a carbazole moiety as the backbone unit due to its chemically and thermally stable properties. In addition, easy functionalization of the alkyl chain, which is attached to the nitrogen atom in the polycarbazole moiety, provides increased solubility in green solvents (water and alcohol), and various choices for pendent groups (e.g., ammonium, phosphonate, sulfonate and carboxylate) attached at the end of the alkyl group can shift the work function (WF) of the metal electrode by forming interfacial dipoles, bringing a wide choice of metal electrodes (e.g., Ag, Cu, and Au). Therefore, with these advantages, we synthesized a carbazole-based CPE, (poly[(6-carbazol-9-yl-hexyl)-trimethyl-ammonium bromide], hereafter referred to as CzNBr (see Fig. 1 and S1). By incorporating this CzNBr layer as the CBL in I-PSCs, we demonstrated efficient and stable PSCs based on methylammonium lead triiodide (MAPbI3). By modifying the WF of the metal electrode with CzNBr, we improved the PCE of MAPbI3–I-PSCs from 15.90% to 20.28%. In particular, the CzNBr layer detains the migrating inherent ionic defects before reaching the metal electrode. Consequently, this novel device architecture exhibited excellent stability under harsher accelerated ageing conditions: 20% loss of the initial efficiency for 1000 hours at 85 °C and a thermal cycling test of 50 cycles from −25 to 85 °C. We also demonstrated enhanced device stabilities under moisture and light exposure.

We fabricated I-PSCs with a configuration of poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA)/poly[9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethyl)-N-ethylammonium-propyl-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)]dibromide (PFN-Br)/MAPbI3/PC61BM/CPE/Cu, as shown in Fig. 1(a) and (b), where PTAA and PC61BM were used as the hole transport layer (HTL) and electron transport layer (ETL), respectively. A PFN-Br layer was deposited on top of PTAA for the purpose of improving the wettability of the perovskite layer, as reported in our previous studies. The chemical structure of the newly synthesized carbazole-based CPE used in this work is presented in Fig. 1c. CzNBr is composed of a carbazole backbone as a π-conjugated backbone and an alkyl side chain bearing cationic ammonium (N+) with a bromide counterion (Br−). The synthetic details, gel permeation chromatography (GPC) and optical properties are presented in Fig. S1–S5. As shown in Fig. S6, CzNBr exhibits excellent thermal stability, which was confirmed by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA); no decomposition was observed at 200 °C, where it starts to degrade.

To optimize the device performance of I-PSCs with CzNBr (denoted as the CzNBr device), we prepared various concentrations of CzNBr solutions from 0.01 to 0.4 wt% to fabricate CzNBr layers and obtained the best device performance with a ∼0.1 wt% CzNBr solution corresponding to a thickness of approximately 7 nm; see Fig. S7 and S8. As depicted in Fig. 1(d) and Table 1, the device with CzNBr exhibits substantially enhanced device performance; the best CzNBr device shows an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.12 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 22.78 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 80%, yielding a PCE of 20.28% in an active area of 0.0464 cm2 (a certified PCE of 19.14% in an active area of 0.155 cm2, see Fig. S9). In contrast, the device without CzNBr (denoted as the control device) shows a lower PCE of 15.90% with a Voc of 1.10 V, a Jsc of 20.6 mA cm−2 and a FF of 70%. The Jsc values obtained from the J–V characteristics agree well with the integrated Jsc values calculated from the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra (Fig. 1(f) and Table S1). Note that a dramatic change in the EQE spectra is observed in the long wavelength range (from 500 to 700 nm). Considering no change in the UV-Vis absorption spectra of MAPbI3/PC61BM films with and without CzNBr (see Fig. S10), this enhancement can be attributed to the reduction of the probability of charge carrier recombination at the interface of the device. Since the PSCs with considering the similar structure including a solution processable bathocuproine (BCP) as the CBL, which is reported in our previous work, exhibited a PCE of 18.35% with a Voc of 1.09 V, a Jsc of 21.45 mA cm−2 and a FF of 79%, our results indicate that CzNBr is more efficient than BCP as the CBL in PSCs. Furthermore, to the best of our knowledge, our results with CzNBr as the CBL approach the performance of I-PSCs based on single-crystalline MAPbI3 (see Table S2).
Sweep direction
 V oc (V)
 J sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
 a From our previous data. 
w/o CzNBr
FWD
1.096
20.75
70
16.02
REV
1.097
20.67
70
15.90
w/BCP
FWD
1.09
21.45
79
18.35
REV
1.09
21.34
79
18.33
w/CzNBr
FWD
1.114
22.70
79
20.01
REV
1.115
22.78
80
20.28
Since CzNBr is a CPE, we simply infer that CzNBr can modify the WF of the Cu electrode by forming an interfacial dipole between PC61BM and the Cu electrode, as described in Fig. 1(g). Therefore, we performed ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurements on the CzNBr/Cu film. As presented in Fig. 1(h), by introducing a CzNBr layer on the Cu electrode, a shift of 0.28 eV occurs towards a higher binding energy from 16.63 (for bare Cu) to 16.91 eV (for CzNBr/Cu) without any change in the onset of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the Cu electrode (Table S3). Therefore, the WF of the Cu electrode shifted from 4.57 to 4.29 eV, producing a favourable energy level at the PC61BM/Cu interface. Thus, it is possible to facilitate better charge transport from PC61BM to the Cu electrode, as described in Fig. 1(g).
Based on the changes in the WF of the Cu electrode, we examined the charge transport properties of the control and CzNBr devices by measuring transient photovoltage (TPV) decay under open-circuit conditions and transient photocurrent (TPC) decay under short-circuit conditions (Fig. S11(a) left and right, respectively). The TPV data show a longer charge recombination time of 7.2 μs for the CzNBr device than for the control device (4.8 μs). Meanwhile, the charge transport time for the CzNBr device determined by the TPC measurements is approximately 0.15 μs, which is substantially shorter than 0.38 μs for the control device, implying an enhanced charge extraction capability from the perovskite layer to the metal electrode. Further information on the charge recombination and transfer in I-PSCs is obtained by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), as shown in Fig. S11(b) and (c), respectively. The fitting results of EIS are given in more detail in Table S3. Note that a significant difference is observed in the radius of semicircles obtained from a high-frequency component, correlating the electronic transport and the kinetics of charge recombination for I-PSCs with and without CzNBr. The control device exhibits a high resistance (Rp ∼ 651.40 Ω cm−2) at a lower frequency. In contrast, the semicircle of the CzNBr device is located in the high frequency range with a lower Rp (<45.14 Ω cm−2), indicating that the charge transport at the PC61BM/Cu electrode interface is enhanced by using CzNBr in I-PSCs, which is consistent with the TPC data.
The essence of the function of the CzNBr layer in PSCs truly appears in stability tests under various operational conditions, such as heat, light, and humidity stresses. All the measurements were carried out with nonencapsulated I-PSC devices. We first tested the thermal stability of the control and CzNBr device under continuous thermal annealing at 85 °C in a nitrogen gas atmosphere. While the PCE of the control device decreases to 80% of its initial PCE within 25 hours (T80 = 25 hours) with noticeable hysteresis, the CzNBr device exhibits a prolonged T80 of approximately 1000 hours without any noticeable hysteresis, as shown in Fig. 2(a). This excellent thermal stability of the CzNBr devices was further confirmed in their thermal cycling test, which is a part of International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) 61215 for practical applications by applying a rapid temperature change from −25 to 85 °C for each cycle in a vacuum chamber at 10−4 torr. Then, the J–V characteristics of the device were obtained every 10 cycles under ambient conditions. The thermal cycling test is a tough test due to mismatch of the thermal expansion coefficient for each adjacent layer in PSCs, resulting in the mechanical detachment of layers. Surprisingly, the CzNBr device maintains almost 80% of its initial efficiency after 50 thermal cycles, whereas the control device exhibits a significant decrease to 40% of its initial efficiency after 50 identical thermal cycles (Fig. 2(b)).
We also examined the photostability of I-PSCs by monitoring using the maximum power point tracking (MPPT) method under continuous photoirradiation (AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2) under a nitrogen gas atmosphere without a UV cut-off filter. As shown in Fig. 2(c), the CzNBr device had significantly enhanced photostability compared with that of the control device; the CzNBr device showed a significantly prolonged T80 ≈ 350 hours compared with the control device with only T80 ≈ 10 hours, as shown in Fig. 2(c). Note that the CzBNr device exhibits a ‘burn-in-loss’-free behaviour in its initial stage of the photostability measurement. Because this has not been observed generally in previous photostability measurements, we consider that the influence of the CzNBr layer is fundamentally profound on I-PSCs. Surprisingly, the CzNBr layer is also quite effective in protecting humidity, thereby resulting in enhanced environmental stability of the CzNBr devices (see Fig. 2(d)). When the samples were stored under ambient air conditions at 25 °C with 25–40% relative humidity (RH), the CzNBr device exhibited a prolonged T80 up to 1500 hours, whereas the control device showed a short T80 of approximately 100 hours. From stability tests of the devices, we found that all photovoltaic parameters (Voc, Jsc, and FF) of the control devices deteriorated with increasing ageing time (Fig. S12(a)–(c)). This result indicates that the decreased performance of PSCs might originate from both the degradation of the perovskite material itself and the PC61BM/Cu interface. In contrast, the CzNBr devices show no dramatic changes in all photovoltaic parameters during various measurements, indicating that the CzNBr layer can successively passivate the detrimental factors during the stability measurements (see Fig. S13). To confirm this assumption, we conducted time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) depth profile measurements that can sensitively trace the elemental distribution throughout the PSC devices. The representative layers were determined according to the highest intensity of ion counts. However, since the intensity of I− and Cu− ions in the specific region was too strong and beyond the upper detection limit, we chose Br−, I2− and O2− ions to determine other layers in PSCs (Fig. S14(a)–(d)). As shown in Fig. 3(b) and (c), we observed a dominant accumulation of I− and CN− ions at the PC61BM/Cu interface of the as-cast control device. We infer that this accumulation of I− and CN− ions is attributed to the strong interaction between the Cu electrode and the ionic defects, which diffuse from the decomposed MAPbI3 layer throughout PC61BM, as illustrated in Fig. 3(b) and (c). After thermal annealing, the accumulation of both ions is enhanced significantly at the Cu/PC61BM interface, and they diffuse towards the Cu electrode. This fact indicates the formation of a thin insulating layer (e.g., CuI), causing the poor performances obtained in the annealed device. In contrast, for the as-cast CzNBr device, sharp peaks for the signals of both I− and CN− ions are observed (Fig. 3(e)). Since CzNBr molecules consist of carbon and nitrogen, the observed signal for CN− ions can be the result of the superposition of the signals for both CzNBr and methylammonium ions. Therefore, this narrow region can be assigned to the CzNBr layer, indicating that ionic defects (I− ions and CN− ions) accumulate in the CzNBr layer. Considering that the overall intensities of both I− ions and CN− ions in the PC61BM region are lower than that of the control device and have a flattened distribution (Fig. 3(e)), we can infer that the CzNBr layer can forcibly extract ionic defects. This fact was observed more clearly in the ToF-SIMS data on the samples without metal electrodes. As seen in Fig. 3(d), a pronounced peak intensity of I− ions is clearly observed at the top of the CzNBr layer, whereas the control films exhibited a decreased peak intensity for I− ions at the top of the PC61BM layer (Fig. 3(a)), confirming that the CzNBr layer effectively extracts I− ions from the perovskite layer.
The dramatic effect of the CzNBr layer on the PSCs is observed after thermal annealing at 85 °C for 500 hours. As previously reported, MAPbI3 is thermally degradable at 85 °C to byproducts. Therefore, under thermal annealing, the decomposition of MAPbI3 is accelerated, leading to the diffusion of ionic defects towards the Cu electrode, as observed in Fig. 3(c); the signals for both I− and CN− ions are detected in the Cu electrode region, and their intensities are higher than that of Cu. The degraded Cu electrode, as seen in the photoimage (Fig. S14), can be ascribed to these diffused ionic defects in the Cu electrode under thermal annealing and resulted in a significant decrease in the photovoltaic parameters of the control device, as observed in Fig. 2(a). In contrast, the CzNBr device showed the accumulation of both I− ions and CN− ions in the CzNBr layer. Although diffusion of both I− ions and CN− ions towards the Cu electrode was also observed, the intensity of those signals was lower than that of Cu− ions. Therefore, it can be concluded that the CzNBr layer acts as a molecular barrier for the diffusion of I− ions and CN− ions even under thermal annealing. No degradation of the Cu electrode of the CzNBr device after thermal annealing was observed, as seen in Fig. 3(f), which supports the effective protection of the Cu electrode by detaining the I− and CN− ionic defects in the CzNBr layer (see Fig. 3(f)); thus, no degradation of the Cu electrode is observed in the photoimage (Fig. S14).
As seen in the thermal stability test, the PCE of the CzNBr device after thermal annealing for 500 hours is almost similar to that of the initial stage despite detaining ionic defects in the CzNBr layer. This fact indicates that the CzNBr layer is still working as an excellent charge transport layer even after containing ionic defects. To confirm this fact, we investigated the electrical properties of this CzNBr containing ionic defects. Therefore, we prepared the device with a configuration of ITO/MAI:CzNBr composite/Cu (MAI: methyl ammonium iodide). MAI was chosen as an artificial ionic defect (a highly volatile organic compound). To simulate a similar situation in the PSC with the CzNBr layer under thermal annealing, a number of composite layers were prepared with different blend volume ratios of MAI:CzNBr (0.1/0.9, 0.3/0.7, 0.5/0.5, 0.7/0.3 and 0.9/0.1). As seen in Fig. 4(a), we found that the slope of the J–V curve of the as-prepared MAI:CzNBr device gradually decreased as the volume of MAI increased. This behaviour is further accelerated after thermal annealing (Fig. 4(b)). However, the resistance calculated from the slope of the J–V curves indicates that the composites of MAI:CzNBr (0.1/0.9) exhibited no change even after 500 hours of thermal annealing (Fig. 4(c)). In contrast, other composite layers with a higher concentration of MAI (>0.1) showed increased resistance after thermal annealing. Thus, it is practical to infer that a certain volume ratio of ionic defects to CzNBr in a real device would be less than 0.1/0.9 and that the corresponding composite film acts as a good charge transport layer without compromising the device performance even after thermal annealing. This behaviour is also confirmed in the PSCs with mixed films with various blend ratios as the CBL (Fig. 4(d)).
Meanwhile, the excellent device performance of the CzNBr device after thermal annealing indicates that the MAPbI3 layer is preserved. Therefore, we investigated the crystalline structure of MAPbI3 by performing grazing incident wide angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurements on the as-cast and annealed ITO/PTAA/PFN-Br/MAPbI3/PC61BM films without and with the CzNBr layer and analysed the data, especially in association with the results of a constant linear intensity of CN− ions in I-PSCs with the CzNBr layer obtained in TOF-SIMs. Fig. 5(a)–(d) exhibit 2D-GIWAXS images, respectively. The as-cast films clearly exhibit bright diffraction rings at approximately q = 0.98, 2.01, and 2.25 Å−1, corresponding to the preferential orientation of the (110), (220) and (310) planes of MAPbI3, respectively. This result revealed the predominant formation of a polycrystalline perovskite with a tetragonal crystal structure. However, the annealed film without CzNBr shows a significant decrease in peak intensity with a new peak appearance at 0.89 Å−1 corresponding to PbI2. Thus, it is evident that the MAPbI3 layer is thermally degraded due to the natural thermal instability of MAPbI3 at 85 °C. In contrast, the film with CzNBr exhibits no changes in the preferential orientation of MAPbI3 even after thermal annealing for 500 hours, indicating that the bulk crystalline structure of MAPbI3 is preserved. Based on this, we concluded that the initial pull-out of inherent ionic defects by the CzNBr layer (see Fig. 3(d)) from the perovskite layer before deposition of the metal electrode is important to stabilize the MAPbI3 film to demonstrate thermally stable PSCs. That is, the presence of ionic defects in MAPbI3 leads to the decomposition of MAPbI3.
To gain further insight into the morphological changes of MAPbI3 from the samples with and without CzNBr, we conducted scanning electron microscopy (SEM) to investigate the surface morphology of the perovskite layer on the samples with and without CzNBr (PC61BM/Cu or PC61BM/CzNBr/Cu layers were detached). The surface morphologies of the films with and without CzNBr are almost identical, obtaining a large number of crystals of approximately 250 nm, as seen in Fig. 5(e) and (h), respectively. However, after thermal annealing of the films (85 °C for 500 hours), we observed a dramatic difference between the samples with and without CzNBr. The surface morphology of the annealed film without CzNBr is characterized by several smaller grains (split) and large cracks [Fig. 5(f)]. However, the film with CzNBr shows enlarged grains with no cracks after the thermal annealing process. [Fig. 5(h)]. We attribute this observation to the Ostwald ripening phenomenon, in which small grains in the as-cast perovskite layer are recrystallized into enlarged grains, resulting in the stabilization of the MAPbI3 film, which greatly impacts the enhanced stability of PSCs.
Purified 2,7-dibromo-9-(6-bromohexyl)-9H-carbazole (1) (0.1000 g, 0.2049 mmol), 9-(6-bromohexyl)-2,7-bis(4,4,5,5-tetramethyl-1,3,2-dioxaborolan-2-yl)-9H-carbazole (2) (0.1193 g, 0.2049 mmol), 1 ml of tetraethylammonium hydroxide, Pd(PPh3)4 (3 mol%) and 4 ml of anhydrous toluene were added to a microwave reaction tube. After stirring until no solid remained at ambient temperature, the reaction tube was microwave irradiated (PMAX 300 W) for 2 hours at a constant temperature of 100 °C. The reaction mixture was dropped into a solution of MeOH/deionized water (volume ratio of 4:1), and the precipitate was filtered. The filtered solid was washed for two days using a Soxhlet extractor with hexane/acetone/MeOH. After purification, the remaining solid in the thimble filter was dissolved by chloroform and concentrated under reduced pressure. The liquid was precipitated with methanol in the same way as above to generate the final product as a solid. The final product, 0.67 g (35%) of CzBr, was obtained after drying under vacuum at 60 °C. 1H NMR (300 MHz, CDCl3) δ 8.235 (m, 2Hb), 7.709 (m, 1Ha), 7.649 (m, 1Ha′), 7.455 (m, 2Hc), 4.514 (m, 2Hd), 3.364 (m, 2Hi), 2.030 (m, 2He), 1.839 (m, 2Hh), 1.420 (m, 2Hf), and 1.252 (m, 2Hg). GPC: Mn = 9400, Mw = 11800 and PDI = 1.25.
A 5 ml aliquot of trimethylamine was added dropwise to a solution of CzBr (0.26 g) in 30 ml of anhydrous THF at 0 °C. After stirring for 2 days at room temperature, the precipitate was filtered and extracted with chloroform and water. The water phase was washed three times with chloroform and concentrated under reduced pressure to provide a yellow oil of 0.2 g (30%). 1H NMR (300 MHz, CD3OD) δ 8.2–6.6 (m, 6H), 3.2–2.6 (m, 6H), and 1.6–0.8 (m, 6H).
All chemicals were used as received, including lead(II) iodide (PbI2, 99.9985% Alfar Aesar), methylammonium iodide (CH3NH3I, GreatCell Solar), and phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC60BM, Nanoholdings), and the solvents of MeOH, N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), diethyl ether (DEE), toluene and chlorobenzene (CB), which were all purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Indium-doped tin oxide (ITO) substrates were cleaned with deionized water, acetone and isopropanol for 20 minutes in each step in an ultrasonic bath. Subsequently, the cleaned substrates were stored in a hot furnace (85 °C in air) for a 1 day drying process. A poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA, purchased from EM Index) layer with 0.25 wt% toluene was deposited by spin-coating at 5000 rpm for 30 s, followed by deposition of a 0.05 wt% poly[(9,9-bis(3′-((N,N-dimethyl)-N-ethylammonium)-propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene))dibromide] (PFN-Br, purchased from 1-Material) film in MeOH at 5000 rpm for 30 s. Methylammonium lead triiodide (MAPbI3) solution was prepared at a molar ratio of 1.5:1.5 in DMF/DMSO (volume ratio of 9:1.1). The MAPbI3 film was spin-coated at 5000 rpm for 30 s. Then, 0.8 ml of DEE, as an antisolvent, was added dropwise during the MAPbI3 film-coating process in the initial 5 s. The substrate was transferred to a hot plate at 100 °C for 5 min. The PC60BM layer was spin-coated at 1500 rpm for 30 s, and then the CPE of CzNBr (different concentrations) was spin-coated at 5000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, a 100 nm Cu electrode was deposited by thermal evaporation under high-vacuum conditions (1 × 10−6 torr).
All stability measurements were carried out with nonencapsulated PSC devices. For thermal stability analysis, the PSC samples were thermally annealed at 85 °C under nitrogen conditions and cooled prior to J–V measurement. For environmental stability analysis, the PSC samples were kept under dark and ambient conditions (in air). For photostability analysis, the PSC samples were measured by MPPT under nitrogen conditions with a homemade LabVIEW-based program. The light source used was a Newport 750 solar simulator without a UV filter.

The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics (in the range of −0.2 V) of the devices were studied by using a Keithley 238 source meter unit measurement (Keithley Instruments, Inc.) under air mass 1.5 global conditions with an illumination intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (Newport 750 solar simulator) under nitrogen conditions without a UV filter. Before measurement, the intensity of the solar simulator was calibrated using a standard KG5 reference cell. The PCEs of PSCs are all measured with a size of 0.0464 cm2 without an aperture unless specifically mentioned. The SCLC characteristics were measured by using a Keithley 238 source meter unit measurement (Keithley Instruments, Inc.) under dark conditions. The incident-photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) measurements of the devices were performed using a solar cell spectral response QE/IPCE/measurement system (PV measurements, Inc.). The measuring system was also calibrated with a standard cell manufactured by PV measurements. Impedance spectroscopy measurement was conducted using the galvanostat mode (PGSTAT30) under open-circuit conditions with a voltage of 1.08 V in a frequency range between 0.1 and 1 MHz under 1 sun illumination. Transient photovoltage (TPV) and photocurrent (TPC) measurements were performed by connecting the PSCs across 1 MΩ and 50 Ω terminals of an oscilloscope (TDS520, Tektronix), respectively. A 6 ns optical pulse from the frequency-doubled outputs of a 532 nm Nd:YAG laser (LOTIS) and 3 mW cm−2 of continuous white light irradiation (0.03 sun illumination) were applied. The resulting transient voltage and current were measured using an oscilloscope.


UV-Vis spectra of perovskite thin films were measured by using a Varian 5E UV/VIS/NIR spectrophotometer (Palo Alto, California, USA). ToF-SIMS was conducted with a ToF-SIMS 5 (ION-ToFGmbH, Münster, Germany) at the Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST) advanced analysis centre by applying a pulsed 25 keV Bi3+ primary beam with a current of 1 pA. The analysed area used in this work is a 100 × 100 μm2 flood gun. The depth profile is 200 × 200 μm2 using 3 keV Cs+. UPS measurements of the samples were performed by using an AXIS supra (DLD) (Kratos, UK) equipped with He(I) (21.22 eV) as a UV source at the Korea Basic Science Institute (KBSI, Korea). Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images were obtained using an XE-100 (Park System, Korea) in the noncontact mode. GIWAXS measurements were performed at the CMS (11-BM) beamline of the National Synchrotron Light Source II at Brookhaven National Laboratory. An X-ray (13.5 keV, λ = 0.918 Å) beam with a footprint of 0.150 mm × 0.150 mm (defined by a slit) was irradiated on the samples in a vacuum (∼100 mTorr) for 10 s with the incidence angle varying from 0.08° to 0.4°. GIWAXS data collections were performed at two different locations with four incident angles, from 0.08, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, and 0.4 degrees (thus a total of 10 separate measurements for each sample). All three samples for each scenario had an identical visual appearance (i.e., size (1.5 cm × 1.5 cm), roughness, and colour of films), which is translated to nearly identical device characteristics based on our extensive, repeated device experiments. The X-ray scattering signal was collected using a fibre-coupled CCD area detector (Photonic Sciences, ImageStar), covering a q-range from 0.12 Å−1 to 4.09 Å−1. The data were analysed using SciAnalysis (http://gisaxs.com/index.php/SciAnalysis).


By introducing room temperature solution-processed CzNBr as the CBL in I-PSCs, we demonstrated a simple pioneering approach to enhance device performance and operational stability. Primarily benefiting from the use of CzNBr, which can effectively modify the WF of the metal electrode and allow better charge extraction from the ETL to the metal electrode, the champion device exhibited a PCE of 20.28%, thus outperforming the control device (15.90%). More importantly, despite detaining the metal-induced inherent ionic defects from perovskites, which are related to the amine group in the CzNBr layer, this CPE layer containing ionic defects continually acts as an efficient CBL that can protect the deteriorating metal electrode and stabilize the perovskite layer. Consequently, our I-PSC with CzNBr exhibited a high efficiency of 20.28% and improved thermal stability; 80% of the initial efficiency was maintained after 1000 hours. In addition, excellent stability under exposure to moisture and long-term light irradiation is also obtained in these modified I-PSCs. Our results highlight that the removal of inherent ionic defects from perovskite materials is critical and an alternative method for developing low-cost, efficient, and stable PSCs that are easily fabricated.


H. K., Y. R. K., J. K., H. S. and K. L. conceived the idea and designed the experiments, analysed the data and wrote the manuscript. Y. R. K. conducted the fabrication, optimization and characterization of the films and solar cells including the MPP photostability and other stability tests. J. K. and H. S. contributed to synthesizing the materials and the characterization. H. K. contributed to the thermal stability measurements and provided major revisions. A. G. contributed to the device fabrication and evaluation. H. B. and C. N. contributed to the GIWAXS measurements and analyses. C. N. also contributed to the thermal cycling measurements. G. K. contributed to the transient photo-voltage and photo-current measurements. Y. R. K., J. K., H. B., C. N., and H. K. wrote the first draft of the manuscript. All authors discussed the results and commented on the manuscript. K. L., H. S. and H. K. supervised the project.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors thank the Heeger Center for Advanced Materials (HCAM) at the Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST) of Korea for help with device fabrication and measurements. H. K. and K. L. also acknowledge the support provided by a GIST Research Institute (GRI, RISE) grant funded by the GIST in 2022. H. Suh acknowledges the support by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education (2020R1I1A3061306). In addition, this research was supported in part by the Global Research Laboratory (GRL) Program of the NRF funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (MSIP) (NRF-2017K1A1A2013153) and in part by the program of Future Hydrogen Original Technology Development (2021M313A1084747), through the NRF, funded by the Korean government (Ministry of Science and ICT (MSIT)). The authors express thanks to the staff of the Center for Research Facilities at Chonnam National University for extending their support to perform XRD and XPS analysis.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta10185d
‡ Y. R. K. and J. K. contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022