 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA04973G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13830-13836


Mike
Hambsch
*,

Qianqian
Lin
,

Ardalan
Armin
,

Paul L.
Burn
* and 

Paul
Meredith
*

Centre for Organic Photonics & Electronics, School of Mathematics and Physics, School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland 4072, Australia. E-mail: p.burn2@uq.edu.au; meredith@physics.uq.edu.au

Center for Advancing Electronics Dresden, Technische Universität Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany. E-mail: mike.hambsch@tu-dresden.de

Received
14th June 2016
, Accepted 16th August 2016
First published on 25th August 2016
Solar cells based on organohalide perovskites (PSCs) have made rapid progress in recent years and are a promising emerging technology. An important next evolutionary step for PSCs is their up-scaling to commercially relevant dimensions. The main challenges in scaling PSCs to be compatible with current c-Si cells are related to the limited conductivity of the transparent electrode, and the processing of a uniform and defect-free organohalide perovskite layer over large areas. In this work we present a generic and simple approach to realizing efficient solution-processed, monolithic solar cells based on methylammonium lead iodide (CH3NH3PbI3). Our devices have an aperture area of 25 cm2 without relying on an interconnected strip design, therefore reducing the complexity of the fabrication process and enhancing compatibility with the c-Si cell geometry. We utilize simple aluminum grid lines to increase the conductivity of the transparent electrode. These grid lines were exposed to an UV-ozone plasma to grow a thin aluminum oxide layer. This dramatically improves the wetting and film forming of the organohalide perovskite junction on top of the lines, reducing the probability of short circuits between the grid and the top electrode. The best devices employing these modified grids achieved power conversion efficiencies of up to 6.8%.

Solar cells based on methylammonium lead trihalide perovskites have gained significant attention in recent years resulting in a jump in power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 3.8% to 21%, with these efficiencies being comparable to other thin film technologies like CdTe or CIGS. Initially, organohalide perovskites were considered to function as visible-light sensitizers like quantum dots or traditional organic dyes in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) with mesoporous TiO2 scaffolds. However, it was quickly realized that these ‘hybrid’ semiconductors can work as light absorbers, and electron and hole conductors. Devices with a planar structure based on both metal oxides and organic interlayer materials have also been developed with comparable high efficiencies (>18%). This means that organohalide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are rapidly approaching the stage where up-scaling to commercial dimensions is an imperative. It is widely considered that a first “in market” PSC product could be a tandem cell where the PSC is used as a narrow and tunable optical gap junction in combination with a conventional c-Si cell. The validity of this approach has recently been demonstrated by multiple research groups for lab-scale devices.

To realize this opportunity, PSCs will need to be fabricated with dimensions of around 5 inch × 5 inch to be compatible with current c-Si cell geometries. The first step in achieving that goal is to move away from the wasteful and limiting spin-coating process, and towards processes more applicable to mass fabrication. This has recently been achieved with blade-coating or slot die coating of the organohalide perovskite layer. To date, and in common with the early stages of most thin film photovoltaic technologies, the majority of PSCs reported in the literature are small laboratory scale devices with areas <1 cm2. Reports on ‘large area’ cells or sub-modules are comparably scarce. This is mostly due to the same reasons that limit the efficiency of other large area thin film technologies like organic solar cells: the low conductivity of the transparent conducting electrode (TCE) commonly based on indium or fluorine doped tin oxide; and defects, which scale exponentially with area in thin junctions. The relatively low conductivity (sheet resistance of the electrode usually between 10 and 15 Ω sq−1) of the TCE leads to hindered charge carrier extraction resulting in decreased fill factors, short circuit current densities and power conversion efficiencies. Additionally, defects such as pin holes in thin junctions cause shorting between the electrodes, also reducing the fill factor and open circuit voltage.
A widely used approach to address these problems is to divide the large area junction into smaller sub-cells, mostly narrow stripes, with the stripes serially interconnected. This approach has been utilized to achieve efficient organic solar cell modules, and has therefore naturally been adopted for PSCs. In Table 1 the power conversion efficiencies of PSC small ‘modules’ from the literature are summarized, and we note that these efficiencies sometimes refer to the active area, the aperture area, or the module area. This makes comparisons difficult, a problem further exacerbated by not clearly stating which area has been used for the PCE calculation. The table also shows that for most of the modules, there is still a significant difference between the PCE based on the active area, which can be as high as 12.9%, and the PCE based on the aperture or module area. For example, the 12.9% efficiency reported by Heo et al. based on an active area of 40 cm2 corresponds only to a PCE of 5.2% when the actual module area is considered. This fact is simply based on a reduced geometric fill factor due to the interconnection strategy. Together with the increased complexity of the fabrication process, this loss of active area is one of the downsides of this design approach.
Reference
Matteocci et al.
Razza et al.
Seo et al.
Heo et al.
IMEC
Qiu et al.
Perovskite deposition process
Spin-coating
Blade-coating
Spin-coating
Spin-coating
Spin-coating
Spin-coating
Aperture area [cm2]
25
16
4
Active area [cm2]
17
10
60
40
15
3.6
Module area [cm2]
100
100
100
PCE [%]
3.4
5.1
10.3
4.3
8.7
5.3
12.9
5.2
11.3
11.9
13.6
14.9
An alternative means to realize efficient large area cells without the need to divide the active area is to employ metallic grid lines to increase the effective conductivity of the TCE. This has been successfully demonstrated for monolithic large area organic solar cells with junction thicknesses >200 nm. However, organohalide perovskites require hydrophilic surfaces for wetting to promote the appropriate junction crystallization and morphology. This is an additional and critical constraint in PSCs that has yet to be accommodated with current grid strategies.
Motivated by this challenge, in this work we present a simple planar device architecture and low temperature fabrication process for methylammonium lead iodide perovskite solar cells compatible with large area monolithic cells and flexible substrates. The new design uses metallic grid lines to increase the conductivity of the commonly used indium tin oxide (ITO) electrode resulting in an improved fill factor and power conversion efficiency of PSCs with an aperture area of 25 cm2. It also avoids the need for dividing the monolithic cell into smaller interconnected sub-cells keeping the fabrication process as simple as possible, while making efficient use of the substrate area. The grid lines consist of aluminum exposed to an UV-ozone plasma to form an aluminum oxide layer on the surface. The oxide layer dramatically improves the wettability of the perovskite junction casting solution, and appropriate processing delivers a dense, crystalline morphology largely free of defects. The oxide layer also prevents the possible reaction of the aluminum with the iodide in the organohalide perovskite layer – a possible long term degradation mechanism.

In the first step, we prepared small area devices (active area 0.2 cm2) to establish the basic parameters for a standard planar device architecture (Fig. 1a excluding the illustrated grid lines). The anode of the devices consisted of ITO coated with poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) and the cathode of [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC60BM), lithium fluoride and silver. The photoactive organohalide perovskite layer was sandwiched between these electrodes and prepared using the one-step spin-coating process of methylammonium lead iodide (CH3NH3PbI3) first reported by Xiao et al. This process uses an immediate exposure of the still spinning organohalide perovskite film to a non-solvent like toluene or chloroform to control the rate of crystallization. Fig. 1b shows an SEM image of a typical organohalide perovskite film and the cross-sectional view of a complete device with all the individual layers. It can be seen that the individual organohalide perovskite crystals extend vertically across the depth of the film. The large crystals limit the number of individual grain boundaries resulting in increased charge carrier mobility and reduced recombination.

The resultant solar cell performance parameters including statistics of 10 small area devices are summarized in Table 2. The average PCE of devices with an approximately 300 nm thick junction was 13.6% with the best device achieving 14.8%. The average VOC and JSC of 0.97 V and 20.1 mA cm−2, respectively, are similar to those values reported in the literature for this device architecture. The current-density (JV) characteristics of the best device are shown in Fig. 2a and the corresponding external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum in Fig. 2b. The relatively high efficiencies of the small area devices represent a point of reference for the monolithic large area devices – although we note the architecture in question does not deliver best-in-class metrics due to the use of PEDOT:PSS as an unmodified anode interlayer.
Area [cm2]
Number Al-lines
Geometric FF

R
□ [Ω sq−1]

J
SC [mA cm−2]

V
OC [V]
FF
PCE [%]
0.2
0
0
17.5 ± 0.3
20.1 ± 0.7 (20.8)
0.97 ± 0.01 (0.98)
0.70 ± 0.03 (0.73)
13.6 ± 0.8 (14.8)
25
0
1
13.5 ± 0.2
12.9 ± 0.9 (13.5)
0.86 ± 0.04 (0.89)
0.32 ± 0.01 (0.33)
3.6 ± 0.6 (4.0)
25
4
0.96 ± 0.1
2.9 ± 0.5
10.2 ± 1.9 (11.4)
0.91 ± 0.02 (0.91)
0.42 ± 0.08 (0.51)
4.0 ± 1.2 (5.3)
25
5
0.95 ± 0.1
2.4 ± 0.4
10.3 ± 3.5 (13.1)
0.93 ± 0.02 (0.92)
0.54 ± 0.03 (0.56)
5.2 ± 1.9 (6.8)
25
6
0.93 ± 0.1
2.1 ± 0.4
11.7 ± 0.8 (12.7)
0.90 ± 0.02 (0.92)
0.50 ± 0.09 (0.58)
5.3 ± 1.4 (6.7)
After establishing the architecture and processing conditions, we next moved to fabricate monolithic large area cells with an aperture area of 25 cm2. By directly scaling the device area from 0.2 to 25 cm2 without any modifications, the power conversion efficiency was reduced as expected from an average 13.6% to 3.6%. The reason behind this decrease is the lower fill factor (0.32 instead of 0.70) and short circuit current density (12.9 mA cm−2 instead of 20.1 mA cm−2) – both due to the low conductivity of the TCE and the long collection path length, which severely limits the extraction of charge carriers. The complete device parameters are summarized in Table 2 and the JV-characteristics of the best device are shown in Fig. 3.
To mitigate the TCE conductivity issues we applied metallic grids as per our previous up-scaling work on large area organic solar cells. We believe this is a considerably simpler fabrication task than creating interconnected thin strip sub-cells. Initially, we utilized a simple silver grid with different numbers (density) of grid lines (4, 5 and 6). The lines had a width of 550 ± 50 μm and a height of approximately 750 nm. Depending on the number of lines the pitch between the lines was 12 mm (4 lines), 9.5 mm (5 lines) and 9 mm (6 lines) resulting in geometric fill factors of 0.96, 0.95 and 0.93, respectively. It was quickly apparent that the silver reacted to form silver iodide although the exact oxidant for the silver is not yet clear. This effect was observed after less than 24 hours, and was further accelerated under elevated temperatures and high humidity resulting in severe device degradation. The effect can be seen in the photograph shown in Fig. 4a where the organohalide perovskite (brown) near the grid lines turns yellow due to a conversion back to PbI2.
We next substituted silver for gold, which has a lower chemical reactivity with respect to iodine. Unfortunately, all the devices were at least partially shorted due to the incomplete coverage of the gold grid lines with the organohalide perovskite active layer. Compared to organic semiconductors which can conformally coat the thick metal grids of up to 1500 nm, the CH3NH3PbI3 solution has a low viscosity and does not wet the gold lines due to a mismatch in surface energy and surface tension resulting in a high defect density. The results are consistent with reports that organohalide perovskite precursor solutions tend to form a uniform film on hydrophilic surfaces, but not on hydrophobic surfaces.
Armed with this knowledge, we next adopted aluminum for the grid lines and rendered their surfaces hydrophilic via a short UV-ozone plasma treatment. Fig. 5 shows the contact angle of water on top of the grid lines as a function of the plasma exposure time. It can be seen that the contact angle decreases from around 60° to 15° after 15 min of exposure with only minimal change occurring after that. The lower water contact angle can be explained by the increasing thickness of the oxide layer on top of the aluminum. This is further supported by the increased amount of oxygen on the grid line surface as shown by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (see ESI Fig. S1). Furthermore, the aluminum oxide modified grids showed no obvious chemical interaction with the organohalide perovskite junction (see Fig. 4b).
With the new grid lines, we repeated the experiments previously described for the silver grid. We thermally evaporated 750 nm thick grids with 4, 5 and 6 lines (pitch 12, 9.5 and 9 mm; line width 550 ± 50 μm) onto 6 cm × 6 cm glass substrates coated with ITO electrodes, which reduced the effective sheet resistance of the electrode from ∼13 Ω sq−1 to ∼2 Ω sq−1 for the electrode with the six lines. The grid electrodes were then exposed for 15 min to the UV-ozone plasma before spin-coating a PEDOT:PSS interlayer followed by the blend of CH3NH3I and PbI2 as per the small (0.2 cm2) standard cells. The devices with a 25 cm2 aperture area were finished by spin-coating a thin PC60BM layer and evaporating LiF and Ag as the cathode. The results of the large area monolithic PSCs together with the equivalent small area devices are summarized in Table 2. It can be seen that by implementing the modified aluminum grid electrodes, the large area device PCEs are considerably improved, with the best cell reaching 6.8% (versus 4.0% for the best cell without a grid). The increase in efficiency is mostly due to an improved fill factor, whereas JSC and VOC have not changed significantly. This can also be seen in the JV-characteristics of the best devices with and without the grid as shown in Fig. 3.
The improved fill factor originates from the enhanced charge collection efficiency due to the lower sheet resistance of the electrode, and therefore the reduced device series resistance. Additionally, the lower sheet resistance of the electrode might be expected to lead to an increase in the short circuit current density via the same mechanism. However, this is not the case for the following reasons: first, the active area of the device is reduced by up to 7% depending on the number of grid lines due to the opaque nature of the metal (∼0.96 [4 lines], ∼0.95 [5 lines] and ∼0.93 [6 lines]). Second, the thickness of the organohalide perovskite junction does vary over the substrate area. In ESI Fig. 2 the thickness distribution of the spin-coated perovskite junction over an area of approximately 4 cm × 4 cm is shown. A radial distribution of the thickness is evident with a 10 nm higher thickness in the center of the substrate than towards the edges. In Fig. 6 the measured EQE at different spots of the best device are presented. There is a clear variation in the shape of the EQE spectra depending on the measurement position, which indicates a non-uniform thickness distribution. This has previously been reported for large area organic solar cells with spin-coated active layers, and could be avoided by using a more suitable deposition process such as blade- and slot-die coating. The variation in perovskite active layer thickness leads to changes in the junction absorption, especially reducing the amount of absorbed photons in the red as previously shown by Lin et al., which results in the lower EQE in the region between 600 and 780 nm (Fig. 6b). Third, the height of the metal grid lines compared to the junction thickness could influence the growth of the organohalide perovskite crystals, but whether this is indeed the case needs further investigation.
Finally, it is worth noting that the results show that the devices with 5 and 6 grid lines (9.5 mm to 9 mm pitch of the lines) have similar solar cell parameters meaning that the slightly lower sheet resistance of the anode with 6 lines (2.1 Ω sq−1 instead of 2.4 Ω sq−1) does not deliver any further benefit. Only the devices with 4 grid lines and a pitch of 12 mm show a drop off in fill factor indicating that the average collection pathway is above the critical length resulting in increased recombination of free charge carriers before they reach the electrode contact.

In summary, we have developed a simple approach to achieve efficient monolithic 25 cm2 large area solar cells with a methylammonium lead triiodide perovskite junction in a planar architecture. To increase the conductivity of the transparent ITO electrode we incorporated aluminum grid lines, exposed to an UV-ozone plasma to enable the growth of an aluminum oxide layer coating. This specific grid design tackles two of the major issues of up-scaling PSCs, namely: (i) improving the conductivity of the TCE eliminates the need for the commonly used interconnected strip architecture, simplifying the manufacturing process, and reducing the loss in geometrical fill factor; and (ii) the use of the oxide layer significantly improves the wetting of the casting solutions (PEDOT:PSS and CH3NH3I:PbI2) on the grid electrodes therefore reducing possible electrical shorts between the cathode and anode. Unlike silver, the optimized aluminum/aluminum oxide grid was chemically stable when interfaced with the organohalide perovskite junction. The planar architecture adopted delivered respectable small cell (0.2 cm2) efficiencies of up to 14.8% and the equivalent 25 cm2 aperture device without a grid had a much reduced PCE – 4.0% at best. The 25 cm2 oxidized aluminum grid devices were considerably improved achieving a maximum PCE of 6.8%. We believe this efficiency could be further increased by optimizing the deposition process, e.g., by using more suitable large-area coating techniques like blade- or slot-die coating instead of spin-coating. This would also facilitate further scale-up to substrate dimensions compatible with standard silicon cells for the manufacture of tandem devices.


PEDOT:PSS was obtained from Heraeus (Clevios P VP. Al 4083). The lead iodide (PbI2, beads, 99.999% trace metals basis) was purchased from Sigma Aldrich and methylammonium iodide (MAI, MS101000-10) was purchased from Dyesol Pty Ltd. All commercial products were used as received.


The small area (0.2 cm2) devices were fabricated on glass substrates (2.5 cm × 2.5 cm) with a pre-patterned ITO layer (Xinyan, ∼18 Ω sq−1). The electrodes were cleaned using Alconox (detergent) solution and a soft cloth before being sonicated in sequence with Alconox, de-ionized water, acetone and 2-propanol for 10 min each, and then dried under a nitrogen flow. For the large area devices 6 cm × 6 cm glass substrates with an ITO layer (Kintec, ∼13 Ω sq−1) were patterned by photolithography and etched with 5 M hydrochloric acid. The electrodes were cleaned using Alconox solution and a soft cloth before being sonicated in sequence with Alconox, de-ionized water, acetone and 2-propanol for 10 min each, and then dried under a nitrogen flow. For the large area devices with metal grids, 750 nm thick silver, gold or aluminum lines (width 550 ± 50 μm, with the pitch between the lines being dependent on the number of lines) were thermally evaporated through a shadow mask at a vacuum of 10−6 mbar. The substrates with the aluminum grid were then exposed to a UV-ozone plasma (MBraun, MB UV-O3) for 15 min to grow the oxide layer. Each of the substrates were coated with a 30 ± 5 nm PEDOT:PSS layer by spin-coating at 5000 rpm for 30 s before being dried on a hot plate at 170 °C for 10 min. All the substrates were then transferred into a nitrogen filled glove box for device fabrication (O2 < 5 ppm, H2O < 5 ppm). CH3NH3PbI3 thin films were spin-coated as per the method reported by Jeon et al. 1.2 M PbI2 and MAI (e.g., 553 mg PbI2 and 191 mg MAI in 1 mL of solvent) were dissolved in a mixed solvent of γ-butyrolactone (GBL) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (7:3 v/v) with stirring and heating at 60 °C for 2 h. The solution was then dispensed onto the substrate until it was fully covered and spin-coated at 3000 rpm. After 42 s 1.7 mL of toluene was dispensed onto the middle of the spinning organohalide perovskite film. After a further 38 s of spinning at 3000 rpm the spin speed was increased to 5000 rpm for 20 s to dry the film. The substrates were then further dried on a hot plate at 100 °C to fully convert the film to the organohalide perovskite. In the next step a 10 mg mL−1 PC60BM in toluene solution was spin-coated onto the CH3NH3PbI3 layer at a spin speed of 1000 rpm for 20 s. The devices were heated on a hot plate at 70 °C for 10 min. Finally, 1 nm of LiF and 200 nm of Ag were deposited by thermal evaporation under a 10−6 mbar vacuum with a shadow mask to complete the device.


The morphology of the organohalide perovskite films and the cross-sectional structure of the solar cells were measured using a Hitachi SU3500 scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and a Jeol JSM-7100F field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) (Jeol JSM-7100F). The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) data were collected on a Kratos AXIS Ultra with a monochromatic Al X-ray source at 150 W and analyzed with CasaXPS software. The water contact angle of the grid lines were measured by a PSS OCA20 optical contact-measuring system. For the thickness mapping a SCI FilmTek 2000M spectroscopic reflectometer was used.


Current density–voltage (JV) characteristics were acquired in a nitrogen filled glovebox (O2 < 1 ppm, H2O < 1 ppm) using a Keithley 2400 Source Measure Unit and Agilent B1500A semiconductor analyzer. The simulated Air Mass 1.5 Global (AM 1.5 G) illumination was provided by an Abet Sun 2000 Solar Simulator. The light intensity used throughout was ∼1000 W m−2 (the exact number being used for efficiency calculations) as determined by an NREL-calibrated silicon reference cell with a KG5 filter. For the large area devices (25 cm2) the JV curves were measured using an Agilent B1500A semiconductor analyzer with a 4-wire configuration to eliminate the effect of the cable resistances and SMU internal impedance in the measurement circuit. The reason for this is that for the large area devices the current flowing in the circuit was much higher than for the small area devices resulting in a larger voltage drop over the cable resistance and SMU impedance, and thus the four-wire configuration compensates for the voltage drop. For the 0.2 cm2 devices 10 samples and for the 25 cm2 devices three samples were fabricated and tested. EQEs were measured with a QEX7 setup from PV Measurements Inc., using a calibrated photodiode. The area of the focused beam was approximately 0.15 cm2. The white light short circuit current and integrated small perturbation EQE currents were determined to be within 10% of each other as a final validation of the measurement protocols.


P. M. is an Australian Research Council Discovery Outstanding Research Award Fellow, and P. L. B. a University of Queensland Research Focused Fellow. Q. L. is supported by an International Postgraduate Research Scholarship (IPRS) from the Australian Government. This Program was funded by the Australian Government through the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA) Australian Centre for Advanced Photovoltaics. Responsibility for the views, information or advice expressed herein is not accepted by the Australian Government. This work was performed in part at the Queensland node of the Australian National Fabrication Facility (ANFF) – a company established under the National Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy to provide nano and micro fabrication facilities for Australia's researchers. The authors acknowledge the facilities, and scientific and technical assistance of the Australian Microscopy & Microanalysis Research Facility at the Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis, The University of Queensland.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta04973g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016