 DOI: 10.1039/C7TC03619A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 10728-10736


Yi
Ding
* and 

Yanli
Wang
*

Department of Physics, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310036, People's Republic of China. E-mail: dingyi2001@tsinghua.org.cn

Department of Physics, Center for Optoelectronics Materials and Devices, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Xiasha College Park, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310018, People's Republic of China. E-mail: wangyanli-04@tsinghua.org.cn

Received
10th August 2017
, Accepted 11th September 2017
First published on 12th September 2017
Utilizing first-principle calculations, we perform a systematic study on the electronic and magnetic properties of recently proposed graphene-like Be3C2 nanostructures. We found that although the Be3C2 nanosheet exhibits a Dirac feature in the nonmagnetic state, an intrinsic antiferromagnetism is preferred and it opens a sizeable band gap of 2.75 eV at the Dirac point. The edge stabilities of Be3C2 nanoribbons (Be3C2NRs) are revealed in detail, and indicate that the armchair and zigzag edges with Be- and C-terminations are all possibly obtained by careful control of the H and Be chemical potentials. Akin to the Be3C2 nanosheet, these Be3C2NRs are also antiferromagnetic semiconductors regardless of the edge shapes and terminations, whose band gaps are all insensitive to the ribbon width. Peculiar spintronic behaviors can be induced in the zigzag Be3C2NRs by electric fields, which can transform the Be-terminated nanoribbons into half-metals and turn the C-terminated ones into bipolar semiconductors or even spin-gapless-semiconductors. Similar electronic structures are also present in Be3Si2 and Be3Ge2 nanostructures, which are antiferromagnetic semiconductors with smaller band gaps. The valence and conduction band edges of Be3C2NRs straddle the redox potentials of water, and are suitable for photocatalytic water splitting, while for the Be3Si2 and Be3Ge2 nanostructures, the band edges could form a type-II band alignment with the MoS2 nanosheet, for which the combined hetero-nanostructures possess a high power conversion efficiency of up to 14–17% for photovoltaic solar cells. Our study demonstrates that beryllium group-IV nanostructures exhibit versatile electronic and magnetic properties, which endow them with many potential applications in nano-electrics and nano-energy devices.

Due to emergent topological phenomena, several novel quantum materials, such as topological insulators, Dirac semimetals, nodal-line semimetals, and Weyl metals have been discovered. Among them, the graphene system, which is a typical Dirac material with a simple honeycomb lattice, is one of the most popular topics in theoretical and experimental studies. Due to the hexagonal symmetry and half-filled pz orbitals of graphene, its π and π*-bands touch each other at the K point, constructing the Dirac cones in the system. Different processing methods have been proposed to tune the Dirac feature of graphene, such as surface decorations, periodic cavitations, impurity insertions, single and dual-doping approaches, substrate modulations, and so on. Among them, size-trim technology, which cuts two-dimensional (2D) nanosheets into one-dimensional (1D) nanoribbons, is an efficient way to tune the electronic and magnetic properties of graphene. Graphene nanoribbons (GNRs) with armchair edges are all nonmagnetic semiconductors, whose band gaps periodically decay with the ribbon width following the 3N rule. While for the zigzag ones, due to the localized edge states, a spontaneous spin-polarization occurs along the edges, which opens band gaps in the nanoribbons and they could be further modulated to half-metals by transverse electric fields.

Inspired by the progress on graphene, several analogous nanostructures, such as BN, SiC, silicene, germanene, and graphyne nanosheets, have been investigated. BN and SiC nanosheets share the same hexagonal structure as graphene, but the two sublattices of hexagons are occupied by different elements. This breaks the Dirac semimetallic feature and causes a remarkable band gap in the binary systems. Silicene and germanene nanosheets are elemental group-IV hexagonal nanosheets, which possess Dirac-like electronic properties like graphene. However, their basal planes are buckled, which means that the zero-band-gap features are easily altered by external impacts. Graphyne nanosheets are a porous form of graphene, where the C–C bonds are replaced by acetylene chains. Depending on the site and ratio of acetylene bonds, graphyne nanosheets can exhibit semiconducting, semimetallic, or metallic behaviors. Very recently, a graphene-like Be3C2 nanosheet has been predicted by an ab initio evolutionary structure search, which is proposed as a new type of Dirac material. Since 1D nanoribbons usually exhibit distinct properties from 2D nanosheets due to the edge effects and quantum confinement, it is essential to explore the corresponding Be3C2 nanoribbons. What are the stable edge structures in these nanoribbons? Do they behave like graphene nanoribbons or possess unique electronic properties? How about their Si and Ge analogues? To address these issues, we perform a comprehensive first-principles study on the structural stability, electronic and magnetic properties of Be3C2 nanoribbons and relevant Be3Si2, Be3Ge2 nanoribbons.

The first-principles calculations are performed using the VASP code, which utilizes the projector augmented wave pseudopotentials and plane-wave basis sets with a cut-off energy of 600 eV. The exchange and correlation (XC) functional is adopted in the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof revised for solid (PBEsol) form. In order to simulate isolated cases, a vacuum layer of more than 13 Å is added along the non-periodic directions. In the relaxation calculations, a k-mesh of 12 × 12 × 1 is used for the 2D nanosheet, and the k-meshes of 1 × 5 × 1, and 1 × 9 × 1 are adopted for the 1D armchair and zigzag nanoribbons, respectively, which are further increased to 21 × 21 × 1, 1 × 12 × 1 and 1 × 15 × 1 in the static calculations. All the structures are fully relaxed until the residual force is less than 0.01 eV Å−1. Considering that the traditional XC functional will underestimate the band gap of semiconductors, the band calculations are also performed by the hybrid Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof (HSE) XC functional, which is done using the FHI-aims code. In the HSE calculations, the HSE06 form with a screening parameter of 0.11 Bohr−1 is employed. The phonon calculations are performed using the phonopy code, and the geometrical structures in the paper are depicted using the VESTA code.

In order to determine the relative stability of the edges, the formation energies of the edges (Eedge) are calculated as Eedge = (ENRs − nBeEBe − nCEC − nHEH)/2L, where the ENRs is the total energy of a nanoribbon, EBe, EC, and EH are the energies of Be, C, and H elements, and nBe, nC, and nH are the numbers of corresponding atoms. L is the length of the nanoribbon, and the factor of 2 accounts for the two edges. Herein, the EH value is adopted as the energy of the H atom in H2 gas, i.e. EH = EH2/2, where EH2 is the total energy of an isolated H2 molecule. The EBe and EC values correspond to the energies of Be and C atoms in the Be3C2 nanosheet, which satisfy the thermodynamic equilibrium equation of 3EBe + 2EC = E2D, where E2D is the energy of the 2D Be3C2 nanosheet. Despite this constraint, the EBe and EC values can be varied in a certain range. Their upper limits are EC = ECatom and EBe = EBeatom, where EC/Beatom corresponds to the energy of an isolated C/Be atom in the spin-polarized calculations. They correspond to the C-rich (i.e. Be-poor) and Be-rich (i.e. C-poor) conditions, respectively. Under different conditions, the Eedge values would be altered accordingly.


Fig. 1(a) depicts the geometrical structure of the Be3C2 nanosheet, which is a flat honeycomb lattice akin to graphene. The C atoms still occupy the corners of hexagons, which are interconnected by Be atoms at the bridge sites. The Be–C bond length is 1.64 Å, which enlarges the lattice constant (a) to 5.69 Å in the Be3C2 nanosheet. Under the nonmagnetic (NM) state, the Be3C2 nanosheet exhibits a Dirac semimetallic behavior as shown in Fig. 1(c). Similar to graphene, the Dirac cones, which are made up of the C pz orbitals, also appear at the K point. Its Fermi velocity was found to be as high as 2.76/3.63 × 105 m s−1 using the PBEsol/HSE calculations, which agrees well with the previous result. However, we note that the direct band gap at the M point is small in the Be3C2 nanosheet, which is found to be only 0.71/0.97 eV using the PBEsol/HSE calculations. This value is much smaller than that of graphene (PBEsol: 4.0, HSE: 5.0 eV). According to the classical π-electron model based on the honeycomb lattice, which is  (c†i and cj are the creation and annihilation operators), the band gap of the M point can be expressed as EMg = 2t, where t is the hopping integral. Thus, the t between the adjacent C atoms is estimated to be 0.36/0.48 eV from the PBEsol/HSE result. Compared to graphene, the hopping integral is significantly reduced in the Be3C2 nanosheet, which is attributed to the C–C distance being enlarged by the Be atoms in between. When the spin degree is taken into account in the π-electron model, a Hubbard U term is added and the Hamiltonian becomes , where niσ = c†iσciσ (σ = ↑ or ↓). For this Hubbard Hamiltonian, when the ratio of the on-site Coulomb interaction to the hopping integral (U/t) is small, the system will retain the semimetallic features of the U = 0 case. However, when the U/t exceeds the critical point of Uc/t = 3.79–3.87, an antiferromagnetism will appear, which is accompanied by a semiconducting behaviour. For the C atom, the constrained random phase calculations have shown that its on-site Coulomb interaction U is about 8.7 eV in graphene, 4.3/2.5 eV in graphone and 9.8 eV in graphane nanosheets. Since the hopping integral t is quite small in the Be3C2 nanosheet, even for the smallest U value of the C element (2.5 eV), the ratio of U/t is much bigger than the critical point. This suggests that a spontaneous spin-polarization will occur in the Be3C2 nanosheet. Thus, we perform additional spin-polarized calculations on the Be3C2 nanosheet. Both the ferromagnetic (FM) and antiferromagnetic (AFM) states are taken into account in the calculations. It is found that the FM state always converges to the NM state, while the AFM state is stabilized in the Be3C2 nanosheet, which is lower in energy by 0.094 eV per unit than the NM state. The spin charge densities are displayed in Fig. 1(b), which show that the magnetism is mainly distributed on the C atoms. Utilizing the density derived electrostatic and chemical (DDEC) approach, the atomic magnetic moments of the C atoms on different sublattices are obtained as 0.60 and −0.60 μB, respectively, and the Be atoms are found to have zero moments. The magnetic transition temperature (Tc), i.e. the Néel temperature for the antiferromagnetic system, is estimated using  according to the mean-field approximation, where ΔEM is the energy gain of the AFM state and NM is the number of spin-polarized C atoms. For the Be3C2 nanosheet, the estimated Tc is 363 K, suggesting that the AFM state could be maintained around room temperature. Due to the AFM state, the zero-band-gap characteristic of the Be3C2 nanosheet is broken as shown in Fig. 1(d), which opens a sizeable direct band gap of 1.07/2.75 eV at the K point using the PBE/HSE calculations.

We have also performed supercell calculations on the 2 × 2 units in order to search for the possible magnetic orderings in the Be3C2 nanosheet. Four types of magnetic orderings, including the ferromagnetic (FM) and antiferromagnetic Néel (AFM1), zigzag (AFM2), and stripy (AFM3) ones (details can be seen in the ESI) are considered. However, after the self-consistent calculations, both FM and AFM2 configurations are converged to the nonmagnetic (NM) state, while the AFM1 and AFM3 configurations are still preserved. The total energy calculations show that the AFM1 configuration is the ground magnetic state, which is 417 meV lower than the AFM3 configuration. It should be noted that the magnetic ordering of the AFM1 configuration is the same as the AFM ordering in the unit cell, where the magnetic moments of the C atoms are antiparallelly coupled between different sublattices and parallelly coupled in the same sublattice. The effective exchange couplings between the nearest-neighbor and second nearest-neighbor C atoms are also estimated from the supercell calculations. Considering that only two antiferromagnetic configurations are stable, an extra configuration is constructed by flipping one C atom's spin direction in the AFM1 configuration. The obtained energies of different magnetic configurations are mapped to a classical spin Hamiltonian as . Here, 〈i,j〉 and 〈〈i,j〉〉 stand for the first and second nearest-neighbours (NNs), and Si/j is the atomic magnetic moment at the i/j site. The J1 and J2 are the exchange coupling parameters for the NN and second NN carbon pairs, which are estimated to be 214 and 17 meV, respectively. Such large positive J1 value favours the antiferromagnetic order in the Be3C2 nanosheet.
As a binary system, the Be3C2 nanosheet has four different types of edges in its ribbon form. As illustrated in Fig. 2(a), they are ABe, AC, ZBe and ZC ones, which correspond to the Be- or C-terminated armchair and zigzag edges, respectively. For the Be3C2 nanoribbons (Be3C2NRs) in Fig. 2(b)–(d), following previous conventions, H-passivation is used to eliminate the dangling bonds of edge atoms, and the ribbon width (NA/NZ) is adopted as the number of complete C–Be–C dimer/zigzag lines in the armchair/zigzag case. The corresponding Eedge values of NA-ABe/AC-Be3C2NRs and NZ-ZBe/ZC-Be3C2NRs are depicted in Fig. 3(a) and (b). It can be seen that the Eedge values are insusceptible to the ribbon width in both the armchair and zigzag cases. Under the C-rich conditions, the Eedge follows the order of AC(−0.42 eV Å−1) < ZC(−0.36 eV Å−1) < ZBe(0.49 eV Å−1) < ABe(0.56 eV Å−1), while under the Be-rich conditions, it changes to ABe(−0.18 eV Å−1) < ZBe(−0.15 eV Å−1) < ZC(0.28 eV Å−1) < AC(0.32 eV Å−1). This indicates that the relative stabilities of different edge types can be adjusted by the surroundings. To this end, we display the Eedge as a function of EBe in Fig. 3(c). For the EBe value, it can be tuned from the lower limit of EBe = (E2D − 2ECatom)/3 to the upper limit of EBe = EBeatom. Fig. 3(e) shows that as the EBe increases, the favourable edge type can be altered from AC to ZC, then to ZBe, and finally to the ABe type. Besides this, it is also worth mentioning that the first-principles calculations just correspond to the zero-temperature situation. In reality, for the H-passivated nanoribbons, the influence of finite temperature T and partial pressure P of H2 gas should be considered as an additional correction term of  on EH, which is expressed as . Here H0 (S0) is the enthalpy (entropy) at the pressure P0 = 1 bar that is obtained from the CRC handbook. As shown in Fig. 3(f), the regions of zigzag edges are pronouncedly expanded by a negative  value. For example, when , which corresponds to the surroundings at room temperature of 300 K and a small H2 partial pressure of 10−30 bar, the ZBe and ZC types of edges will be favoured in a wide EBe range of [−4.38 to −2.52] and [−2.52 to −0.74] eV, respectively. Therefore, as displayed in Fig. 3(d), through careful control of surrounding chemical potentials of H and Be elements, it is feasible to tailor the morphology of the edges in the Be3C2NRs and all four types of edges can be possibly formed in the experiments.
Now, we focus on the electronic structures of these Be3C2NRs. As shown in Fig. 4, under the NM state, the properties of Be3C2NRs are similar to the graphene counterparts. The armchair Be3C2NRs with either ABe or AC type exhibit a 3N-rule in their band structures: when NA = 3k and 3k + 1 (k is a positive integer), the NA-ABe/AC-Be3C2NRs are narrow-band-gap semiconductors, whereas if NA = 3k + 2, they become zero-band-gap semimetals. For the zigzag Be3C2NRs, both ZBe and ZC edges induce localized edge states at the Fermi level, causing metallic behavior in the nanoribbons. However, the spin-polarized calculations show that the AFM state is still more favourable than the NM state in these nanoribbons. As indicated in Fig. 5, both the armchair and zigzag Be3C2NRs have spin-polarized C atoms across the nanoribbons. The center C atoms well reproduce the magnetic moments of the 2D case, which are also ±0.60 μB as shown in Fig. 5(c) and (d), while the edge C atoms have larger atomic magnetic moments, which are ±0.66/±0.69 μB in the AC/ABe-Be3C2NRs and ±0.67/±0.69 μB in the ZC/ZBe-Be3C2NRs. The energy gains of the AFM state, i.e. ΔEM = EAFM − ENM, are depicted in Fig. 5(e) and (f) for the armchair and zigzag Be3C2NRs, respectively. Note that as the ribbon width increases, more spin-polarized C atoms are included in the nanoribbons, where the stronger ΔEM will be present. When the ΔEM values are averaged by the number of C atoms, the data converge to −0.052 and −0.055 eV C−1 in the armchair and zigzag Be3C2NRs, respectively. Both values are more negative than the Be3C2 nanosheet, i.e. −0.047 eV C−1, indicating that the stability of the AFM state is slightly enhanced in the ribbon form owing to the edge effects.
Under the AFM state, all the Be3C2NRs are semiconductors regardless of the edge types. For the sake of brevity, only the HSE results are displayed in Fig. 6. Different from the NM case, the band gaps under the AFM state are independent of the ribbon width as shown in Fig. 6(c) and (d), which follow the order of ABe(2.77–2.74) ≈ ZBe(2.77–2.72) > AC(2.61–2.58) > and ZC(2.49–2.48) eV. These gap values are all prominently larger than those of the graphene nanoribbons. Besides this, in Fig. 6(e) and (f), the absolute energies of the valence and conduction band edges are also depicted for the four types of Be3C2NRs. It can be seen that the band edges of these nanoribbons well straddle the redox potentials of water at pH = 0. The conduction band minimums (CBMs) are all above the redox potential of H+/H2 (−4.44 eV), and the valence band maximums (VBMs) are below the redox potential of O2/H2O (−5.67 eV). Owing to the suitable band edges and moderate band gaps, the Be3C2NRs are promising nanomaterials for photocatalytic water splitting applications.
For these Be3C2NRs, we found that the VBM and CBM of the C-terminated Be3C2NRs are always higher than those of the Be-terminated ones as shown in Fig. 6(e) and (f). This phenomenon stems from the different edge dipoles in the Be3C2NRs. According to the Pauling electronegativity of elements: Be(1.57) < H(2.20) < C(2.55), the H atom will gain electrons from Be atoms but lose electrons to C atoms. Through the DDEC analysis, it is found that in the ABe/ZBe-Be3C2NRs, the passivated H atoms carry a net atomic charge (NAC) of −0.45/−0.44 |e|, while the outmost edge Be atoms have positive NAC of +0.83/+0.81 |e|. As a result, a line of dipoles is formed at the edge, which point inward in the nanoribbon and raise the band edges. On the contrary, in the C-terminated edges, the NACs of the passivated H atoms and outmost edge C atoms are +0.18/+0.19 and −0.91/−0.96 |e| in the AC/ZC-Be3C2NRs, respectively, which produce dipoles pointing outward from the nanoribbon and lower the band edges. Therefore, the VBM and CBM of AC/ZC-Be3C2NRs are always higher than the ABe/ZBe ones. For the ABe/ZBe-Be3C2NRs, the CBM is located above the redox potential of H+/H2 at pH = 0, but it moves below the redox potential under the conditions of pH = 7 as shown in Fig. 6(e) and (f). This is because the hydrogen redox potential is uplifted by the pH value to be −4.44 + pH × 0.059 eV. Thus, the Be-terminated Be3C2NRs are only suitable for water splitting under the conditions of pH < 4. However, the CBM of AC/ZC-Be3C2NRs still locates above the hydrogen redox potential at pH = 7, which demonstrates that the C-terminated nanoribbons have a robust water splitting ability in a wider pH range of [0, 7].
Previous studies have declared that applying an electric field is an efficient way to tune the electronic properties of nanomaterials. Herein, we also try to use an electric field to modify the electronic structures of Be3C2NRs. It is found that for the armchair Be3C2NRs, the equivalence of the two spins is preserved under the electric field, which simultaneously diminishes the band gaps of spin up and down electrons. On the other hand, for the zigzag Be3C2NRs, since the edge C atoms belong to different sublattices, the electric field could break the equivalence of the two spins. Consequently, peculiar spintronic features will be produced in the ZBe/ZC-Be3C2NRs. As shown in Fig. 7, when the transverse electric field is applied to the 6-ZBe-Be3C2NR, its spin up and down band gaps are both decreased. However, the spin down gap is reduced more rapidly than the spin up gap, and the top valence and bottom conduction bands are always located in the spin down channel. When E = 0.3 V Å−1, the 6-ZBe-Be3C2NR is transformed into a half-metal with the spin up bands being semiconducting and the spin down bands being metallic. The situation becomes different in the 6-ZC-Be3C2NR. As displayed in Fig. 7(c) and (d), although the spin up and down band gaps are also reduced under an electric field, the top valence and bottom conduction bands of 6-ZC-Be3C2NR belong to different spins. The top valence band is contributed by the spin down electrons, while the bottom conduction band is made up of the spin up electrons. Thus, the 6-ZBe-Be3C2NR is transformed into a bipolar semiconductor by the electric field, which further turns into a spin-gapless-semiconductor when the field reaches E = 0.3 V Å−1.
In order to gain more insights into these peculiar spintronic properties, the partial density of states (PDOSs) of 6-ZBe/ZC-Be3C2NRs when E = 0 and 0.1 V Å−1 are depicted in Fig. 8. Herein, for the NZ = 6 cases, as shown in Fig. 5, the C1 and C2 (C12 and C11) atoms are the edge and next-to-edge C atoms in the left (right) side of the nanoribbons, respectively. It can be seen that for these 6-ZBe/ZC-Be3C2NRs, both the left and right side atoms have noticeable contributions to the states around the Fermi level. For the spin up electrons, the states of C12 and C2 atoms are present in the top valence region, while the states of C1 and C11 atoms appear in the bottom conduction region. The compositions of the valence and conduction states are reversed for the spin down electrons, i.e. the states of C1 and C11 (C12 and C2) atoms are in the top valence (bottom conduction) regions. When the transverse electric field is applied to the nanoribbon, as shown in Fig. 8 the states in the left side will be uplifted while the states in the right side will be moved downwards, which dominate the top valence and bottom conduction bands, respectively. Due to the Stark effect, the more left (more right) the C atoms, the more pronounced the energy increase (decrease) of their states. In the 6-ZBe-Be3C2NR, as illustrated in Fig. 8(e), under a zero field, the C1 and C2 states, as well as the C12 and C11 states, have almost degenerated energies in different spin channels. However, when a finite electric field of E = 0.1 V Å−1 is applied, the spin down C1 state will be above the spin up C2 state in the valence region and the spin down C12 state will be below the spin up C11 state in the conduction region. Thus, both the top valence and bottom conduction bands belong to the spin down electrons in the 6-ZBe-Be3C2NR. When the field is further increased to E = 0.3 V Å−1, the spin down band gap is closed, which results in a half-metallic behavior. While in the 6-ZC-Be3C2NR, as illustrated in Fig. 8(f), the C2 and C11 states are noticeably lower than the C1 and C12 ones under a zero field. As a result, the spin down C1 state is always above the spin up C2 state in the valence region, which constructs the top valence band of 6-ZC-Be3C2NR under the electric field. However, in the conduction region, because the spin up C11 state is evidently lower than the spin down C12 state, although the C12 state is moved downwards faster than the C11 state by the electric field, the bottom conduction band is still composed of the spin up C11 state. Thus, the top valence and bottom conduction bands of 6-ZC-Be3C2NRs belong to different spins under the electric field, which exhibit a typical bipolar semiconducting feature. The total band gap is gradually reduced, which is transformed to zero when E = 0.3 V Å−1 and turns the 6-ZC-Be3C2NR into a spin-gapless-semiconductor.
Finally, inspired by the recent progress of silicene and germanene, we also explored the possible Si and Ge analogues of the Be3C2 nanosheet. As shown in Fig. 9(a) and (b), the Be3Si2 and Be3Ge2 nanosheets are still flat honeycomb lattices akin to the Be3C2 nanosheets. The Si–Be and Ge–Be bond lengths are 2.12 and 2.13 Å, respectively, which lead to similar lattice constants of 7.34 and 7.39 Å in them. Their phonon dispersions are displayed in Fig. 9(c) and (d), which show no soft modes in the whole phonon dispersions. This indicates the robust dynamical stabilities for the Be3Si2 and Be3Ge2 systems. Akin to the Be3C2 nanosheet, the AFM state is preferred compared to the NM state in these Si and Ge analogues, and is 0.031 and 0.012 eV per unit more stable than the NM state, respectively. The Si and Ge atoms have the atomic magnetic moments of ±0.48 and ±0.34 μB in the Be3Si2 and Be3Ge2 nanosheets, respectively. As shown in Fig. 9(e) and (f), the Be3Si2 and Be3Ge2 sheets are Dirac semimetals under the NM state, while they become semiconductors under the AFM state with the HSE band gaps of 1.66 and 1.44 eV, respectively.
The band structures of the Be3Si2 and Be3Ge2 nanoribbons (Be3Si2NRs/Be3Ge2NRs) resemble those of their Be3Si2 counterparts. As shown in Fig. 10(a), the gap sizes of armchair Be3Si2NRs and Be3Ge2NRs are also insusceptible to the ribbon width, and follow the order of ASiBe(1.70–1.67) > ASi(1.62–1.60) > AGeBe(1.49–1.45) > AGe(1.41–1.38) eV. For the zigzag nanoribbons, they obey a similar order to ZSiBe(1.72–1.67) > ZSi(1.54–1.52) > ZGeBe(1.50–1.45) > ZGe(1.31–1.30) eV. However, when compared to the Be3C2 ones, the Be3Si2 and Be3Ge2 nanoribbons are no longer appropriate for water splitting owing to the higher VBM, which locates above the oxygen redox potential. Whereas the band edges of Be3Si2NRs and Be3Ge2NRs can well match the band alignment of MoS2 nanosheets for thin-film photovoltaic applications. As shown in Fig. 10(c), the type-II band alignment can be formed between the MoS2 nanosheet and Be3Si2NRs/Be3Ge2NRs. Thus, when the nanoribbons are superimposed onto the MoS2 surface, the MoS2 layer will be an acceptor while the Be3Si2NRs/Be3Ge2NRs will be the donor materials. The formed heterostructure can be utilized as an excitonic solar cell, whose power conversion efficiency (PCE) is estimated as
where
Jsc, Voc, βFF, and Psolar are the short circuit current, the open-circuit voltage, the band-fill factor, and the incident solar radiation, respectively. Following the previous works, the βFF value is set to 0.65, and Voc is adopted as Edg−ECBO−0.3, where Edg is the band gap of the donor part, ECBO is the conduction band offset between the acceptor and donor materials, and 0.3 is an empirical factor for energy conversion kinetics. Jsc is calculated using the integral in the numerator in the limit external quantum efficiency of 100%, and the Psolar in the denominator is the integrated AM 1.5 solar energy flux, which amounts to 1000 W m−2. As shown in Fig. 10(d), for the NA, NZ = 6 cases, the ηPCE of MoS2/Be3Si2NRs are 14.5–15.1% for the four types of edges, and the corresponding ηPCE values of MoS2/Be3Ge2NRs are increased to 15.5–17.2% due to the smaller conduction band offset to MoS2 and moderate band gaps. In particular, the AGeBe-Be3Ge2NRs can exhibit a high ηPCE of 17.2–16.8% with the MoS2 nanosheet, which is comparable to the previously proposed phosphorene–MoS2 (16–18%), Al2C–WSe2/MoTe2 (13.0–18.4%), and SiC2–GaN/ZnO (12–20%) systems. This indicates that these Be3C2-like Si/Ge-based nanostructures would be fascinating materials for green and sustainable energy applications.


In summary, we have performed a comprehensive investigation on graphene-like Be3C2 and the relevant Si, Ge nanostructures. We have found that (1) an intrinsic antiferromagnetism is preferred in the Be3C2 nanosheet, transforming it from a Dirac semimetal to a direct-band-gap semiconductor. (2) Such antiferromagnetism will be enhanced in the nanoribbons, and regardless of edge shapes and terminations, all the Be3C2NRs are semiconductors with width-independent band gaps. (3) Diverse spintronic properties can be introduced in zigzag Be3C2 nanoribbons by an electric field, which could convert the Be-terminated ribbons into half-metals and transform the C-terminated ones into bipolar semiconductors or even spin-gapless-semiconductors. (4) Unlike the buckled structures in silicene and germanene, the dynamically stable Be3Si2 and Be3Ge2 nanosheets are still flat honeycomb lattices, which exhibit electronic properties similar to the Be3C2 ones. (5) The Be3C2 nanoribbons possess moderate band gaps and suitable valence/conduction band edges for photocatalytic water splitting applications, while the Be3Si2 and Be3Ge2 nanoribbons would be utilized in photovoltaic solar cells with MoS2 nanosheets, for which the combined hetero-nanostructures have high power conversion efficiencies of up to 14–17%. Our study demonstrates that the beryllium group-IV nanomaterials exhibit versatile electronic and magnetic properties, which endow them with promising applications in nano-electrics and nano-energy fields.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors acknowledge the support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (11474081, 11774312), the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (LY15A040008), and the Special Program for Applied Research on Super Computation of the NSFC-Guangdong Joint Fund (The Second Phase).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1: Four types of magnetic configurations considered in the supercell calculations. See DOI: 10.1039/c7tc03619a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017