 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA08262E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 561-567


Yuanhang
Cheng
,

Ho-Wa
Li
,

Jinfeng
Zhang
,

Qing-Dan
Yang
,

Taili
Liu
,

Zhiqiang
Guan
,

Jian
Qing
,

Chun-Sing
Lee
 and 

Sai-Wing
Tsang
*

Department of Physics and Materials Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, P. R. China. E-mail: saitsang@cityu.edu.hk

Center of Super-Diamond and Advanced Films (COSDAF), City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, P. R. China

Received
14th October 2015
, Accepted 20th November 2015
First published on 24th November 2015
Solution processed metal–organic halide perovskite photovoltaic devices have recently drawn tremendous attention due to their simplicity of fabrication and high efficiency. Despite numerous reports on optimizing perovskite films with different fabrication approaches, there is limited understanding on the correlation between sensitive processing conditions and the microstructural and electronic properties of perovskite films. Here we combine several opto-electrical spectroscopy techniques to investigate the methylammonium iodide (MAI) loading time effect on the doping density profile and uncoordinated ions in resulting CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite thin films. We find that even in a very short period of different loading times within two minutes, there is a significant impact on the device power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 2% to over 15%. It is found that the doping density profile is inhomogeneous across the perovskite film with too short MAI loading time, resulting in an S-shape in the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics. On the other hand, devices with too long loading time have excess uncoordinated ions attributed to the J–V hysteresis. By using combined spectroscopy techniques to pinpoint the electronic properties in perovskite films, this work would shed light on the understanding of the controversial origins of the reported S-shape and hysteresis in perovskite photovoltaic cells.

Organic–inorganic metal halide perovskite solar cells have recently attracted much attention due to strong light harvesting, high charge-carrier mobility, and long charge-carrier diffusion length. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells has increased dramatically from 3.8% to 20.2% in the last several years. Such encouraging progress is contributed by the efforts on interface engineering to enhance the charge collection, solvent engineering to improve crystal formation, and deposition methods to achieve more controllable growth of perovskite thin films. It is well known that a uniform and pinhole-free perovskite film is critical for achieving high device performance. Therefore, a huge amount of efforts have been focused on optimizing the fabrication processes to manipulate the nucleation and growth of perovskite thin films. Regarding the methods to prepare perovskite films, various approaches have been developed such as vacuum deposition, vapor-assisted solution process, and solution deposition. Among these deposition approaches, solution deposition has shown promise due to its relatively simple process and potentially low-cost. In general, solution deposition of perovskite films has been demonstrated with one-step and two-step approaches. In the one-step approach, precursors of metal halide and organohalide are dissolved in a single solution and coated on a substrate by spin-coating. Despite the simplicity of this deposition process, the application of this one-step method is still limited because of the challenge to control the fast nucleation of perovskite crystals upon deposition, which induces large variation in morphologies and therefore the device reproducibility.

On the other hand, for the two-step sequential deposition (spin-coating or dipping), a lead iodide (PbI2) film is first spin-coated on a substrate, followed by spin-coating methylammonium iodide CH3NH3I (MAI) solution on top of the PbI2 film or dipping the PbI2 film in a MAI solution to complete the conversion reaction of PbI2 to CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite. In contrast to the one-step method, the two-step approach has better control of the growth of perovskite crystals by finely adjusting the deposition conditions at each step. However, in this two-step method, the degree of intermixing of the two stacking precursor thin films plays a key role in determining the crystal growth during the post-annealing process. Very recently, two strategies have been proposed to facilitate the diffusion of MAI into the PbI2 film prior to the conversion reaction to develop homogeneous perovskite thin films. K. Zhu et al., used a mixed precursor of PbI2:MAI instead of the pure PbI2 precursor to deposit the first layer. The authors claimed that the pre-expansion of PbI2 into PbI2–MAI favored the diffusion of MAI into the underneath PbI2 layer to facilitate the conversion reaction of PbI2 to perovskite. Another approach was demonstrated by N.-G. Park et al., in which the PbI2 film was deposited on a mesoporous TiO2 scaffold in the first step. The mesoporous scaffold induced a PbI2 film with a porous structure, and this facilitated the diffusion of MAI and the conversion reaction. They also found that the concentration and loading time of MAI on the PbI2 film before spin-coating had a significant impact on the size and shape of perovskite crystals and the corresponding photovoltaic performance. Nevertheless, questions still remain on (1) whether the intermixing can only be achieved by modifying the first layer deposition approach as reported in ref. 22 and 23, and more fundamentally (2) how such an intermixing alters the structural and electronic properties of the perovskite thin films.
In this report, even without modifying the first layer deposition, we can achieve a PCE over 15% in a simple two-step solution process. We have found that the loading time of the MAI precursor on the PbI2 thin film has a determinable effect on the perovskite crystal formation and corresponding photovoltaic performance. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) results reveal an incomplete conversion reaction of PbI2 to CH3NH3PbI3 with short loading time, which directly affects the photovoltaic performance of the perovskite solar cells as demonstrated in the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics. The photovoltaic device shows a dramatic improvement with the optimal MAI loading time with the highest PCE of 15.58% without notable photocurrent hysteresis. Capacitance–voltage and electroabsorption spectroscopy results confirm a more complete conversion reaction and homogeneous chemical potential distribution in the perovskite films with the optimal MAI loading time.


Fig. 1(a) depicts the two-step fabrication processes used in this study. In the first step, the PbI2 layer was deposited on the PEDOT:PSS substrate, followed by drying at 70 °C for 10 minutes inside a N2 filled glovebox. In the second step, MAI solution was dropped on the PbI2 film, a loading time varying from 0 s to 120 s was carefully controlled before spinning. Finally, solvent annealing was used to facilitate the crystal growth and conversion reaction of the precursor materials to CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite thin films. We hypothesized that the composition profile of the perovskite films should strongly depend on the loading time of the MAI solution on the PbI2 film, as it would take time for MAI to diffuse deeper into the underneath PbI2 film in order to achieve a complete conversion reaction. As shown in Fig. 1(b), the XRD peak which belongs to PbI2 at around 12.7° decreases as the MAI loading time increases. A nearly complete conversion reaction from precursors to CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite is found with MAI loading time more than 90 s. Fig. 1(c) shows the intensity ratios of PbI2 at 12.7° to CH3NH3PbI3 at 14.1° with different MAI loading times. It is clearly shown that the PbI2 peak dramatically decreases with the MAI loading time within the first 30 s, and it gradually decreases with the loading time up to 120 s. According to the XRD results, there are two implications: (1) the composition profile of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite film is strongly dependent on the MAI loading time; (2) the rapid change of film composition with the loading time less than 30 s would cause reproducibility issues in the photovoltaic cell performance.

Besides the impact on the composition, it is also expected that the MAI loading time would determine the growth of the perovskite crystals. Fig. 2 shows the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the perovskite thin films prepared with different MAI loading times. For the samples prepared with different loading times less than 30 s, the perovskite crystals are closely packed without notable difference in the crystal size. However, when the MAI loading time is increased to 60 s, the size of the crystal is significantly increased with the largest lateral dimension more than 1 μm. This agrees with the XRD results and suggests that the longer MAI loading time leads to better intermixing of the two precursors PbI2 and MAI, which facilitates the conversion reaction and the growth of perovskite crystals. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. S1, the perovskite thin films prepared by this simple two-step method have excellent coverage without notable pinholes. Therefore, from the above structural and topological studies, it is expected that such strong dependence of composition and crystals of perovskite thin films on the MAI loading time would have significant impact on the photovoltaic performance.

Fig. 3 shows the photovoltaic performance of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite photovoltaic devices prepared with different MAI loading times. The devices have a general structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS (40 nm)/perovskite (270–290 nm)/C60 (20 nm)/BCP (5 nm)/Au (100 nm). Fig. 3(a) shows the J–V characteristics of the devices under AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2, the results are summarized in Fig. 3(b) and Table 1. In order to obtain a statistical result, 16 to 20 devices were fabricated for each MAI loading time condition. It is clearly shown that the PCE of devices increases significantly with longer MAI loading time from 1.84% at 0 s to 15.58% at 60 s, corresponding to the improvement in open circuit voltage (Voc) from 0.74 V to 0.96 V, short circuit current density (Jsc) from 9.54 mA cm−2 to 21.82 mA cm−2, and fill factor (FF) from 27.4% to 74.3%. It should be noted that S-shaped J–V curves are obtained in devices with short MAI loading times below 30 s. It suggests the presence of double-diode and it is possibly ascribed to the inhomogeneous vertical composition profile of the perovskite films which will be further discussed later. According to the XRD and SEM results, the enhancement in the photovoltaic performance of the perovskite solar cell is ascribed to the more complete conversion reaction of PbI2 to CH3NH3PbI3 and larger crystal size with longer MAI loading time. However, interestingly, when the MAI loading time is further increased to 120 s, the PCE drops unexpectedly to only 7.05% due to the significant reduction in Jsc (15.65 mA cm−2) and FF (49.79%), where the Voc is still comparable to the best devices prepared with 60 s loading time. Recently, H. A. Harms et al. have found that the long reaction time of the MAI could reduce CH3NH3PbI3 to PbI2. However, we do not observe such back extraction according to the XRD results, where only a small amount of PbI2 is observed with 120 s MAI loading time. Moreover, it has also been reported that a small amount of PbI2 in the perovskite film would induce the passivation effect and enhance the device performance. However, it is not clear on the passivation mechanism and it is difficult to judge how a small amount of PbI2 is required to have the passivation effect. As shown in Fig. 1(c), in fact, there is still some PbI2 in long loading time samples. Therefore, we suspected that the large reduction in Jsc with too long MAI loading time would be caused by excess uncoordinated ions, which increased the probability of charge carrier recombination. This will be further elaborated later with the electroabsorption spectroscopy measurement results of the devices with different MAI loading times. To investigate the effect of BCP between the electron transporting layer (C60) and metal electrode (Au) on the photovoltaic performance, devices without BCP were also fabricated. As shown in Fig. S2, it is clear that the device has poor photovoltaic performance even with 60 s as the MAI loading time without using the BCP.
Loading time (s)

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
0
0.74
9.54
27.4
1.94
15
0.72
15.27
25.2
2.77
30
0.92
16.11
43.8
6.51
60
0.96
21.82
74.3
15.58
90
0.92
15.40
55.1
7.81
120
0.90
15.65
49.8
7.05
In order to obtain the statistical results and to investigate the reproducibility of the perovskite solar cells, we prepared 16 to 20 devices for each MAI loading time from 0 s to 120 s. As shown in Fig. 3(b), it is clear that the devices with 60 s loading time have the highest photovoltaic performance and reproducibility.
We sought to investigate the impact of different MAI loading times on the composition profile of the perovskite thin films. Fig. 3(c) shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of all the devices. The device prepared with MAI loading for 60 s exhibits a broad spectral response with the highest EQE over 80%. It is worth noting that the EQE of devices with 0 s, 15 s and 30 s MAI loading times was particularly lower in the range from 300 nm to 500 nm. According to the XRD results, when the MAI loading times are 0 s, 15 s and 30 s, there is still a considerable amount of PbI2 residue under the perovskite layer due to the incomplete conversion reaction. As shown in UV-vis spectra in Fig. 4(a), for different MAI loading time samples, although the optical absorption is comparable around the energy band edge, the samples with smaller MAI loading times have smaller absorption from 400 nm to 600 nm and this is consistent with the smaller EQE obtained in those devices. In addition, the inhomogeneous composition of the perovskite samples with short MAI loading time is also confirmed by the frequency dependent dielectric properties of the perovskite thin films at a frequency range from 103 Hz to 105 Hz as shown in Fig. S3. The dielectric constant is calculated according to the following equation:
(1)
where
C is the measured capacitance, εr is the dielectric constant of the sample, ε0 is the dielectric constant in a vacuum (ε0 ≈ 8.854 × 10−14 F cm−1), A (0.1 cm2) is the active area and d is the thickness. Compared to pure PbI2, CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite has a two to three fold higher dielectric constant, and it increases with longer MAI loading time up to 60 s. It suggests that the perovskite films with shorter loading times are composite films of PbI2 and CH3NH3PbI3, and it is in good agreement with previous structural and opto-electrical results. Interestingly, the sample prepared with 120 s MAI loading time has strong frequency dependence: the dielectric constant increases from 30 to 50 towards lower AC modulation frequency. Considering different relaxation processes, the dielectric response at the frequency range from 10 Hz to 1 MHz is contributed by both orientational (dipolar) and ionic (migration of ions) responses. Typically, the dipole contributed dielectric constant has a much faster response than that from ionic. Consequently, the small frequency dependence of the dielectric constant of the samples prepared with MAI loading time less than 90 s suggests negligible contribution from the ionic response. On the other hand, the increase of the dielectric response of the sample with 120 s loading time at lower frequency is due to the ionic contribution from the uncoordinated ions with excess MA+. It is possibly the origin of the large reduction of the Jsc for the photovoltaic device prepared with 120 s MAI loading time, where the excess uncoordinated ions act as recombination centers to reduce the photocurrent. Details of the recombination kinetics due to the excess uncoordinated ions are still under investigation and will be reported elsewhere.

To further investigate the impact of the inhomogeneous composition profile on the electrical properties of the perovskite devices, we applied the Mott–Schottky analysis by measuring the capacitance–voltage (CV) characteristics of the devices as shown in Fig. 5(a). The doping density N(x),
(2)
can be calculated as a function of distance
x = ε0εrA/C from the Schottky junction using the CV results. Recently, Wang et al. reported composition-dependent self-doping in CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite, where they have found that the MAI-rich and PbI2-rich CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite films are p-type and n-type, respectively. Therefore, the composition is directly correlated with the doping density and energy band structure. Consequently, in the two-step deposition approach, where the MAI concentration is higher at the top of the perovskite films, the perovskite becomes p-type and forms a Schottky junction at the CH3NH3PbI3/C60 interface. As shown in Fig. 5(b), the doping profile with a plateau region beyond 20 nm from the junction can be observed in both devices with the MAI loading time more than 30 s, where the doping density is around 5 × 1016 cm−3. This value is consistent with that previously reported by the potential profiling method. On the other hand, for the device with 15 s MAI loading time, the doping density profile is not homogeneous: the doping density is higher at 30 nm to 40 nm from the CH3NH3PbI3/C60 interface. As in thermal equilibrium, the energy band profile in the perovskite film depends on the doping density, such a inhomogeneous doping density profile would introduce a double diode effect across the perovskite thin films and this explains the observed S-shaped J–V characteristics in the devices with short MAI loading time.

In addition, the effect of the MAI loading time on the J–V hysteresis with respect to the scan direction was also investigated as shown in Fig. 6 and Table S1. Significant J–V hysteresis can be observed for the devices prepared with short MAI loading time (0 s, 15 s and 30 s). Such hysteresis decreases with increasing MAI loading time. Eventually, for the device with 60 s MAI loading time, there is no notable hysteresis. Although such a hysteresis has been widely reported, the origin is still unclear. It has been proposed that the hysteresis in perovskite solar cells can be caused by defect states at the perovskite crystal boundaries, ferroelectric properties of the perovskite, and excess ions (I− and MA+). Regarding the crystal size effect, as shown in Fig. 6(a)–(c), the J–V hysteresis is reduced with increasing the MAI loading time from 0 s to 30 s, where the films have almost the same crystal size as shown in Fig. 2. Therefore, instead of the defect states at crystal boundaries, we suspected that the excess ions with an incomplete conversion reaction in both too short and too long MAI loading times play a key role in the J–V hysteresis. However, it is challenging to directly probe ions in solid state thin films by a microscopy technique. Although it has been reported that the relatively small mass of MA+ in perovskite crystals would migrate to the electrode after electrical pooling which was observed by photothermal induced resonance (PTIR) microscopy, it is still unclear if the final electronic status is an ionic MA+ or a neutralized MAI when reacted with other ionic species. Therefore, a direct approach to probe the contribution of ions on the electronic properties is highly desired to confirm such a critical detrimental effect. Since any excess ions would alter the internal electrical field in the perovskite thin film, we used a highly sensitive electroabsorption (EA) technique to probe the field dependent electronic properties in different MAI loading time samples. According to the Stark effect, the 2nd harmonic response of the excitonic-transition signal is proportional to the magnitude of the ac electrical field across the perovskite films, i.e. −ΔT/T ∝ Fac2. In the case of excess ions, it would screen out the applied electrical field and eventually reduce the EA signal. Fig. 7 shows the 2nd order harmonic EA spectra of the devices with different MAI loading times. It is interesting that the magnitude of the peaks for the devices with 0 s and 120 s MAI loading times is significantly lower under the same measurement conditions. This supports the hypothesis that there are excess ions in the perovskite films in both cases, where the excess ions screen out the electrical field in the bulk and reduce the EA signal. As discussed before, the excess ions are due to the incomplete conversion reaction of the precursor materials. It should be noted that the excess ions with long loading time are not covered on top of the perovskite films. As shown in Fig. S4, there is no improvement even when washing the perovskite film with IPA after the reaction process. This is contradictory to the previous report that the unreacted ions can be washed away in a dipping reaction approach. This further confirms that the uncoordinated ions are distributed in the bulk of the perovskite thin film and reduced the photocurrent.

To conclude, we report a systematic study of the effect of the MAI loading time in a two-step solution deposition approach on the structural and opto-electrical properties of planar CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite photovoltaic cells. We have found that the photovoltaic device performance is very sensitive to the MAI loading time during the reaction of the two precursors in the first two minutes. Having the optimal MAI loading time, the device can achieve a PCE of 15.58% with excellent reproducibility without J–V hysteresis. Using capacitance–voltage measurements and electroabsorption spectroscopy, we have found that both the S-shape and the hysteresis in the J–V characteristics are due to the inhomogeneous composition profile and excess uncoordinated ions, respectively. This work using the simple combined spectroscopy techniques bring insight into the origin of the hot-debating detrimental J–V characteristics in perovskite solar cells, which facilitates the understanding of the impact of processing conditions for achieving high performance photovoltaic devices.


PbI2, anhydrous N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) and anhydrous 2-propanol (IPA) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The conducting polymer poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS, Al4083) was purchased from Clevios, and the CH3NH3I was purchased from Lumtec. All the chemicals were used without any further purification.


ITO glasses were cleaned in ultrasonic bath containing deionized water, acetone and ethanol for 15 minutes each, and then treated in an UV ozone cleaner for 20 min. 40 nm of PEDOT:PSS was deposited onto the ITO surface at 4000 rpm for 40 s, followed by annealing at 150 °C for 15 minutes in air. 100 μL PbI2 solution (462 mg mL−1 in DMF) was then spin-coated on the top of the PEDOT:PSS layer at 4000 rpm for 40 s, and dried at 70 °C for 10 min. After cooling to room temperature, 200 μL CH3NH3I solution (35 mg mL−1 in IPA) was dropped on the surface of PbI2 with various loading times from 0 s to 120 s, followed by spin-coating at 4000 rpm for 40 s. To increase the growth of CH3NH3PbI3, the perovskite films were covered by a Petri dish on a hot plate at 100 °C for 1 hour. 15 μL DMF solvent was added at the edge of the Petri dish during the annealing process. Subsequently, 20 nm thick layer of fullerene C60 and 5 nm thick layer of 2,9-dimethyl-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline (BCP) were deposited on the perovskite thin films by thermal evaporation. Finally, a 100 nm Au electrode was deposited by thermal evaporation. The effective area of the device was 0.1 cm2.


The composition of the perovskite film was investigated by X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements on a D2 Phaser instrument using CuKα (λ = 0.154 nm) radiation. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Philips XL30 FEG) measurements were conducted to demonstrate the morphology of perovskite films. The current–voltage (J–V) curves were measured using a Keithley 2400 source meter under AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2. It should be noted that there is no DC bias applied on the devices prior to the J–V scan. External quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements were conducted by using a power source which was focused through a monochromator and a chopper. The corresponding signal was recorded by using a lock-in amplifier (Stanford research, SR830) and a current preamplifier to enhance large signal to noise ratio. The capacitance–voltage (CV) and capacitance–frequency (CF) measurements were conducted with a HP4284A semiconductor analyzer. The electroabsorption (EA) measurements were conducted with the same optical setup used in EQE. During the EA measurement, 0.5 V alternating voltage (AC) with zero DC voltage bias was applied on the perovskite devices. The electrical field induced optical absorption was recorded by using a Si detector in the visible range and a Ge detector in the IR range by using a lock-in technique. The thickness of each thin film was measured by using a dektak profilometer.


This work is supported by the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China (Project No. 21201514) and CityU start-up grant (CityU – 7200372, CityU – 9610309).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta08262e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016