 DOI: 10.1039/C8QI00076J
(Research Article)
Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 1370-1377


Yafeng
Xu
,

Wenyong
Chen
,

Xihong
Ding
,

Xu
Pan
,

Linhua
Hu
,

Shangfeng
Yang
,

Jun
Zhu
* and 

Songyuan
Dai
*

Key Laboratory of Photovoltaic and Energy Conservation Materials, Institute of Applied Technology, Hefei Institutes of Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei 230031, China. E-mail: zhujzhu@gmail.com

Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, Key Laboratory of Materials for Energy Conversion, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Synergetic Innovation Center of Quantum Information & Quantum Physics, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China

Beijing Key Laboratory of Novel Thin Film Solar Cells, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, China. E-mail: sydai@ncepu.edu.cn

National Engineering Lab of Special Display Technology, State Key Lab of Advanced Display Technology, Academy of Opto-Electronic Technology, Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory of Advanced Functional Materials and Devices, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei 230009, China

Received
29th January 2018
, Accepted 4th April 2018
First published on 4th April 2018
Interfacial charge recombination is a serious problem in semiconductor-sensitized solar cells which severely limits the power conversion efficiency. Herein, an ultrathin SiO2 blocking layer was introduced to the TiO2 surface to suppress the interfacial recombination in Sb2S3-sensitized solar cells. The SiO2 blocking layer was deposited by a simple chemical bath method. Due to the unique features of the SiO2 layer, the Sb2S3 sensitizer shows a remarkable change in the morphology after SiO2 coating, forming numerous irregular large crystals which did not bring a negative impact. Electrochemical impedance spectra and open-circuit voltage-decay analysis confirm that the SiO2 layer efficiently suppresses the interfacial recombination at the TiO2/Sb2S3 interface which is the major recombination path in the solar cells. As a result, the device exhibits remarkably enhanced open-circuit voltage, fill factor and power conversion efficiency.

Semiconductor-sensitized solar cells which evolved from dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) mainly consist of three parts: semiconductor sensitizers, electron transporting materials (ETM, typically TiO2 mesoporous films), and hole transporting materials (HTM). Due to the high absorption coefficient, tunable band gap, potential multiple exciton effect and diversity of preparation methods, semiconductor-sensitized solar cells have attracted much attention over the past ten years. A series of semiconductor sensitizers have been investigated and demonstrated excellent photovoltaic performances, including CdSe, PbS, CuInS2, CuInSe2, Sb2S3, and perovskites. Sb2S3 is a direct band gap semiconductor with a band gap of ∼1.7 eV in its crystalline form. The first Sb2S3-sensitized solar cell achieving an efficiency of 3.37% was reported by Hodes’ team. In recent years, much effort has been devoted to improving the photovoltaic performance and investigating the mechanism. By optimizing the HTM and reducing the defect states in the Sb2S3 sensitizer, Sb2S3-sensitized solar cells with efficiency up to 7.5% have been reported.

Charge recombination usually occurs in the semiconductor-sensitized solar cells and deteriorates the device performance, due to the defect states in the sensitizers and the TiO2 mesoporous films. The charge recombination can be divided into two categories: recombination related to the defect states in the sensitizers and the recombination at the ETM/sensitizer/HTM interfaces. To overcome the former problem, a variety of strategies have been developed that aimed at synthesizing high-quality sensitizers. In quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs), well-designed core/shell and alloyed QD sensitizers have been synthesized. For the latter, three main recombination pathways are included: (1) electron recombination from the sensitizer to the HTM at the sensitizer/HTM interface, (2) back electron recombination from the ETM to the sensitizer at the ETM/sensitizer interface and (3) direct recombination from the ETM to the HTM at the ETM/HTM interface. Interfacial modification with thin blocking layers has been proved to be an efficient method to suppress the interfacial recombination, such as ZnS, CdS and ZnSe which are the most common materials to modify the interface in QDSSCs. Other materials like TiO2, Al2O3, SiO2, ZrO2, MgO and Nb2O5 have also been widely investigated in DSSCs and QDSSCs. In addition to the photovoltaic performance, some oxide blocking layers also help to improve the device stability due to the isolation between sensitizers and corrosive electrolytes. However, to date, little work has been done on suppressing the interfacial recombination in Sb2S3-sensitized solar cells. Tsujimoto et al. treated TiO2 films with Ba2+, Mg2+ and Al3+ to form BaTiO3, MgO and Al2O3 thin films. The devices with Ba2+/Mg2+ double treatment obtained an efficiency of 4.1% which is 45% higher than the reference devices. Fukumoto et al. treated the Sb2S3-sensitized TiO2 films with 1-decyl phosphonic acid (DPA) to reduce the recombination. The DPA-treated devices exhibited increased open circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF).
In this article, we introduced a SiO2 blocking layer into Sb2S3-sensitized solar cells. The SiO2 layer was coated on mesoporous TiO2 films with a low-temperature chemical method. Duo to the porosity of the amorphous SiO2 layer, numerous irregular large Sb2S3 crystals are formed throughout the mesoporous films which thus improves the light absorption. Sb2S3-sensitized solar cells based on the SiO2-coated films exhibit enhanced VOC and FF compared to the devices based on bare TiO2 films. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and open-circuit voltage-decay (OCVD) analysis indicates that the interfacial recombination is greatly suppressed after SiO2 coating.

Titanium diisopropoxide dis(acetylacetonate) (75 wt% in isopropanol) and tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS, 99.9%) were purchased from Alfa Aesar. SbCl3 (99.9%) was purchased from Aladdin. 1,2-Dichlorobenzene (99%) and poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT, Rieke Metals, RMI-001EE) were purchased from J&K Chemical Ltd. Ethanol (AR), 1-butanol (GR), acetone (AR), ammonium hydroxide (25–28%) and Na2S2O3 (99%) were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co. Ltd. All chemicals were used as received without any further purification.


Patterned FTO-coated glass (Pilkington, TEC 15) was cleaned with a detergent and deionized water under sonication for 20 min. After that, the glass was treated by a UVO cleaner for 15 min prior to use. To prepare the TiO2 blocking layer (∼60 nm), 0.15 M titanium diisopropoxide dis(acetylacetonate) solution in 1-butanol was spin-coated on a FTO glass substrate at 2800 rpm for 20 s, which was followed by drying at 125 °C for 5 min. The spin-coating and drying processes were repeated three times. The dried TiO2 precursor was then sintered at 510 °C for 30 min in a dry air flow. A mesoporous TiO2 layer (∼1 μm) was spin-coated at 3000 rpm onto the FTO/bl-TiO2 substrate using a homemade P25 TiO2 (Degussa) paste diluted with ethanol, and then calcined at 510 °C for 30 min in air. The mp-TiO2 film was dipped into a 40 mM TiCl4 aqueous solution at 70 °C for 30 min and washed with deionized water and calcined again at 510 °C for 30 min. Then the mp-TiO2 film was dipped into 0.01 M TEOS ethanol solution containing 0.1 M NH4OH for 1.5 h and rinsed with ethanol to form a SiO2 thin film on mp-TiO2. Sb2S3 was deposited on the mp-TiO2 film by a chemical bath deposition (CBD) method as described by Messina et al. The chemical bath was prepared by mixing 2.5 mL of 1.14 M SbCl3 solution in acetone, 25 mL of 1 M Na2S2O3 aqueous solution and 72.5 mL deionized water. The mp-TiO2 film was dipped in the bath at 7 °C for 2 h 15 min to deposit amorphous Sb2S3. The amorphous Sb2S3 was washed with deionized water, dried, and then annealed at 300 °C for 30 min under an N2 atmosphere. The annealed Sb2S3 film was removed from the N2 atmosphere immediately to make sure that it was cooled in air. The P3HT solution (20 mg mL−1 in 1,2-dichlorobenzene) was spin-coated onto the Sb2S3-sensitized TiO2 film at 2500 rpm for 60 s. The FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/SiO2/Sb2S3/P3HT film was then annealed at 90 °C for 30 min in a vacuum oven. Finally, a gold electrode was deposited by thermal evaporation on top of the device.


High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images were collected on a FEI Tecnai G2 F30 microscope with an accelerating voltage of 300 kV. X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) were recorded on a Thermo Scientific K-Alpha X-ray photoelectron spectrometer with Al Kα radiation (hν = 1486.68 eV). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were collected on a Zeiss EVO18 microscope. UV-visible absorption spectra were recorded using an ultraviolet-visible spectrometer (U-3900H, Hitachi). The current–voltage curves were measured using a Keithley 2400 source meter under simulated AM1.5 illumination using a Newport Sol3A Solar Simulator. The incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurements were performed using a QE/IPCE measurement kit (Newport). EIS and OCVD curves were both measured on a Zennium electrochemical workstation (Zahner). EIS curves were measured under dark conditions applying a 20 mV AC signal at different forward biases with the frequency scanning range of 1 MHz–100 mHz. For the OCVD measurements, open-circuit voltage signals of the samples were monitored after switching-off the illumination.


Atomic layer deposition, electrophoresis and chemical bath methods have been proposed to deposit metal oxide blocking layers for mesoporous solar cells. Here we chose the simplest chemical bath method to prepare the SiO2 blocking layer by using the hydrolysis of TEOS. The detailed hydrolysis reactions are given as follows:

(1)
(2)

Fig. 1b shows the HRTEM image of the SiO2-coated TiO2 nanoparticles. An interplanar spacing of 0.35 nm corresponds to the plane (101) of the TiO2 anatase phase. TiO2 nanoparticles were coated conformally with the SiO2 thin film with a thickness of 0.6–1.6 nm. The ultrasmall thickness of the insulating SiO2 layer ensures the efficient injection of photoinduced electrons from Sb2S3 to the conduction band of TiO2. The Sb2S3 absorber was deposited using the traditional CBD method. As shown in Fig. 1c and d, interplanar spacings of 0.16 nm and 0.19 nm correspond to the plane (132) and (151) of Sb2S3, respectively. The uncoated TiO2 surface was observed clearly in Fig. 1c. It is well-known that CBD Sb2S3 cannot cover every TiO2 nanoparticle conformally. The uncoated TiO2 surface results in direct contact between TiO2 and hole transporting materials (HTM). Thus the conformal SiO2 blocking layer can prevent the physical contact effectively between TiO2/Sb2S3/HTM. Fig. 1d shows the HRTEM image of Sb2S3 deposited on SiO2-coated TiO2 and their interface (Fig. 1d inset), where the SiO2 layer is too thin to observe.
To further confirm the formation of the SiO2 thin layer, X-ray photoelectron spectra of TiO2 and TiO2/SiO2 mesoporous films were recorded. The TiO2/SiO2 sample exhibits a binding energy peak at 102.3 eV, which is assigned to the Si 2p core level, while the TiO2 sample shows no signal. The relatively low peak intensity is ascribed to the extra-thin thickness of the SiO2 layer which has already been measured by HRTEM. In Fig. 2a, the Ti 2p peak decays slightly after SiO2 coating. XPS is a surface analysis technique with a detection thickness of only a few nanometers, the signal of Ti is blocked by the SiO2 layer in the TiO2/SiO2 sample. These results confirm the presence of the SiO2 coating layer on the TiO2 surface.

Fig. 3 shows the surface morphologies of bare TiO2, TiO2/SiO2, TiO2/crystalline Sb2S3 and TiO2/SiO2/crystalline Sb2S3 mesoporous films. Because the SiO2 layer is too thin (0.6–1.6 nm), the morphology difference between TiO2 and TiO2/SiO2 mesoporous films is hard to observe even in the high-resolution SEM images. Fig. 2c and g show the morphologies of the TiO2/crystalline Sb2S3 films. Larger particles and smaller pores can be observed compared to bare TiO2 and TiO2/SiO2 films, indicating the deposition of Sb2S3. This observation is consistent with previous reports. However, the morphology of Sb2S3 changed completely after the deposition of the SiO2 layer. As shown in Fig. 3d and h, Sb2S3 not only coated the clusters of TiO2, but also formed relatively large irregular crystals which partly fill the pores. A homogeneous distribution of Sb2S3 in the mesoporous film is confirmed by the energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy line scan results (Fig. S1) and the cross-sectional SEM image (Fig. S2). This unique morphology of the Sb2S3 absorber may be attributed to the features of the SiO2 layer. According to Zhao et al., the SiO2 layer prepared by this low-temperature chemical method is amorphous and possesses a high porosity. Therefore, the TiO2/SiO2 film exhibits a higher specific surface area than the bare TiO2 film, providing more sites for Sb2S3 deposition. Because of the large size of Sb2S3 crystals, the TiO2/SiO2-based device cannot be classified as a classical extremely thin absorber (ETA) solar cell. However, we noted that the concern about the efficient transfer and separation of photoinduced carriers is unnecessary. Sb2S3 is an excellent solar cell material which has been widely employed in a mesoporous structure as well as a planar heterojunction structure. Sb2S3 planar heterojunction solar cells exhibiting decent photovoltaic performances with an Sb2S3 thickness of 90–150 nm indicate the efficient carrier transfer from Sb2S3 to TiO2.

Fig. 4 shows the absorption spectra of Sb2S3 films. The TiO2/SiO2-based films show slightly increased light absorbance compared to the bare TiO2-based films. Photographs of amorphous and crystalline Sb2S3 films are also given in the inset respectively. The TiO2/SiO2-based films show deeper colours which is in line with the SEM observations. However, the enhanced absorbance does not result in an obvious increase in short-circuit current (JSC) of the devices, which will be discussed below.
The Sb2S3 absorber was prepared by the traditional CBD method. It should be noted that the annealed Sb2S3 film must be cooled in air to form a surface oxide passivation layer. Otherwise poor performance will be resulted. The detailed procedure of device fabrication is given in the Experimental section. J–V curves of the Sb2S3-sensitized solar cells based on TiO2 (abbreviated as a TiO2 cell henceforth) and TiO2/SiO2 (abbreviated as a TiO2/SiO2 cell henceforth) mesoporous films are shown in Fig. 5a. The photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table 1. Compared to the TiO2 cell, the TiO2/SiO2 cell exhibits obviously enhanced VOC and FF, but a slight increase of JSC. These results are similar to previous reports on inorganic blocking layers. Sulphur-deficient Sb2S3 can be formed due to sulphur loss during the annealing process in the inert environment. Impurities, such as SbOCl, Sb2O3, and Sb2(SO3)3, are inevitable in the CBD aqueous media. Point defects (like sulphur vacancies) in the sulphur-deficient phase and the impurities will result in serious charge recombination in the Sb2S3 absorber and at the TiO2/Sb2S3 interface which decrease the VOC and the efficiency of the solar cells. Lee et al. have studied the defect states at the TiO2/Sb2S3 interface in Sb2S3 by using deep level transient spectroscopy. The trap were positioned around an EC of −1.03 eV below the conduction band of Sb2S3. Considering that SiO2 is inert to the species in the Sb2S3 CBD reaction, we conclude that Sb2S3 quality remains almost unchanged after SiO2 coating. The enhanced VOC and FF should be attributed to the energy barrier at the TiO2/Sb2S3 interface generated by SiO2 which efficiently suppresses back electron recombination from TiO2 to Sb2S3. Moreover, it was reported that devices in which Sb2S3 directly contacts with TiO2 undergo discoloration with time. This is probably resulted from the oxidation of Sb2S3 to Sb2O3 at the TiO2/Sb2S3 interface. The oxidation not only reduces the device stability, but also introduces a recombination center at the interface. To overcome this problem, an In–OH–S layer was introduced to segregate TiO2 and Sb2S3. The In–OH–S layer helps to improve the device stability, but has nearly no influence on the photovoltaic performance. We deduce that the SiO2 layer can also delay the oxidation process and prevent the formation of Sb2O3 impurity at the interface.

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
Efficiency (%)
TiO2 cell (reverse)
0.523
10.16
56.5
3.00
TiO2 cell (forward)
0.524
9.90
56.1
2.91
TiO2/SiO2 cell (reverse)
0.558
10.44
68.1
3.96
TiO2/SiO2 cell (forward)
0.562
10.28
68.3
3.94
IPCE spectra were recorded to better understand the slight increase of JSC. The IPCE spectra of two types of solar cells are almost identical except a little difference in the short wavelength region. The IPCE value is determined by LHE, Φinj and ηcoll: IPCE = LHE × Φinj × ηcoll, where LHE, Φinj and ηcoll are the light-harvesting efficiency, charge transfer efficiency and charge collection efficiency, respectively. The absorbed photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (APCE) reflecting charge transfer and collection efficiency can be calculated according to APCE = IPCE/(1–10−Abs). The LHE and APCE spectra are shown in Fig. S3. In the short wavelength region (<530 nm), the TiO2/SiO2 cell shows almost identical LHE with the TiO2 cell due to the high absorbance, but exhibits higher APCE. Generally, the energy barrier generated by insulating oxide layers blocks both electron injection and charge recombination. However, the electron injection can still occur through tunnelling in the ultrathin insulating layer. Therefore, the Φinj of the TiO2/SiO2 cell should be lower than that of the TiO2 cell. This indicates that the increase in JSC should be mainly ascribed to improved charge collection. In addition, we also coated the Sb2S3 absorber with the SiO2 layer to examine the influence of the deposition sequence. However, a poorer performance was achieved than the referential TiO2 cell. The photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table S1.
As shown in Fig. 5c, the photovoltaic parameters exhibit relatively large dispersion for both TiO2 and TiO2/SiO2 cells which can also be found in the literature reported by Choi et al. This is ascribed to the fact that in the CBD method, the quality of the deposited film is sensitive to the reaction conditions like solution temperature, pH and even the location of substrates in solution. Due to the side reactions during deposition, some inevitable impurities will coexist with the Sb2S3 absorber. Moreover, we found that octahedral particles with a size of several hundreds of nanometers can be formed sometimes on the surface of the mesoporous films. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) (Fig. S4) and X-ray diffraction patterns (Fig. S5) confirm that these particles are Sb2O3. Further research on how the particles are formed and the method to eliminate them is ongoing. The large Sb2O3 particles may cause insufficient infiltration of P3HT in mesoporous films and block the contact between P3HT and the Au electrode. All these uncontrollable factors result in large dispersion of the device performances.
EIS measurements were applied to further elucidate the interfacial charge recombination in the Sb2S3-sensitized solar cells and the role of the SiO2 layer. The typical Nyquist plots and Bode plots are shown in Fig. 6. Obviously, the Nyquist plots are composed of three main features: (1) the shortest arc in the high frequency region (1 MHz–100 mHz) which can be ascribed to the charge transfer at the P3HT/Au interface, (2) the arc in the intermediate frequency region (100 kHz–3 kHz) which is ascribed to the charge transport resistance in P3HT coupled to the chemical capacitance of P3HT and (3) the arc in the low frequency region (3 kHz–10 Hz) which is ascribed to the charge recombination resistance at the TiO2/Sb2S3/P3HT interface coupled to the chemical capacitance of TiO2. According to a previous report, charge recombination resistance at the P3HT/TiO2 interface will decrease when coating TiO2 with the Sb2S3 sensitizer, indicating that the recombination between TiO2 and Sb2S3 is the main path of the interfacial charge recombination. Similar observations can be found in the case when using inorganic CuSCN as the HTM. As shown in Fig. 6a, the TiO2/SiO2 cell exhibits a larger recombination resistance than the TiO2 cell. This can be attributed to the efficient suppression of the recombination at the TiO2/Sb2S3 interface by the SiO2 layer. Thus, higher VOC and FF were obtained. When SiO2 was coated on Sb2S3 sensitizers, there was no obvious change on the main recombination pathway, so the device performance was not improved. The other possible reason is that the SiO2 layer breaks the chelation of Sb2S3 with the thiophene moieties in P3HT and hence affects the hole injection from Sb2S3 to P3HT.
To analyse the recombination kinetics of the Sb2S3 solar cells, we also carried out OCVD measurements. The OCVD technique is a simple but powerful tool which can provide a visualized recombination process and electron lifetime of the solar cells. During the measurement, the devices are first illuminated to achieve a steady VOC, then the light is interrupted. Recombination of the photoinduced electrons occurs along with the decay of VOC. The decay rate of VOC reflects the charge recombination rate. As shown in Fig. 7a, the VOC of the TiO2/SiO2 cell decays slower than that of the TiO2 cell. In addition, the electron lifetime can be calculated from the VOC decay according to the equation below
(3)
where
τn is the electron lifetime, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature (293.15 K) and e is the positive elementary charge. The electron lifetime of two types of devices is given in Fig. 7b, from which we can see that the TiO2/SiO2 cell has a longer electron lifetime than the TiO2 cell under the same potentials. This indicates that the SiO2 blocking layer slows down the charge recombination rate in Sb2S3-sensitized solar cells, which is consistent with the EIS results.


In summary, we have shown efficiency enhancement by interfacial recombination control using the SiO2 blocking layer in Sb2S3-sensitized solar cells. The SiO2 layer was coated on TiO2 mesoporous films to suppress the interfacial recombination at the TiO2/Sb2S3 interface which is the major recombination pathway in the Sb2S3-sensitized solar cells. The power conversion efficiency of the device increased from 3.00% to 3.96% with VOC increased from 0.523 to 0.558 V and FF increased from 56.5% to 68.1% after SiO2 coating. This simple method has feasibility for efficiency improvement of other semiconductor-sensitized solar cells and can provide a model for interfacial recombination control.


The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.


This work was supported by the Distinguished Youth Foundation of Anhui Province (1708085J09), the National Basic Research Program of China under Grant No. 2015CB932200, the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 21403247, and the Major/Innovative Program of Development Foundation of Hefei Center for Physical Science and Technology (2016FXZY003).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8qi00076j
This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2018