 DOI: 10.1039/D0TA05676F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 17756-17764


Shuai
You
,

Xiaoyan
Xi
,

Xin
Zhang
,

Hanying
Wang
,

Pingqiang
Gao
,

Xiangrong
Ma
,

Shiqing
Bi
*,

Jianqi
Zhang
*,

Huiqiong
Zhou
* and 

Zhixiang
Wei


School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Yulin University, Yulin 719000, Shaanxi Province, P. R. China. E-mail: bisq@yulinu.edu.cn

Michael Grätzel Center for Mesoscopic Solar Cells, Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, School of Optical and Electronic Information Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China

CAS Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierachical Fabrication, CAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, No. 11 ZhongGuanCun BeiYiTiao, Beijing, P. R. China. E-mail: zhouhq@nanoctr.cn; Zhangjq@nanoctr.cn

Received
6th June 2020
, Accepted 22nd July 2020
First published on 22nd July 2020
Although the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of organometal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has reached 25.2%, control of the crystallization process and its impact on film quality is still one of the main challenges. Here, a new perovskite growth method using formamidinium chloride (FACl) as an additive is introduced to enlarge the crystal grain size and improve the quality of the perovskite film. Strikingly, the champion power conversion efficiency of FA0.85MA0.15PbIxBr3−x-based and Cs0.05FA0.85MA0.10Pb(I0.97Br0.03)3-based PSC devices reaches 21.02% and 22.56%, respectively. The hysteresis index is found to decrease from 0.101 to 0.005, which is attributed to suppressed ion migration and surface charge trapping. Besides, the better film quality with FACl significantly increases the environmental stability of the perovskite films, yielding devices that maintain 90% of their initial efficiency after 1200 h under ambient air conditions, whereas the pristine devices without FACl only maintain 50% of their initial efficiency. Our solar cells processed with additives also achieve retardation of degradation of the PCE with a considerably enhanced environmental stability. This work offers a promising route through crystallization management to achieve high performance and stable PSCs.

In the last couple of years, the breakthrough of 25.2% PCE of organometal halide perovskite solar cells has attracted significant attention. This remarkable progress is due to their superior excellent light absorption (≈105 cm−1), low exciton binding energies (20–30 meV), high charge carrier mobility, long carrier diffusion distance (>1 μm), and non-excitonic charge generation with low recombination rates. Besides, with the possibility of low-cost solution processing to reduce manufacturing cost, PSCs have already been viewed as a serious contender for next-generation photovoltaic (PV) development. However, it is noted that solution-processed polycrystalline perovskite films suffer from poor surface coverage, defects at grain boundaries, instability of the perovskite film and poor reproducibility. These problems have been identified as a critical roadblock to the commercial viability of perovskite photovoltaic technology. Therefore, many efforts have been made to improve these issues, such as additive engineering, optimization of the spin procedure, modification of deposition approaches, surface treatments, variation of the precursor concentration, use of mixed solvents and so on, leading to advances in understanding the defect chemistry and crystallization of perovskites.

Among the above methods, the application of additive engineering has been proven with great versatility to modulate the perovskite film formation and resultant photovoltaic behaviors. Additives, such as organic polymers (PMMA), inorganic salts (KCl and NH4Cl), organic small molecules (PCBM, DIO and thiazole), inorganic acids (HI and HCl), ionic liquids, water, or organic halides (MACl and MAI), can affect perovskite film crystallization and film formation, defect passivation in the bulk and at the surface/interface, or interface tuning of the structure and crystallization kinetics, enabling improvements in the stability, optoelectronic properties, and photovoltaic performance of perovskites. For example, upon using a small organic molecule (PCBM), the resulting perovskite-PCBM solar cell presented a highly dense light-absorbing layer, large grains and fewer grain boundaries. By incorporating an organic halide additive based on methylammonium chloride (MACl), a new perovskite was found to assist in recrystallization of perovskite films, leading to minimization of the vertical grain boundary and trap site in the films. Zhang et al. reported the use of thiazole as an additive, and successfully modulated the micro-environment for nucleation and growth of perovskite crystals. Moreover, a promising route involving acidic additives was demonstrated to mediate the perovskite film formation with prohibiting the decomposition of MAPbI3 to MAI and PbI2. Very recently, new insights into a chemical reaction with defects in perovskite films were obtained through C4H8I2 or ethyl cellulose (EC) additives to promote the dissociation of polyiodide colloids and passivation of the charge defect traps at grain boundaries by forming hydrogen bonding interactions between additives and the perovskite. However, there are still some problems in additive engineering. For example, the quality of a perovskite film is hard to control and holes are prone to occur; the grain size of a perovskite film is generally small, leading to many grain boundaries and carrie recombination centers; some methods can produce films with large grain sizes, but controllable high-quality perovskite films are currently a challenge.
FACl as an additive has been reported in previous articles, and FACl was used in different structural systems and enhanced device performances. Most of them are attributed to the passivation of interfaces, reduction of defects and promotion of carrier transport using the FACl additive. There is little research on the orientation of crystal growth. In this contribution, we report a facile and effective process strategy using an organic halide additive FACl (see schematic illustration of the perovskite film preparation in Fig. 1) to modulate the crystallization and enlarge the crystal grain size in FAMA-based PSCs. We achieve a boosted power conversion efficiency (PCE) of up to 21% with inhibited hysteresis using a compact TiO2 based planar architecture. The enhanced PCE is ascribed to the large grains and high crystallinity because of controlling the crystallographic orientation of grains using the FACl additive, confirmed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and synchrotron grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS). The GIWAXS result shows that FACl has an effect on the (001) crystal plane. We speculate that these modifications are associated with controlling the crystallographic orientation of grains and likely modify interfacial energy favorably, ultimately altering the kinetics of crystal growth. Benefiting from the improvement of the perovskite film quality and enlarged grain size, the stability of the device has also been improved. Under the optimal conditions, the device can maintain ∼90% of the initial PCE after 1200 h storage in the ambient environment.

In this study, we prepared a perovskite film following the one-step spin-coating method with a mixture of lead iodide (PbI2), lead bromide (PbBr2), methylammonium iodide (MAI), formamidinium iodide (FAI), and FACl as the precursor composition. We examined five different FACl concentrations: 0 mg mL−1, 1 mg mL−1, 3 mg mL−1, 6 mg mL−1 and 15 mg mL−1. The color evolution of the perovskite film during 100 °C annealing was studied from the photograph (see Fig. S1). As the FACl concentration increases, the growth of the polycrystalline perovskite films to complete the whole black phase transformation slows down. Top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was carried out to further study the film morphology (see Fig. S2). Without FACl treatment, the perovskite film consisted of small crystallites (∼150 nm). After a 1 mg mL−1 FACl treatment, the grain size of the perovskite film became larger. When the FACl concentration increased to 3 mg mL−1, compact bigger grains (∼270 nm, Fig. S2f) were found in the perovskite film. With further increase of the FACl concentration, the morphology of the perovskite film was almost similar to that of the film treated with 3 mg mL−1. But the grain sizes are smaller. Maybe more nucleation could occur on the top of the perovskite film at a higher concentration of FACl. The SEM images in Fig. 2a and b show the differences of the films untreated and treated with 3 mg mL−1 FACl. For simplicity in our analysis, hereinafter all FACl relevant measurements were performed based on the optimal concentration (3 mg mL−1). The cross-sectional SEM image showed the morphology of the perovskite film (Fig. 2c and d). From the cross-sectional SEM image, we observe that the grains of the perovskite become larger after being modified using FACl. The atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of the pristine perovskite film and the one treated with 3 mg mL−1 FACl are shown in Fig. 2e and f, with a roughness of 27.6 nm and 18.9 nm. These results indicate that the grain size increases and the roughness reduces after FACl modification.

With demonstrating the role of additives in the perovskite precursor solution, we examined the crystallinity in the as-spun FAMA-based perovskite films by XRD and the results are shown in Fig. 3a. From the result, we can see that there is no new peak which appeared after adding the FACl additive. We are confident that almost all of the FACl has evaporated after heating at 100 °C for 45 min, because its boiling point is 88.8 °C. Compared to those of the pristine film, the peaks intensity were found to proportionally increase in the additive-processed films. The differentiated peak intensities of the XRD patterns indicate that the crystallization in FAMA-based perovskite films is aided with the present additives during annealing and this modification is likely attributed to the presence of FACl in the precursor solution, which can affect the crystal growth orientation. Cl is likely to reside at the surfaces and grain boundaries during the annealing process and play a critical role in passivating traps and facilitating interfacial charge transfer. The light absorption properties of the perovskite film treated with and without FACl are shown in Fig. 3b. The UV-vis absorbance spectra display a pronounced increased absorption over the wavelength range from 400 to 750 nm after FACl modification. When the concentration of FACl is 3 mg mL−1, the absorption intensity reaches the maximum. This result originates from the enlarged grain size of the perovskite crystals and better crystallinity, which is consistent with the results of SEM and XRD.
The reduction of surface traps is expected to weaken the non-radiative Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination in perovskites.Fig. 3c shows the steady-state PL spectra of pristine and 3 mg mL−1 FACl modified films. The PL from the band-to-band optical transition is enhanced in the additive-processed films, which can result from the suppressed non-radiative SRH recombination. Based on the same set of samples, we further assessed the PL decay kinetics for the emission at ∼532 nm (Fig. 3d). The appearance of the two temporal regimes can be correlated with the surface (faster decay) and bulk charge recombination (slower decay). From the decay time constants extracted with a bi-exponential decay model (see fitting parameters in Table S1, ESI), the PL in both temporal regimes is found to become longer-lived with additives. This result suggests that charge recombination in both bulk and surface regions may become weakened, which can be primarily ascribed to the meliorated film morphology with fewer structural defects and suppressed surface traps using additives, which enabled the observed open circuit voltage from the corresponding solar cells.
In order to obtain more insights into the morphological impacts on the enhanced device performance with the FACl additive, next we explored the crystal orientation in perovskite films by grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurements. GIWAXS has been well established for understanding the perovskite film orientation, including the film formation process, relationship between the precursor and perovskite crystal orientation, lower dimensional perovskite, etc.Fig. 4a–e display the 2D GIWAXS patterns of perovskite films with different concentrations of the FACl additive. The diffraction profiles are similar to those reported from highly textured crystallized perovskite films; the scattering rings at q ≈ 1.0, 1.4, 1.7, 2.0 and 22.3 Å−1 correspond to (001), (011), (111), (002) and (012) diffractions of perovskite crystals, respectively. Compared to the pristine perovskite film, the film modified with 3 mg mL−1 FACl exhibits brighter and sharper scattering rings, indicating the improved crystallization. This conclusion is consistent with the XRD results.
To assess the ordering in the stacking of the crystallographic plane, we further calculated the crystal correlation length (CCL) by using the following relation:
(1)
where π is the ratio of circumference to diameter,
K is a constant (here a value of 0.9 is used), and Δq is the half width at half-maximum of the diffraction peak which is obtained by Gaussian fitting. As shown in Fig. 4f, the (001) diffraction peak at 1.0 Å−1 for the FACl modified film presents an in-plane (IP) CCL of 19.53 nm and an out-of plane (OOP) CCL of 28.31 nm. In comparison, the CCL of the pristine perovskite film amounts to 18.48 nm and 24.14 nm in the IP and OOP direction, respectively. The increased CCL in the FACl modified film is beneficial to the crystal growth in the (001) direction and adapts to the vertical orientation. We infer that the modification using FACl promotes the vertical growth of the perovskite. The improved film morphology and orientation would facilitate the carrier collection due to the prolonged carrier life and reduced carrier recombination, leading to a remarkable increase in the device performance.

With the identified impacts of additives on the perovskite crystallization and photophysical properties, we studied the photovoltaic characteristics in FAMA-based PSCs that adopted a planar device architecture. Fig. 5a illustrates the normal planar structure of solar cells, in which the TiO2 layer is the electron transport layer and Spiro-OMeTAD is the hole extraction layer. We first screened the concentration dependence of additives on the PCE. Fig. S3 displays current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics (in the reverse scan direction) of FAMA-based PSCs at various concentrations of FACl respectively and the extracted device parameters are summarized in Table S2 in the ESI. We established the optimal additive concentration of 3 mg mL−1, at which the PCE can be boosted to 18.6% with the pristine perovskite and further to 21.02%. Besides, in order to verify the universality of FACl in other systems, we added FACl to a Cs0.05FA0.85MA0.10Pb (I0.97Br0.03)3 perovskite and obtained a maximum PCE of 22.56% (see Fig. S4 and Table S3). Fig. 5b shows the J–V characteristics (reverse scan) of the best PSCs under the optimal conditions (3 mg mL−1) with the device parameters compared in Table 1. The increase of PCEs mainly arises from the enhanced short-circuit current (Jsc) and fill factor (FF), which can be related to the improved film quality and increased grain size using additives that successfully suppressed the leakage current (Fig. S5). Meanwhile, the J–V hysteresis of the optimized device with FACl modification is dramatically suppressed as shown in Fig. 5c. The hysteresis index (HI) was calculated according to the relation:
(2)

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a Values in parentheses are based on the integration of EQE spectra.

W/O FACl-R
1.152
22.53 (21.05)
71.79
18.60
W/O FACl-F
1.136
21.42
67.14
16.34
With FACl-R
1.183
23.63 (22.45)
75.21
21.02
With FACl-F
1.169
23.68
74.85
20.72
The pristine devices present a large PCE difference between 16.34% (forward scan) and 18.6% (reverse scan), whereas in contrast, the FACl modified devices exhibit a small hysteresis with a PCE of 21.02% (reverse scan) and 20.72% (forward scan), that is the HI decreases from 0.101 to 0.005. Fig. 5d displays the incident photon-to-converted electron (EQE) efficiency. The Jsc extracted from the integration of IPCE spectra is consistent with the values determined from J–V characteristics, assuring the accuracy of the device parameters. We additionally study the time-dependent power output of the optimized device as shown in Fig. 5e. The PCE and the steady-state photocurrent of the FACl-modified device are stabilized at 20.56% and 21.2 mA cm−2 under the measured condition of Voc = 0.97 V, respectively, ruling out the deterioration of the cell stability because of FACl modification.
To better demonstrate the improved device performance statistically, we show the histogram of photovoltaic parameters alongside the standard deviations (error bar) in Fig. S6, based on 20 devices under respective process conditions. It is important to note that on top of the boosted PCE, the scattering of the device parameters becomes reduced as well. This result points to a higher reproducibility to yield more efficient PSCs with the described process with additives. Besides, the device with 3 mg mL−1 FACl modification exhibits a narrow PCE distribution with the average PCE, which is enhanced relative to that of the control device (Fig. 5f).
In order to investigate the recombination kinetics and defect density, we measure the dependence of Voc on incident light intensity and space charge limited current (SCLC) (Fig. 6). Fig. 6a shows that the Voc varies logarithmically with light intensity. Generally, in the solar cells with a dominant bimolecular charge recombination via mobile (non-trapped) carriers without SRH recombination, the slope of the Vocvs. Plight plot should equal the thermal voltage kBT/q. If the SRH recombination plays a role, commonly associated with noticeable amounts of impurities/defects in the bulk film or at the interface, the slope should exceed kBT/q. We obtained a slope of 2.21 kBT/q and 1.82 kBT/q for PSCs with and without FACl modified films, respectively, indicating the less monomolecular recombination and the fewer trap defects in the device with 3 mg mL−1 FACl. This result is supported by the larger grain size and higher crystallinity. Fig. 6b shows the electron only device with the ITO/PCBM/perovskite/PCBM/Ag configuration for estimating the defect density in the perovskite film. The device with the reference and 3 mg mL−1 FACl sample had a trap filled limit voltage (VTFL) of 0.454 and 0.326 V, respectively. The value of trap density (Ndefects) was determined from the VTFL of ohmic current to trap filling current according to:
(3)
where
ε is the relative dielectric constant of FA0.85MA0.15PbIxBr3−x (ε = 32),ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, L is the thickness of the active layer (L = 800 nm) and e is the elementary charge. The derived defect density is 2.5 × 1015 and 1.8 × 1015 cm−3 for the reference sample and 3 mg mL−1 FACl sample, respectively. The reason for the decrease in the defect density of the FACl modified sample is mainly due to the increase in crystal grains and the decrease in the grain boundary in the perovskite film. The reduction of the defect density is beneficial to the increase in the carrier diffusion length and ensures that the charge is transported through the thick film before recombination.

We further examined the solar cell behaviors processed with a higher molecular weight of formamidinium halogen additives (FABr and FAI). The device performance at different additive concentrations is shown in Fig. S7 and S8, Tables S4 and S5. Coincidentally, in these two cases, we found that the PCE of the device is maximized with addition of 3 mg mL−1 additive. The maximum PCE is 19.99% for FABr and 19.86% for FAI, respectively.
We also examined the stability of FAMA-based PSCs stored in high temperature and humidity environments. In order to avoid the effect of excessive lead iodide on the results, lead iodide is not excessive in the stability test. Fig, S9 and Table S6 show the performance influence of FACl in excessive PbI2 containing perovskite devices. Excess PbI2 is beneficial to the repeatability of film formation, but has little effect on the performance of the device. Fig. 7a and b display the XRD patterns of perovskite films with and without FACl after being subjected to environmental stress. The films without FACl treated showed PbI2 signals after being stored at 85% RH and 25 °C for 10 h and in a dry N2 atmosphere at 85 °C for 5 h. These results show that the humidity and temperature stability of the perovskite films are improved after FACl modification. The PCEs of the devices under heating stress (85 °C for 200 h under a N2 atmosphere) without any encapsulations show a minimum loss by 8% for the modified devices while up to 50% loss for the control one (Fig. 7c). Fig. 7d shows the stability of FAMA-based perovskite devices as a function of storage time in the ambient environment. The PCE of the control cell drops rapidly, down to about 50% of the initial performance after 1200 h storage. In contrast, a slower decrease in the PCE is observed in the additive modified devices. From the SEM and AFM results, it can be seen that after the FACl modification the perovskite films become more dense and smooth, which likely benefits from a minimized diffusion of H2O and/or oxygen molecules into the perovskite active layer with the compact and pinhole-free morphology.

FACl (98%), FABr (98%) and FAI (98%), were purchased from Yingkou OPV Tech Co. PbI2 (99.99%, TCI), PbBr(98%,TCI), HC(NH2)2I (purity scale: 99.8%, Dyesol) and CH3NH3I (purity scale: 99.8%, Dyesol) were used as received. Spiro-OMeTAD (99.5%) was purchased from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Inc. Dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.8%), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, 98%) and chlorobenzene (99.8%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.


To start, FTO patterned glass substrates were cleaned by soap-scrubbing and sonicated sequentially in ultra-pure water, acetone and isopropanol and finally dried at 80 °C for 20 min before use. TiO2 compact layers were deposited on the FTO conducting glass substrate via hydrolysis of TiCl4 at 70 °C, forming the electron-selective contact. Spiro-OMeTAD solution was prepared by dissolving 72.3 mg of Spiro-OMeTAD in 1 mL of chlorobenzene, and then mixed with 28.8 μL 4-tert-butylpyridine and 17.5 μL of a stock Li+ solution (which contained 520 mg mL−1 bis-trifluoromethylsulfonylamine lithium salt in acetonitrile). For the assembled solar cells in this research, the FAMA-based perovskite precursor was prepared by dissolving a 1.4 M mixture of metal lead salts which were composed of 0.85 PbI2 and 0.15 PbBr2, and 1.35 M organic cations which were composed of 0.85 FAI and 0.15 MABr in a co-solvent of DMSO/DMF (4:1, by volume). FACl, FABr and FAI were added into the precursor solution at different mass concentrations. After heating at 60 °C for two hours with sufficient stirring, the perovskite precursor solutions were then spin-coated onto the FTO/TiO2 substrates at 1000 rpm for 10 s and then at 5000 rpm for 30 s. During the last 25 s of the second spin-coating step 90 μL anti-solvents of ethyl acetate was dropped on the substrates. The films were then annealed at 100 °C for 45 min, and after cooling down, the hole extraction layer comprising Spiro-OMeTAD was spin-coated atop the annealed perovskite films at 5000 rpm for 30 s. For the Cs0.05FA0.85MA0.10Pb(I0.97Br0.03)3-based perovskite solar cells, the perovskite precursor solution was prepared by dissolving a mixture of PbI2 (1.61 mmol, 742.0 mg), FAI (1.31 mmol, 224.4 mg), MABr (0.15 mmol, 16.2 mg), and CsI(0.08 mmol, 19.8 mg) Cs0.05FA0.85MA0.10Pb(I0.97Br0.03)3 with 5% excess of PbI2 in 1 mL of mixed solution of DMF and DMSO [DMF (v):DMSO (v) = 4:1] under mild heating conditions at ∼70 °C to assist in dissolution. The perovskite precursor solution was deposited on the freshly prepared FTO/TiO2 substrate, and a two-step spin-coating method was applied. The first step was carried out at 2000 rpm with an acceleration rate of 200 rpm s−1 for 10 s. The second step was carried out at 6000 rpm with an acceleration rate of 2000 rpm s−1 for 30 s. CB (100 μL) was slowly dripped 15 s before the second step end. After this, the substrate was annealed at 120 °C for 20 min. Finally, 80 nm of a Au top contact was thermally evaporated through shadow masks under high vacuum (<1 × 10−5 Pa). The area of the solar cells was 0.04 cm2.


The current-density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics of FAMA-based PSCs were recorded by using a Keithley 2400 Sourcemeter under a nitrogen environment and the scan rate was 0.1 V s−1. FA0.85MA0.15PbIxBr3−x solar cells were tested under irradiation by using a solar simulator calibrated using a certified reference Si cell. Single carrier devices were tested in the dark in the charge injection regime. Incident photon to current efficiency (EQE) of FA0.85MA0.15PbIxBr3−x solar cells was measured by using a Newport external quantum measurement system (Model 66920).

The morphology of the as-prepared TiO2 and perovskite films was characterized by using a field emission scanning electron microscope (Hitachi-SU8220). Transmittance and absorbance spectra were obtained by utilizing a UV-vis spectrometer (PE Lambda 650/850/950 UV-vis spectrophotometer). Crystallinity and phase identification of the samples were performed using an X-ray diffractometer (Philips X'Pert) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5419 Å). Steady-state PL spectra were measured by using a HORIBA Fluorolog-III spectrofluorometer. The PL lifetime was determined by using a customized spectrometer system (Fluorolog- III, HORIBA Jobin-Yvon Inc) mounted with a diode laser (λ = 532 nm) as the excitation source with the detector (model R-928) operated at a voltage of 950 V with peak preset = 3000 counts. The decay dynamics were analyzed by using data analysis software. GIWAXS measurements were obtained on a Xenocs Xeuss SAXS/WAXS beamline system based on an X-ray wavelength of 0.6887 Å.

To summarize, we demonstrate a facile and highly efficient process strategy using the FACl additive to regulate crystal growth orientation resulting in high quality perovskite films with enlarged crystal grain sizes. Under the best conditions, FAMA-based PSCs processed with 3 mg mL−1 FACl produce an enhanced PCE of 22.56% with a TiO2 based planar architecture. Based on a variety of experimental analyses, we identify the interactions of the additives with the iodine anions in the perovskite precursor solutions via the halogen bonding which can lead to a modified crystallization in FAMA-based perovskite films with an improved film morphology. We found that the carrier transport becomes enhanced in the additive-processed perovskite films, with which charge extraction becomes expedited with reduced recombination losses. In consequence, the device efficiency receives a considerable boost showing inhibited hysteresis. With the demonstrated additive strategy, we simultaneously achieve a favorable retardation of the degradation of the PCE in our solar cells. The increase of environmental stability is primarily related to the morphological mediation of perovskite films with pinhole-free and compact features. This work provides fundamental insights into the defect chemistry in perovskite materials and offers a strategic path to tackle critical issues in PSCs toward high performance and long-term stability.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


The authors acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (No. 21905245 and No. 51962034), the Innovative Talents Promotion Planning Project of the Science and Technology Department of Shaan Xi (2018KJXX-078); the Science and Technology Planning Project of State Administration for Market Regulation (2019MK069), and the Shaanxi Province Science and Technology Resources Open Sharing Platform Project (No. 2019PT-18).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta05676f
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020