 DOI: 10.1039/C3NR05538H
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2847-2854


Taehoon
Kim
,

Seung Jae
Yang
,

Sung Kyun
Kim
,

Hong Soo
Choi
 and 

Chong Rae
Park
*

Carbon Nanomaterials Design Laboratory, Global Research Laboratory (GRL), Research Institute of Advanced Materials (RIAM), and Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-744, Republic of Korea. E-mail: crpark@snu.ac.kr; Fax: +82 2-885-1748; Tel: +82 2-880-8030

Received
18th October 2013
, Accepted 10th December 2013
First published on 19th December 2013
A strategy for fabricating organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices based on PCDTBT nanofibers and PC70BM is described. Electrospinning techniques are used to prepare PCDTBT nanofibers and OPV devices in ambient air. The diameters of the PCDTBT nanofibers are approximately twice the exciton diffusion length, 20 nm. The active layer exhibits 100% photoluminescence quenching due to the small nanofiber diameter, indicating that the excitons are efficiently dissociated. The electrospun PCDTBT nanofibers absorb more photons at longer wavelengths, leading to improved photon harvesting. OPV devices composed of PCDTBT nanofibers show a high short circuit current of 11.54 mA cm−2 and a high power conversion efficiency of 5.82%. The increase in the short circuit current is attributed to enhanced photon harvesting and charge transport. This method may be applied to the fabrication, in ambient air, of large-area active layers composed of other new conjugated polymers to yield high-performance OPV devices.

Organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices have gained much attention due to their low-cost processing and short energy payback time. The performance of an OPV cell is strongly affected by the morphology of the active layer. The development of bulk heterojunction (BHJ) structures has greatly increased the efficiencies of OPV cells by enabling the preparation of large donor/acceptor interface areas and bicontinuous charge pathways that facilitate exciton dissociation and charge transport. A variety of approaches have been used to control the morphology of a BHJ structure, including thermal annealing, solvent annealing, and solvent additives. Nevertheless, BHJ OPV devices intrinsically suffer from the presence of unfavorable morphological features, including dead ends or isolated domains, because the procedure used to fabricate BHJ structures offers little control over the morphology of the active layer. Methods for preparing perfectly interconnected morphologies that yield enhanced exciton dissociation and charge extraction have remained elusive.

The above-mentioned problems may be addressed using a one-dimensional conjugated polymer, such as a polymer nanowire or nanofiber, in the active layer. The one-dimensional conjugated polymer provides a rational approach for controlling the active layer morphology by tuning the diameters and lengths of the rod. Indeed, poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) nanowires have been extensively studied as the donor component in the active layer of OPV cells. The dimensions of the P3HT nanowires include a width of 20 nm and a length of 10 μm. The reported diameters of the P3HT nanowires agreed well with the exciton diffusion lengths in organic materials, and the high aspect ratio of the P3HT nanowires allowed them to easily form a continuous pathway. P3HT can form nanowires in marginal solvents or poor solvents that induce the self-assembly of P3HT into nanowires. Because self-assembly is only observed in thiophene polymer derivatives, the method cannot be applied to new conjugated polymers, e.g. poly[N-9′-hepta-decanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)] (PCDTBT). Alternative fabrication procedures that yield new conjugated polymer nanowires are strongly required for the preparation of photovoltaic devices. Such nanowires are expected to enhance exciton dissociation and charge transport.
Electrospinning is one of the most powerful techniques for spinning polymers or ceramic precursors into continuous fibers with an ultrahigh aspect ratio (>100000). The high aspect ratio makes electrospun fibers attractive for many applications. Here, we report, for the first time, the preparation of highly efficient OPV devices based on PCDTBT nanofibers/PC70BM ([6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester) by electrospinning in ambient air. The performances of the OPV devices were significantly influenced by the diameters of the nanofibers. The smallest diameter of the PCDTBT nanofibers fabricated in this experiment was 20 nm, which is comparable to the diameters of the self-assembled P3HT nanowires. An OPV device composed of PCDTBT nanofibers with diameters smaller than 20 nm exhibited a higher device performance that was achieved using pseudo-bilayer and BHJ devices fabricated in our laboratory. The OPV cell based on the PCDTBT nanofibers displayed a short-circuit current density (JSC) of as high as 11.54 mA cm−2, demonstrating outstanding exciton dissociation and charge transport, even under ambient fabrication conditions.

PCDTBT (MW 30000; 1-Material), PEO (MW 900000; Aldrich), PC70BM (1-Material), PEDOT:PSS (Clevios P VP Al 4083, H.C. Stark), chloroform (Aldrich), acetic acid (Aldrich), N,N′-dimethylformamide (DMF; Daejung, Korea), acetonitrile (Aldrich), and dichloromethane (Aldrich) were purchased and used without further purification.


The spinning dope solution was prepared by dissolving PEO and PCDTBT (0.4 wt%:0.1 wt%) in chloroform/polar solvent (8:1, w/w). The spinning dope solution was electrospun at a feeding rate of 0.5 mL h−1 in air at 25 °C, under an atmosphere containing 20% relative humidity. The metal needle (gauge no. 28, inner diameter 0.18 mm) nozzle was connected to a bias voltage of 25 kV, and the distance from the nozzle to the grounded collector plate was 21 cm. The collector glass plate and the needle nozzle were reciprocated using a three-axis robot. The PCDTBT@PEO nanofibers were washed in acetonitrile repeatedly to remove PEO, yielding virgin PCDTBT nanofibers. The morphologies of the nanofibers were examined using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM; JEOL JSM-6700F) operated at an accelerating voltage of 5 kV, and using a transmission electron microscope (TEM; Tecnai F20) operated at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. The viscosities of the spinning dope solutions were measured using an Orion 4-Star pH-Conductivity Meter (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). TGA was carried out under a nitrogen flow with a heating rate of 10 °C min−1, and isothermal processing was conducted at 370 °C over 30 min using an SDT Q 600 instrument (TA Instruments). The specific surface area was measured with a Micromeritics ASAP 2020 static volumetric gas adsorption instrument at liquid nitrogen temperature (77 K). The ultraviolet-visible absorption characteristics were examined using a Cary 5000 (Varian Inc.). The photoluminescence properties were examined at an excitation wavelength of 550 nm on an LS-55 (Perkin-Elmer).


Indium tin oxide (ITO)/glass substrates were cleaned by sonication in detergent, acetone, and IPA. The ITO substrates were then treated with UV/ozone for 15 min, and PEDOT:PSS was spin-cast at 5000 rpm for 40 s. The PEDOT:PSS films were dried at 150 °C for 15 min, and then a 10 nm PCDTBT layer was spin-coated onto the PEDOT:PSS layer. PCDTBT nanofibers were prepared according to the method described above, and the PC70BM layer was spin-cast onto the active layer at 5000 rpm for 20 s from a dichloromethane PC70BM solution with a concentration of 16 mg mL−1. The total exposure time in ambient air for the nanofibrous devices was 1.5 hours. A TiOX precursor solution was prepared according to previous reports. The solution was spin-cast onto the top of the active layer at 5000 rpm for 40 s. The sample was heat-treated at 80 °C for 10 min under vacuum. Following this, a 100 nm thick aluminum cathode was deposited using a thermal evaporator. The active layers of the BHJ OPV devices were prepared from a chlorobenzene solution of PCDTBT:PC70BM (1:4 w/w) with a total concentration of 20 mg mL−1. The active layers of the pseudo-bilayer OPV devices were prepared by sequentially spin-coating PCDTBT (4 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene) and PC70BM (16 mg mL−1 in dichloromethane). The devices for measuring the hole mobility were fabricated using the same process except that the TiOX/Al layer was substituted with a Au layer. All processes were performed in ambient air. The PCE values of the devices were determined using a K3000 (McScience). The cross-sectional TEM samples were prepared by focused ion beam (FEI Helios 650) slicing and observed using a TEM (JEOL JEM-2100F) operated at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV.


The preparation of a nanostructured OPV cell based on PCDTBT nanofibers (denoted as a “nanofibrous OPV device”) is illustrated in Fig. 1. First, a thin PCDTBT layer (10 nm) was spin-cast onto a poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) layer as an electron blocking layer. Second, the PCDTBT nanofibers were prepared on the PCDTBT layer by electrospinning a PCDTBT and poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) composite nanofiber (denoted as a “PCDTBT@PEO nanofiber”) and selectively removing the auxiliary PEO polymer. PC70BM was subsequently spin-cast onto the top of the PCDTBT nanofibrous layer from a dichloromethane solution (16 mg mL−1). Titanium dioxide and aluminum were deposited as the hole blocking layer and cathode, respectively.

The diameter of a fiber in an electron donor layer should be sufficiently small so that the photogenerated excitons are successfully dissociated. Here, the diameter of a PCDTBT@PEO composite nanofiber was controlled by tuning the conductivity and viscosity of a spinning dope solution, as reported previously (see the ESI, Fig. S1). The resultant PCDTBT@PEO composite nanofibers were longer than one centimeter (Fig. 2(a)), approximately 100 nm in width (Fig. 2(b)), and did not form beads over a large area. An optical microscopy image (Fig. 2(c)) and a fluorescence microscopy image (Fig. 2(d)) revealed that the PCDTBT formed homogeneous fibers in the PCDTBT@PEO composite nanofibers. After selective removal of the auxiliary polymer, the virgin PCDTBT nanofibers that formed the nanoweb displayed diameters of around 20 nm (Fig. 2(e) and (f)), which is an appropriate scale for facilitating exciton dissociation. The small fiber diameter enables the incorporation of PCDTBT nanofibers into the active layer of an OPV device. To the best of our knowledge, the PCDTBT nanofibers are the first electrospun PCDTBT fibers yet reported, and the fiber diameter is the smallest value ever reported for electrospun conjugated polymer fibers. The electrospinning technique permits material savings and large-area fabrication, which are important requirements for OPV device preparation approaches.
The removal of the auxiliary polymer was determined by Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). The strong peaks of PEO are observed in electrospun PEO nanofibers and PCDTBT@PEO composite nanofibers (Fig. S3). After removal of PEO from the composite nanofibers, the characteristic peaks of PEO completely disappeared, indicating that the PEO was successfully eliminated from the composite fibers. The peak located at 795 cm−1 is a characteristic peak of PCDTBT, which is not observed in the PEO nanofiber sample. In this experiment, four types of virgin PCDTBT nanofibers (average diameters: 20 nm, 50 nm, 120 nm, 200 nm) were prepared (Fig. S5) by controlling the viscosity and conductivity of the spinning dope solution.
Previous studies reported that one-dimensional conjugated polymers display a red-shifted absorption spectrum relative to the bulk spectrum. A red-shifted absorption spectrum is a favorable feature of OPV devices because the materials can absorb a greater number of photons and generate a greater photocurrent. The absorption spectrum of a PCDTBT film showed a peak at 570 nm (Fig. 3). On the other hand, the 20 nm PCDTBT nanofibers displayed a red-shifted peak at 589 nm and higher absorption coefficients at longer wavelengths. Extension and orientation of the polymer chain in the fiber during an electrospinning process induce a red shift in the absorption peak. The inset of Fig. S6 shows the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns of PCDTBT films and PCDTBT nanofibers. The diffraction rings in the SAED pattern of PCDTBT nanofibers indicate strain induced crystallization occurred during electrospinning in spite of their amorphous nature. The UV-vis absorption characteristics suggested that the nanofiber-based OPV devices displayed a high photocurrent. Note that a larger red shift was observed in thinner nanofibers. Thicker nanofibers were prepared from the less conductive and highly viscous spinning dope solution, which did not stretch significantly during the electrospinning process. Differences in the peak shifts originate from differences in the stretching effects of various spinning dope solutions. Clearly, the small-diameter nanofibers offered excellent photon absorption and exciton dissociation properties.
Quantitative measurements of the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) specific surface area of the 20 nm PCDTBT nanofibers, determined by the N2 adsorption isotherms, indicated a surface area of as high as 71 m2 g−1 (Fig. 4), much larger than the surface area of the PCDTBT powder (6 m2 g−1) (Table 1). The PCDTBT nanofibers displayed a particularly high pore volume, indicating that the thin nanofibers were well-formed. The specific surface area of the PCDTBT nanofibers, 71 m2 g−1, was almost 5 times the value reported previously for P3HT nanofibers with a diameter of 80 nm (15 m2 g−1). The high surface area of the PCDTBT nanofibers increased the rate of exciton dissociation at the contact area between the PCDTBT and PC70BM materials. The PCDTBT film was assumed to have a specific surface area similar to that of the P3HT film (3 m2 g−1), which was much lower than the specific surface area of the PCDTBT nanofibers. These results suggested that the nanofibrous OPV device had a much higher interfacial area between the PCDTBT and PC70BM materials than the bilayer OPV device, thereby facilitating photon harvesting and exciton dissociation. As expected, the high BET specific surface area of the PCDTBT nanofibers ensured effective exciton dissociation.
Sample
BET SSA (m2 g−1)
Total pore volume (cm3 g−1)

a Previously reported value.

PCDTBT powder
6
0.013
PCDTBT nanofibers
71
0.300
P3HT nanofibers
15
0.014
P3HT film
3
—
The active layers of the OPV devices were prepared by coating PC70BM onto the PCDTBT nanofibers, and the effects of the nanofiber diameter on exciton dissociation were investigated. Dichloromethane was used as an orthogonal solvent for the conjugated polymers during the fabrication of a bilayer structured or a nanostructured OPV cell. The solvent selectivity properties were exploited to form a PCDTBT:PC70BM heterojunction by spin-coating a solution containing PC70BM in dichloromethane onto the PCDTBT nanofibers. The successful formation of a heterojunction and the efficiency of exciton dissociation in the PCDTBT nanofibers were investigated by measuring the photoluminescence (PL) of the PCDTBT:PC70BM heterojunction film. A film composed of 20 nm PCDTBT nanofibers almost completely quenched the photoluminescence (Fig. 5(a)), confirming that the excitons in the PCDTBT nanofibers effectively migrated to the interface of the material and dissociated into electrons and holes. These results are consistent with previous reports that the domain size should be around 20 nm to facilitate exciton diffusion to the interface. Thicker PCDTBT nanofibers displayed a reduced quenching efficiency in the active layer because the surface area of the thick nanofiber layer was smaller and the exciton migration path was longer.
OPV devices are usually fabricated under an inert atmosphere because organic semiconductors can photochemically react with oxidizing agents, such as water vapor and oxygen, thereby degrading the device performance. Despite the practical merits of air processing, the low performance induced by exposure to air has prohibited the development of air-processed OPV devices. Recently, thermal annealing under vacuum or an inert atmosphere after the deposition of the cathode was found to remove the oxygen atoms incorporated during air processing. In this experiment, we applied a post-annealing step to enhance the performance of the nanofibrous processed OPV devices under ambient air. Because the oxygen atoms extracted during the post-annealing step reacted with the metal cathode to form a metal oxide, the selection of the cathode or hole-blocking layer (HBL) was expected to significantly influence the device performance. Three types of cathode/HBL systems (Al only, LiF/Al, TiOX/Al) were prepared on an air-processed BHJ active layer in an effort to identify an optimum system. As shown in Fig. 6, the TiOX/Al cathode system exhibited the best performance. Because a TiOX film in an OPV device fabricated under an inert atmosphere is in the state of oxygen deficiency (with a Ti:O ratio of 42.1:56.4), the TiOX film offered better extraction of the oxygen from the active layer. Therefore, titanium oxide and aluminum were subsequently deposited onto the active layers to examine the photovoltaic performances of the nanofibers with different diameters. Fig. 5(b) shows the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristic of the OPV devices prepared from the various active layer types and a TiOX/Al cathode system. In conjunction with the PL results, the efficiency and JSC of the photovoltaic device increased as the diameter of the PCDTBT nanofibers decreased due to reduced exciton recombination (Table 2).
Fiber diameter (nm)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
200 nm PCDTBT nanofibers
0.851
5.68
35.9
1.74
120 nm PCDTBT nanofibers
0.846
6.18
38.6
2.02
50 nm PCDTBT nanofibers
0.843
7.61
43.0
2.76
20 nm PCDTBT nanofibers
0.860
10.53
48.9
4.43
We could further improve the nanofibrous OPV devices by inserting an electron blocking layer between the active layer and the PEDOT:PSS layer to avoid direct contact between the electron acceptor and PEDOT:PSS. Here, the thin PCDTBT layer (10 nm) was spin-cast prior to electrospinning the nanofibers to enhance the selectivity of the charge and performance of the device. The performances of nanofibrous OPV devices were compared with the performances of OPV devices with a conventional structure, i.e., BHJ and pseudo-bilayer devices.
AFM images were acquired to confirm that the active layer surface in the nanofibrous OPV device was smooth (Fig. S7). Because the nanofibers incorporated into the active layer can induce surface roughness and poor contact with a metal cathode, we obtained AFM images to investigate the surface roughness. The RMS surface roughness in the nanofibrous OPV device (1.93 nm) was slightly higher than that observed in the BHJ (1.42 nm) or pseudo-bilayer (1.19 nm) devices but the roughness was still comparable to the values reported previously for spin-cast films. Therefore, we concluded that the nanofibrous film had an appropriate surface for use in OPV devices.
The photovoltaic characteristics of the BHJ, pseudo-bilayer, and nanofibrous OPV devices are summarized in Table 3, and the corresponding J–V curves are illustrated in Fig. 7(a). As reported earlier, the pseudo-bilayer structured OPV device displayed a low JSC (3.82 mA cm−2) because the low specific surface area of the pseudo-bilayer film compromised the exciton diffusion and light absorption properties. The reference BHJ OPV devices exhibited an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.917 V, JSC of 9.95 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 59.3%, and a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 5.41%. The enhanced JSC resulted from the effective harvesting of excitons. A comparison to the performances of the nanofibrous OPV devices clearly revealed that the JSC of the nanofibrous device was even higher, 11.54 mA cm−2, than the value of the BHJ OPV device. The enhanced JSC in the nanofibrous OPV device was almost 3 times the JSC value in the pseudo-bilayer OPV device and 115% of the JSC value observed in the BHJ OPV device. Although the high series resistance yielded a relatively low FF (56.4%) for the nanofibrous OPV device, the high JSC provided a total PCE (5.82%) that was higher than the value of the BHJ OPV device. The high series resistance originated from the high bulk resistance of the active layer and contact resistance between layers. The low fill factor in the nanofibrous OPV devices may be due to damage incurred during the removal of the auxiliary polymer and the long exposure time in ambient air. Likewise, the low VOC in the nanofibrous OPV devices would have been caused by the defects and traps induced through the exposure to air and small amount of residual auxiliary polymer. Additional improvement in the performance could potentially be made by developing better processing techniques.

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

J
SC (mA cm−2) (from IPCE)
Hole mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1)
Series resistance (Ω cm−2)
Shunt resistance (Ω cm−2)

a Numbers in parentheses indicate average values.

BHJ OPV device
0.917 (0.913 ± 0.006)
9.95 (9.71 ± 0.37)
59.3 (58.2 ± 1.2)
5.41 (5.16 ± 0.19)
9.98
4.68 × 10−5
15.1
520.9
Pseudo-bilayer OPV device
0.916 (0.914 ± 0.003)
3.82 (3.71 ± 0.11)
60.2 (59.2 ± 0.7)
2.11 (2.01 ± 0.07)
4.01
3.59 × 10−5
36.8
1399.6
Nanofibrous OPV device
0.894 (0.894 ± 0.002)
11.54 (11.38 ± 0.12)
56.4 (55.9 ± 1.3)
5.82 (5.69 ± 0.15)
11.45
4.24 × 10−5
22.2
533.9
Given that the hole mobility is usually lower than the electron mobility in an OPV device, the hole mobility of a device can significantly influence the balance between the electron and hole mobility. The hole mobility of the devices was determined using a space charge limited current (SCLC) model for the behavior of the electronic charge in the organic semiconductor at low applied voltages. The hole transport in both N2-processed and air-processed OPV devices could be described according to the SCLC model, as the square root of dark current increased linearly with the bias voltage in a hole-only device. The SCLC model predicted the relationship between the current and bias voltage using the Mott–Gurney square law,
(1)
where
ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, εr is the relative dielectric constant, μ is the mobility in the semiconducting polymer, V is the effective applied voltage, and d is the thickness of the film. Fig. S10 shows the J1/2–V curves for each device, and all devices showed a linear relationship and were well-described by the Mott–Gurney square law. The hole mobility of the BHJ OPV device was 4.68 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, which was comparable to the value reported previously for a PCDTBT:PC70BM OPV device. Despite the use of air-exposed processing, the hole mobility of the BHJ OPV device in this experiment was not significantly degraded. These results indicated that the brief air exposure did not considerably influence the performance. The hole mobility of the nanofibrous OPV device was found to be 4.24 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1. This value was comparable to the values obtained for the BHJ (4.68 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1) and pseudo-bilayer (3.59 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1) OPV devices, despite the presence of possible damage or long exposure to air, possibly due to the better electrical properties of the 1-D materials.

The effects of the red-shifted absorption on the photovoltaic performance were further investigated by measuring the incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) of each OPV device. The JSC values calculated from the IPCE data and the J−V curve were in good agreement (Table 3). The IPCE of the nanofibrous device exceeded the value of the BHJ and pseudo-bilayer devices, especially in the long-wavelength region (Fig. 7(b)). It should be noted that the nanofibrous device harvested low-energy photons more effectively than the BHJ device, as revealed by the UV-vis absorption characteristics. These results indicated that the light absorption, exciton dissociation, and charge transport were effectively enhanced in the nanofibrous device, thereby improving the JSC for a nanofibrous OPV device compared with the BHJ and pseudo-bilayer devices.
The nanomorphology of the BHJ, pseudo-bilayer, and nanofibrous devices was investigated with cross-sectional TEM (Fig. 8). Defocused TEM images and the bright TEM image were presented to see the phase contrast and interface of the device, respectively. The defocused TEM image reveals that the pseudo-bilayer device has two distinct regions: PCDTBT:PC70BM mixture region and pure PC70BM region. The top region is slightly darker than bottom, indicating that the top region is composed of pure PC70BM. On the other hand, the BHJ device and nanofibrous device had no interface. This means that the spin-casting of the PC70BM film onto the nanofibers successfully formed an intermixed layer as the BHJ device formed.

In summary, PCDTBT nanofibers with diameters below 20 nm were successfully prepared using an electrospinning method. The high aspect ratio, high surface area, and small domain sizes of the nanofibers provided a favorable morphology for the active materials of an OPV device. Nearly 100% PL quenching and a higher JSC in the nanofibrous OPV devices indicated effective charge transport and exciton dissociation in the device. This preparation method may be extended to other conjugated polymers for the preparation of large-area nanofibers and nanofibrous OPV devices under ambient conditions.


This research was supported by the Mid-career Researcher Program and Global Research Laboratory Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (no. 2010-0029244).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional discussion of preparation of PCDTBT nanofibers. SEM, TEM micrographs and TGA graph of nanofibers. AFM images, photocurrent–voltage curves, and dark current–voltage curves of OPV devices. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr05538h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014