 DOI: 10.1039/D0TA09612A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 26098-26108


Shuguang
Zhang
,

Young Jun
Yoon
,

Xun
Cui
,

Yajing
Chang
,

Meng
Zhang
,

Shuang
Liang
,

Cheng-Hsin
Lu
 and 

Zhiqun
Lin
*

Department of Electronic Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia 30332, USA. E-mail: zhiqun.lin@mse.gatech.edu

Received
30th September 2020
, Accepted 24th November 2020
First published on 24th November 2020
Interfacial engineering represents a critical step towards passivating trap states and facilitating charge transfer across interfaces in perovskite photovoltaics, thereby resulting in substantially improved device performance. Herein, we report a robust strategy for tailoring interfacial carrier dynamics via judiciously synthesized uniform perovskite CsPbX3 (X = mixed Br/I ions) quantum dots (QDs) by capitalizing on an amphiphilic star-like diblock copolymer as a nanoreactor. The composition-tunable perovskite QDs possess impressive colloidal stability due to intimate ligation with a thin layer of polymer hairs (i.e., hairy QDs). By precisely tuning the composition of CsPbX3 QDs and deliberately positioning them between a perovskite film and hole transport layer (HTL), trap states (e.g., pinholes) on the perovskite surface and at perovskite grain boundaries can be effectively passivated, and concurrently cascade energy band alignment is achieved. As such, carrier separation and interfacial hole transport are greatly facilitated, thus leading to reduced carrier transition time, prolonged life time and improved charge collection efficiency. Consequently, the resulting perovskite solar cells deliver a progressively increased power conversion efficiency up to 19.21% (with interfacial passivation using CsPbBr0.025I2.975 QDs) over the 16.15% of the control device (i.e., absence of CsPbBr3 QD-incorporation). In principle, this perovskite QD-based interfacial engineering strategy may open up new possibilities to passivate traps at interfaces and grain boundaries via convenient compositional tuning of colloidally stable hairy perovskite QDs for a wide range of high-performance optoelectronic devices.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have garnered much attention as they offer an appealing combination of low-cost solution processing and high efficiency due largely to a set of outstanding optoelectronic properties such as flexibly tuned energy bandgap, high absorption coefficient (>3 × 104 cm−1), long electron–hole diffusion length (>1 μm), and excellent carrier mobility. The certified maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 25.2% for PSCs has been reached. Among various approaches to improve the PCE of PSCs, including compositional tailoring and morphological control of perovskite layers, and design and implementation of effective electron transporting layers (ETLs) and hole transporting layers (HTLs), interfacial engineering represents a compelling route to improving PCE.

The ability to create favorable energy band alignment at both ETL/perovskite and perovskite/HTL interfaces and to passivate trap states that act as recombination centers would greatly facilitate charge carrier transport. This remains an active area of research. For example, organic–inorganic hybrid MAPbBr3−xIx quantum dots (QDs) are deposited at a perovskite/HTL interface, leading to increased hole transport. Moreover, the insertion of all-inorganic CsPbX3 (i.e., α-CsPbI3) perovskite nanoparticles at a perovskite/HTL is found to improve hole injection and electron blocking characteristics due to the optimized energy band alignment of the perovskite/α-CsPbI3/HTL. However, MAPbX3 QDs suffer from poor stability due to the volatile organic methylammonium cations. On the other hand, α-CsPbI3 is also unstable at room temperature and transforms into the orthorhombic phase due to a lower Goldschmidt tolerance factor. Clearly, despite great potential in improving the photovoltaic performance of PSCs, there is a vital need for the synthesis of perovskite QDs with a suite of long-term stabilities (e.g., water, colloidal and photo stabilities) and tunable bandgap for improving light harvesting and charge transfer.
Herein, we report a viable strategy to craft uniform hairy perovskite CsPbBrxI3−x QDs with markedly improved colloidal stability and readily tunable compositions that result in concurrent cascade energy band alignment and facilitate charge transfer at the perovskite film/HTL interface, thereby leading to improved device performance. The key to hairy CsPbBrxI3−x QDs of varied Br/I ratios lies in the use of amphiphilic star-like poly(acrylic acid)-block-polystyrene (PAA-b-PS) diblock copolymers with a well-defined molecular weight of each block as nanoreactors. The resulting PS-ligated CsPbBrxI3−x QDs are positioned at the perovskite/HTL interface (i.e., MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD). The incorporation of these QDs not only suppresses the trap states on the MAPbI3 film surface and grain boundaries as corroborated via a set of studies including photoluminescence (PL), time resolved photoluminescence (TRPL), and intensity-modulated photocurrent/photovoltage spectroscopy (IMPS/IMVS), but also facilitates cascade energy band alignment at the MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD interface. As a result, the photogenerated holes in the MAPbI3 layer can be effectively extracted and injected into the Spiro-OMeTAD layer with the assistance of CsPbBrxI3−x QDs. This is revealed by the enhanced charge collection efficiency (98%), improved recombination resistance (350 ohm) and reduced trap states manifested by the longer lifetime (125.93 ns), as compared to ∼92%, 300 ohm and 71.74 ns, respectively, without the incorporation of the CsPbBrxI3−x QD interfacial layer. Consequently, a notable increase of PCE from 16.15% for the CsPbBrxI3−x QD-free device to 19.21% for the CsPbBrxI3−x QD-decorated device is achieved, representing a 19% increase. This work demonstrates a viable approach for interfacial engineering of PSCs by capitalizing on stable polymer-ligated perovskite QDs to impart efficient carrier transport and extraction and thus enhanced device performance.


Scheme 1 depicts the synthetic route to PS-ligated CsPbBr3 QDs (lower second panel), followed by composition engineering into CsPbBrxI3−x QDs with readily varied x, depending on the amount of ZnI2 introduced (lower first panel). The synthesis is detailed in the ESI. Briefly, a unimolecular star-like poly(tert-butyl acrylate)-block-polystyrene (PtBA-b-PS) diblock copolymer (upper fourth panel) is first synthesized by sequential atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP; a living polymerization technique) of tert-butyl acrylate (tBA; upper third panel) and styrene (St; upper fourth panel) using a 21Br-β-CD initiator (upper second panel) obtained from the esterification of β-cyclodextrin (β-CD; upper first panel) with 2-isobutylbromide. The subsequent hydrolysis of the PtBA block in star-like PtBA-b-PS yields amphiphilic star-like PAA-b-PS (lower fourth panel), which is employed as a nanoreactor to template the nucleation and growth of uniform CsPbBr3 QDs. The strong coordination interaction between the metal moieties of CsPbBr3 precursors (i.e., CsBr and PbBr2) and the carboxyl groups (–COOH) of PAA facilitates the preferential loading of precursors in the compartment occupied by inner hydrophilic PAA blocks of star-like PAA-b-PS in dimethylformamide (DMF). Upon dropping the precursor-loaded star-like PAA-b-PS DMF solution into toluene (a nonsolvent for CsPbBr3 yet a good solvent for PS hairs), PS-ligated CsPbBr3 QDs are instantaneously formed (i.e., hairy QDs; lower second panel). The partial anion exchange of Br− with ZnI2 leads to PS-ligated CsPbBrxI3−x QDs. By altering the amount of ZnI2 introduced, a series of CsPbBrxI3−x QDs with different Br/I ratios can be conveniently achieved (lower first panel). It is notable that the diameter of QDs and the length of the outer hydrophobic PS blocks intimately ligated on the QD surface can be precisely tailored by controlling the molecular weights of inner PAA blocks and outer PS blocks during the ATRP of tBA and St, respectively.

The implementation of PAA-b-PS as a template for CsPbBrxI3−x synthesis is advantageous compared with conventional ligand-assisted methods. Star-like PAA-b-PS block copolymers are capable of forming unimolecular, stable, spherical micelles in solution. The inner PAA blocks enable the coordination with the metal moieties of precursors via their carboxylic acid groups to yield CsPbBrxI3−x QDs with a uniform diameter dictated by the length of PAA blocks. In addition, the outer PS blocks possess high hydrophobicity and resistance against many environmental factors. The covalent bond between PS and PAA would lead to the formation of CsPbBrxI3−x QDs with permanently ligated PS chains on the surface, thereby avoiding the ligand dissociation issue as in the case of commonly used organic ligands. The PS chains provide a physical barrier to inhibit the diffusion of moisture and other polar solvents, thus resulting in enhanced stabilities of PS-ligated CsPbBrxI3−x QDs.

Fig. 1a shows a representative transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of uniform PS-ligated CsPbBr3 QDs with an average diameter of 14 ± 0.7 nm, dictated by the molecular weight of the inner PAA blocks of star-like PAA-b-PS (Fig. S1 and Table S1). The bandgaps of PS-ligated CsPbX3 QDs (X = Br, or Br0.5I2.5 after partial anion exchange with ZnI2) can be obtained from the onset of UV-vis absorption spectra (Fig. 1b), yielding 2.38 eV for CsPbBr3 and 1.84 eV for CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs, respectively. The Bohr radii of CsPbBr3 and CsPbI3 are 3.5 nm and 6 nm, respectively. As the size of the as-synthesized QDs is ∼14 nm, which is larger than the Bohr radius, the size of these QDs does not affect the bandgap much. The absorption spectra of MAPbI3 with and without the deposition of CsPbBrxI3−x QDs (i.e., CsPbBr3 and CsPbBr0.5I2.5) are shown in Fig. S2, where no significant absorption increase upon the coating of QDs is seen. Fig. 1c depicts the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of CsPbBr3 and CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs with the emission peaks located at 521 and 674 nm, respectively, which correlate well with the corresponding UV-vis absorption results. The CsPbBr3 and CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs are green-emitting and red-emitting, respectively.
As noted above, CsPbBrxI3−x QDs at varied Br/I ratios (e.g., 0.5/2.5 and 0.075/2.925 as demonstrated in the study) can be readily produced by introducing a suitable amount of ZnI2 into the PS-capped CsPbBr3 QDs, as confirmed from their UV-vis absorption spectra (Fig. S3). Furthermore, the PL peak of CsPbBr0.075I2.925 QDs significantly red-shifts over that of CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs as the I/Br ratio increases (Fig. S4). It is notable that these PS-ligated QDs exhibited outstanding colloidal stability due to the intimately and permanently ligated hydrophobic PS chains on the surface, representing negligible PL intensity variation after exposure to ambient conditions for three days (i.e., the PS-capped CsPbBrxI3−x QD solution was exposed to air and room light without stirring at room temperature) (Fig. S5 and S6).
The time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) study on CsPbBrxI3−x QDs was then performed to reveal the exciton dynamics (Fig. 1d), from which the decay time can be obtained, offering information regarding the radiative recombination mechanism. The PL decay curves can be well-fitted using a biexponential function:
where
A, A1, and A2 are constants, t is time, and τ1 and τ2 represent the decay lifetimes of perovskite QDs corresponding to the intrinsic excitonic emission and the interaction between excitons and phonons or defects, respectively. The average lifetime τave can be expressed as:
The as-synthesized PS-ligated CsPbBr3 QDs have lifetimes τ1 of 39.49 ns, τ2 of 204.00 ns, and τave of 101.60 ns (Table S2). We note that compared with those in the literature, the increased lifetime of PS-ligated CsPbBr3 QDs may be ascribed to their size uniformity and inner PAA chain effects. For PS-ligated CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs, τ1, τ2 and τave are 25.45 ns, 128.86 ns, and 145.46 ns, respectively (Table S2). The prolonged lifetime of CsPbBrxI3−x QDs over that of CsPbBr3 QDs may be due to the reduced exciton binding energy as a result of the partial replacement of Br− by I−, which is in good agreement with previous studies.
The increased stability makes these PS-ligated QDs promising candidates for interfacial engineering of PSCs. Fig. 1e and f compare the surface morphologies of the MAPbI3 film before and after the deposition of CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs as examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The pristine MAPbI3 layer has an average crystal grain size of ∼350 nm, yet the adjacent grains are not closely packed with one another, displaying a large amount of grain boundaries and some recognizable pinholes. In contrast, the coating of PS-ligated CsPbBr0.5I2.5 on the surface of the MAPbI3 film is seen to greatly eliminate the pinholes and reduce grain boundaries (Fig. 1f), leading to a considerably smooth and compact surface and thus suppressed charge recombination, which is favorable for hole transport from MAPbI3 to Spiro-OMeTAD as the interfacial trap states are passivated by CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs. Fig. S7 illustrates the possible improved hole transport caused by the introduction of CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs at the MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD interface.
It is noteworthy that the X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements show the diffraction peaks of the MAPbI3 film, and the small peak with 2θ ∼ 12.8° before (110) of MAPbI3 can be attributed to PbI2-related diffraction. No characteristic peaks of perovskite QDs (i.e., both PS-ligated CsPbBr3 and PS-ligated CsPbBr0.5I2.5) can be detected due to the inappreciable amount of QDs on the MAPbI3 surface (Fig. S8). On the other hand, the slight redshift of diffraction peaks of the pristine perovskite may be attributed to partial phase transition from a cubic into a nonperovskite tetragonal or orthorhombic structure. With PS-ligated QD passivation, the presence of insulating PS on the surface of perovskite QDs can form electrostatic interaction with cationic MA+ to immobilize the MA+ and maintain the cubic perovskite structure, which will be discussed in detail later. The reduced intensity of MAPbI3 with QDs can be ascribed to the QD scattering-induced decreased diffraction. The SEM images of the MAPbI3 film before and after the coating of PS-ligated CsPbBr3 and CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs on the film surface are shown in Fig. S9. The elemental distribution of MAPbI3 coated with CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs on the surface was examined by X-ray energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) (Fig. S10). In order to visualize the QDs on the perovskite surface, we also collected the AFM images of both height and phase patterns and CsPbBr0.5I2.5 perovskite QDs can be distinctly shown on MAPbI3 (Fig. S11).
Subsequently, stable PS-ligated CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs were sandwiched between the MAPbI3 film and the Spiro-OMeTAD HTL (see the Experimental section in the ESI) for the PSC (Fig. 2a). It is notable that a pristine PSC (i.e., without CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QD passivation) was also fabricated and used as a control. The choice of PS-ligated CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs over PS-ligated CsPbBr3 QDs for PSCs is motivated by their favorable energy band alignment with MAPbI3 and Spiro-OMeTAD. As depicted in Fig. 2b, the CsPbBr3 QD acts as a barrier for hole transport due to its lower valence band (VB; 5.56 eV) energy level compared with the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO; 5.43 eV) of the MAPbI3 film. In contrast, the CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QD would facilitate hole transport as its VB edge (VB = ∼5.4 eV) lies between the HOMO of MAPbI3 and Spiro-OMeTAD.Fig. 2c shows the optimized device structure consisting of a 10 nm compact TiO2 layer on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO), a 50 nm mesoporous TiO2 layer, a 400 nm thick MAPbI3 layer coated with a thin layer of PS-ligated CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs, a 250 nm thick Spiro-OMeTAD hole transfer layer and an evaporated Ag electrode. Fig. 2d compares the current–voltage (J–V) curves of the pristine PSC and two PS-ligated CsPbBrxI3−x QD-incorporated PSCs (i.e., CsPbBr3 and CsPbBr0.5I2.5). For the CsPbBr3 QD-sandwiched device, despite higher open circuit voltage (VOC) due to the larger energy bandgap between the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of MAPbI3 and the lower VB level of CsPbBr3, both the fill factor (FF) and short circuit current (JSC) are reduced compared to those of the control device (i.e., pristine PSC; PCE = 16.15%), leading to a decreased PCE. In stark contrast, the introduction of CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs at the MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD interface results in an improved PCE (PCE = 18.00%) due to noticeably increased JSC and slightly increased VOC (Table S3).
To scrutinize the effects of PS-ligated perovskite QDs on the device performance of PSCs, the concentration of both CsPbBr3 and CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs was systematically altered. For the devices assembled with CsPbBr3 QDs of varied concentrations (Fig. S12 and Table S4), it is not surprising that the PCEs are reduced due to the lowered JSC and FF compared to those of the control device, which can be attributed to unfavorable energy band alignment as noted above, thus hindering hole transport. On the other hand, for CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs, the PCEs are progressively increased at low QD concentration (c ≤ 0.3 mol L−1; Fig. S13 and Table S5). It is notable that at the optimal concentration of 0.3 mol L−1, a highest PCE of 18.00% was obtained. It is notable that when the QD concentration is low (0.1 mol L−1), they cannot completely passivate the trap states on the MAPbI3 surface. At high QD concentration (0.6 mol L−1), they tend to aggregate, leading to decreased device performance. Similar situations were seen in CsPbBr3 QD-incorporated devices (Fig. S12). Nonetheless, the improved performance can be ascribed to the enhanced charge transition and collection efficiencies, resulting from the effective passivation of surface trap states by CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs in conjunction with their cascade energy band alignment with MAPbI3 and the HTL (Fig. 2b), as will be further discussed below. It is important to note that the insulating PS on the surface of CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs can function as an effective passivating molecule for improved performance of MAPbI3-based PSCs. Moreover, PS with an electron-rich benzyl ring on its repeat unit is capable of forming electrostatic interaction with cationic MA+ to immobilize the MA+ and reducing ion migration, thereby highly improving the stability of the MAPbI3 layer and device durability. Although the ligated PS chains are insulating, the CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QD-incorporated PSCs can still display excellent performance, which may be due to a small amount of PS (i.e., 21 PS chains with a molecular weight of 7.7 kg mol−1 per chain) situated on the surface of a 14 nm QD, as well as reduced ion migration and trap state passivation, as noted above. All PSCs were studied at the same scan rate and there were no significant differences between the reverse-scan and forward-scan device parameters (Fig. S14), indicating less hysteresis and higher reliability of the J–V curve measurements.
To investigate the effects of PS-ligated QDs on the optical properties of the MAPbI3 film, steady state PL measurements were conducted. The pristine MAPbI3 film exhibits a PL peak at 776 nm (Fig. 3a), which can be ascribed to the bulk exciton radiative recombination emission. With the passivation of PS-ligated CsPbBrxI3−x QDs (x = 3 for CsPbBr3 and x = 0.5 for CsPbBr0.5I2.5), both PL intensities are largely increased. Owing to the different PL peak positions of these QDs compared with those of the MAPbI3 film (Fig. 1c), the increased PL intensity cannot originate from the emission of QDs. Thus, the significant PL enhancement may be attributed to the high-quality MAPbI3 film with suppressed surface trap states and compact crystal grains as a result of the deposition of CsPbBrxI3−x QDs. We can see from the normalized PL of the perovskite film with and without PS-ligated CsPbBrxI3−x QDs that there is a slight FWHM broadening of pristine MAPbI3 compared with its QD incorporated counterpart, which may be attributed to the composition variation, interface roughness, and surface trap states of the perovskite film (Fig. S15). With perovskite QD passivation, the crystallinity of MAPbI3 is optimized, showing a decreased FWHM of steady-state PL. On the other hand, CsPbBrxI3−x QDs with the optimized concentration interfaced between MAPbI3 and Spiro-OMeTAD can facilitate hole transport, as confirmed from the corresponding PL spectra. The stronger quenching of the PL of the MAPbI3 film suggests a faster hole extraction after the incorporation of CsPbBrxI3−x QDs, due to the passivated surface states of the MAPbI3 film after CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QD incorporation. The photo-excited holes can transfer into the Spiro-OMeTAD layer, and space-separating electrons and holes can hardly recombine, leading to stronger PL quenching of MAPbI3 with the Spiro-OMeTAD HTL. For the MAPbI3/CsPbBr3/HTL structure, CsPbBr3 can hinder hole transport from MAPbI3 to the HTL due to the unfavorable energy band alignment, and the photo generated electrons and holes can recombine radiatively and PL intensity will be increased compared to that of the Spiro/MAPbI3 structure. However for the MAPbI3/CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs/HTL sample, CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs can further facilitate hole transfer from MAPbI3 into the HTL due to more favorable cascade energy band alignment, resulting in decreased PL intensity (Fig. S16). Moreover, the TRPL decay curves of MAPbI3 films with and without QD incorporation were measured, from which the PL decay times can be determined (Fig. 3b). The PL decay curves were fitted using a biexponential decay function according to previous reports. The MAPbI3 film deposited with CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs exhibits a much longer lifetime (125.93 ns) than the QD-free MAPbI3 film (71.74 ns) (Table S6). For the perovskite layer without a HTL on the surface, the PL decay is attributed to a tradeoff between radiative and nonradiative recombination rather than carrier extraction by the HTL layer. The longer lifetime with CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs is indicative of slower charge recombination, suggesting suppressed nonradiative recombination centers on the surface of the perovskite film. The photogenerated holes after excitation in the MAPbI3 film can transfer to the VB of CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs, and effective separation of electrons and holes ultimately retards the charge recombination, thus enhancing the PL lifetime.
In what follows, we set out to further elucidate charge carrier dynamics within PSCs with and without QD incorporation by performing controlled intensity modulated photocurrent/photovoltage spectroscopy (IMPS/IMVS) measurements as a function of incident light intensity. The IMPS/IMVS studies were conducted using a blue LED light (wavelength of 450 nm) with the tuned light frequency from 1 kHz to 5 MHz. The IMPS results with and without PS-ligated CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs sandwiched at the MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD interface are shown in Fig. 4. In the Nyquist plots (Fig. 4a and b), the semicircles of various diameters represent the relation between the imaginary part and real part of photocurrent as light intensity changes from 100 to 600 W m−2. Within each semicircle, as the incident light frequency is tuned from 1 kHz to 5 MHz, the imaginary part of photocurrent would reach its maximum at a specific incident light frequency. On the other hand, Bode plots distinctly reveal the relation between the imaginary part of photocurrent and the frequency of the incident LED light source (Fig. 4c and d). The frequency corresponding to the peak position can be used to calculate the charge transition time, τd, via the following equation: τd = 1/ω = 1/(2πfd), where fd is the frequency when the imaginary part of the photocurrent reaches its maximum value. Clearly, the τd is reduced upon the incorporation of CsPbBrxI3−x QDs (Fig. S17a and b). The shorter τd of the CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QD-incorporated PSC suggests the faster carrier transport. To investigate the carrier lifetime, the IMVS plots for PSCs with and without CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs were also obtained. The Nyquist (Fig. 4e and f) and Bode plots (Fig. 4g and h) show similar shapes to their IMPS counterparts. Accordingly, the carrier lifetime, τn, can be calculated from the following equation: τn = 1/ω = 1/(2πfn), where fn is the frequency when the imaginary part of photovoltage reaches the maximum value. It is clear that the τn is increased in the case with CsPbBrxI3−x QD incorporation (Fig. S18a and b). Fig. 3c presents the τn and τd for PSCs with and without QD incorporation, respectively. The device with QDs displays a longer τn and shorter τd than the control device (i.e., pristine device without QD incorporation). The charge collection efficiency, ηcc, is the probability of photogenerated charges, which can be collected by electrodes, and can be calculated from τn and τd using the following equation: ηcc = 1 − (τd/τn). The ηcc for the pristine device is between 88% and 94%, and reaches as high as 98% after the interfacial engineering with CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs, as summarized in Tables S7 and S8.
Importantly, the diffusion coefficient and diffusion length of photogenerated carriers were also calculated using carrier transition time and lifetime, respectively, as shown in Fig. 3d. The diffusion coefficient, Dn, can be calculated using the following equation  (d is the device thickness). It is notable that the Dn of photo-generated and built-in electric-field separated electron–hole pairs is increased by approximately 1.5 fold, compared to that of the pristine device. The carrier diffusion length, Ln, can be calculated using the following equation: . The Ln of the control device is ∼600 nm, whereas Ln over 1 μm is seen in the CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QD-incorporated device. The longer Ln results from τn due to the passivation of trap states of the MAPbI3 film by PS-ligated CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs, which correlates well with the PL and TRPL results discussed above.
In addition, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed with the applied bias from 0.1 to 0.6 V under standard AM1.5 illumination (Fig. 3e) to further elucidate the interfacial charge-transfer properties of PSCs. The frequency range for all the EIS measurements is from 1 Hz to 1 MHz. The Nyquist plots were fitted to an equivalent circuit (Fig. S19). Both the control and CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QD-incorporated devices exhibit comparable series resistance Rs and contact resistance Rc. However, the higher recombination resistance Rrec in the CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QD-incorporated device can be ascribed to the suppression of surface trap states. The larger Rrec suggests a lower recombination probability of separated electrons and holes, which is favorable for higher PCE. It is interesting to note that the EIS-derived lower recombination is indicative of faster charge separation and transition. Meanwhile, the prolonged lifetime and reduced transition time from IMPS/IMVS originate from the improved charge transfer at the MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD interface due to the surface defect passivation and cascade band energy alignment after the introduction of CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs. Thus, the EIS results are consistent with the IMPS/IMVS measurements. In order to further understand the recombination of photogenerated carriers during device operation, we measured VOC as a function of light intensity with IMPS/IMVS equipment for both pristine and QD-incorporated devices (Fig. S20). By linearly fitting VOCvs. log-scaled light intensity [lnI], a slope of 1.32 kBT/q (ideality factor, where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is absolute temperature, and q is elementary charge) can be obtained for the latter device. Compared to the 1.84 for the control device, the reduced ideality factor for the QD-incorporated device signifies the suppressed interfacial recombination. It has also been reported that light intensity dependent VOC and JSC measurement is a very effective approach to obtain further insight into the recombination mechanism of photogenerated charge carriers within perovskite solar cells.Fig. 3f compares the external quantum efficiency (EQE) and the integrated current intensity of both devices over a wavelength range from 300 to 850 nm. Clearly, the CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QD-incorporated device shows a higher EQE than the control device. The increased EQE can be attributed to the improved charge collection efficiency as a result of the reduced trap states and favorable energy band alignment via placing CsPbBr0.5I2.5 QDs at the MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD interface. Moreover, the integrated current intensity is consistent with JSC from the J–V curves.
It is noteworthy that PS-ligated CsPbBrxI3−x QDs with a higher iodide content were also utilized to systematically investigate the effect of the Br/I ratios of CsPbBrxI3−x on the performance of the resulting PSCs, and the champion device with a PCE of 19.21% (a VOC of 1.12 V, a JSC of 23.30 mA cm−2, and a FF of 73.61%) was found for the device using CsPbBr0.025I2.975 QDs (i.e., Br/I = 0.025/2.975) to passivate the MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD interface (Fig. 5a). It is worth noting that the PCE is improved by approximately 20% (from 16.15% of the control device to 19.21% of the champion device). We attribute the improvement in PCE to the enhanced charge transition and collection efficiencies arising from the reduced trap states in the MAPbI3 film and more favorable energy band alignment after the incorporation of CsPbBr0.025I2.975 QDs. The stable output photocurrent density and PCE of PSCs with and without the deposition of CsPbBr0.025I2.975 QDs at the interface are shown in Fig. 5b. Clearly, the champion cell delivers a stable output JSC of 22.65 mA cm−2 and PCE of 17.91% under an applied bias of 0.83 V. For the control device, JSC and PCE are reduced to 21.10 mA cm−2 and 16.11%, respectively, signifying that PS-ligated perovskite QDs could result in a much more stable device with higher output energy under standard sunlight. The statistics of the photovoltaic parameters of both the control device and CsPbBr0.025I2.975 QD-incorporated devices are shown in Fig. 5c and S21. Obviously, the interface-engineered devices with CsPbBr0.025I2.975 QDs outperformed the control device.
Finally, both control and CsPbBr0.025I2.975 QD-incorporated devices stored in a desiccator without encapsulation were evaluated under ambient conditions (i.e., room temperature (∼25 °C) at a relative humidity of approximately 30%) (Fig. S22). The control device experienced a PCE reduction of more than 40% after a 35 day storage. By contrast, the CsPbBr0.025I2.975 QD-incorporated device can still manifest a high PCE of ∼15% due to the effective suppression of trap states via interfacial engineering with stable, hydrophobic PS-ligated perovskite QDs in conjunction with their favorable cascade energy band alignment with MAPbI3 and Spiro-OMeTAD.

In summary, we developed a viable and effective strategy by capitalizing on judiciously crafted hairy all-inorganic perovskite CsPbBrxI3−x QDs with mixed halides to tailor carrier dynamics at the organic–inorganic perovskite/HTL interface. The hairy CsPbBrxI3−x QDs are highly stable as their surface is intimately ligated with hydrophobic PS chains. The positioning of these PS-ligated CsPbBrxI3−x QDs at the organic–inorganic perovskite/HTL interface leads to largely increased efficiency of the resulting PSCs. This may be attributed to the synergy of efficient passivation of surface trap states by PS-ligated CsPbBrxI3−x QDs and advantageous energy band alignment for hole transfer from the organic–inorganic perovskite to the HTL, thereby resulting in shortened carrier transition time, long life time and enhanced charge collection efficiency. The champion CsPbBr0.025I2.975 QD-incorporated PSC manifests a PCE of 19.21% over 16.15% of the control device. The hairy perovskite QD-enabled interfacial passivation strategy may also be implemented to yield other stable perovskite-based optoelectronic devices with markedly improved performance.


The authors declare no conflict of interest.


This work was financially supported by the China Scholarship Council (201606155010; S. Zhang), Science and Technology Program of Guangzhou (Grant No. 201904010282), Key-Area Research and Development Program of Guangdong Province (2020B010180001) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2019MS013).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta09612a
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020