 DOI: 10.1039/D0CC01219J
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 5042-5045


Lingling
Tao
,

Zhe
Sun
*,

Lei
Chen
,

Mao
Liang
 and 

Song
Xue
*

Tianjin Key Laboratory of Organic Solar Cells and Photochemical Conversion, School of Chemistry & Chemical Engineering, Tianjin University of Technology, Tianjin 300384, P. R. China. E-mail: zhesun@tjut.edu.cn; xuesong@ustc.edu.cn

Received
16th February 2020
, Accepted 24th March 2020
First published on 25th March 2020
A photoanode fabricated with agglomerated zinc stannate nanoparticles was applied to dye sensitized solar cells (DSCs) based on cobalt complex mediators. The resultant devices yield an impressive power conversion efficiency of 8.1% under 100 mW cm−2 (AM1.5) light irradiation, which demonstrates the feasibility of use of zinc stannate photoanodes in iodine-free DSCs.

In recent years, great advances have been made in developing dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) with iodine-free redox mediators. Cobalt complex redox shuttles in the family of iodine-free electrolytes have drawn much attention due to their more positive redox potential with respect to iodine based redox couples and less absorption in the blue part of the solar spectrum. The advantage of redox potential allows DSCs with cobalt complex mediators to reach a higher open circuit voltage (Voc). It is common to see the reported Voc exceeding 0.85 V in the literature. Several studies have achieved power conversion efficiencies (η) of DSCs over 12%. Such remarkable improvements are ascribed to the use of thinner TiO2 films (less than 5 μm), by which the diffusion limitation of bulky cobalt complexes is prevented. Fast recombination between the electrons in TiO2 nanocrystals and cobalt complexes is also suppressed due to the adsorption of the sensitizers with insulating spacers onto the TiO2 surface. Self-assembly of the sensitizers engenders a blocking layer for impeding the back reaction. In spite of this, the low electron mobility of TiO2 (0.1–1 cm2 V−1 s−1) could reduce the efficiency of charge collection particularly when the bias voltage is close to Voc. It is desirable to explore wide bandgap metal oxides with high electron mobility for limiting charge recombination and hence improving device performance. In this regard, zinc stannate (Zn2SnO4, ZSO) is promising due to its high electron mobility of 10–15 cm2 V−1 s−1. In previous studies, ZSO films with various morphologies were applied to iodine based DSCs for assessing their photovoltaic performance. The efficiency of the ZSO-DSCs with iodine electrolyte has reached 6.1%. Many studies showed that high efficiency is achieved with the optimized thickness of the ZSO film of over 10 μm. This implies that ZSO does not outperform TiO2 in dye adsorption apparently. In several studies, the ZSO films were further treated with TiCl4 for improving dye loading. For this reason, few studies have reported the performance of ZSO photoanodes in cobalt complex based DSCs. Thicker films would limit the diffusion of cobalt complexes and hence reduce the photocurrent. In this work, we show that this obstacle can be circumvented by using a macroporous ZSO film prepared with agglomerated zinc stannate nanoparticles. This morphology allows the diffusion limitation on cobalt complexes to be prevented even when the ZSO film is as thick as 9.3 μm. We further demonstrate that ZSO based DSCs exhibit sluggish recombination compared with the TiO2 counterpart. Higher absorbed photon conversion efficiency is therefore indicated, for which a device efficiency of 8.1% is achieved.

ZSO nanoparticles were prepared by using a modified hydrothermal method. A precursor suspension containing zinc chloride, tin chloride and tert-butylamine (TBA) with a Zn/Sn/TBA mole ratio of 2:1:9 was heated in a 100 mL autoclave at 200 °C for 12 h. The resultant ZSO precipitates were washed with deionized water and dispersed ultrasonically three times. A detailed procedure is provided in the ESI.Fig. 1a displays the TEM image of the ZSO nanoparticles. The size distribution of the nanoparticles shown in the inset is evaluated according to the image. The plot indicates a wide distribution of particle sizes ranging from 15 to 103 nm. An average size of 38 nm is obtained by fitting the distribution with the Rosin–Rammler function. This value agrees with the particle size calculated from the XRD pattern (Fig. 1c) by using the Scherrer equation (see the ESI). The HR-TEM image and the corresponding FFT pattern (Fig. 1b) show the interlayer spacings of the (111), (220), (311) and (400) planes of the ZSO particles, indicating that these nanocrystals belong to the Fdm space group. The XRD pattern in Fig. 1c further confirms that the nanoparticles are pure Zn2SnO4. No peak is assigned to either SnO2 or ZnO. In the preparation of ZSO paste, an aqueous dispersion of the ZSO nanoparticles was employed. The size distribution of the dispersion is determined by dynamic light scattering measurement. Interestingly, Fig. 1d shows that the size distribution is in the range from 50 to 200 nm. The average particle size of 120.9 nm and the polydispersity index of 0.247 are indicated. The discrepancy of the particle size distributions between Fig. 1a and d implies that the ZSO particles are prone to agglomerate into clusters in the solution even though ultrasonic treatment for particle dispersion has been conducted. We found that the ZSO dispersion (shown in the inset of Fig. 1d) is stable when stored for more than 6 months.
An ZSO film was fabricated with the ZSO paste by using the screen printing technique. The SEM image of the ZSO film in top-view (Fig. 2a) and its partial enlargement (Fig. S1 in the ESI) indicate that the ZSO film is constituted by agglomerated nanoparticles. The yellow dashed circles in Fig. 2a highlight macro-pores with sizes of 50–100 nm. In comparison, the average pore size of the mesoporous TiO2 film is about 20 nm. As illustrated in Fig. 2c, the ZSO film with macro-pores facilitates the transport of cobalt complexes. Below we will show that an ZSO film as thick as 9.3 μm is free from the diffusion limitation. The cross-sectional SEM image in Fig. 2b displays the ZSO film deposited on an FTO substrate. The photograph in the inset indicates that the ZSO film is semi-transparent. Fig. 2d depicts the UV-vis reflectance spectra of the ZSO films with different film thicknesses. As expected, the light reflectance is shown to increase with thickness. This implies the advantage of thicker ZSO films in light harvesting due to their strong light-scattering.
Photoanodes were fabricated by sensitizing ZSO films with organic dye X73. The TiO2 photoanode composed of a transparent layer (3.9 μm) and a scattering layer (3 μm) is employed for comparison. The J–V characteristics of DSCs with ZSO and TiO2 photoanodes are depicted in Fig. 3a. Device parameters are summarized in Table 1. It is seen that the DSC with a 9.3 μm thick ZSO film, denoted ZS-3, yields the highest PCE of 8.1% at an irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2. This record is comparable to the efficiency of the TiO2 based DSCs. The improved device performance arises from the increase of short circuit current density (Jsc) by using a thicker ZSO film. For the 9.3 μm thick ZSO film, Jsc reaches 13.9 mA cm−2 and less diffusion limitation is indicated according to the photocurrent transients (Fig. 3b). By increasing the film thickness to 12.4 μm (ZS-4), the photocurrent is reduced apparently for the transport limitation on cobalt complexes. Dye loading of the ZSO and TiO2 films is also shown in Table 1. It is seen that the ZSO film, even as thick as 12.4 μm, shows less dye loading with respect to the TiO2 film. This result is ascribed to their difference in particle size. And the ZSO and TiO2 films show surface areas of 19.6 and 54.6 m2 g−1, respectively. In spite of the less dye loading of the ZSO film, the ZS-3 device yields Jsc nearly equal to that of the TiO2 counterpart. Incident photon-to-electron efficiency (IPCE) spectra are therefore measured for interpreting the inconsistency between dye loading and photocurrent response. As shown in Fig. 4a, the ZS-3 device exhibits the highest value of IPCE. And the reduced IPCE of the DSC with a 12.4 μm thick ZSO film (ZS-4) is evidently ascribed to the diffusion limitation. More importantly, the ZS-3 device outperforms the TiO2 counterpart given that the wavelength is below 595 nm. Beyond this wavelength, the TiO2 DSC shows higher IPCE response. The plots of light harvesting efficiency (LHE) in Fig. S2 in the ESI indicate that the IPCE results at long wavelengths are in agreement with the dye loading (see Table 1). The absorbed photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (APCE) spectra in Fig. 4b reveal that the ZS-2 and ZS-3 devices are superior to the TiO2 counterpart in charge collection. This result is confirmed by fitting the impendence spectra of the ZSO and TiO2 devices. The larger effective diffusion coefficients of the ZSO devices are indicated in Fig. S4a in the ESI. This agrees with the higher electron mobility of the ZSO film mentioned before. The approximate equality of Jsc between the ZS-3 and TiO2 devices is therefore interpreted as the compensation between dye loading and charge collection.
Device

d/μm

Π
dye /nmol cm−2

V
oc/mV

J
sc/mA cm−2

η/%
FF

a All cells were measured under simulated solar light irradiation of 100 mW cm−2 (AM1.5). d: film thickness, Πdye: dye loading, Voc: open circuit voltage, Jsc: short circuit current density, η: power conversion efficiency, FF: fill factor. The active area of the DSCs is 0.160 cm2.
b The TiO2 photoanode is constituted by a 3.9 μm thick transparent layer and a 3 μm thick scattering layer.

ZS-1
3.0
68.7
965
9.33
6.0
0.67
ZS-2
6.2
103.2
933
12.3
7.3
0.63
ZS-3
9.3
134.8
931
13.9
8.1
0.63
ZS-4
12.4
157.8
916
10.2
6.2
0.66
TiO2
6.9
162.8
935
13.8
8.4
0.65

Table 1 further shows that the Voc of the ZS-3 device reaches 931 mV, which is below that of the TiO2 counterpart by only 4 mV. The higher Voc of the ZSO device is ascribed to its sluggish recombination. Fig. 4c shows that the electron quantities of the ZSO based devices are much lower than the TiO2 counterpart. This means the reduction of the recombination rate since fewer electrons accumulate in the ZSO film at a given bias voltage.
Moreover, the electron lifetime (τst) is estimated according to the following equation:
(1)
where
q is the elementary charge and I0 is the flux of incident light. τst is understood as the average time of electron transfer from the surface of the nanocrystal to the oxidized cobalt complex. In Fig. 4d, the ZSO device is found to yield τst two times longer than the TiO2 DSC. A similar conclusion on the electron lifetime is drawn from the EIS results (see Fig. S4b in the ESI). Due to its long τst and low electron quantity, slow recombination in the ZSO photoanode is therefore indicated. It is noted that the ZSO device does not outperform the TiO2 DSC in Voc according to Table 1. Previous studies have shown that the conduction band of the photoanode is roughly proportional to dye loading. Therefore, smaller dye loading implies a more positive conduction band in the ZS-3 film, which offsets the effect of slow recombination.

In summary, we extend the use of a zinc stannate (ZSO) photoanode to cobalt complex based dye sensitized solar cells. The photoanode is fabricated using agglomerated zinc stannate nanoparticles. The presence of macro-pores in the photoanode allows the bulky cobalt complexes to be free from the transport limitation. Resultantly, a DSC based on a 9.3 μm ZSO film yields a power conversion efficiency of 8.1%, which is comparable to the TiO2 counterpart. We demonstrate that the ZSO photoanode is compatible with the cobalt complex electrolyte due to its excellent performance in charge collection and sluggish recombination. We anticipate that notable advances in ZSO based DSCs could be achieved by ameliorating the adsorption of sensitizers in the future.

There are no conflicts to declare.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, XRD peak list, enlarged SEM image of the ZSO film, light harvesting efficiency spectra, and analyses of the impedance spectra. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cc01219j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020