 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM31970E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13374-13379

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Jun
Xu
,

Xia
Yang
,

Qing-Dan
Yang
,

Tai-Lun
Wong
,

Shuit-Tong
Lee
,

Wen-Jun
Zhang
 and 

Chun-Sing
Lee
*

Department of Physics and Materials Science, and Center of Super-Diamond and Advanced Films (COSDAF), City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, P. R. China. E-mail: apcslee@cityu.edu.hk

Received
29th March 2012
, Accepted 25th April 2012
First published on 31st May 2012
Highly ordered arrays of CdSe coated ZnO/ZnSe core–shell nanocables on FTO (SnO2:F) glass substrates have been synthesized using ZnO nanowires as precursors via in situ successive ion exchanges without any organic ligands involved. While the low open-circuit voltage (VOC) (typically below 0.72 V) is a main factor limiting the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs), we design and exploit the arrays of ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe nanocables as efficient photoelectrodes for photoelectrochemical (PEC) solar cells, achieving a PCE of 4.54% and a VOC as high as 0.836 V by using a nanostructured Cu2S counter-electrode under AM 1.5G illumination with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The high photovoltage is attributed to the ZnSe layer with a high conduction band edge, which reduces carrier recombination by passivizing the surface of ZnO nanowires and upwardly shifts the conduction band of ZnO in the heterojunction. A VOC up to 0.855 V is achieved for the same cell using a typical platinized FTO (Pt/FTO) counter-electrode. However, the Cu2S counter-electrode, which is demonstrated to have higher catalytic activity, contributes to improvements in the fill factor (FF) and short-circuit current density (JSC) and consequently results in a 55% improvement in PCE.

Conversion of solar energy to electricity is a route for a clean, low-cost and environmentally friendly fuel. To replace the costly dyes in dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), inorganic quantum-dot sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) have been extensively explored for their simple fabrication, low production costs, high flexibility of band gap tuning, and the possibility for multiple exciton generation. In the past few decades, extensive efforts have been devoted to TiO2-based QDSSCs, resulting in fast growing power conversion efficiency (PCE) as high as ∼5.4%; however, the reported open-circuit voltage (VOC) is typically below 0.72 V. With band gap and conduction band energies similar to those of TiO2, ZnO shows more flexibility in synthesis and morphology modulation, and higher electron mobility that would be favorable for electron transport and for reducing recombination loss when used in photoelectrochemical (PEC) cells. Therefore, ZnO is considered to have good potential for application as an anode in QDSSCs. However, performance of ZnO-based QDSSCs (with PCE typically less than 4%) still remains below that of TiO2-based QDSSCs. A counter-electrode with low catalytic activity, which typically leads to low fill factor (FF) and short-current density (JSC), is one of the main reasons for the low efficiency in QDSSCs. Another main limitation is the low VOC obtained. The reported VOC is typically no more than 0.65 V for QDSSCs with efficiencies over 4% under one-sun illumination using a two electrode measurement. To the best of our knowledge, the maximum VOC reported so far in ZnO-based QDSSCs is 0.77 V. The low reported VOC of QDSSCs is commonly explained by interfacial recombination at the oxide–electrolyte and the oxide–QD interfaces. To pursue a high VOC for QDSSCs, it is required to suppress these interface recombinations. The theoretical maximum of VOC is determined by the energy difference between the quasi-Fermi level of the photoanode under irradiation and the Fermi level in the dark, which is the same as the potential of the redox couple in the electrolyte. The quasi-Fermi level is close to the conduction band edge of the photoanode (ZnO or TiO2) due to accumulation of photogenerated electrons in the oxide conduction band under open circuit conditions. Therefore, shifting the conduction band edge of the oxide to a more negative potential or exploiting the electrolyte with a more positive redox potential should increase the VOC, which has been demonstrated in dye sensitized solar cells.

Many efforts have been devoted to improve the photovoltaic performance of QDSSCs. Surface passivation, such as depositing a thin layer of insulating metal oxides (Al2O3) on the surface of ZnO or TiO2, and coating a thin layer of ZnS on CdSe QDSSCs, has been adopted to suppress surface recombination. On the other hand, a double-sensitized QDSSC based on the photoanode of a TiO2/CdS/CdSe film has been demonstrated to enhance both JSC and VOC over those cells based on TiO2/CdS or TiO2/CdSe photoanodes, achieving a high PCE of 4.22% and a VOC of 0.514 V. Recently, a solar cell based on CdSe sensitized ZnO/CdS nanocables prepared by successive ion-layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) coupled with a chemical bath deposition (CBD) procedure has been reported to give a PCE of 4.15% and a VOC of 0.627 V using a polysulfide electrolyte. However, the VOC is still less than the maximum value of 0.77 V reported so far in ZnO-based QDSSCs.
Compared with CdS (Eg = 2.4 eV), ZnSe is a more environmental friendly material and is constituted by more earth-abundant elements. Furthermore, it has a wider bulk band gap of 2.7 eV and a higher conduction band edge than those of CdS. These suggest that upon forming a heterojunction with ZnO, electrons from ZnSe can be more favorably transferred to the lower conduction band of ZnO. The redistribution of electrons in a ZnO/ZnSe type-II heterojunction via Fermi level alignment would induce significant upward and downward shifts of the conduction band edges, respectively, for ZnO and ZnSe. Therefore, ZnSe should be a promising candidate to replace CdS as a buffer/passivation layer in ZnO-based QDSSCs for pursuing high VOC.
In our previous study, we achieved band gap engineering of arrays of bi-layer ZnO/ZnxCd1−xSe nanocables by modulating the shell composition over the entire range (0 ≤ x ≤ 1), and demonstrated a maximum solar cell efficiency of 4.74% with a VOC of 0.65 V at x = 0. In the present work, we report high efficient solar cells with a VOC of 0.836 V and a PCE of 4.54% by using tri-layer ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe nanocable arrays as the photoanode and nanostructured Cu2S as the counter-electrode. To the best of our knowledge, this is the highest VOC for ZnO-based QDSSCs and also the highest VOC for QDSSCs with a PCE over 4%. We also have investigated the effect of counter-electrodes and band gap engineering of the tri-layer nanocables via the quantum confinement effect on photovoltaic performance of the solar cells.

The synthesis of ZnO/ZnSe core–shell nanocable arrays on FTO (F:SnO2) glass substrates has been described in detail in our previous work. In a typical procedure, a FTO glass substrate cleaned sequentially with acetone, ethylene glycol and ethanol by ultrasonication was wetted with a drop of zinc acetate ethanol solution (5.0 mM) and dried under nitrogen flow. This process was repeated five times to coat desirable zinc acetate uniformly over the substrate. The substrate was heated in air at 350 °C for 20 minutes to form a layer of ZnO seeds. The seeded substrates were then immersed in a mixed aqueous solution of Zn(NO3)2 (25.0 mM) and hexamethylenetetramine (25.0 mM), and kept at 92 °C for 3 hours to grow ZnO nanowires. This process was repeated about ten times to get a desirable length of ZnO nanowires. These ZnO nanowire arrays were annealed in air at 400 °C for 30 minutes for improving crystallinity and removing impurities. Arrays of ZnO/ZnSe core–shell nanocables were prepared by immersing the ZnO nanowire arrays in a Se2− ion solution (6.0 mM) prepared by reacting Se powder with NaBH4, and kept at 55 °C for 2.5 hours. This process was repeated two times to obtain a desirable thickness of ZnSe shells. Arrays of trilayer ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe core–shell nanocables were prepared by further reacting the ZnO/ZnSe nanocable arrays with a Cd(NO3)2 solution (25.0 mM) for 10 hours at 55 and 90 °C for two different ZnSe/CdSe volume fractions.


For photovoltaic applications, the as-prepared ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe nanocable arrays were modified with ZnS by twice dipping alternately into 0.1 M Zn(CH3COO)2 and 0.1 M Na2S aqueous solutions for 1 minute each, rinsing with deionized water between dips. Nanostructured Cu2S counter-electrodes were prepared by immersing a brass sheet in a HCl solution (37 wt%) at 70 °C for 5 minutes and subsequently dipping it into a polysulfide solution (1.0 M S, 1.0 M Na2S and 0.1 M NaOH in deionized water) for 5 minutes. To examine the effects of different counter-electrodes, platinum coated FTO counter-electrodes were also prepared by dip coating H2PtCl4 ethanol solution (8 mM) on FTO glass substrates several times, followed by annealing at 400 °C for 20 minutes. Solar cells were prepared by assembling and bonding the nanocable electrodes with the Cu2S or the Pt/FTO counter-electrodes. The two electrodes in the solar cell were separated by a 60 μm thick polypropylene spacer, and the internal space of the cell was filled with a polysulfide electrolyte (1.0 M S, 1.0 M Na2S and 0.1 M NaOH in deionized water). The active area of the solar cell was 0.280 ± 0.003 cm2.


As-prepared samples were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Siemens D-500 diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) were carried out respectively with a Philips XL30 FEG SEM and a Philips CM 20 (or a Philips CM200 FEG or a JEOL JEM-2100F, all operated at 200 kV) TEM. Raman measurements were conducted with a Renishaw 2000 laser Raman microscope equipped with a 514 nm argon ion laser of 2 μm spot size for excitation. Absorption spectra were recorded with a Lambda-750 UV-vis-NIR spectrophotometer. Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the solar cells were measured under AM 1.5G illumination with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. Intensity of the solar simulator was calibrated with a standard silicon diode with a KG-5 filter to minimize error due to spectral mismatch. To further confirm the accuracy of the J–V measurement, external quantum efficiencies (EQEs) of the devices were measured using an EQE system (model Oriel IQE 200). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were also performed using an impedance measurement unit (ZAHNER-elektrik IM6) in the frequency range of 0.1–105 Hz, and the applied bias voltage and ac amplitude were set as the open-circuit voltage of the cells and 10 mV between the counter-electrode and the working electrode, respectively.


Arrays of trilayer ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe nanocables were prepared by surface selenization of ZnO nanowires with Se2− ions to form ZnO/ZnSe nanocables, followed by partial conversion of the as-obtained ZnSe shell to CdSe through ion replacement of Zn2+ by Cd2+.Fig. 1a shows a typical SEM image with a cross-sectional view of an array of ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe (55 °C) core–shell nanocables on an FTO glass substrate prepared by reacting ZnO/ZnSe nanocables with a Cd(NO3)2 solution at 55 °C. The length of the nanocables is estimated to be about 8 μm. Fig. 1b is an SEM image of a broken nanocable, showing the core–shell structure, which is consistent with the TEM image in Fig. 1c. The ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe trilayer structure is further demonstrated with a HRTEM image in Fig. 1d. The single-crystalline core (right hand side) shows a fringe spacing of 0.53 nm, which matches well with the interplanar spacing of the (0001) plane of hexagonal ZnO. On the immediate left of the single crystalline ZnO is a polycrystalline shell. A lattice fringe spacing of 0.33 nm in the crystallites match well to the interplanar spacing of the (111) plane of cubic ZnSe. The leftmost layer consists of fine CdSe crystallites of 4–6 nm with various orientations and lattice spacing. The fringe spacing of 0.25 nm matches well with the interplanar spacing of the (211) plane while the fringe spacing of 0.43 nm matches well with the interplanar spacing of the (110) plane.

The core–shell structure is further demonstrated by dissolving the inner ZnO cores to obtain the ZnSe/CdSe composite shells. Fig. S1a of the ESI shows a TEM image of a bilayer ZnSe/CdSe (55 °C) nanotube prepared by immersing the corresponding ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe (55 °C) nanocables in an acetic acid solution to remove the inner ZnO cores. The bilayer ZnSe/CdSe tube is further characterized with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). Fig. S1b–d of the ESI are, respectively, the corresponding Zn, Cd and Se EDS elemental mappings, revealing that Zn, Cd and Se are homogeneously distributed throughout the tube in Fig. S1a of the ESI. The EDS spectrum in Fig. S2a of the ESI reveals that the shells prepared in the Cd(NO3)2 solution at 55 °C consist of zinc, cadmium, and selenium, with an atomic ratio of 32:18:50.
The thickness and particle size in the outermost CdSe shell can be controlled by the reaction temperature of ZnO/ZnSe nanocables with Cd(NO3)2 solution. Fig. 2a and b show, respectively, a typical SEM and TEM image of a ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe nanocable obtained by reacting the array of ZnO/ZnSe nanocables with the same Cd(NO3)2 aqueous solution for 10 hours at 90 °C. The surface of the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe (90 °C) nanocables (Fig. 2b) is much rougher than that of the nanocables prepared at 55 °C (Fig. 1b), as the size of CdSe nanoparticles increases to 6–8 nm. After removal of the ZnO cores in an acetic acid solution, bilayer ZnSe/CdSe (90 °C) nanotubes were obtained as shown in Fig. 2c. The tubes consist of zinc, cadmium, and selenium with an atomic ratio of 20:30:50 (Fig. S2b of the ESI), indicating a higher content of CdSe in the shells obtained at a higher reaction temperature.

Fig. 3 shows room-temperature Raman spectra of the arrays of bare ZnO nanowires and ZnO-based nanocables. For curve (i), a peak of the zone-boundary phonon E2 mode (E2-ZnO) at ∼436 cm−1 is observed from the array of bare ZnO nanowires, which corresponds to the band characteristic of wurtzite ZnO. For curve (ii), in addition to the E2-ZnO mode, a Raman peak at ∼251 cm−1 arising from the first-order longitudinal optical phonon mode of ZnSe (LO-ZnSe) is observed, indicating formation of the ZnO/ZnSe nanocables. For both curve (iii) for ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe (55 °C) nanocables and curve (iv) of ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe (90 °C) nanocables, a Raman peak at ∼206 cm−1 of the first-order longitudinal optical phonon mode of CdSe (LO-CdSe) is observed. Here, the peak of LO-ZnSe is centered at ∼244 cm−1 and shows a slight shift compared to that of ZnO/ZnSe nanocables (curve (ii)), which may be caused by lattice mismatch and surface tension in the core–shell structure. Compared with curve (iii), curve (iv) shows an increase in the band intensity ratio of LO-CdSe with respect to LO-ZnSe, indicating a higher CdSe content in the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe (90 °C) nanocables prepared at a higher temperature, which is consistent with the EDS results (in Fig. S2 of the ESI).

Fig. 4 shows UV-vis spectra of the arrays of bare ZnO nanowire and ZnO-based nanocables. The absorption edge of each sample was estimated from the intersection point of two fitting lines, the saturation and the incline lines as shown in Fig. 4 (marked in cyan). The bare ZnO nanowire array absorbs only over the UV region at a wavelength shorter than 390 nm. Expanded absorption in the visible light region is demonstrated upon formation of nanocables, which is consistent with their color change from grey for ZnO nanowires to yellow for ZnO/ZnSe nanocables, to red for ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe (55 °C) nanocables, and to dark red for ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe (90 °C) nanocables (inset of Fig. 4). The array of ZnO/ZnSe nanocables (curve (ii)) shows an absorption edge up to 480 nm (2.58 eV). A weak absorption edge at about 600 nm is also observed, which is probably due to the oxidation of Se2− ions on the surface of the ZnSe shell to form amorphous Se in air. A significant red shift of the absorption profiles is observed with partial conversion of ZnSe into CdSe. The absorption edges of ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe (55 °C) nanocables and ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe (90 °C) nanocables are estimated to be 626 nm (1.98 eV) and 695 nm (1.78 eV), respectively. However, both of them are smaller than that for bulk CdSe (1.74 eV), which is attributed to the quantum size effect as the crystal sizes of CdSe are smaller than the exciton Bohr diameter of bulk CdSe (9 nm). It also reveals that a smaller size of CdSe crystallites in the nanocables prepared at a lower temperature does have an absorption edge at a shorter wavelength.
Using the arrays of ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe nanocables as the photoanodes, we fabricated PEC solar cells to evaluate their photovoltaic performances. Fig. 5 shows the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the cells. Key performance parameters of the cells with various nanocables are summarized in Table 1. Based on an array of ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe (55 °C) nanocables, the solar cell using a Cu2S counter-electrode (curve (a)) gives a JSC of 11.96 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.836 V, and a FF of 0.45, yielding a PCE of 4.54%. It was found that the counter-electrodes have significant influences on the FF and the PCE of the solar cells. Upon replacing the Cu2S counter-electrode (curve (a)) with the typical Pt coated FTO glass (Pt/FTO) (curve (b)), the cell shows an improved VOC of 0.855 V. However, the JSC, FF, and PCE of the cell decrease to 10.79 mA cm−2, 0.32, and 2.93%, respectively. The VOC and FF of the solar cells are dependent on the shunt resistance (RP) and series resistance (RS) of the devices. A larger RP contributes to a higher VOC. On the other hand, a larger RP or a smaller RS would lead to a higher FF. RS and RP of solar cells can be approximately estimated as the inverse of the slopes of the J–V curve at VOC and JSC, respectively. Comparing curve (a) with curve (b) in Fig. 5, it can be deduced that the cell with a Cu2S counter-electrode shows a much smaller RS than that with a Pt/FTO counter-electrode, which is responsible for the higher FF and PCE observed in the cell with a Cu2S counter-electrode. The RS can be expressed as RS = RTCO + Rct + Rdiff, where RTCO is the substrate resistance, Rct is the charge transfer resistance at the counter-electrode–electrolyte interface, and Rdiff is the diffusion impedance in the electrolyte. The counter-electrodes in a photoelectrochemical solar cell have two roles: transferring the electrons arriving from the external circuit back to the redox electrolyte and catalyzing the reduction of the electrolyte. To pursue a better photovoltaic performance, the counter-electrode should show high catalytic activity. The inset of Fig. 5 shows the J–V characteristics of the Cu2S-based cell (solid curve) and the Pt/FTO-based cell (dashed curve) in the dark. It can be seen that the dark current of the Cu2S-based cell (solid curve) is considerably higher than that of the Pt/FTO-based cell (dashed curve). This is consistent with the observation that the copper sulfide electrode has stronger catalytic activities than the Pt electrode. As the two solar cells only differ in the counter-electrodes, the smaller RS for the Cu2S-based cell should be attributed to a smaller Rct at the Cu2S–electrolyte interface. This is further confirmed by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Fig. 6 shows Nyquist plots of two cells obtained under dark conditions with an applied bias voltage of 0.85 V. Rct can be estimated from the real impedance component (Z′) of the high frequency semicircles. The Rct values of the Cu2S-based and the Pt/FTO-based cells are estimated to be 140 and 320 Ω cm2, respectively. These show that the counter-electrode can have significant influences on FF and PCE of the solar cells via its effect on Rct at the counter electrode–electrolyte interface.
Photoanode
Counter-electrode

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
Efficiency (%)
Array of ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe nanocables (55 °C)
Cu2S
11.96
0.836
0.45
4.54
Pt/FTO
10.79
0.855
0.32
2.93
Array of ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe nanocables (90 °C)
Cu2S
13.57
0.652
0.40
3.56
Pt/FTO
11.27
0.662
0.23
1.73
The high VOC is considered to be the contribution of the ZnSe shell in two aspects: (i) upon formation of the ZnO/ZnSe type II heterojunction, electrons would be transferred from the higher ZnSe conduction band into the lower ZnO conduction band. This charge redistribution would raise the conduction band of ZnO, and thus could increase the VOC of the cell, as the maximum VOC is determined by the offset between the electron quasi-Fermi level in ZnO under irradiation and the redox potential of the electrolyte. (ii) In the tri-layer core–shell configuration, the ZnSe shell acts as a blocking layer to shield the ZnO core from the outer CdSe nanoparticles/the electrolyte, and provides physical separation of the injected electrons in ZnO from the positively charged CdSe nanoparticles/the electrolyte, thereby retarding the interfacial recombination to obtain a high VOC.
Based on the array of ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe (90 °C) nanocables, the solar cells (curves (c) and (d) in Fig. 5) also show the same results that the device with a Cu2S counter-electrode has improved photovoltaic performance than the cell with a Pt/FTO counter-electrode. Compared with the array of ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe (55 °C) nanocables (curve (a)), the cell based on the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe (90 °C) nanocable array (curve (c)) shows an improved JSC of 13.57 mA cm−2. However, the VOC and FF are decreased to 0.652 V and 0.40, resulting in a PCE of 3.56%. The increased JSC as well as the deteriorated VOC, FF, and PCE are believed to be related mainly with the band gap of the CdSe nanoparticles and the thickness of the ZnSe shells. The expanded light absorption but decreased band gap of CdSe in ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe (90 °C) nanocables, which are further confirmed by the EQE results in Fig. 7, are responsible for the increased JSC. On the other hand, as a blocking layer, a thicker ZnSe shell in the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe (55 °C) nanocables may reduce more recombination, and contribute to obtain a larger VOC.

In summary, arrays of trilayer ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe nanocables on FTO glass substrates have been prepared using a simple and facile ion-exchange approach, which endows the nanocables with uniform coverage and effective loading of the ZnSe and CdSe, and tunable light absorption properties. Based on the array of ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe nanocables, a solar cell using a nanostructured Cu2S counter-electrode has achieved an efficiency of 4.54% and a VOC as high as 0.836 V. The high photovoltage is attributed to the ZnSe shell with a high conduction band edge, which is considered to contribute to the upward shift of the ZnO conduction band via Fermi level alignment, and also provides effective shielding of ZnO from the electrolyte to reduce ZnO–electrolyte interface recombination. The nanostructured Cu2S counter-electrode with high catalytic activity is responsible for the cells with high FF and JSC, contributing to high efficiency. The nanocable configuration, shell passivation, high conduction band edge of ZnSe, favorable absorption properties of CdSe, and the Cu2S counter-electrode contribute to high photovoltaic performance of the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe nanocables.


This project has been financially supported by Research Grants Council of HKSAR (no. CityU 101910). The authors thank Mr T. F. Hung for TEM and EDS mapping characterization.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: TEM image and EDS results of the ZnSe/CdSe nanotubes. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm31970e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012