 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA03144K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 14646-14657


Lethy
Krishnan Jagadamma
,

Muhammad T.
Sajjad
,

Victoria
Savikhin
,

Michael F.
Toney
 and 

Ifor D. W.
Samuel
*

Organic Semiconductor Centre, SUPA, School of Physics and Astronomy, University of St. Andrews, St. Andrews, Fife, KY16 9SS, UK. E-mail: idws@st-and.ac.uk

Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource (SSRL), SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA, USA

Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA

Received
11th April 2017
, Accepted 4th June 2017
First published on 8th June 2017
Selective optimisation of light harvesting materials and interface properties has brought breakthroughs in power conversion efficiency (11–12%) of organic photovoltaics (OPVs). However to translate this promising efficiency to economically viable applications, long term stability is a fundamental requirement. A number of degradation pathways, both extrinsic and intrinsic, reduce the long term stability of OPVs. Here, the photovoltaic properties of a highly efficient bulk heterojunction PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend were investigated as a function of ex situ thermal annealing. The changes in charge generation, separation, and transport due to thermal annealing were measured and related to changes in the microstructure and photovoltaic performance. A 30% drop in the power conversion efficiency of PTB7-Th:PC71BM blends upon thermal annealing at 150 °C was identified as mainly due to morphological instability induced by strong phase separation of donor and acceptor molecules of the blend films. Based on the insight gained from these investigations, enhanced thermal stability was demonstrated by replacing the PC71BM fullerene acceptor with a non-fullerene acceptor ITIC, for which power conversion efficiency dropped only by 9% upon thermal annealing at 150 °C.

Organic solar cells are a very promising and versatile photovoltaic technology because of their simple fabrication, flexible and thin form, tunablility of absorption properties and robust performance under a wide range of lighting conditions. All these attributes make them suitable for a range of applications, such as being placed on irregularly shaped products; hence they are ideal energy sources for portable battery powered consumer electronics. Over a decade now, the focus of research for organic solar cells has been on increasing the power conversion efficiency (PCE). Single junction polymer solar cells with power conversion efficiencies of over 10% have now consistently been achieved over the last two years – a longstanding target for commercialisation. This has been made possible by directed development, research and systematic optimisation of low bandgap conjugated polymers, processing methods and interface engineering. The recently developed promising low bandgap conjugated polymers in this regard are PTB7-Th, PffBT4T-2OD, PBDB-T, blended with PC71BM to realise a near ideal nanoscale phase separation for efficient photovoltaic properties. OPV device architectures incorporating plasmonic nano-structures to maximise light absorption and doping of the charge transporting layers have further enhanced the power conversion efficiency of these blends. However, as discussed in the Unification Challenge – which discusses realizing the objective of achieving stable, efficient, low cost polymer solar cells – the stability of organic solar cells should also be on par with power conversion efficiency and processability, otherwise the progress towards the application of the technology will remain slow. Though the simple solution processing and the possibility of roll to roll fabrication can ensure the cost effectiveness of this photovoltaic technology, stability is a great concern for organic solar cells. Accordingly, investigation of the stability of organic photovoltaic (OPV) blends is recently receiving more attention and standard stability testing protocols are now being implemented. Among the highly efficient narrow bandgap donor polymers, the benzodithiophene (BDT) derivative based PTB7-Th mixed with fullerene PC71BM acceptor has reproducibly demonstrated power conversion efficiency greater than 10% by different research groups and hence is an interesting candidate for further thermal processing and stability investigation.

The stability of organic solar cells is often studied by measuring the effect of chemical/photo/thermal processes on the power conversion efficiency. Chemical degradation of organic solar cells, due to water and/or oxygen from ambient air reacting with the active layer, is reported for systems like P3HT:PCBM and now needs to be understood and extended to OPV blends which have demonstrated lab scale PCE of 10% and above. Two important factors contributing towards degradation of OPV performance are: the inherent acidity of PEDOT: PSS (the most commonly used hole transport layer material in standard OPV architecture); and the use of low work function electrodes such as Ca or Al (which reacts with ambient oxygen). As a result, inverted device architectures with thin oxide layers functioning as charge transport layers and high work function metal electrodes as anodes have been developed to improve stability and performance. The photo-stability of PTB7-Th:PC71BM blends has been reported very recently and has shown that incomplete removal of a DIO additive accelerates the photo-degradation of the OPV devices. The structural ageing or degradation of the nanoscale morphology of P3HT:PC61BM and PCDTBT:PC71BM organic solar cells was previously reported by Schaffer et al. under in operando conditions for a prolonged period of ∼18 h.
To analyse the role of thermal effects on OPV blends, two aspects should be taken into consideration: the first is thermal annealing as a processing method for improving the photovoltaic performance, and, the second is the use of thermal annealing as a stressing method to probe the operational stability of an OPV blend. Considering the former aspect: thermal annealing can modify the nanoscale phase separation and crystallization of OPV blends, which impacts the efficiency of charge generation, extraction and operational stability. The optimised molecular packing and morphology of both the acceptor and donor is essential for efficient exciton transport (diffusion) and maximum charge carrier mobility to the electrodes. This has been demonstrated as an efficient method for systems such as P3HT:PC61BM, where polymer P3HT is semi-crystalline. In the case of poorly ordered polymers such as PTB7-Th, characterised by weak intermolecular interaction, the suitability or applicability of such post-processing techniques on the nano-scale morphology, phase behaviour, and optical and electrical properties of PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend thin films has not been reported. In order to facilitate further increase in efficiency and applicability, it is vital that the factors governing the performance of these high efficiency OPV blends are identified and understood. A deeper understanding of thermal annealing effects on photovoltaic performance parameters of fill factor (FF), short-circuit current density (Jsc), and open circuit voltage (Voc), and correlating these parameters with polymer orientation, packing structure, photophysics and phase separation of these blends, will help accelerate the understanding of how to manipulate the molecular arrangement of BHJ systems to achieve improved stability without compromising the power conversion efficiency. Though the focus of our work is thermal processing induced changes in the photovoltaic properties of PTB7-Th:PC71BM blends, the changes following the heating are also relevant for long term thermal stability.
In this work, we have investigated the photovoltaic properties of the PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend as a function of thermal annealing over a range of temperatures (from room temperature to 150 °C) and how the morphological, structural, charge transport and photophysical properties are contributing to the observed effect. An inverted device architecture was employed to avoid degradation of the ITO/PEDOT:PSS or Ca/Al contacts. Ex situ thermal annealing process was applied only to the active layer of the PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend films, and not to the full organic solar cells. This was to exclude any influence of degradation of charge selective layers or metal contacts on the photovoltaic properties of PTB7-Th:PC71BM blends during the thermal annealing process. With increase in thermal annealing temperature from room temperature to 150 °C, the power conversion efficiency of the PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend-based OPV devices decreases from 9.1% to 6.85%, mainly due to a drop in Jsc and the FF. However, the open circuit voltage slightly improves from 0.77 V to 0.78 V. Since the active layer consists of a blend of a conjugated polymer and a small molecule, the phase separation and crystallization processes are complex and hence a range of characterisation methods has been employed to probe the possible reasons for the efficiency drop. The developed understanding will contribute towards enhancing the operational stability of OPVs based on this high efficiency blend system. Preliminary results on improved thermal stability of the PTB7-Th:ITIC blend system, where ITIC is used as a non-fullerene acceptor, are also demonstrated.

The electron transporting layer was an amorphous ZnO (a-ZnO) thin film of ∼25 nm thickness. The zinc oxide precursor solution (0.11 M) was prepared by dissolving equimolar ratios of zinc acetate dihydrate (ZAD) (Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O, Sigma Aldrich 99.9%) and monoethanolamine (MEA) (NH2CH2CH2OH) in 2-methoxy ethanol (CH3OCH2CH2OH, Sigma Aldrich 99.8%) at room temperature. The precursor solution was stirred continuously at room temperature for 24 hours to induce hydrolysis in air. After the hydrolysis in air, the precursor solution was spin coated on a cleaned ITO surface at 2000 rpm for 30 seconds. This was followed by annealing in air on a hotplate at 150 °C for 10 minutes.


Inverted solar cells were fabricated on pre-patterned ITO-coated glass. The ITO-coated glass substrates were cleaned in detergent (sodium dodecyl sulphate-SDS), ultra-sonicated in deionized water, acetone, isopropyl alcohol and exposed to oxygen plasma ashing for 3 minutes. The PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend solution was prepared by dissolving in the ratio of 1:1.5 (by weight), with a total solid concentration of 25 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene and 3 vol% DIO. The solution was stirred at 60 °C for ∼8 h before deposition. The active layer was deposited by spin coating (1200 rpm, 45 s) on glass/ITO/a-ZnO substrates inside a nitrogen-filled glove box. The resulting film thickness was approximately 150 nm as measured by profilometry (Dektak 150 Surface Profiler). For investigating the ex situ thermal annealing effects on the PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend, the samples were left to dry for 20 minutes, and then transferred to a hotplate set at different annealing temperatures of 70 °C, 100 °C, 120 °C and 150 °C, for 15 minutes. After 15 minutes, the samples were removed from the hotplate. All the processing related to the active layer was performed inside the glove box. The samples were loaded into a vacuum thermal evaporator (1 × 10−6 mbar base pressure) in the glove box for thermally evaporating the hole transporting layer of MoOx (7 nm) and anode Ag (100 nm) using a shadow mask. The active area of the devices was 0.08 cm2 (4 mm × 2 mm).


After the electrode deposition, the devices were encapsulated with a UV optical adhesive and a glass coverslip. The current–voltage characteristics were determined under an illumination intensity of 100 mW cm−2 in air using an air mass 1.5 global (AM 1.5G) Sciencetech solar simulator and a Keithley 2400 source-measure unit. The illumination intensity was verified with a calibrated monosilicon detector and a KG-5 filter. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements were performed at zero bias by illuminating the device with monochromatic light supplied from a Xenon arc lamp in combination with a dual-grating monochromator. The number of photons incident on the sample was calculated for each wavelength by using a silicon photodiode calibrated by the National Physical Laboratory (NPL).


The surface morphology of the of PTB7-Th:PC71BM films was characterised using atomic force microscopy (AFM). AFM images were obtained with a Bruker MultiMode 8 instrument in the tapping mode. NANOSENSORS™ PPP-NCSTR Si cantilever tips with a force constant of 6–7 N m−1 were used as AFM probes. Steady state absorption spectra of the blend films were recorded using a Varian Cary 300 spectrophotometer for the wavelength range of 300–800 nm. For this the active layer blend was deposited under identical conditions to those used for OPV devices, but on a fused silica disc. Time resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra in the pico–nano second regimes were acquired with a synchroscan streak camera (C6860 from Hamamatsu). The excitation wavelength was from the frequency-doubled output of a Ti:sapphire laser, giving 400 nm, 100 fs full-width half-maximum pulses at 80 MHz. Samples for streak camera measurements were held under an active vacuum of ∼10−5 mbar. The excitation wavelength used for the time – resolved PL measurements was 515 nm.

Grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering measurements were performed at Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource beamline 11-3. 12.735 keV photons were used with 2D scattering patterns recorded on a MARCCD detector. The beam center and sample-to-detector distance was calibrated using a Lanthanum Hexaboride standard. Scattering patterns were recorded at X-ray angles of incidence 0.14° or 0.2°. The former angle was chosen close to the critical angle to maximise intensity, whereas the latter angle was chosen well above the critical angle to minimise the effect of alignment error. Data acquisition times of 60 s were used, and 3 to 10 exposures were averaged to improve SNR. X-ray diffraction data were expressed as a function of the scattering vector, q, which is defined as (4π/λ)sinθ, where 2θ is the scattering angle and λ is the wavelength of the incident radiation. From Bragg's law, q = 2π/d, where d is a crystal repeat length (or in this case, intermolecular spacing).
Hole-only or electron-only diodes were fabricated using the architectures ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7-Th:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag for holes and Al/PTB7-Th:PC71BM/LiF/Al for electrons. The mobility was extracted by fitting the current density–voltage curves using the space charge limited current method (SCLC).

The photovoltaic properties of the PTB7-Th:PC71BM solar cells annealed at different temperatures are shown in Fig. 1. The illuminated J–V curve (dark J–V curves in the inset) in Fig. 1(a) shows a clear trend of decreasing short circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF) resulting in an overall drop in power conversion efficiency from 9.1 to 6.85% with increase in thermal annealing temperature from room temperature to 150 °C. In contrast, the open circuit voltage (Voc) shows a small increase. The FF drops from 71 to 62% with a corresponding decrease in Jsc from 16 to 13 mA cm−2. Previous reports on thermal annealing of other efficient OPV blend systems of PCDTBT:PC71BM and PBDTTPD:PC71BM also displayed a decreasing PCE with thermal annealing. However, for the same temperature range, the drop in photovoltaic parameters (FF, Jsc and Voc) was different from that observed for PTB7-Th:PC71BM. This indicates the need to study the thermal processing effects and hence thermal stability of each efficient OPV blend separately. The shunt resistance decreases monotonically with increase in thermal annealing of the PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend, and can account for the increased leakage current seen in dark J–V characteristics of high temperature thermally annealed blends [Table 1 and inset of Fig. 1(a)]. Possible reasons for the reduction in photocurrent density and FF can be reduced exciton dissociation, poor charge separation efficiency, or decreased charge extraction efficiency and the increased recombination losses of the photo-generated charge carriers. In order to investigate the cause of the reduction in these photovoltaic properties, detailed microstructural and photophysical characterisation was performed as detailed below.

Annealing temp. (°C)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)

R
sh (Ω cm−2)

R
s (Ω cm−2)
PCE avg. (%)
PCE best (%)
RT
16.1(0.7)
0.77(0.01)
71.3(1.4)
1160(55)
3.14(0.54)
8.8(0.3)
16.6
0.77
71.5
1210
3.03
9.1
70
15.8(0.6)
0.77(0.01)
67.9(1.5)
688(99.8)
3.84(0.19)
8.3(0.4)
16.5
0.78
68.7
747
3.83
8.8
100
15.1(0.6)
0.77(0.01)
67.8(1.7)
780(121)
3.78(0.45)
7.9(0.2)
15.2
0.77
68.2
620
3.45
8.2
120
14.3(0.7)
0.78(0.01)
65.6(0.7)
561(74)
4.86(0.69)
7.3(0.4)
15.2
0.78
66.2
529
4.18
7.8
150
13.5(0.5)
0.77(0.01)
62.2(2.4)
472(63)
5.37(0.53)
6.7(0.3)
13.9
0.78
63.1
464
5.20
6.9
To identify the potential loss mechanisms that limit the overall PCE of OPV devices as a function of thermal annealing, light intensity (I) dependent J–V curves were measured and analysed. The relation between short circuit current and light intensity follows a power law relation
Jsc ∝ Iα
where
α depends on recombination loss mechanisms. The photocurrent of an OPV system limited only by geminate recombination would scale linearly with light intensity, giving α = 1. The deviation of α from unity to lower values indicates the existence of non-geminate recombination losses. In Fig. 2(a), the log–log plot of Jscvs. incident light intensity is shown. The α values as a function of thermal annealing temperatures are, respectively, 0.977 ± 0.011 (RT), 0.971 ± 0.009 (70 °C), 0.961 ± 0.008 (100 °C), 0.962 ± 0.013 (120 °C) and 0.951 ± 0.016 (150 °C). This shows that bimolecular recombination is weak and changes little with thermal annealing temperature.

To identify the contribution of different non-geminate recombination losses that prevails in blend films, the dependence of open circuit voltage Voc on incident light intensity I was measured and compared to the relation:
where
n is the recombination ideality factor and  the thermal voltage. When the slope of Vocvs. the logarithm of light intensity I is, (corresponding to n = 1) it indicates bimolecular recombination whereas a steeper slope (n > 1) indicates trap assisted recombination.


Fig. 2(b) shows Voc variation vs. logarithm of light intensity for PTB7-Th:PC71BM blends as a function of thermal annealing. It is interesting to note that up to 100 °C, the n values remain close to unity, start to deviate from unity (1.16) for the blend annealed at 120 °C, and are the highest for the 150 °C annealed sample where the slope gives n equal to 2.15. Thus, the main non-geminate recombination loss is bimolecular for the blends annealed up to a temperature of 120 °C and the contribution of trap assisted recombination is dominant for the 150 °C annealed blend. Any non-geminate recombination event is effectively eliminating charge carriers that could otherwise contribute to a photocurrent. Hence the drop in Jsc with increase in thermal annealing, especially at higher temperatures can be attributed to the loss of photogenerated e–h pairs due to non-geminate recombination.
In Fig. 2(c), the variation of FF as a function of light intensity is shown. For the blend films annealed up to 120 °C, the FF increases with lowering of light intensity, and for the blends annealed at 150 °C, the FF follows a monotonic decrease with decrease in light intensity. The drop in the FF at low light intensities suggests that carrier loss by recombination is significant in PTB7-Th:PC71BM blends annealed at a temperature of 150 °C. The factors that lead to non-geminate recombination are inconsistent pathways of donor/acceptor islands due to phase separation, electron/hole mobility mismatch and increased energetic disorder. Since these factors are correlated to each other, a careful and systematic investigation is carried out to elucidate the contribution of each factor to the observed PCE drop.

To identify the morphological stability of the PTB7-Th:PC71BM blends to thermal annealing, morphological features were characterised as a function of different annealing temperatures using atomic force microscopy. Time resolved photoluminescence quenching was used as a complementary probe for estimating the domain size and is described at the end of the next section. The morphology of the donor/acceptor network is crucial in maximising efficiency as the carrier lifetime is largely controlled by nanoscale phase morphology between the donor and acceptor materials. Fig. S1 and 3(a)–(d) show the AFM height and phase images of PTB7-Th:PC71BM films annealed at different temperatures respectively. The RMS surface roughness [Fig. 3(e)], estimated from statistical distribution of surface height from an area of 10 × 10 μm2, shows an overall increasing trend. For the room temperature processed sample has a surface roughness of ∼1.8 nm, which increases to ∼3.2 nm for the 150 °C thermally annealed blend. During the intermediate temperature range of 75 °C to 120 °C, the surface roughness remains more or less the same. This could be related to the phase separation of the donor/acceptor blend as the annealing temperature is raised from room temperature to 150 °C, increasing the molecular mobility.

As shown in the AFM phase images (Fig. 3), the contrast as well as the size of the bright spots (which correspond to PCBM aggregates due to its high elastic modulus) is increased with thermal annealing temperature indicating that there is an enhancement of PCBM aggregation/phase separation length scale. The phase images of the blends annealed at 75 and 120 °C shows high-contrast interpenetrating channels, while those of 100 and 150 °C show a more gradual and random structure with interspersed bright spots. The non-monotonic nature of these patterns makes it difficult to draw detailed, quantitative conclusions regarding the domain size distribution. At room temperature, very low contrast is observed, indicating a fine mixing of the donor acceptor blend, whereas for the blend films annealed at 150 °C, a coarse morphology with large scale phase separation is observed. The distribution of the domain size estimated from AFM height images of the RT and 150 °C processed PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend films are shown in Fig. S2. As seen, the average domain size increases from 16 to 20 nm and the FWHM of a fitted normal distribution increases from 8 to 10.4 nm as the annealing temperature is increased to 150 °C. The slight increase in FWHM indicates the existence of domains with a varied range of sizes due to thermal annealing at high temperatures. This clearly demonstrates that the donor and/or acceptor molecular motion happens with thermal annealing and corresponding morphological changes are occurring.
Large-scale, unfavorable phase separation in BHJ blends would reduce the probability of photo-generated excitons arriving at a donor–acceptor interface for their dissociation prior to recombination compared to the system in which donor and acceptor phases are homogeneously distributed. This would reduce the photo-generated current (and hence the Jsc). Moreover when free photo-generated electrons and holes transport through the isolated domains of donor and/or acceptor, the probability of recombination with trapped carriers within the hopping/tunneling distance also increases. Thus the reduced Jsc and FF of the OPV blends with increase in the thermal annealing temperature can be attributed to the reduced exciton dissociation and increased recombination losses due to inconsistent and unfavorable phase separation. To validate this inference drawn from morphological measurements, detailed photo-physical characterisations of the blend films were performed as described below.

In order to get insight on how the thermal annealing influences the optical properties and exciton/charge dynamics of the PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend, various spectroscopic techniques such as UV-Vis absorption, steady state and time resolved PL spectroscopy are applied. The UV-Vis absorption spectrum shown in Fig. 4(a) reveals that due to thermal annealing, the PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend does not exhibit any strong blue shift or red shift of the absorption maxima. This observation clearly reveals that the photocurrent drop as a function of thermal annealing is not due to a change in absorption properties of the blend films. To investigate the photo-induced charge transfer between the donor and acceptor molecules, static and dynamic PL spectra of pristine and blend films are recorded. The steady state photoluminescence from pristine PTB7-Th, PC71BM and their blends as a function of thermal annealing are shown in Fig. 4(b). The PL emission from PTB7-Th is mainly peaked at 760 nm and from PC71BM at 720 nm, matching well with the previous reports on PL emission for these materials. The PL spectrum of the blend is constituted by combination from both PC71BM and PTB7-Th and no additional peak due to a CT state is observed in the long wavelength region for the analyzed spectral range. This is in contrast to PCDTBT:PC71BM blend where a CT state emission peak is clearly observed. The absence of CT state emission indicates that the CT intermediate state density is too low or that the energy is too close to the PL peak.

PL quenching provides direct evidence for exciton dissociation, and the degree of PL quenching reflects the efficiency of the exciton charge separation which in turn influences the Jsc value of the organic solar cells. A comparison of the PL intensity of the PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend prepared at room temperature and 150 °C is given in Fig. S3(a). A reduced exciton quenching efficiency for the blend films annealed at 150 °C is observed in comparison to the room temperature processed blend films. To further confirm this, time resolved PL measurements of the neat and blend films were performed. The PL decay dynamics of the neat PTB7-Th and neat PC71BM are shown in Fig. S3(b). In the case of neat PC71BM, the PL decay is mono-exponential with a lifetime of ∼640 ps (corresponding fit to PL decay is given in Fig. S3(b)), whereas the PL decay of pristine PTB7-Th is bi-exponential with a 1/e lifetime of ∼280 ps. As shown in Fig. 4(b), both PTB7-Th and PC71BM contributed to PL of the blend in contrast to previous studies of PTB7 and PC71BM blends where only emission from PC71BM was observed. In order to separate the PTB7-Th and PC71BM emissions, we measured the PL excitation spectra of the PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend film at different emission wavelengths (see Fig. S4) and observed the contributions from both donor and acceptor molecules. We found that for λem > 815 nm, emission was mainly from PTB7-Th and for λem < 720 nm, mainly PC71BM was emitting. In between these wavelengths, both materials emit. Therefore for our analysis we selected PL decays between 670 and 720 nm for the PC71BM and between 820 and 900 nm for PTB7-Th.
The corresponding PL decays as a function of thermal annealing for the case of PC71BM and PTB7-Th are shown in Fig. 4(c) and (d) respectively. The PL decays of blend films in both cases are faster compared to decays of their corresponding neat films and this is likely due to charge transfer or resonant energy transfer between the well intermixed donor and acceptor molecules in the blend. We extracted quenching efficiency using the previously reported fitting approach
where
Iblend and Ineat are PL intensity decays of blend and neat films respectively. The obtained values are given in Table S1. The reduced exciton quenching (both in the steady state and time resolved PL) of the blend films annealed at 150 °C is accompanied by a reduction in Jsc from the thermally annealed blends. The reduced exciton quenching can be due to the increase in the length scale of phase separation of the donor–acceptor in the blend. This observation is in agreement with the findings from the AFM phase and height images shown in Fig. 3 and S1.

Since all blend films have bi-exponential decays (very fast decay at an early time and slower decay at a later time), the lifetimes were estimated from PL decay when they fall to 1/e of their initial value and are given as a function of thermal annealing in Table S2. The corresponding fitted PL decay curves are given in Fig. S5(a) and (b). The 1/e lifetime in both cases increased systematically with an increase in thermal annealing and indicates decreasing exciton dissociation efficiency at the polymer: fullerene interfaces after the photoexcitation. This is likely due to an increased domain size resulting in fewer singlet excitons reaching a hetero-interface during their migration. This interpretation is supported by the increase in feature sizes and surface roughness in AFM as seen in Fig. 3 and S1.
In order to get quantitative information about the size of PC71BM domains, we used a similar approach to that of Hedley et al. and used the relation,
where
D is the diffusion coefficient, m is an integer, PLratio is the ratio of the PL of the blend (detected between 670 nm and 720 nm) and the PL of the neat PC71BM film, r is radius of the PCBM domain, and t is time. For our analysis we used the previously reported value of D = 1.6 × 10−4 cm2 s−1 for PC71BM. At the earliest times, fast decay is due to direct energy transfer. Therefore we fitted the ratio of PL decays of blend and pristine film in the region >8 ps (where PL decay is mainly due to exciton diffusion) and found that the size of pure domains of PC71BM increased with the annealing temperature (Table S2 and Fig. S6). Compared to the domain size estimated from the AFM height images (Fig. S2), the domain size estimated from the PL decay studies is smaller and this difference in size estimation could be due to the difference in the assumptions and resolutions achievable with the two different methods.

Thus both steady state and time resolved PL spectroscopic measurements imply a reduced exciton dissociation efficiency due to increased domain size in the blend films with increase in thermal annealing temperature. This can be due to the coarse phase-separation of the donor–acceptor blend films with an increase in the thermal annealing temperature, reducing the interfacial area between the donor PTB7-Th and acceptor PC71BM leading to a suppression of density of initially photo-generated charge carriers. Thus the decrease in the short circuit density of the PTB7-Th:PC71BM solar cells with an increase in thermal annealing temperatures can be due to the increased domain size of the components in the blend films. Previously Guo et al. have reported a similar observation of reduced interfacial boundaries in thermally annealed PTB1:PCBM films which reduced the solar cell PCE by ∼60%. The main factor that contributed to the drop in PCE was the lowered Jsc because of the reduced exciton splitting in the annealed blend films due to the larger PCBM domains.
So far the thermal annealing induced morphological and photophysical properties of PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend films and their correlation to the observed photovoltaic performance, with a focus on short circuit current density, were discussed. In the following section, the molecular packing and the crystallinity of the blend films due to thermal annealing and its correspondence to other photovoltaic properties of Voc and the FF are discussed.

To identify how the thermal annealing changes the molecular packing of both the donor and the acceptor, GIWAXS studies were performed on thermally annealed blend films. Fig. 5 shows the GIWAXS 2D patterns of the PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend as a function of thermal annealing. After applying necessary geometry corrections, we can identify three peaks typical of PC71BM (at Q = 0.7, 1.36, and 1.96 Å−1) and peaks associated with the polymer alkyl stacking peak (Q = 0.32 Å−1) [corresponding to (100) Bragg reflection] and the polymer π-stacking peak (Q = 1.6 Å−1) [corresponding to the (001) Bragg reflection]. The alkyl stacking peak is more intense in the in-plane direction, and the π-stacking peak is prominent in the out-of-plane direction, showing a preferential face-on orientation. With an increase in thermal annealing, the alkyl peak becomes more intense relative to the PCBM diffraction, suggesting a slight increase in ordering of PTB7-Th donors (Fig. S7). No orientation change of the donor molecules with an increase in thermal annealing is observed. A previous study on X-ray scattering of P3HT:PCBM blend and photocurrent has revealed that Jsc depends more on the local ordering of the PCBM than on the π-stacking of the donor molecule. Even though the degree of crystallinity of the PTB7-Th donors increases with thermal annealing, in contrast to P3HT which shows greatly improved ordering on annealing, the Jsc of the devices drops systematically with an increase in annealing temperature. The PC71BM scattering is observed as broad diffusive rings (at 0.6 and 1.4 Å−1), indicating a disordered amorphous or nanocrystalline state. The PCBM ring intensity increases with temperature indicating an increase in aggregation of PCBM. This observation is in agreement with the AFM height and phase imaging in Fig. 3 and S1, and photophysical analysis shown in Fig. 4, where the increase in phase purity and domain size with an increase in thermal annealing temperature is clearly visible. Normalising the GIWAXS data by the second PCBM scattering peak reveals that the polymer alkyl diffraction grows faster than the PCBM aggregates [Fig. S7]. This could be due to PCBM diffusion out of mixed regions, forming weak PCBM aggregates and allowing the polymer to crystallize strongly. The improved photovoltage observed for the thermally annealed PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend can be related to the improved crystallinity of the PTB7-Th donor molecule which would reduce the energetic disorder/defect states, resulting in downshifting of the hole Fermi level. Recently, Moseguí González et al. have reported direct evidence for how the increased crystallinity of the donor polymer (P3HT) in the active layer can contribute to enhanced photovoltage in a BHJ OPV by using an in operando combination of GIWAXS and I–V tracking.


The photovoltaic properties of the polymer blend films are highly correlated to the charge transport properties. In order to obtain high fill factor for OPVs, balanced and high charge carrier mobilities are required for holes and electrons. To study how thermal annealing is affecting the charge transporting properties of the PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend, the hole and electron mobility in the blend films are estimated using the space charge limited current (SCLC) method. The structure of hole only devices is ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7-Th:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag and Al/PTB7-Th:PC71BM/LiF/Al respectively (Fig. S8). The J–V curves of the devices made with blend films annealed at different temperatures are shown in Fig. 6. The mobility of holes and electrons are estimated using the Mott–Murgatroyd relation:
where
Jsclc is the steady state current density function of applied voltage V; d is the film thickness, ε is the dielectric constant of the organic semiconductors (set as 3.5), and μ0 is the mobility in the limit of zero electric field, Vb is the built in voltage and γ is the electric field dependent factor. As given in Table 2, with an increase in thermal annealing there is no considerable variation in hole/electron mobility. However, for the blend films annealed at 150 °C, the charge mobility imbalance is highest. This charge mobility imbalance can cause space charge effects in the active layer blend impeding the charge extraction processes and promoting the trap-assisted recombination losses. This is in accordance with the inference drawn from the recombination losses studies shown in Fig. 2(b), where the 150 °C annealed blend films showed the highest recombination losses. Thus the drop in Jsc and the FF observed for the PTB7-Th:PC71BM blends with an increase in thermal annealing temperatures can be summarized as due to the reduced exciton dissociation due to large length scale phase separation and increased recombination losses.

Annealing temperature (°C)
Hole mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1)
Electron mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1)
RT
8.6 ± 1.7 × 10−4
2.14 ± 0.32 × 10−3
2.50 ± 0.62
70
9.0 ± 0.4 × 10−4
2.26 ± 0.59 × 10−3
2.51 ± 0.66
100
10.1 ± 1.6 × 10−4
2.38 ± 0.40 × 10−3
2.35 ± 0.55
120
10.6 ± 2.1 × 10−4
2.45 ± 0.55 × 10−3
2.31 ± 0.68
150
8.5 ± 2.1 × 10−4
3.10 ± 0.15 × 10−3
3.64 ± 0.74
Based on the above described morphological and optoelectronic characterization, the critical factor that leads to the photovoltaic performance degradation of thermally annealed PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend films is the increased domain size of the donor:acceptor components. Fig. 7 shows a schematic of what happens to the PTB7-Th:PC71BM BHJ blends on thermally annealing at 150 °C. The correlation of morphological degradation on a nanometre scale and the photovoltaic performance of P3HT:PCBM and PCDTBT:PC71BM solar cells under continuous illumination of ∼18 h and in operando condition has been previously reported by Schaffer et al., where the authors employed GISAXS to probe the microstructural evolution of the BHJ active layer. Though solar cell performance loss is attributed to morphological instability, depending on the active layer blend, different responses in photovoltaic performance parameters and microstructure evolution with time were observed. In the case of P3HT:PCBM solar cells, growth of the domain size of the active layer components was observed whilst in PCDTBT:PC71BM solar cells, domain size shrank. Hence, for P3HT:PCBM solar cells, the highest drop was observed in Jsc, (due to reduced exciton splitting) with smaller changes in Voc and the FF. In contrast, for PCDTBT:PC71BM, the shrinking leads to a loss of connectivity in the interpenetrating network and hence a drop in the FF played the largest role in solar cell performance degradation. In the present case of thermally annealed PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend based solar cells, the increased domain size caused a reduction in exciton splitting as discussed in the photophysics section, and hence a higher drop is observed in Jsc (16%) than in the FF (11%). The increased crystallinity of the PTB7-Th and small effects of thermal annealing on electron/hole mobility are possible reasons for the relatively low drop in the FF. Thus, while discussing the performance degradation of OPVs due to morphology instability, these two different morphological aspects should be taken into consideration and based on the response of the PV performance parameters, structural changes can be inferred.

Since morphological instability was the main reason for the adverse photovoltaic properties of the PTB7-Th:PC71BM blends annealed at higher temperatures, we were motivated to test the photovoltaic properties of a non-fullerene acceptor based blend system under similar conditions. The recently reported non-fullerene small molecule acceptor ITIC was selected to investigate the thermal stability of the blend. ITIC is based on a bulky seven-ring fused core (indacenodithieno[3,2-b]thiophene, IT), with 2-(3-oxo-2,3-dihydroinden-1-ylidene)malononitrile (INCN) groups end-capped to the ring, and with four 4-hexylphenyl groups substituted on it [Fig. 8(a)]. These four rigid 4-hexylphenyl substituents are reported to restrict molecular planarity, aggregation, and large phase separation in non-fullerene BHJ blend films. The OPV device performance as a function of thermal annealing is given in Table 3 and Fig. 8. It should be noted that the PCE of this blend system is not as high as the PC71BM-based system and more optimisation process are underway. The PCE only drops by 9% of its as-spun value for an increase in thermal annealing from room temperature to 150 °C, while the PC71BM based fullerene acceptor blend showed a PCE drop of 30%. In contrast to PCBM based systems, the EQE spectra (Fig. 8(c)) of the PTB7-Th:ITIC OPVs do not show considerable difference as a function of thermal annealing.

Annealing temp. (°C)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE avg. (%)
PCE best (%)
RT
15.2(0.3)
0.78(0.01)
49.0(1.7)
5.8(0.3)
15.7
0.78
51.7
6.3
100
15.0(0.2)
0.77(0.01)
46.7(0.7)
5.4(0.1)
15.3
0.77
48.2
5.70
150
14.8(0.5)
0.77(0.01)
45.5(0.3)
5.2(0.2)
15.2
0.78
45.8
5.45
To compare how thermal annealing affects the morphology of the PTB7-Th:ITIC blend, atomic force microscopy images of the blend films at RT and annealed at 150 °C were measured and are shown in Fig. 9. The AFM height images are shown in Fig. 9(a) and (b), whereas the corresponding phase images are shown in Fig. 9(c) and (d). Homogeneous mixing of the donor and acceptor molecules are evident from these images. No considerable difference in the domain size or length scale of phase separation is observed either from the AFM height or phase images due to thermal annealing at 150 °C. This is in accordance with the observed RMS roughness values for the RT and thermally annealed blends, which are respectively 2.6 nm and 2.5 nm. This is in contrast to the PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend where the thermally annealing process increases the RMS roughness [Fig. 3(e)]. The retention of the photovoltaic properties of the PTB7-Th:ITIC blend films even after annealing at 150 °C can be attributed to its morphological stability.

The effect of thermal annealing on the photovoltaic properties of a highly efficient BHJ system comprised of PTB7-Th:PC71BM is investigated. A drop in Jsc and FF leads to a decrease in power conversion efficiency. This is due to the suppression of exciton dissociation and increased recombination losses caused by morphological changes, as the thermal annealing temperature is increased. However, the improved ordering of the PTB7-Th donor molecule with thermal annealing results in an enhanced open circuit voltage. By replacing the fullerene PC71BM acceptor by the non-fullerene acceptor molecule ITIC, improved morphological stability is observed and hence better retention of the photovoltaic performance as a function of thermal annealing is obtained. This result strengthens the need to develop BHJ systems with morphological stability and stable acceptor molecules along with the development of highly efficient, narrow band gap donor molecules.


We acknowledge support from EPSRC (grant number EP/L012294/1) and the European Research Council (grant number 321305). I. D. W. S. also acknowledges a Royal Society Wolfson Research Merit Award. V. S. acknowledges support from the Office of Naval Research NDSEG fellowship. Use of the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, is supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences under Contract No. DE-AC02-76SF00515. We thank Stefan Oosterhout for valuable discussions. Research data supporting this publication is available at http://dx.doi.org/10.17630/eadf56f3-8c70-47da-ac6d-67f2d78b3f74.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta03144k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017