 DOI: 10.1039/D0EE03836A
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 2357-2368


Ke
Meng
,

Xiao
Wang
,

Zhimin
Li
,

Zhou
Liu
,

Zhi
Qiao
,

Chunwu
Wang
,

Youdi
Hu
,

Shunde
Li
,

Lei
Cheng
,

Yufeng
Zhai
 and 

Gang
Chen
*

School of Physical Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, 201210, China. E-mail: gchen@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Received
8th December 2020
, Accepted 9th February 2021
First published on 9th February 2021
Low-dimensional perovskite (LDP) holds great potential to deliver highly stable and efficient solar cells. However, a fundamental understanding of the structure, composition and degradation mechanism of the LDP material is required for further advancements. Here, we present an effective self-passivation strategy to concurrently enhance the efficiency and stability of the butylammonium (BA) based LDP solar cells. It is inspired and guided by the structural characteristics and degradation kinetics of the LDP film. We show that the BA-based LDP film possesses a unique crystal stacking pattern, containing highly oriented perovskite crystals of different layer thicknesses. We also uncover the divergent degradation behaviour of the LDP film under thermal stress and the unique disproportion degradation process under high-humidity conditions. Without introducing foreign compounds, the LDP film is passivated with a thin layer of the BA-based perovskite, which results in an exceptional power conversion efficiency of 17.0% and significantly enhanced device stability. These studies provide mechanistic insight into the structure and stability of the LDP material and offer guidelines for further device optimization.

The real-world deployment of the organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells is hindered by their instability to external stimuli such as heat and moisture. Low-dimensional perovskite (LDP), consisting of layered perovskite slabs separated by large organic spacers, is a promising candidate to address the stability issues while maintaining the remarkable optoelectronic properties. Numerous efforts have been devoted to LDP film preparation and device architecture optimization. However, there is still a lack of fundamental knowledge about the structure, composition and degradation mechanism of the LDP materials, which are prerequisites for further advancements in device performance. In this study, we unveil the structural characteristics and degradation kinetics of the widely adopted butylammonium-based LDP material through a systematic investigation employing the synchrotron-based X-ray techniques. This inspires the development of an effective self-passivation strategy for LDP films, which concurrently improves the device efficiency and stability. The current work provides both mechanistic insights and technical advancements towards the fabrication of highly efficient and stable LDP-based solar cells.


Organic–inorganic hybrid halide perovskites have emerged as the most promising photovoltaic materials for next-generation solar cells due to their remarkable optoelectronic properties. Over the past few years, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has rapidly reached over 25%, making them a strong contender to the existing photovoltaic technology. However, the intrinsic instability issue of the three-dimensional (3D) perovskite materials has become the main obstacle on their way to commercialization. The two-dimensional (2D) or quasi-2D low-dimensional perovskite (LDP), represented by the Ruddlesden–Popper type, has thus attracted increasing attention due to its capability to address the long-term stability issue. The LDP species possess a general chemical formula of (A′)m(A)n−1PbnI3n+1, where A′ and A are the organic cations and n specifies the thickness of the Pb-I slabs. The alternative stacking of the long-chain organic cations and the octahedral perovskite slabs combines the remarkable environmental stability of long-chain organic molecules with the superior optoelectronic property of perovskite materials.

To date, a variety of film processing techniques, such as hot-casting, additive assistant and solvent engineering, and device architectures have been developed to enhance the overall photovoltaic performances. However, many aspects remain unknown in the fundamental understanding of the LDP materials. In particular, the exact composition and structural characteristics of the LDP films are still obscure. Although there are numerous approaches to prepare LDP films with the desirable morphology and crystal orientation, the prototype model for these films is still controversial. It was previously proposed that the LDP film mainly contained the 2D phase (with a defined n value) with some minor 3D contents dispersed inside. Recent studies revealed that there were gradients of phase distributions (different n values) across the LDP film. Apparently, a clear picture of the structure and composition distribution in the LDP film would be beneficial to understand the underlying working mechanism and direct further film optimization.
In addition, the degradation behaviour of perovskites warrants special attention in order to tackle the stability issue. For the 3D methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) perovskite, the detailed pathways for thermal and humidity degradation have been extensively investigated. These insights into the degradation mechanism of the 3D perovskite have inspired new designs for improved stability. It becomes evident that the LDP materials show better overall stability than their 3D analogues. The stability improvement is largely attributed to the moisture and heat resistance of the long-chain organic molecules. However, there is no systematic investigation conducted to unveil the degradation kinetics of the LDP material which could help to improve the film quality and stability.
Herein, we perform a comprehensive investigation on the structural characteristics and degradation mechanism of the LDP films, which fosters an effective self-passivation strategy to significantly enhance the efficiency and stability of the LDP-based PSCs. The structural characteristics of the LDP film are determined by the variable-angle grazing-incidence X-ray diffraction (GI-XRD) technique. The typical hot-casted butylammonium (BA) based LDP film possesses a unique crystal stacking pattern containing highly oriented perovskite crystals of different n values. The degradation mechanism of the LDP films is further investigated by conducting in situ GI-XRD characterizations. The LDP film shows divergent degradation behaviour under thermal stress and unique disproportion reactions in high humidity. Inspired by these new insights, we construct a surface passivation layer of the low-n perovskite over the LDP film. The optimized LDP-based PSCs attain an exceptional PCE of 17.0% and demonstrate significantly enhanced thermal and humidity stabilities.

The typical BA-based LDP films with the nominal composition of (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 (defined by the ratio of the precursors) are prepared employing the well-established hot-casting method. Specifically, the stoichiometric quantities of methylammonium iodide (MAI), butylammonium iodide (BAI) and PbI2 are dissolved in the mixed solvent of N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), which is spun on a hot substrate and further annealed to form the final LDP film. The hot-casting technique is adopted due to its capability to provide high-quality LDP films with regulated crystal orientation. Previous studies confirm the existence of vertically aligned LDP crystals (with the Pb-I slabs aligned perpendicular to the substrate) in these films which can facilitate charge carrier transportation. However, the detailed assembly pattern of these oriented crystals is still missing, although recent studies and our initial optical analyses (Fig. S1, ESI) show evidence of phase separations in the LDP films.

Variable-angle GI-XRD experiments were conducted to unveil the assembly pattern of the perovskite crystals in the LDP film. By adjusting the incident angle, the X-ray penetration depth can be tuned, which allows probing of the different depths of the film (Fig. 1a). Fig. 1b presents the 2D GI-XRD pattern of the LDP film taken at the incident angle (α) of 0.5°, which enables the full-film penetration. The sharp and discrete Bragg spots indicate the high crystallinity and oriented nature of the perovskite crystals in the LDP film. By comparing the experimental patterns with the simulated results, we confirm the presence of the vertically aligned LDP species with its (101) crystal plane parallel to the substrate (Fig. S2, ESI). Specifically, the Bragg spots denoted by the dashed circles in Fig. 1b could not be derived from the 3D perovskite lattice, indicating that there are organic spacers between the vertically aligned Pb-I slabs. Notably, the diffraction signals in the low wavevector transfer (q) region (q < 1 Å−1) are missing in the 2D GI-XRD pattern (they are originated from the (0k0) crystal planes and appear on the horizontal axis according to Fig. S2, ESI). This suggests that the 2D slabs do not form large regular patterns along the in-plane direction, likely due to the variation of the Pb-I slab thickness (Fig. S3, ESI).Fig. 1c shows the 2D GI-XRD pattern taken at α = 0.05° which provides the crystallographic information near the shallow surface of the LDP film. Interestingly, none of the representative Bragg spots originating from the 2D perovskite (denoted by dashed circles in Fig. 1b) are detected and the remaining diffraction spots could be well indexed to the highly oriented 3D perovskite (or perovskites with large n values). It has two preferred crystal orientations with the (010) and (101) planes parallel to the substrate, respectively (Fig. S4, ESI). To further clarify the phase separation in the LDP film, the zoomed-in views of the dash-dot square regions in the 2D GI-XRD patterns of Fig. 1b and c are given in Fig. 1d and e, and the corresponding integrated 1D XRD patterns are shown in Fig. 1f. For α = 0.5°, the pattern in Fig. 1d shows two diffraction spots, corresponding to the two diffraction peaks in the upper panel of Fig. 1f. The weak peak at q around 1.3 Å−1 is ascribed to the 2D components in the film with different n values. Detailed analyses suggest that this peak is the superposition of the diffraction signals from the (1 2n + 1 1) planes of the 2D perovskite crystals where n is the Pb-I slab thickness, e.g., the (151) plane for n = 2 and the (171) plane for n = 3 (Fig. S3, ESI). The diffraction peak at q around 1.4 Å−1 is originated from both the 2D and 3D perovskites. For α = 0.05°, only the diffraction signal at q around 1.4 Å−1 is detected, which is attributed to the (121) and (200) planes of the 3D perovskite and reveals that the surface layer of the LDP film has a 3D-like feature.
The most intense Bragg spots as denoted by the dash-dot circles in Fig. 1b and c are further investigated to gain additional information on the crystallographic structure of the LDP film. The corresponding integrated 1D XRD patterns are presented in Fig. 1g. At α = 0.05°, the XRD pattern exhibits a clear two-peak pattern. The peaks centred at 0.98 and 1.02 Å−1 can be indexed to the (020) and (101) planes of the 3D perovskite, respectively. These two crystal planes are orthogonal to each other. Their diffraction signals coexisting on the vertical axis of the 2D GI-XRD pattern indicate that there are two types of crystal orientations near the surface of the LDP film. At α = 0.5°, the XRD pattern shows a wide and asymmetric diffraction peak which could be deconvoluted into two peaks centred at q of 1.0 and 1.02 Å−1, respectively. The newly emerged peak at q = 1.0 Å−1 could be ascribed to the 2D (111) plane, indicating the presence of 2D species in the interior of the LDP film. The intensity of the 3D peak at 1.02 Å−1 also increases significantly as α increases (Fig. S5 and Table S1, ESI), suggesting that there are 3D species distributed over the entire LDP film. The diffraction peak at 0.98 Å−1 becomes very weak and unrecognizable in the diffraction patterns taken at larger incident angles, implying that it is originated from the shallow surface layer. We thus assign the diffraction peak at 0.98 Å−1 to the 3D perovskite with its (010) plane parallel to the substrate (3D skin layer, 3DS), the one at 1.0 Å−1 to the 2D perovskite with its (101) plane parallel to the substrate and the one at 1.02 Å−1 to the 3D perovskite with its (101) plane parallel to the substrate (3D bulk, 3DB). The variable-angle GI-XRD results demonstrate that the oriented LDP film has different perovskite phase distributions along the directions normal and parallel to the substrate, containing the 3D-like surface layer with two crystal orientations and the 2D/3D perovskite mixture interior.

The identification of the structural characteristics of the LDP film enables further investigation of its degradation pathways. The degradation process of the LDP films under thermal stress is monitored through the in situ GI-XRD technique. The experiments are conducted at the beamline BL14B1 of Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF), where the samples are mounted in a specially designed N2-filled cell equipped with a programmable heating stage. The time–temperature (t–T) profile is set to increase from room temperature (RT) to 220 °C at a ramp of 5 °C min−1. The incident angle α is set as 0.5° to achieve full-film penetration. By integrating the 2D GI-XRD images recorded following the degradation process and plotting in the time (temperature) domain, the 2D intensity-time colour mapping is obtained, which intuitively exhibits the structural evolution of the LDP film through the entire annealing process (Fig. 2a). The typical 1D XRD curves taken at the points I–III (denoted in Fig. 2a) are shown in Fig. 2b. The gradual decrease of the main perovskite diffraction peak at q around 1 Å−1 indicates the degradation of the LDP film. The final product exhibits the diffraction peaks centred at 0.9, 1.6, 1.8, 2.0 and 2.2 Å−1, which could be ascribed to the 6H PbI2. The PbI2 diffraction peaks emerge at around 75 °C and the transformation from perovskite to PbI2 completes at about 210 °C. As emphasized in Fig. 2c, the main perovskite peak around 1 Å−1 has a two-peak pattern at RT, which could be ascribed separately to the diffraction signals from the 3DB (101) and 2D (111) planes. While the intensities of both peaks decrease as the temperature increases, the 3DB (101) peak diminishes at a faster rate. Above 200 °C, the main peak turns into a single-peak pattern, indicating the total degradation of the 3D-like perovskite species. We quantify this by plotting the areal ratio between the 3DB (101) and 2D (111) peaks as a function of temperature in Fig. 2d. It shows the divergent degradation behaviours of the 3D and 2D species in the LDP film and indicates that the surface 3D components are more prone to thermal degradation. As shown in Fig. 2e, the morphological evolution is further investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) to trace the thermal degradation pathways of the LDP film. The as-prepared LDP film shows a dense and flat surface profile. Following the thermal treatment at 150 °C, the bright island-like features emerge over the LDP film, indicating that the thermal degradation process accompanied by the PbI2 formation is initiated from the surface. The LDP film is completely decomposed into discrete PbI2 crystals at 220 °C. Both the in situ GI-XRD and ex situ SEM results indicate that the thermal degradation of the LDP film initiates from the 3D sections of the surface. This is attributed to the intrinsically low stability of the 3D species and the small decomposition energy of the surface layers that contain defects and dangling bonds, making them more susceptible to thermal stress.

To gain more insights into the thermal degradation process of the LDP film, we further investigate the evolution of the 2D GI-XRD patterns through the t–T profile. The typical patterns recorded at the points I–III (as denoted in Fig. 2a) are presented in Fig. S6 (ESI). Interestingly, the 6H trigonal PbI2 resulted from the LDP film degradation also shows discrete Bragg spots, indicating that it contains well-oriented crystal grains. Numerical simulations reveal that the resultant PbI2 film shows two preferable orientations with the (001) and (104) planes parallel to the substrate (Fig. S7, ESI). As shown in Fig. 2f, the XRD intensity from the (003) planes of the 6H PbI2 is plotted along the azimuthal direction (the dotted arcs in the 2D XRD pattern taken at point III in Fig. S6, ESI). The sharp peak at 39° is ascribed to the highly oriented crystal grains with their (104) planes parallel to the substrate, and the broad peak at 90° is associated with the typical stacking of PbI2 with its (001) plane parallel to the substrate. The origin of two PbI2 growth modes is attributed to the constraint of the highly oriented LDP source lattices and the minimization of the growth energy.
We further perform thermogravimetric (TG) analysis coupled with mass spectrometry (MS) measurements to qualitatively analyse the products in the LDP thermal degradation. The powder scraped from the LDP films (ca. 20 mg) is used for the TG measurement and the released gases are collected for the MS analysis. Fig. 3a shows the TG curve recorded during the thermal degradation process of the LDP powder. There are two apparent mass-loss steps that could be associated with the decomposition of the MA/BA related organic part and the inorganic PbI2. The 32.3% weight loss in the first step correlates well with the stoichiometric proportion of the MA/BA halides in the nominal composition of BA2MA3Pb4I13. The MS analysis coupled with the TG measurement can gain more detailed information on the degradation pathways of different species. Employing this technique, previous studies demonstrated that the release of CH3I and NH3 was the thermodynamically favourable pathway for the MAPbI3 degradation through the reverse Menshutkin reaction between the MA and iodide ions. The MS data recorded during the TG measurement of the LDP powder are presented in Fig. 3b, showing the evolution of the mass to charge ratio (m/z) peaks as a function of temperature (time). The m/z peaks at 142 and 127 could be assigned to the CH3I+ and I+ ions originating from the parent molecule and the fragment of CH3I, respectively. The m/z peak at 184 could be assigned to the C4H9I+ ions corresponding to the C4H9I molecule. The emergence of these peaks indicates that the LDP powder releases the CH3I, C4H9I and NH3 gasses during the thermal degradation (Fig. S8, ESI, shows the MS data associated with NH3). The other weak m/z peaks could be attributed to the further reaction products of the ammonia and the alkyl iodides. Interestingly, the CH3I and C4H9I molecules are successively released during the degradation process, which ascertains that there is phase separation in the LDP film. The exclusive appearance of the CH3I signal at low temperatures suggests that the thermal degradation of the LDP powder initiates from the 3D-like part. The TG-MS results are in good accordance with the in situ GI-XRD analysis, which further affirms the divergent degradation behaviour of the LDP film.
To quantitatively assess the thermal stability of the LDP film, we further investigate its degradation process under the isothermal condition and evaluate the reaction kinetics by applying the well-established Johnson–Mehl–Avrami (JMA) model to fit the in situ GI-XRD data. According to the JMA model, to analyse the transformation kinetics in a solid-state reaction, the transformed fraction of a material, x, can be determined by tracking the evolution of the certain property of that material during the reaction. In this case, the intense peak at q = 0.9 Å−1 of the degradation product PbI2 is chosen to determine x, where x(t) represents the fraction of the PbI2 peak areal intensity at the reaction time of t. At the beginning of the reaction, there is no PbI2 peak, and hence x(0) is 0. The degradation process finishes at the time tend when there is no diffraction signal from the perovskite materials, and x(tend) is 1. In this process, the kinetic equations are given as follows:
ln(tx2 − tx1) = Ea/RT − lnk0 + ln(βx2 − βx1)
(1)
xt = 1 − exp[−(k0 exp(−Ea/RT)t)m]
(2)
where
tx1 and tx2 represent the times taken to reach the fractions of x1 and x2, Ea is the effective activation energy, R is the ideal gas constant, T is the temperature, k0 is the rate constant prefactor, m is the growth constant and βxn is a state property that is invariant with respect to the time/temperature variables. The LDP films are isothermally aged at 200, 220 and 240 °C and x(t) is plotted as a function of the reaction time in Fig. 3c. To apply eqn (1), the starting and ending fractions of x1 = 0.2 and x2 = 0.9 are chosen and the corresponding times are taken from Fig. 3c to obtain the ln(tx2 − tx1) versus 1/RT plot (Fig. 3d). The slope of the fitted line, Ea = 74.5 ± 1.2 kJ mol−1, is the degradation activation energy for the LDP film. It is noteworthy that the resultant Ea is the effective activation energy accounting for all the degradation processes in the LDP film. For Ea = 74.5 kJ mol−1, the k0 and m values are determined to be (1.59 ± 0.15) × 105 and 2.44 ± 0.2 by fitting the experimental data in Fig. 3c using eqn (2). The growth constant m lies between 2 and 3, suggesting that PbI2 growth through the LDP film degradation is between the 2D and 3D processes. We prepare the typical 3D MAPbI3 film and quantitatively compare the thermal stability of LDP with the 3D perovskite. Fig. S9, ESI, shows the time evolutions of the transformation fraction x(t) of the PbI2 species derived from the degradation of MAPbI3 at different aging temperatures. The Ea for the 3D perovskite is estimated to be 50.5 ± 1.2 kJ mol−1, which is considerably lower than that of the LDP material. The quantitative comparison affirms the superior thermal stability of the LDP film. To further verify this, the films are isothermally aged at 85 °C which is the recommended thermal test temperature according to the standard stability test protocols of solar cells. The LDP films show no sign of degradation after 10 days of aging and only present a tiny amount of PbI2 after 18 days, while the 3D MAPbI3 perovskite shows a much higher degree of degradation (Fig. S10, ESI).


We subsequently investigate the humidity induced degradation process of the LDP film. A recyclable transformation behaviour was previously reported for 3D perovskite in high humidity, which inspires the protection of the humidity-sensitive species. In the following section, we trace the transformation process of the LDP film in humidity and further investigate its recyclability upon drying. The LDP film is installed in the custom-made cell which is alternatively purged with water vapour (WV) and N2 to provide high humidity and dry conditions. A hygrometer inside the cell monitoring the relative humidity (RH) has readings of >95% and <1% for the humidity and dry conditions, respectively. One cycle includes the complete water vapour applying and removal (WVAR) process. Fig. 4a shows the 2D intensity–time colour mapping following the transformation processes of the LDP film under three WVAR cycles. The alternative evolution of the XRD patterns directly indicates the recyclable degradation and regeneration processes of the LDP film. The 1D XRD patterns taken at the points I–V in Fig. 4a are further analysed to unveil the entire transformation process. Specifically, upon exposure to humidity (RH > 95%), the LDP film gradually transforms into a new species, indicated by the gradual decrease of the perovskite peak intensity at q around 1 Å−1 and the emergence of new diffraction peaks in the low q range. The 1D XRD pattern of the formed species at point II (denoted as 2D intermediate) is presented in Fig. 4b and the experimental XRD pattern of the 3D perovskite intermediate phase of MAPbI3·H2O is also presented as a reference. The 2D intermediate shows four characteristic diffraction peaks centred at q of 0.42, 0.58, 0.68 and 0.76 Å−1, respectively. The peaks at 0.58, 0.68 and 0.76 Å−1 could be well assigned to MAPbI3·H2O, which indicates that the 2D intermediate is related to a hydrated species (the experimental XRD pattern of the MAPbI3·H2O is obtained by monitoring the hydration process of the 3D MAPbI3 film). The distinct peak intensity ratios may originate from the altered crystal growth orientation due to the presence of the long-chain organic molecules. The unassigned peak at 0.42 Å−1 is ascribed to BAI or its hydrate (Fig. S11, ESI). Further removing the water vapour and exposing the sample to dry N2 will transform the 2D intermediate back into perovskite. The typical XRD pattern taken at point III is presented in Fig. 4c. The major diffraction peaks could be indexed separately into the pure-phase 2D perovskite species with the n values of 2, 3 and 4. The XRD patterns recorded at points IV and V show the same set of diffraction peaks, which confirms that the LDP film would transform into a mixture of the pure-phase 2D perovskites with varied n values after the WVAR cycles (we note that this is a partial reaction and further discussed in Fig. S12, ESI). The orientation of the film also changes significantly: unlike the initial vertically-aligned LDP crystals, the regenerated perovskite species exhibit a random-orientation with crystals predominantly aligned parallel to the substrate (Fig. S13, ESI). The changes in the coherency and orientation of LDPs could be ascribed to the different formation energies for various perovskite species. We further trace the areal intensity evolutions of the typical diffraction peaks of the n = 3 (020) plane (A), n = 2 (020) plane (B) and n = 4 (040) plane (C) (A–C are denoted in Fig. 4c) and plotted as a function of time in Fig. 4d. Interestingly, as the number of WVAR cycles increases, the diffraction intensities of the n = 2 species gradually increase, while those of the n = 3 and 4 species decrease. In particular, the diffraction peak for the n = 4 species almost disappears after three WVAR cycles. These results suggest the reduction of the Pb-I slab thickness in the LDP film following the WVAR treatment. The morphological and optical measurement results agree well with the observation in the GI-XRD study (Fig. S14, ESI). The smooth and pinhole-free LDP film gradually transforms into discontinuous dendritic crystals which may originate from the 1D structure of the MAPbI3·H2O intermediate. The blue-shift of the main photoluminescence (PL) peak also indicates the thinning down of the inorganic slabs in the LDP film.

The mixed-phase character of the LDP film complicates the full understanding of the humidity-induced degradation mechanism. The powder samples of the pure-phase BA-based 2D perovskite crystals with n = 2, 3 and 4 are prepared and further subjected to the WVAR cycle for in situ GI-XRD investigations. Fig. 5a exhibits the degradation and reconstruction behaviour of the n = 4 perovskite crystals following the WVAR process. The as-prepared n = 4 perovskite shows three distinct diffraction peaks centred at 0.39, 0.58 and 0.78 Å−1. Similar to the transformation behaviour of the LDP film, the n = 4 crystals transform into the 2D intermediate at high humidity, as evident by the intense diffraction peaks at 0.58 and 0.68 Å−1. After a full WVAR cycle, the emergence of the diffraction peaks at 0.49 and 0.73 Å−1 and the disappearance of those from the n = 4 species indicate that the sample has been transformed into the n = 3 perovskite. The n = 3 species shows a similar transformation behaviour: it converts to the 2D intermediate species in high humidity and transforms into the n = 2 species upon drying (Fig. S15, ESI). The n = 2 species, however, shows distinct transformation behaviour under the humidity condition. The in situ GI-XRD results in Fig. 5b suggest that the n = 2 species partially transforms into the 2D intermediate in high humidity and converts back to the initial n = 2 state upon drying. We further monitor the optical properties of the samples during the WVAR process. The Tauc plots (obtained from the diffuse reflectance spectra and converted using the Kubelka–Munk function) and PL spectra of the n = 4 perovskite before and after the WVAR cycle are presented in Fig. 5c. Typically, the n = 4 species shows an optical bandgap of 1.77 eV and two PL peaks at 650 and 730 nm which could be separately associated with the bulk and edge states of the single crystals. Following a WVAR cycle, the sample shows two additional bandgaps at 1.82 and 1.58 eV and two new PL peaks at 615 and 740 nm, confirming the formation of the n = 3 and 3D species. The n = 2 species shows no obvious change in the absorption and PL spectra following the WVAR treatment. These results jointly suggest a humidity-induced disproportion reaction of the LDP film with the reaction pathway of:
(BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 → BAI·H2O + (MAPbI3·H2O)·PbI2 → MAPbI3 + (BA)2(MA)n−2Pbn−1I3n−2
(3)
A proposed mechanism of the entire degradation and reconstruction process is schematically illustrated in Fig. 5d. In high humidity, the water molecules would invade the LDP lattices and interact with the organic ammonium species through the N–H⋯O hydrogen bonding. As the reaction proceeds, the additional water molecule ingress induces lattice distortion and reconstruction. The point-shared Pb-I octahedra transform into edge-shared ‘ribbons’ with terminal face-shared PbI2 units, leading to the formation of the 2D intermediate of (MAPbI3·H2O)·PbI2 and the hydrate of BAI·H2O. Upon drying, the volatilization of the H2O molecules induces cation exchange between BA+ and the exposed MA+ ions due to the difference in electrostatic forces, which slices the LDP crystals and converts the n perovskite into the n − 1 and 3D species. The LDP degradation terminates at n = 2, showing the exceptional water-resistivity of the low-n perovskites. For the LDP film, the humidity-induced transformation process involves the reversible conversion of the 3D part and the disproportion reaction of the 2D component.
The disproportional degradation of the LDP materials under the humidity condition was also reported in the literature. Employing the in situ real-time characterization techniques, we monitor the entire degradation and reconstruction behaviours of LDP and fully depict the detailed reaction pathways. To further verify the applicability of the proposed mechanism for other LDP species, we employ the organic spacer of phenylethylammonium (PEA) to prepare the (PEA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 LDP film and investigate its structural evolution through the WVAR process. The results in Fig. S16, ESI, indicate that the PEA based LDP exhibits similar degradation and reconstruction behaviours upon moisture exposure and removal. In addition, it was recently reported that the Dion–Jacobson phase LDP material of (PDMA)PbI4 degrades into perovskite hydrates and ammonium salts in the humidity condition, and regenerates upon drying. The above facts suggest that the proposed humidity-induced degradation and reconstruction mechanism is applicable to various LDP materials.

Understanding the structural characteristics and degradation kinetics of the LDP film opens a new avenue for further film quality improvement. The synchrotron-based GI-XRD investigations reveal three important facts about the LDP film: (1) it contains a 3D-like surface layer; (2) the thermal degradation initiates from the 3D-like surface portion; (3) the low-n 2D species (especially the n = 2 species) show better resistance to moisture. These insights suggest that the quality of the LDP film could be further enhanced by the selective passivation of the more vulnerable film surface. The humidity–resistive low-n 2D species are capable as the passivation agent, which could directly form on the LDP film through a self-passivation approach without introducing foreign compounds. As a proof of concept, we treat the LDP film with the BAI salt to create a surface capping layer that contains low-n 2D species. The BAI treatment is simply performed by spin-coating the BAI precursor solution on the LDP film and followed by thermal annealing. Fig. 6a and b show the 2D GI-XRD patterns of the BAI-treated LDP (BAI-LDP) film at the incident angle α of 0.05° and 0.5°, respectively. At α = 0.05°, the emergence of the new diffraction spots (denoted by dotted circles) suggests the formation of the parallel aligned 2D species on the 3D-like LDP surface. The much weaker Bragg spot on the horizontal axis (dotted square) reveals the coexistence of a small amount of vertically aligned 2D perovskite which may be associated with the 3DS layer in the LDP film. The 2D GI-XRD pattern taken at α = 0.5° further confirms the presence of the 2D species aligned parallel to the substrate (Fig. 6b and the inset of Fig. 6c). The integrated 1D XRD pattern (Fig. 6c) shows the diffraction peaks at 0.32 and 0.65 Å−1, confirming that the passivation layer mainly contains the n = 2 species. We also perform the PL investigations on the BAI-LDP film and the emergence of the PL emission peaks in the low-wavelength region confirms that the overlayer contains the low-n 2D species (Fig. S17, ESI). The GI-XRD and PL results reveal that the BAI-LDP film contains a tri-layer heterostructure with a thin parallel aligned 2D perovskite overlayer, a highly oriented 3D-like perovskite middle layer and a vertically aligned 2D perovskite inner layer, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 6d. It is reasonable to expect that the 2D overlayer could enhance the stability of the LDP film due to its better resistance to heat and moisture. The BAI-LDP films are further employed to fabricate the PSC devices in the structure of fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/NiO/BAI-LDP film/[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM)/bathocuproine (BCP)/Au (the cross-sectional SEM image is presented in Fig. 6e). Fig. 6f presents the J–V characteristics of the PSCs employing the pristine LDP and BAI-LDP films. The PSC based on the pristine LDP film shows an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.143 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 18.84 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 75.3%, leading to a PCE of 16.2%. The BAI-LDP based PSC exhibits a VOC of 1.185 V, JSC of 18.87 mA cm−2 and FF of 76.0%, resulting in an enhanced PCE of 17.0% (the device exhibits the stabilized power output of 15.8% at 0.93 V and the forward scan result is presented in Fig. S18, ESI), which is one of the best for the BA-based PSCs. The BAI treatment also leads to the higher average PCE and the narrower PCE distribution (Fig. 6g). The enhancement in device PCEs is mainly derived from the VOC improvement, which could be attributed to the defect passivation capability of the 2D overlayer (see Fig. S19 and S20, ESI). We note that surface passivation is a widely adopted strategy to improve the 3D perovskite films. For instance, the BAI-treated MAPbI3 or formamidinium (FA)-MA mixed perovskite films deliver better solar cell efficiencies. To further verify the adaptability of the BAI-treatment to other perovskites, we have fabricated the (PEA)2(MA)4Pb5I16 LDP and 3D (FAPbI3)0.97(MAPbBr3)0.03 based PSCs, respectively. For both devices, the BAI-treated films enhance the device PCEs with improved VOC values (Fig. S21, ESI). We subsequently investigate the effect of the BAI treatment on the stability of the films and the related PSC devices. Fig. 6h and i show the evolutions of the XRD patterns of the pristine LDP and BAI-LDP films under the thermal and humidity stresses. After 10 days of aging at 100 °C, the pristine LDP film exhibits an obvious PbI2 diffraction signal while the BAI-LDP film remains intact. The zoomed-in XRD patterns of the BAI-LDP film suggest that the low-n 2D capping layer transforms into the higher-n species after the thermal aging (Fig. S22, ESI). We propose that the low-n 2D capping layer could uptake the MA molecules released from the inner film, which then elevates the potential energy barrier for further MA molecule diffusion. The low-n 2D overlayer, functioning as an organic cation reservoir, could thus act as a buffer layer and suppress the thermal degradation. Under the humidity condition (RH = 60 ± 5%) for 10 days, the pristine LDP film shows hydrated species and degrades to the lower-n-value perovskites, while the BAI-LDP film shows the imperceptible sign of degradation. The enhanced thermal and humidity stabilities of the BAI-LDP films are further examined by tracing the PCE evolutions of the related PSC devices (Fig. 6j and k). At 60 °C in N2, despite the initial burn-in process, the PCE of the BAI-LDP based device retains 80% of the initial value after 30 days of aging. We characterize the aged devices to rationalize the better thermal stability of the BAI-LDP based solar cells. The cross-sectional SEM images of the thermally aged devices show no obvious structural variations; however, the LDP based device shows significantly decreased FF and VOC (Fig. S23, ESI). It was previously reported that the cross-layer ion migration under thermal stress would induce the degradation of the perovskite/charge transport layer/metal electrode interfaces and deteriorate the device performance. For the BAI-LDP based device, the low-n 2D overlayer could act as a barrier for the ion migrations due to its intrinsically high activation energy for ionic conductivity, which ultimately enhances the thermal stability of the corresponding device. In ambient air with RH = 40%, the BAI-LDP based device shows overall better PCEs as compared to the device based on the pristine LDP film.


In summary, we have elucidated the structural characteristics of an LDP film and unveiled its degradation kinetics under thermal and humidity conditions. The LDP film has a unique crystal stacking pattern with a highly oriented 3D-like surface layer and a 2D/3D composite interior. In situ GI-XRD studies reveal the detailed degradation pathways of the LDP film. The thermal degradation of the LDP film initiates from the 3D surface and propagates inwards, which generates the highly oriented 6H PbI2 and the CH3I and C4H9I species in the process. The effective activation energy for the entire film decomposition process is determined to be 74.5 ± 1.2 kJ mol−1, which is 50% higher than that of the 3D perovskite. Under the humidity condition, the LDP film turns into the hydrant form which induces a unique disproportion reaction upon drying. Further analyses on the 2D perovskite crystal powders confirm that the 2D n species would disproportionately degrade into the 2D n − 1 and 3D species when exposed to water vapour. To protect the vulnerable 3D-like surface of the LDP film, a horizontally aligned 2D perovskite layer mainly containing the thermodynamically stable n = 2 species is deposited onto the LDP film, which simultaneously enhances the efficiency and stability of the corresponding PSC device. The PSC devices based on the self-passivated LDP films demonstrate the remarkable PCE of 17.0% and the significantly enhanced thermal and humidity stabilities. Our study provides a profound understanding of the structural characteristics and the degradation pathways of the LDP film and paves the way towards designing better perovskite materials for more efficient and stable optoelectronic devices.


G. C. and K. M. conceived the project and designed the experiments. K. M., X. W., Z. L., Y. H., S. L., Z. Q. and Y. Z. conducted the GI-XRD measurements and analyzed the data. K. M., Z. L., C. W. and L. C. prepared the samples, performed UV-vis, PL and SEM measurements and characterized the solar cell devices. K. M. and Z. L. performed TG-MS measurements. G. C. and K. M. wrote the manuscript. All authors discussed the results and contributed to the writing of the paper.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (U1632265, 51802194), and the Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (YDZX20203100001438, 17YF1412000 and 19ZR1476900). We thank all the team members at beamline BL14B1 of SSRF.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Materials and Methods, eighteen supplementary figures and one supplementary table. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ee03836a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021