 DOI: 10.1039/C6NJ01133K
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 6228-6237


Sankarapanicker
Suresh
,

Thrithamarassery Gangadharan
Deepak
,

Chengsheng
Ni
,

Chandrasekharan Nair Omanaamma
Sreekala
,

Malladi
Satyanarayana
,

A. Sreekumaran
Nair
* and 

Vellara Pappukkuty Pillai Mahadevan
Pillai
*

Department of Optoelectronics, University of Kerala, Kariavattom, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India-695581

Amrita Centre for Nanosciences and Molecular Medicine, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences (AIMS), Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham University, AIMS PO, Ponekkara, Kochi 682041, Kerala, India. E-mail: sreekumarannair@aims.amrita.edu

School of Chemistry, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, Fife KY16 9ST, UK

School of Biotechnology, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham University, Amritapuri Campus, Kollam, Kerala, India-690525

Received
(in Montpellier, France)
12th April 2016
, Accepted 30th April 2016
First published on 2nd May 2016
The prevention of back electron transfer by inserting an energy barrier layer at the interface of a photo-anode is an effective method for improving the photovoltaic parameters in dye sensitised solar cells (DSSCs). In this study, phase a modified Nb2O5 blocking layer was inserted at the fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO)/TiO2 interface via a Rf magnetron sputtering process. For a critical tunnelling distance of ∼40 nm, the crystalline Nb2O5 blocking layer improved the efficiency close to 7% and outperformed the amorphous blocking layer by about 68%. The longer electron lifetime observed in DSSCs containing an inhomogeneous Nb2O5 layer indicates that trapping/de-trapping impedes the discharge of electrons to the TiO2 band edge. The origin of the longer electron lifetime is explained by formulating a theory from photovoltage decay measurements.

The pioneering study of O'Regan and Grätzel in the early 1990's revolutionized the idea of photoelectrochemical cells and was the catalyst for a new era of dye-sensitised solar cells (DSSCs), which mimic the photosynthesis process in which light absorption and charge transport are performed by different components. This separation of functions leads to lower purity demands on the raw materials used and consequently makes DSSCs a low-cost alternative to the conventional first generation (Si) and second generation (thin film) solar cells.

In DSSCs, the process of charge separation and transport are influenced by different interfacial layers such as dye/TiO2, TiO2/working electrode, dye/electrolyte and electrolyte/counter electrode. The large surface area of nanocrystalline TiO2 promotes back electron transfer due to the absence of a potential barrier between the TiO2/dye–electrolyte. The fast reduction of oxidised dye molecules by iodide ions (I−) suppresses the probability of recombination at the TiO2/dye interfaces and therefore the reaction occurs almost entirely at the TiO2 particle/redox electrolyte solution interface. The porous nature of the TiO2 layer provides another recombination site for the liquid electrolyte with the working electrode. Though intimate contact between these layers promotes fast electron injection, it also opens the path for charge recombination, which will reduce the performance of DSSCs. Therefore, interfacial engineering plays an important role in improving the various parameters of DSSCs.
Interfacial modifications of these two surface sites, with a dense compact blocking layer, have been studied by many research groups. This forms an inherent energy barrier at the interface, which effectively suppresses the recombination rate of photo-injected electrons with the oxidised dye and electrolyte species. Surface modification of the TiO2/dye–electrolyte interface by incorporating a core–shell double structure to form a TiO2/Nb2O5 bi-layer electrode has been reported by Zaban et al. and Chen et al., respectively. Similar structural modifications have been carried out with a variety of oxide materials such as Al2O3, BaCO3, CaCO3, HfO2, MgO, SrTiO3, Y2O3, ZnO and ZrO2. Post-treatment of the TiO2 porous layer with TiCl4 was found to be an effective method to increase the photocurrent. A dense compact blocking layer between the working electrode (usually a transparent conducting oxide (TCO)) and the nanoporous TiO2 film can reduce back electron transfer from TCO to the electrolyte. Wide band-gap metal oxides, such as TiO2, Nb2O5, ZnO and HfO2, have also been investigated as blocking layers for DSSCs. At the TCO/TiO2 interface, the deposition method has a significant role in making pinhole-free smooth dense films and techniques, such as spray pyrolysis, sputtering, and sol–gel, have been investigated. Xia et al. first investigated the effect of a Nb2O5 blocking layer at the TCO/TiO2 interface via a radio frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering process using a Nb2O5 disk as the sputtering target and achieved a maximum conversion efficiency (η) of 4.5% and fill factor (FF) of 0.68. To date, the highest conversion efficiency of η = 5.6% and FF = 0.686 have been reported by Sung-Hwan Lim et al.
The crystal structure of Nb2O5 is relatively complicated and exhibits extensive polymorphism and as many as 15 different phases have been reported. Studies on the thin films of Nb2O5 have shown that the as-deposited films are amorphous in nature and therefore post-annealing is required to crystallize the material and the phase formation depends on the annealing temperature. Amorphous films heated in air mainly crystallize in the orthorhombic phase at a temperature of T ≥ 600 °C or in a more stable monoclinic phase at a temperature of T ≥ 1000 °C. Rosenfeld et al. reported that annealing at a temperature of 500 °C for 2 h crystallizes the film in the less stable pseudo hexagonal (TT) phase. In previous investigations, a Nb2O5 blocking layer (BL) along with the mesoporous TiO2 layer was sintered at a temperature of 500 °C for only 30 min. Therefore, it can be inferred that the BL used in the previous investigations was amorphous in nature and in the literature no reports have been found regarding the phase purity of the BL vis-à-vis DSSC performance.
The BL will function as an efficient energy barrier as long as its thickness is below the critical tunnelling distance. We have found a huge discrepancy in the reported values of critical BL thickness in the literature, which spans from 5 nm to 400 nm. These earlier results inspired us to investigate the role of crystalline/amorphous blocking layers (BLs) in DSSCs at the FTO/TiO2 interface of the photo-anode and also to optimise the BL thickness for the critical tunnelling distance. DSSCs were fabricated with both amorphous and crystalline Nb2O5 BLs with different thicknesses and their photovoltaic properties were evaluated and compared. Open-circuit voltage decay (OCVD) measurements were carried out to further understand the role of the crystallinity of the BL during the DSSC operation in the electron transport process.

Niobium oxide thin films were deposited on FTO glass substrates via a RF magnetron sputtering technique at room temperature. The sputter chamber was evacuated initially to a base pressure of ∼4 × 10−6 mbar. Pure argon gas was admitted into the chamber and the argon pressure was maintained at 0.015 mbar. Pressed Nb2O5 powder (Aldrich, 99.99% purity) was used as the sputtering target. The FTO substrates (Sigma Aldrich, USA) were pre-cleaned with de-ionized water, acetone and isopropanol, successively, using ultrasonication and then heated at a temperature of 80 °C for 2 h in a muffle furnace. The target-to-substrate distance was maintained at 50 mm. The target was powered through a magnetron power supply (Advanced Energy, MDX 500, US) operated at a power of 100 W. Blocking layers with different thicknesses were deposited by varying the deposition time viz., 10, 20, 30, 40, 60 and 80 min. One set of films was annealed in a microcontroller-based furnace at a temperature of 600 °C with a heating rate of 3 °C min−1 and maintained for 1 h at atmospheric pressure. The electrical properties of the FTO glass was remarkably stable if the annealing temperature is ≤600 °C and begins to change appreciably at temperatures above ≥700 °C and therefore it is safer to anneal the FTO glass at 600 °C.


Nanoporous TiO2 films were deposited on pure and surface-modified FTO plates using a spray pyrolysis deposition machine (KM-150, SPD Laboratory, Inc. Japan). The TiO2 colloidal solution for spraying was prepared as reported by Deepak et al. Deposition was carried out for 25 cycles maintaining the substrate temperature at 90 °C at a flow rate of 0.41 g s−1. The films were sintered at 500 °C for 30 min and the measured thickness of the films was ∼8 μm (Fig. 4d). Three types of photoanodes were prepared: (a) a TiO2 layer directly over FTO (which was coded as BL0) (b) a TiO2 layer over FTO/BL (where the BL was as-deposited) and (c) TiO2 layer over FTO/BL (where the BL was annealed). The photoanodes prepared over the as-deposited BL with BL deposition time viz., 10, 20, 30, 40, 60 and 80 min are coded as BL10, BL20, BL30, BL40, BL60, and BL80, respectively. The photoanodes prepared over annealed BL with BL deposition time viz., 10, 20, 30, 40, 60 and 80 min are coded as BL10A, BL20A, BL30A, BL40A, BL60A, and BL80A, respectively.


The photoanodes were carved out for an active area of 0.2 cm2 and immersed in N719 dye solution (0.3 mM in a 1:1 acetonitrile–tert butanol mixture) for saturate chemisorption of the dye for 24 h and washed with acetonitrile for the removal of the weakly adsorbed dyes. Pt-coated FTO plates were used as the counter electrodes and the electrodes were sealed with a spacer (Parafilm M, Neenah, WI 54956) between the electrodes. The liquid electrolyte, I3−/I− (ESI) was filled using a vacuum back filling machine (Electrolyte filling machine, SPD Inc. Laboratory, Japan).


The structural properties of the different layers of the photo-anode were characterized using X-ray diffraction (XRD) and grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) (Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer using Cu Kαλ = 1.5406 Å) by recording the patterns in the 2θ values ranging from 10° to 80°. The micro-Raman spectra of the layers were obtained with an excitation radiation of wavelength 514.5 nm from an Argon ion laser with a spectral resolution of about 1 cm−1 (Labram-HR 800 spectrometer equipped Synapse CCD camera system maintained at −70 °C). The surface morphology and compositional analysis of the layers were studied by a field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Nova Nano SEM 450 with EDX attachment (Bruker)) and atomic force microscopy (Bruker, Dimension Edge). High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, JEM-2100, JEOL, USA) was used for high-resolution imaging of the TiO2 nanoparticles. Optical measurements were carried out using UV-Vis spectroscopy (JASCO V-550 double beam spectrophotometer) and spectroscopic ellipsometry (Horiba Jobin Yvon MM-16). The thickness of the Nb2O5 blocking layers was measured from the ellipsometric data and that of the TiO2 layers was measured using the lateral SEM images. The DSSCs were characterized using a solar simulator under AM1.5G conditions (Newport Oriel Class AAA-Solar simulator, USA).

Open circuit voltage decay (OCVD) analysis was performed to study the electron transfer kinetics. The cells were illuminated for a few seconds and then the light source was turned off to monitor the decay of the open-circuit voltage (VOC) during the relaxation from quasi-equilibrium state to dark equilibrium.

DSSCs were fabricated with amorphous and crystalline Nb2O5 blocking layers of various thicknesses. The performance of the DSSCs thus fabricated was evaluated to study the role of the crystallinity and thickness of the BL on the cell functions. Our study on the X-ray diffraction of Nb2O5 thin films shows that up to an annealing temperature of 500 °C, the films were amorphous in nature and crystallizes in the orthorhombic (T) phase at a temperature of 600 °C (Fig. S1, ESI). Therefore, in the present investigation, Nb2O5 BLs were annealed at 600 °C to make them crystalline.


Micro-Raman spectroscopy and grazing incidence X-ray diffraction were carried out to identify the phase formation of the Nb2O5 blocking layer on FTO. The micro-Raman spectra are shown in Fig. 1. Fig. (1a) shows FTO, Fig. (1b) shows the Nb2O5 blocking layer sputtered (80 min) on FTO, Fig. (1c) shows the Nb2O5 thin film on a quartz substrate and annealed at 600 °C for 1 h and Fig. (1d) represents the Nb2O5 blocking layer sputtered (80 min) on FTO and annealed at 600 °C for 1 h. The well-defined intense band at ∼690 cm−1 in the Raman spectra of the annealed films (Fig. 1c and d, respectively) can be assigned to the symmetric stretching mode of Nb2O5 polyhedral and is the characteristic feature of the orthorhombic Nb2O5 phase. The Raman spectrum of the as-deposited Nb2O5 film (BL80) (Fig. 1b) shows only the bands corresponding to the FTO (Fig. 1a), indicating the amorphous nature of the film. Fig. 2a shows the GIXRD pattern of the FTO substrate and BL80A. The XRD pattern of the Nb2O5 thin film (Fig. 2b) sputtered on a quartz substrate was recorded for comparison. The main peaks observed in the GIXRD pattern of BL80A were due to FTO alone and the less intense peaks observed at 2θ values 22.61° and 28.41° correspond to the lattice reflection planes, (001) and (200), respectively, of the orthorhombic phase of Nb2O5 (JCPDS card 30-0873). The less intense nature of these peaks can be due to the lower thickness of the BL. The appearance of these peaks confirms the orthorhombic phase formation of the annealed BL films on the FTO.

The surface morphology of the different layers was investigated using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM). The AFM images (Fig. 3a and b) shows the low surface roughness of the FTO substrate and BL80A structure, viz., 4.5 nm and 6.3 nm, respectively. FESEM images of the FTO substrate and BL80A are shown in Fig. 4a and b. A dense distribution of well-defined grains of Nb2O5 can be observed in Fig. 4b, which is an indication of the crystalline nature of the BL. To confirm the formation of the Nb2O5 blocking layer over FTO, an energy dispersive X-ray spectrum (EDX) was obtained and the peaks corresponding to Nb and O can be observed along with Sn and F. The peaks corresponding to F and Sn are from the FTO substrate (Fig. S2, ESI).
In the DSSCs, a significant fraction of the incident light may be lost due to reflection, transmission, scattering, and insufficient carrier injection and therefore optical studies were carried out to investigate the effect of the BL at the FTO/TiO2 interface. The transmittance and diffused-reflectance spectra were obtained using UV-Vis spectroscopy with light passing in the glass/FTO/BL direction. The transmittance spectra of the films are shown in Fig. 5. From the measurements of the average transmittance of the different blocking layers (shown in the inset of Fig. 5), it can be observed that the change in transmittance with thickness was not appreciable. The diffused-reflectance spectra (Fig. 6) show a slight change in reflectance between the amorphous (BL60, BL80) and crystalline (BL60A, BL80A) BLs. The reduced reflectance in the annealed (crystalline) blocking layers can be attributed to less scattering of light in the ordered structure and larger grain boundaries. The refractive index of the Nb2O5 thin film (sputtered on quartz substrate) obtained from spectroscopic ellipsometry was found to be 2.236 (632 nm) for the annealed film and 2.151 (632 nm) for the as-deposited film (Fig. S3, ESI). The increase in refractive index can be attributed to the densification of the film upon annealing. It is very interesting to note that even though the variation of refractive index in the glass/FTO/Nb2O5 interfaces (1.5/1.9/2.236) favours more light refraction and transmission, no such improvements have been observed in the transmittance with the crystallinity, as well as thickness of the blocking layer. The larger refractive index of anatase TiO2 (n = ∼2.58) may place BL as an effective anti-reflection layer in the dye–TiO2/BL/FTO direction and can increase the optical path length of photons inside the DSSC. Because variation in the refractive index of the annealed BL with respect to the as-deposited BL is only ∼4%, a significant improvement in light trapping between these two BL can be ruled out. The variation in thickness of the film upon annealing was found to be only ∼12 Å (Table S1, ESI) and therefore will have negligible influence on the cell parameters between the as-deposited and annealed blocking layers for the same duration of deposition. Therefore, from the optical studies it can be concluded that the presence of a blocking layer has little change in the transmittance and reflectance, and any appreciable improvement in the DSSC parameters due to the blocking layer should come from other possible reasons.
The crystallinity and particle size of the nanoporous TiO2 layer were studied using XRD and HRTEM techniques. Fig. 7a shows the X-ray diffraction pattern of the TiO2 nanoparticles and the peaks identified for the best fit were found to be the anatase phase (JCPDS 71-1169); the particle size calculated from Williamsons–Hall plot was 9.5 nm (Fig. S4, ESI). The high resolution TEM image (Fig. 7b) was taken for further confirmation of the particle size and is in agreement with the XRD data. The phase purity of the TiO2 nanoparticles was established by the characteristic lattice spacing of 0.35 nm, corresponding to the (101) lattice reflection plane of anatase TiO2 (Fig. 7c). The circular rings in the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern (Fig. 7d) indicate the polycrystalline nature of the TiO2 nanoparticles. The FESEM image (Fig. 4c) of the photo-anode shows its highly porous nature and the cross-sectional image of the fabricated cell (Fig. 4d) indicates the thickness of the porous layer was ∼8 μm.

The basic structure of the fabricated DSSC, showing photon excitation of the dye and subsequent electron transport through the cell, is schematically shown in Fig. 8a. The expected prevention of back electron transfer between the conduction band of TiO2 to the LUMO of the dye (N719) and to the I3−/I− liquid electrolyte is also drawn. Fig. 8b shows the trap state-assisted electron recombination possibilities in the photoanode with an amorphous BL and Fig. 8c represents the photoanode with the crystalline BL showing the elimination of trap state-assisted recombination.


Fig. 9a displays the photocurrent density–voltage curves (J–V curves) of the DSSC with an annealed blocking layer with six different thicknesses and one without a blocking layer. For each thickness, the DSSCs were fabricated with annealed BL and as-deposited BL, and the results are summarized in Table 1. The enhancement of short-circuit current density (Jsc) with BL thickness in the annealed films is an indication of the effective prevention of back-electron-transfer. The highest photo-current density of 11.94 mA cm−2 was obtained for a BL thickness of ∼40 nm (BL40A) with a power conversion efficiency of 6.94% and a fill factor of 74.25%. It is found that beyond this BL thickness of ∼40 nm, the photo-current density and efficiency of the DSSC decreased. This can be explained due to the blocking layer thickness exceeding the tunnelling barrier distance; the cell's series resistance begins to increase, which reduces the performance of the device. A similar trend in BL thickness was also observed in amorphous films but with much reduced efficiency and fill-factor (Fig. 9b). It is found that the improvement in the Jsc value of the DSSC, with the amorphous BL thickness, is minimal and the efficiency, as well as fill-factor of the DSSCs with amorphous BLs, was less when compared to the cell without a BL. It is interesting to note that the DSSC with an amorphous BL of ∼40 nm thickness presents a Jsc value of 7.81 mA cm−2 with a power conversion efficiency of 4.12% and a fill factor of 67.9% only. From this, it can be observed that the crystalline nature of the BL has a profound effect on the performance of the DSSC. The lower value of shunt resistance in the amorphous BL cells (Table S2, ESI) points towards leakage across the junction due to crystal defects. These results prompted us to think that instead of performing as a blocking layer, the amorphous layer is functioning as a centre for promoting charge recombination. To further clarify this, we have performed open circuit voltage decay (OCVD) analyses of the various DSSCs.
Thickness
Sample code

V
OC/V

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF (%)

η (%)
BL0
0.786
7.97
76.19
4.78
∼10 nm
BL10
0.749
6.99
74.74
3.92
BL10A
0.820
6.80
76.45
4.27
∼20 nm
BL20
0.818
7.49
32.98
2.02
BL20A
0.797
8.45
69.76
4.71
∼30 nm
BL30
0.859
7.63
50.34
3.30
BL30A
0.822
10.10
72.20
5.99
∼40 nm
BL40
0.777
7.81
67.90
4.12
BL40A
0.780
11.94
74.25
6.94
∼60 nm
BL60
0.715
8.23
48.05
2.83
BL60A
0.769
9.90
75.30
5.73
∼80 nm
BL80
0.732
9.54
23.74
1.66
BL80A
0.772
9.66
72.03
5.38

Open-circuit voltage decay analysis is a powerful tool to study the electron response time (τn) that governs the change of lifetime over a broad variation of internal conditions in DSSCs. Its simple experimental technique and data analysis makes this technique a better choice compared to frequency or steady-state-based methods used for obtaining relevant information. The experiment was performed by illuminating the cell with an open-circuit and constant light intensity (100 mW cm−2) to reach a non-equilibrium steady state. Light is then abruptly switched off and the transient decay of the open-circuit voltage VOC(t) was recorded. In the non-equilibrium steady state, the recombination rate U(n) and electron injection rate are balanced and the free electron density (n) in the semiconductor was unaffected. The electron injection rate is given by ‘αI0’ where α is the absorption coefficient of the dye and I0 is the incident light intensity. In the transient state, with I0 = 0, the accumulated free electrons will decay mainly through the electrolyte and by neglecting the decay through the dye we can write:

(1)
Under thermodynamic equilibrium, the probability of an energy state
E occupied with electrons is described by the Fermi–Dirac distribution function:

(2)
From the band theory of semiconductors, the number of electrons (
n0) occupied in the conduction band having NC states with band edge EC can be expressed as:

(3)
In a DSSC, in the non-equilibrium steady state, photo-injected electrons populate the conduction band (
EC) and the Fermi level shifts towards the EC with the population of injected electrons given by:

(4)
where
EF0 is the redox potential of the electrolyte and the open circuit voltage can be written as:

(5)
By defining electron response time from
eqn (3) as:

(6)
Zaban
et al. derived the following expression for τn from the open-circuit voltage decay using eqn (5) and shown that it is also valid for non-linear dye-sensitized solar cells:

(7)
The electron response time
τn was calculated for the fabricated cells using eqn (7) and the various decay parameters are plotted in Fig. 10. Fig. 10a shows the open-circuit voltage decay curve for a selected group of the fabricated cells. For further analysis, we have selected four DSSCs with the following blocking layers, viz., BL40, BL40A, BL80 and BL80A. Fig. 10b represents the variation first derivative of VOC with time for these cells. The DSSCs with crystalline BL show shorter response times (τn) when compared to the DSSCs with amorphous BL (Fig. 10c and d). The reason for this can be explained as follows: because the net out-flow of electrons under open-circuit conditions is zero, the photoinjected carriers should undergo recombination with the holes in the electrolyte. This mechanism with ionic hole mediators are contributed by (i) direct electron transfer from the conduction band states of the semiconductor (TiO2), (ii) indirect transfer of the trapped electrons at the surface states near the conduction band and (iii) indirect transfer of electrons trapped at the mono-energetic deep surface states. In addition, the presence of a BL will introduce additional energy states in the band-gap region whose density heavily depends on the crystallinity of the layer. An amorphous semiconductor will have an exponential tail of electronic band states near the conduction band, which act as an electronic trap centre. This trapping and de-trapping will delay the discharge of electrons to the TiO2 conduction band and then to the electrolyte.

Using the classical model of Rose et al. for the response time-dependence on light intensity in photoconductors, Zeban et al. formulated the following equation of conservation for free and trapped electrons:
(8)
where
NT is the density of localized states, nT is the density of the localized electrons in the band-gap of TiO2, fT is the fractional occupancy for TiO2, Pt is the probability of trapping and Pd is the probability of de-trapping in the localized states of TiO2. However, this equation does not account for the influence of the BL in the trapping and de-trapping mechanism.

Now, let us consider the effect of introducing the BL in the DSSC structure and its role in the trapping and de-trapping processes. Let NBL be the density of localized states and nBL be the density of localized electrons in the band-gap of the blocking layer. Let fBL be the fractional occupancy for the Nb2O5 blocking layer. Eqn (10) can be modified by incorporating the terms for accounting the influence of BL as:
(9)
where
PtBL is the probability of trapping and PdBL be the probability of de-trapping in the localized states of BL.

The time rate of change of fractional occupancy can be written as:
(10)
(11)
From
eqn (9)–(11) we can write:

(12)
 The recombination of charge carriers will shift the Fermi level towards the dark equilibrium and we may write:

(13)
where
n0, nT0, nBL0 and U0 are the values of the respective quantities in the quasi equilibrium state.

From eqn (3) for a small change in ∇n we obtain:  and eqn (13) can be modified as:
(14)
where
τn0 is the life time in the absence of trap states. Eqn (14) is the modified form of electron lifetime

(15)
derived by Zaban
et al. without considering the effect of BL. It is very clear that the delay in recombination is significant only if,
In the case of an amorphous blocking layer, the value of this term will be higher than that of crystalline blocking layer. It can be observed from Fig. 10c and d that the response time was comparable for DSSCs having an amorphous and crystalline BL near the open circuit voltage and a significant shift occurs only at the lower decay potentials. This is because near the open circuit voltage, the density of the conduction band electrons in the mesoporous TiO2 layer is very large when compared to the trapped electrons in the blocking layer. At lower decay potentials, the trapped electrons populate the conduction band via de-trapping and the response time begins to depend on trap state density. The delayed response time of the amorphous BL cells compared to crystalline BL cells in our OCVD analysis (Fig. 10c, d and Table S3, ESI) validates this theoretical analysis.

Although placing an energy barrier layer between the interfaces of a photoanode has been shown to improve the performance of DSSCs, the respective role of the crystallinity of such layers during DSSC operation has not been investigated. In this study, a Nb2O5 crystalline blocking layer, as well as a Nb2O5 amorphous blocking layer, was inserted between the FTO/TiO2 interface and the results of the fabricated DSSCS compared. The photovoltaic performance and charge recombination rate of the DSSCs fabricated employing these films varied strongly with the crystallinity of the blocking layers. It is found that the crystalline nature of the BL has a profound effect on the performance of the DSSC by forming an energy barrier that suppresses electron recombination from the FTO to the electrolyte. The energy barrier was effective at reducing electron recombination as long as the thickness of the blocking layer was ∼40 nm and achieved a maximum conversion efficiency of 6.94%. At thicknesses above 40 nm, the decreased tunnelling probability hindered the performance of the device. The amorphous blocking layers were found to be a centre for electron recombination with significantly reduced cell efficiency and fill factor as the thickness increases. The delayed response time of electrons in the OCVD analyses shows that the trapping and de-trapping of electrons in the inhomogeneous Nb2O5 layer impedes the discharge of electrons to the TiO2 band edge.


Mr S. Suresh thanks the University Grants Commission, New Delhi, India for granting the teacher fellowship through the faculty development programme. T. G. Deepak, C. O. Sreekala and A. S. Nair thank the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) for financial support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: XRD pattern of Nb2O5 films annealed at different temperatures, EDX spectrum of Nb2O5 BL, spectroscopic ellipsometric data of Nb2O5 film, cell impedance and electron response time. See DOI: 10.1039/c6nj01133k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2016