 DOI: 10.1039/C5TC03007B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 831-839


Jieung
Baek
,

Junseok
Lee
,

Munkyu
Joo
,

Donggeon
Han
,

Houngkyung
Kim
,

Hyejeong
Seong
,

Jinsup
Lee
,

Jihan
Kim
,

Seunghyup
Yoo
,

Seokwoo
Jeon
* and 

Sung Gap
Im
*

Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), 291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-701, Republic of Korea. E-mail: sgim@kaist.ac.kr

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, KAIST, Republic of Korea

Department of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Republic of Korea

Graphene Research Center in KI for Nano Century, KAIST, Republic of Korea

Received
20th September 2015
, Accepted 15th December 2015
First published on 15th December 2015
In organic electronic devices, the capability of controlling the work function (WF) of electrodes is crucial in order to facilitate charge injection/collection. In this work, we introduce a new method to improve the electron injection characteristics of electrodes by depositing an ultrathin, electron-donating polymer layer, poly(dimethylaminomethyl styrene) (PDMAMS), via initiated chemical vapor deposition (iCVD). The deposition process enabled the ultrathin PDMAMS layer to be coated on top of the electrode surfaces with a wide range of hydrophilicity, without requiring any surface pretreatment. WF reduction was observed in various electrode materials including Au, Cu, indium tin oxide (ITO), and graphene surfaces, due to the strong electron donating property of the polymeric layer. The newly integrated WF-controlled Au and Cu electrodes were applied to organic thin film transistors (OTFTs), and a substantial improvement in electron mobility (from 4.75 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 0.89 cm2 V−1 s−1) was observed, due to the facilitated electron injection from the modified air-stable electrodes. The ultrathin layer was also coated onto the ITO cathode of inverted organic solar cells (IOSCs), resulting in around 3.5 fold improvement in the device efficiency. Furthermore, an effective n-type doping of graphene was successfully demonstrated where the Dirac point of graphene systematically shifted after the film deposition, which enabled the production of a graphene inverter with distinct on/off configurations. Since the iCVD can be used to form ultrathin films free of dewetting issues, deposition of ultrathin PDMAMS via iCVD can be a new powerful method to control the interface of various electrodes and the active channel for organic electronics.

Organic electronic devices such as organic solar cells (OSCs), organic thin film transistors (OTFTs), and graphene devices have attracted a considerable amount of attention due to their mechanical flexibility, lightweight, and cost-competitiveness. To improve the performance of the organic electronic devices, optimizing charge injection/collection properties between the electrode and the organic semiconductor materials is of critical importance. In order to facilitate the electron injection in organic devices, using electrode materials with low work function (WF) is highly desirable, but low-WF metals such as Ca, Ba and Mg are extremely reactive with oxygen and moisture. Therefore, compared to air-stable high-WF electrode materials, low-WF electrodes have severely limited usage and need further improvements to be integrated into the organic devices. One major strategy that can be utilized to improve the electron injection from air-stable electrodes is to insert an ultrathin electron injecting layer with electron donating property that lowers the energy barrier height. Some of the suggested injection layers include metal oxides, such as zinc oxide (ZnO), titanium oxide (TiOx), alkali metal salts, self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) with a strong dipole moment, conjugated polyelectrolytes, and ultrathin insulating polymers. However, these materials have several issues to be addressed for the application to organic electronic devices, including low air stability and damage to the electrode surfaces. Thermally evaporated polymeric layers had also been introduced as another type of effective electron injecting layer to mitigate these issues.

Here, we introduce a new vapor-phase deposition method to coat an ultrathin electron injecting polymeric layer onto various substrates, termed initiated chemical vapor deposition (iCVD) (Fig. 1a). Regardless of the chemical nature, the surface-growing iCVD polymer films can be deposited without causing any surface tension-driven dewetting problems. Moreover, the layer thickness can be precisely controlled simply by tuning the deposition time, leading to reliable deposition of the ultrathin polymer layers. The iCVD-grown polymer layers are exceptionally pure because the deposition process is inherently free of solvents and additives, which is of substantial importance in organic electronic materials. In the past, highly uniform and pure ultrathin iCVD polymer film with excellent insulating properties was synthesized and applied to various soft electronic devices. Given some of these excellent properties, the iCVD process would be ideal for systematically controlling the electron injecting properties to improve the performance of organic electronic devices.
In this work, we polymerized poly(dimethylaminomethyl styrene) (PDMAMS), an amine-containing polymer, via iCVD to achieve effective electron injection (Fig. 1b). Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) analysis showed that the ultrathin PDMAMS layer significantly shifted the WF of various materials such as Au, Cu, indium tin oxide (ITO), and graphene. Graphene is especially an interesting electronic material as it possesses extraordinary properties such as high carrier mobility, massless relativistic behavior, and half-integer quantum Hall effect. In spite of its theoretically ambipolar conduction behavior with Dirac voltage at 0 V, chemical vapor deposited (CVD) graphene after the transfer process tends to be p-doped in air due to the effects of moisture and oxygen. The inherent p-type nature of graphene prevents it from being used for various applications such as low-WF electrode materials. To rectify this, it is essential to develop a facile n-type doping method, and to implement an infallible n-doping method to allow the electrons to move effectively within the intrinsic p-type graphene layer with excellent electrical properties. In this work, we observed a WF shift of up to 0.4 eV in graphene with the application of an ultrathin PDMAMS layer on top of the graphene surface, while maintaining its electronic properties.
The commonly observed WF shift with the addition of the PDMAMS layer is derived from the formation of interface dipole moment between the electrode and PDMAMS, due to the electron-donating group in the polymer structure. With its electron-donating property, PDMAMS was applied to various organic electronic devices (i.e. OTFTs, inverted OSCs, and graphene inverter), and in all cases substantially improved device efficiencies were observed, demonstrating its high potential for application in various electronic devices to enhance electron injection.

The polymerization of PDMAMS by iCVD was confirmed by gel permeation chromatography (GPC) and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) analysis. According to the GPC measurement, the number-averaged molecular weight (Mn) and polydispersity index (PDI) of the iCVD PDMAMS were 2752 g mol−1 and 3.61, respectively. Fig. S1 in ESI shows the FTIR spectra of DMAMS monomer (top, black) and the iCVD PDMAMS (bottom, red). The intensity of the peaks for vinyl moieties (900, 1030, 1360, 1630, and 3085 cm−1) in the spectrum of DMAMS monomer was significantly reduced compared to that of iCVD PDMAMS. Since the peaks are only associated with DMAMS monomer, these results clearly demonstrate that the polymerization of PDMAMS successfully occurred during the iCVD process. On the other hand, the intensity of the characteristic peak at 2770 cm−1 representing the tertiary amino-methyl moieties in the amide group was detected in both spectra, indicating that the tertiary amine functionalities in the monomer were not damaged during the iCVD process.

The film morphology of ultrathin iCVD PDMAMS layers was characterized by performing atomic force microscopy (AFM) analysis. The images obtained from AFM clearly indicate that the ultrathin PDMAMS layers with thickness ranging from 0 to 6.0 nm were successfully formed on the surface of Si wafer by the iCVD process (Fig. S2a in ESI). The precise thickness controllability of the iCVD polymer film below 10 nm was achieved simply by tuning the deposition process time (Fig. S2b in ESI). A slight increase in the root-mean-squared (RMS) roughness in the AFM images was also observed for thicker layers, but the maximum RMS roughness was still quite small (0.27 nm with the 6 nm-thick PDMAMS layer). Since a high surface RMS roughness may cause a significant thickness variation of the superincumbent layer depending on the location, the deposition of surface with low surface roughness would be important to sustain the inherent electrical property of the upper active layer with a uniformly distributed electric field.
The iCVD PDMAMS layer was applied to various electrode materials with the process time of 120 s and 300 s, which resulted in film thicknesses below 4 nm on Si wafer (Fig. S2b in ESI). Fig. 2a shows the change in the water contact angles of five representative air-stable electrode materials (Au, Ag, Cu, graphene, and ITO) after PDMAMS deposition via iCVD. Despite the wide range of hydrophilicity in each electrode material, the water contact angle values of all the PDMAMS-coated electrodes merged between 50° and 60°. As can be seen from the AFM images of each material surface with/without PDMAMS-coating (Fig. 2b–e), the RMS roughness of Au, Cu, ITO, and graphene surface decreased slightly in the presence of PDMAMS coating, indicating that the ultrathin iCVD polymeric layer smoothened the rough electrode surfaces. These results clearly show that the ultrathin PDMAMS layer was successfully deposited on the various surfaces of electrode materials through the iCVD process without requiring pretreatment, regardless of the surface nature of the substrates underneath. These observations also indicate that the process can be universally applied onto the surfaces of various conducting materials without damaging them.
In the survey scan of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra of bare Au and PDMAMS-modified Au surface, the intensity of the Au4f peak in bare Au decreased and the C1s peak and N1s peaks emerged only in the spectra of PDMAMS-modified Au surface, ensuring the coverage of PDMAMS on the Au surface (Fig. S3 in ESI).

Fig. 3a shows the UPS He I spectra of Au, Cu, ITO, and graphene, and those of PDMAMS-modified ones with the deposition time of 30 s. The WF of each surface was determined from the corresponding onset position of each UPS spectrum, and the obtained WFs of the electrode materials are shown in Fig. S4 in ESI. Even with an extremely thin PDMAMS (30 s) layer, the shift of onset position in each UPS spectrum was distinct, and 0.4–1.0 eV of shift was commonly observed from all the electrodes including metals (Au and Cu), oxide (ITO), and carbon-based material (graphene): from 4.7 to 3.7 eV for Au, from 4.6 to 3.8 eV for Cu, from 4.6 to 4.0 eV for ITO, and from 4.5 to 4.1 eV for graphene. The origin behind the WF reduction can be related largely to the presence of electron-donating tertiary amine groups in PDMAMS, which contribute to the formation of dipole moment on the surface of the electrode. The induced dipole moment can be categorized in two ways. First of all, the tertiary amine functionality in PDMAMS generates an inherent intermolecular dipole moment, which will cause the vacuum level shift by reducing the electrostatic potential at the interface between the conducting electrode and the ultrathin polymeric layer. Secondly, the tertiary amine group can also create an ionic double layer on the surface of the electrode by inducing a slight charge transfer from the PDMAMS to the electrode. The induced charge transfer complex at the electrode interface generates an interface dipole moment, and the dipole also lowers the electrostatic potential at the interface. Thus, the electron injection/collection of the electrode materials can be enhanced (Fig. 3b). In addition, this mechanism with two kinds of dipole moments clearly supports the variation in the amount of reduction in WF with the substrate identities. Since the adsorption of functionalities in a surface modifier depends on the chemical and physical characteristics of substrates, the formation of dipole moment is highly affected by the nature of the substrates, which causes the variation.
The WF reduction becomes even larger with the increased PDMAMS thickness on Au and graphene, as shown in Fig. 3c. The monotonic decrease of WF with increasing polymer thickness can be attributed to the slight increase of dipole moments at the interface as the number of tertiary amine groups in a given surface area increases. In particular, after the sharp initial decrease, the WF decreased gradually as the deposition time increased. With the increase of the PDMAMS deposition time, the surface coverage of the electrode with PDMAMS increased. Thus, the dipole formation was also enhanced as the deposition time increased. However, since the increase in the amount of surface coverage is not significant due to the initial high coverage of the surface at the initial short deposition time, the amount of reduction in the WF is much less than the reduction at the initial deposition period.
Next, the WF-controlled air-stable electrodes from the PDMAMS modification were applied to OTFTs. Bottom-contact C60 OTFTs were fabricated with PDMAMS-modified Au and Cu electrodes as source (S)/drain (D) electrodes (Fig. 4a). With bare Au S/D electrodes, the C60 OTFT was inoperable with an extremely low saturation mobility value (4.75 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1) (Table 1). However, after the deposition of PDMAMS on Au with the optimized deposition time (30 s) (Fig. S5a in ESI), the electron mobility dramatically increased up to 0.89 cm2 V−1 s−1.
Metal

C
i (nF cm−2)

μ
sat (at VD = 30 V) (cm2 V−1 s−1)

V
T (V)

R
C (at VG = 30 V) (Ω cm)

I
on/Ioff
Without BCB treatment
Au
35.26
6.84 × 10−7
21.44
5.56 × 1011
—
PDMAMS/Au
35.28
0.45
−0.24
3.25 × 104
2.90 × 105
With BCB treatment
Au
12.49
4.75 × 10−6
12.09
—
—
PDMAMS/Au
12.21
0.89
2.38
2.20 × 104
2.92 × 106
Cu
14.79
0.01
4.02
—
1.91 × 103
PDMAMS/Cu
13.91
0.53
1.36
1.64 × 105
7.29 × 105
Moreover, the contact resistance, calculated via the transfer length method (TLM), showed significant reduction from 5.56 × 1011 Ω cm to 3.25 × 104 Ω cm, and no significant hysteresis was observed in the transfer characteristics of PDMAMS-modified OTFT (Fig. 4b). These observations clearly demonstrate that the performance of the C60 OTFT with bare Au electrodes is highly limited by the contact resistance between the Au and C60, and the PDMAMS efficiently reduced the contact resistance and improved the TFT performance. In addition, a linear current–voltage relationship at low VD was observed with the PDMAMS-modified device, indicating its good electron-injection efficiency (Fig. S5b in ESI).
The effect of ultrathin PDMAMS was also prominent in the OTFTs with Cu S/D electrodes (Fig. 4c). The enhancement of electron mobility is consistent with the UPS results in Fig. 2a and b, since the Fermi level shift of the bare electrodes with respect to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of C60 (−4.5 eV) reduces the electron injection energy barrier and thus facilitates the electron injection. Consequently, the on-currents of C60 OTFTs with both Au and Cu S/D electrodes were significantly enhanced, despite the insulating property of PDMAMS (Fig. S5c and d in ESI).
Analogously, the modification of electrodes could also be utilized to fabricate inverted OSCs, which are regarded as superior to conventional OSCs from the stability standpoint. PDMAMS was deposited on ITO surface via iCVD to realize a bottom cathode, which is essential in inverted OSCs with bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) composites of [6,6]-phenyl C70-butyric acid methyl ester (PC70BM) and poly[N-9′′-hepta-decanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)] (PCDTBT) (Fig. 4d). Without the inserting layer, WF of a bare ITO is too high for a cathode, resulting in a low built-in field and thus low open-circuit voltage (VOC). On the other hand, the PDMAMS-modification lowered the WF of ITO and enabled a dramatic increase in built-in field and VOC, as can be confirmed in the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the inverted OSCs under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (Fig. 4e). In this measurement, the OSC with PDMAMS-modified ITO was compared with two reference cells: one with bare ITO and the other with polyethyleneimine-ethoxylated (PEIE)-modified ITO by spin coating. In order to get the efficiencies, five samples from different batches were tested for each kind of device. VOC values of the devices with PEIE- and PDMAMS-modified ITO are 0.88 V and 0.89 V, respectively, while VOC of the device with a bare ITO is limited to 0.39 V (see also Table 2 for a summary of device performance). With the modified ITO electrode with PDMAMS and PEIE, short circuit current density (JSC), power conversion efficiency (PCE), and fill factor (FF) as well as VOC were enhanced mainly due to the increased built-in fields and reduced Schottky barrier at the cathode/PC70BM interface. In particular, PCE of the device with ITO/PDMAMS was higher than that with ITO/PEIE, and the t-test result showed that the p value was less than 0.05, indicating that the difference is statistically significant. In addition, PDMAMS has several advantages with regard to electrode modification compared with PEIE. Firstly, for PEIE modification of electrode materials based on the liquid phase method, a specific surface pretreatment is inevitable to ensure uniform wetting of the ultrathin PEIE layer. However, the pre-treatment process may damage the electrical property of the conducting materials. On the other hand, with the solvent-free iCVD process, it is possible to deposit ultrathin PDMAMS onto various substrates without any particular pre-treatment. In addition, the PDMAMS can be easily patterned by using a shadow mask, and is applicable to substrates with various geometries, such as paper.

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
ITO
0.39 ± 0.05
−9.35 ± 0.76
0.40 ± 0.03
1.38 ± 0.35
ITO/PEIE
0.88 ± 0.01
−9.77 ± 0.20
0.52 ± 0.02
4.44 ± 0.23
ITO/PDMAMS
0.89 ± 0.01
−10.03 ± 0.43
0.54 ± 0.01
4.85 ± 0.20
The strong electron-donating property of the PDMAMS layer can also be utilized to enrich graphene with n-type conduction property. An ultrathin PDMAMS layer (240 s) was deposited directly onto a CVD graphene layer transferred onto the SiO2/Si substrate. On the ultrathin PDMAMS layer, a Cr/Au electrode was deposited subsequently by thermal evaporation to complete graphene TFT (GTFT) with bottom-gate configuration. The schematic illustration of the device structure is shown in Fig. 5a and the optical microscope (OM) image of the final device is shown in Fig. S6a in ESI. The initial Dirac point of pristine graphene, which is the center of the ambipolar transfer curve, was near +10 V, indicating that the graphene is inherently p-doped, because of water molecules, oxygen, and the polymer residue during the fabrication process, which is fully consistent with previous observation. Therefore, restoring the intrinsic states of graphene with the Dirac point near 0 V is of great significance. In order to mitigate the unintentional p-doping problem, the ultrathin PDMAMS layer was applied onto graphene surface. As a result, the modification of graphene resets the Dirac point of graphene from 8.5 V to near 0 V (Fig. S6b in ESI), indicating that this ultrathin polymeric layer can be an effective surface modifier of graphene with several advantages. First of all, the damage-free iCVD method can deposit PDMAMS onto graphene surface without any surface treatment. Besides, the method can dope the graphene surface area-selectively simply with a shadow mask. After brief thermal treatment at 150 °C for 10 min, the Dirac point was shifted down to −7 V confirming the PDMAMS-driven n-doping (Fig. 5b; further detail of the Dirac shift by annealing is shown in Fig. S6c in ESI). The n-doping of graphene also induced an increase of electron mobility from 300 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 390 cm2 V−1 s−1 and a decrease of hole mobility from 293 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 257 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Fig. 5c). These results clearly demonstrate that the ultrathin PDMAMS layer can make graphene n-doped. It is worthwhile to note that the iCVD process used to deposit the PDMAMS layer does not damage the electronic properties of graphene, showing its great potential for stable n-doping of graphene.
With the n-doping capability of the PDMAMS layer, a graphene inverter was made by combining p-type GTFT and n-type GTFT in series connection, achieved by area-selective PDMAMS (240 s) deposition with simple lithographic masking with poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA). Fig. 5d shows an illustrative configuration of the graphene inverter.
As shown in Fig. 5e, the graphene inverter possessed a clear ON/OFF switching configuration; 60% of VDD (5 V) at the negative input voltage regime (“ON” mode) and 45% of VDD at the positive input voltage regime (“OFF” mode) were obtained, respectively, with a maximum gain of 0.1 (dVout/dVin) at 5 V of VDD between the Dirac point of p-type GTFT and n-type GTFT. The VON/VOFF value of our device is about 1.4, which is comparable to the previous reports of graphene inverters doped by charge transfer methods. Considering that the required thickness of the dopant is generally on the order of hundreds of nanometers with the currently used deposition techniques (e.g. spin coating and ink jet printing), the iCVD-based doping method can significantly lower (less than 10 nm) the required thickness of the n-dopant (iCVD PDMAMS). Because graphene is known to possess zero bandgap, the ON/OFF ratio of the graphene inverter is lower than the values measured from common Si-based inverters. However, considering that the PDMAMS deposition via iCVD is a reliable and efficient n-doping method with simple patternability, it would be a powerful tool to fabricate graphene-based devices for electronic device applications.

In summary, an amine-containing polymer, PDMAMS, was successfully deposited on various electrode materials with a wide range of hydrophilicity via a solvent-free, vapor-phase method of iCVD without any pretreatment of the surfaces. An ultrathin (sub-10 nm) polymer film can be grown conformally from the surface of the substrate using the iCVD process without experiencing any dewetting problems. The deposited ultrathin PDMAMS layer effectively shifted the WF of the electrodes by forming an interfacial dipole between the PDMAMS and the surfaces of the conductor materials for all of the materials investigated in this work. Given these excellent properties, PDMAMS-modified electrodes (Au and Cu) were applied to bottom-contact C60 OTFTs as S/D electrodes, and the device performance was substantially improved. In particular, the saturation electron mobility of the devices with Au electrodes was improved from nearly 0 to 0.89 cm2 V−1 s−1, with enhancement coming from the increase of electron injection. In addition, PDMAMS was also applied to inverted OSCs to modify the WF of ITO so that it can function as a transparent cathode. The device performances (VOC, JSC, FF, and PCE) were significantly improved by the ultrathin PDMAMS-modification due to the increased built-in potential when compared to the unmodified ITO devices. Also, the electron-donating property was applied to n-doping of graphene as the Dirac point at +10 V of the unmodified graphene layer was shifted to −7 V due to the strong electron injecting characteristics of the interfacial dipole between the graphene channel and the PDMAMS. By harnessing the change of the doping property of PDMAMS on graphene TFT, we successfully created a graphene inverter with a clearly defined on/off configuration: input voltage sweep that ranges from −10 V to +10 V, and a maximum gain of around 0.1. These data clearly suggest that the electron injecting properties of the ultrathin polymer layer can be utilized for various electronic device applications. Finally, given that it is highly challenging to deposit a highly pure ultrathin polymeric layer in a large area without damaging the substrate, the iCVD process will be uniquely used for universal surface modification for various device applications.


To start the iCVD process, the vaporized monomer, dimethylaminomethyl styrene (DMAMS) (ACROS, 90%), and the initiator, tert-butyl peroxide (TBPO) (Aldrich, 98%), were introduced into the iCVD system to yield a poly(dimethylaminomethyl styrene) (PDMAMS) film. The monomer was preheated to 45 °C to obtain the volumetric flow rate ratio of PDMAMS:TBPO = 3:1 (in sccm). The pressure inside the chamber was set to 150 mTorr and the temperature of the filament was 180 °C. The substrate on which the polymer was deposited was heated to a temperature of 38 °C. The film thickness was monitored in situ by a He-Ne laser (JDS Uniphase) interferometer. The deposition rate of the polymer film was 10 nm/6 min.


Heavily doped silicon wafers with a 100 nm-thick SiO2 insulating layer were used as substrates. The wafers were cleaned in hot acetone, deionized (DI) water, and isopropanol for 10 min successively in an ultrasonic bath. Then, the substrate was treated with O2 plasma, and divinyltetramethyldisiloxane bis(benzocyclobutene) (BCB) (Cyclotene™, Dow Chemicals, Inc.) diluted with mesitylene was spin-cast on the substrate at 500 rpm for 10 s and at 2000 rpm for 30 s, in sequence. In OTFT devices, the divinyltetramethyldisiloxane bis(benzocyclobutene) (BCB) passivation layer is reported to improve the interface between the SiO2 dielectric and the C60 semiconductor. After the BCB coating, the samples were annealed on a hot plate at 290 °C for 1 h. Successively, the metals for bottom S/D electrodes (Au, Ag, and Cu) were thermally evaporated on the BCB-treated silicon dioxide substrate with the thickness of 50 nm and the base pressure of the system was near 1 × 10−6 mbar. The metal layers were patterned with the width and channel length of 1000 μm × 225 μm using a shadow mask. Then, the ultrathin PDMAMS layer was coated on the metals covered with the same shadow mask in the iCVD chamber. Finally, C60 (SES Research, 99.95%) was deposited on the PDMAMS-modified metal layers by a thermal evaporator with the deposition rate of 0.2 ± 0.1 Å s−1 under 1 × 10−6 mbar. The electrical properties were measured using an Agilent B1500A semiconductor device analyzer in an N2-filled glove box. The mobility of the devices was deduced from the transconductance (gm); dgm/dVD = WL−1Ciμ, where gm = ∂ID/∂VGIVD. Contact resistance was calculated from the transmission line measurement (TLM) with the channel lengths of 25, 75, 175, and 225 μm.


ITO substrates were cleaned in an ultrasonic bath using soapy water, DI water, acetone, and isopropanol in sequence and dried in a vacuum oven. The cleaned substrates were O2 plasma-treated (PDC-32G, Harrick Plasma). Polyethylenimine-ethoxylated (PEIE) (Aldrich, 80% ethoxylated, Mw = 70000 g mol−1) aqueous solution (35–40 wt%) was spun cast at 2500 rpm for 60 s, and annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. After coating of the PEIE (10 nm) or the deposition of PDMAMS (120 s) via iCVD on ITO, a blend of poly[N-9′′-hepta-decanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)] (PCDTBT) (1-material, Inc.) and [6,6]-phenyl C70-butyric acid methyl ester (PC70BM) (Nano-C, Inc.) (35 mg ml−1, 1:4 by weight, dissolved in dichlorobenzene) was spin-cast at 1100 rpm for 60 s in an N2-filled glove box. The film was dried for 1 h in an N2-filled glove box and annealed on a hot plate at 80 °C for 10 min. The samples were then transferred to a thermal evaporation chamber (HS-1100, Digital Optics & Vacuum) connected to the glove box for the deposition of MoOx (Alfa Aesar, 99.99%) and Al. Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured with a source-measure unit (Keithley 238) under AM 1.5G illumination. The irradiance of the solar simulator (ABET Technologies) was checked using a calibrated Si photodiode.


Graphene was grown by the CVD method at 1000 °C during 20 min with 60 sccm of methane and 10 sccm of hydrogen on 25 μm-thick Cu foil (Alfa Aesar). The as-grown graphene layer on copper foil was placed on 0.1 M ammonium persulfate solution for 3 h to etch the copper foil. The acid-treated graphene layer was transferred to Si wafer with a 100 nm-thick SiO2 layer. After the graphene transfer process, graphene on the gate dielectric was patterned by a photolithography process. S/D electrodes (5 nm Cr, 30 nm Au) were deposited by e-beam evaporation. After the device fabrication process, the devices were annealed at 300 °C for 24 h with 400 sccm of Ar to remove attached moisture, oxygen, and polymer residue. Then, PDMAMS was deposited on the devices via the iCVD process as described above. Afterwards, the devices are annealed on a hot plate to promote adhesion between PDMAMS and graphene. The graphene inverter was made by connecting two GTFT in series connection and area-selective PDMAMS (240 s) deposition with simple lithographic masking with poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), and the fabrication method was the same as GTFT fabrication. The device characteristics were measured using an Agilent B1500A semiconductor device analyzer in a N2-filled glove box atmosphere.


The static contact angle was measured with 5 μL of DI water droplets, using a contact angle analyzer (Pheonix 150, SEO, Inc.). X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) (Sigma Probe, Thermo VG Scientific Inc.) measurements were performed to detect the surface property of Au with and without PDMAMS modification. The work function change was monitored by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) (AXIS – NOVA, KRATOS Inc.) with a He-I (21.22 eV) excitation source. The number-average molecular weight (Mn) and polydispersity index (PDI) of PDMAMS were determined by SEC (PerkinElmer Series 200), calibrated with polystyrene standards. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) was performed with an ALPHA FT-IR (Bruker Optics, USA) spectrometer in normal transmission mode for ensuring the polymerization process via iCVD. The surface morphologies of PDMAMS-modified conducting materials were observed with atomic force microscopy (AFM) (PSIA XE-100). The thickness of the PDMAMS on Si wafers was determined using a spectroscopic ellipsometer (M2000D, Woollam Inc.).


In order to statistically compare the PCEs of the two kinds of OSCs, an unpaired t-test was performed using GraphPad Prism 6 software.


This work was supported by part by Graphene Materials and Components Development Program of MOTIE/KEIT (10044412, Development of basic and applied technologies for OLEDs with graphene), by a grant from the Center for Advanced Soft Electronics funded by MSIP as Global Frontier Project (Grant No. CASE-2011-0031638), by Institute for Information & communications Technology Promotion (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIP) (B0101-15-0133, The core technology development of light and space adaptable energy-saving I/O platform for future advertising service), and by Nanomaterial Technology Development Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning (2012M3A7B4049807).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5tc03007b
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016