 DOI: 10.1039/D0TA11916D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 7625-7630


Haochen
Fan
,

Jin-Hua
Huang
*,

Longsheng
Chen
,

Yue
Zhang
,

Yang
Wang
,

CaiYan
Gao
,

Pengcheng
Wang
,

Xueqin
Zhou
,

Ke-Jian
Jiang
* and 

YanLin
Song
*

Key Laboratory of Green Printing, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: kjjiang@iccas.ac.cn; huangjinhua@iccas.ac.cn; ylsong@iccas.ac.cn

School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University Tianjin, 300072, P. R. China

Received
8th December 2020
, Accepted 16th February 2021
First published on 26th February 2021
Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite materials have attracted significant attention due to their intriguing optical and electrical properties. However, it is a challenge to grow a perovskite thin film with controlled crystallinity and large-sized grains by a simple solution process, which is important for highly efficient and stable perovskite solar cells. Herein, a methylamine-assisted secondary grain growth approach is developed for post-annealing of a methyl ammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) perovskite film in a controlled methylamine (MA0) atmosphere, leading to the formation of a full-coverage and highly oriented perovskite film with large grain sizes up to tens of microns. The resultant perovskite film shows low trap density, strong photoluminescence, and a prolonged decay lifetime. The perovskite photovoltaic device shows an enhanced power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 20.81% with good environmental stability. The method reported here provides a promising and facile route to fabricate high-quality MAPbI3 perovskite films for efficient optoelectronic devices.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells have attracted widespread attention in recent years due to their low cost and remarkable photovoltaic performances. Methyl ammonium lead iodide (CH3NH3PbI3, MAPbI3) and related perovskite materials have high absorption coefficients, long minority carrier lifetimes and diffusion lengths, and desirable optical band gaps. However, conventional solution-processed perovskite films are typically polycrystalline with small-sized grains and random crystal orientation due to the rapid nucleation and growth during film formation, having numerous imperfections in the grain boundaries/surfaces and within the crystal lattice. These defects are considered as one of the primary causes of energy loss in perovskite solar cells due to detrimental nonradiative recombination of the charge carriers. Moreover, the high density of grain boundaries can provide a dominant pathway for ion migration and moisture ingression in the perovskite films, reducing the charge collection efficiency and device stability.

In the past few years, great efforts have been made towards the fabrication of perovskite films with large-sized grains and high crystallinity by using various processing techniques such as solvent engineering, additive engineering, solvent annealing, hot casting, vacuum flash-assisted process, and so on. Among them, a well-known methylamine (MA0)-gas-induced defect-healing method was reported by Cui and co-workers, where a defective MAPbI3 film could be transformed into an ultra-smooth and dense film from a liquid intermediate phase CH3NH3PbI3·xCH3NH2 upon removal of methylamine (CH3NH2, MA0) gas molecules. The rapid MA0 release, however, causes high density nucleation of the perovskite particles from the liquid phase, resulting in a fine-grained CH3NH3PbI3 film with potential structural defects. Additionally, due to the issues of volatility, wettability and flowability of the liquid phase, it is a challenge to realize a large-area perovskite film with well-defined thickness and complete coverage. On the other hand, Qi and co-workers reported that a methylamine post-annealing could fuse adjacent grains in the MAPbI3 perovskite film and reduce the impurities at the grain boundaries, and thus improve the photovoltaic performance. In the process, the post-annealing was performed in an MA0 atmosphere without the control of the MA0 vapor pressure, and the grain sizes and crystallinity were not obviously changed for the film after the treatment.
In this work, a new methylamine (MA0)-assisted secondary grain growth (MSGG) approach is developed for MAPbI3 perovskite. In the approach, a pristine perovskite film is annealed in an MA0 atmosphere with controlled MA0 partial pressure, leading to secondary grain growth of the perovskite film. After the MSGG, the pristine MAPbI3 film with small grains and random orientation is transformed into a highly oriented MAPbI3 film with large-sized grains of up to tens of microns. The resultant MAPbI3 film exhibits low trap density and long carrier lifetime, and the perovskite photovoltaic device exhibits an enhanced power conversion efficiency of 20.81% with good environmental stability.

For the MSGG, a MAPbI3 film is firstly deposited on a glass substrate by the conventional one-step spin coating method, and then subjected to post-annealing in an MA0 atmosphere with a controlled partial pressure (PMA) as shown in Fig. S1. In the solid state reaction between NaOH and MACl, MA gas is generated as shown in eqn (1).

CH3NH3Cl(s) + NaOH(s) → CH3NH2(g) + NaCl(s) + H2O(l)
(1)
Detailed information is provided in the experimental part. The morphologies of the perovskite films before and after the MSGG treatment were investigated using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). As shown in Fig. 1a and b, both the films are compact and uniform, but with great difference in grain size. The pristine film is composed of small grains with sizes of ∼300 nm, and after the treatment the grains are enlarged with sizes up to ∼20 μm. Fig. 1c and d are cross-sectional SEM images showing that the irregular pristine perovskite crystals converted to monolithic grains from the top to the bottom after the treatment. In addition, the morphology of the MSGG-based MAPbI3 film is distinct from that of the MIDH-based film featuring small grains, indicative of different growth mechanisms between them. Considering the thin film thickness (∼400 nm), such high-aspect-ratio grain growth in the MSGG film is abnormal as compared with the perovskite films treated under various solvent vapors. The crystallinities of the perovskite films were further characterized using X-ray diffraction (XRD). As shown in Fig. 1e, both the XRD patterns can be indexed to the tetragonal phase of MAPbI3 (space group I4/mcm). It should be noted that the MSGG was carried out at a temperature higher than 100 °C, which means that MAPbI3 remains in the cubic phase during this processing. When the resultant film returns to room temperature, the MAPbI3 will undergo a cubic–tetragonal phase transition, and the original {001} crystal plane group may split into {110} and {002} crystal plane groups at room temperature. Due to the little difference in the crystal plane spacing, it is difficult to distinguish the two groups. As shown in Fig. 1e, the MSGG-based film shows a 110/002-textured structure with a 40-fold increase in the intensity of the (110)/(002) reflection, suggesting enhanced crystallinity and orientation of the grown grains after the treatment. Fig. 1f shows the UV-Vis absorption spectra of both the perovskite films. It was found that the absorption intensity was slightly enhanced over the entire absorption range in the MSGG-based film, possibly due to the enlarged grain sizes and thus enhanced light scattering ability.
The effect of MA0 partial pressure (PMA) on the morphology of the perovskite film was studied in detail. In the experiment, MA0 gas was created by the reaction of methyl ammonium chloride (MACl) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) in a closed chamber, and thus the PMA progressively increased with the reaction time. As shown in Fig. S2, the grain sizes increased rapidly with reaction time prolonging (PMA increasing concurrently). At 5 min with PMA of 0.01 MPa, the grain size is around 300 nm, and at 45 min with PMA of 0.08 MPa, the grain size dramatically increased to about 20 μm. To distinguish the influence of the time and the PMA on the grain sizes in the films, we kept the PMA at 0.05 MPa and extended the reaction time from 20 to 45 and further to 320 min at 120 °C, and found that the grain sizes did not change significantly with the annealing time at constant PMA, as shown in Fig. S2 and S3. The results indicate that the grain growth was mainly affected by the PMA in the MSGG. We further investigated the effect of the annealing temperature (T) on the film morphology. Keeping the PMA at 0.06 MPa and the time at 45 min, we observed that the grain size is increased with the decrease of T, with grain size ∼1 μm at 160 °C and ∼5 μm at 120 °C (Fig. S4). It is noted that at a high PMA with a low T, a large amount of MA0 gas could be absorbed in the MAPbI3 film. In our previous report, it was observed that there exists a critical pressure (Pcrit) of MA0 vapor at a given T in the system; when the PMA is equal to or higher than the Pcrit, the solid state film will be transformed into a liquid intermediate phase CH3NH3PbI3·xCH3NH2, and the MAPbI3 film could be sustained when the PMA is lower than the Pcrit. In addition, the Pcrit increases with the T in the system. To correlate the different effects of the T and the PMA on the morphology in the process, a physical parameter D (a ratio of PMA to Pcirt) is introduced here, where D represents the MA0 gas adsorption properties in the MAPbI3 film under different situations. With the D value equal to or higher than 1, a sufficient amount of MA0 gas can be adsorbed in a MAPbI3 film, resulting in the formation of the liquid MAPbI3·nMA0 phase, and with the D value less than 1, the MAPbI3 film can survive without liquefaction. It is noted that all the MAPbI3 films reported here had D less than 1 in the MSGG through the collaborative control of both the PMA and the T. As expected, grains with comparable sizes were obtained for both the MSGG-based films processed at similar D values but with different Ts and PMAs (shown in Fig. S5). The higher the D value, the larger the grain size (Fig. S6). The results imply that the grain growth of the film depends mainly on the amount of MA0 gas adsorbed in the pristine film in the process.
Based on the above results, a MA-assisted secondary grain growth mechanism could be proposed, as schematically shown in Fig. 2a. In the MA0 atmosphere, a certain amount of MA0 gas molecules can be adsorbed on the perovskite film at a certain D value, and a thin liquid membrane could form on the surface of the grains and the grain boundaries. The liquid mediator is conducive to the second grain growth of the film at an elevated temperature in the MSGG, where small MAPbI3 grains with a higher chemical potential will be dissolved, and the relevant species could be transferred through the liquid membrane and deposited on the relatively large grains with a lower chemical potential. At a high D value, a large amount of MA0 gas could be adsorbed, followed by the formation of a thick liquid membrane on the grain surface and grain boundaries, which is conducive to long range diffusion of precursor ions and thus the grain growth of the perovskite film. It is noted that when the D value (0.92) is close to 1, large grains could be obtained, but poor coverage was occasionally observed in the film, probably due to the wettability and flowability of the film with a large amount of the liquid phase (Fig. S7). The optimal experimental conditions for the MSGG films were set at D = 0.65 with T = 120 °C, t = 45 min, and PMA = 0.08 MPa, leading to the formation of a highly oriented MAPbI3 film with enlarged grains (up to ∼20 μm in size) (Fig. 1b). The result is distinct from the solvent-assisted perovskite films reported previously, where only micron-sized grains could be obtained with random orientation. The difference could be ascribed to the unique nature of methylamine (MA0), which has similar species already within the MAPbI3 lattice. Moreover, the MA gas can be easily adsorbed on or desorbed from the film surface, and no foreign species are involved to cause complexity during the second grain growth. Fig. 2b further shows the evolution of the XRD patterns for the perovskite films processed at different D values. It can be seen that the intensity of the {110}/{002} reflections monotonically increases with increasing the D value, while the other diffraction peaks simultaneously weaken in intensity, and disappear when the D value approaches 0.71. By means of the linear interpolation calculation, the random to preferred orientation may be realized in the film when the D value approaches 0.65 in the MSGG. In addition, the FWHM of the (110)/(002) crystal plane also decreases with the increase of the D value (Fig. S8), indicating the increase of the crystallinity of the crystal grains. It can be inversely derived from Fig. 2b that during the MSGG process, the cubic MAPbI3 has the lowest surface energy in the (001) crystal plane in the MA atmosphere. Thus, the surface energy differences would be one of the major driving forces for the oriented and large grain growth in the MSGG process.
In the polycrystalline perovskite films, the grain sizes, usually identified by the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) technique, may be overestimated due to the possible confusion between domains and grains within the films. Here, we employed the EBSD technique to map the local crystal orientations, grains, and grain boundaries in the MSGG perovskite films. Fig. 3a shows a representative backscattered electron (BSE) image of the MSGG perovskite film processed at D = 0.65. It can be seen from the figure that the textured grains are well defined with sizes ranging from 10 to 50 μm. Fig. 3b shows the corresponding inverse pole figure (IPF) map from fitting the Kikuchi patterns, and Fig. 3c presents the IPF color key, where the different colors in the IPF map indicate different crystal orientations. It is noted that there are 0.13% uncalibrated points (black part in Fig. 3b) in the map, probably due to the damage of the beam currents. Fig. 3d shows the IPF map of the perovskite film with a 2° orientation threshold, where the grains and grain boundaries could be clearly identified, well consistent with the BSE result. Furthermore, we measured the misorientation within an individual grain in order to observe the local lattice imperfections. Fig. 3e shows the misorientation angle as a function of distance for one grain selected from Fig. 3d (shown with a white line). The angles are < 1° over 70 μm, less than that (>4°) for the MAPbI3 film prepared by the conventional two-step method. The low misorientation implies that the MSGG process can enhance the grain growth and also reduces stresses and defects within the grains, which is advantageous for improving the perovskite solar cell performance. In addition, the pole density figure shown in Fig. 3f indicates that the MSGG-based perovskite film exhibits strong orientation along the [110] direction in the z axis of the sample coordinate system, as evidenced by the high MUD (multiples of uniform density) value of 42.53, well consistent with the XRD result. Due to the small difference between the a-axis and c-axis lengths of MAPbI3, EBSD has poor resolution of its (002) and (110) crystal planes.
To gain a deeper insight into the photophysical properties of the MSGG-based perovskite films, we investigated the electronic properties of the perovskite films and complete devices processed at different D values. Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy and time-resolved PL (TRPL) decay spectra were recorded to study the charge carrier recombination process in the perovskite layers deposited on pure silica substrates. As shown Fig. 4a, the PL intensity of the perovskite film was increased significantly with the D value in the MSGG process, and the maximum intensity of the sample at D = 0.65 is 44 times higher than that of the pristine sample. This result is in contrast to that for the MIDH-based perovskite film, where the rebuilt perovskite film exhibited slightly decreased PL intensity. The enhanced PL intensity suggests that the non-radiative decay could be significantly suppressed in the MSGG-based film, probably due to the enhanced crystallinity and reduced grain boundaries after the treatment. The corresponding TRPL decay spectra in Fig. 4b show that the average PL lifetime 〈τ〉 of the MSGG perovskite film is about 638 ns, about 60 times higher than that (22 ns) of the pristine sample. The prolonged carrier lifetime may be the consequence of the suppressed nonradiative recombination associated with the lower trap state density in the MSGG film, consistent with the PL result. In order to further explore the origin of the low non-radiative recombination, the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) technique was utilized to evaluate the trap density of the perovskite layers before and after the MSGG process. The trap density (Nt) is estimated based on the equation Nt = 2ε0εrVTFL/eL2, where ε0 and εr are the absolute and relative dielectric constants, respectively, e is the elemental charge, VTFL is the onset voltage, and L is the thickness of the film. As shown in Fig. 4c and d, the Nt of the pristine film was calculated to be ∼1.4 × 1016 cm−3, while the Nt (∼2.8 × 1015 cm−3) of the MSGG film was five times lower than that of the former. The reduced defect density in the MSGG film is consistent with the enhanced PL intensity and the prolonged lifetime, and could be attributed to the MSGG film with enlarged grain size and high crystallinity.
To correlate the effect of morphology and crystallization with the photovoltaic performance, perovskite solar cells were prepared with the FTO/compact TiO2/meso-TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag configuration, wherein the MSGG perovskite layer, processed at D = 0.65 (120 °C for 45 min with the PMA = 0.08 MPa), was selected as the light absorber. In addition, the pristine perovskite film was employed in the cell with the same configuration for comparison. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the devices are shown in Fig. 5a. The highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the target device reached 20.81% with a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 23.21 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.148 V, and fill factor (FF) of 0.781. The PCE value is among the highest for polycrystalline MAPbI3-based solar cells, and comparable with that of single-crystal MAPbI3 cells reported previously. The incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectrum is shown in Fig. 5b. The spectrum integration of the target device yields a JSC of ∼22.8 mA cm−2, consistent with the JSC value from the J–V sweep. In contrast, the control device delivered a lower PCE of 17.47% with a JSC of 22.93 mA cm−2, VOC of 1.042 V, and FF of 0.731. The higher PCE for the target device is mainly ascribed to the enhanced VOC and fill factor, which could be attributed to the reduced nonradiative recombination pathway of the carriers in the MSGG film with both the enlarged grain size and high crystal orientation. The result is consistent with the reduced trap density and enhanced PL intensity and lifetime as observed above. In addition, the J–V hysteresis was clearly suppressed in the target device as compared with the control device (Fig. S9). The statistical PCE distributions of both the devices are shown in Fig. S10. A stability test was performed for the MSGG device by holding the voltage at the maximum power point (ESI Fig. 11). The target device exhibited a relatively narrow PCE distribution with an average efficiency of 20.10%, while the PCE distribution of the control device was much broader with an average at 16.68%. The significant increase in PCE and high reproducibility of the target device could be ascribed to the large grains with highly preferred orientation in the MSGG perovskite layer. Finally, the stability test was performed on unencapsulated devices stored in the dark at 30 °C and 40% humidity. As shown in Fig. 5c, the MSGG device exhibited significantly improved stability as compared with the raw device.

In summary, methylamine-assisted secondary grain growth was developed for the fabrication of highly oriented CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite films with lateral grain sizes up to tens of microns. The secondary grain growth of the perovskite film could be well controlled by the partial pressure of MA0 (PMA) and the temperature in the system, and the mechanism was discussed. The large grains with a highly preferred orientation in the perovskite film were carefully characterized by XRD and EBSD techniques. The resultant perovskite film exhibited reduced trap density and extended PL lifetime, and the corresponding photovoltaic perovskite solar cell was fabricated with enhanced power conversion efficiency and improved device stability. We believe that the methylamine-assisted secondary grain growth method should provide a promising route for the fabrication of high-quality perovskite films for electronic and optoelectronic devices.


K. J., X. Z. and Y. S. conceived and supervised the project. K. J. and H. F. conceived the idea and designed the experiment. H. F. fabricated most of the devices and conducted the characterization. L. C. performed the measurements of XRD and absorption spectra. Y. Z. performed the TRPL measurement and assisted with the IPCE measurement. Y. W. assisted with the device optimization and stability test. C. G. and P. W. discussed the results. H. F., K. J. and J. M. wrote the paper. All authors commented on the manuscript.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61874123, 91963212 and 51961145102 [BRICS project]), the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2018YFA0208501 and 2018YFA0703200), the K. C. Wong Education Foundation, and the Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (BNLMS-CXXM-202005).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta11916d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021