 DOI: 10.1039/C5NJ01308A
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 7379-7388


Sunkara Srinivasa
Rao
,

Ikkurthi Kanaka
Durga
,

Chebrolu Venkata
Tulasi-Varma
,

Dinah
Punnoose
,

Lee Jae
Cheol
 and 

Hee-Je
Kim
*

School of Electrical Engineering, Pusan National University, San 30, Jangjeong-Dong, Gumjeong-Ku, Busan-609 735, South Korea. E-mail: heeje@pusan.ac.kr; Fax: +82 51 513 0212; Tel: +82 51 510 2364

Received
(in Montpellier, France)
24th May 2015
, Accepted 10th July 2015
First published on 13th July 2015
High-performance PbS particles with cube-like structure were deposited onto fluorine-doped tin oxide glass substrates using a hydrothermal method. The PbS particles were used as an efficient counter electrode (CE) for polysulfide redox reactions in CdS/CdSe quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs). The deposition time and urea concentration were optimized to prepare the PbS CEs. The morphology becomes smoother and the surface roughness increases with the 0.3 M urea CE, which was confirmed by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM). Under full sunlight illumination, QDSSCs with the optimized 0.3 M urea CE achieved an efficiency of 3.83% (Voc = 0.55 V, Jsc = 13.17 mA cm−2, and FF = 0.52). This value is higher than those for the 0 M urea cell (η = 2.47%, Jsc = 10.60 mA cm−2) and Pt-based cell (η = 1.32%, Jsc = 5.85 mA cm−2). Characterization by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and Tafel polarization indicated that the PbS cube-like CEs have lower charge transfer resistance at the CE/electrolyte interface (RCE) and superior electrochemical catalytic ability. However, RCE increased with increasing urea concentration (urea >0.3 M), and therefore, the fill factor decreased for the PbS CEs. The influence of different urea concentrations is discussed in detail.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are of great interest due to their low-cost and simple fabrication procedure, the low- to medium-purity materials that can be used, and their effectiveness in converting incident photons to electrical current. DSSCs are based on mesoporous TiO2 particles coated with a monolayer of a charge-generating dye to sensitize the film for light harvesting. The particles are immersed into an I−/I3− redox electrolyte with a Pt counter electrode. A power conversion efficiency of around 11% has been achieved using a ruthenium complex as the sensitizer, which plays a key role in determining the light absorption, and subsequently, the effective separation and transportation of opposite charges generated in the dye molecules.

In addition to DSSCs, inorganic semiconductors have recently received a great deal of attention since they show promise in the development of next-generation solar cells. Inorganic semiconductors are used instead of dyes in the same configuration as DSSCs to fabricate efficient quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs). Quantum dots (QDs) exhibit unique properties, such as a band gap that is tunable by controlling the size of the dots, high molar extinction coefficients, and easy fabrication. Another advantage of QDs is their discrete energy levels for generating multiple excitons from single photon absorption through impact ionization and flexibility in a tandem arrangement, which can expand the spectral response window of the solar cell.
Extensive research has been dedicated to increasing the energy conversion efficiencies of QDSSCs by synthesizing a new type of semiconductor QDs using various strategies. Much QDSSC research has focused on the construction of desired energy band structures using multiple QDs, sensitizing the photoanodes with various combinations of QDs, and changing the chemical composition and concentration of the redox electrolyte. For example, Niitsoo et al., fabricated a desired cascade structure by sequential deposition of CdS and CdSe semiconductor QDs onto TiO2 nanoparticles. Sudhagar et al., achieved an open-circuit photo voltage (Voc) of 750 mV by synthesizing photoanodes of various structures.
Efficient charge transfer resistance between sulfide sensitizers and polysulfide electrolyte generates a higher short-circuit photocurrent density (Jsc) in QDSSCs. Radich et al., obtained a photocurrent density as high as 18.4 mA cm−2 by modifying QD synthesis methods and sensitizing the TiO2 photoanode with various combinations of QDs. In spite of the comparable Voc and Jsc in QDSSCs and DSSCs, the reported fill factor (less than 0.6) is still far below that of DSSCs, which is typically more than 0.7.
It is known that the series resistance in QDSSCs and DSSCs is one of the main parameters that can noticeably affect the fill factor. Improving the conductivity in the active layer by annealing the film is one of the techniques used to decrease the series resistance of the cells to boost the fill factor and conversion efficiency. The rate of the charge transfer resistance at the counter electrode/electrolyte interface affects the fill factor in a clear way. A small difference between the TiO2 Fermi level and polysulfide redox level confines the Voc value. So, various optimizations need to be done to increase Voc and the fill factor to boost the conversion efficiency without sacrificing the high short-circuit photocurrent. The use of a p-type and narrow-band-gap semiconductor material as an efficient counter electrode could lead to comparable or even better fill factors in QDSSCs than DSSCs.
Platinum (Pt) is a catalytic electrode for organic iodide/triiodide (I−/I3−) redox electrolyte. Pt is the most widespread counter electrode in DSSCs and shows a low charge transfer resistance (RCE) at the CE/electrolyte interface. However, in conjunction with aqueous polysulfide electrolytes, Pt and other metals like Au are not very catalytic, because sulfur-containing compounds (S2− or thiol) are strongly and preferentially adsorbed at the Pt surface, which is reflected by a reduction of the total conversion efficiency. Therefore, other effective CE materials for polysulfide solution have been investigated, such as CuS, CoS, and NiS, which have low resistance and high electrocatalytic activity for the redox reaction.
Using CuS and CoS electrodes in conjunction with photoanodes resulted in greater conversion efficiency in QDSSCs. Our previous work revealed that CoS and CuS electrodes may be contaminated in the presence of a polysulfide electrolyte, leading to photoanode contamination. PbS prepared using an electroplating technique showed similar electrocatalytic activity to that of CuS and CoS but with inferior long-term stability. A p-type PbS material serves as the counter electrode and effective photocathode to facilitate electron injection into the polysulfide electrolyte, which results in a higher short-circuit current density and increases the fill factor.
We prepared a new and simple fabrication technique for preparing a highly catalytic PbS CE using the hydrothermal method. We studied the effect of the deposition time and urea concentrations (0, 0.3, 0.6, and 0.9 M) for the preparation of PbS CEs. The PbS was used in an attempt to boost the electrocatalytic activity and conversion efficiency. The resultant PbS electrode has a large specific surface area, high electrocatalytic activity, better performance, and none of the contamination problems shown in alternative materials. A TiO2/CdS/CdSe/ZnS photoanode with the PbS CE produces a power conversion efficiency of 3.83%, which is higher than that of QDSSCs based on Pt (1.32%).

Commercially available TiO2 paste (Ti-Nanoxide HT/SP), cadmium acetate dehydrate [Cd(CH3COO)2·2H2O], zinc acetate dehydrate [Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O], sodium sulfide [Na2S], urea [CH4N2O], sulfur [S], selenium [Se], lead nitrate [Pb(NO3)2], and thioacetamide [C2H5NS] were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. All other chemicals were analytical grade and were used without any purification.


TiO2 films were fabricated using 20 nm anatase TiO2 particles (Ti-Nanoxide HT/SP, Solaronix). Fluorine-doped tin oxide glass (FTO, 13 Ω sq−2) was used as the substrate for the photoanode and the counter electrode. The TiO2 was deposited on FTO substrates using the doctor blade method. First, a rectangular FTO substrate with dimensions 1.6 × 1.3 cm2 was cleaned with acetone, ethanol, and deionized water for 15 min each and dried using a drier. TiO2 particles were deposited on FTO with an active area of 0.27 cm2 and sintered at 450 °C for 30 min in air. A thickness of 7.5 μm was observed in the cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image after solvent evaporation.


We synthesized CdS, CdSe, and ZnS QD materials using a previously described successive ion layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) method. For CdS fabrication, the TiO2 electrodes were immersed into a solution containing 0.1 M of Cd(CH3COO)2·2H2O for 5 min to allow Cd2+ to adsorb onto the TiO2. They were then rinsed with DI water and dipped for another 5 min into 0.1 M aqueous Na2S, rinsed with DI water, and dried with an air gun. These two dipping processes were considered as 1 chemical bath deposition cycle and repeated up to 5 cycles.

For the growth of CdSe layers, the TiO2/CdS electrode was successively dipped into an aqueous solution of 0.1 M of Cd(CH3COO)2·2H2O for 5 min to allow Cd2+ ions to coat the TiO2/CdS electrode and then thoroughly washed with DI water and ethanol for 1 min before being transferred to the solution. Subsequently, the electrodes were immersed into a solution of Na2SeSO3 for 5 min at 65 °C to allow Se2− ions to form CdSe. This dipping process was repeated for 7 cycles. The TiO2/CdS/CdSe electrodes were immersed into 0.1 M of Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O for 5 min, rinsed with DI water and ethanol, and dried with an air drier. They were then dipped for another 5 min into an aqueous solution of 0.1 M Na2S, rinsed with DI water, and dried with an air gun to obtain the desired TiO2/CdS/CdSe/ZnS electrodes.

All chemicals for the preparation of PbS thin films were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and were used without further purification unless otherwise noted. Prior to PbS deposition, the FTO substrates were cleaned with acetone, ethanol, and DI water for 15 min each and dried with an air drier. The PbS CEs were fabricated on ultrasonically well-cleaned FTO substrates via the hydrothermal deposition method. In brief, we used CH4N2O as a reagent for the fabrication to increase the rate of Na2S2O3 decomposition and hydrolysis rate of the prepared solution. First, 0.1 M of lead nitrate and 0.2 M of urea were dissolved in 20 mL of DI water and magnetically stirred for 10 min. Then, 0.4 M of thioacetamide was dissolved in 20 mL of DI water and slowly added to the prepared solution. The resulting solution was transferred to a 100 mL Teflon-lined stainless-steel autoclave, into which ultrasonically cleaned FTO substrates were dipped horizontally.

Subsequently, the sealed autoclave was maintained at a deposition temperature of 90 °C for 90 min and then cooled to room temperature. The obtained PbS films were washed with DI water and ethanol and dried with an air gun. For optimization of the urea concentration, a 40 mL solution containing 0.1 M of lead nitrate and 0.4 M of thioacetamide was prepared, to which 0 M, 0.3 M, 0.6 M, or 0.9 M of urea was added. The cleaned FTO substrates were horizontally immersed in each of the prepared solutions and maintained at a deposition temperature of 90 °C for 90 min. For comparison, a Pt CE was prepared on the FTO substrates. Commercially available Pt paste (Solaronix, platinum catalyst T/SP) was applied using the doctor blade method with an active area of ∼0.7 cm2 and sintered at 450 °C for 10 min.

The crystal structures of the PbS counter electrode samples were obtained by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a CuKα source operated at 40 kV and 30 mA in the 2θ range of 20–80°. The samples were analyzed by SEM (Hitachi S-4200) with a 4k × 4k CCD camera (Ultra Scan 400SP, Gatan corp.) to identify the surface morphology and thickness of the films. The elemental compositions of the PbS films were investigated using an energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscope (EDX). Current–potential (I–V) measurements were performed under one sun illumination (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) using an ABET technologies (USA) at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and a sandwich cell configuration. An EIS (Biologic SP-150) was used to determine the charge transfer resistance between the electrode and electrolyte at frequencies ranging from 100 mHz to 500 kHz. Tafel polarization measurements were performed under dark conditions. The detailed fabrication of symmetric dummy cells has been reported elsewhere.


The structural features of the thin films produced with different amounts of urea were studied by SEM. The SEM images shown in Fig. 1a–d reveal that the surface morphology was greatly affected by the varying urea concentrations in the PbS films. Fig. 1a shows that many nanoparticles with cube-like structure were formed, but each cube had different sizes. As the urea concentration increases from 0 M to 0.3 M, the cube-like morphology remains the same, but the size of the cubes becomes approximately equal, and the surfaces become rougher (Fig. 1b) compared to the 0 M urea film.

The surface morphology of the films made with 0.6 M urea and 0.9 M urea is shown in Fig. 1c and d. The distance between the particles and their size were reduced, and tiny rod-like structures interpenetrated between them, making them look much rougher. The insets of Fig. 1c and d show high-magnification SEM images of the films made of 0.6 M urea and 0.9 M urea. All of the cube structures change to tiny rod structures, which cover the full surface on the FTO substrate. This morphology indicates that increasing the urea from 0 to 0.9 M in the PbS greatly damages the basic morphology of the cube structures.
The thickness of the FTO and 0.3 M urea thin film can be observed from the cross-sectional SEM image. Fig. 2a shows only one interface between the glass and the FTO substrate. The thickness was found to be 695 nm. Fig. 2b shows the thickness of the FTO and PbS (0.3 M urea). There are two interfaces: one between the glass and FTO and one between the FTO and PbS thin film, and the thickness was found to be 1.47 μm. The PbS films prepared using different urea concentrations had approximately the same thickness. This indicates that changing the urea concentration does not have much effect on the thickness but greatly changes the roughness and surface morphology.

Fig. 3 shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns for the films. The PbS film has five peaks at 2θ values of approximately 25.96°, 30.07°, 43.05°, 53.40°, and 78.91°, which are due to the reflections of the (111), (200), (220), (222), and (422) planes, respectively. The XRD results indicate that the PbS film was successfully deposited on the FTO substrate and matched well with the Joint Committee on Powder Diffraction Standards (JCPDS, PDF no. 050592, cubic structure). Additionally, as the urea concentration increases from 0 M to 0.9 M, the intensity of the peak is reduced, and its position shifts to a higher 2θ angle. This is mainly due to the increased urea concentration or the formation of amorphous substances on the film.
The average crystalline size was calculated using the Debye–Scherrer formula, D = 0.91τ/βcosθ, where D is the average nanoparticle size, τ is the wavelength of the radiation, β is the full width at half maximum of the peak diffraction, and θ is Bragg's angle. The average crystalline sizes were 45.70, 44.53 and 39.42 nm for the 0 M urea, 0.3 M urea, and 0.6 M urea films based on the prominent diffraction peak of (111), which is in good agreement with the SEM images in Fig. 1a and c.
The SEM results indicate only the structural features and density of the PbS particles but do not distinguish the surface roughness. The root mean square (RMS) surface roughness of bare PbS and that obtained with 0.3 M urea was identified using atomic force microscopy (AFM) images, as shown in Fig. 4. The surface roughness of the 0.3 M urea film increases from 217.8 to 269.8 nm as the urea concentration is increased from 0 M to 0.3 M. The higher surface roughness is mainly due to the appropriate concentration of urea for the preparation of PbS CE. The AFM results clearly support the hypothesis that the greater surface roughness or surface area of the CE is responsible for the greater electrocatalytic activity for the reduction. From this result, it can be concluded that the incorporation of urea in the PbS film not only reduced the surface resistivity but also increased the surface roughness, which are main factors for enhancing PCE and Jsc. For comparison, surface roughness of 0.6 M urea (202.8 nm) and 0.9 M urea (186.2 nm) was identified using AFM images, which is shown in Fig. S1 in the ESI.

To verify the superior electrochemical catalytic activity of the PbS and Pt CEs, Tafel polarization measurements were performed using symmetrical cells under dark conditions. The Tafel polarization curves in Fig. 5 show the logarithmic current density as a function of the potential (V) for the oxidation/reduction of the S2−/Sn2− couple. The electrocatalytic ability of an electrode is directly related to the exchange current density (J0) and can be estimated from the anodic and cathodic branches of the corresponding Tafel polarization curves. The anodic branch (βa) in Fig. 5 denotes the oxidation of S2− to Sn2− ions, and the cathodic branch (βc) indicates the reduction of Sn2− to S2− ions. The slopes of the βa and βc branches of the 0.3 M urea CE are larger than those of the 0 M, 0.6 M, and 0.9 M urea CEs and the Pt CE. It can be suggested that J0 for the 0.3 M urea CE is higher based on the Tafel equation. Adding urea to the PbS CE improves the catalytic activity.

The J0 value can also be calculated by eqn (1):
J0 = RT/nFRct
(1)
where
R is the gas constant, F is the Faraday constant, Rct is the charge-transfer resistance obtained from EIS spectra, and n is the number of electrons involved in the reduction of disulfide at the counter electrode. The limiting diffusion current density (Jlim) depends on the diffusion coefficient of the redox couple in the symmetric dummy cell, which can be expressed by eqn (2):

Jlim = 2nFCD/l
(2)
where
C is the polysulfide concentration, D is the diffusion coefficient of the polysulfide electrolyte, and l is the space thickness. The values of Jlim for the five symmetric cells increase in the order of Pt < 0.9 M urea < 0.6 M urea < 0 M urea < 0.3 M urea. Jlim is directly proportional to D, which indicates that the 0.3 M urea CE has a large diffusion coefficient and small Zw. The increase of the slope of the Tafel plot and decrease of the charge-transfer resistance in EIS measurements give clear evidence that the 0.3 M urea CE has the best electrocatalytic activity.


To optimize the deposition time, the photovoltaic performance of the QDSSCs was studied under a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 using CEs with films obtained with deposition times of 60, 90, and 120 min (deposition temperature is constant for all the conditions (90 °C)). In this report, three sets of QDSSCs were prepared for each of the condition and experimental error was found to be less than 0.3%. The resultant J–V curves of QDSSCs are shown in Fig. 6a, and the corresponding open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the electrodes are listed in Table 1. When the 60 min CE was used as a CE, the QDSSCs showed poor cell performance due to the poor electrocatalytic ability for reduction. The lower FF for 60 min cell can be attributed to the higher sheet resistance and charge transfer resistance. The QDSSCs fabricated using the 90 min CEs exhibit a higher Jsc value of 13.17 mA cm−2 and an efficiency of 3.83%, which is higher than that of the 120 min CE (0.79%). These results suggest that the conversion efficiency of the PbS CEs depends not only on the deposition temperature and fabrication process, but also the deposition time. The detailed explanation regarding FF and PCE is reported in the ESI.

CEs
PCE (%)

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
60 min
1.90
0.59
10.79
0.29
90 min
3.83
0.55
13.17
0.52
120 min
0.79
0.61
6.52
0.19

0 M urea


2.47


0.55


10.60


0.42


0.3 M urea


3.83


0.55


13.17


0.52

0.6 M urea
1.88
0.61
8.46
0.36
0.9 M urea
1.16
0.59
7.22
0.27
Pt
1.32
0.60
5.85
0.37

J–V curves were obtained from QDSSCs with the CEs made of different urea concentrations, and the results are presented in Fig. 6b and Table 1. Fig. 7a–d show box charts with Jsc, Voc, FF, and PCE of the cells with the PbS CEs. Sandwich-type thin-layer cells with the 0 M urea CE show a moderate Jsc of 10.60 mA cm−2 and PCE of 2.47%. The FF is 0.42, which is obviously lower than that of the 0.3 M urea cells. The cell with the 0.3 M urea CE exhibited higher Jsc, FF, and PCE values of 13.17 mA cm−2, 0.52, and 3.83%, respectively. The improvement in FF can be attributed to the low series resistance of the cell, the electron transport resistance through the photoanode, and the charge transfer resistance at the CE/electrolyte interface. The increase in FF and Jsc of the 0.3 M urea CEs is due to the lower charge transfer resistance at the CE/electrolyte interface, which reduces the recombination rate and internal resistances.
The cell with the Pt CE achieves poor FF, Jsc, and PCE values of 0.37, 5.85 mA cm−2, and 1.32%, respectively. It has been reported in previous studies that the lower PCE is due to the strong absorption of S2− on the surface, which drastically reduces the surface activity of Pt. The better performance of the PbS CE is attributed to the wide absorption spectrum (which resulted in the absorption of long-wavelength solar irradiation) and the p-type photovoltaic response of the PbS electrode. The results show that PbS CEs prepared with 0.3 M urea have a much higher PCE than the other CEs. Moreover, optimizing the concentration of Pb and S in the PbS CE can further improve the cell performance.

Fig. 8 presents the dark current–potential characteristics of QDSSCs with one of the five CEs. This information can be used to estimate the charge recombination at the interface between the CE and polysulfide electrolyte. The optimized 0.3 M urea electrode provided higher dark currents than the other electrodes because of their greater electrocatalytic activities. We used EIS to verify the Tafel polarization results and further elucidate electrochemical characteristics such as the internal resistance, recombination properties, and charge transfer kinetics of the QDSSCs. The analysis was conducted under light illumination (100 mW cm−2) and a frequency range of 100 mHz to 500 kHz. Fig. 9 shows the EIS spectra of the 0 M, 0.3 M, 0.9 M urea CEs and the Pt CE. The corresponding equivalent circuit is shown in the insets of Fig. 9. The values are listed in Table 2.
CEs

R
s (Ω)

R
CE (Ω)

R
ct (Ω)

C
μ (μF)
0 M urea
12.22
1.7
27.7
129
0.3 M urea
9.47
1.1
25.2
140
0.9 M urea
11.51
2.3
26.59
45.61
Pt
15.28
1.95
26.2
90.1
From the equivalent circuit, the high frequency intercept of the real axis corresponds to the Ohmic series resistance (Rs), which denotes the sheet resistance of TCO and the contact resistance of FTO/PbS or FTO/Pt. The first semi-circle in the high frequency region gives the charge transfer resistance at the interface of the CE/electrolyte (RCE). The Rct is the charge transfer resistance at the interface of the photoanode/electrolyte, which is parallel to the chemical capacitance (Cμ).
The Rs value for the 0.3 M urea CE is 9.47 Ω, which is much lower than that of the Pt (15.28 Ω) and 0 M urea CEs (12.22 Ω). The lower Rs value means that the catalytic material is more strongly attached to the FTO substrate. The results in Fig. 9 show that the QDSSCs fabricated using the 0.3 M urea CE can give better adhesion with a smaller RCE (1.1 Ω). The RCE value for the 0 M urea CE was as high as 1.7 Ω, indicating lower electrocatalytic activity for the reduction. The higher RCE values of the 0 M urea and Pt CEs influence the electron transfer from the counter electrode to the polysulfide electrolyte, thus leading to lower Jsc and FF. The appropriate urea concentration in PbS leads to an increased electron transfer rate at the CE/electrolyte interface and improved efficiency of the solar cells. Our study discovered that RCE varied as a function of the urea amount such that the compositional variations played a crucial role in the electrocatalytic activity. With the small RCE values of the 0.3 M urea, the electrocatalytic activities were much higher than that of the 0 M, 0.9 M urea and Pt CE, implying that the compositional variations have another influence on the electrocatalytic activity. Also, the values of RCE can be controlled effectively by varying the thickness, surface area, particle size, the loading and roughness of the electroactive materials, and their composition.
The low value of RCE and Rs with 0.3 M urea indicates greater electrolyte diffusion, which resulted in the enhanced transport of electrons and decreased the overall resistance of the electrode. The RCE and Rs values of Pt were far higher than that of the other electrodes, indicating the deposition of S on the Pt surface, which results in poor electrolyte diffusion. This led to the drastic loss of conversion efficiency and FF. A higher Cμ represents a larger surface area, which leads to better electrocatalytic activity of the CE. The Cμ values of the 0.3 M urea and 0 M urea CEs are 140 and 129 μF, respectively. The 0.3 M urea electrode showed higher Cμ values than the other electrodes. In Table 2, the Cμ values are in the order of 0.3 M urea > 0 M urea > Pt > 0.9 M urea, which agrees well with the results obtained from the AFM and FE-SEM analysis.
To further understand the performance of QDSSCs based on different CEs, transient photovoltage measurements were conducted by monitoring the open-circuit voltage decay curves as a function of time after interrupting the light illumination. Fig. 10 shows the Voc decay curves of QDSSCs. The 0.3 M urea CE showed a much slower Voc decay rate than the other three CEs and was the best among the experimental results. The Pt and 0.9 M urea CEs have the fastest voltage decay rates, which indicate a higher recombination rate and shorter electron lifetime.
To commercialize QDSSCs, the stability of the cell is crucial. The stabilities of the different CEs in QDSSCs with a TiO2/CdS/CdSe/ZnS photoanode were investigated under an illumination of 100 mW cm−2, which is close to real application conditions. Fig. 11 shows the J–V curves and evaluation of photovoltaic parameters such as PCE (%), FF, and Jsc for nearly 600 min. The QDSSCs with the 0.3 M urea CE showed a steady increase in PCE from 100 to 200 min (3.83 to 3.87%), as shown in Fig. 11c. The PCE is nearly constant thereafter (200 to 600 min). The enhanced PCE for the 0.3 M urea cells may be due to the capillary effect of slow electrolyte solution permeation into the CE or improved ionic transport, which arose from heating of the electrolyte. The 0.3 M urea-based QDSSCs decrease by 13.83% in the period of 600 min. These results were compared with those for the 0 M urea based cells, which drastically decrease by 55.46%. These results indicated that the 0.3 M urea based cells are more stable than the CE with the 0 M urea cells in the polysulfide electrolyte.
The CE with 0.3 M urea was compared with PbS and graphene/PbS CEs reported in the literature and they achieved a PCE of 1.28 and 2.63 for PbS and G/PbS based cells. QDSSCs conversion efficiencies of 3.01% was obtained by Zion et al. with PbS as CE. Our results show that the cube-like structure is greatly advantageous for achieving high PCEs (3.83%) using a simple hydrothermal method. The cube-like structured CEs lead to lower charge transfer resistance because of the high surface area and RMS roughness. The PCE of the 0.3 M urea CE is 55.06% higher than that of the 0 M urea CE. From the results, we conclude that the minimum concentration of urea in PbS was very effective for enhancing the catalytic and surface properties.

In summary, we have demonstrated a low-cost, low-temperature processable, and highly efficient PbS counter electrode (CE) deposited on a fluorine doped tin oxide substrate. An efficient PbS CE can be prepared by controlling the deposition time and urea concentration. Comparisons between the PbS CEs with different urea concentrations revealed that the 0.3 M urea has the highest electrocatalytic activity and surface roughness (269.8 nm). The quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) with the 0.3 M urea CE achieved power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.83% and current density (Jsc) of 13.17 mA cm−2, which is higher than those of the 0 M urea cell (PCE = 2.47%, Jsc = 10.60 mA cm−2) and Pt-based cell (PCE = 1.32%, Jsc = 5.85 mA cm−2). The electrode with 0.3 M urea also showed much better stability than the 0 M urea in the polysulfide electrolyte. However, the conversion efficiency declined beyond 0.3 M of urea, which implies that the minimum urea concentration in the PbS was very effective for improving the surface properties regarding chemical stability, roughness, and electrocatalytic activity. The results suggested that PCE and the electrocatalytic activity of the PbS CE depend on the urea concentration and deposition time during synthesis. We believe that a new record efficiency will be easily attainable with QDSSCs using a CE that is optimized in terms of deposition temperature, and concentration of elements (Pb, S, reagent), which is underway in our laboratory.


This research was supported by Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (2011-0014437).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5nj01308a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2015