 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA13159K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2760-2768


Xin
He
,

Tianhao
Wu
,

Xiao
Liu
,

Yanbo
Wang
,

Xiangyue
Meng
,

Jihuai
Wu
*,

Takeshi
Noda
,

Xudong
Yang
,

Yutaka
Moritomo
,

Hiroshi
Segawa
 and 

Liyuan
Han
*

Photovoltaic Materials Group, Center for Green Research on Energy and Environmental Materials, National Institute for Materials Science, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0047, Japan. E-mail: Han.liyuan@nims.go.jp

State Key Laboratory of Metal Matrix Composites, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dong Chuan Road, Shanghai 200240, China

Engineering Research Center of Environment-Friendly Functional Materials for Ministry of Education, Institute of Materials Physical Chemistry, Huaqiao University, 668 Jimei Avenue, Xiamen 361021, China. E-mail: jhwu@hqu.edu.cn

Faculty of Pure and Aplied Science, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8571, Japan

Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 153-8904, Japan

Received
1st December 2019
, Accepted 6th January 2020
First published on 7th January 2020
Tin perovskite solar cells (TPSCs) as one of the most promising candidates for lead-free PSCs have large potential to be industrialized in the future. However, TPSCs have often been fabricated at an extremely low oxygen concentration to avoid oxidation from Sn2+ to Sn4+, which is not applicable to their large scale production. In this work, we construct a carbonylate antioxidant capping layer atop the perovskite surface via a solvent engineering method to prevent oxygen permeation into the perovskite layer during the fabrication process of the device to enlarge the oxygen region from 0.1 ppm to 100 ppm. Meanwhile, a pinhole-free perovskite film with a large grain size, reduced Sn4+ defects and long carrier recombination lifetime was fabricated. As a result, high-performance TPSCs could be achieved in a wide range of oxygen concentration with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 9.47% at 0.1 ppm oxygen and 9.03% at 100 ppm oxygen, respectively; the device was stable, maintaining over 93% of its initial PCE after operating at the maximum power point under continuous light soaking (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) for 600 hours.

Lead halide perovskite solar cells as a next-generation photovoltaic technique have attracted much attention from all over the world. However, the toxicity issue of the lead component makes it a hidden danger in industrialization. Recently, environmentally friendly tin perovskite materials have emerged as one of the most promising candidates in future industrialization due to their optimum optical bandgap from 1.2 eV to 1.4 eV, small exciton binding energy, and high charge carrier mobility. Despite these favorable optoelectronic properties, tin perovskite solar cells (TPSCs) still show a power conversion efficiency (PCE) much lower than that of the lead analogue. This is mainly attributed to the fact that metastable Sn2+ in the perovskite lattice is prone to be oxidized to p-type Sn4+ defects in the presence of oxygen during the device fabrication. On the other hand, these Sn4+ defects could also affect the crystallization of the perovskite film and lead to unfavorable pinholes and vacancies that may act as recombination centers for charge carriers.

In order to suppress the generation of Sn4+ defects, some approaches have been attempted to suppress the instability of the Sn2+ component. Antioxidant agents such as SnF2, H3PO2, N2H5Cl and hydroxybenzene sulfonic acid were employed as sacrificial agents to reduce the Sn4+ defects within perovskite precursors. On the other hand, the incorporation of large-size ammonium cations such as phenylethylammonium (PEA), formamidinium (FA), butylammonium (BA), and guanidinium (GA) could not only raise the formation energy of Sn4+ defects but also induce a higher crystallinity of the tin perovskite film. However, there is still a lack of comprehensive study to suppress the formation of Sn4+ during the whole process of device fabrication, which could be the key to obtaining efficient TPSCs at high oxygen concentration. Furthermore, almost all of tin perovskite solar cells needed to be processed at an extremely low oxygen concentration, typically less than 0.1 ppm. Such a narrow processing window seriously restricts the scalable and industrial production of TPSCs.
Here, we introduced the 4-fluorobenzohydrazide (FBH) additive with low surface energy to form a carbonylate antioxidant capping layer on the FASnI3 perovskite surface via a solvent engineering method. This method effectively suppressed the generation of Sn4+ during the entire fabrication process of the devices, including the deposition of the tin perovskite film and subsequent charge transport layer and metal electrode. In addition, we found that the coordination between the carbonyl group in FBH and the Sn2+ components could benefit the crystal growth in a thermodynamically preferred orientation and lower the total Gibbs free energy of the crystallization process, resulting in a large and smooth perovskite grain with a significant increase in the carrier recombination lifetime. Attributed to these benefits, high-performance TPSCs could be fabricated in a wide range of oxygen concentration, with a champion power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 9.47% at 0.1 ppm oxygen and 9.03% at 100 ppm oxygen, respectively. Additionally, the device showed high operational stability, maintaining over 93% of its initial PCE after 600 hours of continuous light soaking (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) at the maximum power point.

The preparation of the perovskite film was conducted under a wide range of oxygen concentration conditions from 0.1 ppm to 100 ppm (monitored by using a digital detector in a glovebox, as shown in Fig. S1). Firstly, a precursor solution containing FAI, SnI2 and SnF2 was added dropwise onto the substrate for the spin-coating process, and FBH molecules were then introduced into the perovskite precursor by dripping a FBH-containing chlorobenzene anti-solvent to induce the nucleation and growth of perovskite crystals, followed by a thermal annealing process to form a FASnI3 perovskite film capped with the FBH molecules (Fig. 1a). The formation of the surface FBH capping layer is kinetically favorable due to the very low surface energy of the fluorobenzene unit on FBH, since the surface energy tends to decrease spontaneously.

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was employed to investigate the impact of FBH on the surface morphology of the FASnI3 film (Fig. 1b), and the photographs of the samples are also depicted in Fig. S2. Under normal oxygen conditions (0.1 ppm), the pristine FASnI3 perovskite exhibited a polycrystalline and pinhole-free morphology with a large surface roughness. In contrast, FBH-treated FASnI3 perovskite showed a dense and smooth film with a larger grain size, attributed to the fact that the coordination effect between the CO group and the Sn2+ changed the morphology of the precursor film from homogeneous nanoparticles to large randomly distributed textures (Fig. S3), and such a template effect could minimize the total Gibbs free energy of the crystallization process and is favorable for forming large oriented perovskite grains. The coordination reaction was demonstrated by Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, as depicted in Fig. 1c, and the stretching vibration signal of the CO bond was detected at a wavenumber of 1650 cm−1 for pure FBH powder, and this vibration shifted to a lower wavenumber of 1643 cm−1 for the FBH–SnI2 mixture, indicating the deformation of the electron cloud and reduced bond strength induced by CO⋯Sn2+ coordinate bonding.
However, under high oxygen conditions (100 ppm), the control film showed many pinholes, which should be ascribed to the increased number of Sn vacancies induced by the oxidation process. In contrast, the FBH-treated FASnI3 film can maintain a dense and pinhole-free morphology by the inhabitation of Sn4+ defects. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the FASnI3 and FASnI3–FBH films showed two characteristic peaks located at 14.1° and 28.3°, assigned to the (100) and (200) planes of the orthorhombic perovskite phase, respectively (Fig. S4). It was found that the peak intensity of the FASnI3 film significantly increased after being treated with the FBH additive, which was consistent with the SEM morphology analysis.
To prove the formation of the surface antioxidant capping layer, we conducted time-of-flight secondary-ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) analysis to investigate the depth composition profile of the FBH-treated perovskite film. As shown in Fig. 1d, the FBH molecule (indicated by CN−) was mainly located at the top surface of the perovskite film (indicated by I−) and presented a low content in the bulk or at the bottom surface. XPS measurement was used to further study the surface compositional variation of perovskite films before and after the FBH treatment. Fig. S5 shows the high-resolution C 1s spectra of FASnI3 perovskite films without or with the FBH modification. It was found that the FBH-based samples showed an increase in the peak intensity of the C–C (C–H) bond at 284.8 eV and the CO bond at 287.2 eV, as compared to the pristine film. In the XPS F 1s spectrum, the FBH-treated film depicted an additional peak at 687.5 eV relative to the C–F bond on the fluorobenzene unit, indicating the presence of FBH molecules on the perovskite surface after the thermal annealing process. Based on the above analyses, we proposed that a FBH capping layer was formed atop the perovskite lattice after the film formation.
We further performed liquid-state 1H NMR spectroscopy to verify the redox reaction between the FBH molecules and Sn4+ ions. As shown in Fig. 2a, the pure FBH dissolved in d6-DMSO solvent depicted peaks at 4.5 ppm and 9.8 ppm associated with the hydrogen atoms on the hydrazide group, and the other two peaks at 7.2 ppm and 7.9 ppm were assigned to the hydrogen atoms on the fluorobenzene unit. After mixing with Sn4+ ions (SnI4), the peaks at 4.5 ppm and 9.8 ppm of FBH molecules disappeared, implying the reduction of Sn4+ by the hydrazide group in FBH. Also, the color of the FBH–Sn4+ solution turned from red to light yellow after one minute of stirring (Fig. 2b), emphasizing the reduction process of Sn4+ back to the Sn2+ state. We also recorded the XPS Sn 3d spectrum to calculate the surface Sn4+ content of perovskite films, as shown in Fig. 2c and d. The Sn 3d signal could be separated into two individual peaks at 486.4 eV and 487.2 eV associated with the Sn2+ and Sn4+ components, respectively. The FBH-treated films display a Sn4+ ratio of 9.7% under normal oxygen conditions (0.1 ppm), slightly lower than that of the pristine FASnI3 perovskite (control) (14.5%). When the oxygen concentration increased, the Sn4+ ratio of the control sample significantly increased to 31.2% at 10 ppm oxygen and 54.4% at 100 ppm oxygen (summarized in Fig. 2e), indicating the fact that Sn4+ defect density in the FASnI3 film is quite sensitive to the fabrication conditions. In contrast, the Sn4+ content of the FBH-treated perovskite increased much slower than that of the control one and depicted a value of 12.5% at 10 ppm oxygen and 17.4% at 100 ppm oxygen.
Subsequently, the defect-sensitive steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectrum of the perovskite films fabricated under different oxygen conditions was demonstrated to further verify the ability of FBH in reducing the Sn4+ defects in FASnI3 films (Fig. S6(a)). For the control film, the PL peak intensity showed an obvious quenching of about 55% when the oxygen concentration increased from 0.1 ppm to 100 ppm, indicating serious non-radiative recombination induced by the Sn4+ defects. In the case of the FBH-treated sample, the PL emission peak kept a strong intensity even when fabricated at a high oxygen level. This result was further supported by two-dimensional (2D) PL mapping analysis based on confocal-fluorescence spectroscopy (Fig. S7). Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) plots fitted with a single exponential model were recorded to investigate the carrier lifetime of the corresponding perovskite films (Fig. S6(b)), and the corresponding fitting parameters are summarized in Table S1. Attributed to the large increase of Sn4+ defect states, the carrier lifetime of the control film fabricated at 100 ppm oxygen (1.14 ns) was much shorter than that of the film fabricated under normal conditions (3.87 ns). For the FBH-treated film, the carrier lifetime just depicted a slight drop from 4.58 ns to 4.15 ns when the oxygen content rose up from 0.1 ppm to 100 ppm, indicating that FBH has the ability of inhibiting Sn4+ defects in FASnI3. Compared to other groups reported before, the FASnI3 film showed a longer lifetime indicating better purity of Sn2+ after the treatment with FBH.
Apart from the generation of Sn4+ defects during the fabrication of the perovskite layer, the subsequent oxidization process for the deposition of the charge transporting layer and top metal electrode may also deteriorate the photovoltaic performance of a complete solar cell. Therefore, we studied the oxidization behavior of the perovskite layer (prepared in 100 ppm oxygen) during the deposition process of C60, BCP, and the Ag electrode (sample preparation for measurement is shown in Fig. S8). We conducted FTIR analysis to measure the vibration frequency change of the amino group (–NH2) between the as-prepared perovskite film and the perovskite layer of a complete device. As depicted in Fig. 3a and b, the FTIR spectrum showed two characteristic peaks at 3266 cm−1 and 3393 cm−1 associated with the asymmetric and symmetric stretching vibrations of the N–H bond, respectively. It was found that the symmetric vibration intensity became much weaker in the complete device due to the fact that the symmetry of the –NH2 group could be destroyed by the formation of a N–H⋯O hydrogen bond, which indicates the oxidation of perovskite crystals after device fabrication, consistent with a previous report. In contrast, the FBH-treated perovskite displayed a negligible change in the FTIR spectra after carrying out the same fabrication process to complete the whole cell, and we suspected that a FBH capping layer atop the perovskite surface could effectively retard the oxidization process by breaking the N–H⋯O hydrogen bond via a large steric hindrance effect of the fluorobenzene unit.
Finally, in order to confirm our speculation, XPS measurement and theoretical calculation were both performed. The peak at 528.9 eV related to the Sn–O bond in XPS O 1s spectra (Fig. 3c and d) showed a large increase of intensity for the control sample after device fabrication, implying the absorption of oxygen onto the perovskite surface and the subsequent oxidation of the Sn2+ component. In contrast, the O 1s peak intensity showed a slight change between the raw film and the complete device after forming the FBH capping layer, which indicates the inhibition of oxygen absorption on the Sn perovskite film by the protection FBH capping layer. Furthermore, density functional theory (DFT) calculation was conducted to estimate the absorption energy (Eabs) of oxygen molecules on the FASnI3-based perovskite without or with the FBH capping layer. As shown in Fig. 3e and f, the FASnI3 models used in this study contain three layers of [SnI6]4− octahedral units, and the generalized gradient approximation in the form of Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof was used as an exchange-correlation function to perform the structure-relaxation process. The Eabs values of the oxygen molecule were calculated to be −0.78 eV per atom and 0.25 eV per atom for the FASnI3 and FASnI3–FBH models, respectively, indicating a large increase of the energy barrier for oxygen absorption onto the FBH capping layer, corresponding to the results of FTIR and XPS measurements.
Subsequently, we studied the device performance of the perovskite solar cell with an inverted planar structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/C60/BCP/Ag fabricated at different oxygen concentrations. The cross-sectional SEM image of the typical device is shown in Fig. 4a. Fig. 4b and c show the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the best-performing FASnI3-based TPSCs without or with FBH post-treatment under one sun illumination, and the corresponding performance parameters are summarized in Table S2. Under normal oxygen conditions, the control device showed an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.581 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 20.53 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 69.9%, and a PCE of 8.34% in the forward scan. Meanwhile, the FBH-based device showed a slightly higher PCE of 9.47% with a Voc of 0.598 V, a Jsc of 21.10 mA cm−2, and a FF of 75.1% in the forward scan, and such a high efficiency obtained by the FBH-based device is also comparable to that of the recent state-of-the-art references (Table S3). Encouragingly, under the conditions of 100 ppm oxygen, the performance of the FBH-based device was obviously better than that of the control device. The control device showed only a Voc of 0.487 V, a Jsc of 15.36 mA cm−2, a FF of 55.3%, and a PCE of 4.14% due to the high concentration of Sn4+ in the perovskite film. In contrast, the FBH-based device still kept a high PCE of 9.03%, with a Voc of 0.593 V, a Jsc of 20.94 mA cm−2, and a FF of 72.7%. Moreover, the FBH-based device also showed a smaller J–V hysteresis than that of the control one due to the better film quality of the perovskite layer (Fig. S9). Incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were also recorded to analyze the photo-response of the corresponding devices (Fig. S10). Under normal oxygen conditions (0.1 ppm), the integrated Jsc was calculated to be 20.32 and 21.16 mA cm−2 for the control and FBH-based devices, respectively, in agreement with the Jsc measured from the J–V curves, while under the conditions of 100 ppm oxygen, the IPCE of the FBH-treated cell kept a high value of over 70% in the entire range of the spectrum, but the control one showed a significant drop of IPCE with a value lower than 60%, indicative of an improvement of charge-collection efficiency induced by suppression of p-type Sn4+ defects in the perovskite layer.
To further disclose the charge recombination dynamics in a full device, we obtained the dark current plots of the TPSCs (Fig. S11). The FBH-treated cell exhibited a relatively lower saturation current density under both normal and high oxygen level conditions compared to that of the control device, indicating less charge recombination and higher open-circuit voltage for the TPSCs, consistent with the J–V measurement. In addition, we performed Mott–Schottky analysis to calculate the doping density in the perovskite layer (Fig. S12), and the parameters can be achieved by using the following equation:
(1)
where
C is the capacitance, V is the applied voltage in the measurement, Vbi is the built-in potential of the device, q is the elementary charge, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity and ε is the relative dielectric constant of the perovskite material. The doping density N could be obtained by fitting the slope of Mott–Schottky plots, and the N value was calculated to be 5.16 × 1017 cm−3 and 7.98 × 1017 cm−3 for the control devices fabricated at 0.1 ppm and 100 ppm oxygen, respectively. After being treated with FBH, the N value significantly decreased to 4.21 × 1017 cm−3 under normal conditions and 4.69 × 1017 cm−3 under higher oxygen conditions, implying a large reduction of the background carrier density in the perovskite layer. Furthermore, space-charge limited current analysis was conducted to estimate the defect density of the perovskite layer. Fig. S13 shows the dark J–V curve of the devices with a structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/Au fabricated under different oxygen conditions, which includes an ohmic regime, a trap-filled limited regime and a trap-free space-charge limit current regime. The defect density (Ndefect) can be deduced from the onset voltage of the trap-filled limit region (VTFL):

(2)
where
ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, εr is the relative dielectric constant, e is the charge constant, and L is the thickness of the perovskite film. The defect density was calculated to be 9.19 × 1016 cm−3 and 1.11 ×1017 cm−3 for the control devices fabricated at 0.1 ppm and 100 ppm oxygen, respectively, which significantly reduced to 8.37 × 1016 cm−3 (0.1 ppm oxygen) and 8.62 × 1016 cm−3 (100 ppm oxygen) after being treated with FBH, further supporting the results of TRPL measurement.

Moreover, we fabricated 16 individual cells for each batch to investigate the reproducibility of our device, and the corresponding PCE distribution is depicted in Fig. 4d. Under the conditions of 0.1 ppm oxygen, both the control and FBH-treated devices showed a high reproducibility of the efficiency with a standard deviation of less than 0.2%. When the oxygen concentration rose up, the control cells presented a much larger deviation of the PCE as compared to that under normal oxygen conditions, implying that the reproducibility of the TPSCs prepared by a common strategy is also sensitive to the oxygen conditions. Importantly, we found that this drawback could be entirely eliminated by FBH post-treatment, which is critical for the industrialization of TPSCs.
We also measured the environmental stability of control and FBH-based solar cells fabricated at 0.1 ppm O2 in ambient air (20% humidity), as shown in Fig. S14. The control device showed a serious degradation of PCE after a few hours of measurement under both dark and light-soaking conditions. In contrast, the FBH-based device showed a much lower PCE decay rate than that of the control one. A possible explanation was that the FBH capping layer can effectively prevent the oxygen absorption and permeation into the perovskite film, and thus lower the destruction speed of the perovskite lattice. Finally, the operational stability of control and FBH-based solar cells with full encapsulation at the 0.1 ppm O2 level was determined under continuous light soaking (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) at the maximum power point in air. The FBH-based cell maintained over 93% of its initial power output for 600 hours while the control device showed a 57% loss of its initial efficiency after 600 hours operation (Fig. 4e), indicating a significant improvement of the device operational stability after post-treatment with FBH.

In conclusion, we demonstrated a novel strategy to fabricate highly efficient TPSCs in a wide range of oxygen concentration by forming a carbonylate antioxidant capping layer atop the perovskite film via a solvent engineering method. As a consequence, we achieved a champion efficiency of 9.47% under normal conditions (0.1 ppm oxygen) and 9.03% at a high oxygen level (100 ppm oxygen), showing a negligible difference. Also, the FBH-based device with full encapsulation can maintain over 93% of its initial PCE after operation under continuous light soaking for 600 hours. We believed that this finding provides a new insight into the phase-stabilization mechanism of tin perovskite materials and offers a guideline for the ambient production of high-efficiency tin photoelectric devices.


The ITO glass substrates were patterned and cleaned via sequential ultra-sonication in detergent, deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol for 30 min, respectively. Then the substrates were treated with UV light and ozone for 30 min before the deposition of the (PEG)-PEDOT:PSS layer. The (PEG)-PEDOT:PSS solution was spin-coated onto the ITO substrate at 4000 rpm for 30 s, and the coated substrate was then annealed at 150 °C for 20 min in air. After that, the substrates were immediately transferred into a glovebox. The perovskite precursor solution composed of 0.9 M SnI2, 0.9 M FAI, and 0.09 M SnF2 in DMSO was stirred for 3 h at room temperature. Then the prepared solution was spin-coated onto the (PEG)-PEDOT:PSS layer at 1000 rpm for 12 s and at 5000 rpm for 65 s, and 140 μL chlorobenzene (CB) with or without FBH was dripped onto the perovskite film after 30 s of a high-speed 5000 rpm process. Then the spin-coated perovskite films were annealed at 65 °C for 10 s and at 100 °C for 15 min. For the completely dissolved 0.5 mg mL−1 FBH, the FBH-CB solution should be heated for 3 h at 45 °C, and then cooled down to room temperature before using. Then 50 nm fullerene C60, 8.5 nm BCP, and 70 nm Ag electrode were sequentially evaporated on the perovskite layer at a vacuum level of 5 × 10−4 Pa. For the control of oxygen concentration, an accurate oxygen volume (calculated to be 0.1 ppm, 10 ppm and 100 ppm) was injected into the glovebox to form different processing conditions for device preparation.


The SEM tests were performed by using a JSM-6500F field-emission scanning electron microscope. XRD was performed on a SmartLab 9 kW X-ray diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation. The UV-vis spectra were measured by using a Shimadzu UV-vis 3600 spectrophotometer. The XPS spectra were recorded by using a PHI Quantera SXM (ULVAC-PHI) with an X-ray source of Al Kα (mono), and the incident angle and take-off angle are 90 degrees and 45 degrees, respectively. The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) were measured by using a Hamamatsu C12132 fluorescence lifetime spectrometer. For PL and TRPL tests, the relevant films were deposited on bare glass substrates and a 520 nm light source was used as the excitation light. The Fourier transform infrared spectrum (FTIR) was recorded by using a Shimadzu IRTracer-100. The capacitance–voltage (C–V) measurements were conducted by using a Keithley 4200-SCS. Time-of-flight secondary-ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) measurements were performed using a focused ion beam ToF-SIMS spectrometer (GAIA3 GMU Model 2016, Czech). A 30 keV Bi+ ion beam was used as the primary ion beam to peel the samples with an analysis area of 5 × 5 μm2.


The J–V curves were recorded in the forward scan (−0.1 V to 0.7 V) or reverse scan (0.7 V to −0.1 V) at a fixed step voltage of 10 mV and delay time of 50 ms under a solar simulator with standard air mass AM 1.5 sunlight (100 mW cm−2, WXS-155S-10, Wacom Denso). Monochromatic IPCE spectra were measured under a monochromatic incident light of 1 × 1016 photons cm−2 in director current mode (CEP-2000BX, Bunko-Keiki). The light intensity of the solar simulator was calibrated by using a standard silicon solar cell. Then the light socking stability was tested on a solar cell light resistance test system (Model BIR-50, Bunko-Keiki) with a Class AAA solar simulator. For the long-term light socking stability test, the cells were firstly encapsulated according to our previous reports.


The authors declare no competing interests.


The work performed at the National Institute for Materials Science was supported by the New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO, Japan), and the KAKEHI Grant of Japan (Grant No. 18H02078). The work performed at Shanghai Jiao Tong University was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 11574199, 11674219 and 11834011). X. H. would like to thank the funding of the visiting program, which is supported by the China Scholarship Council (CSC).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta13159k
‡ X. H., T. W., and X. L. contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020