 DOI: 10.1039/C7CC07494H
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 12213-12216


Fangbin
Liu
,

Zicheng
Ding
,

Jun
Liu
* and 

Lixiang
Wang


State Key Laboratory of Polymer Physics and Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun 130022, People's Republic of China. E-mail: liujun@ciac.ac.cn

Received
26th September 2017
, Accepted 19th October 2017
First published on 19th October 2017
Organoboron compounds offer new approaches to tune the electronic structures of π-conjugated molecules. In this work, an electron acceptor (M-BNBP4P-1) is developed by endcapping an organoboron core unit with two strong electron-withdrawing groups. M-BNBP4P-1 exhibits a unique wide absorption spectrum with two strong absorption bands in the long wavelength region (λmax = 771 nm) and the short wavelength region (λmax = 502 nm), which indicate superior sunlight harvesting capability. This is due to its special electronic structure, i.e. a delocalized LUMO and a localized HOMO. Prototype solution-processed organic solar cells based on M-BNBP4P-1 show a power conversion efficiency of 7.06% and a wide photoresponse from 350 nm to 880 nm.

Organoboron compounds offer new approaches (e.g. p–π* conjugation, boron–nitrogen coordination bond) to tune the electronic structures of π-conjugated molecules. They have received great attention and have been widely used in organic electronic devices, such as organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), organic field-effect transistors (OFETs) and organic solar cells (OSCs). OSCs use a blend of polymer/organic electron donor and electron acceptor as the active layer. There are much less electron acceptors than electron donors. For organoboron compounds, only some subphthalocyanines with a boron atom at the inner cavity and some BODIPY compounds have been used as efficient electron acceptors in OSCs. To expand the scope of organoboron materials and advance the development of OSCs, new kinds of organoboron compounds need to be developed and their unique properties need to be explored.

In order to efficiently harvest sunlight for high photovoltaic efficiency, ideal electron acceptors should have broad absorption spectra. However, normal molecular electron acceptors have only one strong absorption band and exhibit narrow absorption spectra. Although great efforts have been made to tune their absorption spectra, there is no report on molecular electron acceptors with two strong absorption bands in both visible and near-infrared regions. Moreover, there are few approaches to rationally design organic chromophores with multiple strong absorption bands. Therefore, it is a great challenge to develop a novel molecular electron acceptor with a wide absorption spectrum for excellent OSC device performance.
In this manuscript, we report a novel organoboron electron acceptor, M-BNBP4P-1, with a unique wide absorption spectrum and excellent OSC device performance. Fig. 1a shows the chemical structure of M-BNBP4P-1, in which an organoboron core unit is connected with a thiophene unit and endcapped with strong electron-withdrawing groups. M-BNBP4P-1 exhibits a wide absorption spectrum with two strong absorption bands in the long wavelength region (λmax = 771 nm) and the short wavelength region (λmax = 502 nm), which are very desirable for sunlight harvesting. This is due to its special electronic structure, i.e. a delocalized LUMO and a localized HOMO. OSCs based on the blend of poly[(ethylhexylthiophenyl)-benzodithiophene-(ethylhexyl)-thienothiophene] (PTB7-Th) electron donor and M-BNBP4P-1 electron acceptor show power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) as high as 7.06%. This work indicates that organoboron compounds are promising photovoltaic materials with interesting opto-electronic properties.
In the chemical structure of M-BNBP4P-1, the core unit is double B←N bridged bipyridine bearing four phenyl groups (BNBP4P), which is derived from our previous molecule. The BNBP4P core unit is connected with the thiophene unit and endcapped with electron-withdrawing 2-(3-oxo-2,3-dihydroinden-ylidene)malononitrile (INCN) groups. Fig. 1b shows the calculated configuration of M-BNBP4P-1. The BNBP4P core unit, thiophene units and INIC groups adopt a nearly planar configuration with a small torsion angle of 19° between the BNBP4P core unit and the thiophene units. The four rigid and bulky phenyl substituents of the BNBP4P unit “stick out” from the plane. Therefore, M-BNBP4P-1 has an overall nonplanar three-dimensional configuration, which is expected to prevent over-aggregation and large-size phase separation in OSCs. Owing to the nonplanar configuration, M-BNBP4P-1 is also expected to show good solubility for the solution-processing of OSCs.

Scheme 1 shows the synthetic route for M-BNBP4P-1. Starting from 5,5′-dibromo-[2,2′-bipyridine]-3,3′-diamine (1), alkylation and subsequent treatment with triphenylborane gave the dibromo-BNBP4P derivative 3. A Suzuki reaction of 3 with 5-(4,4,5,5-tetramethyl-1,3,2-dioxaborolan-2-yl)thiophene-2-carbaldehyde afforded the dialdehyde intermediate 4. Finally, M-BNBP4P-1 was synthesized by the Knoevenagel condensation of 4 and 2-(3-oxo-2,3-dihydroinden-1-ylidene)-malononitrile. M-BNBP4P-1 exhibits good solubility in common organic solvents, such as chloroform, toluene and chlorobenzene (CB). Both differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements (Fig. S3, ESI) indicate that M-BNBP4P-1 is amorphous in the solid state. These properties are in accordance with the nonplanar configuration of M-BNBP4P-1. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) suggests that M-BNBP4P-1 exhibits excellent thermal stability with a thermal degradation temperature (Td) of 288 °C.

Fig. 2a shows the UV/Vis absorption spectra of M-BNBP4P-1 in chlorobenzene solution and in thin film. M-BNBP4P-1 in solution shows a broad absorption spectrum with two absorption peaks at 486 nm and 698 nm with a maximum extinction coefficient of 7.83 × 104 M−1 cm−1. In thin film, owing to the intermolecular interaction in the solid state, the two absorption peaks of M-BNBP4P-1 are red-shifted to 502 nm and 771 nm, respectively. Molecular electron acceptors always exhibit only one strong absorption band either in the long wavelength region (λmax = ca. 700 nm) or in the short wavelength region (λmax = ca. 500 nm). 5 The wide absorption spectrum with both a long-wavelength absorption band and a short-wavelength absorption band of M-BNBP4P-1 indicates superior sunlight harvesting capability, which is very desirable for photovoltaic applications. According to the onset absorption wavelength, the optical bandgap of M-BNBP4P-1 is estimated to be 1.40 eV.
The unique wide absorption spectrum of M-BNBP4P-1 is due to its special electronic structure. The long-wavelength absorption band of the organic chromophore is attributed to the HOMO → LUMO transition. The intensity of this absorption band is determined by the overlap between the HOMO and the LUMO. For normal organic chromophores, both the HOMO and LUMO are delocalized on the whole π-conjugated backbone. The well-overlapped LUMO and HOMO make the HOMO → LUMO transition dominant. Therefore, the absorption spectra of the normal organic chromophore are dominated by the long-wavelength absorption band and exhibit only one strong absorption band. For M-BNBP4P-1, as shown in Fig. 2b, the LUMO is delocalized over the whole backbone and the HOMO is localized at the BNBP4P core unit, indicating limited overlap between the LUMO and HOMO. Therefore, the HOMO → LUMO transition (the long wavelength absorption band) is partially suppressed and other transitions with high energy (the short wavelength absorption band) are more permitted. Both the long wavelength absorption band and the short wavelength absorption band co-exist in the absorption spectrum of M-BNBP4P-1. To further explain the unique absorption spectrum of M-BNBP4P-1, we performed TD-DFT (B3LYP/6-31G*) calculations to obtain the simulated transition energies and oscillator strengths. The results are shown in Fig. S4 and S5 (ESI). The long wavelength absorption band of M-BNBP4P-1 is attributed to the HOMO → LUMO transition. The short wavelength absorption band is mainly assigned to the HOMO−8 → LUMO, HOMO−6 → LUMO, HOMO−4 → LUMO, HOMO−2 → LUMO, HOMO → LUMO+1 and HOMO→ LUMO+4 transitions.
The LUMO and HOMO energy levels of M-BNBP4P-1 are estimated by cyclic voltammetry. According to the onset reduction/oxidation potentials in the cyclic voltammogram (Fig. 3), the LUMO and HOMO energy levels of M-BNBP4P-1 are estimated to be −3.93 eV and −5.34 eV, respectively. The low-lying LUMO level is attributed to both the electron-deficient BNBP4P core unit and the electron-withdrawing INCN groups. PTB7-Th is a widely used polymer electron donor. The energy level alignment of M-BNBP4P-1 and PTB7-Th is shown in Fig. 3. The ΔLUMO offset and ΔHOMO offset between them enable the photoinduced electron transfer from PTB7-Th to M-BNBP4P-1 and photoinduced hole transfer from M-BNBP4P-1 to PTB7-Th. Therefore, M-BNBP4P-1 can be used as an electron acceptor for OSCs.
OSC devices were fabricated with the structure of indium tin oxide (ITO)/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene): poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)/PTB7-Th:M-BNBP4P-1/Ca/Al. After device optimization, a PTB7-Th:M-BNBP4P-1 weight ratio of 1:1 and spincoating with chlorobenzene containing 0.7% diiodooctane (DIO) as the solvent additive gave the best photovoltaic performance. Fig. 4 shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curve and the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum of the device. The device exhibits an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.78 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 14.62 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 0.62, corresponding to a PCE of 7.06%. The average PCE of twelve devices is 6.90%. This performance is much better than that of the best solution-processed OSCs with subphthalocyanines-boron as electron acceptors (PCE = ca. 4%). The EQE spectrum of the device exhibits a broad photoresponse from 350 nm to 880 nm with a maximum EQE of 57% at 496 nm. The band at ca. 660 nm is mainly attributed to the light absorption by the PTB7-Th donor and the two bands at ca. 490 nm and ca. 720 nm are mainly assigned to the light absorption by the M-BNBP4P-1 acceptor. The calculated JSC value obtained by the integration of the EQE spectrum and AM1.5G spectrum agrees well with the value measured by J–V scanning within 1% mismatch.
We investigated the active layer morphology and charge carrier transporting/recombination behaviors of the OSC device of M-BNBP4P-1. As shown in Fig. S6 (ESI), the atomic force microscopy (AFM) height image of the PTB7-Th:M-BNBP4P-1 blend shows a smooth surface with a root-mean-square roughness as small as 1.38 nm. The corresponding phase image exhibits uniform nanoscale phase separation with a bicontinuous fine network at the surface. These results indicate good miscibility of M-BNBP4P-1 with PTB7-Th, which is probably due to the nonplanar 3D architecture of M-BNBP4P-1. The electron and hole mobilities of the blend film were measured using the space charge limited current (SCLC) method with the hole-only and electron-only devices. The device structures and the J–V curves (Fig. S7) are provided in the ESI. The blend film shows an electron mobility and a hole mobility of 1.47 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 6.87 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. The high and balanced electron and hole mobilities are consistent with the good photovoltaic performance of the PTB7-Th:M-BNBP4P-1 blend. The dependence of JSC on the light intensity of the OSC device (Fig. S8, ESI) suggests that bimolecular charge recombination is weak under short-circuit conditions. The characteristic of photocurrent density as a function of effective voltage (Fig. S9, ESI) indicates efficient photogenerated exciton dissociation and charge collection.
In summary, we have developed an electron acceptor, M-BNBP4P-1, in which an organoborn BNBP4P core unit is connected with a thiophene unit and endcapped with electron-withdrawing INCN groups. Owing to its delocalized LUMO and localized HOMO, M-BNBP4P-1 exhibits two strong absorption bands in both the long wavelength region (λmax = 771 nm) and the short wavelength region (λmax = 502 nm), indicating superior sunlight harvesting capability. OSCs based on PTB7-Th:M-BNBP4P-1 blend exhibit a PCE of 7.06% and a wide photoresponse from 350 nm to 880 nm. The special electronic structure, unique wide absorption spectrum and excellent OSC device performance suggest that organoboron compounds are promising opto-electronic materials and deserve great attention.
The authors are grateful for the financial supports by the National Key Basic Research and Development Program of China (973 program, Grant No. 2015CB655001), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51373165, 21625403), the Jilin Scientific and Technological Development Program (Grant No. 20170519003JH) and the Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant No. XDB12010200).

There are no conflicts to declare.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Device fabrication and measurement conditions, DSC and XRD measurements, charge mobility measurement, TD-DFT calculations, and PSC device characterization. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cc07494h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017