 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM35086F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21154-21158

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Jinhe
Wang
*,

Guoquan
Min
,

Zhitang
Song
,

Xiuyuan
Ni
,

Weimin
Zhou
,

Jing
Zhan
,

Yanping
Zhang
,

Jianping
Zhang
 and 

Liyi
Shi
*

Research Center of Nano-science and Nano-technology, Shanghai University, Shangda Road 99, Shanghai, 200444, P. R. China. E-mail: wangjinhe@gmail.com

Nanotechnology Promotion Center, Jiachuan Road 245, Shanghai 200237, P. R. China

Laboratory of Nanotechnology, Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changning Road 865, Shanghai 200050, P. R. China

Polymer Department of Fudan University, Handan Road 220, Shanghai 200433, P.R. China

Received
31st July 2012
, Accepted 21st August 2012
First published on 22nd August 2012
A new method is developed in this work to fabricate large area poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) micro/nano-patterns. The method is based on solvent-infiltration imprint lithography (SIIL). P3HT micro/nano-patterns, including micro-prism arrays, nano-grating and nano-hole arrays, have been successfully prepared with features ranging from 400 nm to 3 μm. The regularity of the patterns was studied by SEM and the morphology of the pattern surfaces was investigated by atomic force microscope (AFM). The solidification mechanism of this method is based on solvent infiltration instead of external UV or heat to form the polymer pattern. This mechanism makes SIIL more universal, of lower cost than hard-mold imprint lithography, and more efficient than capillary force based lithography since high glass transition temperature (Tg) polymers or even polymer/nano-particle blends can be patterned quickly. Polymer solar cells with nano-hole arrays and nano-grating are prepared using SIIL, respectively, and the power conversion efficiency is improved compared with traditional film-structure polymer solar cells.

Conjugated polymers are considered as organic semiconductor materials that could lead to the next generation of electronic and optical devices. Conjugated polymers have many advantages over inorganic semiconducting materials, such as low cost and flexibility of use. Poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) is an important conjugated polymer that has been widely used in solar cells, organic transistors, and polymer light-emitting diodes (LEDs). In order to improve performance, micro or nano patterns are usually required in these devices. For example, micro-textures are employed in solar cells to improve sun light absorption, where micro-arrays are used in organic thin film transistors to increase carrier mobility, and photo crystals are fabricated on the surface of LEDs to improve the light output.

Up to now, photolithography with subsequent dry and wet etching processes, is the most common micro-pattern fabrication method in the state-of-the-art semiconducting industry. However, this method is hardly applicable to conjugated polymers because the polymer will be significantly damaged or have its intrinsic properties altered under the harsh patterning conditions. Some other non-destructive patterning methods, including the anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) template method, dip-pen nanolithography and nanoimprint lithography have been used to fabricate micro/nano-patterns of polymers. However, these methods usually rely on expensive state-of-the-art equipment or cannot fabricate patterns over large areas. Take nanoimprint lithography for example, the conjugated polymer is heated above its glass transition temperature (Tg) and is then imprinted by a hard master which has been patterned previously. Once the temperature drops back below the Tg, the conjugated polymer is solidified again and the pattern is transferred from the hard master to the conjugated polymer. This nanoimprint process is usually carried out on expensive equipment which can provide high temperatures (50–100 °C above the Tg of the polymer), high pressures (ca. 40 bar, 1 bar = 100000 Pa) and full area contact at the same time. Even so, some high Tg polymers are hard to imprint using this process. Many papers have aimed at solving this problem. One method is by using solvent vapor to lower the Tg of the polymer and reduce the imprint temperature and pressure, but this method usually requires long times (for example 3–6 hours) to swell the polymer film, which will reduce the process efficiency inevitably.
In this paper we report a novel imprint lithography method, solvent infiltration imprint lithography (SIIL), by combining the essential feature of nanoimprint lithography—imprinting a polymer film—with the key element of soft lithography—molding a prepolymer or polymer solution with an soft stamp. This idea is similar to capillary force lithography (CFL), which was developed by simply combining nanoimprint and soft lithographies. The differences between SIIL and CFL are (1) the resist layer, which for the soft mold in SIIL is a polymer solution or polymer paste rather than solid polymer film. So heating is not needed to “melt” the polymer and the filling time is much reduced. (2) The solidification of the polymer in SIIL is achieved by solvent infiltration into the soft mold instead of waiting for the temperature to drop below the polymer Tg or chemical cross-linking reactions. So the heating or UV is not necessary in SIIL. It combines the wide adaptability of nanoimprint lithography and the low cost of soft lithography and can pattern polymers or polymer/particle blends without heating or UV radiation. Using this method, micro/nano-patterns of P3HT and P3HT/PCBM polymer solar cells with nano-grating and nano-hole arrays were fabricated.

Poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT, green power, Mw: approximately 55–60 kg mol−1, regioregular >95%, metal content <0.02%) and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) (black powder) was purchased from Luminescence Technology Corp. 1,2-Dichlorobenzene was obtained from Shanghai Guoyao Corp. Poly(ethylenedioxythiophene) doped with poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) Sylgard 184 and its curing agent were purchased from Dow Corning Corp. Two nano-patterned polycarbonate masters were provided by Shanghai Institute of Optics and Fine Mechanics. The micro-structure master is fabricated by photolithography following dry and wet etching processes.


Replication of the PDMS mold was processed as follows: PDMS and its curing agent 30 g (10:1 by weight) was mixed and degassed. The mixture (1 g) was diluted with toluene (60 wt%) to decrease the viscosity. The diluted mixture was spin coated at 3000 rpm for 30 s on the master. Then, the rest of the mixture was carefully poured onto the surface, followed by curing at 80 °C for 120 min. After that, the soft PDMS mold was peeled off carefully from the master. The detailed experimental process can be found in the work of Zhou et al.


P3HT solution in 1,2-dichloriobenzene (50 mg ml−1) was spin-coated (500 rpm) on ITO glass. The imprinting process was carried out immediately. Imprint parameters were a temperature of 25 °C, imprinting pressure of 0.3 bar and imprinting time of 3 min. A schematic of the entire solvent-infiltration imprinting process is shown in Fig. 1.


An approximately 40 nm thick layer of PEDOT:PSS was spin-coated on ITO and annealed at 120 °C for 15 min to remove water. P3HT and PCBM (weight ratio of 1:1) was dissolved in chlorobenzene at a concentration of 20 mg ml−1. The P3HT/PCBM solution was filtered using 0.45 μm syringe filter before spin-coating on the PEDOT:PSS layer, then, the SIIL was carried out to fabricate the nano-grating and nano-hole patterns, followed by with annealing at 120 °C for 15 min. To complete the device fabrication, 1 nm of LiF, 30 nm of Al and 70 nm of Ag were evaporated in order onto the patterns under high vacuum through a shadow mask. The active device area was measured to be 0.1 cm2. A blank solar cell was fabricated under the same conditions, except the SIIL step.


The imprinted patterns were measured by FE SEM (Hitachi S-4800). The morphologies of the imprinted patterns were investigated by atomic force microscope (Veeco, Dimension 3100) in tapping mode. The J–V curve was tested by East China Normal University with a PVIV-412V solar cell test system.


SIIL successfully produced various P3HT micro/nano-structure patterns on ITO glass without hot embossing or reactive ion etching, as shown in Fig. 2. A six-sided cylinder (Fig. 2a), four-sided cylinder (Fig. 2b), tri-prism (Fig. 2c), quadrilateral sink (Fig. 2d), nano-hole (Fig. 2e), and nano-grating (Fig. 2f) with figure sizes ranging from 400 nm to 3 μm are visible over the large area. The details of these micro/nano-structures are given in the figure captions. These figures indicate that highly uniformed micro/nano-structures can be fabricated on large areas through SIIL.

In order to study the pattern transfer fidelity of SIIL, AFM was used to test the surfaces of the PDMS mold and fabricated P3HT micro/nano patterns. Fig. 3(A)–(C) shows the AFM images of the three PDMS molds which have different hole-shapes and hole-size, but the same hole-depth. The AFM images of the three corresponding P3HT patterns are also shown in Fig. 3(a)–(c). A cross-section was made in each graph and the position of the cross-section was shown in each 2D image. The cross-section curve of each structure was also given below each graph. These 2D images of the mold and the corresponding P3HT patterns show that the shapes of the three micro-structures are transferred very well. The cross-section curves of each structure were intercepted (between the two vertical broken lines of each cross-section curve) to compare the mold and the corresponding P3HT structure further (Fig. 4, the cross-section curves of molds are inverted for convenient comparison). This figure shows that the mold and the corresponding P3HT structure match each other very well. The height of each micro-structure is lower than the depth of each PDMS mold, which results from the infiltration of the solvent.
The influence of the polymer solution concentration on the fidelity of SIIL was also studied. The AFM images of the PDMS mold with concentric circles and one of the P3HT concentric circles are shown in Fig. 5. The cross-section curves of the PDMS mold and P3HT concentric circles fabricated with different concentrations of P3HT solution are shown in Fig. 6. This figure shows that as the concentration of the polymer solution decreases the P3HT structure becomes smaller and the meniscus becomes more obvious. This phenomenon can be used to fabricate small size polymer structures with relatively large-size molds, which we will study next.

The aim of a micro/nano-structure fabrication method is to fabricate micro/nano-structures which can be used in optical, photovoltaic or biochip devices. In this work, we used SIIL in polymer solar cells. Fig. 7 is the SEM image of the cross-section of the nano-grating P3HT/PCBM polymer solar cell after the Al cathode layer had evaporated. The thickness of the active layer is in the range of 70–110 nm and the Al layer is about 30 nm. The nano-grating structure is still visible.

To investigate the effect of the nano-structures on the performance of the polymer solar cells, photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves were measured (Fig. 8) and the values of short circuit current densities (Jsc), fill factors (FF), open circuit voltage (Voc) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) are shown in Table 1. The increase of Jsc can be attributed to light diffraction in the nano-structures of the active layer and light reflection on the nano-texturing Al rear electrode, which improves light trapping within the active layer.
Solar cells

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Film structure
0.57
8.07
46.31
2.13
Nano-grating
0.58
9.05
44.37
2.31
Nano-hole array
0.61
8.87
53.86
2.93

In summary, we have demonstrated an extremely simple, highly efficienct, universal method for fabricating high Tg polymer micro/nano patterns, including micro-prism arrays, nano-grating and nano-hole arrays over large areas. In the proposed method, the P3HT structure is formed by imprinting the P3HT solution and solvent infiltration, rather than by heating the polymer beyond its glass transition temperature or by chemical cross-linking reactions. The transfer fidelity of SIIL depends on the concentration of the polymer solution. When the concentration of the P3HT solution is 50 mg ml−1, the lateral fidelity of SIIL is good and the height of the P3HT structures are smaller than the PDMS mold resulting from the solvent infiltration. Lower concentrations of P3HT solution can be used to fabricate smaller P3HT structures using the same PDMS mold. SIIL can be used in P3HT/PCBM polymer solar cells, and the nano-grating and nano-hole arrays improve the PCE of the polymer solar cell.


This work was China Postdoctoral Science Foundation funded project and supported by Shanghai Postdoctoral Science Foundation (11R21420900) and Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai (no. 11ZR1432100).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012