 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA08995K
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21662-21667


Kui
Jiang
,

Fei
Wu
*,

Guangye
Zhang
,

Philip C. Y.
Chow
,

Chao
Ma
,

Shufang
Li
,

Kam Sing
Wong
,

Linna
Zhu
* and 

He
Yan
*

Chongqing Key Laboratory for Advanced Materials and Technologies of Clean Energy, Faculty of Materials & Energy, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, P. R. China. E-mail: feiwu610@swu.edu.cn; lnzhu@swu.edu.cn

Department of Chemistry and Energy Institute, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong. E-mail: hyan@ust.hk

Department of Physics, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong

Received
16th August 2019
, Accepted 2nd September 2019
First published on 5th September 2019
PEDOT:PSS is widely used in perovskite solar cells (PSCs) as the most popular hole transporting layer (HTL). However, p-i-n type inverted planar PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS HTL typically exhibit up to 200 mV more voltage loss compared to conventional planar PSCs (n-i-p) that generally show open circuit voltages (VOC) of around 1.1 V. In this study, we develop a simple, inexpensive and effective interfacial engineering strategy by doping PEDOT:PSS with cesium iodide (CsI) to reduce the voltage loss and achieve highly efficient inverted PSCs. SEM, AFM, and XPS measurements suggest that CsI modifies the interface between PEDOT:PSS and perovskite by reacting with PbI2 to form CsPbI3, thus facilitating interfacial contact and charge transport. Moreover, after CsI-modification (CsI-PEDOT:PSS), the hole transport properties of PEDOT:PSS and the hole extraction are enhanced, while the energy levels are more favorable and charge recombination is suppressed. Importantly, compared to pristine PEDOT:PSS that suffers from a large non-radiative recombination loss (0.375 V), CsI-PEDOT:PSS makes the device to realize an impressively low non-radiative voltage loss (only 0.287 V). As a result, inverted PSCs based on CsI-PEDOT:PSS show a small voltage loss, an excellent power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 20.22%, and no hysteresis and achieve a high VOC (1.084 V), while the control device without CsI shows an inferior efficiency of 16.57%. Both the high VOC and PCE are an improvement over literature data on modified PEDOT:PSS-based inverted PSCs.

The remarkable development of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has made them great candidates for next-generation solar cells. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs enhanced tremendously and rapidly in recent years, and their highest efficiency increases from 3.8% to the current 25.2%, approaching that of silicon solar cells. Currently, the planar architecture of PSCs attracts much attention due to facile device fabrication and high efficiency. Considering the structure of PSCs, two major types are generally used, namely conventional and inverted PSCs. The conventional structure (n-i-p) has a bottom electron transporting layer (ETL) typically based on metal-oxides such as TiO2 and SnO2, and an organic hole transporting layer (HTL, typically Spiro-OMeTAD) on top of the perovskite active layer. The inverted PSCs (also known as the p-i-n device) have their HTL at the bottom and the ETL on the top. Compared to the conventional n-i-p structure, the inverted p-i-n structure possesses attractive merits that include negligible device hysteresis and does not require a high-temperature sintering process. Therefore, more efforts are being made to improve the performance of inverted PSCs.

One of the key factors limiting the improvement of the performance of inverted PSCs is the excessive voltage loss through non-radiative recombination. This is reflected in the relatively low VOC of inverted PSCs (around 1.0 V), which is nearly ∼200 mV lower than that of conventional cells comprising the same perovskite layer. Most inverted cells reported to date use poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene-sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) as the HTL. PEDOT:PSS is a well-studied, highly conductive polymer with high visible light transmittance, good solution processability and excellent wettability for perovskite precursors. However, previous reports show that inverted PSCs based on PEDOT:PSS suffer from surface recombination, causing non-radiative losses which reduce device efficiency. Therefore, to reduce surface recombination while maintaining the benefits of PEDOT:PSS, it is essential to improve the properties of PEDOT:PSS through modification.
Here we report a simple yet effective strategy to address this problem. Our approach is to dope PEDOT:PSS with CsI. We show that doping modifies the interface between PEDOT:PSS and the perovskite layer by forming a layer of CsPbI3. This extra CsPbI3 layer not only improves hole extraction but also reduces surface recombination, which results in a low non-radiative recombination loss of only 0.287 V, a value that is comparable to that of crystalline silicon and CIGS-based solar cells. Our optimized device based on the CsI-PEDOT:PSS HTL with MAPbI3 perovskite demonstrates a high VOC of 1.084 V and a maximum PCE of 20.22% with negligible hysteresis, a substantial improvement from that based on the pristine PEDOT:PSS HTL (16.57% PCE and a 0.375 V non-radiative recombination loss). We summarized previous reports and show that the high VOC and PCE of our devices are clearly an improvement over literature data on modified PEDOT:PSS-based inverted PSCs, which provide clues and foundations for subsequent development of inverted PSCs.

In the planar p-i-n perovskite architecture, perovskite layers were prepared by directly spin-coating the perovskite precursor solution (PbI2 + MAI) on the PEDOT:PSS HTL. It is known that CsI distributed at the surface of the PEDOT:PSS layer can easily react with PbI2 from perovskite to generate CsPbI3. The dopant (CsI) in PEDOT:PSS is very likely to interact with PbI2 from the perovskite precursor to form CsPbI3 at the PEDOT:PSS/perovskite interface. To verify this speculation, we use X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) to investigate the interface. However, the perovskite layer is about 350 nm in thickness so it is impossible to penetrate the whole perovskite layer to conduct XPS measurements. To overcome this problem, an experiment was designed and carried out to study the interaction at the PEDOT:PSS HTL (w or w/o CsI)/perovskite interface: a PbI2 thin film was spin-coated on the PEDOT:PSS (w or w/o CsI) film, and XPS analysis was performed at the PEDOT:PSS/PbI2 interface. As depicted in Fig. S1, for PEDOT:PSS containing CsI, clear peaks of Cs 3d and I 3d are observed, indicating the existence of CsI in the HTL film. When PbI2 was spin-coated on the pristine PEDOT:PSS film, the Pb 4f and I 3d peaks are observed, while the peak for Cs is not found. However, once PbI2 was coated on the CsI-PEDOT:PSS film, the peaks for Pb 4f, Cs 3d and I 3d are simultaneously observed. Additionally, the binding energy for Pb, Cs and I shows obvious shifts as shown in Fig. 1a–c, well confirming that CsI in the PEDOT:PSS film interacts with PbI2 to generate CsPbI3 at the HTL/perovskite interface. The architecture of inverted PSCs based on the CsI-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL is presented in Fig. 1d, and the interaction between CsI and PbI2 at the perovskite/HTL interface is illustrated. CsI on the surface of the PEDOT:PSS film can easily react with PbI2 in the perovskite precursor during the preparation of the perovskite layer, generating CsPbI3 at the interface. The energy diagram for the inverted PSC is shown in Fig. 1e. Obviously, the photo-generated charge carriers can be transported in respective directions effectively.

Atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements were carried out to study the morphology change of the PEDOT:PSS film before and after addition of CsI. From Fig. S5, we can see that the RMS (root-mean-square) roughness reduces from 2.68 nm of the pristine PEDOT:PSS to 1.98 nm of the CsI-modified one, denoting that CsI makes the PEDOT:PSS film smoother and more uniform. Consequently, compared to the normal PEDOT:PSS HTL, the CsI-modified one provides a better interfacial contact that is beneficial for charge selection, reducing surface recombination and preventing leakage current. In addition, we also investigate the effect of CsI on absorption properties and the surface morphology of the top perovskite layer. UV-vis absorption spectra of perovskite films spin-coated on the PEDOT:PSS layer (doped with 5 mg mL−1 CsI or without CsI) were recorded. As shown in Fig. S2a, little distinction was observed between the perovskite films coated on pristine and doped underlayers in the whole absorption range. In the meantime, X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of perovskite films deposited on different PEDOT:PSS layers were also measured (Fig. S2b). The diffraction peaks are almost the same for both films, confirming that the doped CsI in the PEDOT:PSS layer has little impact on the absorbance and the composition/crystallinity of perovskite films. Furthermore, to understand the effect of the CsI content on the surface morphology of perovskite films, field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) was performed and the resulting images are shown in Fig. S3. Perovskite films with a uniform and compact morphology were observed on different substrates, which is irrelevant to the existence or the content of CsI. The absorption, XRD and surface SEM images of perovskite films affirm that our doping method does not deteriorate the growth, composition, and optical properties of the perovskite layer.
The effect of CsI on the work function of PEDOT:PSS is analyzed by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). Fig. 1e and f suggest that the work function of PEDOT:PSS shifts toward lower-energy by about 0.16 eV after CsI-modification, i.e. the work function of PEDOT:PSS shifts from −5.10 eV (pristine) to a deeper level of −5.26 eV (CsI doped), which affords a more favorable band alignment with the perovskite valence band to facilitate hole extraction. Moreover, the work function alignment also leads to a better ohmic contact between PEDOT:PSS and perovskite, which may contribute to higher VOC and JSC of the PSCs.
To evaluate CsI-doped PEDOT:PSS as a hole-transporting material (HTM) for inverted perovskite solar cells, we fabricated MAPbI3 based PSCs based on the typical bilayer device configuration: indium tin oxide (ITO)/PEDOT:PSS (w or w/o CsI)/MAPbI3/PC61BM/Rhodamine 101/LiF/Ag. Fig. S4 shows the cross-sectional SEM image of the perovskite film. Photovoltaic performances of the devices were measured under standard simulated solar irradiation (AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2). The PEDOT:PSS layer was doped with CsI in different concentrations, and the effect of CsI on device performance was discussed. The control device with pristine PEDOT:PSS shows a PCE of 16.57%, with an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1003 mV, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 20.62 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.80. As shown in Fig. 2a, devices based on the CsI-doped PEDOT:PSS HTL show improved efficiencies. In Tables 1 and S1, we show that when the CsI concentration increases from 1 mg mL−1 to 5 mg mL−1, photovoltaic performances of the corresponding PSCs gradually increased. Further increasing the CsI content causes a decline in PCE most likely. An optimized efficiency of 20.22% is obtained when the PEDOT:PSS HTL is doped with 5 mg mL−1 CsI, with a VOC of 1084 mV, a JSC of 22.58 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.83. It is worth noting that the enhancement of PCE for the device using CsI doped PEDOT:PSS is mainly due to the increased JSC and VOC values. The improved VOC from 1003 to 1084 mV should be related to the reduction in energy loss due to the deeper band edges of the doped HTL, which is more compatible with the perovskite valence band, thus allowing maximization of the built-in potential of the PSCs. The improved JSC can be ascribed to the enhanced hole extraction and hole transporting properties of PEDOT:PSS after CsI modification, as supported by PL measurements. Fig. 2b shows the J–V curves scanned from forward and reverse directions for PSCs based on different HTLs. The curves overlap very well, indicating little hysteresis of the inverted PSCs based on pristine PEDOT:PSS and CsI-doped PEDOT:PSS. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum in Fig. 2d shows the high photon to current conversion efficiency in a broad range from 400 to 750 nm of the PSCs studied, and the CsI-doped PEDOT:PSS exhibits a higher response compared to the pristine one. The integrated JSC values obtained from EQE are 22.23 and 20.29 mA cm−2 for PEDOT:PSS with and without CsI, respectively. These results are close to the data obtained from J–V curves (1% error). Dark J–V characteristics of the devices based on PEDOT:PSS with and without CsI are shown in Fig. 2f. The dark current density of the device based on CsI-PEDOT:PSS is significantly lower than that of the control device in the low-voltage region, indicating that anode interface engineering suppresses the leakage current.
HTLs

V
OC (mV)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
EQEEL
ΔVnonradOC

a Data in parentheses are the average values based on 20 independent devices.

Pristine
1003 (993 ± 13)
20.62 (20.39 ± 0.26)
0.80 (0.77 ± 0.03)
16.57 (15.51 ± 0.68)
5.14 × 10−7
0.375
CsI 1 mg mL−1
1033 (1025 ± 11)
21.31 (21.11 ± 0.29)
0.80 (0.77 ± 0.02)
17.54 (16.75 ± 0.65)
—
—
CsI 5 mg mL−1
1084 (1078 ± 8)
22.58 (22.35 ± 0.27)
0.83 (0.81 ± 0.01)
20.22 (19.41 ± 0.53)
1.50 × 10−5
0.287
CsI 10 mg mL−1
1051 (1049 ± 9)
21.61 (21.21 ± 0.31)
0.79 (0.78 ± 0.01)
18.03 (17.26 ± 0.54)
—
—
The distribution of PCE is presented in Fig. 2c. Devices based on CsI-doped PEDOT:PSS exhibit a quite narrow efficiency distribution, demonstrating an excellent reproducibility of these PSCs, outperforming that of those based on pristine PEDOT:PSS. Fig. 2e shows the stabilized output of the best-performing PSCs (with CsI) in 200 s at a bias voltage of 950 mV at the maximum power output point (MPP). A stabilized PCE as high as 19.97%, and a photocurrent density of 21.02 mA cm−2 are recorded for the PSCs based on CsI-PEDOT:PSS. Notably, both PCE and JSC of PSCs based on CsI-PEDOT:PSS reach the stabilized value instantaneously, showing little hysteresis effect on these devices. The results further confirm the high performances and good reproducibility of the inverted PSCs based on the CsI-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL. Stability of devices based on PEDOT:PSS with and without CsI was also studied (Fig. S7). As shown in UV-vis (Fig. S2a), CsI only interacts with PbI2 at the interface, not in the bulk. Thus the CsI modification did not deteriorate the long-term stability of the inverted PSCs.
To further elucidate the effect of CsI-doped PEDOT:PSS on the charge transfer dynamics, the hole transport properties of the PEDOT:PSS layer in the absence and presence of CsI were measured using the device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS (w or w/o CsI)/Ag, in which the same thickness was maintained for PEDOT:PSS with or without CsI. J–V curves were recorded and are shown in Fig. S6. The CsI-doped PEDOT:PSS generates a higher current density than the pristine PEDOT:PSS at the same bias voltage, indicating a superior hole transporting ability for the CsI doped PEDOT:PSS. The hole extraction properties of PEDOT:PSS with and without CsI were studied by the steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) experiments on the perovskite layer covered on different PEDOT:PSS layers (Fig. 3a and b). The perovskite film exhibits strong emission near 800 nm measured on a quartz substrate, while its emission is greatly quenched when it is prepared on the pristine PEDOT:PSS substrate. Apparently, more efficient fluorescence quenching is observed when CsI was doped into PEDOT:PSS. Coherently, PL decay in Fig. 3b shows the same trend. The perovskite film on the PEDOT:PSS substrate shows an accelerated PL decay, and that on CsI-PEDOT:PSS exhibits a faster decay. The results suggest enhanced hole extraction properties for the CsI-modified PEDOT:PSS.
To obtain additional information about the hole transport process and interface resistance, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed. EIS was carried out under the dark conditions at a bias of 0.9 V. Fig. S8 displays the Nyquist plots of devices with different HTLs. It can then be postulated that the smaller RCT is attributed to an improved interfacial contact between the CsI-PEDOT:PSS and perovskite so that the holes could be extracted more efficiently, consistent with the better device performance of the CsI-PEDOT:PSS cells.
We employ transient photocurrent (TPC) and photovoltage (TPV) techniques to probe the charge extraction and recombination dynamics. The charge extraction kinetics was reflected from the photocurrent lifetime decay, as shown in Fig. 3c. The PSC based on the CsI-PEDOT:PSS HTL exhibits a shorter charge-extraction time than the control device, indicating improved charge extraction efficiency with CsI to modify the interface between perovskite and the PEDOT:PSS HTL. The charge recombination dynamics are shown in Fig. 3d. A longer lifetime is observed for the photogenerated charge carriers in the CsI-PEDOT:PSS modified device than for the control device, suggesting a slower charge recombination process as a result of the CsI modification. These results are consistent with the PL analysis above, further supporting that charge transfer at the perovskite/HTL interface is improved upon CsI doping.
We further study the light intensity dependence of open-circuit voltage (Fig. 3e). For the pristine PEDOT:PSS device we observe a slope of 0.92 kBT/q. The small slope (<1 kBT/q) is consistent with that of previous reports showing that surface recombination at the PEDOT:PSS/perovskite interface is a significant loss pathway for inverted PSCs based on the pristine PEDOT:PSS HTL. For the CsI-PEDOT:PSS modified device we observe a slope of 1.34 kBT/q, suggesting that surface recombination is suppressed by the introduction of CsI into PEDOT:PSS and the formation of CsPbI3 at the HTL/perovskite interface. Moreover, we find that the electroluminescence (EL) intensity of the CsI-PEDOT:PSS device is nearly two orders of magnitude greater than that of the pristine PEDOT:PSS-based device at the same injection current (17 mA cm−2). Since voltage loss due to non-radiative recombination is given by the logarithmic of EL quantum yield times thermal energy (kBT) (see the ESI for details), the improved EL intensity is responsible for the VOC enhancement (∼80 meV) of the devices with CsI modification. The non-radiative recombination for CsI-PEDOT:PSS-based PSCs is found as low as 0.287 V in comparison to the relatively large value of 0.375 V for the device with pristine PEDOT:PSS. This low voltage loss is comparable to that of traditional inorganic solar cells and significantly enhances the VOC of our inverted PSC. In Fig. 4, we summarized the literature data of VOC and PCE for inverted PSCs based on modified PEDOT:PSS. It is clear that our result is an improvement over the previous state-of-the-art.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated a simple and effective interfacial engineering strategy by doping PEDOT:PSS with CsI. The use of the CsI-doped hole transporting layer enables the construction of highly efficient inverted perovskite solar cells without obvious hysteresis. XPS analysis concludes that CsI reacts with PbI2 to form CsPbI3 at the interface. Such a modification of the HTL/perovskite layer interface facilitates the formation of an ohmic contact. Doping enhances the hole transport properties of PEDOT:PSS and downshifts the work function of the HTL, which is favorable for hole extraction. Inverted planar PSCs based on CsI modified PEDOT:PSS achieve an excellent PCE of 20.22% with negligible hysteresis, while the control device without CsI shows an inferior efficiency of 16.57%. By employing a combination of transient and steady-state measurements, we find that CsI modification effectively suppresses non-radiative losses through reducing surface recombination at the PEDOT:PSS/perovskite interface, achieving a low non-radiative voltage loss of only 0.287 V. Our high VOC and high PCE are clearly a standout among those for inverted PSCs based on PEDOT:PSS demonstrating that CsI-doping is a facile and effective strategy to improve the PEDOT:PSS HTL. Along with other intrinsic advantages of inverted PSCs, our method could significantly improve the prospects of this device type.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The work described in this paper was partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51703183). We also thank HKUST President's Office for support through SSTSP project number FP201, the Basic research and Frontier Exploration of Chongqing Municipal Science and Technology Commission (cstc2018jcyjAX0568), the Shen Zhen Technology and Innovation Commission (project number JCYJ20170413173814007 and JCYJ20170818113905024), and the Hong Kong Research Grants Council (Research Impact Fund R6021-18, project numbers 16305915, 16322416, 606012, and 16303917).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details of materials preparations and device fabrication. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta08995k
‡ The authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019