 DOI: 10.1039/D1EE02897A
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 1078-1085


Zhichao
Shen
,

Qifeng
Han
*,

Xinhui
Luo
,

Yangzi
Shen
,

Tao
Wang
,

Caiyi
Zhang
,

Yanbo
Wang
,

Han
Chen
,

Xudong
Yang
,

Yiqiang
Zhang
 and 

Liyuan
Han
*

State Key Laboratory of Metal Matrix Composites, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China. E-mail: Han.qifeng@sjtu.edu.cn; han.liyuan@sjtu.edu.cn

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Henan Institute of Advanced Technology, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, China

Received
16th September 2021
, Accepted 3rd February 2022
First published on 3rd February 2022
The photovoltaic performance and stability of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are closely related to the quality of the absorption layer. Further improving the crystallinity of perovskite films is of great significance for the commercial application of PSCs. Here, we introduce a perovskite crystal array (PCA) with regular distribution to assist the growth of the perovskite absorption layer. The PCA provides nuclei where the crystallization can commence without overcoming the critical Gibbs free energy for nucleation and induces a controllable bottom-up crystallization process under solvent annealing. As a result, a perovskite film with high crystallinity and reduced grain boundaries was obtained. The largest grain size was over 4 μm and the average grain size was over 3 μm. PSCs based on the perovskite film with the PCA achieved power conversion efficiencies of 25.1% (certified 24.3%) and 23.1% (certified 22.3%) with aperture areas of 0.0784 cm2 and 1.0085 cm2, respectively. The devices maintained 90% of their initial efficiency after operation at the maximum power point for 2000 hours under 1 sun illumination.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have developed rapidly over the past decade and the power conversion efficiency (PCE) has been boosted to 25.5%. Enhancing the crystallinity of the perovskite absorption layer is the key to improving both the performance and operation stability of PSCs to further realize commercial applications. So far, silicon solar cells account for most of the PV market and seed-assisted growth is widely used to produce high-quality silicon ingots. Inspired by that, we utilized a patterned perovskite crystal array (PCA) to assist the growth of the perovskite absorption layer for better crystallinity. The PCA regularly distributing on the substrate served as templated crystals, which induced a well-organized upward crystallization process. As a result, the resulting film showed high crystallinity with an average grain size of over 3 μm. Moreover, this is the first time that a certified efficiency of over 24% for a small-area device (∼0.1 cm2) and a certified efficiency of over 22% for a large-area device (∼1 cm2) have been reported simultaneously. Our study provides a universal strategy for fabrication of high-quality films with a large area for perovskite devices and other photovoltaic technologies.


Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have developed rapidly over the past decade and the power conversion efficiency (PCE) has been boosted to 25.5%. So far, the crystallization of the absorption layer adopted by highly efficient PSCs is a generally spontaneous process. In contrast, controllable techniques such as the Czochralski method and epitaxial growth are widely used in silicon (Si) and gallium arsenide (GaAs) solar cells, endowing them with high crystallinity and thus excellent photovoltaic performance and stability. Thus, controllable growth of perovskite films should be developed urgently so that PSCs can compete with Si and GaAs solar cells.

Inspired by Si and GaAs solar cells, seed-assisted growth has been applied in PSCs. Seed-assisted growth is a promising approach to modulate the film formation process as it provides nuclei where the crystallization can commence without overcoming the critical Gibbs free energy for nucleation. Zhang et al. and Zhao et al. applied perovskite seeds to assist the film growth, which improved the crystallinity of the perovskite films. However, these seeds showed a random distribution and were possibly damaged by the subsequent solution process, limiting the controllability of the whole process and thus the enhancement of device performance. To realize controllable growth of perovskite absorption layers, high-quality nuclei are prerequisites. Moreover, a deposition method that can well preserve the nuclei quality should be investigated.
Here, we propose a strategy to realize high-quality perovskite films for efficient and stable perovskite solar cells on a patterned perovskite crystal array (PCA). The PCA regularly distributing on the substrate served as templated crystals, which induced a bottom-up crystallization under solvent annealing rather than a spontaneous process. This greatly improved the crystallinity of the perovskite films. The largest grain size was over 4 μm and the average grain size was over 3 μm. Thus, the devices achieved PCEs of 25.1% (certified efficiency 24.3%) with the aperture area of 0.0784 cm2 and 23.1% (certified efficiency 22.3%) with an aperture area of over 1 cm2. In addition, the improved crystalline quality and the reduced trap state density greatly contributed to the operational stability. The PSCs maintained 90% of their initial efficiency after operation at the maximum power point for 2000 hours under 1 sun illumination.

The preparation procedure of the perovskite film with PCA assistance is illustrated in Fig. 1a. First, the precursor solution (exact stoichiometry for the composition FA0.995MA0.005Pb(I0.995Br0.005)3 in anhydrous GBL) was dropped on the SnO2/FTO substrate. Then, a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) template was placed on the substrate with mild pressure (<20 kPa) applying on it to provide the space confinement for the precursor solution to form liquid domains. After the solvent evaporated completely, the PDMS cover was removed and an orderly-distributed PCA was achieved. To prevent the PCA from being destroyed by the solution processing, a PbI2 layer was evaporated on the array, followed by DMSO vapor treatment on a 70 °C hot plate for the PbI2/DMSO adduct to retard the fast crystallization between FAI and PbI2. After the FAI was deposited, a solvent annealing treatment was performed at 150 °C for 15 minutes.


Fig. 1b shows a top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the PCA. The perovskite pixels are orderly arranged, and the thickness is about 200 nm as presented in Fig. S1, ESI. The composition of the PCA was analyzed by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX), and the Pb, I and Br elements were uniformly distributed within the array (Fig. S2, ESI). The atomic number ratio of lead to halide was close to 1:3 demonstrating a stoichiometric composition. We show the atom ratio from EDX measurement in Table S1, ESI.Fig. 1c shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the PCA with two sharp diffraction peaks that are assigned to the (001) and (002) planes. The full width at half maximum (FWHM) was about 0.1° for both peaks, suggesting a high crystallinity of the PCA. To prove the uniformity of the PCA, we measured the orientation of the PCA crystallites in different regions in Fig. S3 (ESI). We can clearly observe that the orientation of the PCA crystallites in different regions is consistent.
To protect the PCA from being damaged by the subsequent solution process, thermal evaporation was applied to deposit the PbI2 layer. Moreover, as the scaffold in the formation of perovskite, the uniform PbI2 layer via evaporation is helpful to realize a homogeneous large-area perovskite film. The top-view image in Fig. S4a, ESI showed that the evaporated PbI2 layer was smooth and compact. The narrow FWHM of the XRD pattern proved a high crystallinity of the evaporated PbI2 (Fig. S4b, ESI). However, if FAI was spin-coated directly on the PbI2 layer, pinholes were observed on the as-cast perovskite layer due to the high reaction rate between PbI2 and FAI (Fig. S5, ESI), which was the main reason for the undeveloped PCE of the devices via the traditional thermal evaporation method. To better control the crystallization process, the PbI2 layer was pretreated by DMSO vapor to form a PbI2/DMSO adduct, which can be seen from the main peak of the (001) plane shifting from 12.8° to 10° (Fig. S4b, ESI). FAI was then deposited, and the perovskite film grew on the substrate with a high-quality PCA.
As shown in the top-view and cross-sectional SEM images, the morphology and grain size of the perovskite film varied with the deposition method (hereafter, samples prepared via conventional sequential deposition are described as the control, while samples assisted by PCA are described as the target; see more details in the ESI, Perovskite solar cell fabrication section). Based on the perovskite array, the grain size of the target films was much larger than that of perovskite films via the conventional sequential deposition method (Fig. 1d, e and Fig. S6, ESI). The grain size distribution is shown in Fig. S7, ESI. We show the atom ratio from EDX measurement in Table S2, ESI for the final perovskite film. It has the same composition stoichiometry as the PCA. The high crystallinity of the target film was also concluded by the XRD and the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) patterns where the high order diffraction signal can be detected (Fig. 1c and Fig. S8, ESI). The orientation of the PCA crystal is the same as that of the final perovskite film as shown in the XRD patterns. Fig. S9, ESI shows the ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) and the photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the control and target samples. The absorption cutoff edge of the UV spectra was consistent with the PL peaks at around 815 nm. Higher intensity over the full wavelength range of both the UV and PL spectra for the target sample than the control one demonstrated improved crystallinity.
The high crystallinity resulted in relatively lower trap state density. Space charge limited current was performed to characterize the trap density (Fig. 1f), which can be calculated from the onset voltage of the trap-filling limit region (VTFL). Based on the VTFL derived from dark current–voltage curves, we deduced that the trap density decreased from 5.6 × 1015 cm−3 for the control film to 2.2 × 1015 cm−3 for the target perovskite film, which was attributed to the array-assisted crystallization process of the perovskite. The carrier lifetime measured by time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) increased from 1.54 μs to 2.47 μs (Fig. 1g), suggesting that non-radiative recombination was strongly suppressed due to the reduced grain boundary in the bulk material. The improved carrier transportation between the perovskite layer and SnO2 was also demonstrated by TRPL (Fig. S10, ESI). The faster charge transfer rate indicated a better interface state between the perovskite layer and SnO2 of our target device.
To unveil the crystallization dynamics of the perovskite films with high crystallinity based on the PCA under solvent annealing, grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) was used to detect the as-cast perovskite films (Fig. 2). Before annealing, dominant diffraction peaks of the FAI-PbI2-DMSO adduct emerged at around 7° and 9°, which can be assigned to be (002), (021), and (022) planes of the intermediate phase (Fig. 2a). The characteristic peak of the perovskite around 14° could be attributed to the perovskite array underneath. After annealing for 3 s on a 150 °C hot plate, the XRD patterns at small incident angles (0.5° and 1°) showed almost no difference compared with those of the fresh film, while the diffraction peaks from the perovskite phase enhanced at the incident angles of 2° and 3°, indicating an upward crystallization due to the existence of the perovskite array (Fig. 2b). When the annealing time was extended to 10 s (Fig. 2c), dominant characteristic peaks of the perovskite phase emerged at small incident angles, and the intensity enhanced further at 30 s (Fig. 2d). Evidently, the peaks of the intermediate phase exhibited almost the same intensity at the incident angles from 0.5° to 3° in Fig. 2d, meaning that the adducts at the bottom have transformed into the perovskite completely. After annealing for 15 minutes, it had grown into a perovskite film with high crystallinity (Fig. 1c). These results showed that the conversion of the intermediate phase to the perovskite was initiated from the vicinity of the bottom interface in the fresh perovskite films and then extended upwards (Fig. 2e). Based on the PCA distributed throughout the substrate, the bottom-up solidification procedure was well-organized, which is beneficial for obtaining a uniform perovskite layer with high crystallinity. For comparison, the crystallization process of the control sample is shown in Fig. S11, ESI. Without the assistance of PCA, the control sample showed wider FWHM and more disordered orientation (Fig. S11d, ESI) than the target sample (Fig. 1c) even though the crystallization was still a bottom-up process.
We tested the performance of the corresponding PSCs. All PSCs adopted an FTO/SnO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au configuration, where FTO is the transparent conductive oxide and spiro-OMeTAD is 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis (N,N-di-p-methoxypheny lamino)-9,9′-spiro-bifluorene. The PCE, open-circuit voltage (VOC), short circuit current (JSC) and fill factor (FF) of the control device were 23.6%, 1.170 V, 24.6 mA cm−2, and 82.0%, respectively. In comparison, the target device yielded a champion PCE of 25.1%, with VOC = 1.195 V, JSC = 24.9 mA cm−2, and FF = 84.3% (Fig. 3a), showing negligible hysteresis. It also gave a stabilized power output of 25.2%. The JSC was in agreement with the integrated current density (24.2 mA cm−2) from the external quantum efficiency (EQE) in Fig. 3b. We validated the performance of our PSCs by sending a cell to an accredited certification center, and a certified PCE of 24.3% was confirmed, with VOC = 1.189 V, JSC = 24.6 mA cm−2, and FF = 83.1% (Fig. S12, ESI). The enhanced VOC and JSC can be contributed by the reduced non-radiative recombination and the better light absorption due to the high-quality perovskite film based on PCA. The introduced PCA also contributed to the reproducibility enhancement of the PSCs due to the controllable growth of the perovskite film (Fig. S13, ESI). In addition, 1 cm2 solar cells assisted by perovskite arrays also yielded a certified PCE of 22.3%, which is the highest reported certified efficiency of 1 cm2 PSCs (Fig. S14, ESI), showing the potential for upscaling the perovskite photovoltaics using our strategy.
To further clarify our strategy, we also carried out some control experiments. Firstly, we show the SEM image and I–V curve for the sample lacking any PCA array step in Fig. S15 (ESI). The SEM image and I–V curve are almost the same as the control sample. This shows that the PCA indeed assisted the growth of the final perovskite film, resulting in a large grain size and high crystallinity. Secondly, for the sample where PbI2 is spin-coated on the PCA rather than evaporated, the SEM image and I–V curve in Fig. S16 (ESI) are also almost the same as those of the “control sample” in our manuscript because the PCA can be easily damaged by the following solution process. Therefore, the PCA cannot play an important role in assisting the growth of the perovskite film. Thirdly, for the sample lacking DMSO treatment, the SEM image is shown in Fig. S5 (ESI) and the I–V curve is shown in Fig. S17 (ESI). Pinholes were observed on the as-cast perovskite layer due to the high reaction rate between PbI2 and FAI. Thus, the resulting solar cells exhibited poor photovoltaic performance.
We also show the SEM images of different PCA sizes and different PCA thicknesses in Fig. S18 and S19 (ESI), respectively. The corresponding I–V curves and parallel and series resistances are shown in Fig. S20, S21 and Table S3 (ESI). When the PCA size is 5 μm or 20 μm, the high quality PCA results in good photovoltaic performance of the final solar cells, and the samples with PCA size of 5 μm or 20 μm show almost no difference in performance. However, when the PCA size is increased to 50 μm, the quality of PCA is obviously poorer than that with size of 5 μm or 20 μm. Thus, the resulting solar cells show poor performance due to the quality of the PCA. The series resistance increased to 2.49 Ω cm2 for the sample with a PCA size of 50 μm because the crystal quality of the final perovskite film decreased. As for the thickness, we fabricated the PCA with a thickness of 50 nm, 200 nm and 500 nm, respectively. When the thickness is 50 nm, the large surface to bulk ratio results in poor PCA quality, which impaired the performance of the solar cells. Therefore, the series resistance of the device increased, consistent with the previous result. When the thickness is increased to 500 nm, it is close to the thickness of the final film, and thus it will cause the nonuniformity and high surface roughness of the final film, which is also adverse to the device performance. Due to the relatively poor interface contact, the shunt resistance of the device decreased a lot.
Carrier transportation was further investigated for better understanding of the performance enhancement. As shown in the dark current measurements (Fig. S22, ESI), the leakage current density at −0.3 V decreased by an order of magnitude attributed to the reduced trap density, which is beneficial to the carrier transportation. From the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) characterization (Fig. 3c), the device with PCA displayed smaller radii of impedance semicircles, which means a decrease of charge recombination at the interface. The ideality factors utilized to evaluate the diode quality were extracted from the VOC dependence on illumination intensity (Fig. 3d). The ideality factor of the control cell is 1.322, and the target cell with perovskite array assistance shows an ideality factor of 1.154 that is closer to 1, which indicates a high-quality diode.
A better device stability should be expected owing to the perovskite layer with high crystallinity and low defect density based on PCA. The devices for the stability test were well encapsulated using atomic layer deposition (ALD) technology. We measured the EQE evolution of the encapsulated device without the perovskite array after operation at maximum power point under 1 sun illumination for 200 hours. The PCE of the control sample decreased to 85% of its initial efficiency, and the quantum efficiency dropped obviously at the short wavelength between 340 nm and 420 nm, indicating a decomposition at the front side interface related to poor crystal quality and high trap density (Fig. 4a). In contrast, the EQEs of PSCs assisted by the perovskite array showed almost no differences after illuminated aging, which was attributed to the high-quality perovskite film (Fig. 4b). This aging phenomenon was also proved by the more substantial degradation of photoluminescence (Fig. 4c and d). We also recorded the morphology and absorbance changes to evaluate the material degradation (Fig. 4e and f). After illumination for 900 hours, the color of the control film turned yellowish. The control sample lost around 50% of its absorbance whereas the target sample only lost around 5%. We further investigated the differences in defect energy level distribution and trap densities for the control and target devices after illumination using thermal admittance spectroscopy. After 200 hours of illumination, the target device showed a much lower trap density than the control device across the region 0.28–0.36 eV with the peak trap-state density of 1.2 × 1022 m−3 eV−1 at 0.325 eV. By contrast, the control devices exhibited a higher trap-density peak of 7.2 × 1022 m−3 eV−1 at a deeper 0.336 eV, which was about six times higher than that of the target one, harmful to the stability of PSCs (Fig. S23, ESI). Therefore, encapsulated devices prepared via a hybrid deposition strategy showed superior operational stability and maintained 90% of their initial efficiency after operating at the maximum power point under 1 sun illumination for 2000 hours (Fig. 4g). The decay trends of JSC, VOC and FF are provided in Fig. S24 (ESI).

In summary, we successfully prepared high-quality perovskite films with an average grain size of over 3 μm via a perovskite-crystal-array-assisted strategy. Therefore, the absorption layer with less defect density and longer carrier lifetime contributed to the highly efficient and stable solar cells. A power conversion efficiency of over 25% and operation stability over 2000 h were obtained. Performance parameters were significantly improved compared with previous reports using the seed-assisted growth method (PCE around 22% and operation stability around 500 h). Our work provides a universal strategy to fabricate high-quality films with large areas for perovskite devices and other photovoltaic technologies.


Z. S., Q. H. and L. H. conceived the experiments, performed the data analysis, and wrote the manuscript. Z. S. led the fabrication of the solar cells. T. W. and C. Z. helped with the sample preparation for characterization. X. L. and Y. S. conducted the characterization. Y. W., H. C., X. Y. and Y. Z. participated in the discussion about the feasibility of the experiments. All the authors discussed the results and commented on the manuscript. Q. H. and L. H. directed and supervised the entire research.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2020YFB1506400), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. U20A20245, 11834011, and 12074245). We thank Q. Rao of the Instrumental Analysis Center of Shanghai Jiao Tong University (China) for help with XRD measurements, Z. Bao, Y. Han, Y. Zhang, and Y. Lin of the Instrumental Analysis Center of Shanghai Jiao Tong University (China) for help with SEM and EDX measurements, R. Wang of the Instrumental Analysis Center of Shanghai Jiao Tong University (China) for help with PL and TRPL measurements, and Y. Li of the Instrumental Analysis Center of Shanghai Jiao Tong University (China) for help with FIB.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee02897a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022