 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM16104D
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3696-3698

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Huajie
Chen
,

Chang
He
,

Gui
Yu
*,

Yan
Zhao
,

Jianyao
Huang
,

Minliang
Zhu
,

Hongtao
Liu
,

Yunlong
Guo
*,

Yongfang
Li
 and 

Yunqi
Liu
*

Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Science, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: yugui@iccas.ac.cn; liuyq@iccas.ac.cn

Graduate University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, P. R. China

Received
23rd November 2011
, Accepted 21st December 2011
First published on 10th January 2012
A highly π-extended copolymer, PPTT, was developed based on 6H-phenanthro[1,10,9,8-cdefg]carbazole (PCZ) and thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole derivative units, being the first PCZ-containing polymer, as well as its first applications in OTFTs and OPVs. This polymer exhibited an excellent solubility in several common organic solvents, a good film-forming ability, a reasonably high thermal stability, and a deep-lying HOMO energy level, meeting well the requirements of OTFTs and OPVs. The investigation of the field-effect and photovoltaic performances demonstrated that PPTT had a high hole mobility of 0.13 cm2 V−1 s−1 and good power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.20%, which were among the highest mobilities and PCEs for a single polymer material with dual transistor and OPV functions simultaneously.

Over the past decades, significant progress has been made on highly π-extended heteroarenes due to their excellent optoelectronic properties and potential applications in organic thin film transistors (OTFTs), organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs), and organic light-emitting diodes. Among the various fused aromatic rings, 6H-phenanthro[1,10,9,8-cdefg]carbazole (PCZ) and its derivatives have been demonstrated to be one of the most versatile and effective building blocks for the synthesis of organic functional materials. Their unusual and remarkable properties, such as perfect planar structure, strong electron-donating ability, facile synthesis, and reasonably high ambient stability, meet well the requirements for organic optoelectronic applications. For an example, Wang and co-workers reported the synthesis of graphene nanoribbons with well-defined edges based on a soluble alkyl-annulated PCZ intermediate. Besides, Wu also reported a series of small-molecular perylene-fused dyes with alkyl-annulated PCZ units, showing excellent solubility, strongly near-infrared absorption/emission, and good photostability. However, the synthesis of highly soluble PCZ-containing copolymers and their applications in OTFTs and OPVs have not been reported yet. Compared with the carbazole unit, PCZ has a much larger π-conjugation system and much stronger electron-donating ability. Usually, a π-extended fused ring as well as a donor–acceptor (D–A) configuration in the polymer backbone will be helpful for enhancing the intermolecular π overlap and thus the π–π stacking, which can contribute to high charge carrier mobility. Additionally, the bridging nitrogen-atoms in PCZ molecules offer a centre for solubilizing functionality and a versatile position tuning the molecular orbital energy levels.

In this communication, we reported the synthesis of a novel PCZ-based copolymer, poly[N-(2-octyldodecyl)-4,8-phenanthro[1,10,9,8-cdefg]carbazole-alt-2,5-bis(3-dodecylthiophene-2-yl)thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole] (PPTT), and its applications in both OTFTs and OPVs. Due to incorporation of an electron-deficient thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole unit as an electron acceptor, the backbone of the PCZ-based copolymer acts as a D–A configuration. Herein, a long branched-alkyl side chain, 2-octyldodecyl, was employed to substitute PCZ at the nitrogen atom to ensure maximum solubility and self-organization. Besides, the 3-dodecylthiophene-modified thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole units were introduced as a second rigid coplanar backbone to further enhance intermolecular interactions and to improve the solubility of the resultant polymer. The investigation of the field-effect and photovoltaic performance indicated that PPTT exhibited a high hole mobility of 0.13 cm2 V−1 s−1 with a high on/off current ratio of 107, and a good power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.20% with a high open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.80 V. These results demonstrated that the copolymers constructed by the highly π-conjugated PCZ donor units could be promising organic semiconductors for high-performance OTFTs and OPVs applications simultaneously.

PPTT was synthesized by Suzuki cross-coupling polycondensation of N-(2-octyldodecyl)-4,8-bis(4,4,5,5-tetramethyl-1,3,2-dioxaborolan-2-yl)-phenanthro[1,10,9,8-cdefg]carbazole (M1) and 2,5-bis(5-bromo-3-dodecylthiophen-2-yl)thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole (M2), as shown in Scheme 1. Two important monomers can be readily synthesized through the reported methods (see ESI). A branched alkyl chain, 2-octyldodecanyl, was used to improve solubility to ensure its solution processability and promote self-organization. The polymer showed excellent solubility (>20 mg mL−1) in common organic solvents such as chloroform, tetrahydrofuran, and o-dichlorobenzene (o-DCB) at room temperature. The molecular weight of PPTT was determined by gel-permeation chromatography with a weight average molecular weight (Mw) of 21900 and a polydispersity index (PDI) of 1.55. The thermogravimetric analysis demonstrated that PPTT had an excellent thermal stability (5% weight loss at 401 °C) for the applications in organic optoelectronic devices (see Fig. S5).
The normalized absorption spectra of PPTT in chloroform solution and as-thin film are shown in Fig. 1. The absorption spectrum of PPTT in chloroform solution showed an absorption maximum at 542 nm, which was remarkably red-shifted about 55 nm compared to the carbazole-containing copolymer (PCDTTz) (λmax = 487 nm). This result is consistent with a more extended π-conjugation system and a much stronger electron-donating ability as we expected. The PPTT film showed a red-shifted absorption peak at 548 nm compared to that of PPTT solution due to the chain-to-chain interactions and π–π stacking of the polymer backbone in the solid film. This strong intermolecular interaction might facilitate charge transport. The optical band gap of PPTT estimated from the absorption edge (ca. 650 nm) of the polymer film is 1.90 eV. The energy level of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) for PPTT determined by cyclic voltammetry was found to be −5.15 eV, calculated from the onset oxidation potential (Eoxonset) according to the equation of EHOMO = −e(Eoxonset + 4.4) eV. The energy level of the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) for PPTT was estimated to be −3.25 eV from the optical band gap and HOMO energy level (Fig. S6). We can note that the HOMO energy level matches well with the work function of gold metal (−5.2 eV), which could enhance the hole injection from the gold source electrode into p-type thin film and thus improve device performance. Besides, the HOMO energy level of PPTT is obviously lower than that of regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (−4.76 eV). The decreased HOMO energy level is expected to be helpful for increasing stability of the polymer against oxidation and improving Voc when it is used as a donor in bulk heterojunction solar cells.
To understand if incorporation of largely π-conjugated PCZ units into the polymer backbones can enhance hole transporting ability of the polymer, the OTFT devices with a conventional bottom-contact and bottom-gate configuration were fabricated using PPTT as a semiconductor. Different annealing temperatures and different channel lengths (L) of the OTFT devices (L = 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50 μm) were used to optimize the device performance. Fig. 2 shows the representative transfer and output current–voltage plots for OTFTs fabricated on an octadecyltrichlorosilane-treated Si/SiO2 (300 nm) substrate. The devices showed a p-type transporting characteristic measured under ambient conditions. Without annealing treatments, the PPTT-based OTFTs exhibited relatively low hole mobilities between 2.2 × 10−3 and 9.6 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 based on different channel lengths (see Fig. S7). However, the devices with L = 5 μm afforded the highest hole mobility of 0.13 cm2 V−1 s−1 with an on/off current ratio of 107 after annealing at 200 °C for 5 min. Besides, OTFTs with L = 10 μm also obtained a high mobility of 0.12 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an on/off current ratio of 2 × 107 when the film annealing temperature reached 210 °C. The remarkable increase in mobility can be readily understood from AFM images (see Fig. 3). With film annealing treatments, the PPTT films form larger crystal grains and better film interconnectivity, which are favourable for the charge transport and lead to an increase of the mobility. It must be emphasized that despite relatively low molecular weight (Mw = 21900, PDI = 1.55 for PPTT), PPTT still showed a high mobility, which was higher by 2 orders of magnitude compared with that of OTFTs based on the copolymer PCDTTz with a high molecular weight (Mw = 58000, PDI = 2.9, and mobility = 3.8 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1), probably arising from the larger π-conjugated system of the PCZ unit which can enhance the intermolecular interaction and π–π stacking between polymer backbones.
Since PPTT has a deep-lying HOMO energy level and a suitable high mobility, this new PCZ-based polymer could be expected to be a good donor material in polymer solar cells. Therefore, we carried out a preliminary study on the photovoltaic properties of OPVs using PPTT as an electron donor and [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) as an electron acceptor with a device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PPTT:PC71BM(1:2, w/w)/Ca/Al. Fig.4a shows the current density–voltage curves of the devices measured under the illumination of AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2. The combination of a fairly large short circuit current (Jsc) of 8.16 mA cm−2 with a high Voc of 0.80 V and a fill factor (0.49) translated to a high PCE of 3.20%. The high Voc could be readily understood from the low HOMO energy level (−5.15 eV) of PPTT. The relatively high Jsc value can be reflected from high hole mobility and high external quantum efficiency (EQE) value of PPTT (Fig. 4b). Considering a relatively broad band gap of PPTT, we believe that PCZ-based copolymers have great potentials to obtain higher PCE by copolymerizing with stronger electron-accepting units to broaden the absorption band.
In conclusion, we have demonstrated that 6H-phenanthro[1,10,9,8-cdefg]carbazole (PCZ) derivative units are the excellent building blocks to develop solution-processable polymer semiconductors for high-performance OTFT and OPV applications. These polymer semiconductors can be readily synthesized and structurally optimized by changing the alkyl chains or replacing the weak thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole acceptor with other strong/weak acceptor units to tune soluble processability, absorption/emission, and the HOMO–LUMO energy levels. The PPTT-based OTFT devices exhibited excellent field-effect performance with a high mobility of 0.13 cm2 V−1 s−1 and a high on/off current ratio of 107, which were sufficiently good for manufacturing low-cost display backplane electronics. Although PPTT has a relatively narrow light absorption (the onset wavelength at ca. 650 nm), its performance in OPVs was impressive and exhibited a high PCE of 3.20% without any special treatments. We are fully confident that the performance of OTFTs and OPVs can be further improved through molecule structural and device optimization.

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (20825208, 60736004, 61101051 and 21021091) and the Major State Basic Research Development Program (2011CB808403, 2011CB932303), and Chinese Academy of Sciences.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details including the polymer synthesis, TGA curve, the fabrication and characterization of the OTFTs and OPVs, measurements, and instruments. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm16104d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012