 DOI: 10.1039/C8TC06218H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 1948-1954


Hui
Wang
,

Rui
Jiang
,

Meili
Sun
,

Xiong
Yin
*,

Yanjun
Guo
,

Meng
He
* and 

Leyu
Wang
*

State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, Innovation Centre for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, P. R. China. E-mail: yinxiong@mail.buct.edu.cn; lywang@mail.buct.edu.cn

CAS Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication, CAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: mhe@nanoctr.cn

School of Physical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China

Received
10th December 2018
, Accepted 10th January 2019
First published on 10th January 2019
Nanostructured inorganic oxide semiconductor, working as an electron-transport layer (ETL), greatly affects the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of organometal-halide perovskite solar cell. In this study, as ETLs for mesoscopic perovskite solar cells, titanate hollow nanospheres were synthesized by a simple process that required a cation-exchanging step. Zn2+, Ba2+ and H+ were induced to tune the properties of titanate spheres, and thus the PCE. The conductivity, optical band gap, valence band and conduction band of hollow nanospheres significantly varied with different cations. Optimized devices based on Ti–Zn–O hollow nanospheres presented a PCE of 17% (average efficiency of 16.39%), outperforming the devices with pristine TiO2 spheres (15.87%, average efficiency of 15.08%) and Ti–Ba–O hollow nanospheres (4.88%). Impedance spectroscopy measurements revealed that the enhancement in PCE was ascribed to the improved carrier transport properties and better band matching with the perovskite layer obtained by introducing Zn2+ cations into the TiO2 matrix. This study focuses on developing high-quality inorganic ETL materials for perovskite-based photovoltaic devices.

Organometal-halide perovskite solar cells have been studied enthusiastically in recent years due to their low cost and high efficiency. Perovskite layer, which acted as a light-harvesting material, possesses outstanding physiochemical properties, such as a high absorption coefficient, tunable band gaps and long diffusion length. More importantly, an ambipolar feature of perovskite material under light illumination made holes and electrons transport simultaneously to a great extent. Both the electron transport layer (ETL) and the hole transport layer were accordingly assembled with the perovskite layer to transport the photogenerated carriers to an external circuit. Transparent conductive glass substrate (FTO) and metal electrode were generally applied as cathode and anode to fabricate a complete photovoltaic device, and the device structure is shown in Scheme 1a. Thus, device architectures and each layer could efficiently influence the photovoltaic performance of solar cells. Most state-of-the-art perovskite solar cells are assembled in a mesoscopic structure using a mesoporous inorganic oxide as the ETL. The resultant device has good repeatability and highest PCE till date. ETL controls the transport of electrons and block of holes. Electrons have smaller diffusion length than holes in the perovskite layer. Therefore, the introduction of mesoporous ETL is to efficiently adjust the balance between the flux of electrons and holes. Electrons are transported via both the perovskite layer and mesoporous ETL, resulting in a high carrier collection efficiency. Obviously, ETL's design plays a crucial role for improving the photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells.

Nanostructured TiO2, which has a good optical property, suitable conduction band minimum and valence band maximum, has been widely used as the leading ETL for high-performance mesoscopic perovskite solar cells. However, compared to the perovskite layer, the electrons show lower mobility in TiO2. Accordingly, a number of approaches, such as doping and geometrical shape or morphology control, have been proposed to enhance the transport properties of the mesoporous TiO2 layer. For example, highly crystalline TiO2 nanorods having high electron mobility were synthesized and utilized in the perovskite solar cells. In addition, single-crystal TiO2 spheres were developed as mesoporous ETLs to enhance the photovoltaic performance. Considerable enhancement in PCE was ascribed to the good infiltration of the perovskite materials within mesoporous ETL. Furthermore, results revealed a tight interconnection between the individual nanoparticles within TiO2 spheres allows the efficient charge transport through ETL, and thus benefits the PCE. Results demonstrated that photovoltaic performance of PSCs can be further improved using TiO2 with a uniform geometrical shape as ETLs.
In this study, we developed a simple and effective method to synthesize uniform titanate hollow spheres and explored them as ETLs for mesoscopic perovskite solar cells. More importantly, the process involved a cation-exchanging step by which the properties of titanate hollow nanospheres could be finely tuned. Zn2+ and Ba2+ ions were selected because of their different effects on the transformation of anatase to rutile. Suitable band-alignment is desirable for improving photovoltaic performance, and could be achieved using different cations. The resultant devices containing Ti–Zn–O hollow nanospheres showed a higher efficiency than that of pristine TiO2 hollow nanospheres-based device. Moreover, enhanced performance was attributed to the high conductivity in Ti–Zn–O based ETL and improved band alignment at the ETL/perovskite interface.

SiO2 spheres (200 nm) were synthesized according to a previous method with minor modifications. Tetraethoxysilane (98%, 0.85 mL) was added to the mixture of ethanol (23 mL), ultrapure water (4 mL) and aqueous ammonia (0.8 mL, 28%). The solution was then stirred at room temperature for 4 h. Silica spheres were then centrifuged and washed three times with ethanol. Silica particles were re-dispersed in ethanol (5 mL) with sonication.


First, hydroxypropyl cellulose (HPC, 50 mg) was dissolved in the mixture of ethanol (10 mL) and acetonitrile (7 mL) with stirring for 30 min. Then, 5 mL of SiO2 particles were well-dispersed in the solution with stirring for 10 min. 0.2 mL of ammonium hydroxide, 1 mL of titanium tert-butoxide (TBOT), 3 mL of ethanol and 1 mL of acetonitrile were injected into the mixture. After injection, the solution was stirred for 2 h at room temperature. The precipitate was isolated using centrifugation and washed with ethanol and water 3 times. Finally, the precipitate was re-dispersed in ultrapure water (24 mL) to give SiO2@TiOx spheres.


An aqueous solution (2.5 M, 1 mL) of NaOH was added to the above SiO2@TiOx solution to partially etch both SiO2 core and TiOx shell and stirred for 20 min at room temperature. Later, the precipitate was collected by centrifugation and washed with ultrapure water once and was re-dispersed in various aqueous solution (12 mL) studied in this work (Zn2+, Ba2+ and H+, 1 mmol). Then, the mixture was stirred overnight to guarantee a cation exchanging process. SiO2@TiOx–Mn+ spheres were collected using centrifugation, washed three times with water and ethanol, and then dried in a vacuum oven.


The as-obtained SiO2@TiOx–Mn+ spheres were sintered at 800 °C for 2 h in a muffle furnace under air. Finally, the particles were fully etched using an aqueous NaOH solution for 4 h at 95 °C, washed with ultrapure water and ethanol, and dried at 60 °C to get the titanate hollow nanospheres (hollow Ti–Zn–O, Ti–Ba–O and TiO2 spheres).


Solar cell devices were fabricated according to previous reports with minor modifications. Briefly, fluorine-doped SnO2 substrate (FTO) was first etched using the desired electrode patterns (15 mm × 10 mm). A compact TiO2 layer was prepared on the FTO by spraying the 0.2 M Ti(i-OPr)2(acac)2 precursor solution at 450 °C. Thickness of this layer was set to be 60 nm by controlling the spray cycles. The as-prepared hollow titanate sphere samples were mixed with ethyl cellulose and terpineol in ethanol solution to form the mesoporous layer pastes. These mesoporous electron-transport layers were spin-coated on the surface of the compact layer using the as-made pastes at diluted concentrations. The thickness of mesoporous layer was tuned by changing the rate of the spin-coater and the concentration of these pastes. These electrodes were then sintered at 450 °C for 20 min to form the mesoporous electron-transport layers. The optimized thickness of mesoporous layer was ∼350 nm. The perovskite layer was then fabricated on the mesoporous layer by spin-coating the perovskite precursor solution, whose components were PbI2, PbBr2, FAI and MABr, according to a previous report. After forming the perovskite-based electrode, the hole-transfer layer (HTL) was then deposited on the top of perovskite layer by spin-coating the solution containing Spiro-MeOTAD, 4-tert-butylpryidine and LiTFSI in chlorobezene at a speed of 3500 rpm for 60 s. Finally, an Au contact electrode (∼80 nm) was deposited on the HTL using thermal evaporation approach at a pressure of 1 × 10−6 mbar.


Morphologies of samples were investigated using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, Hitachi S-4800). High resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images and elemental mapping were recorded on a JEM-2100F at 200 kV. The crystalline structures of samples were observed using a Bruker AXS D8-Advanced X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å). The thickness of the mesoporous layer was measured with a Profilometer (KLA-Tencor Profiler). The UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) and the transmission spectra of samples were characterized using a Lambda 950 ultraviolet-visible spectrophotometer. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy measurements were performed on a Kratos AXIS Ultra DLD spectrometer. Energy was measured with respect to He I photon energy (21.22 eV). Conductivity of the Ti–Zn–O and TiO2 ETLs was measured using a conducting atomic force microscope (CAFM, Multimode 8) operating in a contact-current mode. Photovoltaic performances of perovskite-based solar cells assembled various mesoporous layers were recorded with a Keithley 2420 SourceMeter and an 150 W solar simulator (Oriel Newport, AM 1.5G) was employed as the light source at an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The light intensity was calibrated using a Si reference cell (Oriel Newport PN91150V). The active area of the devices was fixed to 0.09 cm2 using a metal mask. Various devices were recorded using reverse scanning from the forward bias to the short circuit. All the measurements were conducted under ambient conditions.


Synthesis of hollow titanate spheres includes the following main steps: colloidal synthesis of SiO2@TiOx core–shell structures, base etching to provide species for the following cation-exchanging, calcination to increase the crystallinity, and fully etching to produce titanate shells. Schematic of the procedure is shown in Scheme 1b. More specifically, the fabrication process involves the preparation of uniform silica soft templates (200 nm), coating with a TiOx layer via a sol–gel reaction of TBOT to form SiO2@TiOx core–shell structures, partial etching of SiO2 core and TiOx shell by NaOH to give species for cation exchanging, calcination at desirable temperature and complete etching of SiO2 core to produce hollow spheres. Three different cations, i.e., Zn2+, Ba2+ and H+, were exchanged with base-etched SiO2@TiOx sample in the study. The corresponding TEM images of final samples are shown in Fig. 1a–c. Hollow spheres were obviously observed, and they were well maintained during the complete synthesis process. Thickness of the shells was estimated to be ∼30 nm, and the thickness could be fine controlled by the volume of TBOT in the sol–gel reaction. Moreover, the elemental distribution contained in the samples was further characterized via elemental mapping analysis. Ti, O and Zn elements were clearly found in the Ti–Zn–O shells (Fig. 1d). Results of line scanning confirm that the Ti–Zn–O shell has a hollow structure (Fig. 1e and f), which agrees with those observed in TEM images. More importantly, according to elemental mapping results for the Ti–Ba–O (Fig. S1, ESI), the different cations could be easily exchanged with Na+ ions within TiOx shells to give titanate hollow nanospheres. This method was successfully developed further to synthesize the Ti–Ca–O hollow nanospheres (Fig. S2, ESI).

After the calcination process, different crystal sizes were observed for three samples because of the different cations used in the exchanging step. Accordingly, the crystal structure of the samples was further characterized using XRD. The corresponding XRD patterns for samples are shown in Fig. 2a. In the case of H+ ions, the sample presented a sole anatase crystalline structure, which is in good agreement with previous reports. When Zn2+ ions were used, the obvious rutile structure was observed, and the anatase crystalline structure still retained, in addition to the emergence peaks of the Ti–Zn–O phase. However, in case of Ba2+ based hollow nanospheres, the crystallization of amorphous nanoparticle becomes difficult at the same calcination temperature. Different crystallization behaviors induced by cations result into their different effect on the kinetics of the anatase to rutile transition. Cations of small radii and low valence can accelerate the transition to rutile owing to the increase in oxygen vacancies. Zn2+ ion could be considered as the phase transformation promoter, while Ba2+ ion is treated as the phase transformation inhibitor. The different morphologies for samples (Fig. 1) may be because of the different crystallization behaviors, which is induced by cations. In addition, the transition of Ti–Zn–O hollow sphere is largely influenced by the calcination temperature. Anatase TiO2 transforms to the rutile phase when the temperature is up to 700 °C, as shown in Fig. 2b. Moreover, the hollow sphere crystallization and subsequent grain growth can readily occur at 700 °C as is revealed by TEM images (Fig. S3, ESI). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images indicate that the as-prepared samples consist of mono-dispersed spheres with sizes of 200–250 nm (Fig. S4, ESI). Moreover, it confirmed the porous nature of the as-obtained materials. In addition, the cations used in the exchanging step showed a negligible influence on the shape of the samples.
Transmittance of the electrodes consisting of various hollow nanospheres was characterized by UV-Vis spectroscopy. These electrodes exhibited high transmittance in the visible wavelength, which guarantees that light is harvested by the perovskite layer (Fig. S5, ESI). The three electrodes possessed almost identical transmittance within the scanning wavelength range. Furthermore, to determine the band gaps of the films, UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra deposited on quartz substrates were recorded, and the corresponding Kubelka–Munk plots are given in Fig. 3a. Optical band gaps calculated from Fig. 3a are 3.25 eV, 3.30 eV and 2.98 eV for TiO2-, Ti–Zn–O- and Ti–Ba–O-based films, respectively. Moreover, ultraviolet photoemission spectra (UPS) are recorded to estimate the VBM of the titanate spheres and presented in Fig. 3b. The CBM of the titanate spheres are then deduced according to the VBM and band gaps. The corresponding VBM, band gap and CBM for each hollow nanospheres are listed in Table 1. VBM deduced from the UPS for the nanosphere-based films is −7.61 eV (TiO2), −7.59 eV (Ti–Zn–O) and −7.49 eV (Ti–Ba–O), respectively, with respect to the vacuum level. Therefore, the corresponding CBM for TiO2, Ti–Zn–O and Ti–Ba–O films is −4.36, −4.29 eV and −4.51 eV, respectively. As illustrated in the energy-level diagram (Fig. 5a), the Ti–Ba–O is not suitable to be applied as ETL for perovskite-based solar cells because of its low CBM. However, the Ti–Zn–O presented an up-shifted CBM, compared to TiO2. The up-shifted CBM for Ti–Zn–O was considered to be more compatible with perovskite layer and will reduce the energy loss of electrons in the transportation process. Thus, the Ti–Zn–O spheres will be a good candidate for ETL materials because of the favorable band gap and CBM.
Hollow sphere

E
g/eV
VBM/eV
CBM/eV

a Data deduced from the UPS measurements.

TiO2
3.25
−7.61
−4.36
Ti–Zn–O
3.30
−7.59
−4.29
Ti–Ba–O
2.98
−7.49
−4.51
Mesoscopic perovskite solar cells with different mesoporous ETLs, such as TiO2, Ti–Zn–O and Ti–Ba–O hollow nanospheres-based films, were fabricated under controlled conditions. Fig. 3c shows the representative current–voltage curves of devices, and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 2. The photovoltaic performance of each device were measured under simulated light with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5G). Evidently, ETL possesses an important effect on the PCE of the mesoscopic perovskite-based solar cells. Devices using Ti–Ba–O layer exhibited the lowest PCE of 4.88%, with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.957 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 15.01 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.34. When TiO2 sphere was applied as the ETL, there was a considerable increase in the device performance. Perovskite solar cell containing TiO2 ETL showed a Voc of 1.016 V, a Jsc of 23.92 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.653, leading to a PCE of 15.87%. More importantly, the performance of the device could further be improved using Ti–Zn–O hollow nanosphere as ETL. The Voc, Jsc, and FF of the device are 1.035 V, 24.62 mA cm−2, 0.668, respectively, resulting in a PCE of 17.01%. Histograms of PCEs for each group of 30 devices using TiO2 and Ti–Zn–O spheres as ELTs, respectively, are shown in Fig. 3d. Average PCE for devices containing TiO2 and Ti–Zn–O ETLs are 15.07% and 16.39%, respectively. Moreover, the histogram for each type of device was fitted well with a normal distributed model, and the fitting results are illustrated in Fig. 3d. Both the histograms and the fitting results indicate that Zn2+ cation exchanging could indeed statistically improve the performance of solar cells. Furthermore, the stability of the perovskite solar cells with different electron transport layers was investigated. The unpackaged devices were kept in a desiccator and corresponding J–V curves were measured each day. The normalized PCE for each device is shown in Fig. S6 (ESI). Obviously, up to 85% of PCE was maintained after the devices were kept in a desiccator for one week. Moreover, the results indicated that the application of titanate hollow nanospheres as electron transport layers seem to have little effect on the long-term stability of the devices.
ETLs

V
oc
/V

J
sc
/mA cm−2
FF
PCE/%

a 
V
oc: open-circuit photovoltage.
b 
J
sc: short-circuit photocurrent density.
c FF: fill factor.
d PCE: power conversion efficiency.

TiO2
1.016
23.92
0.653
15.87
Ti–Zn–O
1.035
24.61
0.668
17.01
Ti–Ba–O
0.957
15.01
0.340
4.88
Impedance spectroscopy (IS) has been extensively utilized for characterizing photovoltaic devices and obtain essential information of the internal electrical processes. IS was consequently employed to investigate the effect of various titanate hollow nanospheres on the photovoltaic performance of devices. Spectra of TiO2 and Ti–Zn–O hollow spheres based devices were obtained under light illumination at various applied biases. Typical Nyquist plots are shown in Fig. S7a, b, (ESI) and the corresponding equivalent circuit is presented in Fig. S7c (ESI). The fitting results of the selective contact resistance (Rsc) and recombination resistance (Rrec) are shown in Fig. 4a and b, respectively. Obviously, the Rsc of two types of devices slightly changed with the measured biases, and Ti–Zn–O hollow spheres-based devices showed a slight small Rsc. However, the Rrec of the device was enhanced after introducing Zn2+ into the TiO2 matrix, the improved Rrec implies less hole–electron recombination within the devices, and the decreased Rsc indicates more efficient forward carrier transport. Changed in Rsc resulted in improved fill factor, as observed in Table 2. Moreover, the increase in Rrec can lead to a higher Voc for Ti–Zn–O-based devices. Therefore, the Ti–Zn–O-based device had a low Rsc and a high Rrec, yielding an enhancement in the PCE of a device.
To confirm the carrier transport properties within hollow nanospheres-based ETLs, electric current mapping images for Ti–Zn–O and TiO2 hollow nanospheres were obtained using a CAFM. The corresponding images are shown in Fig. 5b and c, respectively. Obviously, the current recorded on the Ti–Zn–O hollow nanospheres is significantly higher than that for the TiO2 hollow nanospheres. The average current value is 27 nA for Ti–Zn–O hollow nanospheres and 11 nA for the TiO2 hollow nanospheres, according to the CAFM measurement. Results demonstrate that the conductivity of ETL could be finely tuned via a simple cation-exchanging approach. Introduction of Zn2+ ion into TiO2 matrix could effectively improve the electric conductivity of the ETL. The result is in good agreement with the properties observed in IS measurement. High electric conductivity is desirable for the ETLs used in the perovskite-based solar cells because of its benefit to the carrier transporting behavior. Zn2+ cation-exchanging could improve the transporting properties of photo-generated electrons within ETL, and thus the performance of the perovskite solar cells. Compared with the TiO2-based device, the enhanced PCE of device containing Ti–Zn–O ETL could be ascribed to the increase in the conductivity of ETL after the Zn2+ cation-exchanging process.

In conclusion, various titanate hollow nanospheres, which were applied as mesoporous ETLs for perovskite solar cells, were prepared by a simple and effective approach after undergoing sol–gel of Ti4+ precursor, partial etching and cation-exchanging steps. Physicochemical properties of hollow nanospheres could finely be adjusted by altering the cations. Compared to the Ti–Ba–O and pristine TiO2 layers, the Ti–Zn–O spheres exhibited remarkably improved conductivity, evidenced by the conducting atomic force microscopy measurement. Moreover, the Ti–Zn–O hollow nanospheres-based ETL had suitable energy levels to extract photo-generated electrons from the perovskite layer. Accordingly, the devices with Ti–Zn–O hollow nanospheres as mesoporous ETLs showed the highest PCE. Electrochemical impedance revealed that Ti–Zn–O hollow nanospheres-based devices showed a decreased selective contact resistance and increased charge recombination resistance after incorporating Zn2+ into the TiO2 matrix. These results suggest that controllable tuning of the features of ETL is an effective way to improve the photovoltaic performances of perovskite-based devices. This, in turn, facilitates the wide use of inorganic oxides-based ETLs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The research was partial supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21771019, 21725501, 21475007 and 21675009) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (buctrc201706, buctrc201815 and buctrc201812). We also thank the support from the Public Hatching Platform for Recruited Talents of Beijing University of Chemical Technology. X. Y. is grateful to Prof. Y. Yin at the University of California, Riverside for his kind supervision on the controllable synthesis of functional nanomaterials. Thanks also go to J. Feng at UCR for her help in the sample synthesis. X. Y. thanks the fellowship support by the China Scholarship Council (CSC).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: TEM image, SEM image, UV-Vis transmittance spectra, Nyquist plots of mesoscopic perovskite solar cells. See DOI: 10.1039/c8tc06218h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019