 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA00894E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13448-13456


Mengna
Sun
,

Fei
Zhang
*,

Hongli
Liu
,

Xianggao
Li
,

Yin
Xiao
 and 

Shirong
Wang
*

School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300354, China. E-mail: wangshirong@tju.edu.cn; zhangf890206@tju.edu.cn

Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), Tianjin 300072, China

Received
26th January 2017
, Accepted 28th April 2017
First published on 29th April 2017
Here, we report a rapid and simple process to prepare perovskite solar cells in ambient air by adding 2-pyridylthiourea in the precursor solution. 2-Pyridylthiourea can not only promote the conversion of 2-D PbI2 to tetragonal CH3NH3PbI3 crystals, but also improve the quality of the perovskite absorber layer via enhancing the uniformity and the size of the crystal grains. The perovskite solar cells with the addition of 2-pyridylthiourea at a concentration of 0.5 mg mL−1 exhibited a remarkable overall power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 18.2%, which is among the highest PCE of CH3NH3PbI3-based devices fabricated in ambient air. It also showed an 18% increase and less hysteresis compared with the cells without additives. Importantly, the devices with 2-pyridylthiourea show relatively better stability compared to reference devices when aged under ambient air of 55 ± 5% relative humidity in the dark and under 65 °C after 30 days. The presented results clearly show that 2-pyridylthiourea can be an additive candidate for tuning the morphology of perovskite thin films, which may be a new direction for large-scale production of PSCs.

Hybrid lead halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have gotten substantial attention as next-generation commercial photovoltaic materials due to their simple structure, low fabrication cost and outstanding photovoltaic performance. In recent years, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has increased from 3.8% to more than 20%. Although the PCE of the perovskite solar cells has achieved more than 20%, current–voltage hysteresis, as well as moisture and thermal stability is still an important issue to be solved.

Since hybrid lead halide perovskite is an ionic crystal, the perovskite absorber layer has been reported to be influenced by humidity and heat in air. Without long-term device stability, PSCs are difficult to be commercially used. Conventional perovskite solar cells are made up of a lead halide perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) absorber layer, which is deposited on the mesoporous TiO2 layer, and spiro-OMeTAD is used as the hole-transporting layer with TBP and LiTFSI as additives. Traditional attempts had been made to improve the stability of perovskite solar cells, such as modification of the perovskite sensitizer, as well as modification of the additives in the hole-transporting layer and the application of dopant-free or additive-free hole-transporting materials. Among the modification strategies of the perovskite, the easiest way is adding some additives into the perovskite solution precursor.
The role of additives is major in improving the morphology and crystallinity of the perovskite absorber layer to control the film quality of the perovskite absorber layer. For example, NH3SO3 has been used as an additive to improve the performance of solar cells by controlling the morphology and crystallinity of the perovskite film, where the PCE was enhanced from 13.08% to 16.02%, and the devices without encapsulation exhibit respectable long-term stability. PEG as the polymer scaffold was employed in solar cells to achieve the highest PCE of 16% and the cells with PEG displayed strong humidity resistance. In addition, other additives had been explored to improve the photovoltaic performance, such as 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO), polyethylenimine (PEI), fullerene derivatives, LiCletc. All the additives were aimed at improving PCE and long-term stability, but the reported PCE is not high, few above 18%. Moreover, it is also a big challenge to improve the humidity stability and thermal stability of the devices at the same time, which depends on the high quality film of the perovskite. Thus, the fabrication of a uniform, continuous and compact perovskite layer is a very important factor for the photovoltaic performance and the long-term stability of perovskite solar cells.
Herein, we firstly address the use of 2-pyridylthiourea as the additive in the fabrication of the PSCs in ambient air via a simple one-step spin-coating method. 2-Pyridylthiourea can act as an N-donor, as well as an S-donor to coordinate with PbI2, resulting in reducing the speed of perovskite crystal formation, which can produce uniform, continuous and compact perovskite films with larger crystal grains. The optical and electrical properties can be improved due to the improvement of the crystallinity and morphology of the perovskite absorber layer. Compared to the control device, the PCE of devices with the 2-pyridylthiourea additive is obviously improved from 15.5% to 18.2%. The champion device with the 2-pyridylthiourea additive at 0.5 mg mL−1 obtained the PCE of 18.2% with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.10 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 22.03 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 75%, with less hysteresis. Moreover, the devices with 2-pyridylthiourea show relatively better stability compared to reference devices when aged under ambient air of 55 ± 5% relative humidity in the dark and under 65 °C after 30 days.

The substrates are FTO conducting glass (<15 Ω per square) obtained from Nippon Sheet Glass Corporation. Spiro-OMeTAD and PbI2 was obtained from Luminescence Technology Corporation. Titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) and 2-pyridylthiourea were purchased from Alfa Aesar. n-Butanol and methylamine solution (40% in methanol) were obtained from Aladdin. Dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO) and N,N′-dimethylformamide (DMF) were purchased from J&K chemical Corporation. CH3NH3I (MAI) was synthesized according to the literature. All the materials were used as received without any other purification unless otherwise specified.


The image of a cross section of a solar cell was measured on a scanning electron microscope (SEM, XL30S-FEG, FEI, USA). X-ray diffraction (XRD) data were recorded on a Mini Flex 600 in the range 2θ = 10–60° using CuKα1 radiation. Ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) absorption spectrum was measured with a Thermo Evolution 300 UV/Visible spectrometer. Fourier transfer infrared spectra (FTIR) was recorded as a KBr disk on a Thermo NICOLET380 spectrometer. Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra were confirmed on Edinburgh Instruments (FLS 980, UK) collected at 775 nm after excitation at 485 nm. Illumination of the solar cells was set at 100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5G) made with an Oriel solar simulator 91160A, the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were recorded with a Keithley 2602 SourceMeter, and a mask of window of 0.16 cm2 was applied to confirm the effective area of the solar cells. The incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) was obtained with a lab-made IPCE testing system.


FTO-coated glass substrates were washed by detergent, and after rinsing with distilled water, the substrates were further cleaned with deionized water and then with ethanol. In the end, the substrates were placed in air to dry. A compact layer of TiO2 was deposited on the cleaned substrate by spin-coating the titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) in n-butanol (v/v = 1:16) at 2000 rpm for 30 s, soon after heating at 500 °C for 30 min in air. The mesoporous TiO2 layer can be obtained by spin-coating the commercial TiO2 paste diluted in ethanol (w/w = 1:6) on the compact layer at 4000 rpm for 30 s; the substrate was sintering at 500 °C for 30 min. The CH3NH3PbI3 absorber layer was obtained through an anti-solvent method and the precursor solution was prepared from 1.35 M Pb2+ with different concentrations of 2-pyridylthiourea in the mixed solvent of DMF and DMSO; the volume ratio of DMF/DMSO is 4:1. The spin-coating procedure was performed at 2000 rpm for 9 s then at 5000 rpm for 30 s. At 21 s before the last spin-coating step, 180 μL of chlorobenzene (CB) was pipetted onto the substrate. Thereafter, the substrate was put onto a hotplate for 1 hour at 100 °C. Subsequently, the hole-transporting material (HTM) was deposited on the top of the perovskite by spin coating at 4000 rpm for 20 s. The spiro-OMeTAD solutions were prepared by dissolving the spiro-OMeTAD in 1 mL chlorobenzene at a concentration of 72.3 mg mL−1 with the addition of 30 μL 4-tert-butylpyridine and 18 μL of 520 mg mL−1 lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl)imide acetonitrile solution. All these processes are prepared in ambient air. At last, a gold electrode of 80 nm thickness was deposited on the top of the HTM layer to get the back contact through thermal evaporation under high vacuum.



Fig. 1 shows the schematic reaction process from the precursor to monolithic perovskite grains and the schematic diagram of corresponding perovskite solar cells. This process mainly consists of three steps: (i) PbI2, MAI and 2-pyridylthiourea are dissolved in solvent mixture and are then spin-coated on mesoporous TiO2; (ii) after spinning for a certain time, chlorobenzene was added as an orthogonal solvent to promote fast nucleation and growth and the formation of an intermediate phase; (iii) the film was transformed into a final perovskite phase after annealing at 100 °C for 60 minutes. The key step in the above solvent engineering process is the formation of the intermediate phase. In this work, 2-pyridylthiourea was chosen as an additive to gain the flexibility of tuning the coordination strength since thiourea as an S-donor has a stronger ability to coordinate with PbI2 and pyridine as an N-donor Lewis acid–base can also coordinate with PbI2. After the annealing process, most of the 2-pyridylthiourea is likely to exist on the boundary and surface of CH3NH3PbI3.


Fig. 2a shows the UV-Vis absorption spectra of the CH3NH3PbI3 absorber films prepared with the different concentrations of 2-pyridylthiourea in the CH3NH3PbI3 precursor solution on the mesoporous TiO2 film. Compared to the pristine CH3NH3PbI3 film, with the increasing concentration of the 2-pyridylthiourea, the CH3NH3PbI3 film showed obvious absorption enhancement in almost the whole visible-light region, reaching the maximum value at the concentration of 0.5 mg mL−1 in precursor solutions, which probably originates from the contribution of its impact on the improved surface morphology and more uniform crystal formation of CH3NH3PbI3. With more increase of the concentration of 2-pyridylthiourea, there is significant decrease of absorbance which can result from the decrease of the crystal quality.
The good thin film uniformity suggests a homogenous nucleation of the perovskites on the TiO2 surface. In order to confirm the influence of the 2-pyridylthiourea on the crystallinity and surface morphology of the perovskite thin films, CH3NH3PbI3 thin films with 2-pyridylthiourea at different concentrations had been made. Fig. 2b–f show the top SEM images of the perovskite absorber films. The morphology of the CH3NH3PbI3 film is affected by adding the 2-pyridylthiourea obviously. There are some visible pinholes in the perovskite absorber films without 2-pyridylthiourea and the crystal grains are small. With the addition of 2-pyridylthiourea, the morphology of the active layer can be effectively improved. The perovskite films are more uniform and smooth and the grains become larger. The existence of the pinholes may be due to rapid reaction between the organic iodide and PbI2. Due to the weak coordination between DMSO and PbI2, it is easy for the DMSO to escape from the PbI2 framework. This always leads to insufficient perovskite grain growth. With the addition of 2-pyridylthiourea, the reaction can be retarded to obtain uniform and dense perovskite films with high quality. At 0.1 mg mL−1 of 2-pyridylthiourea, the perovskite film was compact and smooth. Moreover, the needle-like pores on the surface decreased, and the quality of the film was improved. When the content of 2-pyridylthiourea was increased to 0.5 mg mL−1, the crystal grains of perovskite became larger and the arrangement between the grains became more dense. In addition, the perovskite thin film exhibits good uniformity, with no pinholes. The significant effect on the morphology of the perovskite films may be attributed to the interactions between PbI2 and 2-pyridylthiourea during the growth of the perovskite, which correspondingly slow down the speed of the perovskite formation process. However, when we further increased the amount of 2-pyridylthiourea to 1.0 mg mL−1 and 3.0 mg mL−1, the perovskite film became coarser for the non-compact arrangement of the crystal grains. This conclusion is well consistent with the UV-Vis absorption properties as shown in Fig. 2a.
The morphology of the CH3NH3PbI3 thin films with and without 2-pyridylthiourea was studied by AFM, as shown in Fig. 3a and b. It can be found that with 2-pyridylthiourea, the small root mean squared (Rms) roughness of the perovskite film is 2.63 nm; on contrast, without 2-pyridylthiourea, the Rms is 13.86 nm. The result shows that with the addition of 2-pyridylthiourea, the perovskite thin film can be more smooth and uniform, which is beneficial for the effective charge transport and thus achieve higher photovoltaic performance.
The FTIR spectra is carried out to investigate how 2-pyridylthiourea tunes the crystal growth of perovskite thin-films. Fig. 3c shows the spectra of the mixed solvent of DMF and DMSO with PbI2, 2-pyridylthiourea, PbI2·2-pyridylthiourea, and 2-pyridylthiourea-containing perovskite precursors at different molar ratios. The stretching vibrations of CS and CN for pure 2-pyridylthiourea lie at 785 cm−1 and 1600 cm−1, respectively. The stretching vibrations of CS and CN are blue-shifted to 783 cm−1 and 1598 cm−1 respectively for the PbI2·2-pyridylthiourea solution due to interaction with PbI2, and then further shifted to a lower wavenumber for the 2-pyridylthiourea-containing perovskite precursors. The blue-shift in the PbI2·2-pyridylthiourea solution is due to the partial electron cloud migration from CS and CN to S·Pb and N·Pb. Meanwhile, the 2-pyridylthiourea-containing perovskite precursor can form the adduct of MAI·PbI2·2-pyridylthiourea caused by the interaction between 2-pyridylthiourea and/or iodide (I−) and PbI2, which may be the result of the further blue shift of the stretching vibrations of CS and CN. In addition, with the increase of the additive amount, both CN and CS are further shifted to lower wavenumber due to the enhanced coordination between the 2-pyridylthiourea and PbI2. All the results can indicate that 2-pyridylthiourea can coordinate with the PbI2, which is beneficial for the perovskite formation process. We reason that this interaction not only stabilizes the surface of perovskite nanocrystals, but also prevents decomposition of perovskite into PbI2. The EDS data in Fig. S1 show that 2-pyridylthiourea was evenly distributed in the perovskite film. The XRD of the perovskite films with 2-pyridylthiourea at different concentrations is shown in Fig. 3d; all the films have the main diffraction peaks of 14.67°, 28.91°, and 32.46°, which are assigned to the (110), (220), and (310) faces of the perovskite crystal structure, respectively. It is clear that with the 2-pyridylthiourea additive, the XRD peak centred at 14.67°, 28.91°, and 32.46° increased, as well as the peak centred at 13.2° corresponding to the (001) face of the PbI2 disappeared. The peaks which can be assigned to the perovskite structure reach the highest at the concentration of 0.5 mg mL−1. With more increase of the concentration of 2-pyridylthiourea, there is significant decrease, which is mainly due to the decrease of the crystal quality. All the results are consistent with enhancement of crystallinity and orientation of the CH3NH3PbI3 grains.
The durable XRD tests of the thin films with and without 2-pyridylthiourea had also been conducted. It is clear that the thin film with 2-pyridylthiourea shows better stability under thermal pressure as well as humidity. As shown in Fig. 3e and f, there is no obvious peak of PbI2 both under humidity and thermal pressure for the film with 2-pyridylthiourea. In contrast, for the film without 2-pyridylthiourea, the intensity of the peak gradually increased and finally achieved the 72% and 27% compared to the reference peak located at 14.67° after aging under the same conditions which can be attribute to the degradation from CH3NH3PbI3 to PbI2, respectively. As a result, the colour of perovskite films with 2-pyridylthiourea remained persistent, while the perovskite films without 2-pyridylthiourea faded from black to yellow, which can be observed from Fig. S2. These results indicate 2-pyridylthiourea can enhance the stability. Besides, the contact angles (θ) between perovskite thin films and H2O were carried out to confirm the hydrophobicity, which can provide a rationale for its greatly enhanced stability against degradation in humid air. As shown in Fig. S3, the value of θ for the perovskite thin film with 2-pyridylthiourea is 65.07°, higher than the value of the film without the additive (44.07°). With 2-pyridylthiourea, the θ can be effectively enhanced, which is favourable for long-term stability. The results are corresponding to the XRD data in Fig. 3e.
To investigate the mechanism of the improvement of performance by adding 2-pyridylthiourea, steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) of the CH3NH3PbI3 film with and without 2-pyridylthiourea are exhibited in Fig. 4a and b. With adding 2-pyridylthiourea, the steady-state PL spectrum of the perovskite film displayed a blue shift by 7 nm, which suggests fewer surface defects close to the top surface of the perovskite film. We also investigated TRPL measurements on the FTO substrate with and without 2-pyridylthiourea. Fig. 4b shows the TRPL decay measurement and the stretched exponential decay lifetimes are obtained by fitting the data with a bi-exponential decay function, Y = A1exp(−t/τ1) + A2exp(−t/τ2) + y0. In this formula, A1 and A2 are relative amplitudes, while τ1 and τ2 represent the lifetimes of the fast and slow recombination, respectively. The film without 2-pyridylthiourea showed fast and slow phase lifetimes of τ1 = 11.83 ns (fraction A1 = 0.97) and τ2 = 157.84 ns (fraction A2 = 0.03), while the film with 2-pyridylthiourea exhibits fast and slow phase lifetimes of τ1 = 21.27 ns (fraction A1 = 0.89) and τ2 = 388.18 ns (fraction A2 = 0.11). This indicates a lower defect concentration and hence superior electronic quality for the 2-pyridylthiourea-containing perovskite film, consistent with the higher Voc of the corresponding PSC.

Fig. 4c exhibits the cross-sectional SEM image based on the CH3NH3PbI3 film with 2-pyridylthiourea of 0.5 mg mL−1. Fig. 4d displays the J–V curves of PSCs with and without 2-pyridylthioure under AM 1.5G illumination and the corresponding photovoltaic data are summarized in Table 1. The control device based on pristine perovskite has a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 21.13 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.06 V, a fill factor (FF) of 0.69, and a resulting PCE of 15.5%. In contrast, 2-pyridylthiourea-containing perovskite-based devices exhibit significant improvements in both Jsc, Voc and FF. The 2-pyridylthiourea-containing perovskite-based solar cells present the best performance with a PCE of 18.2%, a Jsc of 22.03 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.10 V, and a FF of 0.75, We ascribed the improvement of the performance based on the 2-pyridylthiourea-containing perovskite mainly to its improved light-harvesting ability, charge transport, and the reduction of defect and recombination loss, as well as the improvement of the smooth and continuous perovskite absorber layer, which is due to the coordination of 2-pyridylthiourea and PbI2. Besides, there is a commonly observed hysteresis phenomenon in PSCs which may be associated with the changes of the defect state in the active layer, ion transport, or other changes happening in the interface between the charge collection layer and the active layer, as well as the ferroelectric effect and other factors. The device's hysteresis effect can be reduced obviously by the addition of 2-pyridylthiourea due to the decrease of spontaneous radiative recombination between trap states.
Material
Direction

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)
CH3NH3PbI3 with 2-pyridylthiourea
Reverse
22.03
1.10
0.75
18.2
Forward
22.04
1.10
0.74
18.0
CH3NH3PbI3
Reverse
21.13
1.06
0.69
15.5
Forward
21.14
1.03
0.67
14.9
The stabilized power output was measured in Fig. 4e; the PCE was stable after 30 s. The IPCE spectrum of the cells based on the corresponding perovskite layers is presented in Fig. 4f. By integrating the IPCE spectrum, the Jsc are 21.70 and 20.59 mA cm−2 for the devices with and without 2-pyridylthiourea, respectively, indicating that the results are in good agreement with the Jsc values confirmed from the J–V curves. The reproducibility of the device performance was also evaluated by characterizing about 10 cells. The cells demonstrate excellent reproducibility by the narrow statistical distribution of the photovoltaic metrics shown in Fig. 5.
Long-term stability is a key parameter for perovskite solar cells. The long-term stability test of the device with and without 2-pyridylthiourea had been carried out under an ambient atmosphere with a relative humidity of 55 ± 5% at room temperature, and at 65 °C for 30 days, respectively. As shown in Fig. 6 the devices with 2-pyridylthiourea exhibit better long-term stability under heating and humidity conditions. The PCE of devices with 2-pyridylthiourea decreased by 8% after 30 days under an ambient atmosphere with a relative humidity of 55 ± 5%, while for the control devices without the additive, the value of PCE showed a significant decrease to 12% under the same conditions. After aging at 65 °C for 30 days, the devices with 2-pyridylthiourea also presented better stability than that without 2-pyridylthiourea, which is due to the coordination between 2-pyridylthiourea and PbI2, that can make the precursor more stable. At the same time, the perovskite precursor with 2-pyridylthiourea can be utilized to grow high quality perovskite films, and the films can acquire the desired morphology with larger grain size, improved uniformity and increased hydrophobicity. As a result, the perovskite thin films obtained from the precursor with 2-pyridylthiourea show long-term stability than the films obtained from the precursor without 2-pyridylthiourea.

In conclusion, we show an excellent additive (2-pyridylthiourea) for fabricating highly efficient and stable perovskite solar cells in ambient air. With the additive, the morphology and crystallinity had been improved obviously, which is beneficial to enhance the performance of the solar cells. With the addition of 2-pyridylthiourea, a PCE of 18.2% with less hysteresis can be obtained, which is 18% higher than that of the devices without 2-pyridylthiourea. Moreover, especially with regard to long-term stability, the devices with 2-pyridylthiourea exhibit better stability compared to reference devices when aged under ambient air of 55 ± 5% relative humidity in the dark and under 65 °C after 30 days. The results may pave a new way for fabricating stable and efficient perovskite solar cells.


M. N. S. and F. Z. have contributed equally. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21676188) and Key Projects in the Natural Science Foundation of Tianjin (16JCZDJC37100).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: EDS and the contact angles; the pictures of the perovskite films before and after aging. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta00894e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017