 DOI: 10.1039/D1SE01251G
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2022, 6, 371-376


Haitao
Liu
,

Bizu
He
,

Huiqiang
Lu
,

Rong
Tang
,

Fei
Wu
*,

Cheng
Zhong
,

Shufang
Li
,

Jinliang
Wang
* and 

Linna
Zhu
*

Institute of Chemistry, Henan Academy of Sciences, Zhengzhou 450002, P. R. China. E-mail: jinliangw@hotmail.com

School of Materials & Energy, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, P. R. China. E-mail: lnzhu@swu.edu.cn; feiwu610@swu.edu.cn

Department of Chemistry, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, P. R. China

Received
17th August 2021
, Accepted 24th November 2021
First published on 25th November 2021
D–A type carbazole derivatives (KZ, KZIC and KZRD) are reported as hole transport materials (HTMs) in conventional perovskite solar cells (PSCs). In KZ, carbazole is substituted by diphenylamine groups at the 3,6-position. In KZIC and KZRD, KZ functions as the donor group, with 3-(dicyanomethylene) indone and 3-ethyl rhodanine as the electron-withdrawing groups, respectively. The D–A type molecular structure offers strong electrostatic surface potential on the acceptor part, which could enhance the molecular interaction. The photophysical and electronic properties of the newly designed compounds were studied, and the effect of the molecular structure on the hole transport properties as well as device performances was investigated. The KZRD film exhibits a smoother surface morphology and higher hole mobility compared to KZ and KZIC, ensuring good interfacial contact and efficient hole transport ability. Moreover, the sulfur atom and carbonyl group in KZRD could more effectively passivate defects at the perovskite/HTM interface. Therefore, PSCs using KZRD as the HTM exhibited a high power conversion efficiency of 20.40%, outperforming that of KZ and KZIC-based PSCs.

Over the past decade, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have received widespread attention due to their solution-processability, facile fabrication, low cost and outstanding power conversion efficiency (PCE). To date, the certified efficiency of PSCs has been exceeding 25%. The rapid improvement makes PSCs potential candidates in the solar cell community. Generally, a typical perovskite solar cell device constitutes the perovskite photoabsorber, a hole transport layer, an electron transport layer, in conjunction with the electrodes. Hole transport materials (HTMs) represent one of the most important components for highly efficient PSCs, as they could extract and transport holes, and meanwhile provide a good contact between the perovskite and the metal electrode.

Various hole transport materials have been developed in recent years, which could be roughly distinguished as inorganic metal oxides and organic molecule/polymeric-based HTMs. The inorganic HTMs often show high hole mobility, but the solvent used during film deposition tends to partially dissolve the perovskite material, compromising the device efficiency and stability. In contrast, the diversity in organic materials and the easily modified structures endow them with tunable properties, and the study on organic HTMs, especially that based on small organic molecules has attracted extensive attention in recent years. Spiro-OMeTAD (2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9-spirobifluorene) is the most widely used HTM to date, while the tedious synthesis and purification processes could be a hurdle on the road to commercialization of PSCs. In recent years, a large number of organic HTMs were developed, aiming to replace the high-cost spiro-OMeTAD. Carbazole was extensively introduced in constructing organic hole transport materials because of its photophysical properties, good charge transport properties, and fine-tunable optical and electrical properties. Generally, the carbazole moiety is designed as the peripheral group, in conjunction with various core structures. For example, the benzo[1,2-b:3,4-b′:5,6-b′′]trithiophene (BTT) core structure and carbazole derivative-based star-shaped HTMs were reported, endowing the PSCs with comparable performance to spiro-OMeTAD-based devices. Diphenylamine-substituted carbazole fragments linked by non-conjugated methylenebenzene were developed as HTMs, which showed good thermal, optical and photophysical properties, as well as decent hole mobility. Previously, we synthesized a series of D–A–D type HTMs with carbazole-diphenylamine as the donor and benzothiadiazole (BT) derivatives as the acceptor. The incorporation of the benzothiadiazole core structure increased polarity of the whole molecule and facilitated molecular interaction, thus increasing device performances. More importantly, the hole transport properties were significantly improved when further increasing the electron-withdrawing ability of the central BT unit.
Although a variety of HTMs have been developed incorporating carbazole derivatives, in most cases, carbazole derivatives were constructed with star-shape or D–A–D type structures. Carbazole-based D–A type HTMs were relatively less reported till now. The D–A featuring molecules have the following advantages: (1) facilely tune the energy levels to match the valence band of the perovskite, (2) maintain a relatively high LUMO level to block electron transfer from the perovskite to the metal electrode, and (3) ensure large polarity and strong intermolecular interactions, which are advantageous for high hole mobility. Therefore, it is reasonable to deduce that carbazole-based D–A type HTMs are promising for perovskite solar cells. Herein, we report carbazole-based D–A featuring small organic molecules as HTMs in perovskite solar cells. Two HTMs with methoxydiphenylamine-substituted carbazole as the donor, combined with the IC or RD acceptor were designed and synthesized, namely KZIC and KZRD, as shown in Scheme 1. Reference compound KZ without the acceptor unit was also synthesized for comparison. As electron-deficient groups, 3-(dicyanomethylene) indone (IC) and 3-ethyl rhodanine (RD) were often used to construct n-type organic semiconductors. The incorporation of the acceptor unit provides a suitable HOMO level for hole extraction, meanwhile, a strong molecular interaction facilitates hole mobility. Additionally, the cyano (–CN), CS and carbonyl (CO) groups on the acceptor moiety could work to passivate defects at the perovskite/HTM interface, as a result of the Lewis acid–base interaction with the undercoordinated Pb2+ in the perovskite. It turned out that among the three compounds studied, KZRD containing the rhodanine acceptor showed the well-matched HOMO level, highest hole mobility, and lowest reorganization energy. As a result, devices based on KZRD achieved a PCE of 20.40%, with a high open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.11 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 22.46 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 0.82. Devices based on the KZIC HTM delivered an inferior PCE of 18.66%, while those based on KZ showed the lowest PCE of 16.65%. The results demonstrate that molecular engineering toward HTMs has potential to improve the perovskite solar cell performance.

The molecular structures of KZIC and KZRD are shown in Scheme 1. KZ and intermediate 1 were synthesized according to the method reported in the literature. Detailed synthetic routes are described in the ESI (Scheme S1). Structural characterization was performed using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and mass spectroscopy (MS). The results indicate the accuracy of the molecular structure and the corresponding spectra are presented in the ESI.

The UV-vis absorption spectra of KZ, KZIC and KZRD were measured in CH2Cl2 solution, as shown in Fig. 1. It is observed that for KZ without the acceptor group, the maximum absorption was at 312 nm, attributed to the π–π* transition, while for KZIC and KZRD, except for the π–π* transition at around 300 nm, an additional absorption band at a longer wavelength was observed (513 nm for KZIC, 381 nm and 490 nm for KZRD), indicating the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) feature in the two D–A type molecules. The onset absorption (λonset) of KZ, KZIC and KZRD is measured to be 444 nm, 611 nm and 617 nm, respectively. And the optical band gap (Eg) of the three compounds is calculated to be 2.79 eV for KZ, 2.03 eV for KZIC and 2.01 eV for KZRD, according to the equation Eg = 1240/λonset. Apparently, the D–A molecular structure promotes intramolecular charge transfer in KZIC and KZRD, resulting in a narrower bandgap in comparison with that of reference molecule KZ.
The electrochemical properties of the three compounds were studied by cyclic voltammetry (CV), and the CV curves were recorded in CH2Cl2 solution containing 0.1 M TBAPF6 as the electrolyte, and ferrocene (Fc) as the reference (Fig. S7). The highest-occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy level is calculated according to the first oxidation peak versus Fc/Fc+. It is calculated that the HOMO energy levels of KZ, KZIC and KZRD are −5.22 eV, −5.21 eV and −5.24 eV respectively, matching well with the valence band of the perovskite (VB, −5.43 eV). The suitable HOMO level indicates that the three compounds could effectively extract holes from the perovskite layer. We note that the HOMO level of KZRD is the deepest among the three compounds, perhaps due to the stronger electron-withdrawing ability of the rhodanine group, which may contribute to a larger open-circuit voltage in the corresponding PSCs. The lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy level is calculated from ELUMO = EHOMO + Eg. As shown in Table 1, the LUMO levels of the three compounds are much higher than the conduction band of the perovskite, and thus could efficiently block electron back transfer from the perovskite to the metal electrode.
HTMs

λ
abs
 (nm)

E
HOMO
 (eV)

E
LUMO
 (eV)

E
g
 (eV)
Hole mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1)

a Measured in dichloromethane (CH2Cl2) solution.
b Obtained from CV.
c 
E
g was obtained from the onset of the absorption spectra.

KZ
312, 372
−5.22
−2.43
2.79
8.02 × 10−5
KZIC
282, 308, 513
−5.21
−3.18
2.03
3.79 × 10−4
KZRD
308, 381, 490
−5.24
−3.23
2.01
6.57 × 10−4
Frontier molecular orbital distribution of the three molecules was performed using density functional theory (DFT) at the B3LYP/def2SVP level, and the results are shown in Fig. S8. The HOMO level of KZ was distributed on the whole molecule, while the LUMO was mainly on the central carbazole moiety. Strikingly, the orbital distribution was much different in the D–A type molecules KZIC and KZRD. For the D–A configuration, the HOMO was mostly distributed on the carbazole-diphenylamine electron-donating moiety, while the LUMO was mainly on the acceptor part. Electrostatic surface potential maps (ESPs) of the molecular models of KZ, KZIC and KZRD were also recorded to study the electrostatic charge distribution of the three molecules. As shown in Fig. 1c, a strong electrostatic potential could be detected on the acceptor part in KZIC and KZRD, which is beneficial for the molecular interaction, and thus has potential to enhance charge transport.
The thermal stability of the newly designed materials was studied by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). As shown in Fig. S9, the thermal decomposition temperature (Td) of KZ, KZIC and KZRD is 499 °C, 408 °C and 468 °C at a weight loss of 5% under a nitrogen atmosphere. As shown in Fig. S9, the glass transition temperatures (Tg) of KZ, KZIC and KZRD were at 94 °C, 139 °C and 118 °C, respectively, as observed from the second heating–cooling cycle. The above results clearly demonstrate that all three compounds have good thermal stability, and are suitable for application in solar cell devices.
Hole mobility is an important factor for hole transport materials, and the space-charge limited current (SCLC) method was used to evaluate the hole mobility of KZ, KZIC and KZRD (Fig. 2a). The hole-only device was fabricated with a configuration of ITO (indium tin oxide)/PEDOT:PSS (poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/polystyrene sulfonate)/HTMs/MoO3//Ag, and hole mobility is calculated according to the Mott–Gurney law. As a result, the three compounds (in the doped state) show hole mobilities of 8.02 × 10−5 for KZ, 3.79 × 10−4 for KZIC and 6.57 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 for KZRD. Obviously, the hole mobilities of KZIC and KZRD are an order of magnitude higher than that of KZ, revealing that the introduction of the acceptor moiety in the D–A structure significantly promotes the hole transport properties. Moreover, steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra were recorded to study the ability of the three compounds to extract holes from the perovskite. As shown in Fig. 2b, the neat perovskite film on the quartz substrate shows a high PL intensity, with a peak at about 775 nm. After spin-coating different HTMs onto the perovskite layer, significant PL quenching was observed. The perovskite films covered with KZIC and KZRD show a stronger quenching effect than that with KZ, further confirming that the D–A type HTMs have higher hole extraction ability than KZ without the acceptor group. Therefore, the molecular engineering of D–A type HTMs is rational and advantageous for enhancing hole extraction and hole mobility. In addition, KZRD shows a slightly higher quenching effect compared to KZIC, which may contribute to a higher short-circuit current density in devices based on the KZRD HTM.
Film morphology is also an important factor when evaluating hole transport materials, which directly affects the interfacial contact. Correspondingly, the surface SEM images of perovskite films with different HTMs on top are measured and the results are shown in Fig. 3a–c. It could be seen that the perovskite layer could be fully covered with the three HTMs. Compared with KZ and KZIC, the surface morphology of the perovskite film deposited with KZRD is much smoother. AFM (atomic force microscope) images of perovskite films deposited with different hole transport materials are also studied, as shown in Fig. 3d–f. The RMS (root-mean-square roughness) values of perovskite/KZ, perovskite/KZIC and perovskite/KZRD films were 10.8, 10.3 and 8.7 nm, respectively. The perovskite film deposited with KZRD shows the minimum RMS value, indicating that KZRD could provide a good interfacial contact between the perovskite and the metal electrode.
To evaluate the photovoltaic performances of PSCs with different hole-transporting materials, planar n-i-p type devices (FTO/compact TiO2/perovskite/HTMs/Ag) were fabricated. The cross-sectional SEM image of PSCs with the KZRD HTM is shown in Fig. S10, and each layer could be clearly distinguished. The thicknesses of KZ, KZIC and KZRD films were 134.6, 138.4 and 141.2 nm, respectively. Fig. 4a shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the devices under AM 1.5G illumination, and the detailed parameters are summarized in Table 2. Among the three HTMs studied, PSCs based on KZRD as the HTM achieved the best performance, exhibiting a photon conversion efficiency (PCE) of 20.40%, with a high open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.11 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 22.46 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 0.82. Under identical conditions, PSCs based on the KZIC HTM exhibited an inferior efficiency of 18.66%, with Voc of 1.08 V, Jsc of 22.17 mA cm−2 and FF of 0.78. For comparison, PSCs based on the KZ HTM obtained a relatively low efficiency of 16.65% (Voc = 1.06 V, Jsc = 21.48 mA cm−2, and FF = 0.73). A control device using the spiro-OMeTAD HTM was also fabricated and measured under the same conditions, and a PCE of 19.47% was obtained. Generally, we can see that the D–A design motif has excellent hole transport properties and leads to decent photovoltaic performances, when compared to the reference compound KZ without the acceptor moiety.
HTM

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Best
Average

a The data in parentheses is the average value based on 20 devices.

KZ
1.06
21.48
0.73
16.65
(15.73 ± 0.60)
KZIC
1.08
22.17
0.78
18.66
(17.81 ± 0.56)
KZRD
1.11
22.46
0.82
20.40
(19.39 ± 0.52)
Spiro-OMeTAD
1.12
22.08
0.79
19.47
(18.68 ± 0.50)
As summarized in Table 2, KZRD-based devices outperform PSCs utilizing the other HTMs mainly due to the elevated Voc and FF values. PSCs based on the KZRD HTM exhibited the highest Voc value, which should be due to the more matched HOMO level of KZRD compared to the other HTMs. Additionally, the sulfur atom and the CO group were able to interact with the under-coordinated Pb2+ in the perovskite, thus passivating defects at the perovskite/KZRD interface, and reducing the non-radiative recombination of carriers, which could also contribute to an elevated Voc in KZRD-based PSCs. The defect passivation effect could be confirmed using the FTIR spectra of the PbI2–HTM mixture (for simplification, PbI2 was used instead of the perovskite). As shown in Fig. S13, there is about a 3 cm−1 shift of CO and ∼2 cm−1 shift of CS in KZRD after the addition of PbI2, as observed from the FTIR spectra, indicating that interaction occurs between CO/CS and Pb2+ in the perovskite. For KZIC, the cyano group shows a ∼3 cm−1 shift in the presence of PbI2, while the wavenumber of the carbonyl group almost has no change, revealing that only the cyano group interacts with the undercoordinated Pb2+. In contrast, the FTIR spectra of KZ did not show significant changes before and after the addition of PbI2 (Fig. S14). As for the FF, it could be concluded from the above discussions that the efficient hole extraction ability, high hole mobility and smooth film morphology of the KZRD film have a bonus effect on the improved FF value in the corresponding device.
The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of devices containing different HTMs are shown in Fig. 4c. In the visible light range from 400 nm to 750 nm, all the devices show strong photoelectric conversion intensity. The integrated current densities of the devices based on KZ, KZIC and KZRD are 20.22 mA cm−2, 21.04 mA cm−2 and 21.25 mA cm−2, respectively, which are consistent with the Jsc values obtained from the J–V curves. The hysteresis effect of PSCs with different HTMs was studied by scanning J–V curves in the forward and reverse directions. KZRD-based PSCs are shown in Fig. 4b, and the detailed parameters are summarized in Table S1. The hysteresis effect of devices utilizing the other HTMs is provided in the ESI (Table S1). Little difference is observed in the forward and backward scanning of KZRD-based devices, and a hysteresis index (HI) of 0.059 was obtained, indicating that little hysteresis existed in the device using the KZRD HTM.
The photocurrent density and efficiency of PSCs based on KZRD were measured at the maximum power output (MPP) at a bias voltage of 0.97 V (Fig. 4d). A stabilized PCE of 20.2% and a stable Jsc of 20.8 mA cm−2 were detected. Similarly, PSCs based on KZ and KZIC show a stabilized PCE of 16.4% at a bias voltage of 0.83 V, and 18.4% PCE at a bias voltage of 0.91 V, respectively (Fig. S12). Distribution statistics of photovoltaic parameters of PSCs using different HTMs were also recorded, based on 20 independent cells, and the results are shown in Fig. S11. It can be seen that all parameters (Voc, Jsc, FF and PCE) exhibit a narrow distribution, indicating that the devices have good reproducibility.
In order to study the charge recombination and charge transfer dynamics of devices based on different HTMs, transient photovoltage (TPV) and transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements were performed. As shown in Fig. 5a, the photovoltage decay of PSCs with the KZRD HTM is the slowest among the devices studied, indicating a longer charger carrier lifetime and less charge recombination in KZRD-based devices. This could be attributed to the efficient hole extraction from the perovskite layer to the KZRD hole-transporting layer, which promotes the spatial separation of electrons and holes and suppresses charge recombination. Meanwhile, compared to KZ and KZIC-based devices, KZRD-based PSCs show an obvious faster decay in photocurrent density (Fig. 5b), which should be due to the high hole mobility of the KZRD HTM. Furthermore, the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) of PSCs based on different HTMs was also performed to fully understand the interfacial charge transport processes (Fig. S15). EIS was performed in the dark, and the equivalent circuit model is shown in the inset of Fig. S15. The Nyquist plot shows a primary semicircle in the low frequency region, reflecting the charge recombination impedance. Among the HTMs studied, KZRD-based PSCs show the largest semicircle while KZ-based devices show the smallest one, revealing that KZRD endows the corresponding devices with the largest recombination resistance (Rrec). The results further confirm that KZRD could more effectively suppress charge recombination at the perovskite/HTM interface.
Stability is one of the most important factors to evaluate the performance of a solar cell device. PSC stability was measured in a glove box filled with N2 with the devices unencapsulated (Fig. S16). It turned out that the stability of the devices based on KZ, KZIC and KZRD remained at 74%, 80% and 85% of the original efficiency, respectively, after storing for 30 days in a N2 atmosphere. For comparison, the device based on spiro-OMeTAD exhibited similar stability and the PCE remained at 82% of the original value.

In summary, three carbazole-based hole transport materials were synthesized and characterized. Compared with KZ, KZIC and KZRD containing a strong electron-withdrawing moiety enhance the molecular interaction, and thus are beneficial for charge transfer. Correspondingly, KZIC and KZRD showed improved hole extraction and hole transport ability. SEM and AFM images show that the surface of the perovskite film covered with KZRD is smoother than that of KZ and KZIC, ensuring good interfacial contact between the perovskite layer and the metal electrode. In addition, the rhodanine group in KZRD is able to passivate defects at the perovskite/HTM interface. As a result, KZRD-based devices achieved a high PCE of 20.40%, with a high Voc of 1.11 V.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The work described in this paper was supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (XDJK2020B002) and the Research and Development Project of Henan Academy of Sciences (no. 200603122, 200503005, 200603113 and 210603034).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1se01251g
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022