 DOI: 10.1039/C7PY00349H
(Paper)
Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 2227-2234


Tao
Wang
,

Lihui
Jiang
,

Jun
Yuan
,

Liuliu
Feng
,

Zhi-Guo
Zhang
,

Jiannan
Xiang
,

Yongfang
Li
 and 

Yingping
Zou
*

State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China

College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China. E-mail: yingpingzou@csu.edu.cn

Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China

Received
1st March 2017
, Accepted 16th March 2017
First published on 17th March 2017
In order to improve the photovoltaic performance of pyrido[3,4-b]pyrazine (PP)-based polymers, a new fluoropyrido[3,4-b]pyrazine based D–A type polymer (BDT-S-fPP) was synthesized. The optical, electrochemical and photovoltaic properties were well investigated. A power conversion efficiency (PCE) over 6.0% with a single junction device was obtained, which is the highest PCE among the PP-based polymers reported to date.

In recent years, polymer solar cells (PSCs) with the bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) structure have attracted considerable attention from both the academia and industry communities due to their simple preparation, lightweight, low cost and large flexible area. The critical issue in PSCs is to improve the PCE of the devices. The PCE value of photovoltaic devices is directly proportional to three key parameters, short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), and fill factor (FF). Combining donor–acceptor (D–A) units is an effective method to obtain high-performance donor materials due to the unique feature of tuning the optical and electronic properties. Until now, numerous photovoltaic polymers with D–A structures were designed and investigated. Many building blocks are derived from alkylthiothienyl substituted benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (BDT-S), thieno[3,4-b]thiophene (TT), benzothiadiazole (BT)etc. They are widely used to construct conjugated D–A copolymers and most of them have demonstrated excellent photovoltaic properties. The BDT unit is an excellent building block, with high rigidity and planar conjugated structure which is beneficial for ordered π–π stacking. Hence, it was expected to obtain a relatively high hole mobility. Furthermore, introduction of alkylthio side chains on BDT can modulate optical, electrical and morphological properties, which affect the photovoltaic properties. The PCEs of solution-processed PSCs have reached beyond 10% by optimizing the bandgap, carrier mobilities, energy levels and modified morphologies of the active layer. To simultaneously achieve a high Jsc (over 20 mA cm−2), high Voc (over 1 V) and fill factor (FF) (over 75%) is still a great challenge for molecular design of new photovoltaic polymers.

To improve the photovoltaic performance, tremendous efforts have been successfully applied to design molecular structures of conjugated polymers, including backbone modulation, side chain optimization, functional substitutions, etc. In terms of designing new polymeric materials, we noticed that pyrido[3,4-b]pyrazine (PP) is a fascinating electron-deficient unit, its electron-accepting ability larger than pyridine and quinoxaline (e.g., reduction potential vs. Hg pool: −0.86 V (pyridopyrazine) > −1.10 V (quinoxaline (Qx)) > −2.20 V (pyridine)) because of the electron-withdrawing properties of two imine nitrogens and the pyridine N-atom. Furthermore, the PP motif can provide the versatility of introducing different substituents easily on the 2 and 3 positions (Scheme 1), which could be used to tune the solubility, bandgap and energy levels of the resulting polymers. As is well-known, 2,3-diphenylpyrido[3,4-b]pyrazine, which possesses two separated phenyl rings, is one of the commonly investigated PP derivatives because of its facile synthesis and versatility. Thus, using the PP unit as components in PSCs is an attractive way to improve the PCE. Some D–A PP-based conjugated polymers were synthesized for photovoltaic applications, however they usually have low molecular weight, poor solubility and low FF. Some research studies indicated that PP-based polymers as light-harvesting and electron-donating materials have exhibited moderate PCEs from 2.0% to 4.4%. Based on the above reasons, PP based polymers received much less attention compared to those from their similar counterpart-quinoxaline (Qx) based polymers. Recent progress in molecular design has shown that solubility, π-electron transport, optical and the electronic properties can be well tuned by side chain engineering. Meanwhile, the fluorine atom is an interesting substituent. The incorporation of an electron-withdrawing fluorine atom onto the periphery of the acceptor unit can lower the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy level simultaneously. Moreover, the size of the fluorine atom is small, which can minimize the undesired steric interactions. Fluorinated polymers could also lead to good compatibility between donor and acceptor phases to shape highly ordered film morphology from the inter and intramolecular F–H hydrogen bonding effect and the induced dipole along C–F bonding. As a result, the FF and Jsc of the corresponding devices are improved. For instance, the PBDD4T-2F showed an improvement of the absorption with the increase of the number of fluorine atoms, PSCs based on the PBDD4T-2F/PC71BM exhibited a high PCE of 9.04% with a high Jsc of 15.13 mA cm−2. Similar phenomena have been investigated in some other fluorinated D–A polymer systems. Although fluorinated D–A polymers have made great progress in PSCs, it is still needed to understand how fluorine affects the optoelectronic properties.
Very recently, our group has reported a conjugated polymer PBDTT-ffQx, which is synthesized from 5,8-bis(5-bromothiophen-2-yl)-2,3-bis(4-((2-ethylhexyl)oxy)-3-fluorophenyl)-6,7-difluoroquinoxaline and (4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl)bis(trimethylstannane). The polymer showed a promising PCE up to 8.6%. Our investigations demonstrated that by the incorporation of an electron-deficient fluorine atom at the meta-position of phenyl substituted Qx, the charge mobility and morphology were significantly improved, which resulted in a higher Jsc and FF. We also found that the using of an alkoxy group not only significantly enhanced the solubility and molecular weights but also affected their self-assembling properties. More importantly, an alkoxyl group can be used to replace the alkyl chain because of its increase of the electron donating ability and coplanarity. Encouraged by this strategy, we adopted a similar method by introducing fluorine atoms at the meta-position of phenyl substituted PP to synthesize a new electron acceptor unit (Scheme 1). We expected that a PP derivative with 3-fluorophenyl substitution can improve photovoltaic performance, imparting a more efficient balance among the three factors of Jsc, Voc and FF.
In this work, we designed and synthesized a new D–A alternating copolymer, namely poly{2,3-bis(4-((2-ethylhexyl)oxy)-3-fluorophenyl)-5-(5-(6-methyl-4,8-bis(5-(octylthio)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophen-2-yl)thiophen-2-yl)-8-(5-methylthiophen-2-yl)pyrido[3,4-b]pyrazine} (BDT-S-fPP), which was based on 2,3-bis(4-((2-ethylhexyl)oxy)-3-fluorophenyl)pyrido[3,4-b]pyrazine (fPP) and (4,8-bis(5-((2-ethylhexyl)thio)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl) (BDT-S) (as shown in Scheme 1). Due to the introduction of the appending two alkoxy side chains, BDT-S-fPP was readily soluble in common organic solvents such as chloroform (CF), chlorobenzene (CB), 1,2-dichlorobenzene (o-DCB), etc. BDT-S-fPP exhibits a broad absorption spectrum. Benefitting from the two-dimensional (2D) donor and fPP acceptor unit, PSCs with a blend ratio of BDT-S-fPP:PC71BM (1:1, w/w, with 1.2 vol% DIO additive) as the active layer showed a PCE of 6.2%, with a Voc of 0.80 V, a Jsc of 13.85 mA cm−2 and a FF of 56%, which is the highest PCE among PP-based polymers to date.

5,8-Dibromo-2,3-bis(4-((2-ethylhexyl)oxy)-3-fluorophenyl)pyrido[3,4-b]pyrazine (fPP) and (4,8-bis(5-((2-ethylhexyl)thio)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl)bis(trimethylstannane) (BDT-S) were synthesized according to the reported literature. BDT-S-fPP was synthesized via the typical Stille-coupling reaction with Pd(PPh3)4 as a catalyst in anhydrous toluene solution under Ar. The polymerization was conducted at 110 °C under an inert atmosphere for 24 hours. The synthesis route is shown in Scheme 1 and the detailed synthetic procedures are described in the ESI. The crude polymer was precipitated into methanol and filtered. After that, it was subjected to Soxhlet extraction successively with methanol, hexane, acetone and chloroform. Then the chloroform fraction was concentrated under vacuum evaporation, precipitated into methanol and collected by filtration, a purple-black solid was obtained. fPP, BDT-S and BDT-S-fPP were well characterized by 1H NMR and 13C NMR. NMR spectra of the intermediates and polymer are shown in Fig. S1–S6 in the ESI. In general, polymers with higher molecular weight lead to a better photovoltaic performance since it can promote the hole mobility, optical properties and film morphology of the conjugated polymers. The molecular weight of the BDT-S-fPP was estimated by high-temperature gel permeation chromatography (HT-GPC) at 150 °C using 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene as the eluent. BDT-S-fPP showed a number-average molecular weight (Mn) of 16.1 kDa, with a corresponding polydispersity index (PDI) of 3.59 (as shown in Fig. S7 in the ESI). Good thermal stability of the polymer can prevent the film deformation. BDT-S-fPP exhibited good thermal stability with the decomposition temperature (Td) at 5% weight-loss at approximately 359 °C under an inert atmosphere (see Fig. S8). The thermal stability of BDT-S-fPP is adequate for its practical application. The related data including the molecular weight and TGA of BDT-S-fPP are listed in Table 1.

Polymer

M
n (kDa)

M
w (kDa)
PDI
Yield (%)

T
d (°C)

a 
M
n, Mw, and PDI of the polymer were determined by HT-GPC using polystyrene standards in 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene.
b The 5% weight-loss temperatures under an inert atmosphere.

BDT-S-fPP
16.1
57.9
3.59
85
359

UV-vis absorption spectra of the polymer in CF solution and in the film state are shown in Fig. 1a. In dilute CF solution, BDT-S-fPP showed a broad and strong absorption from 300 nm to 750 nm. The absorption peaks are located at 375, 442 and 633 nm, respectively, due to the localized π–π* transitions and intramolecular charge transfer interactions between fluoropyrido[3,4-b]pyrazine (fPP) and the BDT-S unit. In addition, it is worth noting that the λmax of BDT-S-fPP in thin film has no distinct red-shift compared with that in solution because of the aggregation of the polymer chains in solution, indicating that an orderly π–π stacking was formed in solution. Meanwhile, BDT-S-fPP thin film showed an absorption edge (λonset) at ca. 748 nm, corresponding to the optical band gap (Eoptg = 1240/λonset) of 1.66 eV. The HOMO level was deduced from the onset electrochemical oxidation potential of 0.92 V according to EHOMO = −(Eox + 4.4) (eV). The LUMO level was calculated from Eoptg according to ELUMO = Eoptg + EHOMO, and the HOMO and LUMO levels of BDT-S-fPP were −5.32 eV and −3.66 eV, respectively (Fig. 1b). The gaps of the HOMOdonor–HOMOacceptor (ΔHOMO) in the BDT-S-fPP:PC71BM blend are 0.58 eV. A ΔHOMO higher than 0.3 eV is usually considered as a threshold for efficient exciton dissociation. Obviously, the HOMO level of BDT-S-fPP was low which enabled a driving force for charge separation. The reasons probably arise from introducing fluorine atoms onto the meta-position of phenyl substituted PP, which can increase the electron-deficiency of PP. The other factor is that the sulfur atom exhibits π-electron withdrawing properties when attaching onto the thiophene unit, which makes the HOMO energy level down-shift. Therefore, a higher Voc can be expected. The optical and CV data of BDT-S-fPP are summarized in Table S2. In order to further investigate the exciton dissociation and charge transfer behavior, photoluminescence (PL) quenching experiments were conducted in the blend films. As shown in Fig. 1c, the spectral shape of the pure polymer was broad. When excited at a wavelength of 620 nm, a PL emission peak of the polymer donor appears in the range of 700–900 nm centered at 825 nm. It is almost completely quenched upon mixing with PC71BM, the results indicated that efficient charge transfer occurs through the D/A interface, which might be due to the formation of well-developed intermixed phases.


The typical current density–voltage (J–V) characteristic curves of PSCs under simulated AM 1.5 G irradiation are demonstrated in Fig. 2a and the corresponding photovoltaic data are listed in Table 2. The detailed photovoltaic properties are shown in Table S2. The best device exhibited a PCE of 6.2% with Voc = 0.80 V, Jsc = 13.85 mA cm−2, and FF = 0.56. To the best of our knowledge, PCE here is among one of the highest values of PP based derivatives in BHJ PSCs. The higher Jsc may partially be assigned to the broadened absorption and nanoscale morphology films. Meanwhile, the higher Voc is benefited from the strong electron-withdrawing fluorine atoms and pyridine N-atoms which can decrease the HOMO level. The corresponding values of Jsc (9.10 mA cm−2 to 13.85 mA cm−2) and FF (0.41 to 0.56) have significantly been improved by using 1.2 vol% DIO as the processing additive. To verify the accuracy of the measurement of the devices, the corresponding external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves of the devices were also measured under the optimized conditions as shown in Fig. 2b. The EQE profiles from the BDT-S-fPP:PC71BM blend are consistent with their corresponding absorption spectra (Fig. 2a). The BDT-S-fPP based device exhibited quite efficient EQE responses from 300 to 700 nm and the maximum EQE plateau reaches 50% from 350 to 650 nm. According to the EQE curves, the calculated Jsc value of the devices agrees well with Jsc from J–V measurements (the error within 5%), indicating that our photovoltaic results are reliable.

Active layer

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Thickness (nm)

a Device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/BDT-S-fPP:PC71BM/ZrAcac/Al.
b Thickness of the active layers.

BDT-S-fPP:PC71BM
0.84
9.10
0.41
3.15
100
BDT-S-fPP:PC71BM (1.2% DIO)
0.80
13.85
0.56
6.20
110

Besides the absorption and energy levels, the charge carrier transport abilities of conjugated polymers are also critical for photovoltaic performance. It is generally known that Jsc and FF are related to the hole and electron mobility (μh and μe). A higher charge mobility can ensure charge transport within an active layer without large photocurrent loss owing to recombination of opposite charges. To investigate the charge transport, we used the space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) method to measure the hole mobilities with a device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/BDT-S-fPP:PC71BM/Au. The electron mobilities were measured with a device structure of ITO/ZnO/BDT-S-fPP:PC71BM/ZrAcac/Ag. The SCLC is calculated by equation:

(1)
in which
J is the current density, ε0 is the permittivity of free space, εr is the permittivity of the material, μ0 is the zero-field mobility, d is the thickness of the device, V is the internal voltage and V = Vappl − Vbi, where Vappl is the applied voltage to the device, and Vbi is the built-in potential. The results are plotted as ln(Jd3/V2) vs. (V/d)0.5. Fig. 3a and b show the J1/2–V plots of the BDT-S-fPP/PC71BM-based devices with or without DIO treatment, the related results are summarized in Table S3. According to eqn (1) and Fig. 3a and b, the μh/μe of the BDT-S-fPP/PC71BM (1:1) film without DIO is evaluated to be 1.1 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1/1.58 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 1.43 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1/1.85 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the blend with 1.2% DIO additive. Obviously, with the addition of DIO, the mobilities are significantly increased. The results showed that the increased charge carrier mobilities with the addition of 1.2% DIO are beneficial to improving the device performance. The higher and more balanced μh/μe is conducive to the higher Jsc and FF, resulting in a higher PCE.


In order to better understand the differences in PCE, the surface morphology and the internal morphology of the BDT-S-fPP/PC71BM (w:w = 1:1) blend films were investigated by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). All the blend films were prepared under the same conditions with the optimized photovoltaic devices. The height and phase images (5 μm × 5 μm) of the blend films are shown in Fig. 4a and b. The corresponding root mean square (RMS) roughnesses are observed to be 3.50 and 4.48 nm from the as-cast film and the blend film with 1.2% DIO additive, respectively. It is suggested that the treatment of DIO can promote the aggregation of polymer and PC71BM blend, which is beneficial for the exciton dissociation and charge transportation. Fig. 4c and d show the TEM images of BDT-S-fPP/PC71BM blend films. The dark and light regions represent fullerene and polymer domains, respectively. Some large-size aggregations of PC71BM can be observed in the TEM image (Fig. 4c), while the blend films were spin-coated from CF solution with 1.2% DIO additive, a preferable blend film morphology was formed as shown in Fig. 4d.


In summary, a new D–A copolymer based on an alkylthio-thienyl substituted BDT donor unit and an fPP acceptor unit, BDT-S-fPP, was synthesized by a Stille coupling polymerization and used as the donor material in PSCs. The effects of side chains of PP on the photovoltaic performances were investigated. The fluorine atoms and the pyridine N-atoms have increased the withdrawing ability of PP, resulting in a lower HOMO level. When 1.2% DIO was used as a processing additive, for BDT-S-fPP based devices, the PCE got increased to 6.20% from 3.15%, accountable to an improved morphology and higher charge mobilities. We firmly believe that the photovoltaic properties can be further improved by material design and different processing conditions. Our research showed that fPP is probably an excellent electron acceptor block for constructing high efficiency photovoltaic conjugated polymers.


This work was supported by NSFC (no. 51673205 and 21506258), the Hunan Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China, and the Project of Innovation-driven Plan in Central South University, China (2016CX035).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details including synthesis, related figures and tables. See DOI: 10.1039/c7py00349h
‡ These authors contributed to this work equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017