 DOI: 10.1039/D3NJ00845B
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2023, 47, 11792-11799


Yuanyuan
Xu
,

Xuyu
Gao
*,

Xiaochen
Song
,

Duoquan
You
,

Jingsheng
Wang
,

Jian
Wang
,

Yijing
Wu
,

Xianwang
Tao
,

Jian
Ye
 and 

Youtian
Tao
*

Key Lab for Flexible Electronics and Institute of Advanced Materials, Nanjing Tech University, 30 South Puzhu Road, Nanjing, 211816, P. R. China. E-mail: iamxygao@njtech.edu.cn; iamyttao@njtech.edu.cn

Duolun Technology Corporation Ltd., 1555 Tianyin Avenue, Nanjing, 211100, P. R. China

Received
22nd February 2023
, Accepted 16th May 2023
First published on 8th June 2023
In this study, two electron acceptors with fully-unfused conformations, namely MBTIC-4F and MBTIC-4Cl, are facilely developed with a steric boron dipyrromethene (BODIPY) derivative as core, single thiophene as bridges, and fluorinated and chlorinated dicyanoindanone as endcaps. Benefiting from the steric BODIPY core, both the fully-unfused electron acceptors (FUEAs) show twisted geometries to avoid excessive intermolecular stacking and achieve satisfactory sunlight capture contributed by the inherent high extinction coefficient of BODIPY. Blending with the polymer donor PBDB-T, MBTIC-4Cl affords a better power conversion efficiency of 3.47% than MBTIC-4F of 2.03% in the corresponding organic solar cells. The disparities in crystallinity and miscibility are unraveled to be responsible for differential photovoltaic performance. More specifically, chlorinated MBTIC-4Cl demonstrates a stronger crystalline structure, lower miscibility with PBDB-T, and large-scale pure acceptor domains in the relevant blends, resulting in favorable morphology to guarantee sufficient exciton dissociation, high electron mobility, and balanced charge transport. This study reveals great potential for achieving cost-effective FUEAs by employing a BODIPY core via an appropriate molecular design.

The rapid progress of fused-ring electron acceptors (FREAs) has stimulated flourishing developments in organic solar cells (OSCs) in the past decade. In particular, numerous ITIC and Y6 analogues have contributed inspiring power conversion efficiency (PCE) beyond 15% and 19% in single-junction OSCs, respectively. However, FREAs generally suffer from tedious synthetic routes, low yields, and fastidious reacting and purifying conditions, which are unfavorable for large-scale synthesis and commercialization. Therefore, strategies of replacing all-fused-ring cores in FREAs with nonfused-ring architectures have been presented. The resulting nonfused-ring electron acceptors (NFREAs) feature unique merits of facile synthesis and diversified molecule-design probabilities. However, to date, state-of-the-art NFREAs are commonly in partially-fused structures. Despite the fused dicyanoindanone (IC) as terminal electron-accepting (A) groups, fused cyclopentadithiophene (CPDT) and indacenodithiophene (IDT) are commonly used as electron-donating (D) bridges. In contrast, replacing fused D units with fully-unfused building blocks, such as single aromatic rings, can further simplify molecular structures, which is more favorable for achieving cost-effective OSCs.

However, abnegating partially-fused-ring skeletons can probably result in adverse influences on photovoltaic properties. On one hand, owing to the small-scale conjugation of single aromatic rings and consequential weakened intramolecular charge transfer (ICT), fully-unfused fragments dedicate less light-harvest capacity compared with the bulky fused-ring building blocks. On the other hand, the alkyl substituents attached to the sp3 carbon atoms of CPDT or IDT can effectively suppress the excessive intermolecular stacking of acceptor materials, thus leading to appropriate phase separation and suitable stacking intensity in bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) blends. Hence, if CPDT or IDT is replaced with fully-unfused aromatic units, substitute molecular design strategies to synchronously promote absorbance and restrict excessive intermolecular aggregation should be carried out to remedy the deficiencies.
Consequently, in this study, we afforded a “two birds one stone” strategy by employing a steric boron dipyrromethene (BODIPY) derivative as the central unit to comprise fully-unfused electron acceptors (FUEAs). BODIPY derivatives are famous for their remarkable optical properties, including high absorption coefficient, low optical band gap, high fluorescence quantum yield, and excellent photochemical stability. Consequently, BODIPY units have achieved various applications in bioimaging, photodynamic therapy, fluorescent probes, and organic optoelectronics. In addition, the superiorities of BODIPY derivatives ensure that they are workable as organic photovoltaic candidates. Recently, some novel and efficient electron donor and acceptor materials have been developed based on BODIPY units. In this case, considering the advantages of the inherent high extinction coefficient of BODIPY as core, the resulting FUEAs are promising to possess strong light-harvest ability. Moreover, it has been widely reported that weakening molecular coplanarity is beneficial for relieving over-strong aggregation tendency for small-molecule acceptors. Introducing steric hindrance is a widely employed approach to twist the molecular skeleton, further hindering excessive intermolecular stacking to a certain extent. For FUEAs, herein, the steric units on the BODIPY core can rotate the molecular backbones by inducing steric hindrance. Hence, the twisted and spatial geometries of FUEAs might be favorable for constituting proper intermolecular stacking intensities in BHJ blends.
Accordingly, through two-step synthetic procedures, two FUEAs, namely MBTIC-4F and MBTIC-4Cl, in simple A–D–A′–D–A structures were facilely developed by employing steric BODIPY as core (A′), single thiophene as π-spacers (D), and fluorinated and chlorinated IC as end groups (A) (Fig. 1a). The tetramethyl structure induced torsion in molecular skeletons, affording three-dimensional (3D) spatial configurations for both FUEAs. Moreover, both materials demonstrated satisfactory light-harvest capacity in the visible region and suitable energy levels as electron acceptors. By employing benchmark polymer PBDB-T as donor material, the relevant OSCs based on MBTIC-4F and MBTIC-4Cl yielded PCE of 2.03% and 3.47%, respectively. The better photovoltaic performance of the devices based on MBTIC-4Cl originated from favorable carrier dynamics and better miscibility-driven morphology in the relevant blends. Our results demonstrated the promising potentials of BODIPY-derived cores in developing simple-structured FUEAs. Furthermore, the contrastive photovoltaic properties attributed to different halogenations might afford guidelines in rational molecular design for efficient electron acceptors.

The synthetic routes to FUEAs are depicted as Scheme S1 in ESI. The FUEAs were facilely synthesized through two-step procedures. First, a Suzuki cross coupling between the commercially available BODIPY dibromide (1) and 4-hexyl-5-(4,4,5,5-tetramethyl-1,3,2-dioxaborolan-2-yl)thiophene-2-carbaldehyde (2) yielded dialdehyde intermediate (3). Then, through Knoevenagel condensation of compound (3) with different halogenated dicyanoindanone endcaps, different FUEAs in the A–D–A′–D–A architecture were furnished. Chemical structures of the as-synthesized molecules were fully characterized by 1H NMR (Fig. S1–S3, ESI), 13C NMR (Fig. S4 and S5, ESI), matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectroscopy (MALDI-TOF MS, Fig. S6 and S7, ESI) and elemental analysis. Within the BODIPY core, comprising dipyrromethene and B ← N coordination bridges, a three-membered quasi-fused-ring structure was formed. This specific quasi-fused architecture can provide some merits that are similar to their fused-ring counterparts, including high extinction and efficient charge transportation. Moreover, based on BF2-chelation, the BODIPY core demonstrated electron affinity. In addition, the methyl groups on pyrrole rings can induce a steric hindrance to twist the molecular skeletons. As expected, the dihedral angles between the BODIPY core and thiophene bridges were estimated at 57.8° from density functional theory (DFT) calculations (Fig. 1b). In this case, MBTIC-4F and MBTIC-4Cl exhibited stereoscopic conformations that were beneficial for avoiding excessive π–π stacking in the blend films.

Thermogravimetric (TG) analysis revealed the high decomposition temperatures (Td, corresponding to 5% weight loss) of 300 and 313 °C for MBTIC-4F and MBTIC-4Cl, respectively, indicating their satisfactory thermal stability (Fig. S8a, ESI). Additionally, the results from differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements illuminated that MBTIC-4F showed no solid-state thermal transition (Fig. S8b, ESI). In contrast, chlorinated MBTIC-4Cl showed evident melting and crystallizing processes, with melting/crystallization temperatures (Tm/Tc) detected at 260 and 88 °C, respectively. The contrastive thermodynamic behaviors were probably attributed to the following two aspects. First, the amorphous character of MBTIC-4F was attributed to the twisted molecular structure to conceal the π–π stacking (face-to-face). Second, the Cl⋯Cl interactions contributed to stronger intermolecular interactions (tail-to-tail) than their fluorinated counterparts. Thus, chlorinated MBTIC-4Cl showed stronger crystallinity than MBTIC-4F. In this case, for the FUEAs used in this study, intermolecular stacking was mainly in the tail-to-tail model and dominated by halogenated interactions. The different crystallinity further induced disparities in light-capture and morphological issues, which are discussed below. Moreover, the energy levels of the highest occupied molecular orbitals (EHOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals (ELUMO) were calculated from cyclic voltammetry (CV) (Fig. S9, ESI). The same EHOMO value of −5.78 eV for both FUEAs was characterized. Moreover, MBTIC-4Cl showed a down-shifted ELUMO of −3.43 eV than −3.41 eV of MBTIC-4F owing to the strong electron affinity of chlorine atoms (Fig. 2a). Additionally, as observed from the simulated molecular orbital distributions (Fig. S10, ESI), the HOMO of both molecules was mostly distributed within the BODIPY core. Thus, the different halogenated atoms on the terminal groups had a negligible influence on EHOMO. These phenomena were probably due to the strong spatial hindrance and large skeleton torsion induced by steric BODIPY. However, the LUMO was uniformly distributed along the whole conjugated backbones, and thus the chlorinated MBTIC-4Cl showed deeper ELUMO (Table 1).
FUEA

T
d/Tm/Tc [°C]

E
HOMO/ELUMO [eV]

λ
max/FWHM [nm]

ε
 [M−1 cm−1]

λ
max/FWHM [nm]

κ
 [cm−1]

E
g
 [eV]

a Decomposition temperature (Td) from TG, melting (Tm) and crystallization temperature (Tc) from DSC measurements.
b Energy levels of the highest occupied molecular orbitals (EHOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals (ELUMO) calculated from the onsets of oxidation/reduction CV curves: EHOMO = −(4.80 + Eox) eV and ELUMO = −(4.80 + Ere) eV.
c Maximum absorption peaks (λmax) and full width at half maximum (FWHM) values calculated from the absorption profiles in a dilute chloroform solution.
d Maximum molar extinction coefficient (ε).
e Maximum absorption peaks (λmax) and full width at half maximum (FWHM) values calculated from the absorption profiles in the film state.
f Maximum film-state absorptivity (κ) measured from film-state FUEAs.
g Optical bandgaps (Eg) calculated from the onsets of the film-state absorption profiles, Eg = 1240/λonset.

MBTIC-4F
300/—/—
−5.78/−3.41
570/72
1.12 × 105
591/115
6.41 × 104
1.80
MBTIC-4Cl
313/260/88
−5.78/−3.43
574/75
9.63 × 104
600/142
7.97 × 104
1.72
The light-harvest ability of the as-synthesized FUEAs was studied using ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectroscopy. In dilute chloroform solution, both the FUEAs showed relatively narrow but strong absorbance in the range of 490–660 nm. For MBTIC-4F and MBTIC-4Cl, the maximum absorption peaks (λmax) were located at 570 and 574 nm. And the full width at half maximum (FWHM) values were comparable at 72 and 75 nm, respectively (Fig. 2b). Additionally, at the λmax, MBTIC-4F and MBTIC-4Cl showed molar extinction coefficient (ε) values as high as 1.12 × 105 and 9.63 × 104 M−1 cm−1 (Fig. 2c), which were higher than some state-of-the-art FUEAs and even comparable with some partially-fused electron acceptors reported in the literature. The results indicated that the BODIPY core can compensate for the deficiency in light harvest induced by a fully-unfused backbone to a certain extent. Moreover, by comparison, the fluorinated MBTIC-4F possessed a stronger light-capture capacity in the solution state. On the other side, owing to the ascended aggregation in the film state, the absorption profiles were bathochromically shifted to further cover the 500–700 nm range with the λmax located at 591 and 600 nm for MBTIC-4F and MBTIC-4Cl, respectively. Interestingly, the maximum film-state absorptivity (κ) calculated from their neat films were 6.41 × 104 and 7.97 × 104 cm−1 (Fig. 2d). In addition, MBTIC-4Cl demonstrated a relatively wider absorption profile with a larger FWHM of 142 nm than 115 nm of MBTIC-4F. The optical bandgaps (Eg) of MBTIC-4F and MBTIC-4Cl were calculated to be 1.80 and 1.72 eV, respectively. Hence, different from that in the solution state, MBTIC-4Cl afforded broader, stronger and bathochromic absorbance, which was attributed to its ascended aggregating intensity compared to MBTIC-4F. Additionally, the solid-state absorption profile of polymer donor PBDB-T (Fig. 2a) was closely related to the absorption of FUEAs. Thus, the active layer blends exhibited limited complementary absorption (Fig. 2e).
To evaluate the photovoltaic performance of the as-synthesized FUEAs, OSCs in an inverted structure of ITO/ZnO/PBDB-T:MBTIC-4F or PBDB-T:MBTIC-4Cl/MoO3/Ag were fabricated. The detailed processes in device fabrication are summarized in ESI. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics are shown in Fig. 3a. The optimal devices based on MBTIC-4F delivered open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.70 V, short-circuit current density (JSC) of 7.86 mA cm−2, fill factor (FF) of 0.37 and moderate PCE of 2.03%. For MBTIC-4Cl-based OSCs, accompanied by synchronously enhanced VOC, JSC and FF of 0.73 V, 8.74 mA cm−2 and 0.55, an improved PCE of 3.47% was obtained (Table 2). More specifically, devices based on MBTIC-4Cl with low-lying LUMO yielded larger VOC than their MBTIC-4F counterparts, suggesting less energy loss in PBDB-T:MBTIC-4Cl. The outperformed FF of PBDB-T:MBTIC-4Cl was attributed to its advantageous carrier dynamics, which are discussed below. In addition, as evidenced by the external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements (Fig. 3b), OSCs based on as-synthesized FUEAs afforded unsatisfactory JSC to restrict their PCE. According to the absorption spectra (Fig. 2e), MBTIC-4F and MBTIC-4Cl afforded no absorbance in the near-infrared region. Thus, PBDB-T and FUEAs contributed nearly no complementation to cover the added range in the solar spectrum. The hypsochromic absorption of FUEAs was reasonably attributed to the small-scale conjugation extent and relatively weakened ICT effect within the twisted fully-unfused skeletons. Hence, despite enlarging the absorptivity within a certain wavelength region, it is still challenging to simultaneously guarantee adequately broad absorption profiles in developing efficient FUEAs.
Acceptor

V
OC [V]

J
SC [mA cm−2]
FF
PCE [%]

μ
h [cm2 V−1 s−1]

μ
e [cm2 V−1 s−1]

μ
h:μe

a Average PCE values calculated from over 8 devices.

MBTIC-4F
0.70 (0.70 ± 0)
7.86 (7.68 ± 0.31)
0.37 (0.34 ± 0.06)
2.03 (1.86)
2.23 × 10−4
8.23 × 10−6
27.10
MBTIC-4Cl
0.73 (0.73 ± 0)
8.74 (8.58 ± 0.26)
0.55 (0.52 ± 0.04)
3.47 (3.32)
1.95 × 10−4
3.51 × 10−5
5.56
Exciton dissociation and charge generation characteristics of the device-based BODIPY-cored FUEAs were estimated by studying the variations in photocurrent density (Jph) on effective voltage (Veff). The exciton dissociation probabilities (P(E,T)) were calculated based on the photocurrent density under the short-circuit and maximum output (Jsat) conditions (P(E,T) = Jph/Jsat). As shown in Fig. 3c, PBDB-T:MBTIC-4Cl demonstrated an enhanced P(E,T) value of 0.85 compared to 0.77 from PBDB-T:MBTIC-4F, suggesting that the photogenerated excitons were more sufficiently dissociated into free charges in MBTIC-4Cl-based blends. Moreover, to examine the charge recombination process, the dependency of JSC on light intensity (Plight) was performed (Fig. 3d). The charge bimolecular recombination degree can be reflected by the power-law factor α in the equation of JSC ∝ Plightα. Not surprisingly, devices based on MBTIC-4Cl showed higher α values than their MBTIC-4F counterparts (0.98 vs. 0.89). Hence, less charge recombination loss was authenticated in PBDB-T:MBTIC-4Cl. In addition, a photoluminescence (PL) quenching study was conducted to compare the charge-transfer features of the different blends. As depicted in Fig. 3e, the strong PL intensity excited at 480 nm for PBDB-T was obviously quenched by blending FUEAs. More specifically, the PL quenching efficiency (ηPLQ) was calculated to be 63.32% and 84.78% in PBDB-T:MBTIC-4F and PBDB-T:MBTIC-4Cl, respectively. On the other side, when excited at 580 nm for both FUEAs, the sufficient hole-transfer characteristics engaged sufficiently quenched PL intensity for donor:acceptor blends. Compared to the electron-transfer processes, the hole-transfer behaviors were more efficient, showing enhanced ηPLQ values. From different FUEAs to PBDB-T, the ηPLQ in PBDB-T:MBTIC-4F and PBDB-T:MBTIC-4Cl were 95.19% and 99.23%, respectively. The above results indicated that the blends based on MBTIC-4Cl demonstrated significantly outperformed charge-transfer characteristics in both the processes of electron transfer from PBDB-T to FUEA and hole transfer from FUEA to PBDB-T.
Moreover, charge transport properties were studied using the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) method. The electron mobility (μe) of neat MBTIC-4F and MBTIC-4Cl films was 1.36 × 10−5 and 1.67 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively (Fig. S11, ESI). MBTIC-4Cl showed better electron-transport ability because of its stronger aggregation intensity. Additionally, the two blends based on MBTIC-4F and MBTIC-4Cl exhibited comparable hole mobility (μh) of 2.23 × 10−4 and 1.95 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively (Fig. S12, ESI). However, the μe of PBDB-T:MBTIC-4Cl (3.51 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1) was four times larger than that of PBDB-T:MBTIC-4F (8.23 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1, Fig. S13, ESI). Consequently, the prominently enhanced μe of PBDB-T:MBTIC-4Cl contributed relatively balanced carrier transport (μh/μe = 5.56) compared to that of PBDB-T:MBTIC-4F (μh/μe = 27.10). The inferior electron mobility and unbalanced carrier transport of MBTIC-4F-based blends further unraveled the origination of their severe charge recombination and poor FF. Furthermore, characterizations of the dark current intensity of OSCs based on different FUEAs were performed. As shown in Fig. S14 (ESI), devices based on MBTIC-4Cl exhibited higher intensity and earlier turn-on dark currents compared to those of MBTIC-4F. According to the literature, the intensity of the dark current is significantly related to the carrier conductivity, carrier concentration near electrodes and charge recombination behaviors in photovoltaic devices. The rapid carrier extraction and efficient charge transport lead to an earlier turn-on feature of dark current. In this case, the results of dark current measurements illuminated the superior carrier dynamics of PBDB-T:MBTIC-4Cl, which agreed with the conclusions from SCLC and JSC–Plight characterizations.
As solution-processed and phase-mixed thin films, the morphology of the BHJ blends was tightly correlated with the miscibility between the donor and acceptor materials. Herein, the miscibility-driven disparities in PBDB-T:MBTIC-4F and PBDB-T:MBTIC-4Cl were characterized. The contact angles of distilled water and diiodomethane upon different neat films were measured (Fig. 4a). Using the Owens–Wendt formula (eqn (1)), the surface free energies (γ) of different photoactive materials were calculated:
(1)
where the superscripts
γd and γp represent the dispersion and polar components of the surface energy, and L and S represent the probe liquid and film samples, respectively. The results were compared, as illustrated in Fig. 4b. Additionally, MBTIC-4Cl afforded the highest γ value of 41.40 mN m−1, followed by 35.88 mN m−1 from PBDB-T and 34.71 mN m−1 from MBTIC-4F. Then, based on the Flory–Huggins interaction model (eqn (2)),

(2)
the interaction parameters (
χ) were calculated as 0.01 and 0.21 for blends of PBDB-T:MBTIC-4F and PBDB-T:MBTIC-4Cl, respectively (Table S1, ESI). Therefore, the excessively smaller χPBDB-T:MBTIC-4F indicated the well-intermixed features in the relevant blends. In contrast, PBDB-T and MBTIC-4Cl tended to form more isolated phases with explicit phase separation. Additionally, the disparities in miscibility were further proved by the interfacial tension calculation (eqn (3)):

(3)

γdonor:acceptor is the interfacial surface energy in the donor:acceptor pair and β is equal to 0.000115 m2 mN−2. Generally, γdonor:acceptor is high when the donor and acceptor tend to form isolated phases. In contrast, if the donor and acceptor components are distributed compactly, γdonor:acceptor is low, further reflecting better miscibility between the donor and acceptor. According to eqn (3), γPBDB-T:MBTIC-4F and γPBDB-T:MBTIC-4Cl were calculated to be 0.021 and 0.47 mN m−1, respectively. Overall, chlorinated MBTIC-4Cl was less miscible with polymer donor PBDB-T than fluorinated MBTIC-4F, originating from its stronger aggregating intensity. In this case, the differential miscibility between different FUEAs with donors can result in disparities in phase separation and domain scale in the corresponding BHJ blends.

The morphology was further characterized by atomic force microscopy (AFM). First, the surface morphology of PBDB-T, MBTIC-4F and MBTIC-4Cl neat films are shown in Fig. S15 in ESI. Different from the amorphous feature of polymeric PBDB-T, both the small-molecule FUEAs presented a strong aggregation state to exhibit numerous islands in AFM patterns. The aggregates in the MBTIC-4Cl film were more agglomerate and explicit, exhibiting stronger crystallinity than MBTIC-4F. Moreover, sharply contrasting morphology was observed in donor:acceptor blend films (Fig. 4c), which agreed well with the miscibility-driven conjectures. For PBDB-T:MBTIC-4F blends with excessive miscibility, the blend surface was relatively smooth and uniform, with small root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 1.58 nm. The nanofibers mushed up compactly, leading to misty phase separation. The over-weakened aggregation of MBTIC-4F and extreme miscibility in PBDB-T:MBTIC-4F resulted in this kind of phenomenon, which was unfavorable for exciton dissociation and charge transport. In contrast, the large-scale squamous plates belonging to crystalline MBTIC-4Cl emerged within the PBDB-T:MBTIC-4Cl blends, resulting in a well-bedded morphology with a significantly enhanced RMS value of 16.82 nm. More specifically, the ascended crystallinity of MBTIC-4Cl and less-miscible characteristics in PBDB-T:MBTIC-4Cl induced discernible phase separation to facilitate exciton dissociation and sufficient-sized pure acceptor domains to guarantee efficient electron transport. These morphological parameters were in good agreement with the miscibility-driven characteristics, which jointly resulted in convincing explanations for the disparities in carrier dynamics in different FUEA-based blends.

To summarize, two FUEAs with simple molecular architectures were developed based on a novel steric BODIPY core, single alkyl-thiophene π-spacers and halogenated dicyanoindanone endcaps. The BODIPY core concurrently brought two merits to the molecular design. First, the connatural high extinction coefficient boosted the light-harvest capacity of FUEAs, which to some extent remedied the defective absorbance attributed to fully-unfused skeletons. Second, the steric BODIPY core twisted the molecular backbones to restrict excessive coplanar stacking, which was beneficial for proper blend morphology. Blending with polymer donor PBDB-T, the corresponding OSCs yielded a PCE of 2.03% for MBTIC-4F and 3.47% for MBTIC-4Cl. The better performance of MBTIC-4Cl-based OSCs was attributed to the synergetic benefits of ascended film-state sunlight capture, intensive crystallinity and outperformed carrier dynamics induced by favorable miscibility-driven morphological parameters. From our results, the benefits of the BODIPY-derived building blocks were illuminated. Additionally, this study provided some references that further improved the photovoltaic properties of FUEAs.


The author declares no conflict of interest in this work.


We thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61761136013) for financial support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3nj00845b
‡ Y. Xu and X. Gao contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2023