 DOI: 10.1039/C6EE02139E
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3071-3078


Dong
Yang
,

Xin
Zhou
,

Ruixia
Yang
,

Zhou
Yang
,

Wei
Yu
,

Xiuli
Wang
,

Can
Li
*,

Shengzhong (Frank)
Liu
* and 

Robert P. H.
Chang


Key Laboratory of Applied Surface and Colloid Chemistry, National Ministry of Education, Shaanxi Engineering Lab for Advanced Energy Technology, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an 710119, China

College of Environmental and Chemical Engineering, Dalian University, Dalian, 116622, China

State Key Laboratory of Catalysis, Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian, 116023, China. E-mail: canli@dicp.ac.cn; szliu@dicp.ac.cn

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Argonne-Northwestern Solar Energy Research (ANSER) Center, Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan Road, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA

Received
25th July 2016
, Accepted 15th August 2016
First published on 15th August 2016
The electron-transport layer (ETL) between the active perovskite material and the cathode plays a critical role in planar perovskite solar cells. Herein, we report a drastically improved solar cell efficiency via surface optimization of the TiO2 ETL using a special ionic-liquid (IL) that shows high optical transparency and superior electron mobility. As a consequence, the efficiency is promoted to as high as 19.62% (the certified efficiency is 19.42%), exceeding the previous highest efficiency recorded for planar CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells. Surprisingly, the notorious hysteresis is completely eliminated, likely due to the improved ETL quality that has effectively suppressed ion migration in the perovskite layer and charge accumulation at the interfaces, higher electron mobility to balance the hole flux at the anode, and a better growth platform for the high quality perovskite absorber. Both experimental analyses and theoretical calculations reveal that the anion group of the IL bonds to TiO2, leading to a higher electron mobility and a well-matched work function. Meanwhile, the cation group interfaces with adjacent perovskite grains to provide an effective channel for electron transport and a suitable setting to grow low trap-state density perovskite for improved device performance.

Planar configuration perovskite solar cells have attracted a great deal of attention due to their simple structure and straightforward preparation. Compared to the mesoporous architecture, unfortunately, there remain two major roadblocks to their practical applications. One of them is that the best efficiency for planar perovskite solar cells is significantly lower than those of the mesoporous structured counterparts, and the other major challenge in the field is the notorious current density–voltage hysteresis. In this work, we have increased the device efficiency to 19.62% (a certified PCE of 19.42%) by modifying the electron-transport layer using a [BMIM]BF4 IL, the highest efficiency for the CH3NH3PbI3 planar configuration. Amazingly, the current density–voltage hysteresis in the planar perovskite solar cells is completely eliminated. The [BF4]− group bonds to TiO2, resulting in a higher electron mobility and a well-matched work function. Meanwhile, the [BMIM]+ group interfaces with adjacent perovskite grains to provide an effective channel for electron transport and a suitable setting for growing low trap-state density perovskites for good device performance. As the IL is applied using a simple solution processed at low temperature, this preparation is compatible with large-scale roll-to-roll manufacturing.


Organometal–halide perovskites have attracted extensive attention as the ideal candidate for photovoltaics, photonics, and optoelectronic applications including photodetectors, light emission, lasers, etc., due to their intriguing properties, such as a large absorption coefficient, long carrier diffusion length, small exciton binding energy, and the surprisingly high tolerance to defects. In the last few years, improvements in interface engineering, morphology control, device design and fabrication have increased the NREL certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) for perovskite solar cells to 22.1%. Most high efficiency perovskite photovoltaics often adopt a mesoscopic configuration. But the complicated structure needs high temperature fabrication processes, increasing manufacturing costs, and limiting their applications. As such, planar perovskite solar cells including normal and inverted structures have become more and more popular because of their simpler device architecture and straightforward preparation. However, compared to the mesoporous configuration, planar-perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are facing two major challenges: (i) the highest PCE for the PSCs is significantly lower than that of the mesoporous structure and (ii) the notorious photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) hysteresis often exists in the PSCs when measured under different scan directions, making accurate efficiency determination challenging.

It is known that the electron-transport layer (ETL) is critical for perovskite solar cells, especially in the planar configuration. The ETL is usually sandwiched between the perovskite absorber and the cathode to aid carrier separation and collection at the cathode. To date, a few effective ETL materials have been developed, including metallic salts, transition metal oxides, organic materials, and so on. Among these, TiO2 remains the best one for its excellent optical transmittance and superior chemical stability at high temperature in air. However, the outstanding shortcoming of the TiO2 ETL is that its electron mobility is only about 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, merely a fraction of the hole mobility (∼10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1) for the most commonly used hole-transport layers (HTLs), such as 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) and poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA), leading to an imbalance between the electron flux (Je) and the hole flux (Jh). The unbalanced charge carriers would be directly recombined or trapped by trap sites, resulting in lower PCEs of the PSCs. Ke and Baena et al. used SnO2 with high electron mobility to successfully replace the TiO2 ETL, to reduce the J–V hysteresis for improved device performance; however, a slight hysteresis is still persistent in all these reports. The J–V hysteresis in PSCs is mainly caused by the following reasons: (i) ion migration within the perovskite layer; (ii) high trap-state density for electronic carriers at the perovskite surface; and (iii) unbalanced carrier transport within the perovskite absorber. Xu, et al. reported that the hysteresis could be effectively suppressed using a fullerene derivative to passivate the traps during perovskite formation. Jeon et al. employed a 200–300 nm thick mesoscopic TiO2 layer to increase the Jevia its controlled interface area to reduce the J–V hysteresis. Based on the above discussion, it is imperative to develop an effective means to restrict ion migration, to improve the electron mobility of the ETL and to reduce the trap-state density within the perovskite material to eliminate the hysteresis for improved efficiency in PSCs.
In the present work, 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ionic liquid (IL), as shown in Scheme S1a (ESI), is chosen for its large electrical conductivity, high charge mobility and superior optical transparency. It is expected that the IL would form a surface dipole to tune the energy level of the TiO2, aligning its work function to match with the perovskite absorber layer. Using IL modified TiO2 (labelled as m-TiO2) as the ETL, we have improved the solar cell efficiency to as high as 19.62% (the certified PCE at 19.42%), an improvement of ∼19% over the control device using the bare TiO2 ETL. It is worth noting that the PCE value has surpassed the previous record efficiency for this type of PSCs. Meanwhile, we were surprised by the fact that the notorious J–V hysteresis is completely eliminated due to the balanced carriers and reduced traps in the perovskite device. The outstanding performance is attributed to the improved electron mobility, reduced contact resistance, well-matched work function and decreased trap-state density in the perovskite absorber produced.
The IL solution was spin-coated onto the TiO2 substrates, followed by thermal annealing at 80 °C for 10 minutes. Fig. 1a shows the atomic force microscopy (AFM) topographic images of the TiO2 and m-TiO2 samples. It is clear that when the TiO2 was modified with the IL, the root-mean-square (RMS) roughness is reduced from 11.57 to 9.05 nm. The smoother surface is well known to be a better foundation for the perovskite to grow and to form a better electronic contact with the underlying ETL. Even though only a minimal amount of IL remains on the TiO2, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) shows that there is indeed a detectable layer of IL present on the TiO2 surface, as shown in Fig. 1b. Both characteristic peaks of IL, N1s and B1s, attributed to its nitrogen and boron moieties, are resolved at around 400 eV and 200 eV, respectively, demonstrating that the IL is indeed detected on the TiO2 surface. In particular, it is found that the Ti2p and F1s peaks are shifted by about −0.6 eV and 1.5 eV, respectively, as shown in Fig. 1b and Fig. S1 (ESI), demonstrating strong electronic interactions between the TiO2 and the IL, and the modification is limited to the very surface of TiO2.
Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) was used to measure the work function of both TiO2 and m-TiO2 with the surface potential images shown in Fig. S2a (ESI). It is found that the work function of m-TiO2 decreased from 4.26 eV for the bare TiO2 to 4.01. The IL surface layer brings spontaneous bipolar modification at the TiO2 surface. The permanent dipoles (μ) formed point outwards in free space from the TiO2 surface, thereby reducing the work function of the TiO2 through a downward vacuum level shift, as shown in Fig. S2b (ESI). The lower work function is known to suppress the electron transport from the ETL back to the perovskite absorber, leading to more effective electron extraction for improved device performance. Meanwhile, the electron mobility is studied by the space charge limited current (SCLC) method using an electron-only device structure. The detailed process is shown in the ESI.Fig. 1c shows J–V curves of the electron-only device fitted with the Mott–Gurney law. The electron mobility of the pristine TiO2 is 3.83 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, while it increased to 1.36 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 after the IL modification, four-times higher than its original value, demonstrating that the IL does promote the electron transport effectively. Fig. 2d compares the optical transmission spectra of TiO2 to those of m-TiO2 films. It appears that the m-TiO2 displays a higher average transmittance in the wavelength range of 400–800 nm, likely due to reduced reflection, promising more photon flux into the perovskite absorber for higher solar cell efficiency.
It is clear from above that the IL modification has brought about a range of beneficial effects, including lower reflection loss, smoother TiO2 surface, reduced energy-level mismatch, and increased electron mobility. We therefore fabricated PSCs using m-TiO2 to compare with the pristine TiO2 ETL. Fig. 2a illustrates the energy level diagram of the PSC. The energy level alignment indicates that the lower work of the m-TiO2 effectively decreases the interface barrier. Fig. 2b shows a cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the completed device, wherein the FTO transparent electrode is used as the bottom cathode, TiO2 or m-TiO2 as the ETL, PTAA (Scheme S1b, ESI) as the HTL, and a gold coating as the top anode. The ∼345 nm thick perovskite film was deposited using a vacuum deposition method. Fig. S3a (ESI) and related references show that the film is pinhole-free; the ETL surface is completely covered with large microcrystalline grains. More details are shown in the ESI. X-Ray diffraction (XRD) shows five peaks centered at 14.15°, 28.48°, 31.92°, 43.24° and 60.90°, assigned to (110), (220), (310), (330) and (440), respectively (Fig. S3b, ESI).
The highest J–V performance is achieved by optimizing the IL concentration, as shown in Fig. S4 (ESI), and the key parameters are listed in Table S1 (ESI). When the IL concentration was changed from 0.01 wt% to 0.05 wt%, the PCE was improved from 17.69% to 19.62%, apparently due to an increased FF prompted by a decreased series resistance (Rs) and increased shunt resistance (Rsh). Further increase in the IL concentration to 0.10 wt% led to a reduced PCE to 14.72%. The IL concentration is therefore optimized at 0.05 wt%. In order to analyse what remains on the IL modified TiO2 surface after the device fabrication, a thin perovskite film (∼100 nm) was deposited on an m-TiO2 surface and XPS was used to track the elemental change with the Ar plasma etching time. Fig. S5 (ESI) shows the XPS spectra of the sample as a function of etching time. It is apparent that the sample only contains Pb and I from the perovskite before etching. When the etching time exceeds 300 s, N1s and B1s peaks, attributed to nitrogen and boron moieties of the IL, appear at around 400 eV and 200 eV, respectively, demonstrating that there is indeed an IL component existing on the m-TiO2 surface even after the device fabrication. Fig. 2c shows the J–V characteristics of the champion PSCs with both ETLs measured using both reverse and forward scan directions. While the cell using the bare TiO2 displays a clear hysteresis, as shown in Fig. 2c, it is surprising to see that the J–V hysteresis is eliminated when the device employs the m-TiO2 ETL. Table 1 summarizes the key J–V parameters including the short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and PCE of each device using both reverse and forward scan conditions. The device based on the pristine TiO2 ETL gives a PCE of 16.45% under the reverse scan direction with Jsc = 21.37 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.04 V and FF = 0.74. While using the forward scan direction, both the FF and PCE are lowered to 0.67 and 14.90%, discounted by ∼10%. We are pleasantly surprised by the fact that the J–V curves overlap for both the reversed and forward scan directions when the m-TiO2 ETL is used (Fig. 2c and Table 1). The PCEs from the reverse and forward scan directions are 19.62% and 19.59%, respectively, essentially identical considering the measurement error. When the device was tested at the National Center of Supervision & Inspection on Solar Photovoltaic Products Quality of China (CPVT), the PCE is certified as 19.42% with a Jsc of 22.44 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.0994 V and a FF of 78.72% (Fig. S6, ESI). Compared with the control device, all key J–V parameters are improved significantly. The larger Voc is likely attributed to the lowered work function reaped from the surface modification. The higher Jsc and FF are ascribed to the m-TiO2 with lower reflection loss, better matched work function and balanced charge carriers due to improved electron mobility.Fig. 2d shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) and the integrated product of the EQE curves with the AM 1.5 G photon flux for the devices using different ETLs. The Jsc data calculated from the EQE spectra for the devices using TiO2 and m-TiO2 are 21.05 and 22.31 mA cm−2 respectively, in excellent agreement with the J–V measurements. The reflection and transmission of a complete device are characterized, and the internal quantum efficiency (IQE) is calculated from the EQE, reflection and transmission spectra, with the results shown in Fig. S7 (ESI). It is clear that the IQE of the m-TiO2 based device at ∼490 nm is up to 98.7%, indicating that the carriers are effectively collected in the PSC using the m-TiO2 ETL. The theoretical calculations reveal that the IL bonds to the TiO2 by its [BF4]− group and to the perovskite by its [BMIM]+ group, as shown in Fig. S8 (ESI), in excellent agreement with the XPS and KPFM results. The computational details are shown in the ESI. In other words, the IL forms a bridge between the TiO2 and the perovskite absorber, which provides an effective channel for electron transfer, resulting in the relatively high EQE and Jsc of the PSCs. To further confirm the reproducibility of the PSCs based on TiO2 and m-TiO2, more individual devices were fabricated and the PCE distribution histograms are shown in Fig. 2e, and the statistics are listed in Tables S2 and S3 (ESI). It is clear that all key J–V parameters of the PSCs using m-TiO2 ETLs show very narrow distribution. The good device reproducibility is likely due to the small RMS (13.28 nm) of the perovskite film when m-TiO2 is used (Fig. S9, ESI), which is lower compared with previous reports.
ETLs
Scan directions

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)
TiO2
Reverse
21.37
1.04
0.74
16.45
TiO2
Forward
21.38
1.04
0.67
14.90
m-TiO2
Reverse
22.75
1.12
0.77
19.62
m-TiO2
Forward
21.71
1.12
0.77
19.59
To ensure the J–V measurement is reliable, the photocurrent densities of the champion devices were recorded as a function of time when the cells were biased at their respective Vmp (voltage at the maximum power point), as shown in Fig. 2f. The PCE of the champion device using the m-TiO2 ETL stabilizes at 19.53% for more than 100 s, while its current density remains at the Jmp obtained from the J–V measurements. However, the PCE of the device based on bare TiO2 stabilizes at 15.24%, which is significantly lower than that from the J–V curve using the reverse scan direction. It should be noted that while the device using m-TiO2 measures Jmp instantly, it takes 40 seconds for the bare TiO2 cell to reach the maximum photocurrent density, likely due to the hysteresis.

Fig. 2c and Table 1 display the PSCs using the bare TiO2 ETL with apparent hysteresis and distortion under different scan directions. Interestingly, the infamous J–V hysteresis is completely eliminated by the m-TiO2 ETL. In order to further confirm that there is no hysteresis indeed in the PSC based on m-TiO2, the device was measured under different scan conditions, with the delay time changed from 10 ms to 600 ms per step and the measurement time from 6 s to 360 s using both forward and reverse scan directions. As shown in Fig. S10 (ESI), the J–V curves of the PSC based on m-TiO2 show essentially the same behavior regardless of the scan conditions, implying that the J–V hysteresis is completely eliminated. It is believed that the J–V hysteresis originates from the unbalanced charge carriers, trap-state density and ion migration within the perovskite absorber. We conclude that the presence of the IL layer likely plays a positive role in suppressing ion migration considering the interaction between the cation group of IL and perovskite (Fig. S8, ESI). The introduction of the cation group of the IL can compensate the ion space charge in the perovskite film, preventing charge accumulation at the interfaces. The electron trap-state density is apparently reduced when the perovskite film is fabricated on the m-TiO2 ETL, as will be discussed later. The charge-transfer mechanism in the devices based on different ETLs is shown in Fig. S11 (ESI). Under light illumination, the perovskite generates electrons and holes and then they are transported to the ETL and HTL, respectively. It is known that the hole mobility of the PTAA HTL is on the order of ∼10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, about an order of magnitude faster than the electron mobility using the TiO2 ETL (∼10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1). As the interface area of the TiO2 ETL–perovskite is the same as that of the perovskite–PTAA HTL in the PSCs, thus the Je is ∼10 times smaller than the hole Jh, leading to accumulated charge or capacitance at the TiO2 ETL–perovskite, as shown in Fig. S11a (ESI). As the capacitance would behave differently at different scan directions, severe J–V hysteresis is observed. When m-TiO2 is used as the ETL, the electron mobility is increased to as high as 1.36 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, comparable to the hole mobility of the PTAA HTL (Fig. S11b, ESI). With equivalent charge transfer rates at both electrodes, there is no significant charge accumulation, therefore no capacitance to cause J–V hysteresis.
We have fabricated electron-only devices (FTO/TiO2 or m-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Ag) to measure the electron trap-state density in the perovskite absorber. Fig. 3a shows the I–V curves of the devices based on TiO2 and m-TiO2. The linear relation (cyan) indicates an ohmic response of the electron-only device at low bias voltage, and the current quickly increases nonlinearly (olive) when the bias voltage exceeds the kink point, demonstrating that the trap-states are completely filled. The trap-state density can be determined by the trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL) using eqn (1):
(1)
where
e is the elementary charge of the electron, L is the perovskite film thickness, ε is the relative dielectric constant of CH3NH3PbI3 (ε = 28.8),ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, and nt is the trap-state density. The VTFL of the CH3NH3PbI3 films deposited on TiO2 and m-TiO2 substrates are 2.48 and 0.46 V, respectively. Therefore, the electron trap-state density of CH3NH3PbI3 coated on TiO2 is 6.67 × 1016 cm−3, in good agreement with previous reports. When CH3NH3PbI3 is deposited on m-TiO2, the electron trap-state density is reduced to 1.22 × 1016 cm−3, indicating that the film quality is much improved. The steady state photoluminescence (PL) spectra (Fig. S12, ESI) show that the m-TiO2/perovskite peak blue-shifted from 782 nm to 775 nm, confirming that the trap-states in the CH3NH3PbI3 absorber are effectively passivated. The lower electron trap-state density is likely one of the causes why the J–V hysteresis is completely eliminated in the PSCs.


Fig. 3b shows Jsc measured as a function of light intensity, with an apparent linear correlation observed for all PSCs. More specifically, the device based on bare TiO2 gives a slop of 0.97, and the cell with m-TiO2 gives the slope of 0.98. Both slopes essentially equal to 1, signifying negligible bimolecular recombination in the devices.Fig. 3c shows Vocvs. light intensity. It is known that when the slope deviates from (kT/q), it reflects trap-assisted recombination. In the present case, the device based on TiO2 ETL exhibits a slope of 1.63kT/q (Fig. 3c), indicating a strong energy loss due to trap-assisted recombination. For the device using the m-TiO2 ETL, the slope is decreased to 1.09kT/q (Fig. 3c), indicating no significant trap-assisted recombination, in good agreement with the conclusion from Fig. 3a that the perovskite absorber layer was formed on the m-TiO2 showing a reduced trap-state density. All in all, the m-TiO2 is found to be effective in reducing the trap-state density, leading to suppressed J–V hysteresis and improved cell efficiency.
In addition, the time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectroscopy was used to study the charge-transfer kinetics from the perovskite absorber to the TiO2 and m-TiO2 ETLs. Fig. 4a displays the TRPL spectra of the perovskite films on different ETLs. The PL decay time and amplitudes are modeled using a bi-exponential eqn (2):
(2)
where
Ai is the decay amplitude, τi the decay time and B is a constant for the base-line offset. Table S4 (ESI) lists all abovementioned parameters attained from the analysis. For the FTO/perovskite sample, the PL decay times are τ1 = 36.06 ns and τ2 = 11.92 ns, and the corresponding amplitudes are 28.97% and 71.03%, respectively. In comparison, when the TiO2 ETL is introduced in between the FTO and the perovskite layer, both τ1 and τ2 decrease to 19.34 ns and 1.63 ns, and the corresponding amplitudes are 9.50% and 90.50%, respectively. Furthermore, when the perovskite is deposited on m-TiO2, the τ1 and τ2 further reduced to 13.15 ns and 1.02 ns, and the corresponding amplitudes changed to 7.21% and 92.79%, respectively. The average PL decay times (τave) are estimated using the τi and Ai values from the fitted curve data (Table S4, ESI) using eqn (3):

(3)
The τave of FTO/perovskite is 25.24 ns, consistent with previous reports. The average PL decay time is significantly reduced to 11.46 ns when the TiO2 ETL is used, and it further decreased to 7.09 ns when m-TiO2 is employed, indicating that the electrons transfer faster from the perovskite film to m-TiO2 than to TiO2. It is obvious that the well-matched work function and high electron extraction of m-TiO2 allow more efficient electron transfer from the perovskite and the faster electron injection rate from the perovskite layer to the m-TiO2 ETL. It is known that the reduced PL decay time is beneficial for suppressing the charge recombination at the perovskite–ETL interface. Therefore, the Jsc and FF values are significantly enhanced, in agreement with the J–V and EQE measurements.
Electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is another effective tool to provide insight into the charge transport process and contact resistance information.Fig. 4b shows the Nyquist plots of the devices using TiO2 and m-TiO2 as measured at open-circuit voltage under dark conditions. The equivalent circuit composed of the Rs, the recombination resistance (Rrec) and the contact resistance (Rco) at either the ETL-perovskite or the perovskite-HTL interface is shown in Fig. S13 (ESI). The Rco and Rrec values are ascribed to the high-frequency element and the low-frequency one in EIS, respectively. The Rco is associated with the TiO2–perovskite or the m-TiO2–perovskite interface since the perovskite–HTL interface is identical in both cases. The parameters of the equivalent circuit with TiO2 and m-TiO2 are listed in Table S5 (ESI). As expected, based on above discussion, the Rco of the device using m-TiO2 is reduced to 64.7 Ω, significantly lower than the resistance (82.6 Ω) obtained using the bare TiO2 ETL, revealing more efficient electron extraction at the m-TiO2–perovskite interface. Meanwhile, the Rrec of the device using m-TiO2 is increased to 468.5 Ω, much larger than that of the device based on the bare TiO2 ETL (229.4 Ω). The larger Rrec suppresses the charge recombination more effectively, and hence improves the device performance.
As the perovskite solar cell efficiency has been increased to higher than 22%, the device stability has become a key issue. It is found that the device fabricated on m-TiO2 shows good stability. For the bare device, without any encapsulation, the PCE was degraded by only about 15% after being illuminated for 240 min under ambient conditions (Fig. S14, ESI). The remarkable stability is likely attributed to the suppressed charge accumulation by the IL, the reduced trap-state density of the perovskite using m-TiO2 (Fig. 3a), and the balanced carrier transport between ETLs and HTLs of PSCs.

Through surface modification of TiO2 using an IL, we have effectively eliminated J–V hysteresis in PSCs with much improved solar cell efficiency as high as 19.62% and a certified PCE of 19.42%, the highest efficiency reported for CH3NH3PbI3 PSCs. The outstanding device performance is attributed to the extraordinary merits of the m-TiO2 ETL, including a smoother surface, enhanced electron mobility, reduced contact resistance, a more appropriate work function, and the decreased electron trap-state density of the perovskite absorber. Meanwhile, the devices exhibit good stability. Moreover, considering that the surface modification is so straightforward and economic, while it is so effective, it is anticipated to be viable for large-scale roll-to-roll production.


The authors acknowledge all the support from the National Key Research Program of China (2016YFA0202403), the Changjiang Scholar and the Innovative Research Team (IRT_14R33), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation funded project (2015M580809) and the Chinese National 1000-talent-plan program.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee02139e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016