 DOI: 10.1039/C6CP01688J
(Communication)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 16615-16620


Zhifeng
Liu
*,

Jiajun
Huang
,

Jianhuan
Han
,

Tiantian
Hong
,

Jing
Zhang
 and 

Zhihua
Liu


School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tianjin Chengjian University, Tianjin, 300384, China. E-mail: tjulzf@163.com; Fax: +86 2223085110; Tel: +86 22 23085236

School of Civil Engineering and Architecture, Xinxiang University, Xinxiang, 453003, China

Received
12th March 2016
, Accepted 31st May 2016
First published on 7th June 2016
A facile, low-cost, simple solution-based process for preparing novel promising chalcostibite CuSbS2 sensitized ZnO nanorod arrays, and the application of these as photoanodes of semiconductor quantum dot sensitized inorganic–organic solar cells (QDSSCs) is reported for the first time. ZnO/CuSbS2 nanofilms were designed and prepared through a simple successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) method and heat treatment process by employing ZnO nanorods as reactive templates. Novel efficient QDSSCs based on the ZnO/CuSbS2 nanofilms plus a solid electrolyte of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) were formed, and a power conversion efficiency of 1.61% was achieved. The excellent photoelectric performance is attributed to the improved light absorption efficiency, widened light absorption region, ideal band gap value, and high speed electron injection and transportation. The results demonstrate that a novel ternary sensitizer (I–V–VI2) can be synthesized via a low-cost method as described here and has great promising potential as a sensitizer in solar cells.

Recently, a novel generation photovoltaic device based on semiconductor quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) was proposed to achieve a simple preparation process and cost-effective properties. The key component of the QDSSCs based on metal oxide is a photoelectrode consisting of a film of TiO2 or ZnO nanostructures sensitized with quantum dots. For this generation of solar cells, ZnO-based QDSSCs have represented promising potential in the past few decades because of their similar energy band structure and the electron injection process to TiO2, and the extremely fast electron transmission rate. Moreover, various nanostructures of ZnO (nanowires, nanotubes, nanoparticles, and nanosheets) can be prepared easily by simple synthesis methods. Among these nanostructures, one-dimensional (1D) ZnO nanostructures (such as nanowire, nanorod, nanotube etc.) have attracted much attention and were expected to optimize the electron diffusion length in the photoelectrode through providing a direct pathway for electron transportation, and thus 1D ZnO nanostructures can obtain high-speed electron transportation and low-loss in the electron transportation process.

To overcome the disadvantages of ZnO of a narrow light absorption region due to the large band gap and chemical instability because ZnO is an amphoteric oxide, construction of semiconductor nanomaterials with a core/shell heterostructure with an ideal band gap has been investigated.Among the majority of the various studied semiconductor sensitizer materials (such as CdS, PbS, CuS and Sb2S3etc.) so far, metal sulfide semiconductor nanomaterials have shown promising potentials, which are abundant, low-cost, non-toxic, and the fabrication techniques are facile, simple and scalable. In addition to these binary metal sulfide semiconductor sensitizer nanomaterials, ternary metal sulfide semiconductor nanomaterials have been extensively studied as due to their excellent light absorption efficiency and ideal band gap values. Tang et al. prepared visible light active CuInS2 nanoparticles on the surface of vertically aligned ZnO nanoarrays by an electrodeposition method. Ag3CuS and AgInS2 sensitized ZnO nanoarrays on ITO substrates were prepared according to our previous reports and applied in solar cells. I–V–VI2 semiconductor materials based on Cu element have attracted much attention for application in solar cells due to their abundant low-cost raw materials, non-toxic elements and appropriate energy gap structure. Copper antimony sulfide (CuSbS2) with an optimal band gap (1.5 eV) and high absorption coefficient of 104 cm−1 (ref. 25) may be a promising semiconductor absorber material in solar cells.
However, to the best of our knowledge, there are few reports on photoanodes using chalcostibite as a semiconductor absorber material in solar cells. In this study, a novel sensitizer of the chalcostibite CuSbS2 quantum dot shell layer was obtained by heating the CuS/Sb2S3 shell to 350 °C. The CuS/Sb2S3 core/shell nanostructure was grown on the surface of ZnO nanorod arrays using a two-stage successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) process. Finally, a novel ternary quantum dot semiconductor sensitizer-CuSbS2 was applied as sensitizer for the ZnO-based QDSSCs, and a power conversion efficiency of 1.61% was obtained. It can be concluded that the excellent photoelectric performance can be attributed to the enhanced light absorption intensity, broadened light absorption region, ideal nanostructure for electron injection and transportation and rapid electron/hole separation. This work offers an alternative fabrication of ternary semiconductor sensitizers for metal sulfide-based QDSSCs by a facile low-cost method using potentially low cost raw materials.
The synthesis of ZnO nanorod arrays on ITO substrates has been successfully performed via a facile hydrothermal method. Firstly, the ITO substrates were ultrasonically rinsed in acetone, isopropyl alcohol and ethanol for 30 min, respectively. Then the ZnO seed layer was deposited on the ITO substrates by a dip-coating, sol–gel method and heat treatment at 400 °C for 60 min. The ZnO nanorod arrays were fabricated by immersing the ITO with the ZnO seed layer in the solution containing 50 mM zinc nitrate and 50 mM hexamethylenetetramine (HMTA) at 90 °C for 4 h. The CuSbS2 sensitized ZnO nanoarrays were grown on the ITO substrates using a two-stage successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) process, involving (i) a CuS shell layer prepared around the ZnO nanorod surface; (ii) the Sb2S3 shell layer was deposited on the surface of the ZnO/CuS nanorod; (iii) post annealing of the CuS/Sb2S3 shell layer transformed the double-layered structure into CuSbS2. Finally, both the ZnO and ZnO/CuSbS2 nanorods were spincoated at 2500 rpm for 60 s using a poly-3-hexylthiophene (regioregular-P3HT) chlorobenzene solution. After that, the solar cells were assembled by covering with a platinum sheet, which was served as a counter electrode.
A schematic illustration for the synthesis of ZnO/CuSbS2 is shown in Fig. 1. For the preparation of the CuS layer, ITO with ZnO nanorod arrays was dipped into a room temperature 50 mM copper nitrate deionized water (DI water) solution for 20 s, rinsed with DI water, and then dried in air. This process produced Cu2+ ions. The ITO was then dipped into a 20 mM sodium sulfide deionized water (DI water) solution for 20 s, rinsed with DI water, and then dried in air. This process produced S2− ions (step 1). For the coating of the Sb2S3 layer, the ITO with ZnO/CuS nanorod arrays was dipped into a 25 mM antimony chloride DI water for 20 s, rinsed with DI water, and then dried in air. The sample was then dipped into a 20 mM sodium sulfide deionized water solution for 20 s, rinsed with DI water, and then dried in air (step 2). This two-stage process forms the whole SILAR process, and produced CuS/Sb2S3 nanoparticles around the ZnO nanorod surface. Samples of ZnO/CuS/Sb2S3 went through 5 SILAR cycles based on this process. The CuSbS2 shell layer was transformed by heating the CuS/Sb2S3 layer at 350 °C for 30 min (step 3). Finally, the ZnO/CuSbS2 nanoarrays were fabricated onto ITO substrates successfully. Post-annealing transformed the double-layered structure into CuSbS2.
Sb2S3 + 2CuS → 2CuSbS2 + S↑
(1)
In order to investigate the micromorphology and nanostructure of the ZnO/CuSbS2 nanorods, a field scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) HITACHI S-4800I was used. Fig. 2(a) displays an SEM image of the ZnO/CuSbS2 nanorod arrays, and it can be seen that large-scale vertical ZnO/CuSbS2 nanorod arrays were grown on the ITO substrates densely and uniformly. Fig. 2(b) shows a large-view SEM image of a selected area of Fig. 2(a), and it can be seen that a layer of nanoparticles deposited on the surface of the nanorod arrays and the diameter of ZnO/CuSbS2 nanorods was measured to be 120 nm approximately. In addition, the thickness of the as-prepared products was 1.5 μm as observed from Fig. S1 (ESI). The nanostructure of the ZnO/CuSbS2 nanorods was investigated by HITACHI H-7650 transmission electron microscopy (TEM) operated at an accelerating voltage of 100 kV, and a TEM image of ZnO/CuSbS2 nanorods is displayed in Fig. 2(c). From the TEM image of the ZnO/CuSbS2 nanorods, the size of the CuSbS2 nanoparticles and their distribution on ZnO nanorod core can be seen. A layer of CuSbS2 nanoparticles distributed uniformly around the surface of the ZnO nanorod, demonstrating a large-scale, uniform coverage of the ZnO/CuSbS2 nanorods. Based on the HRTEM image of ZnO/CuSbS2 nanostructure, which is shown in Fig. 2(d), a hexagonal wurtzite ZnO(002) crystalline plane with a lattice spacing distance of 0.26 nm and the chalcostibite CuSbS2(002) crystalline plane with a lattice spacing distance of 0.19 nm can be found easily. Based on these experimental results, it can be concluded that the ZnO/CuSbS2 nanorod arrays were prepared on the ITO substrate successfully, in which the ZnO nanorod acted as a core, and the CuSbS2 layer as a shell. Meanwhile, the nanorod was covered by a layer of CuSbS2 nanoparticles.
The chemical composition and crystal structure of the samples were tested using X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the nanofilms by a Rigaku D/max-2500 using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.154059 nm). The inset of Fig. 2(b) shows XRD patterns of the ZnO and ZnO/CuSbS2 nanofilms, respectively. The XRD pattern of the ZnO nanofilms is shown as curve (I) in Fig. 2(b) inset; it can be seen that the samples of ZnO nanofilms mainly grew along the (002) direction, in comparison with the standard ZnO diffraction pattern (JCPDS, No. 36-1451). The corresponding XRD pattern of the ZnO/CuSbS2 nanofilms is shown as curve (II) in Fig. 2(b) inset; other than the diffraction peaks of ZnO, the diffraction peaks of CuSbS2 can also be found in curve (II) in Fig. 2(b) inset, when compared with the diffraction pattern (JCPDS, No. 44-1417). Corresponding to the diffraction peaks of the ZnO in curve (I), the diffraction peaks of ZnO/CuSbS2 in curve (II) with 2θ values of around 24.211° and 47.863° can be found, and can be indexed to the (101) and (002) crystalline planes of CuSbS2, respectively.
Furthermore, in order to investigate the surface states of the ZnO/CuSbS2 nanoarrays, an X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) technique was used. Fig. S2 (ESI) shows a high-resolution spectra of the Cu 2p, Sb 3d and S 2p peaks, respectively. In Fig. S2(a) (ESI), the peaks at 952.2 eV and 932.6 eV are assigned to the binding energy of Cu 2p1/2 and Cu 2p3/2, respectively, which are characteristic peaks of Cu+. Sb3+ is confirmed by the Sb 3d3/2 and Sb 3d5/2 peaks, observed at 537.6 eV and 528.2 eV respectively in Fig. S2(b) (ESI). In Fig. S2(c) (ESI), the two peaks of 162.6 eV and 161.4 eV are assigned to the binding energy of S 2p1/2 and S 2p3/2, respectively, indicating the existence of S2−. Based on these experimental results, it can be concluded that the chemical composition of sample is ZnO/CuSbS2, and further proved that the ZnO/CuSbS2 nanostructure can be fabricated on ITO successfully based on the SILAR and heat treatment method.
The optical absorption properties of the as-prepared samples were characterized using a DU-8B UV-vis double-beam spectrophotometer by determining the UV-vis absorption spectra of samples. Fig. 3(a) shows the light absorption curves of the ZnO and ZnO/CuSbS2 nanofilms, it can be observed clearly that the light absorption region of the ZnO/CuSbS2 nanofilms was broadened significantly compared with that of pure ZnO nanofilms. That is to say, in comparison with the nanofilms of ZnO, the nanofilms of ZnO/CuSbS2 show an obvious red-shift. The light absorption region was widened, and the light absorption intensity in visible-light region was enhanced significantly. Furthermore, the theoretical band gap values of ZnO and ZnO/CuSbS2 were calculated based on the absorption spectra of the samples. Fig. 3(b) shows the curves of (OD.hν)2versus hν of the ZnO and ZnO/CuSbS2 nanoarrays, and the calculated band gaps of the ZnO and ZnO/CuSbS2 nanostructures were ascertained to be ∼3.08 eV and ∼2.46 eV, respectively. Thus the CuSbS2 modified ZnO nanoarray films are more ideal for light absorption than the pure ZnO nanoarrays, implying that the CuSbS2 modified ZnO nanoarray films can absorb more photons because of the appropriate band gap value of the ZnO/CuSbS2 nanostructure. What is more, the photovoltaic properties of the ZnO nanofilms were improved when using CuSbS2 as sensitizer for modifying pure ZnO. So it was found that the sensitizer material CuSbS2 can broaden the photoresponse spectrum to the visible light region because of the more ideal band gap value and higher light absorption efficiency of CuSbS2.

Fig. 4(a) shows a schematic illustration of QDSSCs based on the ZnO/CuSbS2 nanorods. After being assembled, the QDSSCs (ITO/ZnO/CuSbS2/P3HT/Pt) using the as-prepared ZnO/CuSbS2 nanofilms as photoanodes, using regioregular-P3HT (poly-3-hexylthiophene) as a solid electrolyte and platinum (Pt) as a counter electrode, the photoelectric performance of the samples was investigated under irradiation of a xenon lamp (100 mW cm−2) with global AM 1.5 condition, and current density–voltage curves of the solar cells were obtained using a potentiostat. During the photocurrent measurements, the PCE values of the QDSSCs based on CuSbS2 modified ZnO nanoarrays were calculated by the following equations:
η = (VocJscFF)/Pin
(2)
FF = VoptJopt/VocJsc
(3)
where
Pin is the power of incident white light, FF is the fill factor, Vopt and Jopt are voltage and current for the maximum power output, and Voc and Jsc are open-circuit photovoltage and short-circuit photocurrent, respectively. The parameters of the QDSSCs based on the photoanodes of ZnO and ZnO/CuSbS2 nanofilms were summarized in Fig. 4(b) and Table 1. The QDSSCs based on the photoanodes of ZnO and ZnO/CuSbS2 nanofilms display a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 1.20 mA cm−2 and 5.87 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 269 mV and 491 mV, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.55 and 0.56, achieving a power conversion efficiency (η) of 0.18% and 1.61%, respectively. In comparison with the QDSSCs based on ZnO nanofilms, the solar cells with CuSbS2 as a sensitizer shows enhancement in Voc, Jsc and η of 82.53%, 389.17% and 794.44%, respectively. The solar cells based on the ZnO/CuSbS2 exhibited an increase in Voc owing to the accumulation of the carrier. The Voc is closely related to the carrier concentration and changes correspondingly. Hence, when the products of ZnO and ZnO/CuSbS2 are irradiated at a photon energy beyond the band gap of the semiconductor, ZnO/CuSbS2 spontaneously absorbs more photons and generates more photoexcited electron–hole pairs compared with that of pure ZnO. Thus, the device with ZnO/CuSbS2 presents a larger carrier quantity leading to an improvement of the Voc.

Photoanodes

V
oc (mV)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

η (%)
ZnO
269
1.20
55
0.18
ZnO/CuSbS2
491
5.87
56
1.61
In order to investigate the relationship between visible light absorption and photocurrent, the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurement for ZnO and ZnO/CuSbS2 electrodes was conducted, and is presented in Fig. S3 (ESI). It can be clearly observed that the ZnO/CuSbS2 nanoarrays exhibit an enhancement in IPCE value over the visible light region when compared with that of pure ZnO, which means the ability of photon response for ZnO/CuSbS2 nanoarrays is broadened and strengthened. To investigate the charge transport behavior of ZnO and ZnO/CuSbS2, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was measured using the equipment of an electrochemical workstation. As displayed in Fig. S4 (ESI), the Nyquist plot of ZnO/CuSbS2 presents a smaller arc radius, revealing much faster interfacial electron transport and less recombination of photon-induced electron–hole pairs than in single ZnO. The EIS data demonstrates that the sample of ZnO/CuSbS2 has a longer lifetime of photon-generated electrons and more efficient carrier collection, and the result exhibit that a gradient band structure was constructed by modifying CuSbS2 on the surface of the ZnO nanoarrays.
For the purpose of surveying the stability of the QDSSC solar cells based on the ZnO/CuSbS2 electrode, linear sweep voltammograms were used under illumination after C–V scanning for 20 cycles, with ITO/ZnO/CuSbS2 served as the electrode. Finally, the solar cells achieved a power conversion efficiency of 1.55% approximately, which show a slightly decrease in η of 4%. Therefore, the QDSSC solar cells based on the ZnO/CuSbS2 photoelectrode possess a high stability performance.
As we all know, the photon absorption efficiency, the band gap value, and the velocity of electron injection and transportation are key elements for the optimization of the photoelectric properties of QDSSCs, and the photoelectric performance can be improved by ameliorating these factors. In the photoanode structure of the QDSSCs (ITO/ZnO/CuSbS2/P3HT/Pt), the vertical 1D ZnO nanorods are the core, and can serve as the electron injection and transportation pathway. The shell of CuSbS2 can be used as a sensitizer and absorber layer. P3HT is the solid electrolyte; it can used as both a hole conductor and absorber. As we all know, 1D nanostructures can provide a direct electrons transportation pathway without crystalline boundary resistance, and thus the electron injection and transportation were improved and the electron/hole recombination was reduced in this nanostructure. That is to say, the 1D CuSbS2 modified ZnO nanorods were suitable for electron transportation, and the photovoltaic properties were also enhanced. A high specific surface area was achieved in the 1D nanoarrays, and due to this structure, more photons were captured and generating more electrons and holes. In detail, as shown in Fig. 4(c), multiple photosensitizers of CuSbS2 on the ZnO nanorod surface can improve the light utilization efficiency by reflecting unabsorbed photos back to other ZnO nanorods and CuSbS2 nanoparticles, which is in favor of the full utilization of incident light. Therefore, these accumulated CuSbS2 nanoparticles can relatively trap more photons, and thus a larger amount of photons will be utilized by the ZnO/CuSbS2 nanoarrays for generating electron/hole pairs. In addition, a more ideal band gap value was obtained using chalcostibite CuSbS2 as a sensitizer to modify the ZnO nanoarrays, and the light absorption region was broadened. The optimal band gap is schematically illustrated in Fig. 4(d); electron injection from the lowest unoccupied molecular edge (LUMO) level of P3HT into the conduction band edge of CuSbS2 and ZnO in sequence is energetically favorable. Meanwhile, the hole can transport from the valance band of ZnO into that of CuSbS2, and then, into the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of P3HT. In this process, the existence of CuSbS2 can avoid electrons and holes flowing in the reverse direction. Therefore, the stepwise band gap structure facilitate the efficient separation of photon-induced electrons and holes, which inhibits the recombination of photon-induced electrons and holes. As a result, the photovoltaic performance of ZnO/CuSbS2 was enhanced by applying CuSbS2 as a sensitizer and absorber layer in this nanostructure.
The results presented here are noteworthy, considering that the nanoarrays were fabricated on ITO mainly through an SILAR method, which can be projected as a facile, low-cost large-area technique suitable for QDSSCs with very low investment. Similar possibilities might open up for other ternary I–V–VI2 semiconductor materials to play a role as sensitizers in QDSSCs. This method based on SILAR and heat treatment can be applied as a promising process for the preparation of ternary sensitizers in QDSSCs. The CuSbS2 sensitizer semiconductor material was synthesized and used in QDSSCs and the PCE reached up to 1.61%, the improvements in the PCE may be attributed to improved light absorption efficiency, the ideal band gap of the composite structure and high speed charge transportation. Furthermore, this work can initiate ideas for the synthesis of other ternary semiconductor sensitizer materials via a facile low-cost process and be used in other kinds of solar cells.

The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from National Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 51102174) and State Key Laboratory of Heavy Oil Processing (No. SKLHOP201505).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp01688j
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016