 DOI: 10.1039/C7CC02266B
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 5561-5564


Shuai
Gu
,

Enbing
Bi
,

Bitian
Fu
,

Gjergj
Dodbiba
,

Toyohisa
Fujita
,

David P.
Wilkinson
*,

Yuezhou
Wei
* and 

Baizeng
Fang
*

Graduate School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo, 113-8656, Japan

State Key Laboratory of Metal Matrix Composites, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China

School of Ecological and Environmental Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China

Department of Chemical & Biological Engineering, University of British Columbia, 2360 East Mall, Vancouver, B.C., V6T 1Z3, Canada. E-mail: dwilkinson@chbe.ubc.ca; bfang@chbe.ubc.ca

College of Resources and Metallurgy, Guangxi University, Nanning 530004, Guangxi, China. E-mail: yzwei@gxu.edu.cn

Received
25th March 2017
, Accepted 21st April 2017
First published on 21st April 2017
An innovative Pt-free counter electrode was developed through which an electrolyte solution could be circulated in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) to facilitate mass transfer, resulting in greatly suppressed charge recombination and a considerably enhanced electron lifetime, and accordingly much higher power conversion efficiency than a DSC with a stationary electrolyte.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) have attracted much attention due to their simplicity and high flexibility. However, platinum (Pt) has been widely used as a counter electrode in conventional DSCs, resulting in high fabrication cost. In addition, a low mass transfer rate in conventional DSCs accelerates the energy-wasting recombination reactions, resulting in low power conversion efficiency (η). Therefore, a Pt-free counter electrode together with a high efficiency is highly desired. So far, many efforts have been made towards improving the efficiency and reducing the cost, such as optimizing the composition of the electrolyte, utilizing organic disulfide/thiolate solution, adding co-adsorbents and co-sensitizers, using metal-free dyes, optimizing the photo-anode, and employing a Pt-free counter electrode (CE). However, in a conventional DSC, as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI), mass transfer of a redox couple (e.g., I−/I3−) in the electrolyte is under diffusion control, resulting in a fast charge recombination and a sluggish dye regeneration, and thus a low efficiency for the DSC. To improve the efficiency, the charge recombination reactions should be suppressed, while the dye regeneration reaction should be promoted. To date, some measures have been taken to cope with this dilemma, such as adding a compact layer or tert-butylpyridine to suppress the dark current and designing the structure of the dye to ensure that the excited state of the dye is located closer to the TiO2 surface than to the hole that remained on the dye after electron injection. Although these measures help in improving the efficiency to some extent, the fast energy-wasting charge recombination rate and the slow dye regeneration rate caused by the high concentration of I3− ions and the low concentration of I− ions in the TiO2 film are still the main obstacles for further improvement in the efficiency.

Herein, we present a novel Pt-free DSC with a circulating electrolyte to facilitate mass transfer and improve the photovoltaic performance. As illustrated in Fig. S2 (ESI), the circulating electrolyte DSC comprises a TiO2 film developed on a TCO as the working electrode and a graphite block as the CE. Two stainless steel pipes were inserted into both sides of the CE, and connected with a pump to circulate an electrolyte solution through the DSC. Details on the preparation of electrodes and configuration can be seen in Fig. S2 and S3 (ESI). The innovative circulating electrolyte structure enables the electrolyte to flow through the chamber with a desired flow rate, changing the mass transport mechanism of the redox couple in the electrolyte from diffusion to convection. The redox couple I−/I3− ions can be transferred much faster into/out from the TiO2 film than those in a conventional DSC. This would lead to a significant increase of the I− concentration and a decrease of the I3− concentration in the TiO2 film, greatly promoting the dye regeneration reaction and suppressing the charge recombination reactions. As a result, a much higher efficiency (i.e., 10.29%) has been demonstrated by the circulating electrolyte DSC than that (i.e., 6.91%) obtained from a stationary electrolyte DSC.
Prior to the photovoltaic characterization, the relationship between the flow rates of the electrolyte and the rotating speeds of the pump was examined, and a nearly linear relationship was found, as shown in Fig. S4 (ESI). The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the circulating electrolyte DSC (Fig. 1A) at different rotating speeds under AM 1.5 solar illumination show that the open-circuit potential (Voc), short-circuit current (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and η increase with the increase of rotating speeds in the range of 0–80 rpm. The smallest Voc, Jsc, FF and η values of the stationary case (i.e., 0 rpm) are probably due to the highest charge recombination rate, shortest electron lifetime and highest internal resistance from the slowest ion diffusion. When the rotating speeds are greater than zero, the mass transfer mechanism of the redox couple changes from diffusion to convection, which suppresses the dark current (Fig. 1B) and enhances the electron lifetime (Fig. 1C). The efficiency slightly decreases in the range between 80and 120 rpm owing to the removal of the adsorbed dyes by the electrolyte with an extremely fast flow rate, which has been confirmed by the UV-vis absorption spectra of the dyes recorded after the measurements of J–V curves at the various rotating speeds, as shown in Fig. S5 (ESI). As shown in Table 1, the highest efficiency obtained in the circulating electrolyte carbon-based DSC is ca. 10.89%, corresponding to an efficiency increase of ca. 57.60% compared with the stationary electrolyte case, whose mass transfer is diffusion controlled. Even after subtraction of the energy consumed by the pump the net efficiencies are still very impressive (Table S1, ESI), which are considerably higher than that observed for the stationary DSC. The highest efficiency obtained is ca. 10.29%. Repeatability tests of the circulating electrolyte DSCs were performed and the results are shown in Fig. S6 (ESI). It is clear that the circulating electrolyte DSCs fabricated under the same conditions have a very good repeatability at the various rotating speeds, suggesting that the photovoltaic experiments are highly reproducible and the data are reliable. Table S2 (ESI) summarizes some representative photovoltaic parameters reported for DSCs with Pt-free CEs from the literature. Interestingly, the circulating electrolyte DSC not only demonstrates a considerably enhanced power conversion efficiency compared with the DSC with the stationary electrolyte, but also reveals the second largest value (i.e., 10.29%) amongst all reported data for the DSCs with Pt-free CEs, which is comparable to the highest efficiency reported for the Pt-free DSC with a CE coated with a more active material (i.e., core–shell N-doped graphene/CoS).
Speed (rpm)

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF

η (%)
0
0.74
14.45
0.646
6.91
10
0.78
15.91
0.666
8.26
40
0.81
17.60
0.710
10.18
80
0.84
17.99
0.725
10.89
120
0.83
17.72
0.723
10.60
Evidently, the mass transfer mechanism has a significant effect on the efficiency of DSCs. As can be seen from the dark current density–voltage characteristics at various rotating speeds (Fig. 1B), the onset dark currents increase with the rotating speeds and the dark currents are further suppressed with the increase of rotating speeds. This indicates that the charge recombination with I3− ions is successfully suppressed with the increase of the rotating speed. The open-circuit voltage decay measurements for the circulating electrolyte DSC (Fig. 1C) with different rotating speeds have been performed to obtain insights into the backward electron transfer reactions from the conduction band of the TiO2 film. The electron lifetime in the TiO2 film with a stationary electrolyte is much shorter than those observed for the DSC with a circulating electrolyte at different rotating speeds. This result strongly suggests that the backward electron transfer reaction is greatly promoted in the stationary electrolyte case. In contrast, the backward electron transfer reaction is effectively suppressed in the circulating electrolyte cases.
Since the rotating speed of the pump is the only parameter changed here, it should be responsible for the decrease of the dark current and the enhancement of the electron lifetime. The dark current and electron lifetime are closely related to the diffusion coefficient (D) and mass transfer coefficient (m) which can be determined based on the Nernst–Plank equation shown below:
(1)
where
Jj(x) is a one-dimensional flux for species j at distance x (cm) from the electrode in mol cm−2 s−1; Dj, zj, and Cj are the diffusion coefficient in cm2 s−1, the charge, and the concentration for species j in mol cm−3, respectively; v(x) is the rate at which a volume element moves in solution in cm s−1; ∂Cj(x)/∂x is the concentration gradient; and ∂Φ(x)/∂x is the potential gradient along the x-axis. The first term in eqn (1) corresponds to the diffusion, the second term accounts for the migration and the last term accounts for the convection. The main mass transfer mechanism in a conventional DSC is controlled by diffusion, denoted by the first term in eqn (1), while the mass transfer in a circulating electrolyte DSC is mainly controlled by convection, corresponding to the third term in eqn (1). To clarify the difference between these two mass transfer mechanisms, the values of D and m were determined in a traditional three-electrode electrochemical cell. D (cm2 s−1) was measured by the chronoamperometry method according to the Cottrell equation shown below:

(2)
where
A is the electrode area in cm2, C* is the bulk concentration in mol cm−3, i is the current in A, n is the number of electrons involved in charge transfer, F is the Faraday constant, and t is the time in s. The chronoamperometric curves at various step potentials and the linear fit of i vs. t−1/2 plots for I3− ions and I− ions are shown in Fig. 2A and B, and Fig. S7 and S8 (ESI), respectively. By plotting I vs. t−1/2 and fitting the linear part, D can be derived. M can be determined by measuring the mass-transfer limiting current obtained at various stirring rates as shown in Fig. 2C and Fig. S9 (ESI), and is based on the following equation:

il = nFAmC
(3)
where
il is the mass-transfer limited current in A, C is the bulk concentration in mol cm−3, n is the number of electrons involved in charge transfer, and F is the Faraday constant. The derived diffusion coefficient (D) and mass transfer coefficient (m) of I−/I3− ions are shown in Table 2.

Ions

D (cm2 s−1)

m (cm s−1)
Distance per second (cm)
100
200
400
0
100
200
400
I3−
2.52 × 10−5
0.133
0.187
0.263
0.089
0.133
0.187
0.263
I−
9.88 × 10−5
0.265
0.371
0.529
0.018
0.265
0.371
0.529
By calculating the thickness of the Nernst diffusion layer (δ, cm) according to the following equation:
(4)
the time period taken for a molecule of analyte to wander a certain distance can be obtained and the results are also summarized in
Table 2. It can be seen that the distances the redox couple can wander under convection are at least ten times farther compared with the distances under diffusion control (i.e., the stirring rate is 0). This means that under convection conditions I− ions in the bulk solution can reach the dye+ ions in the TiO2 film much faster, which would promote the dye regeneration reaction and in turn suppress the charge recombination with dye+ ions. Besides, I3− ions in the TiO2 film can be transferred much faster from the film into the bulk solution, which would suppress the charge recombination with the electrons from the TiO2 film and the TCO substrate. As a result, the power conversion efficiency of the circulating electrolyte DSC has been considerably improved due to the greatly reduced charge recombination rate and significantly enhanced electron lifetime.

In summary, the as-developed novel circulating electrolyte DSC configuration enables the redox couple to transfer dozens of times faster in the electrolyte solution, which has been demonstrated to be a promising design to greatly improve the power conversion efficiency. The circulating electrolyte DSC can suppress the charge recombination, enhance the electron lifetime and promote dye regeneration reaction effectively. Based on these excellent characteristics, the efficiency of the circulating electrolyte DSC has been increased by 48.9% compared with the stationary electrolyte case (up to 10.29%). Furthermore, much improvement in the efficiency can be expected by (1) utilization of TiO2 nanostructured materials with hierarchical porosity which benefits light harvesting, (2) addition of a co-adsorbent, (3) optimization of the electrolyte composition, (4) replacement of RGO/Cu2S with more active materials (e.g., core–shell N-doped graphene/CoS),etc. In addition, the pump used for circulating the electrolyte can be replaced with a temperature sensitive magnetic fluid (TSMF) to make the circulating electrolyte DSCs more compact (ESI). Significantly, the circulating electrolyte DSCs will bring new opportunities to further optimize the photovoltaic performance of DSCs in many aspects; for instance, it allows the TiO2 film to be thicker because the redox couple can be transferred much faster into/away from the TiO2 electrode. In addition, the circulating electrolyte DSCs can be more easily encapsulated as the encapsulation process does not involve the injection of an electrolyte into the chamber, and the leakage problem of the DSCs can also be alleviated because the electrolyte vapor can be discharged from the pipe and fresh electrolyte can be easily fed into the system, which can significantly reduce the cost in the manufacture and maintenance of the DSCs. All these potentials would definitely promote the industrialization progress of DSCs.
This work was supported by the China Scholarship Council (CSC) which is gratefully acknowledged.
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: A schematic DSC configuration and the circulating electrolyte DSC system, experimental details. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cc02266b
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017