 DOI: 10.1039/D2TC02619H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 13005-13013


Lin
Zheng
,

Zhizai
Li
,

Xufeng
Zhou
,

Hong
Zhang
,

Qian
Wang
,

Hao
Jia
* and 

Zhiwen
Jin
*

School of Physical Science and Technology & Key Laboratory for Magnetism and Magnetic Materials of the Ministry of Education, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, China. E-mail: jinzw@lzu.edu.cn; jiahao@lzu.edu.cn

School of Material Science and Engineering, Liaocheng University, Liaocheng 252000, China

Electron Microscopy Centre of Lanzhou University, School of Materials and Energy, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China

Received
22nd June 2022
, Accepted 10th August 2022
First published on 11th August 2022
To better optimize the optical–electrical performance of photovoltaic devices, high-quality photon management and superior optical design should be developed. Herein, based on hot-spot materials of CsPbI3 perovskite (PVK), the photon management strategy of integrated cheap spherical nanostructured oxide particles (SNOPs) enhanced photocurrent is developed and reported. Three SNOPs (SiO2, ZrO2, Al2O3) with different refractive indices were integrated into different functional layers of CsPbI3 perovskite solar cells (PSCs) to enhance the light-capture performance. Compared with reference PSCs, the short-circuit current density (JSC) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the optimized device reached 20.96 mA cm−2 (20.34 mA cm−2) and 18.55% (17.70%) without sacrificing electrical properties. Further experimental characterization demonstrated that improved performance originated from enhanced visible-light photon utilization, and the competitive mechanism between optical–electrical properties obtains effective mitigation. Moreover, this device with integrated SNOPs was optically numerically simulated and quickly predicted, verified with experimental results, and both showed good agreement. It proves that: (1) photocurrent enhancement mainly lies in the enhanced local optical field of the PVK layer due to specific interference design; (2) photon collection in different depths of the photogenerated electron layer becomes more regular and uniform so that efficiency increases slightly. Importantly, it provides viable insight into potential mechanisms of optical management.

In just a few years, perovskite materials have become one of the best alternatives for next-generation photovoltaic (PV) light absorption materials, due to their excellent bandgap tunability, superior light absorption coefficient, low penetration depth, and long carrier diffusion length. Recently, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has evolved rapidly relative to silicon-based solar cells, jumping from an initial 3.81% in 2009 to nearly 26% with certification. However, the further improvement of the PCE still has many challenges to be addressed. For instance, there are few measures to achieve the regulation of the electro-optical characteristics and the selection of functional materials with appropriate dielectric constants and so on, which still need reasonable optimization and design.

Optical optimization has received more attention due to the limited light capture efficiency of standard PSCs than electrical optimization. Especially, high-quality photon management is the key to improving the optical properties, such as minimizing light loss and enhancing photocurrent. Heavy metals in perovskite materials are highly toxic. Efficient photon management strategies can lead to an effective reduction, without sacrificing optical properties, in the thickness of the perovskite layer, thus reducing the use of heavy metals.
Among the photon management strategies to improve device performance, using nanostructured materials and nanostructured devices with increased optical traps show particular effectiveness. The nanostructure has properties of optical coupling and whispering gallery modes (WGMs), which can be used as secondary light sources to increase the light capture in the perovskite absorber and carrier transport layers. In this way, we can increase the effective absorption and utilization of photons by utilizing the specifically designed interference structure to improve the local field in the PVK layer. Thus, to make these above enhancements work, it is important to rationally select the nature, morphology, and refractive effect of the particles with nanostructures. Then, to optimize the device's optical properties, the particles that are applied to the PSCs and the corresponding functional layer of the device have to be reasonably controlled.
Recently, the study of Cheng et al. revealed that using the local surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effect and the light scattering of metal nanostructures, the light management achieved by the adoption of nanostructured Au, Ag and Au–Ag nanoalloys, can increase the optical path length, resulting in effective photon collection. However, due to the specificity of metallic materials, the reaction with halogens in the perovskite can fail to maximize the performance of devices. Subsequently, it has been found that upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs) exhibit more efficient light management advantages than metals. Xu et al. further investigated and developed UCNPs with an LSPR effect, the NaCsWO3@NaYF4@NaYF4: Yb, Er nanoparticles are used as the LSPR center, which enhanced the photocurrent in PSCs by increasing the reabsorption of active layers through its scattering and reflection effects. At the same time, the effective modification of the film leads to the reduction of surface defects, reducing the carrier recombination, i.e., successfully achieving the enhancement of photocurrent. Unfortunately, due to the low luminescence efficiency of UCNPs, their scattering and reflecting effects are not adequately utilized, and are therefore severely limited in PV applications.
For deeply modifying the nanostructure-related subwavelength focusing effect, a photon management strategy was proposed by Hossain et al. to deeply analyze the photonic and electrical effects of the front contact, using 3D electromagnetic simulations combining finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) and finite-element method (FEM) techniques. The results showed that the nanophotonics front contact resulted in enhanced photocurrent. Meanwhile, the photostability of the PSCs was also greatly improved. Nevertheless, utilizing this front contact structure usually requires a modified design of the device and an optimized deposition technique. At the same time, the loss in electrical reorganization was frequently triggered. Our previous studies have also revealed that by introducing UCNPs with nanostructures of different dielectric constants (NaYF4: 20% Yb3+, 2% Er3+), the optical field interference was disturbed and the absorption of the absorber layer in visible light was significantly enhanced, effectively improving the optical properties of PSCs. Therefore, there is an urgent need to provide a reasonable and feasible alternative strategy compatible with suitable nanomaterials to optimize the photonic design of PSCs, which not only improves the photovoltaic performance but also effectively reduces the experimental time cost.
Accordingly, based on the hot-spot materials of CsPbI3 PVK, with optical numerical simulation optimization that was mutually validated through experiment, we propose an efficient photon management strategy, which introduces novel and cheap spherical nanostructured oxide particles (SNOPs) to make full use of the optical enhancement strategy without affecting the electrical properties. In the first part of this research, the SNOPs (SiO2, ZrO2, Al2O3) with different refractive indices were integrated into different functional layers to systematically investigate the effect of SNOPs on the photon management of PSCs. Meanwhile, the optical numerical modelling and simulations were fitted to explore the potential mechanism. The results show that on the one hand, the performance improvement was attributed to enhanced local light field interference by the introduced SNOPs. On the other hand, photons are collected more regularly and uniformly in the PVK layer, which further enhances the absorption of visible light and significantly improves photon utilization. Finally, based on the model, the best combination of photon collection is predicted by the optical optimization process, and it remained in good agreement with experimental results, successfully obtaining the maximum gain in the optical performance of the PSCs. Compared to the reference, the photocurrent and PCE of the optimized device reached 20.96 mA cm−2 and 18.55%.

In our work, we added the SNOPs (SiO2, ZrO2, Al2O3) with the same morphology but different refractive indices into CsPbI3 PSCs. As a consequence of their light aggregation and scattering effects, nanostructures are capable of optical coupling to visible light (400–700 nm). The cross-sectional schematic of the device is shown in Fig. 1a with the structure of glass substrate/fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/TiO2/CsPbI3 PVK/2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis (N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD, hereinafter referred to as “Spiro”)/Au. The effect of the embedded SNOPs materials in the corresponding functional layers such as the TiO2 layer, PVK layer, and Spiro layer on the device performance are systematically discussed.

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) is applied to study the cross-section of the device and film morphology changes. The SEM cross-sections of the perovskite film before and after modification with 200 nm Al2O3 SNOPs are shown in Fig. 1b and c. Compared to the control device without the addition of Al2O3 SNOPs (reference), as a result of the incorporation of Al2O3 SNOPs (PVK–Al2O3), circular pores of different diameters (282 nm, 353 nm, and 200 nm) appear in the perovskite absorption layer. Obviously, the formation of circular pores illustrates a distribution schematic of SNOPs (Fig. 1d), which is consistent with the distribution of SNOPs in perovskite films. The SNOPs are distributed in disordered arrays within the perovskite films. The case of SiO2 (PVK–SiO2) and ZrO2 (PVK–ZrO2) is consistent with Al2O3 (Fig. S1a and b, ESI). The SEM surface morphology of the perovskite films before and after amendment with Al2O3 SNOPs are shown in Fig. 1e and f. Both films exhibited uniform grain morphology and a flat surface. Furthermore, we statistically counted the grain size of at least 30 grains of perovskite films for both cases separately, as shown in the illustrations in Fig. 1e and f. It was found that the average grain size of PVK–Al2O3 perovskite films was 0.44 μm, which was comparable to that of reference perovskite films (0.42 μm). Thus, the addition of Al2O3 SNOPs does not affect the morphology of films. The situation of SiO2, ZrO2 is also in agreement with that of Al2O3 (Fig. S1c and d, ESI). X-Ray diffraction (XRD) was used to analyze the crystal structure of the perovskite films after adding Al2O3 SNOPs. The diffraction peaks at 14.3° and 28.9° are from the (110) and (220) planes of CsPbI3 (Fig. S2a and b, ESI), indicating that the addition of different SNOPs with different concentrations does not affect the formation of a perovskite crystal structure.
The effect of SNOPs’ addition on the performance of PSCs was systematically explored and studied. Firstly, one of the Al2O3 SNOPs was chosen and added into the TiO2 layer (TiO2–Al2O3), PVK layer (PVK–Al2O3), and Spiro layer (Spiro–Al2O3). The current density–voltage (J–V) curves (reference, TiO2–Al2O3, PVK–Al2O3, Spiro–Al2O3) are shown in Fig. 2a, along with the corresponding performance parameters in Table S1 (ESI). It is apparent that the open-circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF) are almost identical for the PSCs of the reference, TiO2–Al2O3, PVK–Al2O3, and Spiro–Al2O3. As compared to reference one, the short-circuit current density (JSC) was enhanced from 20.34 mA cm−2 to 20.57 mA cm−2 for Spiro–Al2O3 and 20.66 mA cm−2 for TiO2–Al2O3. Notably, PVK–Al2O3 PSCs is the top performer with outstanding JSC (20.85 mA cm−2) and PCE (18.30%). The results obtained are attributed to the superior WGMs and optical coupling of SNOPs. To ensure the reproducibility of the explored devices, the PV parameters (JSC, VOC, FF, and PCE) were measured for 20 devices of the reference, TiO2–Al2O3, Spiro–Al2O3, and PVK–Al2O3, respectively. Their statistical distributions are shown in Fig. 2b and c. It can be observed that the JSC and PCE of four cases of PSCs were concentrated in a narrow distribution interval, indicating that these devices possess excellent repeatability. The VOC and FF are shown in Fig. S3a and b (ESI). Both J–V curves of the reference and Al2O3 SNOPs optimized PSCs measured with reverse and forward scans are shown in Fig. 2d, and the relevant parameters are summarized in Table S2 (ESI).
To further elucidate the properties of light absorption lifting, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum and the integral product of the EQE curve with the AM 1.5G photon flux were measured (Fig. 2e). The EQE enhancement trends of the devices are highly consistent with the trends of the J–V curves in Fig. 2a. In particular, the EQE spectrum of PVK–Al2O3 PSCs is dramatically enhanced in the wavelength range of 400–700 nm, indicating a significant increase in photon utilization.
In addition, the universality JSC enhancement effect of SNOPs was revealed. Apart from the Al2O3 SNOPs discussed above, we also investigated the addition of ZrO2 SNOPs with a larger refractive index (∼2.17) and SiO2 SNOPs with a smaller refractive index (∼1.45) into the PVK layer compared to the refractive index of Al2O3 (∼1.66) SNOPs. The J–V curves of four cases (reference, PVK–SiO2, PVK–ZrO2, PVK–Al2O3) are shown in Fig. 2f. The relevant parameters are summarized in Table S3 (ESI), of which similar results were obtained. Importantly, all the above studies were conducted under the same conditions with an additive concentration of 0.1 mg mL−1, all of which have improved the JSC. Compared with the reference, the JSC was enhanced from 20.34 mA cm−2 to 20.54 mA cm−2 for PVK–SiO2 and 20.65 mA cm−2 for PVK–ZrO2, with no significant sacrifice of other properties (VOC and FF). It suggested that the key to improving the device performance is partially related to the refractive index of SNOPs.
Fig. S4a (ESI) shows the absorption spectra of different SNOPs added in the PVK layer. The results showed that all absorptions optimized by SNOPs were significantly enhanced. The absorption in Al2O3 SNOPs was stronger than the other two SNOPs, showing that more photons were transformed into electrons. This confirms that it is feasible to integrate SNOPs into PVK layers to increase light absorption. To understand the effect of SNOPs on carrier transport and recombination properties, steady-state photoluminescence (PL) was measured. Fig. S4b (ESI) shows the PL spectra of different SNOPs added into the PVK layer. The results indicate that for the films optimized by SNOPs, the recombination of electrons and holes at steady-state PL significantly decreases. Especially, the effect of Al2O3 SNOPs was remarkable. The decrease of PL recombination revealed that the carrier separation was enhanced by the addition of SNOPs. The separation efficiency was further improved as well.
To further analyze the photon management enhancement mechanism of SNOPs introduced into the proposed PSCs, a numerical model was constructed to explore the optical properties of the device. We simulate the transmission of wide-range spectrum light injection by FDTD and assume that the structural distributions are infinite by using periodic boundary conditions (PBC). In this way, we can study the experimentally realized optical properties of the proposed device and examine the effect of optimized photon management on the final optical properties of the proposed PSCs. The vertical device structures are shown in Fig. S5a–d (ESI), and without loss of generality, we permeate the SNOPs in functional layers with hexagon lattices. For each simulation, we inject plane waves with both polarizations to fit the natural light, and the result shows that this structure is insensitive to the polarization direction. The optical field variations across the device region were explored.
As in the previous discussion of the model in Fig. 1d, when the system was stabilized, the distribution of SNOPs approximates a spherical shape in numerous cases. In simulations, to better describe the role of SNOPs, we assume that the distributions in the corresponding functional layers were all spherically shaped distributions with different periods, corresponding to different distribution densities. And the period of SNOPs was set as 396 nm such that the minimum edge-to-edge distance between particles was about 50 nm, thus simulating the relative medium distribution density.
Firstly, the light field of 200 nm Al2O3 SNOPs added in different functional layers was simulated. Fig. 3 shows the vertical cross-sectional view of light field intensity distribution at different wavelengths (450 nm, 500 nm, 550 nm, 600 nm, 650 nm, and 700 nm). From the results, it can be observed that in the reference, the light incident from the glass layer interferes with the reflected waves from the electrode (Au) reflection layer, forming a uniform interference pattern (first row of Fig. 3). For different wavelengths, the wave vector K is different, so the periods between the maximum and minimum distribution are also different. When SNOPs are embedded into the functional layers, the optical field in each layer was disturbed because the refractive indices of SNOPs are different from the related functional layers. In theory, this effect would enhance or weaken the localized optical field, then affect the absorbed energy in the PVK layer. To enhance the efficiency of the device, we expect to enhance the light field in the PVK layer, and thus weaken the energy in other functional layers because of energy conservation.
This goal could be achieved by suitably allocating the material with different refractive indices in different layers. For example, the refractive index at 450 nm for each material is as follows: TiO2: 2.68, PVK: 2.27, Spiro: 1.71, SiO2: 1.45, Al2O3: 1.66, and ZrO2: 2.17.
For the Spiro–Al2O3 case, the refractive indices of the Al2O3 SNOPs were approximately the same as Spiro. As a result, the addition of Al2O3 SNOPs in spiro causes only a slight change in the effective refractive index of this layer. Nonetheless, in the majority of cases, a better distribution of optical tendency was obtained in the functional layer with a higher refractive index in the active layer, which redistributes the photon energy.
Its simulated light intensity is shown in Fig. 3b, relative to the reference in Fig. 3a. The intensity of the light field interference in the Spiro layer was slightly changed, and the light field interference in the other layers was slightly enhanced, which was consistent with the experimental section (JSC increases from 20.34 mA cm−2 to 20.57 mA cm−2). In the TiO2–Al2O3 case, TiO2 has a higher refractive index compared to Al2O3 SNOPs and PVK layers. Moreover, the Al2O3 SNOPs were covered by TiO2, resulting in the geometry change of TiO2. Therefore, it would theoretically obtain stronger scattering and light field interference. The simulated light intensity is shown in Fig. 3c. However, the results of our experiments differ. The reason for this is that the addition of TiO2 layers on the SNOPs restricts the crystalline growth of perovskite films, increasing the surface roughness of the films and affecting the collection of carriers. Hence it fails to maximize its optical properties, which is partially consistent with the experimental section (JSC increases from 20.34 mA cm−2 to 20.66 mA cm−2).
In the PVK–Al2O3 case, the obtained simulation results are in superior conformity with the experiments. The light field interference intensity distribution of the PVK layer showed local enhancement at different wavelengths, with the JSC increasing from 20.34 mA cm−2 to 20.85 mA cm−2 (Fig. 3d). The simulated light intensity variations of PVK–SiO2, PVK–ZrO2 were alike those of PVK–Al2O3, which also achieved good agreement with the experimental results (Fig. S6a and b, ESI).
The results of the numerical model above show that the optical performance gets significantly improved by suitably arranging the material which causes light field interference. Meanwhile, we use quantitative analysis to calculate the normalized absorption (which corresponds to the light-induced carriers) in the active layer when SNOPs (SiO2, ZrO2, Al2O3) are introduced into the Spiro layer, TiO2 layer, and PVK layer at 400–700 nm wavelength ranges (Fig. 4). Since the underlying scattering equation for the Poynting vector (P) was susceptible to numerical problems, the absorbed power per unit volume (unit m−3) was calculated employing a modified equation:
PAbsorption = −0.5ω|E|2imag(ε)
where
ω is the angular frequency of the light, |E|2 is the electric field strength and ε is the complex dielectric permittivity. The absorption in each layer was obtained by the power integral over the entire volume of the observed material layer. As shown in Fig. 4a–c, with reference comparison, the quantitative analysis results are consistent with the above-mentioned trends of the light field interference plots. Fig. 4d shows the integrated absorption over the AM 1.5G spectrum at different lateral PVK positions with different SNOPs embedded. Compared to the reference, the absorption across the incident direction in the PVK layer is more uniform after adding the SNOPs, which would lead to a more effective photon collection capability. This effect indicates that the introduction of SNOPs regulated well the capture of photons by the absorber.

To show the results more clearly, we utilize the relationship between absorption coefficient and extinction coefficient to calculate the integrated absorption coefficient (IAC) of different SNOPs added in different layers of PSCs:
where
λ is the wavelength of light in free space and k is the extinction coefficient of the medium. Fig. S7a (ESI) shows the AM 1.5G spectrum. According to the calculated results, it is obvious that the IAC of SNOPs added into the devices show different degrees of enhancement compared with the reference sample (Fig. S7b–d, ESI).

Based on the discussion above, the combination of experiments and optical simulations successfully clarifies the function of SNOPs added in different layers. The introduction of SNOPs enhances the optical performance of PSCs and manages the photons effectively. It is encouraging that after adding SNOPs, the increasing photocurrent of PVK layers is significantly higher than that of Spiro and TiO2 layers, in addition, the optical simulation results are in good agreement with the previous J–V curves. Also, it is worth pointing out that the crystallization of the film is limited with the incorporation of SNOPs into the TiO2 layer, i.e., increasing the surface roughness of the films and affecting the collection of carriers, thus being unable to maximize its optical performance enhancement.
Moreover, we further verify the universal capability of SNOPs for photon management. Also, it is urgent that the best combination of optical gain is explored and the maximum gain of the optical performance with minimal experimental costs is achieved. Using our model we could quickly predict the performance for the case of multilayer superposition (PVK, Spiro) with SNOPs added. The reference mentioned below refers to the introduction of SNOPs in a single layer. We show the normalized absorbed calculation in Fig. 5a–c, with the addition of different SNOPs in both the PVK layer and the Spiro layer (PVK-add + Spiro-add). The results show that the improvement of absorbed power, compared to the reference, by introducing SNOPs in the double layer was remarkable.
Among them, when adding different SNOPs in the Spiro layer while adding Al2O3 in the PVK layer (PVK–Al2O3 + Spiro-add), the performance gets significant enhancement, compared to SiO2 (PVK–SiO2 + Spiro-add) and ZrO2 (PVK–ZrO2 + Spiro-add). Furthermore, in the case of PVK–Al2O3 + Spiro-add, when the SNOPs added into the Spiro layer are ZrO2 (PVK–Al2O3 + Spiro–ZrO2), we get the best performance (Fig. 5c). This indicates that the light absorption capacity of the absorber layer is further improved.
The IAC is shown in Fig. 5d. Compared with the reference, especially the PVK–Al2O3 + Spiro–ZrO2, it shows the strongest IAC, which was highly consistent with normalized absorption. Meanwhile, the optical simulation also verifies this point. Compared to introducing a single layer, the introduction of SNOPs in a double-layer superposition of PSCs results in significant improvement. The amplitude of the optical field interference in the whole device region of PVK–Al2O3 + Spiro–ZrO2 was dramatically enhanced, which indicates that the optical field intensity was further enhanced as well (Fig. S6c, ESI).
When introducing SNOPs into the multilayer, we prepare the corresponding devices to further verify the consistency of the simulation calculations and experiments, and meanwhile examine the effect on the final optical properties. Their J–V curves are shown in Fig. 6a. The corresponding performance parameters are summarized in Table 1. Apparently, the above results are in good agreement with the introduction of single layers by the SNOPs case. The VOC and FF of four cases PSCs (reference, PVK–Al2O3 + Spiro–SiO2, PVK–Al2O3 + Spiro–Al2O3, PVK–Al2O3 + Spiro–ZrO2) are nearly identical.
Device

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Reference
20.85
1.106
79.29
18.30
PVK–Al2O3 + Spiro–SiO2
20.92
1.103
79.56
18.36
PVK–Al2O3 + Spiro–Al2O3
20.94
1.106
79.55
18.43
PVK–Al2O3 + Spiro–ZrO2
20.96
1.103
80.12
18.55
Compared to the reference, the PVK–Al2O3 + Spiro–SiO2 achieved JSC enhancement from 20.85 mA cm−2 to 20.92 mA cm−2 and the PVK–Al2O3 + Spiro–Al2O3 achieved JSC enhancement to 20.94 mA cm−2. Excitingly, PVK–Al2O3 + Spiro–ZrO2 PSCs with outstanding JSC (20.96 mA cm−2) and PCE (18.55%) exhibit high agreement with the results of optical numerical simulation. And apparently, the photocurrent gets further improved. The forward and reverse scan J–V curves are shown in Fig. S8a (ESI), and the relevant parameters are shown in Table S4 (ESI). The effect of introducing different concentrations of ZrO2 into the Spiro layer on the performance was investigated based on PVK–Al2O3 (optimal experimental conditions). The key PV parameters are summarized in Table S5 (ESI). The performance gradually increases with increasing concentration, and the best performance was achieved when the concentration was 0.1 mg mL−1 (Fig. S8b, ESI).
Besides, the PSCs of PVK–Al2O3 + Spiro–ZrO2 have good steady-state output performances. After running at 0.94 V for 150 seconds, the output current density and the PCE were stabilized at 20.77 mA cm−2 and 18.00%, respectively (Fig. 6b). The PV parameters (JSC, VOC, FF, and PCE) were measured for 20 devices of the reference, PVK–Al2O3 + Spiro–SiO2, PVK–Al2O3 + Spiro–Al2O3, and PVK–Al2O3 + Spiro–ZrO2, respectively. To ensure the reproducibility of the devices, the statistical distributions of device performance are shown in Fig. 6c–f. It is obvious that the JSC, VOC, FF, and PCE of the four cases of PSCs were concentrated in a narrow distribution interval, indicating that the devices possess excellent stability.

In summary, the relationship between SNOPs and the optoelectronic properties of PSCs was systematically investigated by the successful combination of SNOPs with specific functional layers. The maximum gain in optical properties of PSCs was successfully achieved, resulting in the preparation of superior CsPbI3 PSCs with JSC increased from 20.34 mA cm−2 to 20.96 mA cm−2 and PCE of 18.55% without changing VOC and FF. Through modelling for the device and thorough electromagnetic analysis, we successfully investigated the mechanism of SNOPs for performance optimization. Apparently, the increased optical performance of the prepared devices is mainly the result of the incorporation of SNOPs with different refractive indices from other layers. By suitably selecting the material and distribution, the absorption in the active layer is enhanced, and the photon collection is more regular and uniform. The synergistic effect enhances the light-induced carrier. The performance of the prepared devices is in good agreement with the established theoretical model, the described numerical method is well validated. We use the model to predict the structures when SNOPs are in the PVK and spiro layers, and the experiment result also validates our prediction. As a result, this study provides scientific insight by essentially exploring the mechanism of SNOPs in PV devices. In the future, specific functional materials with synergistic PV enhancement capabilities can be created to better utilize visible light and improve the performance of PSCs for practical PV applications.


The project was conceived, planned, and supervised by Z. J. and H. J. L. Z. performed the experiments, data analysis, and experimental planning. H. J. performed the modelling and simulation section. Some of the experimental tests were supported by H. Z., Z. L., X. Z., and Q. W. The manuscript was written by L. Z. All the authors reviewed the manuscript.


The authors declare no competing financial interests.


This work was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (52073131, 61704099, 61905101), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (lzujbky-2021-59, lzujbky-2021-ct15 and lzujbky-2021-sp69) and the Natural Science Foundation of Gansu Province (20JR5RA243).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Synthesis details, additional figures. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2tc02619h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022