 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA07919J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22044-22053


Sora
Oh
,

Chang Eun
Song
,

Taeho
Lee
,

Ara
Cho
,

Hang Ken
Lee
,

Jong-Cheol
Lee
,

Sang-Jin
Moon
,

Eunhee
Lim
*,

Sang Kyu
Lee
* and 

Won Suk
Shin
*

Advanced Materials Division, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), 141 Gajeongro, Yuseong, Daejeon 34114, Republic of Korea. E-mail: skyulee@krict.re.kr

Advanced Materials and Chemical Engineering, University of Science and Technology (UST), 217 Gajeongro, Yuseong, Daejeon 34113, Republic of Korea

Energy Materials Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), 141 Gajeongro, Yuseong, Daejeon 34114, Republic of Korea. E-mail: shinws@krict.re.kr

Department of Chemistry, Kyonggi University, 154-42 Gwanggyosan-ro, eongtong-gu, Suwon 16227, Republic of Korea. E-mail: ehlim@kyonggi.ac.kr

KU-KRICT Collaborative Research Center & Division of Display and Semiconductor Physics & Department of Advanced Materials Chemistry, Korea University, 2511 Sejong-ro, Sejong 30019, Republic of Korea

Received
22nd July 2019
, Accepted 3rd September 2019
First published on 4th September 2019
A simple-structured nonfullerene acceptor (NFA), T2-ORH, consisting of a bithiophene core and octyl-substituted rhodanine ends is utilized as the third component in ternary-blend solar cells with PTB7-Th and EH-IDTBr as host materials. T2-ORH is a wide band gap NFA and specially contributes to light absorption, which provides complimentary absorption with a low band gap acceptor, EH-IDTBR. In the ternary device, a PCE of 11.55%, a short circuit current (JSC) of 17.51 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 63% and an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.05 V were achieved with a 1:1:1 blend ratio. In this ternary system, it is estimated that the two NFAs work as one alloy-like acceptor and energy transfer model from T2-ORH to EH-IDTBR for efficient ternary-blend organic solar cells (OSCs). On conducting thermal, light, and air-process stability tests, the ternary-blend systems show superior stability performance owing to the formation of a stable and robust morphology. Finally, we fabricated a large-scale device (5 cm × 5 cm substrate, 13.5 cm2 aperture size, and a geometric FF of 54%) with the same ternary system. The sub-module ternary-blend OSCs displayed the highest PCE of 10.08% with JSC = 2.83 mA cm−2, VOC = 6.36 V and FF = 56%. As a result, ternary-blend OSCs show tremendous promise for use in actual applications.

Rapid development of solution-processed organic solar cells (OSCs) has been witnessed during the past few years, and the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of OSCs has already exceeded 15% based on polymer donors and non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs) in single-junction cells. However, further improvement of the performance in single-junction NF-OSCs is limited by the insufficient photon harvesting of the photoactive layers due to the relatively narrow absorption window. Thus, tandem OSCs have been developed to achieve broader light absorption and higher PCE. Compared to single-junction OSCs, tandem cells can not only improve the light absorption spectra but also reduce thermalization losses of the photonic energy through the stacking of two or more sub-cells with complementary absorption bands to harvest high- and low-energy photons in the separate sub-cells. Nevertheless, the fabrication of tandem OSCs is still challenging because it requires the design and optimization of each sub-cell to match the short-circuit current density (JSC) from two sub-cells. Furthermore, tandem OSCs must be carefully designed and optimized due to the additional recombination layer between the sub-cells. These recombination layers not only create more interfaces leading to inevitable energy losses and price rise for the fabrication of devices, but also reduce light absorption in the photoactive layers. As an alternative strategy for expanding the spectral range of light absorption, a ternary-blend OSC is a promising candidate, as these OSCs encompass the major advantages of both single-junction and tandem OSCs. Ternary-blend OSCs employ either two donors and one acceptor or one donor and two acceptors in a single photoactive layer to overcome the aforementioned challenges associated with tandem cells. Thus multi-NFA ternary-blend OSCs can achieve higher efficiency than the corresponding binary OSCs. For successful multi-NFA systems in ternary-blend OSCs, finding a proper third NFA component is important owing to the increased complexity involved when adding an additional component.

The addition of a third component has multiple functions to enhance the device performance via photonic, electronic and morphological effects. Moreover, the light harvesting ability of the photoactive layer can be clearly enhanced by an additional absorber with a complementary absorption spectrum. On the other hand, a third component can facilitate the formation of an optimum morphology, which favors the charge generation and transport processes in ternary-blend OSCs. In some cases, a third component can suppress the aggregation and maintain the morphology of the photoactive materials, leading to better morphological stability.
The majority of studies on multi-NFA ternary-blend OSCs present chemical structures similar to those of NFAs, such as cores based on indacenodithienothiophene (IDTT) and indacenodithiophene (IDT), as these can exhibit good compatibility and similar photophysical, electrochemical and crystalline properties. However, improperly tuning the optoelectronic properties and immiscibility between the donor and the respective NFAs presents a major challenge due to the undesirable affinity of the acceptors. This incompatibility of the constituents in multi-NFA ternary-blend systems can interrupt the formation of a favorable domain, with large isolated domains acting as trap sites and recombination centers, resulting in deteriorated charge transfer and transport properties. Moreover, complicated intermolecular interactions can occur between the components in multi-NFA ternary-blend systems, as all of the constituent materials have a flat conformation due to their analogous chemical properties. Therefore, we introduce an alternative approach for the successful improvement of novel multi-NF ternary-blend OSCs with enhanced efficiency and stability.
In this contribution, we demonstrate high-performance ternary-blend OSCs using one polymer donor, poly[4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b;4,5b]di-thiophene-2,6-diyl-alt-(4-(2-ethylhexyl)-3-fluorothieno[3,4-b]thiophene-2-carboxylate-2-6-diyl)] (PTB7-Th), and two NFAs having perfectly different structural characteristics: a ladder-type fused five-ring IDT core with a 2-ethylhexyl side chain (EH-IDTBR) and a very simple bithiophene derivative (T2-ORH) end-capped with octyl-substituted rhodanine (see Fig. 1a). In this case, T2-ORH is utilized as the third component to fabricate high-performance ternary-blend OSCs due to its compact and simple chemical structure with effective light absorption in the range of 400–500 nm, allowing effective improvements of the morphology and complementary light absorption with PTB7-Th and EH-IDTBR.
Impressively, the ternary-blend OSCs based on PTB7-Th:EH-IDBR:T2-ORH (1:1:1, blend ratio) exhibit an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.05 V, a JSC value of 17.51 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 63%, and an outstanding PCE of 11.55%, all of which can be attributed to the enhanced extra-photon harvesting of the third component without interrupting the original charge transport, molecular packing/ordering, and morphological properties. These are valuable results to prove the success of utilizing NFAs with completely different chemical structures in ternary-blend OSCs.

T2-ORH is an unfused skeleton compound, and EH-IDTBR is a fused aromatic π system. The chemical structures of PTB7-Th, EH-IDTBR, and T2-ORH are presented in Fig. 1a. There is no similarity in the chemical structures between EH-IDTBR and T2-ORH NFA, which provides a facile approach to control the optoelectronic and morphological properties via engineering of the chemical composition in multi-NF ternary-blend systems. As shown in Fig. 1b, the UV-vis absorption spectrum of T2-ORH in the thin-film state displays a maximum absorption peak at 450 nm. After solvent vapor annealing (SVA) with CHCl3 (CF) for 15s, the maximum absorption peak of the T2-ORH film shows a red shift with distinct peaks located at 500, 530, and 570 nm, implying enhanced ordering and crystalline behavior. Moreover, the beneficial photon harvesting from 450 nm to 600 nm was markedly increased with the increase in the T2-ORH content. These multi-NF ternary-blend systems show complementary absorption spectra, showing excellent potential with regard to enhanced JSC values in ternary-blend OSCs by optimizing the T2-ORH content. The electrochemical properties of PTB7-Th, EH-IDTBR and T2-ORH were studied by cyclic voltammetry to study the working mechanism of energy and/or charge transfer in ternary-blend systems (Fig. S1), and the corresponding energy-level diagram of the photoactive materials is shown in Fig. 1c.

As depicted in Fig. 1c, the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO)/lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels of PTB7-Th, EH-IDTBR, and T2-ORH are −5.39/−3.41 eV, −5.42/−3.60 eV and −5.67/−3.57 eV, respectively, indicating an ideal energy offset between the donor and acceptors to facilitate effective exciton dissociation and produce a high VOC with the lowest charge carrier losses.

The ternary-blend OSCs were fabricated with the following inverted structure: ITO/ZnO/PEIE/photoactive layer/MoOX/Ag. After systematic device optimization (Tables S1–S4, Fig. S2–S5), CF was used as the host solvent and the PTB7-Th:EH-IDTBR:T2-ORH ratio was optimized. In this case, a ratio of 1:1:1 and SVA (CF, 15s) were selected as the best conditions to achieve the highest efficiency. Fig. 2a shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of ternary-blend OSCs with different EH-IDTBR and T2-ORH contents under one sun illumination (100 mW cm−2). The key photovoltaic parameters of the ternary-blend OSCs are summarized in Table 1. A PCE of 10.07% was achieved for the PTB7-Th:EH-IDTBR-based binary system, with a JSC value of 15.75 mA cm−2, a VOC value of 1.02 V and a FF of 63%, whereas the PTB7-Th:T2-ORH binary OSCs exhibited a PCE of 9.39% with a JSC value of 14.74 mA cm−2, a VOC value of 1.07 V and a FF of 60%. However, the 1:1 (w/w) mixed blend systems exhibited the best PCE of 11.55% in relation to the simultaneously optimized VOC of 1.05 V, FF of 63% and JSC of 17.51 mA cm−2. To verify our photovoltaic results, a certified PCE of 10.81% was recorded, as shown in Fig. S6. It should be noted that the remarkable PCE of 11.55% blended with a perfect 1:1:1 wt ratio of the PTB7-Th:EH-IDTBR:T2-ORH component is an impressive result compared to many previous reports on multi-NFA ternary-blend OSCs commonly presented after the use of a small amount of a third component. However, only a few cases have demonstrated fullerene-based OSCs due to the great difficulties associated with developing such ternary-blend systems.

Acceptor

V
OC [V]

J
SC [mA cm−2]
FF [%]
PCE [%]

μ
h
 [cm2 V−1 s−1]

μ
e
 [cm2 V−1 s−1]

a Inverted device architecture is ITO/ZnO NPs/PEIE/photoactive layer (d = ∼100 nm)/MoOX/Ag and all photoactive layers are annealed by solvent vapor annealing (SVA) using CF for 15s.
b The value is calculated from EQE data.
c The average photovoltaic parameters within brackets are obtained from over 20 independent devices.
d Hole-only device is ITO/PEDOT:PSS/photoactive layer (d = ∼100 nm)/Au.
e Electron-only device is ITO/ZnO NPs/PEIE/photoactive layer(d = ∼100 nm)/Ca/Al.

T2-ORH:EH-IDTBR = 0.0:2.0
1.02 (1.02 ± 0.01)
15.73 (15.25) (15.50 ± 0.22)
63 (62 ± 1)
10.07 (9.72 ± 0.35)
4.36 × 10−4
1.28 × 10−6
T2-ORH:EH-IDTBR = 0.5:1.5
1.04 (1.03 ± 0.01)
16.45 (16.28) (16.29 ± 0.16)
62 (61 ± 2)
10.62 (10.29 ± 0.33)
6.41 × 10−4
3.09 × 10−6
T2-ORH:EH-IDTBR = 1.0:1.0
1.05 (1.04 ± 0.01)
17.51 (17.05) (17.31 ± 0.19)
63 (62 ± 1)
11.55 (11.12 ± 0.44)
6.19 × 10−4
2.32 × 10−6
T2-ORH:EH-IDTBR = 1.5:0.5
1.05 (1.04 ± 0.01)
16.55 (16.30) (16.36 ± 0.20)
59 (59 ± 1)
10.29 (9.94 ± 0.35)
5.86 × 10−4
1.31 × 10−6
T2-ORH:EH-IDTBR = 2.0:0.0
1.07 (1.06 ± 0.01)
14.74 (14.43) (14.52 ± 0.23)
60 (58 ± 2)
9.39 (9.03 ± 0.36)
5.51 × 10−4
1.50 × 10−6
After mixing the T2-ORH:EH-IDTBR acceptor with the PTB7-Th donor in photoactive layers, the improvement in the PCE mainly stems from the increase in the JSC value without reduction of the FF. However, the VOC of ternary-blend OSCs is linearly dependent on the acceptor ratio between binary cells indicating photovoltaic evidence for the working mechanism of alloy-like acceptor materials inside the ternary-blend systems.
The enhancement of JSC is attributed to the complementary light absorption upon blending EH-IDTBR and T2-ORH, thus covering the entire wavelength region. The JSC improvement results from enhanced light absorption and the efficient generation and transport of photo-induced charge carriers. The absorption spectra for the binary and ternary-blend films are shown in Fig. 2c; the PTB7-Th:EH-IDTBR (1:2, back line) film shows strong absorption at 550–800 nm, whereas the absorption spectra with the insertion of the third component show absorption in the short wavelengths originating from T2-ORH. Among the ternary-blend systems, the EH-IDTBR:T2-ORH (1:1, blue line) film absorbs light while covering the range of 300–800 nm, indicating that the exciton and charge generation processes are more efficient than those in the other films. This result is in good agreement with the EQE curves in the full region of 300–800 nm as compared to that of the PTB7-Th:acceptor binary cells (Fig. 2d). The absorption spectral shape of the photoactive layers in this system is identical to that of the EQE curves, which clearly reflects the contribution of the third component to photon harvesting without energy losses accompanied by charge carrier recombination.

Furthermore, it can be estimated that the two NFAs work as one alloy-like acceptor for efficient ternary-blend OSCs. When the amount of T2-ORH increased from 1.0:1.0 to 2.0:0.0 blend ratio, the EQE intensity of the devices is identical in the region from 300 to 600 nm. This phenomenon also appears again in the region from 600 to 800 nm. From 1.0:1.0 to 0.0:2.0 of T2-ORH:EH-IDTBR (w/w), the EQE value is almost retained even with the increase of the EH-IDTBR ratio. As a result, the content of T2-ORH or EH-IDTBR does not reflect the EQE response in the each related region except for the binary system. Notably, it corresponds with the alloy-like acceptor model of the ternary-blend system, which works with one new NFA. Detailed analyses of the working mechanism in these ternary-blend OSCs are discussed as below.

In general, the alloy-like model requires an intimate mixing of two materials and an alloy-like acceptor works as a single material in ternary systems to efficiently extract electrons from the alloy-like acceptor to the cathode. And surprisingly the energy transfer can also simultaneously occur in the alloy-like ternary systems due to good compatibility between the two acceptors. To confirm the excitation energy transfer in the alloy-like acceptor, the photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the blend films with different T2-ORH:EH-IDTBR weight ratios were recorded as shown in Fig. 3a.
When the sample is excited at 500 nm, the neat T2-ORH film showed a strong emission peak at 650 nm, while the neat EH-IDTBR film showed an emission peak at 750 nm under the same conditions. When increasing the amount of T2-ORH in acceptor-blend films, however, the emission of EH-IDTBR was significantly improved due to efficient energy transfer from T2-ORH to EH-IDTBR. In Fig. 3a, we can clearly see that the emission region of T2-ORH overlapped with the absorption band of EH-IDTBR. When T2-ORH absorbs at 500 nm, the emission of T2-ORH with the maximum wavelength at 650 nm will be absorbed by EH-IDTBR. Therefore, the energy transfer from T2-ORH to EH-IDTBR occurred in the blend films. The additional excitons generated from the FRET effect can be dissociated into free charges at the interfaces between the polymer donor and alloy-like NFA. In addition, the PL spectrum of binary and ternary-blend films when the photoactive layers were excited at 650 nm is shown in Fig. S7. The ternary-blend photoactive layer (1:1:1) showed an almost quenched PL compared to the binary system, which demonstrates that the hole is efficiently transferred to the alloy-like NFA. It is well matched with the FF values, which means that the highest FF is generated in the ternary-blend OSCs (1:1:1) and the lowest FF value is generated in the PTB7-Th:T2-ORH binary devices correlated with a low PL quenching effect due to geminated recombination.
Furthermore, to investigate the phase behavior of the ternary-blend photoactive films with the coexistence of the alloy-like structure and energy transfer model, we have performed differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) on the neat and blend NFAs. From the DSC profiles (see Fig. 3b and c), the formation of the alloy-like NFA can be confirmed. The heat flow profiles reveal that both EH-IDTBR and T2-ORH exhibit an endothermic transition peak at 210 °C and 220 °C, respectively (Fig. 3b). In comparison to the neat film, the melting transition of the blended film (T2-ORH:EH-IDTBR = 1:1) is located with a strong endothermic peak at 198 °C, which means that the two acceptors are not present as an individual phase. This phenomenon also appears at the cooling states. The exothermic transition peak of two NFAs are present at 112 °C and 178 °C for EH-IDTBR and T2-ORH, respectively. After blending EH-IDTBR and T2-ORH, the crystalline endothermic peak appears at 140 °C. If the two acceptors are working individually, the transition peak in DSC curves should appear at the same position. However, the blend-acceptor film shows different melting and crystalline temperatures. Moreover, the enthalpy of the alloy-like acceptor (ΔHm = 58.2, ΔHcryst = 24.9 J g−1) is also changed compared to that of EH-IDTBR (ΔHm = 52.1, ΔHcryst = 4.5 J g−1) and T2-ORH (ΔHm = 93.1, ΔHcryst = 75.7 J g−1), also indicating that over self-aggregation and the crystalline structure of the alloy-like acceptor were properly inhibited. According to the DSC results, the new peaks of blended NFAs emerge, indicating a new alloy-like acceptor. Therefore, the alloy-like structure and energy transfer model can coexist in this ternary-blend system by varying the compositional ratio of two NFAs.
For a more in-depth understanding of the gradual change in the PCEs of the ternary-blend OSCs, the charge carrier mobilities of the ternary-blend system were measured using the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) regime (Fig. S8,Table 1).
On increasing the T2-ORH ratios, the hole and electron mobility of each device was found to be similar with the same order, in the ranges of 10−4 and 10−6 [cm2 V−1 s−1], respectively. This indicates the absence of a major difference in the charge carrier mobility despite the addition of T2-ORH, which shows that only the photon harvesting properties were affected without charge carrier losses. Interestingly, in spite of the relatively low electron mobility, ternary-blend OSCs display high FF values of up to 63%. This indicates that non-geminate recombination may be severely suppressed in this system and also charge generation is not strongly field dependent. We further investigated the charge carrier transport time and recombination lifetime of the ternary-blend OSCs via intensity modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) and intensity modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS) techniques (Fig. 3d and e). The charge carrier transport time (τt) and recombination lifetime (τr) were calculated from the frequency minima (fmin) in the IMPS and IMVS data by using 1/2πfmin. The results of IMPS exhibited that ternary-blend OSCs show the value of τt similar to that of binary OSCs (i.e., PTB7-Th:EH-IDTBR, τt = 0.23 μs; PTB7-Th:T2-ORH, τt = 0.23 μs; PTB7-Th:T2-ORH:EH-IDTBR, τt = 0.22 μs), while the ternary-blend OSCs show a longer lifetime than binary OSCs (i.e., PTB7-Th:EH-IDTBR, τr = 12.5 μs; PTB7-Th:T2-ORH, τr = 7.3 μs; PTB7-Th:T2-ORH:EH-IDTBR, τr = 15.7 μs) as confirmed by IMVS measurements. This is attributed to the alloy-like NFA enabling electron transport to the cathode without interruption throughout the photoactive layers. In order to clarify the recombination dynamics that can affect the device performance, we analyzed the dependence of JSC, VOC and FF of the ternary-blend OSCs on the light intensity. As shown in Fig. S9, both trap-assisted and bimolecular recombination in the ternary-blend OSCs were suppressed, which means that the introduction of the acceptor mixtures does not generate more recombination centers in the ternary systems, which can be the consequence of the molecular-level intimate mixing of two acceptors. These results also indicate that the addition of the third component, the T2-ORH NFA, to the binary PTB7-Th:EH-IDTBR blend film did not affect the charge transport or recombination properties and did not produce interfacial surface and bulk trap densities in the photoactive layers.
The influence of the T2-ORH NFA on the morphology of the ternary-blend films was determined by 2D grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS). The GIWAXS results of different components are shown in Fig. S13 and the molecular packing parameters are summarized in Table S6. The PTB7-Th sample shows dominant face-on orientation, with a (100) lamellar scattering peak in the in-plane (IP) direction and sharp (010) π–π stacking in the out-of-plane (OOP) direction. The T2-ORH film shows quite strong (00h) diffraction spots in both the OOP and IP directions with ring-like reflections, indicating a highly crystalline structure. The molecular packing behavior of the EH-IDTBR component is similar to that of the PTB7-Th material with (100) lamellar and (010) π–π stacking diffraction peaks in the IP and OOP directions, respectively. In the 2D GIWAXS pattern of the binary PTB7-Th:EH-IDTBR blend film, broad (100) lamellar and (010) π–π scattering peaks in the IP and OOP directions were observed; these are likely caused by merging of the original PTB7-Th and EH-IDTBR scattering peaks. In Fig. 4e, the binary film of PTB7-Th:T2-ORH (1:2) shows a (100) diffraction peak in the IP direction stemming from the polymer donor and a (001) diffraction peak generated by the T2-ORH NFA in both the OOP and IP directions. The molecular arrangement and packing of the original molecules are suitably retained in the binary-blend films. In the 2D GIWAXS patterns of the PTB7-Th:EH-IDTBR:T2-ORH ternary-blend films, all of the scattering peaks were merged and slightly shifted q positions as compared with each component which is attributed to unique molecular interactions leading to intimate mixing in the blend film without disruption of the two-phase morphology. Importantly, T2-ORH is present in a mixed morphology in the EH-IDTBR matrix upon shifting the diffraction peak position indicating that an alloy-like NFA is formed in this ternary-blend system as represented in Fig. 1c. DSC results also clearly showed that there is no pristine individual phase in ternary-blend films (see Fig. 3b and c). Furthermore, it can be observed that the VOC in ternary systems is linearly dependent on the T2-ORH ratio, which is consistent with the alloy-like structure. As a result, the morphological balance in molecular stacking and crystallinity induces a favorable morphology in the ternary-blend OSCs. Thus, the JSC is enhanced without reducing the VOC or FF.
The morphological evolution of ternary photoactive films induced by the crystalline T2-ORH acceptor was investigated by TEM and AFM measurements, as shown in Fig. 4h–l and S14, respectively. The TEM images are in good agreement with the aforementioned morphological properties obtained by GIWAXS analysis. The TEM image shows uniform and well-mixed interpenetrating morphology of the binary PTB7-Th:EH-IDTBR blend film. Negligible morphological change was observed in the 0.5:1.5 ternary photoactive film, suggesting that the amount of 25% T2-ORH could be well tolerated and intermixed by PTB7-Th:EH-IDTBR binary systems. From the 1.0:1.0 to 1.5:0.5 ternary systems, however, rectangular-shaped domains and a visible interpenetrating network structure were observed, which indicated that more favorable phase separation with optimum molecular crystallinity was generated. Although partly self-aggregated T2-ORH acceptors in ternary photoactive films with a large amount of T2-ORH were formed, the ternary-blend OSCs show enhanced photovoltaic performance compared to binary systems, implying that the intimate mixing of the two acceptors does not introduce severe over self-aggregation/crystalline structure, providing evidence for the excellent molecular compatibility between the T2-ORH and EH-IDTBR acceptors. T2-ORH generates conformational locking with each material for effective morphological stability, leading to enhanced device stability (as discussed below). The AFM tapping-mode images were also consistent with the TEM results. Homogeneous morphologies of the binary PTB7-Th:EH-IDTBR films were observed with a root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 0.61 nm. Upon the addition of T2-ORH, AFM images displayed rougher film states with increased RMS values from 0.72 to 2.48 nm (from 0.5:1.5 to 2.0:0.0 for T2-ORH:EH-IDTBR).
Suitable phase separation with median RMS roughness in ternary-blend photoactive films compared with binary-blend films was observed, indicating the formation of an alloy-like acceptor state without significant isolated domains. Hence, these distinctive and optimum morphologies of the ternary-blend films are more favorable for efficient charge transport and collection, thus supporting the aforementioned results.

To emphasize the device stability of the ternary-blend OSCs, thermal, light, and air-process stability tests were conducted in comparison with binary OSCs. For the thermal stability test, the OSCs were heated for 20 min to 150 °C (Fig. 5a, S15 and Table S7). When increasing the temperature to 150 °C, the ternary-blend OSCs retained 90% of their initial PCE, while the binary devices showed less thermal stability, retaining around 85% of the initial PCE. Moreover, light stability is an essential consideration related to the technological implementation of commercially available OSCs. After the initial measurement was taken, glass-to-glass encapsulated OSCs were stored under one sun illumination conditions at intervals over the course of 600 h. The corresponding photovoltaic properties are shown in Fig. 5b. It is clear that the ternary-blend OSCs demonstrate photo-degradation of the devices, which occurs within 600 hours with the smallest amount of burn-in loss compared to binary OSCs. As a result, the PCE remains relatively stable and still retains 80% of the initial value even after 600 h. In contrast, the initial efficiency of the binary OSCs deteriorates remarkably compared to the ternary-blend device, losing around 70% of its initial PCE. Comparing the efficiency rates depending on the process conditions used during the spin-casting of the photoactive layers, the PCE of the ternary-blend OSCs are similar irrespective of the process conditions, at 11.55% and 11.35% for the N2 and air-processed devices, respectively. However, the PCEs of binary OSCs are relatively different between the N2 and air-processed devices (see Fig. 5c, S17, and Table S8).

Generally, PTB7-Th is a quite unstable polymer donor as compared with other polymers such as P3HT in OSCs. Nevertheless, NFA OSCs with PTB7-Th show excellent stability results. Although the binary device based on the T2-ORH acceptor has relatively poor stability compared to the EH-IDTBR binary cell when mixed with the T2-ORH and EH-IDTBR acceptor in ternary-blend photoactive films, the device stability is improved significantly which is attributed to the intimate mixing between two acceptors. Given the different degrees of the device stability depending on the photoactive compositions, we further performed AFM and TEM analysis to identify morphological changes. As illustrated in Fig. S18 and S19, strong morphological deterioration was observed in the T2-ORH-based photoactive films because the degradation of the efficiency was mainly driven by the T2-ORH aggregation. Large aggregated domains can lead to decrease in exciton dissociation and charge transport efficiency. In addition, UV-vis absorption spectra of the thermal/photo stressed and air processed films are displayed in Fig. S20, which are measured for films with a glass/ITO/ZnO NPs/PEIE/photoactive layer structure. In T2-ORH-based binary films, the PTB7-Th absorption region significantly dropped after light stability tests. In the binary-blend films with EH-IDTBR, however, the absorption peak of PTB7-Th is still preserved after performing the stability test. Especially, it still showed excellent thermal, light and air-processing stability of the ternary-blend device compared to binary OSCs. Thus, we suggested that T2-ORH can generate conformational locking with each material for effective morphological stability and intimately mix with EH-IDTBR for fabricating an alloy-like acceptor, leading to improved device stability. As a result, the ternary-blend systems show superior stability performance under the universal degradation process owing to the formation of a stable and robust morphology.

These two NFAs show perfect complementary absorption spectra with a smaller absorption overlap region. In view of the impressive light absorption system, this result demonstrates highly efficient tandem OSCs. From the superior spectral absorption coverage and the high efficiency of single-junction binary OSCs, PTB7-Th, EH-IDTBR and T2-ORH show great promise for application in tandem OSCs. As shown in Fig. 6a, the tandem device architecture is fabricated with PTB7-Th:T2-ORH as a bottom cell and PTB7-Th:EH-IDTBR as a top cell. The absorption spectra of the bottom and top cells are shown in Fig. 6b. The bottom and top cells exhibit perfect complementary absorption characteristics and cover spectral absorption up to 800 nm. The J–V curves of the tandem OSCs are shown in Fig. 6c, and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table S9.

The best tandem OSC exhibits a PCE of 10.68%, with a VOC value of 2.05 V, a JSC value of 8.76 mA cm−2, and a FF value of 60%. Note that a PCE of 9.91% was certified by the Korea Institute of Energy Research (KIER) (Fig. S21). The VOC value here exceeded 2 V, comparable to that of single-junction cells. Note that the remarkable VOC of more than 2 V is promising for use in efficient and practical solar fuel generation systems. To the best of our knowledge, this is the highest VOC reported for double-junction tandem OSCs with an efficiency exceeding 10%.
Finally, to emphasize the feasibility of large-scale processing, PTB7-TH:EH-IDTBR:T2-ORH-based ternary-blend OSCs were applied to sub-module (5 cm × 5 cm substrate, 13.5 cm2 aperture size, and a geometric FF of 54%) devices. The device fabrication process involving the spin-coating of ZnO, PEIE, and the photoactive layer in sequence onto a patterned ITO glass substrate followed by metal deposition is shown in the schematic diagram in Fig. S22 and S23, and details of the device fabrication process are presented in the Experimental section (see ESI). The sub-module ternary-blend OSCs displayed the best PCE of 10.08% with JSC = 2.83 mA cm−2, VOC = 6.36 V and FF = 56%, which are among the best performances for large-area OSCs (see Table S10). The detailed device architecture, a photograph and the J–V characteristics of the sub-module ternary-blend OSCs are given in Fig. 6d and e, and the photovoltaic properties are summarized in Table S11. Despite the lower efficiencies compared to unit cells (the overall PCE of the sub-module cells remained greater than 87% of the PCE of the unit cells), these results are highly promising due to the considerable potential for printable electronic devices. These results demonstrate that ternary-blend OSCs show tremendous promise for use in actual applications.
To confirm the universality of T2-ORH as the third component in multi-NF ternary-blend OSCs, the binary PTB7-Th:ITIC blend system was selected as the host matrix. The PCE of the optimized ternary-blend OSCs is improved to 10.37% compared to the corresponding binary OSCs (ITIC = 8.81%, T2-ORH = 9.34%). A detailed photovoltaic analysis and its results are described in the ESI (see Fig. S24–S34 and Tables S12–S16).

In conclusion, we report high-performance PTB7-Th-based NF-OSCs with remarkable PCEs of 11.55%, 10.68%, and 10.08% for ternary-blend, tandem, and sub-module devices, respectively. It is important that the incorporation of the compact and simple T2-ORH NFA as the third component improves the JSC value by enhancing the photon harvesting ability while retaining the original charge transport, molecular packing, and morphological properties of each compound. Furthermore, T2-ORH and EH-IDTBR are two NFAs that can work as one alloy-like acceptor and the rapid energy transfer from T2-ORH to EH-IDTBR has a positive effect on the device performance. Additionally, the PTB7-Th:EH-IDTBR:T2-ORH-based ternary-blend OSCs demonstrate improved thermal, light, and air-process stability outcomes compared to binary OSCs due to the stable and robust morphology stemming from the conformational locking properties of the T2-ORH NFA within the alloy-like ternary-blend photoactive layers. Hence, this promising strategy can be realized with commercially available OSCs with improved efficiency, stability, and compatibility with large-area cells.


S. O., C. E. S. and T. L. have contributed equally to this work. C. E. S. and H. K. L. have contributed to the fabrication and characterization of the ternary-blend OSCs. S. O., T. L. and A. C. synthesized the T2-ORH non-fullerene acceptor. C. E. S., J.-C. L., and S. -J. M. fabricated tandem and sub-module devices. S. O., C. E. S. and T. L. wrote the manuscript. C. E. S., H. K. L., J.-C. L. and S.-J. M. performed the GIWAXS and SCLC measurements and analysed the data. All authors discussed and commented on this paper. E. L., S. K. L. and W. S. S. supervised the experiment and manuscript.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This research was supported by the National Research Foundation (NRF-2015M1A2A2056214, 2015M1A2A2055631 and 2019R1A2C1003679) and the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (No. 20173010012960 & 20183010013820) of the Republic of Korea.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental section, optimization of ternary-blend OSCs, ITIC-based ternary-blend OSCs, and additional figures and tables as mentioned in the main text. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta07919j
‡ The first three authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019