 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA04569G
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17862-17866


Xiaoqing
Jiang
,

Ze
Yu
*,

Hai-Bei
Li
,

Yawei
Zhao
,

Jishuang
Qu
,

Jianbo
Lai
,

Wanying
Ma
,

Dongping
Wang
*,

Xichuan
Yang
 and 

Licheng
Sun
*

State Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, Institute of Artificial Photosynthesis, DUT-KTH Joint Education and Research Center on Molecular Devices, Dalian University of Technology (DUT), 116024 Dalian, China. E-mail: ze.yu@dlut.edu.cn

School of Ocean, Shandong University, Weihai 264209, People's Republic of China

College of Chemical Engineering, Shenyang University of Chemical Technology, Shenyang 110142, China. E-mail: dpwang2015@163.com

Department of Chemistry, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, SE-10044 Stockholm, Sweden. E-mail: lichengs@kth.se

Received
25th May 2017
, Accepted 4th August 2017
First published on 7th August 2017
A solution-processable copper(II) phthalocyanine derivative coded as CuPc-TIPS has been synthesized and adopted as a hole-transporting material (HTM) in perovskite solar cells (PSCs), in combination with a mixed-ion perovskite absorber and a low-cost carbon cathode. Optimised PSC devices based on pristine CuPc-TIPS without any additives or dopants show a decent power conversion efficiency of 14.0% (measured at 100 mW cm−2 illumination, AM 1.5G), together with a good long-term stability under ambient conditions. The present finding highlights the potential of solution-processed copper phthalocyanine derivative-based HTMs for the development of efficient and stable PSCs in the future.

In the past few years, organic–inorganic metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have emerged as a competitive alternative to conventional inorganic solar cells, owing to the ease of fabrication processes, relatively cheap materials and very high power conversion efficiencies. Perovskite light absorbers possess several appealing optoelectronic properties, such as a broad absorption spectral range, high absorption coefficient, low exciton binding energy, high charge carrier mobility, long carrier diffusion length, etc. Significant progress has been made in PSCs over the past few years and the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has been dramatically increased from an initial value of 3.8% (ref. 5) to a certified value of 22.1% in 2016.

In the most efficient PSC devices with a regular n–i–p cell configuration, hole-transporting materials (HTMs) are the indispensable component for achieving high PCEs. They play an important role in extracting and collecting photo-generated holes from the perovskite to the cathode, thereby circumventing undesired recombination losses at the interfaces. So far, the state-of-the-art PSC devices commonly used 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) and poly(triarylamine) (PTAA) as HTMs. However, spiro-OMeTAD and PTAA suffer from low hole mobility and conductivity in their pristine form due to the amorphous nature. p-Type dopants or additives, such as lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI), are ubiquitously adopted to generate free carriers and to increase the conductivity, thus leading to higher efficiencies. The introduction of p-type dopants not only makes the optimization process complex but also induces additional production costs. Moreover, lithium salts are hydroscopic, which may accelerate the degradation of PSC devices. Therefore, it is highly desirable to explore alternative HTMs for PSCs. In this regard, a great deal of research efforts have been devoted to developing dopant-free HTMs for PSCs, including donor–acceptor (D–A) small molecules, conducting polymers and inorganic p-type semiconductors.
Metal phthalocyanines have been extensively used as p-type semiconductors in organic solar cells and thin film transistors, due to some of their unique characteristics, such as ease of synthesis, high hole mobility, high stability, etc. To this end, commercially available copper(II) phthalocyanine (CuPc) has been introduced as a HTM in PSCs by thermal evaporation under vacuum. Phthalocyanine (Pc) can be modified by introducing substituents in the peripheral and non-peripheral positions of the macrocycle, which can improve the solubility. Very recently, solution-processed CuPc and ZnPc derivatives have been successfully developed as HTMs for PSCs. These metal complexes doped with Li-TFSI showed PCEs of over 17%, in combination with a mixed-ion perovskite absorber and Au cathode. These results emphasized that the molecularly engineered metal phthalocyanine derivatives are good candidates as HTMs for PSCs.
In this work, CuPc was molecularly engineered by the introduction of triisopropylsilylethynyl (TIPS) substituents in the periphery of the Pc ring to improve the solubility and hydrophobicity (Fig. 1a). Such a substituent has been successfully adopted into pentacene derivatives to improve the solubility and molecule arrangements in the solid state.CuPc-TIPS was synthesized and explored as a HTM for PSCs, in combination with a mixed-ion perovskite absorber (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 (FA: NHCHNH3+, MA: CH3NH3+) and a low-cost vacuum-free carbon counter electrode. The best PSC device based on pristine CuPc-TIPS showed a decent PCE of 14.0% measured under 100 mW cm−2 illumination (AM 1.5G). More strikingly, the devices studied also exhibited a good long-term stability under ambient conditions, due largely to the absence of hydroscopic lithium additives and the introduction of the hydrophobic HTM interlayer that prevented moisture from penetrating into the perovskite film.
The synthesis scheme of CuPc-TIPS is depicted in Fig. 1b. The precursor 4-(triisopropylsilylethynyl)-substituted phthalonitrile (1) was prepared by reacting (triisopropylsilyl) acetylene with 4-bromo-1,2-dicyanobenzene. A blue-green powder of CuPc-TIPS was finally obtained with a high yield of 72.0% according to a method reported previously. As expected, this functionalized CuPc derivative showed good solubility in organic solvents, i.e. chlorobenzene or dichlorobenzene, which makes the solution-processing of this HTM on the perovskite film possible. More detailed information on the synthesis can be found in the ESI. All the materials prepared were fully characterized by 1H NMR and mass spectroscopy (Fig. S1–S3, ESI).
In order to gain some insights into the electronic structure of CuPc-TIPS, density functional theory (DFT) calculations were carried out using the Gaussian 09 program with the B3LYP/6-31+G(d) method. The frontier molecular orbitals are presented in Fig. 1c. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) electron density distribution of CuPc-TIPS is mainly located at the Pc core and the adjacent alkynyl units in the TIPS substituents, whereas the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) electron density distribution is mainly located at two oppositely positioned isoindole units in the Pc ring. The reorganization energy (ER) of CuPc-TIPS was also calculated at the same level. The ER value is determined to be 236 meV, which is much lower than that of spiro-OMeTAD (495 meV). The smaller ER value implies that CuPc-TIPS shows great potential as a HTM for PSCs.
The UV-visible absorption spectrum of CuPc-TIPS in dichloromethane solution is shown in Fig. 2a. CuPc-TIPS displays an intensive band at 699 nm, which is attributed to the Q-band originated from the π → π* transition  from the HOMO to the LUMO energy level of the Pc ring. The HOMO energy level of CuPc-TIPS was determined by differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) measurements as shown in Fig. 2b (the DPV of Fc/Fc+ is shown in Fig. S4). The HOMO energy level of CuPc-TIPS can be estimated on the basis of the following equation: EHOMO = −5.1 − (Eox − E(Fc/Fc+)), where Eox is the onset oxidation potential vs. Fc/Fc+. Accordingly, the HOMO energy level of CuPc-TIPS is calculated to be −5.42 eV, which matches well with the valence band (VB) of mixed-ion perovskite (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 (−5.65 eV) and the carbon cathode (−5.0 eV). It is therefore favorable for the hole transfer from the perovskite absorber to the HTM and hole collection from CuPc-TIPS to the carbon cathode. Based on the HOMO energy level and optical band gap estimated from the onset of the absorption spectrum, the LUMO energy level of CuPc-TIPS is estimated to be −3.69 eV, which is more negative than the conduction band (CB) of the mixed-ion perovskite (−4.05 eV). So this is expected to effectively prevent the electron flowing from the perovskite to the carbon cathode, thus depressing the charge recombination at the interfaces. All the optical and electrochemical properties of CuPc-TIPS are listed in Table 1.
HTM

λ
max solution [nm]

E
ox
 [V]

E
HOMO
 [eV]

E
LUMO
 [eV]

E
g
 [eV]

a Absorption spectrum was measured in dichloromethane solution.
b Differential pulse voltammetry measurement was carried out in dichloromethane solutions with TBAPF6 (0.1 M) as the supporting electrolyte, referenced against Fc/Fc+.
c HOMO level was determined by using the equation EHOMO = −5.1 − (Eox − E(Fc/Fc+)).
d LUMO = HOMO + Eg.
e Optical band gap was calculated from the onset of absorption.


CuPc-TIPS

699
0.32
−5.42
−3.69
1.73
The hole conductivity of a HTM is a crucial parameter to ensure effective transportation/collection of photo-generated holes from the perovskite absorber to the back contact electrode. The conductivity of pristine CuPc-TIPS is estimated to be 5 × 10−6 S cm−1, measured by using a two-contact electrical conductivity setup as reported previously (Fig. 2c). It is significantly higher than the reported value of pristine spiro-OMeTAD (10−7–10−8 S cm−1). For comparison purposes, the conductivity of spiro-OMeTAD doped with Li-TFSI was also measured under the same conditions, amounting to 2 × 10−5 S cm−1. The thermal stability of CuPc-TIPS was also studied using thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) as shown in Fig. S5. The analysis reveals that CuPc-TIPS starts degrading at over 400 °C.

CuPc-TIPS was further explored as a HTM for mesoscopic PSCs. The cell configuration and energy level diagram of PSCs are presented in Fig. 2d and e. The solar cell devices were fabricated with a structure of FTO glass/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/perovskite/HTM/carbon. The mixed-ion perovskite (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 was prepared by using a solvent-engineering technique as reported previously. The cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image (Fig. 2f) shows that the cell configuration is a well-defined layer-by-layer structure. Perovskite crystals grew inside the pores of the TiO2 scaffold (∼150 nm) and formed a uniform capping layer with a total thickness of ∼600–700 nm. The device was completed by depositing a ∼60 nm HTM layer and a doctor-bladed carbon cathode. More details regarding the solar cell fabrication processes can be found in the ESI.
The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the best PSCs employing pristine CuPc-TIPS as a HTM measured under 100 mW cm−2 illumination (AM 1.5G) are shown in Fig. 3a, and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table 2. The best device exhibits a PCE of 14.0%, with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.01 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 21.4 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.65. Under equivalent conditions, the best devices based on pristine spiro-OMeTAD show a considerably lower PCE of merely 9.9%, which is attributed to dramatic decreases of the Jsc and FF, due largely to the lower conductivity of pristine spiro-OMeTAD as compared to CuPc-TIPS. The comparison highlights that the hole transport properties of a HTM are highly important for effectively transporting and collecting photo-generated holes from the perovskite, thus preventing undesirable charge recombination losses and enhancing the overall efficiency. For comparison purposes, devices using doped spiro-OMeTAD with Li-TFSI and 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) were also investigated under identical conditions, which show a best PCE of 15.8%. The higher PCE observed for doped spiro-OMeTAD based devices should be mainly attributed to an improved FF, strongly correlated with a reduced series resistance (3.8 Ω cm2, derived from J–V measurements) arising from the doping effect in comparison to pristine CuPc-TIPS (6.0 Ω cm2). The devices based on doped spiro-OMeTAD as a HTM and gold as a cathode were also tested, showing a best PCE of 19.7% as presented in Fig. S7.
HTMs
PCE (%)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF

a The data of the best performing cells are included in parentheses.

Pristine CuPs-TIPS
12.6 ± 1.4 (14.0)
20.7 ± 0.7 (21.4)
0.97 ± 0.04 (1.01)
0.60 ± 0.05 (0.65)
Pristine spiro-OMeTAD
8.6 ± 1.3 (9.9)
17.2 ± 0.9 (18.1)
0.93 ± 0.05 (0.98)
0.50 ± 0.06 (0.56)
Doped spiro-OMeTAD
14.0 ± 1.6 (15.8)
21.4 ± 0.8 (22.2)
0.99 ± 0.03 (1.02)
0.64 ± 0.06 (0.70)

Fig. 3b shows the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the PSCs with pristine CuPc-TIPS, and pristine and doped spiro-OMeTAD as HTMs. All the devices present a wide spectral response to a long wavelength of over 800 nm due to the intrinsic absorption characteristic of the perovskite material itself. In contrast to the device based on pristine spiro-OMeTAD, devices based on CuPc-TIPS and doped spiro-OMeTAD display higher IPCE values almost over the whole region measured, yielding a broad IPCE plateau of over 80% in the range of 420 to 700 nm. The steady-state efficiency of a representative PSC device based on CuPc-TIPS as a HTM was also evaluated at a fixed bias voltage of 0.73 V for 180 seconds under 1 sun illumination (100 mW cm−2, AM 1.5G), as shown in Fig. 3c. The device displays a steady-state efficiency of 12.3% and a current density of 16.8 mA cm−2. The histograms of 50 identical PSC devices employing pristine CuPc-TIPS as the HTM are shown in Fig. 4d, showing a good reproducibility with an average PCE of 12.1%.
Finally, we investigated the long-term stability of PSC devices employing CuPc-TIPS as the HTM for 30 days, which were stored without encapsulation under ambient conditions with a humidity of ∼35% in the dark. Fig. 4a and b display the dynamic changes of photovoltaic parameters for a representative PSC device. The CuPc-TIPS based device showed a good long-term stability and maintained about 90% of its initial PCE during the aging time (from 14.0% to 12.5%). By contrast, the devices based on doped spiro-OMeTAD exhibited a relatively faster degradation rate, retaining less than 80% of its initial PCE. We further examined the hydrophobic properties of pristine CuPc-TIPS and doped spiro-OMeTAD, the results of which are presented in Fig. 4c. CuPc-TIPS shows a good hydrophobic characteristic, which possesses a larger water contact angle of more than 100°. The hydrophobic characteristic of CuPc-TIPS can effectively prevent moisture from penetrating into the perovskite film, thus resulting in a good long-term durability.

In summary, a solution-processable copper(II) phthalocyanine derivative CuPc-TIPS has been synthesized and explored as a dopant-free HTM for PSCs, in combination with a mixed-ion perovskite absorber and a low-cost vacuum-free carbon cathode. Optimised PSC devices based on pristine CuPc-TIPS showed a decent PCE of 14.0% measured under 100 mW cm−2 illumination, AM 1.5G. Notably, the PSC devices studied also showed a good long-term durability under ambient conditions for 30 days, mainly owing to the absence of hydroscopic lithium additives and the introduction of the hydrophobic HTM interlayer that prevented water from penetrating into the perovskite film. The present work reveals that molecularly engineered CuPc derivatives are promising HTM candidates for the development of efficient and stable PSCs in the future.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21606039, 51661135021, 21403127, and 91233201), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research (SSF), the Swedish Energy Agency, and the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation. Hai-Bei Li acknowledges the fund of Young Scholars Program of Shandong University (Weihai) and the supercomputing system in the Supercomputing Center, Shandong University, Weihai.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta04569g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017