 DOI: 10.1039/D2EE02107B
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 4338-4348


Zhiya
Li
,

Xunchang
Wang
*,

Nan
Zheng
,

Aziz
Saparbaev
,

Jiayi
Zhang
,

Cong
Xiao
,

Shiyun
Lei
,

Xufan
Zheng
,

Manxue
Zhang
,

Yuda
Li
,

Biao
Xiao
 and 

Renqiang
Yang
*

Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Chemical Materials and Devices (Ministry of Education), School of Optoelectronic Materials & Technology, Jianghan University, Wuhan 430056, China. E-mail: wangxc@jhun.edu.cn; yangrq@jhun.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory of Fine Blasting, Jianghan University, Wuhan 430056, China

Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China

Institute of Ion-plasma and Laser Technologies, National University of Uzbekistan, Uzbekistan

Key Laboratory for Green Chemical Process of Ministry of Education, Wuhan Institute of Technology, Wuhan 430205, China

Received
3rd July 2022
, Accepted 30th August 2022
First published on 31st August 2022
The symmetry breaking strategy has been broadly applied in the design of organic photovoltaic materials; however, a comprehensive understanding of the effects of two-dimensional (2D) asymmetric side chains in all-small-molecule organic solar cells (ASM-OSCs) is rarely studied. Herein, a new building block based on an asymmetric 2D side chain with halogen modification was designed for the construction of small molecular donors to fine-tune bulk heterojunction thin films and electronic properties. In comparison with the symmetric BTR-Cl, its asymmetric counterparts, i.e., TB- and TB-F-based blends, exhibited the optimal hierarchical morphology with multi-scale domains, enhanced D/A molecular interactions and interfacial packing at the unilateral chain, and homogeneous vertical phase distribution. Transient absorption measurement revealed that an enhanced exciton diffusion coefficient and fast exciton dissociation process were achieved in the TB-F based device, enabling more percolation paths for charge transport, suppressed bimolecular recombination and reduced energy disorder. Consequently, a champion efficiency of 17.0% with a remarkably increased short-circuit current density and fill factor was recorded in the binary ASM-OSCs. Overall, this work elucidates the important 2D side chain symmetry breaking strategy, which precisely controls and optimizes the material properties and gives design inspiration for the future higher performance of ASM-OSCs.

Recently, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of organic solar cells (OSCs) has made tremendous breakthrough with the discovery of new material systems and device engineering. Compared to polymer solar cells, all-small-molecule OSCs (ASM-OSCs) have great potential for commercial application due to their high device repeatability and well-defined structures. To further enhance the performance of ASM-OSCs, this field has an urgent need for more effective building strategies to regulate the properties of small molecule donors to make them more compatible with the diverse acceptor molecules. Herein, we show in detail that the use of small molecular donors with asymmetrical 2D side chains offers remarkably controlled characteristics in terms of crystallinity, blend film morphology and photodynamics, finally contributing to an outstanding PCE of 17.0% for binary ASM-OSCs. This work elucidates the important 2D side chain symmetry-breaking strategy, which precisely optimizes the material properties and convey design inspiration for future high-performance ASM-OSCs.


Bulk-heterojunction organic solar cells (OSCs), with multiple features such as flexibility, semitransparency and light weight, show great promise for applications in flexible portable devices and can be used as a complement to conventional silicon solar cells. Compared with polymer solar cells (PSCs), all-small-molecule organic solar cells (ASM-OSCs), consisting of a small molecule donor and a small-molecule acceptor, have unique advantages for commercialization because of their low material and device batch-to-batch variations as a result of their well-defined molecular structures. Although the emergence of a large number of excellent small molecule acceptors, such as ITIC, IT-4F, Y6 and L8-Bo, presents a promising avenue for the future development of the performance of ASM-OSCs, their efficiency still lags far behind that of PSCs. Generally, this critical problem is a reflection of the lack of suitable small molecule donors (SMDs) and existence of unknown structure-properties relationship, and therefore a better use of modular synthesis to regulate the electronic structure should be carefully considered.

Fortunately, considerable progress has been achieved in recent studies by empirically designing A–π–D–π–A SMDs. These donors, when matching Y6 series acceptors, enable the promotion of additional tunable miscibility and morphology in blended films, thus providing a reasonable route to improve the performance through well-aligned energy levels, suppression of recombination processes, balanced hole and electron mobility, and increased photocurrent density behavior. The structural tunability of these SMDs is illustrated in terms of synthetic strategies based on three major components: (1) the electron-donating core with pendent side chains, (2) the solubilizing π bridge, and (3) the electron-withdrawing end group (EG). In these strategies, the electron-donating cores with pendent side chains are considered to be the key components in establishing the intramolecular ‘‘push–pull effect’’ and increasing the solubility. A variety of approaches, such as modulation of aromatic topology, halogenation, and substitution sites, have been explored to probe the functions of different side chains, which have been a cutting-edge research hotspot with the aim of improving the device performance. Among them, the symmetry breaking 2D side chain strategy has been widely used in the design of high photovoltaic materials, which can endow molecules with a large dipole moment, strong intermolecular interaction, and controlled energy level by integration of diverse halogens. However, the symmetry breaking 2D side chain strategy has rarely been used in small molecule donors. Furthermore, a fundamental understanding of specific features brought by asymmetric structures in terms of molecular electronic properties, crystallinity, interactions, active layer morphology is lacking, which can be highly desirable to accelerate the development of ASM-OSCs.
In this work, two A–π–D–π–A type SMDs, named TB and TB-F, which share identical π-bridges and end groups to the extensively studied BTR-Cl, but asymmetric thiophene and phenyl side chains attached to the BDT core, were designed. We present a comprehensive investigation on how these SMDs with asymmetric thiophene/phenyl side chains affect the device performance from multiple viewpoints of the molecular packing in the solid state, intramolecular interaction, miscibility and phase separation in the blend film, and charge dynamic behavior. The morphological studies indicated that more suitable phase separation, permeable networks with multiple scales and homogeneous vertical D/A distribution were formed in the TB-F:L8-Bo mixture. The photodynamic analysis revealed that the TB-F-based blend has an enlarged exciton diffusion coefficient and faster exciton dissociation process in comparison with its symmetric counterpart. We also observed a shorter stacking distance in the asymmetric SMDs with a lower binding energy by theoretical simulation quantitatively, together with additional stacking between the phenyl side chain and terminal group, resulting in stronger D/A interaction. Consequently, these SMDs were employed to fabricate OSCs, which exhibited increased PCEs from 15.0% for BTR-Cl to 15.8% for TB, and finally to 17.0% for TB-F, which is the highest value for binary ASM-OSCs reported up to date. Overall, this work reveals a unique and effective symmetry breaking strategy and will provide further inspiration for further material design to tune the morphology and electronic properties of SMDs for achieving better performances.

The synthetic routes for the two SMDs containing asymmetric 2D side chains are provided in the ESI. The key intermediate asymmetric central cores were synthesized through continuous Grignard and butyl lithium reaction in good yield (up to ≈60%). The target small molecules TB and TB-F were obtained through an additional two-step reaction of Stille-coupling followed by Knoevenagel condensation. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were carried out to understand the effect of the asymmetric 2D side chains at the molecular level. As shown in Fig. S21 and S22 (ESI), all the SMDs displayed planar main skeletons and similar dihedral angles of around 58° between the BDT central core and the phenyl/thiophene side chains. However, a clear change in charge distribution on the asymmetric side chains was noted, that is, more negative charges were concentrated on the phenyl side chain, due to the polarization effect of the asymmetric 2D side chain with different halogen substituents and enlarged dipole moments of the SMDs.

The UV-Visible absorption spectra of the three SMDs are shown in Fig. 1c and Fig. S23 (ESI), and their detailed optical data are summarized in Table 1. The absorption spectra of BTR-Cl, TB, and TB-F were almost identical in solution, with strong absorption in the range of 350 to 600 nm, accompanied by similar maximum molar extinction coefficients of 1.72 × 105, 1.68 × 105, and 1.78 × 105 mol−1 L−1 cm−1 at λSolmax, respectively. The slightly higher absorption coefficient found for the TB-F solution may reflect the increased oscillator strengths and free electron density caused by the asymmetric fluorinated and chlorinated side chains. In addition, a clear bathochromic transition from solution to film of about ∼35 nm was observed for all the SMDs, suggesting moderate H-like aggregation and π–π interactions in the solid state. The gradually increased 0–0/0–1 vibronic peak ratios from BTR-Cl (0.90), TB (0.92) to TB-F (0.94) exhibited different strengths in terms of intermolecular interaction and aggregation behaviors (Fig. S23, ESI), which is ascribed to the fact that asymmetric 2D side chain changed the conjugacy together with halogen inductive effects. The electrochemical properties were characterized using cyclic voltammetry (CV, Fig. S24, ESI), and the resulting estimated HOMO/LUMO energy levels of BTR-Cl, TB and TB-F are −5.30/−2.79, −5.28/−2.76 and −5.31/−2.80, respectively, which have a similar trend with the results cross-checked by ultra-violet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) and DFT measurements (Fig. S22, S25 and Table S2, ESI).
SMDs

λ
Solmax [nm]

λ
Filmmax [nm]

λ
onset [nm]

E
optg

 [eV]
HOMO [eV]
LUMO [eV]

a Calculated from the empirical formula: Eoptg = 1240/λonset.
b Cyclic voltammetry (CV) method by measuring the film in acetonitrile.

BTR-Cl
520
580, 624
698
1.78
−5.30
−2.79
TB
521
580, 625
698
1.78
−5.28
−2.76
TB-F
522
581, 625
700
1.77
−5.31
−2.80
Next, differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was used to investigate the thermal behavior of the pure SMDs (Fig. 1e). Both the crystallization-transition temperature (Tc) followed the order of BTR-Cl < TB < TB-F, suggesting the improved crystallization tendency of the asymmetric SMDs. Furthermore, a similar trend was also noted for the melting temperature (Tm). TB and TB-F, bearing 2D asymmetric side chains, displayed Tms values of 238 °C and 240 °C, which were higher than that of TBR-Cl (225 °C), facilitating molecular stacking in the solid state and charge transport. These results are consistent with the variation in neat film hole mobility (Fig. S32 and Table S15, see ESI for detailed device fabrication methods), where higher hole mobility of TB and TB-F (3.18 × 10−4 and 4.79 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively) were obtained in comparison with that of the symmetric BTR-Cl (2.29 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1). We speculate that the mobility improvement can be ascribed to the different electrostatic distributions and larger dipole moments induced by substituting the unilateral thienyl side chain with phenyl ones on the BDT core, resulting in enhanced intermolecular interactions with shorter π–π stacking distances and tighter neighboring molecular chains (vide infra).
To gain an in-depth understanding of the effect of the asymmetric side chains on the molecular stacking, 2D grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) was carried out. As shown in Fig. 1f–h and Fig. S28 (ESI), all the SMDs exhibited similar well-defined π–π diffraction peaks (010) in the in-plane (IP) direction and multilamellar (h00) diffraction peaks in the out-of-plane (OOP) direction, implying no change in the predominant edge orientation through the asymmetric side chain strategy. The neat BTR-Cl, TB and TB-F films showed the (010) peak in the IP direction at 1.70, 1.72 and 1.73 Å−1, corresponding to the π–π stacking distance of 3.69, 3.65 and 3.63 Å, respectively, which demonstrate the tighter π–π stacking of the asymmetric molecules. Additionally, the smallest d-spacing of the alkyl chain for TB-F also implied the tighter inter-chain packing. The relative crystallinity of the films (rDoC) was calculated from the IP π–π (010) peaks for visual comparison, which followed the order of BTR-Cl (0.76) < TB (0.84) < TB-F (1.0) (Fig. 1i and j), indicating a clear increase in crystallinity through the asymmetric phenyl/thiophene side chain strategy.
Given that the exciton dissociation in organic semiconductors is not only related to the driving force at the D/A interface, but also relies on the binding energy of excitons themselves, the relative dielectric constants (εr) correlated with the exciton binding energy were evaluated by plotting εrversus frequency for the three SMDs (Fig. S35, ESI). Compared to BTR-Cl, which has an εr of 2.91 ± 0.22a much higher εrs values of 3.42 ± 0.17 and 3.68 ± 0.23 were recorded for TB and TB-F, respectively, which suggest that more efficient exciton dissociation can be achieved in their pure domains. These εr variations may result from the increased dipole moment and changed electrostatic distribution of molecules endowed by the asymmetric 2D side chains strategy, which could facilitate the optimization of exciton generation and diffusion properties.

ASM-OSCs were fabricated with a device configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/SMD:L8-Bo/PNDIT-F3N/Ag and carefully optimized by altering the ratio of donor to acceptor, solvent vapour annealing and different electron transport layers (Table S4–S14, ESI). The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristic curves and the statistical efficiencies of the optimized devices are displayed in Fig. 2a and c, respectively, and the complete photovoltaic metrics are summarized in Table 2.

Active layer

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

J
SC


FF (%)
PCE (%)

a Calculated from EQE curve.
b The values in parentheses are the average values with standard deviations obtained from 15 devices.

BTR-Cl:L8-Bo
0.86
23.72
22.91
73.0
15.0 (14.7 ± 0.3)
TB:L8-Bo
0.86
24.67
23.98
74.2
15.8 (15.6 ± 0.3)
TB-F:L8-Bo
0.87
25.41
24.77
76.7
17.0 (16.7 ± 0.2)
Interestingly, the short-circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF) greatly improved for all three devices after solvent vapour annealing with chlorobenzene. BTR-Cl:L8-Bo exhibited an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.86 V, Jsc of 23.72 mA cm−2, and FF of 73.0%, yielding a PCE of 15.0%. By replacing the single thiophene side chain with a phenyl side chain, the two new SMDs exhibited a higher performance. The TB-F based devices modified by both F and Cl atoms showed the best PCE of 17.0%, with a Jsc of 25.41 mA cm−2 and FF of 76.7%, which is a record efficiency for binary ASM-OSCs (Fig. 2d and Table S1, ESI). This suggests that the asymmetric thienyl and phenyl substitution with different halogenation could significantly improve the Jsc and FF, while maintaining the Voc to achieve better PCEs. Fig. 2b and Fig. S31 (ESI) depict the external quantum efficiency (EQE) and internal quantum efficiency (IQE) characterization, respectively. Compared to BTR-Cl, the TB- and TB-F- based devices exhibited a higher EQE (over 80%) and IQE (approaching 90%) response, which implies that more efficient internal charge transfer and more absorbed photons were converted into charge carriers, and then collected at the electrodes. In addition, the integrated Jscs from the EQE spectra with the solar spectrum (AM 1.5 G 1 sun) are consistent with the values obtained from the J–V curves.
Given that the asymmetric 2D side chains have an impact on the Voc of the device, the energy loss in the optimized OSC was investigated in detail. Firstly, the radiative recombination losses in the bandgap were analyzed by virtue of highly sensitive EQE (s-EQE) and electroluminescence (EL) measurements (Fig. S30, ESI). As is known, all the active layers possess the tail of the density of states (DOS) in the bandgap, which will form recombination loss due to the limitation of charge carriers. Therefore, the Urbach energy (EU) was quantificationally investigated from the exponential fitting of the sub-band-gap s-EQE spectra. As shown in Fig. 2e, the blend films of TB-F:L8-Bo showed a smaller Urbach energy of 24.8 meV than that of the BTR-Cl:L8-Bo (26.2 meV) and TB:L8-Bo (26.0 meV) blends, which reveals the slightly lower degree of energetic disorder in the TB-F:L8-Bo OSCs. The smallest Urbach energy of the TB-F-based device can be attributed to the largely increased interaction of the donor and acceptor due to the modification with the asymmetric chlorinated and fluorinated side chains, which provided more D/A interfacial packing for exciton dissociation in the BHJ films, thus reducing the formation of trap states. Additionally, the electroluminescence quantum efficiency (EQEEL) of the solar cells (Fig. 2f) was further measured to assess the non-radiative recombination energy loss (ΔEnr) according to the equation ΔEnr = kBT/qln(EQEEL). It can be observed that TB-F:L8-Bo achieved the highest EQEEL of 2.27 × 10−4 among the three devices (1.82 × 10−4 for BTR-Cl:L8-Bo and 0.95 × 10−4 for TB:L8-Bo), from which the slightly lower nonradiative recombination loss (ΔVnr) of 0.20 eV was obtained. Thus, the small Urbach energy and high EQEEL value should be the main reason for the lower recombination loss, and thereby slightly higher Voc in TB-F:L8-Bo-based OSCs.
Next, both the hole and electron mobilities of the hole-only and electron-only devices were measured (Fig. 2g, Table S15 and Fig. S33, S34, ESI) to evaluate the effect of the asymmetric side chains on the charge transport properties, respectively, which are in good agreement with the Jsc and FF amplification trend that the hole and electron mobility both increased. The substitution of the single thiophene chain with a phenyl chain highly improved the hole mobility to obtain more balanced carrier transport, thereby depressing the charge recombination.Fig. 2h shows the plots of photocurrent (Jph) versus effective voltage (Veff) for the three OSCs. Herein, the effective voltage (Veff) was determined as Veff = Voc − Vapp, where Vapp is the applied voltage. The charge dissociation probability P(E,T) was obtained from Jph/Jsat, where Jsat represents the saturation current density. TB:L8-Bo and TB-F:L8-Bo exhibited a greater P(E,T) of 0.962 and 0.973, respectively, than BTR-Cl:L8-Bo (0.942), indicating that exciton dissociation and charge extraction processes are more efficient in these two SMD devices based on asymmetric side chains. The charge recombination mechanisms in these optimized devices were probed via variant light irradiation intensity (Plight) experiments from 1 to 100 mW cm−2 (Fig. 2i). Thus, Jsc followed a power-law dependence on Plight, which is described as the following equation: Jsc ∝ Pαlight, where α reflects the degree of bimolecular recombination in the bulk. As shown in Fig. 2i, the α values of the TB:L8-Bo- and TB-F:L8-Bo-based devices were found to be 0.962 and 0.979, respectively, which are slightly higher than that of the BTR-Cl:L8-Bo-based device (0.951), indicating that bimolecular recombination was considerably suppressed and charge collection was more efficient in the former two devices, thus accounting for the higher Jsc and FF in these two devices.

To deeply understand the changes in carrier dynamics of the symmetric and asymmetric small molecule donors, transient absorption spectroscopy (TA) was conducted to initially probe the diffusion length of exciton in donors through the exciton-exciton annihilation (EEA) method. Previous reports demonstrated that there are two main attenuation channels for excitons based on the EEA method, that is, the radiative and non-radiative deactivations with intrinsic exciton lifetime constant (k) and the bimolecular EEA with bimolecular decay rate coefficient (γ). The k and γ values were used to calculate the exciton diffusion coefficient (D), the LD can be calculated using the equation LD = (D/k)1/2. The ground-state bleaching (GSB) signals will appear after light excitation of BTR-Cl:L8-Bo, TB:L8-Bo and TB-F:L8-Bo films at 460 nm (Fig. S36 and S37, ESI) and the relevant parameters are shown in Table S16 (ESI). Therefore, the calculated LD values of BTR-Cl, TB and TB-F are 4.23 nm, 5.10 nm and 5.84 nm, respectively, implying that the photoinduced excitons in the asymmetric TB and TB-F phase can spread to a longer distance than their symmetric BTR-Cl counterpart within the effective exciton lifetime, which is beneficial to suppress the charge recombination and help to improve the Jsc value in corresponding devices.

Next, we attempted to investigate the process of charge generation and recombination in the three blend films. An excitation wavelength of 460 nm was used to excite the donors, and the corresponding TA images and extraction spectra with different decay times are shown in Fig. S38 and S39 (ESI). The emergence of a negative GSB signal ranging from 550 to 660 nm for the two blend films, which matches well with the absorption of the donor, was induced by electron transfer from the donor to L8-Bo. As depicted in Fig. 3g, the early GSB profiles of 580 nm conforms to the biexponential functions. The fast τ1 can be assigned to the dissociation time of the exciton at the D:A interface, and τ2 represents diffusion time towards the interface before the dissociation of bulk excitons. TB-F:L8-Bo exhibited τ1 of 0.79 ps and τ2 of 126 ps, which are faster than that of TB:L8-Bo (τ1 = 0.92 ps and τ2 = 140 ps) and BTR-Cl:L8-Bo (τ1 = 1.05 ps and τ2 = 147 ps), suggesting the more rapid exciton transfer from the donors to interfaces and exciton dissociation at the interface of the TB-F:L8-Bo blend, which is beneficial for charge generation and the photovoltaic performance of the devices.
Considering the separation absorption spectral range of the donor and acceptor, the acceptor in the D:A blend film was selectively excited with an excitation wavelength of about 800 nm, and the hole transfer dynamics was detected. The TA images of the visible and near-infrared regions of the L8-Bo, BTR-Cl:L8-Bo, TB:L8-Bo and TB-F:L8-Bo-based films are exhibited in Fig. 3a–c and Fig. S40 (ESI) and the TA spectra extracted with different delay times are shown in Fig. 3d–f. As shown in Fig. 3a and d, the pure L8-Bo film shows a bleaching peak at 820 nm and an absorption peak at 890 nm, corresponding to the GSB and excited-state absorption (ESA) of the L8-Bo S1 exciton after photoexcitation, respectively. For the three SMD:L8-Bo blend films, there are two new bleach peaks at 580 and 630 nm and emergence of a new absorption peak at 970 nm. Given that the wavelength of the bleach peaks almost overlapped with the GSB signal in the pure donor, the trace at 630 nm was selected as the characteristic signal of hole transfer from the acceptor to donor. As depicted in Fig. 3h, the three blend films took a similar time to reach saturation values, which may be attributed to the almost unchanged HOMO level offset between the donor and acceptor. However, the distinctly higher GSB values in the TB and TB-F blends compared with the BTR-Cl blend, which is directly correlated with the exciton density, can be ascribed to the enlarged exciton LD values. Besides, we also detected the TA traces of L8-Bo and the three blend films at 880 nm, which can be assigned to the absorption of a singlet exciton at the acceptor. As indicated in Fig. 4i, the lifetimes of the singlet excitons are 3.7, 6.3 and 8.2 ps for BTR-Cl:L8-Bo-, TB:L8-Bo- and TB-F:L8-Bo-based films, respectively, suggesting the slow hole transfer in the blend films containing asymmetric SMDs. Furthermore, compared with neat L8-Bo, a red-shift in the ESA signal at around 970 nm on a long timescale from 20 to 800 ps was observed, which may be assigned to the polaron states, as the exciton absorption peak at 880 nm gradually decreased. The TB-F:L8-Bo film exhibited the longest polaron lifetime (511 ps), indicating the lowest bimolecular recombination probability in the corresponding device.

To obtain insight into the effects of the asymmetric side chains on the morphology of the active layers and the photovoltaic performance, atomic force microscopy (AFM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) characterization was first. As shown in Fig. 4a, the asymmetric TB and TB-F blends have a higher surface roughness of 2.19 and 2.58 nm than that of the BTR-Cl blend (1.67 nm), suggesting the stronger crystallization ability with asymmetric 2D side chain strategy. The corresponding TEM images confirmed that both the TB- and TB-F-based blend films showed significant phase separation with coarse and long fiber-like domains, implying a better continuous interpenetrating morphology. This is expected to facilitate exciton extraction and carrier transport, thus increasing the Jsc and FF in the corresponding devices. The contact angles of the pure films were utilized to characterize the surface tension (γ), and thus estimate the Flory–Huggins interaction parameter χ. The more remarkable surface tension variation between the donor and acceptor represents a larger χ (see calculations). According to the calculated γ of 11.69, 14.30, 15.52 and 20.36 mN m−1 for BTR-Cl, TB, TB-F and L8-Bo, with the detailed results presented in Section 8 of the ESI, the resulting χ values follow the order of TB-F (0.20) < TB (0.60) < BTR-Cl (0.73). This implies that the miscibility between BTR-Cl and L8-Bo is relatively low, and therefore the D/A interaction is weaker than that of the TB/L8-Bo and TB-F/L8-Bo pairs. Apparently, TB and TB-F with two-dimensional asymmetric thiophene and phenyl substituents could improve the D/A interactions compared to the symmetric BTR-Cl, promoting a compatible donor and acceptor distribution, and simultaneously maintaining the formation of molecular crystals, thereby facilitating charge generation and transport, resulting in a high PV performance.

The pristine acceptor L8-Bo and blend film microstructures were also investigated by 2D-GIWAXS to better understand the asymmetric 2D phenyl/thienyl side chain effects. Fig. 4c and Fig. S28, S29 (ESI) show the 2D GIWAXS patterns and the corresponding 1D line cutting profiles. Despite the strong face-on orientation in the L8-Bo neat film, the (010) π–π diffraction textures became visible in both the IP and OOP axes upon blending with the three small molecule donors, manifesting the distinct reduction in the uniform orientation of the blend films. The observation of this texture, consisting of face-on and edge-on crystals, indicated the coexistence of perpendicular and parallel charge transport channels in the active layer of the device, which could form 3D charge channels and enable efficient ASM-OSC performances. Compared with the BTR-Cl blend, significantly stronger peaks with narrower widths, accompanied by the presence of new peaks, such as the secondary and third lamellar peaks, were clearly discernible in the TB-F blend. The stronger and sharper lamellar (100), (200) and (300) diffraction peaks of the TB-F blend imply its higher crystallinity, which is consistent with the AFM and TEM results. These disparate morphologies imply that SMD TB-F with a asymmetric 2D side chain could not only interpenetrate L8-Bo (relatively high miscibility), but also facilely stack on multi-directions and maintain a favorable domain, and thus endowed the BHJ blend with the desirable phase separation and fibrous channels, which was able to guaranteeing efficient exciton dissociation and charge transport.

Further computational simulations were carried out on the BTR-Cl:L8-Bo, TB:L8-Bo and TB-F:L8-Bo couples to quantify the strength of the D/A interaction at the B3LYPD3/Def2-SVP level of theory (see ESI, for details). The optimal molecular conformations of the D/A couples are depicted in Fig. S41 (ESI), and the corresponding binding energies are summarized in Table S17 (ESI). During the optimization process, the central core and terminal groups of the donor tended to overlap with the acceptor backbone, as shown in the side views. Compared to TB:L8-Bo and BTR-Cl:L8-Bo, TB-F:L8-Bo exhibits a simultaneous reduction in backbone/backbone (3.48 Å) and end/end (3.40 Å) interaction distances, suggesting stronger intermolecular interactions for the TB-F:L8-Bo couple, which is consistent with its lowest binding energy of −104.43 kcal mol−1. The reduced density gradient (RDG) isosurface maps are depicted accompanying with the scale-plate to further correlate the D/A interactions with the 2D asymmetric side chains, of which the red and green regions manifest the strong repulsion and van der Waals interactions, respectively (Fig. 5a). It should be noted that the intermolecular interactions are mainly distributed between the backbone of the donor and acceptor and predominated by van der Waals interactions. Additionally, unlike the symmetric BTR-Cl-based complex, the phenyl unit on the side chain in the TB-F/L8-Bo complex possesses an obvious negative ESP center, which can interact with the positive ESP center in L8-Bo (Fig. S42–S44, ESI), which is supposed to enhance the D/A interaction in the TB-F- based mixture. The combination of these results emphasizes that the character of the interfacial structure due to the 2D asymmetric side chain design plays a fundamental role in the formation of the interpenetrating networks, fast exciton dissociation and the reduction of bimolecular recombination in the BHJ morphology.

X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopic (XPS) depth profiling was employed to investigate how the 2D asymmetric side chains affect the D/A distribution in the vertical direction of the blend films. The XPS atomic depth profiles of BTR-Cl:L8-Bo, TB:L8-Bo, and TB-F:L8-Bo are shown in Fig. S45 (ESI), and the estimated D/(D + A) mole ratio is depicted in Fig. 5b (the estimated method is illustrated in the ESI). Given that the variation in the D/(D + A) mole ratio represents the vertical phase gradation, the three blends exhibit different element enrichment states. For the BTR-Cl:L8-Bo blend, apparently, small molecule donors with symmetric thienyl side chains enriched at the blend interface, and the D/A proportion gradually decreased along the etching direction, which can be the key factor to impact the D/A miscibility and the quality of the active layer morphologies. However, by substituting a single thienyl side chain with a phenyl chain, a more homogeneous D/A distribution at the vertical direction was observed, reasonably reflecting the high miscibility and strong D/A interaction, which are beneficial to establish the moderate phase separation and facilitate exciton separation in the BHJ. Thus, this asymmetric 2D side chain strategy can moderately enhance the D/A interaction, and thus can be an effective method to control the enrichment state in the vertical direction, and finally precisely manipulate the blend film morphology.
The small molecule donor/acceptor interfacial packing is crucial for exciton dissociation and charge transport. Herein, we carried out molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to illustrate the impact of the 2D asymmetric side chain on the molecular interface morphologies and D/A interaction. The MD simulation process and the results by replacing each molecule with small balls are exhibited in the ESI (Fig. S46). The center-of-mass radial distribution functions (RDFs) of the 2D side chains of the BDT core relative to the terminal group (IC) of the L8-Bo are shown in Fig. 6. Firstly, compared to BTR-Cl, the TB- and TB-F based blends exhibit two different RDF curves, which can be attributed to the lateral asymmetric thionyl/phenyl side chains (Fig. 6b–d). The similar RDF peaks are located at ≈0.48 nm, corresponding to unchanged stacking distance between two side chains and terminal groups. However, it is worth noting that the obvious strong g(r) represents the side chain stacking dominated by a phenyl unit, implying that the asymmetric 2D side chain can provide more D/A interfacial packing for exciton dissociation and additional percolation path for charge transport, which is consistent with the enlarged exciton LD value and faster exciton dissociation in the TB-F based blends. Finally, some differences can also be seen in Fig. S47 (ESI), where the number of molecules in the largest connection network for TB and TB-F is appreciably greater than that for their symmetric counterpart BTR-Cl, which can further confirm the better-defined robust penetrating network and facilitate charge transport. Therefore, we stress that this symmetry breaking strategy can enhance the 2D side chain and IC terminal group interactions and expand the interfacial contact in the intermixed blends, and thus astonishing performances can be obtained in TB-F-based devices.

This work demonstrated that the use of small molecular donors with asymmetrical 2D side chains offers significant control of the crystallinity, molecular packing, blend film morphology and photodynamics. The morphological and device studies revealed that the TB-F-based blends formed a more desirable morphology in terms of compatible multi-length small domains, favorable interpenetrating networks and homogeneous vertical phase distribution, which can enhance the D/A interface of the active layer, resulting in an enlarged exciton diffusion length and reduced energy disorder. Besides, the joint experimental and theoretical efforts highlighted that the asymmetric donor blends exhibited stronger molecular interaction between the unilateral phenyl side chain and terminal group, better miscibility with L8-Bo, and thus formed a favorable percolation path for charge transport. In this case, the TB-F:L8-Bo device delivered an outstanding efficiency of 17.0%, which is the best performance for binary ASM-OCSs reported thus far. This contribution provides an efficient 2D side chain strategy for the future molecular design and device optimization of AMS-OSCs.


R. Y. and X. W. conceived the idea. Z. L. synthesized materials. A. S. and Z. L. characterized the physical properties (UV, CV, AFM). C. X. and S. L. fabricated and measured the solar cell devices and conducted SCLC measurements. N. Z. conducted the GIWAXS measurement and the data analysis. J. Z. and M. Z. performed the DFT computation. X. Z. and Y. L. conducted the TEM measurement and the data analysis. B. X. performed the energy loss analysis. X. W. and R. Y. directed and supervised the project. All authors analysed the results and prepared the paper.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors are deeply grateful to the National Natural Science Foundation of China (52073122, 52103213), Ministry of Science and Technology of China (2021YFE0113600), Key R & D Project of Hubei Province (2022BAA095), Open Project of Key Laboratory of Green Chemical Process of Ministry of Education (GCP202106), and the start-up funding from Jianghan University.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee02107b
‡ Z. L. and X. W. contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022