 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM33838F
(Highlight)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24202-24212

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Song
Chen
,

Jesse R.
Manders
,

Sai-Wing
Tsang
 and 

Franky
So
*

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Florida, 32611-6400, USA. E-mail: fso@mse.ufl.edu

Received
14th June 2012
, Accepted 22nd August 2012
First published on 22nd August 2012
Significant progress in power conversion efficiencies and stabilities of polymer solar cells has been achieved using semiconducting metal oxides as charge extraction interlayers. Both n- and p-type transition metal oxides with good transparency in the visible as well as infrared region make good Ohmic contacts to both donors and acceptors in polymer bulk heterojunction solar cells. Their compatibility with roll-to-roll processing makes them very attractive for low cost manufacturing of polymer solar cells. In this review, we will present the recent results on synthesis and characterization of these metal oxides along with the device performance of the solar cells using these metal oxides as interlayers.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs) have drawn a lot of research interest in the past decade because of their potential to be low-cost light harvesting devices. The race for power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has been driven by the development of photoactive materials and device architectures. In particular, a large number of donor–acceptor (D–A) polymers have been synthesized by controlling the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels of the donor and the acceptor units of the resulting conjugated polymers. This bandgap engineering enables the realization of many low bandgap polymers with deep-lying HOMO energies, resulting in enhancements in short circuit currents (Jsc) as well as open circuit voltages (Voc), which are two key parameters for photovoltaic cells. Using these photo-active materials, PCEs of 7–9% (ref. 9 and 11–16) have already been demonstrated with the incorporation of charge extraction interlayer materials, among which transition metal oxides are very attractive because of their ability to efficiently extract charge carriers and their compatibility with high volume roll-to-roll (R2R) processing. While solution processed electron extraction materials such as zinc oxide have been demonstrated in both lab-scale devices and scaled-up modules, further development of high work function solution processed metal oxides for hole extraction layers is still needed.

Most PSCs are made with bulk heterojunctions (BHJs) wherein an electron donating polymer and an electron accepting fullerene derivative form nano-scaled interpenetrating networks allowing efficient exciton dissociation and carrier transport. Unlike inorganic solar cells where Ohmic contacts can be made by surface doping, PCSs require alternative strategies for the interface engineering. Specifically, poor Ohmic contacts with transparent conducting oxides (TCO) or metallic electrodes are due to the mismatch of work function, the presence of interfacial dipoles as well as high densities of interfacial trap states. To achieve good Ohmic contacts, various charge extracting interlayers have been used between the BHJ layer and the electrodes. Among the electrode interlayer materials used in high performance PSCs, transition metal oxides are promising because of their better environmental stability, higher optical transparency and easier synthesis routes than alkali metal compounds, aqueous conducting polymers and conjugated polyelectrolytes.
The PCE of PSCs is a product of Voc, Jsc and fill factor (FF). The Voc is determined by recombination as well as the energy level alignment between the photoactive polymer donor and the fullerene acceptor, Jsc is determined by the light harvesting and the charge separation efficiency under large extraction fields, and FF is determined by the device series resistance, the dark current and the charge recombination/extraction rate under low internal fields. The n- and p-type semiconductivities in metal oxides are, in general, due to the intrinsic point defects such as atomic vacancies present in the oxides. Fig. 1 shows the HOMO as well as LUMO energy levels of some of the state-of-the-art photovoltaic polymers, electron accepting fullerene derivatives and the electron affinities and ionization energies of high/low work function metal oxides. These metal oxides form Ohmic contacts to photovoltaic polymers and fullerenes through favorable vacuum level shift, energy level bending and Fermi level pinning at the polymer–electrode interfaces. In addition, the use of oxide interlayers circumvents the direct contact between a photoactive polymer and electrodes where high densities of carrier traps or unfavorable interface dipoles hinder efficient charge collection. Equally important is the use of metal oxides for Ohmic contacts to maximize the Voc because the reduction of built-in potential leads to an increase in dark current as well as carrier recombination.
In this paper, we will review the synthesis and characterization of some of the vacuum-deposited and solution processed metal oxides including zinc oxide, titanium oxide, molybdenum oxide, tungsten oxide, vanadium oxide and nickel oxide for interlayers in PSCs. We will also describe how their properties affect the performance of some of the state-of-the-art PSCs.

Depending on the solar cell device geometry, as shown in Fig. 2, the cathode interlayer is either coupled with the top electrode, usually a low work function metal, or with the bottom TCO electrode. In PSCs, three approaches are used to make Ohmic contacts to the electron accepting fullerene derivatives in the BHJ layer. The first approach is to use alkali metals or related compounds such as cesium carbonate (Cs2CO3) and lithium fluoride (LiF) to make Ohmic contacts to fullerenes due to their low work functions (<3.0 eV). The disadvantage of this approach is, however, that alkali metal compounds are prone to oxidation and lead to rapid device degradation. The second approach is to use alcohol/water-soluble conjugated polyelectrolytes for cathode interlayer materials. Due to the intramolecular dipole moment and their ability to form self-assembled monolayers, these conjugated polyelectrolytes can induce an interface dipole pointing from the cathode to the BHJ layer in the conventional device geometry, thus increasing the built-in potential of the device. Using this approach, high PCE values (8.3%) have been achieved in devices using polyelectrolytes for the top cathode interlayer. The third approach is to use transition metal oxides such as ZnO and TiO2 with work functions matching the LUMO levels of fullerenes. Due to their chemical resistance to oxygen and moisture, optical transparency and facile solution processability, these n-type semiconducting oxides effectively replace low work function metals for cathode contacts, resulting in high efficiency devices demonstrated in both conventional and inverted device geometries.


ZnO is currently the most commonly used electron transporting layer (ETL) material in PSCs. Its work function provides a good Fermi level match to the Fermi levels of TCOs as well as the LUMO energy of [6,6]-phenyl-C61 (or C71) butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM or PC71BM). Because of the large bandgap energy, the ionization potential of ZnO is large enough to let it act as a hole blocker and thus increases the shunt resistance of a BHJ cell. Optically, ZnO absorbs in the UV part of the spectrum and hence it serves as a low-pass filter for PC71BM and photoactive polymers used for solar cells. Using zinc salts as precursors, solution processable ZnO can be formed through sol–gel, solvothermal or a hydrothermal process, as a result, various nanostructures of ZnO such as colloidal nanoparticles and sol–gel ZnO films have been used as ETLs in PSCs.


The use of ZnO NPs enables the material to be utilized in its crystalline phase while its thin film deposition is compatible with solution processing. ZnO NPs have been used for R2R processing of large area solar modules. For lab-scale device fabrication, ZnO NPs are usually deposited by spin-coating as a bottom or top interlayer depending on the device geometry.

ZnO NPs are readily synthesized from zinc acetate dihydrate in alcoholic solvents with a strong base such as sodium hydroxide (NaOH), potassium hydroxide (KOH) or tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH). The resulting wurtzite-type ZnO NPs have diameters of 3–6 nm, bandgap energies of 3.3–3.6 eV, and they form transparent colloids in polar or non-polar solvents. To fabricate PSCs with an inverted device geometry, i.e., devices with a bottom cathode, ZnO NP colloids are spin-coated onto TCO substrates as the bottom electrode interlayer. Using such an approach, inverted poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) cells with a PCE of 4% have been demonstrated. More recently, using low bandgap polymers such as dithienosilole-thienopyrrole-4,6-dione (PDTS-TPD) and dithienogermole-thienopyrrole-4,6-dione (PDTG-TPD), PCEs of 6.6% and 7.3% have also been reported.
Because of the defects present in colloidal ZnO NPs, devices require UV light exposure to enhance the conductivity of ZnO NPs. Such photo-conductivity enhancement occurs within a few seconds of the UV exposure and the phenomena can be explained by photo-doping and defect filling. However, this photo-doping effect only lasts for a short time and such a post UV-soaking alone is not sufficient for optimum device performance. While the defect states give rise to the n-type semiconductivity of ZnO, these defects also lead to a recombination pathway for dissociated carriers in the adjacent BHJ layer. In addition, due to the small crystal diameter, ZnO NPs are known to have up to 30% of the atoms exposed to the particle surface forming dangling bonds which contribute to a high density of gap states. These gap state defects also give rise to the color center emission in the visible spectrum when ZnO NPs are photoexcited. Recently, it has been found that UV-ozone (UVO) treatment was an effective approach to passivate these defect states as evident from the quenching of the color center while maintaining the work function of ZnO. With UVO-treated ZnO NPs as an ETL, PDTG-TPD:PC71BM cells show a significant enhancement of short circuit current due to reduced interface recombination, resulting in a PCE as high as 8.1% which is among the highest reported values of a single junction inverted PSC. These results are illustrated in Fig. 3. However, this UVO treatment only works with devices having a photoactive polymer with a deep HOMO energy—usually benchmarked by an oxidization threshold energy of 5.27 eV. Alternatively, for polymers with shallow HOMO energies, such as P3HT, it has been reported that using a self-assembled C60 layer can block the direct contact between the ZnO NPs ETL and the absorber, thus enhancing the efficiency to 4.9%.
In addition to its use as an ETL in single junction cells, ZnO is also used to form the interconnecting unit in tandem PSCs. Such an interconnecting unit, essentially a tunneling p–n junction sandwiched by two BHJ cell stacks, forms a hole–electron recombination zone across which the Fermi levels of the hole transporting layer and the electron transporting layer are aligned to minimize the Voc loss in a tandem cell. To achieve good performance in tandem cells, the p–n junction materials should be heavily doped in order to reach the energy equilibrium. To date, the most efficient tandem cell reported utilizes ZnO NPs as the bottom cathode interlayer, P3HT:indene-C60 bisadduct (ICBA) as the front cell, ZnO NPs/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) as the interconnecting unit and a low band gap BHJ stack as the rear cell. The resulting devices have a PCE of 8.6% in which the Voc value is very close to the sum of the two single junction cells, indicating a negligible photovoltage loss across the interconnecting unit. Using a very similar device architecture, a new record efficiency of 10.6% was mentioned in a recent progress report.
Compared with low work function metals and polyelectrolytes, the electronic properties of ZnO are insensitive to the moisture and oxygen in the ambient; as a result, the device lifetime is enhanced using ZnO as a cathode interlayer. Without any device encapsulation, inverted P3HT:PC71BM cells with ZnO NPs as the bottom cathode interlayer and evaporated molybdenum oxide as the top anode interlayer experienced less than 20% reduction in PCE after being exposed to ambient for 40 days. Similarly, inverted PDTS-TPD:PC71BM cells retained 85% of their initial PCE (6.6%) after storage in air over a period of a month. Similar trends have also been observed in polymer–CdSe hybrid solar cells and quantum dot light emitting diodes (QLED), indicating the use of ZnO NP ETL is promising to enhance lifetimes of solution processable electronic devices.

In addition to nanoparticles, ZnO thin films can also be formed through sol–gel reaction between zinc salts and hydroxyl groups from solvent and ambient water. The so-called “precursor-based” or “sol–gel derived” ZnO refers to the preparation of ZnO films by annealing zinc acetate dihydrate solution (in ethanol) at 200 °C. Although this process requires amine additives and high temperature annealing to complete the hydrolysis reaction, it is an effective way to prepare ZnO films as the bottom cathode interlayers without any additional material synthesis steps. Using spray pyrolysis and inkjet printing, sol–gel ZnO films can be processed over a large scale with good thickness control. For the lab-scale device fabrication, the first inverted PSC with a PCE of over 6% was made with sol–gel ZnO and poly[[9-(1-octylnonyl)-9H-carbazole-2,7-diyl]-2,5-thiophenediyl-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole-4,7-diyl-2,5-thiophenediyl] (PCDTBT):PC71BM; the PCE was close to the value obtained for a conventional device with a top cathode layer.

In addition to pristine sol–gel ZnO films, sol–gel ZnO polymer composites have also been used for inverted PSCs. For example, ZnO–polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) composites have been made and PVP has been found to cap the ZnO clusters in the composite film to improve the film uniformity. However, due to the smaller surface energy of PVP, the top surface of ZnO films tend to be PVP-rich which forms an extraction barrier when these composite films are used in inverted cells as a bottom cathode interlayer. Upon the removal of extra PVP by UVO treatment, inverted cells of PDTG-TPD:PC71BM also show improved electrical coupling at the ETL–BHJ interface resulting in a PCE exceeding 8% with significantly improved values in FF and Jsc. The surface PVP removal was confirmed by the significant work function change of ZnO–PVP, the compositional change in the X-ray photoelectron spectra and the morphological change in the atomic force microscopy (AFM) phase images.
In summary, today, ZnO is widely used as an electron extraction layer for PSCs in both research and manufacturing and it is promising for both small area coating and large area printing.

TiO2 is a wide gap semiconductor with its conduction band minima composed of the Ti 3d band and its valence maxima composed primarily of the O 2p states. As a result of oxygen deficiency and the occupied defect states, TiOx (x < 2) is an n-type semiconductor. However, as a typical electron transporting material in dye sensitized solar cells (DSSC), the traditional preparation methods of nanocrystalline TiOx are not compatible with processing of PSCs. For example, a high temperature (450 °C) is required to obtain crystalline TiOx and this high temperature processing cannot be used for plastic substrate processing. Moreover, mesoporous TiOx films formed through TiCl4 treatment have a large roughness and cannot be used as an electrode interlayer. Thus, to date, most TiOx films used for PSCs are in amorphous phase made by a sol–gel process. The solution precursor is typically prepared using titanium isopropoxide along with solvent additives. After spin-coating, TiOx films are formed upon hydrolysis at ∼150 °C. Such a method is practically similar to the synthesis sol–gel ZnO presented above. According to X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy results, solution processed TiOx was found to be oxygen deficient with x = 1.34.

PSCs fabricated with sol–gel TiOx have been reported in both conventional and inverted cells. In conventional cells, the incorporation of TiOx as an ETL shows enhanced Jsc and FF when compared with devices using aluminum electrodes. Using PCDTBT:PC71BM as the absorber, the optimum devices have a PCE of 6.1%. The enhancement of PCE was attributed to the improved electrical coupling with PC71BM and the enhanced light harvesting due to optical interference with the TiOx film as an optical spacer. With a BHJ layer as thin as 60–80 nm, this is usually a good strategy for polymers with low hole mobilities and high absorption coefficient, the optical field distribution in the absorber is sensitive to its distance to the back electrodes, making the J–V characteristics highly dependent on the spacer thickness. When TiOx is used as the bottom electrode interlayer and PEDOT:PSS/gold as the top electrode, the PCE of the resulting inverted P3HT:PC71BM cells is about 3%. Similar to ZnO, TiOx has also been used as the n-type material for the interconnecting charge recombination layer for solution processed tandem PSCs. With P3HT:ICBA and poly(4,4-dioctyldithieno(3,2-b:2′,3′-d)silole)-2,6-diyl-alt-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)-4,7-diyl) (PDTS-BTD):PC71BM as the two absorbing layers, a PCE of 7% (ref. 64) was reported.
There have also been reports that PSCs with a TiOx ETL show a strong dependence on UV illumination acquired from the A.M. 1.5G light exposure. Showing poor initial device characteristics before UV illumination, these devices not only require prolonged UV exposure to obtain optimum J–V characteristics but continuous UV illumination is also necessary to keep the TiOx layer “activated” as some study has revealed that both Jsc and FF drop rapidly when the UV portion of the AM 1.5 G spectrum is filtered. Such a phenomenon, along with the work function change upon UV illumination, is in contrast with what has been observed in ZnO devices, and cannot be simply interpreted as a result of UV induced photo-doping. Schmidt et al. tracked the change in FFs of P3HT cells after UV exposure under different ambient conditions. The results indicated that oxygen is chemisorbed at the TiOx surface, leading to band bending in the TiOx and suppressing electron extraction. Unless improvement is made on the UV sensitivity of these TiOx based devices, their use for PSCs will be limited.

For anode interlayers in PSCs, their work functions need to large enough so that the Fermi levels of the interlayers match the HOMO levels of photovoltaic polymers. UVO treated TCO have a work function below 5 eV (ref. 69 and 70) and this low work function does not match the HOMO energy of many photovoltaic polymers; therefore, good Ohmic contacts cannot be made without an anode interlayer in conventional cells. For inverted devices, while a high work function metal may be used for the top anode, good Ohmic contacts cannot be made to conjugated polymers with a high HOMO energy because of the electron transfer from the metal to the organic absorber, thus creating an interface dipole and reducing the device built-in potential. This reduction of built-in potential of the BHJ diode not only increases the series resistance under forward bias but also decreases the extraction field at short circuit condition. Therefore, in order to achieve high Jscs, Vocs and FFs in PSCs, anode interlayer materials with high work functions are needed. To date, despite the problem of device lifetime, PEDOT:PSS is still the anode interlayer material used in most PSCs. Recently, several vacuum-deposited transition metal oxides with high work functions, good stability and high optical transparency have gained significant research interest and PSCs incorporated with these metal oxides have demonstrated good device performance. Depending on the different mechanisms of hole extraction, both n-type and p-type semiconducting oxides are used for anode interlayers. Most transition metal oxides such as molybdenum oxide, tungsten oxide, and vanadium oxide are n-type and they are commonly used for anode Ohmic contacts for both OPV and OLED devices. These oxides have work functions exceeding 6 eV and form strong acceptors with organic materials. When they are used as anode interlayers, Fermi level pinning occurs and increases the built-in potential. Under an extraction field, electrons are injected through the conduction band of the oxide and recombine with the photo-generated holes at the oxide–organic interface. The process is equivalent to “hole extraction”. Nickel oxide is a transition metal oxide known to be p-type. The large work function in NiO allows a good match between the valence band and the HOMO level of most photoactive polymers. In early works, these high work function n-type and p-type semiconducting oxides are vacuum deposited. Recent works also showed these oxides are solution processable. In the following section, we will review examples of both n-type and p-type oxides which have been used as anode interlayer materials.


The use of MoO3 started with the exploration of efficient hole injection materials used in OLEDs where the hole transporting layer has a deep HOMO level. Because of its low melting temperature (795 °C), molybdenum oxide can be deposited by thermal evaporation which allows accurate thickness control at a nanometer scale. MoO3 is an excellent hole injection material and was once misidentified as a p-type semiconductor until the n-type characteristics were directly determined by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). Similar to TiOx, the 4d band of molybdenum is unoccupied and contributes to the conduction band of the oxide. Evident by results of XPS and UPS measurements, oxygen deficiency in e-MoO3 gives rise to the defect band which lifts the Fermi level closer to the conduction band. Like other n-type oxides, e-MoO3 forms Ohmic contacts with many organic hole transporting materials. Based on the results of in situ UPS results, upon deposition of MoO3 onto ITO substrates, the interface experiences a significant vacuum level shift of 2 eV which aligns the Fermi levels of MoO3 and ITO. The work function of MoO3 is 6.7 ± 0.2 eV and the Fermi level lies at an energy of 0.5 ± 0.2 eV below the conduction band edge and 2.7 ± 0.2 eV above the valence band edge. Further study reveals that the work function of MoO3 exhibits a strong dependence on the stoichiometry and is highly sensitive to surface contamination. Upon oxygen or air exposure, the work function decreases to 5.3–5.7 eV (ref. 76–78) which is still sufficient to yield good Ohmic contacts with organic hole transporting materials. Further reduction of the suboxide gives rise to growth of gap states that will finally reach the Fermi energy, resulting in the metallic behavior of MoO2.

In order to understand how a p-type contact is made with an electron accepting material, UPS experiments were conducted to study the energy level evolution of organic materials deposited onto the MoO3 surface. Here, we use a small molecule hole transporting material—aluminum phthalocyanine chloride (AlPcCl) as an example. As shown in Fig. 4, the HOMO level of AlPcCl shifts by 1.6 eV when a few nanometers of the material are deposited on top of the ITO surface, resulting in a strong band bending of AlPcCl within the first few nanometers at the interface. Similar band bending is also directly confirmed by studying the N,N′-diphenyl-N,N′-bis(1-naphthyl)-1,1′-biphenyl-4,4′-diamine (α-NPD)–MoO3 interface. Such band bending indicates there is a strong electron transfer from the HOMO levels of organic materials to the 4d band of molybdenum, leading to Fermi level pinning at the oxide interface. Such a phenomenon can be explained by the thermodynamics that, for either n-type or p-type oxides, given the metal oxide work functions are larger than the HOMO levels of organic materials, the HOMO offset, which is defined as the difference between the HOMO levels and Fermi energy after equilibrium, will approach a fixed minimum, resulting in Fermi level pinning as shown in Fig. 5. In addition, due to such a high work function and a strong electron accepting capability, MoO3 is an efficient p-type dopant in organic hole transporting materials.
For PSCs with a high PCE, the optimum HOMO level of the photovoltaic polymers generally resides between −5.2 eV and −5.6 eV considering the trade-off relationship between Voc and optical absorption band. With these HOMO energies, good Ohmic contacts to organic materials can readily be made with e-MoO3 as an interlayer and the device data of the resulting PSCs are summarized in Table 1. Furthermore, our recent work also showed that compared with the conventional bottom MoO3 p-contact, enhanced Ohmic contacts can be made when MoO3 and silver are sequentially evaporated onto organic materials as a top p-contact. Using such a top p-contact, inverted solar cells are now one of the prototypical structures for the lab-scale device demonstration. Inverted P3HT:PC71BM cells with PCEs of 4.5–5% (ref. 47 and 49) have been reported and these values are consistently higher than those for conventional devices using PEDOT:PSS as the bottom electrode interlayer. Similarly, PDTS-TPD:PC71BM cells with a PCE reaching 7.8% (ref. 13) have been demonstrated and these results are slightly higher than the 7.3% PCE reported using PEDOT:PSS as a bottom p-contact. In addition, PDTG-TPD:PC71BM cells were reported showing a PCE exceeding 8% with the inverted device structures. Using MoO3 to replace PEDOT:PSS for the bottom anode contact, the resulting devices show comparable initial performance with much enhanced stability (Fig. 6), indicating high work function n-type metal oxides can replace PEDOT:PSS in both conventional and inverted devices. In recent years, MoO3 has been widely used as a hole injection layer in organic electronic devices to replace PEDOT:PSS.
Polymer
Anode interlayer
Cathode interlayer

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)
P3HT
e-MoO3
ZnO NP
12.6
0.63
0.62
4.9
P3HT
NiOx (PLD)
LiF
11.3
0.64
0.69
5.2
PCDTBT
PEDOT:PSS
s-TiOx
10.6
0.88
0.66
6.1
PCDTBT
e-MoO3
sol–gel ZnO
10.4
0.88
0.69
6.3
PCDTBT
s-NiOx
Ca
11.5
0.88
0.65
6.7
PDTS-TPD
e-MoO3
ZnO NP
11.3
0.89
0.67
6.7
PCDTBT
e-MoO3
s-TiOx
11.9
0.91
0.66
7.2
PDTS-TPD
e-MoO3
ZnO NP
13.1
0.90
0.66
7.8
PDTG-TPD
e-MoO3
sol–gel ZnO–PVP
14.0
0.86
0.67
8.1
PDTG-TPD
e-MoO3
ZnO NP
14.1
0.86
0.67
8.1

For R2R processing, it is desirable to deposit MoO3 by a solution process instead of vacuum deposition. To use s-MoOx for PSCs, the material should have a high work function as well as low surface roughness. In the following section, we will review several representative routes to prepare s-MoOx and their use in P3HT:PCBM cells.

Liu et al. presented a facile way to make s-MoOx thin films, which represents the first attempt for PSC applications. The aqueous molybdenum containing a precursor, ammonium molybdate [(NH4)6Mo7O24], was dissolved in a mixture of hydrochloric acid and deionized water before spin-casting. After annealing the films at 160 °C in nitrogen, the resulting sol–gel based s-MoOx films show a very similar X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern compared with e-MoO3 films. The reported P3HT:PCBM cells showed a PCE of 3.1% which is close to the PEDOT:PSS device fabricated under the same condition. Despite the low temperature process and acceptable PCE values, aggregation of s-MoOx resulted in poor uniformity and thus limits its use for large scale processing. Shortly afterwards, Meyer et al. reported the UPS measurements and hole injection study of s-MoOx films made by MoO3 nanocrystals. In order to realize homogeneous films, a block copolymer was used to facilitate the nanocrystal dispersion in xylene. After spin-coating, oxygen plasma was carried out to remove the dispersing agent and also to tune the work function of s-MoOx. With thermal annealing in nitrogen ambient at 100 °C, s-MoOx showed a work function of 6.0 eV which was close to the air exposed e-MoO3 film (5.7 eV). Using these MoO3 nanocrystals, Stubhan et al. fabricated P3HT:PCBM cells with s-MoOx interlayers with PCEs of 2.5%, which is lower than the results obtained for typical P3HT cells. The PCE was probably limited by the rough surface of s-MoOx due to the large nanocrystal size of ∼15 nm. Hammond et al. also reported that oxygen plasma treatment on s-MoOx films, made from the molybdenum tricarbonyl trispropionitrile [Mo(CO)3(EtCN)3] precursor, increased the work function of s-MoOx to 5.4 eV, resulting in P3HT cells with PCEs of 3.5%. Others also recently reported similar device performance without using oxygen plasma treatment. Girotto et al. prepared precursors by dissolving MoO3 powder into H2O2. However, to form s-MoOx films to be used for PSCs, the process requires a high annealing temperature (∼300 °C). Zilberberg et al. presented a precursor based on bis(2,4-pentanedionato) molybdenum(VI) dioxide and isopropanol. After annealing in nitrogen at 150 °C, a smooth (roughness r.m.s. <3 nm) s-MoOx film forms with a work function of 5.3 eV without additional treatments.
s-MoOx is a good candidate to replace PEDOT:PSS for PSCs with greatly improved device stability. However, the work function values of s-MoOx films tend to be lower than that of e-MoO3, thus affecting the quality of the resulting Ohmic contacts. In the above mentioned work, P3HT:PCBM cells with s-MoOx generally show a Voc value of 0.55 V which is 50 mV lower than that for the same devices made with e-MoO3. An exploration of better aqueous precursors as well as processing conditions is needed. In spite of progress made, the uniformity issue of ultra-thin s-MoOx films has to be resolved to enable their use for large scale manufacturing.

Another n-type metal oxide with a high work function is WO3; similar to MoO3, its electronic structure highly depends on the stoichiometry, the crystalline structure and thus the deposition conditions. Back in the 1980s, the valence band structure and the Fermi energy of thermally evaporated WO3 (e-WO3) were well studied by UPS. Evaporated films of amorphous WO3 are generally deficient in oxygen which gives rise to the gap states and n-type semiconductivity. Further depletion of oxygen is observed when WO3 films are annealed at high temperatures in vacuum and eventually converted to metallic WO2. During the annealing process, the occupancy of gap states at the valence band edge grows significantly and leads to a reduction of work function from 6.05 eV to 5.5 eV. The work function is also sensitive to oxygen exposure which reduces the work function further to 4.7 eV. The optical band gap of these evaporated films has been determined to be 3.25–3.41 eV and was found to decrease by 0.5 eV upon annealing in air.

Inverted P3HT:PCBM cells using e-WO3 as a top anode interlayer and s-TiOx as a bottom cathode interlayer have been reported by Tao et al. With an optimum e-WO3 film thickness, the devices display a Voc of 0.6 V and a FF over 0.60, revealing the high work function that was reported earlier. Similar device performance was also demonstrated using conventional devices wherein e-WO3 films were used as the bottom anode interlayer with low surface roughness (r.m.s. = 0.88 nm). The tungsten suboxide deposited by thermal evaporation and subsequent hydrogen reduction shows metallic conductivity with a large work function and makes good Ohmic contact to materials with deep HOMO energies such as poly[(9,9-dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl)-co-(1,4-benzo-(2,1′,3)-thiadiazole)] (F8BT) (5.9 eV). Recently, solar cells with good performance using solution processed WO3 have also been reported. Using tungsten ethoxide [W(OC2H5)6] solution (in ethanol) as the precursor, spin-coated films show a larger work function than PEDOT:PSS, which leads to a 3.4% PCE (Jsc = 8.63 mA cm−2; Voc = 0.62 V; FF = 0.63) for a P3HT:PCBM cell made in a conventional structure. The devices show a much enhanced lifetime by maintaining 90% of the initial value after being exposed to air for nearly 200 hours without any encapsulation. These promising results make s-WO3 a better choice than other solution processed high-work-function oxides for large-scale coating in the R2R process.

The third n-type semiconducting oxide used as the anode interlayer is V2O5. Its band gap determined by UPS and IPES is 2.8 eV, revealing that its absorption band partially covers the absorption band of PC71BM. Similar to MoO3 and WO3, the band structure of e-V2O5 is highly sensitive to the ambient environment. Based on the results of in situ UPS measurements, e-V2O5 films deposited under ultra-high-vacuum conditions (<10−10 Torr) reaches a work function value as large as 7.0 eV, and thus provides an excellent Ohmic contact to organic materials with large HOMO energies. P3HT:PCBM cells using e-V2O5 (∼10−6 Torr) as an anode interlayer show an optimum PCE of ∼3%, which is close to similar devices with a MoO3 interlayer. Upon air exposure, the work function of e-V2O5 drops significantly to 5.3 eV along with a significant reduction of electron affinity and growth of gap states. Therefore, compared with the V2O5 deposited in high vacuum, such contaminated e-V2O5 is just lightly n-doped and thus less likely to induce efficient charge transfer, resulting in a larger contact barrier with organic materials. As is evident by XPS spectra, the band structure change is attributed to the adsorbates that partially reduce V5+ at the top surface.

Vanadium(V) oxitriisopropoxide is a common precursor to synthesize sol–gel V2O5 at room temperature. Due to air exposure during the hydrolysis reaction, the work function, ionization potential and electron affinity of this solution processed V2O5 (s-V2O5) are very close to those of the contaminated e-V2O5. The optical gap of sol–gel V2O5 films is 2.3 eV, indicating the change of its electronic structure from the bulk to the top surface. Compared with e-V2O5 without any air exposure, P3HT devices with s-V2O5 show a reduction of Voc due to the poor energy level alignment at the anode interface. The resulting energy alignment does not induce a hole extraction barrier; thus, the reduction of Jsc can only be explained by the decrease of an extraction field. Compared with MoO3, less work has been done on V2O5. For a better understanding of the charge extraction mechanism at the s-V2O5–polymer interface, further studies of the interface electronic structures are still needed.

Among the metal oxides presented in this review, nickel oxide (NiO) is the only p-type semiconducting oxide. In contrast to all the above n-type oxides where their semiconductivity originates from the negative charge compensation at defect sites of oxygen vacancies and/or cation interstitials, the p-type characteristics of NiO stems from positive charge compensation at the thermodynamically favored Ni2+ vacancies and is related to its complex band structure wherein both the valence band maximum and conduction band minimum are believed to contain contributions from the Ni 3d states.

The work function of NiO strongly depends on its surface chemistry, crystal orientation and the thin film deposition conditions. For NiO formed by in situ oxidization of sputtered nickel films, the work function is as large as 6.7 eV. NiO films can also be formed by UVO treatment or oxygen plasma treatment of metallic nickel or solution processed nickel containing precursors. The work function of ex situ oxidized NiO films is 5.0–5.6 eV, close to those of in situ prepared samples with subsequent air exposure. Such a work function change is summarized in Table 2 along with the high work function oxides presented above. It is well documented that the NiO surface readily adsorbs surface contaminants such as nitric oxide, various carbonaceous species and hydroxyl species within minutes of air exposure and results in a work function reduction. Interestingly, a recent study by Ratcliff et al. on solution-processed NiO concluded that post-deposition O2 plasma treatment increased the work function from 4.7 eV to 5.3 eV by creating a dipolar nickel oxyhydroxide (NiOOH) on the NiO surface. However, in earlier work by Ratcliff's collaborators, it was shown that the work function quickly decreased after O2 plasma treatment even when the NiO film was stored in a N2 environment. It is possible that in these studies, the O2 plasma treatment not only induced a favorable NiOOH surface dipole but also removed the surface contaminants, resulting in NiO with a larger work function and making more surface lattice sites available for hydroxylation. Upon exposure to the nitrogen environment after the O2 plasma treatment, it is probable that contaminants were adsorbed by NiO, which reduced the work function again. Despite these changes, the work function of NiO is sufficient for the energy alignment with the HOMO levels of many photovoltaic polymers. Moreover, due to the small electron affinity (∼2.1 eV) and wide band gap, NiO acts as an effective electron blocker by introducing a large electron transporting barrier at the photovoltaic polymer interface. As a result of the electronic structure of NiO thin films, high efficiency solar cells have been fabricated and the results will be presented in the next section.
Work function (eV)
MoO3
WO3
V2O5
NiO
Vacuum deposited
6.5–6.9 (ref. 72, 74–77)
6.1–6.6 (ref. 80 and 90)
6.8–7.0 (ref. 94 and 123)
6.7 (ref. 104)
Air exposed
5.3–5.7 (ref. 76–78)
4.7 (ref. 90)
5.3 (ref. 95)
5.5 (ref. 104)
Solution processed
5.3–6.0 (ref. 78, 87 and 89)
4.8 (ref. 93)
5.3 (ref. 96)
5.3–5.4 (ref. 101, 105 and 110)

In earlier studies on PV cells with NiO interlayers, NiO films were deposited in vacuum where the O2 partial pressure and moisture level during film growth can be accurately controlled. Irwin et al. first demonstrated NiO hole extracting/electron blocking layers in conventional P3HT:PCBM cells by depositing NiO via pulsed laser deposition (PLD) on top of ITO. They observed an increase in Jsc, Voc and FF when compared to devices with no hole extraction/electron blocking layers and devices with PEDOT:PSS as the hole extraction layer. The optimized solar cells incorporated a 10 nm thick NiO layer to minimize series resistance and optical absorption by NiO and achieved a PCE greater than 5%. Encapsulated devices with NiO showed good stability up to 60 days of continuous operation, while the stability curve trends for much longer times. Conductive AFM measurements from the same group revealed a reduction in conductivity “hot and cold spots” when NiO is deposited on ITO, suggesting a homogeneous electrical surface which reduced leakage and recombination at the NiO–organics interface. UPS measurements revealed a large work function and ionization potential which are sufficient for alignment with the HOMO energies of many state-of-the-art photovoltaic polymers. Additionally, the Voc enhancement was attributed to the reduction of electron leakage current. Since then, several groups have also showed enhanced device performance by depositing NiO by sputtering, PLD and O2 plasma treatment of evaporated nickel films. While NiO films can easily be fabricated by a wide variety of vacuum based techniques, solution processed NiO is needed for R2R processing.


Unlike ZnO and TiO2, a direct route from the metal salt to a colloidal nanocrystalline NiO at low temperatures and without aliphatic insulating ligands has not been demonstrated. This seems to be due to the fundamental difference in the chemical behavior of nickel compared to that of zinc or titanium. For example, during the synthesis of ZnO nanoparticles under the excess base condition, the precipitated zinc hydroxide [Zn(OH)2] does not terminate the reaction in alcoholic solvent because it rapidly forms soluble intermediate tetrahydroxozincate ions (i.e. [Zn(OH)4]2−) which then undergo water-catalyzed dehydration to yield colloidal nanocrystalline ZnO. In the case of synthesizing colloidal TiO2, researchers take advantage of the oxophilicity of titanium, i.e. it induces hydrolysis of ambient water or directly abstracts oxygen from its surroundings. This process has been shown to readily yield nanocrystalline TiO2 from a TiCl4 precursor without any bulky insulating ligands. However, the synthesis of nickel oxide from wet chemical techniques cannot follow either of these routes. Nickel hydroxide is insoluble in alcohol and cannot accept excess OH− to form soluble complex anions. Also, it has not been shown that nickel salts possess the same ability to induce direct hydrolysis or oxygen abstraction in alcoholic solutions to form NiO. Despite these limitations, thus far, there have been several routes to employing solution-processed NiO in solar cells, including the “sol–gel” route in the conventional devices, peptized nickel hydroxide in a conventional device structure, and a dispersion of fine NiO powder into solvents for the top electrode interlayer in inverted solar cells. The sol–gel route is more popular for solution-processed NiO films used in organic solar cells. The first report of solution-processed NiO in PSCs came from Steirer et al., where they reported that nickel formate formed a complex with ethylenediamine to compose the nickel ink. NiO films were formed by spin-casting followed by heat treatment (250–300 °C) in air. O2 plasma treatment increased the NiO work function, which enabled solar cells to be made with identical PCEs to those of the control devices with PEDOT:PSS. Further work from Steirer, Ratcliff, and collaborators has developed a more comprehensive understanding of the surface interaction of NiO with photoactive layers based on P3HT and PCDTBT. The O2 plasma treatment on NiO not only increased its work function, it also increased its band gap energy and enhanced its electron blocking capability. UPS and XPS results were correlated with device performance and showed that the dipolar NiOOH species on the NiO surface was responsible for the increase in work function as well as the enhanced hole extraction and electron blocking at the NiO–active layer interface. As shown in Fig. 7, these effects produced solar cells with higher values of Jsc, Voc and FFs than the control devices using PEDOT:PSS, and the devices achieved a final PCE of 6.7% using PCDTBT:PC71BM as the photoactive layer.

As a very promising solution processed anode-interlayer material, the high temperature for annealing during the NiO film processing may be the bottleneck for its flexible electronics applications. A better understanding of the chemical processes during heat treatment will help to realize low-temperature solution processed NiO films.

In summary, we reviewed the synthesis and the electronic properties of transition metal oxides used for both anode as well as cathode interlayers in PSCs along with the performance data of the resulting devices. Low work function oxides, such as ZnO and TiO2, with their work function matching the LUMO levels of electron-accepting fullerene derivatives are used as electron extraction interlayers. High work function oxides such as MoO3, WO3 V2O5, and NiO form good Ohmic contacts to many state-of-the-art photovoltaic polymers and can be used as hole extraction layers. All these metal oxides can be deposited by solution processes in the form of colloidal nanoparticles or aqueous precursors and the results are promising for R2R processing. Specifically, the PCEs of PSCs with solution processed low work function oxides such as ZnO and TiO2 as cathode interlayers are comparable with devices using vacuum deposited low work function electrodes. Therefore, these printable oxides are becoming prototypical in the manufacturing of plastic solar cells. However, to realize all-solution-processed plastic cells with stable performance, further understanding of oxygen substoichiometry in the high-work-function oxides and optimization of solution processed anode interlayers are required. The promising results achieved in this area enable us to believe that interface engineering based on solution processed oxides will accelerate the commercialization of low-cost polymer photovoltaic cells.


We acknowledge the support of Department of Energy Basic Energy Sciences (Award no. DE-FG0207ER46464) for our work on solution processed ZnO.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012