 DOI: 10.1039/D2TA07770A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 1129-1137


Seung-Hoon
Lee
,

Byoungwook
Park
,

Seung Hun
Eom
,

Seo-Jin
Ko
,

Changjin
Lee
* and 

Sung Cheol
Yoon
*

Division of Advanced Materials, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), 141 Gajeong-ro, Yuseong, Daejeon 34114, Republic of Korea. E-mail: cjlee@krict.re.kr; yoonsch@krict.re.kr

Received
5th October 2022
, Accepted 18th November 2022
First published on 21st November 2022
The damp-heat stability at 85 °C/85% relative humidity (85/85) and photostability for 1000 h of polymer solar cells (PSCs) with various ZnO electron extraction layers (EELs) fabricated using different precursors and methodologies were comprehensively investigated. ZnO nanoparticles (ZnO NPs), ZnO fabricated by the sol–gel reaction, and ZnO formed from a pyrophoric precursor were used in this study. Although the initial performances of the PSCs depending on the type of ZnO EELs are similar, the damp-heat stability and photostability of the PSCs are completely different. 85/85 and light soaking stress generate localized states in the ZnO EELs and their interfaces, resulting in an increase in the recombination loss and a decrease in the collection efficiency and mobility of the PSCs. The most stable PSCs with a PTB7-th:EH-IDTBR-based photoactive layer were achieved using ZnO NPs, exhibiting the lowest initial disorder and highest initial pure ZnO/oxygen defect proportion among the ZnO EELs. The corresponding devices retained 85% and 81% of their initial power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) after damp-heat and photostability tests for 1000 h, respectively. Finally, the stability of state-of-the-art PM6:Y6-based PSCs (PCE ∼ 14%) using ZnO EELs was also evaluated to prove their reproducibility with other active materials.

The stability of polymer solar cells (PSCs) is a critical issue for commercialization. Recently, with the development of non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs), the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of single-junction PSCs has rapidly increased to 19%, which is comparable to that of commercial silicon solar cells. However, for industrial viability, the stability of solar cells should be more significant than their PCEs. The stability gap between commercial inorganic and polymer solar cells is larger than that of PCEs, and commercial solar cells with crystalline silicon or cadmium telluride are warranted for 25 years. However, the extrapolated photostability of PSCs was estimated to be almost 10 years. The long-term stability, such as photo and thermal-stability, is promising but remains a major hurdle for the practical application of PSCs. Furthermore, reports on the device stability compared to those on efficiency are relatively scarce, and the degradation mechanisms of PSCs have not been fully elucidated.

Various components of PSCs, such as active materials, electrodes, and interlayers, can be degraded individually and by interacting with each other in complex ways. Research on the stability of PSCs has focused on active materials, such as donor polymers and NFAs. Although the stability of PSCs is effectively governed by the stability and compatibility of interface materials between the photoactive layer and electrode, the interface has been rarely investigated for the stability of PSCs. Recently, Cui et al. reported that the photostability of PSCs was improved by changing only the electron extraction layer (EEL). ZnO is a prototype that is widely used for the EEL of PSCs with inverted structures owing to its tunability of the energy level, solution processability, and excellent transparency. The solution-processed ZnO EEL can be fabricated using various methods and precursors. These ZnO EELs exhibit a slight PCE difference in the most solar cells, depending on the active materials. However, PSCs with ZnO EELs formed by different fabrication methods exhibit large differences in photostability, but the origin of this difference remains unclear. Therefore, a comprehensive investigation of the stability of PSCs with different interfaces of various ZnOs is required.
In this work, 1000 h damp-heat stability at 85 °C/85% relative humidity (85/85) and photostability at class A level 1 sun illumination of PSCs with ZnO EELs fabricated using different precursors and methodologies were investigated. ZnO nanoparticles (ZnO NPs), ZnO fabricated from a zinc acetate dihydrate precursor (Zac-ZnO) by a sol–gel reaction, and ZnO formed from pyrophoric diethyl Zn as a precursor (De-ZnO) were chosen (Fig. 1(a)). Although the initial PCEs of the devices with the three different ZnO EELs were similar, the fabricated ZnO EELs significantly affected the solar cell performance after the aging process. The damp-heat and light-induced stress generates localized states in the EEL and their interfaces with the active layer. This results in an increase in the recombination loss, and a decrease in the collection efficiency and mobility of PSCs. The most stable PSCs after 85/85 aging and photoaging were accomplished using ZnO NPs with the smallest initial energetic disorder and the highest pure ZnO/oxygen defect ratio among the ZnO EELs. The PTB7-th:EH-IDTBR PSCs with ZnO NPs retained 85% and 81% of their initial PCE after damp-heat and photostability tests for 1000 h, respectively. These results were also reproduced in state-of-the-art PM6:Y6-based PSCs.

Individual ZnO EELs were fabricated from different precursors using various methodologies. Fig. 1(a) shows a schematic of the method for fabricating the ZnO NP, Zac-ZnO, and De-ZnO films. ZnO NP were synthesized by the hydrolysis and condensation of zinc acetate dihydrate using potassium hydroxide, and the film was deposited by spin coating. The Zac-ZnO film was prepared by sol–gel method using zinc acetate dihydrate (precursor) and ethanolamine. The De-ZnO film was fabricated using pyrophoric diethyl zinc as the precursor. The conversion of diethyl zinc to ZnO occurs in a two-step process: hydrolysis and elimination of water. Following deposition, all ZnO EELs were annealed at 130 °C for 10 min. The optimal annealing temperature reported in the literature was in the range of 100–450 °C and is currently under debate. The chemical structure of PTB7-th and EH-IDTBR and energy-level diagram of the inverted PSCs with ZnO EELs are shown in Fig. S1. PTB7-th and EH-IDTBR were chosen as the photoactive layers of PSCs because the blend has been extensively investigated in the literature and show promising device stability. All fresh devices with ZnO EELs exhibit similar performances that are also comparable to those of previous reports (Fig. 1(b) and Table S1).

To accurately monitor the degradation of the PSCs after 85/85 and photoaging, the devices were encapsulated using a glass-on-glass architecture. For the 85/85 aging test, a Votsch VC7034 climatic chamber applied thermal and humidity stress to the PSCs. For photoaging, an LG sulfur plasma lamp was used to maintain the solar spectrum and intensity (100 mW cm−2) of the light for 1000 h (Fig. S5). The lamp shows a stronger spectral match (class A) to the AM 1.5G solar spectrum in the visible wavelength range than white light-emitting diodes, which have been widely used in the literature (Fig. S6 and Table S3). Details of the fabrication and characterization are provided in the Experimental section of the ESI.
Despite the similar photovoltaic performance of the pristine PSCs with ZnO EELs, each device under 85/85 aging and photoaging underwent different degradation processes, resulting in different PCEs (Fig. 1(c) and (d)). These results indicate that the properties of the EEL significantly influence the degradation of the PSCs. Fig. 1(c) shows the device stability under 85/85 aging conditions for devices with ZnO EELs. PSCs with ZnO NPs retained approximately 85% of their initial PCE, which was the most stable among the solar cells with ZnO EELs. Devices with ZnO NPs have one of the most stable long-term thermal and 85/85 stabilities in organic solar cells. The PCE loss of 15% was attributed to an open-circuit voltage (Voc) loss of 5% and fill factor (FF) loss of 10% (Fig. S7). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra and calculated short circuit current (Jsc) from the spectra of PSCs with ZnO NPs (Fig. S8) before and after damp-heat were almost the same (15.16 mA cm−2). The power output was burn-in free, and did not exhibit a typical exponential performance loss. The PSCs with Zac-ZnO was burn-in free, but exhibited linear degradation over the entire period (Fig. 1(c)). After 1000 h, the devices with Zac-ZnO retained approximately 75% of their initial PCE values. The steep degradation of the FF is the main reason for the device degradation (Fig. S7). The PSCs with De-ZnO showed a clear burn-in degradation (∼200 h), followed by a linear decay period (Fig. 1(c)). The devices with De-ZnO maintained approximately 70% PCE compared with the initial PCE after 1000 h. The decline in both FF and Voc of the De-ZnO devices resulted in a faster loss of efficiency (Fig. S7). In particular, the Voc of the De-ZnO device was significantly reduced compared to that of the other devices, which may have originated from the degradation of De-ZnO itself.

Fig. 1(d) shows the photostability of PSCs with ZnO EELs under 1000 h of continuous 1 sun illumination with a controlled device temperature of 40 °C. The devices with ZnO NPs also showed the best stability among the solar cells with ZnO EELs. After 1000 h, the PCEs of the devices with ZnO NPs were reduced by 19% compared to the initial PCEs due to the Voc loss of 6% and FF drop of 12% (Fig. S7). The Jsc of the PSCs was maintained during photoaging (Fig. S7). The EQE spectra before and after photoaging were almost the same, and the difference in Jsc was 1 mA cm−2 (Fig. S8). The devices with Zac-ZnO showed a decrease in PCE of approximately 31% compared to the initial PCE after photoaging, and a degradation trend similar to those of PSCs with ZnO NPs. PSCs with De-ZnO were significantly degraded due to burn-in (∼200 h) and a steep FF drop. After burn-in, ongoing degradation was observed. The J–V curves during 85/85 aging and photoaging are shown in Fig. S9.
To verify the surface composition and chemical states of the ZnO NP, Zac-ZnO, and De-ZnO films before and after 85/85 aging and photoaging, X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) core level spectra of the O 1s were measured (Fig. 2). For XPS analysis, the ZnO films were prepared and encapsulated using the same method as that used for PSCs. Typically, the O 1s peak in ZnO can be consistently fitted by three nearly Gaussian peaks, centered at 530.15 ± 0.15, 531.25 ± 0.20 and 532.40 ± 0.15 eV. The low binding energy, ∼530.15 eV corresponds to O2− ions in the wurtzite structure of the hexagonal Zn2+ ion array of the ZnO single crystal, which indicates the Zn–O bonds of pure ZnO. The medium binding energy component (∼531.25 eV) indicates the O2− ions in the oxygen-deficient component (e.g., zinc hydroxide Zn(OH)2) associated with oxygen defects or oxygen vacancies, which are common native point defects. The high binding energy (∼532.40 eV) is attributed to the presence of loosely bound oxygen on the surface of the ZnO film, which belongs to a specific species (e.g., –CO, adsorbed H2O, or adsorbed O2).
The pristine ZnO NP, Zac-ZnO, and De-ZnO films showed three peaks in the XPS spectra (Fig. 2(a)–(c)). The pristine ZnO NPs showed the highest ratio (56.72%) of pure ZnO (gray) (Fig. 2(a) and (d)). The XPS spectra of Zn 2p showed a shift toward higher binding energies, resulting from increased oxidation (Fig. S10). The XPS spectra and pure ZnO ratio (gray) of the 85/85 aged and photoaged ZnO NP films were similar to those of pristine ZnO NPs, indicating the robustness of ZnO NPs (Fig. 2). In contrast, the pure ZnO ratios of pristine Zac-ZnO and De-ZnO were 47.78% and 49.36%, respectively, which were relatively lower than those of ZnO NP (Fig. 2(a) and (d)). The 85/85 aged and photoaged Zac-ZnO and De-ZnO films exhibited a decrease in the pure ZnO ratio and an increase in the oxygen defect ratio (beige). Interestingly, we noted that the ratios of the pure ZnO and oxygen defects in XPS spectra correlate with device degradation. From a structural point of view, after aging, the wurtzite structure of pristine ZnO can be destroyed to become an oxygen-deficient component. The component with loosely bound oxygen (e.g., –CO, adsorbed H2O or adsorbed O2) on the surface of fresh ZnO might also change to a non-stoichiometric component with O2− ions.
Generally, oxygen defects or vacancies play crucial roles in determining the physical and chemical properties of ZnO. The increase in the pure ZnO ratio and decrease in the oxygen defect ratio ameliorated the performance of the solar cells. We speculate that the pure ZnO ratio of pristine ZnO films significantly influences the stability and roles of ZnO EELs. In addition, 85/85 aging and photoaging lead to a reduction in the pure ZnO ratio and an increase in the oxygen defects of the Zac-ZnO and De-ZnO films, which decreased the collection efficiency at the ZnO/active layer interfaces.
UPS and UV-vis absorption spectroscopy were performed to evaluate the energy levels and band gaps of the ZnO EELs before and after 85/85 aging and photoaging (Fig. S2–S4 and Table S2). The details of the energy levels and discussion are provided on the 8th page of the ESI.
To verify the degree of disorder or defects in the ZnO films before and after 85/85 aging, and photoaging, the Urbach energy (EU) was calculated from the optical absorption spectra (Fig. 3). The absorption edge represents the Urbach tail and in semiconductors, it increases exponentially below Eg. These localized tail states originate from defects or energetic disorders, which can be estimated using EU.EU can be extracted from the optical absorption coefficient (α) in the vicinity of Eg:
where
α0 is a constant.


Fig. 3 shows the Urbach plots of the pristine and aged samples. The EU values of the pristine ZnO NP, Zac-ZnO, and De-ZnO films are 45, 99, and 107 meV, respectively, which are similar to previously reported values. The EU values of the 85/85-aged and photoaged ZnO films increased compared to those of the pristine samples. After 85/85 aging and photoaging, the EU value for the ZnO NP film is the smallest among those of the ZnO films, which indicates the lowest density of defect states after aging. Considering the De-ZnO film, the increase in EU is more significant than those of other ZnO films after 85/85 aging and photoaging. As shown in Fig. 3(c), the new localized states below Eg were observed between 2.0–3.2 eV in the Urbach plot of the De-ZnO film, which implies significant damage by light. Furthermore, the EU trends of the ZnO films are consistent with those of the PCE degradation of photovoltaics. These results also align with the increase in the oxygen defect as a non-stoichiometric component (beige region) in the XPS results of the ZnO films shown in Fig. 2(d)–(f). Therefore, thermal activity or photoaging induces an increase in EU of ZnO films, which is associated with an increase in oxygen defects. Furthermore, the increased oxygen defects impede efficient charge transport between ZnO and the active layer, thereby degrading the device performance.
The morphology of ZnO and PTB7-th:EH-IDTBR before and after 85/85 aging and photoaging were analyzed by atomic force microscopy (AFM). After 85/85 aging or photoaging, the morphologies of all ZnO films were aggregated (Fig. S11). No significant difference in the surface morphologies of the films based on the type of ZnO could be observed. The PTB7-th:EH-IDTBR blend films on ZnO NPs, Zac-ZnO, and De-ZnO showed similar surface morphologies, which indicates that the active morphology was not significantly influenced by the type of ZnO (Fig. S12). After 85/85 aging and photoaging, the PTB7-th:EH-IDTBR blend films also tended to aggregate, leading to the generation of the large pinholes in active layer (Fig. S13). The large pinholes induce the increase in leakage current, which indicates the decrease in the shunt resistance (Rsh) of the devices (Fig. 4(i)). The details of Rsh of PSCs are described below. Furthermore, to verify the crystallinity and change in the active layer after 85/85 aging, the active blend films were analyzed by grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS). The GIWAXS patterns of the active layers after 85/85 aging were similar to those in the pristine images (Fig. S14). The negligible change in the crystallinity of PTB7-th:EH-IDTBR before and after photoaging has been previously reported. The IDTBR with high crystallinity and planarity is able to form a stable and highly crystalline blend with donors such as P3HT and PTB7-th. The closely packed molecular lattice can limit the structural change and diffusion of oxygen, resulting in the high stability of the solar cells.
Analyzing the charge recombination and collection processes to discern the degradation of PSCs depending on the ZnO EELs is essential. The recombination mechanism can be obtained by measuring Voc as a function of light intensity. The trap-assisted recombination is identified by a slope of 2kT/q in the Vocvs. light intensity plot, whereas a slope in the order of kT/q substantiates the purely bimolecular recombination.Fig. 4(a) shows the Vocvs. light intensity relationship for pristine PSCs with ZnO NP, Zac-ZnO, and DeZnO. The Vocvs. light intensity graphs of the 85/85-aged and photoaged PSCs are provided in Fig. S15(a) and (b). In the pristine devices (Fig. 4(a)), all slopes were close to kT/q. As shown in Fig. 4(d), the slopes (1.25 and 1.20kT/q) of the 85/85-aged and photoaged solar cells with ZnO NPs are similar to that (1.15kT/q) of pristine devices. ZnO NPs are the most stable EEL and significantly contribute to the improvement in the stability of PSCs. However, the 85/85-aged and photoaged PSCs with Zac-ZnO and De-ZnO show a stronger dependence of Voc on light intensity, which indicates the generation of additional trap-assisted recombination after the aging process (Fig. 4(d)). These results imply that the density of the interfacial traps between the active layer and ZnO increases. These tendencies were consistent with those of PCEs in the 85/85-aged and photoaged devices with Zac-ZnO and De-ZnO. The 85/85-aged PSCs with Zac-ZnO show an atypical slope (0.94 kt/q) because of the significant degradation, whereas the J–V curves exhibit an S shape (Fig. S9(b)).
The PSCs with ZnO NPs exhibited a stable charge collection efficiency (CCE) after 85/85 aging and photoaging. Fig. 4(b) shows the plots of the net photocurrent (Jph = JL − JD) dependence on the effective applied voltage (Veff = V0 − V), where JL and JD are the current densities under illumination and in the dark, respectively, V is the applied voltage, and V0 is the compensation voltage at which Jph = 0. The Jphvs. Veff curves of the 85/85-aged and photoaged PSCs are provided in Fig. S15(c) and (d). The Jph/Jsat ratio represents the CCE. Under short-circuit conditions, the CCEs of the devices with pristine, 85/85 aged, and photoaged devices were extracted. The Veff values at Jsat of the pristine, 85/85 aged, and photoaged PSCs were 2, 3 and 4 V, respectively. As shown in Fig. 4(e), the devices with ZnO NPs show small CCE drops of 2% after 85/85 aging and 5% after photoaging. However, the PSCs with Zac-ZnO and De-ZnO exhibit significant drops in CCEs after 85/85 aging and photoaging, which suggests that trap-assisted recombination dominates and commonly results in reduced FF.
The photo-induced charge-carrier mobility (μ) of the pristine, 85/85 aging and photoaged PSCs was investigated by employing photo-induced charge-carrier extraction by linearly increasing the voltage (photo-CELIV). The photo-CELIV is the best technique to obtain an accurate μ because of the direct use of the optimized solar cells. The transient curves of the PSCs before and after 85/85 aging and photoaging PSC are shown in Fig. 4(c) and S16. The transient characteristics and μ of the devices with ZnO NPs exhibit negligible changes after 85/85 aging and photoaging (∼10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1), which indicates the robustness of the ZnO NPs (Fig. 4(f)). The pristine PSCs with Zac-ZnO and De-ZnO exhibited similar μ of ∼10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1. However, after 85/85 aging and photoaging, the transient curves of the devices were broader than those of the pristine devices, resulting in a shift in the extraction current peak maximum to a longer time. These shifts increase as μ decreases by approximately two orders of magnitude, and the dispersive transport was caused by an increase in the trap states. The maximum peak caused by photoexcitation was not observed in the 85/85 aged PSCs with Zac-ZnO (Fig. S16(a)), which might be due to the significant degradation of the devices (S-shaped curve in Fig. S9(b)).
To analyze the PSC degradation, the series resistance (Rs) and Rsh were extracted using dark J–V curves (Fig. S17(a)–(c)). After 85/85 aging and photoaging, among the solar cell parameters, the FFs of the devices predominantly degraded, resulting in PCE degradation. Generally, the FF can be expressed in terms of Rs and Rsh using the equivalent circuit model of solar cells.Rs is derived from the bulk resistance of the active layer and electrode, and the contact resistances of the interfaces, and Rsh is associated with the current leakage induced by the pinhole, edge, or traps of the cell.
The Rs of all PSCs after 85/85 aging and photoaging increased by approximately 10–20%, which contributed to FF degradation (Fig. S17). The reduction in Rsh mainly contributed to FF degradation after 85/85 aging and photoaging. The dark currents in the reverse bias regime (∼−3 V) of the 85/85 aged and photoaged PSCs were higher than those of the pristine devices (Fig. S17(a)–(c)); that is, 85/85 aging and photoaging lead to an increase in the leakage current. The leakage current flows through Rsh, which is parallel to the photocurrent source and diode. The magnitude of the leakage current is determined by the magnitude of Rsh. As shown Fig. 4(g), the Rsh of the pristine devices with ZnO NPs, Zac- and De-ZnO are 6.07, 0.43, and 5.93 MΩ, respectively; that is, the Rsh values are similar. After 85/85 aging, Rsh (610 kΩ) of PSCs with ZnO NPs was the highest among those (21.4 kΩ and 13.7 kΩ) of the devices with Zac-ZnO and De-ZnO. The Rsh (75.7 kΩ) of the photoaged devices with ZnO NPs was also the best among those (9.9 kΩ and 5.2 kΩ) of photoaged PSCs with Zac-ZnO and De-ZnO (Fig. 4(h) and (i)). These trends are consistent with those of PCE and FF degradation of the PSCs. As the 85/85 degradation and photodegradation progress, the leakage current through the shunt path in ZnOs leads to a dominant reduction in FF, resulting in PCE degradation of the solar cells. The AFM images of the active layer before and after aging are shown in Fig. S13.
Furthermore, Rsh is closely associated with the charge-carrier recombination in solar cells, and efficient charge transfer in the vertical direction reduces the probability of charge-carrier recombination. However, the parasitic leakage current induced by a low Rsh allows for parallel charge transport, resulting in an increase in the recombination in the devices.
In general, ZnO shows photocatalytic activity by absorbing the ultraviolet (UV) light below 380 nm. The absorbed UV light leads to the formation of the reactive oxygen species (e.g., hydroxyl radicals), which reacts at the EEL/active layer interface, causing the decomposition of the non-fullerene acceptor layer. Particularly, the interfacial decomposition is more severe in defect-rich ZnO than pure ZnO. In photovoltaic devices, the photocatalytic reaction increases the carrier recombination loss. However, UV light < 380 nm from the lamp used for the photostability test shows very small density (∼18 μW cm−1) as shown in Fig. S6. In this work, the intrinsic degradation of the EEL bulk and interfaces of EEL and active layer might play a greater role than the photocatalytic effect of ZnO.
In order to analyze the degradation of the active layer itself, the bulk quantum efficiency (BQE) of the PSCs with various ZnOs were calculated (Fig. S18). The BQE is independent of the contacts, buffer layers and their interfaces, and has been proposed to analyze the performance and aging of PSCs by calculating the photogeneration efficiency of the photoactive layer itself. The V80 was defined as the Vbulk required to achieve a BQE of 80%, where Vbulk is the same definition as Veff. A small V80 indicates efficient charge extraction from the active layer. After 85/85 aging, V80 of both devices with ZnO NPs and De-ZnO increased by 0.15 V, indicating that the degradation of both active layers is similar. The V80 of 85/85 aged PSCs with Zac-ZnO is the same as that of the pristine devices, which implies that the degradation of Zac-ZnO is more dominant than the active layer. In the case of photoaging, the degradation of the active layers is severe compared to those of the 85/85 aged devices. The photoaged PSCs shows different V80 depending on the kinds of ZnOs. The V80 of devices with ZnO NPs, Zac-ZnO and De-ZnO increased by 0.26, 0.46 and 0.69 V. It indicates that ZnO NPs have the least influence on the active layer, and De-ZnO accelerates the degradation of the photoactive layer, which might be related to the photocatalytic effect.
Finally, to confirm the reproducibility, ZnO EELs were applied to state-of-the-art PM6:Y6 solar cells. Fig. 5 shows the photo-stability of PM6:Y6-based PSCs aged for 100 h and the initial photovoltaic properties of PSCs with ZnO EELs. The stability of the devices was similar to the results of a previous report, which was poorer than that of PTB7-th:EH-IDTBR. However, the PM6:Y6 devices with ZnO NPs also exhibited the best stability among the PSCs with other ZnO EELs, which corresponds to the results of PTB7-th:EH-IDTBT. These results support the universality of our study for other active materials.

In summary, the 85/85 damp-heat stability and photostability of PSCs with ZnO EELs fabricated using different precursors and methodologies were investigated. Although the initial performances of the PSCs depending on the type of ZnO EELs were similar, the stabilities of the PSCs were completely different. The devices containing ZnO NPs with the lowest initial defects exhibited the best 85/85 damp-heat stability and photostability among the PSCs with ZnO EELs. The initial defects or energetic disorder of EELs had minimal influence on the initial PCE of PSCs. However, the initial defects of ZnO EELs can cause significant degradation of PSCs after aging. Our findings highlight the choice of an EEL with low defects or low energetic disorder to overcome the challenge of long-term PSCs stability, thereby paving the way toward the commercialization of PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We would like to acknowledge the financial support from the Nano/Material Technology Program (NRF-2020M3H4A3081813 and NRF-2020R1C1C1005609) through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta07770a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023