 DOI: 10.1039/C4CP03312D
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 23993-23999


Sanjay Kumar
Swami
*,

Neha
Chaturvedi
,

Anuj
Kumar
,

Nikhil
Chander
,

Viresh
Dutta
,

D. Kishore
Kumar
,

A.
Ivaturi
,

S.
Senthilarasu
 and 

Hari M.
Upadhyaya


Photovoltaic Laboratory, Centre for Energy Studies, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi-110016, India. E-mail: swami.phy@gmail.com; Fax: +91-11-2659-1261; Tel: +91-11-2659-6489

Energy Conversion Laboratory (ECL), Institute of Mechanical Process and Energy Engineering (IMPEE), School of Engineering and Physical Sciences, Heriot-Watt University, Riccarton, Edinburgh EH14 4AS, UK

Environment and Sustainability Institute (ESI), University of Exeter, Penryn, Cornwall, TR10 9EZ, UK

Received
25th July 2014
, Accepted 29th September 2014
First published on 6th October 2014
Stoichiometric thin films of Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) were deposited by the spray technique on a FTO coated glass substrate, with post-annealing in a H2S environment to improve the film properties. CZTS films were used as a counter electrode (CE) in Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells (DSCs) with N719 dye and an iodine electrolyte. The DSC of 0.25 cm2 area using a CE of CZTS film annealed in a H2S environment under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) exhibited a short circuit current density (JSC) = 18.63 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (VOC) = 0.65 V and a fill factor (FF) = 0.53, resulting in an overall power conversion efficiency (PCE) = 6.4%. While the DSC using as deposited CZTS film as a CE showed the PCE = 3.7% with JSC = 13.38 mA cm−2, VOC = 0.57 V and FF = 0.48. Thus, the spray deposited CZTS films can play an important role as a CE in the large area DSC fabrication.

Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells (DSCs) can play an important role in the field of solar photovoltaics due to their low cost and relatively high light to energy conversion efficiency. A combination of a mesoporous photoanode, a sensitizer dye, an electrolyte composed of a redox couple and a counter electrode (CE) determines the device performance both in terms of efficiency as well as cost. The photoexcited electrons injected into the conduction band of the TiO2 photoanode from the excited state of the sensitizer dye cause an oxidation reaction of the redox couple (I−/I3−) at the CE: I3− + 2e− = I−. The reduction reaction takes care of the photogenerated holes and causes dye regeneration to continue the process. Thus an ideal CE should have high electro-catalytic activity for the redox couple in the electrolyte and high stability during the solar cell operation. A thin layer of platinum (Pt) on FTO coated glass is commonly used as the CE in DSCs. The high cost, stability under field conditions and low abundance of Pt are important considerations in the commercial development of DSCs. Efforts are being made to replace Pt with earth abundance and cheap materials such as carbon based materials, conjugated polymeric materials, cobalt sulphide and kesterite.

Kesterite (Cu2ZnSnS4) is a quaternary chalcogenide p-type semiconductor with a direct band gap of 1.45 eV. CZTS contains the combination of non-toxic, cheap and earth abundant materials, viz. Cu, Zn, Sn and S. CZTS thin films have been prepared by various methods such as spray, thermal evaporation and spin for solar cell applications. CZTS nanoparticles synthesized by a solution based method spin coated on FTO and used as the CE in DSCs yielded a power conversion efficiency (PCE) ∼ 7.3%. One step synthesized CZTS nanoparticles used as a CE showed a PCE of ∼3.85%. CZTS nanoparticles synthesized by a solvothermal method were used as the CE to obtain PCE ∼ 6.98%. A spin coating method was used to make a CZTS CE giving PCE ∼ 5.63%. The sputtering technique was used to make a CZTS CE for DSCs and yielded PCE ∼ 3.65%. Graphene + CZTS film also used as the CE in a DSC showed PCE ∼ 7.81%. The CE using CZTSe nanoparticles synthesized by the ligand exchange method resulted in DSC PCE ∼ 7.06%.
This paper reports on the direct formation of CZTS film by a low cost spray technique followed by annealing in a H2S environment. As deposited and annealed CZTS films have been used as the CEs in DSCs. Annealed CZTS film shows a better catalytic behavior than as deposited CZTS film. A PCE ∼ 6.4% with annealed CZTS CE film proves the effectiveness of the spray technique with inherent advantages of less deposition time, easy thickness control, large area deposition and cost effectiveness.

The set-up for spray deposition is given in detail in our earlier publication. Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) thin films were spray deposited on FTO coated glass substrates by taking 0.02 M cuprous chloride, 0.0125 M zinc chloride, 0.01 M stannous chloride and 0.15 M thiourea precursors dissolved in deionized water. Nitrogen (N2) was used as the carrier gas with 1.8 kgf cm−2 pressure and the solution flow rate was maintained at 1 ml min−1 during the process. The FTO coated glass substrates were maintained at 350 °C during deposition. In order to sulphurise the spray deposited CZTS thin films, the samples were introduced into a N2 + H2S (5%) environment inside a tubular furnace. The flow rate of the reactive gas was kept constant to 10 sccm. The temperature of the furnace was increased from room temperature to 300 °C at a step size of 10 °C min−1, from 300 °C to 500 °C at 2 °C min−1 and then maintained at 500 °C for one hour. The reactive gas was replaced with nitrogen and the furnace was left to cool down to room temperature. As deposited sprayed CZTS film is named CZTS I and sprayed CZTS film annealed in a N2 + H2S (5%) environment at 500 °C for one hour is named CZTS II.

The commercially available TiO2 paste (DSL 18NR-T, Dyesol) as the transparent layer (9 μm) and DSL 18NR-AO, Dyesol as the scattering layer (6 μm) were used to prepare mesoporous nano-crystalline TiO2 photoanodes on FTO coated float glass substrates (TEC-8, Pilkington) pretreated with 40 mM aqueous TiCl4 solution at 80 °C for 30 min. The TiO2 photoanodes were made by the screen printing method. After screen printing the TiO2 photoanode was annealed with a ramping program on a hot plate. TiO2 photoanodes were further treated with 40 mM TiCl4 solution as described above, rinsed with water and annealed at 450 °C for 30 min. Thus prepared TiO2 photoanodes were soaked in 0.5 mM ethanolic solutions of N719 dye (Dyesol) for 18–20 h. A reference Pt CE was deposited on FTO coated glass by covering it with a drop of H2PtCl6 solution (2 mg ml−1 in ethanol) followed by annealing at 450 °C for 15 min. Pt film and spray deposited CZTS films with and without sulfurization were used as the CEs in DSCs. The DSC was assembled by making a sandwich structure of the photoanode and the counter electrode, sealing it with 25 μm thick surlyn (Solaronix SA) which also acts as a spacer. The electrolyte consisting of 0.6 M 1,3-dimethylimadazolium iodide, 0.1 M lithium iodide, 0.05 M iodine, 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) and 0.6 M benzmethyl imidazolium iodide in acetonitrile:valeronitrile (85:15) was injected through a previously drilled hole in the counter electrode. After the electrolyte injection the hole was sealed with a cover glass slide and surlyn. A mask of 0.25 cm2 area was used on the photoelectrode for specifying the solar cell area.
The crystal structure of CZTS films was analyzed using an X-ray diffractometer (Phillips X'PERT PRO, using Cu Kα line λ = 1.5405 Å). Chemical composition of the film was analyzed using Zeiss EVO-50 having the EDX analysis instrument. A high resolution scanning electron microscope (Dual beam FEI Quanta 3D Field emission gun SEM) was used for studying the surface morphology and cross-section of CZTS layers. To avoid charging during SEM imaging, a thin layer of gold was sputter coated on the samples. Optical characterization was done using a Perkin Elmer Lambda 1050 UV-vis-NIR spectrophotometer. The Raman spectrum was recorded at room temperature using a Renishaw InVia Raman microscope with the excitation by 514.5 nm photons of 50 mW Argon ion laser from Spectra Physics. Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) was done by Princeton Applied Research (PAR) model no. 273A-2 with a three electrode system in an acetonitrile solution containing 0.1 M LiClO4, 10 mM LiI and 1 mM I2 at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. Ag/Ag+ was used as the reference electrode and Pt wire as the CE. Impedance measurement was done using an Autolab model no. PGSTAT 128N in the frequency range from 100 mHz to 1 MHz with a perturbation of 10 mV. The J–V characteristics were measured under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) using Oriel Sol 3A, a class AAA solar simulator equipped with a Keithley 2440 source meter. The simulator was calibrated using an NREL certified Si solar cell. Incident Photon to Electron Conversion Efficiency (IPCE) spectra at room temperature were recorded using a SpeQuest quantum efficiency measurement system from Rera solutions, the Netherlands. The JSC values for AM1.5 spectrum were obtained from the IPCE spectrum using a built in function in the measurement system.

The XRD patterns of spray deposited CZTS films are shown in Fig. 1. The XRD peaks of CZTS II film at 2θ = 28.5, 32.9, 47.3, 56.1 and 76.1° can be attributed to the (112), (200), (220), (312) and (332) planes, respectively. This shows a single phase formation of CZTS film with no secondary phases. CZTS I film expectedly shows for a lower peak intensity in comparison to the CZTS II film, which shows an enhancement in the crystallinity of CZTS II film. CZTS I film also shows a higher FWHM at 2θ = 28.5° in comparison to that for CZTS II film. All diffraction peaks for both the CZTS films correspond to the tetragonal CZTS structure (JCPDS card no. 26-0575). The lattice parameters of CZTS II film are found to be a = 0.5426 nm, c = 1.0828 nm which are close to the reported values. Since the XRD pattern may not distinguish between the different phases, the Raman study has been done to identify the phases present in the films. Indeed the Raman analysis (Fig. 2) also shows that there is no secondary phases present in the CZTS films. The peak at 336 cm−1 for CZTS I and CZTS II films in the Raman spectra is the main peak attributed to pure kesterite film. Therefore, it can be confirmed that there are no other phases present in the as-deposited and annealed CZTS films.


The SEM micrographs of CZTS I and CZTS II films are shown in Fig. 3. Well distributed CZTS particles can be clearly seen in CZTS II film (Fig. 3b), which shows a larger particle size in compare to the CZTS I film (Fig. 3a). CZTS I film also shows particle agglomeration. The cross sectional SEM micrographs of CZTS I and CZTS II films are shown in Fig. 3c and d, respectively. Continuous nanoflakes can be seen in both CZTS I and CZTS II films in the form of needle like structures. CZTS II films which are annealed in N2 + H2S (5%) atmosphere have shown an improvement in the crystallinity with enhancement in the number of nanoflakes, which should play a role in the enhancement of the charge extraction from the active layer leading to higher current densities comparable to a Pt CE. The annealing has also helped in improving the crystallinity of the FTO layer underneath further helping in charge transport.


The elemental composition of the CZTS film is determined by EDX analysis (Table 1). There is a considerable change in the stoichiometry of the CZTS film after sulphurisation. The as-deposited film is Cu rich, Zn rich and S deficient. Annealing results in stoichiometric CZTS film formation. The sulphur to metal ratio (S/metals) of CZTS film increases from 0.70 to 0.98 after sulphurisation.

Elements (atomic %)
CZTS I
CZTS II
Cu
28.07
23.30
Zn
15.76
14.21
Sn
14.73
12.89
S
41.44
49.60
Zn/Sn
1.06
1.10
S/metal
0.70
0.98
Cu/(Zn + Sn)
0.92
0.85


Fig. 4a shows the transmission spectra of CZTS I and CZTS II films. It can be seen from Fig. 4a that there is a slight increase in the transmission of the CZTS film after sulphurisation. It may be possibly due to the evaporation of the elements during annealing. The Tauc-plots ((αhν)2vs. hν, where α is the absorption coefficient and hν is the photon energy) of the films are shown in Fig. 4b. The optical band gap for CZTS II film is found to be 1.45 eV, which perfectly matches with the reported value for stoichiometric CZTS film.


Having established the improvement in the structural and optical properties of CZTS films due to the sulphurisation treatment, the properties required for suitability of the CZTS films as a CE are studied. CV characterization was done to establish the electro-catalytic action of CZTS films for the reduction of triiodide (Fig. 5). Fig. 5a shows the comparison of the cathodic current density of CZTS I and CZTS II films. The CZTS II film shows a higher cathodic current which demonstrates a much faster I−/I3− reaction rate. The cathodic peak potential of CZTS II film is more positive than that of the CZTS I film, which indicates that the over potential for reduction of I3− to I− of the CZTS II film is much smaller than the CZTS I film. The 100 cycle CV test (Fig. 5b) was carried out consecutively for CZTS II film, and CV does not show any change and exhibits a stable peak at different current densities. This indicates that CZTS II film does not only possesses excellent electrochemical stability, but also it is attached firmly and uniformly onto the FTO coated glass substrate. Fig. 5c shows the CVs of CZTS II film on the I−/I3− system with different scan rates (100, 50, 25, 10 mV s−1). The cathodic peak current density (ipc) and anodic peak current density (ipa) gradually and regularly shift to negative and positive directions with increasing scan rates. It also shows a very good linear relationship between the square root of the scan rate and peak current density.



Fig. 6a shows the J–V curve of DSCs with CZTS I, CZTS II and Pt film used as the CEs and the device parameters are given in Table 2. CZTS II film shows a good catalytic behavior resulting in the DSC with a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 18.63 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.65 V, a fill factor (FF) of 0.53 and an overall PCE of 6.4%. On the other hand, the CZTS I film shows a lower current density due to a lower catalytic behavior. A DSC with the CZTS I CE exhibits a JSC of 13.38 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.57 V and a FF of 0.48 with a PCE of 3.7%. DSC with Pt yields a JSC of 18.18 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.62 V and a FF of 0.74 with a PCE of 8.3%. The increase in the VOC of the CZTS II samples based devices can be attributed to the annealing under N2 + H2S (5%) treatment which has resulted in an increase in the crystallinity as evident from the XRD and SEM data. This may have helped passivate the defects on the surface leading to reduction in the recombination losses in the device, which is also confirmed by the lifetime measurements where a CZTS II CE based DSC has exhibited a higher lifetime. A DSC with the CZTS II CE shows the higher JSC and VOC due to the higher cathodic current, more positive reduction potential and lower RCT (from CE–CE impedance analysis discussed later).

Counter electrode

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF

η (%)

J
SC value from IPCE (mA cm−2)
CZTS I
13.38
0.57
0.48
3.7
13.50
CZTS II
18.63
0.65
0.53
6.4
18.23
Pt
18.18
0.62
0.74
8.3
17.92
The JSC value of the CZTS II device is enhanced which may be due to the increased catalytic behavior and increased charge collection. These observed effects are validated from the IPCE spectra. The IPCE spectra (in the range of 400–800 nm) of DSCs fabricated with CZTS I, CZTS II and Pt CEs are shown in Fig. 6b. The measured JSC values from the J–V curve and the values calculated from IPCE spectra are tabulated in Table 2, both values are close to each other and follow the trend.
The IPCE spectra show lower response for CZTS I resulting in a lower JSC value and higher response for CZTS II resulting in a higher JSC value. This supports the enhanced light harvesting associated with the CZTS II CEs as compared to both Pt and CZTS I CE. It is clear that though the sulphurisation treatment helps the CZTS layer in showing a better CE characteristics in terms of JSC and VOC values a reduced FF causes a poorer efficiency. Doing suitable changes in the film resistivity should help overcome this deficiency causing the CZTS film to perform comparable to or better than the Pt film.

The EIS measurements have been carried out to elucidate the electrochemical behavior of CEs. EIS measurements are performed at zero bias on the symmetrical cell structure: CE/electrolyte/CE. The circuit parameters given in the model (Fig. 7a) are used to fit the data. The fitted values are given in Table 3. The Nyquist plots of CZTS I and CZTS II film as well as Pt are shown in Fig. 7b. Series resistance RS represents the intercept on the real axis at high frequency. Charge transfer resistance RCT and the constant phase element (CPE) due to the electrolyte/CE interfaces are represented by the semicircle in the high frequency range, while the semicircle at low frequency represents the Warburg impedance (W) corresponding to diffusion resistance of the triiodide/iodide redox electrolyte. It is generally recognized that a smaller RCT represents a higher electro-catalytic activity towards the redox electrolyte. CZTS I film exhibits a higher RCT, in confirmation with its poor catalytic behavior, as seen earlier in the CV study and a low efficiency of a DSC. Lower RCT and high CPE of CZTS II indicate a good catalytic activity in conformity with other studies such as CV and J–V studies. RCT of CZTS II film is in fact less than that for the Pt CE, showing the superior catalytic activity. However RS of the Pt CE is less which is expected due to the relatively high conductivity of Pt in comparison to the CZTS I and CZTS II films.

Counter electrode

R
S (Ω cm2)

R
CT (Ω cm2)
CPE-T (μF cm−2)
CZTS I
18.0
8.5
3.49
CZTS II
15.2
1.8
12.29
Pt
13.6
6.5
5.29

Different techniques can be used to calculate the electron lifetime such as EIS, Intensity Modulated Voltage Spectroscopy/Intensity Modulated Photocurrent Spectroscopy, and Transient Absorption Spectroscopy. Here we are using the EIS Bode plot to calculate the lifetime (τOC) under VOC conditions. The Bode diagram represents different features of the electrochemical phenomena: counter electrode/electrolyte interfaces (high frequency), TCO/TiO2/dye/electrolyte interfaces (middle frequency) and the diffusion phenomenon in the electrolyte (low frequency), respectively. Three characteristic peaks are present in the Bode diagram (phase v/s frequency) of the complete DSC.

Using fm, the characteristic frequency of the phase peak related to the TCO/TiO2/dye/electrolyte interfaces, one can obtain τOC from the relation:
(1)
higher
τOC means a lower recombination probability and a better carrier collection in the DSC.


Fig. 7c represents the EIS Bode spectra of the complete DSCs with CZTS I, CZTS II and Pt CEs. All measurements were performed under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) and open circuit voltage conditions. The AC sinusoidal signal of 10 mV was applied during the measurements.
The calculated values of the life time (τOC) from eqn (1) for CZTS I, CZTS II and Pt CEs based DSCs are 0.8 ms, 4.9 ms and 4.7 ms, respectively.
There is a marked improvement in the lifetime from pristine CZTS I samples to CZTS II samples after annealing treatment. A DSC based on the CZTS II CE shows almost the same lifetime as that of the Pt CE based DSC. Longer the lifetime, better is the carrier collection efficiency of solar cells. Comparable life times of CZTS II and Pt CEs show that the catalytic behavior of both in an iodine based electrolyte is similar. The reported improvements in the film properties of CZTS II like catalytic behavior (from CV analysis) and charge transfer resistance (from CE–CE impedance analysis) result in the lifetime improvement to match the Pt CE value. On the other hand, poorer film properties result in a lower lifetime for the CZTS I CE.
The shift in the Bode plot (Fig. 7c) at mid frequency for the CZTS II CE is also due to the higher carrier collection efficiency compared to that for the CZTS I CE. This is also the reason CZTS II shows mid frequency response the same as the Pt CE.
Hence one can say that there is a marked improvement in the lifetime from pristine CZTS I samples to CZTS II samples after annealing treatment. A DSC based on the CZTS II CE shows almost the same lifetime as that of a Pt CE based DSC, which is quite significant.

We have successfully prepared stoichiometric CZTS film by the spray technique on an FTO coated glass substrate by carrying out the post-annealing treatment in a N2 + H2S (5%) environment for one hour. The sulphurised CZTS CE shows a good catalytic behavior with a 6.4% DSC efficiency for 0.25 cm2 effective cell area. The JSC and VOC values for a DSC obtained by using a sulphurised CZTS CE are higher than that for the Pt CE. The continuous growth of nanoflakes in the CZTS II film plays an important role in the enhancement of charge extraction from the active layer of the device resulting in comparable JSC to that observed with the Pt CE.

In view of the spray deposited CZTS showing good electrochemical behavior, excellent stability, and the use of cheap, earth abundant and nontoxic materials, the technique can play an important role in the fabrication of a large area DSC, given the other advantages offered by spray deposition.

The work presented in this paper was done under the Department of Science and Technology (DST)–Research Council UK (RCUK) project “Advancing the efficiency and production potential of excitonic solar cells”. Sanjay Kumar Swami acknowledges Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE), New Delhi, India, for providing the financial assistantship. Mr Firoz Alam is also thanked for helping with initial impedance measurements.


This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014