 DOI: 10.1039/C3CP52075G
(Communication)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 13801-13804

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Guiqiang
Wang
* and 

Shuping
Zhuo


School of Chemical Engineering, Shandong University of Technology, Zibo, China. E-mail: wgqiang123@163.com; Fax: +86-533-2781664; Tel: +86-533-2781664

Received
16th May 2013
, Accepted 26th June 2013
First published on 28th June 2013
Hierarchical micro/nano-structured cobalt sulfide spindles are synthesized via a hydrothermal method and investigated as counter electrodes for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs). It is demonstrated that DSCs with hierarchical cobalt sulfide spindle electrodes show an excellent photovoltaic performance competing with that of a device with a Pt counter electrode.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) have attracted considerable attention in the past two decades and are anticipated to be a potential alternative to Si-based solar cells due to their easy fabrication, relatively high conversion efficiency and low cost. A typical DSC consists of a dye-sensitized semiconductor photoanode, a counter electrode and an electrolyte containing an iodide (I−)/triiodide (I3−) redox couple. The function of the counter electrode is to transfer electrons arriving from the external circuit back into the redox system and to catalyze the reduction of I3−. A Pt film deposited on a conductive substrate is still the most effective counter electrode of DSCs because of its superior electrocatalytic activity and chemical stability. However, Pt is a noble metal with low abundance and high cost. Therefore, it is highly desirable to develop a Pt-free and low-cost counter electrode with a high electrocatalytic activity, especially for mass production of DSCs in the future.

In previous studies, several low-cost materials, including carbonaceous materials and conducting polymers, have been used to prepare Pt-free counter electrodes for DSCs. More recently, inorganic compounds such as transition-metal oxides, nitrides, phosphides, carbides and sulfides have been introduced into DSCs as the catalytic materials in the counter electrode due to their unique characteristics such as material diversity, simple fabrication, low cost and high catalytic activity. Among them, cobalt sulfide is one of the most efficient substances. In 2009, Wang et al. introduced CoS into DSCs as a novel counter electrode catalyst. The results of electrochemical studies indicated that CoS is an efficient counter electrode material and has remarkable stability. Kung's group prepared CoS nanorod array electrodes by depositing Co3O4 acicular nanorod arrays on F-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass and converting Co3O4 to CoS via a chemical bath process. The DSC with CoS nanorod array counter electrodes achieved a conversion efficiency of 7.67%, which is nearly the same as that of a Pt-based cell and higher than that of the device with a CoS film electrode. This result demonstrates that the electrocatalytic performance of cobalt sulfide electrodes could be further improved by tuning the nanostructure of cobalt sulfide. The hierarchical micro/nano-structured materials have a wealth of optimized properties, such as a high surface/volume ratio, high porosity and a highly accessible inner surface. These properties are beneficial to improve the filling and diffusion of the electrolyte and increase the number of catalytically active sites. Therefore, it is reasonably expected that the cobalt sulfide counter electrode with hierarchical micro/nano-structured cobalt sulfide spindles can be an interesting candidate for further enhancing the photovoltaic performance of DSCs. In this study, hierarchical micro/nano-structured cobalt sulfide spindles were prepared by a facile hydrothermal process and deposited on FTO glass as counter electrodes for DSCs. The counter electrodes based on hierarchical micro/nano-structured cobalt sulfide spindles show an excellent electrocatalytic performance for the reduction of I3−, and demonstrate a photovoltaic performance comparable to that of the Pt electrode.
Hierarchical cobalt sulfide spindles are synthesized by a hydrothermal process at 195 °C, in which Co(CH3COO)2·4H2O and thiourea are used as precursors. The energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopic analysis reveals the existence of cobalt and sulfur atoms in the as-prepared product, and the atomic ratio of cobalt and sulfur elements is 1:1.18 (Fig. S1, see ESI). The X-ray diffraction pattern of the as-prepared cobalt sulfide spindles (Fig. S2, see ESI) shows that all diffraction peaks can be indexed to the diffraction data of CoS, CoS2 and Co9S8. Wang et al. reported that the cobalt sulfides prepared by an ethanol solvothermal method were a mixed phase of CoS and Co9S8. Huang et al. found that the cobalt sulfides prepared by a solvothermal route consisted of CoS, CoS2 and Co9S8. They suggested that it was quite difficult to obtain the pure phase of cobalt sulfides because of the nonstoichiometry of cobalt chalcogenides. Therefore, it is reasonable that the cobalt sulfides obtained in this work are mixed phase. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy data (Fig. S3, see ESI) further confirm the formation of cobalt sulfides as revealed by the EDX results. The morphology of the as-prepared cobalt sulfide sample was investigated using SEM and TEM. The typical SEM (Fig. 1a) and TEM (Fig. 1b) images at low magnification show that cobalt sulfide has the form of a hierarchical micro/nano-structured spindle. The average size of a cobalt sulfide spindle is observed to be 1.5 μm along its major axis and 300 nm along its minor axis, and the length-to-diameter ratio is 5:1. From a high magnification TEM image (Fig. 1c), it can be seen that the as-prepared cobalt sulfide spindles are made up of packed nanoparticles with the size of around 4 nm. These nanoparticles interconnect and form mesopores inside the spindle aggregates. Such unique structure of cobalt sulfide spindles is beneficial to the electrolyte diffusion and electrocatalytic activity of the counter electrode.
Nitrogen adsorption studies were carried out to further investigate the porosity of as-prepared hierarchical cobalt sulfide spindles. Fig. 2 shows the nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherm of cobalt sulfide spindles along with BJH (Barrett–Joyner–Halenda) pore size distribution derived from the adsorption branch of the isotherm. The as-prepared cobalt sulfide spindles possess a classical type IV isotherm with a H3 type hysteresis loop, revealing that the as-prepared cobalt sulfide spindles are a type of mesoporous material. The lack of a distinct plateau at high relative pressure is indicative of slit shaped pores in an open pore system. The mesopore distribution of cobalt sulfide spindles (shown in the inset of Fig. 2) is wider, ranging from 2 to 40 nm, leading to a large surface area (144.7 m2 g−1) and pore volume (0.29 cm3 g−1) (Table S1, see ESI). Usually, the size of I3− is 0.3 nm in diameter and 0.6 nm in length. Therefore, the mesopore structure of hierarchical cobalt sulfide spindles may be of great advantage to the diffusion and transport of the I−/I3− redox couple in DSC devices to enhance the overall conversion efficiency.
Cobalt sulfide spindle electrodes were prepared by spraying cobalt sulfide dispersion on precleaned FTO glass (see ESI). The thickness of the cobalt sulfide electrodes is about 1.5 μm (Fig. S4, see ESI). The photovoltaic performance of DSCs with counter electrodes based on the as-prepared hierarchical cobalt sulfide spindles was measured under AM 1.5 solar simulator illumination (100 mW cm−2). Fig. 3 shows the photocurrent density–voltage curves of DSCs with hierarchical cobalt sulfide spindle, Pt and bare FTO glass counter electrodes, respectively. The detailed photovoltaic parameters, such as open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and conversion efficiency (η), are summarized in Table 1. It can be seen that the DSC using bare FTO glass as the counter electrode performs very poorly, with the photovoltaic parameters being Jsc 3.94 mA cm−2, Voc 0.491 V, FF 0.09 and η 0.17%, obviously due to the poor electrocatalytic activity of the FTO glass for I3− reduction. When the hierarchal micro/nano-structured cobalt sulfide spindle is used as the counter electrode, the DSC has the following photovoltaic parameters: Voc = 0.678 V, Jsc = 15.23 mA cm−2, FF = 0.64, and η = 6.62%. The photovoltaic parameters (Voc, Jsc, FF and η) of the cell with the Pt counter electrode are 0.695 V, 15.78 mA cm−2, 0.64 and 7.02%, respectively. Clearly, the conversion efficiency of DSCs with hierarchical cobalt sulfide spindle electrodes is very close to that of DSCs with Pt electrodes.
Counter electrode

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF

η (%)

R
s (Ω)

R
ct (Ω cm2)
FTO glass
0.491
3.94
0.09
0.17
15.66
—
CoS spindle
0.678
15.23
0.64
6.62
15.87
0.89
Pt
0.695
15.78
0.64
7.02
15.47
0.92
DSCs utilize the I−/I3− redox couple as the mediator which shuttles the charges between the sites of dye regeneration on the photoanode and the counter electrode. During the mediator regenerative cycle, the oxidized species (I3−) must be reduced to I− at the minimum energy loss on the counter electrode. Therefore, it is well accepted that the counter electrode should have an excellent electrocatalytic activity for I3− reduction for a well-operating DSC. To better understand the electrocatalytic activity of the hierarchical cobalt sulfide spindle electrodes, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analysis was carried out in a symmetric thin-layer cell consisting of two identical electrodes (Fig. S5, see ESI). The electrolyte used for the symmetric thin-layer cells is the same as that used for DSCs. Fig. 4 shows the Nyquist plots obtained in the dark with no bias potential; the inset shows the equivalent circuit model used for the impedance spectrum. As shown in Fig. 4, there are two semicircles in Nyquist plots of symmetric thin-layer cells. The semicircle in the high frequency region corresponds to the charge-transfer process occurring at the interface of the electrode and the electrolyte, and the one in the low frequency region represents the Nernst diffusion impedance (ZN) of the I−/I3− redox couple in the electrolyte. The charge-transfer resistance (Rct) is an index of electrocatalytic activity of the electrode, which can be directly estimated from the real impedance component (Z′) of the high-frequency semicircle. The ohmic series resistance (Rs) can be determined from the intersection point of the abscissa axis of the Nyquist plot on the high frequency side where the phase is zero. Rct and Rs are summarized in Table 1. Obviously, the Rct of the bare FTO glass is very high, indicating a very poor electrocatalytic activity. In the case of the hierarchical cobalt sulfide spindle electrodes, Rct decreases dramatically to 0.89 Ω cm2, which is very close to, or even lower than, that of the Pt electrode (0.92 Ω cm2), indicating that the hierarchical cobalt sulfide spindle electrodes have similar or even slightly better electrocatalytic activity than Pt electrodes. Such outstanding performance of cobalt sulfide electrodes can be attributed to the high surface area cobalt sulfide spindles with more interfacial active sites for I−/I3− redox reaction, the unique hierarchical micro/nano structure with an intimate contact for effective electron transfer, and the mesoporous structure with wide pore size distribution for electrolyte diffusion. The values of Rs for the electrodes are nearly the same because all the electrodes are prepared on the same FTO glass substrate.
To further confirm the electrocatalytic activity of hierarchical cobalt sulfide spindle electrodes, Tafel polarization curves are also measured using the symmetric cells similar to those used in EIS analysis. The exchange current density (Jo), which is directly related to the electrocatalytic ability of an electrode, can be determined from the extrapolated intercepts of the anodic and cathodic branches of the corresponding Tafel curves.Fig. 5 indicates that the exchange current density of hierarchical cobalt sulfide spindle electrodes (1.02 mA cm−2) is slightly higher than that of Pt electrodes (0.98 mA cm−2), which is in good agreement with the results of EIS measurements.
For comparison, cobalt sulfide electrodes prepared by cathodic electrodeposition (see ESI) are also used as counter electrodes for DSCs. The SEM image of cathodic deposited electrodes (Fig. S6, see ESI) shows a porous structure. Fig. S7 (see ESI) clearly shows that the DSCs with cobalt sulfide spindle electrodes perform better than the cells with porous cobalt sulfide electrodes. This result indicates that the cobalt sulfide spindle electrodes obtained in this study are more effective than the porous cobalt sulfide electrodes obtained under the same experimental conditions.

In summary, hierarchical micro/nano-structured cobalt sulfide spindles were prepared by a facile hydrothermal process and deposited on FTO glass as counter electrodes for DSCs. The hierarchical structure is of great advantage to electrolyte diffusion and electron transfer, while nanoscale particles provide abundant electrocatalytically active sites. A power conversion efficiency of 6.62% is achieved for DSCs with counter electrodes based on hierarchical micro/nano-structured cobalt sulfide spindles, and this efficiency is very close to that of the cells with Pt counter electrodes. The facile procedure, low cost and excellent photovoltaic performance of the hierarchical micro/nano-structured cobalt sulfide spindles make them promising alternative counter electrodes for future large-scale fabrication of DSCs.


This research was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (21273137) and Natural Science foundation of Shandong Province (ZR2010BM038).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details of preparation, XPS, XRD, EDX spectroscopy, SEM, the electrochemical cell used for EIS measurements and additional experimental data. See DOI: 10.1039/c3cp52075g
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2013