 DOI: 10.1039/C5CE02279G
(Paper)
CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 1070-1077


Ye
Feng
,

Tsz-Ki
Lau
,

Guanming
Cheng
,

Ling
Yin
,

Zhaohui
Li
,

Hailin
Luo
,

Zhuang
Liu
,

Xinhui
Lu
*,

Chunlei
Yang
* and 

Xudong
Xiao
*

Center for Photovoltaic Solar Energy, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, 518055, China. E-mail: cl.yang@siat.ac.cn

Department of Physics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, China. E-mail: xhlu@cuhk.edu.hk; xdxiao@phy.cuhk.edu.hk

Received
23rd November 2015
, Accepted 5th January 2016
First published on 6th January 2016
A novel low-temperature Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) formation path using co-sputtered SnS2–ZnS–Cu precursors was employed for CZTS solar cell fabrication, which gave rise to a cell with a power conversion efficiency of 8.58%, a big step forward from the previous record of 6.77% reported by Katagiri et al. for this kind of solar cell. This method consists of a low-temperature annealing stage for CZTS phase formation followed by a short high-temperature annealing stage for grain growth and secondary phase removal. The employment of SnS2 as a precursor causes the CZTS phase to readily form at low temperature when SnS2 has not dramatically decomposed into volatile SnS. The two-stage process wisely separates the phase formation and crystal coalescence, which makes the fabrication of CZTS films more controllable. Furthermore, the demonstration of the low-temperature formation path provides new opportunities to fabricate highly efficient, cost-effective and environmentally friendly CZTS solar cells on low-weight and flexible substrates such as polyimides.

Kesterite Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) thin film solar cells have attracted considerable interest in the past decade and have shown potential to replace their well-developed predecessor the Cu(In,Ga)Se2 solar cell with earth-abundant and environmentally friendly raw materials. Many fabrication processes have been developed for CZTS solar cells, including vacuum processes such as co-evaporation, sputtering/sulfurization or selenization and non-vacuum processes such as electroplating, sol–gel, nanocrystal, spray-printing and solution-based methods. Although so far the most successful fabrication process for CZTS solar cells is the hydrazine solution method which leads to a record power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 12.6%, it incorporates the element selenium which deviates the optical bandgap from the ideal value of 1.5 eV (ref. 24, 25) and raises cost and abundance concerns. Note that they are usually called Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe) to distinguish them from Se-free CZTS absorbers. Until now, the best performing Se-free CZTS cells have been produced by vacuum processes. In 2013, Shin et al. reported a record CZTS device fabricated by co-evaporation with a PCE of 8.4%. In addition, Katagiri et al. achieved a record cell with a PCE of 6.77% through sputtering/sulfurization in 2008.

In spite of the progress in CZTS device fabrication techniques, there emerged several challenges that impede further improvements in device performance. For most reported studies on highly efficient devices, CZTS was formed at annealing temperatures higher than 500 °C. At such temperatures, SnS becomes volatile and is constantly discharged into the environment. This will push the CZTS formation reaction backwards, decomposing CZTS into binary secondary phases. Providing a high vapor pressure of S2 and SnS or increasing the overall chamber pressure by employing excess inert gases could partially solve this problem. However, these methods shift the thermodynamic equilibrium and result in the formation of an unwanted MoS2 layer. It was supported by theories that the formation of a CZTS quaternary phase is energetically favorable at lower temperatures. Unfortunately, this fact did not receive enough attention since the small crystal size leads to defects that are detrimental to the device performance.
In this work, we present a formation path by combining both low-temperature and high-temperature annealing of co-sputtered SnS2–ZnS–Cu precursors to address the aforementioned challenges. Although the two-stage annealing process was employed for fabricating CIGS or CZTS absorbers previously, the main purpose of the short low-temperature annealing is to make metal alloys more mixable or more ready to react into binary compounds. Through our method, named the Low-temperature Formation Path (LTFP), the working mechanism and outcome are totally different from previous reports as we have used specially designed growth parameters. The formation of a quaternary CZTS phase has mainly occurred in a limited temperature range (260 ± 10 °C) at which SnS2 has not dramatically decomposed into volatile SnS while binary compounds in the precursor could readily react with each other. The purpose of the following annealing at a higher temperature is to increase the crystal size and remove secondary phases like SnS. The annealing temperature is usually set to be higher than 430 °C around which the SnS secondary phase starts to vaporize rapidly to leave pure phase CZTS in the thin film. A record PCE of 8.58% for Se-free CZTS solar cells has been achieved, which is a big step forward from the previous record set by Katagiri et al. also using the co-sputtering/sulfurization process. Overall, the devices fabricated by the new method exhibited more than 20% improvement in average PCE (Fig. S1). The characterization results suggested that the formation of CZTS crystallites at relatively low temperature gave rise to more homogeneous element distribution, less secondary phase, higher hole concentration and benign defects. Although an annealing temperature of 510 °C is employed for a shorter annealing time in this paper, we believe that a temperature not higher than 450 °C will be good enough to remove secondary phases like SnS and obtain pure phase CZTS with comparable device performance if the annealing time is further optimized in the future.

Fabrication of CZTS thin films in this study was performed by using a sputtering/sulfurization technique as described before. The precursors were deposited on Mo-coated soda lime glass having a size of 10 × 10 cm2 by co-sputtering SnS2, ZnS and Cu targets. Our precursors were different from those of stacking layers in the form of Cu/SnS2/ZnS reported by Katagiri's group previously. By using the co-sputtering technique, the various elements in our precursors were mixed more homogeneously on the nanoscale, which would be beneficial for a faster solid reaction in the annealing process. To fabricate CZTS thin films, these precursors were sulfurized in an atmosphere of N2 + H2S (5%) vapor with pressure maintained at 300 Torr.

To make the devices, a CdS buffer layer of 60 nm thickness was first deposited on a CZTS thin film by chemical bath deposition (CBD). A 300 nm thick i-ZnO/ZnO:Al layer prepared by sputtering was then used as the transparent conducting layer. Finally, Ni/Al metal grids were deposited by e-beam evaporation through an aperture mask to form the current collector. The photo of the finished sample can be found in Fig. S4. The device performance of the solar cells with a total area of around 0.5 cm2 was measured using a simulated AM1.5 Global spectrum. The illumination intensity was calibrated to 100 mW cm−2 using a certified silicon solar cell.
Grazing incidence X-ray diffraction measurements were carried out at BL14B1 of Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility, Shanghai and BL23A1 of National Synchrotron Radiation Research Center, Hsinchu. The energy of the X-ray source was set to 10 keV (wavelength of 1.24 Å) and the incident angle was 3.5°. Raman measurement was carried out using a Horiba iHR550 UV-NIR spectrometer. The wavelength of the excitation light was 632.8 nm. The cross-sectional morphology and EDS line scan of the thin films were characterized using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Nova NanoSEM 450) operated at 5 kV.
Admittance spectroscopy (AS) was performed using a Tonghui TH2400 LCR meter. Drive-level capacitance profiling (DLCP) with varying frequencies was used to deduce the free carrier densities in the two devices. Temperature-dependent measurements were carried out using a closed-cycle cryostat (Advanced Research Systems (ARS)) with a Lake Shore temperature controller. The temperature was monitored by using a calibrated silicon diode sensor embedded close to the surface of the copper cold finger. In our experiment, the capacitance–frequency (CF) scans were measured in the dark from 200 Hz to 2 MHz in the temperature range from 10 K to 300 K and an AC voltage of 50 mV was used with the DC bias kept at zero. Before each measurement, the temperature of the sample was maintained for 20 minutes or longer to reach thermal equilibrium.

Compared with the slow-ramping process widely employed in growing CZTS thin films by sulfurizing precursors prepared by sputtering or electro-deposition (Fig. 1a, P1), our low-temperature formation process (Fig. 1a, P2) replaces the ramping with a low-temperature stage (260 °C). Both processes have a high-temperature stage (510 °C) for the large CZTS grain growth. The samples were first kept at 260 °C for 75 min before going through a final fast annealing process at 510 °C for 15 min. Previous reports have shown that the compositions of CZTS devices with PCEs higher than 5% mostly fall into regions around Cu/(Zn + Sn) ∼ 0.8 and Zn/Sn ∼ 1.2. In this paper, the final CZTS absorbers were designed to have compositions of Cu/(Zn + Sn) ∼ 0.73 and Zn/Sn ∼ 1.35. The slightly larger than usual zinc content was employed to empirically improve the open circuit voltage of the device. Fig. 1b presents the J–V characteristics under standard AM1.5 illumination of CZTS devices S1 and S2 with absorbers prepared through P1 and P2, respectively. Note here that device S2 was capped with an anti-reflection (AR) MgF2 layer coating while device S1 was not. As a control, device S1 with a PCE of 6.41% represents the champion cell out of hundreds of devices that we fabricated through the annealing profile P1. An anti-reflection layer usually gives rise to an additional 5% PCE improvement which makes it comparable to Katagiri's 6.77% champion cell fabricated through a similar procedure. Device S2 showed a PCE of 8.58%, indicating that it was the best performing cell out of tens of devices made using the low-temperature formation process P2. Following this strategy, devices with PCEs above 8% could be routinely fabricated (Fig. S1). These results clearly demonstrated that the low-temperature formation process was superior to the slow-ramping profiling process in fabricating highly efficient CZTS solar cells. It is also suggested that the sputtering/sulfurization method could fabricate CZTS solar cells as good as or even better than the co-evaporation/sulfurization method, which is good news to future commercialization due to the advantage and maturity of the sputtering technology in scaling up the devices.

The detailed device parameters based on the standard Sites' model including open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF), series resistance (RS), shunt resistance (RSH), ideality factor (A) and reverse saturation current density (J0) are listed in Table 1. By comparing the characteristics of the two devices, we could easily find that the increased efficiency mainly originated from the improved FF and Jsc. The dramatic decrease in series resistance from 3.85 Ω cm2 for S1 to 1.2 Ω cm2 for S2 could well explain the gain in FF. The much smaller reverse saturation current density J0 and ideality factor A in device S2 strongly indicated that it suffered less defect-related recombination in the absorber than device S1.
Cell
Efficiency [%]
FF [%]

V
oc [mV]

J
sc [mA cm−2]

R
S [Ω cm2]

R
SH [Ω cm2]

A


J
0 [A cm−2]
S1
6.41
57.7
642
17.3
3.85
947
1.9
3.1 × 10−6
S2
8.58
65.1
625
21.1
1.2
1183
1.7
6.7 × 10−7
The external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves of the two devices are shown in Fig. 1c. For device S2, the EQE approached 90% in the visible range but slowly decayed in the long wavelength range. The loss at long wavelengths in the highly efficient CZTS devices was believed to originate from the short carrier diffusion length and/or insufficient charge depletion region in the absorber. There still exists room for further enhancement of the PCE by exerting more efforts to reduce the loss at long wavelengths. Device S1 resembled the EQE response of device S2 except having an overall lower efficiency in the entire spectral region.

Grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) measurements of samples undergoing different stages along the annealing pathway (spots on P2 in Fig. 1) were carried out in order to understand the CZTS crystallite formation process. The precursors of the samples were routinely prepared with composition deviation less than 5% and went through an identical thermal process with different terminating points as indicated on P2 in Fig. 1 to represent the absorber conformations at different stages. Intensity integrations of the two-dimensional GIXRD patterns of these samples are plotted versus the scattering wavevector q in Fig. 2a. The diffraction peak located at q ∼ 2.8 Å−1 corresponds to the molybdenum (110) reflection. The CZTS diffraction peaks with the most intense (112) peak located at q ∼ 1.97 Å−1 can be clearly identified as early as stage 1a, confirming that the formation of CZTS started at the low-temperature stage. In Fig. 2a, diffraction peaks corresponding to SnS rather than SnS2 were also observed as early as stage 1a, indicating that SnS2 has either decomposed to SnS or reacted to yield CZTS without forming large enough crystallite phases to be detected by GIXRD.

To further understand the evolution of the CZTS phase, the corresponding (112) peak intensities were extracted and are plotted versus the annealing stage in Fig. 2b. The peak intensity shows a sharp increase at the beginning of stage 1 and gradually saturates by the end of stage 1, indicating that the reaction of CZTS finished within stage 1. This trend is not unique amongst the other reflections (Fig. S3), suggesting that the most intense CZTS (112) peak reflects mainly CZTS instead of ZnS or Cu2SnS3 (CTS). This is also evident in the Raman spectrum (Fig. 3b). For the SnS phase as shown in Fig. 2c, its (111) peak intensity exhibits an initial increase, followed by a plateau during stage 1 and a dramatic decrease during stage 2. The initial increase in SnS content is most likely due to the decomposition of SnS2 and the final decrease could be attributed to the high-temperature vaporization of SnS.
The above observations indicated that our CZTS formation underwent a favorable pathway through this new method. Many studies suggested that there were mainly three possible reactions when annealing SnS2-related precursors:
Cu2S + ZnS + SnS2⇔Cu2ZnSnS4
(1)
(2)
(3)
The stable SnS composition indicates the formation of an equilibrium between reactions (2) and (3). In other words, it is most likely that SnS2 has reacted to form the CZTS phase through either reactions (1) or (2) + (3), except for the initial decomposition during the low-temperature stage. This reflects one important advantage of our low-temperature formation process: the low-temperature annealing could significantly lower the decomposition rate of SnS2 and therefore make route (1) more likely to happen. It also reduces the requirement of external S2 (or H2S) vapor to promote reaction (3), which will likely prevent the formation of unwanted thick MoS2 at the Mo electrode. This will consequently improve the element inhomogeneity issue due to the insufficient penetration of S2 (or H2S) gas into the precursor, which is consistent with the SEM results (Fig. 4).
To confirm our hypothesis, Raman spectroscopy was employed to investigate the phase change of SnS2 at various temperatures. Fig. 3a presents the Raman spectra of the pure SnS2 precursor annealed at different temperatures in a N2 + H2S (5%) atmosphere for 60 minutes. The as-prepared thin film displayed the characteristic peak of the SnS2 phase at 315 cm−1 and the SnS-related peaks at 163, 191 and 218 cm−1 with comparable intensity. This indicated that a significant amount of the SnS phase was mixed with SnS2 in the sputtered film due to sulfur loss induced by the strong sputtering process. When the Sn–S precursor was sulfurized at 240 °C, the SnS2 phase recovered and became the dominant phase with only a small amount of SnS. With the increase in annealing temperature, the decomposition of SnS2 into SnS was clearly observed through the drop in intensity of the SnS2 Raman peak at 315 cm−1 and the accompanied increase in intensity of the SnS peaks at 163, 191 and 218 cm−1. When the temperature was higher than 330 °C, no trace of SnS2 was observable by Raman measurement and only SnS was found to exist in the film. Taken together, the Raman results for the thermal behavior of SnS2 confirm the necessity of a low-temperature stage to suppress the drastic decomposition of SnS2. The Raman spectra of Cu–ZnS–SnS2 precursors annealed at 280 °C, 260 °C and 240 °C are plotted in Fig. 3b. The film annealed at 280 °C contains a substantial amount of SnS with the CZTS phase, whereas the SnS signal is much weaker when the film is annealed at 240 °C and 260 °C. The spectrum of the film annealed at 260 °C did not show much difference from that at 240 °C except for stronger CZTS characteristic peaks. This shows that at low temperature, SnS2 reacts readily to form CZTS without decomposing into SnS. Although the main peak at 338 cm−1 may also be attributed to CTS phases (336 cm−1), the clear existence of the other CZTS characteristic peaks at 260 cm−1, 288 cm−1, 366 cm−1 and 376 cm−1 suggests that the signal comes from the CZTS phases. However, some weak peaks around 305 cm−1 and 318 cm−1 can also be observed. These are attributed to ternary compounds, such as Cu2SnS3 and Cu3SnS4, which are difficult to completely remove at low temperature.

Fig. 4(a) and (b) show the cross-sectional SEM images of the as-cleaved absorbers of devices S1 and S2, respectively. The CZTS thin films in the two devices were about 1000 nm thick. For device S1 (Fig. 4(a)), it was clear that the absorber consisted of two regions with a large-grain top layer and a small-grain bottom layer. The small-grain layer was about 1/3 of the film thickness. For device S2 (Fig. 4(b)), the two-layer feature was less prominent, though smaller grains could still be found in the bottom region. In addition to the difference in grain structure revealed by SEM, the energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopic (EDS) line scans in Fig. 4(c) and (d) demonstrated more dramatic changes in the compositional distribution of the elements across the film thickness. For device S1, the bottom layer adjacent to the Mo back electrode was found to be dominated by the Zn element with a sharp decrease in Cu and Sn density. For device S2, the absorber showed a much homogeneous distribution of the elements except for a slightly higher Cu concentration near the top surface. No sign of strong Zn segregation in the bottom layer of the absorber was observed. Small grains in the absorber were generally believed to be deleterious to device performance due to the increased recombination at the grain boundary and/or decreased carrier mobility. Excess ZnS secondary phase aggregated near the CZTS/Mo interface was identified to increase the serial resistance of the solar cells. The observed thick Zn-rich bottom layer in device S1 can well explain its larger serial resistance and thus poorer FF as compared to device S2.

To investigate the possible origin of the enhanced quantum efficiency and Jsc in the device made by the low-temperature formation process, capacitance-based admittance spectroscopy was employed to study the differences in defect physics of the devices fabricated via slow-ramping and low-temperature formation processes. By measuring the junction capacitance as a function of frequency at different temperatures, the energy level of defects within the band gap could be extracted. Using the model proposed in the work of Kimerling, the capacitance at high frequency mainly represented the response of free carriers, while the capacitance at low frequency represented the response of the sum of free carriers and deep traps, where the traps were not freeze-out. The step transitions in the CF scans could be transformed to a peak feature in the differential capacitance curves as displayed in Fig. 5(a) and (b), from which the inflection frequencies could be easily identified. Plotting the inflection frequency versus temperature in an Arrhenius form allowed the extraction of activation energy Ea which was approximately the average value of the energy difference between the defect level and the valence band edge for p-type absorbers. The Ea values were determined to be 94 meV and 52 meV for devices S1 and S2, respectively. A larger value of Ea is generally an indicator of a slower hole emission rate and thus it was more likely that defects with larger activation energies tended to act as more effective recombination centers. Since the theoretically calculated acceptor level is around 20 meV above VBM for Cu vacancies and around 120–150 meV above VBM for CuZn antisites, assuming that the activation energies of S1 and S2 are related to the ionization of both defects, device S2 should have more Cu vacancies than device S1, which is known to be benign to the device performance.Fig. 5(c) and (d) show the defect density spectra resulting from the CF scans. The defect distributions derived from the CF curves measured at various temperatures collapsed together, indicating a correct scaling of the energy axis. The integrated defect (hole trap) density in the absorber of device S2 was 6.7 × 1015 cm−3, lower than the defect density of 1.07 × 1016 cm−3 in the absorber of device S1. The hole concentration derived from the drive-level capacitance profiling (DLCP) measurement, on the other hand, was 2 × 1016 cm−3 for S2, higher than that of 1 × 1016 cm−3 for S1. The observed much shallower trapping energy, smaller defect density and higher hole concentration for device S2 can well explain its improved device performance, in particular the higher current collection efficiency in terms of its EQE and Jsc, confirming that our low-temperature formation process is promising in producing highly efficient CZTS solar cells.


In summary, we have developed a novel low-temperature formation process for co-sputtered SnS2–ZnS–Cu precursors which results in a record CZTS solar cell with a PCE of 8.58%. Compared with devices fabricated by the conventional slow-ramping thermal annealing strategy, CZTS absorbers made by the low-temperature formation process result in more homogeneous element distribution across the thickness direction without noticeable ZnS segregation near the CZTS/Mo interface, and hence smaller serial resistance and larger fill factor. GIXRD and Raman characterization results suggest that the introduction of the low-temperature stage suppresses the drastic decomposition of SnS2 and effectively promotes its reaction into the CZTS phase during the first stage. Furthermore, the admittance spectroscopy results indicate shallower trapping energy, smaller defect density and higher hole concentration resulting from the low-temperature formation process, which explain the improved quantum efficiency and short-circuit current density of the devices. Our findings have clearly revealed that the sputtering/sulfurization approach with an appropriate annealing protocol not only is an attractive and simple technique but also has the potential to fabricate more efficient CZTS solar cells. As indicated in Fig. S2, the grain size of the thin films annealed at 430 °C is close to that of the films thermally treated at 510 °C. We strongly believe that application of an annealing temperature lower than 450 °C at the second stage can hopefully produce CZTS devices with comparable performance if both the annealing time and precursor compositions are further optimized in the future.


This work was supported by the National Major Science Research Program of China under 2012CB933700 and the National Natural Science Foundation of China under 61274093, 51302304, 51302303 and 61574157. We also wish to thank ITC funding of Shenzhen under projects JCYJ20150529143500956 and JCYJ20150401150223641 and STB funding of Dongguan under project 2014509121212. XDX and XHL were also supported by the Hong Kong Research Grant Council through Theme-based Research Scheme No. T23-407/13-N. XL acknowledges the support from CUHK (Direct Grant No. 4053075).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ce02279g
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016