 DOI: 10.1039/C5NJ02565F
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 1785-1791


Krishnan Shanmugam
Anuratha
,

Subramanian
Mohan
* and 

Subhendu K.
Panda
*

CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi 630 006, India. E-mail: mohan40159@cecri.res.in; skpanda@ceci.res.in; Tel: +91 4565 241234 Tel: +91 4565 241261

Received
(in Montpellier, France)
29th September 2015
, Accepted 7th December 2015
First published on 8th December 2015
Dendritic nanostructures of NiCo2S4 were deposited onto a transparent conducting glass substrate by a facile one step electrodeposition method and were used as counter electrodes (CEs) for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). The NiCo2S4 thin films were deposited by both potentiostatic (PS) and pulse reverse (PR) electrodeposition techniques and characterized using X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and cyclic voltammetry (CV). Both PS and PR techniques produced dendrite-like NiCo2S4 nanostructures. CV and EIS measurements revealed excellent electrocatalytic activities for the I−/I3− redox reaction for DSSCs. Sequential CV scanning further showed the high electrochemical stability of the NiCo2S4 dendritic nanostructures. The CEs prepared by the PR and PS techniques displayed power conversion efficiency of 7.03% and 6.01%, respectively, which are better than in the control device with thermally deposited Pt. Due to the large surface area of the NiCo2S4 dendrite structures and high electrocatalytic activity towards the reduction of I3− to I−, the electrodes demonstrated high solar cell conversion efficiency. This simple and low cost electrodeposition technique shows promise for large scale production of environmentally friendly and highly efficient NiCo2S4 CEs for DSSC applications.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have been viewed as one of the most anticipating alternatives for the traditional silicon solar cells since the first report by Grätzel et al. in 1991. The conventional DSSC holds a sandwich structure with a photoanode, which is anchored by dye molecules, an iodide/triiodide (I−/I3−) redox couple electrolyte and a counter electrode (CE). To enhance the efficiency of DSSCs, a lot of modifications of the photoanode, dye, electrolyte and CE have been reported. One of the most essential components for a long-term operation of the DSSC is the counter electrode and it should have a low charge transfer resistance, high exchange current density and chemical and electrochemical stability in the electrolyte system. To date, platinum has been the preferred material for the CE due to its excellent electrocatalytic activity and stability towards the I−/I3− redox couple. Mostly, platinum CE is fabricated by thermal decomposition of chloroplatinic acid solution or sputtering of Pt on fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrates, but the cost of Pt and heat treatments are the limiting factor for the large scale application and commercialization of DSSCs. Therefore, it is highly essential to replace Pt with another alternative material.

Recent literature reports have demonstrated various options for substituting Pt such as carbonaceous materials, conducting polymers, transition metal sulphides, carbides and nitrides. The binary transition metal sulphides, such as NiS, CoS, MoS2 and WS2, have been proposed as alternative materials to replace the Pt CE for not only the electrocatalytic activity but also having a high corrosion resistance property. Multi-metal sulfide based CEs such as CuInS2 and Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) exhibit excellent performance compared to Pt in DSSCs and quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs). In recent years, more and more attention has been given to ternary transition metal sulphides in various applications. In particular, ternary NiCo2S4 has gained considerable attention due to its excellent electrocatalytic properties, which arises from the unique d-electronic configuration of Co(III) at the surface of NiCo2S4. This possesses a richer redox ability than the single phase of metal sulphides due to its synergistic effect from both nickel and cobalt ions and also shows much higher conductivity. NiCo2S4 was first reported as a CE for DSSC by Lin et al., and it was fabricated using solvothermal and electrophoresis methods. The resultant NiCo2S4 showed high transmittance (75%) and reached 6.14% efficiency, which is comparable to the conventional Pt CE. Moreover, nanoneedles of nickel cobalt sulphide were directly fabricated on FTO substrates by a hydrothermal method in the presence of hydrogen sulfide and argon gas mixture and used as CE for DSSCs with a 6.9% efficiency. Recently, Li et al. reported the low temperature solution process of NiCo2S4 nanosheet films converted from NiCo2O4 nanosheet films on FTO and employed as the CE for p-type DSSCs. The dendrite nanostructures have attracted extensive research interest as they possess a large specific surface area of fractals, short diffusion length, and mechanical integrity of the dendrite that can provide robust stability by the micro- and nanosized assemblies. The structure provides a path for the small molecules to penetrate through the branches to reach the internal catalyst surface sites and it can effectively transport holes or electrons via the interconnected networks in the scaffolds. There are few reports which suggest that electrodeposition is one of the suitable techniques to synthesize dendrite structures directly on a conducting substrate. To the best of our knowledge, the studies on electrodeposited NiCo2S4 towards I3− reduction in DSSCs have not yet been presented so far. In this study, NiCo2S4 is firstly synthesized via a facile one-step electrodeposition route directly onto a FTO glass substrate. The electrochemical deposition is preferred due to its facile and controllable manner for obtaining crystallinity, controlled thickness and different morphology through various competing factors and also it does not require high temperature and vacuum conditions. Moreover, this electrodeposition technique provided the direct deposition onto an FTO substrate, which made the fabrication procedure easier for large scale application of DSSCs. We synthesized the NiCo2S4 using both PS and PR techniques and investigated their electrochemical performance. When employed as CEs for DSSCs, it exhibited higher cell efficiency than the conventional Pt CEs and the previously reported literature based on NiCo2S4 CEs.

All the chemicals were obtained from Sigma Aldrich and used as received without any further purification. NiCo2S4 dendrite nanostructures were deposited on FTO by both potentiostatic (PS) and pulse reverse (PR) electrodeposition methods. The electrolyte bath is formulated by taking 5 mM of CoCl2·6H2O, 2.5 mM of NiCl2·6H2O and 0.75 mM of thiourea and the pH of the solution is measured to be 6.5. The deposition was carried out in a three electrode cell at room temperature using an IVIUMSTAT XRi electrochemical workstation. The cleaned FTO serves as a working electrode, Pt electrode as a counter electrode and Saturated Calomel Electrode (SCE) as a reference electrode. After deposition, the FTO plates were cleaned with deionized water and dried under an air flow.


FTO substrates were cleaned in an acetone and ethanol mixture (1:1) by ultrasonication. The cleaned FTO substrates were spin coated by 20 mM TiCl4 aqueous solution and heated at 450 °C for half an hour to make a TiO2 compact layer. Furthermore, P25 TiO2 nanoparticles were coated by the doctor blade method by mixing the nanoparticles with polyethylene glycol (molecular weight 6000), triton X, acetylacetone and deionized water. The coated substrates were heated in air at 450 °C for one hour. After drying, the substrates were soaked in 0.3 mM N719 [di-tetrabutylammonium cis-bis (isothiocyanato) bis (2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato) ruthenium(II)] dye solution in ethanol for about 24 hours for dye adsorption. The sensitized FTO substrates were washed with ethanol for removing excess dye molecules. The cell dimensions were measured to be 0.4 × 0.4 cm2. The dye sensitized photoanodes were sandwiched with the as deposited NiCo2S4 counter electrodes and the redox electrolyte (0.1 M LiI, 0.05 M I2, 0.6 M 3-methyl n-propyl-immidazolium iodide and 0.5 M tert-butylpyridine in acetonitrile solvent) was injected into the cell through the holes that were already made on FTO substrates by drilling. For comparison, Pt CE was prepared by a spin coating method with a solution of chloroplatinic acid (H2PtCl6·6H2O, 50 mM) in isopropyl alcohol on a drilled FTO substrate at 1000 rpm and heated at 400 °C for 30 minutes.


The deposited NiCo2S4 CEs thin films were characterized for phase formation and phase purity by the powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique using Cu-Kα radiation (D8 Advance, BRUKER). The morphologies of synthesized powder samples were analyzed using a TESCAN scanning electron microscope (SEM). The microstructure of PR sample was characterized by a TECNAI F20 FTWIN TMP high resolution transmission electron microscope (HR-TEM). For TEM sample preparation, the electrodeposited sample was scratched from the FTO substrate and ultrasonicated for few minutes in isopropyl alcohol and then drop casted onto a copper grid. CV measurements for the counter electrode were performed using an IVIUMSTAT XRi electrochemical workstation. The photovoltaic properties of the assembled DSSCs were measured by recording the current–voltage characteristics using a potentiostat (VMP3, BIO-LOGIC) under illumination with a Solar Simulator (PHOTOEMISSION TECH) with an AM 1.5 G filter set. The intensity of the illumination was 100 mW cm−2. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopic (EIS) measurements were made at open circuit voltage conditions under illumination (100 mW cm−2) in the frequency range from 0.1 Hz to 1 MHz with an amplitude voltage of 10 mV.


To determine the best deposition potential for NiCo2S4, Linear Sweep Voltammetry (LSV) was carried out using the aqueous electrolyte containing 5 mM CoCl2·6H2O, 2.5 mM NiCl2·6H2O and 0.75 M thiourea, as is shown in Fig. 1a. In the cathodic sweep, the deposition of NiCo2S4 starts at −1.16 V, indicating a quite large overpotential that can be assigned to the polarization of Ni2+ and Co2+ at the FTO surface. Due to hydrogen evolution, a small current is developed before NiCo2S4 deposition. However, a small hump is observed at around −0.73 V, which indicates the electroreduction of thiourea and incorporation of S into the Ni–Co films. On the other hand, to determine the oxidation potential of deposited Ni and Co in NiCo2S4 thin films, LSV with anodic sweep was done (Fig. 1b) using the following three aqueous electrolytes (i) 5 mM CoCl2·6H2O, (ii) 2.5 mM NiCl2·6H2O and (iii) 5 mM CoCl2·6H2O, 2.5 mM NiCl2·6H2O and 0.75 M thiourea. The deposition of Co and Ni started at around −0.7 and −0.9 V and the oxidation potential occurred at −0.1 and −0.2 V, respectively. The oxidation of both Co and Ni takes place at −0.16 V, which shows that the dissolving rate of Co and Ni is greater in the presence of a large amount of thiourea. By applying an anodic bias following the cathodic bias can help to remove the unwanted Co and Ni, which are deposited during the cathodic process, and the process is known as the potential reverse (PR) technique. The repetition of such procedure is useful for removing the metallic Co and Ni. NiCo2S4 CEs were prepared by both the PS and PR techniques using electrolyte (iii). The cathodic deposition was carried out at around −1.2 V for both techniques. The NiCo2S4 CEs are fabricated by the PS technique with 60 and 120 s time durations. For the PR technique, the anodic and cathodic time was set as 24 s and 6 s, respectively, and 20 cycles were performed for a total deposition time of 120 s. The PS (60 s, 120 s) and PR (120 s) fabricated NiCo2S4 CEs were designated as PS-60, PS-120 and PR-120, respectively.

The current–time (I–t) curves for the PS and PR techniques are shown in Fig. 1c and d. In the PS deposition for 120 s (Fig. 1c), the current drops first and then it increases continually. The initial drop is due to the depletion of Ni2+ and Co2+ ions at the surface of FTO substrate and the increase in current describes the polarization of Ni2+ and Co2+ ions. In the PR technique, the current approaches zero at the end of every anodic polarization, which indicates the complete removal of Ni and Co. The large cathodic current describes the presence of excess Ni2+ ions near the FTO surface caused by the anodic process.
The formation of NiCo2S4 on FTO substrate was confirmed by X-ray diffraction studies. Fig. 2 shows the XRD pattern of electrodeposited NiCo2S4 thin films by PS-120 and PR-120. All the reflections were indexed based on the standard pattern of cubic NiCo2S4 (JCPDS no. 00-020-0782). The pattern of both the films show the planes of (400), (551) and (800), corresponding to a cubic NiCo2S4. The cubic phase of metallic Ni and Co was observed on both PS and PR deposited film, but the intensity of the (111) plane is low for PR-120 because of the dissolution of metallic Ni and Co. From these XRD results, the formation of NiCo2S4 on FTO was confirmed and the removal of metal Ni and Co during the anodic polarization in the PR method was established.


Fig. 3 shows the SEM images of electrodeposited NiCo2S4 thin films of PS-120 and PR-120 (Fig. 3a and c) and the corresponding magnified images are shown in Fig. 3b and d, respectively. In both the PS and PR deposition techniques, dendrite nanostructures were clearly observed on the FTO coated films. PR deposition results in a more oriented flower-like fractal morphology. Fukami et al. studied the detailed mechanism for the growth of such dendrite morphology of metals fabricated by electrodeposition method. Accordingly, at near equilibrium conditions, the surface energy will take a minimum value. While on increasing the driving force, the flat surfaces become unstable due to the higher contribution of mass or heat diffusion; therefore, the unstable surface guides the formation of dendrites. In electrochemical deposition, the growth under far equilibrium conditions can be studied by simply altering the electrode potential, current density or concentration of electro-active species. In the PR technique, due to the removal of undesired pure Co and Ni, the concentration of reacting species is higher near the electrode surface with an anodic bias and as a result, a higher current density is necessary for depleting the region near the electrode during the cathodic bias. Due to the higher mass transport in the PR technique, the surface instability increases, which leads to the formation well oriented hyper branched flower-like morphology. The inset of Fig. 3c shows the EDX spectrum and it was confirmed that the composition of the electrodeposited thin films consisted of Ni, Co and S. The high intensity peaks of Si, F, O and Sn were from the FTO substrate due to the formation of a thin NiCo2S4 film layer. The atomic percentage of Ni, Co and S content is listed in Table 1. In the PS technique, the percentage of Ni and Co gets increased for 60 and 120 s. In the case of the PR technique, the atomic percentage of these metals was decreased due to the dissolution of Ni and Co metals during the anodic bias. The thickness of the thin films (PS-120 and PR-120) was measured by cross sectional SEM imaging (Fig. 3e and f) and the obtained values are 1.12 μm and 1.17 μm for PS-120 and PR-120, respectively, indicating deposition of almost the same thickness of materials in both of the electrodeposition protocols.

Counter electrode
Ni
Co
S
PS-60
13.07
26.19
60.74
PS-120
16.67
32.83
50.50
PR-120
15.40
30.41
54.19
The low magnification bright field TEM image of the sample PR-120 is shown in Fig. 4a. From the image, the branched-like morphology is clearly observed and the inset shows the magnified image of one of the branches. The HR-TEM image (Fig. 4b) shows the lattice fringes, which confirms the crystalline nature of the dendrite structures. The inset of Fig. 4b shows the magnified HR-TEM image of one part of the dendrite structure where the lattice fringes were clearly observed. The calculated d-spacing value is ∼0.23 nm, which matches well to the (400) plane of NiCo2S4.

The catalytic activities towards the reduction of I3− in the (I−/I3−) redox couple of the as deposited NiCo2S4 and Pt CEs were characterized by cyclic voltammetry (CV) in the acetonitrile solution containing 10 mM LiI, 1 mM I2, and 0.1 M LiClO4 at a 50 mV s−1 scan rate and is shown in Fig. 5a. The cyclic voltammograms show two typical pairs of oxidation/reduction peaks, which are denoted as Ox-A/Red-A and Ox-B/Red-B. Ox-A/Red-A represents the oxidation and reduction of (I−/I3−) couple and Ox-B/Red-B represents the oxidation and reduction of (I3−/I2) couple. The peak current densities of PS-60, PS-120 and PR-120 CEs were increased in size compared to Pt. This reveals that the oxidation and reduction of (I−/I3−) redox couple has been greatly enhanced at the surface of NiCo2S4 CEs, suggesting it as a suitable alternate CE material in DSSCs in place of Pt. To examine the relationship between the scanning rates and peak current densities, CV was performed at different scanning rates for the CEs (Fig. 5b). The transportation of iodide species toward all the CEs is diffusion limited and this was found from the obtained linear relationship between peak current densities and the scan rates. This is due to the fact that by increasing the scan rate, thin diffusion layer and large electrochemical polarization were obtained, which lead to high overpotential and poor reversibility. To determine the stability of the as deposited NiCo2S4 CEs (PS-120 and PR-120) toward the (I−/I3−) redox couple, CV was recorded for 20 consecutive cycles at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 (Fig. 5c and d). The constant peak current density and unaltered curve shape demonstrate the extraordinary electrochemical stability of NiCo2S4 CEs towards an (I−/I3−) redox couple.


The improved catalytic activity and electrochemical stability of deposited NiCo2S4 thin films towards the (I−/I3−) redox shuttle make it a potentially suitable CE material in DSSCs. The photocurrent density–voltage characteristics for the fabricated DSSCs using PS-60, 120, PR-120 and Pt as CEs were evaluated and are shown in Fig. 6a. The corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 2. For all the devices, there is no such variation in the open circuit voltage (Voc) values that were observed, because Voc mostly depends on the photoanode material and the redox shuttle. The short circuit current density (Jsc) values were increased compared to the Pt CE, which is due to the fractal-like morphology of NiCo2S4 that promotes the charge transfer reaction and the higher electrocatalytic activity, which is also supported by the CV measurements (Fig. 6a). The fill factor (FF) was observed to be high for the PR-120 sample compared to the other CEs. This improvement in FF from 63.9% to 68.1% is due to the removal of excess metallic Ni and Co during the PR deposition process. The photovoltaic efficiency of PS-120 and PR-120 was enhanced by 1.05% and 1.22%, respectively, in comparison to the DSSC with Pt CE. Fig. 6b shows the long term stability of the fabricated DSSCs for a period of 15 days, which indicates that the efficiency of the cells is almost stable for a long period of time; this is also supported by Fig. 5c and d.

Counter electrode

V
oc (mV)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

η (%)
Pt
0.776
10.9
67.6
5.71
PS-60
0.742
11.8
63.9
5.62
PS-120
0.751
12.5
64.0
6.01
PR-120
0.758
13.6
68.1
7.03

The interfacial charge transfer and the kinetics of charge transport at the electrode/electrolyte interface were studied by Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) for the fabricated DSSC devices and the obtained Nyquist plot is shown in Fig. 7. The intercept at higher frequencies on the real axis represents the series resistance (Rs). The left semicircle in the higher frequency region demonstrates the charge transfer resistance (Rct) at the electrolyte/CE interface and the relative constant phase angle element (CPE). The Nernst diffusion within the electrolyte and charge transfer process at the interface occurred in the low frequency region and these processes are explained by Warburg impedance, (W), Rct and CPE. The inset of Fig. 7 shows the equivalent circuit used to fit the experimental EIS data and it was fitted by the Zsimpwin 3.0 software. Two semicircles were clearly obtained for Pt, PS-60, PS-120, and PR-120 based DSSCs. The obtained parameters (Rs and Rct) from Nyquist plot are listed in Table 3 for Pt, PS-60, PS-120 and PR-120 CEs. Both the Rs and Rct values were decreased for PS-60, PS-120 and PR-120 CEs based DSSCs compared to Pt due to the high surface area of the dendrite structures and the removal of excess Ni and Co during the anodic bias in the PR technique. Higher catalytic activities of PS-60, PS-120 and PR-120 CEs have been proven from EIS measurements as also evidenced by CV measurements.

Counter electrode

R
s (Ω cm−2)

R
ct (Ω cm−2)
Pt
9.1
14.1
PS-60
7.42
4.76
PS-120
7.8
4.4
PR-120
5.8
3.9

In conclusion, dendrite structured NiCo2S4 on FTO substrates were fabricated by a facile one-step electrodeposition method using both potentiostatic and pulse reverse techniques. In the pulse reverse technique, due to the periodically imposed anodic bias, excess metallic Ni and Co were removed, which produced more phase pure NiCo2S4. Due to the hyper-branched dendrite morphology, the electrochemical studies revealed the excellent electrochemical activity for the (I−/I3−) redox shuttle. The pulse reverse deposited counter electrode showed a lower Rct at the counter electrode/electrolyte interface and performed at a higher efficiency than the conventional Pt counter electrode. Optimization of the electrodeposition parameters may lead to further higher efficiency solar cells. This suggests that the as deposited NiCo2S4 counter electrodes by the low-cost and up-scalable electrochemical deposition route are an effective alternate low cost counter electrode material for dye-sensitized solar cell applications.


SKP would like to thank the Department of Science and Technology, Government of India, for the financial support (Project no: SB/FT/CS-048/2012). Authors also acknowledge CSIR-XII Five Year plan Intel Coat (CSC0114).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2016