 DOI: 10.1039/C7CC06369E
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 11157-11160


Doli
Srivani
,

Anubha
Agarwal
,

Sidhanath V.
Bhosale
*,

Avinash L.
Puyad
,

Wanchun
Xiang
,

Richard A.
Evans
,

Akhil
Gupta
* and 

Sheshanath V.
Bhosale
*

Polymers and Functional Materials Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 500007, Telangana, India. E-mail: bhosale@iict.res.in

Academy Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), CSIR-IICT, Hyderabad 500007, Telangana, India

Institute for Frontier Materials, Deakin University, Waurn Ponds, Victoria 3216, Australia. E-mail: akhil.gupta@deakin.edu.au; Tel: +61 3 5247 9542

School of Chemical Sciences, Swami Ramanand Teerth Marathwada University, Nanded 431606, Maharashtra, India

State Key Laboratory of Silicate Materials for Architectures, Wuhan University of Technology, 122 Luoshi Rd, Wuhan 430070, Hubei, P. R. China

CSIRO Manufacturing, Bayview Avenue, Clayton South, Victoria 3169, Australia

School of Science, RMIT University, GPO Box 2476, Melbourne, Victoria 3001, Australia. E-mail: sheshanath.bhosale@rmit.edu.au

Received
15th August 2017
, Accepted 8th September 2017
First published on 8th September 2017
Herein we present the design, synthesis and characterization of two novel, naphthalene diimide (NDI) core-based non-fullerene acceptors, N5 and N6, comprising respectively 2-methoxyethyl-2-cyanoacetate and cyanopyridone acceptor functionalities at the terminals. The influence of terminal units on optoelectronic and photovoltaic properties was studied. The target chromophore bearing cyanopyridone acceptor units (N6) afforded a power conversion efficiency of 6.10% when paired with the conventional donor polymer poly(3-hexylthiophene), a result that is the highest for the NDI core-based non-fullerene acceptors.

Solution-processable bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) devices have been intensively investigated as a promising next-generation green energy resource since they offer unmatchable advantages such as low-cost, flexibility, light weight and solution processability. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of such devices over 11% has been recently achieved with the conventional fullerene acceptors, thus indicating that fullerene derivatives are currently the best possible electron acceptors for organic solar cell applications. Additionally, these fullerene derivatives, either [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) or its C71 analogue (PC71BM), exhibit excellent solubility, good electron-accepting strength and a strong ability to form a favourable nanoscale network with a variety of donor semiconducting components. However, despite these promising properties, these derivatives are afflicted with a number of potential drawbacks, e.g. weak absorption in the visible region, limited chemical and electronic tuning, high production cost and, above all, a large electron affinity that can result in a low open-circuit voltage. Given such limitations associated with fullerene acceptors, it is critical to search for alternate structures which not only can serve as acceptors but also retain most of the promising properties exhibited by fullerenes. This can be challenging given there are no definitive design rules for an acceptor molecule. Thus, many structural types must be systematically designed, be synthetically developed using simple and efficient protocols, and be tested in BHJ devices so as to find lead candidates and to refine design concepts.

The development of small molecule non-fullerene acceptors offers advantages over polymeric counterparts in terms of ease of synthesis, introduction of structural variation, purification, less batch to batch variations and less end-group contamination. Furthermore, advantages such as high Voc can be realized given the energy levels that can be tuned using a variety of building blocks, whether donors or acceptors. In this context, many structural units have recently been reported in the literature where the combination of a variety of donor and acceptor groups has been carried out to generate efficient non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs). However, the NFA targets based on an acceptor–acceptor–acceptor (A–A–A) format, and in particular naphthalene diimide core based, have received relatively little attention even though they comprise strong accepting groups and can fulfil most of the challenging structural requirements of efficient NFAs. The advantages of including NDI in a given target chromophore are its great accepting capability, appropriate physical and electronic properties and strong capacity to influence the solubility of targets via incorporating lipophilic chains on nitrogen atoms. These alkyl chains not only enhance solubility, but also are helpful for generating excellent thin-films without crystallization.
In this report, we wish to demonstrate the utility of the A–A–A design using the NDI core to create efficient NFAs. One of the major advantages offered by the A–A–A format is the scalable synthetic protocols which are paramount for Lab-to-Fab translation. Based on the recent success that we were able to achieve using the A–A–A format, and taking into account the advantages exhibited by the NDI moiety together with the literature precedence, we now report the design, synthesis and characterisation of two novel NFAs, (2Z,2′Z)-bis(2-methoxyethyl) 3,3′-(5,5′-(2,7-dioctyl-1,3,6,8-tetraoxo-1,2,3,6,7,8-hexahydrobenzo[lmn][3,8]phenanthroline-4,9-diyl)bis(thiophene-5,2-diyl))bis(2-cyano acrylate) (N5) and (5Z,5′Z)-5,5′-((5,5′-(2,7-dioctyl-1,3,6,8-tetraoxo-1,2,3,6,7,8-hexahydrobenzo[lmn][3,8]phenanthroline-4,9-diyl)bis(thiophene-5,2-diyl))bis(methanylylidene))bis(4-methyl-1-octyl-2,6-dioxo-1,2,5,6-tetrahydropyridine-3-carbonitrile) (N6), with two different terminal acceptor units, 2-methoxyethyl-2-cyanoacetate and cyanopyridone, respectively (Fig. 1). The former is an open-ended acceptor unit whereas the latter is an aromatizable group. It is well known in the literature that such aromatizable groups are acceptors of greater strength and can exist in various canonical forms that contribute to delocalizing charges and/or free radicals. The combination of various structural groups or motifs, whether donors or acceptors, and aromatizable acceptors, of which cyanopyridone is an example, is a common strategy in the non-linear dye design and provides large red shifts of lambda maxima as compared to conventional acceptors like 2-methoxyethyl-2-cyanoacetate and dicyanovinylidene.
An additional advantage of the cyanopyridone acceptor unit is that a variety of alkyl groups can be located on the nitrogen atom and so allow tuning of solubility. In the present case, the octyl group was the substituent of choice for producing high solubility and excellent film forming properties. The utility of the designs of N5 and N6 was verified as the solution-processable BHJ devices based on their blends with P3HT exhibited high PCEs [P3HT:N5 (4.03%) and P3HTN6 (6.10%) (1:1.2 w/w)], a result that is the highest for the NDI core-based non-fullerene acceptors. Moreover, the reported work is the first effort that has been carried out by combining such acceptor functionalities. These results suggest that the combination of a variety of acceptor units in the A–A–A fashion, and in particular based on the central NDI core, is a successful arrangement that can generate high-performing NFAs. The present work is a continuation of our research interest in the design and development of small-molecule chromophores for organic photovoltaic applications.
The materials N5 and N6 were synthesised from 5,5′-(2,7-dioctyl-1,3,6,8-tetraoxo-1,2,3,6,7,8-hexahydrobenzo[lmn] [3,8]phenanthroline-4,9-diyl)bis(thiophene-2-carbaldehyde) by the reaction with 2-methoxyethyl-2-cyanoacetate in dichloromethane:acetonitrile (1:1) at room temperature with triethylamine as the base to yield N5, and with cyanopyridone in dichloromethane at reflux with pyridine as the base to yield the analogue compound N6 (for synthetic details, see the ESI). The materials were characterized spectrally and their optoelectronic properties were investigated. Both materials showed good solubility in a variety of common organic solvents, such as chlorobenzene and chloroform, which is a common requirement for fabricating solution-processable BHJ devices.
The ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) spectral absorptions of both the materials were measured in chloroform solution and are presented in Fig. S1, ESI. As predicted, the stronger aromatizable acceptor group, cyanopyridone, induced a strong red-shift in the absorption of compound N6 compared with the open-ended 2-methoxyethyl-2-cyanoacetate group. The absorption maxima at 438 nm (ε = 80, 500 L mol−1 cm−1) and 516 nm (ε = 42, 500 L mol−1 cm−1) were measured for N6, whereas N5 exhibited absorption maxima at 363 nm (ε = 55, 000 L mol−1 cm−1) and 475 nm (ε = 11, 550 L mol−1 cm−1). Of particular relevance, we observe the similar bathochromic shift in the thin film spectra of N6 when compared with N5 (Fig. 2), and the two sets of absorption bands can be assigned to the π–π* transition and intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) transition, with the longest wavelength absorption maximum (λmax) designated to the latter. The thin film spectrum of N6 clearly exhibited better light-harvesting properties than N5, which is consistent with the strong accepting strength of the cyanopyridone unit and is a result of a larger conjugated structure. Moreover, the blend film of N6 (P3HT:N6 1:1.2 w/w) displayed strong absorption over most of the visible region, even tailing into the infrared region (Fig. 2), thus, providing a strong indication of a well-mixed blend surface. Furthermore, it is indicative of an efficient charge transfer transition which is usually considered favourable for better device outcome.
In order to obtain information about the theoretical density distributions of N5 and N6, the Gaussian 09 ab-initio/DFT quantum chemical stimulation package was employed. Furthermore, the frontier molecular orbitals (FMOs) were calculated at the CAM-B3LYP/6-31G(d) level of theory and were generated using Avogadro (for details on DFT calculations, see the ESI (Table S1 and Fig. S2)). In an A–A–A molecule, it is of great interest to observe where the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) density may reside. Calculations showed that the LUMO densities were primarily located on the central NDI unit and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) distributions were located at the terminals, meaning that there is well-ordered density segregation which is considered paramount for efficient ICT transition. The computed absorption spectra together with a pair of natural transition orbitals (NTOs) are presented in Fig. S3–S5 and Table S2, ESI.
As such, the experimental estimation of the HOMO energies was carried out using photo electron spectroscopy in air (PESA) and the LUMO energies were calculated by adding the optical band gap (film spectra) to the HOMO values. These PESA measurements were performed on thin solid films to measure work functions corresponding to the HOMO energy levels. The HOMO levels of N5 and N6 were similar but the LUMO level of N6 was more negative when compared to the LUMO level of N5 (3.99 eV vs. 3.57 eV). Of particular relevance, we observe the similar experimental pattern of the HOMO and LUMO densities as the theoretical pattern where a drop in the LUMO was observed for N6. This is logical given the greater accepting strength of cyanopyridone and the fact that the band gap decreases as the acceptor strength increases [Eg = 1.53 eV (N6) and Eg = 2.03 eV (N5)]. For the energy level diagram, see Fig. S6, and for PESA curves, see Fig. S7 and S8, ESI. The energy level diagram suggested that the band gaps of these materials are all in the range required of acceptor materials for BHJ devices. We also conducted the electrochemistry experiments using cyclic voltammetry (CV). The CV measurement revealed that both N5 and N6 undergo reversible reduction processes, thus validating their potential suitability as n-type materials in BHJ devices (Fig. S9 and Table S3, ESI). From the CV experiment, it was observed that the band gap of N6 was narrower when compared with N5, and that the HOMOs were quite similar as was the case with PESA measurement. Moreover, the lower LUMO level of N6 suggested that the incorporation of an aromatizable acceptor unit, of which cyanopyridone is an example, in a given A–A–A format can indeed be advantageous to bring the LUMO down whilst maintaining density segregation. Furthermore, we believed that not only should organic semiconductors display promising optoelectronic properties together with solubility and chemical stability, they should also be thermally stable in order to allow device processing such as annealing. Keeping this criterion in mind, we conducted thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) experiments. Both analyses revealed that the newly designed materials are thermally stable chromophores and can endure annealing conditions at a higher temperature, if required. For TGA curves, see Fig. S10 and S11, and for DSC plots, see Fig. S12 and S13, ESI.
Given the quality of the blend film, favourable blend absorption, potential energy levels, and solubility and stability of the newly synthesized materials N5 and N6, they were examined in solution-processable BHJ devices as n-type semiconducting components along with the conventional donor polymer P3HT. The choice of P3HT was primarily done to observe initial performance and stability of these new acceptors, and to establish that these newly designed acceptors are compatible with the commercially available materials such as P3HT. The device structure used for the current study was ITO/PEDOT:PSS (38 nm)/active layer/Ca (20 nm)/Al (100 nm) where the active layer was a solution-processed blend of either N5 or N6, and the donor polymer P3HT. The active layer was prepared by spin coating the blend solution of appropriate acceptor with P3HT in o-dichlorobenzene (donor:acceptor 1:1.2 (w/w)) without subsequent annealing. The optimum active layer thickness was found to be around 70 nm. A high boiling point solvent was used to limit the formation of large-scale crystals or cracks on active surfaces as the use of a high boiling point solvent results in smooth and consistent films as was demonstrated by us and others. The 1:1.2 combination gave better device outcome than a ratio of 1:2. The annealing of the 1:1.2 active films resulted in poor device performance, mainly because of crack formation on the active surfaces. The poorer performance of the 1:2 combination may be due to the observed rough film surfaces.
The blend films using an optimal ratio of 1:1.2 (P3HT:acceptor) with N5 gave a Voc of 0.97 V, a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 7.03 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 0.59 and a PCE of 4.03%, respectively. The device outcome from the P3HT:N6 combination was very encouraging and afforded a Voc of 0.90 V, a Jsc of 10.78 mA cm−2, an FF of 0.63 and an overall PCE of 6.11%, respectively. It is important to mention that all of the devices afforded Voc and Jsc values as per the predictions from the energy level diagram, which advised that N5 devices should afford higher Voc and the devices incorporating N6 should exhibit a higher current density given the strong and bathochromic absorption of the blend film of N6. In contrast, the maximum PCE, Voc, and Jsc reached 3.02%, 0.58 V and 8.28 mA cm−2, respectively, for a device based on P3HT:PC61BM when fabricated under similar settings. It is notable to point out that the P3HT:N6 device outcome is among the highest PCE numbers that have been achieved using the investigated A–A–A format, and in particular with the NDI core-based NFAs. The respective current–voltage (J–V) curves for the best devices are represented in Fig. 3 and Table S4 (ESI) displays the overall J–V characteristics.
The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) curves of the best BHJ devices based on these acceptors under monochromatic light are shown in Fig. S14, ESI. For N5, the IPCE shows a maximum of ∼37% at 515 nm, whereas for N6, the IPCE spectrum shows a much broader response covering most of the visible region (400–800 nm) and even tailing into the near infrared region with a maximum value of ∼55% at 580 nm. The higher and broader peak IPCE together with the superior BHJ performance in the case of N6 can be attributed to a combination of an aromatizable acceptor (cyanopyridone) and greater light-harvesting when compared with the open-ended acceptor, 2-methoxyethyl-2-cyanoacetate. The IPCE spectra resemble the blend film spectra of the corresponding active layers, thus suggesting that both the donor and acceptor domains contributed to the photocurrent generation.
In order to examine the physical microstructure of the blend surfaces, we conducted atomic force microscopy (AFM) in the tapping mode. The surface morphology of the blend surfaces is shown in Fig. S15, ESI. It was evident that both the materials mixed very well with their donor counterpart and that the surface roughnesses were low in order (N5 = 3.4 nm and N6 = 1.3 nm). In particular, the P3HT:N6 blend showed superior morphology with better phase separation, a result that is usually associated with a higher device outcome. We also conducted the X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis in order to observe the surface crystallinity, if any. We found both the blend surfaces to be amorphous, thus ruling out the possibility of morphologies such as granular (for XRD spectra, see Fig. S16, ESI). This suggested that it was materials’ great miscibility with the donor component that was an important contribution to the observed device performance. This further underlines the utility of the design concepts used in N5 and N6. The excellent performance of N6 as a NFA suggests that other aromatizable groups would be worth examining.
In summary, we were able to explore the A–A–A format based on the NDI-core, and successfully generated two novel, high-performing NFAs, N5 and N6. Both N5 and N6 displayed promising optoelectronic properties, adequate solubility and energy levels matching those of the standard donor polymer P3HT. Not only are the achieved efficiency numbers (P3HT:N6 = 6.10%) among the highest literature values using a NFA based on an A–A–A format and P3HT, but they also suggest that both of the new materials are a type of acceptors which can be tested with other high performing conjugated donors. Moreover, the studied design has a strong potential to tune the optoelectronic properties of a given target just by choosing a different terminal acceptor. Such experiments with other aromatizable acceptor groups are currently underway in our laboratories.
S. V. B. (IICT) acknowledges SERB (DST) SB/S1/IC-009/2014, New Delhi, India, and S. V. B. (RMIT) acknowledges the Australian Research Council under a Future Fellowship Scheme (FT110100152) for financial support. A. G. is thankful to the Alfred Deakin Fellowship Scheme at the IFM, Deakin University, Australia. A. G. and A. A. acknowledge various testing facilities at Deakin, RMIT, Wuhan and Melbourne Universities. We acknowledge Mr D. D. La for XRD measurements. L. P. procured Gaussian 09 under the DST-FIST Scheme (Sanction No. FS/FST/PSI-018/2009).

There are no conflicts to declare.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, synthetic procedures, theoretical optical absorption, PESA, CV, TGA, DSC, IPCE and experimental spectra. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cc06369e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017