 DOI: 10.1039/D1SE00395J
(Communication)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 3092-3096


Akira
Takahara
,

Masahiro
Nakano
*,

Md.
Shahiduzzaman
,

Makoto
Karakawa
,

Tetsuya
Taima
,

Kohshin
Takahashi
,

Hajime
Shibata
 and 

Atsushi
Masuda


Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology, Kanazawa University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-1192, Japan. E-mail: masahiro-nakano@se.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Nanomaterials Research Institute (NanoMaRi), Kanazawa University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-1192, Japan

Institute for Frontier Science Initiative (InFiniti), Kanazawa University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-1192, Japan

National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Tsukuba Central 2, 1-1-1 Umezono, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8568, Japan

Graduate School of Science and Technology, Niigata University, Ikarashi, Nishi-ku, Niigata 950-2181, Japan

Received
17th March 2021
, Accepted 17th May 2021
First published on 18th May 2021
We investigated the photo-stability of PBDB-T, which is a widely used donor material for state-of-the-art organic solar cells (OSCs), in OSCs. PBDB-T did not decompose upon 100 h of photo-irradiation in OSCs, however, we found that PBDB-T can dedope PEDOT:PSS which is a standard solution-processable hole transport material. The dedoped PEDOT:PSS can work as a barrier to the carrier transfer. This result could be important for development of stable high-performance OSCs and interface chemistry of organic devices.

Organic solar cells (OSCs) have received considerable attention owing to their advantages over conventional inorganic solar cells, such as light weight, mechanical flexibility, and feasibility as printable devices. In addition to these features, OSCs do not contain toxic heavy metals or rare-earth metals, which has enabled their use in a wider range of applications than other emerging solar cells. Although OSCs have lower power conversion efficiency (PCE) values than conventional solar cells and other emerging solar cells, e.g., perovskite solar cells, the PCE values of OSCs have improved steadily thanks to the dedicated effort of materials chemists toward the development of efficient organic molecules. Particularly, recently developed efficient electron acceptors, e.g., ITIC and Y6, show good photovoltaic properties in OSCs (PCE: >18%). Moreover, it is predicted that OSCs with higher than 20% PCE values will be produced in the next few years using recently developed efficient acceptors.

Stability of OSCs against the external environment, such as humidity and oxygen in air, is also an important factor for optical functional devices including solar cell devices. In particular, photo-stability is the most important for solar cell devices because solar cell devices only work with photo-irradiation. Some researchers have reported the photo-stability of state-of-the-art OSCs with efficient acceptors, ITIC and Y6. The efficient acceptors are decomposed upon long-time photo-irradiation by the photocatalytic effect of metal oxides in OSCs and the photo-oxidation of the material itself (Fig. S1), which should pose a serious problem in the field of OSCs. To overcome this, methods that can reduce the decomposition rate of the efficient acceptors upon photo-irradiation have been reported, e.g., the insertion of an interlayer at the interface of ZnO and active layer and the addition of another component that can work as a sacrificial material. Those methods were developed as a result of studies of the decomposition mechanism of the active materials in OSCs. However, those studies focused on the acceptor materials in OSCs, and few studies have focused on the photo-stability of the donor materials in OSCs with the effective acceptors. In order to develop highly durable OSCs, it is important to study the photo-stability of the donor materials as well as acceptors. Most of the efficient acceptor-based OSCs with high PCE values contain polymer materials with 4,8-bis(2-thienyl)-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene and 1,3-bis(2-thienyl)-benzo[1,2-c:4,5-c′]dithiophene-4,8-dione units (PBDB-T and PBDB-T-2F, Fig. 1a) as electron donors, because of their complementary absorption range and suitable HOMO/LUMO energy levels to combine the efficient acceptors. Thus, investigating the stability of PBDB-T and its derivatives is an effective way to develop a OSC that features both stability and high efficiency. Although the thermal stability and the photo-stability of PBDB-T itself have been reported, the photo-stability of PBDB-T in working OSCs is still unclear. Study of material stability in working OSCs is important because the environment to which the material is exposed is quite different from that of the neat thin film of the material due to the existence of the high concentrations of electron/hole carriers and an interface with other materials in OSCs.
We have been focusing on the photo-stability of OSCs and were able to develop a stable inverted OSC (i-OSC, Fig. 1b) in 2003. That was a pioneering study of stable OSCs that work under ambient conditions. Our i-OSCs showed good photo-stability; up to 95% PCE was sustained even after 100 h of continuous photo-irradiation under ambient conditions (Fig. S2a). By using the device structure of our stable i-OSCs, the photo-stability of PBDB-Ts can be investigated simply, that is, we can study the photo-degradation of PBDB-Ts in OSCs without regarding the effect of photo-degradation of other materials and interfaces in OSCs. In this paper, we describe the photo-stability of PBDB-T and PBDB-T-2F in OSCs upon long-time photo-irradiation. Both PBDB-T- and PBDB-T-2F- based i-OSCs showed lower photo-stability than that of P3HT-based ones. During photo-irradiation, the i-OSCs showed decreasing photo-current and significant distortion of the J–V curves at the first quadrant was observed. We studied the origin of the decreasing photo-current and the distortion of the J–V curves by spectrochemical and electrical measurements.

We prepared PBDB-T:PC61BM-based i-OSCs that had the same structure as our stable devices (ITO/ZnO/active layer/PEDOT:PSS/Au/barrier film) for study of photo-stability of PBDB-Ts. The photo-stability testing was conducted using solar simulator (AM1.5, 100 mW cm−2) under ambient conditions for 100 h (see Experimental in ESI). The resulting PBDB-T-based OSC showed lower photo-stability (ratio of PCE values after photo-irradiation for 100 h (PCE100h) to max PCE values (PCEmax): 0.81, Fig. 2a and S2b) than the P3HT:PC61BM-based device (PCE100h/PCEmax: 0.95). During first 2 h of photo-irradiation, PCE was slightly increased thanks to improvement of short-circuit current density (JSC) and fill factor (FF) (Fig. S3) (vide infra). After that, JSC gradually decreased and FF and open circuit voltage (VOC) values were kept during photo-irradiation up to 100 h. This suggested that the low photo-stability of PBDB-T-based OSCs originated from decreasing of the JSC of the PBDB-T-based OSC during photo-irradiation. Additionally, even after photo-irradiation for 2 h the J–V curve in the first quadrant became bent in response to the photo-irradiation, which is generally called as roll-over phenomenon. We also fabricated a PBDB-T-2F-based i-OSC and observed similar photovoltaic characteristics upon continuous photo-irradiation: the decrease of the photo-current and the occurrence of roll-over phenomenon (Fig. 2b). This implies that polymer materials with PBDB-T backbone can show similar problem in i-OSCs during continuous photo-irradiation.

To study the origin of the decrease of the photo-current and the occurrence of roll-over phenomenon upon continuous photo-irradiation, we firstly focused on the photo-decomposition of PBDB-T in the working i-OSC. The change of PBDB-T in the working i-OSC was assessed by using reported methods; after peeling off barrier film with Au and PEDOT:PSS layer, PC61BM was removed by using butyl glycidyl ether from the bulk-heterojunction layer in OSCs with and without 100 h of photo-irradiation, then, remaining PBDB-T was investigated by spectral measurements (Fig. S4). The attenuated total reflection infrared (ATR-IR) spectra of the retained films were similar to that of the PBDB-T film without photo-irradiation (Fig. S5a). The absorption spectra of chloroform solution of PBDB-Ts obtained from the retained films were also similar to that of the solution of fresh PBDB-T (Fig. S5b). These results indicate that PBDB-T itself is not photo-sensitive polymer material in working OSCs and does not decompose even after photo-irradiation for 100 h. Morphological changes of the active layer in i-OSCs were studied by atomic force microscopy (AFM) assuming that changes of bulk morphologies are similar to changes of surface morphologies. The AFM images of photo-irradiated active layers were directly observed after peeling off barrier film with Au and PEDOT:PSS layer, and morphologies of PBDB-T component in the active layer can be observed from the AFM images of the remaining PBDB-T after removing PC61BM from the active layer. During the initial 2 h of photo-irradiation, the morphologies of PBDB-T:PC61BM layer and PBDB-T component in the active layer were changed (Fig. S7a, b, d and e). This result can explain the improved JSC and FF of PBDB-T-based i-OSCs from photo-irradiation time 0 h to 2 h. On the other hand, the morphology was retained from photo-irradiation time 2 h to 100 h (Fig. S7b, c, e and f) even though the photo-current was decreased and the J–V curve was distorted as solar simulated light was irradiated up to 100 h. These results indicate that photo-degradation of PBDB-T-based i-OSCs did not originate from the morphological changes of the active layer.
We speculated that the origin of the decrease of the photo-current and the occurrence of roll-over phenomenon of the PBDB-T-based OSCs could be related to the interface problem reported in similar cases. To clarify which layer upper or bottom of active layer causes the problem, PBDB-T:PC61BM-based i-OSCs without ZnO or PEDOT:PSS layer were fabricated. After 2 h of photo-irradiation, the i-OSC without ZnO showed roll-over phenomenon, whereas the one without PEDOT:PSS did not show the phenomenon (Fig. 3). These results suggested that the photo-degradation of PBDB-T-based i-OSCs should originate in the interaction between PBDB-T and PEDOT:PSS, which is hole transporting layer (HTL) material, at the interface in the i-OSC. We fabricated a bilayer structure of thin films of PBDB-T and PEDOT:PSS, which are prepared using low-concentrated solutions, sandwiched by electrodes (ITO/PBDB-T/PEDOT:PSS/Au) to study the changes at the interface between PBDB-T and PEDOT:PSS, and a P3HT-based bilayer device for comparison (ITO/P3HT/PEDOT:PSS/Au). The I–V characteristics of the bilayer films were measured before and after photo-irradiation (irradiation time: 0 h and 100 h, Fig. S9). After 100 h of photo-irradiation, changes of the slope of the I–V trace of the PBDB-T and PEDOT:PSS bilayer films were larger than those of the P3HT and PEDOT:PSS bilayer films, which meant that a component working as resistance was generated at the interface between PEDOT:PSS and PBDB-T.
We assumed that the increase of the resistance would be caused by dedoping of PEDOT:PSS at the interface by PBDB-T. Some studies reported that dedoping of PEDOT:PSS can be caused at the interface by other materials. The dedoping of PEDOT:PSS can make the work function of PEDOT:PSS larger. This would explain the origin of the cause of roll-over phenomenon and decreasing of photo-current in the photovoltaic characteristics upon continuous photo-irradiation; the larger work function of dedoped PEDOT:PSS would work as an energy barrier for the hole transport (Fig. 4). This energy barrier could be a cause of roll-over phenomenon and decreasing photo-current of the i-OSCs with PEDOT:PSS and PBDB-T under continuous photo-irradiation. To prove the assumption, we fabricated a thin PBDB-T and PEDOT:PSS (<10 nm)-based bilayer device with the ITO/ZnO/PBDB-T/PEDOT:PSS/barrier film structure. After 1 day of photo-irradiation of the bilayer device, the barrier film on the bilayer device was peeled off to expose the surface of PEDOT:PSS that is in contact with PBDB-T (Fig. S10); hydrophilic PEDOT:PSS was removed together with the barrier film and only the organic active layer remained on ZnO, as reported previously. Then, the surface potential of the exposed PEDOT:PSS film was measured by Kelvin-probe method. The surface potential of photo-irradiated PEDOT:PSS with PBDB-T is 0.34 eV larger than that of the original PEDOT:PSS, which indicates that work function of the dedoped PEDOT:PSS is 0.34 eV larger than that of original PEDOT:PSS (ca. 5.2 eV). On the other hand, a P3HT-based bilayer device with a thin PEDOT:PSS was fabricated and surface potential of the PEDOT:PSS on P3HT was measured after 1 day of photo-irradiation. The change of surface potential of the photo-irradiated PEDOT:PSS on P3HT (0.06 eV) is smaller than that of the case of the PBDB-T-based bilayer device. These results supported our speculation and the dedoped PEDOT:PSS could work as an energy barrier, which can be the origin of the roll-over phenomenon and decreasing of photo-current.
To avoid the photo-generation of energy barrier for carrier transport at the interface of HTL and PBDB-T, we focused on molybdenum oxide (MoOX) nanoparticle solution for fabrication of HTL, which is good alternative to PEDOT:PSS as a solution-processable HTL material. The i-OSCs with MoOX layer as HTL did not show the roll-over phenomenon in the photovoltaic characteristics even after 2 h of photo-irradiation (Fig. 5). This indicates that energy barrier does not generate at the interface between PBDB-T and MoOX. Moreover, we found that PB-62 (ref. 32) is effective as another conducting polymer material for the HTL. The roll-over phenomenon has not been observed after 2 h of photo-irradiation in the characteristics of the i-OSCs with PB-62 as an HTL (Fig. S11). These results suggest that material-selection of HTL materials is important for the fabrication of efficient OSCs with PBDB-T and its derivatives.

In this study, we investigated the photo-stability of PBDB-T in working OSCs by using a device whose structure is similar to that of previously reported photo-stable OSCs as the template. Although PBDB-T itself did not decompose upon photo-irradiation in the working OSCs, the OSC based on PBDB-T and that based on PBDB-T-2F did not show good stability compared with the P3HT-based OSC. We found that the resistance at the interface between PBDB-T and PEDOT:PSS in the OSC increased with photo-irradiation time, and it appeared in the J–V curves as a decrease of the photo-current and the roll-over phenomenon. This could originate in the dedoping of PEDOT:PSS, which could work as an energy barrier to the carrier transfer of the photovoltaic effect. We believe that these results are important for the development of OSCs with high durability because most of the high-efficiency OSCs contain PBDB-T derivatives and PEDOT:PSS. Moreover, these results are also important for study of interfacial phenomena between semiconducting polymers and conducting materials in organic devices. Further study of photo-stability of OSCs based on high-performance donor polymers are underway in our laboratory.


Attenuated total reflection (ATR)-IR spectra were recorded on FT/IR-460plus (JASCO Corporation). Atomic force microscope (AFM) images were measured with a SII SPI3800N AFM apparatus. Surface potential values were measured by using Trek model 320C electrostatic voltmeter with Kelvin-probe unit. Absorption spectra were obtained by using Cary 8454 (Agilent Technologies).


The J–V characteristics of the device were measured under simulated solar illumination (AM1.5, 100 mW cm−2) from a solar simulator based on a 150 W Xe lamp by using ADC 4262 multi-meter. The light source was a SAN-EI Electric XES-40S1 solar simulator, which was calibrated with a standard silicon photovoltaic detector. The photo-durability testing was performed under continuous photo-irradiation for 100 h (AM1.5, 100 mW cm−2). Environmental conditions of the photo-stability testing are the same to ISOS-L-1 (laboratory simulations, temperature: ambient and relative humidity: ambient).


Fabrication of OSCs and J–V measurements were performed by A. T. and M. N. Analytical measurements were performed by A. T. Research conception was performed by M. N. and K. T. with significant input from M. S., M. K., T. T., H. S., and A. M. All authors contributed to manuscript preparation.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by Fuji Seal Foundation, the Kanazawa University frontier science and innovation cooperation young investigator grant, and the Japan Prize Foundation. The authors are grateful to Nissan Chemical Corporation for kindly supplying PB-62.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1se00395j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021