 DOI: 10.1039/C3RA42624F
(Communication)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 19946-19951
Chih-Liang Wang, Chih-Chieh Wang, B. Reeja-Jayan and Arumugam Manthiram*
Materials Science and Engineering Program, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, USA. E-mail: rmanth@mail.utexas.edu; Fax: +1 512 471-7681; Tel: +1 512 471-1791
Received 29th May 2013, Accepted 2nd September 2013
First published on 5th September 2013
A low-cost and Mo(S,Se)2-free superstrate-type device structure is reported for the first time with the tunable band gap Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals. Using a facile hot-injection approach with only oleylamine reagent for synthesizing Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals with varied Se to (S + Se) ratio, the role of Se in Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals during the sulfurization step is systematically investigated. The loss of Sn is suppressed and the grain size is enlarged when the Se in Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals is replaced by S during the sulfurization. As a proof-of-concept, our superstrate-type architecture without using any binder in the ink exhibits Voc and FF comparable to the typical substrate-type device structure, in addition to its advantage of low cost.

The earth abundant kesterite Cu2ZnSnS4 with a high absorption coefficient of 104 cm−1, direct band gap, and good long-term stability has become an attractive candidate for use in solar cell absorber layers as it is composed of non-toxic, abundant elements compared to the traditional CdTe and Cu(In,Ga)(S,Se)2 (CIGS) thin-film absorbent layers. However, the vulnerability of the Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 system to decomposition pathways (eqn (1)) during heat treatment leads to different requirements for producing efficient Cu2ZnSn(S,S4)-based devices compared to CIGS.

(1)
This decomposition could be avoided by providing excess (S,Se)2 gas or a Sn(S,Se) source during the heat treatment of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4. However, heat treatment can lead to the formation of Mo(S,Se) at the interface between the Mo back contact and the Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 active layer interface (Fig. 1(a)).
While beneficial to devices based on the CIGS system, Mo(S,Se) is detrimental to the Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 system due to the formation of an undesirable Schottky barrier at the Mo/Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 interface. Moreover, Mo(S,Se) can accelerate the decomposition of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4. Despite approaches such as use of a diffusion barrier of TiN or alloyed Mo metal to reduce the impact of (S,Se) on Mo, the formation of Mo(S,Se)2 cannot completely be eliminated. It is, therefore, challenging to fabricate high-quality Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 devices while using a Mo back contact. Unfortunately, all current Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 research is based on the typical substrate-type device structure with an Mo back contact (Fig. 1(a)), which may become a critical bottleneck for increasing the power conversion efficiency of these devices.
On the other hand, high efficiency has been achieved with CdTe on a superstrate-type substrate, as compared to that of CIGS with a substrate-type substrate with Mo back contact. Such a difference indicates that not only the quality of the absorbent film but also the interfacial condition varied by the heat treatment is important for producing high-efficiency solar cells. When the current device efficiency of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 remains far behind those of CIGS and CdTe, it is highly possible to further raise the conversion efficiency of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 by adopting a suitable substrate to promote the film quality and the interfacial conditions.
We report here that inverting the existing Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 device structure to have a bottom substrate of CdS/TiO2/ITO/soda-lime glass instead of Mo during the sulfurization of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 can help address the aforementioned problems associated with the formation of Mo(S,Se)2. This novel superstrate-type configuration of Au/Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4/CdS/TiO2/ITO/soda-lime glass, shown in Fig. 1(b), includes a bifunctional interlayer of CdS to circumvent the formation of Mo(S,Se)2 and avoid the occurrence of potential decomposition pathways. Such a superstrate-type architecture has additional benefits like simplifying the mechanistic studies of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4, blocking the diffusion of Na from the glass substrate into the active layer using a window layer of TiO2, and reducing the overall manufacturing cost of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 modules by utilizing a single piece of glass to both offer support and encapsulate the device in the module. In addition, our work on the Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 system with a superstrate-type device architecture could provide alternative approaches to assess the possibility of replacing CdTe by Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 to greatly impact the solar cell market.
A variety of techniques to make kesterite-related materials such as Cu2ZnSnS4, Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 and Cu2ZnSnSe4 have been reported. Although a record high efficiency of 11% with the Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 family has been achieved using a hydrazine-based approach, hydrazine is a toxic and unstable chemical, which is not suitable for large-scale commercial manufacturing processes. Alternatively, adopting Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 nanocrystals as the initial precursor with a robust, easily scalable, and relatively safe manufacturing process becomes an attractive alternative to control the kesterite-related structure with tunable quaternary compositions and spatial compositional uniformity. Since Cu2ZnSnS4 nanocrystal based inks followed by a selenization process has been demonstrated by Guo et al., nanocrystal-based inks have been considered a promising route for producing a high quality absorbent layer in the Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 devices. However, the strong chemical reaction of Se vapor during selenization causes undesirable effects on Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 devices, as compared to the mild chemical and environmentally friendly reaction of S vapor during sulfurization. Furthermore, S being more abundant in the earth's crust compared to Se makes the sulfurization process more cost-effective compared to selenization price. These advantages make the sulfurization of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 nanocrystals attractive for development of high-quality, low cost Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 films. Unfortunately, currently there are no studies on the effect of sulfurization on the properties of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 nanocrystals and their films.
Accordingly, we report here the controllability of Cu-poor and Zn-rich Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals with various S to Se ratios, synthesized by a facile hot-injection approach using only oleylamine reagent, to successfully synthesize a series of Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals and investigate the role played by Se in Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 during the sulfurization. Additionally, the proposed low-cost superstrate-type device structure of Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4/CdS/TiO2/ITO/soda-lime glass without the effect of Mo(S,Se)2 and Na diffusion has been demonstrated for the first time in the Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 class of materials. This new architecture also provides a stable platform to conduct mechanistic studies that can help correlate materials characteristics with device performance.

The superstrate-type device structure of Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4/CdS/TiO2/ITO/soda-lime glass, as shown in Fig. 1(b), was devised for the first time and compared to the typical device structure of Fig. 1(a). The 30 nm thick anatase TiO2 layer was fabricated by a sol–gel synthesis, followed by heat treatment at 450 °C for 2 h on ITO-coated glass slides purchased from Nanocs (New York, NY). The CdS buffer layer was deposited on top of the TiO2 layers by chemical bath deposition (CBD). Dense CdS thin-film layers were obtained during CBD inside a water bath maintained at 65 °C for 15 min. The Cu-poor and Zn-rich Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals, with Se/(S + Se) ratios of x = 0, 0.27, 0.52, 0.80, 1.0, were synthesized by the hot-injection approach under an argon atmosphere to investigate the influence of Se in Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals during the sulfurization. An (S + Se) anion precursor to Cu ratio higher than 2.5 was prepared for the hot-injection process. An ink consisting of Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals and ethanol was spincoated onto the top of the CdS buffer layer. The Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 film was formed by sulfurization of the spincoated Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 layer at 570 °C for 45 min. The sulfurization process was performed inside a graphite box containing sulfur powder under argon flow. A mild HCl (hydrogen chloride) etching process was applied for the devices after the sulfurization step. Finally, a thermally evaporated gold electrode was used to define an active device area of 0.1 cm2.


To examine the influence of the content of Se in Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 during the sulfurization, a series of Cu poor and Zn-rich Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals with various S to Se ratios based on a kesterite structure are required. Fig. 2(a) shows the photographs of Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystal solutions with the energy band gaps tuned by varying the Se/(S + Se) ratios as x = 0, 0.27, 0.52, 0.80, and 1.0. In Fig. 2(b), the compositional analysis by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) indicates that the S to Se ratio in Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals under Cu-poor and Zn-rich conditions can be varied by our hot-injection approach. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis shown in Fig. 2(c) indicates that the pure Cu2ZnSnS4 and Cu2ZnSnSe4 nanocrystals exhibit diffraction peaks that match with those in the JCPDS cards 26-0575 and 70-8930, respectively. With increasing Se content in the Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals, the diffraction peaks shift to lower angles due to the substitution of larger Se (0.198 nm) for smaller S (0.184 nm). Additionally, the lattice constants a and c of Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 obtained from the XRD data in Fig. 2(d) reveal that the volume of the Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 unit cell increases with increasing amount of Se in Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4. These results indicate that the Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals could be successfully synthesized and tuned by the hot-injection method. Contrary to Riha et al., who synthesized Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 by using extra NaBH4 and toxic trioctylphosphine oxide, and Ou et al., who synthesized by dissolving thiourea in 1-octadecenee, our hot-injection approach employing high amounts of elemental anion precursors and involving direct mixing of S with Se in oleylamine demonstrates a facile, environmentally benign, and easily scalable route to synthesize a series of Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals.
The nanocrystals have been considered a promising precursor to make a spatially uniform film with precisely controlled composition. However, to form a solar cell junction, the heat treatment to promote the grain growth of nanocrystals is necessary to improve carrier transport in as-prepared nanocrystal films. As a result, a series of Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 followed by a 570 °C heat treatment in the presence of sulfur were investigated for realizing the varied morphology of films with increasing content of Se in Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals.
The Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals were incorporated into devices based on the new superstrate-type architecture, Au/Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4/CdS/TiO2/ITO/soda-lime glass, as depicted in Fig. 3(a). The cross-sectional SEM images of a device stack comprising of the Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4/CdS/TiO2/ITO/soda-lime glass layers, for a series of x values, are shown in Fig. 3(b)–(f). The data reveal that the compactness and size of the grains present in the Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 film after the sulfurization is increased by increasing the Se content in the as-synthesized Cu2ZnSnS4 nanocrystals. Compared to the sulfurization of pure Cu2ZnSnSe4, the image of the as-synthesized Cu2ZnSnS4 nanocrystals after the sulfurization treatment revealed relatively small grains, widely distributed over the film, as show in Fig. 3(b), which suggests a slower rate of grain regrowth. This would suggest that the Se content in the as-synthesized Cu2ZnSnS4 nanocrystals can assist the grain regrowth of Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 and benefit the formation of a compact film consisting of larger-size grains, driven by the thermal force of the chemical reaction depicted in eqn (2) in presence of S during heat treatment:
Cu2ZnSnSe4 (s) + 2S2 (g) → Cu2ZnSnS4 (s) + 2Se2 (g)
(2)
This phenomenon of stimulating the grain regrowth for Cu2ZnSnSe4 nanocrystals in the presence of sulfur is the same as that for Cu2ZnSnS4 nanocrystals in the presence of selenium, which proceeds in the reverse direction to that indicated by eqn (2). This suggests that the reaction to produce Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 would follow eqn (2) and Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 system can be achieved by adjusting the amount of Se and S in the heat treatment, which agrees well with a similar concept in the CuIn(S,Se)2 system. While varying the amount of sulfur vapor during heat treatment, the S/(S + Se) ratio could be tuned for producing high quality Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 with an optimal band gap.
In Fig. 4(a), the EDX analysis indicates the compositional ratios in Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals with various Se/(S + Se) ratios of x = 0, 0.27, 0.52, 0.80, and 1.0 after the 570 °C sulfurization for 45 min. Even though there is no consensus for a specific compositional ratio, the expected ranges of desirable compositional ratios have been indicated in Fig. 4(a) by different shadow regions. The compositional ratios of Zn/Sn and Cu/(Zn + Sn) for various Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals are slightly decreased, but the compositional ratio of Cu/Sn in Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals decreased with increasing the Se content in the Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals. Furthermore, Fig. 4(b) shows the change in the S/(S + Se) and Cu/Sn compositional ratios for a series of Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 after the 570 °C sulfurization for 45 min. For the change in the S/(S + Se) compositional ratio, we can see that most portions of Se in the as-synthesized Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanoparticles have been replaced by S during sulfurization, which suggests the occurrence of reaction (2) in the presence of S during heat treatment. On the other hand, it is found that the Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 film with x = 0 in Fig. 3(b) is relatively thin compared to the others. It can be attributed to the formation of pores accompanying the grain regrowth and induced during the Se–S exchanging process. Since large amount of Se is replaced by gas phase S, it is expected to leave relatively large number of pores in the resulting film, leading to the volume expansion as shown in Fig. 3(c)–(f). Secondarily, the unit cell volume of Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 film is varied with the ratio of S to Se due to the larger volume of Cu2ZnSnSe4 unit cell compared to that of Cu2ZnSnS4, which also makes it reasonable to have the Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 films thick.
For the change in the Cu/Sn compositional ratio, this implies the progression of the decomposition path of reaction (1), leading to the loss of Sn. On increasing the Se content in the Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals, the loss of Sn after the sulfurization can be suppressed. This can be explained by the addition of Se into the Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals, stimulating the grain regrowth by the reaction involving the replacement of Se by S to suppress the decomposition path of reaction (1). Our results indicate the possibility of solving the issue of the secondary phases arising from the loss of Sn if the grain regrowth condition can be further optimized. According to Guo's work, the occurrence of the loss of Sn during the selenization was also revealed. The change of the compositional ratio from the Cu2ZnSnS4 nanocrystals (Cu/Sn = 1.37, Cu/(Zn + Sn) = 0.70, Zn/Sn = 0.95) to the Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 resulting film (Cu/Sn = 1.66, Cu/(Zn + Sn) = 0.79, Zn/Sn = 1.11) agrees well with our finding of the loss of Sn in the nanocrystals during the sulfurization.
As a proof-of-concept, the Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals after the sulfurization process were tested on the superstrate-type configuration of CdS/TiO2/ITO/soda-lime glass. The solar cells were illuminated through the ITO side of the substrate with a 100 mW cm−2 white light illumination under AM 1.5 G conditions for measuring the solar cell current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first group to demonstrate Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 absorbers on the superstrate-type configuration, which serves as a platform for us to investigate the sulfurization of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 nanocrystals without being influenced by the effect of Mo(S,Se)2 and Na. The conversion efficiencies of superstrate-type configuration with a series of Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystal precursors have also been evaluated as shown in Fig. 4(c). The results suggest that our new device architecture has the ability to become a stable platform to test device performance while varying the properties of materials. An open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 377 mV, short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 4.18 mA cm−2, fill factor (FF) of 41.37% for the sulfurization of Cu2ZnSnSe4 nanocrystals can be extracted from the J–V characteristics under 1 sun (AM 1.5 G) illumination, as shown in Fig. 4(d). Our superstrate-type device structure without using any binder in the ink exhibits comparable Voc and FF to the typical substrate-type device structure, when compared to the reported efficiencies of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 nanocrystal-based absorber as listed in Table 1. When connecting the results of Fig. 4(c) to Fig. 4(a), we see that relatively higher conversion efficiency can be achieved only when the compositional ratios are closer to the expected ranges of desirable compositional ratios. The relatively high efficiency of the solar cell is due to a compact film with larger grain size, as shown in Fig. 3(f), and lower loss of Sn, as shown in Fig. 4(b), with increasing Se content in the Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals. However, the limitation of our device efficiency mainly by a relatively lower short-circuit current density could be attributed to the resulting Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 film consisting of relatively high porosity and roughness even after sulfurization, which are highly possible to increase charge trapping and recombination. Such defects could be mitigated by modifying the coating technique, such as adjusting the concentration of ink or adopting different organic solvents like alkanethiol to fabricate a robust precursor film.
Device structure
Voc (mV)
Jsc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
Eff. (%)
Ref.
Glass/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/ZnO/ITO
420
30.4
52.7
6.73
17
Glass/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/ZnO/ITO
210
11.5
33.1
0.80
14
Glass/Au/CZTS/CdS/ZnO/ITO
321
1.95
37.0
0.23
23
Glass/ITO/TiO2/CdS/CZTSSe/Au
377
4.18
41.3
0.65
This study
In addition, it has been reported that the preferred dominant defects of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 consists of VCu shallow acceptors. However, undesirable CuZn deep acceptors tend to occur most of the time. Besides, the increase in S content in the resulting Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 film is likely to create extra deep trap states from CuZn + SnZn and 2CuZn + SnZn defect clusters, which can limit the carrier life time. This suggests that optimizing the band gap by tuning the ratio of S to Se is beneficial for producing higher efficiency devices in our system. Our Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 film with x = 1.0 after sulfurization shows S-rich Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 with the Se/(S + Se) ratio of around 0.1, as shown in Fig. 4(a). This suggests that the conversion efficiency can further be raised by fabricating Se-rich Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 films by reducing the replaced amount of Se by S, which could be achieved by varying the amount of sulfur vapor during the heat treatment. As a result, it could reasonably be expected that the efficiency for the sulfurization of Cu2ZnSnSe4 in our superstrate-type configuration could be further enhanced by fabricating a robust precursor film and optimizing the Se/(S + Se) ratio in the Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 film.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated Cu-poor and Zn-rich Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals with varying S to Se ratios, synthesized and altered by a facile hot-injection approach using only the oleylamine reagent. The evolution of Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals to Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 film was investigated for the first time via tuning the ratio of Se to S in Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals followed by a sulfurization step. It was found that minimizing the possibility for the loss of Sn during the heat treatment and producing a compact film with large grain size are beneficial for the device performance. Accordingly, a novel low-cost superstrate-type device architecture has been demonstrated offering an opportunity for the Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 system to circumvent challenges in the existing substrate-type architecture, such as decomposition of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 and a possible Schottky barrier at the Mo/Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 interface.


Financial support by the Welch foundation grant number F-1254 is gratefully acknowledged.

† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ra42624f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013