 DOI: 10.1039/C7CP00231A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 7262-7269


Yuvraj
Patil
,

Rajneesh
Misra
*,

Manish Kumar
Singh
 and 

Ganesh D.
Sharma
*

Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Indore 453552, India. E-mail: rajneeshmisra@iiti.ac.in

Department of Physics, The LNM Institute of Technology (Deemed University), Jamdoli, Jaipur, Rajasthan 302031, India. E-mail: gdsharma273@gmail.com

Received
12th January 2017
, Accepted 17th February 2017
First published on 17th February 2017
A symmetrical D–π–A–π–D type small molecule consisting of thiophene flanked diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) as a core and an end capping ferrocene donor linked by an ethynyl bridge, denoted as Fc-DPP-Fc, was synthesized and its optical, thermal and electrochemical properties were investigated in order to explore its potential applicability as a donor for solution processed bulk heterojunction solar cells. The photophysical and electrochemical properties of this small molecule showed strong charge transfer interaction between the ferrocene donor and the DPP acceptor, and it is found to be suitable as a small molecule donor along with PC71BM as an electron acceptor for solution processed bulk heterojunction organic solar cells (OSCs). Although the open circuit voltage (Voc) of the OSC based on as cast Fc-DPP-Fc:PC71BM (1:2 weight ratio) from a THF solvent is quite high (0.98 V), it showed an overall power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 2.55% with low values of short circuit current (Jsc) and fill factor (FF) of 6.35 mA cm−2 and 0.41, respectively. After using a solvent additive (SA), i.e. 3 v% DIO/THF solution for film deposition, the resultant OSC showed an improved overall PCE of 4.83% and it further improved up to 6.44%. The improvement in the PCE value is mainly attributed to the enhancement in Jsc and FF, resulting from the increased light harvesting efficiency, balanced charge transport and favorable nanoscale morphology of the active layer, induced by SA and TSA.

Organic solar cells based on solution processed bulk heterojunction (BHJ) active layers have received a lot of attention from researchers around the globe owing to their potential in terms of their flexibility, light-weight and low cost of fabrication. The power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of organic solar cells based on small molecules as donors have reached above 10%, and are now comparable to those of polymer based OSCs. Small molecules have various advantages over conjugated polymers, such as their well-defined molecular structure, easy purification and less batch to batch variation. The rapid progress of small molecule based OSCs is mostly attributed to the careful design of the molecular structures. The main motifs in the design of small molecules involve a combination of an electron donor (D) and an electron acceptor (A) in a symmetrical manner, e.g. A–D–A or D–A–D, producing a small molecule with strong light harvesting ability and suitable energy levels as well as forming a nanoscale morphology when blended with fullerene and non-fullerene acceptors.

Diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP), an aromatic heterocycle with two fused electron deficient lactams, possesses good photo-stability, and strong light absorbing and electron withdrawing abilities due to its two amide groups. Small molecules based on DPP possess a greater ability to self-assemble into ordered domains, which leads to high charge-carrier mobility. In recent times, DPP has emerged as an important acceptor motif in the design of various types of small molecule donor as well as acceptor materials for photovoltaics. Porphyrin based DPPs as small-molecule donors have reached PCEs over 8% but their synthesis requires multiple steps. Herein we have synthesized ferrocenyl based DPP Fc-DPP-Fc as a small molecule donor via a simple synthetic methodology with a lower number of steps. We have recently reported various DPP based symmetrical and unsymmetrical small molecule donors for BHJ OSCs. Ferrocene is a strong electron donor, with a reversible redox active center, and is a widely studied donor for various applications. The derivatives of ferrocene are photochemically as well as thermally stable and show nonlinear optical (NLO) properties. The ferrocenyl derivatives are known for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) but are rarely known for bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cell applications. To the best of our knowledge, for the first time we here report ferrocene substituted DPP for bulk heterojunction OSCs.
In this article we report the use of a symmetrical D–π–A–π–D dipolar small molecule as a donor for solution processed bulk heterojunction organic solar cells. The combination of ferrocene and DPP units with a suitable conjugated π-spacer could construct promising architectures which exhibit the good donating ability of ferrocene, the electron-withdrawing nature of DPP, and intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) character from ferrocene to DPP. The introduction of an ethynyl bridge can be of benefit because its electron withdrawing nature could lower the HOMO energy level of Fc-DPP-Fc, thus giving high Voc. Moreover, the ethynyl bridge could result in planar conformations for the Fc-DPP-Fc small molecule donor due to its cylindrical like π-electron density, thus enhancing intermolecular π–π stacking and facilitating intermolecular charge transport.
When Fc-DPP-Fc as an electron donor is blended with PC71BM as an electron acceptor for an OSC processed with the active layer Fc-DPP-Fc:PC71BM (1:2 weight ratio) cast from THF, it showed a low PCE of 2.55%, which may be due to the non-favorable morphology of the active layer, hindering the exciton dissociation and charge transport. After the addition of 3 v% 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) in the THF, i.e. solvent additive (SA), the device based on this active layer showed PCEs up to 4.83% with enhancements in Jsc and FF. The PCE value was further improved to 6.44% when the 3 v% DIO/THF processed blended film was thermally annealed, i.e. two-step processing (TSA), and used as an active layer. The improvement in the PCE value is attributed to the increase in both Jsc and FF and related to a more favorable nanoscale morphology for exciton dissociation and charge transport.

We have synthesized Fc-DPP-Fc as per the reported procedure (Scheme 1) and characterized it by 1H, 13C NMR and HRMS spectroscopic techniques.


The thermal properties of Fc-DPP-Fc were investigated by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) under a nitrogen atmosphere. The Fc-DPP-Fc exhibited good thermal stability and the decomposition temperature for 5% weight loss was found to be 290 °C (Fig. S1, ESI).

The electronic absorption spectrum of Fc-DPP-Fc was recorded in tetrahydrofuran (THF) at room temperature (Fig. 1) and its corresponding data are listed in Table 1. The Fc-DPP-Fc showed absorption in the UV-visible to near infrared region. The Fc-DPP-Fc exhibited an intense band in the longer wavelength region (500–650 nm, centered at 624 nm with a shoulder peak at 590 nm), attributed to the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) between the ferrocene donor and the DPP acceptor unit, as well as less intense bands in the shorter wavelength region (300–450 nm), attributed to the π–π* transitions of the DPP unit. The dual absorption spectrum of this small molecule is a typical characteristic property of D–A conjugated molecules. For the thin film absorption of Fc-DPP-Fc, the absorption peak corresponds to the ICT band shifted to 662 nm and a new vibronic peak located at 702 nm, resulting from molecular aggregation and effective π–π stacking between the molecular backbones which is beneficial for charge transport. The absorption edge for the film absorption spectra of Fc-DPP-Fc is located at 806 nm, corresponding to the optical bandgap of 1.58 eV.

λ
abs (nm)

ε/104 (M−1 cm−1)

T
d
 (°C)

E
2 oxid

E
1 oxid
E1 red

E
2 red

E
g
 (eV)

E
g
 (eV)

a Absorbance measured in THF at 1 × 10−4 M concentration, ε: extinction coefficient.
b Decomposition temperatures for 5% weight loss at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1, under a nitrogen atmosphere.
c The electrochemical analysis was performed in a 0.1 M solution of Bu4NPF6 in dichloromethane at 100 mV s−1 scan rate, versus Ag/Ag+ at 25 °C.
d Optical bandgap obtained from the onset absorption in the thin film.


Fc-DPP-Fc

624
2.6
290
1.06
0.61
−0.87
−1.43
1.7
1.58
The electrochemical properties of Fc-DPP-Fc were explored by cyclic voltammetry (CV) and differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) in a dichloromethane solvent using 0.1 M tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (Bu4NPF6) as a supporting electrolyte (as shown in Fig. S2, ESI). The Fc-DPP-Fc shows two oxidation and two reduction waves in CV and DPV. The first oxidation wave in Fc-DPP-Fc at 0.61 V is due to the ferrocenyl moiety and the second at 1.06 V corresponds to the thiophene unit. The Fc-DPP-Fc exhibits two reduction waves related to the formation of a monoanion and a dianion. The HOMO and LUMO levels of Fc-DPP-Fc were estimated from the onset oxidation and reduction potentials, respectively, and were found to be −5.34 eV and −3.64 eV, respectively, and the electrochemical bandgap was 1.70 eV. The HOMO and LUMO energy levels of the Fc-DPP-Fc donor match well with those of the PC71BM acceptor, indicating effective charge transfer between the donor and the fullerene acceptor, which is energetically feasible.

We investigated the photovoltaic properties of Fc-DPP-Fc as a donor along with PC71BM as an acceptor with the structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/Fc-DPP-Fc:PC71BM/PFN/Al. Poly[(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] (PFN) was used as the cathode interlayer to enhance the electron collection at the Al cathode electrode. First of all, we optimized the donor to acceptor weight ratios (1:0.5, 1:1, 1:1.5 and 1:2) in the active layer processed with THF and found that the 1:1 weight ratio showed the best photovoltaic properties. In device optimization, 3 v% DIO was added as a solvent additive and subsequent thermal annealing was carried out at 110 °C for 10 min. The current–voltage characteristics of the optimized devices, under illumination of AM 1.5 G stimulated light intensity at 100 mW cm−2, are shown in Fig. 2 and the photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table 2. The OSC based on as-cast Fc-DPP-Fc:PC71BM (device A) showed an overall PCE of 2.55% with Jsc = 6.35 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.98 V and FF = 0.41. Employing DIO as a solvent additive (SA) in the active layer (device B) resulted in improved Jsc and FF values up to 9.18 mA cm−2 and 0.56, respectively, but a slight reduction in Voc (0.94 V), enhancing the overall PCE up to 4.83%. The combination of the DIO additive and the subsequent thermal annealing, i.e. two-step annealing (TSA) (device C), gave a good Voc of 0.94 V and high values of both Jsc and FF of 10.71 mA cm−2 and 0.64, respectively, resulting in a PCE of 6.44%, which is quite a bit higher than that for the device based on the as-cast active layer. It is noted that the Fc-DPP-Fc based small molecule donor with D–π–A–π–A structure showed the highest PCE of 6.44%, demonstrating the importance of ferrocene and DPP linked with an ethynyl bridge.

Device

J
sc (mA cm−2)

J
sc
 (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)
PCE (%)

a Average of 8 devices.
b Estimated from the integration of IPCE spectra. Device A: active layer cast from THF. Device B: active layer processed with DIO (3 v%)/THF. Device C: active layer processed with TSA.

Device A
6.35 (±0.21)
6.13
0.98 (±0.05)
0.41 (±0.08)
2.55 (±0.12)
2.47
Device B
9.18 (±0.14)
9.02
0.94 (±0.023)
0.56 (±0.07)
4.83 (±0.13)
4.75
Device C
10.71 (±15)
10.48
0.94 (±0.13)
0.64 (±0.09)
6.44 (±0.08)
6.37
The addition of high boiling point additives, such as DIO, leads to the formation of D–A interfaces with more phase separation, as a consequence of selective solubilization of the PC71BM by DIO, ultimately promoting the formation of donor aggregation during the film formation process. Generally, in this process, Jsc is dramatically increased due to the increased D–A interfaces but Voc usually is decreased owing to the up-shifted HOMO value by the aggregation of the donor materials. But in our results, the Voc value was increased after the subsequent thermal annealing of the active layer, resulting in a significant enhancement in PCE. Similar observations are also reported in the literature.
In all these devices, the high Voc is related to the deeper HOMO energy level of Fc-DPP-Fc, which is consistent with our anticipation. The increase in Jsc and FF after either SA or TSA may originate from the increase in absorption properties, better favorable nanoscale morphology of the active layer and more balanced charge mobilities, which are discussed below.
In order to get information about the effect of SA and TSA on the Jsc and FF of the organic solar cells, we recorded the optical absorption spectra of Fc-DPP-Fc:PC71BM thin films processed under different conditions and the results are shown in Fig. 3. The blended film showed two absorption bands having peaks centered at 388 nm and 646 nm, corresponding to PC71BM and Fc-DPP-Fc, respectively. For the film after SA and TSA treatment, the absorption corresponding to PC71BM remains almost the same but the absorption corresponding to Fc-DPP-Fc is changed significantly (the absorption peak corresponding to Fc-DPP-Fc is red shifted), indicating that the association of small molecule Fc-DPP-Fc in the thin film can be controlled via SA and TSA, which assist organization into ordered structures. Moreover, the optimized active layers showed shoulder peaks at 714 nm and 722 nm, indicating the enhancement of π–π stacking between the molecular backbones. The SA and TSA treatments induce interactions between extended molecular chains, leading to aggregate formation. The differences in the relative orientation of the dipole moments in the as cast, SA and TSA treated films are perceptible as red/blue shifts in the absorption spectra, depending upon the annealing conditions. It can be seen from Fig. 3 that the absorption band corresponding to Fc-DPP-Fc is red shifted upon either SA or TSA compared to the as-cast film, indicating that the chain dipole moments are arranged in a head to tail fashion. Moreover, the vibronic feature in the longer wavelength region is enhanced upon SA, showing an increased aggregation tendency. This indicates that there is an increased population of molecular transition dipoles that are arranged in a head to tail fashion. Upon thermal annealing of the SA film, the spectral broadening is further enhanced, indicating increased aggregation induced by the thermal treatment, which is beneficial for charge transport.
The incident photon to current conversion efficiency is the ratio of the number of collected charge carriers to the number of incident photons absorbed by the active layer of the OSC and is used to characterize the light response for different wavelengths and efficiencies. The IPCE spectra of the OSCs are shown in Fig. 4. As shown in Fig. 4, for devices B and C, there is a uniform increase in the IPCE values across the entire wavelength of measurement compared to that for device A, consistent with the absorption spectra of the active layers. The maximum values of IPCE for devices A, B and C are 42.6%, 52.9% and 62.1%, respectively. The estimated Jsc values obtained from the IPCE curves (as shown in Table 2) are 6.13, 9.02 and 10.48 mA cm−2 for devices A, B and C, respectively. These values are consistent with the Jsc values obtained from the J–V curves under illumination.
The hole and electron mobilities of the optimized Fc-DPP-Fc:PC71BM active layers processed under different conditions were estimated using dark current–voltage characteristics of the hole and electron only devices (as shown in Fig. 5a and b), respectively, and by fitting these curves with a space charge limited current (SCLC) model. For the as-cast blended film, the hole (μh) and electron (μe) mobilities are 3.58 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 2.64 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, with a charge carrier mobility ratio (μe/μh) of 7.38, indicating imbalanced charge transport in device A, resulting in a low value of FF. However, the SA and TSA processed active layer μh values were increased significantly up to 1.05 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 2.13 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, but the μe values slightly increased up to 2.72 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 2.78 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. For the active layer processed with SA, the value of μe/μh is reduced to 2.59, indicating more balanced charge transport properties. The thermal annealing of the SA active layer further enhances the charge carrier mobilities with more balanced charge transport (μe/μh = 1.30) with less charge recombination.
The dependence of photocurrent Jph (Jph = JL − JD, where JL and JD are the current densities under illumination and in the dark, respectively) on the effective applied voltage Veff (Veff = Vo − Vapp, where Vapp is the applied voltage and Vo is the voltage when Jph = 0) was used to analyze the mechanism related to the exciton dissociation and charge collection processes in the devices and the results are shown in Fig. 6. As can be seen from this figure, Jph has a linear dependence on Veff at the low voltage region. It reaches saturation when Veff increases. For device A (as cast), Jph shows a stronger field dependence across the large bias voltage range, and is not fully saturated even at Veff = 2.4 V, suggesting that this device suffers from significant bimolecular recombination and the internal electric field is not sufficient for the extraction of all photo charge carriers. After the SA treatment (device B), the Veff shifts to a lower voltage, at which the Jph is saturated (Jphsat) and further shifted to a lower Veff for device C (TSA treated). These results confirm that the exciton dissociation and charge collection improved for devices B and C. The ratio Jph(sc)/Jphsat under short circuit conditions is used to get information about the overall exciton dissociation efficiency and charge collection efficiency. The values of Jph/Jphsat are 0.72, 0.88 and 0.91 for devices A, B and C, respectively, confirming that the exciton dissociation and charge collection efficiency are improved for devices B and C (more for C) leading to higher Jsc and FF. We have also estimated the maximum generation rate of free charge carriers (Gmax) using Jphsat = qLGmax, where L is the thickness of the active layer and q is the electronic charge. The estimated values of Gmax for the devices A, B and C are 6.47 × 1027 m3 s−1, 7.84 × 1027 m3 s−1 and 8.86 × 1027 m3 s−1, respectively. The trends observed in Gmax for different devices are consistent with the increase in Jsc as well as the UV-visible absorption coefficient of the corresponding active layers (Fig. 3), which indicates the more efficient generation of excitons and their dissociation into free charge carriers in the active layer processed with either SA or TSA treatment. The greater values of Gmax and Jph(sc)/Jphsat for the devices processed with the SA or TSA active layer compared to those of the as-cast counterpart are attributed to their better phase separation in the morphology of the active layer, increased hole mobility and improved balanced charge transport.
In order to get information about the effect of different treatments on the molecular packing and crystallinity of the active layer, X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was performed and the results are shown in Fig. 7. The as-cast Fc-DPP-Fc:PC71BM film exhibits a broad and weak peak at 2θ = 5.32°, corresponding to the (100) diffraction of the d-spacing, indicating a low degree of crystallinity. This peak shifted to 2θ = 6.18° and also became much stronger when the film was processed with the DIO additive, indicating that DIO promotes the crystallization of Fc-DPP-Fc with different molecular arrangements. Moreover, the intensity of the peak also increases with SA and further increases with TSA treatment, indicating that the crystallinity of the active layer is improved, which is beneficial for charge transport. Moreover, a diffraction peak corresponding to π–π stacking (010) appeared at 2θ = 22.36° and the intensity of this peak also increased with SA and TSA treated active layers. Therefore, with SA, the small molecule packing was enhanced and led to greater crystallinity than that of the as-cast film and it further enhanced with TSA treatment. The peak at 2θ = 18.24° observed in the XRD patterns in the blended film is assigned to the diffraction originated from the clusters of PC71BM.
Further, to understand the effect of SA and TSA on the photovoltaic properties of BHJ OSCs, we used transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to probe the morphology of the active layers and the results are shown in Fig. 8. The bright and dark domains are correspond to the Fc-DPP-Fc and PC71BM phases, respectively, because the fullerene has relatively higher electron scattering density than the small molecules. For BHJ OSCs, a certain degree of phase separation is required in the active layers. Severe phase separation or high intermixing of phases does not favor good charge transport and the formation of bi-continuous interpenetrating networks for efficient charge transport. As can be seen from Fig. 8, compared to the as-cast blended film, a better phase separation was observed after SA and TSA treatments. With TSA treatment, a clear fibrillar morphology with a bicontinuous interpenetrating network was observed and is more favorable for exciton diffusion/dissociation and charge transport, beneficial for high Jsc and FF.

In conclusion, a D–π–A–π–D type small molecule consisting of thiophene flanked DPP as an acceptor and an end capping ferrocene donor linked by an ethynyl bridge was used as an electron donor along with PC71BM as an electron acceptor for solution processed BHJ organic solar cells. After the optimization of the nanoscale morphology of the active layer, i.e. SA and TSA processing, the OSCs showed overall PCEs of 4.83% and 6.44%, respectively, which are higher than that for the as-cast active layer counterpart. The enhancement in PCE is mainly attributed to the increase in both Jsc and FF. The high values of Jsc and FF for the TSA treated OSCs are attributed to the enhancement in the absorption of the active layer, a favorable nanoscale morphology and balanced charge transport. The results presented here demonstrate that the use of ferrocene donors will be a useful tool for making highly efficient small molecule donors for BHJ OSCs.


Y. P. thanks the Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD), New Delhi, for a fellowship. R. M. thanks the Department of Science and Technology (Project No. EMR/2014/001257), New Delhi, and the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (Project No. 01/(2795)/14/EMR-II), New Delhi, for the financial support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, TGA, and CV.af0 See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp00231a
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017