 DOI: 10.1039/C9TC00374F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 3852-3861


Xiang
Zhang
,

Yang
Zhou
,

Yuzhu
Li
,

Jiawen
Sun
,

Xubing
Lu
,

Xingsen
Gao
,

Jinwei
Gao
,

Lingling
Shui
,

Sujuan
Wu
* and 

Jun-Ming
Liu


Institute for Advanced Materials and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Quantum Engineering and Quantum Materials, South China Academy of Advanced Optoelectronics, South China Normal University, Guangzhou 510006, P. R. China. E-mail: sujwu@scnu.edu.cn

Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Optical Information Materials and Technology, South China Academy of Advanced Optoelectronics, South China Normal University, Guangzhou 510006, P. R. China

Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, P. R. China

Received
21st January 2019
, Accepted 24th February 2019
First published on 1st March 2019
In this work, planar inorganic perovskite solar cells (PSCs) with the simple structure of glass/ITO/SnO2/CsPbI2Br/C have been fabricated. Solution-processed poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) is selected to modify the CsPbI2Br film. The effects of PMMA modification on the microstructure of the CsPbI2Br film and the photoelectric properties of inorganic PSCs have been systematically investigated. The concentration of the PMMA solution has been optimized. At the optimal concentration, the modified carbon-based hole transport layer (HTL)-free CsPbI2Br PSCs demonstrate an improved open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF), and achieve a champion efficiency of 10.95% with less hysteresis behavior, this being much higher than the 9.14% of the reference PSCs. Moreover, the unencapsulated CsPbI2Br PSCs modified by PMMA demonstrate improved stability and retain about 95% of their initial efficiency after being exposed to air (relative humidity of 25–35%) for 20 days. The enhanced performance is mainly attributed to the reduced trap state density and suppressed charge recombination. This work provides a simple route to fabricate efficient and stable carbon-based HTL-free inorganic PSCs.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite materials have attracted lots of attention in the field of perovskite solar cells (PSCs), due to their excellent photoelectric properties such as long carrier diffusion length, large absorption coefficient, high carrier mobility and so on. Until now, the certified efficiency of organic–inorganic hybrid PSCs has exceeded 23%. However, the device stability still needs to be improved. It has been reported that the intrinsic stability of perovskite materials can be improved by replacing the organic cation with inorganic Cs+. Although the CsPbI3 material has a reasonable bandgap of 1.73 eV, its cubic phase is unstable in the ambient atmosphere. The CsPbBr3 material shows better stability, but its large bandgap (Eg = 2.3 eV) is not suitable for photovoltaic applications. Fortunately, the mixed-halide CsPbI2Br material has an appropriate bandgap of 1.91 eV and exhibits a better phase stability in ambient air. The theoretical efficiency of CsPbI2Br PSCs is predicted to be up to 22.1%. Obviously the CsPbI2Br material is a promising candidate for photovoltaic applications. A high-quality CsPbI2Br film is necessary for efficient charge extraction and transport in PSCs. However, most of the CsPbI2Br films are fabricated by a simple one-step spin-coating method. It is difficult to prepare a pinhole-free and uniform CsPbI2Br film due to its slow crystallization. Moreover, it is reported that most of the charge recombination and the material degradation occur at the grain boundaries and interfaces. To improve the performance of CsPbI2Br PSCs, a series of studies have been done to control the crystallization process, reduce the trap states or optimize the interface. For example, Liu et al. have synthesized Lewis base adducts as precursors to fabricate CsPbI2Br PSCs with an efficiency of 14.78%. Tian et al. have achieved an efficiency of 12.34% by reducing the trap states on the CsPbI2Br film using Pb(NO3)2. Jin et al. have attained an efficiency of 14.45% by modifying the CsPbI2Br/PTAA interface using CsPbI3 quantum dots. Recently, the efficiency of CsPbI2Br PSCs has been enhanced to 16.07%. Regrettably, an organic hole transport layer (HTL) and evaporated gold (Au) electrode are used in these efficient CsPbI2Br PSCs. This not only increases the cost, but also reduces the stability of the PSCs.

To solve these problems, all-inorganic CsPbI2Br PSCs based on carbon (C) electrodes have been developed. But the efficiency of carbon-based CsPbI2Br PSCs is still much lower than that of organic–inorganic hybrid PSCs. Although carbon-based inorganic PSCs have achieved an efficiency over 10%, it is still lower than that of inorganic PSCs based on an evaporated metal electrode and an organic HTL. It is reported that the lower efficiency in carbon-based inorganic PSCs is closely related to the high trap state density. The trap states can not only cause ion migration, current density–voltage (J–V) hysteresis and device degradation in the ambient environment, but also generate shunt-leakage paths due to direct contact between the C electrode and the electron transport layer (ETL), resulting in large charge recombination and a reduced open circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) of PSCs. It is necessary to remove or passivate the trap states in order to obtain efficient and stable carbon-based inorganic PSCs. It is found that charge recombination can be suppressed by incorporating polymers with Lewis base groups. Up to now, various polymers have been used to reduce the trap states in organic–inorganic hybrid PSCs to promote charge extraction and collection. It has been identified that PMMA can passivate the trap states at grain boundaries and interfaces, resulting in reduced charge recombination and improved performance in organic–inorganic hybrid PSCs. However, PMMA has not been used to improve the performance of inorganic PSCs, to the best of our knowledge.
Based on these considerations, inorganic PSCs with the simple structure of glass/ITO/SnO2/CsPbI2Br/C were fabricated. The PMMA solution was spin-coated on the CsPbI2Br film. For convenience of description, two types of carbon-based CsPbI2Br PSCs are discussed in this work: the reference-film/PSC which refers to the CsPbI2Br film/PSC without PMMA modification, and the PMMA-film/PSC which refers to the CsPbI2Br film/PSC with PMMA modification. The effects of PMMA modification on the microstructure of the CsPbI2Br film and the photoelectric properties of carbon-based CsPbI2Br PSCs have been investigated. The results indicate that the PMMA modification can effectively improve the performance of carbon-based CsPbI2Br PSCs. At the optimal PMMA solution concentration, the champion efficiency of the PMMA-PSC is improved to 10.95% from 9.14% of the reference-PSC. Moreover, the PMMA-PSC shows less J–V hysteresis behavior and improved stability. A series of measurements have been carried out to investigate the related mechanisms for the enhanced performance. It is found that the PMMA modification can effectively suppress the non-radiative recombination induced by the trap states in the CsPbI2Br film and the recombination at the CsPbI2Br/C interface, resulting in promoted charge extraction. This work provides a facile and feasible strategy to prepare efficient and stable carbon-based HTL-free inorganic PSCs.

Cesium iodide (CsI) (99.999%, metals basis), cesium bromide (CsBr) (99.999%, metals basis), PMMA (molecular weight: 43982), chlorobenzene (99.9%, spectrophotometric grade) and tin(IV) oxide (SnO2) solution (15 wt% in H2O colloidal dispersion) were bought from Alfa Aesar. Lead(II) iodide (PbI2) (99.99%) and lead(II) bromide (PbBr2) (99.99%) were purchased from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp. Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (≥99.9%) and indium-doped tin oxide (ITO) glass substrates (15 Ohm per square) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich and Nippon Sheet Glass (NSG) Company Limited of Japan, respectively. Conductive carbon paste (printing ink) (CH-8 (MOD2)) was purchased from Jujo Printing Supplies & Technology (Pinghu) Co., Ltd, and its related properties are as follows: surface resistivity: 10.0 Ω cm−2 (measured by the four-probe method); volume resistivity: 1.0 × 10−2 Ω cm (measured by the four-probe method); specific gravity: 1.15 (20 °C); adhesion: 100/100; heat resistance: 150 °C/72 hour with the resistance changing within 10%; moisture resistance: 90% relative humidity/240 hour, 40 °C with the resistance changing within 10%. All the materials were directly used without any further purification.


The glass/ITO substrate was patterned by etching with diluted hydrochloric acid solution and zinc powder, then successively cleaned with detergent, deionized water, acetone, isopropanol and ethanol via an ultrasonic process for 15 min, respectively. Fig. S1 (ESI) shows the schematic drawing of the fabrication of the PMMA-PSC. After the glass/ITO substrate was dried with a nitrogen (N2) flow and UV-ozone treatment for 5 min, the SnO2 film was prepared by spin-coating a SnO2 solution (3 wt%) on the glass/ITO substrate at 4000 rpm for 30 s and then annealed at 150 °C for 30 min in air. After cooling down to room temperature, the glass/ITO/SnO2 substrate was treated with UV-ozone for 15 min, and then the mixture CsPbI2Br precursor solution of CsBr:CsI:PbBr2:PbI2 (molar ratio = 0.5:1:0.5:1) in DMSO at 0.8 M (filtered with a 0.22 μm nylon filter) was spin-coated on the glass/ITO/SnO2 substrate at 4000 rpm for 30 s and annealed at 260 °C for 10 min to get the CsPbI2Br film in air (a relative humidity of 25–35%). For the PMMA-PSC, PMMA chlorobenzene solutions with different concentrations were respectively spin-coated on the CsPbI2Br film at a speed of 3000 rpm for 30 s and annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. Subsequently, the commercial carbon paste was doctor-bladed on the sample surface. Finally, the sample was annealed at 120 °C for 20 min. The size of the carbon-based CsPbI2Br PSCs was 0.085 cm2.


The J–V characteristics of PSCs were measured using a source meter (Keithley 2420) under illumination of 100 mW cm−2 (Newport 91160, AM 1.5G) calibrated by a standard silicon solar cell (certified by NREL) as the reference. For J–V measurements, the scan voltage was from −0.2 V to 1.5 V. The scan rate and delay time were 100 mV s−1 and 50 ms, respectively. The crystallinity of the perovskite film was investigated using an X-ray diffractometer (XRD) (PANalytical X'Pert PRO) using a Cu Kα radiation source. The morphology and contact angle of the perovskite film were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, ZEISS ULTRA 55) and a video-based optical contact angle measurement instrument (Dataphysics OCA Pro 15, Germany), respectively. The UV-vis absorption spectra were obtained using a SHIMADZU UV-2550 spectrophotometer. A standard EQE system (Newport 66902) was used to measure the external quantum efficiency (EQE). Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) (Asylum Research, Cypher) was employed to investigate the surface morphology and local contact potential difference (CPD) of the perovskite films. The current–voltage (I–V) curves were acquired using a Keithley 2420 source meter with a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 in the dark. The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra were measured using a fluorescence spectrophotometer (HITACHIF-5000), exciting at 322 nm. The time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) decay spectra were recorded with a time-correlated single photon counting method using a fluorescence spectrophotometer (Fluorolog-3, Horiba), exciting at 473 nm. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurement was carried out with an electrochemical workstation (Zahner Zennium, Germany) under 10 mW cm−2 white LED light, applying a 10 mV AC signal with the frequency ranging from 1 Hz to 1 MHz under a voltage bias of −1.1 V. All samples without any encapsulation were stored and tested in air (relative humidity of 25–35%).



Fig. 1a–c show the structure and the cross-sectional SEM image of the PMMA-PSC and the molecular structure of PMMA, respectively. It can be seen that the cross-sectional SEM image demonstrates a well-defined layer-by-layer structure. The thicknesses of different components in the PMMA-PSC have been provided in the details. To more clearly distinguish the thickness of the PMMA layer and the C electrode, the cross-sectional SEM images for the PMMA-film modified by the PMMA solution with a concentration of 0.3 mg mL−1 and the C electrode are shown in Fig. S2 and S3 (ESI). The thickness of the PMMA layer is about 9.2 nm, which is similar to previous reports. The effect of the PMMA solution concentration on the J–V performance of the PSCs has been investigated. Fig. S4 (ESI) shows the J–V curves and the detailed photovoltaic parameters including the short-circuit current density (Jsc), Voc, FF and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PMMA-PSCs as a function of PMMA solution concentration. Moreover, the specific values of the photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table S1 (ESI). It can be seen that the PCE of PMMA-PSCs increases with the increase of the PMMA solution concentration at the beginning. When the PMMA solution concentration is increased to 0.3 mg mL−1, the PMMA-PSC demonstrates the highest PCE. It is noted that the Jsc in PMMA-PSCs showed a slightly downward tendency with the increase of the PMMA concentration. This may be attributed to the inherently insulating property of PMMA, which increases the series resistance (Rs) of the device, leading to the reduced Jsc in PMMA-PSCs. Then the device performance becomes worse with the increase of the PMMA solution concentration when it is over 0.3 mg mL−1. Therefore, the optimal concentration for the PMMA solution is 0.3 mg mL−1, which is the condition for PMMA-PSCs in all of our other experiments from Fig. 2–9, as well as Fig. S2 and S5 (ESI).

It is well-known that the morphology and crystallinity of the perovskite film have a significant impact on the photovoltaic performance of PSCs. Regrettably, cracks/pinholes in the perovskite film can cause trap states, which will damage the efficiency and stability of PSCs.Fig. 2a–d show the top-view SEM images of the reference-film and PMMA-film with different scale bars, respectively. As shown in Fig. 2a–d, it is noted that the reference-film exhibits relatively obvious cracks/pinholes at the grain boundary, while the cracks/pinholes become unclear in the PMMA-film. This indicates that the solution-processed PMMA fills the cracks/pinholes at the grain boundary of the CsPbI2Br film, which can alleviate the surface trap states and block the direct contact between the SnO2 ETL and the C electrode. The contact angles of water directly dropped on the reference-film and PMMA-film are inserted in Fig. 2a and c, respectively. It can be seen that the contact angle on the PMMA-film is much larger. The increased contact angle suggests that the hydrophobicity in the PMMA-film is improved, which will facilitate prevention of moisture intrusion and improve the device stability. It will be further discussed in the following. The XRD patterns of the reference-film and PMMA-film deposited on the glass/ITO/SnO2 substrate are shown in Fig. 2e. The diffraction peaks at 14.6 and 29.5° are assigned to the (100) and (200) crystal planes of CsPbI2Br, respectively. This is consistent with previous reports. The XRD pattern of the PMMA-film exhibits a similar peak intensity to the reference-film and no other phases appear, indicating that the PMMA modification does not change the structure of CsPbI2Br.
In order to investigate the effect of PMMA modification on the photovoltaic performance, the reference-PSC and PMMA-PSC have been fabricated. Fig. 3a shows the J–V curves of the reference-PSC and PMMA-PSC measured in the reverse scan direction. It is noticed that the PMMA-PSC achieves a PCE of 10.95% with a Voc of 1.202 V, a Jsc of 12.64 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.71. While the reference-PSC shows a PCE of 9.14% with a Voc of 1.145 V, a Jsc of 12.88 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.62. Compared to the reference-PSC, the PMMA-PSC exhibits an increased Voc and FF. The FF is related to the ratio of the shunt resistance (Rsh) to Rs (Rsh/Rs). The higher FF in the PMMA-PSC is attributed to the larger Rsh/Rs. In order to verify the reproducibility of the reference-PSC and PMMA-PSC, the distributions of the PCE, Jsc, Voc, FF and Rsh/Rs for the two types of PSCs extracted from 35 devices are shown in Fig. 3b–f, respectively. It can be seen that the dispersions of all parameters in the PMMA-PSCs are narrower than those of the reference-PSCs, which implies better reproducibility in the PMMA-PSC. It is well-known that J–V hysteresis behavior is a widely observed phenomenon in PSCs. There is a serious J–V hysteresis behavior in mixed-halide inorganic PSCs owing to the iodide and bromide phase segregation under illumination. To illustrate the effect of PMMA modification on the hysteresis behavior of the device, the J–V curves of the reference-PSC and PMMA-PSC were measured in both the reverse and forward scan directions. Fig. 4a and b show the J–V curves and the detailed photovoltaic parameters are listed. Here the hysteresis index (HI) is used to characterize the J–V hysteresis behavior. The HI is defined according to eqn (1):
(1)

Fig. 4c demonstrates the distributions of the HI for the reference-PSCs and PMMA-PSCs from 15 devices. The average HI for the reference-PSCs and PMMA-PSCs is 0.191 and 0.114, respectively. Obviously the PMMA-PSC shows the smaller HI. The reduced HI in the PMMA-PSC indicates that the J–V hysteresis behavior is suppressed compared to the reference-PSC. It is reported that the J–V hysteresis behavior is related to the steady-state current density as a function of time. Fig. S5 (ESI) shows the steady-state current density of the reference-PSC and PMMA-PSC as a function of time. It can be seen that the current density of the PMMA-PSC quickly saturates at about 40 s while it saturates at about 80 s for the reference-PSC. The faster stabilization of the current density can partly explain the smaller HI in the PMMA-PSC. The detailed reasons for the reduced HI in the PMMA-PSC will be further discussed in the following.

To confirm the reliability of the J–V measurements, the plots of steady-state current density and PCE as functions of time for the reference-PSC and PMMA-PSC have been recorded, as shown in Fig. 4d and e. The reference-PSC and PMMA-PSC were biased at their respective optimal bias voltage (Vopt) at the maximum power output point. The values of Vopt for the reference-PSC and PMMA-PSC are 0.851 and 0.963 V, respectively. Under standard AM 1.5G continuous illumination for 130 s, the PCE of the reference-PSC and PMMA-PSC stabilizes at 9.05% and 10.89% with a current density of 10.64 and 11.31 mA cm−2, respectively. These values are close to the corresponding values obtained from the J–V measurements. This confirms the reliability of the J–V results. Fig. 4f shows the normalized PCE of the reference-PSC and PMMA-PSC as a function of storage time. After being exposed to air with 25–35% relative humidity at 20–25 °C for 20 days, the PCE for the reference-PSC and PMMA-PSC remains at about 78% and 95% of its initial value, respectively. Obviously, the PMMA modification enhances the device stability.
To study the effect of PMMA modification on the optical absorption of the CsPbI2Br film, the UV-vis absorption spectra of the reference-film and PMMA-film deposited on the glass/ITO/SnO2 substrate were measured, as shown in Fig. 5a. It can be seen that the two films demonstrate similar absorption. This result confirms that the PMMA modification does not change the optical absorption of the CsPbI2Br film. Fig. 5b displays the EQE and integrated current density curves of the reference-PSC and PMMA-PSC. It is noted that the PMMA-PSC shows a slightly reduced EQE. The integrated current density for the reference-PSC and PMMA-PSC is 12.52 and 12.26 mA cm−2, respectively. These values are quite comparable to the values of Jsc derived from the J–V curves (errors less than 4%).

Fig. 6a and b display the AFM images of the reference-film and PMMA-film, respectively. The values of the root mean square roughness (RMS) for the reference-film and PMMA-film are 14.78 and 11.90 nm, respectively. Obviously the PMMA-film is smoother compared to the reference-film. KPFM is an effective way to investigate the contact potential distribution on local grain boundaries and the grain bulk. It is reported that the change of the obtained average CPD from KPFM at the nanometer scale is consistent with the bulk measurement, which is correlated with the device performance as well. To investigate the effect of PMMA modification on the local electrical properties of the perovskite film at the nanoscale level, the average CPD was measured by KPFM. Fig. 6c and d display the KPFM images and the obtained average CPD of the reference-film and PMMA-film, respectively. It is noted that the PMMA-film exhibits a higher average CPD than that of the reference-film. The increased CPD is related to the higher Voc of the PMMA-PSC, which corresponds to effective photo-generated charge separation. This is in agreement with the J–V results.
In order to further explore the reason for the enhanced performance in the PMMA-PSC, the electron trap state density (Ntrap) of the reference-film and PMMA-film was characterized. The values of Ntrap can be obtained from the dark I–V curves of electron-only devices with the structure of glass/ITO/SnO2/CsPbI2Br/PMMA(with or without)/PCBM/Ag. As shown in Fig. 7a and b, the current is linearly dependent on voltage in the range of low bias voltage up to a kink point, which indicates an ohmic response. When the voltage increases over the kink point, the current demonstrates a faster exponential rise. This can be attributed to the completely occupied trap states by the injected charge. The voltage at the kink point is defined as the trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL), which can be obtained from the dark I–V curves. Ntrap can be calculated by the following eqn (2):
(2)
where
e is the elementary charge of an electron (e = 1.6 × 10−19 C), L is the thickness of the CsPbI2Br film (L ∼ 316 nm, as shown in Fig. 1b and Fig. S6, ESI), and ε0 and ε are the vacuum permittivity (ε0 = 8.854 × 10−14 F cm−1) and relative dielectric constant (ε ∼ 16.4) of the CsPbI2Br film, respectively. As shown in Fig. 7a and b, the VTFL for the reference-film and PMMA-film is 1.980 and 1.263 V, respectively. According to eqn (2), the calculated Ntrap is 3.6 × 1016 and 2.3 × 1016 cm−3 for the reference-film and PMMA-film, respectively. This indicates that the trap states in the CsPbI2Br film are effectively passivated by PMMA. The reduced trap state density in the PMMA-film is beneficial to suppress charge recombination, which also contributes to decreasing the HI and enhance the Voc and FF in the PMMA-PSC. This can explain the improved performance in the PMMA-PSC.

It is necessary for PSCs to reduce the charge recombination in order to achieve excellent photovoltaic performance. PL and EIS spectra were measured to investigate the effect of PMMA modification on charge recombination. Fig. 8a and b show the steady-state PL spectra and TRPL decay spectra of the reference-film and PMMA-film deposited on the quartz glass substrate. Steady-state PL spectra are generally used to estimate charge non-radiative recombination induced by the trap states in perovskite films. As seen in Fig. 8a, the steady-state PL emission peaks of the reference-film and PMMA-film are around 650 nm, which is consistent with previous reports. Moreover, the intensity of steady-state PL spectra for the PMMA-film shows a significant increase compared with the reference-film. The enhanced PL intensity indicates fewer trap states in the PMMA-film, which also illustrates that charge non-radiative recombination is suppressed. This can be further confirmed by TRPL decay spectra. Fig. 8b shows the TRPL decay spectra of the reference-film and PMMA-film, which can be fitted with the following bi-exponential decay eqn (3):
y(t) = A1e−t/τ1 + A2e−t/τ2 + y0
(3)
where
A1 and A2 are the relative amplitudes, τ1 is the fast decay component, related to non-radiative recombination, τ2 is the slow decay component, related to radiative recombination, and y0 is a constant for the base-line offset. The relevant key parameters resulting from the fitted results are listed in Table S2 (ESI). The average carrier lifetimes (τave) can be calculated by the following formula (4):

(4)
The obtained
τave for the reference-film and PMMA-film is 14.74 and 16.91 ns, respectively. The larger τave in the PMMA-film demonstrates that the PMMA passivates the trap states in the CsPbI2Br film to suppress charge non-radiative recombination. The suppressed charge recombination will contribute to enhance the Voc and FF in the PMMA-PSC. Therefore, the PMMA-PSC demonstrates improved photovoltaic performance. EIS measurements are used to investigate the interfacial charge transfer and recombination process.Fig. 8c shows the Nyquist plots of the reference-PSC and PMMA-PSC measured at a bias of −1.1 V under illumination conditions, where the solid lines are the fitting results using the inserted model. In the fitted Nyquist plots, the value of the starting point at the real part (Z′) corresponds to Rs, and the transfer resistance (Rtra) is ascribed to the high-frequency arc, which is associated with the charge transfer at the SnO2/CsPbI2Br/C interface; the recombination resistance (Rrec) is assigned to the low-frequency arc. For more reliable fitting, the ideal capacitance is replaced by a constant phase angle element (CPEtra and CPErec) to illustrate the spatial inhomogeneity induced by defects and impurities at the interface. These fitted parameters are summarized in Table S3 (ESI). This result shows that the PMMA modification slightly increase the Rs of the PSCs due to the inherently insulating property of PMMA. Since the SnO2/CsPbI2Br interface in the reference-PSC and PMMA-PSC is under the same conditions, Rtra and Rrec are only related to the charge transfer and recombination process at the CsPbI2Br/C interface. As shown in Fig. 8d, the values of Rtra for the reference-PSC and PMMA-PSC are 9.22 and 7.65 Ω cm2, respectively. While the values of Rrec for the reference-PSC and PMMA-PSC are 24.83 and 56.12 Ω cm2, respectively. Obviously the PMMA-PSC shows the lower Rtra and the higher Rrec value compared to those of the reference-PSC. This indicates less interfacial recombination loss between the PMMA-film and the C electrode, which is responsible for the increased Voc and FF. Therefore, the EIS measurement results confirm that the PMMA modification can suppress the charge recombination, resulting in promoted charge extraction and improved device performance.

The J–V characteristics (Voc, Jsc and FF) as a function of light intensity (Plight) have been measured to further investigate the charge recombination mechanisms in the PSCs. The linear relationship of Voc and the natural logarithm of Plight can be plotted according to the following eqn (5):
(5)
where
n, k, T and q are the ideal factor, Boltzmann constant, absolute temperature and elementary charge, respectively. There is no charge extraction under open-circuit conditions, indicating that all photo-generated charge carriers recombine within the PSCs. The slope of Vocversus Plight will be equal to kT/q when trap-assisted recombination is absent or bimolecular recombination determines the performance of the PSCs. In contrast, if trap-assisted recombination is involved in the device operation, the slope would be larger than kT/q. As shown in Fig. 9a, the reference-PSC and PMMA-PSC show a slope of 1.75kT/q and 1.57kT/q, respectively. Moreover, the Voc of the reference-PSC demonstrate a stronger dependence on Plight. This result indicates that the PMMA modification reduces trap-assisted recombination in the PSCs. The dependence of Jsc on Plight could be described by the power law relationship (6):

Jsc ∝ Pαlight (α ≤ 1)
(6)
where
α is an exponential factor. Here, bimolecular recombination is expected to be a minimum for the maximum carrier sweep out (α ≈ 1) at the short circuit. As displayed in Fig. 9b, the values of α for both the reference-PSC (α = 0.96) and PMMA-PSC (α = 0.98) are close to 1, indicating negligible bimolecular recombination in the devices. The dependence of the FF on Plight is presented in Fig. 9c. At relatively low Plight (just under 0.5 sun), the FF of the reference-PSC and PMMA-PSC appears steady around a certain constant and almost remains unchanged. As Plight continues to increase, the FF of the reference-PSC appears more obviously decreased than that of the PMMA-PSC. This can be attributed to trap-assisted recombination. All of these characterizations indicate that the PMMA modification at the CsPbI2Br/C interface can reduce the charge recombination and improve the photovoltaic performance of PSCs.


In summary, we have successfully demonstrated that PMMA modification is an effective and facile method to improve the photovoltaic performance of inorganic PSCs. At the optimal PMMA concentration, the PMMA-PSC achieves a highest PCE of 10.95% and a steady-state PCE of 10.89%, as well as less J–V hysteresis behavior and improved device stability. The improved performance can be attributed to the reduced non-radiative recombination induced by the trap states in the CsPbI2Br film and recombination at the CsPbI2Br/C interface, resulting in promoted charge extraction. This work provides a new and simple route to fabricate efficient and stable carbon-based HTL-free inorganic PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We acknowledge the financial support of the National Key R & D Program of China (2016YFB0401502, 2016YFA0201002), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51431006, 51472093, 61574065, 51571094), the Project for Guangdong Province Universities and Colleges Pearl River Scholar Funded Scheme (2016), the Characteristic Innovation Project of Guangdong Provincial Department of Education (Science 2016, 22), the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (No. 2016A030313421, 2016A030308019), the Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team in University (IRT_17R70), the Guangdong Innovative Research Team Program (No. 2011D039), the MOE International Laboratory for Optical Information Technologies, the Science and Technology Planning Project of Guangdong Province (Grant No. 2016B090906004, 2015B090927006), Guangdong Provincial Engineering Technology Research Center for Transparent Conductive Materials and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Optical Information Materials and Technology (2017B030301007).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc00374f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019