 DOI: 10.1039/C7CC07534K
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 12966-12969


Guanhaojie
Zheng
,

Cheng
Zhu
,

Yihua
Chen
,

Juchen
Zhang
,

Qi
Chen
,

Xingyu
Gao
* and 

Huanping
Zhou
*

Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility, Shanghai Institute of Applied Physics Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201204, China. E-mail: gaoxingyu@sinap.ac.cn

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. E-mail: happy_zhou@pku.edu.cn

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, P. R. China

Received
27th September 2017
, Accepted 6th November 2017
First published on 6th November 2017
We systematically investigated the impact of stoichiometric ratio variation between PbX2 and AX on hybrid perovskite films from the perspective of microstructure, especially on the plane stacking directions, using the two-dimensional synchrotron radiation grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) technique. The tuned crystal plane stacking in perovskite films can consequently enlighten further explorations about the relationship between microstructure and solar cell performance.

Metal halide perovskites with the general formula ABX3 have attracted growing interest in recent years and are considered as one of the most promising semiconductors. The unprecedented increase in power conversion efficiency is closely linked to the unique optoelectronic properties of the perovskites, such as their high absorption coefficient, high mobility, long diffusion length and respectable defect tolerance. Undoubtedly, all these properties are largely determined by the quality of perovskite thin films which is closely related to the preparation process. Among the preparation conditions, the stoichiometric ratio between precursors plays a crucial role in tuning the properties of hybrid perovskite thin films, and an exquisite control on the precursors is an intriguing strategy to boost the photovoltaic device performance.

In the APbX3 hybrid perovskite materials, the stoichiometric ratio variation between AX and PbX2 is considered to be effective in tuning the film crystallization process, defect properties, as well as carrier dynamics in both the film and devices. Earlier studies found that although PbI2 was commonly used in the sequential deposition process, the morphology and crystallinity of PbI2 is important for the crystal nucleation and growth of perovskite thin films. Additionally, the variation of stoichiometric ratio between PbI2 and AX in a one-step processing method can result in perovskite thin films with substantial differences in grain boundary properties and charge carrier transport. A PbI2-rich film can also be obtained via moderate post-annealing of the as-prepared perovskite film, which facilitates charge separation as evidenced by surface photovoltage spectroscopy (SPV) measurements. Straight after that, a controllable technique to form excess PbI2 in a perovskite film with a well-defined grain structure is achieved by post annealing the perovskite film obtained from a vapor-assisted solution process. It was also found that an appropriate amount of excess PbI2 can efficiently passivate the grain boundary, prolong the carrier lifetime, and form favored energy band alignment, which collectively contribute to the improved device performance. Recently, perovskite/PbI2 heterointerfaces were analyzed using light-modulated scanning tunnelling microscopy with improved spatial resolution to reveal the corresponding photocarrier dynamics and band alignment. Accordingly, different charge separation and transfer processes at varied heterointerfaces were observed with different PbI2 thickness, suggesting that suitable PbI2 species can promote the charge generation and separation directly. In addition to PbI2, the amount of CH3NH3I (MAI) also influences the quality of the perovskite film and devices. Instead of the stoichiometric ratio, a 6 mol% excess of MAI versus PbI2 in the precursor solution provides a self-formed grain boundary healing layer. The healing layer efficiently suppresses non-radiative recombination and promotes hole and electron extraction at grain boundaries. These findings suggest that stoichiometric ratio engineering is an effective way to improve the quality of perovskite thin films and solar cell device performance. However, most of the related works were focused on the influence of electronic properties induced by the variation of PbI2 and MAI, based on the commonly used CH3NH3PbI3 film. To the best of our knowledge, there is no report that provides a profound understanding about the impact of PbX2/AX ratio engineering on the perovskite film from the perspective of microstructure, e.g. crystal orientation, which could benefit the photovoltaic properties and the analogous material systems.
Herein, we systematically investigated the impact of precursor composition on crystal orientation within Cs5(FA0.83MA0.17)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 films using a two-dimensional synchrotron radiation grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) technique. The perovskite samples containing excess AX (FAI and MABr) or PbX2 (PbI2 and PbBr2) were found to possess the same crystallographic orientation but different crystal plane stacking modes. It was found that PbX2 can strengthen the initial preferred orientation as well as long-range order in highly crystalline perovskite thin films. Meanwhile, excess AX in the film promoted the (001) plane stacking along the out-of-plane direction with enhanced long-range order instead of the relatively disordered stacking in the reference. The relationship between the stoichiometric ratio of perovskites and device performance was also examined, and the induced different crystal plane stacking directions in the film substantially influenced the solar cell performance.
The perovskite films were fabricated using a one-step method based on a mixed cation system, which is detailed in the ESI. The stoichiometric ratio of PbX2 and AX was systematically adjusted from γ = 0.83 to γ =1.2 (γ represents the mole ratio of PbX2 and AX). Firstly, we conducted the normal X-ray diffraction measurements on the perovskite samples, and the results are shown in Fig. S1a (ESI). When the stoichiometric ratio of γ was increased to 1.2, a strong diffraction peak appeared at 12.8°, indicating that a large amount of PbX2 was present in the resulting perovskite thin films. Similarly, when we changed the stoichiometric ratio of AX:PbX2 to 1.2:1 (γ = 0.83), an obvious peak appeared at 11.7°, which belonged to the yellow P63mc phase of FAPbI3 according to previous work. Except for the detected PbX2 or yellow FAPbI3, we found that all the films display a cubic perovskite phase with characteristic diffraction peaks located at 14.2°, 28.4° and 42°. The nearly unchanged ratio of the peak intensity indicated that the crystallographic orientation was retained, regardless of excess PbX2 or AX in the precursor. Furthermore, we performed UV-absorption measurements to explore the impact of the varied ratio between PbX2 and AX on the optical properties of the perovskite. As shown in Fig. S1b (ESI), all the samples have the same absorption edge at a wavelength of 780 nm, which indicates that the variation of the stoichiometric ratio has a negligible influence on the absorption edge and does not change the bandgap of the optically active layers. To be noted, an enhanced absorption at 540 nm was observed in the sample with γ = 0.83, which was attributed to the absorption from yellow FAPbI3, consistent with the XRD result.
Scanning electronic microscopy (SEM) images of the representative perovskite thin films with different stoichiometric ratios are displayed in Fig. 1. As depicted above, all the perovskite films were compact, uniform and highly crystalline with grain sizes in the range of hundreds of nm. By carefully examining the SEM images, we found that perovskite thin films with different amounts of excess PbX2 showed similar crystal textures with respect to the reference sample with 1:1 PbX2:AX, except that the crystal texture became more obvious with increased PbX2. When PbX2:AX was increased to 1.2:1 (as shown in Fig. 1a), some white dots were observed randomly, indicative of PbI2 crystals, which is consistent with the XRD data in Fig. S1a (ESI). In contrast, increasing the AX content would lead to a film with the crystal texture fading away gradually as evidenced in Fig. 2f. It is worth mentioning that samples with excess PbX2 showed an apparent different morphology from samples with excess AX, especially in crystal textures, domain shapes and grain boundaries. Since the XRD pattern confirmed that samples with different compositions have the same crystallographic orientation, we speculate that the excess AX or PbX2 may further influence the microstructure arrangement, which is also reminiscent of the crystal texture within the perovskite films.
Two-dimensional GIWAXS measurements can be used to precisely detect the crystal structure on a microscopic scale. Therefore, we conducted the synchrotron radiation GIWAXS technique to explore the crystal orientation and microstructure in multiple orders within the perovskite thin films. The GIWAXS spectra are displayed in Fig. 2. As shown in Fig. 2a and b, the diffraction ring at q ≈ 9 nm−1 was denoted as the characteristic diffraction peak of PbI2 (001), where q is the scattering vector (q = 4πsinθ/λ). The diffraction ring at q ≈ 9 nm−1 indicates the existence of residual PbI2, which is consistent with the stoichiometric ratio we adopted for the corresponding samples. This ring disappeared when we decreased the PbX2 amount or increased the AX amount. Notably, the strong diffraction ring at q ≈ 10 nm−1 is ascribed to the diffraction of the perovskite (001) planes. Since the (001) plane was the dominant diffraction peak, as evidenced by the XRD pattern in Fig. S1a (ESI), we studied the microstructure variations within perovskite thin films by analysing the corresponding (001) diffraction pattern. As depicted in Fig. 2, the red colour sections of the ring at q ≈ 10 nm−1 indicate strong diffraction signals for the (001) plane with a certain included angle to the substrate (preferred stacking orientation) within perovskite thin films. Samples with γ = 1.0 to 1.2 exhibited similar diffraction patterns at similar angles. However, when we increased the AX content to γ = 0.91 or 0.83, the diffraction patterns changed with the appearance of different preferred diffraction positions in the ring at q ≈ 10 nm−1. Therefore, we observed that excess PbX2 retains the initial preferred stacking orientation, but excess AX changes the preferred stacking orientation and promotes the growth of the perovskite (001) plane along the out-of-plane direction.
For visualization, we integrated the diffraction pattern of perovskite (001) azimuthally along the ring at q ≈ 10 nm−1. In Fig. 3a, the integrated curves with different colours represent variable stoichiometric ratios. For the reference, the integrated curve is almost a horizontal line with small protuberances at azimuth angles of 25° (180–25)° and 60° (180–60)°, along with a concave area at an azimuth angle of 90°. This integrated curve indicates that the relative diffraction intensities for the (001) plane with any angle α were almost the same, which indicates a relatively disordered crystal stacking within the perovskite thin films without obvious preferred stacking orientations. The concave area at an azimuth angle of 90° indicates the reduced probability for (001) plane stacking along the out-of-plane direction. With the incorporation of excess PbX2, four peaks obviously appeared in the integrated curves, as evidenced by the intense diffraction for the perovskite (001) plane with α values of 25°, 60°, 120°, and 155°. These results reveal that excess PbX2 can promote the stacking orientations at these four azimuth angles, and the preferred direction angle α remained constant regardless of the varied excess amount of PbX2. The demonstrated orientation could be also associated with the crystal texture analysis demonstrated in the SEM analysis. In contrast, when we increased the relative amount of AX to γ = 0.91 or 0.83, the initial preferred stacking orientations disappeared gradually and a new preferred stacking orientation along an azimuth angle of 90° emerged. This is also consistent with the crystal texture evolution process induced by stoichiometry variation between PbX2 and AX. Combined with the aforementioned analysis, we confirmed that excess PbX2 cannot change but can strengthen the initial preferred stacking orientations of the perovskite film, while excess AX promotes the perovskite (001) plane stacking along the out-of-plane direction. A schematic diagram is shown in Fig. 3b, and the α value is 25°(180–25)° or 60°(180–60)°. Although thin films with excess PbX2 or AX resulted in quite different stacking orientations, both conditions were beneficial for fabricating highly crystalline perovskite thin films with long-range order, instead of a relatively disordered crystal structure for the reference. We expect that the different preferred crystal orientations can partially account for the varied performance of solar cells with excess PbX2 or AX, as the microstructure arrangement was closely related to the optoelectronic properties of perovskite-based thin films or devices according to previous studies.
To reveal the influence of excess PbX2 or AX on solar cell performance, devices based on the corresponding compositions were fabricated and intensively investigated. The statistics of device performances are presented in Fig. 4. The I–V curves and detailed parameters of champion devices are summarized in Fig. S2 and Table S2 (ESI), respectively, while the I–V curves of both the forward and reverse scans for a typical device with optimized excess PbI2 are presented in Fig. S3 and Table S3 (ESI). As can be seen, the device based on the composition with a stoichiometry ratio of 1:1 provided a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 18.30%. With the increase of excess PbI2 to γ = 1.05, the short-circuit current density was enhanced obviously, which may be due to the improved highly crystalline perovskite thin films with long-range order caused due to excess PbX2, and finally the highest efficiency of 19.68% was achieved. By further increasing the amount of excess PbI2 to γ = 1.1 or 1.2, the open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current (Jsc) and fill factor (FF) decreased. We ascribed the decrease of these photovoltaic parameters to the thick PbX2 at the grain boundaries, which hinders the charge transfer across the perovskite/PbI2 heterointerface and increases the carrier recombination according to previous studies. For samples with excess AX, both Voc and Jsc decreased. We speculate that this is partially caused due to the large amount of excess AX and the yellow phase of FAPbI3. However, we cannot rule out another possible reason that originates from the altered (001) plane stacking along the out-of-plane direction. Further investigation on the relationship between the crystal orientation and microscopic carrier transport is undergoing.
Subsequently, we conducted SCLC (Fig. S4 and Table S4, ESI) and time-resolved photoluminescence (as shown in Fig. S5, ESI) measurements to explore the carrier dynamics within perovskite thin films. We found that the mobilities and defect densities derived from SCLC data matched well with the Jsc variations. We further fitted the PL decay curves with a bi-exponential decay model and the fitted data are summarized in Table S5. Accordingly,τ1 is a decay component closely related to non-radiative recombination caused by defects near grain boundaries/surfaces while τ2 is closely related to radiative recombination in bulk perovskites. It was found that, compared with the reference, samples with appropriate amounts of excess PbX2 showed a slower PL decay; however, a faster PL decay was observed in samples with excess PbX2 or AX. Therefore, these results indicate that excess amounts of PbX2 or AX species leads to severe recombination at both grain boundaries/surfaces and in bulk. These results match well with previous work.
In conclusion, we carefully investigated the impact on the microstructure, especially the perovskite (001) plane stacking orientations within perovskite thin films of excess PbX2 or AX using the GIWAXS technique. In addition to the well-documented beneficial effects on defect passivation and charge separation or transportation, we found that PbX2 can also strengthen the initial preferred orientation and results in highly crystalline perovskite films with long-range crystallinity. Additionally, we reveal that excess AX could induce the preferred orientation within perovskite films along the out-of-plane direction, which is different from that with excess PbX2. Since the microstructure was reported to be vitally important to the optoelectronic properties of the films, we believe that these results focus on the preferred orientations within the perovskite grainsand consequently enlighten further investigations.
Prof. Xingyu Gao acknowledges funding support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 11175239, U1332116, U1632265, 11605278 and 11675252). The authors acknowledge funding support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51672008 and 51673025). The authors thank BL14B1 in the Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility for providing the beam time.

There are no conflicts to declare.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cc07534k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017