 DOI: 10.1039/C6CP00209A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 12175-12182


Yilin
Wang
,

Haiyan
Fu
,

Ying
Wang
,

Licheng
Tan
*,

Lie
Chen
 and 

Yiwang
Chen


College of Chemistry/Institute of Polymers, Nanchang University, 999 Xuefu Avenue, Nanchang 330031, China. E-mail: tanlicheng@ncu.edu.cn; Fax: +86 791 83969561; Tel: +86 791 83968703

Jiangxi Provincial Key Laboratory of New Energy Chemistry, Nanchang University, 999 Xuefu Avenue, Nanchang 330031, China

Received
12th January 2016
, Accepted 31st March 2016
First published on 31st March 2016
The inclusions of solution-processed ZnO electron transport layers (ETLs) of inverted polymer solar cells can lead to various surface defects, which can act as interfacial recombination centers for photogenerated charges and thereby can lead to degradation of the device performance. Three-dimensional (3D) CdS with different morphologies, such as flower-like CdS (F-CdS), branched CdS (B-CdS), and spherical CdS (S-CdS), are synthesized to modify ZnO ETLs, by effectively removing the intragap states of the ZnO nanocrystal films by forming ZnO/F-CdS, ZnO/B-CdS, and ZnO/S-CdS composite ETLs, respectively. Moreover, ZnO/CdS possesses higher electron mobility and provides a larger interface between the ETL and active layer, which is beneficial for enhancing the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the inverted organic solar cells. In particular, a device based on a ZnO/S-CdS ETL and thieno[3,4-b]-thiophene/benzodithiophene (PTB7):[6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) active layer achieved a PCE of 8.0%, together with better long-term stability.

Bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic photovoltaics (OPVs) with an active layer composed of a conjugated polymer as the donor and fullerene derivative as the acceptor have attracted great attention for low-cost energy harvesting, and are envisioned to exhibit several advantages, such as their ease of fabrication, low cost, possibility for high-throughput solution-processable fabrication techniques, and compatibility for use with large area and flexible plastic substrates.

Generally, due to the hygroscopicity and acidity of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) and the air sensitivity of the Al cathode of traditional device configuration, OPVs with an inverted structure have been proposed to improve the long-term stability. In this inverted structure, air-stable high-work-function metals (e.g., Au, Ag) are used as the anode to collect holes and indium tin oxide (ITO) is used as the cathode to collect electrons. Transparent ITO used as cathodes are modified by interlayers, with a low work function, which act as the electron transport layer (ETLs). The n-type metal oxides, such as titanium oxide (TiOx), zinc oxide (ZnO), and cesium carbonate (Cs2CO3), are the common materials for ETL application. Among these, ZnO is more attractive due to its excellent visible transparency, high electron mobility, environment-friendly nature, and ease of fabrication. A variety of low-temperature and solution-based fabrication methods have been demonstrated to deposit ZnO ETL.
Despite the advantages of applying ZnO ETLs in inverted OPVs, the major challenge of ZnO nanoparticles as ETLs lies in how to control the intragap states induced by surface defects, such as dangling bonds and surface groups, introducing various intragap energy levels. These intragap states can act as recombination centers for photogenerated charge carriers, which can cause significant photocurrent loss and can degrade the charge selectivity of the cathode contacts. Accordingly, there is a need to develop low-defect and uniform ZnO films so as to realize high-efficiency inverted polymer solar cells.
A few strategies have been developed to passivate the surface defects of ZnO ETL. For example, employing self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) on top of ZnO films can avoid the direct contact between the ETL and the active layer, which may result in the formation of interfacial dipoles in favor of electron extraction. In another strategy, ZnO/poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) or ZnO/poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) composites are used to passivate the surface defects of ZnO, leading to improved device performance. Nevertheless, there is a tradeoff between effective passivation and the charge transport properties of the composite films owing to the insulating nature of the coordination polymer. A facile and general approach that can availably passivate the surface defects of ZnO ETLs is thus highly desirable and indeed is critical to fully exploiting their remarkable properties for inverted OPVs.
Herein, we propose that the surface defects of the solution-processed ZnO ETLs can be passivated by another inorganic material. CdS nanocrystals, with high charge mobility, good stability, and other tunable properties, were selected to verify this hypothesis. In this work, 3-dimensional (3D) CdS with different morphologies, such as flower-like CdS (F-CdS), branched CdS (B-CdS), and spherical CdS (S-CdS), were, respectively, capped on the ZnO nanoparticles, forming different ETLs of ZnO/F-CdS, ZnO/B-CdS and ZnO/S-CdS composites. Such a CdS layer can passivate and repair the surface defects of ZnO to boost the electron transport, collection, and device protection against oxygen and moisture. On the other hand, the higher conduction band of CdS compared to ZnO makes the CdS layer act as a bridge for more efficient interfacial charge transfer. Consequently, the contact area between the active layer and ZnO/CdS ETL can be extended in the 3D counterpart, which increases the interface for electron and hole separation, and further improves the electron collection efficiency from the active layer.

The inverted device architecture, with a schematic diagram of the different electron transport layers, is presented in Fig. 1. The bare ZnO nanoparticles were in situ prepared on the transparent ITO electrode according to Heeger's report. CdS nanocrystals with different morphologies, including flower-like, branched, and spherical, were respectively spin-coated on ZnO to obtain ZnO/CdS ETLs. The detailed experiment procedures are shown in the ESI.

The 3D CdS nanocrystals with different shapes and sizes were synthesized by employing cadmium nitrate tetrahydrate [Cd(NO3)2·4H2O] and thiourea (CH4N2S) or thiol acetamide (TAA) as the precursors and hexamethylenetetramine [(CH2)6N4, HMT] as a capping agent. The morphology of the CdS nanocrystals was varied by changing the added molar ratio of cadmium precursor to sulfide precursor (abbreviated as Cd/S), in which dendritic CdS (D-CdS), flower-like CdS (F-CdS), or branched CdS (B-CdS) were prepared by adjusting the ratio of Cd(NO3)2·4H2O, CH4N2S, and HMT at ratios of 1:1:0, 1:1:1, 1:3:1, respectively. In addition, when CH4N2S was replaced by other counterparts, such as TAA as sulfur precursor, small spherical CdS nanoparticles (S-CdS) were obtained. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) were carried out to investigate the morphologies of the samples. From Fig. 2a–d, it can clearly be seen that these nanocrystals are homogeneous and possess a narrow size distribution. Due to D-CdS (Fig. 2a) having a micrometer scale, it is not suitable for applying as an ETL. When the concentration of HMT increased, CdS nanocrystals grow to become flower-like and branched structures on a nanometer scale. When the molar ratio of Cd/S is 1:1, the morphology of CdS nanocrystals change to approximate a flower-like structure (Fig. 2b). It is interesting to find that CdS nanocrystals with a branched structure (B-CdS) are formed with a Cd/S molar ratio as 1:3, and each CdS nanocrystal is composed of five to eight pods (Fig. 2c). Also, the high-resolution transmission microscopy (HRTEM) image in Fig. S1 (ESI) reveals that the fringe spacing is 0.34 nm, which corresponds to the (002) lattice plane, and the nanobranched pods grow preferentially along the [001] direction (c-axis), which is consistent with the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern (in Fig. S1, ESI). When CH4N2S was replaced by TAA, nanometer S-CdS with small spherical morphology were grown, as shown in Fig. 2d.
Optical measurements were carried out to investigate the ZnO and ZnO/CdS hybrid films. From the transmittance spectra in Fig. 3a, there is no obvious difference in the transmittances of hybrid ZnO/CdS and ZnO, with values over 90%. Photoluminescence (PL) (Fig. 3b) under photoexcitation at 325 nm was employed to discuss the effect of CdS on the surface defects of ZnO. The PL spectra of all the samples display two emissions: a sharp emission at 380 nm for the near band edge (NBE), and a broader one at 400–500 nm for the deep level emission (DLE) due to defects, such as oxygen vacancies, zinc vacancies, oxygen interstitial, zinc interstitial, and oxygen antisites. Additionally, the intensity of the DLE peaks decrease with adding CdS onto the ZnO surface, leading to a lower concentration of deep level defects in the hybrid ETLs than those of pristine ZnO. ZnO/S-CdS presents the weakest emission of a DLE peak. This implies that the defects and traps of ZnO nanocrystals are efficiently passivated by different CdS nanocrystals, which would reduce the recombination of charge carriers.
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra reveal the surface chemical composition of ZnO and ZnO/CdS films, as shown in Fig. 4. The Cd peaks located at 409.5 eV and 404.3 eV indicate that CdS nanocrystals are covered on the surface of the ZnO films, leading to the formation of hybrid ETLs. The maximum of the Zn 2p peaks shift toward a lower binding energy indicating modification of the ZnO surface by different CdS. ZnO/S-CdS shows the greatest shift (about 1.0 eV), which is because the higher electron densities are around the zinc atoms. The original Zn–O bonds of the hydroxyl groups or carboxylate groups will reduce and then more Zn atoms will be bound to O atoms. Furthermore, the O 1s peaks can be de-convoluted into two peaks: a lower binding energy peak (about 529.5 eV), which is associated with the O atoms in ZnO matrix, i.e., O–Zn bonding; and a higher binding energy peak (about 531.5 eV), which is attributed to the oxygen-deficient defects, such as oxygen vacancies, zinc hydroxide, and Zn(OH)2. The intensity of the O 1s peaks at 529.5 eV significantly reduce after CdS treatment compared to pristine ZnO NPs, and ZnO/S-CdS shares the weakest intensity, suggesting that CdS nanocrystals are accumulating on top of the pristine ZnO and that the deep level defects might be suppressed by CdS occupying the Zn vacancies.
The surface property of the pristine ZnO and hybrid ZnO films were characterized by atomic force microscopy (AFM). As shown in Fig. S2 (ESI), the pristine ZnO and CdS/ZnO films have a root mean square (RMS) surface roughness of 1.65 nm (pristine ZnO), 1.68 nm (ZnO/F-CdS), 1.76 nm (ZnO/B-CdS), and 1.84 nm (ZnO/S-CdS), respectively. The topological images and the corresponding phase images, however, reveal significantly different features. For pristine ZnO film, large domains with sizes of 50–100 nm are observed. In contrast, CdS/ZnO exhibits much smaller domains, namely due to the filling of CdS nanoparticles during the spin-coating and annealing procedure.
Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was conducted to verify whether the existence of CdS could have an effect on the work functions of the ETLs. As shown in Fig. 5a, the left panel is the Ecutoff gained from the high binding energy cutoff of a spectrum, and the right panel provides EHOMOonset (Fig. 5b), which is the onset relative to the Fermi level of Au (at 0 eV). The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level energies are determined according to the equation:
EHOMO = hv − (Ecutoff − EHOMOonset)
where
hv is the incident photon energy, and hv = 21.22 eV. The EHOMO for pristine ZnO, ZnO/F-CdS, ZnO/B-CdS and ZnO/S-CdS NPs are −7.49 eV, −7.36 eV, −7.33 eV and −7.38 eV, respectively. Using these EHOMO values and the optical band gap obtained from the ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra (Fig. 5c), the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels of ZnO, ZnO/F-CdS, ZnO/B-CdS, and ZnO/S-CdS NPs were determined as −4.32 eV, −4.16 eV, −4.23 eV, and −4.18 eV separately, and the relevant energy levels are illustrated in Fig. 5d. Compared to pristine ZnO NPs, the LUMO levels of ZnO/F-CdS, ZnO/B-CdS, and ZnO/S-CdS are lower, which presents better energy alignment in the device, consequently contributing to the charge extraction and collection.

Pristine ZnO and ZnO/F-CdS, ZnO/B-CdS, ZnO/S-CdS NPs were employed as ETLs in the inverted devices based on ITO/ETLs/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag with an active layer of thieno[3,4-b]-thiophene/benzodithiophene (PTB7):[6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM). The current density–voltage (J–V) curves under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G illumination are shown in Fig. 6a, while the corresponding parameters of the devices are listed in Table 1. Compared to the device with pristine ZnO as the ETL, all the devices with modified ZnO/CdS ETLs display enhanced performance. Notably, the device with ZnO/S-CdS ETL reveals the highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 8.0% with the highest parameters, namely a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 16.19 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.74 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 66.6%. The enhancement of Jsc and FF is attributed to the well-passivated ZnO/CdS ETLs with a larger interface area and channels for charge separation and transportation, as well as higher electron mobility and superior energy level matching. The incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra (Fig. 6b) are in good consistence with the Jsc values, and the modified ZnO/CdS ETLs exhibit higher IPCE than the pristine ZnO ETL throughout the 300–750 nm. The space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) was employed to study the electron transporting. The fitted curves using the SCLC model of all the samples are presented in Fig. 6c, and the corresponding electron mobility calculated using the Mott-Gurney SCLC equation are summarized in Table 2. Compared to pristine ZnO, ZnO/CdS hybrid ETLs exhibit superior electron mobilities, especially for ZnO/S-CdS, with a value of 2.01 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1. The improved electron transporting characteristics is good for increasing current density for devices with modified ZnO ETLs, because of the relatively high conductivity of CdS and its role in filling up the vacancies of ZnO. To further identify the effect of CdS modification, the enhancement of electron collection efficiency can also be determined by calculations of the series resistance (Rs) from impedance under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). For the devices of P3HT:PC61BM with modified ZnO/CdS nanocomposite as ETLs, a drop in Rs was observed compared to that based on bare ZnO NPs. These indicate that the device with a ZnO/CdS ETL do actually provide decreasing Rs by promoting electron mobility at the interface and in the bulk of the ETL (Fig. S3 and Table S1, ESI). The dark curves of the inverted devices (Fig. 6d) show that the reverse saturation current for the devices with modified ETLs are greatly suppressed compared to the device with ZnO ETL, while all the devices exhibit a similar output current in the forward direction, implying that the recombination of charge is decreased. Furthermore, a poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT):[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) blend was employed as the active layer to verify the universality of the electron transport layer, and the J–V curves and the photovoltaic parameters are shown in Fig. S4 and Table S2 (ESI). ZnO ETL modified by CdS improves the PCE of the inverted devices, i.e., from 3.0% for pristine ZnO to 3.5%, 3.7%, 3.9%, for F-CdS, B-CdS, S-CdS, respectively. These results suggest that the CdS modification approach can be a general method to passivate the surface defects of solution-processed ZnO ETL, thereby improving the performance of the resulting inverted solar cells.
Devices with different ETLs

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
The active area is 0.06 cm2 of a single chip; all the values represent averages from twelve devices on a single chip.a The best device PCE.
ZnO
14.29 ± 0.22
0.74 ± 0.01
64.5 ± 1.5
6.8 ± 0.3(7.1)
ZnO/F-CdS
15.83 ± 0.21
0.74 ± 0.01
65.1 ± 1.4
7.6 ± 0.3(7.9)
ZnO/B-CdS
14.93 ± 0.23
0.74 ± 0.01
69.6 ± 1.7
7.7 ± 0.3(8.0)
ZnO/S-CdS
16.19 ± 0.20
0.74 ± 0.01
66.6 ± 1.6
8.0 ± 0.3(8.3)
Different ETLs
ZnO
ZnO/F-CdS
ZnO/B-CdS
ZnO/S-CdS
Electron mobility [cm2 V−1 s−1]
9.65 × 10−4
1.25 × 10−3
1.42 × 10−3
2.01 × 10−3

A simple and general method has been developed to prepare different CdS (F-CdS, B-CdS, and S-CdS) to passivate the surface defects and modulate the intragap states of low-temperature solution-processed ZnO. Different CdS nanocrystals spin-coated on the pristine ZnO ETL surface can form ZnO/F-CdS, ZnO/B-CdS, and ZnO/S-CdS ETLs, respectively. Compared to the device with pristine ZnO as the ETL, all the devices with modified ZnO/CdS ETLs display enhanced performance. Notably, the device with ZnO/S-CdS ETL revealed the highest PCE of 8.0% with the highest parameters: Jsc = 16.19 mA cm−2 and FF = 66.6%. The enhancement of Jsc and FF is attributed to the well-passivated ZnO/CdS ETLs having a larger interface area and channels for charge separation and transportation, as well as higher electron mobility and superior energy level matching.


This work was financially supported by the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (51425304), National Natural Science Foundation of China (51302130), Doctoral Programs Foundation of Ministry of Education of China (Grants 20133601120006) and Natural Science Foundation of Jiangxi Province (20151BAB213013).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The detailed experimental section, preparation of CdS nanocrystals, ZnO/CdS electron transport layer and inverted polymer solar cells, characterizations of ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption and photoluminescence (PL) spectra, X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), atomic force microscopy (AFM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS), space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) mobility measurement, the current density–voltage (J–V), incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) and the impedance measurements of the devices. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp00209a
‡ Haiyan Fu and Yilin Wang contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016