 DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01774H
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4181-4186

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Sang Hyuk
Im
,

Hi-jung
Kim
,

Sung Woo
Kim
,

Sang-Wook
Kim
 and 

Sang Il
Seok
*

KRICT-EPFL Global Research Laboratory, Advanced Materials Division, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology, 19 Sinseongno, Yuseong, Daejeon, 305-600, Republic of Korea. E-mail: seoksi@krict.re.kr; Fax: +82-42-861-4251; Tel: +82-42-860-7314

Department of Molecular Science and Technology, Ajou University, San 5, Wonchen-dong, Suwon, 443-749, Republic of Korea

Received
19th May 2011
, Accepted 15th July 2011
First published on 17th August 2011
The combination of solution processable colloidal quantum dots (CQDs) and organic conjugated polymers has attracted growing interest in the past few years, because devices fabricated using this combination can have potentially low cost and high efficiency. In this paper, we propose a new device architecture of multiply layered PbS CQD-sensitized photovoltaic cells. The multiple layers of PbS CQDs were formed by the repeated spin-coating of oleic-acid-capped PbS CQD solution and 1 wt% 1,2-ethanedithiol (EDT) solution onto mesoporous (mp)-TiO2 as photoanode. Through the structural advantage of a sensitized type device and post-treatment in 10 wt% EDT solution for 16 h, we could fabricate efficient photovoltaic cells having an overall energy conversion efficiency of 2.9% under 1 sun illumination, and an external quantum efficiency of over 15% at zero bias with a signal attenuation to frequency of 10 kHz levels in the near-infrared (NIR) range.


Quantum dot (QD)-sensitized-solar cells (SSCs) are directly based on the dye-sensitized solar cells but use QDs attached to the semiconductor oxide matrix as light absorbers. In QD-SSCs, the relative position of the QDs and the oxide conduction band is fixed not only by the material properties but can also be varied by molecular dipoles of additives. A new type of multiply layered PbS QD-SSCs fabricated in this work showed a great improvement by the presence of 1,2-ethanedithiol (EDT) molecules chelated on the PbS, responsible for an effective charge transport in multiply layered PbS colloidal QDs and/or efficient charge injection from PbS colloidal QDs into the conduction band of mp-TiO2.


Recently, colloidal quantum dots (CQDs) have generated considerable interest owing to their excellent properties such as a high extinction coefficient, convenient bandgap tunability, high dipole moment, multiple exciton generation, and good stability. To exploit these desirable properties of CQDs, many researchers began to apply CQDs to solar cells, light-emitting diodes, and photodetectors. Particularly, CQDs responsive to the near-infrared (NIR) region could be used in special applications such as remote sensing, biological imaging, night vision, photovoltaics, and telecommunications. Hence, the devices responsive to NIR light based on PbS, PbSe, and Bi2S3 CQDs have been intensively studied since Sargent et al. demonstrated that photoconductive PbS CQD photodetectors could effectively detect NIR light under an applied bias voltage. Recently, they also reported the fabrication of a depleted heterojunction solar cell consisting of mesoporous TiO2 (mp-TiO2)/PbS CQDs. Unlike previous Schottky type photovoltaic (PV) cells, these heterojunction cells can attain relatively high open circuit voltage through the formation of an n–p depleted heterojunction of mp-TiO2/PbS CQDs.

Herein, we propose a new type of multiply layered PbS CQD-sensitized PV cells. Previously, we have reported that the PbS CQD-sensitized PV cells can detect light in the NIR region. The QD-sensitized PV cells consist of an electron conductor, a sensitizer (QDs), and a hole conductor. The electrons generated in the sensitizer are injected into the electron conductor and simultaneously the generated holes in the sensitizer are transported to the hole conductor. Accordingly, these types of PV cells could hold a high fill factor once the charge carriers generated in the sensitizer are effectively separated and transported to the electron conductor and the hole conductor, respectively. So far, it has been considered that the design rule for efficient CQD-sensitized PV cells is to deposit the CQDs into a monolayer at the interface between mp-TiO2 and the hole conductor, because aggregated dyes (or multiple layered dyes) attached to the mp-TiO2 surface in dye-sensitized solar cells are known to cause serious recombination due to intermolecular quenching. However, we and another group have reported that the multiply layered inorganic semiconductor sensitizer deposited on the mp-TiO2 surface could efficiently transport the generated charge carriers to the electron conductor and the hole transporting layer (or electrode), respectively, if the device morphology and the structure are well designed. Particularly, in all solid state sensitized PV cells, the device thickness is strongly restricted by the pore filling problems of hole-transporting materials (HTMs) into the nanopores. Therefore, it is desirable to construct all solid state PV cells with multiply layered CQDs on the mp-TiO2 surface in order to exploit the sun light in the limited device thickness by increasing absorption efficiency if the multiply layered CQD-sensitized PV cells are satisfied to effectively transport the generated charge carriers in CQDs.
In this work, we report efficient multiply layered PbS CQD-sensitized PV cells. For the demonstration of PV cells of this type, we constructed the PV cell with mp-TiO2/multiply layered PbS CQDs/poly-3-hexylthiophene (P3HT) as the electron conductor/inorganic sensitizer/HTM. Through the post-treatment of the multiply layered PbS CQD-sensitized PV cell in 10 wt% 1,2-ethanedithiol (EDT) solution, we could fabricate efficient solar cells having an overall power conversion efficiency of 3.4, 3.0, and 2.9% under 0.1, 0.5, and 1 sun illumination. Finally, multiply layered PbS CQD-sensitized PV cells were investigated for photo-responsive properties under NIR light. Cells of this type had an external quantum efficiency of over 15% in the NIR region and could process the input signal up to the 10 kHz level.

To prepare the mp-TiO2 electron conductor film, a dense TiO2 blocking layer (bl-TiO2) of ca. 50 nm thickness on a cleaned F-doped SnO2 (FTO, Pilkington, TEC15) glass substrate was deposited by the spray pyrolysis deposition (SPD) method with 20 mM of titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) (Aldrich) solution at 450 °C. The bl-TiO2 layer was deposited to prevent direct contact between the FTO electrode and P3HT HTM to reduce the recombination. The mp-TiO2 layers (TiO2 nanoparticles: average particle size = ca. 50 nm, crystalline phase = anatase) were then screen printed on the bl-TiO2/FTO substrate to ca. 1 μm thickness using home-made pastes and calcined at 500 °C for 1 h in air. The mp-TiO2 film was then immersed in 20 mM of aqueous TiCl4 solution at room temperature for 12 h, washed with pure water, and sintered at 450 °C for 15 min to facilitate intimate contact between nanocrystalline TiO2 particles.


The PbS CQDs are synthesized by a typical hot solution method.Lead(II) acetate trihydrate (Aldrich, 99.999% metals basis: 0.25 mmol, 94.375 mg) and oleic acid (TCI, 99%: 1 mmol, 282 mg) were mixed into a three neck flask. The mixed solution was degassed under vacuum at 100 °C for 1.5 h. After cooling to 60 °C, we added 4 mL of diphenyl ether (Sigma Aldrich, 99%) to the solution and degassed it at 65 °C for 30 min. The solution was then heated to 160 °C under N2 atmosphere and 0.1 mmol of trioctylphosphine (Strem, 97%)–bis(trimethylsilyl)sulfide (Acros, 95%) (TOP–TMS) injection solution was rapidly added into the three-neck flask at 150 °C. The solution was maintained at 120 °C for 30 min and cooled down to room temperature.


In order to attach the PbS CQDs in multiple layers on the mp-TiO2 surface, the mp-TiO2 layer was treated with 10 wt% 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA, Aldrich) ethanolic (Burdick & Jackson) solution to anchor the oleic-acid-capped PbS CQDs on the surface of mp-TiO2. Removal of the excess MPA on the mp-TiO2 film was achieved by cleaning with ethanol and chloroform. The 100 μL of oleic-acid-capped PbS CQDs in hexane (Aldrich)/1,2-dichlorobenzene (Aldrich) (10/1 v/v) solution (15 mg/1 mL) was spin-coated on the MPA treated mp-TiO2 film at 2500 rpm for 20 s. The film was then washed with chloroform to remove the unanchored PbS CQDs on the mp-TiO2 film by dropping of 1 mL of chloroform on the film and subsequent spin-coating at 2500 rpm for 20 s. In order to make multiply layered PbS CQDs on the pre-anchored PbS CQDs, 250 μL of 1 wt% EDT (Aldrich)/ethanol (Burdick & Jackson) solution was spin-coated at 2500 rpm for 20 s and the PbS CQD solution was then spin-coated at 2500 rpm for 20 s. We prepared “PbS15,” “PbS20,” and “PbS25” samples by the 15, 20, and 25 times repetitions of spin-coating of the EDT and PbS CQD solutions. The P3HT solution (Rieke Metals, > 98% regioregular: 15 mg mL−1 in 1,2-dichlorobenzene) was spin-coated on the PbS CQD-deposited film at 2500 rpm for 1 min. A poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) doped with poly(4-styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS, Baytron AI 4083) diluted with two volumes of methanol was consecutively spin-coated at 2000 rpm for 30 s to improve the contact between P3HT and Au. A 60 nm thick Au counter electrode was then deposited by thermal evaporation under a pressure of 5 × 10−5 Torr. For the EDT post-treatment, the multiply layered PbS-sensitized PV cells were immersed in 10 wt% EDT ethanolic solution for 5, 16, and 21 h. The EDT post-treated cells were then rinsed with ethanol and dried at 60 °C in an oven for 5 min.


The current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the PV cell were measured by using a sourcemeter (Keithley 2420) and a calibrated Si-reference cell (certified by NREL) under 1 sun (100 mW cm−2) AM 1.5 G illumination provided by a solar simulator (Class A, 91195A, Newport). The I–V curves with the intensity of illuminated light (0.1 and 0.5 sun) were measured by passing the simulated light through neutral density filters. The I–V curve for the NIR region was recorded by illuminating the 1 sun light passing the filter (cut-off below 715 nm in wavelength). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the visible to NIR region (from 300 nm to 1100 nm in wavelength: calibrated by a Si photodetector) was measured using a totally computerized system comprising a light source (300 W xenon lamp, 66902, Newport) aligned with a monochromator (Cornerstone™ 260, Newport) and a multimeter (Keithley 2002). The EQE of visible, NIR, and short wavelength regions (from 500 nm to 1700 nm in wavelength: calibrated by an InGaAs photodetector) was measured by a completely computerized home-designed system comprising a light source (1000 W xenon lamp, Newport, 69935) with a monochromator (Newport cornerstone 260) and a multimeter (Keithley 2002). The photocurrent response and signal attenuation with frequency were measured by using a home-designed system consisting of a 980 nm laser diode (Axcel AX-040: 500 μW), a modulator (Neos AOBD), a function generator (Tektronix CFG250), a photodiode (Newfocus), a current–voltage converter (Polaronix K101) and an oscilloscope (Yokogawa DL1702). The active area of PbS CQD-sensitized PV cells for I–V characterization was 0.16 cm2.



Fig. 1(a) depicts the device structure, which is comprised of FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PbS CQD/P3HT/PEDOT:PSS/Au. It should be noted that here we employed oleic-acid-capped PbS CQDs in hexane/chlorobenzene (10/1 v/v) solution (15 mg per 1 mL) without ligand exchange. The reason for this is due to the fact that the capped oleic acid on the surface of PbS CQDs could be quickly exchanged with EDT molecules during the spin-coating process. In addition, the oleic-acid-capped PbS CQDs have good storage stability. As shown in Fig. 1(a), EDT molecules exhibit two modes of interactions. They may be attached to PbS CQDs monodentately bridging different PbS CQDs. Additionally the EDT molecules may also be chelated to a single PbS CQD in a bi-dentate manner. The results of mono- or bi-dentately chelating improve the charge transport between multi-layered PbS CQDs owing to the shortened distance between PbS CQDs and more energetically inject the electrons generated from PbS CQDs under external light illumination to the conduction band of mp-TiO2 by the negative molecular dipole. Therefore, we used the EDT molecules to partially replace the oleic acid capped on PbS CQDs during the spin-coating, and then post-treated the multiply layered PbS CQD-sensitized PV cell in the EDT solution. Fig. 1(b) depicts the energy level diagram of a PbS CQD-sensitized PV cell. It has been reported that the PbS CQDs smaller than 5.5 nm in diameter could transfer the electron–hole pairs generated within themselves to mp-TiO2 and P3HT.

In order to confirm the real device structure, we examined a SEM cross-sectional image of a FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PbS CQDs/P3HT/PEDOT:PSS/Au device (PbS20 sample) as shown in Fig. 2(a) (see more SEM images in Fig. S1). This cross-sectional image indicates that the thickness of mp-TiO2 is ca. 1 μm. Here it should be noted that there is no additional thick PbS CQDs layer on top of the mp-TiO2 layer unlike the n–p depleted heterojunction solar cell. In other words, this device structure should be distinguished from the depleted n–p heterojunction PV cell. Rather, this device is categorized into the PbS CQD-sensitized PV cell because this cell is comprised of mp-TiO2 electron conducting layer/PbS CQD-sensitizer/P3HT HTM. To clarify the structure of this device in detail, we observed a TEM image of PbS-CQDs deposited on the mp-TiO2 film (PbS20) without P3HT/PEDOT:PSS/Au layers as shown in Fig. 2(b). The low magnified TEM image is a representative morphology of PbS CQDs deposited on the mp-TiO2 film and its magnified image clearly indicates that the surface of TiO2 is multiply deposited by one to five layers of PbS CQDs.

Fig. 3(a) displays the NIR absorption spectrum of PbS CQDs deposited on the mp-TiO2 film. The PbS CQDs are capable of absorbing light up to wavelengths of 1500 nm. The inset in Fig. 3(a) shows a TEM image of pristine PbS CQDs in hexane solution and this indicates that the size of PbS CQDs is 4–5 nm of which the bandgap position corresponds to 1150–1350 nm. To find the optimum thickness of deposited PbS CQDs on the mp-TiO2 film, we measured the external quantum efficiency (EQE) with the repeated number of the unit spin-coating process of PbS CQDs, as shown in Fig. 3(b). The EQE increased as the unit spin-coating process of PbS CQDs was repeated from 15 (PbS15) to 20 times (PbS20). It was slightly reduced when the PbS CQD layer was thickened by more than 25 times (PbS25). The increment of EQE in the thicker PbS CQD layer is attributed to the increased light harvesting efficiency by the increased absorption of light in the PbS CQD sensitizer (PbS15 → PbS20). The decrease in EQE values in the much thicker PbS CQD layer (PbS25) is due to the deterioration in charge collection efficiency. The generated charge carriers in the thicker PbS CQD layer cannot be transported effectively. The multiple junctions and loose contact between PbS CQDs contribute to poor EQE because partially remaining oleic acid insulating molecules hinder the intimate contact of PbS CQDs and consequently impair the charge transport between PbS CQDs. In order to improve the charge transport between PbS CQDs, we chemically treated the above samples in 10 wt% EDT solution for 5 h. Fig. 3(b) clearly displays the EQE is improved by post-treatment in EDT solution while maintaining the same tendency with untreated devices. It should be noted that here we directly immersed the FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PbS CQDs/P3HT/PEDOT:PSS/Au devices in 10 wt% EDT solution for the post-treatment. The EDT molecule is small enough to diffuse in the device and further replace any remaining oleic acid on the surface of PbS CQDs forming intimate contact between PbS CQDs. As schematically illustrated in Fig. 1, the characteristics of EDT as either a mono-dentate linker or a bi-dentate dipole molecule could improve the charge transport or charge injection in the PbS CQD layer. Here we see that the optimum thickness of the PbS CQD layer is formed by 20 times repeated unit spin-coating process of PbS CQDs (PbS20) under present experimental conditions.
In order to assess the advantages of a sensitized type PV cell employing P3HT as HTM, we also compared the EQE of the same device without the P3HT layer (FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PbS CQDs/PEDOT:PSS/Au) as shown in Fig. S2. This clearly indicates that the P3HT as HTM has an important role in increasing device efficiency in a sensitized type PV cell because the P3HT could be easily infiltrated in the nanopores of the PbS CQDs/mp-TiO2 film and consequently the generated holes in PbS CQDs could be effectively extracted to the P3HT hole conducting layer. The deterioration of EQE in the device without the P3HT layer might be attributed to the direct contact of Au electrode and mp-TiO2 electron conductor and/or inefficient infiltration of nanopores by Au. Regardless of the chemical post-treatment by 10 wt% EDT solution, the devices also exhibit similar behavior.
In addition, we fabricated a PbS-sensitized PV cell in an effort to confirm that the bidentately chelated EDT molecular dipole on the surface of PbS CQDs can help the charge transfer. The PbS was deposited on mp-TiO2 by the successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) method. It is well known that the PbS created by SILAR is polydispersed and the generated charge carriers in bigger PbS particles cannot be effectively transported to mp-TiO2 due to band misalignment. Fig. S3(a) confirms that the PbS deposited on mp-TiO2 by the SILAR method is polydispersed and the PbS nanoparticles are formed in a mono-layer on the mp-TiO2 surface. This implies that we can exclude the role of EDT molecules as linker combining two different PbS CQDs (in multiply layered PbS CQD-sensitized PV cells). Accordingly, in this case, we can consider that the post-treated EDT molecules act only as molecular dipoles (just in the case of bi-dentately chelated EDT molecules on the PbS surface). The EQE spectra in Fig. S3(b) clearly show that the chemical post-treatment by 10 wt% EDT solution helps the generated charge carriers in PbS to be energetically injected into the mp-TiO2 electron conductor due to the electronic coupling of PbS and EDT molecules. Here it is still not clear what is the exact role of EDT molecules because there are so many interfaces in this complicate device such as mp-TiO2/PbS, mp-TiO2/P3HT, PbS/P3HT and P3HT/Au interfaces. Therefore, more studies should be required to exactly understand the role of EDT molecules. However, we can roughly consider the EDT as molecular dipoles as depicted in Fig. 1, which overall improve the charge transport efficiency.
Based on the concept of chemical post-treatment by EDT solution, we recorded the short circuit current density (Jsc) of the PbS20 device under 1 sun illumination with regard to the post-EDT treatment time in order to determine the optimum treatment time as shown in Fig. 4(a). The Jsc gradually increases as the post-EDT treatment time increases and becomes saturated over 16 h of post-treatment. To confirm the improvement of Jsc by post-EDT treatment for 16 h (PbS20-EDT16h), we measured EQE as shown in Fig. 4(b). Amazingly the EQE was greatly improved through the optimization of post-EDT treatment. This might be attributed to the improved charge transport in multiply layered PbS CQDs and/or efficient charge injection from PbS CQDs into the conduction band of mp-TiO2 due to the mono- or bi-dentately chelated EDT molecules on the PbS CQDs via the post-EDT treatment. The EQEs of PbS15-EDT16h and PbS25-EDT16h devices were also comparably improved by the post-EDT treatment (data are not shown here). Fig. 4(c) shows the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics for the multiply layered PbS CQD-sensitized PV cell (PbS20-EDT16h), measured under standard global AM 1.5 of different light intensities with a 0.16 cm2 masked area. Under full sun, an overall efficiency of 2.9% with the corresponding photovoltaic parameters of Jsc = 14.2 mA cm−2, Voc = 470 mV, and fill factor (FF) = 0.47. Under 10 and 50% sun, the overall efficiencies were 3.4 and 3.0%, respectively. The detailed photovoltaic parameters at various light intensities are summarized in Table 1. To the best of our knowledge, the performance is the highest among the values reported for all-solid state PbS CQD-sensitized solar cells.

PbS20-EDT16h


V
oc/V

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF (%)

η (%)

a Measured by cutting-off below 715 nm wavelength light under 1 sun illumination.
b Calculated efficiency from 1 sun condition.

0.1 sun
0.41
1.6
50.4
3.4
0.5 sun
0.46
7.1
47.2
3.0
1 sun
0.47
14.2
42.9
2.9
NIR (>715 nm)
0.44
4.1
44.1
2.0 (0.8)
As mentioned in the Introduction, PbS CQDs are photo-responsive until the NIR region. Firstly, we measured again the EQE for the multiply layered PbS CQD-sensitized PV cell in the NIR region, as shown in Fig. 5(a). This EQE spectrum clearly shows that the multiply layered PbS CQD-sensitized PV cell responds to the light in the entire visible to NIR region (up to 1400 nm in wavelength). From the integration of EQE spectra in the region of 400–700 nm and 700–1400 nm, we can expect that ca. 26% of photocurrent is generated by the NIR light. From the Jsc values of the real device in 1 sun (14.2 mA cm−2) and in NIR light (4.1 mA cm−2) in Table 1, we can calculate that the contribution of NIR light to the generation of photocurrent is ca. 29%. The contribution of power conversion efficiency from NIR light (0.8%) also corresponds to ca. 26% in overall power conversion efficiency (2.9%) in 1 sun condition. The lower power conversion efficiency (2.0%) in the NIR region compared to the efficiency in the full sun region might be attributed to the lower transmission of FTO glass in the NIR region.
In addition, we characterized this multiply layered PbS CQD-sensitized PV cell to examine potential application as a photodetector under NIR light sources. In a photodetector, the EQE and response time are directly related to the device performances such as detectivity and responsivity. Therefore, we measured photocurrent response with input signal frequency. Fig. 5(b) shows a typical photocurrent response under a 1 kHz modulated 980 nm laser (power = 500 μW) indicating that the multiply layered PbS CQD-sensitized PV cell can catch up with the input signal without delay. By measuring the output photocurrent of output signal with the frequency of input signal, we found that the PV cell could process 10 kHz level signals as shown in Fig. 5(c). Lastly, to check if the device can detect weak input signals, we measured the output photocurrent by reducing the input power of laser as shown in Fig. 5(d). This indicates that the PV cell could detect weaker signals and the output intensity has linear correlation with the power of input signal.

We have demonstrated the successful fabrication of multiply layered PbS CQD-sensitized PV cells. It was found that the device efficiency could be greatly improved by the post-EDT treatment for 16 h. The great improvement of device performance might be attributed to the improved charge transport in multiply layered PbS CQDs and/or efficient charge injection from PbS CQDs into the conduction band of mp-TiO2 due to the mono- or bi-dentately chelated EDT molecules on the PbS CQDs via the post-EDT treatment. Through the optimization of post-EDT treatment and structural advantages of the multiply layered PbS CQD-sensitized PV cell, we could fabricate efficient solar cells having a power conversion efficiency of 3.4, 3.0, and 2.9% under 0.1, 0.5, and 1 sun illumination. In addition, the cell showed over 15% of EQE in the NIR region with 10 kHz level signals. We propose that the multiply layered PbS CQD-sensitized PV cells can be applied to the fabrication of efficient solar cells and NIR photodetectors.


This study was supported by the Global Research Laboratory (GRL) Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, and a grant from KRICT 2020 Program for future Technology of Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), Republic of Korea.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional cross-sectional SEM images of devices, EQEs of a PbS20 device with and without P3HT layers, TEM image of PbS/mp-TiO2 formed by the SILAR method, and EQEs of a PbS-SILAR device before and after EDT treatment. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee01774h
‡ These two authors have equally contributed to this study.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011