 DOI: 10.1039/B823148F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5298-5302

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Asha
Sharma
,

Andreas
Haldi
,

William J.
Potscavage Jr.
,

Peter J.
Hotchkiss
,

Seth R.
Marder
 and 

Bernard
Kippelen
*

Center for Organic Photonics and Electronics (COPE) and School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA. E-mail: kippelen@ece.gatech.edu; Fax: +404 385 5170; Tel: +404 385 5163

Center for Organic Photonics and Electronics (COPE) and School of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA. E-mail: seth.marder@chemistry.gatech.edu

Received
24th December 2008
, Accepted 17th April 2009
First published on 27th May 2009
We investigate the effects of surface modification of indium tin oxide (ITO) on the performance of organic multilayer molecular photovoltaic devices based on pentacene/C60 bi-layer heterojunctions. Values of the open-circuit voltage (Voc), short circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (η) are found invariant of the work function and surface hydrophobicity of ITO. Insensitivity of these parameters to variations of work function in the range of 4.50 to 5.40 eV achieved through the use of surface modifiers are correlated with an invariance of the barrier height (∼0.6 eV) due to Fermi level pinning at the ITO/pentacene interface. Energy barrier heights are extracted independently from the analysis of the electrical characteristics of single-layer diodes based on modified ITO and pentacene using an equivalent circuit model.

In recent years, organic photovoltaic devices (OPVs) have received great interest due to their promising potential for the development of large-area, low-cost, light-weight solar modules with highly flexible form factors. To improve the power conversion efficiency (η) of OPVs, significant efforts have been focused on interpenetrating networks of donor and acceptor materials comprised of either evaporated small molecules or polymer blends. Additionally, attention has also been drawn towards the development of low bandgap materials, tandem cell architectures, hybrid polymer-metal oxide structures, controlling the energy separation between the donor and the acceptor materials, and long term stability. With these developments, understanding the factors that limit the photovoltaic parameters has also become important in order to optimize various materials and device architecture, and eventually to improve the efficiencies of OPVs. The efficiency of OPVs can be improved by optimizing simultaneously the product of the open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), and the fill factor (FF). A critical factor that remains a subject of active debate is the understanding of the physical processes that determine the open-circuit voltage in organic solar cells, and especially the influence of the work function of the charge collecting electrodes. Among possible electrodes in OPVs, indium tin oxide (ITO) has been widely used as a transparent conducting anode and its work function has been engineered by employing several techniques, including the use of thin metal oxide layers, plasma treatment, the use of cross-linked thin films, and the assembly of dipolar molecules. The influence of the changes of work function of the top and bottom electrodes on the photovoltaic device parameters has been discussed in various reports; however, the conclusions are sometimes conflicting and no clear consensus has yet emerged.

In this study, we examine the effect of changing the work function and the surface energy of the ITO electrode on the device parameters of a series of OPV devices with geometry ITO/surface modifier/pentacene/C60/BCP/Al by either incorporation of various organic surface modifiers or air plasma treatment. The work function of ITO was changed by using organic phosphonic acid modifiers comprised of a phosphonic acid moiety as the anchoring group covalently bound to various dipolar functional groups. A motivation for using phosphonic acid modifiers over other modifiers was their superior bonding ability with hydroxyl terminated ITO surfaces. Tuning the organic substituent groups attached to the phosphorus atoms enables one to vary both the ITO work function and surface energy. Our results show that the use of various surface modifiers or air plasma treatment that lead to an increase of the work function of ITO from values of 4.50 eV up to 5.40 eV do not influence the values of standard photovoltaic device parameters {Voc, Jsc, FF and η} in devices based on a bi-layer heterojunction of pentacene/C60. Using an equivalent circuit model, independent studies of the temperature dependence of the current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of diodes comprised of a single layer of pentacene sandwiched between modified ITO electrodes and an Al electrode reveal that the injection barrier height at the ITO/pentacene interface for the various modifiers used in the OPV devices is found nearly constant due to Fermi level pinning effects.


Pentafluorobenzyl phosphonic acid (F5BPA) and 3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,7,7,8,8,8-tridecafluorooctylphosphonic acid (FOPA) were synthesized as reported earlier. ITO coated glass substrates (20 Ω/□ Colorado Concept Coatings, L.L.C.) were first cleaned in an ultrasonic bath using a dilute solution of Triton-X (Aldrich) in DI water (20 min) followed by ultrasonication in DI water (20 min). Further organic cleaning was done in the ultrasonic bath using acetone and ethanol (20 min each). Washed ITO substrates were then dried in a vacuum drying oven at 70 °C under vacuum (1 × 10−2 Torr) for 1 h. The surface modification was performed by dipping the cleaned ITO substrates in a solution of F5BPA or FOPA (1 mM in CHCl3 : C2H5OH : 2 : 1) for 30 min, followed by annealing at 120 °C (1 h). All steps were performed in a nitrogen filled glove box (O2 < 20 ppm and H2O < 1 ppm). Reference ITO samples were subjected to air plasma (3 min). The work functions were measured in air using a Kelvin Probe (Besocke Delta Phi).


For the fabrication of the organic solar cells on modified ITO substrates, a barrier layer of SiOx (300 nm) was first deposited on half of the ITO substrate to avoid electrical shorts during device testing. Pentacene, C60 and BCP were purified once by thermal gradient sublimation under vacuum. First a 50 nm thick pentacene layer was deposited at a rate of 0.5 Å s−1 on modified ITO. A layer of C60 (45 nm) was then deposited on top of the pentacene layer at a rate of 1 Å s−1. A thin layer of BCP, to act as an exciton blocking layer, was subsequently deposited at a rate of 0.4 Å s−1. All organic materials were thermally evaporated at a pressure below 1 × 10−7 Torr. Al cathodes (200 nm) were deposited using a shadow mask to produce five defined devices per substrate with an active area of 0.1 cm2 each. The final device configuration was ITO/modifier/pentacene (50 nm)/C60 (45 nm)/BCP (8 nm)/Al (200 nm). The devices were tested inside a nitrogen filled glove box (O2 < 1 ppm and H2O < 1 ppm). Solar cell characteristics were measured using a 175 W Xenon lamp (ASB-XE-175EX, CVI) broadband light source (350–900 nm) with an irradiance of 78 mW cm−2.


For the study of injection barrier heights at the modified ITO/pentacene interface, single-layer diodes with structure ITO/modifier/pentacene (100 nm)/Al (200 nm) were fabricated by evaporating pentacene at a rate of 0.5 Å s−1 and at a pressure below 1 × 10−7 Torr. Al cathodes were deposited at a rate of 2 Å s−1 using the above referenced shadow mask, leading to devices with an active area of 0.1 cm2. The devices were tested inside the glove box. For temperature dependent J–V characteristics, the devices were kept in a copper holder in contact with a thermoelectric cooler/heater to control the temperature.



Fig. 1 shows energy level diagrams of the materials forming the OPV devices, and the range of values of the work function of ITO treated with various surface modifiers. Unmodified ITO exhibits a work function of 4.50 ± 0.03 eV. The use of F5BPA increases the work function to a value of 4.90 ± 0.02 eV, 0.4 eV higher in comparison to the unmodified. A further increase to a value of 5.30 ± 0.04 eV is achieved when FOPA is used. The use of different terminal functional groups on the phosphonic acid allows for control over the effective dipole moment at the ITO surface leading to different electrostatic potentials at the surface, which results in varying values of the work function of ITO. Air plasma treatment increases the work function of the ITO to 5.40 ± 0.07 eV, however, this large change in work function induced by air plasma treatment is not stable over time. In contrast, the use of phosphonic surface modifiers leads to work function changes with superior stability.

To examine the effect of surface modifiers on the hydrophobicity of the ITO, the contact angles were measured with water droplets (5 µl drop volume). Unmodified ITO shows an average contact angle of 35 ± 3° and illustrates the rather hydrophilic nature of the native surface. Air plasma modification further decreases the contact angle to a value below 10°. In contrast, higher contact angles were measured for F5BPA (70 ± 6°) and FOPA (108 ± 2°) showing that an increase in work function can be achieved while also increasing the hydrophobic nature of the substrate, unlike air plasma treatment that turns the ITO surface more hydrophilic in nature.

The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the OPV devices measured in the dark and under illumination, for the unmodified, F5BPA, FOPA, and air plasma modified ITO are shown in Fig. 2. The devices based on ITO electrodes with different work function and/or hydrophobicity show very similar J–V characteristics both in the dark and under illumination. For each type of ITO modification, results are shown for three devices with identical geometry to illustrate the high reproducibility of the electrical characteristics of the devices studied. The photovoltaic parameters, Voc, Jsc, FF, and power conversion efficiency (η) under broad band illumination (irradiance ∼78 mW cm−2), averaged over three devices, are summarized in Table 1. As shown in Table 1, a device with unmodified ITO exhibits an efficiency of η = 3.8% with Voc = 0.40 V, Jsc = 13 mA cm−2 and FF = 0.55. The OPV devices based on F5BPA, FOPA and air plasma modified ITO, all with higher work functions, yield similar values of Voc, Jsc, FF and η (within the error bar, see Table 1). Hence, a variation of the work function of ITO from values of 4.50 eV up to 5.40 eV does not influence the values of the open-circuit voltage nor any of the other standard photovoltaic device parameters.

Surface modifier
Work function/eV

V
oc/mV

J
sc/mA cm−2

FF


η (%)
Calculated barrier height ΦB/eV

a The work function values are average over three different locations on each substrate. The values of Voc, Jsc, FF, and η are averaged over three devices with identical geometry on each substrate. Calculated values of ΦB are averaged over three devices on the same substrate in single-layer diodes.

Unmodified
4.50 ± 0.03
405 ± 2
13 ± 1
0.55 ± 0.01
3.8 ± 0.1
0.56 ± 0.04
F5BPA
4.90 ± 0.02
399 ± 2
13 ± 0.2
0.55 ± 0.01
3.7 ± 0.1
0.56 ± 0.05

FOPA

5.30 ± 0.04
394 ± 3
13 ± 0.2
0.51 ± 0.02
3.4 ± 0.2
0.60 ± 0.04
Air plasma
5.40 ± 0.07
402 ± 1
12 ± 0.4
0.56 ± 0.01
3.6 ± 0.1
0.60 ± 0.02
These results add to the debate on the origin of the open-circuit voltage in organic photovoltaic devices. Several reports claim that Voc is mainly determined by the difference in energies between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the donor and acceptor, respectively. In contrast, other reports invoke the metal/insulator/metal model and Voc is reported to be influenced by the difference in work function of the electrodes due to the resulting built-in potential. However, in the later case, the variations observed in Voc can be rather small compared to the changes in the difference in work function of the electrodes induced by either selecting metals with different work functions or by electrode surface modification. The origin of that observation has been assigned to Fermi level pinning effects between the anode (cathode) work function to the HOMO (LUMO) level of the organic semiconductor that leave the energy barrier height between the electrode and the semiconductor unchanged. Recently, we proposed a technique based on an equivalent circuit model to extract values of the injection barrier heights from the J–V characteristics of single-layer diodes. Hence, this technique has been applied to single-layer diodes comprised of ITO with surface treatments identical to those used in the solar cells and pentacene as the semiconductor.

In this section, we describe the modelling of the temperature dependent J–V (experimental) characteristics of ITO/modifier/pentacene (100 nm)/Al (200 nm) diodes using the equivalent circuit model proposed earlier, which assumes that the current is due to thermionic emission and can be described by:

(1)
with

(2)
where
J0 is the saturation current density, q is the elementary charge, V is the applied voltage, n is an ideality factor, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, A* is an effective Richardson constant, and ΦB is the injection barrier height for charges at the interface.


Fig. 3 shows the temperature dependent J–V characteristics of a diode using an unmodified ITO electrode. It can be seen that the J–V curves calculated from the model are well fitted to the experimentally measured J–V characteristics at different temperatures. Good fits were also obtained for the devices utilizing surface modifiers and air plasma treatment (not shown here). The slope of the linear relationship between ln(J0/T2) and 1/T determines the barrier height and is shown for differently modified ITO in the inset of Fig. 3. The calculated energy barrier height (ΦB) for unmodified ITO is 0.56 ± 0.04 eV. F5BPA, FOPA and air plasma modifications yielded values for ΦB of 0.56 ± 0.05 eV, 0.60 ± 0.04 and 0.60 ± 02, respectively, and are close to that of unmodified ITO. These similar extracted barrier height values for differently treated ITO do not appear to be influenced by the work function changes of the ITO. A barrier of ∼0.6 eV is in good agreement with the earlier reported values of 0.50 ± 0.03 eV by Fugukawa et al. for a pentacene film on ITO, and that (0.4 eV) reported by Koch et al. on PEDOT : PSS modified ITO from ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy (UPS) studies. The invariance in ΦB suggests that there could be a formation of an interfacial dipole providing the charge transfer across the interface, resulting in a Fermi level pinning effect between ITO and pentacene within the range of work function values (4.50 to 5.40 eV) obtained by the various surface modification techniques employed here. The results are in agreement with those of other independent studies in which Fermi level pinning effects at metal/organic interfaces have been investigated by UPS studies.
Turning now to the surface hydrophobicity and its influence on the OPV performance, previous studies on CuPc/C60 heterojunction solar cells have shown that an increase in the hydrophobicity (increasing the contact angle from 30° to 76°) of the anode surface can lead to an increase in power conversion efficiency by an order of magnitude. This increase was assigned to an increase in Jsc and FF as a result of a better compatibility of the organic layer leading to enhanced charge collection at the anode. In contrast, our findings show that for pentacene/C60 heterojunction OPVs, the Jsc and FF are nearly insensitive to the surface energy of the ITO anode even when the contact angle is varied a large amount from a hydrophilic surface (contact angle <10° after air plasma) to a more hydrophobic one (contact angle of 108 ± 2° with FOPA modification).

In summary, we varied the work function and surface energy of ITO with different techniques, including air plasma treatment and the use of phosphonic acid based surface modifiers. The effects of these changes on the electrical properties of organic photovoltaic devices have been studied. The surface modification of ITO with phosphonic acid compounds yielded increases in work function while simultaneously increasing the hydrophobicity of the ITO surface. The electrical properties of organic photovoltaic devices based on pentacene/C60 heterojunctions were found to be nearly insensitive to the work function of modified ITO within the range studied (4.50–5.40 eV). Despite an increase of the work function of ITO by 0.9 eV, the open-circuit voltage of the photovoltaic devices was found to be constant with a value of Voc = 0.4 V. Further investigations of the energy barrier between modified ITO electrodes and pentacene in single-layer devices revealed that the barrier height was constant with a value of 0.6 eV when the work function of ITO was changed within the range studied (4.50–5.40 eV). This observation is attributed to Fermi level pinning effects. Furthermore, the differences in hydrophobicity of ITO obtained with surface modifiers compared to air plasma treatment were not found to significantly impact the performance of the organic photovoltaic devices tested herein.


This material is based upon work supported in part by Solvay S.A., by the STC Program of the National Science Foundation under Agreement Number DMR-0120967, and by the Office of Naval Research.


† This paper is part of a Journal of Materials Chemistry theme issue on solar cells. Guest editors: Michael Grätzel and René Janssen.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009