 DOI: 10.1039/C4TC01777C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 8715-8722


Chunmei
Zhang
,

Lei
Qi
,

Qiang
Chen
*,

Longfeng
Lv
,

Yu
Ning
,

Yufeng
Hu
,

Yanbing
Hou
 and 

Feng
Teng
*

Laboratory of Plasma Physics and Materials, Beijing Institute of Graphic Communication, Beijing 102600, China. E-mail: chenqiang@bigc.edu.cn

Institute of Optoelectronic Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China. E-mail: fteng@bjtu.edu.cn

Received
11th August 2014
, Accepted 21st August 2014
First published on 18th September 2014
With Ar plasma treatment of the indium tin oxide (ITO) cathode, we achieve efficient inverted bulk heterojunction solar cells based on poly(3-hexylthiophene):[6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester, which do not require electron selective layer. The plasma treatment improves the power conversion efficiency of the device from 1.07% to 3.57% with a fill factor of 66%, open-circuit voltage of 0.60 V, and short-circuit current of 9.03 mA cm−2. This result is comparable to the regular inverted devices with an additional electron selective layer. The Kelvin probe detects a reduction in the ITO work function of ∼0.45 eV after plasma treatment, which finally leads to an increase in the built-in potential and faster carrier extraction. As a result, good device performance is achieved. Because the electron selective layer becomes unnecessary, our strategy suggests a simple way to achieve efficient inverted organic solar cells.

Bulk heterojunction (BHJ) polymer solar cell (PSC) is one of the most promising photovoltaic techniques due to its advantages such as solution processing, low-cost, lightweight and flexibility. Recently, inverted PSCs have attracted increased attention based on their several obvious advantages. Contrary to normal structure BHJ PSCs, in which indium tin oxide (ITO) is used as an anode to collect holes and a low-work-function metal is used as a cathode to collect electrons, the inverted PSCs use ITO as the cathode and a high-work-function metal as the anode. Because of avoiding the need to use a low-work-function metal electrode that oxidizes easily in the environment of air or poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) hole-transporting layer whose acidity etches the underlying ITO over time, inverted PSC devices demonstrate better ambient stability. In addition, the inverted configuration demonstrates the merits of vertical phase separation and concentration gradient in the active layers. The high record power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 9.2% achieved by an inverted PSC was reported recently.

Because of the low electrical resistivity and high transparency in the visible range, ITO is widely used as an electron-collecting electrode in inverted PSCs. The work function of ITO is about 4.5–4.7 eV, which lies between the typical highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of common electron acceptor materials. In order to efficiently extract photo-generated electrons in an inverted PSC, different types of electron selective layers with a low work function (also known as cathode interlayers, electron transporting layers, or hole blocking layers) are popularly used to modify the surface of ITO, including n-type metal oxides such as zinc oxides and titanium oxides, self-assembled cross-linked fullerene, n-type metal carbonates such as cesium carbonate, and low-work-function metals such as calcium and magnesium,etc. Despite the significantly improved device performance, inserting a cathode interlayer actually complicates the fabrication process of PSC devices. Plasma treatment, as known, can tune the ITO work function by changing the surface constituents, and it has been widely used in the area of organic electroluminescent devices. It might be also effective in the organic solar cells.
In this work, we demonstrate its fruitful applications in inverted PSCs. With Ar plasma treatment, the inverted BHJ PSC without a cathode interlayer based on poly(3-hexylthio-phene):[6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT/PCBM) exhibits a PCE of 3.57%, which is comparable to the regular inverted PSCs with an additional cathode interlayer. Additionally, during plasma treatment, the temperature of the ITO substrate is less than 60 °C; this technology is compatible with the fabrication of devices on flexible substrates by the roll-to roll process.

Before plasma treatment, the ITO substrates were cleaned in ultrasonic baths by a sequence of detergent solution, acetone, deionized water and ethanol for 30 min, and then dried under a nitrogen stream. The cleaned ITO was then noted as pristine ITO. Afterwards, the ITO substrates were transferred into a plasma chamber. When the chamber was evacuated to the base pressure of 2 × 10−4 Pa, Ar gas was allowed to flow into the chamber at a flow rate of 10 sccm. Microwave power (150 W in applied power, 2450 MHz in frequency) was applied to generate the plasma in the electron cyclotron resonance (ECR) mode. The ITO substrates were treated by Ar plasma for 3 min. Then, the ITO substrates were transferred and stored in the ambient environment for characterization and device fabrication.


The inverted PSC based on the plasma treated ITO substrates was fabricated as follows: 1,2-dichlorobenzene solution composed of P3HT (Rieke Metals, 17 mg ml−1) and PCBM (Nano-C, 17 mg ml−1) was spin-coated onto the treated ITO at 800 rpm for 25 s in the nitrogen-filled glove box (<0.1 ppm H2O and O2) and then annealed at 110 °C for 10 min. MoO3 (10 nm in thickness) and Ag (100 nm in thickness) as electrodes were thermally evaporated onto the active layer. The assembled structure of the cell is plasma treated ITO/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag, and the area of each cell is 4.5 mm2. As a comparison, the cell based on pristine ITO was also assembled in the inverted PSC, and the structure is pristine ITO/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag.


Pristine and plasma treated ITO structures were characterized by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) using ESCALAB 250 XPS Analysis System with a monochromated Al Kα X-ray source for determining the surface chemical composition. Surface roughness and morphology were acquired by atomic force microscopy (AFM, Veeco Dimension 3100). The work function of ITO was measured with the Kelvin Probe (SKP5050, KP technology Ltd., UK, Au reference) method and the sheet resistance was detected with the four-point probe method. Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the assembled devices were recorded with a Keithley 4200 sourcemeter. An AM 1.5 solar simulator (ABET Technologies) at 100 mW cm−2 intensity was used to provide illumination. The capacitance–voltage (C–V) measurements were conducted using a Keithley 4200-SCS with an AC bias of 25 mV and the data were recorded at a frequency of 3 kHz. For the transient short-circuit photocurrent measurement, a square-pulsed optical excitation of 200 μs was generated from a 525 nm high-brightness LED driven by a function generator, and a 50 Ω input termination of the oscilloscope was used. To test the photo-stability of the device with plasma treated ITO, the device was continuously irradiated with AM 1.5G simulated solar illumination at 100 mW cm−2 intensity for 80 h in a dry N2 environment. The measured temperature of the photo-irradiated samples was maintained at about 45 °C. The photovoltaic output parameters were measured at fixed interval times during this period.


The optical transmission spectrum and AFM images of the pristine and plasma treated ITO glasses are obtained, and the results are shown in Fig. 1. The water contact angle measurements of ITO are shown in the inset. With regard to pristine ITO, AFM images indicate that there are no significant changes in its morphology after plasma treatment, and the root-mean-square (RMS) roughness value only increases from 1.35 nm to 1.59 nm. In the visible range, the transmittance of the ITO substrate is related to the grain-boundary scattering. Since the size of grains in the ITO film is not obviously altered in the AFM images, the transmittances of the pristine and plasma-treated ITO are identical, as shown in Fig. 1.

The surface energy of ITO is characterized by the water contact angle measurements. The negligible variation from 23.4° to 23.6° means that the Ar plasma treatment does not graft any polar groups on the surface. We, then, measured the sheet resistance values of the pristine and plasma treated ITO. The sheet resistance values of ITO are nearly identical for both the samples, varying from 14.2 to 14 Ω □−1.
Then, we surmise that the chemical component after the treatment might have changed. Fig. 2 shows the O1s XPS spectra of pristine and plasma-treated ITO. The O1s cores are fitted with three components. The peak at 531.9 eV is assigned to the super-imposed peak of the O–H, O–C and O–O bonds adsorbed on the ITO surface (OIII). The peaks at 531.0 eV (OII) and 529.7 eV (OI) are assigned to the oxygen in oxide lattice with and without oxygen vacancies, respectively. The appearance of the OIII peak indicates the oxygen contamination of the ITO surface, which may be attributed to the exposure of the samples to air before the XPS measurement. If the sample is etched by the Ar ion in the XPS chamber and then is measured in situ, the surface oxygen (OIII) and carbon contamination can be removed exactly (Fig. S1 and S2).
After Ar plasma treatment, the intensity of OII is relatively higher than that of OI, and the ratio of OII/OI increases from 0.47 to 0.61, indicating that the plasma treatment increases the concentration of the oxygen vacancies in the ITO film. Since oxygen vacancies form donor states, the increase of the oxygen vacancy concentration is expected to cause an upward shift of the Fermi energy of ITO and decrease in the work function. Therefore, we measured the work function of the ITO by the Kelvin Probe (KP) method. It is found that a 0.45 eV decrease of the ITO work function is achieved after Ar plasma treatment. We, then, confirmed the decrease of the ITO work function by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurement, which is shown in Fig. S3. The result is consistent with the KP data: a notable reduction (0.53 eV) of the work function after Ar plasma treatment was obtained. The discrepancy between the work function values measured by the two approaches, namely, KP and UPS, may be due to the different working mechanisms and measurement environments. In the KP method, the changes in the contact potential difference between the Au reference and the samples are measured, followed by calculating the work function; however, in the UPS method, the energy of the incident beam is subtracted from the difference between the Fermi edge and the low-energy cut-off of the secondary electrons to obtain the work function. Besides, KP is performed in the ambient atmosphere and the adsorbed molecular or atomic species can induce an absolute work function shift, whereas the UPS spectra are obtained in ultra-high vacuum, where the highly energetic photons irradiation (He I line) can induce other effects, e.g. desorbing molecular or atomic species from the surface. Nevertheless, both these measurements confirm the decreasing trend of the work function after Ar plasma treatment. We, then, use 0.45 eV as the decrease of the ITO work function in the following analysis because the measurement environment of KP is closer to the experimental conditions used for the fabrication of cells.
The J–V characteristics of the inverted devices with pristine and plasma treated ITO cathodes are shown in Fig. 3. Under illumination, the J–V curve of the device with the pristine ITO rises quickly around V = 0 V and S-shaped characteristic appears in the fourth quadrant, which leads to a small open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.33 V and a comparatively low FF of 40% (Fig. 3(a)). Although the short circuit current is as high as 8.23 mA cm−2, the PCE value is still only 1.07%.
For the device with plasma treated ITO cathode, the J–V curve exhibits normal exponential diode-like characteristics. The S-shaped characteristic in the fourth quadrant disappears, resulting in the increase of the PCE value from 1.07% to 3.57%, with a fill factor of 66%, open-circuit voltage of 0.60 V, and short-circuit current of 9.03 mA cm−2. Table 1 lists the averaged solar cell performance parameters with the standard deviation of five batches of identically processed solar cells: each batch includes four individual cells. One can see that the performance of the cells in the same batch varies slightly from cell to cell (Fig. S4).
Cathode of the device

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Pristine ITO (average ± s.d.)
0.32 ± 0.03
8.09 ± 0.20
0.38 ± 0.04
0.98 ± 0.18
Plasma-treated ITO (average ± s .d.)
0.60 ± 0.01
8.98 ± 0.18
0.65 ± 0.02
3.51 ± 0.07
In the absence of the cathode interlayer, the inverted solar cell with a plasma treated ITO cathode now demonstrates a better performance as compared to the regular inverted solar cells with an additional cathode interlayer. Since the ITO cathode exhibited almost the same surface energy and surface morphology before and after plasma treatment, the vertical phase separation and the morphology of photoactive layers should be similar in the two types of devices. Then, we believe that the improvement of the PCE should be attributed to the decrease of the ITO work function.
The J–V characteristics of the devices in the dark condition are presented in Fig. 3(b). It is distinctly clear that the device with the plasma treated ITO cathode exhibits a larger turn-on voltage (∼0.5 V), while the pristine ITO assembled cell exhibits injection currents with virtually no turn-on voltage. This implies that the built-in potential (Vbi) across the device, which is responsible for exciton dissociation and the upper limit for the attainable VOC, is increased because of the plasma treated ITO. In addition, when comparing with the pristine ITO assembled device, the device with plasma treated ITO yields a brilliant diode quality with a lower leakage current and a higher rectification ratio. This proves that the plasma treated ITO material creates a high conductive path for electron extraction, which can explain the enhanced FF of the device.

Fig. 4(a) compares the capacitance–voltage (C–V) characteristics of devices with pristine and plasma treated ITO. The measurements were carried out in the dark condition at room temperature. The C–V curves in devices based on organic semiconductors are usually used to derive the Mott–Schottky characteristics and even to provide the flat-band voltage (Vfb) (equivalent the built-in potential, Vbi). The Mott–Schottky characteristics for both the samples are shown in Fig. 4(b), where C−2 = 2(Vfb − V)/(A2qεε0NA), V is the applied voltage, A corresponds to the device's active surface (4.5 mm2), q accounts for the elementary charge, ε is the relative dielectric constant of the semiconductors (assumed to be 3), ε0 is the permittivity of vacuum, and NA is the organic semiconductors doping density. Then, the Vfb (Vbi) value could be obtained through the intersection of the voltage axis with the simulated tangent line from the curve. For the pristine ITO based devices, the Vbi value is 0.08 V; however, for plasma treated ITO based devices, the Vbi value increases to 0.41 V. The increase in Vbi matches the increase in VOC and indicates that the plasma treated ITO indeed results in an increase of the device's built-in field.
The enhanced internal electric field could be predicted by the short-circuit current measurement. Fig. 5 presents the short-circuit current response of the two devices to 200 μs square-pulse optical excitation from a 525 nm high-brightness LED driven by a function generator. The device with pristine ITO cathodes exhibits slow turn-on and turn-off dynamics, with very little change in the shape of the transient photocurrent curves under different intensities of the excitation light (Fig. 5(a) and (b)). The rise/fall times of the device (defined as the time taken to go from 10% to 90% of the full response) are about 14 μs and are independent of the light intensity. For the device with plasma treated ITO cathode (Fig. 5(c) and (d)), on the other hand, the photocurrent dynamics become systematically faster. The rise/fall times of the device are about 7 μs and are also independent of the light intensity. Considering the previous transient photocurrent studies on P3HT/PCBM devices, the light-intensity independence of the photocurrent rise/fall time reveals a trap-free charge transport in the device. In the device with the plasma treated ITO cathode, the faster short-circuit photocurrent response at turn-on and turn-off suggests a faster transport of charge occurrence, which is mainly caused by the higher internal electric field.
On the basis of the results discussed above, we try to propose a physical model to explain the favorable role of plasma treated ITO cathode. For the inverted PSC, the direction of the built-in potential Vbi is from the ITO cathode to anode, which is beneficial for the electrons drifting towards the ITO cathode and holes drifting towards the Ag anode. The decrease of the cathode work function can increase the built-in potential and then enhance the extraction efficiency of the photo-generated carriers. In our work, the built-in potential of the device increases from 0.08 V to 0.41 V after the plasma treatment. As a result, a good device performance and faster turn-on and turn-off transient photocurrent response are achieved. In addition, for the devices with pristine ITO cathode, the large energetic mismatch between the work function of the ITO substrate (Wc, 4.7 eV) and the energy of the negative integer transfer state (EICT−) of PCBM (4.3 eV) leads to barriers towards charge injection, which induces the S-shaped J–V curve in the fourth quadrant. When the Wc value is varied from 4.7 eV to 4.25 eV after plasma treatment, the EICT− value of PCBM is only marginally higher than Wc, which results in a desirable Ohmic contact between the ITO and PCBM, consequently reducing the electron accumulation at the ITO cathode.
Furthermore, we studied the aging of plasma treated ITO on the cell efficiency by storing them in air under the ambient condition for different times, and then fabricating the inverted devices with these treated ITO substrates. The J–V curves of the assembled cells are shown in Fig. 6(a), and the parameters of the photovoltaic performance are summarized in Table 2. After the ITO was stored for 40 days, the PCEs of the devices decreased slightly from 3.57% to 3.47%, and the VOC and FF values remained unchanged. This reveals that the shift of the ITO work function after plasma treatment is a non-reversible process, and the treated sample has good stability in air. Wang et al. and Zhou et al. have once reported a process to decrease the ITO work function by prolonging UV or solar simulator illumination in a nitrogen-filled glove box. However, the reversible behavior after re-exposing to air made this method impractical in commercial applications.
ITO storage time

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
2 h
0.60
9.03
66
3.57
1 day
0.60
8.99
65
3.51
3 days
0.60
8.83
67
3.56
7 days
0.60
8.98
65
3.51
40 days
0.60
8.50
68
3.47
Besides the aging of the treated ITO, we examined the stability of the inverted PSCs with Ar plasma treated ITO cathode. It is worth noting that the plasma treated ITO cathode was stored in air for 2 h before being assembled. Un-encapsulated devices were periodically tested during storage in a N2-filled glove box. As can be seen in Fig. 6(b), after 60 days of storage in N2, the PCE of the device was only slightly lower than its original value. We, then, concluded that inverted PCEs with plasma treated ITO are also much stable.
We explore the photo-stability of the free electron selective layer in the inverted PSCs. As known the interface between the ITO and the active layer plays a critical role in the photo-degradation behavior of the devices. In recent years, many studies have focused on the organic/electrode contacts and their influence on the device photo-stability behavior. We intend to explore the photo-stability of the inverted devices with plasma treated ITO. For comparison, we prepared the inverted device with ZnO-modified ITO as the electron selective layer, which is widely used in inverted devices. The structure of the device is ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag. The experimental detail of the device with ZnO interlayer is shown in the ESI, and the initial efficiency of the device with ZnO layer is 3.21%.

Fig. 7 shows the evolution of the normalized cell performance and the alteration of J–V characteristics of the devices under the continuous illumination for both the samples. For the device with the ZnO interlayer, the light stress causes a 20% loss in VOC, 28% loss in JSC and 10% loss in FF after 80 h of continuous light exposure. For the device with plasma-treated ITO, light stress causes a 23% loss in VOC, 29% loss in JSC and 22% loss in FF. Although the losses in VOC and JSC in both these devices are similar, the device with plasma treated ITO suffers a stronger loss in FF. As a result, the PCE of the devices without interlayer and with ZnO interlayer decreased by ca. 52% and ca. 43%, respectively. The larger drop of FF in the device with plasma treated ITO might be due to the direct contact between the active layer and the ITO electrode because in the dark condition, the performance of the device with plasma-treated ITO was degraded marginally. Therefore, we surmise that the interaction between the ITO and the active layer might occur due to the light exposure period. The active layer–electrode interface results in lesser photo-stability than that in the organic-ITO interface with the ZnO interlayer. The photo-degradation mechanism at the active layer–electrode interface will be studied in future works.

To summarize, an efficient inverted P3HT/PCBM solar cell without a cathode interlayer has been achieved by using Ar plasma treated ITO cathodes. The obtained PCE of 3.57% is comparable to the regular inverted solar cells based on P3HT/PCBM with additional cathode interlayers. The XPS results reveal that the plasma treatment increases the concentration of oxygen vacancies in the ITO film, which leads to a reduction in the ITO work function. We notice that the work function of plasma treated ITO is remarkably stable. Compared to the device with the non-treated ITO cathode, we believe the improved performance is attributed to the increase of the built-in potential across the active layer and the better energy match between the ITO work function and EICT− of PCBM. Since inserting a cathode interlayer becomes unnecessary, our strategy suggests a simple method to achieve cost-effective inverted organic solar cells fabrication.


This work was financially supported by the National Science Foundation for Distinguished Yong Scholars of China (61125505), National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant no. 61377028, 11175024, 11375031) and 2011BAD24B01.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4tc01777c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014