 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA09028A
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18259-18264


Kasparas
Rakstys
,

Sanghyun
Paek
,

Muhammad
Sohail
,

Peng
Gao
,

Kyung Taek
Cho
,

Paul
Gratia
,

Yonghui
Lee
,

Klaus H.
Dahmen
 and 

Mohammad Khaja
Nazeeruddin
*

Group for Molecular Engineering of Functional Materials, Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1951 Sion, Switzerland. E-mail: Mdkhaja.nazeeruddin@epfl.ch

Qatar Environment and Energy Research Institute (QEERI), Hamad Bin Khalifa University (HBKU), Qatar Foundation Doha, Qatar

Received
18th October 2016
, Accepted 21st October 2016
First published on 21st October 2016
Dimethoxydiphenylamine-substituted dispiro-oxepine derivative 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N′-di-4-methoxyphenylamine)dispiro-[fluorene-9,4′-dithieno[3,2-c:2′,3′-e]oxepine-6′,9′′-fluorene] (DDOF) has been designed and synthesized using a facile synthetic route. The novel hole transporting material (HTM) was fully characterized and tested in perovskite solar cells exhibiting a remarkable power conversion efficiency of 19.4%. More importantly, compared with spiro-OMeTAD-based devices, DDOF shows significantly improved stability. The comparatively comprehensive solid structure study is attempted to disclose the common features of good performance HTMs. These achievements clearly demonstrated that the highly hindered DDOF can be an effective HTM for the fabrication of efficient perovskite solar cells and further enlightened the rule of new HTM's design.

In recent years, perovskite-based solar cells (PSCs) have become the hottest topic in photovoltaics due to three significant advantages: inexpensive precursors, simple fabrication methods, and remarkably high power conversion efficiency (PCE) values. A typical PSC configuration is composed of a perovskite absorbing material sandwiched between an electron transporting material (ETM) and a hole transporting material (HTM), the last of which plays an important role in facilitating the transportation of holes from perovskite to the gold as a back contact.

Spiro-based organic semiconductor 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N′-di-4-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) was selected as the benchmark HTM for PSCs. However, the tedious multi-step synthesis of spiro-OMeTAD makes it prohibitively expensive and cost-ineffective. Typically, high-purity sublimation-grade spiro-OMeTAD is required to obtain high-performance devices. A huge interest in the development of novel small-molecule organic semiconductors has been raised to find a better understanding between the HTM structure and PSC performance. So far, although a large number and different types of HTMs have been reported reaching an efficiency of 16–18%, only a very few candidates showed PCE values over 19%.
In this work, we present the development of an alternative spiro-annulated HTM 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N′-di-4-methoxyphenylamine)dispiro[fluorene-9,4′-dithieno[3,2-c:2′,3′-e]oxepine-6′,9′′-fluorene] (DDOF), synthesized using a facile 3-step preparation procedure and characterized using various optical, thermal and electrochemical measurements. The single crystallography study disclosed and visualized the highly hindered nature of DDOF. Furthermore, a PCE of 19.4% has been reached employing the titular HTM in a PSC with improved stability, showing potential as a non-sublimed low-cost HTM to replace widely used spiro-OMeTAD.
It is well known that CH3NH3PbI3 is extremely soluble in water accelerating device degradation very quickly even under low humidity conditions; therefore the engineering of the perovskite/HTM interface is one of the most important goals towards improved moisture resistance. DDOF is composed of bithiophene and two dispirodifluorene units incorporated around the oxepine core. While the bithiophene unit has been shown to reveal an additional interaction with perovskite, the four dimethoxydiphenylamine inherent triangular pyramids formed by sp3 nitrogen atoms lead to large steric hindrance to further decrease the anisotropic solid structure, which will favor a homogeneous film morphology to effectively block the electron recombination, resist the perovskite surface from moisture and inhibit gold nanoparticle migration from the electrode.
The general synthesis procedure for the preparation of DDOF is shown in Fig. 1. Firstly, commercially available precursor 3,3′-dibromo-2,2′-bithiophene has been protected with trimethylsilyl groups obtaining 1. By adding a stoichiometric amount of n-BuLi, 5,5′-ditrimethylsilyl-3,3′-dilithio-2,2′-bithiophene was generated in situ and following treatment with an excess of 2,7-dibromofluorenone allowed formation of the intermediate carbinol. Condensing in acetic acid in the presence of a catalytic amount of hydrochloric acid two hydroxyls are involved in intramolecular H-bonding that facilitated an etherification reaction between these groups with closing of the seven membered oxepine ring. Finally, dispiro-oxepine derivative 2 was equipped with 4,4′-dimethoxydiphenylamine units via a palladium-catalyzed Buchwald–Hartwig C–N cross-coupling reaction, to release final bithiophene-functionalized DDOF with original 3D modes. All synthetic procedures, 1H/13C and mass spectra are reported in the ESI.
The chemical structure of DDOF is confirmed by X-ray diffraction analysis as displayed in Fig. 2. Interestingly, in the center of DDOF, the distorted oxepine ring chains up the three main cores (two bis(dimethoxyphenylamine)fluorine with bithiophene). The angle of the ether bond is measured to be 130.03° and the angle of the planes of two fluorene cores is 82.4°. Different from the ubiquitous spiro-OMeTAD and our recently reported KR216, the two fluorene cores of DDOF lost their central symmetric configuration and adopted a seesaw-type orientation with one side arm (di-p-methoxyphenylamine) of each core beneath or above that of the other core (Fig. 2b and c). Therefore, for the sake of visual clarity, three different colors are introduced to mark the three main cores of this molecule with very irregular geometry. Different from the case of FDT, the two thiophene units are not fused by a cyclopentadiene and a torsion angle of 26.09° is measured (Fig. S3). The two bis(dimethoxyphenylamine)fluorenes are orthogonally connected to the oxepine ring with dihedral angles of 87.65° and 88.92° respectively, which are slightly smaller than that of spiro-OMeTAD (89.94°). DDOF was found to crystallize in the monoclinic space group P121/c. In one-unit cell, four independent molecules in the crystal lattice stacked in a highly slipped fashion (Fig. 2d) through only CH/π (CH/O) hydrogen bonds. Similar to that of spiro-OMeTAD, due to the highly sterically hindered geometry, no close face to face overlap is observed. As indicated in Fig. S4 and similar to what we have found in other triphenylamine containing HTMs, the redox active triphenylamine marked with the same color forms channels or networks inside the crystal lattice, which are expected to facilitate the facile establishment of highly efficient charge transport channels.
In an attempt to gain more insight into the electronic structure of compound DDOF, MO calculations were performed at the TD-DFT and DFT levels of theory, respectively, using the B3LYP functional and 6-31G(d) basis set employing the Gaussian 09 package. The optimized geometry of DDOF is shown in Fig. S5. The optimized molecular geometry shows that four diphenylamine side arms are extended from the two coplanar fluorene groups forming four redox active centers. The two fluorene planes are roughly orthogonal to each other with an angle of 89.66°. Due to the non-aromatic nature of the oxepine ring, the planes of two thiophene rings are twisted with a dihedral angle of 26.36°. These values are in agreement with what we measured in the single crystallography.

Fig. 3 reveals its electron density distributions in the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO). The HOMO and HOMO−1 of DDOF are close in energy and spread over the one of the two bis(dimethoxyphenylamine)fluorene groups respectively, resulting from the antibonding interaction of all the aromatic rings. Due to the fact that the oxepine ring breaks the conjugation among the three main conjugated moieties, the interaction between their virtual orbitals is less pronounced. The LUMO of DDOF is a π* orbital confined on the bithiophene groups, and the LUMO+1 is a π* orbital that is mainly delocalized over the two fluorene groups.
The thermal behavior of HTMs was determined by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements (Fig. S6). From TGA, it was found that DDOF has a similar to spiro-OMeTAD (417 °C) and relatively high decomposition temperature (Tdec) of 412 °C, with a weight loss of 5%, indicating good thermal stability. The thermal transitions of DDOF were studied by DSC. Only a glass transition temperature (Tg) of 157 °C was investigated for DDOF during the second heating scan, demonstrating that this HTM is fully amorphous. This is desirable to form homogeneous films in PSC devices.
The normalized UV-vis absorption and photoluminescence spectra of DDOF and spiro-OMeTAD in THF are shown in Fig. 4. Both exhibit an almost identical absorption band in the UV region with the absorption maximum around 385 nm. Compared with spiro-OMeTAD, DDOF shows a narrow emission band centered at 426 nm. The optical band gap (Eg) determined from the onset of absorption was 3.02 eV for DDOF, which is almost identical to that of spiro-OMeTAD. To compare the energy levels of the new HTM with spiro-OMeTAD we performed cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurement. The data derived from the ground-state oxidation potential (EHOMO) estimated from the cyclic voltammogram shown in Fig. 4 are summarized in Table 1. The HOMO value of DDOF was estimated to be −5.07 eV vs. vacuum, which is slightly destabilized compared with that of spiro-OMeTAD (−5.04 eV). Considering that the valence band of double-mixed perovskite is at −5.65 eV (vs. vacuum),DDOF shows enough overpotential leading to efficient photogenerated charge transfer at the interface.
ID

λ
abs
, nm

λ
em
, nm

E
g
, eV

E
HOMO
vs. NHE, V
HOMO, eV
LUMO, eV

a Absorption and photoluminescence measured in THF solution.
b Determined from the UV-vis absorption onset.
c Measured in DCM/tetra-n-butylammonium hexafluorophosphate (0.1 M) solution, using a glassy carbon working electrode, Pt reference electrode, and Pt counter electrode with Fc/Fc+ as an internal standard. Potentials were converted to the normal hydrogen electrode by addition of +0.624 V and −4.44 eV to the vacuum, respectively.
d Calculated from LUMO = HOMO+Eg.


DDOF

378
426
3.02
0.63
−5.07
−2.05
Spiro-OMeTAD
390
424
3.05
0.60
−5.04
−1.99
The lateral thin-film conductivity of HTM layers was measured on OFET substrates (Fig. S7). The conductivity of oxidized DDOF was determined to be 2.5 × 10−5 S cm−1, which is lower than that of spiro-OMeTAD (σ = 4.9 × 10−5 S cm−1).
To demonstrate the ability of DDOF acting as the HTM, we prepared PSCs with (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 perovskite as the absorber. Fig. 5 displays the cross-sectional images of the PSCs analyzed with a field-emission scanning electron microscope. The device is made of ∼400 nm perovskite atop a 200 nm thick mesoporous TiO2 layer, which was deposited on FTO glass coated with ∼50 nm compact TiO2. The device is completed by an ∼100 nm thick HTM and 80 nm gold as a back contact.

Fig. 6 illustrates the current–voltage (J–V) traces collected under simulated solar illumination (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2) for the best PSC among 30 devices. The HTM layers were deposited onto the mixed perovskite from a toluene solution containing 330 mol% tert-butylpyridine (TBP), 50 mol% tris(bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide) (Li-TFSI) and 3 mol% FK209 (CoIII dopant) as additives. A detailed device fabrication procedure is reported in the ESI. Summarized electrical output characteristics are reported in Table 2. The device with DDOF as the HTM possesses an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1101 mV, a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 22.37 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.79, yielding a PCE of 19.4%. The high fill factor may be attributed to the thin HTM layer of 100 nm, causing lower series resistance. Furthermore, we note that the CoIII dopant-free DDOF employed PSC yields a high PCE of 18.3%. To show the impact of the hysteresis on DDOF-based device performance, we reported the J–V traces collected by scanning the applied voltage at 0.01 V s−1 from forward bias (FB) to short circuit (SC) and the other way around (Fig. S9). For comparison, the reference device based on spiro-OMeTAD achieved an overall PCE of 18.8%, which is mainly because of a lower FF, despite similar JSC and VOC using a regular procedure and 16.0% excluding the CoIII dopant from the hole transporting layer composition, respectively. The statistical distribution of the PSC parameters employing DDOF and spiro-OMeTAD is shown in Fig. S8, giving an average DDOF PCE value of 18.7% and indicating very high reproducibility. The incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) (Fig. S10) of the perovskite devices as a function of wavelength shows that the device with DDOF as the HTM exhibits IPCE above 90% from 400 nm covering all the visible region to 700 nm.
ID

J
sc, mA cm−2

V
oc, mV
FF
PCE (%)

DDOF

22.37
1101
0.79
19.4

DDOF w/o CoIII
21.86
1074
0.78
18.3
Spiro-OMeTAD
22.44
1115
0.75
18.8
Spiro-OMeTAD w/o CoIII
21.21
1032
0.73
16.0
The stability of PSCs is a key factor that plays a major role in their commercialization potential. In Fig. 7, we report maximum power point tracking (MPO) using DDOF and spiro-OMeTAD as HTMs. During the measurement, all the unsealed cells were kept in an argon ambience under a constant illumination of 100 mW cm−2. The devices were maintained at the maximum power point during aging and the current–voltage curve was recorded automatically every 2 h. The efficiency of spiro-OMeTAD dramatically decreased in early time decay. Similar dynamics have been recently observed by Guarnera and co-workers, who demonstrated that a rapid degradation mechanism is activated by metal electrode migration through spiro-OMeTAD and contacting the perovskite layer. DDOF has a similar dynamics phenomenon, with a smaller decrease compared with spiro-OMeTAD. By the end of 250 h, the initial MPO values for DDOF, and spiro-OMeTAD decay to 65%, and 37%, respectively. We expect that the MPO after 1000 h would be in good agreement with the trend we found in the first 250 h of testing, confirming that DDOF is substantially more stable than the spiro-OMeTAD. In Fig. S11, we described shelf-stability of the devices at a relative humidity of 10% without any encapsulation for 1000 h. The cells with DDOF maintained around 95% of their initial PCE, while the PCE of devices with spiro-OMeTAD dropped by 20% under identical conditions. The general tendency indicates better long-term stability of our developed HTM. We demonstrated that such a clear improvement is correlated with the chemical stability of DDOF compared to the spiro-OMeTAD.

To summarize, we report a novel dispiro-oxepine derivative as a hole transporting material, obtained by a facile 3-step synthetic route. Perovskite solar cells employing DDOF as the HTM showed one of the highest power conversion efficiencies of 19.4% reported to date. The solid structure study by single crystallography indicated again that the π–π interaction is not a prerequisite for designing an effective HTM. Moreover, improved long-term stability over 250 h has been demonstrated, making this HTM a very promising candidate for industrial production.


The authors acknowledge SNSF NRP 70 project; number: 407040_154056, and the European Union Seventh Framework Programme [FP7/2007-2013] under grant agreement no. 604032 of the MESO project and financial support from CTI 15864.2 PFNM-NM, Solaronix, Aubonne, Switzerland. We thank Dr Rosario Scopelliti for the single crystal measurement, Dr Mariana Spodaryk for the differential scanning calorimetry measurement and Manuel Tschumi for the stability tests.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: General information, synthetic procedures, etc. CCDC 1495258. For ESI and crystallographic data in CIF or other electronic format see DOI: 10.1039/c6ta09028a
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016