 DOI: 10.1039/D0TA05696K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 18792-18801


Shuai
Huang
,

Lian
Duan
* and 

Dongdong
Zhang
*

Key Lab of Organic Optoelectronics and Molecular Engineering of Ministry of Education, Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. E-mail: duanl@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn; ddzhang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Center of Flexible Electronics Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P. R. China

Received
7th June 2020
, Accepted 10th August 2020
First published on 11th August 2020
A highly efficient inverted polymer solar cell (PSC) has been demonstrated by incorporating an insulating inorganic cerium fluoride (CeF3) layer between the annealing-free zinc oxide (ZnO) electron transport layer (ETL) and the photoactive layer. The CeF3-embedded solar cell fabricated by a full annealing-free process presents an overwhelming power conversion efficiency (PCE) of up to 10.53% for the PTB7-Th:PC71BM-based blend system, which far surpasses that of the reference device with a bare ZnO interlayer (8.48%). Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy revealed that the interfacial energy level alignment has been intentionally improved by forming an interfacial dipole layer at the interface between the ZnO ETL and the ultrathin CeF3 interlayer, leading to a reduced energy barrier for electron transport as well as depressed photogenerated carrier recombination. Concurrently, the addition of CeF3 also passivates the interfacial defect states of the ZnO film and ameliorates the inherent incompatibility with the hydrophobic photoactive layer. This protocol demonstrates that the utilization of the ZnO/CeF3 multifunctional interlayer affords a facile but effective strategy for achieving high-performance inverted PSCs, which does not require postprocessing thermal annealing treatments, laying a good foundation for the future developments of organic photovoltaic devices.

Polymer solar cells possess a great potential in prospective large-scale commercial applications by virtue of their outstanding advantages of portability, cost-efficiency, easy processing, and good mechanical flexibility. At present, the PCE of single-junction organic photovoltaics has been reported to exceed 17% due to the considerable innovations in novel high-efficiency photovoltaic materials, interface buffer layer materials, and interface engineering. A majority of PSC devices are on the basis of a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) architecture, which can provide more interfacial area for effective exciton separation. Normally, BHJ PSCs with the conventional configuration display poorer long-term stability due to the utilization of the hygroscopic and acidic PEDOT:PSS hole transport layer and active low work function (WF) metal electrodes.

For circumventing this drawback, inverted device structures with robust interfacial layers and stable high-WF metal anodes are extensively employed because of the superb vertical phase separation and stability. However, these efficient inverted devices usually exhibit a lower open circuit voltage (Voc) compared to the expected value of the donor and acceptor combination (energy compensation) in the BHJ layer, which can be ascribed to the large energy discrepancy in the LUMO level (≈4.3 eV) of the PC71BM acceptor and the WF of the ITO electrode (≈4.7 eV). To solve this issue, electron transport layers (ETLs) have been inserted between the ITO cathode and BHJ layer to regulate and modify the energy level of the bottom electrode. In particular, many metal oxides, including pristine and doped ZnO and TiO2, have captured tremendous interest in inverted PSCs because of the adjustable energy levels, high transparency, and electrical characteristics that can be obtained via element doping or interface modification. Nonetheless, the conduction band energy levels of these materials are still larger than the LUMO of PC71BM, thus causing the reduction of the built-in potential across PSCs. Further, they generally suffer from the inherent surface defects with adsorbed oxygen and inferior surface conductivities, which restrict the efficiency of electron extraction and transport as well as carrier collection, leading to a reduction of photocurrent and fill factor (FF). As an alternative approach, additional organic interface modification materials such as ultra-thin conjugated polyelectrolytes (CPEs) and multifarious self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) have been utilized to reshape the ZnO/BHJ layer interface properties by regulating the WFs of ETLs and/or electron-collecting electrodes. Notwithstanding the prominent upswing of device performance by employing these approaches, the utilizability will still be limited due to the narrow (limited) salt selection windows for salts and other influencing factors. On the one hand, considering the relatively complicated molecular structure of crosslinkable fullerenes, tedious and harsh synthesis procedures are required. On the other hand, in terms of C60-SAMs, there are still some deficiencies, such as incomplete coverage on metal oxides, possible desorption during wetting, and cumbersome processing conditions for the formation of monolayers. Actually, the insertion of ultrathin interlayers through simple thermal evaporation techniques is also an excellent alternative approach.
In the past few years, various ultra-thin metal fluorides, such as magnesium fluoride (MgF2), calcium fluoride (CaF2), and lithium fluoride (LiF) have generally been introduced as interlayers to modify the surface of the metal electrodes in PSCs with traditional device configurations. Notwithstanding the insulating characteristics of these metal fluorides, they can still remarkably boost the photovoltaic performance of the devices. This mainly arises from the interface dipoles on the surface of metal electrodes, which can tune the WFs of metals and interfacial level alignment, ultimately improving the electron collection and cell performance. In particular, cerium fluoride (CeF3) has been reported as a cathode interlayer to modify the Al electrode. The PCE of devices with traditional structures was ameliorated by forming an interface dipole layer on the CeF3–Al interface to reduce the effective WF of the aluminum electrode. The reported PCE of the device based on the PBDTTT-CT/PC71BM BHJ layer is 6.73%, which exceeds that of the cell (5.98%) with a typical MgF2 interlayer. To date, the feasibility of using inorganic metal cerium fluoride to modify an annealing-free ZnO film in constructing effective inverted polymer solar cells is yet unclear and seldom reported. In other words, there is still a lack of proper understanding of certain aspects of CeF3, such as its effects on the properties of PSC devices.
In this contribution, an ultrathin insulating CeF3 layer is employed for the first time to modify the annealing-free ZnO ETL by a facile and efficient strategy, manipulating the energy level alignment and simultaneously passivating the defect states at the ZnO/BHJ layer interface. This semiconductor–insulator stacked structure was then employed as a cathode interfacial layer in inverted PSCs. The optimal preparation conditions of solar cells were monitored by the modulation of CeF3 layer thickness, and the mechanism of performance improvement was comprehensively explored with respect to surface defects, charge transport and extraction, and carrier recombination. The interfacial energy level alignment at the interface of ZnO and the BHJ layer was investigated to scrutinize the role of CeF3 at the interface. In consequence, BHJ PSCs with an optimized thickness (∼5 Å) of the CeF3 layer yield a superb efficiency of approximately 10.53%, exceeding the PCE of individual single-layer ZnO (∼8.48%). The significant improvement of device performance and the simplicity of the annealing-free process indicate that the ZnO/CeF3 multifunctional layer provides a promising and practical approach for achieving efficient organic photovoltaic cells.

The pre-patterned ITO substrates were purchased from the Dongguan Xiangcheng Group. Zinc acetate dehydrate (99%) was bought from Alfa Aesar. PC71BM, PTB7-Th, and PCDTBT were provided by 1-Material Chemscitech Inc. and American Dye Source Inc., while P3HT and PC61BM were received from Rieke Metals (Nebraska). PBDB-TF and IT-4F were ordered from Solarmer Materials (Beijing) Inc. 1,8-Diiodooctane (DIO) was obtained from TCI Chemicals. 1,2-Dichlorobenzene (99.0%), chloroform (99.5%), chlorobenzene (99.8%), methanol (99.8%), n-butanol (99.8%) CeF3 (99.9%) and MoO3 (99.9%) were provided by Sigma Aldrich. Toluene (99.5%), acetone (99.5%), and isopropanol (99.7%) were obtained from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co. All the materials purchased above can be used directly without further purification.


First, the weighed zinc acetate dehydrate was dissolved in methanol (50 mL) and stirred at 65 °C for 30 minutes in a water bath kettle. Next, the prepared KOH solution (22.8 mg mL−1) was added to the solution slowly and stirring was continued for 2 h. Then the reaction solution was naturally cooled to room temperature. Afterward, the ZnO nanoparticles were separated from the obtained solution through the natural sedimentation. Then the precipitate was washed 3 times with anhydrous methanol solvent by centrifugation. Finally, the obtained ZnO precipitate was dissolved in a mixed solution of n-butanol, methanol and chloroform to obtain the ZnO nanoparticle solution. Note that any sintering or thermal annealing process is not required and can be used directly.


The schematic of the fabrication process of the solar cells adopted in our experiment is plotted in Fig. 1. The ITO glasses were ultrasonically cleaned in toluene, acetone, water, and isopropanol for 30 minutes each, and then baked in an oven for 20 minutes. The samples were then treated with UV ozone for 20 minutes. Thereafter, the prepared ZnO precursor solution was spin-coated on the sample surface at a speed of 4500 rpm for 40 s under ambient conditions (humidity ∼20%, temperature ∼25 °C). Afterward, the CeF3 interfacial layers with different thicknesses of 0, 2, 5, 10, and 15 Å were deposited on the ZnO ETL by thermal evaporation at a deposition rate of about 0.01 nm s−1. During the manufacture of the reference devices, the spin-coated ZnO films needed to be additionally annealed on a hot plate at 120 °C for 10 minutes to remove the unnecessary solvents. For the preparation of the BHJ layer solution, 10 mg of PTB7-Th and 15 mg of PC71BM were added to the solvent of chlorobenzene and 1,8-diiodooctane (97:3 v/v) and stirred at 60 °C overnight. For the P3HT:PC61BM BHJ system, P3HT and PC61BM (1:4 w/w) with a weight concentration of 17 mg mL−1 were added to 1,2-dichlorobenzene (DCB) solvent and stirred overnight at room temperature in a nitrogen glove box. To obtain PCDTBT:PC71BM BHJ layer materials, the PCDTBT donor (7 mg) and PC71BM acceptor (28 mg) were also added into 1,2-dichlorobenzene solvent and stirred at 60 °C for about 14 hours using a magnetic stirrer. For PBDB-TF:IT-4F non-fullerene system PSCs, PBDB-TF and IT-4F (1:1 w/w) were dissolved in chlorobenzene and 0.5% volume ratio of DIO and then stirred at 40 °C overnight. After that, the samples were transferred to a dry N2 glove box with H2O < 0.01 ppm to obtain the active layer. The PTB7-Th:PC71BM precursor solution (approximately 100 nm) was spin-coated on the CeF3 interlayer at 1000 rpm for 60 s. At last, a 5 nm MoO3 anode buffer layer and 100 nm silver anode were deposited in sequence under a vacuum of 7 × 10−4 Pa.


Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) images were obtained using a Bruker Dimension Icon. The current–voltage (J–V) parameters were captured using a Keithley 2400 source-measure unit. The IPCE spectra of the inverted PSCs were assessed by using a Crowntech QTest Station 1000AD. The XPS measurements were conducted with a photoelectron spectrometer (Axis Ultra). The transmission and absorption spectra were collected with a Shimadzu UV 1700. The photoluminescence (PL) spectra were recorded with a fluorescence spectrophotometer (RF5301). The impedance spectra were acquired with a 6500B impedance analyser. Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy (KPFM) of the films was performed using a SKP5050 in air. Water contact angle measurements were performed by using a Contact Angle System OCA-20. All the measurements were performed on the PSCs without encapsulation in air (humidity ∼ 30%, temperature ∼ 25 °C).


The transmittance spectra of the ZnO and ZnO/CeF3 (5 Å) interlayers are presented in Fig. 2a. It can be found that the optical characteristics of both films are comparable in the entire visible range. The optical transmittance of different samples is over 80%, beneficial for the sufficient light absorption by the photoactive layers. In light of the nearly uniform absorption spectra of the diverse layers in Fig. 2b, it is reasonable to infer that the impact of light absorption is ignorable for the increment in PCE upon inserting the CeF3 layer. Moreover, it is noteworthy that both films display tiny absorptions in the visible range, which permits the visible light to reach the BHJ layers through the ZnO/CeF3 films without loss. In consequence, surface measurement techniques are required to probe the dominant mechanisms for performance elevation.

To evaluate the surface chemical characteristics of the ZnO samples after depositing the CeF3 layer, XPS measurements were carried out. The detailed Zn 2p spectra are illustrated in Fig. 3a. It is notable that the peaks of Zn 2p3/2 for ZnO and ZnO/CeF3 films appear at 1020.8 eV and 1021.6 eV, respectively. The chemical shift (∼0.8 eV) of Zn 2p3/2 toward a higher energy level denotes that the chemical environment of Zn has been changed by depositing the CeF3 layer, which can be attributed to the formation of Zn–F bonds and the passivation of oxygen vacancies and zinc dangling bonds with fluorine atoms. As presented in Fig. 3b, the F 1s binding energy peak at 684.6 eV has been clearly detected from the CeF3-coated sample, which confirms the successful deposition of CeF3 on the ZnO surface. From the core energy level spectra of O 1s in Fig. 3c and d, it is apparent that the O 1s characteristic peaks of each sample can be fitted into two Gaussian peaks. The O 1s component with a binding energy peak of approximately 530.0 eV should be assigned to the lattice oxygen of ZnO. The other component located at 531.5 eV should be due to oxygen-deficient defects on the surface of ZnO samples. For the CeF3-containing film, the relative percentage of the oxygen-deficient defects is around 49.05%, which is lower than that of bare ZnO (79.66%). The experimental data reveal the diminished oxygen-deficient defects in the CeF3-embedded samples, thus enabling the reinforced Jsc and FF, which can be further confirmed by the subsequent PL measurement (Fig. 9a).
To scrutinize the influence of embedded CeF3 on the surface morphology of the samples, the AFM measurement was performed. As seen clearly in Fig. 4a and b, the AFM height images suggest that the ZnO films are composed of uniform nanoparticles. However, it is difficult to explicitly distinguish the deposited CeF3 from Fig. 4, and both films present little distinction in surface morphology. In addition, both films possess an almost identical root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of about 4.03 nm. This may be ascribed to the ultra-thin thickness or the sparse distribution of the CeF3 layer. In other words, their morphology and roughness mainly depend on the underlying ZnO film. Moreover, the distinctions in surface morphology and RMS roughness of the PTB7-Th:PC71BM active layer after introducing CeF3 are also examined, as shown in Fig. S1. It can be found that the RMS roughness values of the two samples are comparable, which denotes that the incorporation of the CeF3 layer has no obvious effect on the morphology of the BHJ layer. The above data signify that the evaporated CeF3 layer does not influence the coating of the BHJ layer. As shown in Fig. 4c and d, the contact angles of the varied samples were monitored to determine the surface wettability. It is notable that the deposition of the CeF3 layer alters the surface energy of the ZnO ETL, which gives rise to an evident distinction in the contact angle from 41.2° to 52.4°. The result denotes that the surface of the ZnO/CeF3 film exhibits a slightly more hydrophobic characteristic in comparison with the bare ZnO ETL. The elevated hydrophobicity ameliorates the compatibility between the ZnO ETL and the PTB7-Th:PC71BM film, which is favorable of the efficient interface contact with the BHJ layer. These data are in good agreement with the subsequent discussion of impedance spectra.
To ascertain how the novel CeF3 interlayer can facilitate the device performance, inverted PSCs with a configuration of ITO/ZnO/CeF3/BHJ layer/MoO3/Ag (Fig. 5a) were fabricated by employing PTB7-Th:PC71BM as the photoactive layer. Fig. 5b presents the chemical structures of the donor and acceptor materials. In order to elucidate the influence of the deposited CeF3 layer on the WF of the ZnO ETL, we performed the KPFM measurement with Au as the internal standard substance under dark conditions. The information on the topography and local WF can be displayed at the nanometer scale. The CPD values between the sample material and the probe tip can been recorded by the KPFM technology. Concurrently, the actual WF of the samples can be calculated according to the formula:
(1)
Here, Δ
Wsample represents the obtained CPD value of the samples, Wsample refers to the WF of the samples, and ΔWAu stands for the error value calibrated by the standard Au. We measured a total of 100 points over a scan area of 0.9 × 0.9 μm.

The provided WF values are the average value of these data. From the WF images shown in Fig. 6a and b, it is observed that the WF of the pure ZnO film is calculated to be 4.75 eV. However, the WF of ZnO decreases to approximately 4.43 eV after modification with the CeF3 layer. Fig. 6c illustrates the variation in the work function of the ZnO ETL. This shift can be attributed to the fact that an oriented dipole layer is formed at the interface of ZnO and the BHJ layer. The negatively charged fluorine is aligned on the ZnO surface and the direction of the dipole moment points toward the active layer side. The vacuum energy is used as the reference energy. Furthermore, it comes to light that the insertion of CeF3 makes a vacuum level shift of approximately 0.32 eV, which results in a remarkably reduced work function of the ZnO ETL. The fluctuation in WF can be attributed to the interface dipoles on the ZnO layer.Fig. 6d plots the energy level diagram of the various materials adopted in our devices. Noticeably, the WF of the pristine ZnO film far surpasses that of PC71BM. As a contrast, a smaller distinction of WF is observed for the stacked ZnO/CeF3 sample. As we know, inevitable energy band bending will occur when materials with different WFs come into contact.

Fig. 7a and b compare the energy level alignment of ZnO and the acceptor with and without the CeF3 layer. Once the bare ZnO ETL directly comes into contact with the PC71BM acceptor, a uniform Fermi level (Ef) will be established due to their different WFs. At this time, the conduction band of the electron acceptor will bend upwards and a larger electron barrier (qϕ) is formed in the bulk of the acceptor, which inhibits the electron transport to the ZnO side. Nonetheless, the WF of ZnO is pulled closer to that of the acceptor with the incorporation of the CeF3 interlayer, which reduces the electron transport barrier, facilitating efficient electron transport from the active layer to the ZnO ETL. Note that the surface WF of the CeF3-modified ZnO film is lower than that of PC71BM, which basically eliminates the qϕ, promoting better charge transport. In order to further confirm the reduced interfacial barrier between ITO/ZnO/CeF3 and the PC71BM acceptor with incorporating the CeF3 layer, we fabricated electron injection devices with the configurations of ITO/ZnO/PC71BM/Ag and ITO/ZnO/CeF3/PC71BM/Ag. The corresponding device structure and dark J–V curves of the electron injection devices are displayed in Fig. 7c and d. Obviously, the control device without the CeF3 interlayer presents an evident barrier and the electrons have to jump over the barrier in the acceptor during the transfer process. The interfacial barrier will inevitably boost the recombination of charges and reduce the amount of output carriers, thereby leading to a serious loss of electron collection. For comparison, the insertion of CeF3 reduces the interfacial barrier remarkably and enhances the electron transfer in the whole device.
The J–V curves of the annealing-free PSCs with varied thicknesses of CeF3 (from 0 to 15 Å) were measured under illumination, as illustrated in Fig. 8a. The detailed values of J–V parameters are tabulated in Table 1. The control PSC with bare ZnO only delivers a moderate PCE of 8.48%, with a Voc of 0.78 V, short circuit current density (Jsc) of 16.41 mA cm−2, and fill factor (FF) of 66.23%. Interestingly, the device performance first increases from 8.48% to 10.53%, and then drops to 8.62% as the thickness continues to enhance. The PCE of the device slightly improves from 8.48% to 9.19% with increasing the film thickness from 0 to 2 Å. The tiny improvement mainly arises from the limited interface buffering and electron transport provided by the thinner CeF3 layer. As expected, on further increasing the thickness to 5 Å, the CeF3-based PSC achieves an overwhelming performance, with a Voc of 0.80 V, Jsc of 18.47 mA cm−2, and FF of up to 71.27%, yielding an extraordinary efficiency of up to 10.53%. These results suggest that all the J–V parameters of the PSC with the CeF3 layer are simultaneously elevated compared to those of the cells with bare ZnO, indicative of a superb interfacial characteristic of the stacked layers. Nonetheless, when the thickness of CeF3 enhances to 15 Å, both the Jsc and FF are remarkably reduced to 16.85 mA cm−2 and 66.84%, respectively, resulting in a poorer PCE of 8.62%. This experimental phenomenon can be attributed to the insulation characteristics of the CeF3 layer and the enlarged series resistance caused by the larger thickness. As such, through varying the thickness of CeF3 deposited on the ZnO ETL, the device performance can be accurately optimized. Furthermore, the PCE of the PSC based on bare CeF3 is also detected for comparison, which is apparently inferior to that of the ZnO-based cell. As we can see, the device with CeF3 alone cannot show proper diode characteristics, with an extremely poor PCE of 0.18%, Voc of 0.13 V, Jsc of 7.02 mA cm−2 and FF of 19.49%. The IPCE spectra were monitored and the results are presented in Fig. 8b. The control device exhibits a poor photoelectric conversion efficiency and the maximum of IPCE is only approximately 70.4%. Encouragingly, the CeF3 embedded device displays an outstanding photoresponse with integrally uplifted IPCE profiles from 300 to 800 nm, with a maximum IPCE of close to 80%. The obtained integrated Jsc values are 16.04 and 18.08 mA cm−2 for the PSCs without and with CeF3, which are in line with the results recorded by the J–V measurement with an acceptable deviation lower than 3%, corroborating the reliability of measured photovoltaic parameters.
Interfacial layer

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
w/o CeF3
16.41 ± 0.02
0.78 ± 0.01
66.23 ± 0.14
8.48 ± 0.03
With CeF3 (2 Å)
17.45 ± 0.01
0.78 ± 0.01
67.46 ± 0.13
9.19 ± 0.02
With CeF3 (5 Å)
18.47 ± 0.03
0.80 ± 0.01
71.27 ± 0.11
10.53 ± 0.03
With CeF3 (10 Å)
17.33 ± 0.04
0.79 ± 0.01
68.17 ± 0.15
9.33 ± 0.03
With CeF3 (15 Å)
16.85 ± 0.02
0.77 ± 0.01
66.84 ± 0.13
8.62 ± 0.02
Bare CeF3
7.02 ± 0.03
0.13 ± 0.01
19.49 ± 0.17
0.18 ± 0.03
To further assess the electrical characteristics of the multiple interlayers, J–V characteristics under dark conditions were studied in the inverted PSCs. It appears from Fig. 8c that the dark current density of the CeF3 embedded device is approximately 10 times lower than that with the untreated pristine ZnO ETL under the reverse bias. The experimental data are indicative of the suppressed carrier recombination in the PSCs with the CeF3 layer, inducing the mitigation of leakage current and the increment of photocurrent. In addition, the CeF3-containing PSCs exhibit a remarkable diode characteristic with a larger rectification ratio in comparison to the bare cells. The histograms of the statistical PCEs of 30 devices based on the CeF3 interlayer are displayed in Fig. S2. It is notable that the most performance of the PSCs is between 8.5% and 10.5%, corroborating a preeminent uniformity and reproducibility of these CeF3-embedded devices. The universality of device performance is crucial in terms of the practical application. Thus, various photoactive layer materials were also employed based on the identical processing parameters. Fig. 8d and e compare the J–V characteristics of the devices with P3HT:PC60BM and PCDTBT:PC71BM blend systems under illumination conditions. Excitingly, in terms of the P3HT system, the device efficiency soars from 3.17% to 4.26% after the insertion of the CeF3 layer. Likewise, the CeF3-based solar cell possesses an elevated PCE (7.02%) in comparison to that of the corresponding reference cell (PCE 5.52%) for the PCDTBT BHJ system. Fig. S3 exhibits the IPCE curves of the cells. The integrated current densities of the cells with the CeF3 interlayer are found to be 9.95 mA cm−2 and 11.68 mA cm−2 for the P3HT and PCDTBT-based PSCs, respectively, which are in line with the J–V characteristics. In order to further scrutinize the effect of the CeF3 interlayer on the PCE of the devices and realize high-efficiency PSC devices, we selected the highly efficient non-fullerene acceptor BHJ system PBDB-TF:IT-4F as the active layer, as displayed in Fig. 8f. As expected, a promising PCE value of 13.18% is achieved for the CeF3-based cells, which is superior to that of the control cell with individual single-layer ZnO (11.81%). Synchronously, the IPCE spectra are also displayed in Fig. S4. The key J–V photovoltaic parameters and the corresponding integrated Jsc values based on different active layer systems are tabulated in Table S1. The obtained integrated currents are in line with the values obtained from the J–V curves, which further manifests the reliability of the measurement. Consequently, the CeF3 interlayer does work for the different BHJ systems. This result corroborates the fact that the inserted CeF3 presents a good compatibility with diverse photoactive layer materials.
For the devices with the bare ZnO ETL, the existence of surface defects on the film surface can inevitably cause trapping or recombination of photogenerated electrons transported from the photoactive layer, which is disadvantageous for improving the cell performance, particularly the photocurrent. In order to directly ascertain the defect density of the ZnO film surface, the defect-related photoluminescence emission at ≈550 nm is a powerful tool and has been universally employed. Thus, we recorded the PL spectra of the pure ZnO and ZnO/CeF3 stacked interlayers to clarify the working principle of the PSCs in a real and intuitive way. As illustrated in Fig. 9a, the broad PL peak at 532 nm is generally attributed to the emission peak of carrier recombination caused by structural defects such as oxygen (VO) and zinc vacancies (VZn), while the relatively sharp peak around 354 nm can be attributed to the band-to-band emission derived from the excitons that are thermally ionized at room temperature. It can be observed that the defect-related emission is noticeably diminished upon the addition of CeF3, which may be ascribed to the passivation of the surface states, such as dangling bonds as well as zinc and oxygen vacancies. Nevertheless, the visible emission is not thoroughly quenched due to the grain boundaries and defects in the bulk material. To probe the inherent cause of the exciton dissociation facilitated by the CeF3 layer, the PL spectra of the PTB7-Th with distinguishable interfacial layers were recorded. As illustrated in Fig. 9b, it is evident that a fluorescence emission peak appears at approximately 760 nm for both films. Generally, the PL emission can be quenched when the energy transfer exists between the donor material and the adjoining interfacial layer. That is, the lower intensity of PL emission represents enlarged charge transfer and declined charge recombination in the cells. Higher PL intensity can be observed for the reference sample, indicative of severe recombination in the PSCs. In contrast, the PL emission of the polymer donor is quenched to some extent by the addition of CeF3, which attests to the more electron transfer from the PTB7-Th to the stacked interlayers.
To scrutinize the influence of inserted CeF3 on charge transport abilities, single carrier devices with distinct interlayers were fabricated. Fig. 10a and b present the J–V curves of electron-only devices with configurations of ITO/ZnO/BHJ layer/LiF/Ag and ITO/ZnO/CeF3/BHJ layer/LiF/Ag, where LiF plays a role in blocking holes. The electron mobility μe of the fabricated devices can be estimated by utilizing the space charge limited current (SCLC) model
(2)
where
J signifies the current density, ε0 stands for the vacuum permittivity, εr refers to the relative permittivity of 3 for common organic materials, V is the drive voltage, and L denotes the thickness of the BHJ layer (approximately 100 nm). The calculated electron mobility of CeF3-based devices is 1.2 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is notably larger than that of the bare ZnO (7.7 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1). The elevated mobility verifies the increment in electron transport capability upon addition of the CeF3 layer, which accounts for the enhanced Jsc and FF of the CeF3-embedded PSCs.

To figure out the exciton dissociation and extraction processes in the solar cells, the photocurrent density (Jph) versus effective voltage (Veff) curves under illumination are plotted in Fig. 10c. Jph is ascertained by the formula
Jph = JL − JD
(3)
where
JL and JD mean the current density under illumination and dark conditions, respectively. The value of Veff can be determined according to the expression

Veff = V0 − Vapp
(4)
where
Vapp denotes the applied voltage, and V0 represents the voltage at which Jph = 0. It appears from Fig. 10c that the Jph of both devices soars in proportion to the applied voltage at a lower Veff and gradually reaches saturation current density (Jsat) at a Veff greater than 0.3 V. In the case of saturation, all the photoexcited electron–hole pairs are expected to dissociate into free charges and then swept out effectually by the electrodes with negligible recombination loss by virtue of the large internal electric field. In the saturated region, the maximum carrier generation rate (Gmax) can be determined as

Jsat = qGmaxL
(5)
where
L represents the thickness of the active layer and q signifies the elemental charge. It comes to light that the extracted Gmax values soar from 1.08 × 1028 m−3 s−1 (Jsat = 173.20 A m−2) to 1.21 × 1028 m−3 s−1 (Jsat = 193.87 A m−2) after incorporating the CeF3 layer, which can point to efficient electron transport and collection processes in the optimized devices, thus generating a high Jsc in the PSCs.

Impedance spectroscopy (IS) is a pivotal means to examine the interfacial and bulk electronic properties of PSCs.Fig. 10d depicts the Nyquist plots of the fresh cells with varied interlayers under dark conditions at a DC bias of 0.2 V in the measuring frequency range of 100 Hz to 20 MHz. The experimental data were fitted according to the equivalent circuit model presented in the inset of Fig. 10d. The equivalent circuit model consists of a constant phase element, a series resistance (R1) related to the electrical contact and the sheet resistance of electrodes, and a charge transfer resistance (R2) correlated with the charge transport resistance in the active layer and at the ITO/active layer interface. Herein, in view of the uniform preparation parameters for the devices other than the incorporated CeF3, the different resistance values may be caused by the modification effect of the CeF3 interlayer. The smaller R2 for the CeF3-based device provides clear evidence that charge transfer characteristics have been ameliorated, which mainly arises from the optimized charge mobility and compatibility in the solar cells.
To gain further insights into the impact of the CeF3 interlayer on the photovoltaic characteristics of the device, we have scrutinized the relevant photophysical processes. The carrier recombination dynamics of the devices was elucidated by recording the dependence of Jsc values on different illumination intensities (Plight) and the obtained experimental data were fitted by using the power law
Jsc ∝ Plightα
(6)
where
α is an exponential factor value, which implies the degree of bimolecular recombination. Normally, the value of α is equal to 1 when all the free charge carriers are swept out by the electrode. Nonetheless, the value of α less than 1 shows the existence of bimolecular recombination to some extent. Fig. 11a plots the good linear relationship between logJsc and logPlight in both devices. The slope of the reference PSC is 0.88, whereas that of the PSCs based on the CeF3 layer is 0.94. It can be found that the α value of the CeF3-based device is relatively closer to unity compared to that of the reference device, signifying that the bimolecular recombination is alleviated upon incorporating the CeF3 interlayer into the devices.

Further, as displayed in Fig. 11b, the dependence of Voc on various illumination intensities was monitored to evaluate the photogenerated carrier recombination behavior, which can be expressed by the formula
Voc ∝ nkT/qln(Plight)
(7)
Here
q, T, and k represent the elementary charge, Kelvin temperature, and Boltzmann constant, respectively. In general, the free-carrier bimolecular recombination is involved for the device with a slope of the fitting straight line close to kT/q. In contrast, the slope of 2kT/q shows that the dominant mechanism is the trap-assisted or Shockley–Read–Hall recombination. It is evident that the devices without and with CeF3 possess slopes of 1.53kT/q and 1.12kT/q, respectively, demonstrating the prominently relieved trap-assisted recombination in the PSCs.

Moreover, the stability features of the studied cells were also monitored. The long-term stability of the performance parameters of the ETL-free devices with and without the CeF3 layer is shown in Fig. 12. The PSCs were stored in a N2 atmosphere glovebox under the same conditions without any encapsulation. Compared to the reference devices, the CeF3-embedded device exhibits a slightly better stability, which remained above 88% of its initial PCE values after storage for 12 days. The ameliorated stability can be attributed to the passivated dangling bonds and surface defects.

To summarize, high-efficiency and annealing-free inverted PSCs based on the ultra-thin CeF3 insulation layer and the potential working mechanism have been evidenced in this manuscript. The CeF3 layer forms an interfacial dipole on the surface of the ZnO film, which tunes the surface vacuum level and effective work function of the ZnO ETL, thereby contributing to the decrement of the interfacial barrier and the upswing of electron transfer. Moreover, the embedded CeF3 can effectively passivate the surface defects of ZnO films and ameliorate the compatibility with the BHJ layer, which is favorable for the suppressed defect-induced charge recombination and efficient interface contact with the BHJ layer. In consequence, all the performance parameters including Voc, Jsc and FF have been prominently elevated, and the efficiency of the improved device can reach up to 10.53%, which outperforms that of the reference PSC (8.48%). This work puts forward a simple and convenient strategy for diminishing the interfacial energy level barrier and obtaining highly efficient PSCs with bright application prospects.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We acknowledge the National Key Basic Research and Development Program of China (Grant No. 2017YFA0204501, 2016YFB0400702), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51525304, 51903137, U1601651 and 61890942), the Major Program of Guangdong Basic and Applied Research (2019B030302009), and Foshan Xianhu Laboratory of the Advanced Energy Science and Technology Guangdong Laboratory (XHT2020-005).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta05696k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020