 DOI: 10.1039/D0SE00200C
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 3597-3603


Guibin
Shen
,

Hongye
Dong
,

Qingbin
Cai
,

Xiaoning
Wen
,

Xiangning
Xu
 and 

Cheng
Mu
*

Department of Chemistry, Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, People's Republic of China. E-mail: cmu@ruc.edu.cn

Received
6th February 2020
, Accepted 28th April 2020
First published on 28th April 2020
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been very popular in the field of photovoltaics. In inverted PSC structures, the hole transport layer deposited before the perovskite photoactive layer plays a crucial role in the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) and ambient stability of the device. Here, we developed a facile method of preparing NiO hole transport layers with the aid of polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) for inverted perovskite solar cells. Compared with reported fabrication methods, this route has the advantages of simple, low temperature, and low-cost processing. The corresponding devices exhibited a champion power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 17.78% and good stability. Various characterization experiments, XRD, Raman, AFM, SEM, PL studies etc., were carried out to confirm the superior effect of the NiO film prepared by the new method. We believe that this facile route will be a significant contribution for preparing high performance inverted perovskite solar cells.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been very popular in the photovoltaic community. They are expected to have a bright future in the field of photovoltaics because of their economical manufacturing process and rapidly increasing power conversion efficiencies. In the typical conventional structure (n–i–p), n-type materials such as TiO2 or SnO2 are chosen as the electron transport layer (ETL), and SPIRO-OMeTAD doped with Li and Co salts for increasing the charge carrier concentration is the most widely used hole transporting material. However, there are several drawbacks in this structure: high fabrication temperature need of the ETL, instability caused by doping strategies and high synthesis cost of SPIRO-OMeTAD. The inverted PSC structure (p–i–n) has attracted tremendous attention due to its low material cost, simple fabrication process, low or no hysteresis performance and low-temperature production possibility which is compatible with the flexible and stretchable structure. For a p–i–n structure, C60 or PCBM serves as the ETL commonly, and the hole transport material plays a vital role because the perovskite layer and other layers are grown on the hole transport layer (HTL). Various materials have been introduced for HTLs, such as PEDOT:PSS, PTAA, CuSCN, V2O5, CuO, MoOx and NiO. Among the various HTL materials, nickel(II) oxide has shown enormous promise for PSCs due to its suitable work function (∼5.0 eV), wide band gap (>3.5 eV), deep-lying valence band (∼5.4 eV), and superior thermal and chemical stability. Several methods of preparing NiO layers have been reported, such as the sol–gel method, atomic layer deposition, pulsed laser deposition, the combustion method, and nanoparticle ink spinning method. Many of the NiO thin film solution preparation methods require a high temperature annealing process, which is not suitable for indium-tin oxide (ITO) glass substrates that can't tolerate high temperature. Other low-temperature methods require high-cost experimental equipment or complex experimental procedures to achieve high performance and stability of the device. Up to now, it has been difficult to find a method of preparing NiO layers that can accomplish simplicity, low-temperature, low-cost and high performance at the same time.

In this paper, we proposed a method that includes polymer-assisted deposition and a cost-effective thin film growth chemical solution for preparing NiO. We prepared NiO films on ITO substrates successfully through a facile low temperature annealing process and investigated their performance as a hole transport layer in the corresponding perovskite solar cells. PMMA was chosen as the binding agent for the nickel(II) compound. This polymer has several advantages, such as being environmentally friendly, commercially competitive, and easily decomposable at low temperature (∼270 °C). We used the PMMA-assisted deposition NiO film (PAD NiO) as HTLs in our PSCs. We found that the PAD NiO HTL provided better energy alignment with the perovskite layer and enhanced charge extraction capability compared with the NiO film deposited by the sol–gel method. A high-quality MAPbI3 perovskite with better crystallinity and larger grain size can be prepared on PAD NiO substrates. As a result, the PCE and stability were markedly improved for the inverted planar PSC of the methylammonium lead triiodide (MAPbI3) perovskite.

For the PAD NiO fabrication, nickel(II) nitrate hexahydrate and PMMA were first dissolved in acetone to form a precursor solution. After spin-coating the solution onto an ITO substrate, the films were annealed at 275 °C for 3 h in ambient air. The optimum concentration of the solution was 0.1 mol L−1 nickel(II) nitrate hexahydrate and 5 g L−1 PMMA. The sol–gel NiO films were prepared as control NiO according to the reported literature. More experimental details can be found in the ESI. As is presented in the process flow diagram in Fig. 1, due to the abundant ester groups in the side chain, PMMA guaranteed the good dispersion of the nickel compound by the hydrogen bond effect. The good dispersion of the NiO precursor in solution can result in the full coverage and uniform particle size of the NiO film. The hydrogen bond effect will also induce the decomposition of PMMA which has an effect on the conversion of the nickel compound into NiO by the annealing process in a muffle furnace. After the NiO film was prepared, the inverted perovskite solar cells with an active area of 0.1 cm2 were obtained by typical follow-up procedures.

Raman spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction (XRD), thermogravimetric analysis (TGA)- differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and Atomic force microscopy (AFM) were used to analyse the PAD NiO film. Fig. 2a shows the Raman spectrum of PAD NiO on the ITO substrate. The strong broad peak at 503 cm−1 is due to the Ni–O stretching mode and the strongest peak at 1093 cm−1 is assigned to the longitudinal optical (2LO) phonon mode. The other peaks can also be ascribed to NiO, which is in agreement with previously published research studies. This result indicates that the NiO film was successfully deposited on the ITO substrate. Fig. S1 shows the XRD spectrum of pristine ITO and the spectrum of the PAD NiO film on the ITO substrate. All the peaks can be attributed to the characteristic lattice planes of cubic crystalline NiO. However, it can be seen that the XRD peaks of the NiO film on the ITO substrate are very weak among the ITO diffraction peaks due to the very thin NiO thickness. To determine the components, the precursor solution was annealed at 275 °C for 3 h in ambient air to form PAD NiO powder for XRD characterization. Fig. 2b shows the results. The peaks at 37.2°, 43.3°, and 62.8° are assigned to (111), (200), and (220) lattice planes of cubic crystalline NiO respectively. No other impurity peaks, such as characteristic peaks of metallic Ni, Ni(OH)2, or Ni(NO3)2, were observed, which suggests the complete transformation of the precursor into NiO.
We explored the thermal-decomposition process of the PMMA and precursor solution by TGA-DSC, and the results are shown in Fig. 2c and d. In the annealing process, the decomposition of PMMA was nearly complete, and the analysis of the precursor also showed a radical transformation of NiO, which is consistent with the results of the Raman and XRD tests. It is notable that the decomposition of PMMA released lots of heat above 250 °C. According to previous research studies in which NiO from Ni(NO3)2·6H2O was prepared by a solution method, at a heating rate of 5 °C min−1, the formation of NiO started below 230 °C. The peaks of the sample precursor in the TGA-DSC spectra can hardly be identified clearly due to the corresponding decomposition reactions overlapping at the heating rate. So, we guess the whole process of NiO film formation was that, firstly, Ni(NO3)2·6H2O was bonded to PMMA by the hydrogen bond effect and the conversion of Ni(NO3)2·6H2O into NiO began at about 210 °C; in the following stage, the heat released by PMMA not only promoted further transformation into NiO but also produced thermal treatment on NiO formed around PMMA, and at last, the complete decomposition of the polymer and further thermal treatment of NiO occurred at 275 °C for 3 h.
The high optical transparency of the HTL is a prerequisite for the generation of high photocurrent in an inverted planar PSC structure. The transmittance spectrum of NiO is shown in Fig. S2. The PAD NiO film with the ITO substrate shows over 80% transmittance in the range of 450–800 nm, which is better than that of control NiO with the ITO substrate, ensuring that enough photons reach the perovskite layer. Considering previous reports, the transmittance of NiO can be affected by thickness, particle sizes and thermal treatment. The better transmittance of the PAD NiO film should be attributed to the integrated effect of less thick, larger particle sizes and the thermal treatment from decomposition of PMMA.
The bandgap of PAD NiO, which was calculated by the Tauc equation, was 3.88 eV (see the Tauc spectra in Fig. S3 ). A good alignment of the energy band between the light absorption layer and the charge extraction layers plays a crucial role in excellent solar cell devices. We used ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) to determine the energy levels of the control and PAD NiO films. The work function (WF) of the control and PAD NiO film was 4.66 eV and 4.77 eV respectively, which was estimated from the cut-off of the spectrum as shown in Fig. 2e. We calculated the valence band level to be about −5.2 eV (control) and −5.3 eV (PAD) by obtaining the difference between the Fermi level and the valence band (EV − EF) (see the spectrum in Fig. S4 ). The PAD NiO valence band maximum of −5.3 eV guarantees outstanding hole extraction efficiency of the HTL and decreases the energy mismatch between the HTL and the light absorption layer, which is beneficial for achieving a high open-circuit voltage (VOC) of the device. Fig. 2f shows the energy level diagrams of the layers making up the inverted planar perovskite solar cell.
Because the perovskite layers are deposited on the NiO substrates, the morphological properties of the NiO films play an important role in perovskite layer formation. The surface morphologies of the NiO films were investigated by atomic force microscopy (AFM), presented in Fig. 3. It can be observed that the PAD NiO film with a root mean square (Rq) surface roughness of 5.94 nm and the control NiO film with that of 4.42 nm were successfully deposited on the ITO (3.62 nm) substrates. We believe that, to some extent, the greater surface roughness can increase the contact area between the NiO layer and the perovskite layer, promoting the charge transport at the interface. As is presented in the AFM image, PAD NiO reveals slightly larger grains than control NiO. We think that this was mainly caused by the binding effect of PMMA which served as the template agent.
The HTL has significant influence on the perovskite layer growth, which is pivotal for the performance of solar cells. We investigated the influences of NiO HTLs on the morphology, crystallinity, and crystal size of the perovskite films using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), XRD and ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption characterization.

Fig. 4a and b show the SEM images of the perovskite films deposited on the control NiO and PAD NiO films. These images clearly show that uniform, compact, and pinhole-free MAPbI3 films formed on the NiO substrates. The perovskite film deposited on PAD NiO possesses a larger grain size (200–300 nm) than the film grown on the control NiO film(150–200 nm). Larger perovskite grain sizes are beneficial for effective charge separation and transport. The large grains also mean fewer grain boundaries that can reduce the trap sites for charge carrier recombination and ensure the superior J–V performance and stability of the device.
We evaluated the crystallinity of the MAPbI3 perovskite films using XRD. The spectra which include the XRD patterns of the perovskite films grown on both control NiO and on PAD NiO are shown in Fig. 4c. They show three strong diffraction peaks at 2θ values of 14.4°, 28.8°, and 32.3°, which can be assigned to the (110), (220) and (310) crystal planes, respectively, of the MAPbI3 tetragonal phase. It is notable that the perovskite layer grown on PAD NiO exhibits higher intensities of peaks compared with the film deposited on the control NiO film, suggesting the formation of a better perovskite crystal, which is also consistent with the SEM results. As shown in Fig. 4d, the UV-vis absorption spectrum of the MAPbI3 layer grown on the PAD NiO substrate shows higher absorbance intensity compared with that of the perovskite on the control NiO substrate, further confirming the improved crystallinity of the perovskite film.
We also determined the hole extraction efficiency of the HTLs using steady-state photoluminescence (PL), and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements. For comparison, we prepared the structure of glass/ITO/PAD NiO (or control NiO)/perovskite. Fig. 5a shows that compared with the PL emission of MAPbI3 on pristine ITO, the PL emission is quenched upon applying NiO HTLs, and the PAD NiO-based perovskite film shows a higher quenching efficiency than the control. The quenching efficiencies of the devices based on control NiO and PAD NiO are 56% and 78% respectively. This result indicates that PAD NiO is more capable of promoting charge transfer and extracting holes at the interface than control NiO.

Fig. 5b shows the TRPL spectra of the perovskite films deposited on the control and PAD NiO substrates. The perovskite film with the PAD NiO HTL shows that the average lifetime (τave) of photo-generated excitons is 69 ns, while the perovskite layer on control NiO exhibits a τave of 137 ns. The PL lifetime for MAPbI3 based on PAD NiO is shorter than that on control NiO, indicating the better charge transfer capability of PAD NiO. The efficient hole transfer of PAD NiO can be mainly attributed to more favorable energy band alignment and improved film quality of PAD NiO as mentioned above.
To study the effect of the NiO films on the optoelectronic properties of solar cells, we fabricated an inverted planar PSC consisting of glass/ITO/NiO/MAPbI3/fullerene (C60)/bathocuproine (BCP)/Ag. Fig. 5c shows a section of the SEM image of this perovskite solar cell. It demonstrates that a dense perovskite film is obtained and the interfaces of every layer can be clearly distinguished. Fig. 5d shows the diagram of this device. By the analysis of the AFM image using Nanoscope Analysis software, we found that the thickness of PAD NiO was about 15 nm and that of control NiO was about 13 nm. PAD NiO (or control NiO) and C60 are selected as hole transport and electron transport layers, respectively. BCP serves as a cathode interface layer to eliminate Schottky contact and block hole transportation.
Precursor solutions with different nickel nitrate hexahydrate and PMMA concentrations were prepared, and the corresponding devices were fabricated. Fig. S5 shows the PCE statistical chart of the corresponding devices. Based on these results, the solution composed of 0.1 mol L−1 nickel nitrate hexahydrate and 5 g L−1 PMMA was chosen to prepare the optimum HTL.

Fig. 6a shows the typical photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves for the devices with the control NiO HTL and with the PAD NiO HTL. The corresponding photovoltaic parameters, including VOC, short-circuit current (JSC), fill factor (FF), and PCE are listed in Table 1. There is negligible J–V hysteresis observed in both devices, and all the photovoltaic performance parameters of the device were notably improved by applying PAD NiO as the HTL layer. In the reverse scan direction, the device with the PAD NiO HTL exhibits a VOC of 1.062 V, a JSC of 21.78 mA cm−2, an FF of 0.769, and a PCE of 17.78%, which are significantly higher than those of the device based on the control NiO HTL (1.049 V, 20.73 mA cm−2, 0.697, and 15.15%).
Devices
Scan direction

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Control-NiO
Reverse
1.049
20.73
0.697
15.15
Forward
1.040
20.64
0.674
14.48
PAD-NiO
Reverse
1.062
21.78
0.769
17.78
Forward
1.059
21.72
0.746
17.16

Fig. 6b shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the two devices. The integrated JSC calculated from the EQE was 19.36 mA cm−2 for control NiO and 20.80 mA cm−2 for PAD NiO, which are nearly consistent with the JSC values obtained from the J–V curve. The intensity of JSC and EQE is dependent on the absorption intensity in the active layer and the charge transfer capability. The significant improvement in the performance of the PAD NiO-based solar cell mainly originates from the better energy alignment of the HTL with MAPbI3, and the enhanced crystal quality of the perovskite, which enables more efficient charge extraction at the HTL/perovskite interface.
To measure the device performance reliability, we recorded the PCE and current density of the steady-state output as shown in Fig. 6c. The devices maintain a stable output during a 200 s operation when applying a bias voltage of 0.88 V under illumination with the maximum power output. The PAD NiO-based device demonstrates a stable steady-state output with a PCE of 16.60% and a JSC of 18.91 mA cm−2, which are pretty close to the values obtained from the J–V measurements.
Finally, to explore the stability of the PSCs, the un-encapsulated devices were stored in an ambient environment at 25 °C with 30–50% relative humidity for 30 days with J–V testing every five days. The device performance-storage data recorded are shown in Fig. 6d. After one month, the PAD NiO-based device retained ∼87% of its initial PCE, while the control NiO-based solar cell had ∼50% PCE degradation. The better stability of the PAD NiO-based cells may be due to the better crystallinity and larger crystalline grain of MAPbI3 prepared on the PAD NiO substrate. As shown in Fig. S6, we also investigated the change in the J–V parameters of the device based on PAD NiO during 30 days. It is found that the decreasing FF is the main cause of the PCE change. The result provided a guidance for further improving the stability of devices.

In summary, we developed a facile PMMA-assisted deposition method for preparing NiO films at low temperatures. Thanks to the hydrogen bond effect between PMMA and nickel compounds, a full coverage and uniform NiO film was produced in the deposition process. The heat from decomposition of PMMA induced thermal treatment on NiO arising around PMMA. By adding the polymer to the precursor solution, a high-performance NiO film for inverted PSCs was successfully fabricated on ITO substrates through a low temperature annealing process. Various measurement results provided evidence and causes for the superior performance of the PAD NiO film. The PAD NiO film showed excellent transmittance, superior charge transport capability and better energy band alignment of MAPbI3 and the HTL. The MAPbI3 perovskite deposited on the PAD NiO substrate had better crystallinity and larger grain sizes than when it was deposited on the control NiO substrate. As a result, the device based on the PAD NiO HTL exhibited a PCE of 17.78%. The un-encapsulated PAD NiO device exhibited good stability with an 87% PCE retention after storage of 30 days. The performance of the PAD NiO film can be further improved by using ion doping technology and interface engineering for high performance inverted devices.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The work was supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, and the Research Funds of the Renmin University of China (Grant No. 20XNH059).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Detailed experimental section and Fig. S1–S6. See DOI: 10.1039/d0se00200c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020