 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA07586J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 969-974


Kan
Li
,

Yaokang
Zhang
,

Hongyu
Zhen
,

Helin
Wang
,

Shenghua
Liu
,

Feng
Yan
 and 

Zijian
Zheng
*

Nanotechnology Center, Institute of Textiles and Clothing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China. E-mail: tczzheng@polyu.edu.hk

College of Science, Center for Optics & Optoelectronics Research, Zhejiang University of Technology, 18#, Chaowang Road, Hangzhou 310014, P. R. China

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University Shenzhen Research Institute, Shenzhen 518000, China

Department of Applied Physics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China

Received
2nd September 2016
, Accepted 17th October 2016
First published on 17th October 2016
A low-cost biomimetic haze film (BHF) is fabricated by one-step replica molding of the petal texture of yellow roses with polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS). The BHF possesses very high haze transmission (75%) and ultrahigh diffusion transmittance (97%), superior anti-reflection ability, remarkable enhancement of light absorption at small incidence angles, and superb resistance to strong acids. When attached on top of the glass side of photovoltaic cells, the BHF significantly elongates the photon pathway in the active layer and enhances the light harvesting of the solar devices. As a result, the power conversion efficiency of Si solar cells, organic solar cells (OSCs) and perovskite solar cells (PSCs) is respectively improved remarkably by 6.8%, 10% and 15%. In addition, >65% of the photocurrent is maintained even at an extremely small light incidence angle (10°), which equals more than 2.7 times the efficiency enhancement of the solar cell without the BHF.

Solution-processable photovoltaic devices such as organic solar cells (OSCs) and perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are promising low-cost technologies for harvesting solar energy. In order to improve the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of these photovoltaic devices for commercial applications, a wide variety of approaches including new material synthesis, bandgap engineering, interfacial engineering, and optical engineering have been reported in the literature. In particular, using light trapping strategies to improve the optical absorption of these thin-film devices has received rapidly increasing attention in recent years. This is because, limited by the short carrier diffusion length, the active layers of OSCs and PSCs are often very thin, which inevitably results in insufficient absorption of the incident light and lower PCE of the devices. For example, the diffusion length of charge carriers of a typical organic semiconductor is limited to ∼10 nm. As a result, the device efficiency will suffer from a sharp drop once the absorber thickness is too high because of the recombination of the charges. Therefore, the thickness of the active layer of OSCs should be less than several hundred nm, which is much thinner than the thickness required to fully absorb the incident light.

Trapping the incident light in the active layers of OSCs and PSCs can effectively improve the light absorption. This can be achieved by fabricating light trapping structures directly in photovoltaic devices, such as fabricating an anti-reflection layer, designing a V-shape or cone-shape device architecture, engineering a light-scattering texture in the transparent electrode, and introducing plasmonic enhancement with metal nanostructures or metal nanoparticles. Although these methods can effectively improve the PCE of solar cells, they show drawbacks in either introducing undesirable material contamination that is difficult to eliminate or requiring complicated and specialized fabrication steps or only limiting to very specific light absorbers.
On the other hand, attaching a pre-made haze layer on top of the transparent side of the solar cells is a very simple and effective approach to improve the light absorption over a wide optical spectrum without affecting the device fabrication process. The haze layer scatters the incident light that passes through and extends its optical pathway in the active layer, which leads to more efficient light absorption of the device. For example, state-of-the-art ultra-high haze films including nanostructured cellulose papers and thin films made of self-aggregated alumina nanowire bundles increased the PCE of OSCs by 10%. Very recently, 18% improvement in GaAs solar cells was reported by applying a wood composite-based haze film. However, the fabrication of these haze films still required tedious procedures and the use of a large amount of hazardous solvents or etchants. In addition, both cellulose and alumina show potential instability issues under adverse weather conditions such as acid rain.
Herein, we report for the first time a new biomimetic haze film (BHF), which is fabricated by one-step polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) replication from the epidermal texture of rose petals. The BHF combines the advantages of high optical transmittance of PDMS and high light-diffraction ability of the concave-lens-like topography that is complementary to rose petals. As such, it simultaneously possesses an ultrahigh diffusion transmittance of 97% and a very high haze transmittance of 75% over the entire visible spectrum. When attached on top of the transparent side of solar cells, the BHF significantly improves the PCE of OSCs and PSCs by >10% and >15%, respectively. It also improves the PCE of Si solar cells by 6.8%. More importantly, the BHF impairs the dependence of device efficiency on the angle of incident light and thus greatly enhances the light harvesting capability of photovoltaic devices. For example, the photocurrent of PSCs can be enhanced by 2.7 fold at the incidence angle of 10° with the BHF. In addition, BHFs show remarkable resistance to strong acids, which is important for practical solar panel application.

The polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) prepolymer and its curing agent (Sylgard 184) were purchased from Dow Corning. The two reagents were mixed at a ratio of 10:1 (w/w), degassed and cured at 70 °C for about 2 h to prepare cross-linked PDMS. Titanium(IV) isopropoxide (99.999%), niobium(V) ethoxide (99.95%), PbCl2 (99.999%), methylamine solution (MAI, 33% in ethanol), HI (57% in water), bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt (Li-TFSI, 98%), 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO, >97%) and 4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP, 96%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. 2,2′,7,7′-Tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD, 99.5%) was purchased from Derthon Optoelectronic Materials Science Technology Co., Ltd. Poly[{2,5-bis(2-hexyldecyl)-2,3,5,6-tetrahydro-3,6-dioxopyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-diyl}-alt-{[2,2′,5′,2′′-terthiophene]-5,-5′′-diyl](PDPP3T) was purchased from Organtec Materials, Inc. 1-(3-Methoxycarbonyl) propyl-1-phenyl[6,6]C71 (PC71BM) was purchased from American Dye Source, Inc. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) solution PVP AI 4083 was purchased from Heraeus Clevios. ZnO nanoparticles were prepared using an adapted procedure reported elsewhere. The nanoparticles were in the size of about 5 nm, and dispersed in 2-methoxyethanol by a weight ratio of 0.5% for the following device fabrication. The synthesis of CH3NH3I was reported elsewhere. The c-Si solar cells were provided by Mr Jixiang Zhou and Prof. Hui Shen of Sun Yat-Sen University, China.


Patterned FTO/glass slides (purchased from Zhuhai Kaivo Optoelectronic Technology Co., Ltd.) were cleaned in ultrasonic baths of acetone, isopropanol and water for 30 min each. The FTO films were then treated with a piranha solution (mixture of 95% H2SO4 and 30% H2O2, volume ratio 3:1) for 10 min. A solution of titanium isopropoxide (70 μL in 1 mL ethanol, with 1 μL niobium(V) ethoxide) was then spin-coated on the rinsed and dried FTO films at 5000 rpm for 30 s, followed by annealing at 150 °C for 20 min in air. The slides were then treated with plasma for 1 min to remove the organic residues. Afterwards, the slides were taken into a N2-filled glovebox, followed by spin-coating a perovskite precursor solution (2.64 M CH3NH3I and 0.88 M PbCl2 in dimethylformamide) at 2000 rpm for 1 min. After annealing at 100 °C for 90 min, a chlorobenzene solution of spiro-OMeTAD (doped with 25 μL 520 mg mL−1 Li-TFSI acetonitrile solution and 36 μL tBP for each 1 mL solution) was spin-coated atop the perovskite layer. Finally, 60 nm Au was deposited on top of the spiro-OMeTAD layer by thermal evaporation at a rate of 0.3 nm s−1.


PDPP3T:PC61BM (5 mg mL−1:10 mg mL−1) was first dissolved into o-dichlorobenzene (oDCB) and stirred at 70 °C for 5 h. After cooling the solution to room temperature (about 25 °C), chloroform (CF) was added, followed by 1 h stirring. Finally, DIO was added and after 30 min stirring the solution was ready for the device fabrication. In this ternary solvent system, oDCB:CF:DIO was mixed at a volume ratio of 76:19:5. In the device fabrication process, ITO coated glass was ultrasonically cleaned with acetone, ethanol, and deionized water in sequence. PEDOT:PSS was then spin-coated onto ITO at 1500 rpm for 1 min, and baked at 120 °C for 10 min to evaporate the solvent. The solution of PDPP3T:PC71BM was spin coated at 2500 rpm for 1 min and heated at 80 °C for 20 min to form the active layer. The ZnO dispersion was spin-coated at 1500 rpm for 30 s and dried at 80 °C for 30 min. Finally, a 100 nm aluminum electrode was thermally evaporated on the ZnO layer at a rate of 0.1 nm s−1 for the first 20 nm and 1 nm s−1 for the rest.


The optical diffusion transmittance and transmission haze were measured through an Agilent Cary 7000 with an integrating sphere. The optical reflection was tested using an Olympus USPM-RU micro spectrophotometer. A CARL ZEISS ULTRA 55 SEM was used to characterize the BHF surface and cross-sectional morphology. A Keithley 2400 sourcemeter was used to measure the J–V characteristics of the solar cells, and a 300 W Oriel solar simulator (91160, Newport, 100 mW cm−2, equipped with an AM1.5 filter) calibrated by using a standard silicon solar cell was used as the light source. The active area of the device was determined by the overlapping area of the top and bottom electrodes. Typically, the active area was 0.08 cm2 for OSCs and PSCs. The EQE of the devices was measured with a standard system equipped with a xenon lamp (Oriel 66902, 300 W), a monochromator (Newport 66902), a Si detector (Oriel 76175_71580) and a dual channel power meter (Newport 2931_C).


The BHF was fabricated by a one-step soft lithographic replication process shown in Fig. 1a. Briefly, the PDMS prepolymer and its curing agent were mixed at a ratio of 10:1, degassed, and poured onto rose petals. After being cured at 70 °C for 2 h, BHFs were obtained by peeling off the textured PDMS from the rose petal surface. This soft lithographic fabrication uniformly transferred the complementary structure of the epidermis pattern on rose petals onto PDMS (Fig. 1b and c). The total thickness of the BHF was ∼300 μm. The topography of BHFs showed microscale craters, which are similar to concave semi-spheres that are typically used in microlens arrays (Fig. 1d). In each of the microcraters, there existed wrinkle-like sub-structures in the size of several hundred nanometers, which were also duplicated from the rose petal texture. The average size of closely packed microcraters was ∼25 μm in diameter and ∼20 μm in depth.

The light-scattering mechanism of BHFs is illustrated in Fig. 1e. Because the refractive index of air (nair = 1) is lower than that of PDMS (nPDMS ∼ 1.41), the microcrater structure of BHF functions as a concave lens to diverge incident light that passes through. Meanwhile, the submicron wrinkles in each microcrater (Fig. 1d) offer additional anti-reflection functionality to the underlying substrate. As a proof-of-concept of the remarkable haze effect, a BHF was placed on top of a printed paper with a “Haze” logo. When directly attached to the paper, the haze effect was not obvious because the distance between the textured surface and the logo was too low. However, the logo was too hazy to observe when the BHF was lifted 1 cm away from the paper (Fig. 1f).
The remarkable haze effect of BHFs was quantitatively evaluated by optical measurements including the diffusion/haze transmittance and the angular distribution of the scattering light power. The diffusion transmittance refers to the ratio of the total power of transmitted light to the power of incident light, while the haze transmittance is the percentage of the light scattered by the BHF among the total transmitted light. These two parameters demonstrate the haze ability from the perspective of optical power. A commonly used optical measuring setup is illustrated in Fig. 2a, where a spectrophotometer with an integrating sphere was used to collect the transmitted light in every spatial direction to obtain the diffusion transmittance while the transmitted light parallel to the incident light was absorbed by the optical absorber. The BHF presented an ultra-high diffusion transmittance of 97% over the entire testing spectrum ranging from 400 nm to 800 nm. More significantly, the BHF also possessed a haze transmittance of 75% in the same range. Compared with other reports in the literature (Fig. 2c and ESI Table 1), the BHF has a very high haze value as well as the highest diffusion transmittance.
The angular distribution of the haze transmittance of BHF was further studied in detail. The scattering light through the BHF was collected by a movable photodetector along a circular path and the light intensity was measured at different angles between the photodetector and the BHF (Fig. 2d), where the perpendicular direction to the BHF was defined as 0°. As shown in Fig. 2e, the angular distribution varied very little throughout the entire visible spectrum region (400–800 nm), which further indicates that the haze effect of the BHF is not wavelength dependent. More importantly, the intensity of the scattering light reached over 10% of the maximum value over very large spatial angles, being as large as about 56° (Fig. 2f). This is critical for enhancing the light-harvesting of solar cells at small incidence angles, which will be demonstrated in a later section.

The additional anti-reflection ability of the BHF can be approximately quantified by using a Si wafer as a light-absorbing bottom substrate. Although Si (500 μm) is thick enough to fully absorb photons that enter, it also wastes a large amount of incident light by surface reflection due to its high refractive indices (n ranges from ∼3.7 to 5.6 between 400 and 800 nm (ref. 31)). Therefore, anti-reflection layers fabricated by surface coating or etching techniques were often applied on top of Si solar cells to reduce the surface reflection. The BHF also provides a low-cost and facile approach to realize the anti-reflection function. As illustrated in Fig. 3a, a flat PDMS film reduced the reflection of the Si wafer by ∼10% in the optical range. With the additional biomimetic texture, the BHF further reduced the surface reflection by 3–5%, leading to a total anti-reflection ability of 13–15%. When placing the BHF on top of the encapsulation glass of a crystalline-silicon (c-Si) solar cell, a 6.8% improvement of the PCE of the device was obtained (Fig. 3b).

Importantly, the remarkable light-scattering and anti-reflection properties discussed above make the BHF highly suitable for efficiency enhancement of thin-film photovoltaic devices including PSCs and OSCs. As a proof-of-concept, we fabricated PSCs based on the methylammonium lead iodide (CH3NH3PbI3) absorber and OSCs based on the PDPP3T:PC71BM active layer, and tested the devices with and without the additional BHF on the glass side. As illustrated in Fig. 4a, the perovskite solar cell employed a traditional planar structure. The champion device without the BHF showed an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.03 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 20.8 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 77.6% and a high PCE value of 16.6%. After placing the BHF, the JSC of the device was significantly improved to 24.5 mA cm−2 and the PCE was dramatically boosted to 19.2%, which equals a 15.6% efficiency enhancement (Fig. 4b and Table 1). Another 9 randomly selected PSCs were tested with and without the BHF. All the devices showed significant improvement in the device performance with the aid of the BHF, and the average enhancement in the PCE value was 12.3% (summarized in ESI Table 2). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) data showed the improvement of photocurrent in the range of 300–800 nm, which further confirms the improvement of the light absorption enabled by the BHF (Fig. 4c). For OSCs, the J–V and EQE measurements also evidence the improvement of photocurrent (Fig. 4c and ESI Fig. 2). Overall, OSCs gained a PCE enhancement of ∼10%. It is worth noting that PSCs enjoyed a larger enhancement of photocurrent density than OSCs, which can be attributed to the more efficient photon recycling process in PSCs.
Device Type
Device Structure

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
c-Si
Bare
37.9
0.58
72.7
16.0
With flat PDMS
37.6
0.58
72.4
15.8
With the BHF
40.4
0.58
72.8
17.1
PSC
Bare
20.8
1.03
77.6
16.6
With flat PDMS
21.4
1.03
74.8
16.5
With the BHF
24.5
1.03
75.9
19.2
OSC
Bare
10.5
0.70
60.7
4.46
With flat PDMS
10.8
0.70
60.8
4.60
With the BHF
11.9
0.70
60.7
5.06
More importantly, the BHF provides a much improved device performance under oblique incident light. We measured the angular dependence of photocurrent of PSCs from normal incidence (denoted as 0°) to a series of oblique incidence angles (10–80°), and plotted the normalized photocurrent (normal incidence as 100% current density) as a function of incidence angles. As shown in Fig. 4d, the average photocurrent of bare PSCs dramatically dropped from 100% to 27% when the angle was moved from 0° to 80°. With the BHF, the photocurrent of PSCs still maintained ∼90% at 40°, and ∼65% at 80°. When taking the daily sunlight distribution into consideration, such an effect approximately equals >50% improvement of total solar energy harvesting in a low latitude area such as Hong Kong, and ∼85% improvement of energy harvesting in a high latitude area such as Moscow (see ESI Fig. 3 for detailed calculation and assumption).
Note that the BHF is also superior to other reported haze films in terms of the materials stability under adverse weather conditions such as acid rain, ultraviolet (UV) light, and heat. Hence, the stability of the haze film under different weather conditions was demonstrated by exposing the BHF to a strong UV lamp for 1 h, immersing in 0.1 M HCl solution for 1 day, and heating at 80 °C for another day. The PSC performance with the treated BHF was then characterised. As shown in ESI Fig. 4, the efficiency enhancement of PSCs remained unchanged before and after the durability test of the BHF, indicating a stable optical performance of the BHF under adverse weather conditions.

In conclusion, we have reported a new kind of high-performance haze film namely the BHF for significant improvement of the PCE of photovoltaic devices. BHFs were made by one-step replication of the surface texture of rose petals with low-cost PDMS. We have demonstrated their very high transmission haze of 75% and ultra-high diffusion transmittance of 97%, efficient anti-reflection ability, remarkable enhancement of light absorption at small incidence angles, and resistance to strong acids. The BHF could be directly attached to the glass side of solar cells, and has been proved to be versatile for different photovoltaic devices, which offers 6.8%, 10%, and 15% improvement of the PCE of c-Si solar cells, OSCs, and PSCs respectively at normal incidence. At small incidence angles, BHFs could significantly enhance the light absorption of solar cells by as much as 2.7 times, leading to much more efficient light harvesting especially for those devices installed in high latitude areas. Considering their low material and fabrication cost, remarkable efficiency enhancement, applicability to a wide optical spectrum, and versatility to different kinds of solar cells, BHFs should also be applicable to other photovoltaic devices as well as tandem structures.


The authors acknowledge the financial support from ECS of Hong Kong (PolyU 5030/12P), GRF of Hong Kong (PolyU 5036/13P), The Hong Kong Polytechnic University (Project 1-ZVGH), and the Natural Science Foundation of Zhejiang Province (Grant No. LY15F050010). The authors also thank Prof. Hui Shen and Mr Jixiang Zhou of Sun Yat-Sen University for providing the c-Si solar cells.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta07586j
‡ The authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017