 DOI: 10.1039/D1TA00232E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 9616-9623


Jiaxin
Zheng
,

Yinqi
Luo
,

Xinbo
Wen
,

Qinglei
Zhang
,

Yu
Song
,

Jiadong
Zhou
,

Nianqiang
Jiang
,

Linlin
Liu
,

Fei
Huang
 and 

Zengqi
Xie
*

State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Luminescence from Molecular Aggregates, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, P. R. China. E-mail: msxiez@scut.edu.cn

Received
9th January 2021
, Accepted 23rd March 2021
First published on 24th March 2021
With the rapid development of near-infrared absorbing acceptor materials, the photoelectric conversion efficiency of polymer solar cells (PSCs) has been greatly improved in the past several years. However, serious charge recombination close to the cathode interlayer, like sol–gel derived zinc oxide (sg-ZnO), usually restrains the overall device performance, which is attributed to the mismatch between the relatively poor electron transport properties of the cathode interlayer and the largely increased photocurrent from the widely extended absorbing active layer. In this work, we demonstrate a novel strategy for in situ induced crystallization of zinc oxide (ic-ZnO) that shows increased crystallinity relative to the classic sg-ZnO, and such ic-ZnO is proved to reduce the interfacial charge recombination efficiently in PSCs. ic-ZnO was synthesized by a heterogeneous nucleation process, using as-synthesized zinc oxide (as-ZnO) nanoparticles as the nucleus in the precursor solution of sg-ZnO. By using this film as an efficient electron transport layer, a power conversion efficiency of 16.62% was achieved in inverted PSCs. Our results clearly indicate that increasing the crystallinity of zinc oxide by in situ induced crystallization is a facile strategy to meet the demands of high performance non-fullerene PSCs.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs) have attracted wide research interest in the past few decades and rapid progress has been achieved in the most recent years. With the advantages of easy and low-cost solution processing techniques for PSCs, it is predictable that the competition and complementation with the inorganic counterparts would be enhanced in the forthcoming applications. Owing to the emergence of highly efficient non-fullerene electron acceptor materials, champion power conversion efficiencies over 18% have been reported in single junction PSCs. In the past several years, research on photoactive materials especially non-fullerene electron acceptors has been emphasized, including extending near-infrared light absorption by chemical structure design and tuning energy level alignment to minimize energy losses in devices. However, the research on interfacial materials for non-fullerene based PSCs has relatively lagged behind. In order to adapt to the increased photocurrent density and decrease the interfacial recombination losses, highly conductive interlayer materials become one of the decisive issues to further improve the photovoltaic performance.

Sol–gel derived zinc oxide (sg-ZnO) is widely used as a cathode interlayer in inverted PSCs. The precursor materials are easily obtained and the solution processing method is adaptable for mass production. However, the electron mobility of sg-ZnO is typically low and strongly dependent on the processing procedures, which is because of the low crystallinity and vast structural defects (i.e. residual organic and hydroxyl groups). In order to increase the electron mobility and conductivity of sg-ZnO, the post-thermal annealing temperature is usually need to be as high as 200–300 °C to increase the crystallinity of the film, which can improve the device performance effectively. Researchers developed various approaches as alternatives to increase the electron mobility and conductivity of sg-ZnO films by atomic doping using group IIIA elements as the dopants such as aluminum (Al), gallium (Ga) and indium (In). Meanwhile, there are many reports about eliminating the surface defects by doping or interface passivation, for example, employing multiblock copolymers or small organic molecules with functional groups like carboxyl, amino and hydroxyl. Our group also developed a novel photoconductive interface by doping organic dye molecules into the matrix of ZnO, which effectively reduces the trap states and improves the electron mobility through light-induced electron transfer.
An alternative approach to fabricate the cathode interlayer is using the as-synthesized ZnO nanoparticles (as-ZnO) as the source material, which can be processed at room temperature via a solution processing method. Although the crystallinity of such as-ZnO is much better than that of sg-ZnO, the quality of as-ZnO is quite dependent on operator's fine control of reaction conditions. In addition, the grain boundaries with plenty of hydroxyl groups in such thin films largely hindered the electron transport through the film. In this work, we introduced as-ZnO nanoparticles into the precursor solution for sg-ZnO as the nucleating agent to increase the crystallinity and also decrease the structural defects of the thin films for application as cathode interlayers in PSCs, and the method is termed induced crystallization of ZnO (ic-ZnO). A power conversion efficiency of 16.62% was obtained in inverted PSCs by employing this ic-ZnO film as the cathode interlayer, which is remarkably higher than the values from sg-ZnO and as-ZnO based devices. Our present approach to fabricate a highly crystalline ZnO based cathode interlayer combined the advantages of the as-synthesized nanoparticles and sol–gel derived thin film. As an easy, economic and effective way, using ic-ZnO may benefit the further development of PSCs toward practical applications.

as-ZnO nanoparticles were synthesized by the hydrolysis of zinc acetate in methanol according to a procedure reported in the literature. The as-ZnO nanoparticles were re-dispersed in a 2-methoxyethanol/chloroform mixture (1:1 v/v) for characterization and further application as a nucleating agent for ic-ZnO and also as a source material to prepare a cathode interlayer directly as discussed below. This process produces crystalline nanoparticles that are approximately 6 nm in diameter, as determined by high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) (Fig. S1). The surface of such as-ZnO has plenty of hydroxyl groups according to the literature, and indeed in the re-dispersed mixture there are relatively larger aggregates of nanoparticles according to the Tyndall effect tested with a red laser light. The sg-ZnO film was prepared by thermal treatment (200 °C) of the xerogel film spin-coated from the precursor solution of zinc acetate dihydrate in a mixture of ethanolamine and 2-methoxyethanol. The crystallinity of the sg-ZnO film is low, showing an average particle size of only 3.7 nm as revealed by HRTEM images (Fig. S1).

We then mixed the as-ZnO nanoparticles in the 2-methoxyethanol/chloroform mixture and the precursor solution of zinc acetate dihydrate in the mixture of ethanolamine and 2-methoxyethanol with various volume ratios (detailed concentrations are given in the Experimental section in the ESI), and the mixture was stirred vigorously at 50 °C for further growth of the nanoparticles. A clear and colorless mixture without the Tyndall effect was obtained, suggesting the deaggregation of the dispersed as-ZnO particles in the solution system. Then, the mixture was used to fabricate a xerogel film on a substrate by the spin-coating method, followed by thermal treatment at 200 °C to obtain a dense ic-ZnO film. The HRTEM photos reveal that the average size of the nanocrystals in the ic-ZnO film is larger than those in the as-ZnO film, which indicates that the crystallinity of the ic-ZnO film was increased obviously. Especially, when the volume ratio between the solution mixture of as-ZnO and the precursor solution for sg-ZnO is 3:7, the average size of the nanoparticles in the obtained ic-ZnO film was up to 7.6 nm. The induced crystallization process is illustrated in Fig. 1a.
Zn(CH3COO)2 + 2H2O  Zn(OH)x(CH3COO)2−x + xCH3COOH
(1)
–Zn–OH + HO–Zn–  –Zn–O–Zn– + H2O
(2)
–Zn–OOCH3 + HO–Zn–  –Zn–O–Zn– + CH3COOH
(3)
The growth of ZnO crystals can be described by Ostwald ripening. It is known that the formation of sg-ZnO in precursor solution involves the hydrolysis of zinc acetate (1) and polycondensation of monomers (2) and (3). The particles no longer grow when a thermodynamic equilibrium is reached. Then we introduced the as-ZnO nanoparticles into the precursor solution. Driven by the decrease of total interfacial energy, small particles dissolved (referred to as sg-ZnO here) and free monomers deposited on the surface of as-ZnO nanoparticles for further growth until a new thermodynamic equilibrium was established.

The particle size distributions in sg-ZnO, ic-ZnO and as-ZnO films are shown in Fig. 1b–d. More detailed statistical results can be found in Table S1. From the statistical data, it is clear that there are more larger nanoparticles in the ic-ZnO film. The selected HRTEM photos of the ZnO nanoparticles from three different approaches are shown in Fig. S2. An apparent lattice spacing of 0.28 nm is assigned to the (100) facets of hexagonal phase ZnO, while the lattice spacing of 0.25 nm corresponds to the (101) facets. It is observed that most crystal planes of the biggest particles in the ic-ZnO film are (101) facets, which correspond to the preferred orientation of as-ZnO, indicating that the induced growth is very likely to follow the original orientation of as-ZnO. The result agrees with a similar modified route that as-synthesized crystalline titania nanoparticles were introduced into the mesoporous titania films and the preferred orientation is mainly affected by the as-synthesized nanocrystals. The structural information of ic-ZnO was further verified by grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) (Fig. 2a). The diffraction signals of the (100) facet and (101) facet of ZnO are located at 2-theta angles of 32.0° and 36.3° respectively. When the volume ratio between the solution mixture of as-ZnO and the precursor solution for sg-ZnO comes to 3:7, the crystallinity of the ic-ZnO film is almost up to that of the as-ZnO film according to their similar diffraction intensity, which is consistent with the conclusion from the absorption of the films (Fig. S3). So, in the following sections we used the ic-ZnO films derived from the mixture with this special volume ratio of 3:7 to investigate the optoelectronic properties as well as the applications in photovoltaic devices.

As reported before, there are many intrinsic defects existing in the sg-ZnO film such as residual organic and hydroxyl groups, especially when the annealing temperature is relatively low. Thus, we recorded the photoluminescence (PL) spectra to compare the defect density of ZnO films from different methods. As shown in Fig. 2b, there are two emission bands including a narrow one with an emission peak at approximately 400 nm involving exciton recombination and a broad one with an emission peak at 530 nm that is sensitive to oxygen-deficient defects (oxygen vacancies and hydroxyl groups). Remarkably, the ic-ZnO film shows the lowest defect-related green emission when compared with the emission from sg-ZnO and as-ZnO films. Combined with the growth mechanism mentioned above, the reduced content of defects can be attributed to the consumption of surface hydroxyl groups in the further growth of as-ZnO nanoparticles. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) analyses were carried out to further confirm the decreased hydroxyl groups. As shown in Fig. S4, the broad peak at 3450 cm−1 corresponds to the hydroxyl groups and the peaks at 1620 and 1410 cm−1 correspond to the carboxylate groups. After the induced crystallization process, the intensity of the peak at 3450 cm−1 is decreased, suggesting that a large fraction of the hydroxyl groups have been removed. The result reveals that the induced crystallization process is an effective approach to eliminate intrinsic defects.
The bandgaps for sg-ZnO, ic-ZnO and as-ZnO films were determined to be 3.29 eV, 3.33 eV and 3.36 eV according to the onset positions of the absorption spectra (Fig. S5). Furthermore, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was used to probe the valence bands and work functions (WFs) of these ZnO films, and the results are presented in Fig. 2c and Table S2. The valence band maximum (VBM) of the ic-ZnO film lies at 3.62 eV below the Fermi level (EF). The calculated WF value is 3.98 eV obtained by subtracting the low energy cutoff position of the UPS spectrum from the excitation energy (21.22 eV). Considering that the bandgap energy is 3.33 eV, the energy level of the conduction band minimum (CBM) can be determined to be −4.27 eV. In contrast, the WF values for sg-ZnO and as-ZnO films are 3.97 eV and 3.89 eV, and the corresponding CBMs are −4.28 eV and −4.18 eV respectively. The CBM values are consistent with −4.39 eV in another report for ZnO.
In order to investigate the electron transport properties of the ZnO films, electron-only devices with an architecture of ITO/Al/ZnO/Ca/Al were fabricated and electron mobility was determined by using the space-charge limited current (SCLC) method, as shown in Fig. 2d and Table S3. The electron mobility of sg-ZnO, ic-ZnO and as-ZnO films was calculated to be 6.42 × 10−4, 2.88 × 10−3 and 1.53 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. It is worth pointing out that the electron mobility of the ic-ZnO film is three times higher than that of the sg-ZnO film, even much better than that of the as-ZnO film, which is due to the increased crystallinity and reduced structural defects as discussed above. Its increased electron mobility is beneficial for electron collection and transportation as a cathode interlayer in photovoltaic devices, which will be discussed in the following section.

Atomic force microscopy (AFM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and water contact angle measurements were carried out to further investigate the morphology of ZnO films from different fabrication methods. Fig. 3a presents the AFM images of ∼30 nm-thick ZnO films on ITO glass substrates. The sg-ZnO film exhibited a uniform and smooth surface morphology with a root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 1.65 nm. In contrast, the ic-ZnO film showed a relatively rough surface with a RMS roughness of 4.47 nm. The roughened surface morphology contributes to more larger nanoparticles in the ic-ZnO film. As for the as-ZnO film, a moderate RMS roughness of 2.48 nm was obtained. These relatively flat films are conducive to electron transport, which will not cause serious charge recombination that lowers the device performance. The morphological differences were also revealed by the SEM images (Fig. 3b). As can be seen, there are some cracks in the sg-ZnO film because of high post-thermal annealing temperature, which might induce leakage current in the device. In contrast, a more complete coverage of the ITO surface by a dense ic-ZnO film was obtained, which consists of grains with size mainly ranging from 20 to 40 nm and a few grains larger than hundred nanometers; meanwhile plenty of large grains can be found in the film of as-ZnO due to the aggregation of the nanoparticles in the re-dispersed solution system. The uniform and crystalline film of ic-ZnO can effectively serve as an electron transport layer as discussed in the following section. The water contact angles of all three kinds of ZnO films are around 40° (Fig. S6), which indicates their similar surface energy.


Because of the excellent electron transport properties of the ic-ZnO film, it was used as the electron transport layer (ETL) in inverted PSCs with a device architecture of ITO/ETL/PM6:Y6/MoO3/Al. For comparison, devices using sg-ZnO and as-ZnO as ETLs were also fabricated. An efficient binary blend system consisting of the polymer donor PM6 and non-fullerene acceptor Y6 was chosen as the photoactive material (Fig. 4a), and MoO3 was selected as the hole extraction layer. A schematic illustration of the device architecture is shown in Fig. 4b. The energy level alignment for the devices is given in Fig. 4c. As revealed in Fig. 4d, the absorption of the photoactive layer on different ZnO films is quite similar, which can exclude the influence of optical effects like the optical spacer effect and plasmonic effect.

The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the inverted PSCs incorporating different ZnO films under AM 1.5G irradiation (1000 W m−2) are given in Fig. 5a and the main photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table 1. The devices based on the sg-ZnO film exhibited a maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) value of 15.72% with a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 25.45 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.832 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 74.20%, which coincides with the reported performance. When the sg-ZnO film was replaced by the ic-ZnO film as the ETL, the PCE increased to a value of 16.62%. This increase was accompanied by an increased Jsc of 26.54 mA cm−2 and an improved FF of 75.20%. We attributed the higher Jsc and FF to the improved charge transport ability and less charge recombination of the ETL, which originate from the increased average crystal length, enhanced crystallinity and decreased hydroxyl groups in the induced crystallization process. Fig. 5b illustrates the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the devices based on the sg-ZnO film and ic-ZnO film; and the integrated short-circuit current density values deduced from the EQE curves are 24.33 mA cm−2 and 25.32 mA cm−2, respectively, which agree well with the Jsc values from the J–V curves within a 5% mismatch. However, the device based on as-ZnO as the ETL showed a moderate device performance with a maximum PCE of 14.98% (Voc = 0.823 V, Jsc = 24.71 mA cm−2, and FF = 73.64%), which is much lower than those of the devices incorporating sg-ZnO and ic-ZnO films. We speculate that extensive charge recombination has hindered the overall device performance, which is further verified by a transient photovoltage test in the following section. We utilized a fullerene-based active layer (PTB7-Th:PC71BM) to fabricate PSCs as well. As shown in Table S4, the devices based on the ic-ZnO film also presented improved performance compared with those sg-ZnO and as-ZnO based devices, which indicates the universality of ic-ZnO.
ETL

V
oc [V]

J
sc
 [mA cm−2]
FF [%]
PCE (ave.) [%]

a Integrated Jsc from EQE spectra with the AM 1.5G reference spectrum is given in brackets.
b Average PCEs in brackets are based on 10 independent devices.

sg-ZnO
0.832
25.45 (24.33)
74.20
15.72 (15.34 ± 0.22)
ic-ZnO
0.832
26.54 (25.32)
75.20
16.62 (16.14 ± 0.27)
as-ZnO
0.823
24.71 (23.65)
73.64
14.98 (14.71 ± 0.18)
In addition, the application of ic-ZnO can increase the rectification ratio of PSCs according to the dark J–V curve as shown in Fig. 5c. The dark current under reversed bias reduced significantly when compared with the device based on sg-ZnO, indicating less leakage current in such a densely packed film and better charge selectivity. To gain further insight into the charge dissociation and electron collection ability of ZnO films, the dependence of the photo-generated current density (Jph) on the effective voltage (Veff) is illustrated in Fig. 5d. Here, Jph = JL − JD, where JL and JD are the current densities under AM 1.5G illumination and darkness respectively; Veff = V0 − Va, where V0 is the voltage when Jph is zero and Va is the applied voltage. For the devices based on the ic-ZnO film, the Jph reached a higher saturation photocurrent density (Jsat) compared with sg-ZnO and as-ZnO based devices, which means that the loss of photo-generated current diminishes. Meanwhile, the devices based on the ic-ZnO film showed improved photo-generated current characteristics at low values of Veff, indicating better charge dissociation and collection efficiency. Under short-circuit conditions, ic-ZnO based devices gained an exciton dissociation probability (P = Jph/Jsat) value of 95.33%, which is slightly higher than that in the sg-ZnO based device (94.75%), suggesting higher exciton dissociation and charge collection efficiencies in ic-ZnO based devices.
Moreover, the charge recombination and charge extraction behaviors of PSCs with different ETLs were explored via transient photovoltage (TPV) and transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements and the results are given in Fig. 6a and b. The carrier lifetime increased from 31.9 μs for the sg-ZnO based device to 55.8 μs for the ic-ZnO based device, which indicates less charge recombination in the ic-ZnO based device due to the reduced intrinsic defects. In contrast, the value of the device based on the as-ZnO film is only 14.6 μs, which clearly explained the low Jsc and PCE of the corresponding PSCs. At the same time, the charge extraction abilities of those ZnO films are very similar according to TPC measurements, which corresponds to the close WF values as discussed above.

In summary, we increased the crystallinity and reduced the structural defects of ZnO thin films through an induced crystallization method and successfully applied such high quality ic-ZnO as an electron transport layer for high performance non-fullerene PSCs. ic-ZnO showed improved electron mobility, which is crucial for an efficient cathode interlayer. Interfacial trap-assisted charge recombination is remarkably decreased in PSCs, and as a result the best PCE of 16.62% in a binary blend system (PM6:Y6) was obtained, which is much higher than those achieved in sg-ZnO and as-ZnO based devices. The work provides an easy way for fabricating efficient electron transport materials to further boost the development of PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (grant nos 51761135101, 21733005, 21975076, 51873068, and 51521002), the Fund of the Key Laboratory of Luminescence from Molecular Aggregates of Guangdong Province (2019B030301003), and the Key Program of Guangzhou Scientific Research Special Project (201904020035).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta00232e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021