 DOI: 10.1039/D2EE03742D
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, 16, 3014-3024


Peng
Zhai
*,

Lixia
Ren
*,

Yanrui
Zhang
,

Zhuo
Xu
,

Yin
Wu
,

Kui
Zhao
,

Lu
Zhang
 and 

Shengzhong (Frank)
Liu
*

Key Laboratory for Applied Surface and Colloid Chemistry, National Ministry of Education, Shaanxi Engineering Lab for Advanced Energy Technology, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi’an 710119, China. E-mail: zhaipeng@snnu.edu.cn; renlixia@snnu.edu.cn

Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian, 116023, China

Center of Materials Science and Optoelectronics Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China

Received
20th November 2022
, Accepted 19th May 2023
First published on 23rd May 2023
Water is the most sustainable and environmentally friendly solvent in material synthesis. Perovskite prepared from a water solvent-based precursor (Pb(NO3)2/H2O) has been confirmed to be highly preferred and promising. Unfortunately, the sluggish conversion of Pb(NO3)2 to perovskite results in morphological flaws and incomplete transformation, which severely limit its photovoltaic performance. In this study, halide-free aqueous nanofluids (NFs) are prepared to regulate the formation kinetics of a perovskite via a grain refinement strategy. The crystallization process is examined by in situ UV-Vis absorption/PL measurements. It is found that both the microstructure of PbI2 and anion configurations play a key role in the formation kinetics. Consequently, PbCO3 NFs with an inert carbonate anion (CO32−) are carefully selected to promote the reaction rate by ∼30%. Moreover, CO32− effectively inhibits the formation of FA vacancy defects at the surface of a nearly pure FA-based perovskite. The device made from PbCO3 NFs in a fully dry-air atmosphere achieves an average PCE of 23.64% and a stabilized PCE of 23.95%. The bare device without any protection shows outstanding stability under continuous light illumination.

Although the development of power conversion efficiency (PCE) is surging, numerous concerns regarding toxicity, stability and scalability remain unsolved or challenging for the practical application of metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Particularly, almost all solvent systems implemented for the deposition of perovskites are toxic to the environment, which is a key obstacle for future commercialization of these photovoltaic devices. From the perspective of green chemical engineering, perovskites prepared from water solvent-based precursor (Pb(NO3)2/H2O) have been confirmed to be highly preferred and promising. However, perovskite conversion based on the Pb(NO3)2/H2O protocol is too slow compared with the toxic PbI2/DMF system, which will lead to morphological flaws and incomplete transformation. For this purpose, halide-free aqueous nanofluids (NFs) are prepared to promote the formation kinetics of perovskite via a grain refinement strategy. It is found that both the microstructure of PbI2 and anion configurations play a key role in the formation kinetics. Perovskites fabricated by PbCO3 NFs in the air achieve a stabilized PCE of up to 23.95% through this green preparation and exhibit outstanding stability. The use of water as a precursor solvent makes it feasible to produce perovskite without using prohibited industrial solvents, considerably strengthening the competitiveness of PSCs against silicon-based solar cells.


Although their power conversion efficiency (PCE) is surging, numerous concerns regarding toxicity and stability remain unresolved or challenging for the practical application of metal-halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs). So far, most researchers have focused mainly on reducing the lead toxicity by partially or completely substituting lead elements in the perovskite, but they have paid little attention to the toxic organic solvents used for fabricating perovskite films. The commonly used precursor solvents, such as N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), and N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), are toxic and carcinogenic. Obviously, the industrial use of these toxic solvents is restricted in many countries and recycling these solvents will consume additional energy, which is not conducive to achieving the goal of carbon emission reduction. Vapor deposition such as vacuum evaporation involves no liquid solution and is preferred for large-area coating in the semiconductor industry. The device performance of PSCs prepared by vapor deposition is catching up and comparable with that of devices prepared using conventional solution-based methods.

From the perspective of green chemistry, perovskites prepared using water are most desirable because they can completely exclude the traditional toxic precursor solvents, even without using an anti-solvent. Wei et al. first invented an aqueous lead nitrate precursor for the synthesis of a perovskite film through sequential solution deposition. However, due to the perovskite functional layer's poor coverage, the device PCE was stagnant within 12.58%. Through interpretation of the slow and stepwise conversion mechanism, multiple-cycle immersion deposition was developed to improve the perovskite conversion and remedy the flaws in the original MAPbI3 film. Notably, it was reported that a Pb(NO3)2/H2O protocol could achieve an enormous cost reduction over conventional PbI2 organic solutions whether in the laboratory research stage or at the mass production scale. Recently, we have utilized a light modulation strategy to concurrently activate the perovskite crystallization and reduce the deep level Pb0 defects, reaching a high PCE ∼ 23.74%. More importantly, to prevent the harm of Pb2+ to human health, we have developed an eco-friendly scheme to address the issue of waste lead recycling and disposal. Unfortunately, if light is used in mass production, it will increase equipment costs and energy consumption. Meanwhile, the precise control of light intensity and illumination time will complicate the whole scalable manufacturing process. In addition, perovskite conversion based on the Pb(NO3)2/H2O protocol is too slow compared with the toxic PbI2/DMF system. By examining the individual stages of Pb(NO3)2/perovskite transformation, we reveal that Pb(NO3)2 first rapidly reacts with MAI to form PbI2 (reaction i), and then slowly converts from PbI2 to perovskite in hundreds of seconds (reaction ii). The sluggish transition in the latter tends to induce the notorious Ostwald ripening effect, causing the generation of huge cuboid crystals on the surface. Therefore, it is necessary to better manage the formation kinetics of perovskite and control the film quality in order to enhance both the efficiency and stability of water-processed PSCs.
In this paper, halide-free nanofluid (NF)-based Pb(NO3)2 aqueous solutions containing suspensions of solid nanoparticles (Pb(HCOO)2, Pb(SCN)2 and PbCO3 NPs) are intentionally prepared. These insoluble NPs are introduced as nucleating seeds to control the growth of Pb(NO3)2, so as to promote the perovskite formation. We find that formation kinetics is closely related to the microstructure of PbI2 and anion configurations. Our results show that anions with strong affinity for MA+ tend to extract them from the perovskite nuclei, which will hinder the conversion and cause the formation of the δ-FAPbI3 phase. Therefore, PbCO3 NFs with an inert CO32− anion, which cannot react with MAI at room temperature, are selected to accelerate the reaction rate by about ∼30% via a grain refinement strategy. During the annealing process, multiple-ion exchange and component evaporation contribute to the growth of perovskite crystals, and a high-quality, pinhole-free perovskite film with enlarged grain size can be obtained. Moreover, FA vacancy defects at the surface can be eliminated upon the adsorption of CO32−. We further investigate the indoor perovskite photovoltaic performance and suggest that deep-level defects in the device are the key impediments to achieve a high PCE under indoor application. The device made from PbCO3 NFs in a fully dry-air atmosphere achieves an average PCE of 23.64% and a stabilized PCE of 23.95%, and exhibits outstanding stability under the conditions of ambient dark storage for 2000 hours, continuous heating for 800 hours at 85 °C and light exposure in a N2-filled glovebox under continuous 1 sun illumination. This water-processed, eco-friendly precursor system illuminates a direction toward green technologies for preparing perovskite layers.

In the PbI2/DMF system, because the PbI2 scaffold is composed of nanocrystals, it has a high specific surface area and can react rapidly with MAI. Perovskite conversion is usually accomplished in two or three minutes via sequential deposition. Revisiting the consecutive two-reaction route in the Pb(NO3)2/H2O protocol, we observe that the large single-crystalline PbI2 intermediates created in the first reaction present fewer nucleation sites, retarding the diffusion and intercalation with MAI in the second reaction. In kinetically driven chemical reactions, the products are formed according to their relative rates of formation (rate-limiting step). The total reaction rate is determined by the slowest reaction, and thus the slow transformation from PbI2 to perovskite limits the total reaction rate. Consequently, halide-free nanofluids are prepared to regulate the growth of Pb(NO3)2 at the nucleation stage. As shown in Fig. 1(a), there are no particles in the pure Pb(NO3)2 solution according to the dynamic light-scattering (DLS) characterization. After adding the NPs into the Pb(NO3)2 solution, the characteristic particle size of over 150 nm is observed, verifying that they still maintain the colloidal properties in the base Pb(NO3)2 solution. The “Tyndall effect” can be found in the PbCO3 NFs, but not in the pure Pb(NO3)2 solution. In Fig. S1 (ESI), XRD spectra of these NFs show the same pattern as pure Pb(NO3)2. As noted, the Pb(NO3)2 film exhibits an island-like and discontinuous morphology, and large grains can be observed in the SEM image in Fig. 1(b). The grain size of Pb(NO3)2 prepared using NFs decreases significantly (shown in Fig. S2, ESI), suggesting that the use of NFs is a general approach for grain refinement. Due to the trace addition of halide-free lead NPs, it is difficult to distinguish them from Pb(NO3)2 crystals. The refined PbI2 crystals with smaller size (∼200 nm) have a well-shaped hexagonal tetradecahedron structure, which is transformed from NFs during the incubation process (reaction i, ∼60 s). The thickness of porous PbI2 film shown in Fig. S3 (ESI) is ∼300 nm.

In theory, crystallization requires two processes: nucleation and growth. The kinetics of the NP-induced crystallization can be explained by the Gibbs free energy, which includes a surface term (GS) and a volume term (GV). Only when the crystal nucleus is larger than the critical radius, R*, can it survive; otherwise, it will be dissolved spontaneously. In pure Pb(NO3)2 solution, the nucleation of Pb(NO3)2 will not occur until the critical Gibbs free energy barrier (G*) is completely overcome (shown in Fig. 1(c)) and low-density nuclei are gradually generated during the solvent evaporation. While for stable NFs, the large NPs are already present before the start of nucleation. These seeds can greatly reduce the interface energy and the nucleation barrier of Pb(NO3)2, leading to a burst of nuclei at a lower saturation. Furthermore, the nucleation and growth rate are highly determined by the evaporation rate of the solvent. Due to the high evaporation rate of water (shown in Fig. 1(d)), the time of crystal growth becomes short, and thus the NP-induced crystallization can commence immediately at a much faster rate, giving rise to the reduction of grain size. Fig. S4 (ESI) shows the cyclic voltammogram (CV) curves of PbI2 films at different scan rates ranging from 10 to 200 mV s−1 in an ionic liquid. It is obvious that all CV curves exhibit a nearly ideal rectangular shape, indicating that the specific capacitance primarily originates from the double-layer capacitance based on ion adsorption/desorption. At any scan rate, PbI2 prepared from PbCO3 NFs exhibits higher capacitance compared to the pure PbI2, which clearly demonstrates that the refined PbI2 has a higher specific surface area. It is expected that the reaction between PbI2 and MAI can be promoted using a grain refinement strategy. In Fig. S5 (ESI), transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is performed on the PbCO3 NFs film, in which PbCO3 NPs are embedded in the Pb(NO3)2 matrix as the nucleation seeds.
To examine the formation kinetics of the perovskite, we conduct in situ UV-Vis absorption/PL measurements (shown in Fig. S6, ESI) during the dipping process in real time. As shown in Fig. 2(a), the absorbance of the perovskite at 700 nm is monitored during conversion, in which various Pb(NO3)2 substrates are dipped in MAX/IPA solution (X = I/Cl, MAI/MACl = 4:1). The ratio of the absorbance at time t to that after complete conversion is defined as the conversion fraction [α(t); 0 ≤ α(t) ≤ 1], representing the fraction of perovskite formed from the Pb(NO3)2 at time t. It is observed that compared with pure Pb(NO3)2 and PbCO3 NFs, the samples prepared from Pb(HCOO)2 and Pb(SCN)2 NFs take longer to convert to perovskite. The change in the reaction rate (dα/dt) with the conversion fraction (α) is illustrated in Fig. 2(b). The reaction rate of the samples prepared by pure Pb(NO3)2 and PbCO3 NFs are accelerated in the initial stage and then decelerated gradually, while the reaction rate of samples by Pb Pb(HCOO)2/Pb(SCN)2 NFs reach their maxima in the intermediate stage. The kinetic data can be fitted by means of nonlinear regression according to Avrami models:
(1)
where
n is the Avrami exponent, k is the effective reaction rate constant, α is the conversion fraction, and t is time. The values of k (shown in Fig. 2(c)) are calculated to be 0.18, 0.12, 0.15 and 0.23 min−1 for pure Pb(NO3)2, and Pb(HCOO)2, Pb(SCN)2 and PbCO3 NFs, respectively. The reaction rate increases by about 1.28 times when PbCO3 NPs are introduced, according to the Arrhenius equation:

(2)
(3)
where
A is the Arrhenius constant, Q is the experimental activation energy, T is the absolute temperature, and R is the molar gas constant. It can be roughly calculated that the experimental apparent activation energy decreases by about 600 J mol−1 after adding the crystal refiner.

To further explore the reaction mechanism, in situ PL measurement is used to track the film photoemission during nucleation and growth. It is observed in Fig. 2(d) and (e) that, for all newly-formed MAPbI3−xClx, their respective PL signals initiate at much higher energy levels compared with the final bandgap of the bulk perovskite films (approximately 1.62 eV from their PL maxima). The emission peak shifting during the early crystallization period can be ascribed to: (1) quantum confinement of the nanograins, in which case a larger initial crystal size shows smaller energy shifting; (2) a halide homogenization process occurring by diffusion of I to incorporate into the initial Cl-rich nuclei.
As noted, the formation of illuminating perovskite crystals dominates the PL intensity, and the time required to reach the intensity maximum serves as an indicator of the crystallization rate. The earlier it reaches the intensity maximum, the faster is the rate. For pure Pb(NO3)2, the PL intensity of the perovskite increases quickly to a maximum at 5 s, then the crystallization process lasts for 11 s, and the PL signal finally drops before reaching a plateau, which reveals the initial perovskite capping layer is formed. In contrast, the PL signals of Pb(HCOO)2 and Pb(SCN)2 NFs exhibit a two-stage pattern, which is related to the evolution of breaking-to-recrystallization. To date, most reports assume substitution of SCN− or HCOO− for I− at the X site, which is called “pseudo-halide ion”. On one hand, at the nucleation stage, HCOO− may partially replace X− to form the intermediates. On the other hand, since HCOO− has a robust affinity with MA+, the binding between MA+ and HCOO− should be stronger than that between MA+ and X−. When perovskite nuclei make contact with the surrounding undoped HCOO−, the hydrogen bond between MA+ and X− in the perovskite lattice will break owing to the extraction effect of HCOO−. The crystals are decomposed into MAHCOO and PbI2, rendering a sharp PL decay. After the anionic effect is weakened, the PL signal starts to rise again, hinting that the decomposition product PbI2 will react with MAX and recrystallize new “stable” perovskite in the later stage (∼30 s). Similarly, SCN has a larger electronegativity than the X, so there will be a strong interaction between MA+ and SCN−. The undoped SCN− will tend to extract MA+ to form MASCN, and correspondingly destroy the initial perovskite framework.
The crystallization process can also be illustrated by the shift of peak position, which is quantified by a bi-exponential decay model in Fig. S7 (ESI). The longer average decay time (τave) of pseudo-halide NFs reflects that the anions continue to destroy the perovskite lattice from the beginning, slowing down its time to reach the target stoichiometry. Compared with SCN (2.71), HCOO with a higher electronegativity of 2.80 is easier to extract MA+ from perovskite nuclei, which is consistent with their delayed recrystallization time and lower values of k. Surprisingly, the PL signal of PbCO3 NFs displays the same trend as that of pure Pb(NO3)2, but the crystallization is greatly activated as the PL maxima appears at 3 s. On the basis of these in situ measurements, we conclude that both the crystal size of PbI2 and anionic effect jointly determine the reaction rate, which is diminished such that PbCO3 NFs > pure Pb(NO3)2 > Pb(SCN)2 NFs > Pb(HCOO)2 NFs. Here, the film fabrication involves the FA-MA cation intermixing based on MAPbI3−xClx film, which is prepared by the multiple-cycle immersion method in advance (shown in Fig. S8 and S9, ESI). The reaction time is controlled according to their reaction rate values, that is, PbCO3 NFs is 6 min, pure Pb(NO3)2 is 8 min, Pb(SCN)2 NFs is 10 min, and Pb(HCOO)2 NFs is 12 min. However, as shown in Fig. S10 and S11 (ESI), the prolonged time for Pb(HCOO)2 NFs still fails to achieve complete conversion as a result of excessive PbI2 residues, and inevitably induces the generation of cuboidal crystals (Ostwald ripening effect) on the MAPbI3−xClx layer.
In order to qualitatively evaluate the reactivity of various lead salts with MAX, these salts are directly added to the MAX/IPA solution. Except for PbCO3 (white color), the other three powders immediately react with MAX to form a perovskite and change color (shown in Fig. 3(a) and Fig. S12, ESI). The large thermodynamic energy barrier suppresses the reaction between PbCO3 and MAX at room temperature. PbCO3 NFs with inert CO32− anions cannot induce the extraction effect during the crystallization process, thus improving the conversion via grain refinement strategy. Interestingly, when PbCO3 reacts with MAX at 100 °C for 2 mins, the powder changes from white to black. There is a (110) diffraction peak at 14.18° in the XRD spectrum in Fig. 3(b), indicating the formation of perovskite from PbCO3. We speculate that heat can weaken the bond strength between CO32− and Pb2+. CO32− will bind to the surrounding MA+/FA+ ions (FAI/MAI/MACl post-dripping) to form MA2CO3/FA2CO3. The thermodynamic instability of MA2CO3 will lead to the evaporation of CO2, H2O and CH3NH2 during annealing. The activation barrier for conversion can be overcome by thermal energy, which is generally described by the following equations:
(4)
(5)
The whole reaction can be written as:
(6)
As observed in Fig. S13 (ESI), the uniform and pinhole-free perovskite films prepared from various NFs are similar to that of pure Pb(NO3)2, but the grain size of the perovskite films is significantly larger. Pseudo-halide ions help slow the growth process and result in larger grains of the perovskite film. PbCO3 can be categorized as a spectator salt as the anion is not incorporated into the perovskite. During the annealing process, multiple-ion exchange and component evaporation can slow the crystal growth and form a dense perovskite film with a larger grain size.
In the XRD spectra shown in Fig. 3(c), it is evident that there is no diffraction peak of halide-free NPs in the resulting perovskite. The emergence of a tiny peak at 11.73° in the sample prepared from Pb(HCOO)2 corresponds to the (010) plane of the hexagonal δ-FAPbI3 non-perovskite phase. The sluggish and incomplete conversion causes excessive PbI2 residues, rendering the formation of δ-FAPbI3. The FWHM values of the (100) reflection are 0.131, 0.130, 0.123 and 0.117 for perovskites prepared from pure Pb(NO3)2, and Pb(HCOO)2, Pb(SCN)2 and PbCO3 NFs, respectively, demonstrating that the crystallinity is improved by using NFs. In the UV-vis spectra presented in Fig. S14 (ESI), the bandgap values (∼1.532 eV) are almost the same among these films. The XPS spectra of Pb 4f, O 1s, and N 1s for the pure Pb(NO3)2- (the control group) and PbCO3 NFs-based films are shown in Fig. 3(d)–(f). A pair of metallic Pb (Pb0) peaks is observed in the control but not in the PbCO3 NF sample. We find that on the surface of the control sample, the I:Pb ratio (= 2.6) is lower than the stoichiometry of the perovskite, while the PbCO3 NF-based perovskite reaches a close ratio (I:Pb = 3.1). The presence of metallic lead (Pb0) in the control sample can be ascribed to (1) the under-coordinated Pb or (2) the decomposition byproducts of residual PbI2 in perovskites under light illumination. The Pb0 species in the film are likely to act as recombination centers which impairs solar cell operation. The O 1s peak at 531.74 eV is assigned to the chemisorbed oxygen (O2−) at the surface of the control. The O 1s of the PbCO3 NF-based film can be divided into two single peaks, which are attributed to O2− (531.52 eV) and O–C (532.74 eV). There is no O–C inside the perovskite as seen in Fig. S15 (ESI), thus confirming that the residual CO32− is located only on the surface of the perovskite. The shift in binding energy for the N 1s spectra give strong evidence of the interactions between the strong-polarity N–H unit in FA and CO32−. By investigating the depth profile of the N element, we find that the distribution of FA and MA cations are not uniform, whereby FA cations preferentially accumulate on the surface. The inhomogeneity of the FA-MA distribution likely occurs because of a slow diffusion rate for FA cations during the ion-exchange. Under the I-rich surface conditions as confirmed by XPS in Fig. S16 (ESI), FA vacancies defect (VFA) should be dominant when located at the surface of a nearly pure FA-based perovskite. The interaction between CO32− and the surface of the perovskite is studied theoretically using first-principles calculations (in Fig. 3(g)–(i)). The affinity between FA+ and CO32− is due to the formation of strong hydrogen bonding (N–H⋯O) and an adsorption energy value of 0.81 eV is obtained. It can be observed that compared to the intrinsic surface, CO32− can effectively inhibit the generation of VFA defects as the formation energy of FA vacancies are increased from 1.72 to 2.94 eV upon the adsorption of CO32−. The interaction between FA and CO32− can be further characterized by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) spectroscopy. As shown in Fig. S17 (ESI), the N–H stretching vibration mode in the control appears at 3396 cm−1 and upon binding to CO32− shifts to 3358 cm−1, indicating the interaction between N–H and CO32−.
Absolute spectral photon flux Φ is measured to derive the PL quantum yield (PLQY) of the perovskite films (in Fig. S18, ESI), which is improved from 2.47% to 6.40% by using PbCO3 NFs. The quasi-Fermi level splitting (QFLS) increases from 1.165 eV to 1.190 eV for the control and PbCO3 NF-based perovskite, reflecting the suppression of nonradiative recombination by using NFs. From the dark J–V curves in Fig. S19 (ESI), the trap-filled limit voltages (VTFL) are measured to be 0.84 V and 0.32 V for the control and PbCO3 NF-based devices, respectively. Then the calculated trap density (n) for the PbCO3 NFs device is ∼5.13 × 1015 cm−3, which is lower than that the control one (∼1.35 × 1016 cm−3). The lower VTFL and n for the PbCO3 NFs device correspond to fewer defect states. The 2D PL mapping images in Fig. S20 (ESI) allow us to assess the uniformity of the perovskite films. More uniform intensity distribution and longer lifetime are shown in the perovskite made from PbCO3 NFs relative to the control, which results from the elimination of defects.
To evaluate the effect of the NFs on device performance, a series of PSCs are fabricated. A cross-sectional SEM image of the employed PSC structure of FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au is depicted in Fig. 4(a). The statistical distribution of PCE for 20 individual devices is shown in Table S1 and in Fig. S21 (ESI). The PbCO3 NF-based device shows the highest short-circuit current density (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF) and consequent PCE. Compared to the control devices, the average PCE of the PbCO3 devices improves from 21.27% to 23.64%. A champion device with a PCE of 23.80% at forward scan and 24.16% at reverse scan is shown in Fig. 4(b). In Fig. S22 (ESI), note that one of the optimized PSCs is independently tested in the laboratory at the world's leading photovoltaic company (LONGi), confirming a PCE of 22.52% at forward scan and 23.36% at reverse scan. The photovoltaic parameters for the best pure Pb(NO3)2 and PbCO3 NF based PSCs are summarized in Table S2 (ESI). The hysteresis index (defined as HI = (PCErev − PCEfw)/PCErev) in the J–V curve reduces from 4.2% to 1.5%, implying that using PbCO3 NFs can suppress the hysteresis. Compared with the control group, all the NFs enhance the efficiency of the devices. The optimal performance of the PbCO3 NFs-based devices can be attributed to the high-quality perovskite with increased crystallinity and reduced trap densities, which benefit from the accelerated reaction rate and the growth of larger crystals. The presence of δ-FAPbI3 affects the further increment of PCE for Pb(HCOO)2 NF-based devices. The reduction in VOC and FF for the control is ascribed to its small crystal size, as well as the increase in the density of defects. Therefore, the refined PbI2 crystals and halide-free lead additives optimize the formation kinetics and promote the crystal growth, contributing to improve the efficiency. The inset displays the stabilized maximum power point (MPP) power output for the best devices under 30% RH conditions for 200 s. The stabilized PCE for the PbCO3 based device rapidly reaches 23.95%, whereas the control device takes more time to reach steady state with a PCE of 22.18%. The integrated JSC values obtained from the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra are 24.60 and 24.48 mA cm−2 for the PbCO3- and pure Pb(NO3)2-based PSCs, respectively (shown in Fig. 4(c)), which are consistent with their JSC values obtained from J–V measurements. Flexible PSCs grown on low-temperature meso-brookite-TiO2/SnO2/ITO-PEN substrate have been prepared and their PCE reaches 21.73% as shown in Fig. 4(d).
To directly detect the difference in photovoltaic performance under solar radiation and indoor illumination, the dependence of VOC on light intensity under AM 1.5 G illumination and a 2700 K LED lamp are measured and plotted in Fig. 4(e). The calibrated LED light spectrum (visible, 400–750 nm) with an intensity of 1000 lux is displayed in Fig. S23 (ESI). The ideality factor (nid) is calculated from the slope of the linear fit to investigate the recombination dynamics. When nid = 1, it suggests that the Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination assisted by trap density is negligible in photovoltaic cells. However, when nid = 2, there is strong charge recombination. The calculated nid under solar illumination are 1.18 and 1.09 for the control and PbCO3 NF-based devices, respectively. Under the LED light illumination, the corresponding nid increase to 1.75 and 1.21. Fig. 4(f) shows the FF values as a function of JSC, and JSC increases nearly three orders of magnitude, corresponding to irradiance values in the range of 10−3 to 1 sun. The photovoltaic parameters and J–V curve are listed in Table S3 and Fig. S24 (ESI). It is observed that the PCE decay of the control device under various LED illumination intensities (from 1260 to 130 lux) is more pronounced than that of the PbCO3 NFs-based device, which is ascribed to the severe VOC decay under the lower-intensity light conditions. To determine the recombination rates, pump-fluence dependent transient absorption (TA) spectra are measured, and the dynamics at 790 nm are shown in Fig. 4(g) and (h). To further clarify the ultrafast exciton trapping and recombination process, Fig. 4(i) exhibits possible simplified exciton recombination processes. Upon excitation and absorption of a high energy photon, an electron will transit to the conduction band and then rapidly decay to the conduction band edge to form a free exciton. The formed free exciton can recombine directly leading to radiative recombination followed by photon emission or is trapped by trap states from defects and undergoes nonradiative recombination. The integral kinetic traces are split for both samples, showing the former part is in the trap-assisted recombination mode and the later part is the charge carrier recombination mode. The lifetimes of trap-assisted recombination (τ1) range from 1.30 to 1.35 ps, and from 2.89 to 3.34 ps with increased pump fluences (from 2.98 to 14.90 μJ cm−2) for the control and PbCO3 NF-based devices, respectively. The lifetimes of charge carrier recombination (τ2) through electrons and holes are sensitive to the pump fluence, decreasing from 3.12 to 2.49 ns and from 3.52 to 2.73 ns with increasing pump fluence. The related parameters are listed in Table S4 (ESI). Under strong illumination, since the carrier density is high, bimolecular recombination is dominant in PSCs. With decreasing light intensity, the bimolecular recombination is weakened, which increases the FF (above 0.5 sun illumination). When the light intensity drops significantly to the indoor light intensity, the reduction in carrier density causes an increase in the percentage of trap-assisted recombination (A1) in the devices, leading to the trap-assisted recombination mode becoming dominant. In other words, defect levels are critical for indoor photovoltaics and have a great impact on VOC decay. As a result, the reduced density of defects, especially the inhibition of deep-level Pb0 defect, accounts for the suppressed trap-assisted recombination (longer τ1) in the PbCO3 NF-based device, which helps prevent a sharp decay of VOC under low-intensity illumination.
The stability of unencapsulated devices has been tested at a temperature of 25 °C and humidity of 30% under an air environment for 2000 h. The result (shown in Fig. 5(a)) reveals enhanced stability for the PbCO3 NF-based device, which retains 92.0% of its initial efficiency. Thermal stability of the PSCs has been investigated by continuous heating at 85 °C for 800 hours, and the results are displayed in Fig. 5(b). The PbCO3 NF-based device has much better thermal stability, and the device maintains 92.5% of its original efficiency while the control device only maintains 69.0%. In addition, the light stability of devices is evaluated under continuous irradiation at 1 sun for 800 hours in a N2-filled glovebox without device encapsulation. The PbCO3 NF-based device retains 91.5% of its initial efficiency (shown in Fig. 5(c)), which outperforms the control device maintaining only 79.0% of its original efficiency. It is reported that the light- and heat-induced I2 could participate in chemical chain reactions, leading to the self-degradation of perovskite. We track the release of I2 from the control and PbCO3 NF-based films by the absorption spectra of the toluene after exposing toluene-soaked films to light and heat (shown in Fig. 5(d)–(f)). After 120 °C annealing under light exposure for 25 h, we observe that due to the release of I2, the control film obviously fades and the original toluene turns to light pink, whereas the PbCO3 NF-based film is almost unchanged even after aging for 60 h. A faster and greater release of I2 from the control film as compared to the PbCO3 NFs-based film confirms that a high-quality perovskite can be obtained by optimizing the formation kinetics and crystal growth by PbCO3 NFs, thus substantially suppressing I2 formation.

By revisiting the conversion route of Pb(NO3)2 to perovskite, we attempt to utilize halide-free NFs to control the formation kinetics of perovskite. We systematically investigate the reaction mechanism based on various anion configurations (SCN−, HCOO− and CO32−) through in situ UV-Vis absorption/PL measurements. It is confirmed that inert PbCO3 can accelerate the conversion via a grain refinement strategy, while Pb(HCOO)2 and Pb(SCN)2 hinder it due to the anionic extraction effect. The improvement of perovskite conversion by PbCO3 NFs leads to the achievement of both excellent photovoltaic performance and desirable stability for PSCs. The device processed in dry air achieves a stabilized PCE of 23.95% and an average PCE of 23.64%, and is one of the most efficient water-processed PSCs. Clean production of large-scale PSCs using a minimal quantity of harmful chemicals is expected to be realized using this Pb(NO3)2/H2O protocol.


P. Z. conceived the idea and led this project. S. L. and P. Z. designed the experiments. L. R. provided the fabrication technology of mesoporous PSCs. P. Z. and Y. Z. fabricated and optimized all the devices and samples for measurements. P. Z. conducted XRD, UV-vis and characterizations of PSCs. Y. W. and K. Z. conducted the in situ PL measurements. P. Z. and L. R. conducted PL, TRPL and EQE measurements. L. Z. carried out TAS measurement and analyzed the data. P. Z. and L. R. conducted SEM measurements. Z. X. performed DFT calculations. P. Z. and L. R. wrote the first draft of the paper. S. L. revised the paper. All authors contributed to the discussion, comment and review of the paper.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors acknowledge support from the National Key Research Program of China (2016YFA0202403), the Changjiang Scholar and Innovative Research Team (IRT_14R33), the Overseas Talent Recruitment Project (B14041), the 111 Project (B21005), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51702263), the Key Research and Development Program of Shaanxi (program no. 2022LL-JB-08), and the Natural Science Basic Research Plan in Shaanxi Province of China (2020JQ-144, 2022JQ-683).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee03742d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023