 DOI: 10.1039/C1JM10871A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8709-8714

Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical Terms


Qiu-Ping
Luo
,

Bing-Xin
Lei
,

Xiao-Yun
Yu
,

Dai-Bin
Kuang
* and 

Cheng-Yong
Su
*

MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinorganic and Synthetic Chemistry, KLGHEI of Environment and Energy Chemistry, State Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Materials and Technologies, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510275, P. R. China. E-mail: kuangdb@mail.sysu.edu.cn; cesscy@mail.sysu.edu.cn; Fax: +86 20 84113015; Tel: +86 20 84113015

Received
28th February 2011
, Accepted 25th March 2011
First published on 10th May 2011
Vertically aligned hierarchical ZnO rod-in-tube nano-architecture arrays are produced via a two-step process including an initial hydrothermal reaction followed by ultrasonication growth. The ZnO nanorod arrays grow firstly on FTO glass through a hydrothermal process and then act as templates for the fabrication of rod-in-tube nano-architectures during ultrasonication. The as-prepared ZnO rod-in-tube nano-architectures are assembled by the self-stacking of hexagonal nanorings along with <001> orientation of ZnO nanorod templates. Both hexamethylenetetramine and sodium citrate are found to play key roles in the formation of the novel ZnO rod-in-tube nano-architectures. The power conversion efficiency of dye-sensitized solar cell based on hierarchical ZnO rod-in-tube nano-architectures photoelectrode (0.91%) exhibits a significant improvement (75%) compared to that of ZnO nanorods (0.52%).

With regard to that the physical and chemical properties of semiconductor nanostructures are determined by morphology, size, and dimensions, the development of novel nanostructures for oxide semiconductor materials has attracted worldwide attention. Except for the various general nanostructures such as particle, rod, wire and tube, hierarchical nanostructures of functional metal oxide materials with controllable sizes and morphologies have become an interesting focus because of their potential applications in photovoltaics, catalysis, sensing, and environmental fields. Recently, the hierarchical assembly of nanoscale building units has been attracting immense attention in order to realize the multifunctionality of nanostructured materials. One of the semiconductor materials getting attention is zinc oxide (ZnO), which possesses a direct wide band gap (3.37 eV) and a large exciton binding energy (60 meV) at room temperature. Ever since the first report of ultraviolet lasing from ZnO, numerous ZnO nanostructures, e.g. microspheres, nanobelts, nanowires, nanotubes, and nanodisks, have been reported. Furthermore, a few examples of hierarchical ZnO nanostructures e.g. branched ZnO/ZnO, ZnO/TiO2, and ZnO/SnO2, have been synthesized recently. Sounart et al. reported the preparation of secondly ZnO branches on the primary ZnO nanorods by using two hydrothermal growth stages. Wang et al. fabricated three-dimensional ZnO/TiO2 heteroarchitectures, which were composed of dense ZnO nanorods/nanoplates on the surface of the TiO2 fibers, formed via a solution process. Cheng and co-workers prepared a hierarchical assembly of short (100–200 nm) ZnO nanorods as a second structure on SnO2 backbone nanowires by combining vapor-phase growth and solution growth processes. However, the development of morphologically controlled preparation of ZnO nano-architecture with higher surface area is still in progress to meet the requirements for exploring the potential applications of ZnO materials.

Large-scale use will require the development of simple, convenient, and low-cost approaches to the synthesis of functional nanomaterials. One of these efficacious methods is the ultrasonication approach, which causes a process of acoustic cavitation resulting in some extreme conditions so that to drive many chemical reactions. Ultrasonication was found to be a powerful technique for the synthesis of nanostructured materials, especially for ZnO. It's well known that the hydrothermal approach allows a low growth temperature and produces high-density arrays (<1010 cm−2) of ZnO nanowires. In the current study, we combine these two methods to fabricate hierarchical ZnO rod-in-tube (RT) nanoarrays on transparent conductive fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrate. Typically, ZnO nanorod (NR) arrays were firstly grown on a FTO glass via a hydrothermal procedure. Subsequently, the ZnO nanorod arrays were used as templates and subjected to intense ultrasonication irradiation (Sonics: VCX-500) to obtain the unique hierarchical rod-in-tube (RT) ZnO nano-architectures. The main advantages of the present two-step process for the preparation of ZnO RT nano-architectures are low cost, low fabrication temperature etc. To the best of our knowledge, hitherto, this is the first report on the unique ZnO rod-in-tube nano-architectures.
In addition, one-dimensional (1D) nanostructure arrays have shown excellent electron transport properties which results in higher photovoltaic performance for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). 1D ZnO nanoarrays have been widely used as photoanodes for the DSSCs. However, the power conversion efficiency of DSSC based on 1D ZnO photoelectrode is still low, and one of the reasons is the relatively low surface area which results from the large diameter and large distance between adjacent rods. Hence, the 1D ZnO rod-in-tube nano-architecture photoelectrode with higher surface area and excellent electron transport is very desirable for the improvement of photovoltaic performance. The DSSCs based on the present ZnO RT photoelectrode (1.5 μm in length) show 0.91% which is much higher than that (0.52%) of ZnO nanorod photoelectrode.

All chemicals were analytical reagent grade and used as received without further purification. In a typical experimental procedure, diethanolamine [(HOCH2CH2)2NH] was added to an ethanol solution containing 0.6 M zinc acetate dehydrate. After storing overnight, the solution was spin coated onto a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO, 15 Ω/square) glass substrate and thermally cured at 300 °C for 30 min to obtain the ZnO seed layer/FTO glass. Then the ZnO seed layer/FTO glass was transferred to a 50 mL Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave containing 25 mM Zn(NO3)2 and 25 mM hexamethylenetetramine (HMT) aqueous solution, and hydrothermal reaction at 90 °C for 6 h to obtain ZnO nanorod (NR) arrays on FTO glass; secondly, the ZnO NR arrays/FTO glass was immersed into an aqueous solution containing 0.03 M Zn(NO3)2, 0.1 M hexamethylenetetramine (HMT) and 1 mM sodium citrate, afterward, ultrasonication was performed by a ultrasonic apparatus (Sonics: VCX-500) for 60 min under ambient conditions, to yield the novel rod-in-tube ZnO nano-architectures. Both products obtained in each step were rinsed with deionized (DI) water and ethanol, finally dried in air at 60 °C. Controlled experiments such as with or without HMT or sodium citrate, and different ultrasonication reaction time, were performed via similar process.


The prepared ZnO photoelectrode was immersed into a 0.5 mM N719 dye (Ru[LL′-(NCS)2], L = 2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid, L′ = 2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-ditetrabutylammonium carboxylate, Solaronix SA, Switzerland) in acetonitrile/tert-butanol (volume ratio 1:1) for 2 h in order to obtain the dye-sensitized ZnO photoelectrode. To investigate the photovoltaic performance of the ZnO, the dye-sensitized ZnO/FTO was sandwiched together with a Pt coated FTO glass counter electrode, which prepared by thermal depositing H2PtCl6 onto the FTO glass. The electrolyte is composed of 0.6 M 1-methyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide (PMII), 0.03 M I2, 0.05 M LiI, 0.1 M guanidinium thiocyanate (GuSCN), and 0.5 M tert-butylpyridine (TBP) in acetonitrile and valeronitrile (85:15, v/v).


The morphologies of the ZnO nanorod arrays and the ZnO RT nano-architectures were characterized using field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, JSM-6330F) and transmission electron microscope (TEM, JEOL-2010). The current–voltage characteristics were measured using a Keithley 2400 source meter under simulated AM 1.5 G illumination (100 mW cm−2) provided by solar simulator (91192, 1 kW Xe lamp with optical filter, Oriel) to determine the open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (η). The incident light intensity (100 mW cm−2) of the light source was calibrated with a NREL-calibrated Si solar cell.


X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was performed to investigate the crystal phase of products fabricated by hydrothermal synthesis (sample I) and further ultrasonication reaction (sample II). Obviously, both products are the ZnO crystals with hexagonal wurtzite structure (P63mc, a = 3.2495 Å, c = 5.2069 Å), as shown in Fig. 1. Moreover, the (002) reflection is the main peak for the both samples, indicating that they are the vertical <001> oriented.

The morphologies of the ZnO nanostructures prepared via hydrothermal synthesis and further ultrasonication reaction were characterized by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Fig. 2). The images of top-view and cross-section of the as-prepared ZnO NR arrays on FTO glass are visible from Fig. 2a and b, which indicate that the diameter and the length of the nanorods are about 50 nm and 1.5 μm, respectively. After the subsequent ultrasonication reaction for 60 min, the ZnO nanotubal architectures are evidently observed (Fig. 2c). Close observation of the tube reveals that a nanorod exists in the center of the tube (inset in Fig. 2c), namely, hierarchical rod-in-tube nano-architectures are formed. The diameter of the ZnO nanorod in the centre of the hexagonal tube is around 50 nm, which is same as those grown in the hydrothermal synthesized sample. The ZnO RT nano-architectures have an outer diameter of ∼250 nm and wall thickness of 70 nm. Meanwhile, the length (1.5 μm) of the ZnO RT architectures is similar to the initial ZnO NR arrays as well (Fig. 2d). Moreover, the outer nanotubal architectures are assembled by many hexagonal nanorings judged from the high resolution image of the cross section (see the inset of Fig. 2d). These FESEM observation results clearly show that the ultrasonication reaction leads to the formation of a hexagonal tube around the ZnO nanorod arrays.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was employed to further investigate the internal structures and morphology of the novel ZnO RT nano-architectures prepared via the two-step process including hydrothermal and ultrasonication reactions. The low magnification TEM image (Fig. 3a) shows that there is a nanorod in the center of ZnO nanorings forming the hierarchical ZnO nano-architecture. Many hexagonal nanorings (Fig. 3c) with a hole in the center are also visible which can be ascribed to the detachment of nanorings from the nanorods during the ultrasonication preparation of TEM samples. The diameter of the hole is ∼110 nm which is larger than that of ZnO nanorod (50 nm). This verifies the novel hierarchical ZnO rod-in-tube nano-architectures are composed of ZnO nanorods and hexagonal ZnO hollow nanorings based nanotube. The high resolution TEM (HRTEM) image in Fig. 3b reveals that the 20–50 nm thick nanorings with a ∼0.26 nm (002) lattice spacing are single crystals, suggesting the nanorings are grew along the <001> direction. The corresponding selected-area electron diffraction (SAED, inset in Fig. 3d) pattern of an individual ZnO nanoring can be indexed to the wurtzite structure of hexagonal ZnO and indicates its single-crystalline nature. This is in good agreement with the above XRD result.
A series of comparative experiments were further performed to elucidate the roles of HMT and sodium citrate in the formation of the novel ZnO RT nano-architectures during the ultrasonication process. The diameter and length of ZnO NR arrays remained constant if the ultrasonication process was carried out in the absence of HMT, namely only containing Zn(NO3)2 and sodium citrate, shown in Fig. 4a, b. It implies that there is no additional ZnO formation during the ultrasonication process. However, the ZnO NR arrays with larger diameter (120 nm) were obtained in case the ZnO NR arrays on FTO glass were immersed into the solution containing HMT and Zn(NO3)2 (without sodium citrate, Fig. 4c, d), which probably results from the hydrolysis reaction of HMT and Zn(NO3)2 on the ZnO nanorod surface under intense ultrasonication irradiation. HMT would hydrolyze and produce formaldehyde and ammonia during the ultrasonication process, in this case, HMT acts as a pH buffer by slowly providing ammonia. In addition, HMT can also coordinate to the ZnO crystal, hindering the growth of certain surfaces and resulting in the <001> growth of ZnO crystal, so that to help the formation of 1D hexagonal wurtzite structures. In the present fabrication of the novel ZnO RT nano-architectures, zinc cations and hydroxide anions, which are derived from Zn(NO3)2 and HMT, respectively, react to each other to form Zn(OH)42− complexes. Furthermore, the sonolysis of water in air can produce many radicals, e.g. ·H, ·OH, ·O2− and ·HO2. Hence, some typical reactions can happen, as follows, during the present ultrasonication process in the presence of Zn(NO3)2, HMT and/or sodium citrate.
(CH2)6N4 + 6H2O → 4NH3 + 6HCHO
(1)
NH3 + H2O → NH+4 + OH−
(2)
Zn2+ + 4NH3 → Zn(NH3)42+
(3)
Zn(NH3)42+ + 2OH− → ZnO + 4NH3 + H2O
(4)
Zn2+ + 4OH− → Zn(OH)42−
(5)
(6)
(7)
Where the symbol ))) denotes
ultrasonication irradiation.

The ZnO nanorod arrays have a relatively smooth surface (Fig. 4d) implying that no nanorings are formed in the absence of sodium citrate. Furthermore, no tubular structure can be observed (see Fig. 4c), which reveals that sodium citrate plays the determine role in the formation of the hexagonal nanorings based tubular structures in the present study. The stacking of ZnO hexagonal nanorings around the as-prepared ZnO rods can be resulted from the binding mode between citrate ions (through the –COO- and –OH groups) and Zn2+ terminated (001) polar planes of ZnO (two adjacent rings is head-to-head), which suppressing the growth along <001> orientation and leading to the formation of stack of nanoring. In other words, the Zn2+ terminated (001) polar planes connect each other through the citrate ions. Since its weak binding mode between the nanorings, the present ZnO RT nano-architectures fell to pieces during the preparation of the TEM sample, as shown in Fig. 3c. However, in the absence of sodium citrate, ZnO grew along the <001> orientation leading to the formation of solid nanorods with larger diameter (Fig. 4c, d).
The formation process of the novel hierarchical ZnO rod-in-tube nano-architectures were further investigated by time-dependent ultrasonication experiments which contained HMT, Zn(NO3)2 and sodium citrate in the aqueous solution. At the early stages of ultrasonication, e.g. 10 min, the surface of ZnO nanorods exhibited a network structure (Fig. 5a) and the side of nanorod became rough due to the adherence of many granular particles during the ultrasonication reaction of HMT and Zn(NO3)2 (Fig. 5b). When the ultrasonication time was prolonged to 20 min, both the top-view and cross-section SEM images (Fig. 5c, d) show the ZnO nanorods with diameter of ∼200 nm were stacked by a number of pieces of hexagonal nanorings. TEM image (Fig. 5g) shows there is a hole with ∼50 nm in diameter in the center of the ZnO nanorings. It is noticeable that the diameter (∼50 nm) of the hole is same to the diameter of initial ZnO nanorod, indicating the nanorings are grown along the nanorods. A small void between the rod and the hexagonal nanoring can be observed if the ultrasonication time is prolonged to 30 min, implying that etching happens slowly at the interface of ZnO nanorods and hexagonal nanorings (shown in arrows, Fig. 5e). Additionally, the stacking structure of the hexagonal nanorings can be clearly seen in the inset in Fig. 5e.
TEM observation (Fig. 5h) shows a hole with a diameter ∼80 nm in the center of the hexagonal nanoring, which is larger than the diameter of the nanorod (∼50 nm). It reveals that the etching reaction happened at the interface between ZnO nanorods and hexagonal nanorings resulting in larger size of the hole. After 60 min of ultrasonication treatment, the ZnO rod-in-tube hierarchical nano-architectures were clearly visible, as shown in Fig. 2c. The diameter of the hole is enlarged to ∼110 nm (Fig. 2d) with the prolongation of etching reaction.
Based on the FESEM and TEM results, we can deduce that both sodium citrate and HMT play decisive roles in the formation of the novel hierarchical ZnO rod-in-tube nano-architectures. An initial template-directed growth (from ZnO nanorod arrays) and subsequent etching (from sodium citrate) mechanism could be supposed to describe the formation of the novel ZnO rod-in-tube nano-architectures. The formation of ZnO hexagonal nanorings have been also previously reported via an etching process due to NH4+ and NH3 or self-template-directed growth in the presence of coordination polymer. In our case, the citrate ions can etch the interface between the ZnO nanorods and hexagonal nanorings due to the relative weak junction through the formation of [Zn(C6H5O7)412−]10− complex with Zn2+.
According to the above analyses, the formation process of the hierarchical ZnO rod-in-tube nano-architectures can be illustrated as in Fig. 6. Firstly, ZnO crystals undergo heterogeneous nucleation (Fig. 6b) attached to the surface of the well-aligned nanorods (Fig. 6a) in the early stage of ultrasonication process. Secondly, the assemblies of hexagonal ZnO nanorings around the ZnO nanorods were formed (Fig. 6c, 20 min), and with the extension of ultrasonication, the boundary surface between the nanorods and hexagonal nanorings was partly etched due to the weak connection (Fig. 6d). Finally, the ZnO rod-in-tube nano-architectures were formed when the ultrasonication time was extended to 60 min (Fig. 6e). For the whole process, the initial ZnO NR arrays doesn't show any changes and just acts as a template to direct the formation of the following hexagonal nanorings, which at last led to the novel ZnO rod-in-tube hierarchical nano-architectures.
The as-prepared ZnO nanorod arrays (sample I) and hierarchical rod-in-tube arrays (sample II) were further used as photoelectrodes for the application of DSSCs. Fig. 7 shows the current–voltage curves of DSSCs based on the ZnO NRs and the ZnO RT nanoarrays photoelectrodes measured from front side illumination mode under AM 1.5 G illumination (100 mW cm−2). It can be seen that the Jsc value (Jsc = 2.98 mA cm−2) for the DSSC constructed using the ZnO RT shows a significant improvement compared that of ZnO NRs (Jsc = 1.62 mA cm−2), which can be ascribed to the higher loading of N719 dyes because of larger surface area for the former since there is additional nanotubes for the adsorption of dyes. The dye amounts loaded on the ZnO NRs and ZnO RT architectures are 34.16 nmol cm−2 and 85.54 nmol cm−2, respectively. The power conversion efficiency (0.91%) of DSSCs based on ZnO RT photoelectrodes shows a significant enhancement of 75% compared to that of ZnO NR photoelectrodes (0.52%). It is worth noting that around 1% photovoltaic performance is obtained by using ZnO RT nano-architecture arrays photoelectrode with only 1.5 μm in thickness.

In summary, vertically aligned single-crystal ZnO rod-in-tube nano-architecture arrays have been successfully produced via a two-step hydrothermal and ultrasonication procedure. The formation mechanism of the novel nano-architecture has been proposed and verified by time-dependent FESEM observations. The ZnO nanorod arrays prepared via hydrothermal reaction act as template to direct the following formation of hexagonal nanoring/nanotube (initial assembly of nanoring around the ZnO nanorod and following etching at the interface between the ZnO nanorod and the nanoring) during the ultrasonication process. Dye-sensitized solar cells based on the ZnO RT nano-architectures exhibited an improved power conversion efficiency (0.91%) compared to that of ZnO nanorod arrays (0.52%) owing to the larger surface area of the former. We believe the preparation of the novel ZnO rod-in-tube nano-architectures will provide a new avenue for synthesizing other hierarchical nanostructures.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (20873183, 21073239, U0934003), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education (20100171110014) and the Foundation of Sun Yat-sen University.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011