 DOI: 10.1039/D2NJ00294A
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2022, 46, 9572-9581


Gururaj P.
Kini
*,

Mritunjaya
Parashar
,

Muhammad
Jahandar
,

Jaewon
Lee
,

Sein
Chung
,

Kilwon
Cho
,

Vivek Kumar
Shukla
 and 

Ranbir
Singh
*

Department of Chemical Engineering, Konkuk University, 120 Neungdong-ro, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul, 05029, Republic of Korea. E-mail: kinigururaj@yahoo.co.in

Department of Applied Physics, School of Vocational Studies and Applied Sciences, Gautam Buddha University, Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201312, India

Surface Technology Division, Korea Institute of Materials Science (KIMS), 797 Changwon-daero, Seongsan-gu, Changwon, Gyeongnam, 51508, Republic of Korea

Department of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, 34134, Republic of Korea

Department of Chemical Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang, 37673, South Korea

School of Computing and Electrical Engineering (SCEE), Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Mandi, Mandi, Himachal Pradesh, 175005, India. E-mail: ranbir.iitk@gmail.com

Received
19th January 2022
, Accepted 1st April 2022
First published on 4th May 2022
Hole transporting materials (HTMs) with high charge carrier mobilities and receptive functionalities have gained significant attention recently due to their direct effect on boosting the efficiency and lifetime of perovskite solar cells (PVSCs). Herein, two new simple small molecular diketopyrrolopyrrole-based HTMs with different central π-bridges (thieno[3,2-b]thiophene (DPP-TT), and dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d] thiophene (DPP-DTT)) were synthesized via a facile molecular engineering approach. Both small molecules exhibited strong absorption between 500 and 750 nm and an optical bandgap of ∼1.48 and 1.52 eV; however, their crystalline natures were significantly different, resulting in marked differences in their coating ability and PVSC performances. Thus, optimized DPP-TT-based PVSC devices with a lithium (bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide) dopant demonstrated a maximum PCE of 15.57% with superior energy level matching and an optimal trade-off between aggregation and processability, resulting in effective perovskite layer passivation via high surface coverage and suppression of charge recombination. In comparison, DPP-DTT had a slightly lower PCE of 14.49%, attributed to its poor film quality caused by its high aggregation tendency. Additionally, these HTMs delivered superior stability owing to superior hydrophobic characteristics. These findings provide valuable insight into the design of new HTMs with varying central π-bridge, which is a simple and effective approach.

In recent years, perovskite-based solar cells (PVSCs) based on organic–inorganic hybrid halide materials (generic structure: ABX3, where A = large organic cation (e.g., CH3NH3+), B = divalent metal cation from group 14 (e.g., Pb2+), and X = halogen anion (e.g., I−, Br−)) have enticed immense scientific and industrial interests as the replacement candidates for the current photovoltaic technologies because of their outstanding capabilities, such as excellent light-harvesting, tunable bandgap, superior absorption coefficient, ambipolar behavior with charge carrier mobilities exceeding 101 cm2 V−1 s−1, long carrier diffusion length and facile low-cost solution processibility. As a result of years of dedicated research, the crystallinity of photo absorbing perovskite layers has been improved along with the optimization of the device architecture, eventually resulting in an outstanding power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 25.5%. Along with the perovskite layer, hole-transport layers (HTLs) are critical for efficient hole separation and transportation by suppressing charge recombination and increasing stability, particularly in n-i-p perovskite devices; thus, hole-transport materials (HTMs) emerge as the crucial component for further PCE enhancement and stability of PVSCs. To date, both organic (including small organic molecules and p-type polymers) and inorganic (e.g., NiOX, CuI, CuSCN, etc.) HTMs have been exclusively tested in PVSCs, with the most notable example being the 2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) derivatives which are still holding the record PCE in PVSCs. Despite this, the high cost, limited charge carrier mobility, and use of dopants to achieve high PCEs in spiro-OMeTAD-based PVSCs have a detrimental effect on the device performance, reproducibility, and stability. This highlights the importance of developing novel, low-cost, and highly efficient HTMs for the commercialization of PVSCs.

Meanwhile, previous research has revealed that wide bandgap HTMs are preferred over their low bandgap (LBG) counterparts with absorption in the visible and near-infrared region to prevent the light-harvesting capability of perovskite absorber materials. However, a few nanometers thick organic HTLs have been successfully used in perovskite devices, putting this notion to rest. Therefore, the bandgap of HTMs will have a negligible effect on the absorption properties of perovskite absorbers. As a result, a variety of novel low bandgap polymeric and small molecule HTMs have been evaluated and validated as the HTMs for PVSCs, with remarkable performances. For example, Zhang et al. achieved a PCE of ∼17% using fused dithienopicenocarbazole-based polymeric HTMs having an optical bandgap (Eg) over 1.57 eV. In another study, Nazeeruddin and co-workers reported the use of an LBG HTM named CI-TTIN-2F to achieve remarkable PCEs of up to 15.9% and excellent stability with a PCE retention of ∼86% after 1000 h under ambient conditions in CsPbI3-based PVSCs. Using a similar strategy, our group synthesized a series of diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP)-based HTMs based on A–D–A or D–A–D (where A and D represent acceptor and donor moieties, respectively) structures, that exhibited impressive PCEs over 14 to 20%. Along with their ease of synthesis and bathochromic absorption, previously reported DPP-based materials displayed novel properties such as strong visible absorption, high co-planarity, good photochemical stability and excellent charge carrier mobility, attributed to the advantages of the DPP acceptor units. Moreover, the insertion of a planar aromatic π-bridge between the two DPP acceptor units has been demonstrated to be the most tested and proven strategy for extending the effective conjugation length, enhancing the backbone planarity, regulation of the frontier molecular orbital (FMO) energy levels and acquiring high charge mobilities.
Besides, similar to the molecular engineering of the organic semiconducting materials through optimization of the conjugated backbone, atomic substitution, and flexible side chains, the introduction of fused heteroarenes in conjugated backbone has shown enhanced charge-carrier mobilities and they are theoretically predicted to show narrower energy bandgaps relative to smaller acenes and polycyclic aromatic compounds with an identical number of aromatic groups due to an increased effective conjugation length and a concomitant decrease in reorganization energy in these species. Moreover, they also promote interchain interaction in the film to reduce the π–π stacking distance, which is beneficial for enhancing the charge transport in films. Among these acenes, thienoacenes such as thieno[3,2-b]thiophene (TT) and dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]thiophene (DTT) are the preeminent class of building blocks. The incorporation of TT and DTT into the molecular structure has demonstrated several beneficial effects, including highly ordered co-facial π–π-stacking, effective electron delocalization, excellent photostability, and reduction in the bandgap due to the stable quinoidal character and enhanced intermolecular interaction. Additionally, several conjugated molecules with high hole mobility values have been reported using these molecules, highlighting their potential for synthesizing HTMs and employing them in molecular design.
In this study, to gain a better understanding of the effects of the insertion of thienoacenes in the DPP-based A–D–A type small molecule and to establish the structure–property relationship for HTMs, TT and DTT were introduced as central π-bridge to form two new small molecules: 6,6′-(thieno[3,2-b]thiophene-2,5-diylbis(thiophene-5,2-diyl))bis(2,5-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-3-(thiophen-2-yl)-2,5-dihydropyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-dione) (DPP-TT) and 6,6′-(dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]thiophene-2,6-diylbis(thiophene-5,2-diyl))bis(2,5-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-3-(thiophen-2-yl)-2,5-dihydropyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-dione) (DPP-DTT), respectively (Scheme 1), and their potentials were tested as HTMs for efficient and stable PVSCs. As expected, TT and DTT insertion led to a narrowed bandgap and slightly upshifted energy levels due to the increased conjugation length and electron-donating ability. With a lithium (bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide) (LiTFSI) dopant, the planar perovskite devices using DPP-TT and DPP-DTT produced a maximum PCE of 15.57% and 14.49%, respectively. The detailed studies demonstrated that the introduction of TT in DPP-TT resulted in well-matched energy levels with MAPbI3, a favorable balance between crystallinity and film-forming ability, excellent surface coverage with superior morphology and hole harvesting by suppressing the mono and bimolecular surface traps, and thus justified the higher performances. On the other hand, the high aggregation tendency of DPP-DTT resulted in poor film quality, increased charge recombination and decreased PCEs in PVSCs. Furthermore, the excellent hydrophobicity of both these HTMs confers superior ambient stability in the corresponding PVSCs.


Fig. 1 illustrates the synthetic route to DPP-TT and DPP-DTT. To begin, the mono-3-(5-bromothiophen-2-yl)-2,5-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-6-(thiophen-2-yl)-2,5-dihydropyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-dione (M1) was prepared with high overall >70% yields in a simple one step starting from the 2,5-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-3,6-di(thiophen-2-yl)-2,5-dihydropyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-dione. Notably, the 2-ethylhexyl chains on the DPP units were chosen for both DPP-TT and DPP-DTT to render the final products sufficiently soluble to be processed as HTMs for the fabrication of PVSCs. Simultaneously, the monomers 2,5-bis(trimethylstannyl)thieno[3,2-b]thiophene (M2) and 2,6 bis(trimethylstannyl)dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]thiophene (M3) were synthesized according to previous reports. Finally, DPP-TT and DPP-DTT with yields of 70% were produced via Stille coupling reactions between the DPP monomer (M1) and bis-stannylated TT (M2) or DTT (M3) monomers. Complete experimental details, including characterization of the monomers and small molecules, are given in the ESI. Since the cost of the HTMs is one of the major factors determining the commercialization of PVSCs, the rough synthesis costs of DPP-TT and DPP-DTT were determined as shown in Section 3 of the ESI. The estimated synthesis cost of 1 gram of DPP-TT and DPP-DTT was found to be 391 and 447 $, respectively, which is much cheaper than that of the reference spiro-OMeTAD (∼500.00 $g−1).


To gain a better understanding of the backbone geometries, electronic structures, and FMO energy levels of the newly synthesized HTMs, we used the density functional theory (DFT) tool and performed calculations using the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level function. As illustrated in Fig. 2, both molecules showed reduced dihedral angles between the central TT (or DTT) and adjacent DPP units (θ1/θ2 = 11.22/4.32° and 13.91/16.31°, respectively, for DPP-TT and DPP-DTT). These findings suggest that introducing acenes would effectively improve the co-planarity, thereby facilitating compact molecular packing as reported previously. Moreover, electrostatic surface potential (ESP) images revealed that both DPP-TT and DPP-DTT exhibited a continuous dominant positive electrostatic potential along their backbones, implying that they are beneficial for charge transport. Additionally, these also showed distinct negative charges concentrated on the carbonyl groups, indicating that carbonyl groups can act as Lewis bases and presumably aid in the passivation of Pb-atoms in perovskite films. Meanwhile, the FMO energy levels from the DFT calculations indicate that both the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMODFT) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMODFT) were delocalized across the entire backbone of both HTMs, facilitating efficient charge transport. Furthermore, due to the elongation of the π-conjugation length of DTT, DPP-DTT showed an elevation in both HOMODFT and LUMODFT energy levels and a narrow bandgap when compared to DPP-TT.

The optical properties of the DPP-TT and DPP-DTT states were determined by monitoring the UV-Vis absorption spectra in both solution and the film state as shown in Fig. 3(a and b) and the corresponding parameters are listed in Table 1. Although both HTMs showed similar absorption spectra in the solution state, these showed two distinct π–π* transition and ICT absorption peaks at ∼325/597 and 325/626 nm for DPP-TT and DPP-DTT, respectively, in the solid state. As observed in the other π-conjugated molecules, the absorption spectra of both HTMs become broader and bathochromically shifted as they transition from solution to the film state owing to the J-aggregation in the solid state. Besides, in addition to having red-shifted absorption maxima (λmax) (≈10 nm) with a lower optical bandgap (Eg) of 1.61 eV compared to DPP-TT (Eg of 1.63 eV), DPP-DTT also exhibited a distinct vibrionic shoulder peak at ∼692 nm due to the stronger interchain packing/aggregation.
HTM

λ
max(nm), solution

λ
max(nm), film

λ
onset(nm) film

E
optg
 (eV)
HOMO (eV)
LUMO (eV)

a Calculated from the absorption edge of the thin film (Eoptg = 1240/λonset, eV).
b HOMO energy level calculated from the onset oxidation potential.
c LUMO energy level estimated from the optical bandgap and HOMO energy levels (ELUMO = Eoptg–EHOMO).


DPP-TT

617
597
760
1.63
−5.12
−3.49

DPP-DTT

617
626
769
1.61
−5.05
−3.44
Cyclic voltammetry was used to determine the electrochemical properties of DPP-TT and DPP-DTT, and the corresponding cyclic voltammograms and measured data are shown in Fig. 3c and Table 1, respectively. The DPP-TT and DPP-DTT HOMO/LUMO energy levels were calculated to be −5.12/−3.49 and −5.05/3.44 eV, respectively. As the bandgap narrows from DPP-TT to DPP-DTT, both energy levels upshifted due to the elongation of the π-conjugation length from TT to DTT. More importantly, the energy levels derived from solid-state films indicate that the HOMO levels of both HTMs are close enough with the perovskite layer (≈5.4 eV) to facilitate hole extraction, while the LUMO levels are sufficiently deep to prevent electron leakage. As good thermal stability is a prerequisite for employing HTMs in PVSCs, the thermal stability of these HTMs was determined using thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) (Fig. 3d). The decomposition temperature (Td) with 5% weight-loss for DPP-TT and DPP-DTT is 408 °C and 391 °C, respectively, indicating sufficient thermal stability for fabricating PVSCs.
Both newly synthesized HTMs were evaluated in n–i–p-type PVSCs with a glass/ITO/SnO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au device architecture (Fig. 4a). The schematic in Fig. 4b depicts the energy level alignment of several layers of materials utilized in PVSCs in relation to the vacuum energy level (0 eV). Fig. 4c and Table 2 show the current density–voltage (J–V) curves for the PVSCs, along with the pertinent PV parameters. PVSCs fabricated with these newly synthesized DPP-TT and DPP-DTT HTMs had reasonable PCEs of 12.90% and 11.29%, respectively, with corresponding short circuit current density (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), and fill factor (FF) values of 21.38 mA cm−2, 0.94 V, and 61.12% for DPP-TT PVSCs and 19.92 mA cm−2, 0.92 V, and 58.66% for DPP-DTT PVSCs. The performance of PVSCs was enhanced further by adding a trace amount of LiTFSI, which has previously been shown to be an effective dopant for increasing the efficiency of PVSCs (optimizations of various LiTFSI concentrations are shown in Fig. S1 and Table S1, ESI). The optimized DPP-TT w/LiTFSI and DPP-DTT w/LiTFSI PVSCs demonstrated an increased PCE from 12.90 to 15.57 and 11.29 to 14.22%, respectively. Whereas control devices based on spiro-OMeTAD showed a maximum PCE of 18.02% (Fig S2, ESI). The higher JSC of the DPP-TT-based PVSCs could be possibly due to a better energy alignment between the HOMO of DPP-TT and the valence band of the perovskite, which effectively facilitates efficient hole transportation. Meanwhile, these devices also exhibited a higher Voc than their DPP-DTT counterpart, attributed to deep HOMO energy levels of DPP-TT. Furthermore, variations in JSC trends are also validated by the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra, as shown in Fig. 4d. Compared with DPP-DTT-based PVSCs, DPP-TT counterparts had significantly higher EQE values in the region between 350 and 750 nm, with the highest EQE values of up to ∼85%, confirming the higher JSC value for DPP-TT PVSCs. Series and shunt resistances (RS & RSh) of the PVSCs are also measured and tabulated in Table 2. The PVSCs with DPP-TT exhibited the least Rs and highest RSh values, indicating that they have superior photovoltaic (PV) properties.
HTM

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

FF (%)
PCE (%)

R
S (Ω cm2)

R
Sh (Ω cm2)
Hole mobility (μh) (cm2 V−1 s−1)

DPP-TT

0.94
21.38
61.12
12.90
23.46
3772.2
3.94 × 10−4

DPP-DTT

0.92
19.92
58.66
11.29
26.33
4611.4
7.75 × 10−4

DPP-TT w/LiTFSI
0.98
21.74
69.52
15.57
21.92
18555.7
7.43 × 10−4

DPP-DTT w/LiTFSI
0.97
20.34
69.89
14.49
24.52
16591.4
1.08 × 10−3
As illustrated in Fig. S3, (ESI) the photoluminescence (PL) spectra of perovskite films with both HTMs and without HTM are measured to elucidate the charge transfer dynamics at the HTM/perovskite interface. Ideally, the efficient PL quenching and PL lifetime reduction would imply efficient charge separation. Notably, both DPP-TT and DPP-DTT demonstrated higher quenching efficiencies than the perovskite layer alone, suggesting that the new HTMs effectively promoted the charge dissociation. However, DPP-TT exhibited better quenching amongst both HTMs, indicating that more effective exciton dissociation occurs at the DPP-TT/perovskite interface, thus resulting in superior JSC and FF in the DPP-TT-based PVSCs.
To evaluate the charge recombination mechanisms of PVSCs based on these HTMs, the light intensity (I) dependence of VOC and JSC is measured as shown in Fig. 5a and b. Typically, the extent of the bimolecular recombination was predicted by fitting the JSCvs. I curves with the power-law (JSC ∝ Iα) equation, where the α value close to unity indicates that bimolecular recombination is significantly suppressed. From Fig. 5a, the retrieved α values for PVSCs fabricated with DPP-TT, DPP-DTT, DPP-TT w/LiTFSI, and DPP-DTT w/LiTFSI HTMs were 0.923, 0.919, 0.925, and 0.924, respectively. Clearly, the DPP-TT-based devices have the lowest bimolecular recombination over DPP-DTT. Additionally, the relation between VOC and I is expressed as VOC ∝ β(kT/q) (where β is a coefficient, K is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature in Kelvin, and q is the elementary charge); which could provide information regarding trap-assisted recombination losses (Fig. 5b). Normally, a value β > 1 indicates the existence of monomolecular recombination. The β values of 1.89, 2.27, 1.49, and 2.04 for DPP-TT, DPP-DTT, DPP-TT w/LiTFSI, and DPP-DTT w/LiTFSI PVSCs, respectively, indicate that trap-assisted recombination losses were much reduced in the DPP-TT based devices. Altogether, the DPP-TT-based PVSCs exhibited less charge recombination processes than their DPP-DTT counterparts, thereby contributing to their enhanced PCE.
Following that, the hole carrier devices were fabricated using the architecture glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/HTMs/Au to investigate the hole conductivities in the HTMs. As illustrated in Fig. S4, (ESI) the hole mobilities were calculated by fitting the dark J–V curves with the Mott–Gurney equation using the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) approach. The hole mobility enhanced in the order of DPP-TT (3.94 × 10−4 cm−2 V−1 s−1), DPP-TT w/LiTFSI (7.43 × 10−4 cm−2 V−1 s−1), DPP-DTT (7.75 × 10−4 cm−2 V−1 s−1), DPP-DTT w/LiTFSI (1.08 × 10−3 cm−2 V−1 s−1). Thus, even though the DPP-DTT-based devices had higher charge-carrier mobility, they showed inferior performance compared to the DPP-TT PVSCs. As a result, in-depth molecular packing and morphological analysis were studied to make sense of these disparate results.
To understand the molecular packing in these HTMs, we performed a grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) experiment on the DPP-TT and DPP-DTT films. Fig. 6 illustrates the GIWAXS patterns and 1D line-cut profiles along the in-plane (IP) and out-of-plane (OOP) directions, while Table 3 summarizes the corresponding packing parameters. The pristine DPP-TT film shows only intense lamellar (100) diffraction peaks along both the IP and OOP directions (at qxy/qz = ∼0.403 Å−1/∼0.445 Å−1, respectively) with corresponding lamellar spacings of 15.48 and 14.11 Å, respectively. On the other hand, the DPP-DTT films clearly showed an intense π–π stacking (010) diffraction peak along both directions (at qxy/qz = ∼1.65 Å−1/∼1.73 Å−1, contributing to d-spacing values of 3.80 and 3.63 Å, respectively), in addition to the main IP and OOP lamellar (100) scattering (lamellar distances of 15.51 and 13.80 Å, respectively). These results indicate that both molecules have a bimodal orientation (face-on and edge-on), which is helpful for three-dimensional charge transport. Meanwhile, in comparison with DPP-TT, DPP-DTT display higher scattering intensity, shorter lamellar stacking distance, and compact π–π packing, which suggests the higher aggregation nature of DPP-DTT. These results are in good agreement with its more vital interchain interaction as observed in the UV-Vis spectra and higher SCLC charger-carrier mobilities.
Film
IP
OOP

a Calculation from the xy-axis (in-plane).
b Calculation from the z-axis (out-of-plane).

d-(100) [Å]/(q-(100) [Å−1])
d-(010) [Å]/(q-(010) [Å−1])
d-(100) [Å]/(q-(100) [Å−1])
d-(010) [Å]/(q-(010) [Å−1])

DPP-TT

15.58 (0.403)
—
14.11 (0.445)
—

DPP-DTT

15.51 (0.405)
3.80 (1.65)
13.80 (0.455)
3.63 (1.73)
Cross-section scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of PVSCs with both HTMs were examined, as shown in Fig. 7a and b. The SnO2 electron transport layer (ETL), perovskite photo absorber layer, HTM, and top Au electrode were found to have thicknesses of 30–40 nm, 360 nm, 30–40 nm, and 90 nm, respectively. Notably, DPP-TT showed superior homogenous covering of the perovskite layer without any pinholes compared to DPP-DTT (interface boundary is not so clear as in the case of DPP-TT, which suggests direct contact with perovskite), implying that the different aggregation behaviors of the HTMs have drastically affected their coating ability. It is well-known that the performance and stability of PVSCs dramatically depend on the morphology of the perovskite and HTM films. Thus, the surface images of the HTM-coated perovskite layer were investigated using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) to better understand the morphology differences caused by the different crystalline behaviors of the newly synthesized HTMs (Fig. S5, ESI). Although both these HTM films completely cover the perovskite film, the DPP-DTT-based film displayed relatively few cracks or pinholes, which may negatively affect the overall charge transport, leaking of current and low FF in PSCs. Furthermore, as shown in the AFM images of Fig. 7(c–f), DPP-TT exhibited a significantly smoother morphology with an average roughness (Ravg) of 1.35 nm. In contrast, DPP-DTT has a relatively rough and non-homogenous morphology having Ravg of 5.5 nm and a small number of pinholes. Consequently, DPP-TT is thus predicted to deliver an efficient contact at the perovskite/metal electrode interface, as reported previously. These results confirm that different aggregation behaviors of HTMs are the main reason behind their noticeable differences in the PV performances. Thus, the relatively lower solubility of DPP-DTT negatively affects its film coating ability, resulting in poor surface coverage, higher charge recombination and deteriorating photovoltaic performance. Conversely, DPP-TT exhibits a good trade-off between aggregation and processability, thereby yielding smooth, homogenous films that fully cover the perovskite layer.
As illustrated in Fig. 8a and b, the operational stability of the fabricated PVSCs was determined by observing the variation of JSC and VOC under continuous 100 mW cm−2 illuminations. The normalized JSCvs. time curve in Fig. 8a shows that DPP-TT PVSC stabilized rapidly and stayed virtually constant throughout the observation duration. In contrast, DPP-DTT PVSC remained at ∼80% of its original value. Besides, with the addition of the LiTFSI dopant, a similar trend was seen, albeit there was a slight drop in the JSC steadiness for both HTMs. The normalized VOCvs. time curve in Fig. 8b indicates that the VOC of the PVSCs based on both HTMs stabilizes slowly over time and remains nearly unchanged (99% of its maximum value) throughout the operating duration. However, the inclusion of LiTFSI resulted in a slight drop in VOC stability, although the level remained at >97% of its initial values for both HTMs throughout the operation period. As a result, the freshly synthesized HTMs may provide a viable option for fabricating stable PVSCs due to their reasonable operational stability.
Moisture infiltration through the perovskite layer's top contact side further reacts and degrades the perovskite layer to its initial components (e.g., MAI, PbI2, etc.), which is the primary cause of perovskite layer deterioration. Thus, to further test the moisture resistance tendency of the newly synthesized HTMs, the contact angles of HTMs coated on the perovskite layer were measured (Fig. 8c and d). The contact angles for DPP-TT (86.68°) and DPP-DTT (86.19°) were determined to be the greatest relative to the reference spiro-OMeTAD (69.8°), while DPP-TT w/LiTFSI (83.99°) and DPP-DTT w/LiTFSI (81.03°) were further slightly reduced due to the hydrophilic nature of the LiTFSI. As a result, the adequately high contact angles of both the newly designed HTMs imply that both materials can resist moisture penetration, which is a crucial and critical characteristic for developing highly stable PVSCs. Meanwhile, it is essential to note that despite the superior molecular packing of DPP-DTT with a shorter π–π stacking distance, corresponding perovskite films with and without LiTFSI demonstrated lower contact angles than DPP-TT. This phenomenon further indicates the inhomogeneous film formation by the DPP-DTT HTMs, which correlates to their inferior performance.

To better understand the effect of thienoacenes on the performance of perovskite solar cells (PVSCs), two new simple small molecular diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP)-based HTMs, namely DPP-TT and DPP-DTT, were synthesized by introducing a different central π-bridge (thieno[3,2-b]thiophene (DPP-TT) and dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d] thiophene, respectively). Compared to DPP-DTT, DPP-TT demonstrated a deeper HOMO energy level, superior energy level alignment with the MAPbI3 absorber, higher hole mobility and excellent film formation ability, all of which contribute to its higher photovoltaic performance of 15.57% with the corresponding photovoltaic parameters: JSC of 21.74 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.98 V and FF of 69.52%. Conversely, DPP-DTT demonstrated higher crystallization with shorter π–π stacking than DPP-TT, complicating the trade-off between crystallinity and processibility. Consequently, they displayed inferior films with insufficient surface coverage, leading to increased charge recombination and lower photovoltaic performance of 14.49%. Moreover, despite the lower PCEs than reference spiro-OMeTAD, these new HTM materials have relatively facile synthesis, significantly lower synthetic cost and higher hydrophobicity. Additionally, these materials also delivered reasonable stabilities under ambient device fabrication conditions. These results would provide valuable insight into designing new HTMs with an optimal balance of crystallinity and film formation.


There are no competing financial interests or conflicts to declare.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Appendix A. Supplementary data. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2nj00294a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022