 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA03331A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13439-13447


Jiaxing
Song
,

Leijing
Liu
,

Xiao-Feng
Wang
*,

Gang
Chen
,

Wenjing
Tian
* and 

Tsutomu
Miyasaka


State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, PR China. E-mail: wjtian@jlu.edu.cn

Key Laboratory of Physics and Technology for Advanced Batteries, Ministry of Education, College of Physics, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, PR China. E-mail: xf_wang@jlu.edu.cn

Graduate School of Engineering, Toin University of Yokohama, 1614 Kurogane-cho, Aoba, Yokohama, Kanagawa 225-8503, Japan

Received
17th April 2017
, Accepted 2nd June 2017
First published on 2nd June 2017
Although ZnO is a compatible electron transport layer (ETL) for perovskite solar cells (PSCs), the fact that MAPbI3 easily undergoes thermal decomposition on a low-temperature processed ZnO surface limits the use of one-step deposition of perovskite and hence the resulting photovoltaic performance. Herein, we demonstrate triple cation perovskite (Csx(MA0.17FA0.83)(100−x)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3) prepared with a one-step deposition method as a stable light absorber in highly efficient PSCs with low-temperature processed ZnO as the ETL. The photovoltaic performance of the investigated PSCs was dependent on both the annealing temperature of the perovskite film and the composition of the Cs element in the perovskite structure. A remnant PbI2 passivation phase in the perovskite layer, in which the composition is Cs6(MA0.17FA0.83)94Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 and the annealing temperature is 95 °C, leads to the highest power conversion efficiency of ∼18.9%, which is a record-high so far for low-temperature processed ZnO-based PSCs. Importantly, this PSC exhibits excellent environmental durability and photostability, which are critical characteristics for further commercialization of low-temperature processed PSCs.

As emerging photovoltaic materials, organic–inorganic lead halide perovskites (e.g., CH3NH3PbI3) have attracted much attention since an early report in 2009. Their optoelectrical merits, including excellent optical absorption, long-balanced carrier diffusion length and the low-cost processing methods, have allowed them to be extremely promising candidates for next-generation photovoltaics. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) was rapidly increasing at an unprecedented rate and reached the current world record of 22.1% via film crystal growth control, and interface and device engineering.

Although various materials have been designed and established as candidates for the electron transport layer (ETL) for PSC devices, state-of-the-art PSCs are mainly based on a TiO2 nanostructured ETL. However, the disadvantage of TiO2 is that high-temperature sintering is often required to obtain the desired nanostructures, which is a barrier to low cost and stretchable device fabrication. The photoinduced instability of TiO2-based PSCs is also a problem. Among the rest of the ETLs, ZnO is the most attractive owing to its high electron mobility and structural variability. The deposition of a ZnO nanoparticle layer can be processed by spin coating at low temperature, which will be beneficial to the mass and energy-saving production of photovoltaic devices. Despite these advantages of ZnO, the PCE of normal structured PSCs based on pure ZnO was wandering around 15–16%, which is obviously significantly lower than that of PSCs based on TiO2 or SnO2.
In addition, the thermal instability of MAPbI3 on low-temperature-processed ZnO is a severe issue limiting further applications of such devices. This thermal instability was attributed to the remaining hydroxyl groups and/or residual acetate ligands on the ZnO surface accelerating the decomposition of MAPbI3. Thus far, the preparation of an MAPbI3 perovskite layer on ZnO has been dominated by the two-step sequential deposition method, in which the MAPbI3 crystals form during the immersion processing that requires an annealing temperature of no more than 80 °C. Nevertheless, to the best of our knowledge, there have been no reports on highly efficient PSCs prepared by a two-step deposition method with low-temperature processed ZnO as the ETL. However, the employment of a one-step deposition method for MAPbI3 in ZnO-based PSCs has rarely been reported, because an optimal annealing temperature of 100 °C for a long period of time is usually required to obtain high-quality MAPbI3 crystals, which, however, causes simultaneous thermal decomposition of MAPbI3 on the low-temperature-processed ZnO surface, resulting in decreased PCE.
In view of the thermal stability issue, FAPbI3 might be a stable alternative to MAPbI3 for low-temperature ZnO-based PSCs. Previous work indicates that FAPbI3-based PSCs can give a slightly higher PCE with improved thermostability as compared to MAPbI3-based PSCs with ZnO as the ETL. However, FAPbI3 lacks structural stability as it can crystallize into a photoinactive, non-perovskite hexagonal δ-phase (“yellow phase”) and it is sensitive to solvents or humidity at room temperature. Therefore, FAPbI3-based PSCs tend to exhibit poor environmental durability.
Recently, a novel strategy of using a triple Cs/MA/FA cation mixture to achieve perovskite compounds has attracted attention that permits the preparation of defect-free perovskite films with improved structural stability. As reported, MA can induce the crystallization of FA perovskite but at a much slower rate (because MA is only slightly smaller than FA) which still permits a large fraction of the yellow phase to persist. The smaller Cs on the MA/FA combination can lead to a lowering of the effective Cs/MA/FA cation radius in the new perovskite compound, which shifts the tolerance factor towards a cubic lattice structure that matches the black perovskite phase. In addition, the perovskite can be formed even at room temperature, and the Cs containing system is less sensitive to temperature variations in the heating protocol. Hence, this implies that a lower annealing temperature and/or shorter duration might be sufficient for the mixed compound, and gives rise to our strategy of fabricating low-temperature ZnO-based PSCs using mixed cations and halides with a one-step method. In addition, such triple cation compounds already show impressive PCEs and thus the application of the compound may be an avenue in the advancement of planar ZnO-based PSCs.
In this investigation, we prepared ZnO ETLs by spin-coating of nanoparticles to fabricate low-temperature-processed PSCs. The triple cation perovskite with a general formula of “Csx(MA0.17FA0.83)(100−x)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3” was successfully prepared by a one-step deposition method on ZnO for light-harvesting. We observed the dependence of the grain morphology of the as-deposited perovskite films on the annealing temperature. Consequently, the photovoltaic performance of PSCs was found to be sensitive to the annealing temperature. In addition, the amount of Cs component was observed to be a crucial factor influencing the thermostability of perovskite, which then has an effect on the performance and hysteresis behavior of the devices. Furthermore, a remnant PbI2 phase was introduced to passivate the traps in perovskite and the devices delivered the highest efficiency of 18.9% upon optimization. Last but not least, the ZnO-based triple cation PSCs showed excellent durability and photostability.

The ZnO (ZnO-350, Sumitomo Osaka Cement Co.) nanoparticles were used as received. Lead iodide (>99.99%), lead bromide (>99.99%), CH3NH3Br (≥99.5%) and HC(NH2)2I (≥99.5%) were purchased from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Co. (PLT). Spiro-OMeTAD (2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-4-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene, >99.0%) was purchased from Merck. Lithium salts (>99.0%), tert-butylpyridine (tBP) and CsI (beads, −10 mesh, 99.999%) were purchased from Aldrich. Ultradry solvents of N,N-dimethyl formamide (DMF, >99.9%) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, >99.9%) were obtained from J&K, and an ultradry solvent of chlorobenzene (>99.9%) was obtained from Acros. All the chemicals and solvents were kept in a glove-box before starting our experiments.


The pre-patterned ITO substrates were cleaned with detergent, deionized water, acetone, and 2-propanol in sequence. The ZnO nanoparticles were dispersed in isobutanol at a concentration of 6 mg mL−1 and stirred for at least 3 hours before use. The solution was filtered with a PVDF hydrophobic 0.45 μm filter and spin-coated on the ITO substrates at 2500 rpm for 30 s to form a relatively compact ZnO thin layer, followed by short baking at 150 °C for 5 min. This procedure was repeated three times before a final baking at 150 °C for 1 hour. The perovskite film was prepared according to the procedures in the literature. The mixed perovskite films were deposited from a precursor solution containing FAI (1 M), PbI2 (1.1 M), MABr (0.2 M) and PbBr2 (0.2 M) in anhydrous DMF:DMSO = 4:1 vol%, and there was a lead excess as reported elsewhere. Then CsI, predissolved as a 1.5 M stock solution in DMSO, was added to the mixed perovskite precursor to achieve the desired triple cation composition. The perovskite solution was spin-coated on the top of the ZnO layer at 5000 rpm for 30 s. During the spin-coating process, 0.2 mL of chlorobenzene was poured onto the spinning substrate. Films with Cs-containing perovskite turned dark immediately after spin-coating. The films were then annealed for 4 min in a nitrogen filled glove-box. As a hole-transporting material (HTM), a spiro-OMeTAD solution (80 mg of spiro-OMeTAD, 10.5 μL of 4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP), and 46.5 μL of a lithium-bis(tri-fluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI) solution (170 mg Li-TFSI/1 mL acetonitrile) in 1 mL of chlorobenzene) was spin-coated at 4000 rpm for 30 s on the perovskite. The substrates with the HTM were left overnight in the dry air in the dark at room temperature. Finally, a 50 nm thick Ag electrode was thermally evaporated on the top of the HTM to produce a completed PSC device.


The current–voltage characteristics of the solar cells were measured by a computer-controlled Keithley 2400 source meter measurement system with an AM1.5G filter at a calibrated intensity of 100 mW cm−2 illumination, as determined by a standard silicon reference cell (91150V Oriel Instruments). The effective area of the cell was defined to be 0.1 cm2 using a non-reflective metal mask. IPCE spectra were measured in air under short-circuit conditions using a commercial IPCE setup (Crowntech QTest Station 1000AD), which was equipped with a 100 W Xe arc lamp, filter wheel, and monochromator. Monochromated light was chopped at a frequency of 80 Hz and photocurrents were measured using a lock-in amplifier. The setup was calibrated against a certified silicon reference diode.


Film thicknesses were measured using a Veeco Dektak 150 surface profilometer. Time-resolved photoluminescence (TrPL) spectra were obtained on a PL spectrometer (Edinburgh Instruments, FLS 980), excited with a picosecond pulsed diode laser (EPL-375). A Hamamatsu C5680-04 streak camera was used for TrPL. UV-Vis-NIR spectra were obtained using a Shimadzu UV-2550 spectrophotometer. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded on a Rigaku SmartLab X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å) at room temperature. The data were collected with a 0.01° step size (2θ). A field emission scanning electron microscope (Hitachi SU8020) was used to acquire SEM images. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was performed using a multi-technique surface analysis XPS/UPS system (VG Scienta R3000).


As reported in previous work, the ZnO nanoparticles used in this investigation are commercially available. We simply confirmed the nanoparticles by measuring the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern. Fig. S1a shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the ZnO nanoparticles used in this investigation. Each of these diffraction lines is commonly assigned to the hexagonal crystalline phases of ZnO. Fig. S1b shows the high magnification scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the ZnO film prepared by spin-coating of the nanoparticles in ambient air at 150 °C. The ZnO film is found to be ∼20 nm thick, and flat and dense in morphology, suggesting that the corresponding PSCs are based on the planar-heterojunction configuration, and the flat and dense morphology will undoubtedly be beneficial to establishing a high-performance device. The FT-IR spectrum of ZnO film processed at low temperature is also shown in Fig. S2. The IR shift at around 3440 cm−1 originates from the stretching of hydroxyl residues and those at around 1580 cm−1 and 1440 cm−1 originate from the stretching of residual acetate ligands, which is the critical factor affecting the thermal stability of perovskite films.

The “antisolvent method” was used to prepare the “Csx(MA0.17FA0.83)(100−x)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3” perovskite. For convenience, the mixed perovskite is abbreviated as CsxM from now on (x is in percentage of Cs), where M stands for “mixed perovskite”. The compositions of Csx(MA0.17FA0.83)(100−x)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 are derived from the precursor and the preparation details are given in the Experimental Section. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) characterization of the ZnO and perovskite (Cs6M) films was carried out to get the relatively accurate position of the energy bands. Fig. 1(a and b) shows the cut-off band energy region and the expanded valence band region. Thus, the valence band maximum (VBM) was estimated to be 7.62 eV based on the above results for ZnO. The optical bandgap derived from the Tauc plot [(αhν)1/2vs. eV] is 3.24 eV (Fig. 1c). It can be calculated that the conduction band (Ec) of the ZnO nanoparticles is 4.38 eV. One can also estimate that the conduction band of perovskite Cs6M is 4.46 eV from Fig. 1. The possible band alignment between perovskite and ZnO is shown in Fig. 1d. The energy band of spiro-OMeTAD was well characterized and determined in the literature. We can conclude that the conduction bands align well and there is a negligible energy barrier at the interface between ZnO and perovskite, which will undoubtedly be beneficial for the charge transfer. In addition, it is reported that the Voc is proportional to the quasi-Fermi level difference between the ETL and HTL. In this case, the position of the conduction band of ZnO will ensure that the loss in open circuit voltage is less. In addition, the actual composition of the prepared Cs6M was determined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) in Fig. S3. Thus one can estimate and give the form Cs7(MA0.17FA0.83)93Pb(I0.84Br0.16)3, which is basically consistent with the composition of Cs6(MA0.17FA0.83)94Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 derived from the precursor.
Currently, many high-quality perovskite crystals based on TiO2 layers have been obtained after being annealed at 80–100 °C for a long period. Meanwhile, MAPbI3 deposited on low-temperature processed ZnO layers usually suffers from decomposition once the thermal annealing temperature is >70 °C, especially with the one-step deposition method. Cs/MA is effective in assisting the crystallization of the black phase in FA perovskite due to entropic stabilization, even at room temperature. Besides, the Cs containing system is less sensitive to temperature variations in the heating protocol or the precise temperature in the glove-box at the very beginning of the perovskite film formation. Hence, a not overly long annealing time of 4 min was determined and we firstly investigated the effect of the annealing temperature of the Cs10M layer on the photovoltaic performance in low-temperature processed ZnO-based PSCs. Fig. 2 shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of Cs10M-based ZnO solar cells with different annealing temperatures. Table 1 lists the related photovoltaic parameters obtained from the J–V curves. Amongst the annealing temperatures employed here, 95 °C gives the highest PCE of up to 17.9%, with a photocurrent density (Jsc) of 22.5 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.11 V and a fill factor (FF) of 71.7%. A decreased/increased annealing temperature at 85 °C/105 °C causes a drop in PCE. Remarkably, an obvious bleaching of perovskite films was observed at the elevated temperature of 105 °C.
Annealing temperature/°C

V
oc/V

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF/%
PCE/%
85
1.10
22.3
68.4
16.8
95
1.11
22.5
71.7
17.9
105
1.07
22.0
64.1
15.1
The origin of the difference in photovoltaic performance caused by annealing in the ITO/ZnO/Cs10M/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag devices was investigated further by studying the absorption spectra and X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of perovskite films prepared at different annealing temperatures. As shown in Fig. S4, there is no significant difference in the absorbance of the perovskite films annealed at various temperatures. An expanded view of the absorption spectra at the absorption edge region is shown in the inset of Fig. S2. As the annealing temperature increases from 85 °C to 105 °C, the absorption edge of the perovskite films has a slight red-shift, a fact reflecting the partial decomposition of perovskite films that might occur at annealing temperatures above 85 °C. As has been reported, inorganic cesium lead trihalide perovskites exhibit excellent thermal stability compared to organic cation based ones, and the FA cation has a larger cation size and stronger interaction with surrounding PbI6 octahedra than that of the MA cation, so the slight red-shift of the absorption edge is most likely to be caused by the partial release of MA cations. In addition, the fact that FA-based perovskite has a broader absorption compared to that of MA agrees with the red-shift of the absorption edge and it seems to further validate that it is caused by the partial release of MA cations. Certainly, the concomitant release of trace amounts of FA cations cannot be completely ruled out during the process. The increase in the intensity of the XRD peak of PbI2 at 2θ = 12.38° confirms the decomposition of perovskite films when annealed at above 85 °C (Fig. 3). Noticeably, for 85 °C, there are no small side peaks at 11.28° and 12.38° corresponding to the photoinactive hexagonal δ-phase of FAPbI3 and the cubic PbI2, respectively, showing complete conversion of the FA perovskite into the photoactive black phase. As a comparison, the XRD patterns of Cs10M on either TiO2 or bare ITO prepared at the same temperature as that on ZnO were also conducted. As shown in Fig. S5, the patterns of Cs10M on either TiO2 or ITO after annealing at different temperatures are basically identical and there is no representative signal of the diffraction peak from PbI2 at 2θ = 12.38°. In addition, the SEM images were obtained (Fig. 4) to differentiate the morphological features of each Cs10M perovskite film. The quality of the perovskite film annealed at 85 °C seems to be not bad; the crystalline grains pack compactly, but the grain size is relatively small. As the annealing temperature increases to 95 °C, the crystalline grain becomes larger and they still pack compactly, which is beneficial in reducing the energy loss and charge recombination during the photophysical processes of the PSCs. In addition, signs of decomposition can also be observed from the variation in partial grain boundary and the occurrence of a ‘white phase’ in the adjoining grains. The phase showed relatively bright contrast compared to the adjacent grains, possibly because it is less conductive and accumulates more charges. They are speculated to be PbI2, as indicated in the corresponding XRD pattern (Fig. 3). Energy dispersive X-ray analysis (Fig. S6) was further measured in ‘white phase’ and ‘dark phase’, respectively. The white phase area showed a relatively lower ratio of lead and halogen (1:2.56) than that of the dark phase area (1:2.81), indicating that the white phase could be a PbI2 rich area, which is consistent with the discovery in the literature. We suppose that the remnant PbI2 in the perovskite films upon thermal annealing could lead to a successful passivation of the traps, including surface or grain boundary defects, and reduce recombination in the perovskite layer, which is beneficial for device performance, as demonstrated by many previous investigations. Further increasing the annealing temperature to 105 °C causes damage to the crystalline grain and grain boundary, resulting in a deteriorated performance, as supported by the strong diffraction peak of PbI2 in Fig. 3, and the crystalline grain becomes incompact, which can lead to inferior interface contact and charge recombination at grain boundaries.
Not only the post-annealing process, but the percentage of Cs may also play a crucial role in determining the photovoltaic performance of ZnO-based perovskite solar cells. So we further investigated the device performance for CsxM with x = 2, 6, 10, 14%. Fig. 5 shows the J–V characteristics measured from the reversed voltage scan of PSCs fabricated with the above CsxM series annealed at 95 °C. The corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 2. For Cs6M, the highest PCE of up to 18.6% was achieved with all the best performance parameters, a photocurrent density (Jsc) of 22.8 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.12 V and a fill factor (FF) of 72.8%. The corresponding cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the fabricated device is shown in Fig. 6. The thicknesses of the electron transport layer (ZnO) and the hole transport layer (spiro-OMeTAD) are 18 nm and 168 nm, respectively. Intriguingly, during the fabrication process of the devices, we observed that the thermal stability of ZnO-based CsxM perovskite films was sensitive to the Cs percentage under a fixed annealing temperature. The X-ray diffraction results confirmed the difference in thermal stability, as shown in Fig. 7. The intensity of the XRD peak of PbI2 at 2θ = 12.38° increases as the percentage of Cs increases from 2% to 14%. For Cs2M, there are also no small side peaks corresponding to the photoinactive hexagonal δ-phase of FAPbI3 and PbI2, showing that the FA perovskite can completely convert into the photoactive black phase under the current conditions. The PbI2 phase was formed when Cs was 6%, which is due to partial decomposition of the perovskite layer; nevertheless, the intensity of the PbI2 reflection signal was weaker than that of 10% Cs. The PbI2 phase in the Cs6M layer must have a passivation effect for surface defects and charge carrier trapping so as to enhance Voc and shunt resistance, and the lower amount of PbI2 can show a better passivation effect due to the better thermostability than that of Cs10M. The longer lifetime from the perovskite film of Cs6M with excess PbI2 indicated that PbI2 could passivate the defects and reduce recombination in the perovskite film (Fig. S7). The inferior thermostability of Cs14M supposedly may cause damage to the perovskite layer, resulting in a deteriorated performance. However, the mechanism of thermal instability with the increase in Cs is not entirely clear currently, and needs further study. We speculate, on one hand, that the increase in percentage composition of Cs can reduce the percentage of FA that is the thermally stable composition; on the other hand, the ZnO-based perovskite may be intrinsically heat-sensitive due to the strain in the lattice from the different ion radius; or a miscibility problem may generate mobile ions in the new perovskite compound.
CsxM

V
oc/V

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF/%
PCE/%
Cs2M
1.09
22.0
71.1
17.1
Cs6M
1.12
22.8
72.8
18.6
Cs10M
1.12
22.5
72.0
18.1
Cs14M
1.10
21.7
68.2
16.3
The significant differences in the thermostability and corresponding XRD results of the perovskite films might be an implication of different film morphologies. The SEM images of the perovskite films obtained from the above CsxM series are depicted in Fig. 8. The average grain size of Cs2M is relatively larger than that of other control perovskite films, but the surface is a little rough compared to Cs6M and Cs10M. Both Cs6M and Cs10M have a compact crystalline grain and relatively flat surface, which can ensure good interface contact and reduced charge recombination derived from grain boundaries and interfacial trap states. In addition, there is an inconspicuous ‘white phase’ and variation in grain boundary for Cs6M compared to Cs10M, indicating better thermostability, which is consistent with the XRD results. As the content of Cs increases to 14%, the crystalline grains become nonuniform and the surface is rough. Furthermore, the crystalline grains pack incompactly and there is the discovery of an unknown phase at the partial grain boundary region. Obviously, the quality of the perovskite film, including the crystalline grain and grain boundary, was affected by the worst thermostability of Cs14M, which can give rise to energy loss and charge recombination during the photophysical processes of the PSCs. The quality of the CsxM films was further studied by an atomic force microscope (AFM) in Fig. S8, where the root-mean-square (RMS) roughness is expressed as a visual reminder of the morphological changes. In addition, we compared the hysteresis behavior in the J–V curves of solar cells prepared from the CsxM series, in Fig. S9. The hysteresis degree from the devices basically coincides with the thermostability of the perovskite films. The devices based on Cs2M and Cs6M exhibit comparable and the smallest hysteresis among the four solar cells. As the percentage of Cs increases to 14%, there is an increase in the degree of hysteresis. Further results indicated that charge accumulation induced by ion migration in the perovskite layer could be the main cause of hysteresis. On the side, the grain boundaries are most likely the dominant migration channels, and the imperfections in grains and grain boundaries can provide plenty of sites for ion migration. For Cs6M, the small amount of thermally decomposed PbI2 can passivate the traps, including surface or grain boundary defects in the perovskite layer, which are also considered to be one possible cause of hysteresis, so the device exhibited the smallest hysteresis. As the Cs percentage further increases, the gradually deteriorating thermostability of the corresponding perovskite films can have an impact on the crystalline grain and grain boundary to a variable extent, as supported by the SEM images mentioned above. Consequently, the Cs14M-based PSCs exhibited the largest hysteresis due to the worst quality of perovskite film.
Noticeably, given the instability of ZnO due to its basic nature, Cs6M perovskite has shown excellent compatibility with low-temperature processed ZnO, especially as prepared with the one-step method, and has already delivered extraordinarily high PCEs compared to previous PSCs based on low-temperature-processed ZnO. As a comparison, we also fabricated MAPbI3-based PSCs with the “antisolvent method” under identical annealing conditions. Regrettably, a highest PCE of only 9.1% was achieved on account of the inferior thermostability of MAPbI3 on ZnO (Fig. S10). A structural graphical image is provided in Fig. S11 depicting the difference in performance when using the triple-cation recipe as an alternative to MAPbI3 on the low-temperature-processed ZnO. The more stable and dominant cation of FA in the crystal structure weakens the interaction between MA and ZnO and plays an important role in determining the excellent thermal stability of the triple-cation perovskite compared to MAPbI3. In order to further investigate the effect of ETLs on the photovoltaic performance, planar-structure devices using TiO2 as ETLs were fabricated for Cs6M. As shown in Fig. S12, the optimal device performance yielded a PCE of 16.43% with a Jsc = 22.38 mA cm−2, a Voc = 1.08 V, and an FF = 0.68. Time resolved photoluminescence (TrPL) spectroscopy was employed to study the charge extraction dynamics. Fig. 9 shows the decay dynamics of the TrPL spectra for Cs6M, Cs6M/ZnO and Cs6M/TiO2 samples. When depositing the perovskite layer on ZnO, the PL decay displayed a faster rate than that based on TiO2, indicating that efficient electron transfer occurred from perovskite to ZnO. The more efficient charge transport between ZnO and perovskite could be ascribed to the lower energy barrier at the interface between ZnO and perovskite, which could be due to the well aligned energy levels and the higher electron mobility of ZnO. Here, higher mobility would reduce the effect of space charge, and probably enhance the extraction of generated free charge carriers. Therefore, the ZnO-based device could deliver a greater efficiency.
As shown in Fig. 10a, the champion device exhibits a PCE of 18.9% measured from the reversed voltage scan deduced by a Voc of 1.11 V, a Jsc of 22.6 mA cm−2 and an FF of 0.753 upon optimization of the perovskite layer. To the best of our knowledge, a PCE of 18.9% is currently the highest value for low-temperature processed ZnO-based PSCs with a conventional structure, i.e., glass/ITO/ZnO/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag. The typical external quantum efficiency of the device is shown in Fig. 10b, which can effectively cover the entire visible region and is consistent with the ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectrum of CsxM. The integrated short-circuit current (20.38 mA cm−2) generally matches the Jsc values (22.6 mA cm−2) obtained from the J–V characteristic. To gain some understanding of the stabilized power output under the working conditions, the photocurrent of the devices close to the maximum power point was measured as a function of time in Fig. 10c. The photocurrent measured at 0.9 V slightly increased to approximately 19.7 mA cm−2 after tens of seconds of illumination, and then stabilized with little change over the time period of our experiment. From the steady-state photocurrent, the stabilized PCE was estimated to be 17.8%. This indicates that the devices have good working-stability. To demonstrate the reproducibility of the device performance, Fig. 10d shows a histogram of PCEs collected from one batch of devices (40 devices). The power conversion efficiencies range from 15.3% to 18.9%, and most of the device efficiencies are greater than 17%, which proved the good reproducibility of the device performance. We also have tested the durability of the un-encapsulated ZnO- and TiO2-based devices exposed to ambient conditions for as long as 30 days (temperature: ∼25 °C, humidity: ∼20%). It was found that the ZnO-based devices have comparable durability to the TiO2-based devices (Fig. 11a). Although the TiO2-based device maintained a relatively higher percentage of the original levels (91.5% vs. 88.3%), the ZnO-based devices still showed excellent environmental durability and yielded higher power conversion efficiencies than those of the TiO2-based devices after 30 days. The durability of ZnO-based PSCs based on either MAPbI3 or FAPbI3 was also compared with that of devices based on triple cation perovskite in Fig. S13. Clearly, the triple cation perovskite-based solar cells exhibited the best durability among all the solar cells. The excellent stability of the devices might originate not only from the intrinsic physical properties of triple cation perovskite, i.e., fewer defects and superior structural stability related to the reduced cation radius, but also from the insensitive interaction between the MA cation in the triple cation perovskite structure and the hydroxyl-containing ZnO electron transport layer.Fig. 11b shows the photo-stability results of the devices under simulated sunlight illumination. Compared to the device based on TiO2, the ZnO-based device decreased more gently under illumination within 8 h. Both oxygen vacancies and ultraviolet light induced degradation in TiO2 may be the crucial factors affecting the photo-stability of TiO2-based PSCs. This advantage in stability of the ZnO-based Cs6M PSCs makes it a promising candidate in the practical applications of the perovskite solar cells.

In summary, we have successfully developed cesium-containing triple cation (Cs6(MA0.17FA0.83)94Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3) perovskite solar cells based on low-temperature-processed ZnO as the electron transport layer. We observed a dependence of the grain morphology of the as-deposited perovskite films on the annealing temperature. The PSCs exhibit the highest photovoltaic performance at an annealing temperature of 95 °C. Furthermore, the composition of Cs is a crucial factor to determine the thermostability of CsxM on ZnO, and thus affect the photovoltaic performance and hysteresis behavior of the devices. A remnant PbI2 phase was also introduced successfully to passivate the traps in perovskite layers and the device based on Cs6M delivered the champion efficiency of 18.9%, which is a record-high with a conventional structure of glass/ITO/ZnO/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag. Importantly, the ZnO-based Cs6M PSCs showed excellent durability and photostability. We believe that the combination of ease-of-fabrication, low-temperature processing, efficient performance and excellent durability means the Cs6M-based ZnO PSCs deserve to be promising new candidates to solve renewable energy issues in the future.


This work was supported by 973 Program (2014CB643506), the Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21221063 and 11574111), Program for Chang Jiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team in University (No. IRT101713018) and Program for Changbaishan Scholars of Jilin Province. Project 2016017 Supported by Graduate Innovation Fund of Jilin University. X.-F. W. and T. M. thank for the support from Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST) Advanced Low Carbon Technology R&D program (ALCA).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta03331a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017