 DOI: 10.1039/C9NR04110A
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 17073-17083


Yidan
An
,

Chunxiang
Sheng
 and 

Xiaofeng
Li
*

School of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering & Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China. E-mail: xfli@suda.edu.cn

Key Lab of Advanced Optical Manufacturing Technologies of Jiangsu Province & Key Lab of Modern Optical Technologies of Education Ministry of China, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China

Received
14th May 2019
, Accepted 27th August 2019
First published on 27th August 2019
Passive radiative cooling technology has attracted extensive attention as it addresses the potential applications in effectively cooling photovoltaics and related systems. Here, we performed comprehensive multidimensional and multiphysical opto-electro-thermal (OET) modeling, which was used to design a silicon-based radiative cooling system for a solar cell (SC). Our study simultaneously takes into account the coupled effects of the radiative cooling characteristics, carrier thermodynamics, and electrodynamic behaviors of SCs in the spatial and frequency domains. Based on a comprehensive photonic design, we presented a radiative cooler with near-ideal spectral selectivity from the sunlight to the infrared band. The fundamental OET physical mechanisms and the effect of temperature on the performance of SCs were explored. A comparable study on the performance parameters of the SCs with and without a radiative cooler was formulated, which revealed that the SC temperature can be reduced by over 10 °C and the absolute power conversion efficiency (PCE) can be increased by 0.45% after employing a photonic radiative cooler. Our OET study provides a ready method to explore the comprehensive OET physics in photovoltaic systems.

A detailed balance analysis by applying the thermodynamic principle has revealed that a single-junction solar cell (SC) has a theoretical upper limit of the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of around 33% under AM 1.5 solar illumination. This means that a significant portion of the solar energy absorbed by the SC is actually converted into unwanted heat (rather than into useful electricity) via different channels, which considerably increases the operating temperature and degrades the stability of SCs. At present, the PCEs in the lab of typical SCs based on Si, GaAs, or perovskites have already surpassed 23% (or even approaching 30%) by means of advanced photon management and carrier transport optimization. However, the typical operating temperature of a single-junction photovoltaic (PV) system can reach around 50–55 °C (which is even higher for concentrated SCs) in outdoor environments. The thermal effect is detrimental for achieving reliable high-efficiency SCs. For example, for a monocrystalline silicon (c-Si) PV array, every 1 °C rise in temperature leads to a relative efficiency decline of ∼0.45% and an exponentially increased aging rate. Therefore, strategies that can effectively cool PV systems are highly desired.

The conventional cooling strategies include the use of heat pipes, forced air flow circulation, water cooling, thermoelectric cooling, and phase-change materials. However, most of them need extra energy inputs, which increases the system complexity as well as degrades the energy utilization efficiency. In recent years, radiative cooling mechanisms have attracted tremendous attention since they rely only on the thermal emissions of a designed radiative cooler to lower the temperature of the PV system without requiring any external energy inputs. Currently, most studies have focused on the fabrication of radiative coolers and the evaluation of the cooling effect. For example, Lu et al. deposited textured SiO2 on the Si PV module to enable PCE enhancement of over 0.5%; a temperature decline of 13 °C was observed in the experiments by integrating the designed silica (SiO2) photonic crystals on top of a doped silicon wafer. On the other hand, theoretical studies have mainly concentrated on designing a high-performance radiative cooler and revealing its spectral selectivity and cooling effect, but these designs are based on a simplified one-dimensional optical-thermal or opto-electro-thermal (OET) model. For example, by designing an SiO2 pyramid structure, Zhu et al. theoretically demonstrated that the operating temperature of SC can be reduced by ∼18.3 °C based on an optical-thermal model; Li et al. demonstrated that the temperature of encapsulated solar panels can be reduced by over 5.7 °C after using a multilayer photonic design; Sun et al. calculated the radiation power and temperature decrease of an SiO2 bulk material by using an analytical OET method.
In these studies, multilayer or more complicated photonic crystal structures were extensively used; moreover, the infrared thermal radiation of the designed radiative cooler was considered, but the filtering function for the sunlight band of 1.1–4 μm can be further improved. Therefore, designing a radiative cooler with easy fabrication and high-performance spectral selectivity within the range from the sunlight to the infrared band has become imperative, but it still remains a challenge. This is because the precise control of the spectral response of a radiative cooling system for SC applications relies on a thorough understanding of the intrinsic optical, electrical, and thermodynamic characteristics; moreover, the related fundamental physics have to be examined at both macroscopic (e.g., heat caused by sunlight, thermal radiation of atmosphere, and radiative cooler, as well as nonradiative heat exchange processes) and microscopic (e.g., carrier thermodynamics and carrier transports) levels. All these requirements strongly necessitate a comprehensive study on the coupled OET effects. Such an OET study must address the very detailed multidomain and multiscale OET responses, including electromagnetic absorption, electron–hole behaviors in generation/transportation/recombination/collection processes, and heat generation/transport/radiation in multispatial and frequency (or time) domains.
In this work, we report the comprehensive multidimensional OET modeling of a radiative cooling system for SCs in order to comprehensively investigate the intrinsic multiscale physics as well as guide the design of high-performance radiative coolers for SCs. The simulation is implemented by addressing the electromagnetic response, carrier transport dynamics (generation/recombination/transportation/collection), and microscopic carrier thermodynamic processes (thermalization/joule/recombination/Peltier heat), as well as macroscopic thermal conduction, radiation, and diffusion processes (e.g., sunlight absorption, nonradiative heat exchange, atmospheric radiation, cooler radiation, etc.) in the radiative cooling systems of SCs. First, the fundamental physical mechanisms of passive radiative cooling and carrier thermodynamic/electrodynamic principles in SCs are analyzed. Then, we design a high-performance radiative cooler through the photonic method. Next, we present a detailed analysis of the macroscopic energy conversion process in a radiative cooling system for SCs and quantitatively analyze the carrier thermo-/electrodynamic behaviors under forward bias. Finally, the thermal effect on the optoelectronic performance of SCs and the influence of weather conditions on the radiative cooler are explored. Such a comprehensive multidimensional OET model provides a useful platform for comprehensively uncovering the fundamental OET science as well as accurately predicting the performance of OET devices from both microscopic and macroscopic perspectives.

Based on the optoelectronic model of SCs and the pioneering work of OET multiphysics simulation involving GaAs SCs, the OET simulation of radiative cooling systems for SCs can be implemented by simultaneously addressing the optical, electrical, and thermal processes by a finite-element method in the COMSOL Multiphysics platform. Optically, the light reflectivity (R), transitivity (T), and emissivity (E) are obtained by solving the Maxwell's equations. Electrically, the carrier generation–recombination–transportation–collection behaviors, driven by the built-in electric field, carrier concentration gradient, temperature gradient, etc., are accurately treated. Thermodynamically, the macroscopic heat generation and dissipation processes (including solar illumination, thermal emission of radiative cooler and atmosphere, and nonradiative heat exchange) are considered through the steady-state heat diffusion equation; from the microscopic perspective, the carrier thermodynamic behaviors (including thermalization, Joule heat, recombination heat, and Peltier heat) are taken into consideration by solving the carrier thermodynamic equation.

With regard to macroscopic thermodynamics, when the radiative cooling system of SC is exposed to a clear sky, there are four heat exchange processes, namely, (1) absorption of solar irradiance, (2) thermal radiation from the radiative cooler, (3) absorption of thermal radiation from the atmosphere, and (4) convection and conduction heat exchanges between the radiative cooling system and ambient air. For a radiative cooler with area A and temperature T, the thermal radiation power of the radiative cooler (Prad) can be given by
(1)
where
 is the angular integral over the hemisphere,  is the spectral radiance of a blackbody at temperature T, ε(λ,θ) is the directional spectral emissivity, h is the Planck's constant, kB is the Boltzmann constant, c is the speed of light, and λ is the thermal radiation wavelength. By integrating the spectral irradiance, the total radiation power can be obtained according to the Stefan–Boltzmann law:

Prad(T) = AσT4
(2)
where
σ is the Stefan–Boltzmann constant and  is the average emissivity of the radiative cooler. The absorbed radiation power from the atmosphere can be defined as:

(3)
where
Tamb is the ambient temperature, εatm(λ,θ) = 1 − t(λ)1/cosθ is the angle-dependent emissivity of the atmosphere, and t(λ) is the atmospheric transmittance along the zenith.

The solar power absorbed by the radiative cooling system can be expressed as:
(4)
where
IAM1.5 is the standard AM1.5 solar spectrum. The top/bottom nonradiative heat exchange powers between the radiative cooling system and ambient air (i.e., convection and conduction heat exchange processes) are:

PT/Bnon(T, Tamb) = Ahtop/bottom(T − Tamb)
(5)
where
htop/bottom is the top/bottom surface nonradiative heat exchange coefficient of the radiative cooling system representing the ability of nonradiative heat dissipation, which is weighed by the wind speed for a typical environment situation.

For SCs, a significant portion of the absorbed solar energy is converted into heat rather than useful electricity. From the carrier thermodynamic perspective, when a photon is absorbed by the SC, the energy of the photogenerated hot carrier can be dissipated by three kinds of heat channels in the bulk: (1) thermalization (Pth) arising from the thermal relaxation process of the generated hot carriers; (2) Joule heat (PJoule) caused by the carrier movements with the presence of the built-in electric field, i.e., the self-heating effect; and (3) bulk recombination heat (Pbulkrec). Simultaneously, the hot-carrier energy is also consumed by two kinds of heat mechanisms at the surface of SC, i.e., (1) surface recombination heat (Psurfrec) due to the minority carrier recombination process and (2) Peltier heat (Pn/pPeltier) arising from the electron (hole) energy relaxation process from the conduction (valence) band to the corresponding quasi-Fermi level (when the electron or hole is collected by the electrode). The energy dissipation (also heat generation) processes in SC can be defined as:
(6)
PJoule(x, y, z) = F·J
(7)
Pbulkrec(x, y, z) = Eg·Ubulk(x, y, z)
(8)
Psurfrec(x, y, z) = Eg·Usurf(x, y)
(9)
Pn/pPeltier(x, y) = |(Ec/v − Efn/fp)|·J
(10)
where
hv − Eg is the excess photon energy, g(x,y,z,λ) is the carrier generation rate, J is the current density, F is the built-in electric field, Ubulk is the bulk recombination rate (Shockley–Read–Hall and Auger recombination), Usurf is the surface recombination rate, Ec/v is the conduction/valence energy level, and Efn/fp is the electron/hole quasi-Fermi level.

For the SC, carrier thermodynamics are closely related to the carrier transport behaviors. Therefore, the coupled carrier thermodynamic and electrodynamic behaviors are considered in our OET model:
(11)
(12)
(13)
∇·(−k∇T) = H
(14)
where
εr is the material permittivity, n (p) is the electron (hole) concentration, Φ is the electrostatic potential, Dn (Dp) is the electron (hole) diffusion coefficient, Dthn (Dthp) is the thermal diffusion coefficient of the electron (hole), Nc (Nv) is the effective conduction (valence) band density of states, μn (μp) is the electron (hole) mobility, U is the total bulk recombination, q is the electron charge, C is the impurity concentration, and H is the net heat generated in the SC under steady state.

In our OET model, nonradiative heat exchange, surface recombination heat, and Peltier heat are considered as the boundary heat sources, i.e., boundary conditions; the remaining heat processes are bulk heat resources, which rely on the heat exchange positions generated or dissipated in the radiative cooling system. In this study, we concentrate on the comprehensive OET physics and simulation of radiative cooling systems for SCs by taking a 10 μm c-Si SC as the example.

Multilayer thin films and photonic crystal structures have been widely applied for broadband spectral filtering and thermal radiation purposes, respectively. Therefore, the spectral selectivity of a radiative cooler of SC can be easily implemented by integrating the functions of multilayer thin films and photonic crystal structures, as shown in Fig. 1. For example, a standalone daytime radiative cooler (without considering the SC application) must simultaneously meet the following two requirements: (1) high reflection in the entire sunlight band and (2) high and selective thermal emission in the atmospheric transparent window, as shown in Fig. 1(a) and (c). Therefore, it can be guaranteed that the temperature of the daytime radiative cooler under illumination is lower than that of the ambient air. Comparably, more complicated spectral selectivity has to be considered for the radiative coolers used in SCs, as shown in Fig. 1(b) and (d). For example, for the radiative coolers of c-Si SCs, the essential considerations include the following: (1) in the wavelength range of 0.35–1.1 μm, the radiative cooler needs to have the maximum transmittance to allow the incident photons to completely transmit through the radiative cooler and then be absorbed by the c-Si material; (2) in the 1.1–4 μm band, sunlight has to be completely reflected to avoid parasitic heat absorption inside the SC; (3) since the typical operating temperature of the SC is higher than the ambient temperature in the outdoor environment, the net outward radiative power from the radiative cooler to the atmosphere is beneficial for lowering the operating temperature of PV devices; hence, broadband thermal radiation is necessary for the entire infrared range (e.g., 4–25 μm).


Based on the principle mentioned above, we propose a radiative cooler for 10 μm-thick thin-film c-Si SCs, as shown in Fig. 2(a), which integrates a multilayer thin-film stack and a SiO2 grating. SiO2 material is selected due to its high extinction coefficient in the infrared band and high transmittance in the solar band. First, the transmissivity and emissivity of the SiO2 bulk material are shown in Fig. 2(b); evidently, there are two emissivity dips at the wavelengths of 9 and 21 μm, which can be attributed to the strong phonon polarization resonances of silica. At these two wavelengths, silica has particularly high extinction coefficients, exhibiting a strong resistance impedance mismatch between air and SiO2 (as well as high reflectivity from the interface).

In order to obtain a high-performance filtering function, the optimization of the thin-film stack of the radiative cooler is implemented by employing a memetic algorithm, which is an optimization method for designing stacked thin-film structures by combining an evolutionary algorithm and a local optimization method. The materials are selected from the common materials used in experiments, such as magnesium fluoride (MgF2), hafnium dioxide (HfO2), silver (Ag), silicon carbide (SiC), silicon nitride (SiN), aluminum oxide (Al2O3), and silica (SiO2). The corresponding sedimentary sequence and material thicknesses after optimization are listed in Table 1. The resulting SiO2 grating configuration is shown in Fig. 2(a), which includes near-unity thermal emissivity in the infrared band, as shown in Fig. 2(b).
Material
Thickness (nm)
Layer sequence (from top to bottom)
MgF2
600
1
HfO2
39
2
Ag
8
3
HfO2
52
4
SiO2
40
5
SiC
23
6
Ag
8
7
SiN
21
8
Al2O3
147
9
SiC
42
10
For understanding SC applications, Fig. 2(c) and (d) show the optical responses of the designed radiative cooler in the sunlight and infrared bands, respectively, where the ideal spectra are plotted for reference. Evidently, very good spectral selectivity is obtained in the considered wavelength band (e.g., 0.35–25 μm). Within 0.35–1.1 μm, the radiative cooler functions are similar to a multilayer antireflection film. Hence, the radiative cooler enables high transmission (average T ∼0.82), where the average T is 0.90 within 0.4–0.9 μm. Within the 1.1–4 μm band, the radiative cooler is strongly reflective with average R > 0.91 to eliminate the parasitic heat absorption of SCs. The obtained R value is higher than that obtained in an earlier work (∼30%). Simultaneously, the radiative cooler yields near-unity broadband thermal emission in the 4–25 μm band [see Fig. 2(d)], where the average E value is almost 0.92 under TE incidence [transverse-magnetic (TM) situation shows a similar behavior].
For practical radiative cooling applications, it is significant to be independent of the incident angle and light polarization. Fig. 3(a) [Fig. 3(b)] shows the plots of the emissivity of the radiative cooler versus the incident wavelength and angle for TE (TM) situation. Evidently, the radiative cooler features high emissivity in the infrared band even under a very large incident angle (regardless of TE or TM incidence). In order to estimate the overall thermal emission performance of the radiative cooler, the spectrally (within the 4–25 μm infrared band) averaged emission characteristics are plotted as a function of the incident angle, as shown in Fig. 3(c) for both TE and TM cases. In spite of lower thermal emissions in the 4–5 μm band, high average emissivity can be obtained under a large range of incident angles. For example, the average emissivity surpasses 0.9 with an incident angle up to 50° for both polarizations; increasing the incident angle to 70°, the average emissivity under unpolarized incidence [((TE + TM)/2)] can still exceed 0.8. Therefore, it is obvious that the emission properties of the radiative cooling system for SCs are independent of the incident angle and light polarization. Unexpectedly, the spectral selectivity of radiative cooling systems in GaAs-Si-based and perovskite-Si-based tandem SCs are similar as compared to those in Si systems, implying that the designed radiative cooler can be applied for various SCs, as shown in Fig. 3(d).

Based on the structure discussed above through the photonic design, a comprehensive OET simulation can be formulated, which enables a comprehensive and simultaneous evaluation regarding both macroscopic and microscopic responses of the system in the optical, electrical, and thermodynamic domains. The detailed energy analyses are shown in Fig. 4 and summarized in Table 2. In these calculations, both the temperature of SC and ambient air are chosen to be 300 K under the dark condition; moreover, nonradiative heat exchange coefficients for the top and bottom boundaries of the radiative cooling system are htop = 8 and hbottom = 5 W m−2 K−1, respectively.Fig. 4(a) shows the plots of the spectra of the power densities reflected back, transmitted through, and absorbed by the system. Here, the standard AM1.5 solar spectrum is shown for reference. Moreover, the absorptions by the radiative cooling layers (PCAbs) and SC (PSCAbs) can be distinguished. For solar incidence, the power density in the silicon band (0.35–1.1 μm) is 800.94 W m−2 (80.8%) and 189.72 W m−2 (19.2%) in the 1.1–4 μm band (see Table 2). For the designed radiative cooling c-Si SC, the power densities reflected and absorbed by the radiative cooling layers are only ∼80.71 W m−2 (10.1%) and ∼43.02 W m−2 (5.4%), respectively, showing the high-performance filtering effect at the c-Si SC band (see Table 2). Consequently, it ensures that the solar energy of 677.21 W m−2 (84.5%) can reach the SC for electricity generation. Here, a thin-film c-Si SC with Si thickness of 10 μm is used, which shows an absorption power density of 528.91 W m−2 (66.0%) and a transmission power density of 148.30 W m−2 (18.5%), as shown in Fig. 4(a). In the 1.1–4 μm band, the power density of 159.12 W m−2 (83.9%) is reflected by the radiative cooler and c-Si SC does not exhibit noticeable absorption (see Table 2).

Solar spectrum (W m−2)

P
Ref


P
CAbs


P
SCAbs


P
Tra

0.35–1.1 (μm)
800.94 (80.8%)
80.71 (10.1%)
43.02 (5.4%)
528.91 (66.0%)
148.30 (18.5%)
1.1–4 (μm)
189.72 (19.2%)
159.12 (83.9%)
14.89 (7.8%)
0.002 (0.0%)
15.71 (8.3%)
Total
990.66
The OET simulation also facilitates the evaluation of the electrical and thermal responses under various electrical biases. For example, Fig. 4(b) shows the plots of the output power density of the SC and the thermal radiative power density (Prad) of the radiative cooler as a function of the forward electrical bias. For all the SCs, the absorbed solar energy can only be partly converted into electricity (PPV), where the remaining portion is converted into heat (which increases the SC temperature). Due to the law of conservation of energy, the sum of electricity and heat power should be identical to the absorbed solar energy. Energy conservation obeys the following relation:
(15)
where the terms on the right-hand side of the equation are the power densities obtained by thermalization, Joule heat, bulk recombination, surface recombination, Peltier effect, and SC output, respectively. Therefore, under the short-circuit condition,
PPV = 0, implying that the solar power absorbed by the SC is completely dissipated by the various heat mechanisms; in this case, the operation temperature of the SC is 328.58 K (55.43 °C). However, at the point with the highest PPV, the dissipated heat in the SC reaches the minimum and the operating temperature of the SC is decreased to 322.88 K (49.73 °C). For a radiative cooling system for SCs, the energy difference between the absorbed energy (including the absorbed solar illumination and atmospheric radiation) and outward energy (thermal radiation, nonradiative heat exchange, and electrical output) follows the following conservation equation:

0 = Prad(T) + Pnon(T, Tamb) − Psun + PPV − Patm(Tamb)
(16)
where
Pnon includes the top and bottom nonradiative heat exchanges (PTnon & PBnon, respectively).


Fig. 4(c) shows the thermal radiation spectra of the radiative cooler and ambient air at the corresponding temperatures. Blackbody radiations are used as the reference. Moreover, the overall thermal radiation power densities of the radiative cooler and atmosphere in various bands are labeled. It is shown that our designed cooler has an emission spectrum that is very close to that of an ideal blackbody system under the same temperature. The difference of the radiation power densities between the radiative cooler and atmosphere directly reflects the radiative cooling effect. As shown in Fig. 4(c), in the 8–13 μm band, the radiative cooler exhibits the strongest cooling effect since (1) the strong thermal radiation of the cooler occurs in this band and (2) it is the first atmospheric transparent window with very low radiation from the atmosphere. It should be noted that the second atmospheric window exists in the 16–22 μm band, but the radiative cooling effect is very weak due to the lower thermal emission of the cooler.
The thermodynamic characteristics obtained in the radiative cooling system at the maximum power point of the SC are shown in Fig. 4(d). Evidently, (1) for the SC, solar illumination absorbed by the cell is PSCAbs ∼528.9 W m−2 with relatively low output power PPV ∼105.2 W m−2 (due to the very thin Si material under consideration), i.e., a large portion is converted into heat (PSCheat ∼423.7 W m−2); (2) for the radiative cooler, the absorbed solar illumination is only PCheat ∼63.4 W m−2; (3) the radiative power density absorbed from the atmosphere is Patm ∼238.3 W m−2; (4) the calculated nonradiative power densities at the top (htop = 8 W m−2 K−1) and bottom (hbottom = 5 W m−2 K−1) are 182.9 and 111.4 W m−2, respectively; (5) the radiative power density can reach up to 428.4 W m−2.
Since the SC is a coupled OET system, the carrier thermodynamic characteristics are closely related with the carrier transport behaviors. Fig. 5(a) and (b) show a quantitative analysis of the bias-dependent carrier electrodynamic and thermodynamic characteristics, respectively. Under low forward electrical bias (e.g., 0–0.41 V), the built-in electric field is weakened, but without qualitatively affecting the carrier separation capability; therefore, Jsc remains almost unchanged, as shown in Fig. 5(a). Correspondingly, Fig. 5(b) shows that under such low bias, (1) the Joule heat gradually declines due to the weakened built-in electric field; (2) PU and PPeltier remain unchanged with the increase in forward bias; and (3) Pth is independent of the bias since it only relies on the bandgap of the SC material. By contrast, under large forward bias (e.g., 0.42–0.54 V), the carrier cannot be effectively transported over the p–n junction, leading to higher carrier recombinations. It is observed that all the top, bottom, and bulk recombination current densities (JTsurf, JBsurf, and Jbulk) rapidly increase, as shown in Fig. 5(a), leading to much higher recombination heat (PU) [Fig. 5(b)]. In addition, the pie chart of the current density components at the maximum power point is shown in Fig. 5(a), which reveals that 87.6% of the photocurrent is collected by the electrode, and JTsurf and JBsurf are the main recombination-induced photocurrent losses in the SC. Moreover, the quantitative analysis of the thermodynamic behaviors at the maximum power point of SC is summarized in Table 3. Evidently, (1) the absorbed power density of 47.05% (248.87 W m−2) is lost by thermalization, which can be significantly reduced by using a tandem SC structure; (2) the energy of 83.20 W m−2 is lost by Joule heat; and (3) the power densities as a result of recombination and Peltier heat are 34.75 and 56.93 W m−2, respectively. Recombination heat in the SC can be effectively reduced by optimizing the carrier transportation process (e.g., tailoring the doping concentration, energy band alignment, and surface passivation strategy) of the SC. Further, the Peltier heat can be considerably reduced by diminishing the interfacial barrier between the SC and metal–electrode (e.g., regulating the work function of the metal–electrode).
Thermodynamic channels
Thermalization
Joule
Recombination
Peltier
Electricity
Power density (W m−2)
248.87 (47.05%)
83.20 (15.73%)
34.75 (6.57%)
56.93 (10.76%)
105.16 (19.88%)

We perform a comparable study on the thermal characteristics of the considered thin-film c-Si SC with and without the radiative cooler design. For fairness in comparison, this study is based on two conditions: (1) the SCs under both the situations identically absorb sunlight and (2) the same nonradiative heat exchange coefficients (htop = 8 W m−2 K−1 at the top; hbottom = 5 W m−2 K−1 at the bottom) are selected. In fact, through our OET simulation, the steady-state temperature distribution inside the SC can be determined, which can effectively reflect how the radiative cooler affects the thermal response of the SC. Fig. 6(a) shows the plots of the spatial temperature distributions of the SCs without [(a1)] and with [(a2)] the cooler. It is obvious that the temperature gradient in the SC is only ∼0.001 °C due to the high thermal conductivity (130 W m−1 K−1) of the Si material; moreover, there are slight lateral variations in the temperature due to the introduction of the grating layer in the radiative cooling section. For bare SCs, the cell temperature is required to be heated up to ∼332.94 K (59.79 °C) from the environmental 300 K due to the sunlight illumination, as shown in Fig. 6(a1). However, with the incorporation of a radiative cooler, the cell temperature is lowered to 322.88 K (49.73 °C), i.e., a temperature drop of over 10 °C, as shown in Fig. 6(a2).

We further examine how the radiative cooler improves the photoconversion performance of the SC. The current–voltage (J–V) curves of the SCs before and after employing the radiative cooler are shown in Fig. 6(b), where the short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and PCE (η) can be determined and compared. With an increase in the operation temperature of the SC, Jsc can be affected when (1) the equilibrium carrier population increases exponentially, leading to a higher dark current density and lower Jsc; (2) the temperature gradient after exiting from the SC can provide thermal diffusion force for the carrier to induce a thermal current density, which facilitates the increase in Jsc. Eventually, the thermal current density outweighs the dark saturation current density and a relatively higher Jsc value can be obtained for bare SCs without a radiative cooler [Fig. 6(b)]. However, the value of Voc exponentially reduces with an increase in the dark current at higher temperatures, leading to an obvious decrease in Voc.Fig. 6(b) shows that Voc decreases by about 2.1 mV °C−1, which agrees well with the experiments. Therefore, the net effect of temperature is the reduction of the PCE of SC with an increase in the operating temperature, which reveals that the incorporation of a radiative cooler can be useful for sustaining a high PCE. From Fig. 6(b), it is evident that the PCE of the SC can be increased by 0.43% after employing a radiative cooler.
In practice, the nonradiative effects can also lower the operating temperature of the SC, estimated by the nonradiative heat exchange coefficient (hc = htop + hbottom), which remarkably affects the radiative cooling effect. Hence, the temperature decline (ΔT) in the SC after employing a radiative cooler and the Prad of the radiative cooler as a function of hc are shown in Fig. 6(c). It can be observed that the operating temperature of the SC can be reduced by over 23 °C with hc = 8 W m−2 K−1; even for large hc = 15 W m−2 K−1, the temperature reduction of ∼8 °C and considerably high Prad (over 415 W m−2) can still be achieved.
Finally, considering the actual environmental situation in the day, the time-dependent performance of the radiative cooling for the SC is investigated by combining the experimental data of the solar irradiance and ambient air temperature.Fig. 7 shows the variations in the temperature and PCE of the SC as well as the radiative power density of the radiative cooler versus the time of the day. In the time range from 11:30 a.m. to 14:30 p.m., the solar irradiance gradually declines, while the temperature of ambient air increases with time. Near the peak of solar irradiance, the SC achieves the highest temperature of ∼50.77 °C (41.91 °C) under bare (radiative cooler) design, demonstrating that the SC temperature can be cooled by 8.86 °C. As the solar irradiance weakens, the SC temperature shows a rapid decline. At 14:30 p.m., the SC temperatures are 43.48 °C and 36.08 °C in the case of bare and radiative cooling SCs, respectively, i.e., a temperature decline effected by a radiative cooler is 7.4 °C. In addition, the PCE of the SC and radiative power density of the cooler are sensitive to the operating temperature, as shown in Fig. 7(b). The radiative power density over 360 W m−2 can be obtained even with a relatively lower operating temperature (e.g., 36.08 °C).

In summary, we performed a comprehensive multidimensional OET simulation involving photonic radiative coolers with regard to applications in reliable high-efficiency photovoltaic cells. In particular, the fundamental physical mechanisms of the radiative cooling systems for SCs were quantitatively analyzed from the macroscopic and microscopic perspectives by simultaneously addressing the optical, electrical, and thermal effects. We proposed a photonic radiative cooler with near-ideal spectral selectivity from the sunlight to the infrared band, featuring angle and polarization-independence properties. Based on the OET model, we presented a detailed analysis of the macroscopic energy conversion processes (including the absorbed solar illumination, radiative power of the radiative cooler and atmosphere, nonradiative heat exchange, output power of electricity, and net cooling power) in the radiative cooling system for SCs. Moreover, the coupled carrier electrodynamic (carrier generation/recombination/transportation/collection) and thermodynamic (thermalization, Joule, recombination and Peltier heat) behaviors in the SC were quantitatively evaluated under forward bias. Further, the fundamental mechanisms involving the effect of temperature on the performance (Jsc, Voc, FF, and η) of SCs were explored. Our results demonstrated that the absolute efficiency of the SC increases by ∼0.43% and a reduction in the SC operating temperature by ∼10.16 °C can be obtained after employing the designed radiative cooler. The effect of temperature significantly restricts the voltage of the SC, and a high-performance SC can be implemented by integration with a photonic radiative cooler. Our comprehensive OET study provides a ready method to explore the intrinsic OET physics of photovoltaics and other OET-related optoelectronic systems. It can also effectively guide the design of reliable and high-performance OET devices.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (61675142 and 61875143), Jiangsu Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (BK20180042), Natural Science Research Project of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (17KJA480004), and Priority Academic Program Development (PAPD) of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions, Postgraduate Research & Practice Innovation Program of Jiangsu Province (KYCX18_2501).


† These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019