 DOI: 10.1039/D3TC00818E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2023, 11, 9189-9200


Lei
Jin
,

Yi-Lin
Li
,

Jian
Zhou
*,

Chun-Mei
Huang
 and 

Xing
Liu
*

Chongqing Key Laboratory of Inorganic Functional Materials, College of Chemistry, Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing 401331, P. R. China. E-mail: jianzhou888888@163.com

Received
6th March 2023
, Accepted 30th May 2023
First published on 30th May 2023
Organic hybrid metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have become a new class of most promising photovoltaic materials owing to high power conversion efficiency (PCE) and low-cost solution-process. Nevertheless, various defects at the surface and grain boundaries of polycrystalline perovskite films severely affect their efficiencies and stabilities. Defect passivation is one of the effective strategies for improving the photovoltaic efficiency and stability of PSCs via the decrease of non-radiative recombination losses caused by defect states. Herein, a multifunctional rhodamine B (RhB) molecule is applied for the first time for synergistically passivating defects in polycrystalline perovskite films. The carboxylic, diethyl amine and xanthene groups of RhB as Lewis bases inactivate the under-coordinated Pb2+, the π-conjugation benzene ring is able to reduce the neutral iodine related defects, and its positively charged diethyl ammonium (CN+) and Cl− anion neutralize the charged defects, ultimately healing these trap states. After RhB passivation, the inverted PSCs based on MAPbI3 exhibit a best PCE of 20.70% with extremely low hysteresis behavior (0.06%) in comparison to the control PSCs (a PCE of 18.79% with a high hysteresis index of 1.38%). Meanwhile, the unpackaged device with RhB displays better stability owing to the hydrophobic phenyl groups of RhB hindering the decomposition of perovskite films. These results demonstrate that the synergistic passivation of multifunctional RhB in this work exhibits a novel strategy to fabricate highly stable and efficient PSCs.

Organic hybrid metal halide PSCs are of great interest due to their high PCE, long carrier recombination lifetime, long carrier diffusion length, solution processability, low fabrication cost, high defect tolerance and adjustable band gap. In the light of the most outstanding characteristics of PSCs, their highest recorded PCE has exceeded 25% to date, which offers great commercial prospects. Among these PSCs, inverted (p–i–n configuration) PSCs exhibit the merits of high power-per-weight, quite low hysteresis, conformability at minimal cost, and outstanding flexibility, showing potential for commercial application in the future. However, the low temperature solution-fabricating method inevitably generates a great deal of various detrimental defects at the surface and grain boundaries (GBs) in polycrystalline perovskite films. These defects might form a high density of trap states that capture photo-generated carriers, leading to a decrease of charge carrier transportation and device performance. The serious defects at GBs can not only offer a favorable pathway for diffusion and ionic migration that results in the current hysteresis effect and the decrease of device efficiency, but also favors moisture or oxygen to permeate along GBs, which causes device instability. Moreover, the release of the MA+ cation during the thermal annealing process leads to generating varying point defects, such as Pb–I antisites (PbI3−) and under-coordinated Pb2+, finally constituting the main source of surface trap states that enormously decrease the performance of PSCs. Therefore, the exploration of a feasible strategy for healing the detrimental defects at the surface and GBs is highly desirable for improving the stability and performance of PSCs.

Defect passivation has been demonstrated as an effective strategy for the improvement of the stability and efficiency of PSCs. The ionic nature of metal halide perovskites requires different types of functional organic molecules for defect passivation, because they contain positively (e.g., halide anionic vacancies causing under-coordinated Pb2+ defects) and negatively (e.g., MA+ vacancies and PbI3− antisite defects) charged traps. Currently, various Lewis base passivation molecules with functional groups including thiophene/pyridine, carboxylic, sulfonic and amino and others have been developed and serve as electron donors that can bind with positively under-coordinated Pb2+ defects with an electron-deficient feature and thus annihilate these positively charged traps, reducing ionic migration. Lewis base molecules with bi-functional groups might have a more excellent passivation effect than mono-functional molecules, because they have multiple lone pairs of electrons, enhancing the ability to capture the positively charged defects. The typically bi-functional organic molecules are constructed by the common assembly of one amine group and one carboxyl (or carbonyl) group, as exemplified by aminovaleric acid, 2-amino-5-iodobenzoic acid, 4-diaminomethylbenzoic acid and D-4-tert-butylphenylalanine, which have an outstandingly synergistic passivation effect on the positively charged defects. However, Lewis base organic molecules incorporating multiple functional groups are less applied for the passivation of the positive defects, which might be due to their synthetic difficulties. On the other hand, Lewis acid passivation materials (e.g., fullerene, phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester, and indene-C60 bisadduct) can accept foreign electron pairs and possess unique capabilities for passivating the negatively charged under-coordinated I− or PbI3− antisite defects with lone pairs of electrons. Alkylammonium halogens, which contain alkylammonium cations and halogen anions, have a comprehensive passivation effect on both positively charged cationic (e.g., halide anionic vacancy) and negatively charged anionic (e.g., MA+ vacancy) defects via either hydrogen bonding or ionic bonding interactions. Alkylammonium cations occupy the MA+ vacancies and additional halogen anions fill the halide anionic vacancies, which compensate for the loss of MA+ cations and halide anions during the thermal annealing process. In addition, the other important types of neutral I0 (e.g., I2) defects may also exist at the surface or GBs, due to the oxidation of I− to I0 during degradation. The electron-donating aromatic species as Lewis bases can form Lewis adducts with Lewis acid I0 defects, decreasing the neutral iodine related defects. However, most of the functional organic molecules applied for defect passivation could only heal one or two types of trap states. In consideration of the complicated and various defects at the surface and GBs, the development of new multifunctional passivators healing more kinds of defects is very necessary for the improvement of the device performance.
In this study, a multifunctional RhB molecule is applied to synergistically passivate the defects in the perovskite film, realizing the remarkable improvement of the device efficiency and stability. RhB comprising special multifunctional groups and halide ions, such as carboxylic, diethyl amine, xanthene, phenyl ring, positively charged diethyl ammonium (CN+) and Cl− anion, can influence the defect density, stability, and the others of the perovskite film. For RhB, the combination of Lewis base carboxylic, diethyl amine and xanthene groups is a rare assembly, because the reported Lewis base molecules generally contain one carboxylic (or carbonyl) and one amine group. The RhB with a multifunctional Lewis base is expected to simultaneously passivate multiple halide anionic vacancies of the perovskite, and reduce positively charged traps. Although some small aromatic N-heterocycle derivatives such as thiophene and pyridine serve as Lewis bases for passivating halide anionic vacancies, xanthene do not act as a passivating agent for positively charged traps in the inverted PSCs to the best of our knowledge. The π-conjugation benzene ring with six π electrons may not only act as a Lewis base that heals the neutral iodine related defects, but also promotes charge transport. The positively charged diethyl ammonium (CN+) and Cl− anion, which is similar to alkylammonium halogen, can effectively passivate the MA+ and halide anionic vacancy defects of PSCs, which inhibit ion migration. The inverted PSCs modified by the RhB passivating agent exhibit a high PCE of 20.70%, a negligible hysteresis (0.06%) and a low density of trap states, whose device parameters are obviously better than those of the control device. Owing to the hydrophobic ethyl and phenyl groups of RhB hindering the decomposition of the perovskite, the stability of the modified device can be enhanced, and 97% of the initial PCE value can be maintained for 50 days in the N2 environment, and 82% of the initial PCE value can be maintained for 268 hours in the air. Therefore, synergistic passivation by RhB as a multifunctional passivator in this work offers an efficient strategy to heal the defects at the surface and GBs for the improvement of the device stability and performance.

Lead iodide (PbI2, 99.9%) was purchased from Macklin (Shanghai, China). Poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA, >99%, Mr = 6000–15000), CH3NH3I (MAI, 99%), [6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM, 99%), and bathocuproine (BCP, >99%) were purchased from Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Corp. (Xi’an, China). RhB was purchased from Sinopharm (Shanghai, China). Toluene (99.5%) was purchased from Chuandong Chemical Co., Ltd (Chongqing, China). N,N-Dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.8%), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, 99.7%), and isopropanol (IPA, 99.8%) solvents were purchased from J&K Seal (Beijing, China). Chlorobenzene (CB, 99.8%) was purchased from Macklin (Shanghai, China). These chemical reagents were used directly without further purification. The indium tin oxide (ITO) substrate (∼15 Ω sq−1) was obtained from South China Xiangcheng Technology Co., Ltd.


The inverted structural planar PSCs in the configuration of ITO/PTAA/MAPbI3/RhB/PCBM/BCP/Ag (Fig. 1a) were fabricated according to the previously published method. For the typical fabrication process of the inverted PSCs, ITO substrates were ultrasonically cleaned with acetone, detergent, ultrapure water, and IPA for 15 min, respectively. The cleaned ITO substrates were dried with N2, and then transferred to a glove box filled with N2 (H2O < 0.1 ppm and O2 < 0. 1 ppm). 40 μL of the PTAA solution (2 mg mL−1 in toluene) was spin-coated on the ITO substrates at 4000 rpm for 30 s, and then annealed at 100 °C for 10 min to form a hole transport layer. The perovskite active layer was fabricated by an improved two-step route: in step one, 1.2 mmol PbI2 and 0.3 mmol MAI were dissolved in 1 mL of a DMF:DMSO (10:1) mixed solvent, stirred at 60 °C overnight to obtain the perovskite precursor solution. 50 μL of the perovskite precursor solution was spin-coated on PTAA at 6000 rpm for 20 s. In step two, 70 μL of MAI solution (40 mg mL−1 in IPA) was added dropwise onto the middle of the substrate and spin-coated at 4000 rpm for 40 s, and then annealed at 100 °C for 30 min to give a MAPbI3 film. RhB (0.03–0.07 mg) was dissolved in IPA (1 mL) to obtain the RhB solution with a concentration of 0.03–0.07 mg mL−1. 40 μL of RhB solution was spin-coated on the top of the MAPbI3 film at 4000 rpm, and then annealed at 70 °C for 10 min to form a RhB passivation layer. 30 μL of PCBM solution (20 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene) was spin-coated on the RhB passivation layer at 3000 rpm for 30 s, and then annealed at 90 °C for 30 min to form a PCBM electron transport layer. 40 μL of BCP solution (0.5 mg mL−1 in IPA) was spin-coated on the PCBM layer at 4000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, the Ag cathode (about 100 nm) was thermally evaporated on the BCP layer under a vacuum of 2 × 10−4 Pa, and the effective area of the device was 0.04 cm2.


The crystallized phase of the perovskite films was confirmed using an X-ray diffraction (XRD) instrument (a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.54056 Å). The UV/Vis absorption spectra of RhB and the MAPbI3 perovskite were carried out with an Agilent Cary 5000 UV/Vis spectrophotometer. The interaction between RhB and the MAPbI3 perovskite was characterized using a Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectrophotometer (ABB Bomen MB 102). The surface and interface morphologies of the perovskite films were measured by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, HITACHI Regulus8220) and atomic force microscopy (AFM, Bruker, Multimode 8). The surface potential was measured by Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy (KPFM) (Bruker, Multimode 8). The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photo-luminescence (TRPL) spectra of the perovskite films were performed using an Edinburgh FLS 980 analytical instrument equipped with a 450 W xenon lamp and UF900H high-energy microsecond flash lamp as the excitation source. The current–voltage characteristics of the PSCs were measured using a Keithley 2400 source under the illumination of AM1.5G, 100 mW cm−2 (AAA, SOFN Instruments, 7IS0503A). Monochromatic photoelectric conversion efficiency (IPCE) was obtained using a 7-Spec IPCE test system. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and capacitance–voltage curves were measured using an electrochemical workstation (CHI-Instrument, CHI760E) at a bias voltage of 0.9 V. The water contact angle of the perovskite film was measured using a Zhongchen JC2000D1.


A schematic fabrication process of the effective strategy for healing the trap states in perovskite films using an RhB passivating agent is shown in Fig. 1b. A two-step process was applied for the preparation of the control MAPbI3 film, because this method can slow down the crystallization rate of MAPbI3 and its full coverage might be more easily achieved in comparison with a one-step method. Initially, the seed film was achieved by the reaction of PbI2 and MAI with a molar ratio of 1.2:0.3. Soon afterwards, the polycrystalline MAPbI3 film was generated after further reaction with MAI, and exhibited a stone-like form with the largest grain size of approximately 369 nm and an average grain size of about 199 nm (Fig. 1c and Fig. S1a, ESI). The MAPbI3 film after IPA treatment shows an average grain size of 206 nm (Fig. S1b and c, ESI), which is close to that of the pure MAPbI3 film, indicating that IPA has less effect on the grain size of the MAPbI3 film. Although the MAPbI3 film could nearly cover upon the PTAA substrate, some obvious GBs and pinholes (circles) exist in the MAPbI3 film, which provides a favorable pathway for ion migration and moisture permeation, decreasing the stability and performance of the device. To resolve these problems, the multifunctional RhB molecule as a passivating agent is expected to heal the charge trap states and Lewis-type defects. After RhB passivating treatment, the grain sizes are significantly larger with the largest grain size of approximately 276 nm and the average grain size of about 503 nm (Fig. 1d and Fig. S1d, ESI). As a result, the pinholes disappeared and the GBs become blurred, leading to the denser perovskite film with full coverage. The post-treatment method of RhB can favor the crystallinity of the MAPbI3 phase or the fusion of the crystalline grains to increase the grain size. To investigate the effect of the RhB on the MAPbI3 crystalline GBs, the cross-section images of the devices are collected (Fig. 1e and f). The initial perovskite film exhibits some clear GBs that are perpendicular to the substrate, while the number of GBs in the RhB-treated device decreased (Fig. S2, ESI). The carbon (C) element can be applied for a characteristic element of RhB. The distribution of the C element in the MAPbI3 film was further analyzed by cross-section SEM–EDX (Fig. S8a and b, ESI). The RhB-treated MAPbI3 film showed a higher cross-section C concentration derived from RhB in comparison with the control MAPbI3 film. The result can confirm that the post-annealing process can promote RhB to diffuse and fill into the GBs of the perovskite films, benefiting the improvement of the photovoltaic performance. Moreover, the root mean square (RMS) roughness of the RhB-treated MAPbI3 film surface (6.75 nm, Fig. 1g and Fig. S3b, ESI) is clearly lower than that of the initial perovskite film (14.57 nm, Fig. 1h and Fig. S3a, ESI), which shows the smoother surface of the perovskite film with RhB, confirming that the RhB modification of the MAPbI3 film can improve the film quality. Due to the low viscosity and limited solubility of PCBM solution, its film-forming performance is usually poor, and the smoother surface is beneficial for the formation of high-quality interfacial contact between MAPbI3 and PCBM. Because RhB contains the positively charged diethyl ammonium and negatively charged Cl− anion and its dipole is 5.5 D, which may produce an interface dipole on the MAPbI3 film, triggering the formation of an extra electric field. To prove this hypothesis, the contact potential differences (CPD) of MAPbI3 films before and after passivation were measured by KPFM (Fig. 2a–d). The CPD is the relative work function difference between the tip and sample surface, and its value can be obtained using the equation CPD = (Φtip − Φsample)/e, where Φtip is the work function of the tip, Φsample is the work function of the sample and e is the electric charge. Since tip and e are constant, a high CPD means a low work function of the sample. After RhB passivation, the CPD of the MAPbI3 film is 2.95 V, which is 0.30 V higher than that (2.65 V) of the control MAPbI3 film, indicating the formation of an interfacial dipole at the perovskite surface. This interfacial dipole will generally induce an extra electric field, which is favorable to the charge extraction and transportation at the cathode interface, enhancing the device performance.

To investigate the effect of RhB on the crystallinity of the MAPbI3, XRD patterns of MAPbI3 films were determined (Fig. 2e). The XRD patterns of the MAPbI3 and MAPbI3/RhB films exhibit the almost same main diffraction peaks at 14.14°, 28.5° and 31.88°, which belong to (110), (220) and (310) of the cubic perovskite crystal planes, respectively, confirming that RhB does not affect the crystal phase of the MAPbI3 film. After the MAPbI3 film was modified with 0.05 mg mL−1 RhB, the intensity of the PbI2 peak is slightly weakened (Fig. S4a, ESI), while the intensity of the (110) plane is slightly enhanced (Fig. S4b, ESI), because RhB might interact with under-coordinated Pb2+ during the post-treatment process, reducing the defects at the surface and GBs, and improving the crystallinity of the MAPbI3 film. The absorbance of the MAPbI3/RhB film is nearly similar to that of the MAPbI3 film (Fig. 2f), further proving that RhB does not change the crystal phase of MAPbI3. Moreover, the absorption intensity of the MAPbI3/RhB film enhances in the range of 400–485 nm, belonging to the intrinsic absorption of RhB (Fig. S5, ESI), and similar enhancing absorption is also observed in other MAPbI3 films modified by 2-amino-5-iodobenzoic acid as a passivating agent.
Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed using the Gaussian 09 program. The B3LYP exchange–correlation functional with the 6-31G++(d) basis set was applied to give the optimized structure of RhB+. The image of the electrostatic potential (ESP) surface is shown in Fig. 3a. A carboxylic acid (red part) and a planar π-conjugated xanthen group (orange part) show negative ESPs, while diethyl amine, diethyl ammonium, and phenyl group display positive ESPs. The LUMO is mainly located in the phenyl group, while the HOMO comes predominantly from the xanthen group (Fig. 3b). The calculated band gap of 2.13 eV is very close to the experimental optical value of RhB (1.83 eV, Fig. S6, ESI). The schematic diagram of the interaction between RhB and the MAPbI3 crystal is shown in Fig. 3c. The electron cloud density of the CO group in carboxylic acid is the lowest, owing to the phenyl delocalizing the π electron from the CO group. Both carboxylic acid and xanthen groups with negative ESPs, which belong to the π-acceptor Lewis base, are expected to form double coordination bonds with under-coordinated Pb2+ defects. The diethyl ammonium with the highly positive ESP can fill MA+ vacancy at GBs or the surface by ionic bonding, while the diethyl amine with lone pairs of electrons as the σ-donor Lewis base might also heal the under-coordinated Pb2+ defects. The π-conjugation benzene ring with six π electrons as the Lewis base can reduce the neutral iodine related defects. SEM–EDX analysis (Fig. S7, ESI) revealed the presence of a trace amount of Cl in the MAPbI3/RhB film, which must have originated from RhB, and it may fill the I− vacancies, reducing the charged trap states. To consider that I− anionic migration is one of the main reasons for the degradation of PSCs, I− anionic migration in PSCs was also examined by cross-sectional SEM–EDX. After the control PSC was aged in air for 120 h, I− anions have obviously migrated into the electrode region (the yellow square is marked and shown in Fig. S8, ESI), indicating severe I− anionic migration. However, I− anions in the RhB-treated PSC can form hydrogen bonds with –OH groups of RhB to inhibit their migration, and consequently, the I signal was essentially not present in the electrode region (Fig. S8, ESI), which is beneficial for improving the PSC stability.
To examine the interaction between RhB and MAPbI3, the FTIR spectra of RhB and MAPbI3/RhB films are recorded (Fig. 4a–c). For RhB, the symmetric ν(CN+) stretching vibration of the diethyl ammonium is located at 1706 cm−1. This peak is weakened and exhibits a large shift to 1683 cm−1, confirming that the CN+ group (including empty π* orbital) as a Lewis acid can interact with the Lewis base under-coordinated I−. The peak of the characteristic –OH stretching vibration in RhB shifts from 3372 to 3356 cm−1 (Fig. S9, ESI), confirming the hydrogen interaction between –OH and I− anions. The stretching vibrational peaks of the –COO−, C–N and C–O–C of RhB have a redshift (from 1644 to 1646 cm−1 for –COO−; from 1241 to 1247 cm−1 for C–N; from 1176 to 1180 cm−1 for C–O–C). These peak shifts may be due to the O atom of the carboxylic group, the N atom of diethyl amine and the O atom of xanthene sharing the electron with uncoordinated Pb2+, respectively. These peak shifts further prove the existence of a strong interaction between RhB and MAPbI3. To further identify these strong interactions, the XPS spectra of the MAPbI3 and MAPbI3/RhB films were recorded (Fig. S10a, ESI). New CN+ (Fig. 4d) and CO (Fig. S10b, ESI) peaks emerged, confirming the introduction of RhB into the MAPbI3 film, while the NH3+ peak originates from MA+. The I 3d5/2 and I 3d3/2 peaks of the MAPbI3 film located at 619.66 and 631.12 eV also shift to slightly lower binding energies (BEs) for the MAPbI3/RhB film (Fig. 4e), respectively. As a result, the electrons of RhB are more inclined to I−, leading to an increase in charge density around I−. The increased charge density of I− will reinforce the interaction between I− and Pb2+ in MAPbI3, which can suppress the movement of I−. The Pb 4f7/2 (138.81 eV) and Pb 4f5/2 (143.72 eV) peaks of the MAPbI3 film are shifted to the lower BEs of 137.73 and 142.62 eV, respectively (Fig. 4f), after RhB treatment, demonstrating the decrease of the under-coordinated Pb2+ and the existence of I− vacancies. A new weak Pb⋯O peak at 531.99 eV (Fig. S10c, ESI) is observed in the MAPbI3/RhB film, and is similar to the result of another literature report. For the O 1s XPS spectra of RhB and MAPbI3/RhB films, the –OH of RhB shifted towards lower binding energy (Fig. S10d, ESI), which can further prove the existence of the hydrogen bond O–H⋯I between the –OH group and the I− anion from the MAPbI3, suppressing I− anionic migration. Distinctly, the analyses of FTIR and XPS spectra offer the confirmation of the strong interaction between RhB and MAPbI3, and the synergistically passivating effect of RhB at the surface and GBs of the MAPbI3 film.
To systematically evaluate the effect of RhB passivation on the device's photovoltaic performance, inverted PSCs with different RhB concentrations are fabricated. The detailed photovoltaic parameters of the open circuit voltage (VOC), short circuit current density (JSC), fill factor (FF), and efficiency (PCE) are summarized in Table 1 and Fig. 5a. Each average parameter comes from 20 devices, which are fabricated under the same experimental conditions. The average PCE increases as the RhB concentration increases from 0.03 to 0.05 mg mL−1. When the RhB concentration further increases to 0.07 mg mL−1, the photovoltaic performance is drastically degraded, which may be due to the augment of interface resistance caused by the excessive RhB with the insulator feature. The optimal device with 0.05 mg mL−1 RhB shows a high average PCE of 19.86%, VOC of 1.10 V, JSC of 22.60 mA cm−2 and FF of 79.90%. The control device indicates the maximum PCE of 18.79%, VOC of 1.07 V, JSC of 21.97 mA cm−2 and FF of 79.92% (Fig. 5b). The champion device with RhB passivation shows the highest PCE of 20.70%, VOC of 1.11 V, JSC of 23.25 mA cm−2 and FF of 80.31%, which is obviously higher than those of the control device and compared with the performance of other excellent inverted PSCs. Notably, the VOC and FF values of PSCs with RhB passivation are evidently increased, which can be closely related to the improved quality of the perovskite film and the decrease of trap states. The stable PCE and JSC values of the control device and the RhB modified device at the maximum output power point for 30 minutes were measured (Fig. 5c). The JSC values of the RhB modified device and the control device are 21.13 mA cm−2 and 20.70 mA cm−2, respectively, while the corresponding PCEs are 19.81% and 18.12%, respectively. The control device showed slow decay under 1800 S continuous illumination, while the RhB modified device showed more stable performance. This result shows that the stable PCE and JSC of the RhB modified device are improved, confirming the effects of RhB passivation on the device performance.
RhB (mg mL−1)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Control
1.07 ± 0.02 (1.09)
21.47 ± 0.95 (22.18)
78.12 ± 2.48 (80.60)
17.90 ± 0.89 (18.79)
0.03
1.10 ± 0.02 (1.11)
22.43 ± 0.92 (23.35)
78.60 ± 2.38 (80.99)
19.37 ± 0.92 (20.29)
0.05
1.10 ± 0.02 (1.11)
22.60 ± 0.65 (23.25)
79.90 ± 1.76 (81.59)
19.86 ± 0.84 (20.70)
0.07
1.09 ± 0.02 (1.10)
22.28 ± 0.80 (23.08)
79.42 ± 2.64 (81.40)
19.33 ± 0.78 (20.11)
The control and RhB modified devices are measured with reverse and forward scan directions to investigate the hysteresis effect of PSCs passivated by RhB (Fig. 5d and Table S1, ESI). To quantitatively illustrate the hysteresis behavior, the hysteresis index (HI) value is calculated using the equation: HI = (PCEreverse − PCEforward)/(PCEreverse + PCEforward). The HI value of the RhB modified device is 0.06% and obviously lower than that (1.38%) of the control device, which indicates that RhB passivation can reduce the trap states and inhibit ionic migration (or ionic displacement). The IPCE spectra of the control and RhB modified devices are shown in Fig. 5e. Compared with the control device, the IPCE intensity of the RhB modified device in the range of 350–750 nm shows enhancement, suggesting the decrease of the trap density. Moreover, the integrated JSC of the control and RhB modified devices are 19.24 and 20.68 mA cm−2, respectively. The relevant JSC improvement may be attributed to the enhanced light absorption ability of the RhB modified device. The integrated JSC is smaller than the JSC measured from the J–V curve. On the basis of the formula: (JSC – integrated JSC)/JSC, a deviation between integrated JSC and JSC measured from the J–V curve for control and target devices is about 8.5%, mainly because the measurement of the IPCE spectrum is carried out in a single wavelength, and its intensity is lower than the one solar illuminance. The integrated JSC extracted from J–V scans that is within 20% of the value calculated from IPCE measurements shows a reasonable correlation.
To estimate the effect of RhB passivation on the carrier transfer dynamics of the MAPbI3 films, steady-state PL and TRPL spectra of the quartz/MAPbI3 films with and without RhB were recorded (Fig. 6a). The steady-state PL intensity of the quartz/MAPbI3/RhB film is much higher than that of quartz/MAPbI3, indicating that the RhB passivated MAPbI3 film can significantly suppress non-radiative recombination and enhance the luminous efficiency. After PCBM is coated on the quartz/MAPbI3 and quartz/MAPbI3/RhB films, their PL spectra exhibit strong quenching effects, owing to the effective charge separation at the MAPbI3/PCBM interface. The PL spectrum quartz/MAPbI3/RhB/PCBM shows a stronger quenching effect than quartz/MAPbI3/PCBM, because the additional interface electronic field by RhB passivation enhances the carrier extraction and separation rates in the inverted PSCs. The PL decay curves (Fig. 6b and Table S2, ESI) accord with the bi-exponential fitting function [I = A1exp(−t/τ1) + A2exp(−t/τ2) and τ* = (A1τ12 + A2τ22)/(A1τ1 + A2τ2)], where τ* is the average lifetime, A1 and A2 belong to the PL decay amplitudes, τ1 and τ2 represent the fast and slow decay lifetimes, respectively. Usually, the fast decay lifetime may belong to the trap-assisted recombination or non-radiative recombination at the interface, and the slow decay lifetime can originate from the radiative recombination inside the grains. The τ* value of quartz/MAPbI3/RhB is 18.06 ns (τ1 = 5.22 ns, τ2 = 19.86 ns) and obviously longer than that {10.72 ns (τ1 = 3.03 ns, τ2 = 11.37 ns)} of quartz/MAPbI3, indicating that RhB can hinder the recombination and increase the carrier lifetime. After PCBM is coated, the τ* value of the films with and without RhB are decreased to 1.74 ns (τ1 = 3.20 ns, τ2 = 1.39 ns) and 1.89 ns (τ1 = 3.83 ns, τ2 = 1.66 ns), respectively, and the reason for the reduction of the decay lifetime is similar to their steady-state PL spectra.
The EIS of the control device and optimal RhB-passivated device measured at a bias voltage of 0.9 V under dark conditions further investigate the carrier transport mechanism. The EIS data can be well fitted with the equivalent circuit (Fig. 6c), and the detailed fitting parameters are listed in Table S3 (ESI). Generally, the arc at high frequency belongs to the charge transport resistance (RS), the arc at low frequency is recombination resistance (Rrec) of charge carriers, and chemical capacitance (CPE2) is related to the surface charge accumulation. The Rrec value (15087 Ω) of the RhB passivated device is larger than that of the controller device (7456 Ω), meaning that the charge carrier recombination can be effectively suppressed after RhB passivation. The CPE2 value (9.223 × 10−7) of the optimal RhB-passivated device decreases in comparison with the control device (1.064 × 10−6), which may be closely related to the reduction of carrier accumulation at the electrode interface by RhB.
Mott–Schottky analysis (Fig. 6d and e) is applied to examine the influence of RhB on the built-in potential (Vbi) of the devices. The Vbi value of the optimal RhB-passivated device is 0.86 V and obviously larger than that (0.81 V) of the control device. The enhancement of Vbi can be conducive to charge extraction and transport, which effectively avoid the charge accumulation at the interfaces between the perovskite and charge transport layers, finally improving the photovoltaic performance of the device. To quantify the influence of RhB on trap states, the density of trap states can be quantified on the basis of the following equation:
(1)
(2)
(3)
which contain the capacitance of the device (
C), the imaginary part of impedance (Z′′), angular frequency (ω), trap density (Nt), absolute temperature (T), depletion layer width (W), elementary charge (e), attempt-to-escape frequency (ω0 ≈ 1011 s−1), Boltzmann constant (KB), and the demarcation energy (Eω). The trap density-of-states (tDOS, Fig. 6f) of the optimal RhB-passivated device at an energy level of 0.35–0.55 eV is lower than that of the control device, indicating that the shallow trap states (0.35–0.40 eV) at GBs and deep trap states (0.40–0.55 eV) at the film surface are greatly reduced after RhB passivation.

To further prove the reason for the decrease of charge recombination, the dark J–V curves of different devices were measured (Fig. 6g). The RhB-passivated device shows a lower dark current than that of the control device, demonstrating that more photo-generated current can flow via the device to decrease direct shunting. This also suggests that the non-radiative recombination of the charge carrier is reduced, simultaneously resulting in the enhancement of the VOC of the RhB-passivated device. Both JSC and VOC were measured at different light intensities to investigate the charge recombination kinetics in the devices. The VOCversus light intensity for the control and RhB-passivated devices is shown in Fig. 6h. The VOC value increases monotonically as the light intensity increases for the two devices. The RhB-passivated device shows a higher VOC value than the control device in the light intensity range of 30–100 mW cm−2. The plot of VOCversus light intensity (Fig. 6h) is well described using the equation, VOC = (nKT/q)ln(I) + constant, where n, I, K, T and q are the ideal factor, light intensity, Boltzmann constant, absolute temperature and elementary charge, respectively. The closer slope is KT/q, due to the fewer defects in the device. The slope (1.3 KT/q) of the RhB-passivated device is evidently lower than that (1.9 KT/q) of the control device, meaning the abatement of the defect-assisted recombination after RhB passivation, due to fewer trap states at the surface of the MAPbI3 film. The relationship between JSC and the light intensity follows a general power law JSC ∝ Iα, where α is an exponential factor and its value can come from the slope of the curve. If the α value is equal to 1, it means that free carriers can be extracted efficiently without space charge accumulation. The calculated α values were 1.11 for the control device and 1.06 for the RhB-passivated device. Clearly, the α value of the RhB passivated device is closer to 1, implying the decrease of the carrier recombination loss and the improvement of the charge extraction efficiency. In brief, these electrical and optical results offer evidence of healing trap states and promoting charge carrier extraction and transportation.
Moreover, the non-radiative recombination loss may be associated with the defect states at the surface and GBs of the perovskite film, and interfaces of the PSCs. To further evaluate the alteration in the defect state density after RhB passivation, the J–V responses of electron-only (Fig. 7a) and hole-only (Fig. 7b) devices are measured. The J–V curves display a linear ohmic behavior (J ∝ V) at the start region, and then show a nonlinear trap-filled limit region. The kink point between two regions can be labeled as VTFL (trap-filling limit voltage), which is directly related to the defect state density calculated using the equation, Ntrap = 2εrε0VTFL/qL (q, L, εr, and ε0 are the elementary charge, thickness of perovskite, relative dielectric constant of perovskite and vacuum dielectric constant, respectively). The calculated electron defect density values of the control and RhB-passivated devices are 0.93 × 1016 cm−3 and 0.75 × 1016 cm−3, respectively, while the calculated hole trap density values of the control and RhB-passivated devices are 2.13 × 1016 cm−3 and 1.59 × 1016 cm−3, respectively. Hence, both electron and hole defect densities are meaningfully decreased after RhB passivation, which helps to reduce the carrier recombination center, ultimately achieving higher device efficiency.
Trap states at the surface and GBs will boost ion migration and moisture diffusion, accelerating the degradation of PSCs. Generally, their stabilities are likely to be improved by the increase of surface hydrophobicity and the trap state passivation of the functional organic molecules. To evaluate the effect of RhB passivation on the hydrophobicity of the MAPbI3 film, the water contact angles of the two films are tested (Fig. 8a and b). The water contact angle (67.29°) of the RhB modified MAPbI3 film is larger than that (37.14°) of the bare MAPbI3 film, which indicates that RhB can generate a hydrophobic layer to prevent the MAPbI3 film from moisture diffusion, ultimately enhancing the hydrophobicity of the MAPbI3 film. The photographs of the MAPbI3 films with and without the RhB modified layer effected by exposure time in ambient air {55 ± 5% relative humidity (RH) at room temperature} are shown in Fig. 8c. The bare unpackaged MAPbI3 film exhibits quick degradation after about 48 hours and completely decomposed with a yellow color within 164 hours. The MAPbI3/RhB film is still in the black color under the same conditions, revealing that the RhB modified film was more stable in comparison with the control film. The improved stability of the MAPbI3 films will usually favor the long-term stability of PSCs. To examine the UV light stability of the MAPbI3 films, the control and RhB modified MAPbI3 films were exposed to ultraviolet light (365 nm, 6 W). Fig. S11b (ESI) shows the relationship between the PL intensity of the two films and the ultraviolet irradiation time. After 70 min of UV irradiation, the PL intensity of the RhB modified MAPbI3 film could maintain 55% of the initial value, while that of the MAPbI3 film was only 41%. Therefore, RhB can enhance the UV light stability of the perovskite layer. The stabilities of the inverted PSCs with and without RhB in N2 and air (55 ± 5% RH at room temperature) environments were investigated. The variation of the unpackaged device PCEs with specific time intervals in N2 is shown in Fig. 8d. The PCE of the control device in N2 decreases to 87% of the initial value after 60 days, while the RhB modified device can still maintain over 97% of the initial value. The improved stability of the RhB modified device in N2 may be related to the great suppression of ionic immigration and high-quality interfacial contact after RhB passivation. After the unpackaged devices are exposed to air for 268 hours (Fig. 8e), the PCE of the control device decreases to 53% of the initial value, while the RhB modified device can retain over 82% of the initial value. The excellent stability of the RhB modified device in ambient air may be due to the decrease of trap states at the surface and GBs, and the improved hydrophobicity of the MAPbI3 film. Moreover, the variation of the PCE of the unpackaged device in N2 at 85 °C with specific time intervals is shown in Fig. S11a (ESI). The PCE of the control device dropped to 57% of the initial value after 240 hours, while the RhB modified device remained above 77% of the initial value, improving the thermal stability. In brief, the improved stability of MAPbI3 films and PSCs might be attributed to the synergistically passivating influence of RhB.

In this work a synergistic passivation method based on the multifunctional RhB was developed for the remarkable improvement of the device stability and photovoltaic performance. RhB with special multifunctional Lewis bases, Lewis acids and halogen ions can greatly heal various trap states of the MAPbI3 film, reducing the defect density, decreasing the non-radiative recombination loss, suppressing the ionic migration, forming the ionic migration barrier layer, and consequently improving the device performance. RhB also contains hydrophobic ethyl and phenyl groups to enhance the hydrophobic properties of the MAPbI3 surface, which improves moisture stability. The post-treatment method of RhB passivation can be advantageous to the crystallinity of the MAPbI3 phase or the fusion of the crystal grains to increase the grain sizes, finally improving the film quality. The diethyl ammonium (CN+) and –COO− groups of RhB interacting with under-coordinated I− and Pb2+, respectively, induce the oriented arrangement of RhB with asymmetrical charge distribution, which leads to the formation of a strong extra interface electric field, improving the charge extraction and transportation. As a result, the highest PCE of the device reaches 20.70% with a VOC value of 1.11 V, JSC value of 23.25 mA cm−2 and a FF of 80.31%, and the hysteresis behavior is significantly improved. Moreover, the optimized device with RhB also exhibits better stability in N2 or high RH air. The unpackaged RhB-modified device maintains 97% of the initial PCE value for 50 days in N2, and maintains 82% of the initial PCE value for 268 hours in air. Our findings suggest that the synergistic passivation effect of multifunctional organic molecules offers a new guideline for the improvement of the device stability and performance.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


This work was supported by the NNSF of China (No. 21671029), the Innovation and Entrepreneurship Team of Inorganic Optoelectronic Functional Materials for Chongqing Yingcai (No. cstc2021ycjh-bgzxm0131), the Major Project of the Science and Technology Research Program of Chongqing Education Commission of China (No. KJZD-M202100501), the Innovation Program for Chongqing's Overseas Returnees (No. cx2019037), the Natural Science Foundation of Chongqing, China (No. cstc2021jcyj-msxmX0380), Chongqing Normal University (21XLB034) and the Innovative Training Program of University Student (No. 202110637006).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The grain sizes of MAPbI3 and MAPbI3/RhB films, the 2D AFM images of ITO/PTAA/MAPbI3 and ITO/PTAA/MAPbI3/RhB films, the EDX spectrum of the MAPbI3/RhB film, the XRD peak of PbI2 at around 12.7° and magnified XRD patterns around the (110) crystal plane, the experimental optical spectrum of RhB, and the XPS spectra of MAPbI3 and MAPbI3/RhB films. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3tc00818e
‡ Lei Jin and Yi-Lin Li contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023