 DOI: 10.1039/D2CP03207D
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2022, 24, 22562-22571


Xiangning
Xu
,

Zhichao
Lin
,

Qingbin
Cai
,

Hongye
Dong
,

Xinli
Wang
 and 

Cheng
Mu
*

Key Laboratory of Advanced Light Conversion Materials and Biophotonics, Department of Chemistry, Renmin University of China, Beijing, 100872, P. R. China. E-mail: cmu@ruc.edu.cn

Received
13th July 2022
, Accepted 5th September 2022
First published on 7th September 2022
SnO2 is a candidate material for electron transport layers (ETLs) in perovskite solar cells (PSCs). However, a large number of defects at the SnO2/perovskite interface lead to notable non-radiative interfacial recombination. Moreover, the energy level arrangement between SnO2/perovskite does not match well. In this study, a SnO2/CsF-SnO2 double-layer ETL was prepared by doping CsF into SnO2, effectively passivating the defects of the SnO2 ETL and SnO2/perovskite interface. The formation of a good energy level arrangement with the perovskite layer reduces the interface non-radiative recombination and improves the performance of the interface charge extraction. The photoelectric conversion efficiency of the optimal CsF-modified PSC reached 22.18%, owing to the significant increase in the open-circuit voltage to 1.180 V.

Solar energy has attracted extensive attention and is researched widely; it is considered the key to solving energy and environmental problems because it is green, clean, and sustainable. Recently, new solar cells developed from perovskite materials have been the focus of attention because of their easy processing methods and excellent photoelectric conversion performance. Since the groundbreaking work of Miyasaka et al. in 2009, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of metal-halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has increased rapidly to more than 25%. The electron transport layer (ETL) is key to transporting the photogenerated electrons and inhibiting electron–hole recombination in high-efficiency PSCs. Another material used widely for the ETLs in PSCs is TiO2.

However, TiO2 has some associated disadvantages, such as low interfacial charge transfer efficiency, huge interfacial charge accumulation and it being prepared under high-temperature conditions. SnO2 is the most important and widely used ETL in PSCs among the n-type metal oxides explored. Compared with TiO2, SnO2 has excellent optical and electrical properties, a more suitable energy level-match with the perovskite, better stability and it can be prepared at low-temperature. Nevertheless, SnO2 still has some limitations as an ETL material. The drawbacks include SnO2/perovskite interface defects and non-radiative interface recombination. Additionally, the interface between perovskite and the ETL contains a higher concentration of defects than the defects within the perovskite layer and the energy levels of the SnO2 ETL and perovskite are unevenly arranged. It was found that adapting the energy level alignment between SnO2 and perovskite can improve the charge transfer at the interface, thus improving the performance. Recently, Zhang et al. introduced CoCl2 into SnO2 to match the energy levels between the perovskite/ETL, and increase the open-circuit voltage (VOC) to 1.20 V. Some studies have shown that the modification of the SnO2 ETL and ETL/perovskite interfaces using alkali halides as additives or interface engineering methods is feasible and effective. For example, Wang et al. introduced RbF into a SnO2 hydrosol dispersion and SnO2 surface, which reduced the density of the defects at the SnO2/perovskite interface and increased the VOC.
In this work, a SnO2/CsF-SnO2 double-layer ETL was prepared by modifying SnO2 with CsF. The modification effectively passivated the defects of the SnO2 film and formed an excellent energy level-alignment with the perovskite film, thereby improving the interface charge extraction performance. Cs+ can reduce the non-radiative recombination and creates an adequate arrangement of the energy levels at the ETL/perovskite interface; the better arrangement of the energy levels improves the VOC. However, there is an interaction between F− and Sn+, which can improve the electron mobility of SnO2, thus increasing the short-circuit current (JSC). The VOC of the improved PSC was 1.180 V, resulting in an optimal PCE of 22.18%.

Indium tin oxide (ITO) was procured from OPV Tech New Energy Co. Ltd. SnO2 nanoparticles (15% hydrocolloid dispersion) were procured from Alfa Aesar. PbI2 and 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenyl-amine)9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD) were procured from Advanced Election Technology Co. Ltd. Formamidinium iodide (FAI), methylammonium bromide, and methylammonium chloride (MABr and MACl) were procured from Xi’an p-OLED Corp. Isopropanol (IPA), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), chlorobenzene (CB), and lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI) were obtained from J&K Scientific Ltd. Co(III) FK209 TFSI was procured from GreatCell Solar. CsF and 4-tert-butylpyridine were procured from Meryer Chemical Technology Co. Ltd.


ITOs (1.5 cm × 1.5 cm) were washed successively with deionized water containing a detergent, acetone, and isopropanol and subsequently dried and treated with oxygen plasma for 9 min. The SnO2 nanoparticle precursor solution was prepared by mixing the SnO2 colloidal dispersion with ultrapure water in a volume ratio of 1:4. The CsF-SnO2 precursor solution was prepared by dissolving CsF in the above SnO2 nanoparticle precursor solution at a concentration of 1 mg mL−1. The mixed SnO2 and CsF-SnO2 precursor solutions were stirred for 2 h and filtered through a 0.22 μm filter before use. The SnO2 nanoparticle precursor solution was spin-coated onto the ITO at 4000 rpm for 30 s. The spin-coated ITO was annealed at 150 °C for 30 min to prepare the ITO/SnO2 substrates. Before the next step, the ITO/SnO2 substrates were cleaned for 4 min using oxygen plasma. The CsF-SnO2 precursor solution was spin-coated onto the ITO/SnO2 substrate at 4000 rpm for 30 s and the substrate was further annealed at 150 °C for 30 min to prepare ITO/SnO2/CsF-SnO2 ETLs.

The perovskite layer was prepared under a N2 atmosphere. PbI2 was dissolved in DMF:DMSO (volume ratio of 9:1) at a concentration of 1.5 M and spin-coated onto the ETLs at 1500 rpm for 35 s; the substrate was further treated in a glovebox at 70 °C for 50 s. The mixed cationic solution was prepared by dissolving FAI:MACl:MABr in 4 mL of isopropanol solution at a mass ratio of 360 mg:36 mg:36 mg, respectively. The mixed cationic solution (100 μm) was coated on the PbI2 layer at a speed of 2000 rpm for 30 s. Subsequently, the perovskite films were prepared by treating them in ambient air at 150 °C for 15 min.
The hole transport layer (HTL) precursor solution was prepared by adding 71 mg of spiro-OMeTAD to 960 μm of CB solution and stirring for 2 h. Li-TFSI and Co(III) FK209 TFSI solutions were prepared by dissolving 520 mg of Li-TFSI and 300 mg of Co(III) FK209 in 1 mL of acetonitrile, respectively. Li-TFSI (16.8 μL) solution, 27.6 μL of Co(III) FK209 TFSI solution, and 27.6 μL of 4-tert-butylpyridine were added to the HTL precursor solution. The HTL was prepared by spin-coating the above solution onto the perovskite at 3000 rpm for 30 s.
Finally, 700 nm of Au was deposited on the HTL via vacuum thermal evaporation.

The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis was performed using a Hitachi SU8010. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was performed using a Shimadzu XRD-7000 instrument. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) were performed using Thermo Scientific instruments. The ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) absorption and optical transmission spectra were measured using an Agilent Cary60 spectrophotometer. The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements were performed using an FLS980 Series of Fluorescence Spectrometers at 475 nm excitation. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was characterized using an EnliTech QE-R. The current density–voltage (J–V) was measured using a Keithley 2400 source-meter at a scanning rate of 10 mV s−1 under the ambient conditions of 1.5G AM light without any encapsulation and covered with a metal aperture mask to ensure that the effective area was 0.1 cm2. The light intensity was certified by a standard silicon solar cell. The Nyquist diagrams were obtained using a Zahner PP211 at an AC amplitude of 5 mV in the frequency range of 1–106 Hz. Transient photocurrent (TPC) and transient photovoltage (TPV) were measured by irradiating the PSCs with a pulsed laser (530 nm, 20 Hz). Au was deposited using a Suzhou Fangsheng FS-450.



Fig. 1a illustrates the preparation process of the ETL of the target device. The ETL preparation is performed in two steps: first, a layer of SnO2 is coated on the ITO substrate and annealed. Subsequently, a layer of CsF-SnO2 is spin-coated onto the SnO2 layer and annealed again to obtain a SnO2/CsF-SnO2 double-layer ETL. The structure of the target PSC prepared herein is ITO/SnO2/CsF-SnO2/perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au (Fig. 1b).

UPS measurements and UV-vis calculations were performed on the SnO2 and CsF-SnO2 films, and the secondary electron cut-off (Ecut-off) was obtained. The Fermi level and valence band energies were calculated (Fig. S1a and b, ESI). Combined with the optical transmission spectra in Fig. 2c, the band gap is calculated at a portion of the high absorption region. Using the Tauc model formula, αhν = D(hν − Eg)n, where hν is the photon energy, Eg is the optical band gap, α is the optical coefficient, D is a constant, and n is equal to 1/2, the relationship between (αhν)2 and hν was determined (Fig. S1c, ESI); the band gap of the original SnO2 is 3.60 eV, while that of CsF-SnO2 is 3.63 eV. The energy levels of the ETL also change after CsF doping. Table S1 (ESI) summarizes these parameters and the energy levels are illustrated in Fig. 1c. It is noteworthy that the CsF-SnO2 sample has a smaller Ecut-off than that of the original sample; the conduction band energy (ECB) of CsF-SnO2 is reduced and aligned to that of the perovskite to a greater degree than that of the original SnO2. A lower ECB enables the SnO2 ETL to extract electrons more easily from the perovskite, which helps in improving the VOC of the PSC.
XPS was used to analyze whether CsF doping affected the crystallinity of the SnO2 film. The diffraction peak shows no displacement before and after CsF modification (Fig. S2, ESI), indicating that the crystal structure of SnO2 remains unchanged and no impurity phase forms. The original SnO2 and CsF-modified double-layer SnO2 films were analyzed using XPS. The appearance of the Cs 3d peaks in the CsF-modified sample indicates the presence of Cs (Fig. 2a). In addition, the F 1s peak confirms the presence of F (Fig. S3, ESI). The peak values of the original SnO2 film at 486.1 eV and 494.5 eV correspond to the Sn 3d5/2 and Sn 3d3/2 peaks, respectively (Fig. 2b). After doping with CsF, the binding energy moves to a higher value, reaching 486.3 eV and 494.7 eV. This slight shift toward a higher binding energy is attributed to a chemical interaction between the Sn atom and CsF; the interaction results in a change in the density of the electron cloud around the Sn atom. F can combine with Sn to form F–Sn bonds and passivate the defects. The optical transmission profile of SnO2, with or without CsF treatment was tested as shown in Fig. 2c. All the films show high transmittance in the visible region and CsF-SnO2 has a higher optical transmittance in the short-wavelength range of 400–530 nm, exhibiting better optical performance, which aids the improvement of JSC.Fig. 2d shows the I–V curves based on the ITO/SnO2/Ag and ITO/SnO2/CsF-SnO2/Ag structures. The slope of the I–V curve of the CsF-modified double-layer SnO2 is higher than that of the original SnO2; the higher slope indicates that the ETL modified by CsF has a better conductivity, thus improving the transport of the interfacial charge.
In addition, SEM was used to investigate whether modification using CsF affected the ETL. By comparing the top-view SEM images of ITO/SnO2 and ITO/SnO2/CsF-SnO2 (Fig. S4, ESI), it is evident that the SnO2 film, after modification, exhibits no obvious change. Thus, the modification by CsF does not change the original morphology of the SnO2 film.
The influence of using different ETLs on the perovskite films was further observed using SEM (Fig. 3a and b). The grain size of the perovskite deposited on the original SnO2 shows small particle morphology and the average grain size of the perovskite is 0.65 μm (Fig. S5c, ESI). However, the perovskite film deposited on the CsF-SnO2 substrate exhibits a large particle morphology and the average grain size of the perovskite is 1.00 μm (Fig. S5d, ESI). Compared with that of the original group, the grain size of the perovskite deposited on the CsF-SnO2 substrate increases markedly. The cross-sectional SEM images of the PSCs prepared using different electron transport substrates are shown in Fig. 3c and 3d. The perovskite grains deposited on the original SnO2 are disordered, whereas the perovskite grains deposited on the CsF-SnO2 substrate have a single particle morphology connecting the ETL and HTL, which is consistent with the top-view SEM. The SEM results show that modification by CsF improves the perovskite morphology.
The UV–vis absorption of the CsF-modified sample is higher than that of the original sample (Fig. 4a), indicating that the modification by CsF enhances the light absorption and utilization capacity of the perovskite film and is conducive to improving the photocurrent density of the PSCs. Simultaneously, a blue shift is observed in the UV–vis absorption spectrum after the modification by CsF.
XRD analyses were performed to understand the effects of CsF on the crystallinity of the perovskite films; the XRD analyses show the diffraction peaks of the perovskite films deposited on different ETLs. The crystal structure remains unchanged after modification by CsF and the diffraction peak shows no displacement (Fig. 4b). However, the diffraction peaks of the perovskite films modified by CsF are enhanced, indicating that modification by CsF improves the crystallinity. The XRD results are in agreement with the SEM results.
PL and TRPL were used to study the charge transfer characteristics and carrier recombination (Fig. 4c and d). The PL peak position of the modified CsF sample shows a slight blue shift, indicating a reduction of defects. The luminescence intensity of the perovskite film modified by CsF is obviously weaker than that of the original sample, indicating that the modified perovskite film has a stronger luminescence quenching effect; the charge extraction is improved, the carrier transfer at the ETL/perovskite interface is faster, and non-radiative recombination is reduced. These results are further verified by TRPL. The TRPL spectrum was fitted using the double exponential function: f(t) = A1exp(−t/τ1) + A2exp(−t/τ2) + y0, where A1 and A2 are the attenuation amplitudes of the fast- and slow-attenuation processes, respectively; τ1 and τ2 are the fast and slow decay time constants, respectively. The results and fitting parameters of TRPL are illustrated in Fig. 4d and listed in Table S2 (ESI). The average carrier lifetime was calculated using the formula: τAVE = (A1τ12 + A2τ22)/(A1τ1 + A2τ2). The photoluminescence decay life of the perovskite film deposited on the CsF-modified double-layer SnO2 ETL is shorter than that of the film deposited on the original SnO2 ETL. The average carrier lifetime decreases from 592.95 ns to 260.83 ns, confirming that modification by CsF improves the extraction and transmission of the photogenerated electrons, and reduces the defect density.
The optimal J–V curves are shown in Fig. 5a. The optimal PSC based on a CsF-modified double-layer SnO2 ETL has a PCE of 22.18%, VOC of 1.180 V, JSC of 24.01 mA cm−2, and fill factor (FF) of 0.783 in the reverse scan. In contrast, the optimal original PSC in the reverse scan exhibits a PCE of 20.12%, VOC of 1.137 V, JSC of 23.20 mA cm−2, and FF of 0.762. Detailed results are presented in Fig. S6 (ESI). The improvement in the PCE is due to the increase in the VOC and JSC. The addition of CsF to SnO2 reduces the defects in the SnO2 layer and the formed double ETL layer has a good energy level-match with that of the perovskite layer, thus improving the VOC. The increase in JSC is attributed to the improved carrier migration at the ETL/perovskite interface and the improved carrier extraction of the perovskite film. In addition, the hysteresis of the device prepared using the CsF-modified double-layer SnO2 ETL is inhibited. The hysteresis factor varies from 0.13 to 0.10. It is acknowledged that hysteresis is caused by the accumulation of the interface charge due to ion migration, crystal defects, and a charge transfer imbalance between the perovskite layer and the ETL side. The reduction in hysteresis arises from the reduction in non-radiative recombination at the ETL/perovskite interface after CsF modification, and the charge transfer process improves.
The EQE test shows that the CsF-modified PSC has a better light response than that of the original PSC (Fig. 5b), can better convert photons to electrons, and has a better charge extraction and collection performance. The integrated current densities of the SnO2-based PSCs modified by the original SnO2 and CsF are 22.18 mA cm−2 and 23.02 mA cm−2 in the range of 300–800 nm, as determined by an EQE spectrum calculation.
We prepared 80 original PSCs and 80 CsF-modified PSCs and analyzed their parameters (Fig. 5c–f). The prepared PSCs exhibit good repeatability. The average PCE of the CsF-modified PSCs increases from 18.79% to 20.67% owing to the increase in JSC, FF, and particularly, VOC. The average VOC increases from 1.121 to 1.160 V; average JSC increases from 22.49 to 23.45 mA cm−2, and average FF increases from 0.744 to 0.764.
The CsF concentrations of 0 mg mL−1, 0.5 mg mL−1, 1.0 mg mL−1, and 2.0 mg mL−1 were also investigated to determine the optimal CsF modification concentration (Fig. S7 and Table S3, ESI). Compared with the PSC that was not modified, the PCEs of the CsF-modified PSCs are improved. With an increase in the CsF concentration, JSC increases gradually, but VOC and FF decrease gradually. In conclusion, PSC modified with 1.0 mg mL−1 of CsF has the optimal PCE effect.
The defect density of the perovskite films was quantitatively calculated using a space charge limited current (SCLC) test. The dark I–V curves of the typical PSCs (ITO/SnO2/perovskite/PCBM/Ag and ITO/SnO2/CsF-SnO2/perovskite/PCBM/Ag) are illustrated in Fig. 6a. The trap filling limit voltage (VTFL) values of the original and CsF-modified PSCs are 0.22 V and 0.15 V, respectively. The defect density was calculated as Nt = 2εε0VTFL/eL2, where ε is the perovskite dielectric constant, ε0 is the vacuum dielectric constant, L is the thickness of the perovskite film, and e is the elementary charge. The trap densities of the perovskite films deposited on the original SnO2 and CsF-modified double-layer SnO2 ETL are 1.69 × 1015 cm−3 and 1.15 × 1015 cm−3, respectively. The SCLC results show that CsF doping can reduce the defects of the SnO2 ETL and the perovskite films grown using this method.
To verify this result, J–V curves of the original and CsF-modified PSCs were measured in the dark (Fig. 6b). The lower dark current of the CsF-modified PSC indicates that the perovskite films deposited on it have a lower density of trap states.
We further tested the VOC variations of the original and CsF-modified PSCs with the light intensity (Fig. 6c). The slope of the curve can be obtained by linearly fitting the function: ηidkBT/q, where ηid is the ideal factor, kB the Boltzmann constant, T the absolute temperature, and q the elementary charge. The ηid value of the CsF-modified PSC is 1.08, which is much lower than that of the original PSC (1.43). The results show that the CsF-modified PSC can effectively inhibit non-radiative recombination, which is consistent with the TPV results below.
The TPC and TPV attenuations were measured to further understand the effect of the modification by CsF on the film defects and recombination dynamics (Fig. 6d and e). For the TPC transport time constant τ, the charge extraction time of the CsF-modified PSC is 0.88 μs, while that of the original PSC is 0.96 μs (Fig. 6d). The shortening of the charge extraction time indicates that the charge extraction is enhanced. The carrier recombination life of the CsF-modified PSC increases from 26.54 μs of the original PSC to 36.01 μs (Fig. 6e), confirming that the charge recombination at the ETL/perovskite interface is inhibited.

Fig. 6f illustrates the Nyquist diagrams and equivalent circuit of the PSCs, where Rs is the series resistance of the PSCs and Rrec is the composite resistance at the ETL/perovskite interface. The fitting parameters indicate that the Rrec of the CsF-modified PSC is markedly increased from 0.77 × 104 to 1.45 × 104 Ω cm2 (Table S5, ESI). This result indicates that the non-radiative recombination at the ETL/perovskite interface is notably inhibited owing to the effective inactivation of the interface defects by modification using CsF and the improved interface contact.
In addition to enhancing the performance of the PSCs, the stability of CsF-modified PSCs is much improved compared with that of the original PSCs. The CsF-modified PSC maintains 91% of its initial efficiency after 1100 h under a nitrogen atmosphere at 25 °C without encapsulation, while the original PSC maintains only 63% of its initial efficiency (Fig. 6g).

We used a strategy to modify the SnO2 ETL. CsF was introduced into SnO2 to prepare a CsF-modified double-layer (ETL). The results indicate that Cs+ can form a good energy level arrangement between the ETL and the perovskite layer and improve the interface charge extraction. F− can replace the defect site of SnO2, thus reducing the defects and inhibiting the interface non-radiative recombination. The VOC of the PSC increased notably from 1.137 to 1.180 V after modification by CsF. The PCE of the optimal PSC increased from 20.12% to 22.18% and its stability was also improved. This study has promoted the research and development of PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors acknowledge financial support from the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2018YFA0208701), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21773308), the Research Funds of Renmin University of China (Grant No. 201903020), the Outstanding Innovative Talents Cultivation Funded Programs 2021 of Renmin University of China, the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, and the Research Funds of the Renmin University of China (Grant No. 21XNH086).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cp03207d
‡ Xiangning Xu and Zhichao Lin contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2022