 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA00488A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4305-4311


Tiefeng
Liu
,

Fangyuan
Jiang
,

Jinhui
Tong
,

Fei
Qin
,

Wei
Meng
,

Youyu
Jiang
,

Zaifang
Li
 and 

Yinhua
Zhou
*

Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, School of Optical and Electronic Information, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China. E-mail: yh_zhou@hust.edu.cn

Received
18th January 2016
, Accepted 21st February 2016
First published on 23rd February 2016
Perovskite solar cells have been attracting a lot of attention because of their high power conversion efficiency and low-cost processing. However, device reproducibility has been a problem. The fabrication atmosphere is regarded as one of the possible reasons. So far, there has been a lack of direct evidence to prove which kind of atmosphere and how the atmosphere affects the device performance. Here, we report that the methylamine (MA, boiling point: −6 °C) that is used to synthesize the methylammonium iodide (MAI) could chemically reduce the PEDOT:PSS hole-transporting layer. After the reduction, a strong absorbance band appears at 400–1100 nm and the conductivity and work function simultaneously decrease. Furthermore, the MA-reduced PEDOT:PSS films are also found to be easily oxidized in air. The reduced work function of the PEDOT:PSS layer leads to poor hole collection and yields low open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current and power conversion efficiency of the perovskite solar cells. Therefore, though the MA vapor-containing fabrication atmosphere is beneficial to the performance of TiO2-based perovskite solar cells in which the bottom electrode collects the electrons, it is detrimental to that of PEDOT:PSS-based solar cells.

The organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite has emerged as a promising absorption material owing to its low fabrication cost, appropriate bandgap, excellent light absorption, efficient free charge carrier generation and long carrier diffusion length. Power conversion efficiencies of 20% have been achieved for perovskite solar cells by optimizing the perovskite active layer and the charge carriers exaction layers. However, the community complains a lot about the poor device reproducibility. It can be difficult to reproduce the devices using the recipes that are reported in the literature. In some cases devices fabricated in the same lab but in different batches could perform very differently. The fabrication atmosphere is regarded as one of the possible reasons. However, so far there has been a lack of direct evidence to prove which kind of atmosphere and how the atmosphere affects the device performance.

Here, we report that the methylamine (MA, CH3NH2) that is used to synthesize the methylammonium iodide (MAI) could chemically reduce the PEDOT:PSS hole-transporting layer due to its strong electron-donating nature. MA has a low boiling point of −6 °C. It is in gas state at room temperature and easy to mix into the atmosphere. Besides as the reactant of MAI, the MA-vapor has also been used to heal defects in perovskite films and form a high-quality perovskite layer. The MA-treatment effectively enhanced the power conversion efficiency of the perovskite solar cells from 5.7% to 15.1% in the TiO2-based structure (glass/FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/perovskite/HTL/metal electrode; c-TiO2: compact TiO2, m-TiO2: mesoporous TiO2 and HTL: hole-transporting layer, Fig. 1(a)). In addition to the TiO2-based structure, another widely used type of device structure is a PEDOT:PSS-based structure: glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/ETL/metal electrode where PEDOT:PSS is poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) and ETL is the electron-transporting layer (Fig. 1(b)). Comparing to the TiO2-based structure, the PEDOT:PSS-based structure is easier for processing because there is no need for high-temperature sintering. It is feasible to fabricate flexible cells and also to obtain a high power conversion efficiency of over 18%.
The perovskite solar cells with a PEDOT:PSS-based structure are found here to be very sensitive to the MA atmosphere. The MA vapor could chemically reduce the PEDOT:PSS hole-transporting layer, thus leading to the appearance of a strong absorbance band at 400–1100 nm, and simultaneously lowering its conductivity and work function. The reduced work function of the PEDOT:PSS layer leads to the poor hole collection and yields low open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current and power conversion efficiency of the perovskite solar cells. So the MA-containing fabrication atmosphere is beneficial to the performance of TiO2-based perovskite solar cells, but detrimental to that of the PEDOT:PSS-based solar cells.


Fig. 1(a)–(c) show the device structure and J–V characteristics of the TiO2-based and PEDOT:PSS-based perovskite solar cells where the perovskite films are MA-treated. For comparison, perovskite cells with anti-solvent-processed perovskite films were also fabricated that have been proved as an effective approach for efficient highly-reproducible perovskite solar cells. For the TiO2-based devices, the cells with two different perovskite film preparation techniques display similar performance as shown in the J–V curves (Fig. 1(c)). However, the device performance of the two PEDOT:PSS-based planar devices prepared by MA treatment and anti-solvent is very different (Fig. 1(c)). The PEDOT:PSS-based device fabricated with MA treatment shows an obvious decrease in terms of all photovoltaic parameters (short-circuit current (JSC): from 16.44 to 5.98 mA cm−2; open-circuit voltage (VOC): from 0.82 to 0.58 V; fill factor (FF): from 0.73 to 0.57, Table S1) compared with the device fabricated using the anti-solvent approach.

The similar J–V curves of TiO2-based devices prove that both the MA treatment and the anti-solvent methods can form high-quality perovskite films. This was further confirmed by the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns, as shown in Fig. 1(d). The XRD patterns show that the typical CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite phase is in accordance with previous studies. Intense diffraction peaks at 13.98°, 28.32° and 43.06° can be respectively assigned to (110), (220) and (330). The perovskite films prepared by MA treatment show a higher degree of crystallinity compared with the anti-solvent treatment. Besides, according to the performance of PEDOT:PSS-based devices with anti-solvent processing, the device architecture is reasonable and each functioning layer works well. Therefore, the reason of why the perovskite solar cells with MA treatment perform poorly is possibly because the PEDOT:PSS film underneath the perovskite film can be influenced by MA during treatment.
To verify this assumption, we expose a PEDOT:PSS film to MA vapor for 10 minutes. The PEDOT:PSS film color changes from light blue to dark blue, as shown in Fig. 2(a). This observation is in good accordance with previous studies which suggest that PEDOT:PSS can be reduced when exposed to vapors containing amine groups (e.g., polyethylenimine and tetrakis(dimethylamino)ethylene). Upon reaction with those amine groups, the PEDOT is reduced from bipolaron to polaron or a neutral state. Fig. 2(b) depicts the absorbance spectra of the PEDOT:PSS film before and after exposure to MA vapor. Before exposure to the MA vapor, the absorbance spectrum of the untreated PEDOT:PSS films exhibits a large absorption band that extends far into the near infrared region. This broad absorption band can be interpreted as the contribution of free charge carriers to absorption or alternatively to excitation of the midgap states (polaron or bipolaron states) of the conducting polymer. However, after exposure to MA vapor for 10 minutes, the PEDOT:PSS spectrum shows a pronounced peak at around 950 nm, which can be ascribed to the polaron-induced absorption of PEDOT. Concomitantly the bipolaronic absorption in the near infrared region decreases, indicating that some electronic states within the band gap have vanished due to PEDOT at low oxidation levels. Also a new absorption peak appears at around 650 nm, which can be assigned to partly neutralized PEDOT corresponding to the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO)–lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) transition. These optical features are qualitatively consistent with previous reports on dedoping of PEDOT by tetrakis(dimethylamino)ethylene. This phenomenon is associated with electrons migrating into the oxidized PEDOT chains from the amine groups of MA, as shown in Fig. 2(c), thus converting the bipolaron to polaron or neutral PEDOT.

Fig. 3(a) shows the work function and conductivity change of the PEDOT:PSS films after a short (3 seconds) MA exposure and long (up to 5 hours) air exposure. The reason why 3 seconds was chosen is because the optimized solar cell performance is based on 3 seconds exposure to the MA vapor. It can be seen from Fig. 3(a) that the work function immediately drops from 5.0 eV to 4.3 eV after the short-time MA exposure. This will have a profound impact on energy level alignment at interfaces with other layers in solar cells. The reduced work function of the PEDOT:PSS layer leads to the poor hole collection and yields low open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current and power conversion efficiency. The untreated PEDOT:PSS (P VP AI 4083) films show an electrical conductivity of 8.62 × 10−4 S cm−1. After exposure to MA vapor, the conductivity reduces to 2.35 × 10−4 S cm−1 which is nearly a quarter of its original value. The change in the work function and the conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS film has the same tendency upon exposure to MA vapor. Similar changes in electrical conductivity and work function were observed for dedoped PEDOT upon reaction with strong reducing reagents such as tetrakis(dimethylamino)ethylene. The observed conductivity decrease of the PEDOT:PSS film is rationalized by the suppression of polaronic states upon charge donation from MA. The change of work function is because of the contributions from (1) the reduction process and (2) surface modification. The decrease in conductivity and work function is in agreement with the absorbance (color) change and clearly confirms effective chemical reduction of the PEDOT in the films upon exposure to MA vapor.
In addition, Fig. 3(a) also shows that the work function and the conductivity of the MA-treated PEDOT:PSS films gradually increase after exposure to air. The conductivity increases to a saturated value of around 3.41 × 10−4 S cm−1 and the work function stabilizes at 4.6 eV. The recovery of the work function and the conductivity is also consistent with the absorbance results as shown in Fig. 3(b). The peak of the absorbance of the MA-treated PEDOT:PSS film is at around 950 nm which gradually becomes less pronounced as the air exposure time gets longer whereas the absorbance at 1600 nm increases. Air exposure leads to the absorbance spectrum of the MA-treated film moving towards the untreated film (the reference sample in Fig. 3(b)). This indicates the MA-reduced PEDOT was recovered partly towards the untreated film. There are two possibilities leading to the partial recovery of the conductivity, work function and the optical absorbance: (1) physical desorption of MA from the PEDOT:PSS film; or (2) chemical re-oxidation of the reduced PEDOT. To figure out the possible mechanism, we treated the PEDOT:PSS film with MA vapor and kept the MA-treated sample in a nitrogen-filled glovebox to isolate oxygen. After exposed to MA vapor for 10 min, the color turns dark blue and does not change when the film is kept in the nitrogen-filled glovebox up to 22 hours (Fig. 3(c)). However, once the treated PEDOT:PSS film was moved to the ambient atmosphere, the film returns to its original color (before MA treatment) in about 1 hour as shown in Fig. 3(c). This indicates that the reduced PEDOT:PSS will be oxidized by the oxygen rather than the physical desorption of MA, owing to the strong electron-donating character of reduced PEDOT:PSS. This can also be proved using XPS as shown in Fig. 3(d). A strong N1s signal appears after exposure to MA vapor (10 minutes) and air exposure (2 hours), where the PEDOT:PSS film was first reduced and then reoxidized. The peak located at around 402.5 eV supports the presence of positively charged amine groups, corroborating that the MA stays in the PEDOT:PSS instead of physical desorption. This oxidation process results in the increase of the electrical conductivity and work function. However, the reduced PEDOT:PSS can hardly recover back to its pristine untreated state. This is possibly owing to the basic chemical character of MA, which reacts with the sulfonic acid groups of PSS, thus preventing the PEDOT from fully oxidizing.
Now we know the MA vapor can reduce the PEDOT:PSS layer and lower the work function of PEDOT:PSS therefore negatively influencing the device performance. However, people could argue that the MA might have little chance to come into contact and react with the PEDOT:PSS since the PEDOT:PSS film is covered by a layer of perovskite film. This is because the perovskite layer can react with MA to form a liquid during the MA treatment. This process is reversible, where the perovskite converts into a clear liquid when MA vapor is introduced, and converts back to perovskite upon MA degassing (eqn (1)). The liquid CH3NH3PbI3·xCH3NH2 will release MA vapor during the liquid–solid process. The released MA vapor will reduce the PEDOT:PSS layer and influence the device performance.
CH3NH3PbI3(s) + xCH3NH2(g) ↔ CH3NH3PbI3·xCH3NH2(l)
(1)
To further confirm the effect of MA-treatment on the perovskite solar cells, we fabricated solar cells with MA-treatment of either the PEDOT:PSS layer or the perovskite film. The device structure is: (I) glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS (MA-treated)/perovskite (anti-solvent)/PCBM/PEI/Ag, (II) glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite (MA-treated)/PCBM/PEI/Ag, (III) glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite (anti-solvent)/PCBM/PEI/Ag (reference device). Their photovoltaic performance is shown in Fig. S1. Both the devices with MA-treated PEDOT:PSS and with the MA-perovskite film perform poorly, while the reference cell where none of the layers had MA treatment performs well. These results can help indicate that the PEDOT:PSS layer reduced by MA vapor will lead to poor device performance during MA treatment no matter if the MA treatment is directly of the PEDOT:PSS layer or indirectly of the perovskite layer. The MA treatment of the perovskite film could also make the MA come into contact with and react with the PEDOT:PSS layer. The atmosphere of the MA vapor is detrimental to the PEDOT:PSS-based solar cell performance.
These findings might be more critical for PEDOT:PSS-based perovskite solar cells with a thermally vacuum-deposited perovskite layer as it is more likely that part of the MAI is back converted to MA and HI. The effect of MA is probably less severe in devices employing an additional hole transport layer in between the PEDOT:PSS and the perovskite layer, such as poly[N,N′-bis(4-butylphenyl)-N,N′-bis(phenyl)-benzidine] (poly-TPD).

In this work, we report that the methylamine that was used to synthesize the methylammonium iodide (MAI) and to heal the non-uniform defects of the MAPbI3 for high-performance perovskite solar cells could effectively chemically reduce PEDOT:PSS films. The reduction of the PEDOT:PSS film leads to the increased broadband absorbance and simultaneously decreased work function and conductivity. The reduced work function yields poor hole-collecting property and low power conversion efficiency of the perovskite solar cells. The reduced PEDOT:PSS films are also found to be easily oxidized when kept in air. Therefore, the methylamine-containing atmosphere is not suitable for perovskite solar cells with a PEDOT:PSS layer as the hole collecting layer. The effect of dipoles or the chemical reduction from amine-containing molecules (including methylamine) leading to the work function reduction should be considered for pre-deposited charge-collection layers and the interfaces. A MA-containing fabrication atmosphere is beneficial to the performance of TiO2-based perovskite solar cells, but detrimental to that of PEDOT:PSS-based solar cells. This also indicates that selecting a proper film-optimization strategy as well as the right device architecture is important to achieve high-performance perovskite solar cells.


Methylammonium iodide (MAI) was synthesized by mixing methylamine (33 wt% in ethanol, Aldrich) and hydroiodic acid (57 wt% in water, Aldrich) with a mole ratio of 1:1 in a round bottom flask at 0 °C for 2 hours with stirring. After the reaction, the MAI precipitated out by rotary evaporation at 60 °C and then was dissolved in ethanol followed by sedimentation in diethyl ether. This step was repeated three times and the MAI powder was finally collected and dried at 50 °C in a vacuum oven for 24 hours. To prepare the perovskite precursor solution, 159 mg MAI and 461 mg lead iodide (PbI2, 98%, Aldrich) powder were mixed in 1 mL anhydrous dimethylformamide (DMF, Aldrich).


∼40 nm of compact TiO2 was prepared on top of the FTO (7 ohm sq−1) substrate by spin coating the precursor solution and annealed at 150 °C for 30 min. The precursor solution is prepared by dissolving 1 mL isopropyl titanate (Sigma Aldrich) and 0.228 mL ethanol amine (Sigma Aldrich) in 12 mL 2-methoxyethanol (Sigma Aldrich), and reacted in an airtight glass bottle at 80 °C for 2 hours and 120 °C for 1 hour. Then diluted TiO2 (dyesol) solution in ethanol (1:4 by weight) was spin-coated onto the compact TiO2 and sintered at 550 °C for 30 min. The perovskite layer was deposited on TiO2 layers from the mixed solution at 4000 rpm for 30 s, followed by thermal annealing at 100 °C for 10 min. For the anti-solvent method, a drop of anhydrous chlorobenzene (approximately 50 μL) was quickly dropped onto the center of the substrate with a delay time of 6 seconds after the initiation of the spin-coating. For MA treatment, the perovskite was exposed to MA vapor (3 mL methylamine solution in 50 mL beaker) for 3 seconds. The spiro-OMeTAD hole-transporting layer was spin-coated onto the CH3NH3PbI3 film at 5000 rpm for 60 s from a solution mixture [80 mg spiro-OMeTAD (Nichem), 28.8 μL 4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP, Sigma Aldrich) and 17.5 μL lithium-bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI, Aldrich) solution (520 mg Li-TFSI in 1 mL acetonitrile), dissolved in 1 mL chlorobenzene]. Silver electrodes with a thickness of 100 nm were finally evaporated under high vacuum (<2 × 10−7 Torr) through a shadow mask using a thermal evaporator (Mini-spectros, Kurt J. Lesker).


The PEDOT:PSS (Clevios P VP AI 4083) was deposited on pre-cleaned ITO (8 ohm sq−1) at 3000 rpm for 30 s and dried at 150 °C for 10 minutes. The perovskite layer was deposited onto a PEDOT:PSS substrate from a precursor solution at 4000 rpm for 30 s, followed by thermal annealing at 100 °C for 10 min. The anti-solvent treatment and MA treatment were done as described above. Then, the PCBM (20 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene) was deposited on the perovskite at 2000 rpm for 40 s and dried for 1 hour. Finally, polyethylenimine (PEI, Aldrich, 0.1 wt% in isopropanol) was deposited on top of the PCBM layer at 5000 rpm for 60 s.


The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of all devices were measured using a Keithley 2400 source-measure unit. The cells were illuminated using a Newport solar simulator at a calibrated intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The active area of all devices is 10.91 mm2. The films thickness was measured through a step profiler (Dektak XT, Bruker Corp.) and the conductivity tests were measured using a four-point probe (RTS-8). The absorbance of these films was also characterized using a UV-vis-NIR Spectrophotometer (UV-3600, Shimadzu). The work function was measured with a Kelvin probe (KP-020, KP Technology). XRD patterns were obtained using an X-ray diffractometer (XRD-7000, Shimadzu).


The work is supported by the Recruitment Program of Global Youth Experts, the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21474035) and China Postdoctoral Science Foundation funded projects (2014M562016 and 2015T80794).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta00488a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016