 DOI: 10.1039/C7NR06128E
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 15949-15957


Jayraj V.
Vaghasiya
,

Keval K.
Sonigara
,

Thomas
Beuvier
,

Alain
Gibaud
 and 

Saurabh S.
Soni
*

Department of Chemistry, Sardar Patel University, Vallabh Vidyanagar – 388 120, Gujarat, India. E-mail: soni_b21@yahoo.co.in

Institut des Molécules et Matériaux du Mans, Université du Maine, UMR CNRS 6283, Avenue Olivier Messiaen, 72085, Le Mans Cedex 9, France

Received
17th August 2017
, Accepted 13th September 2017
First published on 14th September 2017
A novel saturated heterocyclic organic ionic crystal, piperidinium iodide (PiHI), is synthesized by a facile route and applied as a solid electrolyte in Dye Sensitized Solar Cells (ss-DSSCs). Upon addition of a small quantity of iodine, PiHI self-assembles into a 1D lamellar micro crystalline structure that shows anisotropic conductivity. The two-component PiHI was characterized by using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, cyclic voltammetry, steady state voltammetry, FT-IR, and Raman spectroscopy. Wide angle X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurement confirms the presence of long range 1D lamellar channels that pave the way for the diffusion of the redox couple I−/I3− and exhibit high anisotropic conductivity. The ionic conductivity of 1D PiHI (with I2) aligned perpendicular to the electrode, σ⊥ (15.46 mS cm−1), is 1.5 times higher than that aligned parallel to the electrode σ∥ = 10.32 mS cm−1. The ss-DSSC devices with these self-assembled ordered ionic crystals with a carbazole based sensitizer (SK1) achieved a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 4.2% and 5.2% for ∥al and ⊥ar arrangement, respectively. The reported PCEs are better than that obtained from a classical liquid electrolyte with SK1 sensitizers. The electron kinetics at various interfaces of ss-DSSC devices was evaluated using Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) measurements. The presence of a saturated cyclic structure promotes close packing through H-bonding and electrostatic interactions, which make ss-DSSC devices more stable up to 600 h under illumination of 1 sun.

Since Gratzel's milestone report in 1991, Dye Sensitized Solar Cells (DSSCs) have evolved as one of the most potential candidates for next generation photovoltaic devices. Owing to their good plasticity, low fabrication cost, and simple fabrication procedure over silicon based solar cells, DSSCs have become a promising candidate as a renewable energy source. Typically, a DSSC consists of dye-sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2, an I−/I3− redox couple in a volatile organic solvent as an electrolyte and a Pt-coated conducting glass as a counter electrode. The redox electrolyte is one of the important components of DSSCs. Energy conversion efficiencies of 9–13% (with I−/I3− and cobalt redox shuttle in an organic solvent) were reported under 1 sun illumination with metal based and metal-free sensitizers. The problems of leakage and evaporation of the organic solvent, however, hamper the outdoor application of DSSCs. In view of this, considerable attention has been paid to replace the liquid electrolyte with a solid one. Solid state DSSCs (ss-DSSCs) have been constructed with solid electrolytes such as p-type inorganic semiconductors, organic hole transporting materials, organic ionic conductors and polymer gel electrolytes. Yet polymer gel electrolytes in ss-DSSCs usually suffer from low photo-conversion efficiency (PCE) due to poor pore filling properties in TiO2. On the other hand, organic hole transport materials (HTMs) display attractive diversity and are promising alternative to organic solvent based liquid electrolytes. To date, the best reported PCE, 7.2% for ss-DSSCs, has been achieved using Spiro-OMeTAD as a HTM, but they suffer from multistep complex synthesis and low charge carrier mobility.

Alternatively, nowadays, small organic molecules with efficient ionic conductivity are promising candidates for application in ss-DSSCs. Among all the organic ionic conductors as solid state electrolytes, imidazolium iodides are widely used in ss-DSSCs. Usually, these ionic conductors exhibit low conductivity, and thus ss-DSSCs based on them without any additives or post-treatment are not preferred and show poor performance. However, the doping of iodine or LiI into ionic conductors improves the conductivity and also the photovoltaic performance significantly. Unfortunately, multi-components of the solid electrolyte introduce complexity which is not favourable for tuning of the device and bulk production. Therefore, the development of a new generation organic ionic conductor (OIC) with low cost, facile synthesis and high conductivity is essential and hence, it is highly desirable to develop single component solid state electrolytes with said superiority for stable and efficient ss-DSSCs.
Recently, carbazole-imidazole and phenothiazine-imidazole based ionic conductors have been efficiently used in ss-DSSCs. The poor PCE due to a low conductivity can be enhanced by the addition of iodide. Recently, alkyl or ester substituted imidazole iodide salts as solid state ionic conductors were employed in ss-DSSCs and ∼6–7% PCE was obtained. The Grotthus-type and hopping mechanisms in the presence and absence of iodine, respectively, are responsible for the charge transport in ionic conductors. Wang et al. showed that the large inter-layer distance in the lamellar phase was responsible for poor conductivity and it yields the PCE (∼2%) of the ss-DSSC device based on substituted piperidine iodide compared to imidazolium salt. Therefore, the high conductivity and better efficiency of ionic conductors, long range 1-D lamellar crystallites and the presence of a substituent or iodine impurity are the crucial factors. On the basis of the above points, herein, we designed and synthesized a simple structured cyclic salt of piperidinium iodide (Scheme 1) without any saturated or unsaturated pendent groups for application in ss-DSSCs. Compared to substituted piperidinium iodide salts, a compact lamellar phase with a shorter interlayer distance is achieved for better ionic conductivity. This piperidinium iodide solid electrolyte with a small quantity of iodine facilitates a self-assembled 1-D lamellar micro-crystalline structure with close packing due to the presence of H-bonding and columbic forces. A noticeable enhancement and high anisotropy in ionic conductivity for PiHI have been successfully achieved by controlling the lamellar alignment in the devices. ss-DSSC with SK1 organic dye (Scheme 1) showed a PCE of 5.2% under illumination of 1 sun and exhibited good long term stability.

A saturated heterocyclic iodine salt, piperidinium iodide (PiHI), has been synthesized in a single step from economically viable and commercially available starting materials (Scheme 1). The structure of PiHI was confirmed by 1H-NMR and IR spectroscopy (Fig. S1 and S2, ESI). IR stretching bands for N–H and N–H⋯I are clearly observed at 3425 and 1612 cm−1, respectively. On the other hand, the presence of bands at 2592, 2515, 2469 and 2361 cm−1 confirms the presence of hydrogen bonds between piperidine and iodine. The as-synthesized ionic conductor, PiHI, is a white solid with a melting point around 92 °C (from the peak temperature in the DSC curve), and has good solubility in a wide range of polar organic solvents. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) indicates that PiHI has good thermal stability up to 250 °C, enabling it as a potential candidate for outdoor applications of solar cells (Fig. 1). The observed thermal stability and melting point are quite comparable to those of saturated substituted or un-substituted heterocyclic solid organic ionic conductors. Hence, PiHI can be used as a solid electrolyte in DSSCs.

Apart from thermal stability, conductivity is a crucial parameter for the potential application of PiHI in DSSCs. Table 1 depicts the conductivity (4.20 mS cm−1) for pristine PiHI at room temperature, which is quite comparable to the popular ionic liquid DMPImI (0.19 mS cm−1). The reported conductivity of PiHI is quite superior to other imidazolium, benzimidazolium/pyrrolidium based ionic conductors, including PmII, which is the candidate of choice for highly efficient liquid state DSSCs. Furthermore, in order to enhance the conductivity further, I2 in various amounts was added to PiHI. Unlike the conventional electrolyte system, the concentrations of I2 were selected in such a way that its ratio with PiHI is about 1:10.
Electrolyte
Conductivity (σ, mS cm−1)

D
app (I−), (× 10−6 cm2 s−1)

D
app (I3−), (× 10−6 cm2 s−1)
Pure PiHI
4.20
0.28
—
+0.04 M I2
9.00
2.10
1.96
+0.05 M I2
10.20
3.21
3.17
+0.06 M I2
9.45
1.80
1.77
The variation in conductivity with temperature for PiHI in the presence of I2 is shown in Fig. 2. The figure clearly reveals that the addition of I2 efficiently increases the conductivity of the PIHI. Almost 2–2.5 times enhancement in the conductivity of PiHI was noticed in the presence of I2 and exhibits linear Arrhenius type behaviour.
From the different composition of I2 in PIHI, the 0.05 M I2 performs with higher conductivity and it indicates the interesting fact about the structural changes in the matrix.
σ = σ0exp(−Ea/kT)
(1)
where
σ0 is constant, Ea is the activation energy, k is the Boltzmann constant and T is the absolute temperature. The lowest value, 0.59 kJ mol−1, of Ea was achieved for PiHI in the presence of 0.05 M I2. This confirms that the addition of I2 in PiHI facilitates effective charge transfer through polyiodide chains according to the Grotthus mechanism for observed high conductivity. Such a type of mechanism in conductivity upon the addition of I2 is only possible if I2 generates changes in the crystal structure/packing density as well as in the distance between the iodine and polyiodide species.

To understand the enhancement of conductivity by changing the molecular packing of PiHI in the presence of I2, small and wide angle X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were carried out on spin-coated films of PiHI on glass (with and without I2) under ambient conditions. From Fig. 3 it is clear that pure PiHI exhibits two weak Bragg peaks at 8.6° and 9.2° with the corresponding interlayer distance of 10.3 Å and 9.5 Å. However, we could not find any Bragg peaks at higher θ-values. The same trend continued when a small amount (0.04 M) of I2 was added to PiHI. This provides proof for weak ordering or the presence of two poorly ordered phases in crystalline PiHI and with 0.04 M I2. However, as the amount of I2 increases from 0.04 M to 0.05 M or 0.06 M, the first Bragg peak at 8.6° completely disappeared and higher ordered peaks were observed. Upon a closer look into the XRD pattern, for PiHI with 0.05 M I2, one can confirm the presence of a highly ordered 1-D lamellar structure in PiHI with an interlayer distance of 9.5 Å. The observed inter-layer distance is due to the twisting of the saturated piperidinium ring. The same was confirmed from structure optimization through Density Functional Theory (DFT) with a basis set, LanL2DZ (Fig. S3, ESI). A close packed 1-D lamellar ordered PiHI in the presence of I2 promotes conductivity by facilitating the Grotthus-type mechanism.
A highly ordered 1-D lamellar structure is attributed to the alternative packing of a twisted piperidinium cation ring and polyiodide anions packed due to the presence of strong hydrogen bonding and columbic forces (Scheme 2).
The 1-D layered structure in PiHI with 0.05 M I2 governs fast charge transport along the side-wise aligned polyiodide chain. This supports the observed trend of conductivity in PiHI with or without I2 and it was concluded that the interfacial compatibility of the electrolyte is another main factor affecting the device efficiency of DSSCs. Solid state cyclic voltammetry (CV) was carried out with an aim of revealing the catalytic properties of the Pt counter electrode towards pristine PiHI and with I2. The CV of solid ionic conductors are given in Fig. 4. In a symmetrical cell configuration, all solid ionic conductors show typical oxidation and reduction of iodide and triiodide, respectively. As the magnitude of the peak current represents the catalytic activity of the Pt electrode and the rate of charge transfer along the polyiodide chain, the observed higher current for the PiHI with 0.05 M I2 indicates faster charge transfer along the polyiodide chain. This is generated from its highly ordered 1-D lamellar structure with a close packing due to H-bonding and columbic forces. In the case of pristine PiHI, such a type of charge transfer is slow as indicated by the lower current in CV curves. Hence, the presence of I2 is responsible for high conductivity as well as effective charge transfer through the polyiodide chain and resulted in the controlling of dye regeneration.
Apparent diffusion coefficients of triiodide/iodide, Dapp, in ionic conductors have an influence on the dye regeneration and play an important role in the performance of devices. Hence, it is essential to know the effect of the 1-D lamellar structure on the apparent diffusion coefficient of I−/I3−, Dapp. It was investigated using steady state voltammetry in a two electrode system (Fig. 5).
The Dapp of the redox couple I−/I3− was determined from the anodic and cathodic limiting currents using the following equation:
(2)
where
Dapp is the apparent diffusion coefficient, Iss is the anodic and cathodic steady state limiting current, n is the number of electrons per molecule, F is the Faraday constant, C is the bulk concentration of electroactive species and A is the radius of the microelectrode. As a small amount (0.04–0.06 M) of I2 is added in PiHI, the concentration of I3− is quite low compared to I− and the diffusion of I3− is slower than I−. Hence, the charge transfer in the solid electrolyte is governed by the motion of I3− and the device performance including the photocurrent strongly depends on the diffusion of I3−. The Dapp values of I− and I3− for PiHI with and without I2 are depicted in Table 1.

As per the values of Dapp (I3−), it is revealed that PiHI with 0.05 M I2 displays a higher diffusion coefficient compared to PiHI with other concentrations of I2. Like conductivity, the values of Dapp (I3−) follow similar trends. In solid state electrolytes, ion transport occurs mainly through the Grotthus-type bond exchange mechanism for which a much higher triiodide concentration is essential. The high diffusion of I3− through Grotthus-type bond exchange is facilitated due to: (i) the high concentration of polyiodide species which reduces the distance between I3− species, (ii) the presence of strong H-bonding and electrostatic forces is also responsible for close packing and (iii) the highly ordered 1-D lamellar structure. The optimum concentration of iodide in PiHI is 0.05 M, where high conductivity and I−/I3− diffusion were observed. The slight decrease in the values of the ionic conductivity and Dapp of I−/I3− for 0.06 M I2 in PiHI might be due to the presence of slight inhomogeneity in the solid electrolyte formed upon the excess addition of I2. Moreover, the presence of excess polyiodide may be in the form of I3− or I5− which reduces the bond exchange.
To confirm the presence of polyiodide species, the Raman spectra of PiHI with different concentrations of I2 were obtained and are depicted in Fig. 6. As shown in the figure, no bands at 152 cm−1 and 226 cm−1 were observed for PiHI, which are the signature of polyiodide. The Raman bands corresponding to I3− (113 cm−1) and I5− (152 cm−1) appear when small amounts (0.04, 0.05 and 0.06 M) of I2 were introduced in PiHI solid electrolytes. For the PiHI electrolyte containing I2, a band at 113 cm−1 (overtone at 226 cm−1) is assigned to the symmetric stretch of I3− The relative intensity of the Raman band at 152 cm−1 compared to I3− (226 cm−1) is higher in PiHI + 0.06 M I2 compared to 0.05 M I2; this might produce non-homogeneity in the solid electrolyte and hampered the diffusion of I3− and thus resulted in lower conductivity. However, all samples exhibit a Raman band at 113 cm−1 which is the signature of I3−. The presence of a weak band at 113 cm−1 in pure PiHI might be due to the aerial oxidation of PiHI which produces traces of I2. Based on the results discussed above, PiHI with 0.05 M I2 based solid 1-D lamellar electrolytes was thereby selected further for the fabrication of ss-DSSCs.
As discussed earlier, pure PiHI with a small amount of I2 self-assembled into the 1-D lamellar crystalline phase. In this lamellar phase, a layer of polyiodide and saturated piperidine is organized layer by layer and the former layer has good ionic conductivity compared to the latter (piperidine layer). Therefore, either these phases or domains possess different capacitances as they have different time constants (τ = R × C). Hence, the electron impedance spectroscopy (EIS) technique is used to confirm the orientation as well as anisotropic conductivity of the best performing PiHI with 0.05 M I2. In the absence of any external field, due to the gravitational sedimentation process during the solvent evaporation, PiHI with I2 aligned in lamellar arrangement and is well organized horizontally or parallel to the sediment surface. Hence, due to the surface forces, the surface ∥ arrangement can be easily obtained. In order to obtain the surface ⊥ alignment, we made little modification in the process of fabrication of devices by changing the way of introduction of the solid electrolyte in devices (details are given in the ESI Fig. S4 and S5).
EIS measurements for both the devices with different lamellar orientations have been carried out and the spectra obtained (Nyquist plots) are given in Fig. 7 and the Maxwell–Wagner model is used to fit Nyquist plots. Fig. 7 describes the EIS spectra of both ∥ and ⊥ alignments. Fig. 7(a) presents the Nyquist plots for two phases having different capacitances, stacked ∥ to the electrodes along with a series equivalent circuit. As per the Maxwell–Wagner model, the observed two arcs at low and high frequencies confirm the ∥ alignment with respect to the electrode surface in Fig. 7(a), while for ⊥ orientation along electrodes the production of three arcs is observed, first at low, second at middle and third at high frequency visualised as shown in Fig. 7(b). Hence, from this EIS study, it is confirmed that, based on the method of introduction of the solution of the solid electrolyte (solvent evaporation sedimentation), we can obtain ∥ and ⊥ orientations (with respect to the electrode surface) of PiHI in the presence of I2. The ordering of PiHI with various amounts of I2 is confirmed from TEM images (Fig. S6, ESI).
We have also examined the anisotropic conductivities of the best performing PiHI with 0.05 M I2. The anisotropic conductivities along the direction parallel (σ∥) and perpendicular (σ⊥) to the electrodes were measured (Scheme 3). As the lamellar arrangement is aligned due to the gravimetric sediment force, σ∥ and σ⊥ were measured with a setup shown in Scheme 3. The sample with ⊥ alignment shows an ionic conductivity, σ⊥ = 15.46 mS cm−1, which is roughly 1.5 times more relative to the sample with ∥ alignment (σ∥ = 10.32 mS cm−1). Hence, the ⊥ alignment, with respect to the electrode, facilitates smooth ion transport by the Grotthus bond exchange mechanism compared to the ∥ arrangement (Scheme 3). Hence, in order to examine this effect of alignment for the anisotropic lamellar phase, ss-DSSC devices were also fabricated with ∥ and ⊥ alignments.

The ss-DSSC devices with PiHI and various amounts of I2 were fabricated as per the process explained in the Experimental section. The SEM image of the cross-section of ss-DSSC devices clearly shows a better interface between the PiHI ionic conductor and the nano-crystaline TiO2 photoanode. It is confirmed that the thickness of PiHI on TiO2 and TiO2 on FTO glass is about ∼2 μm and ∼9 μm, respectively (ESI, Fig. S7). The J–V curves of devices based on PiHI with various amounts of I2 as solid electrolytes under illumination of 1 sun light intensity (AM 1.5G filter, 100 mW cm−2) are evaluated and presented in Fig. 8. The photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 2. For the DSSC with pristine PiHI as a solid electrolyte matrix, a photo-conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1.7% with Jsc = 4.33 mA cm−2 and Voc = 0.529 V was recorded. While upon addition of I2 in PiHI, a systematic increase in photocurrent density and PCE was noticed with a constant open circuit potential (Voc = 0.530 V). The highest PCE of 5.2% was achieved with PiHI + 0.05 M I2 (with ⊥ alignment of the solid electrolyte with respect to the electrode). The champion efficiency can be attributed to the significant enhancement of Jsc, compared with devices based on PiHI with or without I2. The increasing trends of Jsc and PCE are similar to the trend of conductivity and apparent diffusion coefficient of I3− ions. Hence, the overall charge transport through the motion of I3− in a highly ordered 1-D lamellar structure governs the enhancement in Jsc of the devices and matched very well with the trend of Dapp (I3−) and conductivity in the solid electrolyte. The presence of lamellar organization of PiHI with 0.05 M I2 on the TiO2 + sensitizer surface was confirmed from wide angle X-ray diffraction measurements on thin films (Fig. S8). Fig. S8 shows the XRD patterns of PiHI + 0.05 M I2, porous TiO2 + dye layer and TiO2 + dye + PiHI (with I2). From the figure it is revealed that PiHI in the presence of I2 retains its 1-D lamellar structure even on the titania + dye surface.

Electrolytes

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω)
CPE-P

R
rec (Ω)

a Performances of ss-DSSCs were measured with a 0.2 cm2 working area (measurements were performed under AM1.5, 1 sun irradiation).
b Values estimated by fitting the Nyquist plot, Jsc: short-circuit current, Voc: open circuit voltage, FF: fill factor and PCE (%): power conversion efficiency.

Pure PiHI
4.3 ± 0.4
0.529 ± 0.02
70 ± 1
1.7 ± (0.2)
26.0
0.68
105
+0.04 M I2
6.2 ± 0.3
0.501 ± 0.02
67 ± 1
2.1 ± (0.1)
25.5
0.68
132
+0.05 M I2 (⊥)
13.0 ± 0.5
0.538 ± 0.05
66 ± 1
5.2 ± (0.3)
24.7
0.70
210
+0.05 M I2 (∥)
11.0 ± 0.3
0.535 ± 0.05
65 ± 1
4.2 ± (0.2)
24.0
0.67
198
+0.06 M I2
10.1 ± 0.2
0.518 ± 0.03
72 ± 1
3.8 ± (0.1)
26.5
0.67
148
As discussed in the earlier section, PiHI with I2 (0.05 M) exhibited 1-D lamellar anisotropic conductivity, and ss-DSSC devices with (∥) and (⊥) alignments of the solid electrolyte were fabricated. The J–V characteristics and the obtained photovoltaic parameters are given in Fig. 8 and Table 2, respectively. Due to easy charge transfer or diffusion of I3− in the ⊥ alignment, ss-DSSCs show Jsc = 13.01 mA cm−2 and PCE = 5.2% with FF = 66%, which are better than the devices with the ∥ arrangement (Jsc = 11.0 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.535 V, PCE = 4.2% and FF = 65%).
An approximately constant value of Voc and FF in both types of devices suggested that PiHI with 0.05 M I2 has better pore filling capacity in dye sensitized porous TiO2. The obtained efficiency, 5.2%, is better than the devices with a similar sensitizer (SK1) along with a classical liquid based electrolyte. Hence, due to the saturated structure and strong electrostatic forces with H-bonded close packing, the highly ordered 1-D lamellar structure in PiHI was responsible for the high efficiency. The charge transfer is feasible and resulted in better performance in solid state devices.
To investigate the role of interfacial resistance on electron transfer and recombination rate in DSSC devices, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were carried out. The EIS curves of ss-DSSC devices based on PiHI with various amounts of I2 are shown in Fig. 9. As shown in Fig. 9, three semicircles were observed in the Nyquist plots. The smaller semicircle (higher frequency from 103 to 105 Hz), larger semicircle (lower mid frequency from 1 to 102 Hz) and last low frequency (0.01 Hz to 1 Hz) in the Nyquist plots were attributed to the charge transfer at the counter electrode/electrolyte interface, the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface and the diffusion process of iodide and triiodide in the electrolytes, respectively. Small high frequency semicircles are almost similar in all the dyes due to the use of the same counter electrode and electrolyte. The curves are fitted for the circuit shown in the inset of Fig. 9 and the obtained parameters (Rct, Rrec and CPE-P) are given in the last three columns of Table 2. All the devices show a low value of Rct, and contribute to the favourable fill factor (FF) and high efficiency of the devices. The EIS results revealed that the electron transport property is enhanced in the case of the PiHI with 0.05 M I2 based device which has been reflected by the middle arc (lower frequency shift) and gives higher Rrec compared with other devices. The higher Rrec value indicates reduction in the charge recombination process and enhancement in the electron injection in the TiO2 layer, which ultimately increase Jsc of devices. The radius of middle semicircles increases in the order pure PiHI < 0.04 M < 0.06 M < 0.05 M I2.
The long-term stability of the fabricated ss-DSSCs was investigated at 100% relative humidity at 45 °C. Fig. 10 presents the time dependence of the important parameters of the solid electrolyte based DSSCs containing the PiHI + 0.05MI2 (⊥) electrolyte redox couple. During this stability analysis, we observed an initial improvement in performance, probably owing to an increase of the carbazole based sensitizer (SK1) regeneration. It can be clearly seen that there was a gradual decrease and stabilization at about 97% of the PCE, Jsc, Voc and FF value of the devices after 600 h at ambient temperature. The solid electrolyte PiHI has good long term stability under humidity and at high temperatures.

A novel saturated heterocyclic organic crystal piperidine iodide, PiHI, has been synthesized using a facile single step route. The introduction of iodine in PiHI facilitates the self-assembly into a 1D-lamellar micro-crystalline structure. XRD studies confirm the highly ordered 1D lamellar structure in PiHI with 0.05 M I2 and the same micro-structure is retained even on the layer of dye sensitized titania. EIS confirms the anisotropic 1-D lamellar structure in PiHI + 0.05 M I2. Because of the saturated ring structure, PiHI undergoes close packing that paves the way for the ionic transport of I−/I3− resulting in a high diffusion coefficient and conductivity. In addition, the ionic conductivity of PiHI is found to be anisotropic. Two-component PiHI with the ⊥ar arrangement with respect to the electrode surface shows 1.5 times higher conductivity compared with the ∥al arrangement. Hence, the ss-DSSC devices with these highly ordered two-component PiHI organic ionic crystals as an electrolyte exhibit 4.2% and 5.2% PCE values for the ∥al and ⊥ar arrangements, respectively. Additionally, a long term thermal stability test demonstrated a very stable PCE for 600 h under 1 sun illumination. Lamellar structure generation enhances the ionic conductivity, leads to easy electron transport in devices and works efficiently for dye regeneration.


Acetonitrile, 4-tert-butyl pyridine and methanol were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, India. TiO2 nanoparticles (20 nm, anatase), ethyl cellulose and α-terpineol were also purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. TCO glass (surface resistivity 15 Ω cm−2) and Meltonix tape were purchased from Solaronix, SA, Switzerland. H2PtCl6 and TiCl4 (Sigma-Aldrich) were used as received. TiCl4 was diluted with water to 2 M at 0 °C to make a stock solution, which was kept in a refrigerator and freshly diluted to 50 mM with water for each TiCl4 treatment of the TiO2-FTO electrode. Piperidine (Loba-chem) and hydroiodic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) were used as received. Iodine (Sigma-Aldrich) was purified by sublimation. The SK1 dye was synthesized in our laboratory.


The equimolar piperidine and hydroiodic acid were charged in 20 mL of ethanol and mixed at 0–5 °C. After stirring for 2 h, the solvent was distilled out by using a rotating evaporator, which resulted in a solid white product. The obtained solid material was washed 3–4 times in ether for removing impurities and dried using an oven at 50 °C. The structure of the ionic conductor, PiHI, was testified by 1H NMR spectroscopy. 1H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO): δ (ppm) –NH2, 8.2δ (2H, t), –C2H4, 3.12δ (4H, t), –C2H4, 1.9δ (4H, t) and –CH2, 1.3δ (2H, t).


For ss-DSSC working electrodes, the FTO glass substrates were cleaned sequentially by sonication in detergent, deionized water, and alcohol, and finally dried in a nitrogen stream. After treatment, they were coated with a buffer layer of TiO2 by spin-coating and then calcination at 450 °C. The FTO glass plates were coated with a layer of TiO2 paste by the doctor blading process. They were kept in such a way that the paste could relax to reduce surface irregularity and then dried for 5 min at 120 °C. The electrode coated with the TiO2 paste was calcined under an air flow at 450 °C for 20 min followed by a treatment with 50 mM TiCl4. The TiO2 films were rinsed with water and ethanol followed by calcination at 450 °C for 20 min. During the cooling down process, when the temperature reached 80 °C, the TiO2 electrodes were immersed in the SK1 solution (solvent mixture of dichloromethane and ethanol). For the counter electrodes, the FTO plates were predrilled on the back of counter electrodes and then washed as per the above process. The counter electrodes were prepared by coating with a drop of H2PtCl6 (50 mM in ethanol) on the FTO and then heated at 450 °C for 15 min. The dye loaded TiO2 film as the working electrode and the Pt-coated FTO as the counter electrode were separated by a surlyn film (25 μm) and sealed at 70–80 °C. A drop of the desired composition of I2 in the electrolyte (in acetonitrile) was put on each of the drilled holes in the counter electrodes. The cell was further dried in a vacuum oven at 50 °C for 24 h (the same process was repeated 2 to 3 times in order to achieve proper contact) for the complete removal of the residual acetonitrile and to form a compact layer of the solid electrolyte.



1H NMR spectra were recorded on a Bruker Advance 400 MHz in deuterated dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO) solution. Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra of the synthesized PiHI electrolyte were recorded on an ABB FTIR Spectrometer, Canada, in the range of 4000–400 cm−1. Thermal analysis was carried out on a TGA-2000S system (SDT Q600, TA Germany). The sample was heated from 50 to 500 °C at a heating rate of 5 °C min−1 under a nitrogen atmosphere. Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) measurement was performed under N2 in the temperature range of 20 to 150 °C. Raman spectra were collected by using an RFS 100/S FT-Raman spectrometer with a Nd:YAG laser source and a Ge diode detector. Electrochemical characterization such as Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) was performed with an electrochemical workstation, CHI660E (CHI instruments, Austin TX). The cyclic voltammetry for the solid electrolyte was performed using two platinized FTO-glass sandwiched with a 25 μm thickness of electrolyte at a scan rate of 25 mV s−1. The conductivity of the ionic crystal, PiHI, was determined by the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) -measurement with two conductive glass electrodes having a radius of 1.32 cm, on a Solartron 1260 + 1287 interface at room temperature over the frequency range of 100 mHz to 1 Hz. EIS is also used to confirm ∥al and ⊥ar alignments of the electrolyte. Steady state voltammetry was conducted on a conventional photoeletrochemical cell equipped with a 20 μm radius platinum ultra-microelectrode (CHI660E) as the working electrode and a Pt-disk as the counter and reference electrodes, respectively. XRD measurements were performed on a Rigaku Ultima X-ray diffractometer with graphite-monochromatized high intensity Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.54 Å). The program written under MATLAB was used to fit the XRD pattern, in which the stacking is decomposed in a series of bilayers representing the head and tail of the molecule with an appropriate electron density. The width of the Bragg peaks is dictated by the number of bilayers chosen in the stacking. The thickness of the active layer of the solid state devices was determined by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). The solar cell performance in terms of power conversion efficiency (PCE) was measured using a Keithley source meter 2450 by sweeping the potential from 0 to 0.7 V at a scan rate 20 mV s−1 under the simulation of white light with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (AM1.5G filter, Photoemission Tech., USA). The incident light intensity was adjusted and calibrated to 100 mW cm−2 (1 sun) using a (NRIL) photometer. A black mask was used in all devices with an equal open mouth area of active layers. EIS of the ss-DSSCs were obtained by sweeping a low amplitude AC signal of 10 mV having a frequency ranging from 120 kHz to 0.1 Hz. EIS measurements were carried out using a Solartron 1260 + 1287 interface and data were analyzed using Zplot and Corrview software (Scribner's associates Inc.). During the measurements, the cells were held in the dark under the application of 0.65 V DC bias.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work is financially supported by Technology System Group, Department of Science and Technology (DST), New Delhi, India (DST/TSG/PT/2012/125-G). The author JVV is thankful to UGC, New Delhi for providing a BSR-RFSMS meritorious fellowship.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: NMR spectroscopy, FTIR spectroscopy, XRD and DFT. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr06128e
‡ Current address: Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National University of Singapore, 9 Engineering Drive 1, 117575, Singapore.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017