 DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35317B
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2763-2803
Andreas Stein*, Benjamin E. Wilson and Stephen G. Rudisill
Department of Chemistry, University of Minnesota, 207 Pleasant St. SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. E-mail: a-stein@umn.edu; Fax: +1 612 626 7541; Tel: +1 612 624 1802
Received 7th August 2012
First published on 18th October 2012
Templating with colloidal crystals composed of monodisperse spheres is a convenient chemical method to obtain porous materials with well-ordered periodicity and interconnected pore systems. The three-dimensionally ordered macroporous (3DOM) products or inverse opals are of interest for numerous applications, both for the optical properties related to structural color of these photonic crystal materials and because of their bicontinuous nanostructure, i.e., a continuous nanostructured skeleton with large interfacial area and a three-dimensionally interconnected pore system with low tortuosity. This review outlines various synthetic methods used to control the morphology of 3DOM materials with different compositions. It highlights aspects of the choice of colloidal particles, assembly of the colloidal crystal template, infiltration and processing, template removal, and other necessary modifications to enhance the functionality of the materials. It also considers syntheses within the confinement of 3DOM materials and summarizes characterization methods that are particularly useful in the analysis of 3DOM materials. The review then discusses chemical applications of 3DOM materials, namely sorption and controlled release, optical and electrochemical sensors, solar cells, lithium ion batteries, supercapacitors, fuel cells, and environmental and chemical fuel catalysis. A focus is on structural features and materials properties that enable these applications.
Andreas Stein
Andreas Stein is a Distinguished McKnight University Professor at the University of Minnesota. He received his PhD in Physical Chemistry from the University of Toronto in 1991 and carried out postdoctoral research at Bayer A.G., Germany, the University of Texas and Penn State University. Professor Stein's research interests are in the field of solid state chemistry, in particular porous materials, templating methods and nanocomposites. He is the recipient of several awards, including a Merck Professorship, 3M Faculty Grant, a Dupont Young Professor Grant, an NSF CAREER Award, a McKnight Land-Grant Professorship and a David & Lucile Packard Fellowship.
Benjamin E. Wilson
Benjamin Wilson received his BA in Chemistry from Northern Michigan University (Marquette, MI, USA) in 2010 and recently completed his MS in Materials Chemistry from the University of Minnesota – Twin Cities. He is pursuing his PhD, studying in the Stein laboratory. His research focuses on electrical energy storage in supercapacitors and batteries using nanostructured materials.
Stephen G. Rudisill
Stephen Rudisill received his BSc in Chemistry from Beloit College (Beloit, WI, USA) in 2009, and most recently completed an MS in Materials Chemistry at the University of Minnesota – Twin Cities. He is currently a PhD candidate in the Stein laboratory, where he develops and investigates sol–gel and templating techniques for engineering porosity in inorganic materials toward a variety of purposes, including colloidal assembly, thermochemical water-splitting, and biomimetic inorganic/biochemical hybrid materials.

Colloidal crystals and inverse replica materials templated from colloidal crystals evoke a sense of beauty, both to the unaided eye and under the microscope (Fig. 1a). Consider the natural prototype of a colloidal crystal: an opal. This gem consists of a cubic-close-packed periodic array of colloidal silica spheres that are uniform in size, like atoms in a crystal (hence “colloidal crystal”), but with typical diameters of a few hundred nanometers. Visible light with wavelengths on a similar scale is diffracted by the periodic structure of the opal, giving the material its “opalescent” appearance and often, its brilliant colors. Templated structures, produced by filling the interstitial space between close-packed spheres with another material and then removing those spheres (Fig. 1b), can possess similar colors, so-called structural colors. These negative replica structures are called inverse opals, inverted opals, or three-dimensionally ordered macroporous (3DOM) materials. They also exhibit the high degree of symmetry imparted by the colloidal crystal template (CCT) when viewed under a scanning electron microscope (SEM) or a transmission electron microscope (TEM). Both the visual attractiveness and the special optical properties derived from the periodic structure of 3DOM materials have been part of the impetus for developing these materials. However, 3DOM materials possess additional features of interest, such as an open, interconnected macropore structure and nanosized wall components. Numerous applications can benefit from these properties, and over the last fifteen years the interest in employing 3DOM materials has increased vastly. Currently, 3DOM materials are being explored for use in photonic devices, sensors, batteries, supercapacitors, fuel cells, catalysis, sorption, thermal insulation, surfaces with special wetting properties, and other potential applications.
In this review, we will first outline synthetic methods used to control the internal structure, external morphology, composition, and surface functionality of 3DOM materials. We will mainly use the term “3DOM” material, because it encompasses structures that are truly representative of the void space in an opal (i.e., true inverse opals), as well as structures consisting of either more rod-like skeletal walls or of closed shells. We will briefly mention characterization techniques that are particularly helpful to elucidate the structure of 3DOM materials. Using examples from the recent literature, the remainder of the review will illustrate how the features of 3DOM materials can be used advantageously in some of the above applications, focusing mainly on chemical applications. Because this field is growing quite rapidly (more than 100 new publications on inverse opals, inverted opals or 3DOM materials appeared in each of the last five years), this will not be a comprehensive review. Examples were chosen to illustrate specific features rather than necessarily providing the first example of a given approach or application. For additional information, the reader is referred to references in the cited literature and to previous reviews. Abbreviations used in this review are listed in Section 8.

The general scheme of a synthesis by colloidal crystal templating is relatively straightforward: one starts with a dispersion of monodisperse colloidal particles (in this review, we will limit ourselves to spherical colloids), assembles these into close-packed arrays, infiltrates the empty volume between spheres with a fluid, converts the fluid into an interconnected solid skeleton (Fig. 2) that permeates the space between spheres, and then removes the original template. However, to do this successfully and to produce the most suitable structure and composition for a given application, it is necessary to consider further details in each of these steps.
The most common colloidal particles used to synthesize 3DOM materials are uniformly sized silica or polymer spheres, which form close-packed arrays in two or three dimensions if sphere diameters vary by less than 3–5%. Such spheres are available commercially in various size ranges, typically as suspensions. Furthermore, they can be readily synthesized in the lab, using established techniques and relatively simple equipment. Uniform silica spheres with diameters from ca. 50 nm to a few micrometers are synthesized by the Stöber process, i.e., by the hydrolysis and condensation of tetraalkoxysilanes in a solution containing excess water, a low molecular weight alcohol, and ammonia. As hard templates for mesoporous solids, smaller uniform silica spheres in the size range from ca. 10 to 40 nm may be prepared by a method employing the basic amino acid L-lysine to control the hydrolysis of tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS).

Monodisperse polymer spheres are most easily synthesized in the range from 200 to 500 nm. Larger polymer spheres of sufficiently small polydispersity are also accessible. Recipes for polymer spheres that have been used for the fabrication of CCTs can be found, for example, for polystyrene (PS), poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), and poly(styrene-methyl methacrylate-acrylic acid) (p(St-MMA-AA). It should be noted that the initiator used in these emulsion polymerizations determines the surface charge on the polymer spheres, which dictates interactions with precursors in the CCT. The initiator 2,2′-azobis(2-methylpropionamidne) dihydrochloride, for instance, introduces a small positive surface charge, whereas the initiator potassium persulfate introduces a small negative surface charge. The three polymers listed above have glass transition temperatures (Tg) in the range from 105–107 °C. Colloidal crystals of these polymer spheres can be mechanically stabilized by brief annealing (a few minutes) just above Tg at 110–115 °C or a longer annealing at slightly lower temperatures, which merges the contact points between spheres. Excessive annealing deforms the spheres to the extent that void space is lost. For silica spheres, annealing at 600 °C before assembly reduces crack formation in the CCT.
Several considerations weigh into the choice of colloidal particles for CCTs. The CCT should maintain its structure at least up to the temperature at which an interconnected skeleton begins to form. Compared to polymer spheres, silica spheres employed in CCTs have the advantage of withstanding relatively high processing temperatures in subsequent steps. This makes them the first choice for chemical vapor deposition processes and other high temperature reactions. With silica spheres, the product undergoes less shrinkage (ca. 10% in linear dimensions) than in typical reactions with polymer spheres (often 20–30%). A disadvantage of silica spheres is associated with template removal, which requires treatment with hydrofluoric acid (toxic and caustic) or hot alkali solution. Polymer spheres are removed by calcination, pyrolysis, or extraction with an organic solvent. Calcination in air removes the polymer at temperatures above ca. 300 °C. Pyrolysis under an inert atmosphere leaves a carbon deposit throughout the product. Solvent extraction is widely used for thin 3DOM films having thicknesses of up to a few micrometers. However, with much larger particles, internal pressure from swelling of the polymer spheres can result in fracture and pulverization of the particles. Another consideration is the surface hydrophobicity or hydrophilicity of the template. For efficient infiltration of the template, aqueous precursors require the addition of a cosolvent, like methanol or ethanol when PS or PMMA spheres are used. On the other hand, (p(St-MMA-AA) spheres have a carboxylate corona around a PS core, which makes them more hydrophilic and suitable for infiltration with aqueous precursors without the need to dilute them with alcohols. A final consideration relates to the ability of the precursor solution for the 3DOM target material to enter the sphere volume. If this is the case, for example, in combinations of core–shell spheres with a precursor that is a good solvent for the shell component, then closed shell structures are likely to be obtained rather than structures containing windows between adjacent macropores. An example relates to 3DOM fluorinated polyimide structures. Materials prepared from the polyimide precursor in THF in a PS template contained open windows. With (p(St-MMA-AA) spheres, THF penetrated the shell layers of the spheres and was replaced by polyimide to form closed shell structures suitable for thermal insulation.
The second step requires the assembly of the monodisperse spheres into close-packed arrays. Generally, the spheres pack into hexagonally-close-packed layers in two dimensions (2D) and into predominantly face-centered cubic (fcc) arrays in three dimensions (3D). However, the resulting CCTs are not defect free. They contain point defects, line defects, stacking defects, dislocations, and cracks. Of course, the amount of defects in a given CCT is influenced by the method chosen for assembly. In 3D CCTs composed of 200–500 nm spheres, typical single crystal domains extend over tens of micrometers before defects are encountered. The need to minimize defects in the CCT depends on the target application. Photonic crystal applications have probably the most stringent requirements, and much effort has been expended to prepare large-area, “defect-free” CCTs for photonic crystals. Other applications, such as catalysis, sorption, or energy storage, benefit from the small dimensions in 3DOM skeletons, from good mass transport through interconnected pores, and from large interfaces, but they do not require perfect periodicity. For those applications simple and fast routes to CCT assembly may be most appropriate.

Several reviews of colloidal crystal assembly for CCTs have been written. We will therefore only briefly discuss some of the more common methods and their limitations. If large amounts (multiple grams) of 3DOM products are required and defects can be tolerated, sedimentation methods are appropriate (Fig. 3a–c). Suspensions of spheres are allowed to settle in large vessels (e.g., crystallization dishes), forming millimeter to centimeter thick CCT layers (Fig. 3a). Sedimentation generally takes a few weeks for 200–500 nm diameter spheres, but decreases for spheres with larger diameters. For larger spheres, a higher viscosity medium may be required to prevent rapid sedimentation, which would result in disordered sphere aggregates. The sedimentation rate may also be controlled by electrophoresis, overcoming the very slow sedimentation of small nanospheres or the too-rapid sedimentation of large spheres.
Compared to natural sedimentation, the assembly time can be significantly shortened by centrifugation, but several hours to days may still be required, depending on the sphere size and the dispersing fluid (Fig. 3b). When using polymer spheres, centrifugation above 1000 rpm can collapse the interstitial spaces between spheres. An alternative process for more rapid assembly of a CCT is membrane filtration, in which a suspension of spheres is filtered through a membrane with sufficiently small pores to retain the spheres (Fig. 3c). The more rapid formation of the CCT through filtration or sedimentation can lead to a higher level of polycrystallinity caused by simultaneous nucleation in different locations and crystal growth in multiple directions. However, a recent study that compared colloidal crystals prepared by gravitational sedimentation and centrifugation found little difference in the product quality on the basis of SEM images (covering regions of tens of sphere layers) and visual color.
CCT formation on a patterned substrate allows for the growth of large, single crystal CCTs with controlled orientation. The pattern can be formed through many common methods, such as electron beam and photolithography, nanoimprinting, reactive ion etching, and many others. Slow sedimentation of the colloidal spheres onto the patterned surface leads to what is called “colloidal epitaxy”, where the size and shape of the pattern determines the morphology of the resulting crystal. Fig. 4 illustrates this process and shows how the orientation of a single crystal CCT can be controlled by changing the angle within an etched silicon substrate.
CCTs are also formed within physical confinement, for example in a cell sandwiched between two substrates (Fig. 3e). By injecting the colloidal suspension into the cell under pressure, films with relatively low levels of defects can be formed. Thickness control is achieved by varying the separation between the two glass plates. Continuous sonication during infiltration can further improve the structural quality of the CCT film.
Currently, most publications that detail the synthesis of inverse opals or 3DOM materials involve thin films formed on planar substrates. A rapid and scalable process of thin film CCT preparation on large (wafer-sized) substrates is by spin coating. To avoid premature sedimentation, the colloids are suspended in a viscous medium. For deposition of monodisperse silica colloids, the viscous, nonvolatile, photopolymerizable monomer ethoxylated trimethylolpropane triacrylate (EDPTA) was appropriate for spin casting as it closely matched the refractive index of silica and reduced attractive van der Waals forces between spheres. After spin coating, EDPTA was photopolymerized but could then be removed by oxygen plasma etching to leave only the silica CCT.
One of the most commonly employed methods for growing high quality thin film CCTs with controlled thickness involves variations of a vertical deposition process (also called controlled drying, convective assembly, or evaporation-assisted assembly). In this method, a planar substrate is placed vertically or at an angle into a suspension of colloidal spheres. As the solvent–air interface moves along the surface of the substrate, either by solvent evaporation, by slow mechanical extraction of the substrate, or by controlled removal of the liquid with a peristaltic pump, capillary forces at the liquid–air interface direct the assembly of spheres on the substrate (Fig. 3d). During the formation of a monolayer of spheres, spheres are initially drawn to the substrate–solvent interface through capillary immersion forces, mediated by the solvent meniscus. This is followed by solvent evaporation leading to a convective particle flux within the remaining suspension towards the drying particle layer. In the case of multi-layer formation, the convective particle flux dominates, causing additional spheres to be drawn towards the crystal front driven by the evaporation of the solvent from within the drying CCT layer. The solvent evaporation also causes strong capillary forces contributing to crack formation in the final film. The choice of substrate, angle of the substrate relative to the suspension, choice of solvent, temperature, humidity, and many other factors determine the final domain size, thickness, and overall order of the resulting CCT. Additionally, improvements to film quality can be achieved by applying a DC current normal to a conducting substrate during vertical deposition. The best results were obtained with repulsive fields, i.e., on the negative electrode for negatively charged spheres. A specific adaptation of the vertical deposition technique is Langmuir–Blodgett deposition. Using functionalized silica spheres, a 2D sphere array is formed at the solvent–air interface. By controlling the speed of upstroke and downstroke through that interface, thin films of CCT are formed, a single layer of colloidal spheres being deposited with each cycle.
In the next steps, the colloidal crystal template is infiltrated with precursor material and processed to form a composite with the CCT and eventually the template-free 3DOM product (Fig. 5). The specific steps for infiltration and processing differ from precursor to precursor and need to be optimized accordingly. Infiltration can be conducted with solid, liquid, or gas phase precursors. Of these, infiltration with solid nanoparticles is less common, except for films consisting of monolayers or very few layers of the template. In this case the ratio of templating sphere size to nanoparticle size must be sufficiently large. An additional phase acting as a glue for the nanoparticles can keep particles together if the volume fraction of nanoparticles is insufficient for this purpose. Incorporation of nanoparticles within the template is more efficiently carried out by co-assembly of templating spheres and colloidal precursors for the target product. Co-deposition also requires a large difference in the two particle sizes to produce 3DOM structures. Otherwise, poorly ordered macroporous products may be obtained, which have fewer interconnections than the twelve windows expected for an fcc structure.
Liquid-phase infiltration applies to sol–gel and solution precursors for the target materials, as well as melts (Fig. 5a). When a CCT is partially or fully immersed into the liquid, the liquids enter the interstitial space by capillary forces. Application of suction through the template or a vacuum to remove air bubbles from the template can assist the infiltration process. Solvent mixtures may be employed to adjust the extent of CCT wetting by the precursor. To minimize the formation of a nonporous overlayer, care should be taken to match the amount of precursor to the amount of the template. For efficient infiltration, the viscosity of the precursor must be considered. Extensive polymerization of a precursor prior to infiltration can increase viscosity and result in incomplete filling of the template. Dilution of the precursor is a possible route to reduce the viscosity. However, after solvent removal, dilute precursors may not completely fill the void space, necessitating multiple infiltration/drying cycles to increase the volume fraction of solid material in the final product. Recently, a forced impregnation method was developed to overcome effects of high precursor viscosity that limit the extent of infiltration. The technique follows the example of Von Hagens's plastination process used to preserve biological specimens with polymers. PS CCTs were immersed in methanol solution to fill all interstitial space with methanol. The alcohol-filled CCTs were transferred into a bath containing a metal alkoxide precursor (e.g., titanium butoxide, niobium ethoxide, tantalum ethoxide, zirconium n-propoxide). Because methanol has a higher vapor pressure than these alkoxides, application of a vacuum removed methanol preferentially, which was replaced in the interstitial space by the liquid alkoxide.

The shape of the skeletal walls surrounding macropores depends on the wetting interactions between the precursor and the template. With strong attractive interactions between the precursor and the spheres, conformal coatings are obtained that closely follow the curved surfaces of the colloidal crystal template. In the resulting, so-called “surface-templated” materials, walls tend to be relatively smooth and windows between adjacent macropores significantly smaller than the macropore diameter (Fig. 6a). Surface templated structures are obtained, for example, in 3DOM carbon materials prepared with PS or PMMA spheres and resol precursors. Similar conformal structures are obtained by the electrodeposition, chemical vapor deposition (CVD), and atomic layer deposition (ALD) processes described below. In some cases, the product layer on the templating spheres blocks off access to additional precursor material, so that the regions templated from octahedral and tetrahedral holes in the CCT are hollow. When the template–precursor interactions are weak, the skeleton forms away from the walls, resulting in “volume templating” and more stick-like skeletal structures with relatively large windows (Fig. 6b). Such structures have porosities that greatly exceed the theoretical porosity of an ideal inverse opal (74%). Intermediate types between surface and volume templating are possible, depending on the precursor and assembly process, and they offer an opportunity for tuning window sizes. For a given PS sphere diameter, the window sizes were smaller in 3DOM SiO2 formed by infiltration of the CCT with a sol–gel precursor, compared to 3DOM SiO2 formed by codeposition of PS spheres and Ludox colloidal silica particles (7 nm diameter). A third structure type contains completely closed macropores, as mentioned in Section 2.1.1, which results from precursor infiltration into individual templating spheres.
No matter what morphology is present, the macropore walls are either amorphous, or they consist of aggregated nanocrystallites (see Fig. 2). Rare cases of single crystalline walls have been observed, for example single crystal 3DOM calcite. Secondary templates, including surfactant templates and smaller colloids, can add secondary structure to the walls, producing materials with hierarchical porosity. In syntheses of 3DOM oxides from sol–gel precursors and salt-solution precursors, the crystalline phase of the macropore walls depends on the template removal process, specifically the calcination temperature. In the case of 3DOM titania, for example, amorphous titania walls are obtained if the template is removed by solvent extraction after condensation of titania, without any high temperature treatment. Calcination in air at temperatures around 400–600 °C produces anatase walls. Full conversion to rutile—of interest in photonic crystal applications because of its higher refractive index—requires temperatures between 700 and 1000 °C. At these high temperatures, the walls sinter excessively, so that the periodic structure is lost. It was recently demonstrated that destruction of the 3DOM structure during formation of rutile can be avoided by incorporating tin(IV)-isopropoxide in a titanium(IV)-butoxide based precursor solution. In this case, 3DOM rutile (Ti:Sn ratio 4:1) with a well-formed periodic structure was obtained after calcination at 500 °C. The SnO2 facilitated the phase transformation from anatase to rutile. The crystallite size of the wall particles was decreased from 11 nm to 4.4 nm upon incorporation of SnO2, suggesting that the nucleation rate was increased by including the tin alkoxide.
For precursors containing multiple metal alkoxides or metal salts, phase homogeneity in the final product depends on the relative rates of hydrolysis and condensation or precipitation of the precursors. Rather than obtaining fully mixed oxide phases, one may produce 3DOM materials with some regions rich in one phase and others rich in another phase. Such heterogeneity was revealed by confocal Raman microscopy and asymmetry in X-ray diffraction peaks in the case of 3DOM Ce1−xZrxO2 binary oxides prepared from cerium chloride and zirconium oxychloride precursors in methanolic solution. Pechini-type methods are more suitable to obtain homogeneous phase distributions in multicomponent systems. In this method, the homogeneity of metal centers is ensured by complexation with citric acid and polymerization of the complexed metals with ethylene glycol. In case of the 3DOM Ce1−xZrxO2 system, only a single crystallographic phase was identified when a Pechini precursor was used for CCT infiltration. To obtain mixed phases of 3DOM oxides with silica and a high loading of a second metal oxide (e.g., alumina or titania), it is also necessary to address the different hydrolysis rates of the precursors. This can be achieved by prehydrolyzing the silicon alkoxide. Prehydrolysis of TEOS forms reaction intermediates that react faster with the second metal alkoxide than TEOS molecules react with each other.
The extensive volume shrinkage associated with the processing of sol–gel precursors and polymeric CCTs leads to cracks, which reduce the mechanical stability of the products and, depending on the application, may affect the product performance. Shrinkage and crack formation may be mitigated by several methods. One approach is to carry out the synthesis in supercritical CO2, a good solvent for many metal alkoxides. For example, in the synthesis of 3DOM anatase from titanium tetraisopropoxide, carried out at 40 °C and 80 bar CO2, less than 5% shrinkage was observed for the macropore size compared to the diameter of the templating PS spheres, even after calcination at 500 °C. Supercritical syntheses may be carried out in a stainless steel batch reactor containing the CCT, and precursors in separate vials. A catalyst is used to facilitate the condensation of alkoxide precursors at the low temperature supercritical conditions. For example, benzenesulfonic acid can be added to the suspension containing colloidal spheres before assembly of the colloidal crystal template. This induces condensation of tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS) during the supercritical CO2 treatment to produce 3DOM SiO2 at 40 °C. (Without this catalyst, the reaction would have to be carried out at 120 °C.) In this case, shrinkage was slightly larger (14%) but still less than under conventional conditions.
An interesting example of a 3DOM material that expanded by 4–5% during the calcination process rather than contracting is given by the polysilazane (–[NH(CH3)Si(CHCH2]x–[NHSi(CH3)NH]y–), a precursor for SiCN ceramics (Fig. 5b). This polysilazane remains a liquid below 200 °C but can be crosslinked into a solid above 150 °C by radical polymerization. Pyrolysis at 500 °C (with a very slow heating rate of 0.5 °C min−1) removes the template and transforms the material into a hybrid composite with a Si–N backbone and organic functional groups. Square-centimeter sized crack-free films were obtained. Remarkably, any cracks in the CCT were healed during infiltration, i.e., they were back-filled by the polymer.
To reduce the number of steps required to bring together the templating colloids and precursors for the target material, a method was recently developed that achieves highly ordered 3DOM structures by co-assembly of polymer spheres with the precursor solution (Fig. 7). The polymer spheres (PS or PMMA) were suspended in a hydrolyzed silicate sol–gel precursor and then assembled on a substrate by vertical deposition. During solvent evaporation, the precursor was drawn into the template as it self-assembled at the substrate–solvent–air interface. Large-area crack-free 3DOM silica films were obtained by this method for thicknesses up to 5 μm or 18–20 sphere layers; however, thicker films developed cracks. Multiple coatings with different sphere sizes are possible and the procedure can also be carried out on patterned supports to obtain patterned films. Currently, this versatile approach is most suitable for small areas, given that the deposition rate is ca. 2 cm per day. A codeposition process involving PS spheres and TiO2 nanoparticles in a capillary cell allowed for fabrication of 1 cm2 3DOM TiO2 films within ca. 30 minutes. The TiO2 nanoparticles needed to be treated hydrothermally to reduce crack formation in the several-micrometer-thick films.
Liquid-phase infiltration methods can be used with both bulk and thin film CCTs. Electrochemical deposition and most of the remaining infiltration methods work best with thin film templates. In electrochemical depositions, single or multiple layers of a CCT are assembled on a planar, electrically conducting substrate by vertical deposition or other suitable techniques. Such substrates include gold-coated glass slides or silicon wafers and indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated or fluorinated tin oxide (FTO)-coated slides. The CCT-coated substrate becomes the working electrode in an electrochemical cell. A suitable electroplating solution is used as the precursor for the target material, which is then formed by electrodeposition using, e.g., cyclic voltammetry or galvanostatic deposition. The product builds up starting from the conducting substrate, growing outward through the CCT. This method avoids pore blockage during infiltration and fills the interstitial space completely, resulting in high quality inverse replicas of the template. The current can be used not only to control the deposition rate but also the thickness of the layer (which depends on the charge, the product of current and deposition time). As the cross-section of the templating spheres varies with distance from the substrate, the size of windows on the top surface of the templated film can be chosen, depending on the stopping point for the deposition. The template is usually removed by solvent extraction from these thin films. If the film is only weakly attached to the substrate, or if a sacrificial interlayer is first present and then removed, the film can be detached from the surface (e.g., with an adhesive tape) to expose the reverse surface (which tends to be highly ordered). Electrodeposition techniques are useful for the preparation of conductive polymers (e.g., polyaniline, PANI), metals, and semiconductors. They produce conformal structures with little pore shrinkage (ca. 5%). Electrodeposition in water is limited to reagents that do not react with water and can be deposited under conditions where water is not electrolyzed. Organic solvents extend the range of suitable materials, but ionic liquids have become particularly interesting because of their wide electrochemical windows that expand the cathodic or anodic limits of the deposition, their low vapor, and good thermal stability. Ionic liquids, such as 1-hexyl-3-methylimidazolium tris(pentafluoroethyl)trifluorophosphate, 1-ethyl-3-methylimiadazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)amide, or 1-butyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl amide) have enabled syntheses of 3DOM Ge and 3DOM Si by electrodeposition. In the 3DOM Si synthesis, the technique worked best with relatively large templating spheres having diameters of 0.5 μm or larger.
Electrophoretic deposition is suitable for introducing preformed nanoparticles into a CCT (Fig. 5f). Similar to the electrodeposition process, a colloidal crystal is grown on the working electrode surface. The working electrode and counterelectrode are placed in a suspension of nanoparticles. Upon application of an electric field between the two electrodes, nanoparticles are attracted to the working electrode if it has a charge opposite to the surface charge of the particles (determined by zeta-potential measurements). The nanoparticles then fill the interstitial spaces of the CCT. A disadvantage of this technique is that nanoparticles can block entry to lower-lying layers, which results in poor filling ratios. To minimize this jamming effect, the electrophoretic deposition has to be carried out at an optimal potential, which must be determined empirically. In an electrophoretic synthesis of 3DOM ZnO films, the colloidal crystal was infiltrated to a depth of ca. 15–20 μm.
In spray pyrolyses, a precursor solution is sprayed onto a substrate at elevated temperature. The solvent then evaporates and a solid is deposited. This technique can be used in combination with colloidal crystal templating, but is most suited for templates with few layers of spheres. As an example, spray pyrolysis of an ammonium tungstate solution onto a PS close-packed monolayer at a deposition temperature of 120 °C produced 2D ordered arrays of Na2W4O13 (i.e., half a layer) after thermal annealing (Fig. 5e).
Vapor phase deposition methods include gas infiltration and reaction, CVD, and ALD. As an example of gas infiltration, 3DOM polyethylene was produced in a solvent-free process by in situ polymerization of ethylene gas at 60 °C in a silica CCT loaded with a co-catalyst system for olefin polymerization (Fig. 5c). The silica template was removed by etching in HF solution. CVD has been employed for the synthesis of colloidal crystal templated materials using single precursors for atomic solids, e.g., for 3DOM Si, or multiple precursors for oxides or sulfides. For example, in the synthesis of 3DOM ZnO by CVD, dimethyl zinc was used as the zinc precursor and water as the oxygen precursor, which were alternately passed in a nitrogen stream over a PS CCT film at 90 °C, starting with water. The resulting 3DOM ZnO could subsequently be sulfided by a reaction with sulfur vapor to produce 3DOM ZnS. The rate of product growth depends on the temperature, exposure time, and carrier gas flow rate. Depending on these parameters, infiltration of the CCT film can be carried out in single or multiple cycles, but a typical growth rate is ca. 8 nm per cycle.
ALD permits the deposition of thin films on a substrate with precise thickness control at the atomic level and good control over the product composition. It produces conformal films without the need for line-of-sight access and is therefore suitable for colloidal crystal templating. Metallic and nonmetallic precursors are introduced into the CCT in alternating reaction steps to build up the desired structure a layer at a time, making ALD most useful for preparations of relatively small amounts of material. Growth is self-limiting, so that any excess precursor is not incorporated in the structure. As an example, a 3DOM film with a high filling fraction of GaP was prepared by ALD using trimethylgallium and tris(dimethylamino)phosphine as precursors for deposition in a SiO2 CCT at 400–500 °C. ALD can also be used to form interlayers or overlayers on an existing 3DOM substructure prepared by other methods. An interlayer of HfO2 was deposited by ALD on 3DOM carbon before CVD deposition of tungsten or molybdenum to improve adhesion and coating uniformity on the metal on the 3DOM substrate. TiO2 overlayers were deposited by ALD from tetrakis(dimethylamido)titanium as the titanium source and water as the oxygen source on the surface of 3DOM CeO2 to alter the surface chemistry and to control the window dimensions between macropores via the thickness of the TiO2 coatings, which varied between 20 and 40 nm (Fig. 5d). Using similar approaches, ALD provides a powerful method of altering the architecture of a templated structure. If a non-close-packed inverse opal is desired, one can coat the CCT with a sacrificial layer, coat this layer with the target material, remove the CCT, and finally remove the sacrificial layer to produce a structure with tubular windows between macropores. 3DOM structures with a gradient in wall thickness as a function of depth are of interest in photonic applications and are also accessible by ALD as a result of limited precursor diffusion through an opaline CCT. When the product of the partial pressure of the precursor and the exposure time is below a minimum value, surface chemisorption of the precursor on the CCT occurs only to a certain depth (depending on the Knudsen diffusion path length) and keeps regions beyond this depth unmodified. If this product is continually reduced in multiple steps, a gradient in thickness of the 3DOM walls is obtained, with thicker walls near the external surface of the CCT and progressively thinner walls at greater depths.
Compared to other templated nanoporous materials, the windows of 3DOM materials are relatively large (tens of nanometers and larger), functionalization of the pore walls is relatively straightforward, and a large variety of functional components may be introduced into 3DOM materials. For many oxides, surface hydroxyl groups provide convenient anchoring points for silane coupling agents and other molecular surface modifiers. 3DOM carbon materials may require some surface preparation, such as surface oxidation and activation, halogenation, sulfonation, etc., to provide initial anchors. The surface charge on the walls of 3DOM materials and the overall surface properties can be significantly altered by depositing polyelectrolytes to the surface by layer-by-layer (LbL) deposition. Although nanoparticles may be introduced directly into 3DOM supports, e.g., by dip coating, the introduction of polyelectrolyte layers is helpful for the attachment of nanoparticles to the pore walls, either as preformed or as in situ synthesized nanoparticles. By increasing the surface charge, the polyelectrolyte layers permit more complete surface coverage with nanoparticles. Another approach to introduce nanoparticles into the walls of 3DOM materials is directly through the templating process. Gold nanoparticles were attached to silica colloidal crystal template via aminopropyl anchors and enlarged by alternating exposure to gold salts and hydroxylamine as a weak reducing agent. The modified template was then infiltrated with PS solution. After etching of the silica spheres, a 3DOM PS film containing gold nanoparticles in the walls was obtained. Similarly, 3DOM Si containing homogeneously embedded Ge nanocrystals throughout the walls was prepared using a composite silica opal with nanocrystalline Ge on the surface and depositing Si by CVD on this nanoparticle-decorated template. The CCT had been prepared by evaporation-induced coassembly of silica spheres and nanocrystalline germanium from an ethanol dispersion.

Controlling the external morphology of 3DOM structures. Supported and free-standing films and irregular powders are the most common morphologies reported for 3DOM materials. Monolithic pieces a few millimeters in thickness and centimeter-sized in other dimensions can be produced for certain compositions (e.g., silica, carbon, titania, tungsten, silicon carbide) using templates of similar dimensions. Cylinders can be grown in the confinement of capillary tubes in which templating spheres have been assembled. Recently, 3DOM cylinders have also been prepared within an electrophoretically assembled template, which provides a helpful example for design considerations. PS spheres were electrophoretically deposited on a carbon fiber (7 μm diameter) by applying a potential to the fiber when it was immersed in a sphere suspension. Sets of smaller spheres (460 nm in diameter) formed ordered colloidal crystals around the fiber, whereas larger spheres (660 nm) formed disordered colloidal structures. Subsequently, Ni was electrodeposited in these cylindrical templates. After extraction of the polymer spheres, 3DOM Ni cylinders with carbon fiber cores were obtained, which are suitable as high-surface area microelectrodes.
Lithographic patterning provides an additional element for structural hierarchy. Lithographic patterns can be combined with most of the methods for colloidal crystal templating mentioned above, for example, with sol–gel chemistry or with electrodeposition using patterns on conductive substrates. By employing selective photopolymerization techniques and making use of the effect of refractive index gradients in a photonic crystal on its structural color (see Section 4), it is possible to produce pixellated patterns. In this instructive example, a silica CCT film on a glass substrate was first infiltrated with the negative photoresist SU-8. The polymer skeleton was heated at 195 °C (hard baked) under exposure to UV light to cross-link the polymer. This 3DOM film was delaminated from the substrate and placed upside down on a silicon substrate, exposing a surface with open windows. Macropores were filled with more SU-8 by capillary infiltration. The composite was then heated to 70 °C (soft baked) and patterned with UV light to cross-link the polymer in selected areas. Because of near-refractive index matching between the hard-baked walls and the soft-baked contents of the macropores, the exposed regions were transparent. Non-exposed SU-8 could then be extracted from the macropores, leaving colored photonic crystal patches. Limited UV exposure resulted in less crosslinking, so that partial extraction of SU-8 was possible, producing regions with intermediate refractive index contrast and different coloration.
Lithography may also be employed to introduce defect patterns into a 3DOM structure. As one example, a PMMA CCT was infiltrated with a photopolymerizable oligomer. After photopolymerization and extraction of the PMMA spheres with THF, macropores were infiltrated with another photoactive resin that had a similar refractive index. Selective exposure by two-photon lithography resulted in localized polymerization of the resin. The exposed regions, whose volume was on the order of the cube of the excitation wavelength of the femtosecond laser, provided defects in the structure. Non-polymerized resin could then be extracted. Other examples of controlled defect introduction can be found in the references cited by Lange et al.
A unique way of patterning 3DOM materials involves site-selective photothermal reactions. A multilayer film of PS CCT was sputter-coated with a thin gold layer (ca. 12 nm), which formed islands of agglomerated gold particles. An amorphous TiO2 layer (50 nm thick) was then applied to the CCT by ALD. A low-power He–Ne laser was focused on specific areas of the film through the objective of a Raman microscope (focal size ca. 2 μm). The laser light was absorbed by the gold particles and heated localized areas of the composite. This local heat caused decomposition of the PS spheres, an exothermic reaction that generated sufficient additional heat to convert the amorphous titania to anatase and produced local 3DOM anatase structures.

On the basis of their interconnected porosity and surface confinement effects, 3DOM materials provide useful host structures for confined growth of nanoparticles and for molding particles. Molding inside a 3DOM material results in inverse replicate structures of the macroporous solid, i.e., it returns the opaline shape of the original CCT, but potentially with a new composition. By this so-called wax templating approach, opaline metals, oxides, carbonates, polymers, and other compositions can be obtained. Through sonication and other processes, such opals may then be disassembled to produce spherical particles. Non-close packed polystyrene films were produced by in situ polymerization inside a 3DOM SiO2 host, whose surface had been coated with an extra layer of silica by CVD with SiCl4.

However, the 3DOM host is more than a mold. By controlling interactions of the precursor with the walls through attractive or repulsive forces and taking advantage of restricted transport through pore windows, it is possible to tune the morphology of the material grown in confinement. These effects have been demonstrated, for example, for hydrothermal zeolite (silicalite) growth inside 3DOM carbon (Fig. 8). Nanoparticles of silicalite have a negative surface charge under the hydrothermal growth conditions. If the 3DOM carbon surface also bears a negative charge (introduced via polyelectrolyte layers), seeds grow apart from the surface and polycrystalline, solid balls of the zeolite form throughout the macropores. If the charge on the 3DOM carbon surface is positive, seeds grow from the surface and eventually block macropores. As a result, the silicalite spheres inside macropores are hollow, resembling natural geodes. When a lower nutrient:solvent ratio is employed for the hydrothermal silicalite growth, single crystal domains grow through windows into adjacent cages, eventually covering many neighboring macropores. Removal of the carbon host by calcination then produces single crystals of opaline silicalite.
Similarly, in surfactant-templated syntheses of mesoporous silica inside a 3DOM host, interfacial interactions influence the silica mesostructure. For mesoporous silica grown in the confinement of 3DOM polyurethane using a triblock copolymer template (Pluronic F127), the mesostructure depended on the macropore diameters and the surface properties of the 3DOM host. The surface of the polymeric host was made more hydrophobic by treatment with octadecyltrichlorosilane or more hydrophilic by exposure to an oxygen plasma. In a hydrophilic host, onion-like structures were obtained (Fig. 9a), and in hydrophobic confinement, a more disordered mesostructure was produced whose structure was not well defined nearest to the interface, i.e., the macropore wall (Fig. 9b). Other mesostructure geometries were obtained at intermediate surface energies.
In another example, a 3DOM poly(pyrrole) host, prepared by electropolymerization of pyrrole in the voids of a PS CCT, was soaked in prehydrolyzed silica sols containing block copolymer templates. Calcination produced mesoporous silica sphere arrays. The silica precursor composition determined whether solid or hollow mesoporous spheres were obtained. Solid spheres were produced with a higher silica concentration and a higher water:alcohol ratio; hollow spheres with a lower silica and water content. Unlike the 3DOM carbon, this synthesis did not require surface modification with polyelectrolytes for efficient macropore filling. This may be due to the more hydrophilic nature of poly(pyrrole) and the presence of a block-copolymer surfactant that acts as a compatibilizer.
Such confined growth of mesostructured materials has also been applied to metal–polymer composites. A chloroform dispersion of gold nanoparticles coated with thiol-terminated poly(styrene) and a block copolymer poly(styrene-block-1,4-isoprene) (PS-b-PI) was introduced into a 3DOM polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) film. The confined spheres contained onion-like layers of gold nanoparticles and polymer, in which the PS blocks interacted with the PS-coated Au particles (Fig. 9c). Au particles were also found near the PVA walls. 3DOM PVA films were chosen in this study because the macropore size (ca. 250 nm or 500 nm) was comparable to the characteristic length of microphase separation in the block copolymers. The periodicity of the microphases was approximately the same for both macropore sizes. The microphase-separated structure was influenced by confinement effects and by interactions with the macropore walls. If the macropore diameter was less than twice the periodicity of the microphase separation structures, frustrated phases appeared, i.e., phases different from those found in the bulk. Similar frustrated phases were observed for polystyrene-block-poly(ferrocenylethylmethylsilane) in 3DOM silica. The effects of 3D confinement in spherical cavities transformed cylindrical morphologies (in the bulk) to spherical morphologies (in confinement) and lamellar structures (in the bulk) to core–multishell structures (in confinement).
While reactions are typically carried out inside the macropores of a 3DOM structure, they may also occur in the walls, if these are porous. Textural mesoporosity exists between nanocrystallites in certain 3DOM materials, and mesopores can also be added by design. These mesopores may then be filled by impregnation with other materials to form nanocomposite walls. If the wall impregnation process is carried out before the removal of the CCT, the macropore space can remain unaffected. Such an approach was used to synthesize non-close packed fcc silica inverse opals (Fig. 10). To do this, a hydrogel was polymerized around a colloidal crystal array of highly charged polystyrene spheres and impregnated with a silica precursor. Calcination removed all organic components, leaving the silica inverse opal structure. The separation between spheres in the colloidal crystal array could be controlled by the sphere concentration and allowed adjustment of the macropore wall thickness and the volume fraction of silica in the inverse opal. In this case, no macropore windows were present; instead, a closed periodic macropore system was produced.

As for other materials that possess features on multiple length scales, complete characterization of 3DOM materials requires an array of techniques. At the atomic length scale, chemical analysis, powder X-ray diffraction, vibrational spectroscopies, NMR, and, if applicable, fluorescence spectroscopy provide compositional, phase, and bonding information that is averaged over the whole sample. Thermogravimetric analysis and differential scanning calorimetry inform about the thermal stability of the products and possible compositional and/or phase changes that occur during heating. These thermal analyses are useful to determine the mass fraction of a polymeric CCT in the infiltrated composite or the content of remaining carbon if a sample was pyrolyzed in an inert atmosphere. Nitrogen sorption measurements provide information about pore structure mainly within the walls, including textural mesoporosity, adventitious micropores (particularly in 3DOM carbon samples), and intentionally introduced micropores or mesopores in the walls. Such pores contribute the largest fraction to the surface area of a 3DOM material. The surface area from non-textured walls corresponds only to a few tens of m2 g−1, depending on pore size. The diameter of macropores in typical 3DOM materials (a few hundred nanometers) is outside the range that is accurately determined by nitrogen sorption measurements and requires analysis by mercury porosimetry instead.

At the length scale of the periodic macropores, electron microscopy is the workhorse for structural information. SEM gives an overview of the periodic structure on an outside surface (and often one or two sublayers) over tens of micrometers, providing information about order, crack density, and density of other defects (Fig. 11a). The (111) surfaces with hexagonal symmetry and (100) surfaces with four-fold symmetry are easily identified. The order of the material may be quantified based on SEM images by an analysis using two-dimensional pair–correlation functions at specific regions of the image. At higher magnification, more details of the wall structure can be analyzed to determine its shape and dimensions and the extent of grain growth. Large mesopores can be identified at the highest magnification in a modern SEM. TEM requires the sample to be broken into smaller fragments in order to achieve sufficient electron transmission. By rotating the sample around the three axes of the sample stage in the microscope and imaging from multiple directions, the 3D symmetry can be verified. If the walls are nanocrystalline, lattice fringes are observable and can be used to confirm crystalline phases. In situ heating and environmental electron microscopy permit the user to follow structural changes during heating, including removal of a polymeric template and grain growth. However, TEM (and to a lesser degree SEM) samples only small volumes of the product, making it imperative to analyze images of multiple regions in the sample.
Other techniques are available to sample the periodic structure of larger amounts of 3DOM materials. Because feature sizes are repeated on a similar length scale as the wavelength of the UV-visible spectrum, diffuse reflectance UV-vis-near-IR spectroscopy may be used as a probe of the symmetry and unit cell parameters of 3DOM materials. Light is diffracted along specific directions by the periodic skeleton and can impart the material with opalescent colors, so-called structural color. For powdered samples with particles in random orientations, the diffuse reflectance spectrum resembles an X-ray powder pattern but at the length scale of a few hundred nanometers, with minima (so-called stop bands) at positions characteristic for some of the lattice planes in the fcc macropore structure of the 3DOM material (e.g., (111), (200), (220), and (311) planes, Fig. 11b). The wavelength of the stop-band minimum (λ) is a function of the spacing between planes (dhkl), the volume fraction of the walls (ϕ), the refractive indices of the walls and pore space (nw and np, respectively), and the order of the reflection (m, usually 1), and it can be approximated by:
(1)
 The approximation can be improved by considering the coupling of the incident and diffracted waves using dynamical diffraction theory,
 but the equations shown here generally suffice for the applications highlighted in this review (e.g., sensors). For thin films of 3DOM materials, the angle dependence of the optical diffraction spectra is analyzed. The top layers typically correspond to the (111) plane, so that , and for the first order reflection (m = 1),

(2)
where
navg = ϕnw + (1 − ϕ)np and α is the angle between the incident light and the surface normal of the sample. The intensity of the stop band reflection, IR, depends on the volume fraction of the walls and the difference in refractive index between the wall and pore phases according to

(3)
 For spatial resolution, multimode microscopy based on an inverted microscope with a multi-axis piezoelectric nanopositioning scanning stage permits the combined observation of spatially resolved reflection and emission spectra in 3DOM materials that contain a fluorescing probe within their pore structure.


Another technique, laser diffraction, permits the study of ordering, defects, and domain misalignment over larger areas than is possible by SEM. It is applicable if the lattice spacing exceeds the laser wavelength. A beam of laser light is focused onto a photonic crystal film, and the resulting Bragg diffraction pattern (position and intensities of diffraction spots) is evaluated (Fig. 11c and d). If each layer in a 3DOM film is considered to be a two-dimensional diffraction grating, the angle of diffraction Θ at which a diffraction spot appears is specified by:
(4)
where
λ is the laser wavelength and d the center-to-center distance between macropores. By employing different wavelengths, it is possible to determine center-to-center distances independently from microscopy images. Scanning the laser beam across the sample surface permits domain mapping, in which two-dimensional maps indicate regions of single domains and various types of multiple domains where the structural orientation changes. Laser diffraction experiments of 3DOM WO3 films identified single crystal regions up to 0.4 × 0.4 mm2.

The length scale of the periodic repeat distance of 3DOM materials makes these applicable to characterization by ultrasmall-angle synchrotron X-ray scattering (USAXS, also called microradian X-ray diffraction, Fig. 11e and f). Unlike optical diffraction methods, USAXS is applicable even if a material absorbs in the optical range. An analysis of the diffraction patterns obtained at specific angles of sample rotation allows one to distinguish between stacking sequences, such as ABCABC… stacking associated with fcc structures, ABABAB… stacking in hcp structures, and mixed ABCABC…–ACBACB… stacking in twinned fcc structures. Calculations of peak intensity ratios then provide information about the relative ratios of the different stacking sequences in a sample. A study of 3DOM SiO2, TiO2, and Fe2O3 films showed that most of these samples were composed of twinned fcc structures, with a small fraction of hcp fragments and random hexagonally close-packed structures. This study also revealed the existence of single domains in the 3DOM films with nearly the same crystallographic structure extending over patches that were at least 0.5 mm in diameter.

In addition to the optical properties mentioned in Section 4, several other properties of 3DOM materials should be briefly discussed here as they are important for the chemical applications reviewed in Section 6.


Given their open pore structures and narrow connection points in the wall skeleton, 3DOM oxides and similar inorganic materials are quite brittle and are easily indented with inelastic deformation and fractured into smaller particles. However, some compositions, including 3DOM carbon, SiC, and certain polymers are relatively strong, so that they can be handled without breaking and can be used as monolithic electrodes or free-standing membranes, respectively. Nanoindentation studies of 3DOM carbon materials have demonstrated that the mechanical properties depend strongly on the wall structure, but even with secondary mesopores robust structures can be obtained. The effect of the wall structure on mechanical properties was also shown for 3DOM fluorinated polyimide. A structure with closed cells improved the mechanical properties significantly compared to open shells on the basis of nanoindentation measurements, yielding higher values of load, modulus, and hardness at the same depth. 3DOM SiC performs particularly well in nanoindentation tests, reaching a hardness of 0.56 GPa and a Young's modulus of 25 GPa. Another particularly interesting example with respect to its mechanical properties is 3DOM silk. This material was obtained by infiltration of a PS CCT with an aqueous solution of regenerated silk fibroin, followed by treatment with ethanol to induce β-sheet formation and formation of the reconstituted silk walls. After extraction of the CCT with toluene, the 3DOM silk was found to be highly elastic, able to recover from loads of up to 112 MPa by reversible pore deformation. Compression of the material caused anisotropic pore deformation.


The importance of surface interactions between the CCT and a precursor or between 3DOM materials and components assembled inside macropores has already been mentioned above. Attractive or repulsive interactions between a 3DOM material and other substances can also be employed to globally or locally alter the optical appearance of 3DOM materials or to provide surfaces with superhydrophobic, superoleophilic, or superhydrophilic properties. This has ramifications for numerous applications, such as sensing, microfluidic switching, encoding of information, displays, decoration, and absorption of waste fluids. The wetting behavior is controlled by the surface composition of the 3DOM material and is significantly amplified by the surface roughness of this structure. A 3DOM phenolic resin, for instance, is superhydrophobic, so that water droplets bead up on its surface with a contact angle (CA) of 154°; on the other hand, oil wets the resin effectively (CA = 5°) and easily penetrates the pores. In contrast, unmodified 3DOM silica films are sufficiently hydrophilic to be filled by water (CA = 0°). Modification with water-repelling functional groups, such as perfluoroalkane chains, renders their surface superhydrophobic. Some functional groups permit reversible switching between more or less hydrophobic states. Modification with a surface layer of an azobenzene-derivatized polyelectrolyte by LbL self-assembly produced superhydrophobic 3DOM silica (CA = 148°). Azobenzenes undergo a trans–cis transition upon irradiation with UV light (365 nm), which can be reversed thermally or by irradiation with visible light (494 nm). Because of the difference in dipole moment between the two states, the surface polarity changes. This, in turn, modifies the contact angle of water from 141° (trans) to 122° (cis) as the surface becomes less hydrophobic. These contact angle values refer to 3DOM silica films with 263 nm diameter macropores, and the contact angles become smaller with larger macropore sizes.

Reversible modification of surface properties is also possible by electrochemical methods. The wettability of 3DOM polypyrrole (PPY) can be switched from superhydrophobic to more hydrophilic by controlling its electrochemical potential. Doping with Li+ by electrochemical reduction decreased the contact angle in 3DOM PPY from 139° to 49°. The surface of electroplated macroporous ZnO films on ITO glass was superhydrophobic after the pore surfaces were coated with perfluorodecyltriethoxysilane. When a potential was applied across the surface and a water droplet, the contact angle of water decreased, i.e., the surface became more hydrophilic. The applied electric field raised the surface energy, which could then be lowered by coating with water. The extent of change depended on the thickness of the porous film. For semilayers, water droplets underwent a sharp transition from non-wetting to wetting at 26 V, whereas the droplets on 3DOM ZnO films with 4.5 layers also showed an intermediate state at which they exhibited a reduced contact angle but did not yet penetrate the macropores.
Spatially selective wetting has been demonstrated for 3DOM silica thin films that were rendered hydrophobic by exposure to perfluoroalkyltrichloro silane vapors. The films were then masked with poly(dimethyl siloxane) (PDMS) slabs. Unmasked areas were exposed to an oxygen plasma to render these regions more hydrophilic or to provide new silanol groups as anchors for additional surface modifiers. This process allowed patterning of the internal surface with multiple surface groups whose location was defined by the masks. The surface functional groups can, in principle, be tailored for specific solvents and give area-specific wetting behavior, which may be translated into visible color patterns (Fig. 12).

Compared to diffusion through microporous or mesoporous materials, mass transport through 3DOM materials is quite efficient. In well-ordered 3DOM materials, each macropore has twelve windows to neighboring cages, facing in multiple directions. This high degree of three-dimensional interconnectedness provides transport paths with little tortuosity. Infiltration with molecular fluids, if they wet the surface of the porous host, is therefore fast. For example, a powder or thin film of a 3DOM oxide is quickly (i.e., within a second) infiltrated with a low-viscosity wetting fluid. A better understanding of diffusion processes in confinement of 3DOM materials is relevant to separation and purification processes, confinement synthesis reactions, drug delivery, microfluidics, fuel cells, and other applications. Therefore, several studies have addressed mass transport through 2D ordered macroporous (2DOM) films or more extended 3DOM structures. In one study, the motion of DNA molecules was monitored in a 2DOM polymer film with 920 nm macropores, connected through 200 nm diameter windows to each of six neighboring macropores. It was concluded that such motion occurs via discrete, rapid jumps (<1 s) from one macropore to another, interspersed by longer time periods (average 18 s) during which the DNA molecules remain within a given macropore. Interestingly, the tails of DNA strands continued to probe neighboring pores during those “resting” times. In the case of quantum dots inside 3DOM silica films, particles also bounce within a macropores multiple times until they can escape through a window into an adjacent macropore, following a random-walk process (Fig. 13). On the basis of diffusion studies of fluorescent quantum dots inside 3DOM silica films by fluorescence correlation spectroscopy and Brownian dynamics simulations, it was concluded that the diffusion mechanism depends on the size of the probe relative to the size of windows and on the size of the windows relative to that of the macropores. For a given macropore diameter, the number of bounces before the probe leaves a macropore increases with increasing ratio of probe size to window size. For fluorescent dye traces, the diffusion mechanism appeared to be more complex, occurring by three pathways: (1) free diffusion similar to that in bulk solution but slowed down by a factor of 3–4 by the silica walls in the 3DOM structure; (2) slow diffusion through mesopores within the silica macropore walls; and (3) diffusion limited by adsorption. The importance of each pathway depended on the solvent system. For aqueous solutions, pathway 1 was most important, with a small contribution from pathway 3. In toluene systems, pathways 2 and 3 dominated.
In addition to feature dimensions, surface interactions may be exploited to manipulate guest transport through a 3DOM film. When a flexible 3DOM polyurethane acrylate membrane was coated with multiple polyelectrolyte layers, finishing with a positively charged polyelectrolyte top layer, the membrane provided good cation rejection rates. This was due to the high surface charge on the macropore walls, while maintaining high throughput as a result of the open macropore structure. The charged polyelectrolyte chains induced efficient Donnan exclusion, i.e., the exclusion of mobile ions within the porous structure due to the presence of fixed charges of the same sign from the polyelectrolyte layers. As a result such nanofiltration membranes proved to be effective for separating multivalent cations from water.

Numerous potential applications of 3DOM materials have been investigated, including physical applications which exploit the optical properties of the periodically structured materials as photonic crystals and chemical applications that rely on interactions and/or reactions of other species with 3DOM materials. In this review, we will focus on chemical applications, namely sorption and controlled release, sensing, energy storage and conversion, and catalysis. The emphasis will be on publications in approximately the last six years. For other references, please refer to prior reviews.


As porous hosts, 3DOM materials are obvious candidates for both sorption and controlled release applications. In comparison to mesoporous analogues, surface areas of 3DOM materials are lower, but pore interconnectivity and surface accessibility is high. Depending on the system of interest, 3DOM hosts can be used as-synthesized, functionalized with molecular surface groups, or even functionalized with nanoparticles. An example of sorption of heavy metals from contaminated water by an as-synthesized host relates to 3DOM hydroxyapatite (Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2, HAp). Here the inorganic wall skeleton itself is involved in uptake of heavy metal ions, allowing replacement of Ca2+ by Ba2+, Sr2+, Cd2+, or Pb2+. Uptake of Cd2+ was significantly higher for 3DOM HAp than for nonporous HAp (x = 0.71 vs. 0.42 in Ca10−xCdx(PO4)6(OH)2. In 3DOM HAp the Cd2+ uptake increased at higher temperature (in the range from room temperature to 80 °C), but the 3DOM structure also transformed to a greater extent at the higher temperatures. To maintain better long-term stability, one may employ stable hosts with organic functional groups selected for specific adsorption of target species, provided that the organic groups also remain stable under the sorption conditions. Hybrid 3DOM materials containing molecular functional groups can be synthesized easily by sol–gel chemistry with hybrid precursors. 3DOM zirconia and titania materials with thiol surface groups were effective adsorbents for the removal of mercury and lead ions from aqueous solutions, with adsorption capacities ranging from 0.33 to 1.41 mmol g−1 for Hg2+ ions and 0.27 to 1.24 mmol g−1 for Pb2+ ions. These sorbents remained effective after regeneration, though with some capacity loss. In 3DOM materials with organic functional groups, the adsorption capacities and kinetics can be improved by separating active groups and the pore walls with spacer groups. This was demonstrated for chloromethylated 3DOM cross-linked PS functionalized with mercaptobenzothiazole (MBZ) groups either directly or via polyethylene glycol (PEG) chains of various lengths as hydrophilic spacers. Absorption capacities of 0.25–1.14 mmol g−1 Ag+ and 0.28–0.51 mmol g−1 Hg2+ were determined. Because of the relatively large macropore diameters, such spacers do not plug the pores. The materials could be regenerated with acidic thiourea solution, resulting in ca. 10% capacity losses.

A recent example of surface functionalization with nanoparticles for sorption applications is given by 3DOM carbon whose pore surface was decorated with Prussian blue (PB, Fe4[Fe(CN)6]3) nanoparticles, an effective ion exchanger and chelating agent for treatment of radioactive 137Cs contamination or non-radioactive 133Cs poisoning (Fig. 14). 3DOM carbon macropores were loaded with an aqueous solution of FeCl3 and K3[Fe(CN)6], aided by ultrasonication. The carbon support acted as the reducing agent in the formation of PB to produce PB particles averaging 7 nm in diameter. This material absorbed an impressive 40 mmol g−1 of 133Cs ions (a model for the 137Cs that has been released in nuclear accidents). It was also effective in uptake of 85Rb, and to a slightly lesser extent, 138Ba, 88Sr, 140Ce and 205Tl. The large uptake was ascribed to the high surface area of the 3DOM C-supported PB nanoparticles. Materials with 100 nm macropores were more effective than those with larger macropores and also more effective than materials with 50 nm pores. Due to the openness of the macropore structure, the adsorption process was rapid, and saturation was achieved within 2 h.
An example of controlled release of adsorbed drugs in 3DOM hosts relates to 3DOM hydroxyapatite. 3DOM HAp was loaded with the antibiotic norfloxacin and release of this drug into simulated body fluid was monitored. Release of the drug in this environment was fast and complete within 1 h as a result of the relatively large pore size compared to the size of norfloxacin molecules. Better regulation of the release profile is possible by employing hosts with hierarchical porosity. Loading and release of a fluorescent dye as a model system and of ampicillin as an antibacterial drug was compared in three films with identical silica volume: mesoporous silica, 3DOM silica, and hierarchical silica templated with both PS CCTs and the block-copolymer surfactant Pluronic F127 (7 nm mesopores, 200 nm macropores). When loaded with the dye rhodamine for the same amount of time, all three materials displayed similar initial release rates. The 3DOM silica then released most of its content the fastest, whereas both films containing mesopores provided more extended release times. The film with hierarchical porosity provided the most efficient loading and extended drug release. The high surface area and interconnected pores in the hierarchically structured film allowed for rapid uptake of a large amount of drug material and released the drug molecules over a longer time period than both the 3DOM silica film and the mesoporous film.

Among the different applications of 3DOM materials that have been explored, sensors are probably the most developed and provide an excellent showcase of the advantageous properties of these structures. Sensing can benefit from several attributes of 3DOM materials, including their structural colors, their highly accessible surfaces, and their nanostructured features. Recently, complex sensors based on functionalized 3DOM materials have been developed that combine these properties with specific surface interactions and site-selective wetting behavior. 3DOM or inverse opal sensors can be classified as optical sensors, electrochemical sensors, or multifunctional sensors.

Optical 3DOM sensors rely either on structural color, luminescence (sometimes combined with photonic crystal effects), or localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effects. A simple detection mechanism is based on changes in refractive index as macropores are filled with a fluid. This causes a measurable shift in the stop band position and the color of a 3DOM material. For 3DOM ZrO2 powders, the peak shifted by 2.9 nm, 3.8 nm, and 4.2 nm per 0.01 refractive index units for 200, 250, and 285 nm macropores, respectively, allowing for detection of solvents with different refractive indices. Similarly, 3DOM silica films as refractive index sensors allow the detection of refractive index changes of ca. 10−2 units on the bases of shifts in stop band position and decreases in stop band intensity as the refractive indices of the filling solution and the silica walls are more closely matched. For a 3DOM phenolic resin with superoleophilic properties used as an optical sensor for oils, the shift in the optical diffraction peak was as high as 13 nm per 0.01 refractive index units. In a comparison of 3DOM PS, silica, and titania films, the 3DOM titania films exhibited the highest sensitivity to changes in ethanol concentration in optical measurements, as these provided the highest refractive index difference.

Most often, the change in refractive index occurs in the pore space. However, as shown in a recent study, changes in the refractive index of the walls may also be used to induce an optical response. When 3DOM ZnO was exposed to UV radiation with frequencies above the absorption band of ZnO, the relative transmission at the photonic bandgap changed by up to 40%. This change was ascribed to desorption of chemisorbed oxygen on the ZnO skeleton which destroyed the depletion layer at the ZnO surface and lowered the refractive index of the material. The effect was quite pronounced in a 3DOM structure due to its relatively large exposed surface area. In the case of polyaniline-infiltrated 3DOM TiO2, color changes were observable by eye upon exposure to atmospheres saturated with NH3 (red shift by 132 nm) or HCl (blue-shift). Contact with these basic or acidic vapors transformed the polymer to its emeraldine base or emeraldine salt forms, leading to changes in refractive index and absorption spectra of the polyaniline component and in the position of the stop band. The color change between green and red was reversible and occurred over a time period of a few minutes. Changing the effective wall thickness of 3DOM materials, e.g., by immobilizing long-chain alkylthiol groups on the surface of 3DOM gold films, also shifts the stop band position, although by small amounts (ca. 5 nm).
3DOM polymer films are interesting for optical sensing applications, because they can be processed into free-standing, flexible structures, and their colors are readily altered by deformation. Stretching of 3DOM PMMA films results in a shift of reflection peaks to shorter wavelengths and allows for versatile selection of stop band positions without the need for multiple sphere sizes. Volume changes are also achieved by internal forces. A 3DOM polymer film containing trifluoroacetyl groups swells upon exposure to cyanide ions as a result of a transformation from a neutral and hydrophobic state of the polymer network to a charged and hydrophilic state upon the addition reaction between cyanide and trifluoroacetyl groups. This effect permits sub-micromolar detection of cyanide ions on the basis of structural color changes. Even structural changes resulting from decomposition may be useful for optical detection. An inverse opal composed of a biodegradable polymer (citric-acid based polyester) was implanted in subcutaneous tissue of mice and its degradation was followed by optical spectroscopy, i.e., a decrease in intensity of the stop band peak as the periodic structure disintegrated.
As a specific subgroup of polymer-based sensors, hydrogel sensors with periodic structure on optical length scales are a particularly versatile platform for optical detection. Hydrogels respond to stimuli such as solvent, pH, electric field, temperature, mechanical pressure, ionic strength, cations, anions, and biomolecules by volume changes. Any alteration in the volume of a photonic hydrogel changes the repeat distance of the structure and thereby causes a shift in the position of the optical stop band. This behavior was originally exploited for colloidal crystals embedded in hydrogels, but the more open 3DOM structure with its thin walls provides a faster response than opal or bulk hydrogel structures. The optical response of supported 3DOM hydrogel films can be anisotropic because the hydrogel is pinned at the interface to the substrate, so that the deformation is nonuniform in different directions. For example, pores may become elongated along the direction normal to the film and collapse along the parallel direction.
A thermosensitive hydrogel can be prepared by infiltrating a precursor containing a thermosensitive monomer (N-isopropylacrylamide), a cross-linker (N,N-methylenebis(acrylamide)), and a free-radical initiator (benzoyl peroxide) into a silica CCT with submicrometer to micrometer diameters. After polymerization, silica spheres are removed by soaking in HF solution. A thermal volume phase transition from a swollen state occurs at ca. 33 °C, above which the structure shrinks and the structural color of the hydrogel changes. This phase transition is reversible, and the 3DOM structure persists in multiple cycles. Similar responses to humidity can be achieved with a 3DOM hydrogel prepared from acrylamide with bisacrylamide as a crosslinker and diethoxyacetophenone as a photoinitiator. Polyacrylamide films also respond to alcohols, providing a visual test of alcohols within a few seconds (Fig. 15a). The shifts in stop band position depend on the number of hydroxyl groups, chain length, molecular structure, and concentration of the alcohols. For aqueous solutions of methanol, ethanol, and n-propanol, the film color shifted from red through orange and green to blue with increasing alcohol concentration, but the concentration that corresponded to a given color was different for each alcohol type. If the alcohol type is known, its concentration can be estimated to the nearest 10%. The 3DOM hydrogel films can be regenerated by soaking in deionized water. Similar color responses can be obtained by controlling the contact angle through surface modification of the porous film (Fig. 15b, see also Section 5.2).
For detection of specific ions or molecules, hydrogels may be decorated with functional groups that interact with the target species. For example, carboxylic acid groups in acrylic acid components improve the response of a 3DOM hydrogel sensor to changes in pH. A 3DOM hydrogel film containing acrylic acid showed a response time of <10 s to changes in pH, with color shifts from blue through other spectral colors to red between pH 1.3 and 7.0. The response time depends on the film thickness, and inverse opal monolayers respond faster to pH changes than thicker photonic hydrogel films. For a 2DOM polyelectrolyte gel, 96% of the color response was obtained within 6 seconds. An optical response to heavy metal ions was achieved by functionalizing the hydrogels with N-containing ligands (vinyl pyridine) for Cu2+, O-containing ligands (4-vinylbenzo-18-crown-6) for Pb2+, or S-containing ligands (thiourea formaldehyde) for Ag+. Interference from anions and pH variation was minimal for this system. The sensitivity was improved by increasing the concentration of specific functional groups. An enzyme-free glucose sensor was prepared by functionalizing a 3DOM hydrogel with phenylboronic acid groups. These groups reversibly bind to glucose, creating a positive osmotic pressure that increases the hydrogel volume. As a result of this swelling, the color of the 3DOM hydrogel changed from green (5 mM) to yellow/orange (10 mM) to red (15 mM) with increasing glucose concentration.
Because hydrogels respond with volume changes to a wide variety of stimuli, it is often difficult to distinguish between separate stimuli. To overcome this limitation and improve specificity of a response to given molecules, molecular imprinting methods have recently been combined with the colloidal crystal templating process. The target molecule for detection is included in the mixture of the hydrogel precursors during templating and subsequently extracted. As a result, it creates recognition sites that complement the molecule in shape and preferably even functionality. For example, 3-pyridinecarboxamide (PA) was imprinted in 3DOM polyacrylamide and then extracted. A reasonably fast (within 1 minute), reversible, and selective optical response (red shift by 65 nm) was observed upon exposure of the imprinted film to a 40% aqueous solution of PA. The shift was only half as large for a non-imprinted control sample. At loadings below 5% PA, the shifts were linear functions of the PA concentration. Control experiments confirmed the importance of the imprinting process: when PA was replaced by nicotinic acid, a molecule with the same molecular weight as PA, or with acrylamide, a molecule with similar functional groups as PA, the optical response was very small. Similar specificity was demonstrated for 3DOM hydrogels imprinted with bisphenol A, the drug L-dopamine, and the herbicide atrazine. The detection limit is a function of the hydrogel film thickness, improving from 10−9 M to 10−13 M by increasing the thickness from ca. 2.8 to 6.6 μm in the bisphenol A detection system.
An alternate approach to reducing interference between multiple stimuli is to design a 3DOM hydrogel sensor that exhibits independent responses based on wettability and volume changes, using image contrast between responsive and non-responsive regions in the hydrogel to enable visual detection. One such system was designed to respond to anion–solvent combinations, using a cross-linked copolymer, where one of the monomers employed for copolymerization controlled the wettability (e.g., trifluoroethyl methacrylate for hydrophobicity, 2-hydroxyethyl methacryalte for hydrophilicity). Anions produced volume changes in the hydrogel walls only if the analyte could wet the macropores, so that anion responses and solvent responses were independent. Similarly a cation-pH detection system was prepared by copolymerizing 4-vinylpyridene into the hydrogel to enable pH and Cu2+ responses. Different wettability responses to Cu2+ and H+ permitted differentiation between these ions.
Although hydrogel-based sensors are highly versatile, they are limited by their mechanical strength and stability. The mechanical strength and lifetime of 3DOM hydrogels depend on the extent of crosslinking. The lifetime of a photopolymerized hydrogel with a high degree of crosslinking exceeded half a year if the hydrogel was not dried out. However, better sensitivity of a hydrogel was achieved by decreasing the extent of crosslinking. The mechanical strength was improved (fracture stress close to 1.5 MPa) by forming a double network of two hydrogel components (polyacrylic acid and polyacrylamide), one network being highly crosslinked, the other loosely crosslinked. The response of this system was complex due to the interaction between the independently crosslinked networks.
While most of the above 3DOM sensors rely on their optical response to structural or refractive index changes, some systems (including hydrogels and non-hydrogels) take advantage of the high surface area of the porous support to improve fluorescence signals. One example involves a sphere-templated macroporous hydrogel coated with a ruthenium-based fluorescing layer whose fluorescence is quenched by oxygen. This structure allows mapping of oxygen levels by confocal fluorescence spectroscopy during cell growth on the hydrogel. Another example is a microarray of 3DOM hydrogel patches formed by photolithographic patterning on a poly(ethylene glycol)-coated silicon substrate. The 3DOM patches were functionalized with 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane for covalent attachment of proteins. The protein loading in the porous host was ca. six times greater than in non-porous hydrogel micropatterns and increased with smaller macropore size. Therefore, compared to non-porous hydrogel micropatterns, biotinilated 3DOM hydrogel patterns showed improved fluorescence signals in response to a streptavidin test. A third example relates to fluorescence sensors for explosives detection. Here, 3DOM silica was used as a support for fluorescent dyes whose fluorescence is quenched by exposure to trinitrotoluene (TNT) via non-emissive fluorescence resonance transfer. The fluorescence signal was enhanced by the large surface area of the support compared to nontemplated supports and the quenching response was also amplified. The fastest response was achieved by introducing secondary mesopores into the 3DOM silica walls (55% quenching within 10 s exposure to TNT and 97% quenching after 2 min compared to <1% quenching within 10 s for an amorphous control sample).
A final mechanism that should be discussed in the context of optical 3DOM sensors involves the phenomenon of localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR). LSPR occurs through excitation of conduction electrons by light, inducing collective oscillation. This enhances the absorption and emission of light in colorimetric and fluorescent detection. Electromagnetic field localization and signal enhancement are particularly strong in nanosized gaps between particles. Effects of LSPR have been exploited in 3DOM gold films for surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy and more recently in 3DOM titania films coated with gold nanoparticles for detection of label-free DNA. The working hypothesis in the latter study was that overlap of the stop band edges with the LSPR and the excitation wavelength can induce an intense localized field on the gold nanoparticles to increase the efficiency of light emitters. The gold-nanoparticle-coated 3DOM titania was functionalized with double-labeled DNA molecular beacons as selective fluorescence sensors. The modified biosensor achieved a sensitivity to tens of picomoles of DNA with a signal intensity ca. 22 times higher than that of gold nanoparticle-coated glass slides and a ten times lower detection limit of 0.030 nM.
Electrochemical sensors made of 3DOM metals, carbon, semiconducting oxides, or conductive polymer electrodes benefit mainly from the relatively large, accessible surfaces in these electrodes. In most cases, the electrodes are used as thin films on a conductive support, although 3DOM carbon has been employed as self-supporting monoliths. 3DOM films composed of noble metals, such as gold or platinum may be used either directly as working electrodes or their surfaces may be functionalized to enable specific interactions with analyte species. A nonfunctionalized 3DOM gold electrode was employed as an enzyme-free glucose sensor. To avoid interference effects from other molecules found under physiological conditions (e.g., ascorbic acid, uric acid, p-acetamidophenol), electrochemical detection of the oxidation of glucose was carried out at a low operating potential. A linear response to glucose was observed for the range of 5 μM to 10000 μM with a detection limit of 3.2 μM. A high sensitivity of 46.6 μA mM−1 cm−2 was ascribed to the large accessible surface of the 3DOM gold film. The surface areas of 3DOM gold films consisting of a few layers of macropores are 10–20 times higher than those of bare flat gold electrodes of similar length and width. A 3DOM platinum electrode whose walls were composed of electrocatalytically active Pt nanoparticles exhibited greater selectivity to glucose over interferents compared to nontemplated Pt film electrodes. This effect was ascribed to the preferred acceleration of the kinetically controlled glucose electrooxidation reaction on the higher-surface-area porous electrode; the oxidation reactions of ascorbic acid and other typical interferents are instead diffusion controlled and, therefore, do not benefit from the higher surface area. In the case of 3DOM gold electrodes modified with the enzyme lactate oxidase for the determination of L-lactic acid, most analytical properties of the 3DOM gold electrodes were similar to those of lactate biosensors based on rough gold electrodes. However, the detection limit was significantly lower and the stability improved for the 3DOM electrodes. No difference in response to interferents was observed. In functionalized 3DOM gold films for the detection of 5′-thiolated adenosine triphosphate (ATP) using modified CdSe/ZnS quantum dots, the 3DOM structure permitted increased loadings of quantum dots to provide high sensitivity down to 0.01 nM levels.

3DOM carbon electrodes have been used as solid contacts for ion-selective electrodes to analyze potassium and silver ions. In these applications, macropores are contacted and infiltrated with a polymer membrane containing an ionophore that specifically complexes the ion of interest. The backside of the 3DOM carbon monolith is connected to a current collector. These composite electrodes exhibit very little potential drift, show good resistance to interference from oxygen, and can be very sensitive, permitting detection of silver ions in the subnanomolar range (Fig. 16). The excellent performance compared to electrodes using nonporous glassy carbon as solid contacts was ascribed to the large interfacial area between the sensing membrane and the solid contact and the relatively high capacitance of the 3DOM carbon.
Certain semiconducting oxide films, such as 3DOM TiO2 supported on conductive substrates (ITO or FTO-coated glasses), have also been employed as electrochemical biosensors after appropriate functionalization. Others, like 3DOM SnO2 or WO3 are more commonly used directly as electrochemical gas sensors, operating at elevated temperatures (ca. 200–400 °C, depending on the system). Here the detection mechanism involves the formation of a space-charge region on the surface of the oxide resulting from electron trapping of adsorbed species. A 3DOM SnO2 sensor for CO or toluene showed a rapid response and was considered an “ideal” model structure for three-dimensional networks of semiconductor-based sensors, because the thin dimensions of bridges and junctions in the wall skeleton render the response relatively independent of gas sensitivity. Doping the 3DOM SnO2 with Ru, Pt, or Zn centers during the templating synthesis enhances the electrical response to CO. Adsorption of CO leads to the formation of singly ionized oxygen vacancies near the semiconductor surface, which transfer electron density to Ru or Pt centers, thereby enhancing the reactivity of the SnO2 surface toward CO. A fast electrical response was ascribed to good dispersion of transition metal centers over the surface of the porous semiconductor. In one system, the electrical response of the 3DOM SnO2 was not quantitatively different from that of nontemplated nanosized materials; however, in another system a greater response compared to non-templated sol–gel SnO2 films was reported and attributed to effective gas diffusion through the 3DOM oxide. Improved electrical response of a 3DOM film compared to a non-templated film was also reported for WO3 films doped with Pt for detection of NH3 gas. Chemisorption of NH3 on acidic sites of WO3 nanocrystals in the 3DOM skeleton is promoted by the open pore structure, and surface Pt nanoclusters act as catalysts for N–H bond dissociation.
3DOM conductive polymers have been mainly used in glucose sensor systems. 3DOM polyaniline is prepared by electropolymerization of aniline in a CCT on a conducting substrate. The polymer may be doped during the process, for example with a polyelectrolyte to aid in subsequent functionalization of the pore surfaces. Using electrostatic self-assembly, this permits immobilization of the enzyme that catalyzes glucose oxidation (glucose oxidase) on the macropore walls. The electron transfer between the active site in glucose oxidase and glucose can then be monitored. Alternatively, the concentration of hydrogen peroxide produced during glucose oxidation is monitored either directly or by invoking a second redox reaction enabled by another enzyme (e.g., horseradish peroxidase) or an “artificial peroxidase” capable of mediating hydrogen peroxide reduction (e.g., Prussian blue = ferric hexacyanoferrate). The current produced in this step is proportional to the glucose concentration and is electrochemically detected. Conductive 3DOM films can be beneficial for this process, as they provide large active surfaces that benefit electron exchange between the redox sites and the current collector. The macropores permit loading with a high density of enzyme to enhance electrochemical signal intensities and sensitivity to analytes. An open macropore structure can enable rapid response of a sensor. The response time of a 3DOM polyaniline film coated with glucose oxidase/polyelectrolyte layers was only 5 s. A glucose biosensor prepared by electrodepositing first a layer of Prussian blue, then a layer of polyaniline within a gold-supported colloidal crystal template exhibited a wide linear response range from 2 to 1600 μM and a low detection limit of 0.4 μM, several orders of magnitude lower than that of other Prussian-blue based glucose biosensors.
It is possible to add an optical detection mechanism to electrochemical detection by employing a hydrogel scaffold, loaded with a conductive polymer. As an example of such a dual-signal glucose sensor, a 3DOM polyacrylamide hydrogel was first hydrolyzed to partially convert amide groups on the backbone to carboxylate groups. The macropores were then infiltrated with the conductive polymer poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) by in situ chemical oxypolymerization to form an interpenetrating network. Subsequently, glucose oxidase was anchored to the carboxyl groups on the hydrogel. Because it maintained a periodic structure, the composite product exhibited an optical stop band, which was blue-shifted compared to that of the original 3DOM hydrogel. During sensing of glucose, the glucose-oxidase based enzymatic reaction changed the local ionic strength, causing a shrinkage of the hydrogel. The electron transfer process of the enzymatic reaction could be followed electrochemically. Both the position of the stop band peak and the current density in electrochemical analysis shifted with glucose concentration over the range from 1 to 12 mM. The optical shift changed the appearance of the film from red (0 mM) to green (2 mM), blue (7 mM) and violet (11 mM). Response times for the color shift were from 2 to 3 minutes.
One other interesting application of a 3DOM conductive polymer film (polypyrrole) is that of an actuator. When 3DOM polypyrrole is electrochemically doped or dedoped, the polymer must exclude or incorporate counterions to maintain its charge balance, which leads to shrinkage or swelling, respectively. This provides the basis for the actuation mechanism, i.e., bending of the film (Fig. 17). The actuation rates of 3DOM films were found to be greater than those of films that are not nanostructured. The 3DOM polypyrrole films can capture, hold, and release colloidal particles by electrochemical actuation in different voltage ranges. These actuators were used to transfer microspheres from one medium to another, and were capable of selecting particles with different diameters depending on the macropore sizes in the actuator film.
A DSSC contains a photoanode composed of nanocrystalline semiconductor oxide particulates (typically TiO2) that form a porous structure and are coated with a molecular dye (typically Ru-based) or with quantum dots (e.g., CdSe nanoparticles). The dye or the quantum dots act as sensitizers to absorb sunlight more efficiently. Other components of a DSSC include the counter electrode (a platinized conducting substrate) and a liquid electrolyte containing, for example, I−/I3− redox couples. During operation of the DSSC, the dye sensitizer is excited by capturing photons from sunlight. Electrons from the excited state of the dye are then injected into the conduction band of the photoanode. The electrons pass on through a current collector into the external circuit, and then return to the counter electrode. Holes are captured by iodide ions and the oxidized ions (the triiodide ions) are shuttled to the counter electrode, where they recombine with the electrons, regenerating iodide ions. Dye molecules are regenerated by oxidation of the electrolyte. The overall conversion efficiency of a DSSC is given by η = Jsc × Voc × FF/P, where Jsc is the short circuit photocurrent density, Voc the open-circuit voltage, FF the fill factor (ratio of maximum obtainable power to the product of the open-circuit voltage and the short-circuit current), and P the power density of incident light. Conventional DSSC electrodes exhibit an efficiency of 11%, the current record being a power conversion efficiency of 12.3%.

Although no DSSCs with inverse opal components have yet exceeded that efficiency, the 3DOM architecture is of interest in DSSC research for multiple reasons. 3DOM TiO2 functions as an optical element, improving light harvesting capabilities of the cell. Light absorption is better in 3DOM TiO2 films compared to disordered macroporous TiO2 films, although recombination rates of charge carriers are the same in both types of structure. The nanostructured skeleton of 3DOM TiO2 improves charge transfer across interfaces as a result of the highly accessible surface that makes contact with the electrolyte, and it also provides a continuous path for charge carriers. Furthermore, the large internal surface area of 3DOM TiO2 favors dye absorption, thereby increasing the light harvesting capabilities of the cell. The interconnected macropore structure facilitates transport of ions and electrolyte solution and is particularly beneficial for viscous electrolytes.
Mallouk et al. proposed the use of 3DOM TiO2 as an optical element to improve the efficiency of DSSCs by enhancing photocurrents near the photonic band edges. They found, however, that the enhancement extended to wider wavelength regions and occurred only when the cell was illuminated from the counterelectrode side, where light first passed through a nanocrystalline dyed titania layer before proceeding through the more open photonic crystal region. Subsequent studies provided further insight. By using a scalar wave approximation, it was shown that dye-sensitized 3DOM TiO2 by itself would not improve the overall efficiency, because the extent of photon absorption would be diminished by the effects of the photonic stop band. When 3DOM TiO2 layers (or disordered porous TiO2 layers) are coupled to nanocrystalline TiO2 layers in DSSCs, the response of the DSSC is enhanced in the red spectral region, where the traditional sensitizer is a poor absorber. The photocurrent enhancement is due to a standing wave (resonance modes) created between the lower refractive index porous layer and the higher refractive index non-templated layer. The layers must be well coupled. Gaps as small as 200 nm can optically isolate the two layers from each other. These theoretical predictions were confirmed by experiment: Single dye-sensitized 3DOM TiO2 layers exhibit poorer performance when compared to standard electrodes (Fig. 18). 3DOM TiO2 layers placed behind dye-sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2 layers enhance the light harvesting efficiency at wavelengths overlapping with the photonic stop band position. Multiple 3DOM TiO2 layers with varying pore size lead to the enhancement effect in all of the applicable stop band ranges. Coupling is improved by treating the bilayer structure with TiCl4 vapor. The addition of such a photonic crystal layer increased the efficiency of DSSCs from 6.5 to 8.3% at constant dye loading.
Several attempts have been made to improve the efficiency of 3DOM TiO2 photoanodes by doping or coating the surface with additional phases and through structural control. Doping with Ta by ALD increased the conversion efficiency of 3DOM TiO2 slightly up to a loading of 3.4% and then decreased it. Post-treatment of 3DOM TiO2 with another TiO2 precursor solution and calcination resulted in the growth of rutile nanoparticles on the anatase macropore walls. This treatment improved the efficiency by 183% (to 4.6%) by increasing the charge collection efficiency by the dye on the larger specific surface, and increasing the electron lifetime. However, the improvement was observed only up to a critical rutile layer thickness, beyond which the electrode performance deteriorated. The efficiency also appears to be a function of pore size. 3DOM TiO2 films prepared by ALD show greater efficiency for smaller pore sizes (288 vs. 510 nm pores). This effect was attributed to the larger specific surface area achieved in the smaller macropores, which allows for greater dye loadings. More complex structures may offer further improvements. A recent theoretical investigation predicts that 3DOM TiO2 containing smaller spheres within macropores (a “double-inverse opal”, DIO) provides increased light scattering over broad spectral regions in the whole visible range. When these double inverse opals are used as a mirror in DSSCs, the photocurrent efficiency is enhanced compared to single inverse opals (3DOM TiO2). One DIO layer increases the efficiency by 47%, two DIO layers by 80%.
3DOM structures have also been considered for the current collector at the photoanode and for the counter electrode in DSSCs. For a current collector, a transparent conducting electrode is required, such as ITO or FTO. Optimization of the performance of a photoanode is normally a compromise between using a thicker layer to enhance the optical density for better light harvesting and a thinner layer to minimize the charge transport path length. This dilemma has been addressed by coating a thin titania semiconductor layer onto the macropore surfaces of a 3DOM FTO terminal electrode, which greatly enhances the interfacial contact between the two components and improves charge transport across the interface. 3DOM FTO films absorb more strongly than untemplated FTO films, due to multiple scattering, which is most pronounced at shorter wavelengths. In addition, they exhibit a stop band, whose position varies with pore spacing. The electrical conductivity of the 3DOM FTO film was comparable to that of commercial continuous FTO films. Requirements for the counter electrode include the ability to catalyse the reduction of triiodide to iodide effectively, a high surface area, and good electrical conductivity to enable electron transfer to the redox couple. Typically, Pt-coated counter electrodes are used. Due to the high cost of Pt, 3DOM carbon materials have been considered as counterelectrodes for DSSCs. Powders of 3DOM carbon were dispersed in ethanol and spray coated onto a current collector. The efficiency of the counterelectrodes depended largely on the charge-transfer resistance and also on the thickness of the deposited film. The fill factor increased with film thicknesses increasing from 15 to 25 μm (1 to 10 coating steps). Graphitized 3DOM carbon, due to its higher conductivity and lower interfacial resistance with the electrolyte, was more efficient than as-synthesized 3DOM carbon. 3DOM carbon with hierarchical porosity (macropores and mesopores) had the highest specific surface area, which yielded the highest efficiency among these carbon materials, with an efficiency of 95% that of a Pt-coated counter electrode.
Studies of inverse opal-based photovoltaic cells have largely focused on 3DOM Si photonic crystals films. For this purpose, 3DOM Si was prepared by dynamic CVD using a silica colloidal crystal template, which was subsequently removed by etching with HF solution. 3DOM Si is suitable for photovoltaics, given that is has comparable conductivity to crystalline Si and that its conductivity can be controlled by p- and n-doping. As a photonic crystal, it can potentially permit slowing of photons and formation of optical stop bands or complete photonic bandgaps that are suitable for light trapping or suppression of carrier recombination. Because the walls in 3DOM Si consist of interconnected nanoparticles, potential barriers exist between grain boundaries as a result of dangling bonds and trap states on the Si nanoparticles. These can be reduced by hydrogen plasma passivation, resulting in an improved internal quantum efficiency, especially in the longer wavelength range. Doping of 3DOM amorphous Si films is possible by spin coating sol–gel solutions with boron precursors for p-doping or phosphorus precursors for n-doping onto the films, followed by thermal annealing to facilitate dopant diffusion into the Si lattice and to crystallize the Si. It is noteworthy that thermal annealing could be accomplished at temperatures as low as 630 °C for these systems, whereas usually a higher temperature of 900 °C is needed. Initial studies of 3DOM Si photovoltaic cells have given an indication that slow photon effects occur near the photonic bandgaps, which would enable amplification of the efficiency of converting photons to electrons in silicon-based solar cells. Opportunities remain for further optimization of photonic-crystal-based photovoltaic cells, because theoretical investigations suggest that a simple cubic photonic crystal structure as an intermediate layer in the optical collector would enhance the absorption efficiency of a photovoltaic cell more than an fcc photonic crystal; the simple cubic structure would provide ca. 2-fold enhancement relative to a nontemplated layer of equivalent volume over the spectral range from 480 to 1127 nm.

Lithium ion batteries (LIBs) are among the most widely used rechargeable batteries in portable devices. They are now entering the transportation sector and are also being considered for storage of electrical energy generated by alternative power sources, including solar and wind energy. To meet the demands of these applications, it is necessary to improve the rate capabilities of the batteries, so that they can be recharged more quickly or deliver current at faster rates. The charge and discharge rates in conventional LIBs are limited by transport of Li+ ions across interfaces between the electrolyte and the electrode and through the active electrode material. Porous electrodes and porous solid electrolytes are currently being considered to overcome these limitations, including those prepared by colloidal crystal templating. The use of porous electrodes is motivated mainly by their high surface areas and their thin walls. The large, accessible surfaces provide many sites for charge transfer across the electrolyte/electrode interface. Nanometer-sized walls in porous electrodes reduce the ion diffusion lengths and especially the ion diffusion times through the solid phase (the time constant for Li+ ion intercalation in the electrode is proportional to the square of the diffusion length). This permits greater utilization of active material, especially at high charge or discharge rates. 3DOM materials provide the additional advantages of having a bicontinuous structure with continuous pore space (for good electrolyte access) and continuous walls (for conduction of electrons and ions). However, macropores reduce the capacity per unit volume, and pores near the border between mesopores and macropores (a few tens of nanometers) seem to provide a good balance between rate capabilities and capacities. Within the macropore range, better cycle performance was demonstrated for 3DOM Sn–Co alloy films with 180 nm diameter macropores compared to 500 nm macropores. In inverse opal films of anatase TiO2, rate capabilities and specific capacities increased when templating spheres with smaller diameters (100 nm) were employed, because these led to thinner walls in the 3DOM structure and larger specific surface areas. In a study of 3DOM Li4Ti5O12 that contained both templated macropores and textural mesopores, mesoporosity was deemed to be more important than macroporosity for improving the high rate behavior.

Improved rate capabilities of 3DOM electrodes compared to conventional architectures have been demonstrated for several electrode compositions, and just a few examples will be given here. A 3DOM vanadia electrode showed less polarization at higher discharge rates than conventional electrodes prepared with vanadia ambigels. The improvement was ascribed in part to a reduced electrolyte resistance resulting from the lower tortuosity and good accessibility of pores in the 3DOM structure. Half-a-millimeter-thick glassy carbon pieces, not surprisingly, lose most of their capacity at very low discharge rates (full discharge in 24 h); however, 3DOM carbon monoliths of similar dimensions and the same composition maintain good specific capacities at much higher discharge rates. This performance can be improved further by incorporating secondary mesopores in the walls of the porous carbon, by using thinner films of the 3DOM electrode, or by improving the extent of graphitization of carbon to enhance conductivity. It should be noted that at low rates, the porous electrodes can have lower specific capacities than nonporous analogs. Sluggish lithium insertion/deinsertion compared to nontemplated electrodes may also be observed if the interconnection of grains within the 3DOM skeleton is poor. On the other hand, as demonstrated for 3DOM Li4Ti5O12, low-angle grain boundaries between crystallites in the 3DOM walls can improve the conduction pathway compared to electrodes prepared from packed nanoparticles, and reduce polarization, enabling high rate cycling.
As noted earlier, the synthesis of a 3DOM structure is extremely versatile, and a wide variety of electrode materials have been synthesized. Examples of 3DOM anodes for LIBs include 3DOM carbon, anatase TiO2, Li4Ti5O12, CoFe2O4, Si, SnO2, and alloys of Sn with Ni or with Co. Examples of 3DOM cathodes include V2O5, LiNiO2, LiCoO2, LiMn2O4, LiFePO4, and FePO4. In addition, a 3DOM solid electrolyte of the composition Li1.5Al0.5Ti1.5(PO4)3 (LATP) has been synthesized, and 3DOM Ni has been used as an effective current collector.
When a 3DOM electrode can be formed as a monolith or as a film on a current collector, the electrode can be made without electrochemically inactive binders. For certain electrode compositions (in particular, alloys used as anodes), if the electrode is prepared without a binder, cracks may form during cycling, breaking electrical contact, and eventually causing electrode failure. To mitigate this problem, 3DOM electrodes can be formed within a confined space creating two-dimensional pillars of 3DOM material, providing additional room for volume changes within the electrode. A hierarchically ordered nickel–tin alloy made by filling a lithographic template with a PS CCT showed significantly reduced crack formation during cycling over a monolithic 3DOM electrode. This led to better cyclability with a 98% retention after over 100 cycles when the charging was limited to 80% of the theoretical potential, before eventual electrode breakdown. When charging was limited to 67% of the theoretical capacity, 99% retention was observed. In comparison, for a 3DOM alloy electrode without external confinement, the capacity increased over the first 30 cycles, but rapidly decreased to less than 35% of the original capacity over the first 100 cycles.
3DOM battery electrodes can be entirely composed of electroactive material or of a conductive backbone that is coated or filled with the desired electrode material. The latter type enables the formation of nanocomposites of active material with another component that provides either improved conductivity or enhanced stability. For example, using an aqueous salt-imbibition procedure, SnO2 was coated onto the surface of 3DOM carbon, increasing the capacitance from 223 to 278 mA h g−1. However, the capacity in the SnO2-coated electrode deteriorated in part due to the detachment of the lithiated tin oxide which underwent large volume changes. Detachment can be avoided by trapping SnO2 with mesopores in the walls of 3DOM/m carbon, or by a multi-constituent synthesis that incorporates the active material directly into the conductive scaffold. By combining precursors for LiFePO4 into a phenol–formaldehyde resol, a 3DOM LiFePO4/C composite was synthesized with the LiFePO4 distributed within the monolithic 3DOM structure. The presence of carbon improved the conductivity, which controls the rate performance of the electrode, from ca. 10−9–10−10 S cm−1 for pure LiFePO4 to 0.14 S cm−1 for the nanocomposite. Using this porous nanocomposite cathode, a rate of 16C (full discharge in 1/16 of an hour) was able to be supported (2720 mA g−1 for an electrode with 36.7 mg LiFePO4) while retaining over 40% of the capacity compared to a slower rate of C/5 (Fig. 19a and b). Additionally, the composite material maintained its capacity over many cycles even at the higher rates (Fig. 19c). Even more impressive rate capabilities were observed for a composite electrode, in which the active material (manganese oxide) was coated on a 3DOM nickel film substrate, where the nickel scaffold acted as a current collector with significantly lower resistance than that of thick monolithic 3DOM carbon scaffolds. In addition, the large interface between the porous metal, the active phase, and the electrolyte contributed to the excellent cycle rates that were observed, allowing this LIB to be charged to 90% capacity in only two minutes.
Beyond oxide- and carbon-based electrodes, polymers are an attractive electrode material, in particular for organic radical batteries, and can be synthesized in a 3DOM structure. Specifically, nitroxide polymers are of interest for organic radical batteries, because they are mechanically flexible. These polymers need to be cross-linked in order to remain insoluble in the electrolyte, and are therefore grafted onto current collectors, such as ITO, which leads to a non-porous planar electrode. However, when a polystyrene colloidal crystal template is deposited onto an ITO current collector first, followed by electropolymerization of a polypyrrole 3DOM structure, a poly(2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-oxyl-4-yl methacrylate) (PTMA) nitroxide electrode material can be synthesized through a surface-initiated atom transfer radical polymerization reaction. The polypyrrole provides a conductive backbone while the PTMA material acts as the electroactive material in the organic radical battery. Due to the higher surface area and interconnected structure, the 3DOM electrode outperformed a traditional planar electrode by almost 40 times, with a discharge capacity of 6.79 μA cm−2versus 0.17 μA cm−2 at a discharge rate of 5C (i.e., complete discharge in 12 minutes) for the 3DOM and planar electrodes, respectively. The discharge capacity was proportional to the thickness of the 3DOM electrode, at least in the range from 3.5 to 14 μm thickness. Additionally, these electrodes showed good cyclability with a 96% retention after 250 cycles.
The 3DOM architecture can be the basis for an all-solid-state battery. The pores are sufficiently large to allow for the infiltration with solid electrolytes, such as poly(phenylene oxide), Li1.3Al0.5Ti1.5(PO4)3 (LATP), or other commercial polymer electrolytes. Using this concept, an all-solid-state lithium battery has been fabricated by using a 3DOM LATP scaffold with the cathode infiltrated with Li4Mn5O12 and the anode infiltrated with LiMn2O12, combined with a commercial polymer electrolyte that consisted of polystyrene and polyethylene oxide blocks. The LATP provided a lithium source for active anode and cathode materials, while the polymer electrolyte created the necessary separation between the electrodes, maintaining ionic conductivity. A battery formed in this manner showed a discharge capacity of 480 μA h cm−2 with an 80% fill fraction of the active material in the 3DOM pores. The authors proposed that a higher capacity might be obtained by increasing the fill fraction of the active material in the 3DOM structure.
Finally, 3DOM materials also provide a platform for three-dimensionally (3D) interpenetrating batteries, desirable for battery-powered devices that have extremely limited available area for the battery. In such a battery, one 3DOM electrode, either as a monolith or a thin film in contact with a current collector, is coated with an ultrathin, conformal layer of a polymer that acts as a separator but allows transfer of Li+ ions. The remaining macropore space is then infiltrated with material for the opposite electrode and is contacted with a current collector. Proof of this concept was provided for an assembly using 3DOM carbon monoliths as the anode, coated with poly(phenylene oxide) by a self-limiting electropolymerization reaction, infiltrated with a vanadia ambigel as the cathode, and electrochemically lithiated and then cycled while it was immersed in an organic electrolyte. Although the specific capacity and rate capabilities of this electrochemical cell were still limited by resistances of the electrodes and ion transport, the example demonstrated the feasibility of fabricating these desirable structures. More details about 3DOM electrodes and other porous electrodes for LIBs are provided in a recent review.

Supercapacitors store charge at an interface of an electrode and the electrolyte, in contrast to batteries that store charge in the bulk of the electrode. There are two primary types of supercapacitors: electric double layer capacitors that store charge based on electrostatic interactions, and pseudocapacitors that store charge based on surface redox chemistry. Both of these types of supercapacitors require high surface area electrodes, which typically incorporate mesopores, or pores between 2–50 nm. It is important that these pores can be infiltrated by an electrolyte. For this purpose, macroporous electrodes create unique opportunities as they improve electrolyte infiltration, which achieves higher ionic conductivity throughout the pores, and permits the use of viscous electrolytes, such as ion gels. Other advantages of 3DOM-based supercapacitor electrodes include their ability to form all-solid-state cells, potentially no need for a binder, and a versatile synthesis that can be applied to composite electrodes.

A good example of how 3DOM materials facilitate good electrical and ionic conductivity can be seen in the case of 3DOM nickel/nickel oxide composite film. The surfaces of a 3DOM nickel film were coated with a nickel oxide layer by electrodeposition, and this electrode was compared with one prepared from commercially available nickel oxide nanoparticles less than 50 nm in diameter. Cyclic voltammetry measurements showed that the capacitance of the core–shell 3DOM Ni–NiO outperformed nanoparticulate NiO by a factor of nearly two at high scan rates in a 1 M KOH electrolyte within a 0.5 V potential window (Fig. 20a). Furthermore, the scan rate dependence was less for the 3DOM Ni/NiO electrode, indicating good ionic and electrical conductivity within the electrode. Using galvanostatic measurements, the capacitance of the 3DOM sample did not decrease over 1000 cycles, but rather increased slightly. More notably, the electrode did not exhibit a significant current-resistance drop, further verifying the high ionic and electrical conductivity of the 3DOM Ni/NiO core–shell electrode (Fig. 20b and c).
The surface area dependence and pore size dependence of capacity in 3DOM carbon electrodes was demonstrated for a series of 3DOM carbon membranes prepared from templates with diameters of 50, 100, 280, 500, and 1000 nm. The specific surface area of the sample made from the 50 nm template was the greatest, as would be expected (Fig. 21). The surface area had contributions from templated macropores and adventitious micro- and mesopores typically found in pyrolyzed carbon. An activated carbon electrode had a specific surface area of 1700 m2 g−1, which is approximately 50% greater than that of the 50 nm 3DOM sample. Yet, the 50 nm 3DOM carbon sample had the highest capacitance, at 100 F g−1, slightly above that of the activated carbon electrode (95 F g−1). The capacitance values for the larger-pore 3DOM materials were lower, at 79 and 52 F g−1 for the 100 nm and 1000 nm 3DOM samples, respectively. A linear relationship between surface area and the capacitance was seen, as well as a decreased capacitance per unit area of the activated carbon compared to the 3DOM samples, probably due to the easier electrolyte infiltration through the highly interconnected pore structure of the 3DOM samples.
As in the case of LIB electrodes, the 3DOM structure can also be used as a scaffold for other active materials for supercapacitors. The large void space left by the macropores reduces the volumetric energy density; however, the overall capacitance of a 3DOM electrode can be increased by filling the pores with a different active material. As an example, the pores of 3DOM carbon have been filled with a pseudocapacitive polymer, such as polypyrrole or polyaniline, to create a composite electrode with a much higher capacitance than pure 3DOM carbon. The addition of 57 wt% polypyrrole to the 3DOM carbon increased the specific capacitance from 95.4 F g−1 to 140.4 F g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 in a potential window of 2.0–4.0 V (vs. Li/Li+). The volumetric capacitance showed an even more pronounced change, rising from 30.6 F cm−3 to 95.4 F cm−3 at the same current density. Additionally, when filled with polypyrrole, 3DOM carbon showed good rate performance, only losing 38% of its capacitance when charged at 4.0 A g−1 compared to the capacitance at 0.1 A g−1. When the 3DOM carbon was filled with polyaniline, the capacitance was further increased to 200 F g−1, while the volumetric capacitance remained at 95.4 F cm−3. The polyaniline-filled 3DOM carbon also showed better rate capability than the polypyrrole analogue with only 27% capacitance loss at 6.0 A g−1 compared to 0.1 A g−1. The improvement of polyaniline over polypyrrole can be explained by increased pore blockage in the polypyrrole sample due to the mechanism of infiltration, limiting the ionic conductivity of the electrolyte within the electrode.
The benefits of a 3DOM structure can also be seen in MnO2 electrodes prepared from hydrothermally prepared nanoparticles. The use of nanoparticles, rather than anodic deposition, helped to minimize grain size. The capacitance of 3DOM MnO2 electrodes synthesized with a 200 nm template showed a 2.9-fold improvement over a dense film (Fig. 22). Additionally, when different pore sizes were used (200, 400, and 900 nm), the smallest pore size yielded the highest capacitance, as in the case of the carbon materials discussed above. Furthermore, the capacitance of the 200 nm 3DOM MnO2 sample showed the best cycle retention, with >98% retained over 1000 cycles, compared to 90%, 83%, and 78% retention for the 400 and 900 nm 3DOM and dense film, respectively. Finally, on the basis of the shape of the Nyquist plot, better capacitive behavior was seen in the 3DOM MnO2, indicated by the more vertical slope in the lower frequency region. The high frequency loop seen in the plot of the dense film indicated a higher electrical resistance, and the steeper low frequency response for the 3DOM electrode indicated lower diffusion resistance compared to the thin film electrode, resulting from faster ion transport within the macropores of the 3DOM electrode.
Another example of the utility of supercapacitor electrodes with 3DOM structure relates to all-solid-state supercapacitors using ion gels as an electrolyte. Starting from a 3DOM carbon electrode, a polymer gel containing an ionic liquid electrolyte, known as an ion gel, can be formed within the macropores of the electrode. This is done by infiltrating the 3DOM carbon with a monomer (such as methyl methacrylate), initiator, and cross linker in solution with an ionic liquid electrolyte (such as 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)amide ([C2mim][NTf2])). The larger pores found in 3DOM carbon are advantageous for the infiltration and polymerization of the ionic gel. When the 3DOM carbon was tested using the pure ionic liquid and an organic electrolyte (tetraethylammonium tetrafluoroborate in propylene carbonate), all of these electrolytes performed similarly, with capacitances of between 100 and 120 F g−1 showing the viability of this type of all-solid-state supercapacitor. Furthermore, when compared to an activated carbon electrode in the same organic electrolyte, the capacitance was nearly indistinguishable over a range of current densities.
While 3DOM materials provide certain advantages for supercapacitor energy storage as previously discussed, the primary limitation is their lower surface area accessible for electrolyte compared to mesoporous materials. However, hierarchical templating provides materials that can combine the advantages of both macropores and mesopores. Macropores enable easy electrolyte infiltration and an ion reservoir, as well as low mass resistance due to the highly interconnected pore structure. Mesopores create additional surface area for electrode–electrolyte interactions, helping to improve the total capacitance. These mesopores are primarily introduced through the addition of an amphiphilic block co-polymer or surfactant (Pluronics F127 and P123, KLE, CTAB, etc.) or by the addition of small silica colloidal particles to the infiltration of a colloidal crystal.

Utilizing a silica opal and Pluronic F127 as templates, three-dimensionally ordered macroporous/mesoporous (3DOM/m) carbon was synthesized, giving a large surface area of nearly 1600 m2 g−1 combined with a very large pore volume of 3.98 cm3 g−1. Using a 6 M KOH electrolyte, the 3DOM/m carbon possessed a high capacitance of 130 F g−1, comparable to that of commercially available activated carbon. The addition of NiCl2 to the precursor solution combined with carbonization at 1000 °C significantly increased the graphitization level within the carbon. This had the disadvantage of collapsing much of the microporosity present in amorphous carbon materials, resulting in a surface area of less than 300 m2 g−1 and lower total capacitance (73.4 F g−1). However, the electrical resistance within the electrode was reduced to less than 0.2 Ω, which helped to improve the rate performance of the resulting electrical cell.
By employing small silica colloids as pore formers for mesopores in a 3DOM/m carbon supercapacitor, a series of samples were synthesized to probe the separate effects of macropore and mesopore diameters in these hierarchically structured materials. In general, the mesopore diameter controls the overall surface area and subsequent capacitance. Using an organic electrolyte of 1 M tetraethylammonium tetrafluoroborate in propylene carbonate, a sample made from templating with 204 nm PS and 5 nm silica spheres showed the best capacitance at 120 F g−1 and the highest surface area of 1500 m2 g−1. The interconnected macropores play a significant role by facilitating ion transport to all of the surfaces. However, due to the large volume of electrolyte stored in the macropores that does not contribute to the overall capacitance, the volumetric capacitance of 3DOM/m electrodes is reduced; in the previous example it was 40 F cm−3 compared to 60 F cm−3 in an activated carbon electrode using the same electrolyte.

Chemical fuel cells of varying construction feature prominently in the alternative energy landscape as energy storage/delivery materials. Fuel cells, in their most general sense, convert chemical energy to electricity through a redox reaction. A variety of these cells with various fuel sources (H2, CH4, CH3OH, etc.) can be constructed. In general, a fuel cell consists of three major components: an anode, a cathode, and a medium through which charge can be conducted. Depending on the type of fuel cell, this medium may be a solid electrolyte, or a liquid electrolyte with a membrane permeable only to the desired charge carriers. 3DOM materials have the potential to play substantial roles in these components.

SOFCs typically use hydrogen or methane as a fuel source. They frequently operate at temperatures between 500 and 1000 °C, as the ceramic materials involved in their construction (solid oxides) only become catalytically active and/or ion-conductive at these elevated temperatures. Among solid oxides, porous yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) films are frequently employed as solid electrolytes, owing to their ability to conduct O2− ions at elevated temperatures. Considering only the electrolyte, a dense YSZ film would be preferred, as this maximizes ion conductivity within the solid. However, other factors must be balanced in the consideration of the final structure; namely, maximizing what is known as the triple-phase boundary (TPB), surfaces where reactant gases, the electrode, and the solid electrolyte meet. The performance of the cell is highly dependent on the TPB density within the structure, and this is where structural design through colloidal crystal templating can become useful.

A solution to the problem of dense vs. porous YSZ is to incorporate both structures and directly interface them in the cell. In a recent investigation, a 3DOM NiO–YSZ anode was produced through mixing of PS spheres (2.5 μm) and NiO–YSZ (410 nm) particles in aqueous solution, and forming a CCT through self-assembly on the surface of a 0.22 μm pore filter. To interface this 3DOM material with a thin film of YSZ, 90 nm YSZ spheres were then deposited on top of the assembled structure. The structurally heterogeneous material was removed from the filter and calcined (1350 °C, 5 h) to remove the spheres and densify the YSZ film. A non-ordered La0.85Sr0.15MnO3/YSZ cathode was deposited on the reverse side of the electrolyte film through calcination of a glycerol paste (1200 °C, 2 h) containing the desired particles (Fig. 23a). When tested under reaction conditions, the cell with a 3DOM cathode shows substantially improved power density at 700 °C (236 mW cm−2 compared to 144 mW cm−2 for a non-porous anode). To further confirm this effect, a second cell was produced, possessing two different pore sizes in the 3DOM anode, with the smaller pores (1.4 μm PS spheres) interfacing with the film (Fig. 23b). The inclusion of smaller pores (and thus larger surface area) increases the power density to 374 mW cm−2.
Conceivably, further improvement could be realized by reducing the pore size. However, one should note the large spheres and very high calcination temperatures utilized in the synthesis above. These temperatures are necessary for ensuring good contact between the electrodes and the electrolyte (by sintering the solid materials at the interface together), but they do result in densification of the structure, and thus loss of surface area. Ceramic materials with smaller pores exposed to these temperatures densify substantially, often to the point of destroying the porous network. This is one of the major factors which limits the use of 3DOM materials in these applications.
Nonetheless, ceramic firing techniques for incorporating 3DOM electrodes onto solid electrolyte films with good electrical contact have recently been studied. By preparing a cathode/electrolyte interface in a similar manner to the above paper, but with smaller pores (350 nm), low resistance and retention of the structure can be obtained by increasing the ramp rate of the calcination step and decreasing the dwell time. For a ramp rate of 200 °C min−1 and a dwell of 15 minutes at 1000 °C, polarization resistance of the cathode decreases substantially, to 0.71 Ω cm2. For comparison, materials fired under the same conditions but for shorter dwell times (<8 min), have polarization resistances of over 10 Ω cm2, and for longer (30 min), polarization resistance increases by a factor of 2. These observed resistances are tied directly to the structural changes occurring in the 3DOM cathode (Fig. 24), as too little heat treatment does not result in the degree of grain growth required to ensure good contact with the electrolyte film. However, lengthy treatment times destroy the 3DOM structure, and with it, performance is lost.
Another common fuel cell type is the DMFC. Investigations into the usefulness of 3DOM materials as catalysts/catalyst supports and membranes within DMFCs are ongoing. Each of these components has different structural requirements. The most important structural aspects of a DMFC catalyst are the surfaces available for reaction (both the total surface area, and which crystallographic planes are located at the catalyst interface) and reactant transfer. Membranes, on the other hand, require selectivity for proton permeability over that of methanol along with substantial structural stability. Here we discuss some examples of 3DOM materials being incorporated in these aspects of the DMFC.

3DOM WC was synthesized as a DMFC catalyst, motivated by the similar behavior of WC surfaces to Pt and Pt–Ru metal catalysts. The carbide was produced from two precursors, a CCT infiltrated with aqueous ammonium metatungstate (AMT) and pre-made 3DOM WO3, both treated under the same conditions: 825 °C in a mixture of CH4/H2/N2. The two routes produced differing morphologies; carburizing the WO3 led to some distortion of the 3DOM structure and a loss of order in the final product, while directly carburizing the AMT-infiltrated CCT gave accurate inverse replication of the template (Fig. 25a–d). However, while the “direct” synthesis yielded better structural replication, it also produced a very slight carbon deficiency in the material, shown by the presence of tungsten carbide impurity phases in the XRD pattern (Fig. 25e and f). To examine the performance of the material, the 3DOM WC was loaded with Pt nanoparticles, placed in an electrochemical cell, and driven to oxidize methanol. At a 5% loading of Pt, the “direct synthesis” material outperformed a commercial Pt/C catalyst (20% Pt loading) by a factor of two, and provided similar performance at a loading of 1%. The material produced by indirect carburization of 3DOM WO3 did not perform as well as the directly carburized 3DOM WC. This suggested that the enhanced surface area associated with accurate replication of the template had greater impact on performance than minor variances in the overall crystal structure of the material.
Membranes for DMFCs can also be produced, but structurally robust materials, such as SiO2 must be used as a scaffold. A polymer/3DOM SiO2 hybrid membrane was produced, in which 3DOM SiO2 was templated with PS CCTs, and then coated with a sulfonated polymer, poly(1,4-phenylene ether ether sulfone) (SPEES) through infiltration and evaporation. A separate sulfonated monomer (2-acrylamido-2-methyl-1-propanesulfonic acid) (AMPS, polymer PAMPS) was then infiltrated into this coated 3DOM SiO2 structure, and an initiator was added to have polymerization take place within the pores, largely filling them and closing the windows (Fig. 26). The polymers in question are particularly prone to swelling in the presence of water (2000% volume increase for PAMPS), and methanol is able to permeate through them to some degree. The addition of the rigid 3DOM SiO2 support spatially confined the polymer within the pores, preventing significant water uptake and any volume expansion. Also, through this dual-polymer coating/infiltration process, a nearly four-fold improvement in selectivity for proton permeability over the pure PAMPS material was realized.

Heterogeneous reactions, being surface-dependent, are frequently improved through the incorporation of enhanced surface area via engineered porosity in a solid catalyst. As the catalytic step typically takes place at a surface site, increasing the total available surface area increases the number of available “sites” for reaction, effectively increasing the collision frequency of the reactants with the surface. Also, increased pore volume and limited tortuosity within a porous solid can often enhance reactant throughput and diffusion. Given these factors, 3DOM materials are well-suited to the challenges presented by heterogeneous catalysis; moderate surface areas are obtained through the incorporation of macroporosity, and complete interconnectivity of the pores within the material means that all generated surface area is available and not closed-off. Additionally, the photonic aspects of the 3DOM structure may be exploited in photocatalytic processes.

The utility of the 3DOM architecture in a heterogeneous catalyst is greatest for systems involving bulky molecules and the need for high reactant throughput, although reports on this differ. For example, in the epoxidation of cyclohexene oxide in the presence of isobutyraldehyde, little difference was observed in catalytic activity of polyoxometalate clusters supported on 3DOM silica, mesoporous silica, or amorphous silica. On the other hand, the macropore architecture seemed to be beneficial for 3DOM SiO2–SH and 3DOM SiO2–SO3H produced through co-condensation of tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) and a thiolated ethoxysilane, 3-mercaptopropyl triethoxysilane (MPTS) within a PS CCT. The catalytic activity of these materials was tested for the esterification of butanol and acetic acid to produce butyl acetate; it was found that the materials with the highest amount of –SO3H groups had the highest activity. Compared to similar processes carried out on other substrates (Al-MCM-41 mesoporous silica, for example), the 3DOM SiO2–SO3H materials achieved a reasonable yield of 77% butyl acetate within 1 h, faster than some mesoporous silica materials. This was likely due to the improved mass transport through the larger channels. In this section we will highlight only a few representative 3DOM catalyst systems relevant to environmental catalysis and to chemical fuel catalysis, where advantages of the 3DOM structure were realized.
CexZr1−xO2 is a common active material used in automotive catalysis, for oxidation and reduction of combustion byproducts. CO, NOx and uncombusted hydrocarbons can be converted to less-harmful forms by modifying their oxidation states (e.g. CO is highly toxic, CO2 is less so; likewise with NOx and N2). The solid acts as an “oxygen reservoir,” in which concurrent oxidation/reduction reactions take place, either removing oxygen from (creating oxygen vacancies) or storing it (filling in vacancies) in the solid material. In most cases, the porous solid is coated with noble metal nanoparticles (Pt, Rh), which enhance oxygen transport into and out of the “reservoir.” Higher surface area means that there are more regions where oxygen can undergo these chemical reactions, but also, the materials can accommodate a higher loading of nanoparticles without blocking access to the underlying support, further increasing the rate of transfer.

Recent studies have produced a variety of 3DOM CexZr1−xO2 materials for oxidative catalysis of soot and combustion byproducts. Au nanoparticles ∼3 nm in diameter were dispersed on the surface of the 3DOM material (Fig. 27), which was shown to lower the temperatures required for oxygen transport and catalysis. The best performance for soot oxidation (90% conversion at ∼400 °C) was observed for zero Zr content (i.e. pure CeO2), but Ce0.8Zr0.2O2 was observed to have the lowest threshold temperature for activity (10% conversion at ∼230 °C). The enhanced activity of the nanoparticle-seeded materials resulted from the kinetically-preferred transport of oxygen from 3DOM CexZr1−xO2 to the surface of the Au nanoparticle (rather than directly from the solid to the gas phase), where it could then be transferred to soot particles or gaseous CO (Fig. 27, bottom).
CoO/MoO3 catalysts supported on 3DOM γ-Al2O3 have been produced for the desulfurization of dibenzothiophene. The γ-Al2O3 support was produced via infiltration of an ethanolic solution of Al(NO3)3·9H2O, with a surfactant (Pluronic F127) added to introduce mesoporosity in the walls of the template, into a PMMA CCT. At all temperatures tested (260–300 °C), the catalyst supported on the 3DOM γ-Al2O3 outperformed the same catalyst supported on commercially available mesoporous γ-Al2O3 support, reaching 98% conversion at 300 °C. This performance advantage was attributed to the enhanced mass-transport enabled by the ordered macroporous network, as the control material was similar in all other relevant aspects (crystallinity, phase purity, surface area, etc.).
Photocatalyzed oxidation of pollutants and a variety of other organic molecules via 3DOM TiO2 is a very active field of research. In addition to providing high surface areas, these photonic crystal structures are of interest for their potential to produce “slow photons” (so-called due to their lowered group velocity—the speed at which the amplitude of a given light wave propagates through space). Slow photons are produced near the edge of the photonic stop band of the material, which is directly controlled by the repeat distance between pores. These slow photons, if properly tuned to the absorbance of the active material, can yield enhanced performance in a variety of photocatalytic processes. This enhancement was studied in detail during the oxidation of methylene blue by nanocrystalline 3DOM anatase TiO2. A range of 3DOM TiO2 materials were produced through infiltration of PS CCTs with varying sphere diameters from 280 to 500 nm (Fig. 28a and b). It was found that for 3DOM TiO2 materials with pore sizes that most closely matched the photonic stop-band to the electronic bandgap of the TiO2 material, a nearly two-fold enhancement in photocatalytic activity could be realized (Fig. 28c). Further enhancement could be produced by loading the TiO2 network with platinum and increasing the fill-fraction of TiO2, using TiF62− as a liquid phase deposition precursor.
Heterogeneous catalysis is frequently employed in the production and conversion of fuels, as the conditions for these reactions are typically high temperatures and reactive environments—conditions under which many homogeneous catalysts become inactive. 3DOM materials fill a particular niche in this field, as their pores are large enough to survive relatively high temperatures, at which the materials maintain substantial surface areas.

For instance, 3DOM ZnO supports for CuO catalysts can be produced for methanol reforming, a reaction which converts methanol into H2, with CO2 as a byproduct.
2CH3OH + H2O+1/2O2 → 2CO2 + 5H2
In this work, the CCT was formed in the channels of a lithographically patterned substrate. In order to make the structure more “channel-like,” the CCT was annealed at 90 °C for three or more hours, which thickened the contact points between the spheres in the template. Pores 300 nm in diameter were produced from a PS CCT with 500 nm spheres. Textural mesoporosity (which typically accounts for most of the surface area of 3DOM metal oxides) was then enhanced by etching the produced material with an O2 plasma. The surface area of the resulting material was thus increased to 280 m2 g−1 (for comparison, most 3DOM metal oxides are in the range of 10–60 m2 g−1). XPS analysis demonstrated that this O2 plasma etch had also increased the concentration of oxygen vacancies in the CuO. A substantial improvement in catalytic behavior was achieved by the inverse opal structure: 90% conversion at 260 °C, whereas a dense film only yielded 40% conversion under the same conditions. After the additional O2 plasma etching process, 100% conversion was achieved.
Another popular application for nanostructured materials is photocatalytic electrolysis of water to generate hydrogen for use as a chemical reagent or fuel. To achieve this purpose, CdS nanocrystallites were mounted on 3DOM TiO2, (Fig. 29a–d). Compared to an untemplated control, the 3DOM TiO2/CdS material had a higher surface area (allowing for higher loading of CdS nanoparticles), and achieved more complete infiltration/penetration of electrolyte through the structure. High photocurrent density was found for smaller pore sizes under simulated solar radiation (4.84 mA cm−2 @ 288 nm); as pore size increases, the performance of the materials decreased due to increased electron–hole recombination and poorer charge-transfer capabilities through the thicker walls (Fig. 29e and f).
Another material investigated as a photocatalyst was 3DOM Bi2WO6. The material was tested for the photocatalytic degradation of salicylic acid, in which the templated porous materials had photonic efficiencies 2.2 times that of an untemplated material. When tested for water-splitting behavior, direct photon-to-H2 efficiencies of 3DOM Bi2WO6 calcined at 500 °C were likewise three times higher (0.12%) than for a non-structured control sample. The increase in efficiency was attributed to the enhanced scattering of light by the photonic crystal and the greater surface areas which enabled small molecule transport/diffusion. Additionally, the effect of calcination temperature on the performance of the materials was investigated; a substantial drop-off in performance was observed when the calcination temperature was significantly above or below 500 °C. Increased crystallinity (crystallite size) due to sintering was proposed as an explanation for the improved performance up to 500 °C, and above this temperature, sintering-induced structural collapse resulted in poorer performance.
The interplay between structure and temperature—both of synthesis and during operation—is a common theme for many high-temperature catalysis applications. For thermochemical water-splitting and CO2-splitting reactions, it is a dominating factor. In these applications, Ce1−xZrxO2 is also used as an oxygen reservoir, though the oxygen is released through direct thermal treatment. 3DOM Ce1−xZrxO2 materials were produced through infiltration of Pechini precursors into a PMMA CCT, diameter 485 nm. The materials were evaluated for both H2 productivity and structural stability under isothermal chemical cycling. It was found that increasing the Zr content improved the stability of the 3DOM structure at high temperatures (as pure 3DOM CeO2 lost much of its structure during cycling) while H2 productivity was maximized for Ce0.8Zr0.2O2.

Over the past decade and a half, colloidal crystal templating has become a powerful tool in the toolbox for nanostructured materials, particularly porous, periodic materials in two and three dimensions. As this review has illustrated, the general concept of colloidal crystal templating is simple, but needs to be tailored to specific materials. More importantly, the technique is highly versatile and applicable to many different compositions. As a method for assembling nano- and submicrostructures in two (2D) or three dimensions (3D), colloidal crystal templating competes with template-free methods on one hand and lithographic or robotic methods on the other hand. Template-free methods are desirable because they reduce the materials and environmental costs of a synthesis. However, they tend to provide less architectural control than CCTs. Lithography or assembly by robotic manipulation give better structural control and more accessible structure types than CCTs, but both methods require more expensive, highly specialized equipment and are still slow, particularly for three-dimensional constructs. In comparison, colloidal crystal templating provides reasonable structural control in 3D at a reasonable expense.

Although the aesthetics of the template and the templated product may still play a role in attracting newcomers to this technique, real advantages of inverse opal or 3DOM structures have been demonstrated for various applications, so that the field is now reaching the threshold from potential to actual applications. Interestingly, in numerous applications, 3DOM materials are being considered as multiple device components. For example, in the case of LIBs, they have been examined as the platform for anodes, cathodes, solid electrolytes, and current collectors. In DSSCs they can play the role of working electrode, counter electrode, current collector, or reflecting layer. In fuel cells, they can operate as an electrocatalyst or as the membrane. Even for a given component, 3DOM materials may provide multiple functions: structural support, photonic component, high surface area host, active or passive material, and more. Another important characteristic of 3DOM materials is their ability to accommodate secondary and tertiary components either within the walls of 3DOM materials, at the surface of the walls, or throughout macropores. This has allowed for the construction of complex, multifunctional systems, several of which were highlighted in this review. Thus, colloidal crystal templating enables precise structuring of multicomponent systems at the submicrometer length scale and will likely facilitate new applications in the future.
Among the applications reviewed here, the one closest to reaching the consumer market is probably that of sensors, in particular those sensors that rely on color-based responses of the 3DOM material. Some publications are already making comparisons with litmus paper. The ability to impart selectivity on an inverse-opal-based “litmus paper” through imprinting, surface functionalization, and wettability control with spatial resolution makes it possible to design specific sensors and sensor arrays. For these applications, scalable processing techniques are in place to permit production on a scale beyond that of the lab bench.
For some of the other chemical applications given here, in particular those that do not necessarily require structural periodicity at the nano- to micrometer length scales, 3DOM materials are competing with porous materials prepared by other methods, including those that do not utilize a template. The financial and environmental costs of the template, template assembly, and eventually template removal are certainly considerations that will influence the choice of the synthesis method. Yet, there are numerous examples in the literature, where a comparison of the performance of a 3DOM material with a non-templated and/or a less regularly structured porous material demonstrates advantages for the 3DOM material. In those cases, the advantages may arise from the higher degree of interconnectedness of the pore system with few dead ends, the low extent of tortuosity, the uniformity of feature sizes, or the bicontinuous nature of the wall skeleton and the macropore system. The performance advantage is usually related to mass or charge transport issues and may be largest when rapid transport of guest species or charge carriers is required or when guest molecules are large and contact times in an interfacial process are short. If the competitive advantage is truly significant, there is then a need and an opportunity for adjusting processing conditions to reduce synthesis costs and times. The cost-limiting factor is probably the colloidal template and the time-limiting factor the CCT assembly. To reduce the cost of the colloids, it may be possible to employ spheres with a slightly higher degree of polydispersity. The associated drawback would be a higher defect density in the product structure, less uniformity and, perhaps the most important factor, a smaller average number of windows between adjacent macropores. Similarly, in the assembly step, the trade-off is between assembly rates and order.
The choice of pore size depends on the desired application. For optical diffraction effects, macropores of a few hundred nanometer diameters are obviously required. In many reactive applications, smaller macropores or large mesopores provide higher surface areas or more controlled release. Large, well-defined mesopores (10–40 nm) have until recently been difficult to achieve, but are now accessible by templating with CCTs comprised of silica spheres, as well as with certain high molecular weight polymeric surfactants. Colloidal crystal templating also allows incorporation of a secondary template to form structures with hierarchical porosity that combine the benefits of high surface areas from meso- and micropores with facile mass transport through the macropore system.
Has the field of colloidal crystal templating reached maturity? In one sense, yes: the understanding of synthesis–structure–property relationships has grown tremendously since the early publications describing inverse opals or 3DOM materials. This level of understanding has enabled the development of the applications described in this review and others outside of the scope of the review (e.g., physical applications of photonic crystals, hierarchically structured 3DOM materials etc.). On the other hand, and on the basis of the rapid progress observed in the last few years, the authors believe that more is yet to come. Some of the major growth opportunities may be in the fabrication of more complex systems, where such complexity would arise from lower symmetries of the CCT, compositional gradients, and new hybrid materials that take advantage of the physical or chemical properties of inorganic components and the processability or compositional variety of organic components. Other advancements may come from incorporating colloidal crystal templating in existing manufacturing platforms. Methods of producing large-area, crack-free 3DOM materials in a rapid manner will be needed to expedite commercial viability, and progress is already being made in this area. An additional important consideration in future developments of 3DOM materials is their ability to maintain structural features under operating conditions. In the light of such opportunities, one might say that the field has finished the stage of its youth and that some of the most productive years of adulthood lie ahead.
2D
two dimensions, two-dimensional
2DOM
two-dimensionally ordered macroporous
3D
three dimensions, three-dimensional
3DOM
three-dimensionally ordered macroporous
3DOM/m
three-dimensionally ordered macroporous and mesoporous (i.e., mesoporous walls around macropores)
ALD
atomic layer deposition
AMT
ammonium metatungstate
ATP
adenosine triphosphate
CA
contact angle
CCT
colloidal crystal template
CTAB
cetyltrimethylammonium bromide
CVD
chemical vapor deposition
DIO
double-inverse opal
DNA
deoxyribonucleic acid
DMFC
direct methanol fuel cell
DSSC
dye-sensitized solar cell
EDPTA
ethoxylated trimethylolpropane triacrylate
fcc
face-centered cubit
FF
fill factor
FTO
fluorine-doped tin oxide
HAp
hydroxyapatite
HF
hydrofluoric acid
HRTEM
high-resolution transmission electron microscopy
IHT
infiltration/hydrothermal reaction
IR
infrared
ITO
indium tin oxide
LATP
Li1.3Al0.5Ti1.5(PO4)3
LbL
layer-by-layer
LIB
lithium ion battery
LSM
La0.85Sr0.15MnO3
LSPR
localized surface plasmon resonance
MBZ
mercaptobenzothiazole
NMR
nuclear magnetic resonance
PA
pyridinecarboxamide
PAMPS
poly(2-acrylamido-2-methyl-1-propanesulfonic acid)
PANI
polyaniline
PB
prussian blue
PDMS
poly(dimethyl siloxane)
PEG
polyethylene glycol
PMMA
poly(methyl methacrylate)
PPY
polypyrrole
PS
polystyrene
PS-b-PI
poly(styrene-block-1,4-isoprene)
p(St-MMA-AA)
poly(styrene-methyl methacrylate-acrylic acid)
PVA
polyvinyl alcohol
SEM
scanning electron microscopy
SPEES
poly(1,4-phenylene ether ether sulfone)
TEM
transmission electron microscopy
TEOS
tetraethyl orthosilicate
Tg
glass transition temperature
THF
tetrahydrofuran
TNT
trinitrotoluene
TPB
triple-phase boundary
USAXS
ultrasmall-angle synchrotron X-ray scattering
UV
ultraviolet
XPS
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
YSZ
yttria-stabilized zirconia

For parts of the work highlighted in this review, we thank the following sources for funding: the National Science Foundation (DMR-0704312, CMMI-0707610), the Office of Naval Research (Grant N00014-07-1-0608), the University of Minnesota Initiative for Renewable Energy and the Environment, and the University of Minnesota Characterization Facility, which receives partial support from the NSF through the MRSEC, ERC, MRI, and NNIN programs.

† Part of the chemistry of functional nanomaterials themed issue.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013