 DOI: 10.1039/D2CP03085C
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2022, 24, 24181-24191


Ramesh
Mamindla
*,

Arghya
Ghosh
 and 

Manish K.
Niranjan


Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad, TS 502285, India. E-mail: manish@iith.ac.in

Department of Physics, VNR Vignana Jyothi Institute of Engineering and Technology, Hyderabad 500090, TS, India. E-mail: ramesh.mamindla@gmail.com

Received
7th July 2022
, Accepted 13th September 2022
First published on 14th September 2022
Semiconductors AlSb and GaSb have emerged, in recent years, as important candidates for photovoltaic applications due to their strong absorption coefficients and other photovoltaic properties. In this study, AlSb (GaSb) p–n junction-based solar cell device parameters and properties are studied using the density functional theoretical framework and the non-equilibrium Green function approach. The effect of temperature on various solar cell parameters such as open-circuit voltage, power conversion efficiency, photocurrent density, short-circuit current, etc. is investigated using a special-thermal-displacement approach along with the GGA-1/2 exchange–correlation functional. As temperature increases, the phonons are found to significantly influence the charge carrier transport in the solar cells. The computed power conversion efficiencies for AlSb are estimated as 12.31% and 10.21% at 0 K and 400 K, respectively. The obtained results strongly indicate that the electron–phonon coupling and resulting phonon-assisted photon absorption are necessary for accurate description and prediction of solar cell properties. The estimates obtained in this study may serve as first-principles parameters with possible use in continuum model-based multiscale simulations of AlSb (GaSb) p–n homo-junction solar cells.

The III–V group semiconductor compounds are remarkable materials that are widely used in various technologies such as high speed electronic devices, optoelectronics, nanoelectronics etc. In particular, these semiconductors are commonly used to fabricate high speed mobility transistors (HEMT), microwave amplifiers, light emitting diodes (LEDs), infrared detectors, quantum well lasers, high-efficiency multi-well solar cells, optical fibers, infrared cameras etc. In addition, several novel phenomena including the fractional quantum hall effect, quantum transport, quantum hall effect etc. have been observed in structures manufactured from III–V semiconductors. A well-known member of the III–V semiconductor family is the direct bandgap semiconductor gallium arsenide (GaAs), which has served as a benchmark material over the years due to its numerous device applications, interesting properties and structure. AlSb and GaSb also belong to the same group and have attracted a great deal of interest in recent years owing to their remarkable optoelectronic and photovoltaic properties, making them suitable for many technological applications. In particular, AlSb is exploited in Li-ion batteries, X-ray and gamma-ray radiation detectors, electro-optical devices and p–n junction diodes. The semiconducting AlSb has an indirect bandgap of ∼1.7 eV. This makes AlSb a good photovoltaic material due to its bandgap in the solar spectrum. The power conversion efficiency of AlSb p–i–n solar cells has been reported to be around 14.41%. The quantum efficiency of InAs/AlSb superlattice photodiodes has been reported to be ∼38% at 300 K. Likewise, the quantum efficiency of InAs/GaSb/AlSb superlattice photodetectors has been found to be 55% at 150 K. The GaSb-based multijunction solar cell efficiency has been reported to be 44.5%. The hot carrier absorber properties for AlSb indicate that its photovoltaic conversion efficiency can be improved by reducing thermalization loss. Overall, AlSb is expected to be a next generation photovoltaic material due to its numerous additional advantages such as non-toxic nature, inexpensiveness, high conversion efficiency, significant light absorption, high carrier mobility, high availability etc.

Although AlSb has been explored experimentally, the theoretical research studies on the photovoltaic (PV) properties of AlSb solar cells are almost none or very few. For instance, to the best of our knowledge, the photovoltaic properties of AlSb-based solar cells have not been explored using first-principles quantum mechanical methods. Such studies are important in that these can appropriately take into account various atomistic details and local environments. Usually, the continuum models are used to deduce the PV parameters from the experimental data. Though classical physics-based models are useful to simulate larger device structures, these models do not capture details at the atomistic level. Therefore, using classical models, it becomes extremely challenging to describe important effects arising due to particle (electron, phonon etc.) confinement, strain, interface etc. On the other hand, first-principles density functional (DFT) studies can describe the aforementioned effects in fairly good detail. In addition, the transport-related properties in simple junction structures can also be explored by combining the DFT formalism with the nonequilibrium Green's function (NEGF) as has been reported in recent studies.
AlSb (GaSb) exhibits an indirect (direct) bandgap of ∼1.7 eV (∼0.72 eV) and therefore light absorption around the fundamental energy gap can only be facilitated by the absorption or emission of phonons. This results in electron–phonon coupling (EPC) in indirect (direct) semiconductors such as AlSb (GaSb). In general, the coupling between electrons and phonons is important in that it may result in temperature-dependence of various solid material properties. Quite naturally, EPC is also expected to crucially influence the properties of PV cells based on indirect semiconductors. Recently, it has been shown that the performance of solar cells based on direct-band-gap materials is also significantly influenced by EPC. In general, the estimates of PV parameters like photocurrent, short-circuit-current (Jsc), and open-circuit voltage (Voc) may be significantly underestimated in the absence of EPC in the theoretical models. However, it is worth noting that first-principles quantum mechanical computations of EPC in the photovoltaic studies can be computationally very expensive due to double sum over the k-points in the Brillouin zone and the involvement of two-excitation processes.
Recently, a scheme known as special-thermal-displacement (STD) has been introduced, which can be exploited to compute the phonon influence on the absorption coefficient. The STD scheme is based on the displacement of atoms from their average positions in the supercell. The STD scheme can be combined with DFT and the NEGF formalism to study the temperature-dependence of photocurrent in the p–n junctions as has been reported recently for silicon-based p–n junctions.
In this study, we comprehensively investigate the temperature-dependent bandgap and thereby temperature-dependence of photovoltaic properties. In particular, STD and NEGF schemes are used within the DFT framework to compute the temperature-dependent open-circuit-voltage (Voc), short-circuit-current density (Jsc), photocurrent, efficiency (η) and fill factor (FF) of an AlSb (GaSb) p–n homojunction. The temperature-dependence of indirect (direct) bandgap AlSb (GaSb) solar cell parameters arises due to absorption that is assisted by phonons. The understanding of how temperature influences key solar cell parameters is important as it directly affects the performance of the solar cell device. To the best of our knowledge, the temperature-dependence of solar cell properties of AlSb (GaSb) junctions has not been explored from a first-principles approach. As the temperature of a solar cell material increases, the phonons start to play an increasingly important role via EPC. Therefore, the key solar cell parameters Voc, Jsc, and η of the AlSb (GaSb) p–n junction are expected to be enhanced due to phonon-assisted tunnelling across the junction. The results presented in this study indeed suggest that the PV parameters obtained using first principles DFT methodology and without the consideration of EPC can be significantly underestimated. To calculate and understand the photovoltaic properties at a fundamental level, we first compute the electronic, optical, and phonon properties using an advanced semiempirical GGA-1/2 scheme. The GGA-1/2 functional significantly improves the bandgap estimate value, which is necessary for accurate description of optical absorption, Voc and Jsc. We also analyze the temperature-dependent photocurrent and J–V characteristics using the STD approach. In addition, we investigate how the efficiency of an AlSb (GaSb) solar cell reduces with an increase in temperature. The obtained ab initio results of solar cell properties of AlSb (GaSb) p–n junctions can be used as complementary results in combination with experiments. Furthermore, these ab initio results can serve as input parameters in studies based on multiscale continuum models.

The AlSb and GaSb(100) p–n junction-device simulations are performed using DFT and the NEGF formalism using the QuantumATK software. The calculations are performed with the GGA-1/2 exchange–correlation (XC) functional with a double zeta polarization in the LCAO basis set. The structural optimizations are performed by reducing the atomic force to 0.01 eV Å−1 or less. The total energy is allowed to converge up to 10−6 eV per cell to achieve self-consistency in the calculation. The phonon spectrum is calculated using generalized Tersoff force field potentials. The temperature effects on the solar cell properties are introduced via EPC, which in turn is included using the STD atomic configuration. The optical and solar cell properties are obtained by using 1 × 16 × 16 and 1 × 21 × 21 k-meshes for Brillouin zone integrations. The energy cutoff values of 57 Ha and 65 Ha are used to calculate the photocurrent density and J–V characteristics, respectively. The photocurrent and J–V characteristics are calculated using the NEGF method within the DFT approach. The charge-doping in the supercell is simulated by adding fixed amounts of charge at each atomic site. The solar cell device properties are evaluated at photon flux with magnitude of 1 S−1 A−1. The charge density of 3.5 × 1018 cm−3 is used for the p-side and n-side regions in the supercell. The ESI, section briefly summarizes the all-important methods that are used in this study.


Both AlSb and GaSb have a face-centered cubic (FCC) crystal structure with space-group number 216 and space-group symmetry F3m. The primitive cell of AlSb (GaSb) contains two atoms: Al (Ga) at (0 0 0) and Sb at (0.25 0.25 0.25). The relaxed atomic positions and lattice parameters are in good agreement with the experimental and earlier theoretical results (see Table 1). The band structure of AlSb (GaSb) along the high symmetric direction is shown in Fig. 1(a and c) and the computed bandgap results are displayed in Table 1. Fig. 1(a) shows that the conduction band (CB) minimum is at the X point and the valence band (VB) maximum is located at the Γ point in the Brillouin zone. The bandgap values computed using GGA and LDA are found to be 1.40 eV and 1.16 eV, respectively. The LDA and GGA calculated bandgap values are significantly low as compared to the experiments (∼1.7 eV). In recent years, the GGA-1/2 exchange–correlation potentials have been successfully used to estimate the bandgap values of several semiconducting systems with quite a reasonable accuracy. These bandgap estimates are close to their experimental values because of improved VB and CB, which in turn is due to significant reduction in self-interaction errors in local and semilocal XC functionals. The GGA-1/2 scheme is therefore used to compute the bandgap of semiconducting AlSb. The GGA-1/2 computed indirect (direct) bandgap is 1.84 eV (2.24 eV), which is reasonably improved as compared to the LDA and GGA bandgap values. Overall, the computed (GGA-1/2) AlSb electronic bandgap is in reasonably good agreement with previously reported schemes such as HISS and HSE06 and experimental results. In the case of GaSb, the VB maximum and CB minimum are located at the Γ (0 0 0) point, as displayed in Fig. 1(c). The GGA-1/2 computed band structure of GaSb shows a direct bandgap of 0.54 eV. We also compute the temperature-dependent bandgap values of bulk AlSb and GaSb using the Varshni relation:

(1)
where
T is the temperature, Eg(0) is the bandgap at T = 0, and β and γ are the fitting parameters of the semiconductor material taken from ref. 45. Fig. 1(b) shows the bandgap as a function of temperature computed using various methods such as LDA, GGA and GGA-1/2. The variation in bandgap is seen from 1.16 to 1.0 eV for LDA, 1.40 to 1.29 eV for GGA, and 1.84 to 1.688 eV for GGA-1/2 for temperature variation in the range of 0–500 K. As expected, the bandgap gradually reduces with an increase in the temperature due to EPC. Furthermore, the GGA computed magnitudes are in reasonable agreement with the experimental values at 22 and 300 K (see Fig. 1(b)).Fig. 1(b) shows that the GGA-1/2 computed values are in good agreement with the reported experimental optical bandgap at 400 K. In the case of GaSb, the direct bandgap varies with the temperature in the range of ∼0.54–0.37 eV for GGA-1/2 (see Fig. 1(d)). As mentioned earlier, the temperature-dependent bandgap directly influences the temperature-dependent photocurrent and J–V characteristics.


a (Å)

E
g (eV)
AlSb
Cal.
LDA
6.093
1.16
GGA
6.210
1.40
GGA-1/2
6.137
1.84
Exp.
6.136
1.69
GaSb
Cal.
GGA-1/2
6.118
0.54
Exp.
6.092
0.8

Fig. 2 shows the projected density-of-states (PDOS) of AlSb and GaSb. The energy range in the PDOS figure is scaled so that the Fermi energy is at 0 eV. For AlSb (GaSb), the VB in the range of −1 to −4 eV is primarily derived from Al-3p (Ga-4p) and Sb-5p orbitals. In the conduction band (CB) of AlSb (GaSb) the major contribution at around 2 eV comes from the Al-3s (Ga-4s) orbital, while a minor contribution is from the Sb-5s5p orbital. The CB is almost constant for higher energies (>3.8 eV).
Next, we explore the phonon dispersion in order to understand the lattice dynamical characteristics of the AlSb and GaSb systems. The phonon dispersions are obtained using Tersoff force-field potentials and are shown in Fig. 3. The acoustic phonons of bulk AlSb (GaSb) are in the energy range of 0 to 24 meV (0 to 21 meV), which are primarily dominated by the displacement of the Sb atom. Likewise, the optical phonons are in the energy range of 45 to 52 meV (25 to 33 meV) and are primarily dominated by the displacement of the Al (Ga) atom. In the case of AlSb, the acoustic and optical phonons are separated by a large energy gap of 21 meV due to the significant mass difference (the Sb atomic mass is more than four times that of an Al atom). The phonon density-of-states is displayed in Fig. 3(b and d) and shows two strong peaks due to acoustic and optical phonons. In the case of AlSb, the strong acoustic and optical phonon densities can be seen at ∼22 meV and ∼53 meV, respectively. Overall, the optical phonon density is more prominent than the acoustic phonon density for both materials. The absence of negative phonon density-of-states indicates that both AlSb and GaSb are dynamically more stable. The obtained results match with the reported theoretical and experimental results. The phonon results have implications for the temperature-dependent photocurrent and J–V characteristics as discussed in Section 3.4 and in Section 3.5.

The absorption coefficient is a crucial optical parameter to understand the properties of a solar cell. In the present work, it is computed using the GGA-1/2 XC functional and in the independent-particle approximation. The absorption coefficient can be direction-dependent with its average value given as α(ω) = {αxx(ω) + αyy(ω) + αzz(ω)}/3. Fig. 4(a and c) show the average optical absorption coefficient as a function of energy of incident photons. As can be seen, the absorption coefficient (>104 cm−1) is significant for low light energy near 2 eV, which indicates that AlSb is indeed suitable for solar cell applications. The absorption onset is about 1.84 eV (0.5 eV), which is close to the fundamental bandgap of AlSb (GaSb). The absorption onset of GaSb is significantly small as compared to AlSb due to its relatively lower bandgap. Fig. 4(a) [Fig. 4(c)] shows that the absorption coefficient for AlSb (GaSb) increases sharply in the range of 2.7–4.2 eV (1.7–4.2 eV). A strong absorption peak is found at 4.23 eV (4.21 eV) for AlSb (GaSb), higher than those in some conventional semiconducting materials such as Si and GaAs. The computed absorption coefficient and optical onset come out to be in good agreement with the experiments due to improvement in the electronic structural properties provided by the GGA-1/2 scheme as discussed in the previous Section 3.1. The absorption varies with change in the temperature of the material. As the temperature increases, the absorption onset and optical bandgap are reduced due to bandgap reduction by EPC (see Fig. 1(b and d)). Thus, the material can absorb light even below its bandgap due to the influence of phonons. The phonon-assisted absorption coefficient, in turn, influences the temperature-dependent photocurrent as discussed in the next section. In a bandgap material, the photons and phonons play important roles in the transition of electrons from the valence to conduction band. The absorption coefficient of the semiconductor depends on energies as:

α = (E − Eg ± Ep)2
(2)
where
E and Eg are the energy of the photon and the bandgap of the material, respectively. +Ep (−Ep) is the energy of the absorbed (emitted) phonon. As evident from eqn (2), the absorption starts when the light energy is higher than the indirect (direct) bandgap of AlSb (GaSb). Furthermore, the absorption is also influenced by phonon emission or absorption. Therefore, the absorption coefficient evenly increases in the 1.7 to 2.7 eV (0.5 to 1.6 eV) energy range by the phonon effect, as shown in Fig. 4(a and c). Here, the acoustic and optical phonon absorption or emission influences the absorption coefficient via temperature-dependent bandgap (see Fig. 1(b and d)). This may be due to the transfer of electrons from the VB maximum at the Γ point to the CB minimum at the X point in the indirect (direct) bandgap of AlSb (GaSb) (see Fig. 1(a and c)). Here, the VB near the VBM is comprised of Al-3p (Ga-4p) and Sb-5p orbitals. The CB near the CBM is comprised primarily of Al-3s (Ga-4s) orbitals for below 2.7 eV (1.6 eV). The charge carriers in these energy bands may interact with the phonons during inter-band transitions. Moreover, these inter-band transitions also result in the absorption onset of 1.84 eV (0.5 eV) and optical bandgap of 1.95 eV (0.62 eV) [see Fig. 4(b and d)]. Similarly, a strong absorption coefficient above 2.7 eV (1.7 eV) is expected due to the transfer of the electrons from the VB (major contribution from Al-3p (Ga-4p) and Sb-5p orbitals) to the CB (major contribution from Al-3p (Ga-4s) and a minor contribution from Al-3s (Ga-4p) orbitals). These optical properties play crucial roles in the determination of the photocurrent densities of AlSb and GaSb solar cells, as discussed in Section 3.4.


In this section, we briefly discuss the AlSb p–n junction device structure and its associated electronic characteristics that are relevant to photovoltaic properties discussed in Sections 3.4 and 3.5. The unit cell of AlSb is repeated along the X-axis to obtain a supercell that in turn is used to make a p–n junction solar cell device. The p–n junction-based device structure consists of two electrodes (left and right) with a large central region (see Fig. 5a). The homojunction length is 14.8 nm with two different atomic layers repeated along the (1 0 0) direction and the interlayer separation is ∼1.533 Å. The left side half part is doped as p-type, and the right side half part is doped as n-type. The length of each electrode is 15 Å and the doping density is 3 × 1018 cm−3. The p–n junction interface is indicated with a dotted red color line located in the middle of the supercell.

The local density-of-states (LDOS) for the AlSb p–n junction are calculated using the NEGF method within the DFT scheme and are shown in Fig. 5(b). In the figure, the black color region indicates the absence of electrons and the red color region indicates the presence of electrons. The Fermi level in the left electrode (∈L) side is close to the VB and indicates that it is p-type. Similarly the right electrode (∈R) side is n-type, since the Fermi level is close to the CB. At the electrode region, the bandgap is almost equal to the experimental bulk bandgap of AlSb. These LDOS properties are consistent with those expected for a p–n junction.

The temperature-dependent photocurrent densities of AlSb and GaSb are explored on the basis of their electronic and phonon properties. The STD method is used to compute the temperature-dependent photocurrent in the p–n junction solar cell. In this method, atoms are moved from their mean positions due to the temperature effect and the distorted atomic configuration is generated from the following equation:

(3)
where
em is the eigenvector of the mth phonon mode. σm(T) is the Gaussian width. The photocurrent in the AlSb p–n junction solar cell is calculated using the Meir–Wingreen equation and EPC is included via the STD method. The photocurrent is obtained using the p–n junction under AM1.5 illumination with a photon flux of 1 s−1 Å−2. The light is absorbed by AlSb atomic layers, which results in VB electron excitations to the CB, which in turn generates the electron–hole pairs. As shown in Fig. 6(a and c), these electron–hole pairs are responsible for the photocurrent. The hole charge carriers are obtained predominantly from Al-3p, Sb-5p and Ga-4p orbitals in the VB. Similarly, electron charge carriers are obtained predominantly from Al-3s3p and Ga-4s4p orbitals with a minor contribution from the Sb-5s5p orbital in the CB (see Fig. 2). Fig. 6(a) shows the photocurrent density calculated using the STD and GGA-1/2 schemes for various temperatures (0 K, 300 K, and 400 K). The vertical dotted lines at 1.84 eV and 2.24 eV (0.49 eV) show indirect and direct bandgap values of bulk AlSb (GaSb), respectively. As expected, the photocurrent begins when the light energy is higher than their indirect (direct) bandgap. For photon energy less than 2.3 eV (1.2 eV), the photocurrent exhibits anisotropy due to the temperature-dependence of the indirect (direct) bandgap (see Fig. 1(a and c)) which in turn is due to EPC in the AlSb (GaSb) p–n junction. Moreover, at the photon energy below 2.3 eV (1.2 eV), GaSb shows a stronger photocurrent than AlSb due to te strong phonon influence by the low direct bandgap. The isotropic nature is observed above the direct bandgap of 2.3 eV (1.2 eV) due to strong inter-band transitions. The highest photocurrent in AlSb (GaSb) is ∼10 mA cm−2 (∼3 mA cm−2) at around 3.75 eV (4.2 eV). Furthermore, the photocurrent onsets for 0 K, 300 K, and 400 K are 1.75 eV (0.49 eV), 1.5 eV (0.38 eV), and 1.35 eV, respectively. This shows that in each temperature case, the photocurrent starts below their indirect (direct) bandgap (see Fig. 1(b and d)). Moreover, the photocurrent shifts towards the low energy side with increased temperature due to strong EPC. In general, the bandgap is decreased with increased temperature due to strong EPC (see Fig. 1(b and d)), resulting in temperature-dependent optical absorption shifting towards the lower energy side. Therefore, as temperature increases, the photocurrent density shifts towards the lower energy side. In particular, a strong shift can be seen for 400 K (see Fig. 6(a)) due to the charge carriers strongly interacting with the acoustic phonons in the range of 0 to 24 meV (0 to 21 meV) and optical phonons in the range of 45 to 52 meV (25 to 33 meV) in the EPC process (see Fig. 3). Furthermore, the phonon interaction with the charge carrier also improves the electrical conductivity. Overall, the photocurrent density is higher in AlSb as compared to that in GaSb due to higher absorption coefficient and phonon strength. The above results are qualitatively consistent with those reported for the silicon p–n junction and graphene. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) is computed from the photocurrent using the following equation:

(4)
where
J, F, Ac and Ad are the photocurrent, photon flux, electrode area and device area exposed by light, respectively. As shown in Fig. 6(b), the computed EQE of the AlSb p–n junction contains two strong peaks for each temperature case. The most significant peak of EQE is obtained at 3.6 eV for 0 K.


Next, we discuss the J–V characteristics computed for the AlSb (GaSb)(100) p–n junction solar cell. The photocurrent is calculated for various bias voltages and least-square fit data points are used in the following p–n junction diode equation under illumination conditions:

(5)
where
q, V, Iph, T and Kb are the charge, voltage, photocurrent, temperature, and Boltzmann constant, respectively. The J–V characteristics are influenced by the band-structural properties at the corresponding temperatures (see Fig. 1(b and d)). The J–V characteristics of the AlSb (GaSb) p–n junction solar cell are computed using the GGA-1/2 scheme and EPC is included using the STD method. As discussed earlier, the bandgap and other electronic properties are significantly improved with the use of the GGA-1/2 scheme as compared to the GGA or LDA scheme. The computed results are presented in Fig. 7 and in Table 2. The results suggest that solar cell parameters such Jsc and Voc are significantly underestimated if EPC is ignored and not taken into account in the theoretical model. Fig. 7 shows the dark current (without light) and is similar to that expected in a general forward bias p–n junction. In the case of T = 0 K, Jsc is 11.40 mA cm−2, and Voc is 1.31 V with η of 12.31%. Jsc depends on the thickness of the solar cell and thus light absorption by the AlSb solar cell material increases with an increase in thickness, which causes the increase in Jsc. In the present study, we used a nanoscale AlSb p–n junction solar cell device (length is 14.8 nm) and its thickness is minimal compared to the previous theoretical and experimental reports. Therefore, the Jsc value found in this study is small compared to that presented in these reports. However, Voc and η are found to be in qualitative agreement. In may be noted that the present study differs from that in ref. 55 in that the latter is based on classical semiconductor device equations whereas the present study is based on an ab initio quantum mechanical framework. In the case of GaSb at 0 K, Voc (Jsc) is smaller (larger) as compared to that in AlSb due to the small bandgap. Moreover, small Voc causes significant reduction in η. For temperature 300 K, Jsc, Voc and η are 13.11 mA cm−2, 1.08 V and 11.42%, respectively. The solar cell parameters are also computed for T = 400 K with EPC and without EPC and are shown in Fig. 7. These results clearly show that Jsc and Voc are improved with the inclusion of EPC in the calculations. A comparison of Js for various temperatures (see Table 2) shows that Jsc is increased by 2.53 mA cm−2 and Voc is reduced by 0.37 V, resulting in a reduction of 2.10% in η as the temperature is raised from 0 K to 400 K. This can be understood as follows. The bandgap is reduced by EPC with increasing temperature (see Fig. 1(b and d)), resulting in the enhancement of the charge carriers in the AlSb (GaSb) solar cell. This causes the inter-band transitions even for energies less than its indirect (direct) bandgap. The phonon strength increases with increasing temperature, influencing the electronic transport properties. In turn, the electronic transport properties of the AlSb (GaSb) p–n junction solar cell can influence the phonons in addition to its bias voltage. At high temperatures, electron–phonon scattering boosts the charge carriers enabling them to crossover the ultrathin p–n junction potential barrier. Therefore, more charge carriers crossover the p–n junction as phonon strength increases in EPC. This phonon assisted tunnelling plays an important role in the determination and enhancement of the critical photovoltaic properties such as Jsc and Voc. Thus, Jsc (Voc) at 400 K is higher (lower) than that at 0 K and 300 K (see Table 2). It may be noted that Voc decreased from 1.31 eV to 0.95 eV as the temperature is increased from 0 K to 400 K (see Fig. 8(a)). Similarly, in the case of GaSb, Voc is decreased from 0.36 eV to 0.23 eV as the temperature is increased from 0 K to 300 K (see Fig. 8(b)). This Voc reduction (see Fig. 8) via EPC is responsible for the reduction in η for both materials. The strong phonon assisted tunnelling across the p–n junction is due to acoustic phonons in the energy range from 0 to 24 meV (0 to 21 meV) and optical phonons in the energy range from 45 to 52 meV (25 to 33 meV) in AlSb (GaSb) as shown in Fig. 3. Furthermore, phonons due to vibrations of Al atoms play a more prominent role as their phonon density is higher than that contributed by Sb atom vibrations. Thus, the strong Al atomic optical phonons play an essential role in reducing η. The overall phonon influenced Jsc in GaSb is stronger than that of AlSb as the temperature is raised from 0 K to 300 K. This is due to stronger phonon influence on the inter band transitions in a relatively smaller direct bandgap material such GaSb. The contribution to Jsc is primarily from Al-3p (Ga-4p), Sb-5p orbitals (hole charge carriers) and Al-3s3p (Ga-4s4p) orbitals (electron charge carriers).


T (K)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)

η (%)
AlSb
0
11.40
1.31
12.31
300
13.11
1.08
11.42
400
13.93
0.94
10.21
GaSb
0
19.10
0.36
3.70
300
22.43
0.23
2.61
Next, we analyze the Voc of the AlSb(100) p–n junction for different light intensities (sun). Fig. 9 shows the variation of Voc with light intensity in the range from 0.2 to 1 sun, for temperatures 0 K, 300 K, and 400 K. Voc varies from 1.31 eV to 1.36 eV for 0 K, 0.94 eV to 1.01 eV for 300 K, and 0.79 eV to 0.85 eV for 400 K. These results indicate that Voc increases with light intensity for all temperature cases. As temperature increases, Voc is reduced due to the strong EPC in the AlSb (GaSb)(100) p–n junction.

The temperature-dependent solar cell parameters of an indirect (direct) bandgap AlSb (GaSb) p–n junction are studied using the non-equilibrium Green's function (NEGF) method within the density functional theoretical (DFT) framework. The temperature-dependence of solar cell parameters is introduced through electron–phonon coupling (EPC) via a special-thermal-displacement (STD) scheme. The solar cell parameters like photocurrent, short-circuit current (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc) etc. are found to be significantly influenced by EPC and thereby phonon-assisted photon absorption. The improved electronic, optical, and phonon properties are obtained using the GGA-1/2 exchange–correlation functional. The bandgap is found to reduce from 1.84 eV to 1.70 eV with the temperature increasing in the range of 0–500 K. The photocurrent onset values are found to shift towards the lower energy of incident photons due to bandgap reduction by EPC, as the temperature increases. At temperature 0 K, the Jsc, Voc and η are computed to be 11.40 mA cm−2, 1.31 V and 12.31%, respectively. The photovoltaic properties of the AlSb (GaSb) p–n junction are significantly improved with increasing temperature due to phonon-assisted tunnelling of charge carriers across the junction. Furthermore, η reduces due to strong phonon population via EPC with increasing temperature. The strong absorption coefficient and high η suggest that the AlSb and GaSb are indeed promising absorber semiconductors for applications in solar cells. The ab initio results presented here, on AlSb p–n junctions can be used as parameters in classical physics-based multiscale models and simulations.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work is supported by the computational facility grant provided by DST-FIST(SR/FST/PSI-215/2016).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cp03085c
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2022