 DOI: 10.1039/C8NR03928C
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11745-11749


Huan
Wang
,

Shouli
Ming
,

Liren
Zhang
,

Xin
Li
,

Wenhua
Li
* and 

Zhishan
Bo
*

Key Laboratory of Energy Conversion and Storage Materials, College of Chemistry, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China

Received
15th May 2018
, Accepted 6th June 2018
First published on 6th June 2018
Au-Cu2−xS Janus nanostructures with a shape-controlled semiconductor part are successfully built. The key parameters for controlling the morphology of Cu2−xS in Au-Cu2−xS are demonstrated. Coupled local surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) properties in these Au-Cu2−xS NCs give them potential for application in polymer solar cells (PSCs) as an efficient dopant.

Recently, Janus nanostructures composed of noble metal and semiconductor nanocrystals have undergone tremendous development owing to their extraordinary combination of optical, magnetic, and catalytic characteristics. Besides retaining the physical and chemical properties of each individual nanocrystal (NC) in a single entity, more importantly, hybrid Janus nanostructures can enhance the desired properties and even create novel properties via the synergistic interactions of two components. A vast number of experimentally realized ingenious Janus nanostructures have demonstrated a sensitive dependence of their integrated functionalities on the overall geometry and the interfacial junction which brings the two domains together. In particular, for a hybridized optical plasmonic system, Au NCs are usually required to provide sharp local surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) in the Janus hybrid nanostructure. Varying the shape of the semiconductor part can induce a variation in its charge carrier density due to the carrier transfer from one domain to another, which may give rise to a clear modification in the plasmonic property. Regardless of whether the semiconductor is a metal oxide or a chalcogenide, it is not yet possible to create varying semiconductor shapes while maintaining noble metal NCs within the same system. While a variety of procedures are accessible for precisely controlling the morphology of each single-component NC, one main constraint for realizing morphology control in a hybrid Janus nanostructure pertains to the difficulty in avoiding homogeneous formation of new undesired particles of secondary components.

In recent years, the development of plasmonic semiconductor-based NCs for example copper chalcogenides CuxA (A = S, Se, or Te) has opened a new door for tuning LSPR across the infrared region, attributed to the copper vacancies. Au-Cu2−xS features a dual plasmonic nanostructure which has given rise to prominent biomedical applications thanks to its LSPR absorption spanning the range of visible to NIR regions. Herein, we present the preparation of shape-varied Janus colloidal Au-Cu2−xS NCs via the in situ crystal growth of Cu2−xS on the same batch of Au NC seeds. Simply reducing the amount of added Au seeds makes the Cu2−xS in the hybrid Au-Cu2−xS transform from a badminton tail-shape to a polyhedron shape. These hybrid NCs exhibit intriguing coupled LSPR properties which are highlighted in the performance enhancement of bulk heterojunction (BHJ) polymer solar cells (PSCs). PSCs have attracted much attention due to the advantages of low cost, being lightweight, being able to undergo large-area fabrication, and so forth. However, a low charge carrier mobility in the thin active film and low light absorption still limit the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs. Plasmonic nanoparticles have been proven to be an effective additive for solving these problems. In this study, we employed hybrid Au-Cu2−xS as dopants in the active layer of PSCs and it was demonstrated experimentally to effectively enhance the final PCE value. After the incorporation of Au-Cu2−xS NCs, the short-circuit current (Jsc) and fill factor (FF) of the doped device were considerably improved along with a decrease in the series resistance (Rs).

Au-Cu2−xS NCs were synthesized by a seed mediated growth approach. The cleaned Au NCs were dispersed in oleylamine (OLA) as the seed stock solution. In a typical preparation of Au-Cu2−xS NCs, 0.0852 g of CuCl2·2H2O, 7 mL of OLA, and 3 mL of Au–OLA solution were successively introduced to a 25 mL four-neck flask connected to a Schlenk line. The mixture was fully flushed with nitrogen at room temperature and then heated to 180 °C. In this process, Au NCs and Cu precursors were mixed sufficiently under vigorous stirring and the Cu–OLA complex was formed while removing oxygen, water and other impurities. The nucleation and growth of Cu2−xS on the surface of the Au NCs was consequently initiated by the injection of 1 mL of di-tert-butyl disulfide (TBDS) through a septum. The reaction mixture was kept at 180 °C for 70 min to allow the NCs to grow. Then the flask was rapidly cooled down to room temperature and the resulting NC suspension was treated with a standard centrifuge/precipitation procedure three times. The NCs were re-dispersed in chloroform and stored in a nitrogen filled glove-box.


Fig. 1 shows the representative transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) micrographs of the Au-Cu2−xS hybrids produced under the optimized conditions. Clearly, the epitaxial growth of Cu2−xS occurs under the guidance of adjacent Au seeds and a close link between each Au and Cu2−xS NC is established. Depending on the molar ratio of Au:Cu, different shaped heterostructures are observed. When a little Au–OLA solution was added, the shape of the Cu2−xS in the hybrid Au-Cu2−xS is characterized as a polyhedron (Fig. 1(a) and (b), Shape I). These polyhedra are monodisperse and have an average diameter of 25 nm, while there are only smaller badminton tail-shaped Cu2−xS formed in the Au-Cu2−xS heterostructures upon increasing the amount of Au seeds as shown in Fig. 1(c) and (d) (Shape II). Both of these two kinds of Au-Cu2−xS NC are monodisperse as depicted in the inset histograms. Their crystal structure was examined by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurement and the corresponding spectra (Fig. 1(g)) reveal the existence of face-centered cubic gold structures. Even though Cu2−xS crystal phases are varied, they can be unambiguously identified to match orthorhombic and cubic phases in each case due to the high crystallinity. The chemical composition of these different shaped Au-Cu2−xS NCs was determined by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) and the corresponding spectra are present in the ESI. They show the composition to be 1.97:1 and 1.8:1 respectively which is consistent with the analyzed XRD results as mentioned above. Further characterization of the as-synthesized hybrids was performed by EDX elemental mapping. As shown in Fig. 1(e) and (f), the distributions of Au, Cu and S are co-localized. This clearly confirms each element present in a single nanostructure and again the close bond between Au and Cu2−xS, indicating the successful formation of a hybrid Au-Cu2−xS unit.
In our study, there are several crucial parameters for the successful formation and shape control of metal–semiconductor heterogeneous NCs, including the molar ratio of precursors, the method of introducing Au seeds etc. The optimal molar ratio of Au:Cu was determined as 1:20 and 1:5 which corresponds to the formation of different shaped semiconductors in the Au-Cu2−xS NCs. Below 1:20, free Cu2−xS structures were dominant (ESI). In the case of more than 1:5, all the formed Cu2−xS particles had combined with Au seeds but become smaller which is reasonable due to too much Cu precursor being consumed in the nucleation stage, directed by sufficient Au seeds. When keeping the ratio between 1:20 and 1:5, the product mainly consists of hybrid Au-Cu2−xS NCs but the morphology of Cu2−xS becomes non-uniform (as seen in the ESI). We speculate that on the one hand, the increased Au amount efficiently prevents the formation of free single Cu2−xS by reducing the Cu precursor concentration below a critical point in the solution; on the other hand, the amount of added Au seeds has a significant influence on the morphology and homogeneity of Cu2−xS. Moreover, preparing Au seed solution by using toluene (as done in the work of Ding et al.) or chloroform instead of OLA has been unsuccessful in building hybrid structures and only separated Au and Cu2−xS NCs are observed in the final product. Tuning the ratio of Cu:S or replacing the S precursor of TBDS with DDT leads to poor quality formed hybrids.
Notably, the best heterostructured Au-Cu2−xS NC was usually obtained at a lower temperature with a longer reaction time. The slow growth rate of Cu2−xS NCs allows us to monitor the evolution process and to gain an insight into the formation mechanism of hybrid Au-Cu2−xS. For the badminton-shaped hybrids, only single Au NCs were observed at the initial stage after the injection of TBDS (Fig. S5). Importantly, the Au NCs in the system remained monodisperse and there were no aggregates formed during the long purification process. This is vital for the subsequent construction of hybrid structures by the seeded method. With the reaction time, the Au NCs remain the same but plenty of ambiguous small dots are present as the arrows indicate in Fig. S5. After 10 min, these small dots become distinct and meanwhile have a high propensity to centralize along one side of each Au NC as highlighted with the circles in Fig. 2(e). The magnified TEM image displays an irregular feature of these assemblies i.e. they almost fuse together into a single NC but are attached upon an Au NC. When prolonging the reaction time to 30 and 50 min, the incomplete NCs keep growing and gradually become crystallized, and shaped with an aggregation of more and more small dots around them. At 70 min, all of the small dots were running out since none were detected (Fig. 2(f)–(h)). The hybrids with Cu2−xS polyhedron structures experienced almost the same formation process as shown in Fig. 2(a)–(d). Since the amount of added Cu and S precursors remained the same at the beginning and only the Au seeds were varied, in the case of the formation of Shape I there was a relatively small quantity of Au seeds which directed the nucleation process of Cu2−xS. This means only a small amount of the Cu precursor was consumed in the nucleation stage and more than four times the Cu precursor was able to take part in the growth of the Cu2−xS NCs, so the particles formed in this case are much bigger compared to Shape II. In addition, the concentration of the Cu precursor in the system has a great influence on the morphology of the Cu2−xS NCs. Therefore, varying the initial amount of the Au seeds could actually make a different Cu precursor amount/concentration for further Cu2−xS growth leading to Au-Cu2−xS NCs forming with different sizes and morphologies in the two cases.
The growth of Cu2−xS NCs upon the Au NCs endows Au-Cu2−xS hybrids with distinct optical properties. In Fig. 3, the UV-vis spectrum of the as-prepared Au NCs dispersed in chloroform shows a typical absorption band centered at 523 nm, which is assigned to LSPR. This plasmonic peak becomes broader and red-shifted by 56 and 46 nm relative to the pure Au NCs to 579 and 569 nm for the hybrid Au-Cu2−xS NCs of Shape I and II, respectively. Such a redshift of the plasmonic absorption peak can be induced by the high refractive index of the Cu2−xS surrounding the Au seeds since the same solvent medium of chloroform was used. Considering the shape, size, cation vacancy density, and composition of both Cu2−xS structures are different, it is difficult to single out what the determining factor is for the red-shifted absorption of these two kinds of hybrid nanostructure. In particular, the coupled LSPR between the Au and Cu2−xS makes the wavelength region of the Au-Cu2−xS hybrids broader which coincides with the absorption range of the polymer used in PSCs. As a result, the absorption capability of the active layer of the BHJ and further the photocurrent of the device doped with Au-Cu2−xS NCs could be expected to improve.
To evaluate the effect of Au-Cu2−xS NCs on improving the performance of PSCs, devices with and without Au-Cu2−xS NCs (Shape I was chosen as the representative) were fabricated in a typical configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/LiF (0.6 nm)/Al (100 nm). Here the active layer consisted of polymer 1 (P1) a donor material previously developed by our group, and (6,6)-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) as the acceptor material. The molecular structure of P1 and the device architecture are presented in the ESI. Due to the hydrophobicity of Au-Cu2−xS NCs, they were doped in the active layer directly (for details refer to the ESI). Device performance was tested and the data are summarized in Fig. 4 and Table 1.
Polymer
NCs concentration

V
oc [V]

J
sc [mA cm−2]
FF
PCEmax (ave) [%]

a At least four devices were tested and the average values were determined.

P1
0
0.92
6.23
0.60
3.45 (3.34)
P1
0.50 mg mL−1
0.78
6.22
0.56
2.71 (2.57)
P1
0.10 mg mL−1
0.87
6.33
0.54
3.00(2.82)
P1
0.05 mg mL−1
0.90
8.33
0.65
4.83(4.79)
P1
0.01 mg mL−1
0.91
8.05
0.67
4.93(4.67)
The average PCE of the plain devices is 3.45% with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.92 V, a Jsc of 6.23 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.60. For devices embedded with 0.01 mg mL−1 Au-Cu2−xS, a constant Voc value of 0.91, an increased Jsc value of 8.05 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.67 are seen, leading to a PCE of up to 4.93% with a 42.9% enhancement. The PCE enhancement mainly results from a marked improvement in the Jsc and FF. In addition, by doping 0.05 mg mL−1 Au-Cu2−xS NCs into the active layer, the devices exhibit the best Jsc value of 8.33 mA cm−2. Fig. 4(a) and (b) depicts the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the devices with different amounts of Au-Cu2−xS NCs. To further explain the increase in the Jsc value, external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves of all of the devices were measured, as illustrated in Fig. 4(c) and (d). The optimized devices with dopants show considerable and consistent enhancements in the entire wavelength range compared to the control device, which is consistent with the Jsc. On the other hand, the Rs for the 0.01 mg mL−1 Au-Cu2−xS NC doped device decreases from 9.58 to 5.93 Ω cm2 which contributes to the increase in the FF. The surface roughness of the active layer was also measured by atomic force microscopy (AFM) to study the morphological properties of the devices (ESI). A negligible difference in the surface roughness is seen between the plain film and the Au-Cu2−xS NC doped films, which indicates that the Au-Cu2−xS NCs do not have an effect on the morphologies. Further studies on the mechanism behind the enhancement are ongoing.

In summary, two kinds of Au-Cu2−xS Janus nanostructure with polyhedron and badminton tail-shaped Cu2−xS were prepared. The ratio of Au:Cu was found to be critical for both the successful coupling of Cu2−xS with the Au NCs, and for controlling the Cu2−xS shape. Under the optimal conditions the controllable processes of heterogeneous nucleation and growth of Cu2−xS were achieved leading to the successful formation of Au-Cu2−xS heterostructures. Doping the active layer with Au-Cu2−xS NCs could greatly enhance the performance of PSCs, leading to a significant increase in the PCE from 3.45% to 4.95%. The contribution is mainly from the improvement in the Jsc value and the FF. These results indicate that these Janus nanostructured Au-Cu2−xS are promising additives for improving the photovoltaic performance of PSCs. Furthermore, the realization of Cu2−xS morphology control in the hybrid Janus nanostructure offers an opportunity/platform to advance fundamental research on inter-coupling of semiconductors and metals in a unit, for example studying the shape effect on the overall properties of hybrids.


The authors declare no competing financial interests.


The authors are thankful for the financial support from the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (2152017), NSF of China (51403021, 21574013), the Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Teams in University. The Program for the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities is gratefully acknowledged.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details of the experimental section and characterization of Au-Cu2−xS NCs and PSCs. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nr03928c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018