 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA04239A
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19288-19293


Xin
Xu
,

Huiyin
Zhang
,

Jiangjian
Shi
,

Juan
Dong
,

Yanhong
Luo
,

Dongmei
Li
 and 

Qingbo
Meng
*

Key Laboratory for Renewable Energy (CAS), Beijing Key Laboratory for New Energy Materials and Devices, Beijing National Laboratory for Condense Matter Physics, Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: qbmeng@iphy.ac.cn; Tel: +86-10-8264 9242

Received
11th June 2015
, Accepted 25th August 2015
First published on 27th August 2015
A TiO2/ZnO electron transport bilayer, which combines the advantages of high electron extraction and low interfacial recombination together, has been designed for planar perovskite solar cells. With this bilayer, the front surface recombination in the cell is significantly suppressed, and a high efficiency exceeding 17% has been achieved. These results suggest a promising and simple approach to further design photovoltaic devices from the aspect of charge transport and recombination.

Perovskite organic lead halide compounds have attracted more and more attention as light absorbers for thin-film solar cells, due to their high light absorption, long carrier diffusion length and low-cost fabrication technologies. Numerous studies have been reported to improve the device performance in a short period of time, and the highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 20.1% was certified. For perovskite solar cells, different device structures including mesoscopic, planar, inverted and single-heterojunction have demonstrated to be promising for high efficiency. No matter what kind of device structures, high-quality perovskite absorbers and excellent interface properties are always crucial to the cell performance, typically to efficient charge carrier generation, collection and suppression of the recombination in perovskite solar cells. As for planar structure devices, the electron transport layer (ETL) plays a dramatic role in charge separation and transport, eliminating the electrical shunts between the transparent electrode/perovskite and transparent electrode/hole transport material (HTM) interfaces. Therefore, a dense, pin-hole free and well electrically conductive electron transport layer is highly demanded for the fabrication of planar perovskite solar cells with good performance.

ZnO, with many merits such as good transparency in the visible spectrum, high electron mobility and various nanostructures, is supposed to be an ideal choice as the ETL for this cell. Some methods have been developed to prepare compact ZnO layers, such as deposition from nanoparticle suspension, atomic layer deposition (ALD) and magnetron sputtering (MS) methods, yielding a relative high performance. However, these processes are relatively complicated, such as well dispersed nanoparticles are needed or expensive ALD or MS equipment is required, which may be disadvantageous for widespread application. In fact, spin coating of ZnO precursor sol–gel solution is a simple, low-cost and fast way to synthesize ETLs. However, this sol–gel ZnO layer still suffers from some inadequacies, for example, thermal treatment will introduce cracks. These cracks may lead to the direct contact between the perovskite absorber and electrode, reducing the blocking effect of the ETL. Moreover, serious charge recombination and energy level offset usually occur at the ZnO/perovskite interface, limiting further improvement in the cell performance. On the other hand, TiO2, as a widely used ETL in planar perovskite solar cells, was suggested to exhibit a good blocking effect for high-efficiency devices. However, electron collection and transport may be less effective in TiO2, leading to great hysteresis which is mentioned in other research studies. Thus, new investigations on a better performing electron transport layer from this facile fabrication method are still needed to enhance the power-conversion of planar perovskite solar cells.
In this work, we developed a TiO2/ZnO bilayer by a sol–gel method as the electron transport layer for planar perovskite solar cells. This kind of bilayer can produce a more compact interfacial layer, which will avoid the direct contact between the SnO2:F (FTO) electrode and perovskite absorber. The X-ray photoelectron spectra results reveal that the energy level structure of the FTO/TiO2/ZnO/perovskite absorber helps to transport the photo-induced carriers, avoiding charge accumulation to reduce recombination. Current–voltage, transient photovoltage and impedance spectra results demonstrate that the charge recombination in the cell is significantly suppressed. Finally, the cell efficiency is promoted from 13.2% to 17.2%, indicating a solid improvement in cell performance with this interfacial bilayer.

The morphology of the ETLs composed of the TiO2 or ZnO single layer and TiO2/ZnO bilayer, respectively, is shown in Fig. 1. As seen in Fig. 1(a), the morphology of FTO polycrystalline can still be distinguished after being covered with a thin TiO2 layer, which implies that the TiO2 layer is thin enough. However, this TiO2 layer shows an amorphous-like morphology and poor conductivity, in agreement with the previous work. In contrast, the ZnO layer on the FTO substrate deposited by the sol–gel method with hydrolysis of the precursor solution shows a clearer feature of aggregated nanoparticles and a better conductivity, as in Fig. 1(b). On the other hand, these nanoparticles are supposed to give a high interfacial area between ZnO and the perovskite absorber for charge extraction, and the high conductivity is beneficial for electron transport. However, some large pin holes can be clearly seen between the aggregations, which will lead to the direct contact between the perovskite absorber and the FTO electrode, causing serious recombination. For the TiO2/ZnO compact bilayer, no FTO substrate is directly observed, and meanwhile less pin holes on the surface are found, as shown in Fig. 1(c). The XRD pattern of different ETLs is given in Fig. S1, ESI. Obviously, this compact ZnO layer with a thin TiO2 layer underneath is expected to avoid the direct contact between the perovskite absorber and the FTO electrode. In addition, the surface of the TiO2/ZnO compact bilayer is smooth with reduced pin-holes in some scale. This was confirmed by the AFM measurement results that the TiO2/ZnO bilayer films exhibited lower surface roughness (RMS = 8.2 nm, Fig. 1(e)) than the ZnO films (RMS = 12.5 nm, Fig. 1(d)).

Moreover, XPS measurement results reveal that the valence band maximum and conduction band minimum of ZnO are a little higher than those of TiO2 (ΔEV = 0.19 eV), thus suggesting that the TiO2/ZnO bilayer has a type-II energy band structure, which is in agreement with Fig. 1(f). More details could be seen in the ESI (Fig. S2). This energy band structure could help electron transportation at the TiO2/ZnO interface, and suppress charge accumulation in the ZnO layer and the recombination at the ZnO/perovskite absorber interface. The combined TiO2–ZnO system was also reported in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) previously. A. Agrios et al. used ZnO/TiO2 nanocomposite films to increase the surface area and improve electron transport for high efficiency DSSCs. In the meantime, this composite may suffer from an energy barrier when the TiO2 is on the top of the ZnO, which may limit the electron transfer. In contrast, when the TiO2 is under the ZnO layer, the generated electrons can be easily injected due to the band alignment, which also agrees with other research studies.
With this ETL, the planar perovskite solar cells with a structure as shown in Fig. 2(a) are fabricated. The TiO2/ZnO electron transport bilayer is covered on the FTO substrate. A uniform and dense perovskite absorber with a thickness of about 300 nm is deposited on the ETL, and is smoothly covered with a 300 nm-thick spiro-OMeTAD as the hole transport layer (HTL). Then the Au back electrode with a thickness of about 80 nm is finally evaporated contacting with the HTL, benefiting interfacial charge transport. The perovskite layer was made by a fast crystallization–deposition method which was first reported by Xiao et al. A very smooth surface and high quality crystals are obtained for the perovskite layer prepared by this method (Fig. 2(c)). Free charge carriers generated in the perovskite absorber layer under illumination can be extracted by the electron selective contact and hole-transporting material, based on the energy levels of each device component (Fig. 2(b)).
Since the thickness of the ETL can play an important role in planar perovskite solar cells, we fabricated devices with different thickness ZnO, TiO2/ZnO ETLs to find the final optimized component. For the devices only using ZnO as the ETL, it can be seen that (Table S1, ESI) when the ZnO is 20 nm, the devices exhibit poor performances with low open-circuit voltages and fill factors. The power-conversion efficiency began to increase with increase of ETL thickness. But when an 80 nm-thick ETL is used, the efficiency started to decrease again due to the reduced fill factors. After optimization, we found the 50 nm-thick ZnO layer ETL device performed the best. It also can be concluded that merely increasing the ETL thickness cannot further improve the performance of planar perovskite solar cells. Therefore, more efficient modification should be developed. When a thin layer of TiO2 is added under the ZnO, the performance of devices is dramatically improved. Different thicknesses were also optimized (Table S2, ESI) and the best performance can be achieved with TiO2/ZnO around 10 nm/50 nm. We will start the following discussion based on the optimal results.

Fig. 2(d) presents the current–voltage (I–V) results of the cells with different ETLs. We can see that the TiO2/ZnO device exhibits good I–V performances, with a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 20.12 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1084.7 mV, fill factor (FF) of 0.753 and power-conversion efficiency (PCE) of 16.44%. The bare ZnO ETL device shows a relatively low performance, mainly due to the reduced VOC and fill factor. The significant differences in film morphology as discussed in Fig. 1 can be one of the origins. In addition, the I–V curve of the TiO2/ZnO bilayer based cell can be well described with a single diode model, agreeing with the semiconductor theory. In contrast, a serious charge recombination is estimated from the I–V curve of the ZnO based cell. This I–V curve cannot be described by a single diode model, but can be well fitted with a parallel-connected double diode model (Fig. S3). This result indicates that part of the CH3NH3PbI3 absorber may come into contact directly with the FTO electrode, forming a shunt diode of serious recombination. Thus, it can be concluded that the shunt recombination at the FTO/CH3NH3PbI3 absorber interface has been significantly suppressed with the additional TiO2 layer as expected. Moreover, we presented a device with only a spin-coated TiO2 ETL for comparison. A low short-circuit current density (JSC) of 14.5 mA cm−2 is achieved probably due to the poor charge extraction at the TiO2/perovskite absorber interface. A strange bending between 0 and 600 mV exists in the I–V curve with serious hysteresis (forward PCE of 2.1% and backward of 10.2%, Fig. S4, ESI), implying charge accumulation at interfaces and slow charge extraction. Some research studies suggested that compact TiO2 used in planar perovskite solar cells can exhibit great hysteresis and the electron collection at the TiO2/perovskite interface may be less efficient. These results indicate that electron extraction at the ZnO/CH3NH3PbI3 interface is more effective than that at the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 interface. Furthermore, the comparison of performance between the cells with ZnO and TiO2/ZnO compact layers is statistically analyzed with the histograms, as shown in Fig. 3. It is unambiguous that the cell performance can be significantly enhanced with the design of the compact bilayer.
With this design and optimizations in cell fabrication, high efficiency planar perovskite solar cells with ZnO/CH3NH3PbI3 acting as the electron extraction interface are obtained. The I–V results of the best performed cell are shown in Fig. 4(a). A PCE of 16.1% with JSC of 20.8 mA cm−2, VOC of 1084 mV and FF of 0.714 (forward: 15.0%, backward: 17.2%) is achieved according to the average I–V curve. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of this cell is also shown in Fig. 4(b), integration of which yields a JSC of 20.05 mA cm−2, agreeing well with the I–V results. Further perspective of I–V curves of TiO2/ZnO ETL perovskite solar cells under different scan rates is given in Fig. S5. The stabilities of devices based on TiO2, ZnO and TiO2/ZnO are also compared in Fig. S6. All the devices presented a continuous decline of PCEs. This might be due to the instability of spiro-OMeTAD as the hole transport material. After two weeks, the TiO2/ZnO devices still exhibit better performance than the ZnO or TiO2 ones. However, compared to TiO2 ETL devices, the ZnO based solar cells presented less stability probably caused by chemical reactions at the ZnO interface. Therefore, it still needs more research to help to give better understanding and to enhance the stability of ZnO ETL perovskite solar cells.
To further clarify the origins of this enhancement with the TiO2/ZnO bilayer compared to the ZnO single compact layer, the dark I–V curves are analyzed to investigate the charge recombination properties of the cells. As the dark I–V curves shown in Fig. 5(a), both of the devices keep nearly zero before 500 mV. However, the ZnO ETL devices exhibit a rapid drop after 600 mV, whereas the devices with the TiO2 interlayer begin to fall off at around 900 mV. Further calculations imply that the equivalent saturated current density of the ZnO single layer based cell (6.8 × 10−7 mA cm−2) is hundred times larger than that of the TiO2/ZnO bilayer based cell (7.6 × 10−9 mA cm−2). The improved dark current and reduced reverse saturated current density of the TiO2/ZnO bilayer devices indicate that the TiO2/ZnO bilayer has a better blocking effect resulting in a reduced recombination process, which is effective to improve the fill factor and VOC, and better performances of planar perovskite solar cells.
Transient photovoltage spectroscopy (TPV) methods are proposed to study the transport and recombination process of charge carriers in the devices. The TPV results shown in Fig. 5(b) indicate that the charge recombination velocity of the TiO2/ZnO based cell is much slower than that of the ZnO based cell. It can also be seen that the charge transport velocity of the cell is somewhat slowed due to the additional TiO2 layer, as shown by the transient photocurrent results in the inset of Fig. 5(b).
The differences in the charge recombination of these cells are further confirmed by the impedance spectra results. In the Nyquist plots of both the ZnO and TiO2/ZnO based cells, semicircles can be observed in the intermediate frequency region, as shown in the inset of Fig. 5(c), which are related to the charge transfer at the FTO/compact/perovskite/HTL interface. The charge transfer resistance (RCT) of the cell can be derived by fitting the Nyquist plots with a resistance-constant phase element model (R-CPE). As can be seen in Fig. 5(c), the RCT of the TiO2/ZnO based cell is obviously larger than that of the ZnO based cell, agreeing well with other results discussed above. Therefore, it is concluded that the charge recombination in planar perovskite solar cells has been significantly suppressed with the design of a TiO2/ZnO electron transport bilayer.
For a better understanding of the origins discussed above, the schematic diagrams of charge transport and recombination in the cell are depicted in Fig. 6. As large pin holes exist in the ZnO compact layer, the perovskite absorber can infiltrate into these holes and contact directly with the FTO electrode, as shown in Fig. 6(a). In this Schottky contact, the free electron is easy to re-inject into the valence band of the perovskite absorber due to a low interfacial energy barrier, causing serious front surface recombination. Moreover, carrier depletion can exist in the ZnO layer due to the mismatch in the work functions between FTO and ZnO, which will affect the smooth electron transport in the ZnO layer, causing charge accumulation and recombination at the ZnO/perovskite absorber interface. On the other hand, when the thin TiO2 layer is introduced, the direct contact between FTO and the perovskite absorber can be effectively eliminated. Moreover, the band offset at the TiO2/ZnO interface can further help electron injection and transfer in the ETLs, and lower the recombination at the ZnO/perovskite interface as well. Thus, the overall charge recombination in the cell is suppressed, and the cell performance is significantly enhanced.

PbI2 was purchased from Aldrich-Sigma (99.8%), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) and chlorobenzene were from Alfar Aesar. Isopropanol was purchased from J&K Chemicals. Zinc acetate dihydrate (AR, 99.0%), hydroiodic acid (AR, 45 wt% in water) and methylamine (AR, 27% in methanol) were from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co. Ltd. CH3NH3I was synthesized according to the literature. Spiro-OMeTAD was from Luminescence Technology Corp., Taiwan. All the chemicals were directly used without further purification.


Laser-patterned FTO glass (Pilkington, thickness of 2.2 mm and sheet resistance of 15 Ω per sq) was sequentially cleaned with mild detergent, distilled water and ethanol in an ultrasonic bath. After drying with an air stream, they were treated with ultraviolet ozone (UVO) for 15 minutes to remove organic materials. For the ZnO ETL, a 50 nm-thick ZnO layer was spin coated onto the FTO substrate with Zn(Ac)2 solution in methanol (0.25 M, 3000 rpm, 20 s), followed by thermal treatment at 350 °C for 30 minutes. For the TiO2/ZnO ETL, a TiO2 thin layer (10 nm) was first spin coated (4000 rpm) onto the FTO substrate with titanium(IV) isopropoxide solution in ethanol (0.14 M) as the precursor and with 500 °C thermal treatment for 30 min before depositing the ZnO layer. The CH3NH3PbI3 layer was deposited by a fast deposition–crystallization procedure according to the literature. 30 μl perovskite precursor solution (equimolar PbI2 and CH3NH3I dissolved in DMF, 45 wt%) was first dropped onto the prepared ETL film. After the substrate was spun at 5000 rpm for six seconds, anhydrous chlorobenzene (100 μl) was poured on the center of the substrate to induce quick crystallization of the perovskite. The obtained films were dried on a hot plate at 90 °C for 10 minutes. After that, a 300 nm-thickness hole transport layer composed of spiro-OMeTAD in chlorobenzene was spin coated (2000 rpm) on the perovskite films. The preparation of perovskite films and HTLs was carried out in a N2-filled glove box. Finally, an 80 nm-thick gold back electrode was deposited onto the above prepared films by thermal evaporation (Kurt J. Lesker).


The thickness of the films was measured by using a surface profiler (KLA-Tencor). The morphologies of the films were obtained by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi S4800) at 10 kV acceleration voltage. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) height images were obtained with a Bruker Multimode 8 AFM using ScanAsyst mode. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed on a Thermo Scientific ESCALab 250Xi using 200 W monochromated Al Kα radiation. The 500 μm X-ray spot was used for XPS analysis. The base pressure in the analysis chamber was about 3 × 10−10 mbar. Typically the hydrocarbon C1s line at 284.8 eV from adventitious carbon is used for energy referencing. For the current–voltage (I–V) measurements, the cells were illuminated under AM 1.5 simulated sunlight (100 mW cm−2) from Oriel Solar Simulator 91192. I–V curves were recorded by using a digital source meter (Keithley model 2602). The solar cells were masked with a black aperture to define the active area of 0.1 cm2. The I–V scan rate was 100 mV s−1 with a delay time of 100 ms at each point. External quantum efficiency (EQE) of the cells was measured with a lab-made IPCE setup. Transient photovoltage and current were recorded using a sub-nanosecond resolved digital oscilloscope (Tektronix DPO 7104) with input impedances of 1 MΩ and 50 Ω, respectively, after the cell was excited using a pulsed double frequency Nd:YAG laser (Brio, 20 Hz, 4 ns) at 532 nm with an ultralow light intensity. Impedance spectra measurements were performed with an IM6ex electrochemical workstation (Zahner) under 0.2 sun illumination at positive bias voltages ranging from 0.4 to 0.9 V in the range of 1 M to 0.5 Hz with a perturbation amplitude of 10 mV.


A TiO2/ZnO electron transport bilayer, which combines the advantages of high electron extraction and low interfacial recombination together, has been applied for planar perovskite solar cells. This bilayer together with the perovskite absorber forms a type-II energy band structure, benefiting electron transport and avoiding charge accumulation. Moreover, this kind of ETL can effectively eliminate the direct contact between the FTO electrode and the perovskite absorber. Due to these advantages, the front surface recombination in the cell is significantly suppressed, and a high efficiency exceeding 17% has been achieved. This modified structure of the electron transport layer is proved to be an effective approach to further improve the performance of perovskite solar cells.


The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from the MOST (973 projects, No. 2012CB932903 and 2012CB932904), NSFC (No. 51402348, 11474333, 91433205, 51421002, 91233202 and 21173260) and the Knowledge Innovation Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. The authors would also thank Dr Xiang Hao from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences for the help in the GIXRD measurement.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta04239a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015