 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA04789A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18889-18897


Chenyi
Yang
,

Jianqi
Zhang
,

Ningning
Liang
,

Huifeng
Yao
,

Zhixiang
Wei
,

Chang
He
,

Xiaotao
Yuan
* and 

Jianhui
Hou
*

School of Chemistry and Biology Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China. E-mail: yuanxt@ustb.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory of Polymer Physics and Chemistry, Institute of Chemistry Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences CAS Research/Education Center for Excellence in Molecular Sciences (BNLMS), Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: hjhzlz@iccas.ac.cn

CAS Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication, CAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100049, China

Received
8th May 2019
, Accepted 11th July 2019
First published on 12th July 2019
Minimizing the energy-level offset between a donor and acceptor in order to reduce energy loss (Eloss) is a hot topic in the field of organic solar cells (OSCs). However, for non-fullerene OSCs, the discussion concerning the relationship between energy-level offset and device performance has not yet reached a general conclusion due to their complex molecular structure and wide variety of photoactive materials. This study consists of a systematic investigation of this issue based on a typical polymer donor PBDB-TF and a series of A–D–A-type aromatic hybrid fused-ring electron acceptors with various energy levels. We investigate the charge separation of all devices and build the relationship between Eloss, exciton dissociation efficiency (Pdiss) and energy-level offset. We find that in large ΔLUMO cases, Eloss and Pdiss are positively correlated with ΔHOMO. Larger ΔHOMO could provide sufficient driving force for more efficient exciton dissociation, and thus, higher power conversion efficiency (PCE) in the corresponding non-fullerene OSCs. When ΔHOMO is below a particular threshold, the exciton dissociation process could be hindered severely, thereby deteriorating device performance. Therefore, sufficient driving force is still necessary for efficient exciton dissociation in PBDB-TF-based non-fullerene OSCs in order to achieve outstanding photovoltaic performance. The particular threshold for efficient exciton dissociation needs to be determined in future research.

Organic solar cells (OSCs) have long been a hot research topic within the field of renewable energy due to their light weight, flexibility, low production cost, and potential in the printing of large-area solar panels. In recent years, the rapid development of non-fullerene small molecular acceptors (NFSMAs) has greatly promoted the research progress of high-performance OSCs, and the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of single-junction cells has now exceeded 15%. These results, however, still lag far behind those of their inorganic counterparts. One of the most important factors limiting the PCE of OSCs is their large energy loss (Eloss), which is mainly ascribed to the relatively large non-radiative recombination loss caused by the extremely low electroluminescence quantum efficiency of organic photovoltaic materials, as well as the radiative recombination loss caused by the significant energy-level offset between the donor and acceptor (D/A).

It is generally recognized that the energy-level offset between D/A should be greater than 0.30 eV in order to provide sufficient driving force for efficient exciton dissociation. This has been systematically studied in fullerene-based OSCs. However, with the rapid progress of NFSMAs, many non-fullerene OSCs have been found that can maintain efficient exciton dissociation with extremely small energy-level offsets, and their photovoltaic performance has been effectively improved due to the reduced Eloss. Hence, reducing the energy-level offsets, and therefore the Eloss, has been a research focus in recent years. However, for most systems, minor energy-level offsets will lead to decreased exciton dissociation efficiency (Pdiss), which negatively impacts the improvement of device performance. In addition, the calculation methods of Eloss reported in current studies are not consistent, indicating the varying interpretations of Eloss. In general, discussion concerning the effects of energy-level offset between D/A on the photovoltaic performance of non-fullerene OSCs has yet to reach a consistent conclusion.
Compared with fullerene acceptors, chemical modification is easier to implement in NFSMAs, resulting in abundant molecular structures as well as diverse photoelectric properties. These are the main factors affecting the photovoltaic performance of non-fullerene OSCs. To draw a reliable conclusion from the study of the correlation between energy-level offset and photovoltaic performance of non-fullerene OSCs, the interference of these factors on research results must be eliminated. Thus, choosing a suitable material system is crucial. Since the active layer morphologies of non-fullerene OSCs are mainly determined by polymer donors, we should select for analysis a particular donor to match a series of acceptors with gradient energy levels designed to minimize the influence of the active layer morphology on research results as much as possible.
Polymer PBDB-TF is the fluorinated product of PBDB-T reported previously by our research group. Recently, it has attracted much attention due to its excellent photovoltaic performance in non-fullerene OSCs. Research has demonstrated that active layers based on PBDB-TF and ITIC or its derivatives can be processed using simple methods with similar processing conditions and exhibit similar surface morphologies. Therefore, the influence of device processing method and active layer morphology on photovoltaic results could essentially be eliminated. Meanwhile, ITIC and its derivatives are small molecular acceptors based on indaceno [1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene (IDT), and their energy levels are mainly tuned via the chemical modification of end-groups. Using similar molecular structures can greatly reduce the influence of material properties on device performance. In summary, PBDB-TF matched with ITIC and its derivatives should well satisfy the material system requirements for this investigation. We fabricated OSCs by blending PBDB-TF with these acceptors and investigated the charge separation process in these devices. We then examined and analyzed the effects of energy-level offset between D/A on Eloss and Pdiss in detail and were ultimately able to draw a conclusion.

The molecular structures of the donor and acceptors used in this work are displayed in Fig. 1. The molecular energy levels of the materials were measured by cyclic voltammetry (CV), and the CV curves and molecular energy-level diagrams are depicted in Fig. S1 and 2a, respectively. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) levels and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels were calculated from the onset of oxidation and reduction potentials, respectively. As shown in Fig. 2a, both HOMO and LUMO levels of the acceptors decreased with the introduction of strong electron-withdrawing groups on the end-groups. At the same time, the energy-level offset between PBDB-TF and acceptor, that is, ΔHOMO (HOMOdonor − HOMOacceptor) and ΔLUMO (LUMOdonor − LUMOacceptor), increased gradually. The corresponding values are listed in Table 1.

Acceptors

V
OC [V]

J
SC [mA cm−2]
FF
PCE [%]

J
SC
 [mA cm−2]
ΔLUMO [eV]
ΔHOMO [eV]

E
loss [eV]

a All average values with standard deviations were calculated from 10 devices.
b Calculated JSC from the EQE spectra shown in Fig. 4b.

Group 1
IT-2F
0.93
19.35
0.76
13.68 (13.34 ± 0.17)
18.71
0.39
0.21
0.69
IT-2Cl
0.92
19.80
0.75
13.74 (13.65 ± 0.12)
19.16
0.42
0.22
0.68
IT-4F
0.87
20.42
0.75
13.35 (13.20 ± 0.18)
19.92
0.43
0.24
0.74
IT-4Cl
0.79
22.12
0.74
12.87 (12.65 ± 0.24)
21.81
0.48
0.25
0.76
Group 2
ITCC
1.07
14.20
0.62
9.51 (9.41 ± 0.10)
13.69
0.22
0.15
0.68
IT-M
1.01
16.13
0.63
10.42 (10.30 ± 0.11)
15.91
0.30
0.16
0.66
ITIC
1.00
16.42
0.65
10.75 (10.63 ± 0.15)
16.04
0.33
0.18
0.65
Group 3
IEICO
0.96
0.64
0.41
0.25 (0.23 ± 0.02)
0.50
0.30
−0.10
0.48
IEICO-4F
0.84
6.34
0.51
2.76 (2.66 ± 0.14)
5.62
0.44
−0.02
0.51
IEICO-4Cl
0.82
4.44
0.45
1.64 (1.60 ± 0.07)
4.18
0.48
0.01
0.50
In addition, the electron-withdrawing groups can enhance the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) effect, leading to narrower band gaps and more red-shifted ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra of the acceptors (Fig. 2b). The absorption spectra of PBDB-TF-based blend films were also measured, as shown in Fig. S2. Since the absorption spectra of ITCC, ITM, ITIC, IT-2F, IT-2Cl, IT-4F, and IT-4Cl neat films partially overlap that of PBDB-TF, their blend films exhibited higher extinction coefficients in the 550–700 nm wavelength range. As for IEICO, IEICO-4F, and IEICO-4Cl, their absorption spectra are red-shifted significantly for narrow band gaps. Hence, the blend films prepared by blending them with PBDB-TF exhibited a wider light absorption range.

Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was used to observe the surface morphologies of the blend films. As displayed in Fig. 3, the AFM height images reveal that the root-mean-square surface roughness values of these films were similar (Rq = 2–4 nm). In addition, similar fibril-shape polymer network structures and favorable nanoscale phase separations can be observed in the AFM phase images, which is consistent with the results reported in previous research. This is mainly because these acceptors have similar chemical structures, which display similar aggregation behaviors during the formation of blend films under the same processing conditions, resulting in similar surface morphologies. Besides, the crystalline properties of these blend films were further investigated by grazing incident wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS). As shown in Fig. S3, all the films exhibited preferential face-on orientation with the (010) diffraction peaks at 1.70–1.75 Å−1 (corresponding to the π–π stacking distance of 3.6–3.7 Å) in the out-of-plane direction, indicating the similar crystallinity and molecular packing. Therefore, the influence of active layer morphology on device performance can be ignored in the following discussion.


We fabricated the PBDB-TF-based non-fullerene OSCs with a conventional device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/PFN-Br/Al. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the devices with the best performance are shown in Fig. 4a, and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. For the sake of discussion, these devices were divided into three groups based on their photovoltaic performance. The devices prepared by blending IT-2F, IT-2Cl, IT-4F, and IT-4Cl with PBDB-TF were regarded as group 1. They possessed appropriate energy-level offsets between PBDB-TF and acceptors (ΔLUMO ranging from 0.39 to 0.48 eV, ΔHOMO values of 0.21–0.25 eV), and exhibited high short-circuit current (JSC) (∼20 mA cm−2), fill factor (FF) (∼0.75), and PCE (∼13%). These results indicate that the charge generation in these devices was efficient and the JSC differences mainly stemmed from the different absorption spectra. The device based on PBDB-TF:IT-4F yielded a PCE of 13.35%, with an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.87 V, a JSC of 20.42 mA cm−2, and an FF of 0.75, findings that agree with those reported in previous studies. The devices using ITCC, IT-M, and ITIC as acceptors constituted group 2. Compared with the first group, the energy-level offsets of the devices in group 2 were lower. ΔLUMO ranged from 0.22–0.33 eV and ΔHOMO varied from 0.15–0.18 eV. Although the corresponding devices exhibited high VOC (≥1 V), their JSC and FF were less—lower than their reported PBDB-T-based counterparts—indicating the relatively severe charge recombination in these PBDB-TF-based devices. Group 3 included the devices based on the acceptors IEICO, IEICO-4F, and IEICO-4Cl. The ΔLUMO values of these devices were relatively large (0.29–0.48 eV), while the ΔHOMO was almost 0 eV. Although the acceptors in group 3 possessed wide absorption spectra, all of the corresponding devices displayed poor JSC and FF values, especially the PBDB-TF:IEICO-based device, which only had a JSC of 0.64 mA cm−2, an FF of 0.41, and a PCE of 0.25%. These results imply that the charge recombination in these devices was serious. Fig. 4b presents the external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves of these PBDB-TF-based OSCs. As seen in the figure, the devices in group 1 exhibited strong photoresponses, with the EQE values actually exceeding 80% in the long wavelength range. The devices in group 2 possessed narrower response ranges, and their maximum EQE values decreased to about 70%. Although the devices in group 3 displayed a broad response range from 300 to 1000 nm, their EQE values were less than 20%. The integral current densities of all the devices calculated from the EQE curves are listed in Table 1 and agree well with the JSC values obtained from the J–V measurements.

The Eloss of the devices can be calculated using Egap − eVOC, where Egap is the optical bandgap of the donor or the acceptor (whichever is smaller). Its determination method plays a critical role in the calculation of Eloss. It has been commonly reported in previous studies that the Egap is extracted by either the onset of the absorption spectrum, the EQE spectrum, or the intersection between the normalized absorption and emission spectra of the organic material in the solid film. Among these, determining the Egap at the intersection of the absorption and emission spectra is physically motivated and well-reproducible. Therefore, we employed this method to determine the Egap of each device (Fig. S4). The detailed values are listed in Table S1, and the calculated Eloss values are collected in Table 1. It was discovered that the Eloss values of the devices in groups 1 and 2 ranged from 0.65 to 0.76 eV, while those of the devices in group 3 were only ∼0.50 eV.

Photo-induced charge-carrier extraction in a linearly increasing voltage (photo-CELIV) measurements were conducted to investigate the carrier mobilities in the PBDB-TF-based non-fullerene OSCs.Fig. 5a shows the photo-CELIV transients of the devices, which were recorded by applying a rise speed of 200 V ms−1, a linearly increasing reverse bias pulse, and a delay time of 1 ms. The photo-CELIV mobilities for the charge carriers in each device are summarized in Table S1 and Fig. S5. It can be seen that these devices had similar carrier mobilities, suggesting that the charge transport characteristics of different acceptor materials should not be responsible for the significant differences in device performance. We can also infer from the mobility results that the variation of energy-level offset between PBDB-TF and the acceptor may alter the device performance by affecting the charge separation rather than the charge transport process in the device. In addition, the devices in group 1 exhibited higher charge-carrier densities (reflected by the integrated areas of the photo-CELIV curves), which is consistent with the JSC values.

The dependence of the photocurrent (Jph) on the effective voltage (Veff) was measured in order to estimate the charge generation and exciton dissociation characteristics of the devices. Jph is defined as the difference between light and dark current density. Veff is defined as V0 − V, where V0 is the voltage when Jph = 0 and V is the applied voltage. For OSCs, Jph increases sharply when Veff is low and then reaches saturation (Jsat) with the increase of Veff, which suggests that almost all the photogenerated excitons are dissociated into free carriers and collected by the electrodes with the help of large reverse bias. Thus, the exciton dissociation probability (Pdiss) can be estimated by the ratio of JSC/Jsat. As shown in Fig. 5b, the Pdiss values were all >90% for the devices in group 1, indicating effective exciton dissociation, charge transport, and charge collection in these devices. The Pdiss values ranged from 85% to 90% for the devices in group 2, and only 7%, 31%, and 20% for the devices using IEICO, IEICO-4F, and IEICO-4Cl as acceptors, respectively. It is noteworthy that the Jph of the devices in group 3 did not fully saturate even at a high Veff of >7 V. Therefore, their Pdiss values were in fact less than the values calculated above, suggesting that the exciton dissociation process in these devices is hindered severely, which accounts for the extremely low JSC and FF.
The photoluminescence (PL) of solid films can also reveal information on the photoinduced charge transfer in OSCs. Fig. 6 depicts the PL spectra of the neat and blend films of each system. As shown in Fig. 6a–d, the PL emission of the blends in group 1 could be quenched sufficiently when excited at the excitation wavelengths for either donor or acceptors, suggesting that the appropriate energy-level offset provides enough driving force for the effective charge transfer between donor and acceptor. Meanwhile, the PL emission of the blends in group 2 was quenched insufficiently (Fig. 6e–g), indicating that the decreased energy-level offset hampered the charge transfer. As for the blends in group 3 (Fig. 6h–j), the PL emission of PBDB-TF could be completely quenched by the acceptor, although the spectral shape and intensity of the emissions from the blend films under the excitation wavelengths for the acceptors resembled those of the neat acceptor films. This indicates that in the negligible ΔHOMO cases, most acceptor excitons decay to the ground state via radiative fluorescence instead of dissociating into spatially-separated charges.

From the above results, it is clear that the energy-level offset between PBDB-TF and acceptor (especially ΔHOMO in this case) plays a crucial role in the exciton dissociation process. In order to intuitively illustrate the effects of energy-level offset on the performance of these PBDB-TF-based OSC devices, we plotted the Eloss and Pdiss values of the devices versus ΔLUMO and ΔHOMO. These plots reveal that Eloss and Pdiss exhibited irregular distributions versus ΔLUMO (Fig. S6), but positive correlations with ΔHOMO (Fig. 7a and b). The results indicate that these two parameters have little correlation with ΔLUMO, and are primarily affected by ΔHOMO. This is because the ΔLUMO values of the devices in this case were relatively large (0.22–0.48 eV), and the driving force for exciton dissociation was mainly restricted by the distinct ΔHOMO. The large ΔHOMO is able to provide sufficient driving force for efficient exciton dissociation, resulting in high Pdiss and thus high JSC and FF, corresponding to the devices in group 1. The decrease of ΔHOMO can reduce the Eloss and improve the VOC of devices, but can also lead to insufficient driving force and lower Pdiss, which is not conducive to the improvement of device performance, corresponding to the devices in group 2. Excessively small ΔHOMO (∼0 eV) can seriously hinder the exciton dissociation process, leading to extremely low JSC and FF, corresponding to the devices in group 3.

It is noteworthy that Pdiss decreased slowly with decreasing ΔHOMO for large values of this parameter, but dropped sharply for small values (Fig. 7b). This indicates that there may be an inflection point, which would represent the threshold for effective exciton dissociation. These results demonstrate that in non-fullerene systems with large ΔLUMO, only when ΔHOMO is kept above the threshold, reducing it can improve the device performance. When ΔHOMO is too small to provide sufficient driving force, the exciton dissociation process can be hindered severely, which is detrimental to the photovoltaic performance of the device. Therefore, high-performance PBDB-TF-based non-fullerene OSCs still require sufficient driving force in order to promote the excitons to dissociate effectively at the D/A interface. It is not a sound strategy to improve device performance only by minimizing the energy-level offset.
We also plotted the VOC of each device versus the offset between the LUMO of acceptor and the HOMO of PBDB-TF (ΔEDA) in each corresponding device. The calculated ΔEDA values are listed in Table S1. As shown in Fig. 7c, VOC is almost directly proportional to ΔEDA, and a line with a slope of 1 can be obtained by linearly fitting the points in the graph, that is, it satisfies the formula:
This finding is consistent with earlier research results.

We investigated non-fullerene OSCs based on the polymer donor PBDB-TF and a series of NFSMAs (ITIC and its derivatives) having similar chemical structures but varying molecular energy levels, thereby demonstrating the relationship between energy-level offset and device performance. It was discovered that the variation of energy-level offset between D/A has no impact on the charge transport process and primarily affects the exciton dissociation process in non-fullerene OSCs. In cases with large ΔLUMO values, larger ΔHOMO can provide sufficient driving force, which contributes to higher Pdiss and PCE of the corresponding device. Although simply minimizing ΔHOMO can effectively reduce the Eloss and thus improve the VOC, the decreasing driving force will inevitably hinder the exciton dissociation process. Once ΔHOMO falls below a threshold, the Pdiss will drop sharply, which has a significantly negative impact on the photovoltaic performance of the device. As a result, for high-performance PBDB-TF-based non-fullerene OSCs, a certain energy-level offset between D/A is still needed to provide sufficient driving force for efficient exciton dissociation. In addition, as for the determination of the threshold for efficient exciton dissociation and its relationship with molecular structure, in-depth analysis and understanding are still required via theoretical calculation and device physics, affording researchers new challenges and development opportunities.

As mentioned in the introduction, some non-fullerene OSCs can still achieve efficient charge separation despite the negligible energy-level offset between donor and acceptor. Very recently, a study revealed that the large molecular electrostatic potential (ESP) between donor and acceptor may assist the charge separation. Therefore, for non-fullerene OSCs, the source and magnitude of the driving force should be investigated in more systems to draw a general conclusion.

PBDB-TF used in this work was synthesized according to the previous report. ITCC, IT-M, ITIC, IT-2F, IT-2Cl, IT-4F, IT-4Cl, IEICO, IEICO-4F, IEICO-4Cl and PFN-Br were commercially available from Solarmer Material Inc. The other materials and solvents were purchased from commercial sources and used as received.


The OSC devices in this work were fabricated in a conventional structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/BHJ/PFN-Br/Al. The ITO-coated glass substrates were pre-cleaned ultrasonically in deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol in sequence for 30 min. After the ultraviolet-ozone treatment for 20 min, about 15 nm thick of PEDOT:PSS was spin-coated on the ITO glass as the anode interlayer and annealed at 150 °C for 15 min. Then all PEDOT:PSS coated glass substrates were transferred to the nitrogen-filled glovebox. The donor and acceptor (1:1, w/w) were dissolved in chlorobenzene (o-xylene for IT-4Cl) with a concentration of 10 mg ml−1 (for polymer) and then stirred at 40 °C for 8 hours. 1,8-Diiodooctane (DIO) with a ratio of 0.5% vol to the host solvent was added to the blend solution 30 min before the spin-coating process. Subsequently, the solution was spin-coated on the PEDOT:PSS layer to form the active layer (∼100 nm thick), followed with thermal annealing at 100 °C for 10 min. The PFN-Br methanol solution (0.5 mg ml−1) was spin-coated on the active layer to give a cathode interlayer (∼5 nm thick). Finally, about 100 nm thick of Al was deposited onto the active layer under high vacuum, giving an effective cell area of 3.70 mm2.

For the UV-visible absorption spectroscopy and PL measurements of solid films, quartz is used as the substrate whose pretreatment is the same as that of ITO-coated glass. The thickness is about 40 nm for neat films, and 100 nm for blend ones. The preparation method of the blend films is the same as that of the active layers.

The UV-visible absorption spectroscopy measurements of solid films were conducted on a Hitachi UH4150 spectrophotometer. The electrochemical cyclic voltammetry was conducted on a CHI650D electrochemical workstation: using glassy-carbon as working electrode, platinum-wire as counter electrode, Ag/Ag+ electrode as the reference electrode, and 0.1 M tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (Bu4NPF6) acetonitrile solution as the electrolyte, to measure the onset of oxidation and reduction potentials of the materials. Ferrocene/ferrocenium (Fc/Fc+) was further measured as an internal standard with an absolute energy level of 4.8 eV below vacuum. The HOMO and LUMO levels of the organic semiconductor molecules can be calculated by the following equations:
HOMO = −(φox + 4.8) (eV)
LUMO = −(φred + 4.8) (eV)
The J–V measurement was performed via solar simulator (SS-F5-3A) along with AM 1.5G spectra whose intensity was calibrated by the certified standard silicon solar cell (SRC-2020, Enlitech) at 100 mW cm−2. The EQE was measured by solar cell spectral response measurement system QE-R3011 (Enli Technology Co., Ltd.). The atomic force microscopy (AFM) images were acquired on a Nanoscope V AFM (Bruker) by tapping mode. GIWAXS were conducted on a Xeuss SAXS/WAXS system with X-ray wavelength of 1.5418 Å. The film samples were irradiated at a fixed angle of 0.2°. The photo-CELIV measurements were performed by the all-in-one characterization platform Paios developed and commercialized by Fluxim AG, Switzerland. The PL spectra of the solid films were recorded on a FLS980 fluorescence spectrophotometer.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.


J. Hou would like to acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51673201, 91633301, 21835006) and Chinese Academy of Sciences (XDB12030200). C. He acknowledges the financial support of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21734008). Z. Wei acknowledges the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51961135103). This work was supported by Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (BNLMS-CXXM-201903).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta04789a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019