 DOI: 10.1039/C7NR05416E
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 18535-18545


Fan-Li
Meng
,

Jiao-Jiao
Wu
,

Er-Fei
Zhao
,

Yan-Zhen
Zheng
*,

Mei-Lan
Huang
,

Li-Ming
Dai
,

Xia
Tao
* and 

Jian-Feng
Chen


State Key Laboratory of Organic–Inorganic Composites, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, 15 Beisanhuan East Road, Beijing, 100029, P. R. China. E-mail: taoxia@yahoo.com; Fax: +86-10-6443-4784; Tel: +86-10-6445-3680

Research Center of the Ministry of Education for High Gravity Engineering & Technology, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China

School of Chemistry & Chemical Engineering, Queen's University Belfast, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH44106, UK

Department of Macromolecular Science and Engineering, Case School of Engineering, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA

Received
24th July 2017
, Accepted 4th November 2017
First published on 6th November 2017
Integration of the upconversion effect in perovskite solar cells (PSCs) is a facile approach towards extending the spectral absorption from the visible to the near infrared (NIR) range and reducing the non-absorption loss of solar photons. However, the big challenge for practical application of UCNCs in planar PSCs is the poor compatibility between UCNCs and the perovskite precursor. Herein, we have subtly overcome the tough compatibility issue using a ligand-exchange strategy. For the first time, β-NaYF4:Yb,Er UCNCs have been embedded in situ into a CH3NH3PbI3 layer to fabricate NIR-enabled planar PSCs. The CH3NH3I-capped UCNCs generated from the ligand-exchange were mixed with the perovskite precursor and served as nucleation sites for the UCNC-mediated heteroepitaxial growth of perovskite; moreover, the in situ embedding of UCNCs into the perovskite layer was realized during a spin-coating process. The resulting UCNC-embedded perovskite layer attained a uniform pinhole-free morphology with enlarged crystal grains and enabled NIR absorption. It also contributed to the energy transfer from the UCNCs to the perovskite and electron transport to the collecting electrode surface. The device fabricated using the UCNC-embedded perovskite film achieved an average power-conversion efficiency of 18.60% (19.70% for the best) under AM 1.5G and 0.37% under 980 nm laser, corresponding to 54% and 740-fold increase as compared to that of its counterpart without UCNCs.

Due to the excellent physical properties, such as large absorption coefficients (104–105 cm−1), ambipolar charge transport, low exciton binding energy (≈50 meV), and long charge diffusion length, of perovskite materials, organolead trihalide perovskite materials (APbX3, A = CH3NH3, HC(NH2)2; X = Cl, Br, and I) have attracted significant interest since being rediscovered as sensitizers in solid-state perovskite solar cells (PSCs). The power conversion efficiency (η) of PSCs has rapidly increased from 9.7% to 22.7% (National Center For Photovoltaics Home Page, http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/images/effciency_chart.jpg). To date, major research activities in this field have been focused on the control of perovskite crystallization to prepare perovskite layers with good morphology. Due to their inherent optical bandgap of ∼1.5 eV, however, the commonly used MAPbI3 (MA = CH3NH3) can only absorb incident light with wavelengths ranging from about 280 nm to 800 nm; thus, a large portion of the solar spectrum over the NIR region is inevitably wasted. A common strategy to utilize the NIR photons is to tune the band-gap of the perovskite to extend the optical absorption to the NIR region. In this context, formamidinium cation (FA+, HC(NH2)2+) has been used to replace methylammonium cation (MA+) in the APbX3 perovskite layer, leading to a narrowed bandgap (1.47 eV) and a broader absorption up to about 850 nm. Moreover, the hybrid halide perovskites MASn1−xPbxI3 with a portion of Pb2+ being substituted by Sn2+ have been reported to show a reduced bandgap and extended absorption.

Alternatively, the integration of upconversion nanocrystals (UCNCs) has been demonstrated to be effective at generating extra photocurrent and breaking the conversion-efficiency limitations of solar cells by absorbing the NIR photons and emitting visible ones. UCNCs, especially lanthanide-doped UCNCs, are currently attracting extensive interest because of their potential applications in solar cells, infrared detectors, biolabels, and biosensors. For instance, the UCNCs-integrated TiO2 mesoporous electrode has been demonstrated to be effective in increasing the η of dye-sensitized solar cells. Along this line, researchers have also attempted to integrate UCNCs with the internal mesoporous TiO2 electrode or employ UCNCs as internal mesoporous scaffolds for perovskite infiltration and NIR enabled mesoporous PSCs. However, the internal configuration of UCNCs-TiO2-perovskite or UCNCs-perovskite composites suffers from severe electron–hole recombination at the complex mesoporous scaffold/perovskite interfaces and therefore a heavy loss of photocurrent. In sharp contrast to complex mesoporous structured PSCs, planar-heterojunction structured PSCs largely simplify the device architecture by removing the mesoporous scaffold layer, where the ultra-thin perovskite layer serves as both an efficient light absorber and a long-range transporter of ambipolar charge species. In this context, the incorporation of insulating UCNCs within an excellent charge transporter i.e. perovskite layer is expected to reduce electron–hole recombination and boost the NIR light utilization in planar PSCs. However, this UCNCs-incorporated planar PSC has yet to be reported.
One big obstacle to the practical application of UCNCs in planar PSCs is the poor compatibility between UCNCs and perovskite precursors. This is because most synthetic routes to high-quality UCNCs predominantly employ long-chain alkyl molecules such as oleic acid (OA) and oleylamine (OM) as ligands, which sterically stabilize UCNCs in non-polar and hydrophobic solvents. Note that the commonly used organolead trihalide perovskite only dissolves in polar and hydrophilic solvents and is incompatible with long-chain alkyl molecule-capped UCNCs. Moreover, the presence of such bulky ligands creates an insulating barrier around each UCNC to block the access of perovskite absorber to the UCNC surface, which is detrimental to the energy transfer in optoelectronic applications. To address this issue, a ligand-exchange strategy was developed to replace the originally capped long-chain alkyl ligands on the surface of UCNCs with specifically designed species, allowing phase transfer of the UCNCs from a hydrophobic solvent (e.g. n-hexane) to various hydrophilic media (e.g. DMF). Methylammonium iodine (MAI), which is one moiety of the CH3NH3PbI3 precursor and fully compatible with DMF solvent, can be used as a ligand to replace the long-chain alkyl molecules capped on the surface of the UCNCs for improving the compatibility between the UCNCs and perovskite precursor, while reducing the spacing around each UCNC. More importantly, UCNCs capped with MAI can provide nucleation sites for the growth of UCNC-embedded perovskite crystals. We hypothesize such in situ grown UCNCs-perovskite films should have the following advantages: (i) improving the compatibility of MAI-capped UCNCs with DMF solvent, while the starting OM-capped UCNCs are free from aggregation with a controlled dimension, and simultaneously reducing the spacing around each UCNC for the facile access of the perovskite absorber to the UCNC surface. (ii) Modulating the nucleation and growth of perovskite crystals by the well-controlled MAI-capped UCNC heterogeneous nucleation sites, subsequently forming heterojunction-structured UCNCs-perovskite film that is beneficial for efficient energy transfer from UCNCs to perovskite. (iii) Absorbing and converting NIR energy to visible photons by the embedded UCNCs.
Herein, we report for the first time a facile approach to the fabrication of NIR-enabled planar PSC, in which the ligand-exchanged MAI-capped β-NaYF4:Yb,Er UCNCs serve as additional seed-like sites for facilitating the heterogeneous nucleation and heteroepitaxial growth of the perovskite crystals, leading to the formation of a perovskite layer composed of large crystal grains embedded with UCNCs. The UCNCs embedded into the perovskite film are demonstrably capable of converting low-energy NIR photons into absorbable high-energy visible photons and efficiently transferring the visible-photon energy to the perovskite absorber, due to the favorable UCNCs-embedded perovskite structure. Furthermore, the large-grain UCNCs-embedded perovskite film shows excellent charge transport properties. Planar PSCs based on the β-NaYF4:Yb,Er UCNCs-embedded perovskite film exhibit a record high overall η of 19.70% under AM 1.5G and NIR η of 0.37%, which surpassed the previous record values (overall η of 17.8% under AM 1.5G and NIR η of 0.35%) for UCNC-incorporated PSCs. Interestingly, the addition of MAI-capped UCNCs not only gives rise to the enabled NIR-response and improved photovoltaic performance, but also remarkably enhances the moisture resistance of the perovskite film, and thus, the PSC stability.

Lead iodide (PbI2, 99.9985%) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. CH3NH3I (>99%) and 2,2,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine) 9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD, 99%) were obtained from Dyesol. Lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI, 99.95%) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. All other organic solvents were obtained as analytical grade from J&K Chemical Ltd and stored in sealed bottles with molecular sieves. All of the above reagents were used without further purification. The deionized water used in this work was maintained at 18.2 MΩ cm−1 and was produced by a reagent water system (Easy pure II, Barnstead).


ZnO precursor solution ([Zn(NH3)4](OH)2) was prepared according to the method reported elsewhere. Zn(OH)2 slurry was prepared by adding 25 mM NaOH dropwise to a 7.5 mM Zn(NO3)2 solution under vigorous stirring for 5 min. The resulting slurry was centrifuged and then rinsed several times with H2O. Following final centrifugation, the Zn(OH)2 was dissolved in 60 mL of dilute NH3 solution to form a clear precursor solution.


CF3COONa (Y(CF3COO)3, Yb(CF3COO)3, or Er(CF3COO)3) was prepared by dissolving 2.50 mmol Na2CO3, (5.00 mmol Y2O3, Yb2O3, or Er2O3, 99.99%, Aladdin) in excess 50 vol% trifluoroacetic acid (99.5%, Aladdin) aqueous solution and refluxing at 80 °C for 6 h. Afterwards, a mixture of CF3COONa (2 mmol), (CF3COO)3Y (0.78 mmol), (CF3COO)3Yb (0.2 mmol), and (CF3COO)3Er (0.02 mmol) was dissolved in oleylamine (10 mL), then passed through a 0.22 μm filter to remove any residue. Under vigorous stirring in a 50 mL flask, the mixture was heated to 330 °C in the presence of N2 for protection from oxidation. After 1 h, heating was stopped. The transparent yellowish reaction mixture was allowed to cool to 80 °C before ethanol (20 mL) was added. The nanoparticles were isolated by centrifugation. The as-precipitated nanoparticles were washed three times with ethanol to remove the residue.


β-NaYF4:Yb,Er nanocrystals (UCNCs) were synthesized according to the method reported in the literature. The as-synthesized OM-capped UCNCs were first dispersed in n-hexane at the concentration of 10 mg mL−1, whereas the halide ligand CH3NH3I (MAI) was dissolved in DMF solvent with the concentration of 10 mg mL−1. To exchange OM ligands, these two solutions were mixed vigorously, and then the mixture was kept static until phase-separation of n-hexane and DMF occurred. Finally, the MAI-capped UCNCs were transfer into the lower DMF phase and were collected using a separatory funnel. The MAI-UCNCs sample for FT-IR and XPS characterization was prepared using a DMF solution of low concentration MAI (1 mg mL−1) to avoid the existence of uncapped MAI molecules.


After ligand exchange treatment, a small amount of MAI-capped UCNCs nanocrystals was mixed with the pristine perovskite precursor (MAI and PbI2 in DMF). X μL (where X is equal to 200, 400, 600, 1000) of DMF solution containing MAI-capped UCNCs at a concentration of 50 mg mL−1 were mixed with (1000 − X) μL of DMF solvent containing (163 − 0.02X) mg MAI and 470 mg PbI2, to obtain 0.05X mg mL−1 of MAI-UCNCs-mixed perovskite precursor solution.


The ITO/glass substrate (Xiang Sci. Tech. Co., 8 Ω sq−1) was cleaned in an ultrasonic bath for 20 min successively with acetone, detergent, deionized water, and isopropanol, followed by UVO treatment for 15 min before use. The ZnO compact layer was deposited by spin-coating [Zn(NH3)4](OH)2 onto the ITO/glass substrate under 2000 rpm for 30 s, followed by annealing at 150 °C for 10 min. The UCNCs-embedded perovskite film was prepared by spin-coating the UCNCs-mixed perovskite precursor solution on the ZnO compact layer at 4000 rpm for 30 s with dripping chlorobenzene on the 6th second. Subsequently, the spiro-OMeTAD solution consisting of 72.3 mg spiro-OMeTAD, 17.5 μL Li-TFSI (0.5 g mL−1 in acetonitrile) and 28.8 μL 4-tert-butylpyridine in 1 mL chlorobenzene was coated onto the MAPbI3 films by spin-coating at 2500 rpm for 30 s. Finally, a layer of Ag as the counter electrode was slowly deposited on the top of the spiro-OMeTAD layer by vacuum thermal evaporation at the rate of 0.01 nm s−1. The active area of the planar PSC device is the overlapping region of the patterned 0.3 cm wide ITO electrode and 0.3 cm wide Ag electrode, i.e., 0.09 cm2.


Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) studies were conducted using a JEOL 3010 microscope operated at 300 kV. The elemental analysis was conducted by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a JEOL-6701F microscope equipped with an X-ray energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS). The crystal structure and compositions of UCNCs and the perovskite layer were characterized in the 2θ range from 5° to 60° with a Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.15406 nm) operated at 40 mA and 40 kV using an X-ray diffractometer (X'Pert PRO MPD, Panalytical). The upconversion emission spectra were obtained on a spectrophotometer (FLS980, Edinburgh) with a CW NIR laser at 980 nm as the excitation source. The chemical compositions of the UCNCS samples before and after ligand exchange were identified by FT-IR spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) performed on a Fourier transform infrared spectrometer (FT-IR, Vertex 70v, Bruker) in the 4000 to 650 cm−1 range, and a thermo ESCALAB250 XPS system using an Al Kα X-ray source, respectively. KBr discs (KBr, 99.999%, PIKE Tech) were used for the powdered samples. The surface morphology of the perovskite layers was observed using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, JEOL JSM-6701F) working at 10 kV. The light absorption properties of the perovskite films were determined via UV-Vis-NIR light absorption spectroscopy (Lambda 950, PerkinElmer). The photovoltaic performances of the PSCs were characterized by measuring the current–voltage (J–V) curves under air mass 1.5 global (AM 1.5G) light with 100 mW cm−2 light output using a solar light simulator (Newport Oriel Sol 3A class, America, calibrated by a Newport reference cell). The data were measured with a Keithley 2400 source meter from 1.5 V to −0.5 V with a scan rate of 0.2 V s−1 and a pre-condition of 0.5 s. The NIR response of the PSC devices were tested using a 980 nm laser (3 W cm−2) with an 800 nm high-pass optical filter on the light path. During the J–V test, a 0.09 cm2 square-aperture shade mask was placed in front of the solar cell to avoid over-estimation of the photocurrent density. An Oriel model QE-PV-SI system, equipped with a 300 W Xe lamp, together with a calibrated silicon photodetector were used to acquire the monochromatic incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectrum. The integrated J value was calculated by integrating the EQE spectrum over the AM 1.5G photon flux. Steady-state (SS) and time-resolved (TR) photoluminescence (PL) spectra of perovskite films were recorded on a photoluminescence spectrometer (FS5, Edinburgh Instruments). TR-PL was measured at 775 nm using the time-correlated single-photon counting technique, and a picosecond diode laser at the wavelength of 470 nm provided the excitation. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) studies were conducted using a Zennium electrochemical workstation under AM 1.5G, and the EIS Nyquist plots were measured at a bias of 0.8 V with AC amplitude of 10 mV at frequencies ranging from 0.1 to 105 Hz.


The synthesis route to UCNCs-embedded CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layer involves the ligand-exchange of UCNCs and the subsequent heteroepitaxial growth of perovskite crystals, as shown in Scheme 1. The OM-capped β-NaYF4:Yb,Er UCNCs were synthesized by a classic thermal decomposition method and were well dispersed in n-hexane.Fig. 1a shows the TEM image of the as-synthesized highly monodisperse β-NaYF4:Yb,Er UCNCs with an average diameter of approximately 12 nm (Fig. 1b), and the magnified image (inset) shows that the nanoparticle is coated with a shell. From the EDS analysis (Fig. S1), the peaks of the host (Na, Y, and F) and dopant (Yb) and their evaluated atomic ratios show good agreement with those of the reactants. In addition, a small amount of carbon was detected, suggesting that the coating shell is probably made up of OM ligands. The OM molecules capping on the surface of the as-synthesized UCNCs function as a compatibilizer as well as passivating ligand that prevents the nanocrystals from agglomeration. XRD patterns of the UCNCs (Fig. 1c) demonstrate the formation of hexagonal NaYF4:Yb,Er crystals (Joint Committee on Powder Diffraction Standards, JCPDS 28-1192). Fig. 1d shows the room-temperature UC photoluminescence spectra of the UCNCs under 980 nm continuous wave excitation and filtered simulated sunlight (>780 nm). With the excitation of a 980 nm laser, the as-synthesized UCNCs colloid emits bright fluorescence (Fig. 1d inset), and the emission bands are centered at 522, 542, and 655 nm, which are attributable to the transitions from the 2H11/2, 4S3/2 and the 4F9/2 excited states to the 4I15/2 ground state of Er3+, respectively. With the excitation of filtered sunlight, the red 4F9/2–4I15/2 emission dominates the luminescence, probably because the population of the red level originates from the cooperative processes of a 1540 nm photon and a 980 nm photon. This observation is also consistent with the previous report concerning the emission spectra of LiYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ upconversion single crystals applied in perovskite solar cells. To in situ embed β-NaYF4:Yb,Er UCNCs into the perovskite layer, MAI, a component of the precursor of MAPbI3, was subtly chosen as the organic halide salt ligand to substitute for the originally capping OM ligands on the surface of the UCNC nanocrystals, as shown in Fig. S2. From Fig. 2a, the co-existence of the colorless and transparent solution (bottom phase of the left photo) and the bright upconversion fluorescence of UCNCs in DMF (bottom phase of the right photo) indicate that UCNCs have been transferred from n-hexane (top phase) to DMF (bottom phase). The dispersion of UCNCs in DMF solution was most probably achieved by the substitution of its capped OM by MAI.

To analyze the surface ligands capping UCNCs, we performed FT-IR and XPS measurements. The FT-IR transmission spectra of UCNCs (Fig. 2b) show bands centered around 2930 and 2850 cm−1, which are ascribed to the antisymmetric and symmetric C–H stretching vibrations of the –CH2– groups of the long alkyl chain, respectively. The bands centered around 970 and 740 cm−1 are assigned to the C–H wagging vibrations of the CC–H groups of the OM ligands. These vibration modes significantly weaken after the ligand-exchange, demonstrating that most of the OM ligands originally capping the UCNCs were removed. The appearance of an absorption band centered at 1388 cm−1, attributable to the C–H symmetric deformation vibration of –CH3 in the MAI ligands, indicates the change in ligands from OM to MAI. Further evidence for the successful formation of MAI-capped UCNCs via the ligand-exchange process arose from the XPS results shown in Fig. 2c. The high-resolution N 1s spectra show a peak centered at 396.3 eV, attributable to the –NH2 groups in the OM ligands of the OM-capped UCNCs, which shifts to 401.3 eV, characteristic of the NH3+ groups in the MAI ligands after the ligand transfer. As expected, the I 3d spectrum for the ligand-exchanged sample shows also two peaks at around 630.0 and 618.5 eV attributable to I 3d3/2 and I 3d5/2, respectively, whereas the corresponding spectrum for the sample before the ligand transfer does not show any peak. These XPS results clearly reflect the ligand exchange from OM to MAI, consistent with the FT-IR results. The ligand-exchange also causes small, but noticeable, negative shifts in the binding energies associated with Na, Y and Yb, and a positive shift in that associated with F (Fig. S3). These shifts in binding energies are caused by the changed electron density associated with the attached I− ions of a lower electrophilicity than F− ions.
We subsequently used the mixed precursor solutions containing MAI-UCNCs to deposit perovskite film onto the as-prepared ZnO compact layer by spin-coating. The SEM-EDS mapping result (Fig. S4) clearly shows the uniform distribution of Na, Y, F, Yb, and Er elements in the UCNCs-embedded perovskite film, indicating the uniform distribution of UCNCs in the perovskite film. To explore the influence of addition of MAI-UCNCs on perovskite crystallization and growth, we controlled the additive amount of MAI-UCNCs in mixed perovskite precursor solutions as 10, 20, 30, and 50 mg mL−1 MAI-UCNCs, respectively. As shown in the SEM image (Fig. 3a), the pristine perovskite film shows a uniform and pinhole-free morphology. Surprisingly, the perovskite grain-size (see the statistics of average grain diameter, , in Fig. S5) conspicuously increases with increasing MAI-UCNCs from 91 ± 19 nm for the pristine perovskite film (Fig. 3a), through 182 ± 50 nm for the film with 10 mg mL−1 MAI-UCNCs (Fig. 3b), to 427 ± 91 nm for the film with 20 mg mL−1 MAI-UCNCs (Fig. 3c), which exhibits the best morphology in terms of surface coverage and uniformity. A proper explanation for the improved morphology is that the MAI-capped UCNCs are well dispersed in the perovskite precursors and provide many heterogeneous nucleation sites beneficial to the nucleation of perovskite. As such, the resulting UCNCs-embedded perovskite films exhibit large crystal domains with more continuous and uniform surface coverage, as shown in Fig. 3, which may facilitate the charge transport within the cell device. Such an observation is in good agreement with the previous reports on nanoparticle (TiO2 and PbS) embedded structures for perovskite solar cells. However, further addition of MAI-UCNCs leads to cracks (30 mg mL−1 MAI-UCNCs, Fig. 3d) or even voids between perovskite grains (50 mg mL−1 MAI-UCNCs, Fig. 3e). The enlarged grain-size caused by increasing amounts of MAI-UCNCs can be further confirmed by XRD measurements. As seen in Fig. S6, the peaks at 14.2° and 28.5° corresponding to the (110) and (220) reflections of the tetragonal perovskite lattice, respectively, become increasingly intense when MAI-capped UCNCs are gradually added. The variation of the XRD peak intensity also indicates that the crystallinities of UCNCs-embedded perovskites are largely enhanced along the direction perpendicular to the substrate, which is attractive for optoelectronic performance. As expected, the UC-20 perovskite film shows a significant absorption enhancement over 400–800 nm as compared to the pristine film (Fig. 3f), which originates from more generated and crystallized MAPbI3 perovskite associated with the embedded UCNCs, as demonstrated by the XRD patterns (Fig. S6). This means that more incident photons can be collected to generate a larger photocurrent. Interestingly, the embedding of UCNCs also induces a discernible absorption around 980 nm for the UC-20 film (inset of Fig. 3f), which is ascribed to the upconversion effect of the embedded UCNCs. From the upconversion emission spectra of as-synthesized UCNCs and UCNCs/perovskite powders (Fig. S7), we find that the intensity of the UCNCs/perovskite is much weaker than that of equivalent UCNCs, implying that a large proportion of upconversion emission is quenched by the UCNCs-anchored perovskite. Accordingly, Fig. S8 shows that the 980 nm laser-excited PL intensity of the perovskite film embedded with β-NaYF4:Yb,Er NCs is much higher than that embedded with β-NaYF4:Yb NCs. This clearly indicates that the 980 nm photon energy is upconverted to higher photon energy by the embedded UCNCs, and is subsequently transferred to the perovskite with further band-edge re-emission. The experimental evidence and results indicate that the in situ embedding of UCNCs into the perovskite film is able to achieve efficient upconversion-emission energy transfer from UCNCs to perovskite, which brings advantages to the internal incorporation of UCNCs in the perovskite film.
To investigate the photovoltaic effect of the UCNC-embedded perovskite materials, we fabricated the perovskite films into planar solar cell devices with an architecture of ITO/ZnO/UCNCs-MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag (Fig. S9a). The corresponding cross-sectional SEM image of a complete planar PSC device is given in Fig. S9b, which shows a 300 nm thick, highly compact perovskite film sandwiched between a 30 nm thick compact ZnO layer supported by an ITO anode and a 200 nm thick spiro-OMeTAD layer, followed by covering with a 120 nm thick Ag layer as the cathode. The photocurrent density–voltage curves (J–V) of the planar PSCs shown in Fig. 4a were measured under one sun illumination at AM 1.5G, which, along with other photovoltaic parameters, are summarized in Table 1. For clarity, PSC devices fabricated using the pristine perovskite precursor and UCNC-embedded perovskite precursors are denoted as the pristine cell and UC-X cells (where X is the amount of the UCNC additives ranging from 10 to 50 mg mL−1), respectively. As can be seen, the pristine cell shows a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 18.65 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.13 V, a fill factor (FF) of 63.93%, and η of 13.46%. The addition of 10 mg mL−1 MAI-capped UCNCs significantly improves the cell performance, leading to Jsc of 19.60 mA cm−2, Voc of 1.13 V, FF of 72.98%, and η of 16.17%. The UC-20 cell fabricated from the perovskite film with 20 mg mL−1 MAI-capped UCNCs additive exhibits a champion η of 19.70%, which is better than that of UC-10 (16.17%), UC-30 (17.21%) and UC-50 (11.29%). The superior performance of the UC-20 cell is because the perovskite grains of the UC-20 film are larger than those of the UC-10 film, which could ensure more efficient electron transport within the cell. Meanwhile, the UC-20 film does not form any pinholes or voids as do the UC-30 and UC-50 films, and it thereby avoids the severe charge recombination caused by the contact between ZnO and Spiro-OMeTAD. The corresponding forward-scan J–V results of the UC-20 cell (Fig. S10) show Jsc of 22.63 mA cm−2, Voc of 1.15 V, FF of 72.36%, and η of 18.83%. Statistical results from fifty individual devices show that the highest average value of η with the narrowest distribution (18.60 ± 0.44%) was achieved by the UC-20 device (see Fig. S11 and Table S1), demonstrating a reliable fabrication of the UC-20 device with high performance.
Samples

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

η
best (%)

η
avg (%)
Pristine
1.13
18.65
63.93
13.46
12.05 ± 0.67
UC-10
1.13
19.60
72.98
16.17
14.98 ± 0.54
UC-20
1.15
22.71
75.39
19.70
18.60 ± 0.44
UC-30
1.14
21.98
68.87
17.21
14.88 ± 0.95
UC-50
1.10
16.29
63.03
11.29
7.88 ± 1.39
Compared to the pristine cell, the UC-20 cell achieved about 46% enhancement in η, mainly due to the improvement in FF and Jsc (Table 1). Specifically, the UC-20 cell showed substantial improvement in FF (75.39%) compared to the pristine cell (FF = 63.93%). The FF was reported to be largely determined by the series resistance (Rs) of the cell, which can be estimated from the J–V results given by the following equation:
where the diode ideality factor (
n = 1) is assumed and Iph, Is, q, k, T and V represent the photocurrent, inverse polarization dark saturation current, charge, Boltzmann constant, absolute temperature and bias potential, respectively. Accordingly, Rs was estimated to be 11.16 and 4.74 Ω cm2 for the pristine and UC-20 cells, respectively. The lower Rs is in good agreement with the observed larger FF for UC-20. The change in Rs is probably related to the morphology of the perovskite film, such as the presence of grain boundaries. Since UC-20 contains relatively large crystal grains with less grain boundaries within the perovskite film, it should show a lower Rs and larger FF than those of the pristine cell.

A significant increase in Jsc was also observed for the UC-20 cell in relation to the pristine cell (22.71 mA cm−2versus 18.65 mA cm−2), which was determined by the photocarrier flux, the electronic injection efficiency, and the electron–hole recombination rate. The Jsc was verified by the current density integrated from the IPCE spectra (Fig. 4b). In the 300–800 nm region, the UC-20 cell achieved a Jsc of 22.47 mA cm−2, higher than the pristine cell (18.34 mA cm−2), which was mostly associated with the improved crystallization of the perovskite film. Note that the UC-20 cell further achieved the extra current density of 0.19 mA cm−2 in the 800–1100 nm region (i.e. 0.84% of the total J), where the pristine cell only obtained a value of 0.03 mA cm−2, demonstrating the efficient NIR utilization via the upconversion effect in the UC-20 cell (cf. Fig. S7 and S8). The photocarrier flux was largely determined by the absorption coefficient of the perovskite layer. As mentioned above, the embedding of the UCNCs caused absorption enhancement in both the visible and NIR regions (Fig. 3f), thus boosting a higher photocarrier flux and final Jsc (22.66 mA cm−2). We further investigated the electronic injection and electron–hole recombination properties in the interior of PSCs by performing the SS-PL analyses. Fig. 4c shows that without the ZnO coating to quench the electron emission, the UC-20 perovskite film exhibits a higher PL peak intensity than that of the pristine film, indicating a reduction in the defect trap states. The reduction of defect trap states within the UC-20 perovskite film, which is greatly related to the reduced grain boundaries and the enhanced perovskite crystallinity, can lead to suppressed charge recombination and increased exciton diffusion length, and thereby improve the cell performance. When coated with ZnO to quench the electron emission, the UC-20 film shows a decreased PL emission with the PL peak intensity even lower than that of the pristine film (Fig. 4c), resulting from the more efficient electron injection into the ZnO layer from the UC-20 perovskite layer than from the pristine film. These results are supported by the TR-PL measurements. As seen from Fig. 4d and Table S2, the UC-20 film exhibits a longer average PL lifetime constant () of 181.36 ns, compared to that of the pristine film (138.07 ns) without the ZnO coating due to the larger τ3 as displayed in Table S2, revealing that the UC-20 perovskite film contains fewer defect trap states. When coated with a layer of ZnO as the electron quencher, the UC-20 film showed a shorter PL  (14.79 ns) than that of the pristine sample (22.08 ns), demonstrating a more efficient electron injection process at the UC-20 perovskite/ZnO interface with respect to the pristine perovskite/ZnO interface. The EIS Nyquist plots (Fig. S12) measured under AM 1.5G show a lower charge transfer impedance and a higher recombination resistance for the UC-20 cell as compared to the pristine cell, indicating an improved charge transport and suppressed electron–hole recombination for the UC-20 perovskite film. Thus, UV-vis, SS-PL, TR-PL, and EIS results all verify that the UC-20 planar PSC device achieved an improvement in Jsc due to the enhanced light-absorption, decreased defect trap states within the perovskite layer, and improved electron transfer at the perovskite/ZnO interface.
As demonstrated by theoretical study, upconversion fluorescence could break the Shockley–Queisser limit of a single-junction solar cell by contributing additional photocurrents, i.e., the embedded β-NaYF4:Yb,Er UCNCs are supposed to contribute to the Jsc and thereby η of the PSC device by enhancing the NIR utilization via upconversion. To identify the contribution of NIR harvesting on η, we measured and compared the J–V data with controlling the dopants (Yb and Er). As shown in Fig. S13, the w/Yb&Er cell achieved η of 19.70%, while the w/o Yb&Er cell achieved η of 19.49%. Since the dopants can control the upconversion luminescence, the contribution of upconversion luminescence can be identified from the η difference, where the NIR contribution is ca. 1% of the total η. The performance of a UC-20 cell under a concentrated 980 nm NIR laser irradiation with a power density of 3 W cm−2 was also measured. As can be seen in Fig. 5a, a 740-fold enhanced photovoltaic performance was observed for the UC-20 cell (η = 0.37%) with respect to the pristine PSC (η = 0.0005%), demonstrating that the 980 nm NIR light can be effectively utilized by the UC-20 cell, but not the pristine cell. Such a NIR photovoltaic performance (η = 0.37%) caused by embedded UCNCs is obviously larger than those reported values of other UC-embedded PSC devices (see Table S3). Moreover, there is considerable room to further enhance the photovoltaic performance of the UCNC-embedded PSCs by improving the upconversion quantum yield of UCNCs. The photocurrent density and corresponding η of the UC-20 planar PSC were measured as a function of time at a constant forward bias of 0.94 V under AM1.5G with a 980 nm NIR laser switched on and off every 20 s, as shown in Fig. 5b. Under the standard sunlight, a stable output photocurrent density of 20.87 mA cm−2 and the η of 19.70% was maintained for 100 s, while the photocurrent density was found to increase to 21.26 mA cm−2 with a stable output η of 20.06% once the 980 nm NIR laser was turned on. This demonstrates that the embedded UCNCs are capable of converting NIR light to absorbable visible light for CH3NH3PbI3, leading to the generation of additional photocurrents without causing parasitic loss. Fig. 5c shows the energy transfer scheme for the UC-embedded PSCs. The incident photons with energy lower than the band gap of perovskite, which could not be harvested by perovskite, were absorbed by embedded UCNCs (see Fig. 3f), and then transferred to perovskite absorbable high-energy photons to contribute to the additional photocurrents of the perovskite active layer.
The UC-20 cell was further subjected to testing the long-term cell durability under ambient conditions. Organometallic halide perovskites are notoriously sensitive to moisture, due to their ionic character, which could result in the rapid degradation of unsealed perovskite cells in a humid environment. The UC-20 and the pristine perovskite counterpart were exposed continuously to ambient air at a relative humidity of 40% for seven days and their operation stabilities were monitored by XRD measurements on the perovskite films before and after the degradation experiment (Fig. 6a) and the time-dependent measurements of the cell photovoltaic parameters (i.e., Jsc, Voc, FF, η, see Fig. 6b). For the pristine perovskite, a small peak at 12.7° corresponding to the PbI2 (001) lattice plane was initially observed, arising from the decomposition of MAPbI3 into PbI2 during the film annealing process. No PbI2 peak was observed in the UCNCs-embedded perovskite starting film, indicating improved thermostability for the ZnO-supported UCNCs-embedded perovskite. After exposure of the pristine perovskite to ambient air for one week, decomposition of the aged perovskite occurred to generate sufficient PbI2 to give a strong peak at 12.7° (Fig. 6a). In sharp contrast, the PbI2 peak at 12.7° for the UC-20 film aged under the same conditions was insignificant, implying a much lower degree of decomposition. The improved moisture resistance of the UCNC-embedded perovskite was probably due to the reduced grain boundaries. More quantitatively, the durability of an unsealed UC-20 cell under air ambient conditions (at room temperature, with average relative humidity of 40%) is displayed in Fig. 6b in the form of the normalized photovoltaic parameters as a function of the storage time. Initially, η for the UC-20 cell reached the highest value (19.70%) after 48-hours of exposure to ambient air, due to the oxidation of spiro-OMeTAD, and then leveled off at about 81% of the highest η value even after exposure to the ambient air for 792 h, demonstrating good ambient durability. Thus, the UCNCs-embedded perovskite cells have environmental stability of practical significance.

In summary, we have demonstrated a novel approach for the in situ growth of β-NaYF4:Yb,Er UCNCs-embedded perovskite film with excellent photovoltaic performance and high stability. The use of UCNCs capped with MAI organic salts as a co-precursor of the MAPbI3 perovskite facilitated the UCNCs-mediated heteroepitaxial growth of perovskite, leading to the formation of large perovskite grains with fewer defects. The UCNCs-incorporated device exhibited a significant enhancement in both photovoltaic performance and stability with respect to the pristine perovskite counterpart. XRD, UV-vis, PL, EIS and 980 nm NIR J–V results demonstrated that the improved cell performance of the UCNCs-incorporated device was mainly due to the intensified light absorption associated with the embedding of UCNCs, enhanced interfacial electronic extraction, reduced charge recombination, and fewer grain-boundaries. Our work provides a feasible strategy to reliably fabricate UCNCs-embedded perovskite devices with NIR response and excellent photovoltaic performance (η = 19.70%) of practical significance.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


The work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21476019, 21377011, 21676017).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr05416e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017