 DOI: 10.1039/C7TC05052F
(Highlight)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 3564-3572


Brenden
McDearmon
,

Zachariah A.
Page
,

Michael L.
Chabinyc
* and 

Craig J.
Hawker
*

Materials Department, University of California, Santa Barbara, California 93106, USA. E-mail: mchabinyc@engineering.ucsb.edu; hawker@mrl.ucsb.edu

Materials Research Laboratory, University of California, Santa Barbara, California 93106, USA

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Santa Barbara, California 93106, USA

Received
7th November 2017
, Accepted 19th January 2018
First published on 30th January 2018
Fundamental to the field of organic electronics is the understanding that structure begets function. For conjugated polymers, monomer structure determines overall energy levels while also influencing interchain interactions. These interchain interactions induce aggregation and creates higher order morphology, greatly influencing the ultimate performance of electronic devices. Understanding the interplay of morphological changes with device efficiency is imperative to improving the performance of organic electronics with minor differences in molecular structure, linear versus branched side-chains, carbon versus silicon bridgehead atoms or hydrogen versus fluorine substitution, having dramatic effects on the energetics, aggregation, morphology, and, ultimately, performance of these materials. This report highlights the power of minor structural changes in conjugated polymers and the associated design rules for the preparation of next generation electronic materials.

Organic electronics offer the promise of low cost and light weight devices for a range of applications from displays to sensors. To realize the potential of these applications, substantial synthetic efforts over the last several decades have resulted in an impressive array of materials with unique properties and performance. Fundamental to this development has been an improved understanding of how molecular structure impacts morphology. This structure-morphology-performance paradigm is ubiquitous across organic electronic materials and serves to explain differences in material properties. Significantly, minor perturbations to molecular structure have resulted in dramatic changes in materials properties, and thus device performance, making systematic studies of such variations imperative. In particular, the study of; (1) linear vs. branched side-chains, (2) carbon vs. silicon bridgehead atoms, and (3) hydrogen vs. fluorine substitution have emerged as powerful design strategies. In addition to further elucidating the underlying physics surrounding morphological control and its impact on device performance, the development of design rules for these minor structural changes will guide the future development of next generation materials for improved organic electronic devices. This highlight aims to disseminate recent findings and illustrate the power of isomeric and atomic changes in monomer structure.


Originally synthesized within the Leclerc, Jen, and Fréchet groups, the poly(benzodithiophene thienopyrroledione) (PBDTTPD) family of donor–acceptor polymers are a well-studied, high-performance class of materials for bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices (Scheme 1). The modular synthesis and facile incorporation of various side-chains into the benzodithiophene (BDT) and thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione (TPD) monomer units has enabled a diverse library of PBDTTPD derivatives to be generated and characterized. These libraries of structurally similar materials have improved our understanding of the relationship between monomer structure, morphology, and performance in BHJ OPV devices. In particular, the PBDTTPD derivatives wherein the BDT unit has 2-ethylhexyl side-chains and the TPD unit has either the same branched 2-ethylhexyl side-chains, or linear octyl groups have offered significant insight. Differing only in the hydrocarbon side-chain, these structural isomers demonstrate how minor deviations in architecture can have a significant impact on BHJ OPV device performance with morphology and donor/acceptor packing (i.e., PBDTTPD/PC61BM) being critical.

Recent studies by Fréchet and coworkers utilized UV/vis absorption spectroscopy (Fig. 1A) and grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) (Fig. 1B) measurements to compare the morphology of neat films comprised of linear and branched PBDTTPD. Significantly, the PBDTTPD derivative with linear side-chains was observed to adopt a more planar backbone configuration with increased π-stacking relative to the branched derivative. This results in a red-shift in absorption and narrower π–π peak at higher q in GIWAXS. When blended with PC61BM as the electron acceptor in a BHJ, the linear derivative was found to significantly outperform the branched derivative, with an average power conversion efficiency (PCE) value of >6%, relative to the <4% PCE obtained when incorporating the branched derivative. This increased PCE of the BHJ containing the PBDTTPD derivative with a linear side-chain is due to the significantly enhanced short circuit current density (JSC) and fill factor (FF), as observed in both the current density–voltage (J–V) curves (Fig. 1C) and external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements (Fig. 1D).
McGehee and co-workers have since probed these systems in more detail to understand the observed enhancements in the performance of BHJs using PBDTTPD with linear side-chains. A series of experiments were performed to illustrate the importance of favorable polymer–fullerene interactions by diluting the donor polymers (linear or branched) with PC61BM, thereby minimizing polymer–polymer interactions. JSC and sub-band gap EQE measurements revealed that the linear derivative adopts a more favorable and less energetically disordered charge transfer state with PC61BM, relative to the isomeric branched derivative. Solid-state 2D 13C{1H} dipolar-mediated heteronuclear correlation nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy supported this observation, showing a stronger interaction between linear TPD and PC61BM resonances when compared to branched TPD and PC61BM resonances (Fig. 2). The authors postulated that this was due to an increase in favorable molecular interactions between the less sterically crowded linear TPD repeat unit and the fullerene nucleus.
These results were further reinforced by the So group with sub-bandgap EQE and time-resolved photoluminescence measurements. Specifically, BHJs containing PC61BM acceptors and PBDTTPD with linear side-chains on TPD and branched side-chains on BDT were compared to polymers with branched side-chains on TPD. The BHJs containing the derivative with linear side-chains had increased EQE both above and below the optical gap (Fig. 3A) and faster transient photoluminescent decays (Fig. 3B) in comparison to those containing branched-TPD, indicating improved charge generation. These results are consistent with GIXS measurements for blends of PC61BM and linear-PBDTTPD which were shown to be more ordered in comparison to blends with branched-PBDTTPD. Subsequently, the morphology of PC61BM/linear-PBDTTPD blends have been extensively characterized, revealing the presence of three distinct domains: (1) regions of aggregated polymer surrounded by (2) amorphous regions of intermixed polymer/fullerene molecules within a network of (3) PC61BM rich regions that percolate through the BHJ. It is hypothesized that this complex multiphasic morphology leads to the improved device performance.
The favorable PC61BM/linear-PBDTTPD interactions, described as “molecular docking”, that promotes efficient charge transfer and charge carrier generation, has recently been computationally studied using quantum chemical and molecular dynamics simulations by Brédas and coworkers. Notably, these simulations were in agreement with experimental data clearly showing that the substitution pattern of PBDTTPD directs PC61BM docking with the fullerene preferentially interacting with the linear-TPD unit. Comparison with the branched derivative illustrates how the simple structural change – linear octyl side-chain versus branched 2-ethylhexyl side-chain – significantly impacts polymer aggregation and polymer–fullerene interactions resulting in optimal charge-transfer states, charge generation, charge extraction, and ultimately BHJ device performance.
These comprehensive experimental and computational studies show the influence of minor structural changes on overall physical properties and nanoscale morphology. This difference is especially true for narrow energy gap donor–acceptor polymers where the LUMO is typically more localized on the acceptor unit. As a result, design strategies for controlling the steric ‘bulkiness’ surrounding the acceptor groups of other high performance donor–acceptor copolymers in BHJ devices have been proposed to enhance polymer–fullerene electronic interactions and to lead to improved charge generation.

Change of a single bridgehead atom on a polymer can surprisingly cause significant changes in properties. Classic examples of the beneficial effect of bridgehead systems include biphenyl bridging to produce fluorene and carbazole, while bridging dithiophene leads to cyclopentadithiophene as the parent building block. The most widely studied example of this family of materials is the donor–acceptor copolymer, poly[(4,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-cyclopenta-[2,1-b;3,4-b′]dithiophene)-2,6-diyl-alt-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole-4,7-diyl], PCPDTBT, first reported by Brabec and co-workers (Scheme 2). Building on the successes of PCPDTBT, the Yang group developed and investigated the silicon bridged analogue, poly[(4,4′-bis(2-ethylhexyl)dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]silole)-2,6-diyl-alt-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)-4,7-diyl] (PSBTBT). While in the same column in the periodic table, silicon offers a number of opportunities and intrinsic differences when compared to carbon. Size, electronegativity, and polarizability lend unique property changes when silicon is incorporated as a bridgehead atom in conjugated systems. For example, the bridgehead bond lengths of the silole ring (1.89 Å) are longer than that of cyclopentadiene (1.53 Å), resulting in a change in backbone geometry. Additionally, the σ* orbitals of the exocyclic Si–C bonds have the appropriate energy levels to participate in orbital mixing interactions with the π* orbital of the diene core in silole derivatives. Substitution of Si for C also impacts the morphology of thin films, which ultimately affects the performance in electronic devices.

Given the importance of morphology on device performance, intensive efforts to further control assembly via processing have been made. In particular, PCPDTBT has been shown to adopt different morphologies based on changes in the processing conditions. For example, solvent additives, such as 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) and 1,8-octanedithiol (ODT), have led to dramatic improvements in the degree of ordering/crystallinity for PCPDTBT compared to casting from pure chlorobenzene. These differences in morphology manifest in the tuning of the optical absorption and carrier mobility, with solvent additives inducing a bathochromic shift and increased hole mobility relative to as-cast films. Alternatively, thermal or solvent vapor annealing leads to the more thermodynamically stable dimer morphology for PCPDTBT (Fig. 4) with increased crystallinity when compared to the morphologies obtain via solvent additives.
In stark contrast to the morphologies obtained with PCPDTBT, PSBTBT forms a cross-hatched structure when spun cast from chlorobenzene, and does not generate a dimer structure upon thermal annealing (Fig. 5). The cross-hatched structure observed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is due to a quasi-epitaxial overlap of ordered domains with face-on orientation. The crossing can be understood as a result of the separation of the conjugated chains set by the alkyl side-chains and the length of the repeating unit along the backbone (Fig. 5). Interestingly, these morphological differences have been correlated to solution behavior, where variable temperature absorption spectroscopy in chlorobenzene indicates significant aggregation for PSBTBT with little or no aggregation for PCPDTBT (Fig. 6).
While PSBTBT derivatives outperform PCPDTBT in FETs, it does not directly translate to BHJ OPVs, where similar PCE values of 5.6% and 5.5% for PSBTBT and PCPDTBT are obtained. The cross-hatched structure adopted by PSBTBT is seen to persist on blending with PCBM and has been characterized with HRTEM on BHJ thin films. Similar to pure films, blending with PCBM leads to higher charge transport mobilities for PSBTBT when compared to PCPDTBT. GIWAXS reveals a tighter and more ordered π–π stacking for PSBTBT relative to PCPDTBT. Another distinct difference between PCPDTBT and PSBTBT blends with PCBM is the effect of high boiling solvent additives and thermal annealing on BHJ OPV devices. PCPDTBT:PCBM based OPVs benefit greatly when processed from chlorobenzene containing DIO as an additive, while thermal annealing leads to a decrease in PCE. The changes in PCE are attributed to variations in the blend morphology, where the formation of edge-on π-stacking occurs when employing DIO, improving charge transport and thus PCE, while annealing leads to the characteristic dimer formation, impeding charge transport. In contrast, PSBTBT:PCBM BHJ OPVs do not benefit from the addition of solvent additives while thermal annealing leads to a significant improvement in PCE due to an increase in crystallinity and, correspondingly, charge transport mobility.
These studies highlight the power of atom substitution (Si versus C) in tuning structural changes at the molecular level that scales to macroscopic changes in morphology, and ultimately controls the performance of organic semiconductors in electronic devices. In the specific case of PCPDTBT vs. PSBTBT, the larger Si atom results in longer bond lengths, alters the backbone geometry, propensity to aggregate, and solid-state morphology. In an analogous fashion, Si for C substitution in fluorene based materials (e.g., silafluorene) have demonstrated lower HOMO–LUMO energy levels, higher hole mobilities, and enhanced BHJ performance, further exemplifying the importance and broad utility of bridgehead atom choice in electronic materials design.

The important role of isomers and nanoscale morphology are also manifested in the substitution of main chain H-atoms with fluorine atoms. It is particularly interesting to note in this case, the subtle change in molecular structure also causes a pronounced electronic change leading to improved charge transport and solar cell device performance. Fluorine, being the most electronegative atom on the periodic table, has been shown to lower both the HOMO and LUMO levels as well as change the polarity and dipole moment of conjugated polymers. As an illustrative example, the fluorinated derivative of poly(thienyl-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-co-thieno[3,4-b]thiophene) (PBDTTT-Th), also known as PTB7-Th, was one of the first conjugated polymers to achieve >10% PCE in single junction BHJ solar cells (Scheme 3). These initial insights have led to a wide range of research studies showing the effect of fluorine substitution.

Cao and coworkers examined the effect of fluorine substitution on the electronics, performance, and morphology of PBDTTT-Th by varying the degree of fluorination (Fig. 7). The fluorinated series was synthesized by copolymerizing a thienyl-substituted benzodithiophene (BDT-Th) monomer with different ratios of hydrogen and fluorine substituted thienothiophene (TT) monomers, providing a fluorine content ranging from 0% (100% hydrogen repeat unit) to 100% (0% hydrogen repeat unit). Both the HOMO and LUMO energies were decreased with increasing fluorine content, and an associated increase in ionization potential and electron affinity was observed with increasing fluorine content.
Incorporating the semi-fluorinated PBDTTT-Th series into BHJ solar cells as the photoactive donor component with PC71BM as the acceptor was also shown to lead to impressive differences in PCE, from 6.7% (0% F) to 8.4% (100% F) (Fig. 7B). The improved device performance upon fluorination arises from an increase in open circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF) (Fig. 7C). Additionally, the hole mobility (μh) of the BHJ layer was shown to increase by a factor of ∼3 when going from 0 to 100% F (Fig. 7D). While the VOC can be accounted for by the propensity of the more electronegative fluorine atom to increase the ionization potential of PBDTTT-Th, and thus increase the energy gap between the HOMO of the donor and LUMO of the acceptor, the enhancement of FF and μh are not as apparent.
Seeking to understand the correlation between fluorine substitution and the observable increase in FF and μh, the authors conducted a series of GIWAXS, TEM, and resonant soft X-ray scattering (RSoXS) experiments, to directly probe the morphology. The GIXD showed that the alkyl and π–π spacings remain relatively unchanged with varied fluorine content for the BHJ blends. Furthermore, TEM revealed uniform features on the order of 10 nm irrespective of the degree of backbone fluorination. In contrast, RSoXS showed a distinct shift to higher q with increasing fluorine content, indicative of a decrease in crystallite size. Integrating the peaks from RSoXS (I × q2) gives the total scattering intensity, which is a relative measure of the phase purity and polymer–fullerene intermixing. Interestingly, the total scattering intensity was found to decrease with increasing fluorine content, which correlates to a decrease in polymer–fullerene phase purity and greater extent of intermixing (Fig. 8A and C). Based on this morphological characterization, the observed increase in mobility with increasing fluorine content may be due to an enhanced interconnected network of polymer and fullerene domains, enabling faster charge transport through the BHJ device. In turn, the increase in charge transport can be used to explain the observed increase in FF. The enhanced interconnectivity and charge transport for fluorinated polymers are thought to arise from aggregation in solution, which can be ascribed to an increase in polarity with the use of F in place of H, causing a shift in solubility.
Similar fractional fluorination studies have been performed on other conjugated polymer families, including the closely related alkoxy-substituted PBDTTT (PTB7) derivative. Such studies have seen similar effects of fluorination on the PCE and VOC with mixed effects on other solar cell device parameters (e.g., JSC and FF). Typically, fluorine substitution results in a lowering of both HOMO and LUMO energy levels, while also increasing aggregation and ultimately impacting both morphology and device characteristics. The synergistic effect of energy level tuning and enhanced aggregation makes fluorination a powerful tool for the design of high performance conjugated polymers.

As the field of organic electronics continues to advance, understanding the impact of subtle changes in molecular structure on the morphology and performance of conjugated materials will remain a fundamentally important challenge. While the studies and materials highlighted herein deal with narrow energy gap polymers often employed as donor materials in BHJ solar cells, the influence of isomer and atomic changes has also been exploited in the design of high performance OFET materials, non-fullerene acceptors, and emissive polymers. In particular, non-fullerene acceptors have been identified as a recent target in an effort to decrease the cost and improve the efficiency of organic solar cells, with perylene diimide (PDI) serving as an excellent platform to study the impact of minor variations in molecular structure on morphology and performance (Scheme 4). In general, non-fullerene acceptors enable a more modular approach to tuning the structure and in-turn optoelectronic properties. As a result, larger molar absorptivities and wider absorption windows, in addition to more economical syntheses, relative to traditional fullerene acceptors have become accessible. A key design rule for such non-fullerene acceptors is to have a rigid three-dimensional architecture, which prevents undesirable aggregation and phase-separation between donor and acceptor molecules common when using planar semiconductors. Such differences in molecular structure exert a pronounced effect on active layer morphology and corresponding device performance. In a recent example, ring fusion of a tetra-perylene diimide to change its molecular structure from a “propeller” form to a more compact “double-decker” form resulted in a dramatic increase in overall PCE from 6.7 to 10.4%.

Device stability is an equally important consideration when designing organic electronic materials. Typically, device performance decreases over time, which can occur through several identified mechanisms, including: (i) photochemical degradation upon reaction with water and/or oxygen and (ii) thermal rearrangements that change morphology. Interestingly, film morphology has been shown to influence photobleaching, where denser and more crystalline films have been shown to possess increased stability over amorphous films of the same material. Additionally, many BHJ morphologies are kinetically trapped metastable states, where prolonged device operation and resultant heating can lead to molecular rearrangements that decrease performance. Indeed, device performance begins to decrease sharply as the temperature approaches the glass transition temperature (Tg) of the lowest Tg component in the blend. Linking these changes in performance to molecule structure enables chemists to design materials with improved properties.
Such examples continue to illustrate the fundamental importance of molecular architecture in material design. Building upon the results described herein, further research designed to systematically study the synthesis, characterization, and device implementation of novel organic semiconductors will continue to push the boundaries of their utility in technologically advanced and unique electronics to the benefit of society.

There are no conflicts to declare.


We acknowledge support from the National Science Foundation through DMR 1436263 and the MRSEC Program (DMR 1720256). B. McDearmon also thanks the DoD and ASEE for funding through the NDSEG Fellowship program. Further copyright information pertaining to material reproduced from the ACS can be found at http://www.acs.org.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018