 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA06023H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23146-23157


I-Ping
Liu
,

Hsisheng
Teng
 and 

Yuh-Lang
Lee
*

Department of Chemical Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 70101, Taiwan, Republic of China. E-mail: yllee@mail.ncku.edu.tw

Research Center for Energy Technology and Strategy (RCETS), National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 70101, Taiwan, Republic of China

Center for Micro/Nano Science and Technology, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 70101, Taiwan, Republic of China

Received
11th July 2017
, Accepted 11th October 2017
First published on 11th October 2017
A facile and cost-effective method is proposed herein to fabricate highly electrocatalytic carbon black/copper sulfide (CB/CuXS) composite counter electrodes for quantum-dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs). In brief, mesoporous CB thin films and copper salts are first deposited on FTO substrates by a spin-coating process; a sulfidation treatment is then conducted to facilitate accumulations of CuXS catalysts in the mesoporous structure. Experimental results illustrate that during the sulfidation, an ion exchange reaction and a reduction of Cu(II) to Cu(I) take place simultaneously, and that the obtained CuXS catalyst possesses a nonstoichiometric phase. The electrochemical properties of the resultant composite films are carefully investigated. The results show that the electrocatalytic activity of the CB/CuXS films related to the polysulfide redox reaction is much superior to that of common platinum. Compared to a solar cell equipped with a solution-processed CuS counter electrode, the QDSSC using a composite film prepared only by a single spin-coating displays similar photovoltaic performance. Furthermore, increasing the coating times can lead to improvements both in the electrocatalytic activity of the CB/CuXS films and in the cell performance of the relevant QDSSCs. When CdS/CdSe sensitizers are employed, the QDSSC using a CB/CuXS counter electrode fabricated with three coating times demonstrates a conversion efficiency of 5.62% under 1 sun irradiation.

As the use of fossil fuels causes a gradual increase in the global annual temperature and more frequent emergence of extreme climate events, developing clean, renewable and sustainable energy sources is imperative. The exploitation of solar power is considered to be the most appropriate solution to meet this urgent demand. Over the past few decades, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), being a very prospective candidate for next-generation photovoltaics, have attracted a great amount of research attention owing to their low-cost and simple fabrication. Recently, some dye sensitizers and novel electrolytes have been judiciously developed for DSSCs, and a high power conversion efficiency surpassing 12% has been achieved. Apart from organic dye molecules, semiconductor quantum dot (QD) materials are also being utilized as photon absorbers due to several fascinating features, such as their large extinction coefficient, size-dependent tunable band gap and multiple exciton generation (MEG). More importantly, QD materials are usually not as expensive as organic dye molecules; in view of the MEG effect, the prediction of photovoltaic efficiency beyond the Shockley–Queisser limit has been reported.

As an analogue to DSSCs, quantum-dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) typically include an electrolyte solution sandwiched between a photoelectrode and a counter electrode. In terms of chemical compatibility with QD sensitizers, polysulfide electrolytes are employed in nearly all of the liquid-junction-based QDSSCs, rather than iodide/triiodide redox couples commonly utilized in DSSCs. Moreover, in both DSSCs and QDSSCs, counter electrodes are responsible for the reduction of oxidized species in the electrolyte and for the collection of electrons from the external circuit. Therefore, an appropriate counter electrode material has to display good chemical stability and outstanding charge transfer kinetics at the electrode/electrolyte interface. A weak charge transfer at the counter electrode will influence the overall electron flow and result in inferior photovoltaic performance. Until now, in addition to platinum, a variety of materials and composites have been developed for utilization as counter electrodes in DSSCs.
To be utilized as counter electrodes of QDSSCs, few materials demonstrate notable electrochemical characteristics with respect to a polysulfide electrolyte. Platinum (Pt) is the most commonly adopted catalyst in DSSCs, but in QDSSCs, its electrocatalytic activity is restrained because of the irreversible adsorption of sulfur species on the Pt surface. QDSSCs are usually assembled using sulfur-treated brass as the counter electrode; in brief, commercial brass substrates are etched with hydrochloric acid and then immersed in a polysulfide solution to produce Cu2S catalysts. This counter electrode shows promising electrocatalytic activity in regard to the polysulfide redox reaction, yet its poor mechanical stability, ascribed to the corrosion effect of the polysulfide electrolyte, is also sometimes mentioned. Recently, several materials have been proposed in the literature for the preparation of high-performance counter electrodes for QDSSCs, such as metal sulfide, metal selenide and carbonaceous materials. It is worth noting that currently QDSSCs displaying exceptional photovoltaic efficiency beyond 11% are fabricated using not only robust QD sensitizers, but also Ti mesh supported mesoporous carbon counter electrodes.
Besides the use of a single material, the development of composite counter electrodes has also gained much attention. In 2011, a remarkable composite counter electrode based on reduced graphene oxide (RGO)–Cu2S was synthesized by Kamat and co-workers, and the relevant electrochemical properties were also studied. In 2014, a one-step solvothermal process was reported for the preparation of effective counter electrodes composed of Cu2S microspheres wrapped in RGO nanosheets. Recently, Zhong's group presented an approach for fabricating hybrid counter electrodes via the sulfidation of copper–carbon composites. In addition, metal sulfides (PbS, CuInS2 and Cu2S) and commercial carbonaceous materials were also utilized to prepare composite counter electrodes for QDSSCs by Meng and collaborators.
From the above-mentioned research, it can be observed that composite counter electrodes exhibit remarkable electrocatalytic activity, yet their fabrication is rather complicated. A series of steps is usually required either to synthesize metal sulfide catalysts or to prepare pastes for screen-printing; even solution-processing routes, e.g., chemical bath deposition and solvothermal synthesis, are time-consuming and sometimes energy-intensive. The fabrication of counter electrodes for QDSSCs is definitely not as simple as that of conventional Pt for DSSCs. Herein, a new method is proposed to overcome this situation. In a previous study, commercial carbon black (CB) was employed as a counter electrode material for cobalt(III)/(II)-mediated DSSCs. The mesoporous architecture of the CB thin film is believed to offer a tremendous amount of space for other catalyst accumulation. Accordingly, in this study, through a combination of spin-coating and sulfidation, an ultra-facile and cost-effective method is proposed to fabricate CB/copper sulfide composite catalysts for QDSSCs. Both the formation mechanism and the electrochemical behavior of the composite thin film electrode were thoroughly studied. This simple method can not only be adopted to readily fabricate highly electrocatalytic composite counter electrodes, but is also fairly beneficial to the progress of QDSSCs.

As inspired by a previous study, carbon black (CB) thin films with a mesoporous architecture are anticipated to offer massive space for the accumulation of catalytic materials. Accordingly, an ultra-facile method for the fabrication of CB/copper sulfide composite thin films was developed herein, with the related procedures illustrated in Scheme 1. Firstly, several materials were mixed in absolute ethanol to obtain a dispersion solution with a composition of 1.12 wt% commercial CB powders, 0.15 wt% ethyl cellulose (EC), 10.11 wt% Cu(NO3)2·3H2O and 88.62 wt% ethanol. A spin-coating method was implemented to coat FTO substrates with the dispersion; heat treatment was then performed using a hot plate at 90 °C under ambient conditions. The amount of catalyst deposition was controlled by the coating times employed, i.e. repeating steps II and III in Scheme 1 for several cycles (here, the heat treatment was conducted for 15 min). After accomplishing the overall catalyst coating, the as-prepared thin film was heated for 25 min. The heat-treated thin film was then immersed in a Na2S solution to perform the sulfidation reaction, as depicted in step IV in Scheme 1. It is noteworthy that the heat treatment plays an important role in the fabrication process. A “dry” thin film is needed to carry out both the sulfidation and the spin-coating; otherwise, the pre-deposited catalysts may become detached from the FTO substrates.

The above-mentioned thin films were first characterized by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The C(1s) and Cu(2p) XPS core level spectra of a thin film fabricated without conducting the sulfidation are exhibited in Fig. 1(a) and (b), respectively. As shown in Fig. 1(a), the C(1s) XPS spectrum can be fitted properly with three singlet peaks; the binding energies of these peaks are observed at 284.8, 286.3 and 287.5 eV, which can be assigned to graphitic carbon (C–C), carbon in ether or alcohol groups (C–O), and carbon in carbonyl groups (CO), respectively. Undoubtedly, the C–C peak results mainly from the CB powders, while the C–O peak with a high intensity clearly illustrates the presence of EC and residual ethanol in this “precursor thin film” (most ethanol is expected to be evaporated during the heat treatment). Either the adventitious carbon or the functional group on CB is responsible for the CO peak. Regarding the Cu(2p) XPS spectrum as exhibited in Fig. 1(b), the Cu(2p3/2) and Cu(2p1/2) binding energies are found at 934.7 and 954.7 eV, respectively, consistent with the feature of spin–orbital splitting of Cu(2p) species. In addition, the shake-up satellite peaks of Cu(2p3/2) and Cu(2p1/2) are noticeably located at the binding energies of 943.5 and 962.5 eV, respectively. These results illustrate that before performing the sulfidation, copper elements in the thin film were present substantially in a divalent state [Cu(II)]. Moreover, this resultant Cu(2p) XPS spectrum is very similar to that of copper hydroxide [Cu(OH)2] as reported in the published literature.

Fig. 2 displays the XPS and X-ray-excited Auger electron spectra collected from a CB/copper sulfide composite thin film (i.e. the thin film acquired after conducting the sulfidation). Some primary elements in this composite thin film are recognized as labeled in the survey scan spectrum in Fig. 2(a), among which the C(1s) peak is centered at a binding energy of 284.8 eV. As shown in Fig. 2(b), two distinct peaks can be observed, which are assigned to Cu(2p3/2) and Cu(2p1/2) at binding energies of 932.7 and 952.6 eV respectively, with no evident shake-up satellite signals in this Cu(2p) spectrum. Meanwhile, in Fig. 2(c), it is found that the Cu L3M45M45 Auger peak is located at a kinetic peak of 917.5 eV. According to several studies, it can therefore be inferred that a reduction of Cu(II) had occurred during the sulfidation step; in this composite thin film, copper elements appear to be entirely in a monovalent state [Cu(I)]. In addition, the S(2p) XPS core level spectrum is exhibited in Fig. 2(d). This spectrum can be precisely fitted with two doublet peaks, with each doublet peak containing S(2p3/2) and S(2p1/2) components, both constrained with a spin–orbital splitting of 1.2 eV and with an intensity ratio of 2: 1 for 2p3/2 to 2p1/2. The doublet peak with a S(2p3/2) component located at a binding energy of 161.8 eV is attributed to the Cu–S–Cu bonding configuration, which is almost identical to that in chalcocite Cu2S. The other doublet peak shows its S(2p3/2) component at a binding energy of 162.7 eV, probably arising from highly Cu-deficient sulfide in the composite film.
On the basis of the aforementioned XPS results, the formation mechanism of the copper sulfide catalyst can be deduced as illustrated below. For the thin film fabricated without performing the sulfidation, copper elements were present in a Cu(II) oxidation state; they existed in Cu(OH)2 and/or copper(II) oxide (CuO) compounds. Since a highly oxidized copper species is always passivated by forming an oxide film in the highest oxidation state, a Cu(2p) XPS spectrum similar to that of Cu(OH)2 was obtained. During the sulfidation reaction, the formation of a copper sulfide catalyst occurred by replacing hydroxyl ions (OH−) in the Cu(OH)2 with sulfide ions (S2−). This ion exchange reaction is able to take place spontaneously because of the much smaller solubility products (Ksp) of copper sulfide minerals (CuS: ∼10−36 and Cu2S: ∼10−47) in comparison to that of Cu(OH)2 (∼10−19). Moreover, the reduction of Cu(II) to Cu(I) also happened at the same time. For the final composite thin film, it appears that copper elements were exclusively in one oxidation state [i.e. Cu(I)], which is in good agreement with nearly all kinds of copper sulfide minerals in various phases. The copper sulfide catalyst synthesized in this study, however, is not identical to covellite CuS, due to the absence of a doublet peak in the S(2p) XPS spectrum related to the disulfide unit [(S–S)2−]. Chalcocite Cu2S can be ruled out based on the fact that there is only one binding state detectable for the sulfur element in the chalcocite phase. It is therefore believed that this copper sulfide catalyst has a nonstoichiometric phase, requiring more comprehensive investigation to identify the detailed configuration. Hence, in the following paragraphs, the CB/copper sulfide composite film prepared by coating catalytic materials for n times is denoted as CB/CuXS-n.
The aforementioned thin films were also investigated by Raman spectroscopy with a 532 nm excitation laser. As depicted in Fig. 3, for both CB-based thin films, there are two broad and overlapping characteristic peaks with maximum intensities at ∼1590 cm−1 and ∼1355 cm−1, which correspond to the G band related to an ideal graphitic lattice vibration mode and the D band associated with disordered graphite, respectively. These features basically indicate that the employed CB powders have a high density of defects and a low degree of crystallinity. By referring to the specifications from the manufacturer, the CB powders were produced by a furnace black process where the defects were easily introduced into the graphitic lattice because of the incomplete combustion at a very high temperature. Furthermore, a conspicuous peak can be observed at 472 cm−1 for the CB/CuXS thin film, which is attributable to S–S stretching vibration. This Raman characteristic is highly consistent with a copper sulfide system reported in the literature, but it was not recorded in a thin film fabricated without sulfidation treatment. As a result, the Raman analysis verifies the formation and the presence of copper sulfide catalysts.
The surface morphology of the resultant thin films fabricated with 1–3 coating times was analyzed by SEM. In comparison with a pristine FTO (see Fig. S1 in the ESI), it can be readily noticed in Fig. 4(a)–(c) that the CB/CuXS composite catalysts are deposited on the FTO surface, and the coverage of the catalysts is obviously enhanced with the increase in employed coating times. The insets of Fig. 4(a)–(c) show the cross-sectional morphology, from which the thickness of CB/CuXS-1, CB/CuXS-2 and CB/CuXS-3 composite catalysts can be roughly measured to be about 0.64, 1.12 and 1.42 μm, respectively. Meanwhile, as exhibited in Fig. 4(f), the appearance of the composite electrodes becomes darker as the coating step is repeated. On the basis of these observations and results, it appears that increasing the coating times results in a larger amount of catalyst deposition. Furthermore, Fig. 4(d) reveals that the composite electrode is entirely made up of millions of nanoparticulates which distinctly constitute a mesoporous structure, offering a vast electrocatalytic area for the occurrence of redox reactions. The TEM image of the catalysts detached from the glass substrate is shown in Fig. 4(e). It displays agglomerated particles with different sizes in a random arrangement. The spherical units with particle sizes of around 20–60 nm can be recognized as carbon black, while the other much smaller particles are considered to be copper sulfide catalysts. In brief, according to the results mentioned in this section, the CB/CuXS composite thin films were successfully fabricated by this facile, cost-effective and reliable method.

Analogous to conventional DSSCs, the counter electrode in QDSSCs is responsible for the reduction of oxidized mediators (i.e. polysulfide ions, Sn2−), so the electrocatalytic activity of a counter electrode material is clearly important in determining the corresponding photovoltaic performance. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), Tafel polarization and cyclic voltammetry (CV) were adopted to evaluate the electrochemical properties of various thin film electrodes in an aqueous polysulfide electrolyte. In addition to the CB/CuXS films, three kinds of thin films were utilized to implement the comparison; one is a simple CB thin film without additional catalysts, the second is sputtered platinum (Pt), and the third is copper sulfide synthesized by chemical bath deposition (denoted as CBD-CuS). Among them, the last one has been commonly used in the literature as an efficient counter electrode material for QDSSC applications. The digital pictures of Pt and CBD-CuS thin film electrodes are exhibited in Fig. 4(f).

EIS analysis is employed very often to examine the electrochemical characteristics at interfaces. In this study, EIS measurements were conducted with symmetrical dummy cells which were assembled using two identical thin film electrodes and an aqueous polysulfide electrolyte (1.0 M S and 1.0 M Na2S). As can be seen in Fig. 5(a), the Nyquist plots of the studied dummy cells reveal a semicircle feature in relation to the charge transfer at the electrode/electrolyte interface. By fitting the Nyquist spectra to a simple equivalent circuit (see Fig. S2 in the ESI), the related series resistances (Rs), constant phase elements (CPE) and charge transfer resistances (RCT) can be determined. Because the catalytic films were coated on the same kind of FTO substrate, the Rs values of all dummy cells are almost similar, as summarized in Table 1. In addition, the RCT values are 11.4, 4.82 and 3.35 Ω cm2 for the CB/CuXS-1, CB/CuXS-2 and CB/CuXS-3 dummy cells, respectively, suggesting that the electrocatalytic activity related to a sulfide ion/polysulfide ion (S2−/Sn2−) redox reaction is strongly dependent on the amount of catalyst deposition. The more the CB/CuXS composite catalysts deposited, the better the electrocatalytic activity a thin film electrode demonstrates. Moreover, it is worth noting that the RCT value of the CB/CuXS-1 cell is nearly comparable to that of the CBD-CuS cell (10.2 Ω cm2), yet much lower than those of the Pt and CB cells (Pt: 2.00 × 103 Ω cm2 and CB: 1.79 × 104 Ω cm2). This result illustrates that, concerning the electrocatalysis related to the S2−/Sn2− redox reaction, the CB/CuXS-1 thin film is similar to the commonly used CBD-CuS electrode, whereas neither the Pt nor the CB film is suitable as a counter electrode material for QDSSCs.
Thin film electrode

R
s
 (Ω cm2)
CPE (mF cm−2)

R
CT
 (Ω cm2)

J
sc
 (mA cm−2)

V
oc
 (mV)
FF

η
 (%)

a Fitted results acquired from impedance measurements.
b Photovoltaic parameters of CdS QDSSCs measured under 1 sun irradiation. The data are the average values calculated from five cells, and the parameters of the cell showing the best efficiency under each condition are exhibited in parentheses.

CB/CuXS-1
1.77
6.65
11.4
8.31 (8.58)
639 (638)
0.530 (0.527)
2.81 ± 0.05 (2.88)
CB/CuXS-2
2.67
16.8
4.82
9.41 (9.59)
641 (639)
0.566 (0.570)
3.41 ± 0.06 (3.49)
CB/CuXS-3
2.46
24.1
3.35
9.50 (9.70)
642 (640)
0.574 (0.578)
3.50 ± 0.08 (3.59)
Pt
2.11
1.61 × 10−1
2.00 × 103
5.34 (5.49)
599 (593)
0.222 (0.223)
0.710 ± 0.016 (0.726)
CBD-CuS
1.97
14.7
10.2
8.74 (8.87)
631 (631)
0.528 (0.535)
2.91 ± 0.06 (2.99)
CB
2.86
6.20 × 10−2
1.79 × 104
0.081 (0.091)
205 (225)
0.131 (0.124)
0.002 ± 0.000 (0.003)
Tafel polarization analysis is another simple method to evaluate the solid/liquid interfacial electrochemical properties. The symmetrical dummy cells, the same as those used in the EIS experiment, were employed to measure the Tafel polarization curves at a low scan rate of 10 mV s−1. In the Tafel zone of the polarization curves, the exchange current density (J0) can be obtained by extrapolating the cathodic or anodic branch to the vertical line at 0 V. The J0 represents the intrinsic charge transfer at the electrode/electrolyte interface at equilibrium. According to the equation of J0 = RT × (nFRCT)−1, J0 is inversely proportional to RCT (n, F, R and T represent the number of electrons involved in the charge transfer, Faraday constant, gas constant and temperature, respectively); therefore, a higher J0 substantially signifies the superior electrocatalytic activity of a thin film electrode. It is found in Fig. 5(b) that the J0s are varied, following the sequence of CB/CuXS-1 < CB/CuXS-2 < CB/CuXS-3, which is consistent with the dependence of the electrocatalytic activity on the deposited catalyst amount as mentioned before. The CBD-CuS dummy cell reveals a J0 similar to that of the CB/CuXS-1 cell, confirming again the similar electrochemical behavior of these two thin films. Moreover, the J0s are much lower for the Pt and CB dummy cells, suggesting poor electrocatalysis with respect to the S2−/Sn2− redox reaction.
The electrocatalytic properties of these thin film electrodes were also investigated by the traditional CV method. The CV measurement was carried out at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 using a three-electrode system composed of a thin film working electrode, a Pt foil counter electrode, a SCE reference electrode and an aqueous polysulfide electrolyte (1.0 M S and 1.0 M Na2S). Fig. 6 presents the CV curves of various thin film electrodes (in the 5th cycle). These “straight” CV features are similar to those published in the literature. The cathodic current in a CV curve represents the reduction reaction identical to that existing at the counter electrode in QDSSCs. It is evident that the cathodic currents of the CB/CuXS composite thin films are larger than that of the sputtered Pt, reflecting the superior electrochemical behavior of the CB/CuXS composite catalysts. Meanwhile, the cathodic current increases as the amount of the CB/CuXS deposition is enhanced. This tendency is in good agreement with the previous results obtained by the EIS and Tafel polarization analyses. The inset of Fig. 6 shows a comparison of 15 consecutive CV cycles between Pt and CB/CuXS-3 thin films. The cathodic current of the Pt film gradually decays with repeated CV cycles, while both the curve shape and the current value are nearly constant for the CB/CuXS-3 thin film. This result illustrates that the sputtered Pt thin film is electrochemically unstable in the polysulfide electrolyte, probably ascribed to the poisoning effect induced by the chemical adsorption of sulfur species on the Pt surface. In contrast, the CB/CuXS-3 thin film is eminently stable; its cathodic current merely decreases very slightly after the 300-cycle CV measurement (see Fig. S3 in the ESI), demonstrating the excellent electrochemical stability in the S2−/Sn2− environment. To sum up, the effect of the catalyst amount on the electrochemical behavior has been thoroughly illustrated in this section, and the CB/CuXS composite thin film fabricated by this facile method displays outstanding electrocatalytic activity and satisfactory electrochemical stability, implying its potential as a promising counter electrode for QDSSCs.

The CB/CuXS composite and other catalytic thin films studied in the previous section are employed as counter electrodes in QDSSCs using S2−/Sn2− redox shuttles. In view of the penetration of redox shuttles inside the TiO2 mesoporous structure, TiO2 particles with a diameter of ∼30 nm were employed to prepare a transparent main layer (∼7.5 μm in thickness) in the photoelectrode of QDSSCs. A light-scattering layer (∼5.0 μm in thickness) was further introduced, yielding a TiO2 photoelectrode with a double-layered architecture. A successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) process was implemented for the deposition of QD sensitizers. In terms of CdS QDs, to achieve a better QD distribution, sodium acetate was utilized as an additive in the cationic precursor in the SILAR.

First, the applicability of the aforementioned thin films for counter electrodes is evaluated with CdS-sensitized photoelectrodes prepared using 5 SILAR cycles. The assembled CdS QDSSCs were analyzed under simulated 1 sun irradiation (AM 1.5 global spectrum, 100 mW cm−2); the corresponding J–V curves and the extracted photovoltaic parameters are shown in Fig. 7(a) and Table 1, respectively. It can be seen that the QDSSC based on the CB/CuXS-1 thin film reveals a J–V curve similar to that of the solar cell using a CBD-CuS thin film, and that comparable power conversion efficiencies (η) were obtained (2.88% vs. 2.99%). Meanwhile, as depicted in Fig. 7(b), there is no significant discrepancy in incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra between the CB/CuXS-1 and CBD-CuS solar cells. These photovoltaic results are in line with expectations owing to the highly similar electrochemical properties of these two thin films, as demonstrated in the previous section; this therefore indicates that in terms of a counter electrode material for QDSSCs, the CB/CuXS thin film based on a single coating rivals the commonly used CBD-CuS thin film. In addition, the solar cell equipped with a simple CB electrode presents nearly no photovoltaic response, illustrating that the CB powder cannot show adequate electrocatalytic activity, but can provide a porous structure for catalyst accumulation. Regarding the QDSSC equipped with a Pt counter electrode, an anomalous J–V curve and inferior IPCE response were measured, ascribed to the poor electrocatalytic activity of Pt related to the S2−/Sn2− redox reaction, as discussed previously. When comparing the Pt and CB/CuXS-1 solar cells, the red shift of the IPCE spectrum can be observed. It is quite possible that the CB/CuXS composite films can harvest photons and reveal a photovoltaic response. More detailed analyses are required to figure out the reason for this unique characteristic.
Compared to the CB/CuXS-1 solar cell, both the CB/CuXS-2 and CB/CuXS-3 QDSSCs displayed superior efficiency, which is intimately connected to the striking increases in both the short-circuit current density (Jsc) and the fill factor (FF). These enhanced parameters are manifestly attributable to the improved electrocatalytic activity of the related thin films, as mentioned before; this also illustrates that increasing the amount of catalyst deposition is beneficial for the photovoltaic performance of QDSSCs. Even though the CB/CuXS-3 thin film definitely shows better electrocatalytic activity than the CB/CuXS-2 thin film, the corresponding effect on photovoltaic performance seems to be a little limited. In consequence, it is inferred that the catalyst amount on the CB/CuXS-3 electrode can meet the requirement of a conventional QDSSC, and that the CB/CuXS-3 thin film can be utilized as an appropriate counter electrode in QDSSCs using more robust QD sensitizers.
To further boost the photovoltaic performance, a powerful QD combination which has been proved to have exceptional charge separation and a broad wavelength range for harvesting photons, i.e. CdS/CdSe, was introduced as the sensitizer. For this QD combination, SILAR cycles of 2 and 6 were implemented to synthesize CdS and CdSe sensitizers, respectively; and an anionic precursor with high reactivity was utilized for the CdSe deposition under an inert atmosphere.Fig. 8(a) displays a schematic illustration of the CdS/CdSe QDSSC equipped with a CB/CuXS-3 thin film counter electrode. The J–V curve of this solar cell measured under 1 sun irradiation (100 mW cm−2) is depicted in Fig. 8(b), and the cell parameters in relation to the best performance, as listed in Table 2, are as follows: Jsc of 16.96 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 584 mV, FF of 0.567 and η of 5.62%. Undoubtedly, the striking increases in Jsc and η are directly related to the broad range of its IPCE spectrum, as exhibited in the inset of Fig. 8(b), suggesting that compared to CdS QDs, more photons were harvested and utilized by the CdS/CdSe QD sensitizers. The decrease in Voc is moderate, resulting from the lower energy level position of CdSe. Nonetheless, this result is highly competitive in comparison with other reported QDSSCs based on CdS/CdSe sensitizers and carbon-related composite counter electrodes (see Table S1 in the ESI). Furthermore, it is worth noting that the CdS/CdSe QDSSC assembled using a CBD-CuS counter electrode reveals a low FF of 0.491 together with an inferior η of 4.70% (see Fig. S4 in the ESI). This therefore verifies that the CB/CuXS-3 composite thin film fabricated by the facile method proposed in this study is eminently suitable as a counter electrode catalyst for highly efficient QDSSCs.
Illumination intensity (mW cm−2)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)
FF

η (%)

a The average parameters calculated from five cells.
b The parameters obtained from the cell demonstrating the best efficiency under 1 sun irradiation.

100 (1 sun)
16.55
584
0.569
5.50 ± 0.08
100 (1 sun)
16.96
584
0.567
5.62
70.2
11.61
579
0.579
5.54
50.0
8.43
572
0.578
5.57
29.9
4.84
557
0.583
5.26
9.91
1.64
518
0.552
4.73
In addition to the conventional 1 sun, the CdS/CdSe QDSSC was also evaluated under other irradiation conditions with various light intensities. The resultant photovoltaic behavior and corresponding parameters are shown in Fig. S5 (ESI) and Table 2, respectively. On the basis of these results, the tendencies of Jsc and conversion efficiency as a function of illumination intensity are acquired, as exhibited in Fig. 8(c). It is clear that the Jsc expresses an approximate linear response to the enhancement of light intensity, representing efficient charge extraction in this high-performance QDSSC. The efficiency is almost constant in the illumination intensity range of 100 to 50 mW cm−2; however, it declines as the illumination intensity is decreased below 50.0 mW cm−2, which is attributable to the unexpected drop in Voc. This result is a little different from that of the common DSSC. The charge transfer mechanism in the QDSSC is more complicated; it is thus deduced that in terms of the QDSSC the charge recombination paths under low-light conditions are changed, unlike those under normal 1 sun. Nevertheless, this QDSSC, comprising CdS/CdSe sensitizers and CB/CuXS composite catalysts, still performs well in a wide irradiation range. On the basis of the highly electrocatalytic CB/CuXS composite catalyst demonstrated in this study, it is anticipated that better photovoltaic performance can be achieved when a more robust QD material is employed to fabricate QDSSCs.

In conclusion, a facile, cost-effective and reliable method is proposed herein to fabricate highly electrocatalytic counter electrodes for QD photovoltaic applications. In this method, FTO substrates are first spin-coated with a dispersion consisting of commercial carbon black (CB) nanoparticulates and copper salts. The amount of catalyst deposition and the surface morphology can be adjusted by the number of coating times employed. The XPS analysis indicates that in the as-prepared thin film, copper elements are present in a divalent state [Cu(II)]. The thin film is then immersed in a Na2S solution to perform a sulfidation treatment; during this time, a reduction of Cu(II) to Cu(I) as well as an ion exchange reaction take place simultaneously. Eventually, CB/CuXS composite thin films are obtained, in which the mesoporous architecture of CB accumulated nonstoichiometric CuXS catalysts.

The electrocatalytic activity of the CB/CuXS thin films related to the S2−/Sn2− redox reaction has been thoroughly investigated. The experimental results show that the catalyst amount dominates the electrochemical behavior of the CB/CuXS electrodes. In terms of the electrocatalytic activity, the CB/CuXS thin film fabricated by a single coating (CB/CuXS-1) is not only better than the noble Pt catalyst, but also almost comparable to the commonly used copper sulfide prepared by the CBD process (CBD-CuS). A similar photovoltaic performance is also measured for the solar cells assembled using a CB/CuXS-1 or a CBD-CuS counter electrode. Furthermore, due to the increase in catalyst deposition, the CB/CuXS-3 thin film demonstrates improved electrocatalytic activity, and the relevant QDSSC based on the CdS sensitizer exhibits an efficiency of 3.59% under 1 sun irradiation. The efficiency is further boosted to 5.62% by replacing the CdS with robust CdS/CdSe sensitizers, and the application of this CdS/CdSe QDSSC to perform under various irradiation conditions has been evaluated.

Fluorine-doped tin oxide-coated glass (FTO, TEC 7, 2.2 mm thick, 7 Ω sq−1) was employed as the substrate to fabricate various thin film electrodes in this study. Prior to coating catalytic materials, the FTO substrates were ultrasonicated in sequence with detergent, deionized water and ethanol for 15 min, respectively. An ultra-facile method was developed for the fabrication of CB/CuXS composite thin films. A dispersion was first prepared by mixing CB powders, EC and Cu(NO3)2·3H2O in ethanol; this dispersion was dropped on the cleaned FTO substrate, and then the spin-coating method was conducted at 2000 rpm for 20 s. This coating step was performed several times to enhance the amount of catalyst deposition; before each coating, the pre-deposited CB/copper(II) thin film needed to be dried using a hot plate at 90 °C for 15 min. Upon finishing the coating process, the as-prepared thin film was dried at 90 °C for 25 min, and a sulfidation treatment was then carried out by immersing the thin film electrode in a 0.1 M Na2S aqueous solution at 60 °C for 30 min. Then, the electrode was rinsed with deionized water and dried in air, and a CB/CuXS composite thin film electrode was thereby obtained.


Three different kinds of catalytic thin films were prepared for comparison. One was a simple CB thin film fabricated following the same procedures described in a previous study. Another was a Pt thin film which was deposited on a cleaned FTO substrate using an automatic sputter coater (108 auto, Cressington Scientific Instruments, England); the sputter-coating process was executed for 105 s in an argon atmosphere at a pressure of ∼0.06 mbar with a controlled current of 40 mA. The other was a copper sulfide thin film which was fabricated by the CBD method according to the published literature; in brief, a cleaned FTO substrate was immersed vertically in a growth solution reacting at 60 °C for 75 min. The growth solution was prepared by vigorously stirring a mixture of 0.1 M CuSO4·5H2O, 1.0 M thioacetamide and 0.6 M acetic acid in deionized water for 30 min. In this article, these three kinds of catalytic thin film electrodes are denoted as CB, Pt and CBD-CuS.


A complete QDSSC was composed of a QD-sensitized photoelectrode (more information is illustrated in the ESI), a polysulfide electrolyte and a counter electrode comprising electrocatalytic materials. The counter electrode and photoelectrode were assembled with a sealing Surlyn sheet (60 μm-thick, Meltonix 1170-60, Solaronix) as the separating spacer; the polysulfide electrolyte (1.0 M S and 1.0 M Na2S in deionized water) was then injected into the solar cell through predrilled holes on the counter electrode. The active area of each solar cell for the irradiation was defined as 0.16 cm2 with a black mask, and at least five solar cells were fabricated for each parameter in order for the reproducibility of the photovoltaic characteristics to be verified.

The symmetrical dummy cell for the impedance spectroscopy and Tafel polarization analyses exhibited the same sandwich-type configuration as the QDSSC, but it was assembled using two identical electrodes both of which were coated with the same catalyst. The sealing Surlyn and the electrolyte employed in the dummy cell were also the same as those utilized in the QDSSC, and the active area in each dummy cell was 5 × 5 mm2.

There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


This work was financially supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) of Taiwan (MOST 103-2221-E-006-248-MY3 and 105-2119-M-006-003) and in part by the Ministry of Education of Taiwan under the Headquarters of University Advancement at National Cheng Kung University. The authors greatly appreciate Yi-Chen Hou for helpful suggestions and Cheng-Chung Lai for providing the photographic device. I-Ping Liu thanks the scholarships received from Hsing Tian Kong and CTCI Foundations.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The experimental section including materials, preparation of QD-sensitized photoelectrodes, characterization and measurements; a comparison of cell performance; an SEM image of bare FTO; an equivalent circuit for the EIS fitting; a CV result of the CB/CuXS-3 thin film; photovoltaic J–V curves of the CdS/CdSe solar cells using CBD-CuS and CB/CuXS-3 counter electrodes. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta06023h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017