 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA08068E
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18763-18768


Il
Jeon
,

Yang
Qian
,

Shoichiro
Nakao
,

Daisuke
Ogawa
,

Rong
Xiang
,

Taiki
Inoue
,

Shohei
Chiashi
,

Tetsuya
Hasegawa
,

Shigeo
Maruyama
* and 

Yutaka
Matsuo
*

Department of Mechanical Engineering, School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan. E-mail: matsuo@photon.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Kanagawa Academy of Science and Technology, 3-2-1 Sakado, Takatsu-ku, Kawasaki 213-0012, Japan

Department of Chemistry, School of Science, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan

National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), 1-2-1 Namiki, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8564, Japan

Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China

Received
18th September 2016
, Accepted 7th November 2016
First published on 9th November 2016
This study reports improved performance of inverted organic solar cells by using high working-pressure sputtered ZnO. Sputtering produces highly crystalline ZnO without the need for thermal annealing. However, photovoltaic devices fabricated by using sputtered ZnO have shown lower power conversion efficiencies than those made by using sol–gel ZnO. On the other hand, sol–gel ZnO limits the flexible application of inverted organic solar cells because of high-temperature annealing. Therefore, a new method of sputtering under high working pressure is developed. The power conversion efficiency of inverted organic solar cells fabricated using this high working-pressure-sputtered ZnO (η = 8.6%, VOC = 0.77 V, JSC = 15.6 mA cm−2, and FF = 0.72) is superior to that of conventional sol–gel ZnO-based devices (η = 7.8%, VOC = 0.73 V, JSC = 16.0 mA cm−2, and FF = 0.63). Furthermore, utilizing the low temperature process of sputtering, flexible application is successfully achieved using polyethylene terephthalate indium tin oxide films.

Organic solar cells (OSCs) have received much attention in recent years due to their potential as the next-generation of clean and efficient light harvesting devices. Moreover, there are substantial benefits to be gained from the organic thin-film structure, which translate into flexible device application. In inverted OSCs, ZnO plays a major role as an electron-transporting layer (ETL). ZnO forms an ohmic contact with ITO and the active layer, because its conduction-band edge (−4.4 eV) is located between the conduction-band edge of ITO (−4.7 eV) and the LUMO energy level of electron acceptors (−3.8 eV). ZnO is currently the best-performing electron transporting layer (ETL) among candidates such as TiOx, Cs2CO3, and Al2O3, due to its high mobility and reduced light-soaking effect. Currently, the most widely used method of depositing ZnO is the sol–gel method reported by Heeger and his colleagues. However, it has been well known that a high performance ZnO film requires high temperature thermal annealing, which limits the flexibility of its application. Low-temperature ZnO processes have been developed, but they provide OSCs with low power conversion efficiencies (PCEs). There are other techniques that enable low temperature ZnO fabrication, namely plasma-enhanced chemical vapour deposition (PEC-VD), microwave plasma chemical vapour deposition (MPCVD), atomic layer deposition (ALD), and sputtering, of which the latter has attracted a lot of attention lately. Sputtering not only operates at low temperature, but is also able to deposit dense, homogeneous, and reproducible ZnO films with well-defined c-axis orientation even when deposited on amorphous rigid substrates. Also, sputtering is compatible with the roll-to-roll process under high deposition rates which can challenge the solution process of ZnO. What is more, since the substrate, indium tin oxide (ITO), is sputtered anyway, its cost-issue can be resolved if ZnO is sputtered right after the ITO deposition.

Despite the numerous merits of the sputtering technique, high PCE has not been reported from sputtered ZnO-based OSCs to date. Some report that high-temperature annealing of sputtered ZnO can improve PCEs, but it defies the objective of using the sputtering technique over the solution process. There is a two-step method that evades high-temperature annealing, but this technique is disadvantageous in terms of its ability to produce high-quality films with low VOC and the number of steps.
In this paper, we report a high-performance one-step ZnO film sputtering technique that utilizes high working pressure (HWP) (Fig. S1). HWP reduced the energy of high-energy particles such as recoiled Ar and negatively charged oxygen, based on previous studies on TiO2. This led to higher crystallinity and increased conductivity of ZnO films, owing to reduced recombination centers. The high quality of HWP-sputtered ZnO was proven by a strong c-axis (002) peak from X-ray diffraction spectroscopy (XRD) and an O–Zn peak from X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). On the basis of the finding, inverted OSCs were fabricated as shown in Fig. 1. We obtained a PCE of 8.6% for thieno[3,4-b]thiophene/benzodithiophene (PTB7) and [6,6]-phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM)-based inverted OSCs with an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.77 V and a fill factor (FF) of 0.72, while the sol–gel ZnO-based device showed a PCE of 7.8% with a VOC of 0.73 and a FF of 0.65. The increases in both the VOC and FF denote the superior film-quality of the HWP-sputtered ZnO films. Furthermore, a flexible OSC was fabricated on an ITO/polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate and it exhibited a PCE of 4.4%.
The crystallinity of ZnO films was investigated using XRD (Fig. 2). HWP-sputtered ZnO films showed a (002) peak at 34.26°, in addition to a (103) peak at 63.81°; on the other hand, the sol–gel ZnO films showed no peaks. This reveals that the sputter-grown ZnO films have a wurtzite structure (JCPDS card no. 36-1451), while the sol–gel ZnO films have an amorphous layer with small crystallite size. This also shows that HWP-sputtered ZnO exhibited c-axis preferential growth. Such a favourable effect can be attributed to the better control of the sputtered particles in a HWP atmosphere. In general, working pressure is optimized to produce dense films with high crystallinity, which belong to the zone T structure in the Thornton model. Because the formation of the zone T structure is assisted by the bombardment of high energy (100–1000 eV) particles, for example, recoiled Ar and negatively charged oxygen ions, films inevitably contain defects that can act as recombination centers. However, if the deposition is performed under HWP, defects can be reduced via low energy particles arising from scattering of the process gas (thermalization). Indeed, a better photocatalytic effect was also observed under HWP in TiO2. Therefore, we can expect the possible existence of recombination centers deteriorating the performance in conventionally sputtered ZnO films and higher quality from HWP-sputtered ZnO, which will improve the mobility of electrons and electron collection efficiency at the interface between ZnO and the active layer.
We tested the extent to which ZnO thickness, sputter working-pressure, and oxygen partial pressure affect the performance of ZnO in inverted OSCs. We found that a working pressure of 4.2 Pa and a thickness of 5 nm gave the best performance (Table S1). The PCEs increased with an increase in working pressure, but too much pressure did not yield working solar cells. Fig. S2 shows the atomic force microscopy (AFM) images and roughness averages (Ra) of ZnO produced under different working pressures. Ra marginally increased with increasing working pressure. An increase in sputtering pressure giving a rougher film is well known. Yet, ZnO films produced under 7.7 × 10 Pa showed extremely high Ra with many islands. This poor morphology results in poor device performance. To investigate further, we used XRD and XPS. XRD data showed no significant difference among the ZnO films produced under HWP, but the ZnO film produced under a low working pressure (2.6 × 10−1 Pa) showed a relatively weak (002) peak at 34.26°, which could be indicative of lower crystallinity of the film (Fig. S3). On the other hand, XPS data displayed a clearer difference between the pressures (Fig. 3). Fig. 3a shows Zn 2p3/2 peaks in which lower binding energy implies that more Zn atoms are bound to O atoms. Also, Fig. 3b shows O 1s peaks in which the peak with lower binding energy corresponds to O atoms in a ZnO matrix and the peak with higher binding energy corresponds to oxygen-deficient species which are defects. Therefore, the ZnO film fabricated under HWP (4.2 Pa) shows the maximum Zn–O bonds in the ZnO matrix and the minimum O defects. Too low or too high working pressure will deviate from the optimal point. The optimized working pressure leads to high performance in sputtered ZnO-based OSCs.
The partial pressure of oxygen during the sputtering process affects the quality of ZnO films. In order to find out its effect on HWP-sputtered ZnO, the partial pressure of oxygen was varied from 0% to 7%. Table S2 shows the PCEs of inverted OSCs fabricated using sputtered ZnO films under 0–7% oxygen partial pressures. From the table and the J–V curves in Fig. S4, we can observe that all photovoltaic parameters drop with the increase in partial pressure and 1% partial pressure displays the optimal performance. An oxygen partial pressure of 0% did not yield a working solar cell, indicating that it is crucial to have oxygen during sputtering to ensure that the ratio of Zn:O is 1:1. While AFM images show no morphological difference among the samples (Fig. S5), XRD spectra show ZnO sputtered under 1% partial pressure possessing a strong (002) peak (Fig. S6). The XPS data more clearly display the quality of the ZnO film by revealing the strongest O–Zn peak and weakest O defect peak for the ZnO sputtered under 1% partial pressure (Fig. S7). Too much oxygen was also bad for the ZnO films and the reason has been reported by Grunze and colleagues.
Data obtained in previous studies indicate that using high temperature annealing on sputtered ZnO improves the performance of OSCs by inducing structural changes of the ZnO surface. According to Jouane et al., sputtered ZnO films annealed at high temperatures demonstrated improvement in performance when used in OSCs. In our study, HWP-ZnO (4.2 Pa) films were annealed at different temperatures from 200 °C to 400 °C in air and in N2. Table S3 shows the photovoltaic performance recorded. The thermal annealing decreases the performance of the OSC devices substantially. Although annealing in both air and N2 decreased the PCEs, annealing in N2 significantly decreased the performance with the increase in annealing temperature. Fig. S8 shows the results obtained using AFM. While there is no apparent change in the ZnO samples annealed in air, thermal annealing in N2 created severe aggregations with the increase in annealing temperature. From the XPS data, it is clear that thermal annealing of ZnO in air increases the O deficient peak at 532 eV, and at the same time the O–Zn peak at 530 eV decreases with annealing (Fig. S9). The position of the Zn 2p3/2 peaks also agrees with those of the peaks from annealed ZnO films, which have higher binding energy than that of non-annealed ZnO. The same was true for the ZnO films annealed in N2, except that the O–Zn peak disappeared and strong O deficient peaks appeared immediately after they were annealed (Fig. S10). This is because they were annealed under no oxygen. Based on these results, we conclude that thermal annealing does not improve the HWP-ZnO film in OSCs.
Through various optimizations, we have found the optimum working pressure to be 4.2 Pa, thickness to be under 20 nm, and oxygen partial pressure to be 1% without thermal annealing. Inverted OSCs using P3HT:PC61BM and PTB7:PC71BM were fabricated using the optimized HWP-sputtered ZnO. The best data out of 10 cells from each condition are demonstrated in Table 1. The J–V curves are displayed in Fig. 4. For both the P3HT and PTB7 systems, PCEs were substantially increased. This increase resulted mainly from the fill factor (FF), which was determined by low series resistance (RS). This is surmised to be due to reduced recombination centers from HWP sputtering. HWP-sputtered ZnO-based devices showed higher open-circuit voltage (VOC) compared to the sol–gel ZnO-based devices, as can be seen from the PTB7-based devices. Although such an increase in VOC was also observed from the P3HT system, the difference was more frequently observed from the PTB7 system due to its intrinsically high VOC value. The differences in the short-circuit current density (JSC) values were subtle. The concurrent increase or decrease in JSC was sample dependent. Although, HWP-sputtered ZnO showed slightly higher transmittance especially below the wavelength of 400 nm than sol–gel ZnO (Fig. S11), our conjecture is that it is not sufficient for an optical effect to take place. The recorded PCE of HWP-sputtered ZnO-based P3HT:PCBM OSCs is the highest reported value in the literature to our knowledge (Fig. S12), and the PCE of the PTB7:PC71BM OSC is also high among the reported values.
ETL
Active layer

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF

R
S (Ω)

R
SH (Ω)
PCE (%)
Sol–gel ZnO
P3HT:PCBM
0.61
9.08
0.56
17
1.1 × 104
3.07
HWP-sputtered ZnO
0.61
10.3
0.60
3
7.9 × 103
3.71
Sol–gel ZnO
PTB7:PC71BM
0.73
16.0
0.65
7
5.7 × 106
7.81
HWP-sputtered ZnO
0.77
15.6
0.72
3
2.7 × 106
8.58
It is necessary to address previous studies in which sputtering was used to grow ZnO films and OSCs were fabricated. Fig. S4 shows the reported PCEs from the literature and working pressure used during sputtering. We can observe a positive correlation between the PCEs and working pressure used. However, there were some exceptions: for example, Jouane et al. achieved almost 3% at low working pressure, but high temperature (500 °C) annealing of ZnO was used. Zhu et al. reported around 3.6%, but they had to use two-step sputtering.
By implementing the demonstrated technique, flexible inverted OSCs were fabricated on a PET/ITO substrate. While high performance sol–gel ZnO requires annealing temperature above the glass transition temperature (Tg) of PET, the synthesis of HWP-sputtered ZnO is a room temperature process. Fig. 5 shows the photovoltaic data and J–V curves of the flexible inverted OSC with a picture as an inset. The FF was low due to the intrinsic high sheet resistance of the PET/ITO. Also we suspect that chlorobenzene, the solvent used to dissolve PTB7:PC71BM, might have damaged the substrate. Nevertheless, a decent PCE of 4.4% was achieved.

In summary, we have presented the effectiveness of the HWP-sputtering technique in producing room temperature and high quality ZnO films for inverted OSCs. Moreover, its flexible application was demonstrated. As noted earlier, XPS served as the most informative method when it comes to analyzing the sputtered ZnO films. The strong O–Zn peak and weak O deficient peak of optimized HWP-sputtered ZnO evidenced its high quality. Also, the crystallinity of the c-axis (002) peak was strong from XRD, indicating improvement in electron mobility, which was reflected by lowering RS. Our results provide compelling evidence for the excellence of the sputtering technique over the conventional sol–gel process. Future work should therefore include its follow-up applications in various other photovoltaics such as perovskite solar cells to evaluate its effectiveness when other aspects are concerned.


This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (15H05760 and 16H04187) and the CREST project. I. J. thanks the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science for financial support (16F16069). A part of this work was conducted at Advanced Characterization Nanotechnology Platform of the University of Tokyo, supported by "Nanotechnology Platform" of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT), Japan.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Sputtered ZnO working pressure split test, sputtered ZnO oxygen partial pressure split test, sputtered ZnO thermal annealing test, sputtered ZnO optical analysis, and literature comparisons. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta08068e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016