 DOI: 10.1039/B917634A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 492-497

Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical Terms


Zhifu
Liu
,

Yongjin
Li
,

Zhigang
Zhao
,

Yan
Cui
,

Kohjiro
Hara
 and 

Masahiro
Miyauchi
*

National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Central 5, 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8565, Japan. E-mail: m-miyauchi@aist.go.jp

Received
26th August 2009
, Accepted 22nd October 2009
First published on
11th November 2009

Nanoporous TiO2 films were prepared on conductive fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrates using polystyrene-block-poly (ethylene oxide) (PS-b-PEO) copolymer as template. By optimizing the ratio of the template to titanium precursor, a TiO2 film with uniform bicontinuous pore structure was obtained. The CdSe quantum dots (QDs) were in situ deposited on the nanoporous TiO2 films by chemical bath deposition. The solar cells based on CdSe QD-sensitized TiO2 films were evaluated by measuring the incident photon to electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) and the photovoltaic performance. The TiO2 film with bicontinuous pore structure showed a higher IPCE value and superior photovoltaic performance. The solar cell based on CdS and CdSe QDs co-sensitized 1.6 μm thick TiO2 films can reach a peak IPCE value of 21% and a power conversion efficiency of 0.358% under the simulated sunlight (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2).

The application of solar energy is thought to be one of the best options to solve the energy crisis on the earth. Improving solar energy conversion efficiency and reducing the production costs of solar cell panels are the main themes of solar cell development. Dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) developed by Gratzel et al. were thought of as a promising alternative to low-cost solar energy because of their comparable power conversion efficiency, low cost and ease of production. The photoanode of such cells is constituted by a nanoporous TiO2 film sensitized generally with organic dyes. The dyes act as light absorbers and various organic dyes have been applied for improving the efficiency, light absorption coverage, stability, and reducing the cost. Instead of organic dyes, the narrow band gap semiconductor QDs such as CdS, CdSe, PbS, InAs, and InP were also used as sensitizers because of their tunable absorption spectra, large extinction coefficient, and the possibility of multi-exciton generation through impact ionization.

In either organic dyes or QD-sensitized photoanodes, the nanoporous TiO2 film on conducting glass substrate acts as an electron collector. The electrons are injected from the photoexcited dyes or QDs into the conduction band of TiO2, and diffuse through the network of TiO2 by a random walk process to the conducting glass. Control of the microstructure of the TiO2 film such as the surface area, the porosity and pore size, crystal structure, and crystallinity is extremely important since it is critical in governing the sensitizer absorption, the electronic properties, and the electron transport and recombination characteristics of solar cells. Although extensive work has been done on optimizing the TiO2 photoanode for DSSCs, a new challenge appears due to the recent development of solid state DSSCs, which require sufficient filtration of the electrolyte into TiO2 porous photoanode. On the other hand, the QDs showed faster recombination speed and a more complicated electron-loss pathway than organic dyes. The optimized geometry of the porous TiO2 film for QDs solar cells may be different from that of DSSCs. So it would be very meaningful to finely control the microstructure of the nanoporous TiO2 for new solar cell development.
Block copolymers are versatile soft templates for the synthesis of nanoarchitectures with periods from below 5 nm up to around 100 nm because of their ability to form self-assembled ordered nanoscopic domains. For a diblock copolymer containing a hydrophilic block and hydrophobic block, the metal oxide precursors can selectively swell the hydrophilic part of the copolymer. The hydrophilic part and hydrophobic part will separate through self-assembly forming spheres, columns, lamellae, or gyroid microstructures after the solvent evaporation. Highly crystallized metal oxide with different pore structures would be obtained after removing the polymer template by high-temperature annealing. The pore structure and pore size of the products can be finely adjusted by changing the molecular weight and the weight ratio between the hydrophilic part and hydrophobic part, which provides a toolbox for tailoring the nanostructures to fulfil the demand of solar cell applications. The block copolymer templated nanoporous TiO2 has been used for dye-sensitized solar cells and solid-state hybrid solar cells, and promising performance was achieved. The inorganic QDs have different size, different characteristics of interconnection with TiO2, and different electron-transfer behavior compared with organic dyes. So the performance of the QDSSCs based on this kind of nanoporous TiO2 should be different. However, there have been no reports on QDs sensitized solar cell using block copolymer templated nanostructures. In this work, we synthesized nanoporous TiO2 film of up to 1.6 μm in thickness with uniform bicontinuous pores on FTO glass using PS-b-PEO copolymer as template. The CdSe QD-sensitized solar cells based on the bicontinuous TiO2 films were developed.

The PS-b-PEO block copolymer (Polymer Source, Inc.) with a molecular weight of 89.6 kg mol−1 and PEO ratio of 34.6 wt% was used as template for preparing the nanostructured TiO2 films. The precursors for TiO2 are titanium isopropoxide and titanium chloride (Aldrich). In a typical procedure, 0.05 g PS-b-PEO copolymer was firstly dissolved in 2 ml chloroform. Equal molar amounts of titanium isopropoxide (0.07 ml) and titanium chloride (0.026 ml) were added to the polymer solution under stirring. In this case, the weight ratio of titania to polymer is 2:1. After stirring the solution for 5 h at room temperature, films were deposited on FTO glass by a spin-coating process, which was repeated several times to increase the film thickness. The films were heated on a hot plate at 80 °C for 5 min after each coating. After spin-coating, the films were put into a vacuum oven and treated at 120 °C overnight. The hybrid films were first annealed under a N2 flow with a 2 °C min−1 ramp to 400 °C and kept at 400 °C for 1 h. When the furnace was cooled to 200 °C, the gas flow was switched to O2. The nanostructured TiO2 films were finally obtained by annealing the films in O2 flow with a 10 °C min−1 ramp to 500 °C and held for 1 h. To investigate the effect of the amount of titanium precursor, the films were also prepared using the precursor with mass ratio of titania to the PS-b-PEO copolymer of 0.5:1, 1:1, and 3:1.

The CdSe QDs were deposited on the TiO2 films in a chemical bath containing 0.02 M CdSO4, 0.032 M sodium nitrilotriacetate, and 0.02 M Na2SeSO3. The pH value of the bath was adjusted to 11 using 0.1 M NaOH solution and the deposition was carried out at room temperature (25 °C) for 5 h. For the CdS/CdSe QDs co-sensitized electrodes, the CdS QDs were firstly deposited on the TiO2 films by a successive ionic layer absorption reaction (SILAR) process following the method described in ref. 14. The QD-sensitized electrodes were sealed in sandwich cells with a 30 μm spacer by using Pt-coated FTO glass as counter electrode. The polysulfide aqueous solution containing 0.5 M Na2S, 0.125 M S, and 0.2 M KCl was used as electrolyte for photoelectrochemical measurements.
The morphology of the nanostructured TiO2 films was observed using a HITACHI S-4800 field emission electron scanning microscope (FESEM). A Rigaku Ultima III X-ray diffractometer was used to investigate the phase composition of the films. The absorption spectra of the QD-sensitized nanostructure TiO2 films were obtained using a JASCO V-660 UV-Vis spectrometer under reflection mode. The monochromatic IPCE of the solar cells was measured with a CEP-99W system (BUNKOH-KEIKI Co., Ltd.). The photovoltaic performance of the solar cells was measured with a source meter (ADVANTEST, R6246), employing an AM 1.5 solar simulator (Wacom Co., WXS-80C3 with a 300 W Xe lamp and an AM filter) as the light source. The incident light intensity was calibrated by using a standard solar cell composed of a crystalline silicon solar cell and an IR-cut off filter (Schott, KG-5), giving the photoresponse range of an amorphous silicon solar cell (produced and calibrated by the Japan Quality Assurance Organization). To avoid the penetration of diffuse light into the active dye-sensitized film, a black mask with an aperture area of 0.2354 cm2 was employed to measure the photovoltaic performance.

In the present work, we introduced the titanium precursor by a non-hydrolytic sol–gel process. After the titanium isopropoxide and titanium chloride precursor were added into the chloroform solution of the PS-b-PEO block copolymer, the titanium chloride reacts with titanium isopropoxide under stirring, forming a transparent TiO2 sol. The TiO2 sol selectively swells the hydrophilic PEO part of the block copolymer. This kind of mixture precursor solution was spin-coated on an FTO glass substrate, where the polymer and the TiO2 sol were left and the volatile components in the solution evaporated. Microphase separation will happen in the hybrid film due to the self-assembly character of the block copolymer. A schematic diagram of the ordered microstructure formation is shown in Fig. 1. It is known that the process parameters such as solvent evaporation rate, substrate, temperature, and the amount of inorganic precursor have a large effect on the microphase separation. In our experiments, we found that uniform microstructure cannot be obtained from the film coated at a speed lower than 1000 rpm. This may be caused by the high speed evaporation of chloroform and the sensitivity of the titanium precursor to the ambient moisture. So all films used in the present work were coated at 2000 rpm. Since all the films were coated with several layers, keeping the film at 120 °C overnight not only ensured the complete phase separation but also promoted the fusion of spin-coated layers to form uniform films.


Fig. 2 shows the SEM images of the nanostructured TiO2 films on FTO glass prepared with the weight ratios of titania to polymer of 0.5:1, 1:1, 2:1, and 3:1. When the titania to polymer ratio is 0.5:1, the amount of titania is not enough to sustain the continuous three-dimensional structure. Particulate film was left after removing the organic template (Fig. 2a). For the film prepared with a block copolymer to titania ratio of 1:1, highly porous three-dimensional network structures were obtained. The hydrophilic PEO part is only about 34.6 wt% of the PS-b-PEO copolymer used here, which is located in the gyroid area in the phase diagram of the PS-b-PEO copolymer. The titania in the PEO part preserved the gyroid “skeleton” of the PEO microphase after the annealing process. The diameter of the “skeleton” is about 30–50 nm and comparable with the theoretical size of PEO domains. When the titania to polymer weight ratio increased to 2:1, the uniform gyroid structure is obtained. From the cross-section SEM image we can see that uniform bicontinuous pores about 30–50 nm in size extend to the whole film. The pores in the film should be formed by removing the hydrophobic PS domains. We noticed that the PS part is a major part of the PS-b-PEO block copolymer used in the present work. The phase inversion should be caused by the swelling of the PEO by the addition of two times the amount of the titania so that the volume of the PEO–titania hybrid overwhelms that of the PS part. Upon further increasing the titania to 3:1, the pore volume in the film largely decreases. The cross-section image also shows that the pores of tens of nanometres do not appear in the film. We suspect that the large amount of titanium precursor exceeds the swelling ability of PEO and some free titanium precursor is left. The large amount of titanium precursor may also affect the phase separation of PS.
It is interesting to see that, except for the particulate film, gyroid microstructure tends to be formed under the present experimental conditions despite the increase of the titanium precursor, although the pore volume changes. This is different from the previous reports that the microstructure of the block copolymer templated films changes with variation of the inorganic precursor amount. The relatively large molecular weight of the PS-b-PEO copolymer may be helpful for keeping the gyroid microphase separation. Our multilayer spin-coating process may also reduce the effects of the substrate and the solvent evaporation speed. For making solar cells, we coated 10, 7, 4, and 3 layers, respectively, on the FTO substrates for the solutions with titania to polymer ratio of 0.5:1, 1:1, 2:1, and 3:1 to make TiO2 films with comparable thickness. In this work, crystallized nanoporous TiO2 films with thickness of about 1.4–1.7 μm were obtained. These films are uniform and free from optical detectable cracks in the area of 0.25 cm2 for the solar cell photoanode.
For the preparation of solar cells, the CdSe QDs were loaded on the TiO2 porous film by an in situ chemical bath method. Fig. 3 compared the typical SEM morphology and the XRD patterns of the nanoporous TiO2 film before and after CdSe QDs deposition. Although the QDs aggregate to small particles, the coverage of the QDs on the films is relatively uniform. We can see that the CdSe QDs preferred to deposit at the rough sites or the edge of pores where crystal nuclei may easily form. The pores in the films are still open, which is preferred for the electrolyte to filter into the deep layer. The XRD pattern of the porous TiO2 film indicates that the film is composed of a well crystallized anatase phase. Except for the diffraction peaks of FTO substrate, the (101), (112), and (200) peaks of the anatase phase can be clearly seen. In the XRD pattern of the CdSe QD-sensitized TiO2 film, the peaks at about 25° and 42° look broadened. It is because the (111) and (220) peaks of CdSe QDs are located at 25.3° and 42.0° (JCPDS No. 19-0191), respectively. These CdSe QDs peaks almost overlap with those of TiO2. The small crystalline size of the CdSe QDs leads to the broadened XRD peaks.

Fig. 4 shows the absorption spectra of the CdSe QD-sensitized nanoporous TiO2 films prepared with titania to polymer ratio of 0.5:1, 1:1, 2:1, and 3:1. The numbers shown in the brackets indicate the repeat times of spin-coating. The absorbance of all the films covers most of the visible range with absorption edges at about 640–660 nm. The absorption edges should result from the absorption of CdSe QDs. With the increase of the amount of titania, the absorption edge has a little red shift, which implies that the size of the QDs increases. This may be because the film prepared with a smaller amount of titanium precursor has a rougher surface so that more crystal nuclei can form on the film, leading to smaller QD size. The band gap corresponding to the absorption edge is about 1.88–1.94 eV, which is larger than that of bulk CdSe (1.72 eV) due to the quantum size effect. The average particle size of the QDs is about 5.5–6.2 nm evaluated from the effective mass approximation model. The optical interference fringe in the thin film with titania to polymer ratio of 0.5:1 may be attributed to the clear interface or density of the film composed of uniform aggregates. It is noticeable that the film prepared with titania to polymer ratio of 1:1 showed the strongest visible light absorption. While the absorption of the films decreases when the amount of titania precursor increases further. Since the light absorption at the visible range only originated from the CdSe QDs, the intensity of absorbance reflects the amount of QDs. It is believed that the large effective surface area of the network structure obtained with the titania to polymer ratio of 1:1 preferred to load more CdSe QDs leading to the strong absorption. The lowest absorption of the film prepared with titania to polymer ratio of 3:1 implies that the QDs loading on the film is low. This is understandable considering its low porosity indicated by the SEM image. The surface area and pore volume measurements by nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherm also support this conclusion (see ESI for details).
Sandwich structured solar cells were made using the CdSe QD-sensitized films as photoanodes for investigation of the photoelectrochemical properties. Fig. 5 presents the monochromatic IPCE spectra of the CdSe QD-sensitized solar cells based on the nanostructured TiO2 prepared with different polymer to precursor ratios. The IPCE spectra show good accordance with the light absorption except for that the peak IPCE values do not match with the absorption intensity. The solar cells based on the porous TiO2 films prepared with titania to polymer ratio of 2:1 show the highest peak IPCE value of 14.2%. Although the film prepared with a titania to polymer ratio of 1:1 showed the strongest absorption, the IPCE value of the solar cell based on it is only 10.2%. The IPCE results suggest that more photoelectron loss happens in the solar cell based on the film prepared with titania to polymer ratio of 1:1.
In order to further understand the performance of the solar cells based on the CdSe QD-sensitized nanoporous films, the photovoltaic behavior of these solar cells was investigated. The photocurrent–photovoltage characteristics of the CdSe QD-sensitized solar cells based on the nanostructure TiO2 prepared with different titania to block copolymer ratios are shown in Fig. 6. Corresponding photovoltaic parameters, short circuit current (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (η), are listed in Table 1. For the power conversion efficiency of these solar cells, a similar trend to that of IPCE value was obtained. The solar cell based on the porous TiO2 films prepared with titania to polymer ratio of 2:1 show the highest power conversion efficiency of 0.111% with a short circuit current density of 1.70 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage of 0.25 V, and a fill factor of 0.261. The solar cells based on other films have power conversion efficiency of 0.051%, 0.066%, and 0.048%, respectively, which is much lower than that of the solar cell based on the film obtained with titania to polymer ratio of 2:1. It is also noticeable that the fill factor of the solar cells increases with the increase of the ratio of polymer to precursor, although the fill factors are relatively low for all of the samples.
Sample

J
sc/mA cm−2

V
oc/V
FF

η (%)
0.5:1
0.96
0.227
0.233
0.051
1:1
1.13
0.235
0.248
0.066
2:1
1.70
0.250
0.261
0.111
3:1
0.91
0.202
0.263
0.048
The photovoltaic performance measurements indicate that the films prepared with different titania to polymer ratios have different properties. The films prepared with titania to polymer ratios of 0.5:1 and 1:1 have particulate and network morphologies, respectively. They showed higher effective surface area, therefore, higher CdSe QDs loading, which is reflected in the light absorption spectra. But the high light absorption did not result in high photocurrent and high power conversion efficiency. Since the films were all prepared following the same process, they should have similar crystallinity and surface state density. So the film morphology should be the dominant factor that affects their photovoltaic performance. In a typical mesoporous TiO2-based DSSC, the injected electrons from the dye diffuse through the TiO2 network to the collecting FTO substrate. The electron diffusion is limited by factors such as the residence time of electrons in traps, the coordination number of the interparticle connection, the interparticle contact area, and the interface between the TiO2 and FTO substrate. The particulate film as shown in Fig. 2a shows that only simply particles aggregate and the interparticle contact is only point to point. The high barrier largely retards the electron transfer and promotes the electron recombination. For the network film prepared with titania to polymer ratio of 1:1, the photoelectron transfer speed may also be limited due to the low coordination number of the particles in the network. So the competition process, i.e. the recombination, is relatively enhanced, leading to the lower efficiency. The bicontinuous TiO2 films have uniform pores and continuous walls that extend through the whole film. The continuous wall structure should be advantageous for electron transfer; as a result, their based solar cells show higher efficiency. When the titania to polymer ratio increases to 3:1, the solar cell efficiency decreases because of the filling of the pores in TiO2 film; as a result, the loading of CdSe QDs reduces. We also noticed that, although relatively low, the fill factors of the solar cells based on the nanostructure TiO2 films increase with the increase in polymer to precursor ratio. The higher fill factor generally implies the lower internal resistance of the photoanode. This is understandable from the inside microstructure of the films shown in the SEM images.
Although the power conversion efficiency is still low, the solar cell based on the CdSe QD-sensitized bicontinuous TiO2 films showed promising performance. It is possible to improve the solar cell performance by increasing the roughness factor of the films through increasing the films thickness and adjusting the pore size. On the other hand, there is also a large amount of room for optimizing the QDs composition, the loading method of QDs, and the electrolyte to improve the efficiency of the solar cells. Previous reports showed that dye or QDs co-sensitization can largely improve the solar cell efficiency. Here we demonstrated that the CdS/CdSe QDs co-sensitized bicontinuous TiO2 film has much better performance than the CdSe QDs sensitized film.
The CdS QDs were deposited onto the porous TiO2 film using a SILAR process for 5 circles. Then, the CdSe QDs were deposited onto the CdS-sensitized TiO2 film by a chemical bath method. The XPS analysis shows the coexistence of CdS and CdSe QDs over the porous TiO2 film (ESI, Fig. S4). Fig. 7 shows the monochromatic IPCE spectrum of the solar cell based on the CdS/CdSe QDs co-sensitized bicontinuous TiO2 film. The shape of the spectrum is similar to that of the solar cell based on CdSe QD-sensitized film. The broad and strong light absorption of CdSe QDs may overlap the photoresponse spectra of CdS QDs. The peak IPCE value reaches about 21%, which is much higher than the CdSe QDs sensitized film. The improved IPCE should be attributed to the contribution of CdS QDs and the enhanced charge separation in CdSe QDs because of the built-in electric field between CdS and CdSe. Fig. 8 presents the photovoltaic characteristics of the co-sensitized solar cell. The short circuit of the solar cell based on CdS/CdSe QDs co-sensitized film is more than 2 times of that of the solar cell based on CdSe QD-sensitized film. Corresponding to the increase of the photocurrent density, the open circuit voltage can reach a value of 0.425 V and a power conversion efficiency of 0.35% is obtained. Obviously, this kind of co-sensitization method is an effective route to high efficiency QD-sensitized solar cells.

Uniform bicontinuous TiO2 nanoporous films on conductive FTO glass substrate were fabricated using PS-b-PEO block copolymer as template by optimizing the titania to polymer ratio. The film has bicontinuous pore wall and uniform pore size of about 30–50 nm. Solar cells based on the CdSe QD-sensitized TiO2 nanoporous films exhibited promising photovoltaic performance. An IPCE value of 21% and power conversion efficiency of 0.358% were obtained by CdS/CdSe QDs co-sensitization. The flexibility of the block copolymer template allows us to tailor the microstructure of the TiO2 porous films to improve the performance of their based solar cells. We believe that this kind of bicontinuous porous film is also advantageous for the solid-state solar cell, which requires the good filtration of organic electrolyte into the deep layer of the photoanode. Related studies are going on.


This work is supported by the New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO) in Japan and was partly conducted using the AIST Nano-Processing Facility, which is supported by the “Nanotechnology Support Project” of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Surface area measurements and X-ray photoelectron spectra. See DOI: 10.1039/b917634a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010