 DOI: 10.1039/C9TC01562K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 7427-7432


Yingjian
Yu
,

Changshuai
Dong
,

Abdullah F.
Alahmadi
,

Bin
Meng
*,

Jun
Liu
*,

Frieder
Jäkle
* and 

Lixiang
Wang


State Key Laboratory of Polymer Physics and Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun 130022, P. R. China. E-mail: mengbin@ciac.ac.cn; liujun@ciac.ac.cn

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, P. R. China

Department of Chemistry, Rutgers University – Newark, 73 Warren Street, Newark, NJ 07102, USA. E-mail: fjaekle@rutgers.edu

Received
22nd March 2019
, Accepted 22nd May 2019
First published on 22nd May 2019
We report a p-π* conjugated organic molecule based on triarylborane as n-type organic semiconductor with unique alcohol solubility. Its favorable alcohol solubility even in the absence of polar side chains is mainly due to the large dipole moment and enhanced flexibility of the conjugated backbone once the boron atom is embedded. The p-π* conjugation directly affects the electronic structure as the LUMO is fully delocalized, including the boron atom, whereas the HOMO has the boron atom residing on a node. As a result, the molecule exhibits low-lying LUMO/HOMO energy levels of −3.61 eV/−5.73 eV paired with a good electron mobility of 1.37 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1. We further demonstrate its application as an electron acceptor in alcohol-processed organic solar cells (OSCs). To our best knowledge, this p-π* conjugated molecule is the first alcohol-processable non-fullerene electron acceptor, a feature that is in strong demand for environmentally friendly processing of OSCs.

Both p-type and n-type organic semiconductors are required for organic optoelectronic applications, such as organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs), organic field-effect transistors (OFETs) and organic solar cells (OSCs). The development of n-type organic semiconductors lags far behind that of the p-type counterparts. Most n-type organic semiconductors are derived from π-conjugated molecules, in which carbon–carbon single bonds and double bonds alternate in the backbone. Doping or modification with heteroatoms is an attractive approach to enhance the acceptor character of conjugated organic materials. Thus, a new strategy to design n-type semiconductors for OSC applications involves p-π* conjugation with an electron-deficient boron atom. Representative examples of p-π* conjugated molecular and polymeric arylboranes are illustrated in Fig. 1. In these systems, the empty 2pz orbital of the boron atom overlaps with the π* orbitals of aromatic units, endowing the arylboranes with strong acceptor characteristics. Polymers B derived from hydroboration polymerization have been explored as components of OSCs in blends with P3HT. Recently, we have unambiguously demonstrated the n-type semiconductor properties of p-π* conjugated triarylborane polymers (A). Organic acceptor-substituted triarylborane small molecules such as C or D have also attracted significant attention for OSCs and as luminescent sensors. In this manuscript, we report a new p-π* conjugated n-type organic small molecule based on triarylborane, which shows unique alcohol solubility even in the absence of polar side chains. This alcohol solubility is very desirable for environmentally friendly processing in organic optoelectronic applications.

Compared with inorganic semiconductors, one of the greatest advantages of organic materials is their solution-processability at low cost. As typical π-conjugated molecules possess a rigid and hydrophobic backbone they tend to be soluble in halogenated or aromatic solvents of low polarity, but these solvents can be harmful to the environment and human body. Conversely, they are generally insoluble in eco-friendly solvents, such as alcohols and water. For the large-scale manufacturing of organic optoelectronic devices, it is urgent to develop organic semiconductors with alcohol processability. To render π-conjugated molecules soluble in alcohols, the general strategy has been to use polar or ionic side chains or substituents, such as oligo(ethylene glycol) (OEG) groups, phosphonate groups, sulfonate groups, ammonium groups,etc.
Herein, we realize the alcohol solubility of n-type organic semiconductors by embedding a boron atom into the conjugated backbone. Fig. 2a shows the chemical structure of the alcohol-soluble n-type molecule, (2,4,6-tri-tert-butylphenyl)di(5-(2-((Z)-3-ethyl-5-((4-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)methylene)-4-oxothiazolidin-2-ylidene)malononitrile)-thiophene-2-yl)borane (BDT). In BDT, the p-π* conjugated triarylborane core unit is end-capped by two electron-withdrawing 2-(3-ethyl-4-oxothiazolidin-2-ylidene)malononitrile groups. The 2,4,6-tri-tert-butylphenyl (Mes*) group on boron serves as a bulky group that endows the molecule with excellent stability even in protic solvents. Although BDT has hydrophobic alkyl side chains, it is well soluble in alcohol solvents up to 9 mg mL−1. Thus, we not only demonstrate the low-lying energy levels and favorable electron mobility of BDT, but also disclose its application as electron acceptor in alcohol-processed OSC devices. To our best knowledge, BDT is the first alcohol-processable non-fullerene electron acceptor for OSCs.

The synthetic route to BDT is illustrated in Scheme 1. The bromo-substituted end-capping group (3) was synthesized by Knoevenagel condensation of 5-bromo-4-(2-ethylhexyl)-thiophene-2-carbaldehyde (2) and 2-(3-ethyl-4-oxothiazolidin-2-ylidene)malononitrile. The distannylated triarylborane core unit (4) was prepared following our previously reported procedures. Finally, Stille coupling of 3 and 4 afforded the desired acceptor molecule, BDT. For comparison, we also synthesized the reference molecule without the boron atom, TT (Fig. 2a). The chemical structure of BDT was confirmed by 1H NMR, 13C NMR, 11B NMR and elemental analysis. Due to the bulky Mes* group on the boron atom BDT is highly stable under ambient conditions in the solid state and in solution. According to thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), BDT also shows good thermal stability with a high degradation temperature (Td) at 5% weight loss of 269 °C (Fig. S8, ESI).

We performed density-functional theory (DFT) calculations at the B3LYP/6-31G* level on model compounds of BDT and TT without the long alkyl chains to investigate the molecular arrangements and electronic structures. As shown in Fig. 2b, in the most stable conformation of BDT, the sulfur atoms of the two thiophene units on boron both point away from the Mes* group, leading to an axisymmetric configuration. The conjugated backbone of BDT adopts a nearly planar conformation, while the Mes* group on the boron atom is oriented almost orthogonal to the backbone. In contrast, in the optimized configuration of TT, the sulfur atoms of the central two thiophene units point in opposite directions, resulting in a centrosymmetric configuration. As a result, BDT possesses a natural dipole moment of 8.0 Debye, but that of TT is only 0.3 Debye.
To estimate ELUMO/EHOMO of BDT and TT, we performed cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements on solutions in dichloromethane. The cyclic voltammograms are shown in Fig. 3a. BDT and TT show both reduction and oxidation waves. According to the onset reduction and oxidation potentials, the ELUMO/EHOMO of BDT and TT are estimated to be −3.61 eV/−5.73 eV and −3.52 eV/−5.33 eV, respectively (Table 1). The ELUMO and EHOMO of BDT are lower than those of TT by 0.09 eV and 0.40 eV, respectively. These findings are consistent with the DFT calculation results. As mentioned before, the downshifted ELUMO is due to the p-π* conjugation in the LUMO involving the boron atom and the downshifted EHOMO is due to the node on the boron atom in the HOMO.

λ
hexanolmax (nm)

ε
hexanolmax (L mol−1 cm−1)

λ
CBmax (nm)

ε
CBmax (L mol−1 cm−1)

λ
filmmax (nm)

E
optg (eV)

E
redonset
 (V)

E
oxonset
 (V)

E
LUMO (eV)

E
HOMO (eV)

μ
e (cm2 V−1 s−1)

a Onset potential vs. Fc/Fc+ in dichloromethane.
b The Eredonset of BDT is attributed to the reduction of the terminal groups; the boron-centered reduction would be present at more negative potential.


BDT

474
4.90 × 104
477
5.80 × 104
487
2.16
−1.19
0.93
−3.61
−5.73
1.37 × 10−5

TT

—
—
520
6.20 × 104
553
1.79
−1.28
0.53
−3.52
−5.33
4.86 × 10−7

Fig. 3b shows the absorption spectra of the two compounds in chlorobenzene (CB) solution and as thin films. The photophysical characteristics are listed in Table 1. In solution, the absorption spectrum of BDT is blueshifted by 43 nm compared with that of TT. This is due to the aforementioned increased bandgap of BDT. The absorption band is redshifted upon going from solution to a thin film by 10 nm for BDT and 33 nm for TT. The small redshift of BDT indicates relatively weaker intermolecular interactions of BDT, which is due to the steric hindrance effect of the Mes* group on the boron atom.
The electron mobilities of the two compounds were measured using the space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) method using the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of electron-only devices shown in Fig. 3c. The electron mobilities of BDT and TT are estimated to be 1.37 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 4.86 × 10−7 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. The much higher electron mobility of BDT in comparison to TT could be due to favorable slipped stacking in the solid state. High electron mobilities are frequently observed for acceptor–donor–acceptor (A–D–A) type molecules bearing bulky groups in the core. In these systems, the steric hindrance forces the molecules to adopt a solid state structure, in which terminal A units can stack together to form continuous electron transporting channels for high electron mobility. In BDT, the Mes* group on the boron atom is oriented perpendicular to the p-π* conjugated backbone (see Fig. 2b), and the resulting steric hindrance may induce the BDT molecules to adopt such a slipped stacking pattern that allows for high electron mobility. X-ray diffraction data on thin films, however, did not provide evidence for long range order (Fig. S9, ESI).
The low-lying ELUMO/EHOMO and high electron mobility indicate that BDT acts as an n-type organic semiconductor. This motivated us to test its application as electron acceptor in alcohol-processed OSCs. OSCs are generally processed with halogenated solvent, which is eco-unfriendly, and it is challenging to develop OSCs that can be fabricated with alcohols. To match the alcohol-soluble small molecule acceptor BDT with a suitable donor, we followed literature methods and synthesized the alcohol-soluble polymer D-OEG (Fig. 4b). The synthesis details are provided in the ESI. Due to the long and branched OEG side chains, D-OEG is well soluble in 1-butanol and 1-hexanol. The ELUMO/EHOMO of D-OEG is estimated to be −3.39/−4.92 eV, which matches well with those of BDT (Fig. S10, ESI). The OSC device structure is indium tin oxide (ITO)/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) doped with poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)/D-OEG:BDT/Ca/Al (Fig. 4a). The active layer was spin-coated from a 1-hexanol solution of D-OEG and BDT. Fig. 4c and d show the J–V curve under AM1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2 and the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum of the device. The device shows an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.08 V, short-circuit current density (JSC) of 2.83 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 33.6%, corresponding to a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1.03%. The EQE spectrum spans from 320 nm to 700 nm with a maximum value of 19%. OSCs based on non-fullerene acceptors are receiving great attention recently and their PCE has increased rapidly to more than 15%. However, to our best knowledge, this is the first report of the successful use of an alcohol-processed non-fullerene electron acceptor in OSCs. The preliminary device results unambiguously prove that BDT can be used as an n-type organic semiconductor for alcohol-processable organic opto-electronic devices.
The relatively low PCE of the alcohol-processed OSC device may be due to suboptimal phase separation in the active layer. We measured the surface morphology of neat films and blended active layers using atomic force microscopy (AFM). The AFM height and phase images are shown in Fig. S12, ESI. The neat film of BDT shows spheroidal aggregates with domain sizes of more than 200 nm; the surface root-mean-square (rms) roughness is calculated to be 2.81 nm, which implies that severe aggregation occurs. The neat film of D-OEG shows a homogeneous morphology with obvious fibrous networks; the surface rms roughness is calculated to be 0.60 nm. However, for the active layer, consisting of a blend of BDT and D-OEG, an ordered array of fibers is not observed. A possible reason is that the severe aggregation of BDT inhibits the ordering of blends. The amorphous morphology in the active layer is detrimental to the charge carrier transport. Besides, the strong aggregation of BDT may lead to local phase separation in the active layer, which likely hampers exciton diffusion and dissociation, leading to the modest JSC and FF. Much improved photovoltaic performance can be expected after optimization of the active layer morphology of the alcohol-processed OSC devices.

In summary, we have developed a p-π* conjugated organoboron molecule as alcohol-processable n-type organic semiconductor. The unique alcohol solubility in the absence of polar side chains is mainly attributed to the large dipole moment and flexibility of the boron-embedded p-π* conjugated backbone. BDT exhibits low-lying ELUMO/EHOMO of −3.61 eV/−5.73 eV combined with a high electron mobility of 1.37 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1. We also demonstrate its application in alcohol-processed OSC devices. This work suggests that p-π* conjugation based on triarylboranes is an effective strategy to develop n-type organic semiconductors with interesting electronic structures and unique properties for organic opto-electronic device applications.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors are grateful for the financial supports by the National Key Basic Research and Development Program of China (973 program, Grant No. 2015CB655001). Funded by MOST, the Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21625403, 21875244, 21875241, 51603203, 21761132020), the Strategic Priority Research Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences (No. XDB12010200). F. J. and A. F. A. thank the US National Science Foundation (NSF) for support under grant CHE-1664975 and A. F. A. thanks the government of Saudi Arabia for a scholarship.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, theoretical calculations, solubility, thermal property, mobility, morphology, as well as OSC device fabrications and characterizations. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc01562k
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019