 DOI: 10.1039/D2TC00882C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 7641-7650


Dengjie
Zhao
,

Chenxi
Zhang
*,

Min
Zhao
,

Jingkun
Ren
,

Zhen
Dai
,

Yukun
Wu
,

Qinjun
Sun
,

Yanxia
Cui
 and 

Yuying
Hao
*

College of Physics and Optoelectronics, Key Lab of Advanced Transducers and Intelligent Control System, Taiyuan University of Technology, Taiyuan, Shanxi, China. E-mail: zhangchenxi@tuyt.edu.cn; haoyuying@tyut.edu.cn

Key Laboratory of Interface Science and Engineering in Advanced Materials, Ministry of Education, Taiyuan University of Technology, Taiyuan, Shanxi, China

Received
4th March 2022
, Accepted 12th April 2022
First published on 14th April 2022
For perovskite solar cells (PSCs), the electron transport layer (ETL) is a key component for the separation and transport of charge carriers. Also, the modulation of perovskite crystallization processes is important to obtain highly crystalline and stable perovskite films. Herein, we proposed a novel strategy, i.e. potassium phytate (PP)-doped SnO2 as the ETL. The incorporation of PP into the SnO2 ETL not only adjusts the electronic properties of SnO2 but also optimizes the energy level arrangement between SnO2 and the perovskite by passivating the Sn dangling bonds within SnO2. As a result, a better transport/extraction of electrons across the ETL and the ETL/perovskite interface is achieved. Meanwhile, the diffusible K+ cations from the hydrolytic PP fill the lattice defect sites in the perovskite and improve dramatically the crystallinity of the perovskite, and hence reduce the charge trap density of the perovskite and suppress the charge recombination loss. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) is enhanced from 20.14% to 22.14% for the champion PP–SnO2 PSCs relative to the pristine devices. In addition, the stability against humidity of the unencapsulated PSCs with the PP–SnO2 ETL is improved obviously compared to the pristine devices. This work provides a comprehensive optimization strategy for high efficiency and stability PSCs.

In recent years, tremendous attention has been focused on PSCs owing to their superior photovoltaic performance. Over the past few decades, improvement by leaps and bounds has been achieved in their PCE, which is more than 25% according to the NREL certification. To date, several kinds of typical structures for PSCs, including mesoporous and planar heterojunction structures with the n–i–p or p–i–n-type, have been developed. Among them, n–i–p-type PSCs with TiO2 as the ETL often demonstrate a high PCE. However, the preparation of TiO2 usually requires a high-temperature sintering process, which limits its application in large-area and flexible devices. To overcome this limitation, planar PSCs with low-temperature solution-processed SnO2 as the ETL were exploited widely. Compared with TiO2, SnO2 shows a greater potential due to its more excellent photoelectric properties, such as high electron mobility and UV stability. Despite these impressive advantages, the SnO2 ETL still faces many challenges. On the one hand, the SnO2 ETL often contains large amounts of bulk and surface defects caused mainly by oxygen vacancies, which seriously affects the electron transport/extraction. On the other hand, the SnO2 film is prone to island-growth due to the spontaneous aggregation of SnO2 nanoparticles by the strong van der Waals interactions, thereby leading to local shunt pathways. In addition, the energy level arrangement of SnO2 does not sufficiently match with the adjacent perovskite. All of these will lead to serious charge recombination loss and poor device stability. In order to solve these problems, tetramethylammonium chloride (TMACl) was added into the SnO2 precursor solution as a passivation agent, in which TMA and Cl ions complementarily passivate the oxygen vacancies on the surface of the SnO2 ETL to improve the charge carrier transport/extraction properties. Qian et al. used titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) (TiAcAc) as a stabilizer to reduce effectively the aggregation of SnO2 nanoparticles, thereby improving the uniformity and conductivity of the SnO2 film. Tetrabutylammonium iodide (TBAI) was also incorporated into SnO2 colloidal solution, and, as a result, the conduction band (CB) edges of SnO2 better matched with that of the perovskite layer, which reduces the energy barrier for electron transfer.

In addition to the optimization of the SnO2 ETL, controlling the crystallization of the perovskite layer is also of vital importance for achieving high performance and stability PSCs. Recently, additive engineering as an effective way was widely studied to assist the crystal growth of the perovskite layer. For example, Zhao et al. incorporated a small amount of KI into the perovskite precursor solution, in which K+ mainly occupied the interstitial sites in the perovskite crystal lattice to improve the crystallinity of the perovskite film. Adding ammonium iodide (NH4I) into the PbI2 solution through a two-step deposition method retarded the crystallization and reduced the defects of perovskite layers. Lead thiocyanate (Pb(SCN)2) had also been proven to be an effective additive for increasing the perovskite grain size. Yang et al. added ethyl cellulose (EC) into the perovskite precursor solution, which exhibited a synergistic effect with passivating the Lewis acid defects and promoting the crystal growth of the perovskite.
Despite the large progress in solving the existing problems of PSCs with the SnO2 ETL, the proposed approaches mainly focus on solving only a unilateral issue, such as passivating the defects in the ETLs or controlling the perovskite crystallization or adjusting the interface energy level. Therefore, a viable way is extremely desired to overcome all the existing problems of PSCs with the SnO2 ETL simultaneously.
In the present work, we reported a novel strategy to solve these problems simultaneously by doping potassium phytate (PP) into SnO2 as the ETL. The PP is natural, low-cost and non-toxic. A new bond of Sn–O–P between PP and SnO2 forms so that the Sn dangling bonds are efficiently passivated, thereby reducing the electron trapping in the ETL and contributing to the increase in the conductivity of PP–SnO2. Besides, –PO(OH)2 forms by the strong hydration of the phosphate radicals in the SnO2 precursor solution. At the same time, the interfacial chemical bridge between SnO2 and the perovskite is constructed through the formation of a hydrogen bond via hydroxyl (see Fig. 1). Thus, the PP not only passivates the defects at the SnO2/perovskite interface but also optimizes the energy level arrangement between SnO2 and the perovskite, which facilitate electron extraction at the ETL/perovskite interface and thus suppress charge recombination loss. Furthermore, diffusible cationic K+ passivates the MA/FA vacancy defects in the perovskite lattice and improves the crystal quality of the perovskite, and thus reduces the charge trap density and the charge recombination. Benefiting from the above advantages of PP, PSCs with PP-doped SnO2 displayed a large improvement from 19.53% to 21.49% in the average PCE and from 20.14% to 22.14% in the champion PCE relative to the pristine devices. Moreover, the unencapsulated devices with PP-doped SnO2 retained 74.24% of the initial efficiency after 16 days at 30–40% humidity and room temperature. In contrast, the pristine devices retained only 66.00% of the initial PCE under the same storage conditions.

The n–i–p planar PSCs with SnO2 or PP–SnO2 as the ETL were fabricated with a structure of ITO/ETL/perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag. The SnO2 or the PP–SnO2 ETL was built by using a precursor solution containing SnO2 nanoparticles without or with different concentrations of PP as an additive. The FAxMA1−xPbI3 perovskite layer was deposited on the SnO2 ETL using a two-step spin-coating method. The Spiro-OMeTAD acted as a hole transport layer (HTL). ITO and Ag were used as cathode and anode electrodes, respectively.

In order to investigate the effects of PP on the properties of SnO2, a series of characterization studies were carried out. As demonstrated in Fig. S1 (ESI), the transmittance spectra of PP-doped SnO2 films deposited on ITO with different concentrations of PP are almost the same as that of the original SnO2 film, showing high transmittance in the range of 400–800 nm. This means that the low concentration PP dopants in SnO2 do not affect the light absorption of the perovskite film. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra of different SnO2 samples are shown in Fig. 2a, in which the peaks at 26.65°, 34.04°, and 51.75° correspond to the (110), (101), and (211) crystal planes of rutile SnO2, respectively. It is observed that the intensity and position of all peaks are not changed with the increase of the PP concentration. This indicates that the introduction of PP does not change the crystal structure of SnO2. The influence of PP on the electrical properties of SnO2 films was investigated through the measurements of current density–voltage (I–V) curves of the device with the structure of ITO/SnO2 ETL/Ag, and the corresponding results are shown in Fig. 2b. It can be seen that the slope of the curves first increases and then decreases with the increase of PP concentration doped in SnO2 films. According to the equation of I = σ0Ad−1V, where I is the current, V is the applied voltage, and σ0, A, and d represent the conductivity, area, and thickness of the SnO2 films with different concentrations of PP, respectively. As listed in Table S1 (ESI), the calculated σ0 values are 3.57, 4.33, 5.10, 5.68, and 4.55 × 10−5 S cm−1 for the samples with different PP concentrations of 0, 0.01, 0.02, 0.03 and 0.04 mg mL−1, respectively. The conductivity of SnO2 reaches its maximum with a 1.59 times increase when 0.03 mg mL−1 of PP was doped in SnO2. However, when the doping concentration of PP is higher than 0.03 mg mL−1, the electrical conductivity of SnO2 begins to decrease, indicating that doping with a higher concentration of PP in SnO2 may affect the crystallinity of SnO2.
In order to investigate the chemical interaction of the PP dopant with SnO2, the X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) of SnO2 films with and without PP were measured. The fine spectra of O 1s peaks for each sample were differentiated, as shown in Fig. 2c, in which the asymmetric broad peaks were deconvoluted into four peaks for both pristine SnO2 and PP–SnO2 films. The strongest peak at about 530.20 eV (purple region) is assigned to the lattice oxygen in SnO2. The peak at 531.77 eV (green region) is attributed to the adsorbed oxygen in SnO2. The weakest peak at 529.33 eV (red region) is related to the oxygen vacancies in the crystal lattice, which act as charge trapping centers. Remarkably, a new peak at 531.48 eV (orange region) appears, which should be related to the O bridge in Sn–O–P. The fitting peak data for O 1s spectra are listed in Table S2 (ESI). It can be found that the area ratio of the O bridge in Sn–O–P increased from 0 to 11.93% after adding PP into SnO2, which is an obvious indication of a bonding reaction between SnO2 and PP. Furthermore, the Sn 3d5/2 spectra were fitted with three peaks, and the three differentiated peaks are shown in Fig. 2d. The peak at 486.1 eV (blue region) is related to Sn4+, the peak at 486.6 eV (yellow region) is associated with Sn2+, and the peak at 484.9 eV (pink region) is assigned to atomic Sn. The fitting peak data for Sn 3d5/2 spectra are listed in Table S3 (ESI). The area ratio of the Sn4+ peak increased obviously from 74.42% to 83.65% after PP doping into SnO2. Meanwhile, the area ratio of Sn2+ decreased obviously from 21.44% to 16.12%. The presence of Sn2+ generally corresponds to the oxygen vacancies in the SnO2 crystal. Therefore, the decrease of the Sn2+ content is also an important indicator of the chemical reaction between SnO2 and PP. All these confirm the formation of a new bond of Sn–O–P. After PP doping into SnO2, the Sn dangling bonds are efficiently passivated, thereby reducing the charge capture in the ETL and contributing to an increase in the conductivity of PP–SnO2.
Next, the atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurement was conducted to analyze the surface properties of SnO2 and PP–SnO2 films. As shown in Fig. S2a and b (ESI), it can be clearly seen that the PP–SnO2 film exhibits a smoother surface morphology with a smaller root mean square (RMS) roughness of 0.138 nm compared to the pristine SnO2 film with an RMS of 0.182 nm. The water contact angles of pristine SnO2 and PP–SnO2 films were also measured, as shown in Fig. S2c and d (ESI). After PP doping into SnO2, the water contact angle decreases relative to the SnO2 film. Based on the above investigation, it is concluded that the PP–SnO2 film provides a more excellent surface for the growth of PbI2 in the next step and then the formation of a high-quality perovskite film.
The crystallinity of the perovskite film was intuitively reflected by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) measurements. Fig. 3a–e displays the SEM images of the perovskite films deposited on SnO2 substrates, which were made with different concentrations of PP (0, 0.01, 0.02, 0.03, and 0.04 mg mL−1). The SEM image clearly shows that some small grains and pinholes are present at the grain boundaries of the control film, while the perovskite films deposited on the PP–SnO2 films exhibit dense, uniform, and large-size grain distribution. In particular, for the perovskite films deposited on PP–SnO2 doped with 0.02 mg mL−1 PP, the average grain size increases to 842.02 nm from 629.36 nm of the control film, as shown in Fig. 3f. However, when the concentration of PP incorporated into SnO2 reaches 0.03 mg mL−1, the perovskite film exhibits an uneven morphology with scattered small grains at the grain boundaries. Fig. 3g and h shows the cross-sectional SEM images of perovskite films deposited on SnO2 and 0.02 mg mL−1 PP–SnO2. Obviously, the perovskite film grown on PP–SnO2 is occupied by dense, uniform and film-through grains, which has an ideal crystal morphology for efficient PSCs because the charges can be transported and collected through a single grain without encountering grain boundaries, while the control films consist of some stacked small grains, which is very unfavorable to the carrier transport. Therefore, we can conclude that both SnO2 ETLs and the perovskite layer can be optimized simultaneously by adding 0.02 mg mL−1 of PP into SnO2.
To further investigate the effect of PP on the crystallinity of the perovskite, XRD analysis was performed. As shown in Fig. 4a and Fig. S3 (ESI), all patterns exhibit typical diffraction peaks of the perovskite at around 13.9°, 24.4°, 28.2°, 31.6°, 34.7°, 40.3°, and 42.8°, which are assigned to the (001), (111), (002), (012), (112), (022), and (112) crystal planes of the perovskite structure, respectively, which is in good agreement with previously reported results. The hashtag labeled peaks represent lead iodide. The moderate excess PbI2 can in situ passivate the defect states and thus inhibit the nonradiative recombination. The intensities of diffraction peaks for the perovskite films deposited on PP–SnO2 are higher than those of the perovskite films deposited on pristine SnO2. Moreover, the full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) of the strongest diffraction peak for the perovskite film grown on SnO2 doped with 0.02 mg mL−1 PP is narrower than that of the corresponding diffraction peak for the perovskite film deposited on SnO2. This indicates that the perovskite film grown on PP–SnO2 has better crystallinity and the grain size becomes larger. The improvement in the crystallization will be beneficial for effective charge transport, thus achieving a higher photovoltaic performance. The enlarged grain size might be assisted by the diffusion of K+ from PP during the growth process of the perovskite. It is noted from the magnified XRD shown in Fig. 4b that the (001) peak positions shift obviously to smaller 2θ values with the increase of PP concentration, indicating the expansion of the crystal lattice. This is probably caused by the bottom-up self-diffusion of K+ from PP. During the formation of perovskite crystals, MA+/FA+ vacancy defects are generated inevitably in the perovskite crystal lattice and thus lead to lattice shrinkage. However, when these defect positions are filled by the K+ ions, the crystal lattice constant becomes larger, which will also improve the crystalline quality of the perovskite.
Next, the perovskite films deposited on the SnO2 ETL doped with different concentrations of PP were further evaluated by UV-vis absorption spectroscopy, as shown in Fig. 4c. Compared with the perovskite film deposited on pristine SnO2, the absorbance of the perovskite films deposited on PP-doped SnO2 gradually increased in the almost entire visible light region when the concentration of PP doped in SnO2 was increased from 0 to 0.02 mg mL−1, which probably originated from the formation of more dense and larger crystal grains. With further increase in the concentration of PP, the absorbance of the perovskite films significantly decreased, resulting from the decrease in the crystalline quality, which is consistent with the variation trend of the perovskite morphology from the SEM results.
To evaluate the influence of PP on the electronic structure of the SnO2 ETL, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) spectra of SnO2 and PP–SnO2 films were measured. As illustrated in Fig. 4d, the cut-off binding energies (Ecut-off) are 17.0 and 16.9 eV for SnO2 and PP–SnO2 films, and their Fermi energy levels (EF) are calculated to be −4.22 and −4.32 eV using the formula of EF = 21.22 − Ecut-off, respectively. As shown in Fig. 4e, the Fermi edge (EF,edge) is estimated to be 3.69 eV for the SnO2 film and 3.62 eV for the PP–SnO2 film, and thus the valence band maxima (EVB) of SnO2 and PP–SnO2 films are calculated to be −7.91 and −7.94 eV based on the equation of EVB = EF − EF,edge, respectively. Finally, the conduction band minima (ECB) of SnO2 and PP–SnO2 films are determined to be −4.12 and −4.15 eV, respectively, according to the formula of ECB = EVB + Eg.Fig. 4f shows the energy level diagram of device components in this study. Herein, the energy level of the FAxMA1−xPbI3 perovskite film was obtained using the UPS spectrum (see Fig. S4, ESI). Obviously, the ECB (−4.15 eV) value of PP–SnO2 is closer to that of the perovskite compared with pristine SnO2 (−4.12 eV). Therefore, a better energy level alignment is obtained at the PP–SnO2/perovskite interface, which efficiently reduces the energy barrier for electron transfer and thus enhances the electron extraction efficiency.
To better illustrate the influence of the PP dopant in SnO2 on electron transfer and extraction, we investigated the photoluminescence (PL) spectra of perovskite films deposited on SnO2 substrates with different concentrations of PP dopant. Fig. 5a shows the PL spectra of all samples, in which the PL peak position does not significantly change. This result was in agreement with the unchanged absorption onset in Fig. 4c, meaning that the bandgap of the perovskite is not impacted by the introduction of K cations. Compared with the perovskite film on the pristine SnO2 substrate, the PL intensity of the perovskite film deposited on PP–SnO2 first increases and then decreases with the increase of PP concentration. The PL intensity of the perovskite film on the 0.02 mg mL−1 PP–SnO2 substrate is the strongest, which should be attributed to the fewer grain boundaries and then suppressed nonradiative recombination owing to the high crystallinity of the perovskite film, which agrees well with the SEM and XRD measurements. The analysis of time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra is also an effective way to determine the carrier recombination kinetics of the perovskite on different SnO2 substrates, as shown in Fig. 5b. The perovskite films were illuminated by a laser pulse from the perovskite side with an excitation wavelength of 400 nm. Then the photogenerated carriers in perovskite films are delayed through different processes. The carrier lifetimes are estimated by fitting the TRPL curve with bi-exponential decay, I(t) = I0+ A1exp(−t/τ1) + A2exp(−t/τ2), where I0 is a constant, τ1 is the fast decay time constant, reflecting the charge extraction by the SnO2 ETL, and τ2 is the slow decay time constant, representing the recombination process inside the perovskite film. Table S4 (ESI) summarizes the fitted parameters. For the sample deposited on the 0.02 mg mL−1 PP-doped SnO2 substrate, the fast decay lifetime obviously decreases to 143.16 ns from 312.78 ns of the control sample, indicating that the electron transfer occurs more quickly from the perovskite to the ETL. This result should be attributed to the more matched energy level alignment at the perovskite/ETL interface. The slow decay lifetime τ2 increases from 1233.51 ns for the control sample to 1795.76 ns for the perovskite film on the 0.02 mg mL−1 PP–SnO2 ETL, indicating a lower defect density and then lower nonradiative recombination loss inside the perovskite film due to the enhanced perovskite crystallinity, which is also consistent with the abovementioned XRD and SEM results. By combining the results of steady-state and time-resolved PL, it can be concluded that PP–SnO2 as the ETL is better than the pristine SnO2, not only improving the quality of perovskite films but also obtaining a well-matched energy level alignment at the perovskite/ETL interface.
To further study the charge transport dynamics in PSCs, we measured the electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) spectra of the PSCs. EIS is a non-destructive powerful technique to elucidate the charge transport and recombination processes in solar cells. Fig. 5c shows the Nyquist plots of the PSCs with different concentrations of PP doped in the SnO2 ETL, which were measured at a bias of 0.92 V under dark conditions and were fitted well with the inserted equivalent circuit model. The series resistance Rs and the recombination resistance Rrec values are summarized in Table S5 (ESI). The Rs values exhibit a trend of decrease, which is related to the enhanced electrical conductivity of SnO2 with the appropriate amount of PP dopant. As expected, the Rrec values of the PSCs gradually increased to 10670 Ohm when the concentration of PP increased to 0.02 mg mL−1, in comparison to that of the control PSCs (6265 Ohm). The higher Rrec values of the PSCs with the PP–SnO2 ETL indicate that the charge recombination is effectively suppressed. These results further support the roles of PP as an additive in reducing charge-carrier recombination and promoting charge-carrier transfer. Also, the charge transport and recombination behaviors at the SnO2/perovskite interface were investigated by Mott–Schottky capacitance–voltage (C–V) measurements under dark conditions. From the x-intercept of the linear regime in the Mott–Schottky plot, the built-in potential (Vbi) can be obtained. As shown in Fig. 5d, the Vbi values of the PSCs with the PP–SnO2 ETL (0.851 V) is slightly larger than that of the control devices (0.834 V). A larger built-in potential means an enhanced driving force for the separation of photogenerated carriers and an extended depletion region for efficient suppression of back transport of electrons from SnO2 to the perovskite, and hence facilitates the process of charge extraction and transport.
To investigate the effect of the PP–SnO2 ETL on the photovoltaic performance of PSCs, we prepared 20 PSCs based on the PP–SnO2 ETL with different doping concentrations, respectively. Table S6 (ESI) shows the mean photovoltaic performance parameters for a batch of PSCs with different PP doping concentrations in the SnO2 ETL under one simulated sun illumination. The control devices have a mean open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.11 V, a mean short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 24.54 mA cm−2, and a mean fill factor (FF) of 0.72, yielding a mean PCE of 19.53%. As the doping concentration of PP in SnO2 increases, the PCE of the device first increases and then decreases. Obviously, the mean PCE reaches a maximum of 21.49% with a mean Voc of 1.14 V, a mean Jsc of 24.85 mA cm−2 and a mean FF of 0.76 when the doping concentration of PP in SnO2 is increased to 0.02 mg mL−1. But when the concentration of PP further increases, the performance of the PSCs gradually decreases. The reason could be the excess PP hindering the electron transport and decreasing the electron collection in the cathode. The photovoltaic parameters of champion PSCs made with different concentrations of PP are summarized in Table 1. Fig. 6a shows the corresponding current–density voltage (J–V) curves for the champion PSCs made with different concentrations of PP. The champion PSC with the 0.02 mg mL−1 PP-doped SnO2 exhibits a PCE of 22.14% with a Voc of 1.15 V, a FF of 0.77 and a Jsc of 24.95 mA cm−2, which are obviously higher than those of the control device. All these improvements should be attributed to the better electron transfer/transport and the suppressed nonradiative recombination due to the incorporation of PP into SnO2, which had been adequately discussed by the abovementioned various characterization studies.
Concentration (mg mL−1)

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
0
1.11
24.56
0.74
20.14
0.01
1.14
24.94
0.77
21.83
0.02
1.15
24.95
0.77
22.14
0.03
1.14
24.57
0.77
21.54
0.04
1.12
24.50
0.76
20.88
Furthermore, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the corresponding PSCs were measured to cross-check the validity of their power output. Fig. 6b shows the EQE spectra and the integrated current density from the measured EQE for the PSCs with SnO2 and PP–SnO2 as the ETL, respectively. It shows that the EQE of the PP–SnO2 PSC is superior to that of the control device over the almost entire spectral region, which is in accordance with the UV–vis absorbance spectra. The corresponding integrated current densities are 24.00 mA cm−2 and 24.54 mA cm−2, respectively, which are basically consistent with the test Jsc extracted from the corresponding J–V curves. The steady-state PCE measurement of PSCs based on SnO2 and PP–SnO2 ETLs at the maximum power points of 0.945 V and 0.959 V were carried out to evaluate the operational stability of the device, respectively. As shown in Fig. 6c, the corresponding PCEs are 19.96 mA cm−2 and 21.89 mA cm−2, respectively, exhibiting negligible changes under continuous illumination for 200 s, which proves the excellent irradiation stability of both SnO2- and PP–SnO2-based PSCs.
Finally, the stability of the pristine SnO2- and PP–SnO2-based PSCs without encapsulation was evaluated. As shown in Fig. 6d, the un-encapsulated PSCs were stored at room temperature with a humidity of about 30∼40% and then their photovoltaic performance was measured regularly. It is clear that the PCE of the PP–SnO2 device dropped from 21.66% to 16.08%, which was 74.24% of the initial efficiency after 16 days, while the PCE of pristine PSCs dropped from 20.56% to 13.57%, which was 66.00% of the initial efficiency under the same storage conditions. The photostability performance of the PSCs under continuous maximum power point tracking (MPPT) for 100 hours under nitrogen gas conditions with continuous full-sun illumination (1 sun, 100 mW cm2) is shown in Fig. S5 (ESI). The results show that the photostability performance of the PP–SnO2 device is better than that of the standard device. The better stability of PP–SnO2-based devices can be attributed to the better interface contact between SnO2 and the perovskite and the better crystallinity of the perovskite and thus fewer bulk and surface defects. Based on all the above results, the PP–SnO2 ETLs designed in this work exhibit promising application potential in PSCs.

In summary, we proposed a novel strategy, i.e. PP-doped SnO2 as the ETL, to realize a comprehensive optimization of the SnO2 ETL and perovskite layer for high efficiency and stability PSCs. The incorporation of PP into SnO2 not only increases the conductivity of PP–SnO2 but also modulates the energy level arrangement at the SnO2/perovskite interface by passivating Sn dangling bonds and building an interfacial chemical bridge between SnO2 and the perovskite, and hence facilitating the electron transport in the ETL and the electron extraction at the ETL/perovskite interface. In addition, the diffusible K+ cations from the hydrolyzed PP improve the crystalline quality of the perovskite and passivate the MA/FA vacancy defects, thereby reducing the non-radiative recombination loss in the perovskite. As a result, the PSCs with PP-doped SnO2 displayed a large improvement from 19.53% to 21.49% in the average PCE and from 20.14% to 22.14% in the champion PCE relative to the pristine devices. Moreover, the unencapsulated PP–SnO2 devices have a better stability against humidity compared with the pristine devices. This work offers a very effective approach for improving the performance and stability of PSCs.


SnO2 colloidal precursor (tin(IV) oxide, 15% in H2O colloidal dispersion) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. Potassium phytate was purchased from Shanghai Macklin Biochemical Company. Dimethylformamide (DMF), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), chlorobenzene, toluene, and isopropyl alcohol were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Formamidinium iodide (FAI), methylammonium bromide (MABr), methylammonium iodide (MAI) and methylammonium chloride (MACl) were all purchased from Xi’an Polymer Light Technology in China. Lead iodide (PbI2) was purchased from TCI Company.


The ITO glasses were first cleaned by sequentially washing with deionized water, acetone and isopropanol (IPA) for 15 minutes, respectively. Before use, the ITO glasses were treated with UV-ozone for 15 minutes. Then the substrate was spin-coated with a thin layer of a SnO2 nanoparticle film (SnO2 colloidal precursor:deionized water = 1:4) at 4000 r.p.m. for 30 s and annealed in ambient air at 150 °C for 30 min. Different concentrations of potassium phytate-doped SnO2 solution were spin-coated at 4000 r.p.m. for 30 s and annealed in ambient air at 150 °C for 30 min. After that, 1.5 M PbI2 in the DMF:DMSO (9:1) solvent was spin-coated onto SnO2 at 1600 r.p.m. for 30 s, then annealed at 70 °C for 1 min, and cooled to room temperature. For FAxMA1−xPbI3 perovskite film deposition, a mixture solution of FAI:MAI:MACl (90 mg:6.39 mg:9 mg in 1 mL IPA) organic salts was spin-coated onto PbI2 at a spin rate of 2000 r.p.m. for 30 s, followed by thermal annealing at 120 °C for 30 min in ambient air conditions. After perovskite formation, the samples were transferred to a nitrogen-filled glove box for further processing. Subsequently, Spiro-OMeTAD solution (72.3 mg Spiro-OMeTAD, 17.5 μL Li–TFSI (520 mg mL−1 in acetonitrile), and 28 μL TBP in 1 mL chlorobenzene) was spin-coated onto the film at a speed of 4000 rpm for 30 seconds. Finally, 100 nm of the Ag electrode was deposited by thermal evaporation under a high vacuum.


The optical transmittance spectra and absorption spectra were measured using a Shimadzu UV-2600. The XRD patterns were taken on a Bruker QUANTAX 200 diffractometer. XPS was carried out using a photoelectron spectrometer (ESCALAB 250Xi, Thermo Fisher Scientific). AFM was performed using an NX10 atomic force microscope from Park Systems. The surface morphology of the thin films was characterized by SEM (JEOL JSM-6340, Japan). The steady-state PL spectra and TRPL spectra were measured by using a fluorescence spectrometer (FLS980, Edinburgh Instruments). A solar simulator (ABET SUN3000) was used to provide simulated solar irradiation (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). The measurement of J–V characteristics and the MPP test were performed using a Keithley 2400 source meter. The output of the light source was adjusted using a calibrated silicon photodiode (ABET Technology). The EQE was measured using a power source (ZOLIX CSC1011) with a monochromator and a source meter.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This research work was supported by the National Natural Scientific Foundation Program of China (62074108), Joint Fund for Regional Innovation and Development (U21A20102), NSFC-Joint Foundation Program of Shanxi Coal Based Low Carbon Nurturing Project (U1710115), Major Special Projects of Shanxi Province in Science and Technology (20201101012), Platform and Base Special Project of Shanxi (201605D131038), and Natural Science Foundation of Shanxi Province (201901D211051, 201901D211114, and 201801D121015).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2tc00882c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022