 DOI: 10.1039/D0TC00365D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 5894-5903


Yunxin
Zhang
,

Siqi
Chen
,

Hao
Chen
,

Guodong
Zhang
,

Min
Zhao
,

Chengjie
Zhao
,

Wenfei
Guo
,

Wenjie
Ji
,

Zhiqiang
Shi
* and 

Tonggang
Jiu
*

College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Shandong Normal University, Jinan 250014, P. R. China. E-mail: zshi@sdnu.edu.cn

Qingdao Institute of Bioenergy and Bioprocess Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao, 266101, P. R. China. E-mail: jiutg@qibebt.ac.cn

Department of Chemistry and Key Laboratory for Preparation and Application of Ordered Structural Materials of Guangdong Province, Shantou University, Shantou, Guangdong 515063, P. R. China

Received
20th January 2020
, Accepted 10th March 2020
First published on 10th March 2020
High-quality perovskite films play a vital role in determining the performance of inverted perovskite solar cells. Here, for the first time, glucose is introduced to realize high quality MAPbI3 perovskite film, boosting the power conversion efficiency from 17.53% to 20.15% with an inverted planar configuration. In addition, all device parameters exhibit excellent reproducibility. More encouragingly, the current–voltage hysteresis is significantly suppressed in terms of the hysteresis index (control device: 0.083, glucose-modified device: 0.035). It is found that glucose could contribute to the enlargement of grain size and the decrease of grain boundaries in perovskite film. The decreased defect density and corresponding suppressed charge recombination account for the enchancement of Jsc and FF. Meanwhile, the stability of glucose-modified devices under conditions of heat, light and moisture is significantly improved. These findings indicate the eminent effects of glucose on performance optimization and stability enhancement of perovskite solar cells, which is potentially promising for other optoelectronic applications.

Organic–inorganic perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have gained considerable attention thanks to their superior optoelectronic performance manifesting strong light absorption coefficients, high carrier mobility, long carrier lifetime and high defect tolerance. The power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of PSCs have been rapidly elevated from 3.8% (2009) to 25.2% (2019) in the past decade, mainly owing to the advances of film quality optimization and interface engineering. The existence of pinholes, grain boundaries, and defect states in the perovskite films has been proved as major reasons that induce non-radiative recombination and hysteresis effects, which are detrimental to device performance.

To address these issues, various methods have been employed to fabricate high-quality perovskite films, such as solution engineering, thermal annealing, anti-solvent, and additive engineering. In particular, the crystal nucleation and growth process can be well managed through the successful use of additives and thus the defect state of the perovskite film is passivated. Different additives, such as inorganic acids (HI, and H3PO4) and metal ions (e.g. Eu3+, and K+), have been reported for their positive effects on morphological modification of the perovskite film. In addition, small molecules, ionic liquids and polymers have been used to passivate defects by various bonding interactions. It has been found that different functional groups could influence the defect passivation and morphology evolution. However, it remains challenging to obtain multi-functional additives that possess different groups in one molecular structure and simultaneously display desirable properties like low cost, easy processing, environmental friendliness, etc.
Glucose is a non-toxic, easily available and biocompatible material with multi-hydroxyl and aldehyde groups, which has been intensively studied in the field of biology. It has been found that glucose can modify the interfacial layers in perovskite solar cells, giving improved wettability of the hole transporting layer. Here, for the first time, we introduced glucose into the perovskite active film (MAPbI3 (glucose)) to facilitate the crystal growth and the as-prepared film presented the grain size of up to 450 nm from scanning electron microscopy (SEM) measurements. Meanwhile, the trap states of the perovskite film being effectively reduced by the modification of glucose was proved by space charge limited current measurement. Furthermore, steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence results confirmed the formation of the high-quality perovskite film. The overall results verify the integrated effect of glucose molecules on morphology optimization and defect passivation. As a result, the performance of inverted planar PSCs with excellent environmental stability was remarkably improved with PCE enhanced from 17.5% to 20.15%, and the corresponding J–V hysteresis was significantly suppressed with the hysteresis index decreasing to 0.035 as compared to 0.083 for the control device.

The crystallinity of perovskite films exerts an important impact on PSCs. To investigate the effect of glucose on the perovskite film, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) measurements were performed. Top view images of pristine MAPbI3 and glucose modified MAPbI3 film (MAPbI3 (glucose)) are shown in Fig. 1a and b and Fig. S1 (ESI). Compared to the pristine MAPbI3 film with the average grain size of 300 nm, MAPbI3 (glucose) film presented the grain size of up to 450 nm, as shown in Fig. 1c. The results demonstrate that the participation of glucose can significantly enlarge the grain size of the perovskite film, reduce the grain boundary, and thus promote the formation of a high quality MAPbI3 film. A significant increase in absorption coefficient after the modification of glucose is shown in Fig. 1d, since the perovskite film possesses a higher degree of crystallization. All these results indicate that the presence of glucose in the precursor solution facilitates the fabrication of MAPbI3 film with optimized crystallinity and enlarged grain size, as shown in Fig. 1e.

In order to figure out the correlation of glucose and perovskite film, we used X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) to study the pristine MAPbI3 film and the MAPbI3 (glucose) film. As displayed in Fig. 2a, the main peaks of Pb 4f of MAPbI3 film appeared at 138.4 eV and 143.2 eV, respectively. The main peaks of Pb 4f of MAPbI3 (glucose) film appeared at 138.2 eV and 143.0 eV, respectively, showing a ∼0.2 eV shift to lower bonding energy. Similarly, the I 3d peaks in MAPbI3 (glucose) films located at 619.0 eV and 630.5 eV showed an ∼0.2 eV shift to lower bonding energy compared with those in MAPbI3 film, as shown in Fig. 2b. The shift of Pb 4f and I 3d indicated the presence of additional negative charge around the Pb and I atoms. It could be inferred that the Pb and I atoms accepted more electrons by coordinating with glucose, leading to an increase in electron cloud density and a decrease in electron affinity of the Pb and I atoms. Meanwhile, as shown in Fig. 2c, the main peaks of N 1s in MAPbI3 (glucose) film appeared at 401.9 eV, compared with the one that appeared at 402.2 eV in MAPbI3 film. The ∼0.3 eV shift revealed the existence of additional negative charge around the N atom. Moreover, an additional peak of N 1s in MAPbI3 (glucose) film was observed at 399.9 eV. Given the color transformation of glucose and MAI mixture solution after heating at 60 °C (Fig. S2, ESI), the possible intermolecular interaction between carbonyl groups of glucose and MAI was confirmed by the presence of Schiff base via liquid-chromatograph mass spectrometry (LC-MS, Fig. S3, ESI). Compared with the molecular weight of glucose (180.16), the peaks of [M + H]+ and [M + Na]+ in LC-MS spectrum that appeared at 194.10 and 216.08, respectively, are consistent with the molecular mass of Schiff base by calculation, which indicates the interaction between carbonyl groups of glucose and MAI. Therefore, the change of electron cloud density around the N atom corresponds to the shift of the main peaks and the presence of a neo-peak.
To further address the intermolecular interaction of the glucose and perovskite components, FT-IR spectra were obtained, as depicted in Fig. S4 (ESI). With the introduction of PbI2 into glucose, the typical peak of CO stretching vibration showed an obvious shift from 1640 cm−1 to 1600 cm−1, and at the same time, the signal of −OH of glucose shifted from 1033 cm−1 to 1026 cm−1, all of which could be assigned to the interaction of CO and –OH groups in glucose with PbI2. Meanwhile, the typical peak of –NH3+ stretch of the MAI shifted from 3094 cm−1 to 3102 cm−1, mainly caused by the hydrogen bonds formed between glucose and MAI. Consequently, the introduction of glucose provided anchor-sites for perovskite components (Fig. 1e), which impacted the grain growth process aiming to prepare high-quality films with large-sized crystal grains.
Previous studies have shown that device performance is highly dependent on the crystallinity of perovskite films, and proved the efficacy of additives on improving perovskite crystallinity, film morphology and the enhancement of device parameters. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed to examine the crystallinity property change before and after adding glucose. As shown in Fig. 2d, the crystal of perovskite exhibited diffraction peaks at 14.2°, 20.2°, 23.6°, 24.6°, 28.5°, 32.0°, 40.5° and 43.3°, which corresponded to the crystal planes of (110), (112), (211), (202), (220), (310), (224), and (314), respectively. No impurity phase or significant peak shift was observed in the MAPbI3 (glucose) films, suggesting that the perovskite active layer completely transformed into a tetragonal phase. What's more, the observed increase in peak intensity of the crystal planes of MAPbI3 at 14.2° and 28.5° after the introduction of glucose was indicative of the enhanced crystallinity in MAPbI3 (glucose) devices. Benefiting from the interaction between the multifunctional groups of glucose and perovskite components, the molecular arrangement was well regulated in the crystallization process, which further contributed to the improvement of the film quality with enlarged grain size and passivated defects.
Then, we fabricated inverted planar PSCs with the device structure of ITO/P3CT-K/MAPbI3 (glucose)/PCBM/ZnO/Al to test the efficacy of glucose. The current–voltage (J–V) curves are plotted in Fig. 3a. Compared with the pristine MAPbI3-based devices with 17.53% efficiency, MAPbI3 (glucose)-based PSCs gave a PCE of 20.15% (average PCE: 19.95%) with an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.084 eV, a short circuit current (Jsc) of 22.68 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 81.96%. The J–V curves in different scanning directions are recorded in Fig. 3b. The PCE values of the MAPbI3 (glucose) device via forward bias scan (forward bias to short circuit, FB-to-SC) and reverse bias scan (short circuit to forward bias, SC-to-FB) were 20.15% and 19.47%, respectively, while the accompanied values of the control device were 17.53% and 16.18%, respectively. The hysteresis index  declined from 0.083 to 0.034 upon the addition of 1 mg mL−1 glucose, showing that the MAPbI3 (glucose) device exhibited less hysteresis, which indicated that the interaction between glucose and perovskite suppressed ion migration and surface charge trapping, thus alleviating device hysteresis effectively. Corresponding external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the devices with MAPbI3 (glucose) and pristine MAPbI3 are shown in Fig. 3c. It was found that the EQE spectrum of the MAPbI3 (glucose) device was obviously increased in the wavelength range of 300–800 nm, as compared with the pure MAPbI3 device, and the obtained integrated Jsc values were 21.31 and 20.45 mA cm−2, which were consistent with a higher Jsc obtained from the J–V results. Steady-state photocurrent and power output of the glucose-modified perovskite device were measured to determine the actual power output by monitoring the photocurrent at the maximum power point of the device under bias applied under AM 1.5 illumination. It exhibited a stabilized efficiency of 19.95%, which matched with the PCE value of 20.15% shown in Fig. 3d. The results reveal that the optimized PCE of our device is reliable.
To further examine the reproducibility of the MAPbI3 (glucose)-based devices, standard box plots of the main parameters of 15 devices fabricated with MAPbI3 and MAPbI3 (glucose) are shown in Fig. 4. MAPbI3 (glucose) devices exhibited better reproducibility. The detailed parameters are summarized in Table S1 (ESI). It can be observed that the values of Voc, FF, Jsc, and PCE of MAPbI3 (glucose) devices were enhanced remarkably when the concentration of glucose was 1 mg mL−1. In addition, the statistical data, the detailed parameters and the J–V curves of 15 devices with different concentrations of glucose are presented in Fig. S5, Table S2 and Fig. S6 (ESI). As the concentration of glucose increased, the performance of MAPbI3 (glucose) devices gradually improved, presenting an optimal concentration at 1 mg mL−1. However, as the concentration continued to increase, the performance of the device began to deteriorate. These results suggested a much lower Jsc and FF led to a decreased PCE, which was attributed to the poor conductivity of excess glucose and the existence of more recombination centers.
In order to probe the reasons for the improved device performance, the J–V curve test was performed under dark conditions. As shown in Fig. 5a, the MAPbI3 (glucose)-based devices show a much more reduced dark current at low voltage. Meanwhile, the parameters of the low voltage region are mainly influenced by the shunt resistance (Rsh) of the device. By fitting to the equivalent circuit model of the double diode model of solar cells, the Rsh of the MAPbI3 (glucose)-based device increased to ∼14 KΩ cm−2 compared with the one of the MAPbI3-based device (∼5.0 KΩ cm−2), which indicates that the MAPbI3 (glucose)-based device has a lowered leakage current. The relationship between the photocurrent density (Jph) and effective voltage (Veff) for the MAPbI3 and MAPbI3 (glucose) devices was studied to explore the effect of glucose in PSCs, as shown in Fig. 5b and Fig. S7 (ESI). Jph is calculated by Jph = Jld − Jdd (Jld and Jdd denote the density current under light and dark conditions, respectively).Veff is determined according to the equation Veff = Va − Vd (Va and Vd mean the applied voltage and voltage value at Jld = Jdd, respectively). As shown in Fig. 5b, the saturation photocurrent (Jsat) of the MAPbI3 (glucose) device was reached earlier than that of the MAPbI3 counterpart. The maximum exciton generation rate (Gmax) can be calculated by Jsat = qGmaxL (electronic charge (q) and thickness of active layer (L)). The Gmax values of MAPbI3 and MAPbI3 (glucose) devices are 1.37 and 1.46 × 1027 m−3 s−1, respectively. Meanwhile, the exciton dissociation probability (P) was calculated from the normalization photocurrent density Jph/Jsat, as shown in Fig. S7 (ESI). Apparently, at 0.1 V of Veff, P was 40% for MAPbI3, while it reached 80% for the MAPbI3 (glucose)-based device. The increase of Gmax and P values implied the reduction of exciton recombination rate and the suppression of charge recombination, which accounts for the enhancement of Jsc and FF.
The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) of the MAPbI3 (glucose) and MAPbI3 film is shown in Fig. 5c. The PL intensity of MAPbI3 (glucose) film was enhanced by 2.5 times compared to that of pristine MAPbI3 film. The increase in PL demonstrated that the addition of glucose reduced the defect state density, which facilitated enhanced charge extraction and inhibited charge recombination. Time-resolved PL measurement was conducted to further study the charge-carrier dynamics. In Fig. 5d, typical bi-exponential decay curves are presented, which respectively related to non-radiative recombination (fast fraction) and bi-molecular recombination (slow fraction). Parameters of bi-exponential fitting of TRPL decay curves are shown in Table S3 (ESI). The fast lifetime increased from 10.72 ns to 25.74 ns with the fraction decreasing from 26.01% to 7.2%. Meanwhile, the slow lifetime increased from 69.76 ns to 132.53 ns. The change tendency of both lifetime value and fraction exhibited the same results as reported by Yang et al., implying that the defects in perovskite film were greatly passivated by glucose, leading to a high Jsc and FF. The PL and time-resolved PL results show that the introduction of glucose into the perovskite active layer decreased the bulk trap states, which is beneficial to the enhancement of charge extraction and the suppression of non-radiative charge recombination. The passivation of defects enhanced carrier concentration under light irradiation by reducing non-radiative recombination, which is beneficial to larger quasi-Fermi level splitting and a higher Voc value.
To further understand the device mechanism with glucose modification, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurement was carried out at 1 V bias voltage under dark conditions. In the Nyquist plots, the diameter of the semicircle is referred to as charge recombination resistance (Rrec), which suggests current leakage and accompanied recombination of electron transport layers and active layers. A larger Rrec is generally interpreted as reduced charge recombination, which is beneficial to efficient carrier transport. As presented in Fig. 6a, the series resistance values of the devices based on MAPbI3 and MAPbI3 (glucose) films are 90 Ω and 65 Ω, and the recombination resistance values are 458 Ω and 767 Ω, respectively. These results suggest that glucose suppressed the trap states in the perovskite active layer, improved the charge-carrier transport in the bulk film and reduced the current leakage and charge recombination between the perovskite and the contiguous layers.Fig. 6b depicts Bode EIS spectra measured under dark conditions at 1 V bias voltage to discern the dependence of electron lifetime (τ) on MAPbI3- and MAPbI3 (glucose)-based devices. Electron lifetime can be easily acquired based on the equation of , where fp represents peak frequency relating to the electrochemical reaction of the charge-transfer process of MAPbI3- or MAPbI3 (glucose)-based device. As a result, the values of τ were 9.31 μs for MAPbI3 (glucose)-based devices and 7.32 μs for the MAPbI3-based counterparts, concluding that MAPbI3 (glucose)-based devices demonstrated a higher electron density and a lower charge recombination.
We also measured the trap density with the structure of ITO/PCBM/perovskite/PCBM/Al by space charge limited current (SCLC) characterization in the dark. The defect density is calculated via the equation: ntrap = 2εrε0VTFL/qL2, where VTFL is the trap-filling limit voltage, εr is the relative dielectric constant, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, q is the electron charge and L is the perovskite film thickness. From Fig. 6c and d, we can find that the VTFL decreased from 0.74 V for the MAPbI3 device to 0.56 V for the MAPbI3 (glucose) device. Accordingly, the ntrap values of the MAPbI3 (glucose) and MAPbI3 films are 9.65 × 1015 cm−3 and 1.28 × 1016 cm−3, respectively. This indicated that the glucose can effectively reduce trap states and charge recombination, which is beneficial to the enhancement of Jsc and FF.
More importantly, we examined the environmental stability of the non-encapsulated devices by subjecting them to three important stress conditions: (1) heat, (2) light and (3) moisture. We conducted thermal-stability testing in a N2 glove box by annealing the films and devices on a hotplate at 85 °C. The XRD patterns with different annealing times of MAPbI3 and MAPbI3 (glucose) films are shown in Fig. 7a and b. Under the same testing conditions, a significant peak of PbI2 appeared in the MAPbI3 film after 200 min annealing. However, the MAPbI3 (glucose) film showed a slight peak of PbI2 until annealing for 600 min. Corresponding to the normalized PCE, as shown in Fig. 7c, the PCE of MAPbI3 (glucose)-based devices retained 85% after annealing for 1200 min. However, the MAPbI3-based devices degraded dramatically, with a drop in efficiency to less than 60% after 500 min annealing. Simultaneously, we tested the light stability of PSCs under stimulated AM 1.5G 1 sun illumination in a N2 glove box; as shown in Fig. 7d, non-encapsulated MAPbI3 (glucose)-based devices still retained over 86% of initial efficiency after 1000 min, while the MAPbI3 devices retained less than 70% efficiency after 500 min. Apart from thermal and light stability, the moisture stability of PSCs was also improved in MAPbI3 (glucose) devices. As shown in Fig. S8 (ESI), MAPbI3 (glucose)-based devices exhibited excellent stability in moist air (relative humidity: 85–90%, room temperature: 25 °C), retaining 76% of the maximum efficiency after 150 min storage, while the stability was much inferior in the case of control MAPbI3 devices and <50% efficiency can be retained merely after 50 min. The stability of the MAPbI3 (glucose) devices was significantly improved, benefiting from the enhanced quality of the perovskite film with reduced grain boundaries and trap densities as has been proved.

In summary, glucose, as an additive, is used to enhance the performance of the inverted planar PSCs by improving the quality of the perovskite film characteristic of larger grain size, fewer grain boundaries and trap density. It also decreases the exciton recombination rate and reduces the charge recombination as proved by photoluminescence and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurements. Consequently, the optimized power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 20.15% is obtained with all improved device parameters. Additionally, the J–V hysteresis is significantly improved, and the hysteresis index is found to be considerably reduced. Moreover, the PSCs with glucose exhibit greatly improved stability under conditions of heat, light and moisture. Therefore, the strategy of glucose modification of perovskite film provides an encouraging approach to fabricate highly efficient and stable inverted planar perovskite solar cells.


Experimental sections are provided in the ESI.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51672288 and 21975273), the Taishan Scholars Program of Shandong Province, Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy (DICP QIBEBT No. UN201705), Scientific Research Cooperation Foundation of Qingdao Institute of Bioenergy and Bioprocess Technology, Open Foundation of Key Laboratory for Preparation and Application of Ordered Structural Materials of Guangdong Province (KLPAOSM201702), and Qingdao Postdoctoral Application Research Project (Project 2018183 and 2018186).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental sections, the digital photo, structure and LC-MS characterization of Schiff base, FT-IR spectrum, SEM images, J–V curves, the statistical data of the main parameters, PCE decay versus storage time, summary of the details of devices and PL decay curves. See DOI: 10.1039/d0tc00365d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020