 DOI: 10.1039/C3EE42516A
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3356-3362
Shaocong Hou, Xin Cai, Hongwei Wu, Xiao Yu, Ming Peng, Kai Yan and Dechun Zou*
Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Key Laboratory of Polymer Chemistry and Physics of Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. E-mail: dczou@pku.edu.cn; Fax: +86-10-6275-9799; Tel: +86-10-6275-9799
Received 25th July 2013, Accepted 13th September 2013
First published on 13th September 2013
Nitrogen-doped graphene was demonstrated as an efficient and alternative metal-free electrocatalyst for dye-sensitized solar cells. Electrochemical measurements showed that the nitrogen-doping process can remarkably improve the catalytic activity of graphene toward triiodide reduction, lower the charge transfer resistance, and thus enhance the corresponding photovoltaic performance. Furthermore, the nitrogen doping levels ranging from 3.5 at% to 18 at%, as well as the nitrogen states (including pyrrolic, pyridinic and quaternary configurations) in graphene, were controlled to interpret the roles of graphene structure in catalytic activity and device performance. The results suggested that the nitrogen states, rather than the total N content, have a significant effect on the catalytic activity. Both pyridinic and quaternary nitrogen states can provide active sites for promoting triiodide reduction reaction, probably due to the shift in redox potential and the lowered adsorption energy.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have been drawing widespread attention for their low cost, high efficiency, simple fabrication processes, and environmental friendly nature. Typically, a DSSC consists of a dye-sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2 photoanode, an I−/I3− electrolyte, and a Pt/FTO counter electrode (CE) that reduces iodine to iodide to maintain a steady power output. Traditionally, noble metal Pt is utilized as electrocatalyst for the CE because of its high conductivity and catalytic activity. However, Pt is expensive and scarce, and its stability in corrosive electrolytes is also inferior. Thus, alternatives to the Pt electrocatalyst have been extensively studied, such as inorganic metal compounds, conducting polymers, and carbon materials. Among them, carbon materials including carbon black, carbon nanotubes, and nanocarbon are low cost, abundant, and stable in corrosive electrolyte. Usually, in order to overcome their inferior intrinsic catalytic activity, carbon-based electrocatalysts are made into thick porous films with high surface area, which lead to high resistance and are detrimental to device performance.

Graphene, a two-dimensional atomically thick carbon nanomaterial, has been widely researched in energy conversion/storage fields for its excellent properties of light, transparency, high conductivity, and large specific surface area. However, pristine graphene, which lacks catalytic active sites, is hardly suitable for DSSC electrocatalysts. In 2010, Roy-Mayhew et al. discovered that functionalizing graphene with oxygen-containing sites contributes to the high catalytic activity of graphene toward I−/I3−, showing comparable performance to the Pt catalyst. And graphene performs even better toward cobalt-based or sulfur-based redox couples. The highest conversion efficiency of DSSCs utilizing commercial graphene nanoplatelets has reached 9.5%. Although the oxygen-doping process improves catalytic activity, the conductivity of graphene is always tremendously decreased due to the destruction of the conductive carbon framework. To overcome the contradiction between the conductivity and catalytic activity by oxygen-doping is still challenging. Recent studies show that nitrogen-doped graphene (NrG) is a potentially efficient electrocatalyst for DSSCs. Compared with oxygen-doped graphene, the nitrogen-doping process could improve the electrochemical activity of graphene without significant decrease in conductivity, which helps reduce the total internal resistance and thus improves the photovoltaic performance. Nevertheless, the N-doping level of NrG in previous studies is low, and the contribution of the large amount of abundant residual oxygen-containing groups in NrG to catalytic activity and conductivity could not be neglected. Thus, whether catalytic activity could be further improved simply by increasing the nitrogen content in graphene remains unclear. Moreover, several nitrogen-doping states, such as pyrrolic, pyridinic, quaternary N and N-oxide of pyridinic, always coexist in NrG. The specific functional groups responsible for catalytic activity are still unknown. Exploration of their individual contributions could help identify the catalytic active sites and better understand the reduction mechanism. To our knowledge, no systematic research on the relationship between the structure and the performance of heteroatom-functionalized graphene as an electrocatalyst for DSSCs was reported.
In this study, NrG was prepared by thermal annealing of graphene oxide (GO) with cyanamide, which was subsequently utilized as an alternative to the Pt electrocatalyst for DSSCs. By controlling the N content from 3 at% to 18 at% and the types of nitrogen-containing species in graphene, we were able to achieve better elucidation of the NrG structure and its electrochemical functions in DSSC performance. Furthermore, this work provides insight into the catalytic reduction mechanism on nitrogen-doped graphene, and presents a way to maximize the catalytic activity of graphene and the corresponding device performance.

Graphene oxide (GO) was synthesized according to modified Hummer's method. About 5 mL of 8.8 mg mL−1 GO aqueous solution was mixed well with 2.2 g of 50 wt% cyanamide aqueous solution (Alfa Aesar). After a freeze-drying process to remove the solvent, a gray GO/cyanamide composite remained. NrG was obtained by heating the composite under different temperatures for a total of 4 h in N2 atmosphere. The pyrolysis temperature was set above 700 °C to ensure the complete decomposition of cyanamide and its condensation derivatives. NrG-700, NrG-800, NrG-900, and NrG-1000 represent the NrG prepared at the pyrolysis temperatures of 700, 800, 900, and 1000 °C, respectively. For comparison, reduced graphene oxide (rGO-900) without N-doping was also synthesized by drying GO in air and then heating at 900 °C for 4 h.


NrG was dispersed in isopropanol by vigorous sonication for 1 h to form uniform NrG ink (4 mg mL−1). Before drop-casting the NrG ink, Ti wire (diameter = 250 μm) was modified with a thin GO buffer layer to improve the adhesion to the NrG film. NrG loading on Ti wire was about 40 μg cm−1. The resulting NrG/GO/Ti was dried at 120 °C, and then annealed at 500 °C for 1 h under N2 gas.


Fiber DSSCs were fabricated according to our previous work. Briefly, a fiber-shaped photoanode based on Ti wire (250 μm) was prepared by dip-coating in TiO2 colloid to form a porous film with a thickness of 10 μm, annealing at 450 °C for 0.5 h, and then sensitizing in N719 dye solution. The as-prepared photoanode and counter electrode in parallel were inserted into a glass capillary filled with I−/I3− electrolyte containing 0.6 M BMII, 0.03 M I2, 0.05 M LiClO4, 0.3 M TPB, and 0.05 M GuSCN in acetonitrile solution. Finally, the two ends were sealed with wax.


The morphology was characterized by TEM (Hitachi H-9000) by dropping diluted NrG-900/IPA dispersion on a Cu micro-grid. The porous NrG film for SEM characterization (Hitachi S-4800) was prepared by drop-casting NrG/isopropanol dispersion on aluminum foil and then drying in air. The photovoltaic performances of DSSCs were measured under 1 sun (AM 1.5), calibrated with a standard silicon solar cell. The electrochemical test was conducted with the Ti wire electrode loaded with 10 μg NrG or the rGO electrocatalyst. EIS was conducted with a dummy cell at 0 V bias potential. The dummy cell consisted of two identical Ti wire electrodes in parallel and separated by a distance of 160 μm. For linear sweep voltammetry, the Ti electrode was preloaded with the 10 μg electrocatalyst and was used as the working electrode, with Ag/Ag+ as the reference electrode and Pt wire as the auxiliary electrode, and then measured by an electrochemical workstation (Autolab PG320) in acetonitrile solution with 0.06 M DMII and 0.003 M I2 at different potential scanning rates (500, 250, 100, 50, 25 mV s−1). The Ag/Ag+ reference electrode was calibrated with 1 mM ferrocene in acetonitrile (the redox potential is 84 ± 3 mV). XPS and valence band spectra were obtained using an imaging photoelectron spectrometer (Axis Ultra).


NrG was prepared by annealing GO with cyanamide as a nitrogen source at 900 °C (Fig. S1 and S2). The morphologies of the resultant NrG and undoped graphene were investigated by TEM and SEM, as shown in Fig. 1. The NrG-900 shows transparent graphene nanosheets with much more highly wrinkled structure than rGO-900 (Fig. 1a and b). The wrinkled structure increases the surface area of nanosheets and reduces their interlayer π–π stacking process, thereby facilitating the formation of porous films (Fig. 1c and d). An amorphous structure is observed, probably due to the relatively large amount of defects and nitrogen-containing functional groups in the graphene plane (Fig. S3 and 4). High nitrogen content (7.4 at%) and low oxygen content (3.3 at%) in NrG-900 indicate that the N-doping process and the O-removing process took place simultaneously.
The nitrogen-doped graphene (NrG-900) was dispersed in isopropanol and drop-cast onto titanium wire, which was pre-modified with a thin GO buffer layer. After annealing at 500 °C to remove the solvent and enhance the adhesion, a uniform NrG porous film was formed on the rGO/Ti electrode. The as-prepared fiber-shaped CE was combined with the titanium wire-based photoanode for the assembly of fiber DSSCs (Fig. S5). Here, a fiber DSSC was chosen for its unique advantages in TCO-free, high flexibility, and three-dimensional light harvesting ability, which is considered as an alternative strategy toward efficient flexible/wearable solar cells. The photovoltaic curve of the DSSC with the NrG-900 electrocatalyst is shown in Fig. 2. For effective comparison, the photovoltaic performance of the device with pristine graphene (rGO) and Pt were also measured. The DSSC with the Pt electrocatalyst shows an open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 0.713 V, 10.5 mA cm−2, 0.68, and 5.1%, respectively. The PCE of the rGO-based DSSC was as low as 4.0%, mainly resulting from the much lower Jsc. By replacing rGO-900 with NrG-900, the PCE of the corresponding DSSC increased to 5.4%, which is even higher than that of the Pt-based device. The higher PCE is directly ascribed to higher Jsc and FF.
The charge transfer resistance (Rct) is often used to explain the difference in the performance of DSSCs with different CEs. To exclusively evaluate Rct, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) tests of dummy cells with two identical CEs were conducted at 0 V bias potential. The resultant Nyquist plots of rGO-900, NrG-900, and Pt are presented in Fig. 3. The Nyquist plot of Pt clearly shows a semicircle at high frequency and an upturned line at low frequency, which corresponds to the electron transfer process at the electrode–electrolyte interface and the Nernst diffusion process in the electrolyte, respectively. For rGO-900 and NrG-900, a distorted arc appears on the left side of the semicircle, which corresponds to the second Nernst diffusion process in the pores of the rGO or NrG thick film.Rct can be extracted through fitting the semicircle with an appropriate equivalent circuit. The obtained Rct values are summarized in Table 1. For rGO-900, the Rct (158.4 Ω) is five times larger than that of Pt (48.8 Ω). When NrG-900 was used instead of rGO-900, a substantial reduction in Rct to 34.5 Ω occurred, even lower than that of Pt. Generally, Rct can significantly affect the device performance in two ways: (1) lower Rct leads to lower total internal resistance, which is better for the fill factor; (2) lower Rct also implies effective reduction of I3− to I− at the electrolyte–CE interface, which could favor the dye-regeneration process at the electrolyte–photoanode interface, reflected in the improvement of Jsc.
Electrocatalyst
N content (at%)
Rct (Ω)
Voc (V)
FF
Jsc (mA cm−2)
PCE (%)
rGO-900
0
158
0.727
0.71
7.79
4.0
NrG-700
18
116
0.727
0.74
9.20
4.9
NrG-800
9.5
44
0.749
0.74
9.22
5.1
NrG-900
7.4
35
0.729
0.71
10.5
5.4
NrG-1000
3.6
90
0.741
0.76
7.97
4.5
Pt
/
49
0.713
0.68
10.5
5.1
Different from the thin and dense Pt film, the NrG catalytic layer on CE is a thick porous film. Thus, to determine whether the lower Rct originates from the intrinsically higher catalytic activity or from the higher electro-active surface area of NrG is difficult. The relationship between Rct and the intrinsic catalytic activity or electro-active surface area can be described by following eqn (1) and (2).
J0 = RT/nFRct
(1)
J0 = βJ′0
(2)
where
R, T, n, and F represent the universal gas constant, temperature, number of electrons contributing to the charge-transfer at the interface, and Faraday's constant, respectively. J0 is the apparent exchange current, which is the kinetic component positively correlated with the electrochemical reaction rate constant. β is the effective electro-active area for the porous film relative to the one with a smooth dense film, that is, the roughness factor. J′0 is the intrinsic exchange current normalized with effective electro-active area. Thus, J′0 could be used to exclusively reflect the intrinsic catalytic activity.

According to Xue's method, the ratios of the electro-active surface area (β) of different electrocatalysts were obtained (rGO-900:NrG-900:Pt = 2.3:2.1:1) (Fig. S6). By normalizing the above-mentioned Rct values to the electro-active surface area, the resulting ratio of the normalized exchange current J′0 (rGO-900:NrG-900:Pt) is 0.13:0.67:1. The calculated results show that N-doping remarkably improves the intrinsic catalytic activity of graphene. However, the intrinsic catalytic activity of NrG is still lower than that of Pt, which is in line with the fact that Pt is most electrocatalytic toward triiodide reduction. For comparison, the NrG prepared by annealing with NH3 gas in Xue's work was calculated in the same manner. The ratio of the intrinsic exchange current for their NrG to Pt is 0.53:1, which is obviously lower than the result obtained in this study (0.67:1), although the N content of the two NrG samples (about 7.5%) is almost the same. In this regard, our preparation method, namely, annealing of GO with cyanamide, shows advantages in obtaining more catalytically active NrG. Both results demonstrate that the low intrinsic catalytic activity of NrG could be compensated by the high electro-active surface area. Thus, NrG shows higher apparent catalytic activity than Pt.
Voltammetry reveals a quasi-reversible iodine reduction reaction for the NrG-900 electrocatalyst (Fig. S7). The reduction peak current is linear with the square root of the scanning rate (Fig. S8), illustrating fast electron transfer and diffusion-controlling processes. Furthermore, NrG shows higher stability of catalytic activity than the Pt electrocatalyst, as proved by the continuous voltammetry experiment (Fig. S7).

Previous work has demonstrated that increasing the amount of oxygen or fluorine-containing functional groups in graphene can improve the apparent catalytic activity, as the incorporation of O or F heteroatoms could create catalytic active sites for iodine reduction reaction. In an effort to elucidate the relationship between the catalytic activity and the nitrogen content of graphene, NrG with different N contents should be prepared. However, the total N content of NrG obtained by traditional N-doping methods, such as hydrothermal techniques, N2 plasma, N2H4 treatment or annealing in NH3, is usually no more than 5 at%. We found that the total N content could be easily adjusted in a wide range, simply by pyrolysis of GO with cyanamide at different temperatures. XPS (Fig. S9) shows that the N content of NrG-700 is as high as 18 at%, which is obviously higher than that of NrG prepared by most post-treatment methods. Thus, our method also provides the benefit of verifying the catalytic activity of NrG with much higher N content. As the annealing temperature increases from 700 to 800, 900, and 1000 °C, the N content successively drops to 9.5 at%, 7.4 at%, and 3.6 at%, respectively. The decrease in N content could be ascribed to the removal of some unstable N functional groups, consistent with previous findings. The contribution of the catalytic activity from other heteroatom impurities, such as oxygen and phosphorus, could be neglected, because their contents are much lower than N content, which is different from that prepared by a hydrothermal method. Although the N content varied, the resultant films deposited with NrG/isopropanol dispersion retained the porous structure, facilitating the diffusion process of the redox species (Fig. S10).

Rct could be extracted by fitting the EIS of the corresponding dummy cells to compare the catalytic activity of different NrG samples (Fig. 4a and b). For the sample with the lowest N content, NrG-1000, Rct is about 89.6 Ω, which is nearly triple the value of NrG-900. The apparent catalytic activity is improved when the total N content is increased from 3.6 at% to 7.4%. With further increase of the total N content, Rct does not decrease as expected, but increases to 44.1 and 115.7 Ω for NrG-800 (N content: 9.5 at%) and NrG-700 (N content: 18 at%), respectively. The normalized exchange current J′0 shows similar tendency as the total N content varies (Table S1). The photovoltaic curves of DSSCs with four NrG electrocatalysts were measured (Fig. 4c), and the parameters are summarized in Fig. 4d. From Fig. 4d, the best photovoltaic performance was achieved for NrG-900 with the N content of 7.4 at%, which is consistent with the recent report. Whether to increase or decrease the N content will reduce the corresponding PCE. These results suggest that the catalytic activity of graphene could not be improved simply by increasing the total N content. A reasonable explanation for this phenomenon is that some special N-functionalized groups have an important role in creating catalytically active sites, whereas others may contribute little to catalytic activity.

To explore the special N-containing functional groups, the N-doping states were systematically analyzed by high-resolution C1s and N1s XPS spectra. Taking NrG-900 as an example, its C1s spectra (Fig. 5) show an asymmetric peak at around 285 eV. Through peak fitting, the asymmetric peak could be divided into a main peak and two additional peaks, which correspond to the carbon with the CC bond (284.6 eV), CN bond (285.2 eV), and C–N bond (286.2 eV). This result confirms that the heteroatom nitrogen is successfully incorporated into the graphene plane, whereas the oxygen atom is removed simultaneously during the N-doping process. High-resolution N1s XPS spectra could determine the nitrogen states in the NrG samples. By deconvoluting N1s spectra, four kinds of N species can be identified by the bonding states of the N atom, including pyridinic N (398.1 eV), pyrrolic N (399.3 eV), quaternary N (400.8 eV), and N-oxides of pyridinic N (403.7 eV). Pyrrolic and pyridinic N are bonded to two adjacent carbon atoms and are always located at the edge of the graphene plane. Quaternary N usually substitutes the carbon atom in the carbon framework and could be located at either the center or the edge of the sheet (Fig. 4c). The composition atomic ratios of four types of N species in the four NrG samples are summarized in Table S2 and Fig. 5d, which show an obvious difference in the content distribution of N species. For NrG-700, the pyrrolic configuration dominates. Upon increasing the annealing temperature to 800 or 900 °C, the content of pyrrolic N sharply decreases to 3.26 at% or 0.39 at%, respectively, accompanied by the increase of pyridinic N and quaternary N. Due to its lower thermal stability, pyrrolic N may be transformed into pyridinic or quaternary N at higher annealing temperatures, according to the “ring expansion” model. For NrG-1000, quaternary N is the predominant type because of its thermally stable nature. Apart from the transforming process, part of the N species may also be directly removed from the graphene sheets, leading to the decrease of the total N content, consistent with previous reports.
In addition to the Rct mentioned above, the role of N-doping states in catalytic performance is discussed as follows. (1) The role of pyrrolic N: compared with rGO-900, a larger amount (more than 10.7 at%) of pyrrolic N was introduced into the NrG-700 sample. However, a slight decrease of Rct from 158.4 Ω to 115.7 Ω was observed. This finding suggests that the catalytic activity of pyrrolic N is inferior. (2) The role of N-oxide of pyridinic N: the content of N-oxide of pyridinic N contentiously decreased with the increase in temperature. By contrast, Rct does not follow the same trend. Previous studies show that the N-oxide of pyridinic N has no catalytic activity in the oxygen reduction reactions. Thus, the N-oxide of pyridinic N was not responsible for the catalytic activity of NrG. (3) The role of pyridinic N: when replacing NrG-700 with NrG-800, the content of pyridinic N almost doubles, whereas that of all the other N species decrease. Moreover, Rct noticeably decreases from 115.7 Ω to 44.1 Ω. The increase of pyridinic N was responsible for the improvement of the catalytic activity. (4) The role of quaternary N: compared with NrG-800, NrG-900 has nearly the same content of pyridinic N. However, the content of quaternary N increases from 2.7 at% to 3.3 at%, along with the decrease of Rct to 34.5 Ω. Apart from pyridinic N, quaternary N could also contribute to the catalytic activity. Overall, the catalytic activity follows the tendency of the total content of pyridinic and quaternary N. Thus, both pyridinic and quaternary N may be effective catalytic active sites for iodine reduction reaction. The similar positive effect of pyridinic and quaternary N on oxygen reduction reaction has been observed. Notably, the defects in the graphene plane created during the doping process could also serve as catalytic active sites. However, their contribution to the catalytic activity may not be as significant as the aforementioned special N species. The intensity ratio of the D band to the G band (ID/IG) in the Raman spectra could be used to characterize the amount of structural defects and edge plane exposure. From the Raman spectra (Fig. S6), ID/IG values of four NrG samples are larger than those of rGO, which indicates a large amount of defects in NrG. However, the continuous decrease of ID/IG from 3.7 for NrG-700 to 2.3 for NrG-1000 suggests that defects are reduced, resulting from the self-healing process of the graphene plane as the temperature increases. The trend of ID/IG is evidently different from that of Rct, thereby providing substantial evidence that defects in the graphene plane do not dominate the catalytic activity.

Exploring the electrocatalytic mechanism of triiodide reduction reaction is important for rational design of electrocatalysts for dye-sensitized solar cells, but few studies have been reported to reveal it. To our knowledge, no report exists on the mechanism of catalytic iodine reduction on nitrogen-doped graphene. Our findings suggest that the improvement of catalytic activity possibly originates from the charge redistribution in the graphene carbon framework due to the substitution of the N atom for the C atom. The change in the electronic structure of graphene could be characterized by the valence band spectra, as shown in Fig. 6a. For all electrocatalysts, four regions at 2 to 5, 7 to 10, 12 to 15, and 16 to 22 eV correspond to the p-π band, p-σ band, s–p hybrid state, and C 2s band, respectively. Compared with rGO-900, a significant increase in the intensities of p-π and p-σ bands for NrG-700 and NrG-900 was observed, accompanied by the emergence of a new peak of the N 2s band at around 25 eV, which reflects the substitution of the N atom to the carbon network and its π electron-donating effect. The obvious shift toward high energy for C 2s band also proves the substitution of the carbon atom by the electron-rich nitrogen atom. Previous studies have confirmed that the substitution of electron-donating nitrogen into the graphene sheet will introduce a donor level near the bottom of the conduction band, and thus raise the Fermi level, leading to a lower work function.Fig. 6a (inset) illustrates a significant decrease in the position of the Fermi level relative to the valence band edge (EF − EVBedge) after the incorporation of N. The change of photoemission threshold also confirms the change of work function. Das et al. found that lowering the work function in functionalized graphene would result in a shift in the graphene redox potential, thus facilitating the iodine reduction reaction. Ni et al. also proved that nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes with lower function have higher energy electrons and thus stronger reducing ability towards the oxygen reduction reaction. It is noteworthy that a slight difference is observed in the valence band spectra for NrG-700 and NrG-900, which probably results from the difference in N content and N-doping states.
The appropriate adsorption energy of the iodine atom on the electrocatalyst surface is also important for iodine reduction reaction. The incorporation of N atoms may change the adsorption energy of redox species on graphene sheets. The voltammetry experiment shows that the peak reduction current of NrG-700 is linear with the potential scanning rate (v) (Fig. 6b and S12), and reveals a surface-confined process for pyrrolic N-dominating NrG-700, probably due to its strong adsorption of redox species. Jeong et al. found that pyrrolic N has large binding energy toward ions in the solution, which may result in difficulty in the desorption of I* to I− (sol) for iodine reduction reaction. Thus, the decrease of reaction sites would restrict the overall activity. However, for NrG-800, NrG-900, and NrG-1000, a diffusion-controlling process rather than a surface-confined process was indicated from the linear relationship of the peak reduction current and v1/2. This result indicates that the adsorption energy of redox species on the three electrocatalysts decreased. Thus, the transformation of pyrrolic N to pyridinic and quaternary N may reduce the adsorption energy and lead to higher catalytic activity, in agreement with a previous study on oxygen reduction reaction. Further studies on a more clear electrocatalytic mechanism with the first-principles calculation method is still undergoing.

We demonstrated a highly efficient functionalized graphene as an alternative to the Pt electrocatalyst for DSSCs. The incorporation of the N heteroatom can significantly enhance the catalytic activity, decrease the charge transfer resistance, and improve correspondingly the photovoltaic performance. Furthermore, NrG with different N contents and N-doped states, simply prepared through the adjustment of annealing temperature, were used to elucidate the relationship between the graphene structure and the electrochemical activity. We found that the content of special N-doping states, not the total N content, has a key function in catalytic activity. The pyridinic and quaternary N can serve as catalytic active sites for iodine reduction reaction, possibly due to the shift in redox potential and reduced adsorption energy. The results can offer useful insight into the catalytic mechanism of iodine reduction reaction on graphene. Furthermore, with better understanding of the important function of doping states in graphene, we will be able to provide a principle for designing highly efficient carbon-based electrocatalysts (e.g. graphenes, CNTs and nanocarbons) for more efficient, low cost DSSCs, and other electrochemical related applications.


This work was financially supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology (no. 2011CB933300), the Ministry of Education of China (no. 20120001140010), the fund from Beijing city (no. Z121100001312009), and the Scholarship Award for Excellent Doctoral Student granted by Ministry of Education of China.

† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental detail, TGA of GO/cyanamide composites, XRD, Raman, XPS spectra and electrochemical characterization of NrG samples. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee42516a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013