 DOI: 10.1039/D0TC03133J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 11882-11889


Zhihai
Liu
,

Lei
Wang
 and 

Xiaoyin
Xie
*

School of Opto-Electronic Information Science and Technology, Yantai University, Yantai, 264005, China

Department of Packing Engineering, Beijing Technology and Business University, Beijing, 100048, China

Department of Chemical Technology, Jilin Institute of Chemical Technology, Jilin, 132022, China. E-mail: xyxie@jlict.edu.cn

Received
2nd July 2020
, Accepted 21st July 2020
First published on 22nd July 2020
Ruddlesden–Popper type two-dimensional (2D) perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been intensively studied because of their high power-conversion-efficiency (PCE) and long-term stability. In this work, we improved the performance of 2D PSCs by adding an anti-solvent (chlorobenzene) into the perovskite precursors. The use of chlorobenzene could promote the crystallization of the 2D perovskite by accelerating the formation of the perovskite nuclei. Consequently, the quality of the 2D perovskite film was improved with enhanced crystallinity, enlarged grains and reduced pinholes. By adding 20% chlorobenzene into the precursor, the average PCE of the 2D PSCs was significantly improved from 9.83 to 12.91%, with simultaneous enhancements in open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current density and fill factor. Additionally, the PCE degradation of the 2D PSCs was also reduced from 21 to 13% after a 15-day duration, indicating the improved long-term stability. The best device processed from the chlorobenzene-added precursor exhibited the highest PCE of 13.35% with a stable power output and negligible hysteresis. Our research provides a simple and effective way for improving the performance of 2D PSCs.

During the past few years, organic–inorganic hybrid metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been intensively investigated and rapidly developed due to their superior performance regarding high power conversion efficiency (PCE) and convenient fabrication processes. Since the first use of a perovskite material in solar cells by Miyasaka et al. in 2009, the PCE of the PSCs has significantly improved from initially 3.8% to recently certified 25.2%, which shows great potential for commercial applications.

Besides their high performance in power conversion, the environmental stability of the PSCs has to be further improved to satisfy the requirement of commercialization. However, the widely investigated 3-dimensional (3D) perovskite (MAPbX3, MA = CH3NH3, X = Cl, Br, or I) materials usually suffer from the problem of hydration and decomposition under ambient conditions. To improve the stability of the PSCs, finding more stable perovskite material has become an important aspect. For example, CsPbX3 (X = Br or I)-based all-inorganic PSCs have been developed, which show a higher stability than conventional MAPbX3 based PSCs. However, preparing all-inorganic perovskites usually requires a high temperature (about 250 °C), which could increase the cost of mass production. Moreover, the larger band-gap (over 1.8 eV) of all-inorganic perovskites would limit the light absorption of the PSCs, which is a restriction for achieving high PCEs. Recently, two-dimensional (2D) or quasi-2D perovskite materials (Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites) with good environmental stability and tunable band-gaps have been synthesized for solar applications. For example, (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 perovskites, in which n is an integer and BA stands for CH3(CH2)3NH3, can be simply prepared using a one-step solution method at a lower temperature (100 °C). Up to now, the PCE (<15%) of 2D PSCs has still been lower than that (>20%) of conventional 3D PSCs, which needs further improvement.
Improving the quality of perovskite films plays critical roles in fabricating high-performance PSCs. For the one-step solution processed perovskites, usually rapid nuclei formation and retarded crystal growth are beneficial for preparing high quality perovskite films, which should be carefully controlled. To accelerate the nuclei formation, dropping some amount of anti-solvents onto the samples during the spin-coating process is widely used for the preparation of 2D and 3D perovskites. The anti-solvents can be miscible with the host solvent of the perovskite precursor, but insoluble for the solutes (such as PbI2 and MAI). As a result, the anti-solvents could quickly remove residual solvent from the samples, which function as the driving force for realizing the supersaturated state during the progress of crystallization. For example, by using chlorobenzene (CB) or diethyl ether as the anti-solvent, the quality of perovskite films was improved with reduced pinholes and enhanced crystallinity, which further largely improved the PCE of the PSCs from 1.5% to 19.4%. However, experimentally dropping anti-solvent onto the samples during the spin-coating process is not easy to achieve, because the dropping time and target position have to be carefully and exactly controlled. Moreover, to fabricate a batch of PSCs, a large amount of anti-solvent would be consumed (e.g., CB, about 200 μL for each sample), which is quite harmful to the environment. Considering these disadvantages, directly mixing some amount of anti-solvent to the perovskite precursor may be more convenient, which has not been investigated for 2D PSCs. Therefore, it is very important to study the effect of adding an anti-solvent into the precursor on the quality of 2D perovskite films and the performance of 2D PSCs.
In this study, we introduce the investigation of adding the anti-solvent (CB) to the 2D perovskite precursor for improving the performance of 2D PSCs. We find that, upon using CB, the quality of the 2D perovskite film was improved with enlarged grains, reduced pinholes and enhanced crystallinity. The anti-solvent CB could promote the crystallization of the 2D perovskite by accelerating the formation of perovskite nuclei during the spin-coating process. Consequently, the average PCE of the 2D PSCs was significantly improved from 9.83 to 12.91% by adding 20% CB to the precursor. This is mainly caused by the simultaneous enhancements in short-circuit current density (Jsc, from 16.7 to 18.5 mA cm−2) and fill factor (FF, from 58.3 to 67.1%). Additionally, the PCE degradation of the 2D PSCs was also reduced from 21 to 13% after a 15-day duration, indicating the improved long-term stability. The best device processed from CB-added precursor exhibited the highest PCE of 13.35% with a stable power output and negligible hysteresis. Our results indicate that directly adding a small amount of the anti-solvent into the precursor can significantly improve the performance of 2D PSCs.

[6,6]-Phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) and methylammonium iodide (MAI) were purchased from Nano-C Inc. (USA) and Ying Kou You Xuan Trade Co., Ltd (China), respectively. Butylammonium iodide (BAI), PbI2, N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), 2-propanol, and CB were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (USA). Poly(bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine) (PTAA) and bathocuproine (BCP) were purchased from EM index (Korea) and Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Corp. (China), respectively. As shown in Fig. 1(a), the 2D PSCs were fabricated on the patterned indium-tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates with the structure of glass/ITO/PTAA/perovskite/PCBM/BCP/Ag. First, the PTAA solution (in CB, 10 mg mL−1) was spin coated onto the pre-cleaned ITO glasses at 3500 rpm. Then the samples were thermally annealed at 80 °C to fully remove the residual solvent. The 2D perovskite precursor solutions were prepared by dissolving BAI, MAI, and PbI2 (molar ratio = 2:3:4) in pure DMF and different mixtures of solvents (DMF:CB = 90:10, DMF:CB = 80:20, and DMF:CB = 70:30 in volume) at a total concentration of 40 wt%. The perovskite precursor was spin coated onto the PTAA layers at 4000 rpm in a N2 filled glove-box. Then the 2D (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite films were formed after thermal annealing at 100 °C. After that, the PCBM solution (20 mg mL−1 in CB) was spin coated onto the perovskite films at 1000 rpm. Then the BCP solution (in 2-propanol at 0.5 mg mL−1) was spin coated onto the perovskite layers at 4500 rpm. The fabrication of the 2D PSCs was finished by thermally evaporating 100 nm Ag onto the samples. The effective working area of the 2D PSCs was 0.1 cm2, which was determined by ITO and Ag electrodes. The electron-only space charge-limited current density (SCLC) devices were fabricated using a structure of glass/Ag/perovskite/PCBM/Ag.


Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra were measured using a PerkinElmer Lambda 750 (USA) instrument. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained using an X-ray diffractometer (Panalytical, Netherlands). The cross-sectional image of the PSC and top view image of perovskite surfaces were measured using an SU8020 scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi, Japan), operated at an acceleration voltage of 8 kV. Photoluminescence (PL) behavior was characterized using a spectrometer (FLS920, Edinburgh Instruments, UK). The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) spectra of the electron-only devices were obtained in a dark environment using an electrochemical workstation (CH Instruments, USA). The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the devices were measured for the irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (AM1.5). The incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) was measured using a Solar Cell IPCE measurement system (Solar Cell Scan 100, Zolix, China).


The cross-sectional SEM image in Fig. 1(b) shows a dense layer-by-layer structure for the 2D PSCs, which is consistent with Fig. 1(a). The SEM image also indicates that the thicknesses of the perovskite and PCBM layers are about 390 nm and 55 nm, respectively, which are typical for 2D PSCs. As shown in Fig. S1 (ESI), under the same spin-coating condition (4000 rpm), the thickness of the (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 film increases gradually from 390 to 460 nm when increasing the concentration of CB in the precursors. Due to the existence of CB in the precursor, the actual concentration (ratio of solute to DMF) becomes higher, which makes it easier to reach the saturated condition during the spin-coating process. As shown in Fig. S2 (ESI), when adding 40% CB, the perovskite precursor becomes turbid with some precipitate, which is in good agreement with our hypothesis. To obtain a similar film thickness (about 390 nm) processed from different precursor solutions, we carefully tuned the speed of spin-coating to 4350, 4700 and 5000 rpm for the 10, 20 and 30% CB-added precursors, respectively.

From Fig. 2(a), the perovskite film processed from the precursor without CB shows a rough morphology with a few pinholes existing on the surface. The perovskite planes exhibit a diameter of 0.3 to 1 μm, which are not well compacted with each other. Fig. 2(b) shows an improved surface morphology of the perovskite, which was processed from the precursor with 10% CB. The size of the planes was enlarged to about 1.5 μm and the number of the pinholes was significantly reduced. As shown in Fig. 2(c), when increasing the concentration of CB to 20%, the surface of the perovskite film shows a homogenous and compact morphology without significant pinholes. The size of the perovskite planes further increases to 1.8–2.5 μm, indicating the improved crystallization of the perovskite.Fig. 2(d) shows that adding 30% CB leads to a low surface coverage of the perovskite film, which might be caused by the fast solidification of the precursor under a high speed spin-coating process. The SEM images indicate that adding CB into the precursor could significantly affect the crystallization of the perovskite film.
The results of the J–V characteristics of the 2D PSCs are shown in Fig. 3(a), with the specific solar parameters summarized in Table 1. The control group without CB shows an average PCE of 9.83%, which is a standard value for (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite-based PSCs given in previous studies. As can be seen, the PCE of the 2D PSCs was gradually improved by increasing the amount of CB added (from 10 to 20%) to the precursor. When using the precursor with 20% CB added, a maximum average PCE of 12.91% can be obtained for the PSCs. This was mainly induced by the significant enhancements in Jsc (from 16.7 to 18.5 mA cm−2) and FF (from 58.3 to 67.1%), while the open-circuit voltage (Voc) was slightly improved (from 1.01 to 1.04 V) simultaneously. The PCE values of 32 individual devices for the control and best groups are shown in Fig. S3 (ESI), indicating the obvious improvement by using CB. The best sample in this group showed the highest PCE of 13.35%, indicating the superior effect of adding CB to the perovskite precursor. Further increasing the concentration of CB leads to PCE degradation (to 11.42) for the PSCs, which is mainly caused by the significantly decreased FF (to 62.9%). This can be explained by the poor surface coverage of the perovskite (Fig. 2(d)), which leads to a high contact resistance. As shown in Fig. 3(b), the IPCE spectra indicate an improved photon-to-electron response for a broad wavelength range of 350–700 nm. The Jsc values calculated from the IPCE spectra are 16.4 and 18.1 mA cm−2 for the PSCs processed from the precursors without and with 20% CB, respectively. The difference is less than 2.3% for the Jsc measured from J–V characteristics and calculated from IPCE spectra, indicating the high accuracy of our measurement. Fig. 3(c) shows the J–V characteristics of the best sample under forward and reverse scans, which suggests a negligible hysteresis behavior. In the reverse scan, the PCE was slightly increased to 13.51%, which is caused by the slightly increased FF (to 68.2%). Fig. S4 (ESI) shows the forward and reverse J–V characteristics of a control PSC, which indicates a much larger hysteresis effect. The steady-state current density and PCE as a function of time for the best device is shown in Fig. 3(d). The current density stabilized at 17.0 mA cm−2 for 600 s, yielding a stabilized PCE of 13.12%, showing a stable power output of the PSC.
Precursor solution

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
Average PCE (%)
Best PCE (%)
Without CB
1.01
16.7
58.3
9.83
10.21
With 10% CB
1.03
17.9
65.2
12.13
12.39
With 20% CB
1.04
18.5
67.1
12.91
13.35
With 30% CB
1.02
17.8
62.9
11.42
11.78
To further analyze the crystallization of the perovskite films, we obtained the UV-vis absorption spectra, XRD patterns and PL spectra of the perovskite films, which were prepared from the precursor without and with 20% CB. As shown in Fig. 4(a), the optical absorption peak at about 606 nm was enhanced, which indicates the enhanced crystal quality of the perovskite film from another aspect. The enhanced crystallinity can be proved by the XRD measurement. From the XRD patterns in Fig. 4(b), the two dominant peaks at 14.2° and 28.5° represent the crystallographic (111) and (202) planes for the 2D (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite. The perovskite film processed from 20% CB-added precursor shows higher and sharper characteristic peaks than those of the control case, suggesting the enhanced crystallinity of the perovskite upon using CB. Moreover, the small peak for the (001) lattice plane of the hexagonal (2H polytype) PbI2 peak (at 12.5°) was significantly reduced, which further demonstrates the enhanced crystallinity. From the steady state PL spectra in Fig. 4(c), by using 20% CB, the PL intensity of the perovskite film becomes much higher than that of the control perovskite film, indicating the improved optoelectronic property of the perovskite. In addition, an about 5 nm red shift of the PL peak can be found, which is in consistent with the absorption spectra in Fig. 4(a). Previous studies indicate that a well-crystallized perovskite film usually shows a narrow band-gap, which can explain this phenomenon.Fig. 4(d) shows the TRPL spectra of the relevant perovskite films, which indicates a significant improvement in the PL lifetime. When using a bi-exponential fitting to the spectra, the PL lifetime of the perovskite film processed from the 20% CB-added precursor is 276 ns, which is much longer than that (158 ns) of the control case. The TRPL results also indicate the longer surviving time of excitons in the perovskite film processed from the CB-added precursor, which is beneficial for achieving higher Jsc of the PSCs. The UV-vis absorption, XRD and PL analyses can confirm the improved crystallization of the perovskite film upon using CB, which is in good agreement with the SEM images (Fig. 2).

Fig. 5 shows the progress of spin-coating and thermal annealing, which are very important procedures for influencing the quality of the perovskite films. Generally, perovskite crystallization can consist of two processes, which are nuclei formation and perovskite growth. The nuclei formation step occurs at the initial stage of the spin-coating process (usually several seconds). Then the perovskite planes grow up based on these nuclei during the later spin coating and thermal annealing processes. The existence of CB in the precursor can accelerate the formation of a supersaturated state during the initial spin-coating process, which further promotes the nucleus formation of the perovskite. Then the perovskite grows into larger crystal planes during the later spin-coating and thermal annealing processes. The mechanism is similar with that of dropping with anti-solvent, which is beneficial for preparing high quality perovskite films. Therefore, we attribute the improved morphology and crystallinity of the perovskite film to the accelerated nucleus-formation upon adding CB to the perovskite precursor.
To identify the PCE improvement of the PSCs upon adding CB to the precursor, we analyzed the J–V characteristics for the electron-only SCLC devices. As shown in Fig. 6(a) and (b), the J–V curves can be divided into 3 regions. In the low-voltage range, the current density shows a linear dependence on the voltage, indicating an ohmic response. In the intermediate-voltage range, the current exhibited a rapid non-linear increase, indicating the trap-filled limit, where all the available trap states are filled by the injected carriers. The cross point between the ohmic and trap-filled regions is known as the trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL), which is related with the trap states. The trap density (ntrap) can be calculated using the following eqn (1).
(1)
where
L is the thickness of the perovskite film, ε is the relative dielectric constant of perovskite, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, and e is the elementary charge. From Fig. 6(a) and (b), the VTFL of the devices based on control and 20% CB-added perovskite films are 0.49 and 0.28 V, which correspond to ntrap of 5.3 × 1015 and 3.1 × 1015 cm−3, respectively. The lower ntrap can be explained by the fewer defects in the device upon using CB, which is in good agreement with the reduced pinholes in the perovskite film (see Fig. 2). At the high-voltage range, the current density increased quadratically with the voltage, which is known as the Child's regime. The electron mobility (μelectron) can be calculated according to the Mott–Gurney law (2) as follows.

(2)
the calculated
μelectron of the devices based on the control and 20% CB-added perovskite films are 4.2 × 10−4 and 6.7 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. The dramatically reduced ntrap and μelectron can be explained by the improved quality of the perovskite films. A uniform and well-crystallized perovskite film is beneficial for charge generation and transportation, which is highly related with ntrap and μelectron. To analyze the charge transfer property in the PSCs, we measured the EIS spectra of the PSCs based on the perovskite films processed from the precursor without and with 20% CB. As shown in Fig. 6(c), the spectra can be fitted using the equivalent circuit shown in the inset, which consists of series resistance (Rs), charge transfer resistance (Rct) and capacitor (C). For PSCs, Rs is usually related to the interfacial connections of different functional layers and Rct indicates the charge transfer process from the perovskite to electrodes. By using CB, Rs was slightly reduced from 28 to 22 Ω, indicating the improved contact between the perovskite and charge transport layers. As shown in Fig. 2, a smooth perovskite surface is beneficial for reducing the contact resistance with other layers. Moreover, Rct of the PSCs was significantly decreased from 315 to 232 Ω, indicating the improved charge transport property of the PSCs upon using CB. The EIS result is in good agreement with the SCLC analysis, which well explains the improvements in Jsc and FF. The slightly improved Voc (from 1.01 to 1.04 V) can be explained by the Shockley equation, which indicates that the improvement in Jsc can induce a higher Voc.

We also tested the environmental stability of the PSCs based on the perovskite films processed from the precursor without and with 20% CB. As shown in Fig. 6(d), after 15 days storage (without encapsulation, at 25 °C and 30–40% humidity in dark ambient conditions), the control device retains a PCE of 7.76%, corresponding to a 21% degradation. However, the PSC processed from 20% CB-added precursor still has a higher PCE of 11.23%, showing a lower PCE degradation (13%). In both the cases, the PCE degradation is induced by the degraded Jsc and FF. The environmental stability improvement can be also explained by the improved quality of the perovskite film upon using CB. A well-crystallized perovskite film with fewer defects is conducive to suppress the hydrolysis and decomposition of the perovskite, which is the main problem for the low stability of PSCs.

In conclusion, we improved the performance of inverted 2D PSCs by adding an amount of an anti-solvent (CB) to the precursor solutions. The existence of CB could promote the crystallization of the 2D perovskite by accelerating the formation of perovskite nuclei during the spin-coating process. As a result, the average PCE of the PSCs was significantly improved from 9.83 to 12.91%, which was mainly induced by the simultaneously improved Jsc (from 16.7 to 18.5 mA cm−2) and FF (from 58.3 to 67.1%). The maximum PCE was improved from 10.21 to 13.35% with a stable power output, which indicates the superior effect of adding CB. The SEM, UV-vis absorption, XRD and PL analyses demonstrate the improved crystallization of the perovskite film. The SCLC and EIS analyses indicate the suppressed charge traps and enhanced charge transfer of the PSCs upon using CB. The long-term stability of the PSCs was also improved with the PCE degradation reduced from 21 to 13% after a 15-day duration. In this study, we provide a simple and effective way to improve the performance of 2D PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the Excellent Doctoral Foundation of JLICT (Grant No.: JLICT-2019-009).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional figures. See DOI: 10.1039/d0tc03133j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020